THE 
DIARY OF 
A WRITER 
F. M. DOSTOIEVSK Y 
TRANSLATED AND ANNOTATED 
RY 
BORIS BRASOL 
N.e w York 
GEORGE BRAZILLER 

COPYRIGII'J'0 1919. BY 
CHARLES SCRIBNER"S SONS 
Pri.ated in the United States of America 

PREFACE 
FEODOR l\1. DOSTOIEVSKY was born on October 30, 1821, 
in Moscow, where his father, a physician at the Mary Hospital for 
the Poor, and a man of modest means himself, was then residing. 
Young iJostoievsky's education began rather early, when he was 
only five. His parents were very religious and imparted their simple, 
but fervent, faith to their son. In the evenings the father used to 
read aloud to all the members of his family Karamzin's (q.v.) His­
tory of the Russian State, or some other classical literary work. 
When Feodor reached the age of ten, his father bought a small estate 
in the Province of Tula, not far from :\Joscow. There the boy came 
into contact with rural Russia. At the age of fourteen, Feodor entered 
a high school in l\loscow, in which 1\Jichael, his elder brother, was 
also studying at the time. This was a model scho,-;1. where even 
University professors gave courses for pupils in the 
igher grades. 
In 1837 Dostoievsky lost his mother, to whom he was tenderly 
devoted. Shortly after her death he matriculated at the Engineering 
School in St. Petersburg. This, too, was an excellently appointed 
educational institution which was then unde1 the patronage of Grand 
Duke 1\'lichael, the brother of Emperor Kicholas I. Even during that 
early period Dostoievsky began to evince gloomy and hypochondriac 
traits of character. He took no interest in his schooLėates, keeping 
aloof from their entertainmentĘ and distractions. The six years which 
he spent in the Engineering School contributed much to his mental 
development, particularly because he spent a great deal of his time 
in reading and in self-education. In 181'1 Dostoievsky's father died, 
and this was the second severe shock in h,>dor's young life. 
After graduation, Dostoievsky entered Government service, 
but all his leanings lay in the field of literary work. In 1845 he 
completed his first novel, Poor Folk, which, a iew months later, 
was published in The St. Petersburg Collection, a magazine edited 
v 

vi 
PRt:l<'ACt: 
•by N. A. Nekrasov 
(q.v.), a famous Russian poet. This 
first 
work of Dostoievsky was enthusiastically greeted by the Russian 
literary world, and won the approval of Bielinsky (q.v.), whose 
fame as a critic was then at its zenith. The success which accom­
panied Dostoievsky's literary debut brought him into personal 
contact with Bielinsky and that radical circle of which he was the 
recognized leader. Dostoievsky began associating with these men, 
with whose views he had no sympathy whatsoever. It was then that 
he made the acquaintance of one Petrashevsky, a revolutionary, 
whose activities came to the notice of the police under Nicholas I. 
On April 23, 1849, Petrashevsky and all his associates, including 
Dostoievsky, were arrested. Dostoievsky was accused of having read 
aloud at one of Petrashevsky's mf'f'tings. Bielinsky's notorious Jetter 
to Gogo) (q.v.) of July 15, 1847, apropos the latter's Correspondence 
with Friends, in which he expounded conservative views. After seven 
months of confinement in the SS. Peter and Paul Fortress the 
Petrashevsky trial came to an end. All the defendants were sen­
tenced to death, and on December 22, 1849, they were brought for 
execution to the Semenovsky Square in St. Petersburg. However, 
the death penalty was commuted by the Emperor, and Dostoievsky 
was sentenced to four years of hard labor in Siberia. On March 2, 
1854, he was released from prison, after which, for several years, 
he served as a private in the Seventh Siberian Battalion. He re­
turned to European Russia in 1859. Two years later he published 
his Memoirs from the House of Death, an ingenious resume of his 
prison experiences. In 1מ64 appeared his Letters from the Under­
world, which revealed the full power of his analytical genius. This 
novel may be regarded as the nucleus of many profound ideas which 
were subsequently developed in Crime and Punishment ( 1866), The 
Insulted and Injured (1867), The Idiot ( 1868), The Possessed 
(1871-1872), and in The Brothers Karamazov (1879-188o). 
Dostoievsky expounded his political philosophy in The Diary 
of a Writer (1873, 1876, 1877 and one issue each in 188o and 
1881). The last is, in a way, a unique literary production, having 
no counterpart in world literature. Evading every established belle­
tristic pattern (novel, satire, drama, reminiscences, essay, fable, 
etc.), it is a bold attempt on the part of a man of genius to enter 
into an informal colloquy with his readers, critics and correspondents 
-at times, on mosl intimate topics. In some of the sketches ap­
pearing in the Diary Dostoievsky touches upon many of the burn­
ing problems with which Russia had to contend after the liberation 
of the peasants in 1861. The people became confused and the coun­
try was in a state of both natural and stimulated unrest. These 
conditions, of necessity, found their reflection in literature which 
I 
J 

PREFACE 
vii 
in Russia, has always been an accurate barometer of public moodS" 
and aspirations. As Nekrasov aptly put it: 
A writer, if he be a wave, 
And Russia be a stormy or" an, 
Cannot but be in great commotion 
When elements in fury rave. 
While much space is devoted in the Diary to political ques­
tions, especially to Russia's part in the ultimate settlement of the 
future destinies of Slavdom, Dostoievsky's Slavophile idea!' are 
hardly the most appealing or important portion of the book. What 
is of genuine and lasting interest is-to use Pushkin's phrase-
His mind's dispassioned observations 
And doleful records of his heart. 
Where human psychology is assayed, where man's sufferings, per­
plexities and mental agonies are dwelt upon, Dostoievsky, the un­
rivalled, perspicacious reader of the mind and heart, emerges ai a 
great friend of hnmanity, as a good Samaritan, ever ready and eager 
to lend his helping hand to him who stands helpless and hopeless, 
battered by the storms and tragedies of life. In this sense the Diary 
is a noble human document. Rousseau's and Tolstoy's somewhat 
pretentious ''confessions," Goethe's Dichtunl{ und Wahrheit, 1\Ius­
set's La Confession d'un Enfant du Siccle, a!ld similar public 
avowals, are either more or less entertaining mE':''. "rs, or auto­
biographical discourses, essentially egocentric and, de͏. 'e their self­
denunciation, obviously intended either to diagnose the author's 
"moral malady" or to justify it by rea͐.on of the rrorbid influences 
of a vicious "milieu" or other circumstances beyond one's control. 
The Diary, on the other hand, contains little autobiographical ma­
terial. The author's "l'' is bashfully hidden behind the coulisses of 
the impetuous narrative; only now and then does it appear as a 
mere casual allusion to something having a general Significance in 
the treatment of a vit ·1 subject. The emphasis here is not on 
"I " 
but on "you," on the things that are common to all men, to every 
stratum of modern society. If some of Dostoievsky's vi:ws may 
well be challenged, their sincerity can ·t--and never has been­
questioned. At any rate, they are the product of a deep and keenly 
analytical mind which was fascinated by the invisible "chemical" 
and "thermal" spectra of other people's consciousness and emotions. 
Precisely in these fields, carefully concE'aled frorn idlers' curiosity, 
Dostoievsky discovered all the clandestine longings, morbid states 

viii 
PREFACE 
'and· temperamental crises secretly dwelling, or merely subconsciously 
slumbering, in man's ego. 
Even today the prolific literary heritage of Dostoievsky is not 
fully appraised and evaluated. If Pushkin can be called the Raphael 
of Russian literature, Dostoievsky should be recognized as its 
Michelangelo. His fame reached its climax in 188o, after his brilliant 
speech at the unveiling of the Pushkin monument in Moscow. This 
famous address is recorded in the Diary for the year 188o. 
Dostoievsky died in St. Petersburg, on January 28, 1881. Enor­
mous crowds attended his funeral: men and women from all walks 
of life-statesmen of high rank and downtrodden prostitutes ; illiter­
ate peasants and distinguished men of letters ; army officers and 
learned scientists; credulous priests and incredulous students-they 
were all there. 
Whom did Russia bury with so great a reverence? Was it only 
one of her famous men of letters? Indeed not: in that coffin lay 
a noble and lofty man, a prudent teacher, an inspired prophet whose 
thoughts, like mountain peaks, were always pointed toward heaven, 
and who had measured the depths of man's quivering heart with all 
its struggles, sins and tempests; its riddles, pains and sorrows; its 
unseen tears and burning passions. For he did teach men to live 
and love and suffer. And to the meekest he would offer his brotherly 
compassion-to all who labor and are heavy laden. He would come 
to them as an equal, laying before them the wisdom of his soul, 
his tender understanding of all that, in modern man, is human and 
even inhuman. He would counsel the doubting and soothe the wounds 
of those afflicted with distress. And many a hope would thus be 
restored, many a soul resurrected by the grand visions and magic 
of his genius. 
Now he was no longer. The cold blast of Death had extin­
guished a luminous torch of Truth. 
The news of Dostoievsky's passing spread instantly, like an 
electric current, to the remotest parts of Russia, and a wave of 
mourning swept through the hearts of her saddened people. l\lillions 
humbly prayed that he, to whom happiness was so cruelly denied 
on earth, be granted eternal bliss in the smiling Garden of Heaven. 
BORIS BRASOL 

Introduction 
Old People 
The :\I ilieu 
Something Personal 
VIas 
CONTENTS 
1873 
Bobok: Notes of a Certain Man 
"Perplexed Air" 
"A Certain Person's " Half-letter 
"A Certain Person's" Half-letter 
Apropos of th Exhibitivn 
1\-Iummer 
"Unmarried Conceptions of a l\larried Monk" 
"On the Choristers' Livery": A Letter to the Editor 
Visions and Re,·eries 
Apropos of a New Drama 
Little Pictures 
To a Teacher 
Something about Lying 
One of the Contemporaneous Falsehoods 
1876 
January 
CHAPTF.R I: In Lieu of a Preface on the Great and Little Bears, 
on the Prayers of the Great Goethe and, Generally, on Bad 
Habits . .. .  The Future ͑ovel. Again, an "Accidental Fam-
ily. " . .. Christmas Tree at the Artists' Club. Reasoning 
Children and Relieved Children. "Gluttonous Youth. " 
''Yes-Girls." Jostling Raw Youths. The Hurrying Mo͒cow 
I 
4 
9 
22 
31 
43 
57 
65 
67 
74 
8s 
8s 
86 
100 
107 
118 
128 
133 
142 
Captain . . . .  The Golden Age in the '·'ocket 
157 
CHAPTER n: A Boy with His Hand Stretched out for Alms . . . .  
A Little Boy at Christ's Christmas Tree .
. . .  A Colony of 
ix 

CONTENTS 
Juvenile Delinquents. Gloomy Creatures. Conversion of 
Vicious Souls into IJ{nocent Ones. Measures Recognized as 
Most Expedient Therefor. Little and Bold Friends of Man-
kind 
I66 
CHAPTER m: Russian Society for the Protection of Animals. 
Courier. Green Liquor. Itch for Debauch and Vorobiev. 
:From the End or from the Beginning? ... Spiritism. Some­
thing about Devils. Extraordinary Craftiness of the Devils, 
if only These Are Devils .... A Word Apropos of My Biog-
raphy .. .. A Turkish Proverb 
I82 
February 
CHAPTER I: On the Subject That We All Are Good Fellows. 
Resembl.mce between Russian Society and Marshal Mac­
Mahon .... On the Love of the People. The Necessary 
Contract with the People .... Peasant Marei 
I98 
CHAPTER II: Apropos the Kroneberg Case .... Something about 
Lawyers in General. l\ly Na"ive and Incompetent Presump­
tions. Something about Talents in General and in Par­
ticular .... l\1r. Spasovich's Speech. Adroit Methods .... 
Little Berries . . .. Hercules' Pillars .. .. The Family and 
Our Sanctities. A Concluding Word about a Certain Young 
School 
2IO 
March 
CHAPTER I: Is the Proposition Correct: "Better Let's Have Bad 
Ideals as Long as Reality Is Good"? ... A Centenarian . .. .  
"Segreg:!lion" .... Meditations about Europe .... Dead 
Force and Future Forces 
238 
CHAPTER II: Don Carlos and Sir Watkin. Again, Symptoms of 
"the Beginning of the End" .... Lord Redstock .. . .  A 
Little Word on the Report of the Scientific Committee on 
Spiritistic Phenomena .... Isolated Phenomena .... About 
Urij Samarin 
259 
April 
CHAPTER I: Ideals of Vegetative Still Life. Kulaks and Blood­
suckers of Peasants. Higher-Ups Whipping Russia For-

CONTENTS 
xi 
ward .... Cultured Little Types. Corrupted People . .  
Confusedness and Inaccuracy of the Contested Points .... 
The Beneficent Doorman Liberating the Russian Peasant 
273 
CHAPTER n: Something about Political Questions .... The Par­
adoxicalist. ... Again but One Word aoout Spiritism .... 
May 
On Behalf of a Deceased Person 
293 
CHAPTER 1: From a Private Letter .... A New Regional Word . 
. . . The Court and Mrs. Kairova . ... Mr. Defense Lawyer 
and Kairova .... Mr. Defense Lawyer and Velikanova 
312 
CHAPTER II: Something about a Certain Building. Respective 
Thoughts. Deceit and Falsehood on Every Side! This Is 
What Is Sometimes Unbearable! ... A Certain Inappro-
priate lhuught. . . . Unquestionable Democracy. Women 
330 
June 
CHAPTER 1: Tlw Death of George Sand .... A Few Words about 
George Sand 
341 
CHAPTER II: My Paradox .... Deduction from the Paradox .... 
The Eastern Question .... The Utopian Conception of His-
tory . ... Again about Women 
350 
]uirAugust 
CHAPTER 1: Departure Abroad. Something about Russians in 
Railroad Cars .... On the Pugnacity oi the Germans .. .. 
The Very Last Word of Civilization 
369 
CHAPTER II: Idealists-Cynics . . . . Is it Shameful ࢾv Be an 
Idealist? ... Th" Germans and Work. Incomprehensible 
tricks .... On Wit 
3 79 
CHAPTER 111: The Russian or the Frt:n'"" Language .... ѵ,\hat 
Language Should a Future Pillar of .. 1is !\lotherland Speak? 
396 
CHAPTER 1v: Which Gives Relief at Spas: Mineral Water or 
Bon Ton? ... One of Those Benefited by Mo,Jern Woman. 

xii 
CONTENTS 
... Children's Secrets .... The Land and the Children .... 
· A Peculiar Summer for Russia .... Post-scriptum 
404 
September 
CHAPTER I: Piccola Bestia .... Words, Words, Word!>! ... Com-
binations and Combinations .... Morning Gowns and Soap 
42 7 
CHAPTER 11: Antiquated People .... Kifo-:\Iokievschina .... 
Continuation of the Preceding .... Fears and Apprehen-
sions .... Post-scrir.tum 
442 
October 
CHAPTER I: A Simple but Tricky Case .... A Few Remarks on 
Simplicity and Simplification .... Two Suicides .... The 
Verdict 
459 
CHAPTER II: A New Phase in the Eastern Question . ... Cher-
niaev .... Best Men .... About the Same 
473 
The Meek One: A Fantastic Story (Author's Foreword) 
490 
CHAPTU I: Who Was I and Who Was She? .. . Marital Pro-
posal. .. . The Noblest of Men-But I Don't Believe It 
Myself. ... All Plans and Plans .... The Meek One Rebels . 
. . . The Dreadful Reminiscence 
492 
CHAPTER II: The Dream of Pride . .. . Suddenly the Shroud 
Fell .... I Understand Too Clearly .... I Was Only Five 
Minutes Late 
5 I 2 
December 
CHAPTER 1: Again : hout a Simple but Tricky Case .... Belated 
Moral. ... Arbitrary Assertions ... .  A Few Words about 
Youth .... On Suicide and Haughtiness 
527 
CHAPTER II: An Anecdote from Children's Lives .... Explana­
tion Concerning My Participation in the Forthcoming Pub-

CONTENTS 
xiii 
lication of the Magazine-"Light" .... Where Does the 
Business Stand? .. . A Little Word about "Peter Thinking 
for a Day" 
547 
1877 
January 
CHAPTER 1: Three Ideas .... Mirages: Stundism and Redstock­
ists .... Foma Danilov-The Russian Hero Tortured to 
Death 
561 
CHAPTER II: A Conciliatory Dream without Science . . . .  In 
Europe We Are Mere Canaille . . .. Russian Satire. Virgin 
Soil. Last Songs. Old Reminiscences . .. .  The Boy Celebrat-
ing mേ '\aint's Dav .. .. From the Editor's Office 
575 
February 
CHAPTER 1: Sr If-Appointed Prophets anci Lame Coopers Who 
Continue to Construct the 1\loon on Gorokhovia Street. 
One of the l\tost Unknown Great Russian ·Men ... . Home­
Baked Giants and the Humiliated Son of the "Nest." An 
Anecdote about the Skin Stripped from the Back. The 
Supreme Interests of Civilization and "Let Them Be 
Damned if They Are to Be BoughѶ :!ࢽ Such a l'!' ·e" .... 
About Strippinѷ Skins in General and Various AL: •rations 
in Particular-Hatred of Authority Coupled with Lacyism 
in Thought. ... The l\letternichs and the Don Quixotes 
593 
CHAPTER II: One of the Principal Contemporaneous Questions . 
. . . ''Topic of the Day" .... The Topic of the Day in Eu-
rope ... . The Russian Solution to the Problem 
609 
March 
CHAPTER 1: Once )[ore on the Subjc 
that Constantiuuple, 
Sooner or Later, l\1 ust Be Ours .... The Russian People, 
from Their Standpoint, Have Fully Grown up to a State 
Conception of the Eastern Problem ... . The ·Most Oppor-
tune Thoughts at the Present Time 
626 

xiv 
CONTENTS 
CH2PTER 11: "The Jewish Question" .... Pro-and-Con . . . . 
Status in Statu. Forty Centuries of Existence .... But Long 
Live Brotherhood 
63 7 
CHAPTER m: "The Funeral of the 'Universal Man'" .... An 
Isolated Case .... To Our Correspondents 
653 
April 
CHAPTER 1: War. We Are Stronger than the Rest. ... Not Al­
ways Is War a Scourge. Sometimes It Is Salvation ... . 
Does Spilled Blood Save? ... The Opinion of the "Gentlest" 
Czar on the Eastern Question 
66o 
CHAPTER 11: The Dream of a Strange Man: A Fantastic Story . 
. . . Discharge of Defendant Kornilova .... To My Readers 
672 
CHAPTER 1: From the Book of Predictions by Johann Lichten­
berger, in the Year 1528 . ... About Anonymous Abusive 
Letters .... The Plan of a Satirical Novel Dealing with 
Contemporaneous Life 
693 
CHAPTER 11: Former Agriculturists-Future Diplomats . ... 
Diplomacy in the Face of World Problems .... Never Was 
Russia More Powerful Than at Present-Not a Diplomatic 
Decision 
710 
CHAPTER 111: The Germanic World Problem. Germany Is a 
Protesting Country .... A Certain Ingeniously Suspicious 
Man . ... Both Angry and Strong .... The Black Army. 
The Legions' Opinion as a New Element of Civilization .... 
A Rather Unpleasant Secret 
727 
CHAPTER IV: Lovers of the Turks .... Golden Dress-Coats. The 
Pig-headed Ones 
7 46 
]ulrAugust 
CHAPTER 1: A Conversation with a Moscow Acquaintance of 
Mine- A Note Apropos of a New Book . ... Thirst for 
Rumors and the Things "Concealed"-The Word "Con­
cealed" May Have a Future, and Therefore Measures 

CONTENTS 
xv 
Should Be Taken in Advance. Again on a Casual Family . 
. . . The Case of the Parents Djunkovsky and Their Own 
Children . . . .  The Imaginary Speech of the President of 
the Court 
752 
CHAPTER n: Again Segregation. The Eighth Part of Anna 
Karenina . .
. . Confessions of a Slavophile . . . .  Anna 
Karenina as a Fact of Special Signif1cance . . . .  A Land-
owner Procuring Faith in God from a Peasant 
777 
CHAPTER m: Irritability of Amour-propre . . . .  Tout ce qui 
n'est pas expressement permis est defendu . . . .  On the 
Unmistakable Knowled͓e of the Uneducated and Illiterate 
Russian People of the QuintE-ssence of the Eastern Ques­
tion . . . .  Levin's Commotion. Question: Does Distance 
Exercise Influence upon Humaneness? Can One Agree with 
the CJp; .. i.•n of a f'..ptured Turk Concf'rning the Humane­
ness of Some of Our Ladies? What, Then, Are Our Teachers 
Teaching Us? 
793 
September 
CHAPTER 1: Unlucky ami Odd Fellows . . . .  :\ Curious Charac­
ter . . . .  This but Not Quite. Reference to What I Wrote 
Three Months Ago . . . .  What Does Austr:a at Present 
Think About? . . .  \Vho's Knocking ·rt the Door7 ·. ͔'ho will 
Enter? Inescapable Fate 
813 
CHAPTER n: A Lie Is Saved by a Lie . . . .  )lollusb. Taken for 
Human Beings. What ls )lore :\dvantaഔeous to Us: When 
the Truth ls Known about Vs or Whrn Xonsense [s spoken 
about Us? . . .  :\ Slight Hint at the Future Intelligent Rus­
sian l\lan. The Unquestionable Fate of the Futur͕' Russian 
Woman 
835 
October 
CHAPTER 1: To Our Readers . . . .  An Old Eternal :\lilitary Rule . 
. . . The Same Rule-Only in a Xcw Version . . . .  The :\lost 
Enormous :\lilitary :\Iistakes Sometimes :\lay Not Be Mis­
takes at All . . . . We 1\Ierely Stumbled against a Fact, but 

xvi 
CONTEѮTS 
·There Was ѯo l\listake. Two Armies-Two Opposites. The 
Present States of Affairs 
846 
CHAPTER 11: Hartung's Suicide and Our Eternal Question: Who 
Is to Be Blamed? . .. The Russian Gentleman. A Gentle­
man Must Remain a Gentleman to the End ... . Deceit Is 
Necessary to Truth. Deceit Multiplied by Deceit Produces 
Truth. Is This So? 
859 
CHAPTER m: Roman Clericals in Russia .. .. A Summer Attempt 
on the Part of Old Poland at Reconciliation .... The Sally 
of "The Stock-Exchange Gazette." Not Bold but Wicked 
Pens 
870 
November 
CHAPTER 1: What Does the Word "Strutzky" Mean? . . . The 
History of the Verb "Stushevatsia" 
88o 
CHAPTER n: Servility or Politeness? . . . The l\lost Servile In­
cident Possible . ... An Altogether Special Word about 
Slavs Which I Meant to Say Long Ago 
885 
CHAPTER III: Peace Rumors. "Constantinople Must Be Ours"­
Is This Possible? Different Opinions .... Again, for the 
Last Time, "Predictions" .... It Is Necessary to Seize the 
Moment 
902 
December 
CHAPTER 1: The Final Explanation of a Previous Fact .. . . 
Excerpt. ... Distortions and 1\Ianipulations--This Costs 
Us Nothing . . . .  Spiteful Psychologists. Accoucheurs-
Psychiatrists .... An Incident Which to l\Iy l\lind Explains 
Much .... Am I an Enemy of Children? What Does the 
Word "Happy One" Mean at Times? 
913 
CHAPTER n: The Death of Nekrasov. On What Has Been Said 
at His Grave .... Pushkin, Lermontov and Nekrasov . . .. 
The Poet and the Citizen. General Comments on Nekrasov 
as a Man .. .. !\ Witness in Nekrasov's Favor .... To the 
Reader 
935 

CONTENTS 
xvii 
1880 
August 
CHAPTER I: Explanatory Word Concerning the Address on 
Pushkin Printed Below 
9S9 
CHAPTER n: Pushkin: A Sketch 
967 
CHAPTER III: Seizing upon an Occasion .. . .  Concerning One 
Most Important :\latter. . . . Aleko and Derjimorda. 
Aleko's Suffering for the Peasant Serf. Anecdotes .... Two 
Halves .. .. Humble Thyself-to One; Exalt Thyself-
to the Other. A Tempest in a Tea-pot 
98I 
188 1 
January 
CHAPTER I :  Fiilartces. A Citizen Insulted in the Person of 
Thersites. ( r0wning from Below and Ѱhe :\1 usicians. The 
Chatter-Mill and Chatterboxes . . .. Can We Demand for 
Russia European Finances? . . . Let Us Forget Current 
Things in Order to Render the Roots Healthy. Because of 
Inability I Embark upon Something Spiritual. . . . The 
First Root. Instead of a Firm Financial Tone I amѱ .:J.psing 
into Old Words. The Ocean. Thirst wr Truth 
d the 
Necessity of Tranquillity so Useful to Finance. . 
. Let 
Them Speak First. For the Time Being Let Us Stand Aside 
in Order to Learn Sense and Reason 
1013 
CHAPTER n: A Witty Bureaucrat. His Opinion on Our I.iberals 
and Europeans .. .. An Old Krylov Fable about a Certain 
Pig .... Geok-Teje. What Is Asia to Us? ... Quest: ... .-Ѳs and 
Answers 
1037 
Notes: The reader desiring further information regarding CPr­
tain individuals, books, plays, or ltistĬric events mentio,,A 
in the text, or elucidation of words c, phrases peculiar to 
Dostoievsky, will find these alphabetically arranged, for 
ready reference, in the Notes at the back of the book. 
IOSS 
Index 
1091 


<=r'he 
r>iary 
of a 
Wri-ter 


18 73 


INTRODUCTION 
ON THE TWENTIETH OF DECEMBER I learned that 
everything has been decided, and that I am the editor of The Citizen. 
This extraordinary event, that is, extraordinary to me-(1 have no 
desire to offend anyone)-occurred in a rather simple ntanner. 
On the twentieth of December I had just been reading in the 
Moscow Gazette of the nuptials of the Chinese Emperor. This mag­
nificent, and apparently most complicated, event is also remarkably 
simple: the whole affair had been anticipated and decreed, in every 
detail, as far back as one thousand years ago in a ceremonial book 
comprising 
closr to two hundred volumes. On 
comparing 
the 
enormity of the Chinese event with my appointment as editor, I 
suddenly he;:ron to feel an ingratitude toward my domestic institu­
tions, despite the ease with which I was appointed, and it occurred 
to me that it would have been far more profitable to us, meaning 
Prince Meschersky and myself, to publish The Citizen in China. 
There, rverything is clear .... On a designatrd day we would both 
be reporting at the local office in charge of the press. Having knocked 
our foreheads against the floor, and after licking the floor with our 
tongues, we would rise and lift our forefingers in front of our noses, 
respectfully inclining our heads. Of course, the director-in-chief of 
the bureau supervising the press would pretend that he was paying 
as little attention to us as to so many flies flying in and out of the 
room. However, the third assistant to his third secrdary would 
stand up, and, holding in his hands the diploma of my appointment 
to the office of editor, would utter in an impressive, yet kind, voice 
a behest required by the ceremonial etiquette. It would br so clear 
and intelligible that we both would be immensely pleased to listen 
to it. 
If, in China, I were to become so stupid and so pure in heart 
that, when assuming my editorial dutieÙ and realizing the limitations 
of my ability, I should grow fearful and should start experiencing 
rackings of conscience, it would be promptly proved to my satis­
faction that I was doubly stupid because of entertaining sur:h feel­
ings; that precisely, beginning with this ••1oment, I would need no 
mind whatsoever, even granting I had one, and that it would be 
far safer not to possess any intellect at all. 
Surely it would be most plrasant to listen to this. And conclud­
ing his oration with the beautiful words: "Go, editor; henceforth 
I 

2 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY: 1873 
thou mayest eat thy rice and drink thy tea with a new peace in thy 
conscience," the third assistant to the third secretary would hand 
me a pretty diploma printed on red satin in gold letters ; Prince 
Meschersky would give a substantial bribe, and we both, returning 
home, would forthwith publish a most gorgeous issue of The Citizen, 
.such as we shall never publish here.-In China we would be pub­
lishing splendidly. 
I suspect, however, that in China Prince Meschersky would 
certainly try to dupe me by offering me the post of editor primarily 
for the purpose that I act as his substitute at the chief bureau for 
the supervision of the press every time he might be summoned 
thither to be cudgelled on his heels with bamboo sticks. But I 
would outwit him : I would immediately cease printing Bismarck, 
while I myself would be quietly writing articles, so that I would 
be invited to the bamboo ceremony only after every other issue. 
In exchange, I would learn to write. 
In China I should be writing very well. Here, this is much 
more difficult. There, everything is anticipated and calculated one 
thousand years in advance ; here, everything is topsy-turvy for the 
next thousand years. There, willy-nilly, I would be writing intel­
ligibly, so that I do not even know who would be reading me. Here, 
in order to compel people to read me, it is even better to write 
unintelligibly. Only in the Moscow Gazette editorials are one and 
a half columns long and, surprisingly, they are being written plainly. 
In The Voice such articles extend to eight, ten, twelve and even 
thirteen columns. So this is how many columns have to be wasted 
in order to make people respect you. 
Here, merely speaking to anyone is a science, i.e., at the first 
glance, perhaps, much in the same way as in China : as there, there 
are several rather simplified and strictly scientific devices. In days 
gone by, for instance, the words "I understand nothing" meant merely 
ignorance on the part of him who uttered them ; yet, at present they 
bring great honor. One has only to declare with an open air and 
uppishly: "I do not understand religion ; I understand nothing in 
Russia; I understand nothing in art"-and at once one is lifted to 
lofty heights. And this is all the more advantageous if one, in fact, 
understands nothing. 
However, this simplified device proves nothing. Essentially, 
everybody here, without giving further thought, suspects everybody 
else of being stupid, without asking himself the question : "Is it not 
I, indeed, who am stupid ?"-The situation is altogether pleasing, 
but nevertheless no one is pleased, and everybody is angry. Besides, 
in our day, thoughtfulness is next to impossible: it is too expensive 
a luxury. True enough, ready ideas are being bought. They are being 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
3 
sold everywhere, even gratis, but gratuitously, in the long run, they 
prove more expensive, and people begin to forbode this fact. As a 
result, there is neither profit nor advantage, but a state of upheaval, 
as heretofore. 
Perhaps, we are but a replica of China, only without her order­
liness. We are scarcely beginning that which is coming to an end 
in China. No doubt, we shall come to the same terminus-but when ? 
In order to accept one thousand volumes of Ceremonies, so as finally 
to win the right to think about nothing, we have to live at least a 
millennium of meditation. And yet, nobody wants to accelerate this 
term, since no one is prepared to cogitate. 
True : if no one wishes to reflect, it would seem, things are 
made easier for the Russian writer. In fact, they are easier ; and 
woe to that writer and editor who, in our day, do meditate. Still 
worse off is he who, of his own accord, seeks to study and to under­
stand things. Even harder is the lot of him who candidly divulges 
such an intPntion. But if he ventures to declare that he has succeeded 
a bit in graspmg something, and that he intends to express his 
thoughts, he is promptly deserted by everybody. Nothing is left to 
him but to find some one suitable fellow, or even hire him, in order 
to converge with him alone ; perhaps to publish the magazine for 
him alone. It is a despicable situation, <;ince it is as if one were 
speaking to oneself and publishing a periodical for one's own amuse­
ment. 
I strongly suspect that for a long time The Citizen will be 
talking to himself and for his own pleasure. To begin with, according 
to medical science, soliloquy signifies a predispositir n to insanity. 
The Citizen, of necessity, must speak 
w citizens, a1 
therein lies 
its whole trouble ! 
So, then, this is the publication with which I ha\"e affiliated 
myself. My situation is extremely indeterminate . .Hut I, too, pro­
pose to speak to myself and for my own p:easure, in the form of 
this diary, and let things be as they may. 
What shall I speak about ?-About everything that might im­
press me or make me think. And if, perchance, I :.hould find a 
reader-and one who, God forbid, should turn out to be an op­
ponent-! realize that I must understand how to speak, and must 
know whom to address and in what manner. I will try to master 
this task, since for us this is the most difficult thing-1 :r:ean, in 
literature. Besides, there are different -.pponents : it is not with 
every opponent that one can start a conversation. 
I shall recite a fable which I heard the other day. It is said 
that this fable is of ancient, almost Hindu, origm, which is very 
encouraging. 

4 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSჟY : 1873 
Once upon a time a pig quarreled with a lion and summoned 
him to a duel. Having returned home, the pig changed his mind 
and got frightened. The entire herd assembled, deliberated awhile 
and decided thus :-Now, pig, here in the vicinity there is a ditch ; 
go and take a good roll in its mud, and in this garb proceed to the 
place of the duel. You will see. 
The pig acted accordingly. Presently the lion appeared on the 
scene, sniffed, frowned and walked away. For a long time after­
ward the pig kept boasting that the lion turned coward and ran away 
from the battlefield. 
Such is the fable. Of course, in Russia there are no lions : the 
climate does not suit them, and, besides, this would be too grand 
a setting. But substitute for the lion a decent man-and every man 
has to be decent-and the moral will be identical. 
By the way, I will add this flourish. 
On one occasion, conversing with the late Hertzen, I gave 
high praise to one of his books-From the Other Shore. Much to 
my delight, Mikhail Petrovich Pogodin also lauded this work in 
his excellent and curious article on meeting Hertzen abroad. The 
book is written in the form of a dialogue between Hertzen and his 
opponent. 
"And what I like most," I remarked inter alia, "is the fact 
that your opponent is also very clever. You must concede that many 
a time he has pinned you to the wall." 
"Why, that is the whole trick," said Hertzen, laughing. "I 
will give you an anecdote. When I was once in Petersburg, Bielinsky 
dragged me into his apartment and made me sit down and listen 
to his article, A Conversation Between Mr. A. and Mr. B., which 
was written in a fervent vein. ( It is included in his collected works.) 
"Mr. A.-of course, Bielinsky himself-is portrayed there as 
being very clever, while Mr. B., his opponent, is mentally inferior. 
When Bielinsky had finished reading, he asked me, with feverish 
expectancy, 'Now, what do you think ?' 
"Oh, it's good, quite good, and one can see that you are quite 
smart, but why should you be wasting your time on such a fool ?" 
"Bielinsky threw himself upon a sofa and, burying his face 
in a cushion and laughing heartily, exclaimed : 
" 'You're killing me ! You're killing mel' " 
OLD PEOPLE 
This anecdote about Bielinsky reminds me now of my first 
steps in the field of literary pursuit, God knows how many years 
ago: this was a sad and fatal time for me. 
I recall precisely Bielinsky himself, as I met him then and the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
s 
way in which he met me. I frequently think of people of the past,.of 
course, because at present I am meeting new ones. 
Bielinsky was the most ardent person of all those whom I 
have met throughout my life. Hertzen was quite different. He was 
a product of our noble class-a gentilhomme russe et citoyen du 
monde above all-a type which developed in Russia, and which 
could have sprung up nowhere but in Russia. Hertzen did not 
emigrate ; he did not begin Russian emigration ;-no, he was already 
born an emigrant. They all, akin to him, were ready-born emigrants, 
even though the majority of them never left Russia. During the 
hundred and fifty years of the preceding life of the Russian nobility, 
with very few exceptions, the last roots had rotted, the last ties 
with Russian soil and Russian truth had disintegrated. History it­
self, as it were, predestined Hertzen to embody, in a most vivid 
type, this rupture of the overwhelming majority of our educated 
class with the people. In this sense it is an historical type. 
Having detached themselves from the people, they naturally 
also lo::.t lic.d. The 1 რstless among them became atheists ; the 
apathetic and placid ones waxed indifferent. For the Russian people 
they felt nothing but contempt, believing, however, that they loved 
the people and wished them the best of everything. But they loved 
the people negatively, conceiving in their stead some ideal people, 
such as, according to their notions, the Russian people ought to be. 
This ideal people, in the minds of certain progressive represen­
tatives of the majority, involuntarily incarnated themselves in the 
Paris rabble of '93· In those days this was the most captivating 
ideal of a people. 
It goes without saying that Hertzt.l. had to beer- e a socialist, 
and precisely after the fashion of a nobleman's son, chat is, with 
neither need nor aim, but merely as a result of "the logical flux 
of ideas" and the heart-emptiness aL home. He renounced the 
foundations of the former society ; he denid family, and, it seems, 
was a good father and husband. He denied property, but at the 
same time he managed to arrange his affairs, and abroad he ex­
perienced with pleasure his financial independence. !ࢼe engineered 
revolutions and incited other people to participate in them, and at 
the same time he loveu comfort and family peace. He was an artist, 
a thinker, a brilliant writer, an extraordinarily well-read man, a 
wit, a wonderful conversationalist (he ..;poke even bette· than he 
wrote), and an excellent reflector. The .!flex-the faculty of turn­
ing a most profound personal sentiment into an object which he 
set before himself, which he would worship and which, a minute 
later, he would ridicule-that faculty was highly developed in him. 
Unquestionably, this was an unusual man, but whatever he 

6 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
IJI,ay have been-whether he wrote his memoirs or published a maga­
zine in coJlaboration with Proudhon ; whether, in Paris, he mounted 
a barricade (which he so comically described in his reminiscences) ;  
whether he suffered, or felt happy, or was afflicted with doubts ; 
whether, as in x863, to please the Poles, he sent his proclamation 
to Russian revolutionists in Russia, even though he did not trust 
the Poles, and realized that they had deceived him, and knew that 
his appeal doomed hundreds of these unfortunate young men ; 
whether, with astounding naivete he confessed to these things in 
one of his subsequent articles, failing to perceive in what light he 
had placed himself by such an avowal-invariably, everywhere and 
all his life, he was above all a gentilhomme russe et citoyen du 
monde, a mere product of former servitude which he hated and 
from which he descended, not only from his father, but precisely 
as a result of the severance with his native land and its ideals. 
Bielinsky-he, on the contrary, was not a gentilhomme at all ; 
oh no! (God knows from whom he descended! His father, it seems, 
was a military surgeon.) 
Substantially, Bielinsky was not a reflective person, but all 
his life he was always a boundlessly enthusiastic individual. My 
first novel, Poor People, delighted him (subsequently, appproxi­
mately one year later, we parted for various reasons which, how­
ever, were most insignificant in every respect) ;  yet, at the time, 
during the first days of our acquaintance, having attached himself 
to me with all his heart, he hastened, with a most naive precipitancy, 
to convert me to his creed. 
I do not at all exaggerate his ardent attraction to me, at 
least during the first months of our acquaintance. I found him a 
passionate socialist, and, straight off the bat, he embarked upon 
atheism. This, namely, his wonderful insight and his unusual faculty 
for becoming profoundly imbued with an idea, is to me very sig­
nificant. Some two years ago, the International prefaced one of its 
proclamations with this straightforward, meaningful statement: 
"Above all, we are an atheistic society"-that is, they started with 
the very essence of the matter Such was also Bielinsky's prelude. 
Treasuring above everything reason, science and realism, at 
the same time he comprehended more keenly than anyone that reason, 
science and realism alone can merely produce an ant's nest, and 
not social "har::სony" within which man can organize his life. He 
knew that moral principles are the basis of all things. He believed, 
to the degree of delusion and without any reflex, in the new moral 
foundations of socialism (which, however, up to the present re­
vealed none Lut abominable perversions of nature and common 
sense) .  Here was nothing but rapture. Still, as a socialist, he had 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
to destroy Christianity in the first place. He knew that the revol\z­
tion must necessarily begin with atheism. He had to dethrone that 
religion whence the moral foundations of the society rejected by 
him had sprung up. Family, property, personal moral responsibility 
-these he denied radically. (I may observ"! that, even as Hertzen, 
he was also a good husband and father.) Doubtless, he understood 
that by denying moral responsibility of man, he thereby denied 
also his freedom ; yet, he believed with all his being (much more 
blindly than Hertzen, who at the end, it seems, began to doubt) 
that socialism not only does not destroy the freedom of man, but, 
on the contrary, restores it in a form of unheard-of majesty, only 
on a new and adamantine foundation. 
At this juncture, however, there remained the radiant per­
sonality of Christ himself to contend with, which was the most 
difficult problem. As a socialist, he was duty bound to destroy the 
teaching of Christ, to call it fallacious and ignorant philanthropy, 
doomed by modern science and economic tenets. Even so, there 
remained the !Jeatific image of God-man, its moral inaccessibility, 
its wonderful and miraculous beauty. But in his incessant, un­
quenchable transport, Bielinsky did not stop even before this in­
surmountable obტtacle, as did Renan, who proclaimed in his Vie 
de Jesus-a book permeated with increduHty-that Christ neverthe­
less is the ideal of human beauty, an inaccessible type which cannot 
be repeated even in the future. 
"But do you know," he screamed one evening (sometimes in 
a state of great excitement he used to scream) ,  "do you know it 
is impossible to charge man with sinუ, to burden hi"l with debtg 
and turning the other cheek, when societ}' ;.; organized :· '1eanly that 
man cannot help but perpetrate villainies; when, ecor.·Jmically, he 
has been brought to villainy, and that it is silly and cruel to demand 
from man that which, by the very laws of nature, he is impotent 
to perform even if he wished to .
. . ?" 
That evening we were not alone: there was present one of 
Bielinsky's friends whom he respected very much and obeyed in 
many ways. Also present was an author, quite you"ფ, who later 
gained prominence in literature. 
"I am even touched to look at him," said Bielinsky, suddenly 
interrupting his furious exclamations, turning to his friend and 
pointing at me. "Every time I mentil'n rbrist his face c}l:"·lges its 
expression, as if he were ready to start 
eeping . . . .  But, believe 
me, naive man," he jumped at me again, ''believe me that your 
Christ, if He were born in our time, would be a most imperceptible 
and ordinary man ; in the presence of contemporary science and 
contemporary propellers of mankind, he would be effaced!" 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
"Oh, no I "  interposed Bielinsky's friend. (I remember that 
we were sitting and he was pacing up and down the room.) "Oh, 
no I If Christ were to appear in our day, He would join the move­
ment and would head it. . . .  " 
"Yes, of course ; yes," conceded Bielinsky in remarkable haste. 
"Precisely, He would join the socialists and follow them." 
These propellers of mankind, whom Christ was designed to 
join, were then the French : George Sand, the now altogether for­
gotten Cabet, Pierre Leroux and Proudhon who was then only 
beginning his activities. As far as I remember, at that time Bielinsky 
respected these four most.-Fourier had already lost much of his 
prestige.-They were being discussed through whole evenings. 
There was also a German before whom Bielinsky bowed with 
great deference, namely, Feuerbach. ( Bielinsky, who all his life 
was unable to master any foreign language, pronounced the name 
of Feuerbach as Fierbach.) Strauss was spoken of with reverence. 
With this warm faith in his idea, Bielinsky was, of course, 
the happiest of all human beings. Oh, in vain it was said later that 
had Bielinsky lived longer, he would have joined the Slavophile 
doctrine. He would never have ended with that. Perhaps, he would 
have ended by emigrating, that is, if he had lived longer and if 
he could have managed to emigrate ; if so, now, he, a tiny and 
enraptured little old fellow, with his original warm faith precluding 
any slightest doubt, would be hanging .around somewhere at con­
ventions in Germany and Switzerland, or he might have enlisted 
as adjutant to some German Madame Hegg, rendering petty services 
in connection with some feminine problem. 
Even so, this most blessed human being, endowed with such 
a remarkably serene conscience, would sometimes become very sad ; 
but this melancholy was of a special kind-resulting not from 
doubts, not from disillusions-oh, no-but from the query : why, 
indeed, not today, but tomorrow ?-In the whole of Russia he was 
the most hurried man. I met him once, about three o'clock in the 
afternoon, near the Znamensky church. He told me that he had 
been out for a walk and was going home. 
"I come here often to watch the progress of the construction 
(of the terminal of the Nikolaievsky railroad, which was then being 
built) .  My heart is appeased somewhat when I stand here observing 
the work : at 1ൄ:, we, too, are going to have a railroad. You wouldn't 
believe how this thought at times comforts my heart." 
This was said well and enthusiastically ; Bielinsky never 
showed off. We proceeded together. On our way, I recall, he said 
to me: 
"And when they will bury me in a grave (he knew that he 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
9 
had consumption), only then will they discover whom they hate 
lost." 
During the last year of his life I did not visit him. He took 
a dislike to me, but then I had passionately embraced his teaching. 
One year later, in Tobolsk, when we, awaiting our further lot, were 
assembled in a prison courtyard, the wives of the Decembrists pre­
vailed upon the superintendent to arrange a secret meeting with 
us in his apartment. We saw these great sufferers who had voluntarily 
followed their husbands into Siberia. They had renounced every­
thing: eminence, wealth, connections and relatives; they sacrificed 
everything for the sublime moral duty, the freest duty that can ever 
exist. Guilty of nothing, they endured over a long period of twenty­
five years everything which their convicted husbands were forced 
to endure. 
The interview lasted one hour. They blessed us who were 
about to start on a new journey; they crossed us and gave us copies 
of the New Testament-the only book permitted in prison. It lay 
for four ycࢻ • .  - nnder f1"' pillow in penal 'it'rvitude. Sometimes I 
read it to my self and sometimes-to others. I used it to teach a 
convict how to read. 
Around me were precisely those men who, according to Bielin­
sky's belief, cov'.L not have failed to commiL their crimes, and, 
therefore, were 
1 ight and merely less fortunate than the rest. I 
know that the whole Russian peoplr called us "sufferers"; I have 
heard this term uttered many a time by many a mouth. Yet, here 
there was something different, not at all that about which Bielinsky 
used to speak, but that which suunds in ѳorne of ou1 jurors' verdicts. 
In this term "sufferers," in thi!'\ people".· "erdict, tl.t' 
sounds a 
different thought. Four years of forced labor was a i. · .g school; 
I had the time to convince myself. ... And this is exactly the 
thing which I should like to discuss now. 
The Citizen, 1873, Xo. I. 
THE MILIEU 
It seems that the one feeling common to all jurors throughout 
the world, and to our j ;rors in particular (aside, of course, from 
other emotions), must be the feeling of authority, or, to express 
it better, absolute power. This is a miserable feeling, that is when 
it prevails over all others. But though in i• 
lCrceptible form, though 
suppressed by a whole maze of other nobler fl'elings, it must never­
theless nestle i'l every juror's soul, even in the face of the highest 
realization of one's civic duty. I believe that this somehow emerges 
from the very laws of nature, and, thereforr, I recall that when 

101 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
opr new (upright) courts of law had recently been instituted, this 
ოeling, in one sense, aroused in me intense curiosity. 
In my fancies I was dreaming of court sessions made up, for 
instance, almost exclusively of peasants, serfs of yesterday. The 
district attorney and the lawyers would address them, seeking their 
favors, while our good peasants would be sitting and silently ponder­
ing in their heads : "See how things have shaped themselves : now 
if it pleases me, I'll acquit ; if it pleases me, I'll send him away 
to Siberia ! " 
And, nevertheless, the remarkable thing is that now they do 
not punish but keep acquitting by the wholesale. Of course, this is 
also exercise, and even abuse, of power, but only in some peculiar 
direction-is it the sentimental direction ?-difficult to say. Yet, 
everywhere it is a common, almost a preconceived tendency, as if 
people had come to a general agreement. The sweeping character of 
this "tendency" cannot be doubted. And the problem is that the 
acquittal mania quand-meme affects not only the peasants, the 
humiliated and insulted of yesterday ; it has captured all Russian 
jurors without distinction, even those of the highest grades-noble­
men and university professors. Such a universality, in itself, presents 
a most curious theme for deliberation, suggesting manifold, and at 
times, perhaps, strange, conjectures. 
Not long ago in one of our very influential newspapers, in 
a rather modest and certainly well-intentioned little article, in pass­
ing, the following conjecture was set forth : is it not conceivable 
that our jurors, as people who, without any apparent reason, having 
suddenly grasped their great power (as if it fell from the sky), 
especially after ages of humiliation and oppression, are inclined on 
every opportune occasion to vex the "authorities"-the district at­
torney, for example-merely as a matter of waggery, or, so to speak, 
by way of contrast with the past ? The conjecture is not a bad 
one, and one which is also not devoid of some jocularity, but, of 
course, it does not explain everything. 
"Simply, it is a pity to ruin somebody else's fate : they are 
human beings too. The Russian people are compassionate."-Such 
is the opinion of others, as this has sometimes been expressed. 
However, I was always under the impression that in England, 
too, the people are compassionate, and that even if they do not 
possess such a kindheartedness, so to speak, as our Russian people, 
at least they are not devoid of humaneness ; that they do have a 
realization and vivid feeling of the Christian duty toward their 
neighbor-a feeling which, perhaps to a high degree, to a firm and 
independent conviction, is one which may be more unflinching than 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
I I  
ours, bearing in mind their culture and secular independence. For 
truly, over there that much power did not fall on them "suddenly 
from the sky." Besides, they themselves have invented the jury 
trial without borrowing it from anyone ; they themselves have 
sanctioned it through ages, carving it out of life itself and not 
merely receiving it as a gift. 
And yet, over there a juror comprehends that the moment 
he ascends his bench in a courtroom, he is not only a sensitive 
man with a tender heart, but above all-a citizen. He thinks-whether 
rightly or erroneously-that compliance with civic duty is, perhaps, 
even more important than the performance of a wholehearted private 
exploit. Only recently there was general rumbling throughout their 
Kingdom when the jurors acquitted a notorious thief. The general 
commotion all over the country proved the fact that if there, too, 
as in Russia, such verdicts are possible, they Jo occur only rarely, 
as exceptional cases which promptly arouse public opinion. Over 
there the juror, first of all, understands that he holds in his hands 
the ban'ltr cf England as a whole ; that ht> ceases to he a private 
person, but that he must represent the opinion of his land. 
The ability to be a citizen is exactly the ability to lift oneself 
to the level of the common opinion of the country. Certainly, there 
too, there is "compassion" in the verdict ; there also, "the drgrading 
mileu"-this seems to be our present-day pel doctrinr-is being taken 
into account, but only to a certain limit, as far as this is tolerated 
by the sane opinion of the country and the level of its civilization 
based upon Christian morality (and this level apprars to be pretty 
high). 
As against this, the juror over •h,პe reluct.tf'·, · ·: renders a 
"yes, guilty" verdict, realizing above all that his duty : .-eeminently 
consists in that he, by his pronouncement, certifies before all his 
countrymen that in old England, for which every oth. uf them would 
shed his blood, vice, as heretofore, is callPd vier, and villainy­
villainy ; and that the moral foundations of the country are still 
the same-firm, intact, and standing as they stood before. 
"Even though it be presumed"-! can hear a voice-'·that 
your solid (that is, Christian) foundations are the same and that, 
in truth, one has to Ltൃ, above all, a citizen, and, well, that one 
must hold the banner, etc., as you retailed-even if this be pre­
sumed for the time being, without challenge-think, 
w hF · r shall 
we find citizens ? Consider only what WL · ad yesterday ! Now, you 
know that civil rights (and what rights ! )  rolled down upon him 
as from a hill. They crushed him and, as yet, they are to him 
but a burden-indeed, a burden I " 

1 2  
I 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
"Of course, there is truth in your observation," I answer the 
voice, slightly downcast-"nevertheless, the Russian people . . .  
" 
"The Russian people ?-Let me tell you ! "-1 hear another 
voice-"Here, we are told that the gifts rolled down from a hill 
and crushed the people. But, perhaps, they feel that that much 
they have received as a gift ; and, on top of this, they realize that 
they have received these gifts gratis ; and that as yet they, the 
people, are not worthy of them. Please observe that this does not 
mean at all that the people in reality are unworthy of the gifts, 
and that it was not necessary or it was too early to bestow them 
upon the people ; quite the contrary is true : the people themselves, 
in their humble conscience, realize the fact that they arc unworthy 
of such gifts and this humble, but lofty, popular avowal of their un­
worthiness is precisely a pledge that they are worthy. Meanwhile, 
however, the people are confused in their humility. Who penetrated 
the innermost recesses of their hearts ? Is there anyone among us 
who can maintain that he is fully familiar with the Russian people ? 
-No, here we have not merely compassion and kindheartedness, 
as you deign to prattle. Here, the power itself is dreadful ! We 
got frightened by this terrible power over human fate, over the lot 
of our own brethren ; and until we grow up to your citizenship­
we forgive. We sit as jurors, and, perhaps, cogitate : 'Are we our­
selves better than the defendant ?-We are rich, provided with 
means ; but should we happen to be in a situation such as his, we 
might be acting even worse than he-and so we forgive.' Maybe, 
this is a good thing-! J]lCan, the heart's compassion. This is, per­
haps, a pledge of something sublime, Christian, in the future-some­
thing that is as yet unknown to the world I "  
"This, in a way, is a Slavophile voice"-! say to myself. "The 
thought is, indeed, encouraging, while my conjecture concerning 
popular humility before the power received gratuitously, and be­
stowed upon the still 'unworthy,' is certainly smarter than the 
suggestion of a desire 'to tease the district attorney,' notwith­
standing the fact that this suggestion continues to appeal to me 
by reason of its realism (of course, accepting it rather as a special 
case, as, indeed, it is being set forth by its author himself). How­
ever . . .  this is what disturbs me most : that our people suddenly 
began to fear their compassion. It is very hard, we mean, to convict 
a man." What of i̎ ? Depart with your pain. Truth is higher than 
your pain. 
In fact, if we believe that, at times, we ourselves are worse 
than the criminal, we thereby also admit that we are half-guilty of 
his crime. If he broke the law which the country prescribed for 
him, we ourselves are at fault that he stands now before us. For 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
I J  
if we all were better, he, too, would be better, and he would not 
be standing facing us. . . . 
So, then, we should be acquitting at this juncture ? 
No, on the contrary, at this juncture it is necessary to state 
the truth, and to call evil-evil. As against this, however, we should 
assume half the burden of the verdict. This distress of the heart 
which nowadays everybody fears so much, and with which we shall 
leave the courtroom, will be our punishment. If the pain is genuine 
and sharp, it will purify us and make us better. In fact, having 
ourselves become better, we will improve our environment and will 
make it better.'[This alone can rectify it. Because escapism from 
one's own compassiȍ the sake of evading personal suffering 
and wholesale acquittals is easy. In this way, by-and-by, we may 
reach the conclusion that there are no crimes at all, and that "rn­
vironment is guilty" of everything. We will come to the point, 
following the thread of a ball, that crime is evrn a duty , a noble 
protest against "environment." "Since society is wickedly organized, 
it is imyoss:Lole to strU[6le out of it without a knife in hand." J 
Indeed, this is what the doctrine- of environment contend:: 
in opposition to Christianity which, fully recognizing the prcssurr 
of the milieu, and which, having proclaimed mercy for him who 
has sinned, nevertheless makes it a moral duty for man to ̐truggle 
against environment, and draws a line of demarcation between 
where environment ends and duty begins. :\laking man responsible, 
Christianity eo ipso also recognizes his freedom. However, making 
man dept!ndent on any error in the social organization, the environ­
mental doctrine reduces man to ab̑olute impersJnality, to a total 
emancipation from all personal moral d'!ty, from al̒ ;.- drpendence ; 
reduces him to a state of the most miserable slaver) ̓hat can be 
conceived. 
For in this way a man may wi̔h for tobaco, but because 
he has no money be at liberty to kill another man to get tobacco. 
Think : "An educated man, who suffers more than an uneducated 
one from the failure to satisfy his wants, requires money for their 
satisfaction ; so, then, why shouldn't he kill the uneducated, if 
there is no other way of obtaining monry ?"-Is it possible that 
you have not listened lo lawyers' voices : "Truly," they say, "the 
law has been violated ; it stands to reason that this is a crime ; 
that he has killed the uneducated, but, gentlemen of ' he jury, 
please take into account that . . .  etc.· :uch opinions were almost 
ready to be voiced, and not only "almost . . .  
" 
"However," I can hear a sarcastic voice-"it seems that it is 
you who are pressing on the people the latest environmental phi­
losophy, for whence did it come to them ? Since these twelve jurors 

14 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
-at times, all of them peasants-sit there, and each one of them 
considers it a mortal sin to eat forbidden food in Lent you should 
have accused them point-blank of social tendencies." 
"Of course, of course, why should they be worrying about 
the 'milieu,' I mean, they as a body-I began to ponder-yet, the 
ideas are soaring in the air ; there is something penetrating in an 
idea . . . .  
" 
"There you are ! "-laughs the caustic voice. 
"And what if our people are particularly inclined toward the 
environmental doctrine-by their very nature, by their, let us say, 
Slav propensities ? What if they-our people-are the best material 
in Europe for certain propagandists ?" 
The sarcastic voice laughs still louder, but somewhat arti­
ficially. 
No, as far as the people are concerned, as yet we have here 
merely a trick and not an "environmental philosophy." Here, there 
is one error, one deceit, and in this deceit there is a great seduction. 
This fraud may be explained, "by way of an example at least, 
in the following manner : 
Granted that the people call convicts "sufferers" and give them 
pennies and white loaves. What, in the course, possibly, of ages, 
do they mean to express thereby ?-Christian truth, or "environ­
mental" truth ? Precisely here is the stumbling block ; precisely here 
is that lever which could be successfully seized by the "environ­
mental" propagandist. 
rThere are unexpressed, unconscious ideas which are merely 
stron'gly felt. There are many such ideas and thtj are, as it were, 
fused with the soul of man. They also exist in a nation at large, 
and in mankind taken as a whole. So long as these ideas dwell 
unconsciously in the people's life, and are but strongly and truth­
fully felt-up to that time only can the people pursue a vigorous 
and animated life.jin the endeavors to interpret these concealed 
ideas consists the whole energy of the existence of the people. The 
more firmly the people cling to these ideas, the less they are capable 
of betraying the original feeling ; the less they are inclined to 
submit to different misinterpretations of these ideas, the more 
powerful, solid and happy they are. Among these ideas concealed 
in the Russian people-ideas of the Russian people-is the denomina­
tion of crime as a misfortune, and of criminals-as sufferers. 
[This is a purely Russian idea. In no other European people 
has it been recorded. J.n the West it is now being expounded only 
by philosophers and commentators. However, our people proclaimed 
it long before those philosophers and commentators. But from this 
it does not follow that the people cannot be misled, at least tern-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
IS 
porarily and superficially, by the false interpretation of this idea 
by some glossator. The ultimate meaning and the last word, no 
doubt, will always belong to the people ; yet, temporarily-this may 
be <ti_fferent. J 
L Briefly, by this word "sufferers" the people, as it were, say 
to the "sufferers" :  "You have sinned, and you are suffering ; but 
we, too, are sinful. If we had been in your place, possibly, we 
should have done even worse. If we ourselves had been better, 
perhaps, you would not be kept in jails. Together with the retalia­
tion for your crimes you have also assumed the burden for general 
lawlessness. Pray for us, and we shall pray for you. Meanwhile, 
accept, you 'sufferers,' our pennies ; we give them to you so that 
you may know that we remember you and that we did not sever 
our brotherly bonds with you." 
You must agree that there is nothing easier than to apply 
to this view the doctrine of "environment" :  "Society is wicked, 
and, therefore, we, too, are wicked ; but we are rich, well provided ; 
we misଁed by mere ar:ident that with which you have collided. 
Had we done so, we should have done the same thing which you 
have done. Who is guilty ? The environment is guilty. Thus, there 
is but a vile setup of the environment, and there are no crimes 
at all." 
Now, the trick, which I have mentioned, lies in this sophistical 
inference. 
No, the people do not deny crime, and they know that the 
criminal is guilty. It is only that the people are aware of the fact 
that they themselves are guilty in common with every criminal. 
Still, blaming themselves, the people dn not pro' ..: ଂhereby that 
they believe in "environment" ; on the contrary, the_ believe that 
environment is wholly dependent on them, on their uninterrupted 
repentance and self-betterment. Energ_v, work, ani' struggle-these 
are the things which reform environment. By work and struggle 
alone, independence and the sentiment of self-respect are being 
achieved. "Let us become better, and environment will improve." 
This is what the Russian people, by a strong feeling, are tacitly 
conceiving in their concealed idea of the misfortune ot the criminal. 
Now imagine : what if the criminal himself, on hearing from 
the peopl© that he is a "sufferer," were to consider himself only 
a sufferer and not a criminal ?-In this case the people wr.uld turn 
, 
away from such a misinterpretation a. 
1 would call it a betrayal 
of the popular truth and faith. 
I could cite examples in support of my contention, but let 
us postpone this for the time being, and let us sav this. 
A criminal and a person contemplating the commission of a 

16 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
crime are two different beings, belonging, however, to one and the 
same category. What if, deliberately planning a crime, the criminal 
should say to himself : "There is no crime I "-Would the people call 
him a "sufferer" ? 
Possibly, even for certain, they would so label him. The people 
are compassionate ; besides, there is no criminal more unfortunate 
than he who no longer even considers himself a criminal : he is an 
animal, a beast. What is there in the fact that he does not under­
stand that he is an animal, and that he has killed conscience in 
himself ? He is but doubly unfortunate-doubly unfortunate, but 
also twice as criminal. The people will pity him, but they will not 
renounce their truth. Never did the people, when calling a criminal 
a "sufferer," cease to regard him as a criminal ! And there would 
be no greater misfortune for us should the people agree with the 
criminal and answer him : "No, thou art not guilty, since there 
is no 'crim.e' l "1 
Such is our faith-our common faith-I should like to say ; 
the faith of all who trust and hope. Let me add two more words. 
I was in penal servitude, and I saw "desperate" criminals. 
I repeat, this was a hard school. Not one of them ceased to consider 
himself a criminal. To look at, they were a dreadful and cruel 
lot. However, only the simpletons and newcomers were "braggarts," 
and these used to be ridiculed. Mostly, they were gloomy, pensive 
people. No one spoke about his crimes. I never heard any grumbling. 
It was even impossible to speak aloud about one's crimes. Now 
and then someone would utter a word with a challenge and a twist 
-and all the inmates, as one man, would "put a check on" the pert 
fellow. It was a rule not to speak about this. Nevertheless, I believe, 
probably not one among them evaded long psychic suffering within 
himself-that suffering which is the most purifying and invigorating. 
I saw them solitarily pensive ; I beheld them in the church, pray­
ing before confession ; I listened to their single, spontaneous words 
and exclamations ; I remember their faces-and, believe me, not 
one of them, in his innermost, considered himself right ! 
I would not wish my words to be deemed cruel. Nevertheless, 
I shall venture to speak frankly. I will say plainly : by harsh 
punishment, by prison and penal servitude, perhaps, you would have 
saved half of thଃm. You would have assuaged, and not burdened, 
them. Self-purification through suffering is easier, I tell you : easier 
-than that destiny which you are paving for many of them by 
wholesale acquittals in court. You are merely planting cynicism 
in their souls ; you are leaving in them a seductive question and 
a contempt for yourselves. You do not believe ?-A contempt for 
yourselves, for your judgment, for the judgment of the whole 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
17 
country ! You infuse into their souls incredulity in the popular 
truth, in the truth of God ; you are leaving them confused . . . .  
They will walk away and think : "Oh, that's the way things are 
now ; there is no strictness. Well, they have grown wiser. Perhaps, 
they are afraid. Therefore, one can do it .. ଄ain. It stands to reason : 
if I was in such a need, why should I not have stolen ! "  
And do you really believe that by acquitting them all, or by 
declaring them "deserving every consideration," you are giving 
them a chance to reform ?-What's his worry ! "Possibly, I am not 
guilty at all ! "-this is what, in the long run, he will say. You your­
selves will suggest to him such an inference. And-most important 
of all-faith in the law and in popular truth is being undermined. 
Only recently, for several years in succession, I have been 
living abroad. When I left Russia. the nf!w courts were me_!_ଅly 
beginning to function. How avidly I used to read there in our 
newspapers everything concerning the Russian courts. Abroad I 
was observing our emigres with sorrow, their children ignorant 
of their nativt: tongut, or forgetting it. It was clear to me that 
half of them, by the very nature of things, will finally turn into 
expatriates. I always suffer when thinking about this : so much 
vigor, so many of the best people, perhaps, and in Russia people 
are so needed ! Yet, gentlemen, by Go<i ! sometimes leaving the 
reading room, involuntarily I felt reconciled to absenteeism and 
with the absentees. I experienced real pain in my heart. I would 
be reading : a wife, who murdered her husband, was acquitted. The 
crime was an obvious and proved one ; she confessed to it. And yet : 
"No, not guilty." Then, again, a young man breaks open a strong 
box and steals the cash : "He was very n.uch in love, } 
!:lee ; he had 
to get money to please his sweetheart.-No, not gt;.,lty." And if 
at least all these cases could be explained by compassion or pity ! 
But the thing that I could not undert.tand was the reason for the 
acquittals-and I got confused. The imprc::.sion which I gathered 
was a vague one, almost insulting. In these angry moments at 
times I would be picturing Russia as a marsh or a swamp on which 
someone started building a palace. On the surfacn the ground 
appears solid and even, whert:as this is something akin to the sur­
face of pea soup : jusL step upon it and you will slip down, into 
the very abyss. I reproached myself for my pusillanimity ;  I was 
encouraged by the thought that, from ahr, perhaps I am :•·istaking 
things ; that, temporarily, be that as .t may, I myself am an 
absentee · and so I do not see things at close range, I do not hear 
I 
I 
I 
clearly . . . .  
And here I am-for a long time-again in n.y native land. 
"Let's be frank ! Are they really sorry ?"-That's the question ! 

I8 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
Don't laugh because I am attaching so much importance to this. 
"Compassion" at least tends to explain something and somehow ; 
it at least leads one out of darkness, whereas, without such ex­
planation, there is nothing but obscurity in which there dwells some 
lunatic. 
A peasant beats up his wife, mutilates her ovt>r a period of 
long years ; insults her more than a dog. In despair and in an almost 
senseless state, having made up her mind to commit suicide, she 
goes to the village court. There, they dismiss her and, with an 
apathetic mumble, she is told : "You should live on more amicable 
terms." Is this compassion ? These are the dull words of a drunkard 
waking up after a spell of hard drinking ; he scarcely discerns that 
you are standing in front of him ; stupidly and aimlessly he waves 
his hand at you, so that you shouldn't be in his way ; he can scarcely 
move his tongue-fumes and madness invading his brain. 
By the way, the story of this woman is known ; it is quite 
recent. It has been read in all the papers, and, perhaps, it is still 
remembered : briefly and simply, as a result of her husband's beat­
ing, the wife hanged herself. The husband was tried and was found 
deserving clemency. But for a long time I kept dreaming about 
the whole situation ; I am also dreaming now . . . .  
I kept picturing to myself his figure : it was stated that he 
was tall, stout, strong, light-haired ; I would have added-scanty­
haired. The body-white, bloated ; movements-slow and grave ; his 
glance-concentrated ; he speaks little and rarely ; he drops words 
as if they were precious pearls which he himself values most. Wit­
nesses testified that he was of a cruel disposition : he would catch 
a chicken and hang it by its legs, head down-for mere pleasure ; 
this amused him-a splendid, characteristic trait I 
He beat his wife over a period of several years with whatever 
happened to be around-with ropes, sticks. He would pull out a 
floor board, thrust her feet into the opening, pressing upon the 
board, and would flog and flog. I believe that he himself did not 
know why he beat her : just so, prompted by the same motives 
which made him hang the chicken. He also used to starve her, 
leaving her without bread for three days. He would put the bread 
on a shelf, would call her and tell her : "Don't dare to touch that 
bread ; it's my bread"-which is also a very characteristic trait I 
With her ten-year-oUi child she used to go begging among neigh­
bors : if they gave her some bread, they-mother and child-would 
eat ; if not-they would sଆy hungry. 
He demanded that she work ; she attended to everything 
steadfastly, speechlessly, in dismay, and at last-as if in a state of 
delirium. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1 9  
I can also visualize her appearance : probably, she must have 
been a very little woman-emaciated, lean as a rake. It happens 
sometimes that very big and stout men, white and puffed-up of 
body, marry tiny and skinny women (I have noticed that they are 
inclined to such a choice) ; and it is so strange to observe them 
when they stand or walk side by side. It seems to me that if she 
had become pregnant by him during the Vf'ry last stage, this would 
have been the most characteristic and most essential trait to com­
plete the picture ; otherwise, something would seem to be missing. 
Did you ever see how a peasant whips his wife ?-I did. He 
begins with a rope or a strap. Peasant life is devoid of resthetic 
delighb-music, theatres, magazines ; naturally it has to be enlarged 
somehow. Tying up his wife, or thrusting her legs into the opening 
of a floor board, our good little peaଇant would probably begin­
methodically, phlegmatically, even sleepily-with measured blows, 
not listening to the screams and entreaties l to be more correct­
precisely listening to them, listening with delight, for otherwise what 
pleasure "Nnuld he be deriving from the whipping ?-Do you know, 
gentlemen, that people are born in different surroundings ? Would 
you not believe that this woman, in other surroundings, might 
have been a Juliet or a Beatrice from Shakespeare, a Gretchen from 
Faust ? I do not say that she would be-it would be very silly to 
make such an assertion-but there might have been in her soul, 
in embryo form, something noble, possibly something not inferior 
to what one finds among the noble class, namely, a loving and even 
lofty heart, a character full of most original beauty. 
The fact itself that she tarried so long to commit suicide 
puts her in such a quiet, benign, patient, affectio1.ଈte light. And 
this very Beatrice or Gretchen is being whipped, ͵ lipped like a 
cat l Countless blows are being showered more and m._.re frequently, 
more sharply ; he is getting excited ; he begins to savor the thing. 
Presently he becomes wild, and this he realizes with pleasure. The 
animal shrieks of the tortured woman go to his head as liquor. 
"I'll wash your feet and drink tǞଉter," shouts Beatrice in 
an mlilman vo1ce. At length she grows quiet ; she shrieks no 
longer ; now she merely groans wildly ; her breath -.0mes in gasps 
every minute ; but right then the blows come down more frequently, 
more violently . . . .  Suddenly, he throws away the strap ; like a 
madman, he seizes a stick, a bough, anything, and breaks it over 
her back with three last, terrific blowଊ -No more ! He quits, plants 
himself by the table, sighs, and sets hintself to his kvass. 
The little girl, their daughter-they did have a daughter ! ­
trembling on the oven in the corner, tries to hide : she hears her 
mother shrieking. He walks out. At dawn, mothଋr will come to her 

20 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
senses ; she will get up and, heaving sighs and crying out at every 
movement, she will go to milk the cow ; she goes to work. 
And he, when departing, admonishes her, in his methodical, 
grave voice : "Don't you dare to eat this bread ; it's my bread." 
Lastly, he also became fond of hanging her by her legs, just 
like that chicken. Probably he would hang her, then he would step 
aside, sit down, set himself to his porridge, eat, and, suddenly grasp­
ing the strap, he would again start beating the hanged creature . . . .  
And the little girl keeps shivering, shrinking on the oven ; stealthily 
she throws a wild glance at her mother hanging by her legs, and 
she hides again. . 
. . 
The mother hanged herself in May, early in the morning ; 
probably on a bright spring day. She was seen on the eve, beaten 
up, in a state of complete madness. Before her death she went to 
the village court, and it was there that she was mumblingly advised : 
"You should live on more amicable terms." 
When she hanged herself and the throat rattle started, the 
girl cried out from her corner : "Mama, why do you choke ?" After 
that, timidly she approached her, called to the hanged woman, 
gazed at her wildly, and several times that morning she came out 
of the corner to take a look at her mother, until father returned. 
And here he is before the court-grave, puffed up, concen­
trated. He denies everything : "We lived in perfect harmony" -drops 
the rare words like some precious pearls. The jurors, "after brief 
deliberation," come out and render their verdict : 
"Guilty but deserves clemency." 
Bear in mind thai the little girl testified against her father. 
She told everything, and it is said that she made those present 
weep. Had it not been for the jurors' "clemency," he would have 
been exiled to Siberia. But, with the "clemency," he is to spend 
only eight months in jail ; after which he will return home, and 
will summon the little girl who testified against him on behalf of 
her mother. Again there will be someone to hang by the legs. 
"Deserves clemency I "  And this verdict was deliberately ren­
dered. They knew what would be awaiting the child. Clemency­
to whom, to what ?-One feels as if in some whirl : one is seized 
and turned and twisted around. 
Wait. I will relate another anecdote. 
Some time ago, before the inauguration of the new courts 
(true, not long before) ,  I read in our papers about this little 
incident : a mother carried in her arms a baby of twelve or fourteen 
months. At this age_ǝ¨ u;e cutting their teeth ; they are sick, 
they cry and they §ǜr' 45 Maybe the mother got tired of the 
baby, and there ൂ ,.dluch w.â&, to be done ; and here she had 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
2 1  
to carry the baby in her arms and to listen to its shrill wailing. 
She grew angry. Yet, is so tiny a child to be beaten for this ? It 
is such a pity to beat it, and, besides, what can it understand ?­
It is so helpless, so dependent upon everything around. . . . Nor 
will it stop crying if one beats it : it will burst into tears, and 
will clasp you with its little hands ; or f"tse, it will start kissing 
you, and will weep and weep. So she did not beat it. But there 
stood in the room a samovar with water boiling in it. She placed 
the baby's little hand right under the faucet and turned it open. 
She kept that little hand under boiling water for some ten seconds. 
This is a fact ; I read about it. But imagine if this were to 
happen in our day, and the woman were summoned to court. The 
jurors would retire, and "after brief deliberation," they would render 
the verdict : "Deserves clemency." 
Only imagine such a thing. I urge mothers at least to picture 
this. How a lawyer would be wheedling on such an occasion : 
"Gentlemen of the jury, of course this is not what you would 
call a h•mu.ne incident · but look at the case in toto ; please visualize 
the environment, the surroundings. This is a poor woman ; she is 
the only worker in the household ; she suffers disappointments. She 
cannot even afford to hire a nurse. It stands to reason that in a 
moment when anger against the all-devouring milieu, so to speak, 
penetrates one, then, gentlemen, it is OIIIY natural that she should 
have drawn the little hand under the faucet of the samovar . . .  , 
and then . . .  
" 
Oh, of course, I realize the whole usefulness of the lawyer's 
profession, which is respected by everybody. Stm, at times, it is 
impossible not to view the problem from this-T r ·lncede-light­
minded, but nevertheless forced, point of view : in· ଌd, on occa­
sions, what a beastly job is his-one ponders : he spin!> around, and 
tries-oh, how hard ! -to extricate him.;elf ; he lies against his con­
science, against his conviction, against all morality, against every­
thing human !. No, he is not being paid for nothing. 
"Look here ! "-suddenly exclaims the familiar caustic voice­
"This is all nonsense, and nothing but your fantasy : jurors never 
have rendered such a verdict. The lawyer never did go a round­
about way. It's you ,.·bo invented the whole thing I "  
But the wife hung head over heels, as a chicken I And "this 
is my bread : don't you dare to touch it ! '' And the little g:rl shiver­
ing on that oven, listening for a half l ·tr to her mother s shrieks l 
And, "Mama, why do you choke ?"-lsn't all this identical with 
the little hand under boiling water ?-Indeed-almost identical ! 
"Ignorance - dullness - have pity - environment," insists the 
peasant's lawyer. But millions of them are living-and not all of 

22 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
them indulge in hanging their wives by the legs I -AII the same, 
there must be here a demarcation line. . . . Oh, gentlemen of the 
bar, stop spinning around with your "environment" I 
The Citizen, 1873, No. 2. 
SOMETHING PERSONAL 
Several times I have been urged to write my literary remi­
niscences. I don't know whether I shall write them, and, besides, 
my memory is weak. Furthermore, it is sad to recollect ; I don't 
like to recollect. However, some episodes of my literary career stick 
in my mind with extraordinary lucidity, notwithstanding my weak 
memory. 
Here, for instance, is an anecdote. 
One morning, during spring, I called on the late Egor Petrovich 
Kovalevsky. He was very much pleased with my novel Crime and 
Punishment, which just then had appeared in The Russian Mes­
senger. He ardently praised it, and he conveyed to me a precious 
comment by a certain person whose name I cannot reveal. Mean­
while, two magazine publishers entered the room, one after the 
other. One of these magazines subsequently acquired a very large 
number of subscribers-indeed, unheard-of in the annals of our 
monthly perodicals-but at that time it was only beginning. The 
other journal, on the contrary, was about to terminate its existence 
which had exercised a remarkable and potent influence upon both 
literature and the public. But then, that morning, its publisher 
did not know that his · magazine was so near to its close. It was 
with the latter publisher that we went into another room, and we 
found ourselves alone. 
Without mentioning his name, I will merely say that my first 
meeting with him was an extremely warm one-one that I shall 
always remember. Perhaps, he also recalls it. In those days he was 
not yet editor. Later, there developed many misunderstandings. 
Upon my return from Siberia, we met only on rare occasions, but 
once, in passing, he spoke to me very sympathetically and, in con­
nection with a certain matter, he called my attention to a poem 
-the best he had ever written. I may add that in his appearance 
and habits no one less than he resembled a poet, especially of the 
category of "sufferi 1g" poets. Yet, he is one of the most passionate, 
most gloomy and "suffering" among our bards. 
"Well now, we have scolded you," he told me (that is, in 
his magazine, for Crime-and Punishment). 
11I know," said I. 
11And do you know why ?" 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
"Probably, as a matter of principle." 
"For Chernyshevsky." 
I stood dumbfounded in surprise. 
23 
"N. N., who wrote the critical review"-continued the pub­
lisher-"told me : 'The novel is good ; but since in one of his stories, 
two years ago, he was not ashamed to insuit a poor exile, and cari­
catured him, I shall denounce his novel.' " 
"So this is the same stupid tattle about The Crocodile," I 
exclaimed, grasping what it was about. "Is it possible that you, 
too, believe it ? Have you yourself read this story of mine-The 
Crocodile ?" 
"No, I haven't read it." 
"But all this is gossip, the most trivial gossip that one can 
imagine. Indeed, one has to have the mind and the poetic instinct 
of a Bulgarin, to perceive between the lines in this bagatelle, in 
this comic story, a 'civic' allegory, and, in addition, one directed 
against Chernyshevsky ! If you only knew how silly this strained 
explana଍iur. is ! By thf' way, I shall never forgive myself that two 
years ago I did not protest against this mean calumny, when it 
had just been launched ! " 
This conversation with the editor of a now long defunct maga­
zine took place some seven years ago, and up to the present time 
I have not protested against the "calun.ny"-through neglect, and 
because of "lack of time." And yet, this meanness, ascribed to 
me, continues to dwell in the memories of certain persons as an 
unquestionable fact ; it has been propagated in literary circles ; it 
has spread among the public, and on more than one occasion it 
has already caused me annoyance. It i!'\ time to sa:· -:t least a few 
words about all this, all the more so as this is an o1 • '>rtune occa­
sion to refute, even without proof, a calumny which, by the way, 
is also absolutely prooftess. By my protracted silf'nce and neglect 
up to the present, I countenanced it, as it were. 
I first met Nikolai Gavrilovich Chernyshevsky in 1859, dur­
ing the year of my return from Siberia-I don't remember where 
and how. Later, we would meet sometimes, but very rarely ; we 
would converse, but very little. Yet, invariably we used to shake 
hands. Hertzen told rr:·ࢹ that Chernyshevsky gave him a disagreeable 
impression, that is, by his appearance and manners. For my part, 
I liked Chernyshevsky's appearance and manners. 
One morning I found at the do; 
of my apartmem, on the 
handle of the lock, one of the most remarkable proclamations of 
those which had been appearing at the time, and there had ben 
a good many of them. It was entitled : To the Young Generation. 
One could not have irnagined anything more nonsensical and stupid. 

24 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
Its content was most shocking and expressed in a most ludicrous 
form, that could have been conceived only by a villain. I was very 
much annoyed, and all day I felt sad. All this was then still novel, 
and so close that it was difficult to gain a clear view of these men. 
Precisely, it was difficult because somehow one refused to believe 
that such a trifle was concealed under the whole upheaval. I am 
not referring to the movement, as a whole, which was then on 
foot, but merely to the people involved in it. As to the movement, 
it was a distressing, pathological phenomenon, yet one that was 
inevitable by reason of its historical logic ; it will constitute a grave 
page in the Petersburg period of our history. And it seems that 
this page is far from being fully written. 
And here, I, who heart and soul disagreed with these people 
and with the meaning of their movement-! became suddenly vexed 
and almost ashamed, as it were, of their incompetency : "Why is 
everything so stupid and ignorant about them ? And what do I care 
about this matter ?" But I regretted-not their failure. Strictly 
speaking, I did not know the disseminators of the proclamations ; 
I do not know them even to this day ; but the thing that was 
precisely sad was the fact that this phenomenon was not just a 
single one, nor was it merely a silly trick of these particular men 
who meant nothing to me. But I was oppressed by this fact : by 
the educational, mental level and the absence of any comprehension. 
of reality-this, to me, was terribly oppressive. 
Even though I had lived in Petersburg some three years and 
had observed certain events, this proclamation that morning stupe­
fied me, as it were, and· came as an altogether new and unexpected 
revelation : never before that day had I experienced such nullity ! 
Precisely the degree of that nullity was frightening. 
Towards evening I suddenly decided to go to Chernyshevsky. 
Prior to that time I had never visited him, nor had he visited me. 
I recall, it was about five in the afternoon. I found Nikolai 
Gavrilovich all alone : even the servants were not at home, and 
he himself opened the door. He greeted me with extreme cordiality 
and led me into his living room. 
"Nikolai Gavrilovich, what is this ?"-1 handed him the proc­
lamation. 
He took it as something quite unknown to him and read it. 
There were only a b. ::It ten lines. 
"Now, what ?"-he asked me, with a slight smile. 
"Is it possible that they are so stupid and ridiculous ? Is it 
possible that they can't be stopped and that an end can't be put 
to this abomination ?" 
He answered very weightily and impressively : 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
25 
"Do you really suppose that I am in sympathy with them 
and that I could have taken part in the compilation of this scrap 
of paper ?" 
"Indeed, I do not suppose,"-! answered-"and I even deem 
it unnecessary to assure you of this. But at any rate they should 
be stopped by all means. Your word carril''i weight with them, and 
they certainly are afraid of your opinion." 
"I know no one among them." 
"I am also convinced of this. However, one doesn't have to 
know them at all or to speak personally to them. It would suffice 
if you would express aloud somewhere your reproof. This will 
reach them." 
"Maybe it will have no effect. Besides, these, as side facts, 
are inevitable." 
"And yet they are damaging to everybody and everything." 
Presently another guest rang the bell--I don't recall who. 
I left. I deem it my duty to remark that I spoke to Chernyshevsky 
sincerel:,·, ail•i T believ' d,· as I also believe now, that he was not 
"in sympathy" with these disseminators. I was under the impres­
sion that Nikolai Gavrilovich was displeased with my visit. Several 
days later he confirmed this, having personally called on me. He 
stayed with me for an hour or so, and I confess that I have rarely 
met a more kindhearted, cordial man, so that even then I felt 
puzzled over certain comments on his alleged harsh, uncongenial 
character. 
It was clear to me that he wanted to become acquainted with 
me, and I recall that this pleased me. Once more after that I went 
to see him, and he also visited me agair. Soon, O\' : . · to personal 
circumstances, I went to live in Moscow, and I stayl 
there about 
nine months. The acquaintance which had begun, thus came to an 
end. After that Chernyshevsky's am•!>t took plac ' and his exile_ 
I was never able to find out anything about his case ; nor do I 
know anything at present. 
About eighteen months ago it occurred to me to write a 
fantastic tale-something along the lines of Gogol's story The Nose. 
Never before did I attempt to write in a fantastic vein. This was 
a purely literary pra1.k, solely for the sake of humor. In fact, I 
had come across several comical situations which I sought to un­
fold. Though the subject is not worth it, I shall relate ii so that 
what has later been made out of it w1 
be understood. 
A Petersburg government official, before leaving for abroad, 
goes with his young wife and his inseparable friend to the Passage, 
and, among other things, they all stop to look at a crocodile. This 
clerk belongs to the middle class, but he is one of those who possess 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
an independent fortune ; he is still young but devoured by am­
bition ; above all, he is a fool-just as the unforgettable Major 
Kovalev who had lost his nose. Comically, he is convinced of his 
great merits, he is half-educated, but considers himself almost a 
genius ; in his department he is looked upon as a man full of 
emptiness, and he is always offended by the general neglect of 
him. As if in revenge therefor, he bosses and tyrannizes over his 
pusillanimous friend, pluming himself over him by his intellect. 
The friend hates him but endures everything because secretly he 
is fond of the wife. 
In the Passage, while this little young and good-looking dame, 
of a purely Petersburg pattern, a brainless and coquettish petty 
creature of the middle class, forgets herself in gazing at monkeys 
whch are being shown along with the crocodile, her ingenious hus­
band manages somehow to exasperate the hitherto sleepy creature 
which has been lying still as a log. Suddenly, the beast opens wide 
its jaws and swallows him up, leaving no trace of him. It develops 
soon that the great man had suffered not even the slightest injury 
from this episode ; contrarywise, with his peculiar obstinacy, he 
declares from the insides of the crocodile that he feels quite com­
fortable sitting there. Presently, friend and wife depart to solicit 
the aid of the authorities for the liberation of the prisoner. In 
order to do so, it appears quite inevitable to kill the animal, to 
cut it up and thus release the great man. But, of course, the German, 
owner of the crocodile, and his inseparable Mutter must be com­
pensated for the loss of their crocodile. At first, the German is 
indignant and he fears that the creature which has swallowed a 
"whole government official" may die ; but shortly he guesses that 
the swallowed member of the Petersburg administration, and one 
who, in addition, has happily survived, henceforth may bring him 
in Europe an extraordinary harvest. He demands an enormous sum 
for the crocodile, and-on top of that-the rank of a Russian colonel. 
On the other hand, the authorities feel quite embarrassed, 
since this, in the annals of their Ministry, is too novel a case, for 
which, up to then, there had been no precedent. "If only we could 
dig up an analogous example, no matter how trifling, we could 
start acting, but as things stand-it is difficult." The authorities 
also suspect that the bureaucrat thrust himself into the crocodile, 
prompted by some forbidden liberal tendencies. Meanwhile, the 
spouse begins to feel that her status, "akin to that of a widow," 
is not devoid of piquancy. At the same time, the swallowed husband 
definitely declares to his friend that it is far better for him to 
remain inside the crocodile than in government service, inasmuch 
as now at least, willy-nilly, he is going to be noticed-something 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
which he had never been able to achieve. He insists that his wife 
start giving evening parties, and that he be brought to these parties 
in a chest, together with the crocodile. He is sure that the whole 
af Petersburg and state dignitaries will rush to these parties, to 
behold the new phenomenon. At this point he is resolved to score 
a victory : "I shall utter the truth and teach ; I shall give advice 
to the statesman, and I shall prove my ability to the Minister," 
says he, already considering himself, as it were, not of this world 
and, therefore, entitled to give advice and pronounce judgments. 
In answer to the cautious, yet venomous, question of the friend : 
"And what if, as a result of some unexpected process, which, how­
ever, must be expected, he should be digested into something which 
he does not expect ?"-the great man states that he has already 
given thought to this, but that he will indignantly resist this phe­
nomenon though it be conforming to the laws of nature. 
However, the wife refuses to give parties for the specified pur­
pose, notwithstanding the fact that the idea itself appeals to her. 
"How c..1ulu it be tha! my husband should be brought to me in 
a chest ?"-she argues. Besides, the status of a widow pleases her 
more and more. She acquires a taste for it ; people sympathize 
with her. Her husband's chief comes to visit her and he plays 
cards with her . . . .  
Such, then, is the first part of this burlesque story-it is not 
finished. Some day, by all means, I will finish it, even though I 
have forgotten it and have to read it over to recall it. 
And yet, here is what people managed to make out of this 
bagatelle. No sooner had the story appeared in the magazine Epoch 
(in 1865) ,  than The Voice, unexpectedly_ printed r. '" · ·ange notice. 
I do not literally recall its contents and, besides, it v. . · ctld take too 
much trouble to check it, but its meaning was somewhat along 
these lines : "In vain, it would seem, does the .1uthor of The 
Crocodile choose this path ; it will bring him neither honor nor 
anticipated advantage," etc., etc., followed by a few most nebulous 
and inimical stings. I read it in passing, understood nothing, but 
perceived much venom without comprehending why. This vague 
feuilletonistic comment, in itself, of course, could cause me no 
damage : all the same 110 one among the readers could have under­
stood it-even as myself. Yet, a week later, N. N. S. said to me : 
"Do you know what they are thinking there ?-There ࢸ i}ey are 
convinced that your Crocodile is an alL · Jry, the story of Cherny­
shevsky's exile, and that it was your intention to portray and 
ridicule him." Although surprised, I wasn't much worried-what 
kind of conjectures can't be set forth ? This opininn seemed to me 
too isolated and far-fetched to produce any effect, and I deemed 

28 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY :  1873 
it altogether unnecessary to protest. This I will never forgive my­
self, since the opinion took root and did spread. Calomniez, il en 
restera toujours quelque chose. 
However, even now I am certain that here there was no 
calumny at all-and what would be the purpose ?-In literary circles 
I had quarrelled with almost no one-at least, seriously. At present, 
this very moment, I am talking about myself for the second time 
only during the period of the twenty-seven years of my literary 
career. Here, there was simply dullness-gloomy, suspicious dullness 
planted in some head "with a tendency." I am convinced that this 
wise head is quite certain-even up to the present day-that it has 
not erred, and that, of course, I must have ridiculed ill-starred 
Chernyshevsky. Furthermore, I am convinced that even today I 
should be unable, despite any explanations and apologies, to sway 
this head to my side. Not in vain is this a wise head. (It goes 
without saying that I am speaking here not about Andrei Alex­
androvich : as editor and publisher of his paper, in this matter, 
as usual, he had no part. ) 
Wherein is the allegry ?-Why, certainly-the crocodile sig­
nifies Siberia ; the self-conceited and light-minded bureaucrat is 
Chernyshevsky. He got into the crocodile, but still hopes to teach 
the whole world. The pusillanimous friend of his typifies all the 
local friends of Chernyshevsky. The good-looking but stupid little 
wife of the bureaucrat, enjoying her status "as that of a widow" 
-this is . . . But this is dirty to such an extent that I decline 
to soil myself and to. continue the explanation of the allegory. 
(And yeL it did take root ; and it did so, perhaps, precisely because 
of this last insinuation. I have irrefutable proof thereof. )  
So that the presumption was made that I ,  myself a former 
exile and a convict, rejoiced in the exile of another "unfortunate" ; 
even more-l wrote on this occasion a diatribe. Yet, where is the 
proof of that ? In the allegory ? But give me whatever you please : 
The Memoirs oj a Lunatic, the ode God, Uri Miloslavsky, the verses 
of Fet-anything-and I undertake to prove to you by thr very 
first ten lines, designated by you, that therein is precisely an 
allegory on the Franco-Prussian war or a pasquinade on the actor 
Gorbunov-in a word, on anyone you please, on anyone you may 
insist upon. 
Please recall how, in olden days, at the end of the Forties, 
for instance, censors used to examine manuscripts : there wasn't 
a line, there wasn't a dot in which something, some allegory, 
wouldn't have been suspected. Let them produce anything at all 
from the record of my whole life in support of the fact that I 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
resemble a malicious, heartless lampooner, and that one may expect 
from me allegories of this kind. 
On the contrary, the very haste and promptitude of such 
inferences prove a certain vileness of spirit in the accusers, the 
coarseness and inhumanity of their views. Here, the simpleminded­
ness of the conjecture itself is no excuse. Why not ?-One can be 
simplemindedly vile-and that's all. 
Perhaps, I had a personal hatred of Chernyshevsky ?-To fore­
stall this accusation I gave above an account of our brief and 
cordial acquaintance. It may be said : this is not enough, for I 
may have nourished a concealed hate. Then, let them set forth 
pretexts for such animosity, if they have anything to produce. But 
there were no such pretexts. On the other hand, I am certain that 
Chernyshevsky himself would corroborate the veracity of my ac­
count of our meeting, if some day he should read it. And I pray 
God that he be given an opportunity to do so. I am longing for 
this as warmly, as ardently as I sincerely regretted, and do regret, 
his midoru.lole 
But, perhaps, this was hate generated by convictions ? 
Why ?-Chernyshevsky never offended me by his convictions. 
One can very much respect a man, even though radically disagree­
ing with his ideas. On this point, however, I can speak not alto­
gether without foundation, and I even nave a little proof. In one 
of the last issues of the magazine Epoch, which at about that time 
terminated its existence (it may even have been in the very last 
issue) , there appeared a long critical review of the "famous" novel 
by Chernyshevsky, What to Do ? This is a remarkable article, com­
ing from a renowned pen. And whaP - Tn it just . r:bute is paid 
to Chernyshevsky's intellect and talent. In fact, his 
· •>Vel is being 
warmly praised. And no one has ever doubted his outstanding 
intellect. The article merely mentions the peculia_ ities and devia­
tions of his mind ; yet, the very seriousness of the review is proof 
of the due respect of our critic for the merits of the author dis­
cussed by him. Now, please concede : if there was in me hatred 
arising from convictions, of course, I would not have permitted 
an article in the magazine in which Chernyshevsky was spoken of 
with due respect ; for I, not anyone else, was editor of the Epoch. 
Maybe, by publishing a venomous allegory, I was hoping to 
gain somewhere en haut lieu ?-But when and who can say that 
I have ever sought favors or have ga. ed anything in this sense 
in some lieu-in other words, that I have sold my pen? I believe 
that the author of the conjecture himself had no such thought, 
notwithstanding his simplemindedness. Nor, Ul'lder any circum-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
stances, would it have been given credence in literary circles, had 
the accusation been confined to this alone. 
As to the possibility of a vile allegory concerning some 
domestic facts in the life of Nikolai Gavrilovich, I repeat, I do 
not even wish to touch on this point lest I become soiled. 
I am very sorry that on this occasion I started speaking about 
myself. This is what it means to write literary memoirs. I never 
will write them. I regret very much that I have undoubtedly bored 
the reader, but I am writing a diary, a diary of my personal im­
pressions, and only recently have I acquired a "literary" impression, 
which all of a sudden indirectly reminded me also of the forgotten 
anecdote about my forgotten Crocodile. 
The other day one of the men whom I respect most, and 
whose opinions I treasure highly, said to me : 
"I have just read your article on The Milieu and on the 
verdicts of our jurors (The Citizen, No. 2 ) . I am quite in accord 
with you, but your article may produce an unpleasant misunder­
standing. It may be thought that you are advocating the abolition 
of jury trials and that you favor renewed interference by way of 
administrative tutelage . . . .  
" 
I was sorrowfully surprised. This was the voice of a most 
impartial man, standing outside of any literary parties and "al­
legories." 
Is it possible that my article may be interpreted in such a 
sense I If so, there is nothing one can speak about. The economic 
and moral condition 9f the people after the abolition of serfdom 
is awful. Irrefutable and most disturbing facts attest to this every 
minute. Decline of morality, cheapness, shyster-innkeepers, theft and 
daylight banditry-all these are undeniable facts ; and the thing 
keeps growing and growing. And what ?-If anyone, being spiritually 
and in his heart alarmed, should grasp the pen and write about 
all this-why, is it really possible that people would start shouting 
that the man favors serfdom and would have it restored among the 
peasants ? 
"At any rate, it is desirable that the people possess full free­
dom to get out of their sad situation without any tutelage and 
any turns backward." 
Quite so, and this is precisely my thought ! And even if as 
a result of natio11al decadence (sometimes, here and there, looking 
upon themselves they admit : "Yes, we've weakened, weakened ! ")­
even, I say, if a real, indubitably popular calamity should occur-some 
colossal collapse, some big misfortune-even then the people would 
save themselves, and us, too, as it has happened to them many 
a time-a fact which is confirmed by their whole history. Such 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
3 1  
is my idea. Precisely-no more meddling I 
Still, how words may 
be understood and misinterpreted I Possibly, I may run into another 
allegory ! 
The Citizen, I87J, No. 3· 
VLAS 
Do you remember VIas ? For some reason I am reminded of him. 
In a ragged coat-open collar­
With his old head white and bare, 
Through the cities full of squalor, 
Paces VIas with anxious stare. 
On his chest-a copper ikon : 
He collects for God's own church 
A;; Is J. nown, in lays gone by, this same VIas "had no God." 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
flogging 
Sent his wife into her grave, 
And to bandits, skilled in robbing, 
To horse-thieves, he shelter gave. 
Even to horse-stealers I -the poet scares us, adopting the tone 
of a pious old woman. My, what sins I And he had been struck 
with lightning. VIas fell sick, and he saw a vision, 'lfter which be 
took an oath to become a beggar and ࢷc engage in 
))]ections for 
the church. 
He did see the world's damnation, 
Sinners did he see in hell : 
·Devils torture them and tingle, 
Restless witch stings them with cries, 
And with her Ethiopians mingle­
Ugly, black, with glowing eyes 
Some hang strung on long wood rods, 
Others lick the red-hot . •or . . . 
Briefly, unimaginable horrors-so that one is even scared to 
read. "But," the poet continues, "it is impossible- ؁o describe every­
thing." 

J2 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
Pilgrim-women, humbly clever, 
Even better stories tell. 
Oh, poet ! - (Unfortunately, you are our genuine poet) -if you 
would only cease approaching the people with ecstasies, about which 
Pilgrim-women, humbly clever, 
Even better stories tell-
you would not offend us by the deduction that, after all, in conse­
quence of such trifles, women's trifles 
Churches rise-God's holy churches­
On the face of our land. 
And even though VIas is wandering with his sack, out of mere 
.. foolishness," still you did grasp the gravity of his suffering ; still, 
you did become impressed with his stately figure. ( Of course, you 
are a poet ; it could not have been otherwise.) 
His whole soul's enormous power 
On a godly task was spent. 
-you say beautifully. However, I wish to believe that you have 
Inserted your sarcasm unwittingly, for fear of the liberals, since this 
awful, even intimidating, power of VIas's humility ; this craving for 
self-salvation ; this burning thirst for suffering-have also struck you, 
a cosmopolitan and a Russian gentilhomme, and the stately popular 
image wrought enthusiasm and respect from your highly liberal soul ! 
All that VIas had owned and treasured 
He forsook, and barefoot, bare, 
He went forth, in footfall measured, 
To collect God's churches' share. 
Ever since he roams and wanders- . 
Soon it will be thirty years-
And he lives on alms, and ponders 
O'er his vow which he endears. 
Full of deep, despairing sorrow, 
Swarthy-faced, erect and tall, 
(This is wonderfully beautiful ! ) 
Paces he from day to morrow 
In the heat and rainy fall. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
With his book for church collection 
Paces VIas through woods and plains, 
And he bears for soul's perfection 
On his body iron chains. 
33 
Wonderful, wonderful ! So wonderful that it seems it was not 
you who wrote this ; it seems that not you but somebody else in 
your stead has later been playing antics "on the Volga"-also, in 
superb verses-about the haulers' songs. Perhaps, you did not play 
antics "on the Volga," maybe just a little ; on the Volga, too, you 
loved in the hauler the universal man, and you suffered for him, 
that is, strictly speaking, not for the hauler but, so to speak, for the 
universal hauler. You see, to love the universal man necessarily 
means to despise, and, at times, to hate the real man standing at 
your side. 
Intentionally I emphasized the immeasurably beautiful verses 
in this burlesque poem (taking it as a whole-if you will pardon 
me) .  
The reason why I recalled this poetical VIas is that a few 
days ago I heard a most fantastic story about another VIas, even 
about two hitherto unheard-of Vlases. The episode is a real one, 
and is certainly remarkable by reason of its strangeness. 
There are in monasteries in Russia, 1t is said, ascetics, monks­
confessors and light-bearers. Whether this is good or bad ; whether 
such monks are or are not needed, I shall not discuss at this mo­
ment ; nor did I take up my pen for this purpose. 
However, since we are living in a given reality, it is impossible 
to eject from the story even a monk , i f  the story ; -؂If is based 
on him. These monks, light-bearers, are at times, it 
' ould seem, 
endowed with great intellect and erudition. At least, so they are 
described, although I know nothing ahout it. It is recounted that 
among them there are such as possess a wonderful gift for pene­
trating the human soul and mastering it. Several such men, it is 
said, are known to the whole of Russia, that is, substantially, to 
those whom this concerns. Let us suppose that such an elder lives 
in the Kherson province, and :vet the people journey to him, some­
times even on foot, frc;n Petersburg or Archangel, from Siberia or 
the Caucasus. Of course, they go with souls crushed by despair, 
souls which no longer hope for recovery, or with such a terrible 
burden at heart that the sinner refraiL 
from speaking about it 
to his priest-confessor-not from fear or distrust, but simply because 
he absolutely despairs of his salvation. But if he happens to hear 
about any such monk, light-bearer, he will go to him. 
"You know"-said one of these elders, in a friendly, face-to-

34 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
face conversation with a certain listener-"! have ben listening to 
people for twenty years and, believe me, I have learned-oh, how 
much-about the most hidden and complex ailments of the human 
soul ; but even after twenty years sometimes I begin to shiver with 
indignation when listening to certain secrets. I lose the calmness 
of the spirit which is needed for giving consolation and, instead, 
I feel compelled to fortify myself in humility and serenity." 
At this point he told me the strange story taken from popular 
life, which I mentioned above. 
"I see there, creeping into my room, a peasant on his knees. 
I had seen him before out of my window, creeping on the ground. 
His first words to me were : 
" 'There's no salvation for me. I'm damned I And whatever 
you may say-all the same, I'm damned.' 
"Somehow I managed to calm him. I could see that the man 
had crawled from afar, after suffering. 
" 'Several of us lads got together in the village'-thus he started 
-'and we began to bet : which one of us would outdo the others 
in some temerarious deed ? Because of pride, I challenged the rest. 
A lad took me aside, and said to me, face-to-face : 
" ' "It is impossible for you to do what you are telling. You're 
boasting.'' 
" 'I began to swear to him. 
" ' "No, wait, swear"-says he-"by your salvation in the other 
world that you will do exactly as I tell you.'' 
" 'I swore. 
" ' "Soon we'll have J.,ent,"-he says-"start fasting. When you 
go to Holy Communion-accept the Eucharist, but do not swallow 
it. Step aside-take it out with your hand and preserve it. And later 
I will tell you what to do.'' 
" 'I did as he told me. Straight from the church he led me 
into a kitchen garden. He took a rod, thrust it into the earth and 
said : "Put it I "  I put the Eucharist on the rod. 
" '  "Now"-says he-"bring a gun." 
" 'I brought it. 
" ' "Load it.'' 
" 'I loaded it. 
" ' "Lift it and shoot.'' 
" 'I lifted my hand and started aiming. And just as I was 
about to fire the shot, suddenly there appeared before me a cross, 
and on the cross-our Savior. I fell down with the gun and became 
unconscious.' " 
This had occurred several years before he came to the old 
monk. Who this VIas was, whence was he, and what his name was 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
35 
-the elder, of course, did not disclose ; nor did he divulge what 
penitence he bad conferred upon him. Probably, be bad burdened 
the soul with some dreadful load, which human strength could not 
have borne, on the theory that the heavier-the better : "He him­
self had crept after suffering." 
Isn't this a rather characteristic epiRode, hinting at many 
things, so that, perhaps, it is worthy of special-though, two or 
three minutes'-scrutiny. I am still of the opinion that theirs will 
be the last word-I mean, these different "Vlases," the repenting 
and non-repenting ones ; they will show us the new path and the 
new solution to all our seemingly insoluble difficulties. Certainly, 
it will not be Petersburg that will finally settle the Russian destiny. 
For this reason, every slightest new trait characterizing these "new 
people" may be worthy of our attention. 
To begin with, I am puzzled-indeed, this is the most sur­
prising point-over the very inception of the affair, that is, over 
the very possibility of such an argument and contention in a Rus­
sian village : "Who will outdo the others in some temerar ious deed ?" 
This is a tact hindng at a good many things and, to me, it is almost 
wholly surprising-even though I have met many and most queer 
people. I may add that the seeming singularity of this fact is, 
however, proof of its authenticity : when people lie they will invent 
something much more common and conforming to conventional 
things, so that everybody might believe it. 
Further, the strictly medical aspect of the facts is remarkable. 
Hallucination is pre-eminently a pathological phenomenon ; it is a 
very rare malady. The possibility of sudden hallucination, even in 
a very excited, yet fully normal, individual, is perhaps art unheard-of 
case. But this is a medical problem, and I ;:,!'!l not much · ؃rsed in it. 
The psychological aspect of the facts is a diffe1 · nt matter. 
Here we have two popular types, in the highest degree characteristic 
of the Russian people as a whole. First of all-the ob1ivion of evf'ry 
measure in everything (and note, almost alw؄ys, a temporary and 
passing oblivion constituting, as it were, a hypnotic phenomenon ) .  
This i s  a n  urge for the extreme, for the fainting sensation of 
approaching an abyss, and half-leaning over it-to pe"p into the 
bottomless pit, and, in some very rare cases, to throw oneself into 
it bead-forward as in a trenzy. 
This is an urge for negation in a man, sometimes, most be­
lieving and venerating-negation of everything, of the most ;;acred 
thing in one's heart, of one's loftiest id1 .1 in its totality, which 
only a moment before one had worshipped, but which, all of a 
sudden, bad seemingly become an almost unbearable burden. 
Particularly remarkable is that haste, that impetuosity, with 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 187.3 
which the Russian hurries to reveal himself in certain significant 
moments of his own or the nation's life-to reveal himself whether 
it be in good or in evil. Sometimes here there is simply no restraint. 
Be it love, or liquor, debauch, egotism, envy-in all these some 
Russians will give themselves away, heart and soul ; they are ready 
to sever with everything, to forswear everything-family, customs, 
God. 
The kindest man, suddenly, may somehow turn into a most 
wicked debauchee and criminal-simply because he is caught into 
this whirl, into the fatal tornado of convulsive and momentary self­
negation and self-annihilation, which is so typical of the Russian 
national character in certain crucial moments of his life. 
As against this, the individual Russian, as well as the people 
as a whole, with equal force and impetuosity, with equal thirst for 
self-preservation and repentance, save themselves, usually, when 
they have reached the utmost limit, that is, when there is already 
nowhere to go. But it is most significant that the back-stroke, the 
:;hock of restoration and self-salvation, is invariably more serious 
than the former impulse of negation and self-destruction. This means 
that the latter impulse is to be credited to petty pusillanimity, 
whereas the Russian invests in his restoration an enormous and 
solemn effort, regarding the former negative motion with contempt 
for himself. 
I believe that the main and most fundamental spiritual quest 
of the Russian people is their craving for suffering-perpetual and 
unquenchable suffering-everywhere and in everything. It seems that 
they have been affected. by this thirst for martyrdom from time 
immemorial. The suffering stream flows through their whole history 
-not merely because of external calamities and misfortunes : it 
gushes from the people's very heart. 
Even in happiness there is in the Russian people an element 
of suffering ; otherwise, felicity to them is incomplete. Never, not 
even in the most solemn hours of their history, do they assume 
an uppish and pompous air ; there is an air of tenderness bordering 
on suffering ; they are heaving sighs attributing their glory to God's 
mercy. The Russian people, as it were, delight in their afflictions. 
And that which is true of the people as a whole is also characteristic 
of individual types-of course, generally speaking. 
For example, look at the manifold patterns of the Russian 
debauchee : here we nave not merely excessive debauch, sometimes 
astounding us by the boldness of its scale and the abomination 
of corruption of the hum!ln soul. That debauchee, to begin with, 
is a sufferer himself. In the Russian, even if he be a fool, there 
is no trace of naive and pompous self-sufficiency. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
3 7 
Take a Russian drunkard and compare him, let us say, with 
a German drunkard : the Russian is more abominable than the 
German ; still, the German drunkard is unmistakably more stupid 
and ridiculous than the Russian. The Germans are pre-eminently 
a self-conceited people ; they are proud of themselves. In a drunken 
German these fundamental national traits increase with the meas­
ure of beer consumed. He gets home drunk as a fiddler, and 
yet proud of himself. The Russian toper likes to drink from grief, 
and to weep. And even while he assumes bold airs, he does not 
triumph, but is merely turbulent. Invariably, he will recall some 
offense and will start reproaching the offender, whether or not 
he be present. Insolently, he will, perhaps, argue that he is some­
thing next to a general ; he swears bitterly and, if people refuse 
to believe him, he will finally sound an alarm and cry out for help. 
Still, the reason why he is so ugly and why he cries out for help 
is that, in the innermost part of his tipsy soul, he is unquestionably 
convinced that he is no "general" at all, but merely a nasty sot, 
and that he has become filthier than a beast. 
The thmg which "' t  perceive from a microscopic example is 
also true in larger instances. The biggest debauchee, one who is 
even attractive by his temerity and elegant vices, so that fools seek 
to imitate him, nevertheless scents through some instinct-in the 
innermost of hi5 perverted soul-that, in the last analysis, he is 
nothing but a scoundrel. He is not pleased with himself ; there 
grows a reproof in his heart, and so he takes vengeance on those 
around him ; he rages and assails everybody, and at this juncture 
he reaches his limit, struggling against his affliction which steadily 
accumulates in his heart and, at the same time, delightedly slakes 
his thirst with that suffering. If he is c:-a ;x1ble of n:,• '  ു from his 
degradation, he cruelly avenges himself for his past 
l"ickedness, 
even more harshly than he had been avenging others in the turmoil 
of the debauch, for his secret torment resulting fro . .  t his dissatis­
faction with himself. 
Who provoked both lads to the argument : "which one of us 
will outdo the others in some temerarious act ?"-and what has 
caused the possibility itself of such a rivalry remain" unknown ; 
but it is certain that both wr.re suffering : one-by accepting the 
challenge, and the other--by proffering it. No doubt, here there were 
some preliminaries : either a hidden hatred between them, or a 
hate dating back to childhood, which they themselves bar, never 
suspected and which burst forth in the l. Jrse of the argument or 
at the moment of the challenge. The latter seems more likely : 
probably, they had been friends up to that minute, living in accord 
which, the longer it lasted, was becoming more and more unbear-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
able. However, by the time of the challenge the tension of mutual 
hate and envy of the victim toward his Mephistopheles had become 
quite extraordinary. 
"I will be afraid of nothing ; I shall do whatever you may 
suggest. Let the soul perish, but I will disgrace you I "  
"You're boasting I You'll run as a mouse into a cellar. I'll 
humble you. Let the soul perish." 
For the contest something different might have been chosen, 
something very bold-robbery, murder, open rebellion against a man 
of power. Didn't the lad swear that he would dare anything, and 
his seducer knew that this time it was meant seriously, and that 
he would, indeed, go to the limit ? 
No. The most dreadful "boldness" seems to the seducer too 
commonplace. He invents an unheard-of challenge, one that had 
never been known before, incredible, while its selection reflects the 
people's whole philosophy. 
Incredible ?  Yet, the fact itself that he had selected it shows 
that, perhaps, he had already pondered over it. Long ago, maybe 
in childhood, the fancy had crept into his soul, shook it by its 
horror and, at the same time, by its torturous delight. That every­
thing had been invented long ago-the gun, the vegetable garden­
and that he had kept it in solemn secrecy, can hardly be doubted. 
Of course, he had invented this not for the purpose of perpetrating 
it ; besides, alone, he would probably not have dared to perpetrate 
the thing. Simply, he liked this vision ; now and then it pierced his 
soul ; it lured him, and he would be timidly retreating, growing 
cold from horror. But on.e single moment of such unheard-of audacity 
-and after that let everything perish ! And most certainly, he be­
lieved that he would be punished for this by eternal perdition. But­
"Anyhow, I did reach such a height ! "  
Much may be not conceived, but merely felt. Much may be 
grasped unconsciously. But, truly, isn't this a curious soul-espe­
cially, in such a milieu ? Herein lies the whole matter. It would be 
nice to find out whether or not he felt more guilty than his victim.­
Judging by his apparent mental development, one is inclined to 
think that he considered himself more, or, at least, equally guilty, 
that when challenging his victim to a "bold act," he was also 
challenging himself. 
It is said that the Russian people know the Gospel poorly, 
that they are ignorant of the fundamental principles of faith. Of 
course, this is true, but they do know Christ, and they have ben 
carying Him in their hearts from time immemorial. Of this there 
can be no doubt. How ·is the true conception of Christ possible 
without religious teaching ?-This is a diferent question. But the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
39 
heart-knowledge of Christ, a true conception of Him, does fully 
exist. It is being passed from generation to generation, and it has 
merged with the heart of the people. Perhaps, Christ is the only 
love of the Russian people, and they love His image in their own 
way, to the limit of sufferance. 
And, more than on anything else, the people pride themselves 
on the name "orthodox," that is, as confessing Christ more genuinely 
than all others. I repeat, much may be known unconsciously. 
Now, to scoff at such a popular sanctity ; thereby to tear one­
self from the whole land ; to destroy oneself forever and ever by 
negation and pride, for the sake of one brief moment of triumph­
this is the most daring thing a Russian Mephistopheles could have 
possibly conceived I The possibility of such a tension of passion, 
of such sinister and complex sentiments in the soul of a commoner, 
is really astounding I And note-all this reached the stage of an 
almost conscious idea. 
However, the victim does not shrink, is not humbled and is 
not intimidated. At least, he pretends that he is not scared. The 
lad accepts tnc Lhallengc. Days pass by, but he clings to his posi­
tion. Presently, it is not the vision but the deed itself that comes 
true ; he goes to church ; he hears daily the words of Christ, but 
he insists on his own. 
There are horrible murderers who do not shrink even at the 
sight of the victim slain by them. One such murderer, an obvious 
murderer, caught on the spot, refused to confess and, to the very 
end, continued to lie to the examining magistrate. When the latter 
got up and ordered the man to be conducted to prison, the culprit, 
with an imploring air, asked as a favor to be permitter{ to bid fare­
well to the murdered who lay right thw଎ (his fornw' sweetheart 
whom he had slain from jealousy) .  He stooped dow1 . . kissed her 
tenderly ; broke into tears and, without rising from his knees, stretch­
ing his hand over her, again reiterated that he wa., not guilty. I 
only wish to nbte the bestial degret which insensibility may reach 
in man. 
Here, however, it is not insensibility at all. We have here, in 
addition, something altogether peculiar-a mystical horror which ex­
ercises an enormous power over the human soul. Unquestionably 
it was present, at least judging by the denouement of the affair. 
The lad's vigorous soul was able to enter into a contest with this 
horror ; he proved it. But is it strength or the ultimate ckgree of 
cowardice ?-Possibly, this and that com. ned in the contiguity of 
the extremes. Nevertheless, this mystical awe not only did not put 
an end to the struggle but it even prolonged it ; and, no doubt, 
that feeling of awe helped to bring the contest to :m end precisely 

40 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
by the fact that it took out of the sinner's heart every sentiment 
of touching emotion ; the more strongly the latter had been sup­
pressed, the more impossible it became. The sensation of horror 
is a harsh sentiment ; it dries and hardens the heart, rendering it 
inaccessible to any kindness and lofty emotion. This is why the 
sinner did endure the moment before the cup, even though, perhaps, 
benumbed and overpowered by fear. 
I believe that mutual hate between the victim and his torturer 
must have disappeared altogether. In fits the tortured may have 
hated with pathological anger, himself, those around him, worshippers 
in the church, but least of all his Mephistopheles. Both felt that 
they mutually needed each other in order to finish the undertaking 
jointly. Each of them, no doubt, felt impotent to terminate it alone. 
Why, then, did they pursue the venture ? Why did they assume so 
much torture ?-Strictly speaking, they could not have broken th؅ 
alliance. Had their agreement been breached, mutual hate-ten time؆ 
more intense than heretofore-would have immediately flared up, 
and would have unfailingly resulted in murder : the tortured would 
have killed his torturer. 
Be this as it may. Even this would have been nothing com­
pared with the terror endured by the victim. The main point is 
that here there must have been in both of them, in the depth of 
their souls, some diabolical delight in their own perdition, the 
fascinating urge to bend over the abyss and to peep into it, the 
heart-thrilling ecstasy over their own daring. It is virtually impos­
sible that the matter could have been brought to an end without 
these exciting and passionate emotions. Certainly, these were not 
merely mischief-makers, or dull and stupid rogues-with that whole 
range of events, beginning "'ith the "boldness contest" and cui- , 
minating in the despair before the elder-monk. 
And note also that the seducer did not reveal his whole secret 
to his victim : when leaving the church, he knew not what he was 
to do with the Sacrament, up to the very moment when he was 
ordered to bring the gun. So many days of mystical incertitude, 
again, goes to prove the terrible obstinacy of the sinner. On the 
other hand, the village Mephisto, too, appears as a great psychologist. 
But, perhaps, when they arrived in the kitchen-garden, they 
were already insensible ?-Still, the lad did remember how he had 
loaded the gun and pointed it. Maybe, even though retaining full 
memory, he acted automatically, as, indeed, happens sometimes in 
a state of horror ?-I don't think so : if he were reduced to a plain 
machine, continuing its functioning by mere inertia, certainly, later, 
he would not have beheld the vision ; he would simply have fallen 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
41 
down unconscious after having exhausted the whole supply of energy 
-and not prior to but after the shot. 
No, most probably, consciousness had been retained all the 
time with extraordinary lucidity, notwithstanding the deadly horror 
progressively growing every second. And the mere fact that the 
victim had endured such a pressure of progressively increasing ter­
ror, I repeat, shows that he was unquestionably endowed with an 
enormous spiritual power. 
Let us note that the loading of the gun is an operation re­
quiring at any rate certain attention. In a moment such as this, 
the most difficult and unbearable thing is to detach oneself from 
one's own horror, from the oppressive idea. Usually, individuals 
stricken by terror are no longer capable of abstaining from its 
contemplation, from the object or idea which dumbfounded them : 
they stand facing it straight in the eyes, as if bewitched. But the 
· .1d had attentively loaded the gun ; this he remembers. He also 
remembered how, after that, he began pointing it ; he remembered 
everything, up to the last moment. 
It JTlay have been that the process of loading proved to 
him a relief, a way out, to his agonizing soul, and he was glad 
tu concentrate-if only for a second-his attention on some ex­
ternal object. This happens on the guillotine to him whose head 
is being chopped off. Dubarry cried to the executioner : "Encore 
un moment, monsieur le bourreau, encore un moment !" She would 
have endured twenty times more during that minute of grace, had 
it been granted her, but, even so, she did cry out and entreat for 
this minute. But if it be supposed that, to our sinner, the loading 
of the gun was something akin to Dubarry's "encC're un moment," 
certainly, after that, he could not have 3lJ,IIin turned ࢶ; his horror, 
from which he had detached himself, and continued 
. ʹ business 
by pointing and firing the shot. At this juncture his hands would 
have grown numb and would have refused to obey him, notwith­
standing even the retained consciousness and will power. 
And now, at the very last moment, the whole deceit, the whole 
abomination of the deed, the whole cowardice taken as a sign of 
strength, the whole shame of the debacle-all this suddenly, in a 
moment, burst forth from his heart, and rose before him as a 
menacing indictment. T'I-Je incredible vision appeared to him . . . 
everything was finished. 
Of course, the judgment thundered out of his heart. Why did 
it thunder not consciously, not in the forr, · ·"lf a momentary clearing 
of reason and conscience ? Why did it reveal itself in a vision, as 
if in an altogether external fact, independent of the spirit ?-Therein 

42 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
lies the immense psychological problem and the act of God. VIas 
became a beggar and demanded suffering. 
And what about the other VIas ?-The remaining one, the 
seducer ?-The legend does not tell us that he had crept after re­
pentance ; it makes no mention of him. Maybe, he, too, had crept ; 
and, maybe, he stayed on in the village and lives there up to the 
present day, keeps on drinking and tittering on holidays : indeed, 
it was not he who had beheld the vision. Is this so, however ?-It 
would be most desirable to learn about his story-just for the sake 
of information, for the record. 
Here is why this also would be desirable : what if he is a 
genuine village nihilist, a home-baked negator and thinker, an un­
believer, who had selected the object of the contest with a haughty 
smirk ; one who did not suffer, who did not quiver along with his 
victim, as we have suggested in our sketch, but who had been 
observing with cold curiosity its palpitations and convulsions, out 
of mere craving for another man's suffering, human humiliation­
devil knows, perhaps-as a matter of scientific survey ? 
Even if such traits be present in the character of the people­
(in our day everything may be presumed) -and, on top of that, 
in our villages-this would be a new and, moreover, unexpected 
revelation. Somehow, such traits were never heard of before. The 
seducer in Mr. Ostrovsky's excellent comedy Don't Live as Thou 
Willst is portrayed pretty poorly.-lt is a pity that nothing can be 
positively ascertained. 
It goes without saying that the interest of the story told here 
-if there be an interest in it-lies in the fact that it is a true story. 
It is not unnecessary to "peep, from time to time, into the soul of 
the contemporary VIas. He changes quickly. There, below, he has 
the same vision as we have it on the top, ever since February 19. 
The giant woke from his sleep and is stretching out his limbs : 
perhaps he will wish to start revelling, to transgress all limits. It 
is rumored that he did already go merry-making. Dreadful things 
are being told and published : drunkenness, banditry, intoxicated 
children, drunken mothers, cynicism, destitution, dishonesty, god­
lessness. Some serious-minded, but somewhat too hasty, people con­
tend, basing themselves on facts, that should such "merry-making" 
last even another ten years, the consequences, from the economic 
standpoint alone, would be inconceivable. But let us recall "VIas" 
and be appeased : th1؇ whole conceit, if there be conceit, will spring 
out of the people's heart and rise before it with an incredible power 
of indictment. VIas will come to his senses and will take up God's 
labours. At any rate he will save himself, should things really turn 
into a calamity. He will save himself and us, since-! repeat once 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
43 
more-light and salvation will come from below ( in a form, per­
haps, altogether surprising to our liberals, and in this there will be 
a great deal of comedy) .  There are hints as to this surprise, and 
even now we have some facts to this effect. . . . However, this may 
be discussed at some future time. Be that as it may, our insolvency 
as "fledgelings of Peter's nest" is at present beyond doubt. Besides, 
after February 19, strictly speaking, the 1 eter period of Russian 
history came to an end, so that long ago V'<e commenced to dwell 
in total obscurity. 
The Citizen, 1873, ؈o. 4· 
BOBOK : NOTES OF A CERTA IN MAN 
This time I am publishing ''Notes of a Certai11 Man." It is 
not me ; it is an altogether different person. I believe ihat no further 
introduction is needed. 
T.h:! d .. _;: hl'fore Y"3terday Semen Ardalionovich asked me : 
"Ivan Ivanovich, tell me, for God's mercy, will you ever be 
sober ?" 
What a strange demand ! I am taking no offence ; I am a 
timid man ; evt>n so, I was declared insane. An artist, by mere acci­
dent, painted my portrait : "Anyhow," satd he, "you are a writer." 
I gave my consent, and he exhibited the portrait. I read : "Go and 
look at this ailing face which borders on insanity." 
Let it be so ; nevertheless, why should it be heralded in the 
press ? The press should print nothing but noblt' things ; it should 
be propagating ideals, and, yet, look. . . 
. 
At least, they should have stated it indirect]:_. 
style exists 
just for this purpose. But no ; they don't want to put 1t indirectly. 
Nowadays humor a11d elt>gant style are disappear;ng, while abuse 
is accepted for witticism. I'm taking no offence : God knows, I'm 
not too prominent a writer to go mad. I wrote a novel-they refused 
to print it. I wrote a feuilleton-it was turned down. I peddled a 
lot of these feuilletons from one editorial office to another ; but, 
everywhere, they shook their heads : "You're lackmg salt"-they 
say. 
"What kind of salt do you expect ?''-I asked them sarcastically 
-"Attic salt, perchance ?" 
They don't even understand. l\; -;tly I'm translatmg from 
the French for bookdealers. I'm also penning ads for merchants : 
"Rarity ! Red tea, so to speak, coming from our plantations." 
.
.
.
 
I got a big wad for a panegyric of his excellency, the late Petr 

44 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1 873 
؉latveievich. For a book-dealer I composed The Art of Pleasing the 
Ladies. Of such books, I wrote about half a dozen during my life. 
I'm planning to compile Voltaire's bons mots, but I'm afraid our 
folks will find them stale. What's Voltaire today ?-Nowadays it's 
a cudgel, and not Voltaire ! They knock each other out to the last 
tooth ! 
Such, briefly, is my literary record. In addition, over my full 
signature, I am gratuitously mailing letters to editorial offices. I 
keep sending admonitions and advices. I am criticizing and point­
ing out the right way. Last week I sent the fortieth letter, over 
a period of two years, to one of the editorial offices : on postage 
alone I have spent four rubles. I have a bad disposition-that's the 
thing. 
I believe that the artist painted my portrait not because of 
my literature, but on account of my two warts growing sym­
metrically on my forehead : it's a phenomenon, so to speak. Lack­
ing an idea, they try to make phenomena work for them. But how 
beautifuliy the warts came out on the portrait-they are alive ! They 
call it realism. 
As to madness, last year many were recorded as lunatics. 
And what a style was used : "Notwithstanding such a, so to speak, 
original talent . . .  what an end . . . .  However, this was to be 
anticipated long ago . . . .  
" This is rather smart ; so that, from the 
point of view of pure art, perhaps, it deserves commendation. But, 
unexpectedly, they came back even more clever. Now, that's the 
point : we drive people mad, but as yet no one has ever been made 
more clever. 
. 
He, 1 take it, is the most intelligent who at least once a 
month calls himself a fool-in our day this is an unheard-of faculty ! 
In the past, the fool, at least once a year, would recognize the 
fact that he is a fool ; but today-nothing doing. And they mixed 
things up to such a degree that it is impossible to distinguish a 
fool from a clever man. This they did on purpose. 
I recall a Spanish witticism about the French who, two and 
a half centuries ago, had constructed in France the first insane 
asylum : "They locked up their fools in a special building to con­
vince people that they themselves were wise men." Indeed : by 
locking up the other fellow in a madhouse one can't prove one's own 
intelligence. "K. went mad, so it means that now we are clever." 
No, it means nothing of the kind . . . .  
But, what the deuce ! . . .  Why am I fussing about my mind : 
I'm grumbling and grum'f?ling. Even my maid-servant is tired of 
me. Yesterday a friend dropped in. "Your style," he said, "is chang­
ing ; it's choppy. You're chopping and chopping-then you squeeze 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
45 
in an incidental proposition, and you add to it another incidental 
proposition ; after that you will insert something in brackets, and 
again you start chopping and chopping. . . .  
" 
My friend is right. Something strange is transpiring in me. 
My disposition is changing, and I have headaches. I begin to see 
and hear some strange things-not exactly voices, but as if someone 
beside me keeps whispering : "bobok, bobok, bobok." 
Who, the deuce, is bobok ?-I should divert myself. 
I went out to divert myself, and ran into a funeral. A distant 
relative. However, a collegiate councilor. A widow, five daughters­
all maidens. Think, what shoes alone must cost I The deceased had 
been earning, but now there is only a miserable pension. They'll 
have to cut down. They always received me inhospitably. Even 
now I would not have gone, were it not for an emergency case. 
Among others, I accompanied the procession to the cemetery. They 
shunned me and behaved haughtily. True, my uniform is a bit 
shabby. I believe I haven't been to a cemetery for almost twenty-five 
years. What a spot I 
To oegm with-tht atmosphere ! Some fifteen corpses arrived 
together. Palls differently priced. There were even two catafalques­
one for a general, and the other one-for some lady. Many sad faces 
and much simulated grief ; also much candid joy. The clergy 
shouldn't be complaining : income. But the atmosphere ! The at­
mosphere ! -I wouldn 't like to be a clergyman there. 
I peeped cautiously at the faces of the dead, not relying on 
my nerves. Some expressions are tender, but some are disagreeable. 
Speaking generally, the smiles are unpleasant-on some faces, very 
much so. I don't like them. I 'm dreaming of them. 
After the Mass I went out of the church into • · ͳ open air. 
The day was grayish but dry. It was cold, too. Well, o 
::ourse, it's 
October. I roamed around the graves. Different grades. The third 
grade costs thirty rubles : it's fitting and not so expe .. sive. The first 
two grades are given space in the church un؊؋r the porch. But this 
is too dear. On that occasion some six persons, including the general 
and the lady, were buried in the third grade. 
I peeped into the graves-horrible I Water-and what water ! 
Quite green and . . .  Well, what is there to say ? Every minute 
the grave-digger bailed it out with a scoop. While the service was 
being officiated, I went to roam outside the gate. There, in the imme­
diate vicinity, is an almshouse, and a little fur¦her-a rec:l :1urant. 
Not a bad little restaurant :  one can t •
.
 
e a b1te, and so forth. 
It was crowded ; among others, there were quite a few of those 
attending the funerals. I noticed much hilarity and genuine anima­
tion. I ate and had a drink. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
Thereupon, I participated in carrying, with my own hands, 
the coffin from the church to the grave. Why do the C:.ead grow so 
heavy in the coffin ?-It is said that this is due to some inertia, 
that the body somehow does not control itself . . . or some such 
nonsense : this contradict، mechanics and common sense. J don't 
like it when people with merely a general education venture to pass 
judgment on special problems and, with us, it is a common habit. 
Civilians are eager to deliberate on military, and even field-marshal, 
subjects, while men with engineering education pass judgment 
mostly on philosophy and political economy. 
I didn't go to the requiem. I have my pride, and if I am being 
received merely because of urgent necessity, why should I drag 
myself to their dinners, even though these be funeral dinners ?-I 
seated myself on a tombstone and started musing respectfully. 
I began with the Moscow exhibition, and finished with the 
subject of surprise-generally speaking, of surprise as a topic. This 
is what I reasoned about "surprise." 
"To be surprised at everything is foolish, of course. B ut to 
be surprised at nothing is much prettier and is, for some reason, 
considered bon ton. I doubt, however, that this is so. In my opinion, 
to be surprised at nothing is far more foolish than to be surprised 
at everything. Besides, to be surprised at nothing is almost the 
same as to respect nothing. And a stupid man is incapable of 
respect." 
Yes, above all, I wish to respect. "I'm thirsting for respect" 
-an acquaintance of mine told rne the other day. 
He thirsts for respect I By God-1 thought-what would happen 
to you if, at present, you only dared to put this in print. 
At this point I forgot myself. I don't like to read epitaphs. On 
a slab near me lay a half-eaten sandwich-stupid and out of place. 
I threw it off onto the ground, since this is not bread but merely 
a sandwich. However, it seems that there's no sin in letting crumb5 
fall on the ground ; it is a sin, though, to let them fall on the 
floor. I must check it in Suvorin's almanac. 
I presume that I'd been sitting for a long while, much too 
long. I even laid myself down on an elongated stone in the shape 
of a marble sepulcher. And how did it happen that I started hearing 
all sorts of things ? At first, I paid no attention, assuming a con­
temptuous attitude Still, the conversations continued. I bear-the 
sounds are dull, as if the mouths are covered up with pillows ; and 
at that-they are audible and seem quite close. I woke up and began 
listening intently. 
"Your excellency, this is absolutely impossible. You declared 
hearts ; I led hearts, and all of a sudden-you have a slam in 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
47 
diamonds. You should have declared diamonds in the first place." 
"What of it-should one be playing by heart ? Where would 
be the attraction ?" 
"Your excellency, it's impossible wthout a guaranty. One has 
to play with a dummy, and the deal must be blind." 
"Why, a dummy can't be gotten here." 
Indeed, what arrogant words ! It's ზlrange and even unex­
pected. One-such a weighty and solid voice ; and the other one­
as if softly sweetened. I shouldn't have believed it had I not heard 
it myself. It seems, I have not attended the requiem. And still, how 
does it happen that there is a game of preference, and also a general ? 
That the sounds came from down under, in the graves, there 
couldn't be a shadow of doubt. I bent down and read the inscription 
on the tomb. 
"Here lies the body of Major-general Pervoiedov . . . knight 
of such and such orders.'' Hm ! "Died in the month of August of 
this year . . . .  Lie in rest, dear body, till the glad morn ! "  
Hm I devil, a general indeed I On the other grave, whence the 
adulating vo1ce suundeu, as yet there stood no monument ; there 
was but a cut stone. Probably one of the novices. Judging by the 
voice-a court-councilor. 
"Oh, oh, oh ! "  sounded a wholly new voice, some five sajen 
from the general's place, from under a quite fresh little grave-a 
masculine, plebeian voice, but an enfeebled and reverently tender 
one. 
"Oh, oh, oh I "  
"Ah, he is hiccoughing again ! "-came suddenly the squeamish 
and haughty voice of an irritated lady, seemingly uf the beau monde. 
-"It's a curse to be near the shopkeepe:· ' "  
" I  didn't hiccough at all, nor did I taste food : .
.
 is is merely 
my nature. Lady, you still can't get over those locai caprices of 
yours." 
"Then why did you lie down here?" 
"I was laid down, laid by my spouse and little children-! did 
not lie down of my own accord. Mystery of death I Nor would I 
have lain down next to you-not for any amount of gold-but I 
repose here according to my means-that is, judging by the price. 
This we can always auord to pay for our burial place, of the third 
grade." 
"He hoarded money ! He cheated the people I "  
"Not easy to cheat you : since JaL :1ry, I gather, we've never 
received payment. The bill debiting you is available in the shop." 
"Now this is stupid I It is quite silly, in my judgment, to 
collect debts down here ! Go upstairs. Sue my niece. She's the 
heiress." 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
"Where can one go ? And what's the use of suing now ?-We 
both have reached the limit, and before God's judgment we are 
equal in our sins I " 
"In our sins"-contemptuously mocked the deceased lady.-
"And don't you dare speak to me I "  
"Oh, oh, oh ! "  
"The shopkeeper, however, obeys the lady, your excellency." 
"Why shouldn't he obey ?" 
"Of course, your excellency, because here it is a new order." 
"What's that new order ?" 
"But, your excellency, we've died, so to speak." 
"Oh, yes ! Still, as to the order . . .  
" 
What is one to say ?-l'm obliged and cheered ! If, down there, 
things have reached this point, what can we expect on the upper 
floor ? But what tricks I Yet, I continued to listen, even though 
with utmost indignation. 
"No, I'd be willing to live a little longer ! Yes, indeed, I 
would"-unexpectedly sounded somebody's voice-a new one, some­
where in the space between the general and the waspish lady. 
"Do you hear, your excellency ?-Our man is at it again. He 
keeps silent for three long days and suddenly : 'I'd be willing to 
live a little longer I '  And so relishingly, hee-hee ! "  
"And light-mindedly." 
"He's thrilled, your excellency. And you know, he's falling 
asleep, he's almost asleep. He's been here ever since April, and all 
of a sudden-' I'd be willing to live I '  " 
"It's a bit boring, .however"-remarked his excellency. 
"It is a bit boring, your excellency. Why not start teasing 
Avdotia lgnatievna again ?" 
"No, I beg to be relieved. I just hate this snarlish female." 
"And I, on the contrary, hate both of you," squeamishly de­
clared the female. "You two are most boring, and you are unable 
to relate anything idealistic. About you, your excellency-pray, don't 
be conceited-I know a little story : how the lackey swept you out 
with his broom from under one conjugal bed." 
"A bad woman ! "-muttered the general through his teeth. 
"Avdotia Ignatievna, dear"-again suddenly shouted the shop­
keeper-"dear little lady, tell me, forgetting your grudge, why do 
I have to pass through all sorts of trials, or is something else . . . ?" 
"Ah, he's at it 'again. I had a presentiment, because I scented 
his spirit-yes, his spirit : it is he who tosses around I "  
"I'm not tossing, dear lady ; nor do I exhale any particular 
smell, since I have fully conserved my body ; but you, little lady, 
you're beginning to taint-since your odor is unbearable, even as 
far as this place goes. I keep silent out of mere politeness." 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
49 
"Oh, wicked insulter I He himself smells dreadfully, and yet 
he accuses me I " 
"Oh, oh, oh I But that our fortieth day might come sooner : 
I can hear above me their tearful voices-my wife's shrieks and my 
children's gentle lamentation." 
"Pooh ! What's he wailing about ?-They'll stuff their stomachs 
with boiled rice and raisins, and off they'll go. Oh, if only anyone 
should wake up ! " 
"Avdotia Ignatievna"-suggested the flattering bureaucrat­
"wait a little while, and the newcomers will start speaking." 
"Are there any young men among them ?" 
"There are young ones, too, Avdotia Ignatievna. There are 
even youths." 
"Oh, that wouldn't be bad at all ! "  
"Haven't they started yet ?" inquired his excellency. 
"No, even those of the day before yesterday haven't come 
to their senses : you yourself know that sometimes they remain 
mute during a whole week. It's good that yesterday, the day before 
that and tociay, somehow, they were brought in all together ; be­
cause around here, some ten sajen around, they're almost all of 
the past year." 
"Yes, that's interesting." 
"Today, your excellency, Privy f"':ouncilor Tarasevich was 
buried. I found this out through the voices. I am acquainted with 
his nephew ; recently he helped me to take down the casket." 
"Hm-where is he ?" 
"Some f1ve steps from you, your excellency-to the left. Al­
most at your feet. Why not strike up an acquaint"nce with him, 
your excellency ?" 
"Hm, no-why should I take the initiative ?" 
"No, that's right, your excellency. He'll take the lead. He'll 
even be flattered. Leave it to me, your excellency, and I . . .  
" 
"Oh ! . . .  Oh ! What has come to ;:1e ?"-suddenly groaned 
some new frightened thin voice. 
"A new one, your excellency-a new one, praised be the Lord ; 
and how soon ! At times, they stay mute for a weP.1" ! " 
"Ah ! Seems to be a young man l "-shrieked Avdotia lgna­
tievna. 
"I . . .  I 
. . .  I . . .  because of a complication, and so sud­
denly"-the youth started lisping agaiTJ. "Only yesterd'lთ Schultz 
warned me : 'You have a complication, .1e said. And, suddenly, be­
fore morning I passed away. Ah ! . . .  Ah l "  
"Well, there's nothing to be done, young man"-graciously 
remarked the general, obviously welcoming the 11ovice. "One must 

so 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
get over ou are welcome to our valley of Jo.abad. We're kind 
folks. Yo 
get to know and value us.-Major General Vasily Vasi­
Iiev Pervo 
ov-at your service." 
"Oh, no ! No ! -ls it me ? I am at Schultz's. I had, you know, 
a complication : first, the chest became affected and a cough set 
in ; and then I contracted a cold ; the chest and a grippe . . . and 
then, quite suddenly . . .  the main thing-quite unexpectedly." 
"You say : first, the chest"-mildly intervened the bureaucrat, 
as if seeking to enhearten the novice. 
"Yes, the chest-and mucus. And then, suddenly-no more 
mucus . . .  the chest, and I can't breathe . . .  you know . . .  
" 
"I know. I know. But if it's the chest, you should have seen 
Eck, and not Schultz." 
"And, you know, I was thinking of going to Botkin . . .  and 
suddenly . . . " 
"But Botkin bites"-observed the general. 
"Not in the least-he never bites : I was told : he is so atten­
tive, and tells you everything in advance." 
"His excellency referred to the fee"-(;orrected the bureaucrat. 
"What do you mean ?-Only three rubles, and he examines so 
thoroughly, and the prescription . . .  why, I meant to go by all 
means, because I was told . . .  Now, gentlemen, should I try Eck 
or Botkin ?" 
"What ? Whom ?"-the general's corpse, pleasantly laughing, 
began to rock. The bureaucrat seconded him in falsetto. 
"Sweet boy, sweet, joyous boy, how I love you ! "-enthusias­
tically scn:amed Avdotia" lgnatievna. "If only such a one were laid 
beside me I " 
No, I will not tolerate a thing of this sort ! And this is a con­
temporary dead person ! However, I shall listen a little more with­
out jumping to conclusions. This snotty novice-! remember him 
in the coffin-with the expression of a scared chick, the most 
disgusting expression in the world I However, what's next ? 
But after that there ensued such a jumble that I did not retain 
everything in my mind, since quite a lot of them woke up all to­
gether : a bureaucrat, a state councilor, woke up, and forthwith he 
began to converse with the general on the project of a new sub­
committee in the Ministry of 
affairs, and on the prob­
able shifts of the f1mctionaries, as a result of the appointment of 
the subcommittee. To the general this was quite a diversion. I 
confess, I, too, gathered much information, and I even started 
pondering over the ways · through which one may be tipped off to 
administrative news in this capital of ours. Then, a certain engineer 
-he was but half-awake-mumbled protractedly all sorts of non-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
51 
sense, so that our folks did not press him, leaving him to rest 
awhile. Finally, the prominent lady who, in the morning, had been 
given a burial under the catafalque, began to reveal symptoms of 
sepulchral animation. Lebeziatnikov (for such proved- to be the 
name of the hated flattering court-councilor quartered next to Gen­
eral Pervoiedov) grew restless and kept wondering why this time 
everyone is waking up so soon. I confess--T, too, was puzzled. True : 
some of those who woke up had been buried the day before yester­
day : for instance, quite a young girl, say, of sixteen, who kept 
giggling . . .  giggling abominably and carnivorously. 
"Your excellency, Privy Councilor Tarasevich is about to wake 
up ! "-suddenly announced Lebeziatnikov with extraordinary haste. 
"Eh ? What ?"-squeamishly and in a hissing voice mumbled 
the suddenly awaking privy councilor. In the sound of his voice 
there was something capriciously commanding. I was listening with 
curiosity because lately I had heard something about this Tarasevich 
-something seductive and extremely disturbing. 
"It's me, your excellency ; as yet, it's only me." 
"\Vlvrt are you soliciting and what do you want ?" 
"Solely to inquire about your excellency's health. For lack 
of habit, everyone here feels cooped up at first, as it were . . . .  
General Pervoiedov would like to be granted the honor of being 
introduced to your excellency, and he hopes . . .  
" 
"I haven't heard of him." 
"But, your excellency, General Pervoiedov, Vasily Vasilie­
vich . . . .  
" 
"Are you General Pervoiedov ?" 
"No, your excellency, I'm only court-councilor Lebeziatnikov 
-at your service. But, General Pervoiedov . .  : ' 
"Nonsense. And please, do leave •ne alone." 
"Stop it"-General Pervoiedov finally, with a . ..;nity, checked 
the hideous impttuosity of his sepulchral client. 
"They are not yet awake, yuur excellency-this has to be 
taken into account. It's due to lack of h::.bit. When they wake up, 
they will receive you ; otherwse . . . " 
"Stop it"-rcpeated the general. 
"Vasily Vasilievich ! Hey, you, your excellf'ncy ! "-suddenly 
sounded loudly and daringly an altogether new voice, right next to 
Avdotia Ignatievna-an aristocratic and defiant voice, with a fash­
ionable, fatigued accent and insolent tone. "l'იe been observing 
all of you for two hours. You see, I've been lymg bf'•·· for three 
days. Do you remember me, Vasily \1 .. .;ilievich ? I'm Klinevich ; we 
met at the Volokonskys, where-1 don't know why-you also were 
received." 

52 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
"Is it possible, Count Piotr Petrovich. . . .  Is it possible that 
it's you . . .  and so young . . . .  I'm awfully sorry I "  
"Well, I'm sorry, too, but it makes no difference to me, and 
I want to derive every possible advantage from everything. Nor 
am I a count. I'm a baron, nothing but a baron. We're scabby, 
petty barons, descending from lackeys-! don't know why. But I 
don't give a hang. I'm merely a scoundrel of the pseudo-beau monde, 
and I'm considered an 'aimable polisson.' My father is an insig­
nificant general of some kind, while my mother, in days gone by, 
used to be received en haut lieu. With that Jew Zifel, I smuggled 
some fifty thousand counterfeit bills, and on top of that I denounced 
him, while Julia Charpentier carried away all the money to Bor­
deaux. And imagine, I was already formally betrothed to Scheval­
skaia-in three months she will be sixteen ; she's still in a girls' 
college ; her dower would come to some ninety thousand. Avdotia 
Ignatievna, do you remember bow you seduced me, some fifteen 
years ago, when I was a fourteen-year-old cadet in the Corps of 
Pages ?" 
"Oh, it's you, scoundrel ; at least, God sent you, for other­
wise here . . . " 
"You suspected in vain your neighbor, the shopkeeper, of bad 
odor . . .  I kept silent, and only laughed. It comes from me : it 
is simply that I was buried in a nailed-up casket." 
"Oh, you rascal ! And yet I'm glad. You wouldn't believe, 
Klinevich, what an absence of life and wit prevails 'round here." 
"Quite so, quite ! And I intend to start something original 
here. Your excellency-not you, Pervoiedov-your excellency, the 
other, Mr. Tarasevich, pr1vy councilor I Please respond 1 -Klinevich, 
who, during Lent, took you over to Mademoiselle Furey ? Do you 
hear ?" 
"I can hear you-it's Klinevich ; I'm very glad, to be sure . . . .  " 
"I don't believe you that much, and I don't give a hoot. 
Dear old man, I'd like to kiss you but, praised be the Lord, I 
can't. Do you know, folks, what this grand-pere did ?-He died 
three or four days ago and, can you imagine, he left a deficiency 
in government accounts of fully four hundred thousand ?-Widows' 
and orphans' money, and for some reason he had been managing 
the business alone, so that, at length, he hadn't been audited for 
eight years or so. I can imagine what long faces they are all dis­
playing there and hrw they are cursing him. Don't you think it's 
a seductive thought I Last year I kept wondering-how could such 
a seventy-year-old little fellow-a gouty and chiragric fellow, too­
preserve so much strength ·for debauch ? And here's the solution to 
the riddle I These widows and orphans-why, the very thought of 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
53 
them must have inflamed his imagination I 
I knew about this 
long ago, and I was the only one who knew it-Charpentier told 
me about it. No sooner did I find it out than I started pressing him 
in a friendly way-this was during Easter week : 'Come across with 
twenty-five thousand-otherwise, tomorrow you'll be audited.' And, 
imagine, he had then only thirteen thousa!'li left, so, it seems, now 
that he died in good time. Grand-pere I Grand-pere I Do you hear ?" 
"Cher Klinevich, I'm in full accord with you, but it was to 
no purpose for you to embark upon these details. In life there is 
so much suffering, torment, and so little reward . . . .  Finally, I 
made up my mind to repose myself and, as far as I can see, I hope 
to derive everything from this place here.'' 
"I bet he scented out Katish Bercstova I "  
"Whom ? What Katish ?"-voluptuously quivered the old man's 
voice. 
"Aha, what Katish ?-Right here, to my left, five steps from 
me ; from you-ten. She's already here her fifth day. And if you 
only knew, grand-pere, what a nasty little woman she is . . .  of 
good birth, educated-and a monster, a monster in the highest de­
gree I Over there I showed her to no one. Only I did know her . . . .  
Katish, respond ! "  
"Tee-hee-htc ! "-responded a half-broken girlish, thin voice ; 
but in it one felt something akin to a neerlle's prick. "Tee-hee-hee ! "  
"And a li'l-blon-die ?" lisped grand-pere abruptly in three 
syllables. 
"Tee-hee-hee ! "  
"I 
. . .  l . .
. "-lisped the old man, losing his breath-"I've 
been entertaining with pleasure the vision of a little hlonde . . .  of 
fifteen or so . . . and precisely in a setL.:r.g such as ! • s one. . . " 
"Oh, monster ! "-cried Avdotia Jgnatievna. 
"Enough ! "-decided Klinevich-"1 see that the material is 
excellent. Forthwith we shall arrange everything ht:re for the best. 
The main thing is to spend the remaining tiკe pleasantly. But what 
time ? Hey, you, functionary of some sort ; Lebeziatnikov-is that 
your name ?-1 heard you called so ! "  
"Lebeziatnikov-court councilor, Semen Evsf'irh, at your 
service, and I'm very, very glad." 
"I don't give a hang if you're glad. But only you seem to 
know everything about this place. Tell me, first of all-(I've been 
wondering since yesterday) -how is it that we're conver!'i . !g here ? 
Well didn't we die-and yet we're cm• .!rsing : we seem to move 
and, 'yet, we neither move nor speak ? Wha_t's t¥e ¤rick ?" 
. 
"This, baron, if you wish, Platon N1kola•ev•ch can explam 
better than I could myself." 

54 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
"Who's Platon Nikolaievich ?-Don't mumble ; get down to 
business." 
"Platon Nikolaievich, our home-baked, local philosopher, 
naturalist and magister. He has published several philosophy books, 
but for three months he has been falling asleep, so that here it's 
difficult to shake him to his senses. Once a week he starts mur­
muring a few irrelevant words." 
"Get down to business 1 -To business ! " 
"He explains it all by a most simple fact, namely, that when 
we'd been living upstairs we mistook the yonder death for death. 
Down here the body, as it were, is revived once more, but only 
in consciousness. This means-I don't know how to put it-that life 
continues, as it were, by inertia. Everything is concentrated, accord­
ing to him, somewhere in consciousness, and persists another two 
or three months-sometimes, even as long as six months. For ex­
ample, we have here one fellow ; he's almost completely decom­
posed, but once every six weeks or so he suddenly will murmur 
one little word-senseless, of course-about some bobok : 'Bobok, 
bobok' ; this means that in him, too, life continues to glimmer as 
an imperceptble spark . . . .  
" 
"Pretty stupid. And how is it that I have no sense of smell, 
and still I can scent a stench ?" 
"As to that . . .  hee-hee . . . .  Well, at this juncture our 
philosopher is in a fog. Precisely about the sense of smell, he re­
marked, that stink we scent is, so to speak, moral stink-bee-hee l­
Offensive odor emanating from the soul, so as to give us a chance 
during these two or tht'ee months to come to our senses, and this 
is, as it were, the ultimate mercy . . . .  Only it seems to me, baron, 
that this mystical delirium is, indeed, quite excusable in his sit­
uation." 
"Enough. Besides, I'm sure all this is fiddlesticks. The main 
thing : two or three months of life, and, finally-bobok. I suggest 
that we all spend these two months as pleasantly as possible, and 
-with this in mind-try to settle on a new basis. Gentlemen I I 
suggest that we be ashamed of nothing I "  
"Oh, let's, let's be ashamed of nothing I "-sounded many 
voices and, strangely, among them there were quite new voices­
that is, of those who had in the meanwhile awakened. With par­
ticular readiness tbe engineer thundered his consent in basso-he 
was fully awake. The little girl, Katish, started giggling joyfully. 
"Oh, how eager I am to be ashamed of nothing I "-exclaimed 
Avdotia Ignatievna with delight. 
"Do you hear : now, if Avdota lgnatievna wants to be ashamed 
of nothing . . .  
" 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
55 
"No, no, no, Klinevich, over there I still used to feel shame, 
but here I'm awfully, awfully anxious to be ashamed of nothing I "  
"I understand, Klinevich"-said the engineer in a bass voice 
-"that you suggest organizing our local life, so to speak, on a new 
and rational basis." 
"Oh, I don't give a hoot ! On this score let's wait for Kudeiarov 
-he was brought in yesterday. He'll wake up, and then he'll explain 
everything to you. He's such a person, such a gigantic person I 
Tomorrow, I believe, they'll drag in one more naturalist-an officer, 
for sure ; and, if I'm not mistaken, in three or four days-a columnist, 
perhaps, together with the editor. However, let them go to the 
devil ! Only we'll have a little company of our own, and every­
thing will shape itself of its own accord. Meanwhile, however, 
I hope that there will be no lying. I want this only because this 
is the main thing. To live on earth without lying is impossible, 
since life and lies are synonyms. But down here let's not be telling 
lies-just for fun. What the deuce !-The grave must, indeed, mean 
something ! We all shall tell our stories aloud without any shame. 
First, I'li ഼ivr an acC'ount of myself. You know, I'm one of the 
carnivorous. Up there, all this was tied with rotten strings. Down 
with the strings I And let's live these two months in a most shame­
less truth ! Let's uncover ourselves and be nude I "  
"Let's be nude I Let's be nude ! "-voices shouted everywhere. 
"I'm awfully anxious to uncover 1oᆷyself ! "-screamed Avdotia 
Ignatievna. 
"Oh ! . . .  Oh ! I see we'll have fun here ! I don't want to go 
to Eck ! "  
"No-you know, I'd like to live a little longer I "  
"Tee-bee-bee I "-gigglerl Katish. 
"The principal thing is that no one can forbi." us ; and even 
though, I see, Pervoiedov is angry today, nevertheless he can't reach 
me with his hand. Do you agree, grand-pere ?" 
"I quite agree ! Quite-and with utmost pleasure-on condi­
tion, however, that Katish give her bi-o-graphy first." 
"I protest ! I protest most strongly ! "-uttered General Per­
voiedov firmly. 
"Your excellency I "  -lisped and argued, with hurried agitation 
and lowering his voice, the scoundrel Lebeziatnikov. "Your excel­
lency, it's even to our advantage to agree. Here, you know, is this 
little girl . . .  and, finally, all these various jests . . .  
" 
"Well, of course, a little girl, but - . .  " 
"It's to our advantage, your excellency, by God, it is I Oh, 
let's try it-just for the sake of a little experiment. 
, 
"They won't let you rest even in the grave I "  

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
"To begin with, general, you're playing a game of preference 
in the grave ; and, secondly, we have contempt for you I "-intoned 
Klinevich. 
"Dear sir I I wish you would not forget yourself." 
"What ? You can't reach me, whereas I can tease you from 
here, as Julia's lap-dog ! And, first of all, what kind of general is 
he here ? It's up there that he was a general, but here-he's a plain 
civilian ! " 
"No, not a civilian . . .  even here I'm . . .  " 
"Here you'll rot in the casket, and nothing but six brass 
buttons will remain of you." 
"Bravo, Klinevich! Ha-ha-ha ! "-roared the voices. 
"I served my emperor . . .  I have a sword." 
"Your sword is only good to stab mice with and, besides, you 
never drew it out I "  
"All the same : I formed a part of the whole." 
"There are many different parts of a whole I "  
"Bravo, Klinevich, bravo I Ha-ha-ha I "  
" I  don't understand what a sword is"-exclaimed the engineer. 
"We'll run from the Prussians like mice ! They'll scatter us 
like down ! "-shouted a distant, unfamiliar voice, literally choking 
with delight. 
"The sword, sir, means honor I "-the general was about to 
shout. But this was the last I heard of him. There ensued a pro­
tracted and fierce uproar, a riot and hubbub, and one could only 
hear impatient, hysterical screams from Avdotia lgnatievna : 
"Oh, let's burry, h:t's ! Oh, when will we begin to be ashamed 
of nothing I " 
"Oh, verily, the soul is being dragged through sufferings I "­
faintly sounded the commoner's voice, and . . . 
At this point I sneezed. This happened suddenly and unavoid­
ably, but it had an amazing effect : everything became silent, as 
in any cemetery, and disappeared as a dream. Verily, sepulchral 
silence ensued. I don't think they became ashamed because of my 
presence : in fact, hadn't they decided to be ashamed of nothing ! 
Nor is it likely to suppose that they were scared by the possibility 
of a denunciation to the police : for what could the police do in 
a matter such as this ?-Willy-nilly, I came to the conclusion that, 
in spite of all, they must hold some secret, unknown to a mortal­
one which they carefully conceal from any mortal. 
"Well, dearest"-! said to myself-"1'11 pay you another visit." 
And with these words I lᆸft the cemetery. 
No, I can't concede it : verily, I can't. Bobok does not confuse 
me. (Here, then, he did prove a bobok I )  

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
57 
Depravity in such a place ; debauch of ultimate hopes, de­
bauch of flabby and rotting corpses-even without sparing the last 
moments of consciousness I They're given-given gratuitously-these 
moments, and . . .  But the main, the cardinal, point is-in a place 
such as this l No, this, I can't concede . . .  
I'll try other graves. I'll listen evei.';where. That's really the 
thing to do : I must listen everywhere, and not merely in some one 
spot, in order to form a judgment. Mayhap, I'll also strike some­
thing comforting. 
But, to these fellows I shall return by all means. Disgusting l 
Yet, I will by all means come back : this is a matter of conscience l 
I'll take this over to The Citizen: there, the portrait of an 
editor has also been placed on exhibition. I do hope he'll print this. 
The Citizen, 1873, No. 6. 
"PERPLRXED AIR" 
I have been reading a few things in current literature, and 
I feel that Tire Citizen should make mention of them in its columns. 
But what kind of a critic am I ?  In truth, I did intend to write 
a critical article, but it seems that I can merely say something 
"apropos." I have read Mr. I.eskov's Ensealed Ant:el; a poem by 
Nekrasov, and an article by Mr. Schedrin. Also, I have perused the 
articles by Messrs. Skabichevsky and N. M. in The Domestic 
Records. The latter two articles are, in a sense, as it were, a new 
revelation to me. Sometime, I want to discuss them by all means. 
But, for the present, I shall begin with the beginr.:ng, that is, in 
the order I have read-with The Enseated Angel. 
This is a story by Mr. Leskov in The Russt..:ll Messenger. 
It is known that here, in Petersburg, it was widely read and many 
people liked it. Indeed, it is worth it : it is characteristic and enter­
taining. This is a novel recounted by a certain dissenter at a station 
on Christmas night, about how some one hundred and fifty men, 
all of them dissenters, as a workers' artel, embraced the Orthodox 
faith as the result of a miracle. 
That workers' :ntel had been engaged in the construction of 
a bridge in a big Russian city-living for three years in special 
barracks on the shore of the river. They had a chapel, and in it 
they kept many ancient holy images which had been ᆹ-·nsecrated 
prior to the times of Patriarch Nikon. fhf' story of a certain man 
-not an altogether unimportant bureaucrat-who sought to exact 
from the artel a bribe of some fifteen thousand, is told quite enter­
tainingly. Having arrived suddenly in the ch:tvel with members 

58 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
of the administration, he demanded a ransom of one hundred rubles 
for every ikon. The artel was unable to comply with this demand. 
Thereupon he sequestrated the images ; holes were bored through 
them, they were strung, like so many cracknels, on an iron rod, 
and were carried away to some cellar. But among the ikons was 
an ancient one of an Angel, particularly revered by the artel ; it 
was believed to be a miraculous image. In order to deal a blow 
which would avenge and insult the workers, the bureaucrat, irritated 
by the refusal of the dissenters to pay the graft, took a piece of 
sealing wax and, in the presence of the whole assembly, poured 
drops of the wax on the· face of the Angel and affixed to it an 
official seal. The local archbishop, after having looked upon the 
ensealed face of the sanctity, said : "Perplexed air ! "  and ordered 
the desecrated ikon to be placed on a window in the cathedral. 
Mr. Leskov maintains that the archbishop's words and his order 
to have the defiled image placed in the cathedral, instead of in the 
cellar, pleased the dissenters. 
This is followed by an involved and entertaining story of 
how that "Angel" was stolen from the cathedral. An Enᇇ;lishman 
of noble birth, seemingly the contractor of the bridge under con­
struction, got mixed up with the dissenters ; he took a liking for 
them and, since they were outspoken with him, he undertook to 
help them. 
Particularly noteworthy in the novel are the conversations 
of the dissenters with the Englishman about ikon painting. This 
is a serious portion and the best one in the whole novel. The story 
winds up with an account of the theft of the image from the 
cathedral, during the evening service. The seal was removed from 
the Angel's face ; the ikon was replaced by , a new one-not 
yet consecrated-which the Englishman's wife agreed to "seal" in 
the manner of the former. And at this critical moment a miracle 
occurred : light was seen (true, by only one man ) emanating from 
the newly sealed image, and after it had been brought to the 
cathedral, it had been found unsealed-that is, without the sealing 
wax over the face. This made such an impression on the dissenter 
who had brought it that, then and there, he went to the archbishop 
in the cathedral and made a full confession to him. The archbishop 
granted absolution and uttered these words : 
"This must cm,vince you, whose faith is more effective : you" 
-SCI.id he-"have removed the seal from your Angel by fraud, 
whereas our Angel removed it himself, and brought you here." 
The miracle created such a sensation among the dissenters 
that the whole artel-the hundred and fifty men, or so-were con­
verted to Orthodoxy. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
59 
At this point, however, the author made a slip and finished 
the story rather awkwardly. (Mr. Leskov is apt to make such 
blunders : let us recall only the end of the deacon Akhilla in his 
Cathedral Folk.) It seems that he grew scared lest he might be 
accused of being inclined toward prejudices, and he hastened to 
explain the miracle. The narrator himself, m• aning the little peasant, 
the former dissenter, "mirthfully" confess(;d that one day after 
their conversion to Orthodoxy, it was discovered why the Angel 
had unsealed himself. The Englishwoman did not dare to pour the 
wax over the face on an ikon even though it had not yet been 
consecrated ; instead, she affixed the seal on a slip of paper which 
she inserted under the edge of the trimming. Naturally, on the 
way the slip had slid down, and the Angel had thus been unsealed. 
Consequently, it is somewhat incomprehensible that the dissenters 
would continue to adhere to Orthodoxy, despite the elucidation 
of the miracle.-Of course, it was because they were moved by 
the kindness of the archbishop, who had granted forgiveness. How­
ever, ta'Ying intn accour:t the firmness and purity of their former 
beliefs ; bearing in mind the desecration of their sacred object and 
the humiliation of their own reverent feelings ; and, finally, if one 
considers the general character of our schismatic movement-it is 
hardly possible tu explain the conversion of the dissenters by mere 
emotional sensibility, and to what-to \\ hom ?-As a mere matter 
of gratitude to the archbishop's absolution ? Indeed, didn't they 
comprehend-and even more clearly than the rest-what precisely the 
archbishop's ecclesiastical authority must have meant in a case 
where he, an archbishop, after such an unheard-of, publicly shame­
less and violent sacrilege on the part of the graftr• 1:ureaucrat- a 
sacrilege that concerned both the dissenters and all 
rthodox be­
lievers-confined himself to the sighing remark : "Per!Jlexed air I " ; 
an archbishop who was impotent to prevent eve., a second-rate 
functionary from perpetrating acts so bestial and invective to 
religion ! 
And, generally speaking, in this respect 1\fr. Leskov's novel 
left in me a sickly impression and a certain distrust of the truth 
of the story. Of course, it is excellently told and cieserves much 
praise. But the questi· 1n is : indeed, is ever:ything in. it true ? Is it 
possible that all thi" could have happened m our midst ?-But the 
point is that it is said that the story is based upon an actual fact. 
Let us only imagine such a caᆺ · let us say thaL there is 
somewhere, in our day, in some Orthodox church, a thaumaturgical 
ikon generally revered by Orthodox people. Let us suppose that 
some dissenters' artel, as a united group, steals that image from 
the cathedral-strictly speaking, in order to keep that ancient 

6o 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
sanctity in their own chapel. Of course, all this could have hap­
pened. Let us further presume that a decade later some government 
official finds that ikon, and bargains with the dissenters in the hope 
of a fat bribe. They are unable to raise any such sum. Then he 
takes sealing wax, pours drops of it on the face of the image and 
affixes the official seal. Now, can it be maintained that because of 
the mere fact that the ikon had remained a certain time in the 
possession of dissenters, it has lost its saintliness ?-In fact, the 
ikon of the "Angel," about which Mr. Leskov tells us, was an 
Orthodox ikon, consecrated in ancient times, and one which, prior 
to the schism, had been generally revered by the Orthodox world. 
And is it conceivable that on this occasion the local arch­
bishop would have been unable, and would not have had the right, 
to raise at least one finger in defense of the :;acred object, and 
would have merely uttered with a sigh : "Perplexed air" ?-My 
disturbing queries may seem to our educated people trifling and 
prejudicial. But I am of the opinion that an insult to a popular 
sentiment, to everything the people hold sacred, is a terrible outrage 
and an extraordinary inhumanity. 
Can it be that the thought did not occur to the dissenters : 
"How would this Orthodox dignitary have protected the church, 
should the offender have been a still more prominent person ?" 
Could they have felt respect for a church in which the ecclesiastical 
authority, as the novel describes it, possesses so little power ?-Since 
how, otherwise, can the archbishop's action be explained than 
by the fact of the meagreness of his authority ? Can it really be 
explained by indifference and indolence, or by the incredible sup­
position that, having forgotten the duties of his office, he turned 
into a mere functionary of the government ? For if such nonsense 
were to penetrate the heads of his spiritual children, it would sig­
nify the worst calamity : his Orthodox children would gradually 
lose all zeal in the matter of faith, their love and devotion to the 
church, while the dissenters would be looking upon the Orthodox 
church with contempt. The spiritual overseer must mean something 
-mustn't he ? Don't the dissenters understand this ? 
Now, these are the thoughts which are evoked in one's mind 
after reading Mr. Leskov's admirable story. Thus-let us repeat­
we are inclined to regard it, in certain details, as almost implausible. 
Meanwhile, I rFad in one of the recent issues of The Voice the 
following news : 
"One of the village priests in the province of Orel writes to 
the newspaper Present Time: 'Having taught the children of my 
parishioners how to read and write almost ever since the time of 
the abolition of serfdom, I relinquished this duty only when our 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
6I 
D-sky zemstvo assumed the cost of teaching and expressed the 
desire to have teachers who were free of other occupations. How­
ever, in the beginning of the current academic year 1872-1873, it 
was ascertained that there was a deficiency of schoolteachers in 
our county. Being opposed to the closing of the school in my village, 
I decided to declare my desire to assume the office of teacher, and 
I sent to the school board an application for my confirmation in 
the said office. The board replied that I would be confirmed in 
the office of schoolteacher if and when the peasants' community 
expresses its consent thereto. The peasants' community did express 
its willingness and drew up a respectful resolution. Then-abiding 
by the instructions of the school board-I applied to the volost ad­
ministration for certification of the resolution. The volost adminis­
tration, headed by the ignorant clerk M. S. and the chief, obedient 
to him in all matters, refused to certify the resolution, giving as 
a pretext the alleged fact that I have no time to teach-but, in 
reality, prompted by other motives. I applied to the mediator. 
Straight to my face he uttered these remarkable words : "The gov­
ernmem, generully, is hot disposed to have popular education in the 
hands of the clergy." "Why so ?"-I asked him. "Because"-replied 
the mediator-"the clergy propagates superstition." ' "  
How do you like this bit of news, gentlemen ? Of course, in 
an indirect sense, it almost restores the verisimilitude of Mr. 
Leskov's story, which we have so strongly called in question and 
which we stubbornly continue to doubt. Here, it is not important 
that such a mediator happened to turn up : what is there in the 
fact that some fool utters, in idle talk, a foolish word ? And what 
do we care about his convictions ?-The important point here is 
that the matter was put so candidly ar.::! .:tuthoritatp·. 'y, with such 
deliberate authority, with such untroubled uncereiT'VilOUsness. He 
expresses his profoundly wise conviction without hesitation, straight 
to one's face, and, in addition, he has the impude1n:e to ascribe his 
convictions to the government and to spe'lk in the name of the 
government. 
Now, would any sort of mediator, even a person vested with 
ten times greater authority, dare to tell this, for instance, to a 
Baltic pastor ?-God I What a row such a pastor would have started, 
and what turmoil, in fact, would have ensued ! In our midst the 
priest modestly accuses the arrogant fellow by resorting to pub­
licity. 
But this thought occurs : had this 1 rson been more prominent 
than a mediator (which would be quite possible sine.! in our country 
everything may happen), perhaps, our good shepherd would have 
altogether refrained from accusing him, knowing that this would 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
merely result in a "perplexed air," and in nothing else. Besides, we 
cannot expect from him the zeal of the first centuries of Chris­
tianity, much as we may long for it. We are, generally, inclined 
to accuse our clergy of indifference toward the sacred task. How­
ever, under given circumstances, what else is to be expected ? And 
yet, al no time has the clergy's help to the people been so urgently 
needed as in our day. We are living in a transitory, and, perhaps, 
the most fatal, moment in the whole history of the Russian people. 
A very strange phenomenon has recently occurred in one 
section of Russia : German Protestantism in the midst of Orthodoxy, 
a new sect-the Stundists. At the proper time The Citizen has given 
notice of it. It is an ugly phenomenon, but there sounds in it, as 
it were, something prophetic. 
In the province of Kherson a certain pastor Boneketberg, see­
ing the local Russian people unenlightened and spiritually back­
ward, kindheartedly felt sorry for them ; so he began preaching 
the Christian Gospel to them, adhering, however, to Orthodoxy and 
urging them not to deviate from it. But things took a different turn : 
though the preaching met with full success, yet the new Christians 
promptly started with the desertion of Orthodoxy, making this their 
first and binding condition ; they turned away from the rituals, 
the ikons, and began to congregate according to the Lutheran 
fashion and sing psalms and use prayer books. Some of them even 
learned the German language. The sect spread wth fanatical swift­
ness, extending to other counties and provinces. The sectarians 
changrd their mode of. living and gave up carousing. They argued, 
for instance, along these lines : 
"They (that is, the German Lutheran Stundists) live well, 
honestly and decently because they have no Lenten seasons . . . .  
" 
This is miserable logic ; yet, whatever one may say, there is 
some sense in it, particularly if Lent be regarded as a mere ritual. 
And where would the poor man learn about the salutary and pro­
found meaning of Lent ?-In fact, he used to conceive his former 
religion as a mere ritual. 
It means that he protested against a ritual. 
Well, this, let us say, is comprehensible. But why did he so 
suddenly and hastily start protesting ? What was the prompting 
cause ? 
Perhaps, the cause is a very general one, namely, that ever 
since Frbruary 19, the light of a new life has begun to gleam on 
him. With his first steP.S on the new path he may have stumbled, 
and fallen down ; but he had to recover by all means and, having 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
done so, he realized all of a sudden how "pitiful and poor and blind 
and miserable and bare" he was. The main thing is : he started 
craving for the truth, even sacrificing everything that hithᆻrto had 
been held sacred by him. In fact, no degree of depravity, no pres­
sure, no kind of humiliation can kill or eradicate in the hearts 
of our people the thirst for truth, since this thirst is dearest of all 
to them. They may terribly decay, but even at the moment of their 
most unbridled debauch they will remember that they are but de­
bauchees, and nothing but that, and that somewhere there is sub­
lime truth which stands above everything else. 
Such is the phenomenon. Perhaps, as yet, it may be a single 
and superficial one, but, hardly, is it accidental. It may abate and 
harden at its very inception and transform itself into some ritualism, 
as in most Russian sects, especially if they be left alone. But say 
what you please, there may be in this phenomenon-! repeat-some­
thing prophetic, as it were. In our day, when the future is so 
mysterious, it is permissible to believe even in prophecies. 
Whᆼt if somethinv simlar should spread all over Russia ? Not 
exactly Stundists (particularly, as it is rumored that proper meas­
ures have already been adopted) ,  but something similar ? What if 
the whole people, having reached the limit of their debauch and 
perceived their misery, should say to themselves : "We do not want 
debauch. We don't want any liquor. B·1t we do want truth and 
fear of God-but, most important, truth, truth above all." 
That they will thirst for truth is, of course, an encouraging 
phenomenon. And yet, instead of truth, the greatest deceit may 
develop, as in the case of the Stundists. 
In fact, what kind of Protestants and Germans ::.re our people ? 
And what is the use of their learning i.ierman in 
·der to sing 
psalms ? And does not Orthodoxy comprise everything, · ndeed every­
thing, which they are seeking ? Isn't there in Orthodoxy alone both 
the truth and the salvation of the Russian people, and-in the forth­
coming centuries-of mankind as a whole ? Hasn't there been pre­
served in Orthodoxy alone, in all its purity, the Divine image of 
Christ ? And, perhaps, the most momentous preordained destiny of 
the Russian people, within the destinies of mankind :lt large, con­
sists in the preservation in their midst of the Divine image of Christ, 
in all its purity, and, when the time comes, in the revelation of 
this image to the world which has lost its way ! 
Yes but before all this would COfT'e to pass, the par: )r would 
, 
wake up earlier, with the first birds, a .. d would go to the. people 
in order to reveal to them the truth-the Orthodox truth, smce he 
would be very scrupulous. However, the people would follow him, 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
and not Orthodoxy-not out of mere gratitude, but for the reason 
that it was from him that they first learned the truth. And it would 
develop that "his life is good because there are no Lenten seasons." 
-Quite an intelligible inference once the personal element has be­
come involved. 
But, by the way, what about our priests ? What is heard about 
them ? 
Our priests, too-it is rumored-begin to awake. It is said that 
our clergy began long ago to reveal signs of life. We read with 
humble gratification the admonitions of the ecclesiastical masters 
in churches, regarding the virtues of preaching and of the moral 
way of living. According to all reports, our spiritual leaders are 
resolutely beginning to compose sermons and are getting ready 
to deliver them. 
Only, will they arrive in time ? Will they manage to wake up 
with the first birds ?-The pastor is a bird of passage, a bird of 
different feathers, differently constituted. Besides, his is a different 
kind of service, his superiors are different, and so forth. Be that 
as it may, our priest, too, indeed, is no functionary 1 Isn't he the 
preacher of the sole great Truth, destined to revive the whole world ? 
The pastor did arrive earlier than he-this is so. However, 
what was the priest to do, for instance, in the case of those 
Stundists ? We are inclined to accuse our priests ; but let us con­
sider : is it possible that they were to confine themselves to a mere 
denunciation to the authorities ? Oh, of course, not : we have many 
good shepherds-perhaps, more than we may hope for, or more 
than we ourselves des6rve. Even so, what would he start preaching 
here ?-(I, as a laic person, unfamiliar with the problem, some­
times question it myself.)-On the advantages of Orthodoxy over 
Lutheranism ?-But our peasants are ignorant people : perhaps, they 
would understand nothing and would not be convinced. Speaking 
generally, without going into details, would they preach good be­
havior and decency in the mode of living ?-But how is "decency" 
to be expected when the people are drunk all day ?-Abstinence from 
liquor, perhaps, to exterminate the very root of evil ?-No doubt, 
that would be the thing, although-without entering into details­
one has to take into account the greatness of Russia, as a great 
power, which is so expensive a proposition . . . .  Well, this, in a 
sense, is almost equivalent to the "perplexed air." So that there 
is nothing else left except to preach that the people drink a little less. 
And what does the pastor care about Russia's greatness, as a 
great European power ?. Nor is he afraid of any "perplexed air," 
and his is a different kind of service. This is why he won. 
The Citizen, 1873, No. 8. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
65 
"A CERTAIN PERSON'S" HALF-LETTER 
Below I am printing a letter-to be more exact, half of a 
letter of a "certain person," addressed to the editorial office of The 
Citizen. It would be quite impossible to publish the whole letter. 
It is the same "person," the one who has already distinguished 
himself in The Citizen in the matter of "li ttle graves." I confess, 
I am printing this solely to get rid of hirn. The editor's desk is 
literally clogged with his articles. First, this "person" resolutely 
comes forth as my defender against my literary "enemies." He has 
already written in my defense, and on my behalf, three "anti­
criticisms," two "notes," three "casual notes," one "apropos," and, 
finally, an "instruction on how to behave." In the latter polemic 
composition of his, under the guise of an instruction to my "enemies," 
he attacks me, and he attacks me in a tone more energetic and 
furious than I have ever encountered even in my "enemies." He hopes 
that I shall print it all ! I told him quite definitely that, to begin with, 
I have no "enemies" whatsoever and that these are but phantoms. 
Secondly, th;;.: it is alr' :1dy too latf', since all that journalistic 
tumult which had broken out after the appearance of the first issue 
of The Citizen in the current year of 1873, with such unheard-of 
rage, lack of indulgence, and naivete of methods of attack, has now 
-since two or even three werks ago-suddenly ceased for some un­
known reason in Lhe same way as, for some unknown reason, it 
had started. Finally, that were I to make up my mind to answer 
anyone, I should manage to do so myself, without his assistance. 
He grew angry with me and, after quarrelling with me, he 
departed. Of this I was even glad. Hf' is an ailing man . . . .  In 
his article, which we have previously rr;nted in cu.. :om nal, he 
gave in part certain facts pertaining to his biography : . . aggrieved 
man and one who is daily "vexing'' himself. But the main thing 
is that I am afraid of the excessive strength, of the ''civic energy," 
of this contributor. Can you imagine that at the very outset he 
declared that he required no honorarium whatsoever, and that he 
was writing solely as a matter of "civic duty" ? He admitted even 
with proud candor, in no way damaging to his reputation, that he 
had written not at all with a view to defending me, but-taking 
advantage of the occa; :on-for the sole purpose of revealing his 
ideas since no other periodical would print his writings. Simply, 
he e£tertained the swret hope that he might secure for h:.nself­
even though without pay-a permanent 
· tie corner in our maga­
zine so as to be able continually to reveal hi, thoughts. 
' Now what are these thoughts ?-He writes about everything ; 
he reacts to everything with bitterness, with rage, with venom and 

66 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
with a "tender tear." "Ninety percent dedicated to venom and one 
percent to the tender tear" -he declares himself in one of his 
manuscripts. A new magazine or newspaper comes into existence, 
and he is right there on the spot-teaching and dispensing instruc­
tions. It is quite true that he had sent to one of the newspapers 
some forty letters, with instructions as to how they should be 
publishing ; how they should be behaving ; what they should be 
writing about, and what they should be paying attention to. In our 
editorial office, in the course of two and a half months, there ac­
cumulated twenty-eight of his letters. Invariably he writes over his 
full signature, so that he is already known everywhere. Moreover, 
he spends his last kopecks on postage and, on top of that, he keeps 
enclosing return stamps on the supposition that at length he will 
succeed in starting a civic correspondence with the editorial offices. 
The thing that puzzles me most is the fact that, in spite of 
his twenty-eight letters, I have been utterly unable to discover 
what his convictions are and what he is trying to accomplish.-lt's 
all trash and nonsense . . . .  Along with the coarseness of his 
methods, the cynicism of the red nose and "offensive odor" ; along 
with the ecstatic style and torn boots, there gleams some hidden 
craving for tenderness, for something ideal-a faith in beauty, a 
Sehnsucht for something lost. And all thi5 takes, in him, an 
abominable form. Generally, I am sick and tired of him. True, he 
is candidly rude and demands no money for it, so that in a way 
he is an honorable man, but God be with him and his .honor I 
Only three days after our quarrel he appeared again with "the last 
attempt," bringing with him this "Letter of a Certain Person." There 
was nothing to be dbne but to take it, and now I am obliged to 
publish it. 
It is absolutely impossible to print the first half of the letter. 
It is nothing but personalities and cursing at virtually all Peters­
burg and Moscow periodicals, a cursing exceeding all limits. None 
of the incriminated magazines has ever reached such a cynicism 
in invectives. And the main point is that he himself curses them 
solely for their cynicism and for the vulgar tone of their polemics. 
I simply clipped off with scissors the entire first part of the letter, 
returning it to him. I am printing the concluding part because here, 
as it were, the theme is a general one : this is a certain admonition 
addressed to some imaginary columnist-an admonition suitable to 
columnists of al' ages and nations because it is so general. The 
style is exalted, and the impetuosity of the style can only match 
the naivete of the ideas set forth. Addressing the admonition to 
the columnist, he callᆽ him thou, as in odes of ancient times. He 
emphatically objected to my starting after a period or full stop, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
and insisted that the printing of the half-letter begin in the middle 
of a sentence, precisely as it had been cut by the scissors : "Let 
them see how I was mutilated ! "  It was also he who insisted on 
the title. I meant to entitle it, "Letter of a Certain Person" ; but 
he categorically demanded that it be designated : "A Certain Person's 
Half-Letter." 
And so, this is the half-letter : 
"A CERTAIN PERSON'S HALF-LETTER 
and is it possible that the word 'swine' has such a magic and 
attractive meaning that it is forthwith and unfailingly credited to 
one's own account? I observed long ago that in Russian literature 
this little word invariably carries a certain peculiar, and even, as 
it were, mystical, meaning. Realizing this, even grandpa Krylov 
used 'swine' in his fables with special affection. An author who is 
silently reading in solitude, coming across this word, immediately 
shudders ..tHo r vrthwith ',l'gins pondering : 'Is it not me ? I sn't this 
written about me ?' 
"l admit, this is an energetic little word, but why should one 
presume that it applies to him and to him alone ? There are others 
besides thine owu self. Perhaps, thou hast secret reasons therefor ? 
For how is one to explain otherwise thy suspiciousness ?1 
"The second thing I shall remark to thee, 0 my columnist 
friend, is the fact that thou art inttmperate in the planning of 
thy feuilletons. Thou stuffest thy columns with such a multitude 
of generals, stockholders, princes, relying on thee and on thy witti­
cisms, that, when reading, I conclude ,,-iѴ!y-nilly u-,഻: despite tht! 
abundance of the many thou hast not a single one. } . , .. ; thou art 
present at an important board meeting and thou utterest bons 
mots, haughtily and carelessly, but tl>('n·by thou · ᆾrowest a ray 
of light, and the board immediately and hastily changes for the 
I Unquc:Ûtionably this is an exaggeration, and yet, partly, it is true. 
Strictly speaking, this is a hint to the fact th;:t in the first issue of The 
Citi::e11 1 had the misfortune of citing a very ancient llindu fable about 
the duel betwl'en a l ion and a pig-, ami allroitly I olwiateu llle very pos­
sihility of the supposition that the word ''lion" immodestly referred to my­
self. And what ? Aࢵ a m;-ttter of fact, many people have expressed extraor­
dinary and hasty suspiciousness. There c1·en occurred something- akin to 
a phc-noml'non. A ll'tter had heen received !•Y the editoഺial office 
rom .one 
of the !-.Uhscrihcrs in a remote harder reg-1c 
of Russ1a. That ::.ul.•scnber 
impudently and haphazardly accuÜed the editors of. the alleഹed fact that 
by the word "swine" thl'y unquestiOnably meant the1r subscrrhQrs-;_t pre­
sumption so ahsurd that even some of the Pl'tcrRburg columP1sts d1d not 
dare to make use of it in thl'ir attacks . . . and tins, of rr-urse, IS a measure 
of everything.-Ed. 

68 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : rSn 
better. Now thou hast ridiculed a wealthy prince straight to his face, 
in reward for which he invites thee to dinner, but thou passest him 
by and uppishly-yet in a liberal fashion-thou refusest the dinner 
invitation. Now again, jestingly, thou revealest, in intimate salon 
talk with a foreign lord, the whole secret underlayers of Russia. 
He is appalled and delighted ; then and there he wires to London, 
and the very next day Victoria's cabinet is overthrown. On another 
occasion, on the Nevsky, during a walk from two to four, thou 
solvest a state problem to three ex-ministers running after thee. 
Then thou runnest into a guard captain, who has lost everything 
at play, and thou throwest him a loan of two hundred rubles ; thou 
goest with him to Fifma to spill noble (presumably) indignation. 
"Briefly, thou art here, thou art there, thou art everywhere ; 
thou art dispersed in society ; thou art torn asunder ; thou swallow­
est truffles, eatest candies ; thou art being driven by cabmen ; thou 
maintainest friendship with waiters at Palkin-in a word, nothing 
transpires without thee. Such a high position as thine, in the long 
run, creates suspicion. A modest provincial reader, in truth, might 
lake thee for one unjustly deprived of a reward, or, at least, for 
a retired minister seeking anew to regain his office with the aid of 
a free, but opposition, press. 
"However, the seasoned dweller of both capitals knows dif­
ferently, since he is aware of the fact that thou art nothing but 
a scribbler hired by a .contractor-editor ; thou hast been hired and 
art obliged to defend. It is also he (and no other) who instigates 
thee against anyone he chooses. 
"So that, al1 this anger and irritation in thee, all this barking 
of thine-all this is but a hired proposition, directed by somebody 
else's hand. And it would be something to thy credit if thou shouldst 
defend thine own independent stand I Contrarywise, the thing that 
surprises me most in thee is the fact that thou actually growest 
excited, that thou takest things to thy heart as if they were thine 
own ; thou quarrellest with a rival columnist as though about some 
cherished idea, some conviction dear to thee. However, thou know­
est thyself that thou hast no ideas of thine own-not to speak of 
convictions. Or, perhaps, as a result of many years of agitation 
and enthusiasm over thy fetid success, thou hast finally fancied that 
thou hast an idea, and that thou art capable of having a conviction ? 
-If so, how canS- thou, after that, count upon my respect ? 
"In times gone by thou wert an honest and decent youth . 
. . . Oh, do recall Pushkin-if I am not mistaken, it's a version 
from the Persian language : a venerable old man says to a youth 
eager to throw himself into a battle : 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
'Yes, I fear, antidst hard fighting 
Thou shalt lose thy movements tame : 
With their modesty inviting 
And the lovely sense of shame.' 
"Alas I Thou hast lost all these long J.go and forever I Look, 
thyself, at the way thou polemizest with try rival columnist , and 
realize to what limit ye both have carried your abuses ! Since 
ye both arc not as vile as ye are picturing one another. Recall 
that in early years children come to blows mainly because they 
have not yet learned to express their thoughts. But thou, a gray­
haired child, because of the absence of thoughts, thou cursest, 
employing all words at once-this is a bad device ! 
"Precisely, owing to lack of convictions and grnuine erudi­
tion, thou seekest to peep into the private life of thy rival ; avidly 
dost thou learn his trespasses, distorteლt them and deliverest him 
unto salutary publicity. Thou sparest not his wife and children. 
Presuming ქ'arh other dead, ye write mutually one to the other 
obituaries in the form of pasquinades. 
"Well, tell me, who in the long run shall bf'lieve thee ? Read­
ing thy feuilleton, bespattered with saliva and ink, I am compelled 
to think that thou art not right ; that in thy article there is a 
peculiar and secret meaning ; that ye mu ,t have come to blows at 
some country resort and ye are unable to forget it. Willy-nilly, 
I favor thy rival, and thy arrow has gone astray. Is this what thou 
hast sought ? 
"And what a childish incompetency in thee ! Having scolded 
thy rival, thou windest up thy feuilleton with the wm .'I., :  'I can sl'c 
you, 1\lr. N. N.-how, after having read tnese lines, yt 
are runninმ 
about your room in a rage, tearing your hair, shouting .Lt your wife 
who, in a state of fright, came running to you ; how you are driving 
away your children and, grinding your teeth, you are hammering 
the wall with your fists in a fit of impotenl frenzy . . .  .' 
"Oh, my friend, thou simple-minded but enraged sufferer from 
thy fictitious rage, assumed for the benefit of thy manager. Oh, 
my columnist-friend ! Tell me : upon reading in th) article such 
lines, as it were, about thy rival, is it conceivable that I shall not 
guess that thou-thou thyself, and not thy rival-art running around 
thy room, tearing thy hair ; that thou beatest the frighteneil lackey 
-if thou hast one, and if after Fe-bru::;r•• 19 he hath noნ iost his 
primitive innocence ; with screams and g, mding of thy teeth, thou 
rushest against the wall, smashing thine own fists till they begin to 
bleed ? This is how thou betrayest thyself. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
"Do come to thy senses and do acquire some shame. Having 
acquired it, thou shalt also learn to write feuilletons-this is the 
advantage. 
"I shall give thee an allegory. All of a sudden thou advertisest 
on a poster that next week, on Thursday or Friday (in a word, 
imagine a day on which thou writest thy feuilletons) , in the Berg 
Theatre, or on premises specially adapted therefor, thou shalt ex­
hibit thyself naked, even in all minute details. I am sure, amateurs 
will be forthcoming : shows of this sort carry a particular appeal 
to contemporary society. I really believe that people-a multitude 
of them-will come. But will they come to pay thee respect ?-And 
where, then, and what is thy triumph ? 
"Now, consider, if thou canst : do not thy feuilletons portray 
the same thing ? Dost thou not appear every week, on a certain 
day, nude even in all details, before the public ? And what for-for 
whom dost thou exert thyself ?  
"The funniest part of it all is that the entire public is cog­
nizant of the secret of your warfare ; it knows and yet does not 
care to know ; it passes you by indifferently. But ye are exerting 
yourselves, imagining that everybody is sympathizing with you. 
"Oh, simpleminded man I The public knows only too well 
that the manager of a newspaper in the capital, when, following 
his own example, another newspaper had been founded, seized him­
self by his pocket and exclaimed : 'This newly-founded, good-for­
nothing wretch may deprive me of two thousand or twenty-five 
hundred subscribers. All right. Jill hire a barking dog and will set 
it at my rival.' Thou art the barking dog ! 
"The manager is pleased with thee, he strokes his whiskers 
and, after luncheon, he smilingly cogitates : 'How well I instigated 
him ! '  
"Dost thou recall Turgenev's Antro pka ? This piece by an 
author beloved by the public is, indeed, ingenious. Antropka is a 
provincial urchin, or-more correctly-the brother of another pro­
vincial urchin ; Antropka (let us call the former-Nefed) disap­
peared from the hut on one dark summer night because of some 
mischief perpetrated by him. Their austere father sent the elder 
boy to bring back his mischievous little brother. And presently, 
over the bank, shrill cries begin to sound : 
" 'Antropka r Antropka I '  
"The guilty scamp remains silent for a long while but, finally, 
'as if from the other world,' comes his trembling and timid, thin 
little voice from the other side of the bank : 
" 'Wba-a-t ?' 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
7I 
11 'Daddy wants to spa-a-nk you I '-with bitter but hasty joy, 
echoes the elder brother . . . .  
"The voice 'from the other world,' of course, is heard no 
mor̕. But the strained, impotent screams, full of exasperated anger, 
continue to resound endlessly in the dark night : 
11 'Antropka I Antropka-a-a I '  
"This ingenious exclamation-and mPst important : its im­
potent, yet angry̖ strain-may be re-echoed not only among provin­
cial urchins but equally among grown-up people having attained a 
venerable gray-haired age, among members of our contemporary 
society disturbed by the reforms. And doesn't something at least 
remind thee of those Antropkas in the capital r Since between these 
two managers of periodicals in the capital, dost thou not observe 
something of the Antropka pattern r Thou and thy rival-haven't 
ye both been sent out by your masters for the purpose of finding 
Antropkas ? The Antropkas-aren't they those new subscribers con­
ceived by you who might give credence to your innocence r Ye are 
both awar̗ of the fact that your rage, the whole strain :1nd all your 
efforts will be m vain ; that Antropka will give no answer ; that 
neither of you will take away a single subscribPr from the other ; 
that each of you will have enough subscribers anyway. However, ye 
have gnawed yonrselves into this gamP, and ye are so fond of thiസ 
heart-scratching journalistic strain of yo1·rs that ye can no longer 
desist ! And thus, weekly, on specified days, there sounds the strained 
and raging exclamation : 'Antropka ! Antropka-a ! '  And we are 
listening to it. 
"I'll indulge in another allegory. 
"Imagine that thou hast been invited by decent neople, since 
I presume that thou art also visiting rt:;,p̘ctable sm · 
of society. 
Thou goest to a formal evening party of a person as : .. gh in rank 
a!; that of a state-councilor, on his saint's day. Guests have been 
informed in advance about thy wit. rhou enterest politely, well 
dressed ; thou bowest courteously to thy l:ostess and tellest her 
amiable things. Thou sensest with pleasure that everybody is look­
ing at thee and thou art ready to distinguish thyself. And suddenly 
-oh horror !-thou observest in a corner of tht: hal! thy literary 
rivai who has arrived earlier J.nd whom, till the last minute, thou 
hast not even suspected of being acquainted with these people. 
Thy face hath changed, but thine host, at̙ributing this to thy 
momentary indisposition, hastens naiup]v to mtroduce thP·· to thy 
literary foe. Ye bow and then immed1 .• ely t̚rn Y?Ur backs on 
each other. The host is embarrassed, but regams h1s composure, 
believing that it is merely a new literary device of which he is not 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
aware, owing to the pressure of his official business. Meanwhile, 
a game of cards is being hastily arranged, and the hostess, with 
her usual amiability, invites thee to take part in a game of whist. 
In order to rid thyself of thy rival, thou pickest joyously a card.­
A new affront ! It develops that thou art to be seated with him at 
one and the same table ! It is too late to refuse because thou hast, 
as thy partners, two cheerful, well-meaning and socially prominent 
ladies. They hurriedly take their seats. Gathered around them are 
several relatives and acquaintances, and all are eager to listen to 
two litterateurs ; all of them are staring into your mouths, catching 
every word of yours, intently looking at you. 
"Thy rival turneth to the lady and calmly saith to her : 'I be­
lieve, it's your deal, madam.' Everybody smiles, looking at one 
another. The witticism meets with success ; and thy heart begins to 
quiver from envy. Cards are being dealt. Thou openest thine : 
threes, twos, sixes and the highest card is a jack. Thou grindest 
thy teeth, while thy rival smiles. He has all the cards, and proudly 
bids a slam. Thine eyes grow dim. Thou seizest a heavy bronze family 
candlestick, of which thy host is proud ; all year long it is kept 
in the hostess's cupboard and it is being exhibited only on some 
saint's day. Thou seizest the candlestick and violently flingest it 
into thy rival's forehead. Screams and perplexity ! People leap to 
their feet, but ye have already sprung upon each other and ye are 
clawing each other's hair in a foam of rage.1 Because of thine 
impatience in literature and thine inability to restrain thyself, I also 
have the right to infer thine impatience in private company. Thy 
partner, the young lad¥ who had been expecting from thee so much 
wit, with a scream, seeks shelter under the wing of her husband­
an important engineer and lieutenant-colonel. Pointing at both of 
you, clawing each other's hair, he says to her : 'I have warned you, 
my dearest-what can one expect from modern belles-lettres ! '  
"Hm•;ever, both of you, having been dragged down the stair­
case, are kicked out into the street. The host, celebrating his saint's 
day and realizing his guilt before his guests, makes his apologies 
to all present, urging them to forget about Russian literature and 
bidding them to continue their whist. But thou hast deprived thy­
self of a social evening party, of some pleasant, though innocent, 
moments with a Petersburg lady, and of a supper. 
"Yet, ye both are not concerned about all this : ye hire cab­
men and dash through the stinking Petersburg streets, each heading 
for his apartment, in order to start immediately composing his 
feuilleton. Thou art sp.urring on thy coachman, inadvertently en­
vying his innocence, but thou art already pondering over thine article. 
1The editors consider this picture slightly exaggerated. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
73 
Presently, thou hast arrived ; thou graspest thy pen, and thou re­
countest, to the last dot, every minute detail of the things that 
happened to thee at the councilor's home 1 
"Thou indictest the host celebrating his saint's day his wife 
their refreshments ; thou protestest against the custom of ¢elebrating 
saints' days, against the engineer lieutenal"'ბ-colonel, against thy 
lady partner-and, finally, thou reachest thy rival. 
"Oh, at this juncture-everything is being set forth in the 
most minute details, fully in accord with thy present-day fashion 
to reveal all the ins and outs. Thou tellest how he beat thee, how 
thou didst beat him ; thou promisest that thou shalt beat him and 
thou also tellest that he had promised to beat thee. Thou wishest 
to append to thine article a patch of hair torn from his head. 
"But it is already morning . . . .  Thou runnest around thy 
room, waiting for the office hour to strike. Thou goest to the editor 
and, suddenly, with a calm air, he declares to thee that already, 
only yesterday, he had made peace with his rival manager who 
hath discontinued his periodical, transferring his subscribers to him, 
thy manager ; he also telleth thee that the peace pact hath been cele­
brated at Dussot's with a bottle of champagne. Thereupon, he 
thanketh thee for thy services and declareth that thou art no longer 
needed by him. Nnw, tell me, what is thy situation ? 
"Least of all, do I like thr last dayგ of butter-week, when 
the common people are getting drunk in a most obnoxious fashion. 
Dulled ugly faces of topers, in torn dressing gowns and dirty old 
coats, assemble in crowds in front of saloons. Here are two fellows 
who have stopped in the street : one of them claims he is a general ; 
the other shouts in reply : 'Liar ! '  The former rages and -:urses, and 
the latter keeps on shouting, 'Liar ! '  The D.1st one ex' · s himself 
ever more strenuously ; but the other persists in his-' L tar ! '  And 
so on and so forth, maybe two hundred times ! Both precisely 
perceive beauty in the impotent and endless repetition of one and 
the same word, sinking, so to speak, into deligდ1t in the importance 
of their degradation. 
"When reading thy feuilletons, somehow I visualize an end­
less, drunken and senseless, butter-week that hath been pr·sisting too 
long in our literature. Since, b not thy case identical with that 
of those two insipid, drunken dressing-gown peddlეrs ? Doth not thy 
rival claim in each one of his articles that he IS a general, and 
dost thou not, even as that peddler at thვ crossroads, reply ' · • him 
in each one of thine : 'Liar ! '  And all tJ .s, a countless number 
of times without even the slightest suspicion on thy part of how 
all this in the long run maketh me weary and tired. I visualize you, 
crazed ' and intoxicated, precisely on the last (forgiveness I )  day 

74 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
of butter-week. I see each of you lying in front of the windows of 
your editorial offices, and wallowing in the dirty brown snow of 
the capital and shouting at the top of your hoarse voices at each 
other : 'Help ! He-e-Jp ! H-e-elp ! '  
"But I remain silent, hurrying by . . . .  
Silent Observer." 
N. B. "Silent Observer" is the pseudonym of "A Certain Per­
son." I forgot to note this beforehand. 
The Citizen, 1873, No. 10. 
APROPOS OF THE EXHIBITION 
l went lo see the exhibition. A good many pictures by our 
Russian artisls are being dispatched to the Vienna international 
exhibition. This is not the first time, and modern Russian painters 
are gelting to be known in Europe. Even so, I wonder : is it possible 
over there to understand our artists, and from what angle are they 
going to be evaluated there ? In my opinion, if Ostrovsky's comedy 
-say, We're No Strangers-We'll Settle It, or, in fact, any of them 
-were translated, and translated as well as possible, into German 
or French, and if it were produced on some European stage-I don't 
know what would come of it. Of course, something would be under­
stood and-who knows ?-some pleasure might be derived from it, 
but at least three-quarters of the comedy would remain inaccessible 
to European understjj.nding. 
I recall, in my youthful days, I became greatly interested in 
the fact that Mr. Viardot, a Frenchman (the husband of the famous 
singer who, at the time, had been singing in our Italian opera) ,  
not knowing a word of Russian, had been translating our Gogo] 
under the guidance of Mr. Turgenev. True, Viardot was endowed 
with an artistic and critical faculty and, in addition, with a sen­
sitiveness to the understanding of poetry of alien nationalities-this 
he had proved by his admirable French version of Don Quixote. 
At the same time, it goes without saying that Mr. Turgenev under­
stood Gogol in every minute detail, enthusia'!;tically loved him, 
I take it-much as everybody else in those days-and, on top of 
that, was himself a poet, although then he had hardly begun his 
poetic pursuits. (N. B. He had only written several poems, I forget 
which ones, and also a novel, Three Portraits-already a noteworthy 
piece.) Thus, somethipg could have come of it. I may note that 
Mr. Turgenev, probably, knows the French language to perfection. 
But what was the result ?-Such a strange thing was produced 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
75 
by this translation that, even though I had anticipated that Gogol 
cannot be rendered into French, nevertheless I had not expected 
such an outcome. This translation is available at present-look what 
it amounts to. Gogol has literally vanished. All the humor ; all 
that is comical ; all individual details and the principal phases of 
the denouements which if suddenly recalleri in solitude (and often­
times in the least literary moments of one's life) will set one break­
ing into irresistible laughter to one's self-all this has vanished, as 
if it had never been there. 
I cannot imagine what opinion the French could have formed 
at the time about Gogol, judging by that translation. For the rest, 
it seems, they have formed no opinion whatever. No doubt, The 
Queen of Spades and The Captain's Daughter, which had also been 
translated into French, must likewise have half-vanished, notwith­
standing the fact that in these much more could have been under­
stood than in Gogol. 
Briefly, in my opinion, everything characteristic-everything 
that is our-,. preeminently national (and therefore, everything genu­
inely artistic)-is unintelligible to Europe. Translate Turgenev's 
novel Rudin-(1 speak of Mr. Turgenev because he has been trans­
lated more than other Russian authors, and of the novel Rudin, 
for the reason that among all of Mr. Turgenev's works it conforms 
the most to something German)-into anv European language, and 
even then it will not be understood. The real gist of the matter 
will even remain unsuspected. A Hunter's Sketches will be as little 
understood as Pushkin and Gogol. So that-it would seem to me 
-all our outstanding talents are, perhaps, destined, for many years 
to come, to remain utterly unknown to Europe ; .଻nd even : the 
greater, the more original, the talent-tt.e more ur • telligible he 
will be. 
We, however, understand Dickens, when rendered into Rus­
sian, almost as well as the English-perhaps, even all nuances. 
Moreover, we love him-perhaps, not less than his own country­
men. And yet, how typical, original and national is Dickens ! What 
can be derived from this ?-Is such an understanding of alien na­
tionalities a special gift of the Russians, as compard with Euro­
peans ?-Perhaps, such a special gift actually exists ; and if it exists 
(as well as the gift of speaking foreign languages which, indeed, 
is more pronounced among us than among other Europeans), it is 
a very significant gift, carrying a grf'- t promise for th· · future­
one that predestines the Russians to m ... ny a thing, although I do 
not know whether this is a good gift or whether there is something 
bad in it. . . .  
More correctly-many will maintain-Europeans know little 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
about Russia and Russian life simply because, as yet, they have 
had no particular need of being informed about them in any detail. 
It is true that Europe, up to this time, has had no special need 
of being informed about us in any detail. Nevertheless, it seems 
certain that for a European, regardless of his nationality, it is al­
ways easier to learn some other European language and penetrate 
the soul of any other European nationality than to master the 
Russian and to grasp our Russian essence. Even those Europeans 
who have deliberately studied us for some specific purposes-and 
there have been such-and who have spent much labor on this, 
have been leaving us, though with much knowledge, yet without 
a complete understanding of certain facts ; it may even be said that 
they will long fail to comprehend these facts, at least in contem­
porary, and in the closest, generations. 
All this suggests our long, and perhaps sad, solitude amidst 
the family of European peoples ; mistakes of Europeans in their 
judgments about Russia even in the remote future ; and their ap­
parent inclination to judge us unfavorably. All this, possibly, ex­
plains also that permanent, general animosity of Europe toward us, 
which is based on some powerful, immediate and squeamish feel­
ing ; a disgust for us as for something repugnant ; partly even, her 
superstitious fear of us-and the eternal, familiar verdict of long 
standing that we are not Europeans at all . . . .  Of course, we feel 
offended and exert every effort to prove that we are Europeans. 
Of course, I do not maintain that, in Europe, our landscape 
painters, for instance, will not be understood : the scenes of the 
Crimea, the Caucasus, ·even of our steppes, will naturally be found 
interesting. However, I do believe that our Russian, preeminently 
national, landscape, that is, of the northern and central regions of 
our European Russia, will produce in Vienna no great impression. 
And yet, to us, this "weary nature," whose whole characteristic 
resides, so tO speak, in its lack of characteristic, is dear and charm­
ing. Take, for instance, those two little birches in Mr. Kuindgi's 
landscape A Scene in Valaam : in the foreground-a marsh and 
swampy sedge ; in the background-a forest ; over it-not exactly 
a cloud, but mist, dampness-one is, as it were, penetrated by it ; 
you almost feel it ; and in the middle, between the forest and your­
selves, two little white birches, bright, hard-the strongest point 
in the picture. Nt w, what is there peculiar about this ? What is 
there characteristic here ?-And yet, how beautiful this is 1 
•
•
•
 I 
may be mistaken, but this will not please the German as much. 
It isn't even worth while speaking about historical painting. 
In the strictly historical painting we have long been failing to 
glitter, so that we will cause no surprise in Europe ; nor in battle 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
77 
painting. Even the transmigration of the Circassians (an enormous, 
many-colored canvass, perhaps with great merits-! cannot judge) 
-in my opinion, will create no strong impression abroad. But genre, 
our genre-what will they comprehend in it ? And yet, in Russia 
it has been reigning almost supreme over a period of many years ; 
and if we can pride ourselves on somethin୍t-if we have something 
to show-certainly, it is our genre. 
Here, for example, is a small picture by Makovsky-1 be­
lieve, Amateurs of Nightingales' Singing; I don't know just what 
it is called. Look : a small room of a commoner ur some discharged 
soldier, a dealer in singing-birds, perhaps, and, besides, a fowler. 
Several bird cages may be seen ; benches, a table and, on it, a 
samovar, around which guests are seated-two merchants or shop­
keepers, amateurs of nightingales' singing. The nightingale is in a 
cage hung beside the window, and probably he is whistling, trilling, 
chattering, while the guests are listening. Both of them are, ap­
parently, serious-minded people-close-fisted shopkeepers and job­
bers, advanced in age, and, perhaps, debauchees in family life 
(somehow, iL i:. a custo ,, that this "dark kingdom" is necessarily 
composed of debauchees behaving themselves indecently in their 
family life) ; and yet, it seems that they have already grown soft 
from delight-the most innocent and almost touching delight. Here, 
something moving, to the point of foolishness, is taking place. The 
one sitting by the window slightly lowers his head and lifts one 
hand, holding it in suspense ; he is hearkening, melting, with a 
blissful smile on his face ; he is listening to the last sounds of the 
trill. He wants to grasp at something-he is afraid of losing some­
thing. 
The other one sits at the table, "'\";tit his te::. , ··is back is 
almost turned, but you are aware of the fact that he 1. 'suffering" 
not less than his· companion. In front of them is the host who had 
invited them to listen to the nightingall:' and, it goe: without say­
ing, to sell them the bird. He is a somewhat lean, tall fellow, of 
about forty or more, dressed in his domestic, rather unceremonious 
suit (and why should he indulge in ceremonies I )  ; he is telling 
something to the merchants, and one feels that he talks wit
_h au­
thority. Compared with these .,hopkeepers, from the standpomt of 
his social position-his pocket-he is, of course, an insignificant 
person · but now he has a nightingale-a good one, too-and so he 
looks haughtily (as if he himself were singing) ; he speaks to thP. 
merchants even with a sort of insolence, ternly (there's no other 
way ! )  . . .  
It is noteworthy that the shopkeepers sit and unquestionably 
think it should be thus-that he should slightly scolrl them, because 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
"the nightingale is darned good I "  Tea will son be finished and 
the bargaining will then ensue. . 
. 
. 
Now, I ask you, what will a German or a Viennese Jew 
(Vienna, even as Odessa, they say, is full of Jews) understand in 
this picture ? Perhaps, somebody will explain the gist of the matter, 
and they will learn that a Russian merchant of average standing 
has two passions-the race horse and the nightingale-and that on 
this account the picture is awfully amusing. But what will this 
come to ? This is some abstract knowledge, and it will be hard for 
the German to comprehend why this is amusing. But we look at 
the little picture and we smile ; later, we recall it and, for some 
reason, we feel amused and pleased. 
In truth-and let the people laugh at me-in these little pic­
tures, in my opinion, there is love of humanity, not merely and 
particularly Russian, but humanity in general. I have referred to 
this small canvas merely as an example. But the thing which is 
most annoying is the fact that we should understand a similar Ger­
man picture, portraying German genre, just as well as they would, 
and we should even be delighted as much as they, experiencing 
almost their German sentiments, whereas, in Russian painting, they 
will understand nothing at all. But then, maybe, in a sense, this 
is to our advantage. 
Now here, a game of cards is portrayed in an Esthonian or 
Livonian cabin : of course, this is intelligible, especially the figure 
of a boy taking part in the game ; everybody is playing cards and 
guessing, so that The Ten of Spades (such is the name of the pic­
ture) would also be iully comprehensible. But I doubt if, for ex­
ample, Perov's Hunters would be understood. I am intentionally 
referring to one of the most intelligible pictures of our national 
genre. It is a well-known one-Hunters at a Halting-Place : one 
of them is enthusiastically and deliberately telling lies ; the other 
one is listening and believing with all his heart, while the third 
hunter believes nothing ; he lays himself down right there and 
laughs. . . .  How delightful ! Of course, with proper explanation 
the picture would be understood by the Germans, too ; still they 
would not comprehend, as we do, the fact that this is a Russian 
liar, and that he lies in a Russian fashion. For we almost hear him 
and we know what he is talking about, the whole trend of his 
prevarications, his style and his emotions. I am sure that if Mr. 
Perov were to portray (and, no doubt, he would be capable of 
doing it) French or German hunters-of course, in a different man­
ner and picturing different characters-we Russians would understand 
both German and French taradiddle, in all the minute details and 
al the national variations, the style and the theme of the fib ; we 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
79 
would guess all these things merely by looking at the picture. But 
the German, no matter how much he may be exerting himself, 
would not grasp our Russian lies. Certainly, thereby he wouldn't 
be losing much ; and, ag:1in, this might be to our advantage. How­
ever, he would not fully understand the picture, and, consequently, 
he would not properly appreciate it. And this is a pity because 
we are making the journey in order to be pr:.ised. 
I don't know what attitude will be taken in Vienna toward 
Makovsky's Psalm-Readers. In my judgment this is no longer 
genre, but an historical painting. I am joking, of course, but do 
look attentively : nothing but choristers-in a sense, an official choir 
-singing a concerto at a liturgy. They are all in formal habit with 
clean-shaven chins. Look attentively at this gentleman with 
whiskers, for example : it is clear that he, so to speak, is disguised 
in a garment which is altogether .out of harmony with himself ; he 
is wearing it as a matter of official duty. True, all choristers wear 
similar habits on official occasions only ; this has been the custom 
since patrid଼,.'hଽl times, lmt here this disguise somehow is particu­
larly noticeable. One is accustomed to behold such a decorous func­
tionary in uniform only in a government office : this is a little fellow 
belonging to the middle class, modest and solid, with appropriatrly 
cut hair. He is Jragging out something like the notorious "I am 
stung ! ," but, louking at him, even the "I am stung l "  is converted 
into something official. There is nothing funnier than to imagine 
that this well-intentioned man, basking in his official position, could 
have been "stung ! "  If one doesn't look at them, turning away from 
them and merely listening to them, something charming would 
emerge from it. But if one looks at these figures, it · . .  ·ill seem that 
the psalm is being chanted merely for some pretense 
. and that 
there is something altogether different about the who.ା scene. 
I am terribly afraid of "tendency" when it takes its hold 
on a young artist, especially at an early stage of his career. And 
what do you think I am specifically afrairi of ?-Specifically, that 
the aim of the tendency is not going to be attained. Will a certain 
dear critic whom I have been reading of late and whom I do not 
wish to name at present-will he believe that every ari.;.3tic creation, 
without a preconceive·-1 tendency, produced solely because of the 
artistic urge, dealing with a strictly neutral subject hinting at noth­
ing "tendentious"-will this critic believe that such a creation will 
prove much more useful for his own : ·•rposes than, for .r.stance, 
all songs of the shirt (not by Hood, uut by our writers) , even 
though it m.1y on the surface resemble that which is denoted as 
"satisfaction of idle curiosity ?" If even men of learning, apparently, 
have not yet guessed this, what may sometimes occur in the hearts 

So 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r873 
and minds of our young authors and artists ? What a jumble of 
conceptions and preconceived feelings I For the gratification of pub­
lic pressure a young poet suppresses in himself the natural urge to 
reveal himself in images that are peculiarly his own ; he is afraid 
that he might be condemned for "idle curiosity" ; he crushes and 
effaces images which, of their own accord, are evoked from his 
soul ; he leaves them undeveloped, and, with painful convulsions, 
he draws out of himself a theme conforming to the general, "uni­
formed," liberal and social opinion. Still, what an awfully simple, 
naive and coarse blunder this is ! One of the coarsest blunders 
consists in that the indictment of vice (or that which liberalism 
is wont to conceive as vice) and the instigation to hate and ven­
geance are considered the only road to the achievement of an aim ! 
True, even on this narrow path a forceful talent might extricate 
himself and save himst>lf from being smothered at the beginning of 
his career. One should only recall more frequently the golden rule 
that an uttered word is silver, and the unuttered one is gold. There 
are quite a few considerable talents who were so promising, but 
who were so chewed up by tendency that the latter clothed them 
in some sort of uniform. 
I have read the last two poems by Nekrasov : decidedly, this 
eminent poet of ours is at present wearing a uniform. And still in 
these poems, too, there is something good, reminding one of Mr. 
Nekrasov's former talent. But what is to be done ? the "uniformed" 
contents of the theme ; the "uniformed" character of the technique ; 
the "uniformed" substance of thought, style and naturalness . . .  
yes, indeed, even the '"uniformed" approach to naturalness itself 
For example, does our respected poet know that no woman, even 
replete with the loftiest sentiments, one who has conferred upon 
herself so many labors in order to come and see her ill-starred 
husband ; one who has journeyed six thousand versts in a cart and 
who has "learned the delights" of a cart ; who has fallen, as you 
claim yourself, "from a high ridge of the Altai" (which, by the 
way, is quite impossible) ;  do you know, poet, that this woman, 
under no circumstances, would first kiss the chains of her beloved, 
but would most certainly kiss him first, and only after that-his 
chains, should there awake in her so impetuously and so suddenly 
the magnanimous impulse of civic duty. Most decidedly, every 
woman would act thus. 
Of course, mine is a trifling observation, and it wouldn't be 
worth mentioning, since the poem itself has been written for no 
important purpose : just so-perhaps, as to get out something 
in anticipation of the first of January 
.
.
•
.
 However, Mr. Nekrasov 
has a prominent literary name, which is almost fixed and complete, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
81 
and he has many admirable verses to his credit. He is a poet of 
suffering, and he almost deserves this name. But still one pities the 
little novices : not every one of them possesses so forceful a talent 
as to manage not to submit to the "uniformed" thought at the in­
ception of his career, and, consequently, to protect himself against 
literary consumption and death. What is tn be done ? the uniform 
is so pretty-indeed, embroidered and shimTtg . . . .  And also how 
profitable ! That is, it is· particularly profitable in our day. 
The moment I had read in the papers about Mr. Repin's 
haulers, I got frightened. The theme itself is horrible : somehow 
we take it for granted that haulers are particularly fit to symbolize 
the familiar idea of the insolvent debt of. the upper classes to the 
people. And I was ready to meet them all in uniforms with well­
known labels on their foreheads. And what ? Much to my joy all 
my fears proved unfounded : haulers, genuine haulers, and nothing 
more. Not one of them is shouting from the canvas to the spectator : 
"Look, how unfortunate I am, and what indebtedness you have 
incurred to the people I "  This alone must be credited to the artist 
as a great m.:!ril. Nice, familiar figures : the two fore-haulers are 
almost laughing ; at least, they are not weeping at all and, cer­
tainly, they are not pondering over their social status. The little 
soldier uses cunning and deceit ; he is trying to fill his pipe. The 
urchin pretend!" to be serious ; he is shouting and even quarrelling­
a wonderful figure, practically the best in the picture, and it is 
analogous in its conception to that of the posterior hauler, a miser­
able, drooping little peasant, creeping along separately from the 
rest, his face not even visible. It is quite inconceivable that the 
idea of politico-economic and social debts of the upିr classes to 
the people could at any time have peiୀct:·ated tht: p· 1r drooping 
bead of that miserable little peasant cast down by pe, )etual grief. 
. . . And do you know, dear critic, that precisely this humble in­
nocence of thought in that peasant achieves the pUl}lOSe-your ten­
dentious, liberal purpose-much more effecti .. ely than you suspect I 
Some spectators will walk away with a sore spot in their heart 
and with love-and what love ! -for this miserable little peasant or 
for that urchin, or for that rogue and scoundrel-the little soldier I 
Indeed, it is impossible not to take a liking to them, these defense­
less ones ; it is impossible to walk away without having grown 
fond of them. It is impossible not to start reflecting that one is 
indebted, actually indebted, to the peoole. . . . For thiୁ haulers' 
"gang" later will recur in one's dream:. 
it will be recalled some 
fifteen years hence ! And had they not been so natural, innocent and 
simple, they would not have produced such an impression and they 
would not have presented such a picture. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
But here we have almost a picture ! -Besides, the collars of 
uniforms are disgusting, no matter how they be embroidered with 
gold ! However, what is there to discourse about ? Besides, there is 
no need of recounting a picture ; pictures are much too difficult to 
be expressed in words. I will simply say : Gogolesque figures. This 
is a big word, but I am not saying that Repin is Gogol in his line 
of art. Our genre has not yet grown up to Gogol and Dickens. 
However, a certain over-emphasis may be discerned even in 
Repin : precisely in the dresses, and this-only in two figures. Such 
tatters are even inconceivable. That shirt, for example, must have 
accidentally fallen into a trough in which cutlets had been chopped 
with a chaff-cutter. No doubt, haulers make no display of their 
clothing. Everybody knows whence these people have come : at 
home, as has been at least frequently reported, by the end of 
winter they subsist on Lark ; in the spring they go to a master to 
be hired to haul barges-some of them for nothing but porridge, 
almost without any agreement. There have been instances when the 
hauler, during his first days, would die right at his gruel, falling 
on it from hunger ; he would choke to death and "burst." It is said 
that medical men performing the autopsy upon these men would 
find nothing but porridge sticking up to their throats. Such some­
times are these subjects. Still, an unuttered word is gold, more so 
as a shirt such as this cannot even be put on if once it has been 
taken off : it will not f1t, But, compared with the merits and inde­
pendence of the conception of the picture, this trifling over-emphasis 
on the clothing seems negligible. 
It is a pity that ·I know nothing about Mr. Repin. It would 
be curious to know whether he is or is not a young man. How I 
would wish that he might be a very young man, and a beginner 
artist. Several lines above, I hastened to make the reservation that 
he is still not a Gogol. Yes, l\Ir. Repin, it is a mighty long stretch 
to Gogol : don't let your deserved success go to your head. Our 
genre is following a good road, and there are also talents ; yet, 
something is lacking in it, something that prevents it from expand­
ing and broadening. Indeed, Dickens is genre, too, nothing but genre. 
But Dickens created Pickwick, Oliver Twist, and grandfather and 
grand-daughter in the novel The Old Curiosity Shop. No, our genre 
is still a long way off : it still stands on its "hunters" and "night­
ingales." Dickens has them, too, in secondary places. Judging by 
certain indications, I am inclined to think that at the present junc­
ture of our art Pickwick and the grand-daughter would seem some­
thing ideal to our genre. And, as far as I could observe from conver­
sations with some of our most prominent painters, they are as afraid 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
of the ideal as of an evil spirit. No doubt, it is a noble apprehen­
sion, but a prejudicial and unjust one. Our artists need more bold­
ness, more independence of thought, and, perhaps, more education. 
This is why, I take it, our historical painting is ailing and has 
somehow slowed down. Apparently, our contemporary artists are 
afraid of historical painting and have lau.1ched into genre as the 
only genuine and legitimate escape for ever:, gifted person. It seems 
to me that they have a presentiment, as it were, that in historical 
painting, according to them, they would have to "idealize" by all 
means and, consequently, to lie. "Reality should be represented as 
it is," they say, whereas there is no such reality, never has been 
because, to man, the substance of things is inaccessible, while he 
apperceives nature as it reflects itself in his idea after having passed 
through his senses. This is why one should give more leeway to 
the idea without fearing the ideal. 
A portraitist, for instance, seats his subject, in order to paint 
his portrait ;  he is getting ready ; he stares. Why is he doing this ? 
-Becall'f' !'e knows frnm experience that a man does not always 
resemble himself and, for this reason, he tries to discover "the funda­
mental idea of his physiognomy"-to arrest that moment in which 
the subject resembles himself most. In the ability to find and arrest 
this moment liP , the gift of the portraitist. 
Now, what else is the artist doing :.ere than trusting his idea 
(the ideal) more than the projected reality ? The ideal, indeed, is 
also a reality as legitimate as current reality. Take, for example, 
Bronnikov's Hymn of the Pythagoreans : some genre-painter (even 
a very talented one) will start wondering how it is possible for 
a modern artist to indulge in such themes. And y... these themes 
(almost fantastic) are as real and as neecssary to ;;._ 
and man as 
current reality. 
What is genre, in substance ? Genre is an l:l rt of portraying 
contemporaneous, current reality which the artist has personally 
felt and seen with his own eyes, as distingu1shed, for instance, from 
historical reality which cannot be beheld with one's own eyes, and 
which is being portrayed not in a fluent but completed state. ( I  
will make a nota bene : we say : "beheld with one's v\wn eyes." But 
Dickens had never srPn Pickwick with his own eyes, merely per­
ceiving him in the diversity of the reality observed by him ; he 
created a character and presented him as a result of hi:o- observa­
tions. Thus, this character is as real 
. ._ an actually eୂ:-ting one, 
even though Dickens had merely takt11 an ideal of the reality.) 
Meanwhile, we precisely confuse the conceptions of reality. 
For example, historical reality in art, of course, is not identical 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
with contemporaneous reality (genre), precisely because it is a 
structuralized and not a fluent one. Ask any psychologist you please, 
and he will explain to you that if one visualizes a past event (and 
to live without visualizing the past is impossible), and particularly 
an event of the remote past, a structuralized, historical event-such 
an occurrence necessarily will appear in its completed state, that is, 
with the supplement of the whole subsequent development which 
has not been taking place at that particular historical moment at 
which the artist seeks to visualize a character or an event. For this 
reason, the essence of an historical event cannot be represented by 
the artist exactly as it probably has been occurring in reality. Thus, 
the artist is seized by a sort of superstitious fear that willy-nilly 
he would have to "idealize," which, according to his understanding, 
means to lie. In order to avoid the imaginary error he endeavors 
to fuse (cases of this kind do happen) both realities-the historical 
and current ones. As a result of such an unnatural blending, the 
worst kind of lying ensues. In my opinion, this pernicious error 
may be observed in several of Mr. Gue's pictures. For instance, 
out of his Lord's Supper, which has caused so much comment, he 
produced a perfect genre. Look attentively : this is an ordinary 
quarrel among most ordinary men. Here Christ is sitting, but is it 
really Christ ? This may be though a very kind young man, quite 
grieved by the altercation with Judas, who is standing right there 
and putting on his garb; ready to go and make his denunciation, 
but it is not the Christ whom we know. The Master is surrounded 
by His friends who hasten to comfort Him, but the question is : 
where are the succeed1ng eighteen centuries of Christianity and 
what have these to do with the matter ? How is it conceivable that 
out of the commonplace dispute of such ordinary men who had 
come together for supper, as this is portrayed by Mr. Gue, some­
thing so colossal could have emerged ? 
Here, nothing has been explained ; here, there is no historical 
truth ; nor is there even the truth of genre here ; here everything 
is spurious. 
From whatever angle one might be judging, that event could 
not have occurred in this way : here everything transpires altogether 
incommensurately and disproportionately to the future. At least 
Titian would have given to the Master that countenance with 
which he portraye<J Him in his well-known picture Caesar's Unto 
Caesar; then much would have been intelligible forthwith. Whereas 
in Mr. Gue's picture some nice people have simply quarrelled among 
themselves. As a result, ·we have deceit and a preconceived idea ; 
and every kind of deceit is a lie, and no realism at all. Mr. Gue 
was after realism. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
ss 
However, I sem to have forgotten about the exhibition. By the 
way . . . what kind of a reporter am I ?-1 merely meant to jot down 
several remarks "apropos." Nevertheless the editorial office promises 
to give a detailed survey of the pictures of our artists which are 
to be sent to the Vienna exhibition. Or, better perhaps, it will try 
to make mention of them from the exhibition, with a ready account 
of the impression which these canvases, in turn, will produce upon 
the foreigners attending the exhibition. 
The Citizen, 1873, No. IJ. 
MUMMER 
Who prompted thee I 
In The Russian World (No. 103) there appeared a notice scold­
ing me. I am not answering any upbraiding articles ; I shall answer 
this one because of certain considerations, which will become clear 
in the course of my reply. 
And, Lv h»gin wit h, the point is that my reviler is an eccle­
siastic : I least expected an attack from this side. The "notice" is 
signed : "Pr. P. Kastorsky." What is "Pr." ? Priest ? What can this 
abbreviation mean other than "priest" ? All the more so as the sub­
ject deals with a church matter. In issue No. 1 5-16 of The Citizen 
there was published a novel Sexton by Mr. Nedolin. Well, it is to 
this that the "notice" refers. Here it is. 
"UNMARRIED CONCEPTIONS OF A MARRIED MONK" 
"In our day clergymen and churୃhmen are q .. ··e frequently 
being chosen by our authors and novelists as heroes o . heir stories. 
Even oftener, they appear there in the quality of interpolated, so 
to speak, accessory characters. And it is very goc i that they are 
being portrayed : in the clerical world there are a good many typical 
characters, so why shouldn't they be portrayed with both their 
good and their bad traits ? The recent success of 'Sketches by a 
Churchman' in The Domestic Review, and, also, the still greater 
success of 'The Cathedral Folk' in The Russian Messenger demon­
strate the fact that much interest may be aroused among the public 
by artistic descriptions of the ways of life of our clergy. Both 
works mentioned portray members of our clergy from different 
angles, and both have been read with 
. · · tention and pleasure. And 
why ?-Because they were written well, artistically, and with a 
knowledge of the subject. Hut something altoRether different emerges 
when, prompted by imitativeness or by something else-for example, 

86 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
by self-confidence or lightmindedness, the task is being undertaken 
by people who have no conception of it. They merely humiliate 
themselves and harm the cause by setting forth false views, and 
for this reason to leave these injurious attempts-to caricature the 
ways of life of our clergy-without notice is impossible, and, fol­
lowing the example of the psalm-reader who has recently, in The 
Russian World, pointed out the ignorance of the writer Dostoievsky 
regarding choristers, I feel it impossible to keep silent on a still 
coarser, more ludicrous and unpardonable ignorance again mani­
fested in the same magazine, The Citizen, which has been signed 
by the same l\Ir. Dostoievsky as editor." 
Let us, for the time being, stop here. What is mea11t by "fol­
lowing the example of the psalm-reader who revealed in The Russian 
World the ignorance of the writer Dostoievsky" ?  I have not read 
it. (And again The Russian World !) I find (No. 87) that there is, 
in fact, an accusation signed "Psalm-Reader." Let us see what 
this is : 
"ON THE CHORISTERS' LIVERY" 
(A Letter to the Editor) 
"In issue No. 13 of the magazine The Citizen (March 26) I 
happened to read an article by Mr. F. Dostoievsky apropos of the 
academic exhibition of paintings. Mr. Dostoievsky, treating in that 
article of psalm-readers, portrayed by the artist Makovsky, wrote 
the following lines : 'They are all gentlemen in formal gowns with 
clean-shaven chins. True, all choristers, too, wear similar gowns 
on official occasions oniy, and from time immemorial they have been 
wearing such gowns, and so it has been the custom from time 
immemorial ever since patriarchal times . .  .' " 
Let us interrupt this for a moment : to begin with, I have no 
such stupid sentence at all. I wrote : "True, all choristers, too, wear 
similar gowns on official occasions only, and, from time immemorial, 
this has been the custom-since patriarchal times . . .  
" which is 
quite different. 
\V e continue the quotation : 
"This is incorrect : neither from time immemorial nor since 
patriarchal times have church choristers in the Russian Church ever 
donned such gowns as those in which we see them at present and 
in which they are ,.ortrayed on Mr. Makovsky's canvas. This livery 
is a more recent borrowing from the West or, more correctly speak­
ing, from Poland, and among the eminent dignitaries of our Church 
there are-and have been-not a few who regard this liveried mas­
querade as inappropriate, while the choristers of the choirs, assigned 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
to them, sing in ordinary black frock-coats, which, of course, are 
more modest and more dignified than the Polish uniform. And 'from 
time immemorial,' in 'patriarchal times' choristers have sung stand­
ing up in long black caftans, and unfailingly with music-sheets in 
their hands. In the same manner also do choristers stand in our 
day in the churches of the dissidents anl; in the chapels of the 
dissenters." 
It would appear, perhaps, that in our present-day Orthodox 
churches choristers sing seated. It is always useful to listen to an 
expert. 
"Fearing [much is there to fear ! ]  that through l\lr. Dos­
toievsky's incompetent word the erroneous opinion on these liveries 
may be consolidated [will an earthquake result from this-or what ? ] ,  
which liveries should long ago have been remodelled to the Russian 
fashion, I have the honor to beg the editorial office of Tltc Russian 
World to give space to these brief lines of mine. 
Psalm-Reader." 
Such is the notice of the psalm-reader, to which Priest Kas­
torsky makes reference. Before continuing with Kastorsky, let us 
finish with the "psalm-reader." 
Mr. Psalm-Reader, why did you get angry ? You say : "It is 
incorrect : neither from time immemorial uor since patriarchal times 
have church choristers in the Russian Church ever donned such 
gowns . . .  
" How is this ? Why is this "incorrect" ?  Why can't one 
say : from time immemorial and since patriarchal times ? Well, did 
they start wearing these clothes yestf'rday ?-Why, they have been 
doing so since great-great-grandfather's times ! Knitt:·.ୄ your brow:;, 
with the air of a profound historian, you come to c. -ect us, and 
you yourself make no precise statement ! One is expec.mg that the 
profound historian is going to determi:1e with precision the epoch, 
the year and, perhaps, even the day when clerics put on this garb 
for the first time ; but after all tht! things you have heralded, you 
confine yourself to the withered conjecture : "This came to us 
from Poland"-nothing but that ! But how much tolling and bell­
ringing ! 
Please answer o:'ly, Mr. Psalm-Reader, what is your opinion : 
did Polish influence which, in Russia, has simultaneously reflected 
itself in many fields-and even, you see, in clerical mattf'!"s-start, 
according to you long ago or merel) · he day before )' "୅terday ? 
Why, then, is it ¡ot permissible, for the sake of n୆ere iେtelligibility, 
to use the expression that this custom has been m existence from 
time immemorial, since patriarchal times ?-  ot only from . patri­
archal times but it dates back almost to the times of the Patrwrchs. 
I 

88 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
These costumes (or ones similar to them) appeared at the 
time of Peter the Great ; consequently, they almost coincide with 
the times of the Patriarchs, or nearly so. Is this-recently ? Why 
isn't it permissible to say-from time immemorial 'I Or-since patri­
archal times ? And if, in my article, I myself have not determined 
with historical precision since what time specifically our choristers 
have been wearing these clothes, the reason for this was that I had 
no such purpose or aim in mind, and that I merely meant to say 
that this dates back to the remote past-so remote that the ex­
pression from time immemorial could well have been used, and 
everyone would understand it. I was not referring to the epoch of 
Dmitry Donskoi, nor to that of Yaroslav. I meant to intimate "very 
long ago," and nothing but that. 
But let's leave the learned psalm-reader. He jumped to the 
forefront, did a lot of hand-waving-and nothing came of it. At 
least, he spoke politely : "Fearing (so to speak) that through Mr. 
Dostoievsky's incompetent word," etc. However, priest Kastorsky 
promptly exceeded the limits set by the "psalm-reader." A sportive 
man I . . .  "The ignorance of the writer Dostoievsky regarding the 
choristers . . .  " "I feel it impossible to keep silent on a still coarser, 
more ludicrous and unpardonable ignorance again manifested in 
the same magazine The Citizen, which has been signed by the same 
Mr. Dostoievsky as editor." 
What horrible crimes-one might think-have been perpetrated 
by that Dostoievsky : it is even impossible to forgive them I A 
clergyman who, it would seem, ought to be love incarnate-even he 
cannot forgive I 
However, what is this "ignorance" ?  What is the matter ?­
Well, there is nothing to be done : let us transcribe the whole of 
Kastorsky ; let us give a treat to the readers. Why should one have 
only "a little bit of the good" ? The more-the better. Such is my 
idea. 
"In issue No. 15-16 of The Citizen, which appeared on the 
r6th day of the current April, there was published 'The Sexton. 
A Story told among Friends,' by Mr. Nedolin. The story is built 
upon a most erroneous and impossible foundation : in it there is 
portrayed a sexton with a high-sounding voice, who is being beaten 
by his wife so assiduously and cruelly that he escapes from her 
into a monastery, JVhere he consecrates himself to God and must 
no longer think about any earthly matters. He stays behind the 
monastery wall, while his wife, who has long been beating him, 
is standing outside the · gates. He is sonorously singing there an 
adaptation of the psalm : 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Oh, holy is Thy chosen, blessed Lord ; 
And wht.n, as envoy of Thy sacred will, 
His arm will draw the mighty vengeful sword 
The wicked giant shall be crushed and still. 
"And the deserted wife is again standing at the monastery 
gate, and pressing her burning head against the monastery wall, 
she is weeping ; she is begging that her husband, who has been 
admitted to the monastery, be beckoned out, and she promises to 
become his 'slave and dog.' The husband, however, never did come 
out, and died in the monastery. 
"What a pitiful, inconceivable and ludicrously idle story I 
Who this Mr. Nedolin is-we don't know, but most certainly he 
is a man absolutely ignorant of Russian legislation and of Russian 
life-ignorant to such an extent that he supposes that in Russia a 
married man could be admitted to a monastery and that he would 
be permitted to stay there. Yet, how is it possible that these things 
are unknown to the editor, Mr. Dostoievsky, who has recently so 
protract-:!al:> announced that he is an ardent Christian, and, in 
addition, one of Orthodox faith, orthodoxly believing in the most 
amazing miracles ? Does he, perchance, class among miracles this 
admission to a monastery of a married man ?-Then it's a different 
thing ; but anyone even slightly familiar with the law and the 
regulations of one's church could convince Mr. Dostoievsky that 
in Russia such a miracle is even impossible because it is strictly 
forbidden and is prosecuted by our substantive laws which no 
monastic authority can violate, and that a married man may not 
be admitted to a monastery. 
"Nevertheless, the most miserable and inexpertl; knit-together 
plot of the story The Sexton could have gained to ' :  ,:ne extent if 
its denouement were verisimilar, and it could easily have been 
made such by an author or an editor familiar, tho·•gh superficially, 
with the customs of the depicted milieu. For instance, the story 
could have led up to a . ..tther familiar dramatic situation in which 
the sexton, in order to steal away from his snarlish wife, runs from 
one monastery to another ; but here, he is being driven out by the 
authorities because he is married ; there, he is called for by the 
wife herself, and, perhaps, again she starts beating him . . . .  There­
upon, seeing no escape from his wife in his own country and, at 
the same time, longing for a monastic life, the ill-starred sexton 
could run away, say, to Athos where under the Mohammedan 
administration of the Turkish Sultan, the Orthodox Church in many 
respects is functioning more independently than in Russia. There, 

90 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
as is known, monasteries sometimes do not hesitate to admit married 
men seeking monkhood. There, the Russian sexton, who was being 
mercilessly smitten by his wife, could have found refuge ; he could 
be praying and singing, but under no circumstances that metrical 
adaptation which The Citizen's sexton sings. This on the ground 
that : first, as is wen known, it enjoys no popularity among the 
clergy ; second, it is not adapted to singing and is not being sung, 
and, third, no laic metrical adaptations are permitted to be sung 
within the wans of Orthodox monasteries, and no one Jiving there 
may disregard this interdiction lest the tranquiJJity appropriate to 
such a place be disturbed. 
Pr. P. Kastorsky." 
Now, Jet us answer point after point. And, to begin with, Jet 
us reassure the aroused priest Kastorsky on the main point, by 
explaining to him that the nove) The Sexton is not a genre novel 
at aJJ. Its esteemed author, :Mr. NedoJin (not a pseudonym) ,  who 
had spent part of his life in very active government service, was 
in this particular instance in no way concerned about church life. 
His hero the "sexton," with no disadvantage to either himself or 
the story, might have been, for example, a post-office clerk, and 
if in the story he had remained a sexton, it is solely because this 
is a true event. This poem is an exceptional, almost fantastic, one. 
Do you know, priest Kastorsky, that true events, depicted 
with an the exclusiveness of their occurrenc!:, nearly always assume 
a fantastic, almost incredible, character ? lThe aim of art is not 
to portray these or those incidents in the ways of life but their 
general idea, sharp-sigh(edly divined and correctly removed from 
the whole multiplicity of analogous Jiving phenomena] In Mr. 
NedoJin's story, a quite different phenomenon of the human spirit 
has been synthesized. On the contrary, had he aspired to a genre 
delineation, from this point of view and with this one anecdote 
of his, he would of necessity have run into an exceptionality. 
It is said that recently, i.e., several months ago, in one of 
our most renowned monasteries a cruel monk had beaten to death 
in the school a ten-year-old boy-and this, in the presence of wit­
nesses. Now, at first glance, isn't this a fantastic happening ? And 
yet, it seems, it is quite true. Wen, were someone to describe it, 
people would at once start shouting that it is incredible, excep­
tional ; that it has been depicted with a preconceived aim.-And 
they would be right if one were to judge that event from the stand­
point of the mere genre authenticity of the description of our 
monasteries. In the light of this one story alone there would have 
been no authenticity : even to this day there is to be found in our 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
monasteries angelic life for the glory of God and the Church, while 
the occurrence involving the cruel monk will forever remain ex­
ceptional. 
· 
However, the novelist, the poet, may have other problems, 
aside from the genre aspect : there are general, eternal and-it would 
seem-forever unexplorable depths of human character and spirit. 
But you think that once the word "sextun" has been written, it 
must necessarily signify a special genre description. And if it be 
that, we must have by all means segregated and patented authors 
for such descriptions, and then others wouldn't dare to poke into 
our field. This is our corner, our exploitation, our source of income. 
Isn't it true, priest Kastorsky, that it is precisely this which has 
disturbed you ? But, for goodness' sake, the word "sexton" may be 
penned with no aim of taking anything away from Mr. Leskov. 
And so, do calm down. 
Having appeased you, I will ask you to pay attention to the 
title of your polemic article : 
"Unmarried Conceptions of a Married Monk." 
In passing I shall ask : what is the meaning of "unmarried" 
here ? To what extent would the conceptions be changed if they 
were married persons ? And are there unmarried and married con­
ceptions ?-Well, of course, you are not a litterateur, and all this 
is but a trifle ; you are a disturbed priest, Kastorsky, and one 
shouldn't be expecting any style from you, particularly in such a 
state. The principal point here is this : who told you that our sexton 
had joined the monastic order ? Where-in Mr. Nedolin's whole 
novel-did you find any mention of the fact that the sexton had 
taken the veil ? Yet, this is very important : having given it this 
title, you are simply misleading a reader unfami . .  r with Mr. 
Nedolin's novel. "Yes, indeed," he will reflect, "a married sexton 
could not have become a monk ! How can it be ·ୈat The Citizen 
does not know this ?" Therefore, having turned the reader's eyes 
away by the word "monk," you exclaim triumphantly in the middle 
of your article : 
"What a pitiful, inconceivable and ludicrously idle story 1 
. . .  How can the editor, Mr. Dostoievsky, be ignorant of this, he 
who, etc . . . .  
" 
And yet you have simply fraudulently shuffled the matter, 
and I am very quietly catching you at your cheat. But, tlear little 
Father, you made a slight slip witlu-nt giving the matter due 
thought. A married man will not be consecrated into monkhood­
this is so ; but why will "no monastic authority admit to a monastery 
one who has a living wife," as you are haphazardly asserting ? 

92 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
Whence did you derive such information ? For example, someone 
might wish to take abode in a monastery (where, let's say, there 
are convenient quarters) ; but he is married. Suppose his wife is 
somewhere in the capital or abroad ; and now, only because he is 
married will he be driven out of the monastery ? Is that so ? Father, 
you do not know the business-and yet you are a clergyman. I 
could even point out certain persons, well known in Petersburg 
society and still remembered by it, who, at the end of their lives, 
finished up by taking abode in monasteries, and they have been 
living there for some time since, and are still there. All this 
transpired with mutual consent. Exactly in the same way Mr. 
Nedolin's sexton took abode in the monastery. Eliminate the fraudu­
lent shuffling regarding the consecration into monkhood-deliberately 
invented by yourself, and a thing which does not appear at all in 
Mr. Nedolin's whole novel-and everything will at once be explained 
to you. Here it occurred even better than "with mutual consent" ;  
here, the thing took place with the permission of the authorities. 
I have, Father, a very effective device with which to pacify you 
on this score. Just suppose that I have made inquiries and have 
received the following information : 
First, the artist-sexton, as long as six months prior to his 
admission to the monastery-when bidding farewell to the land­
owner-revealed to him for the first time that he was planning to 
take abode in a monastery, and even then he knew what he was 
talking about-precisely because he had already told the superior 
of the monastery about his plans. The latter was very fond of him 
-rather, he liked his singing, he himself being an ardent admirer 
of music and patronizing Sofron to the best of his ability. It even 
seems that the superior had been urging him to come and live in 
the monastery. The sexton hesitated to accept the landowner's offer 
to go abroad, and this is the reason why he had tarried another 
six months or so ; however, when his patience came to an end, he 
departed to the monastery. And this was very easy to arrange : 
Father John was on friendly terms with the superior of the diocese, 
and when two such persons come to an agreement, no pretexts are 
needed. No doubt, however, a pretext was nevertheless found, 
under which the sexton was, so to speak, "deputed" to the mon­
astery. The vow taken by him to "consecrate himself to God" 
(which makes you particularly angry) was an altogether free, inner, 
unofficial one-a matter of his conscience-and the promise was 
given to himself. 
Moreover, in Mr. Nedolin's story there is a very clear hint 
of the fact that the sexton merely resided in the monastery, and 
that by no means had he been made to take the veil, as you, Father, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
93 
have so unceremoniously lied. Specifically : the landowner, who had 
come back, still continues to urge Sofran to leave the monastery 
and go abroad, while the sexton, on the first day of the negotiations, 
even feels undecided. Now, could this have happened if Sofron had 
already taken the veil ? Finally, do not conceal the fact that the 
sexton is a most remarkable artist-at least, extraordinarily gifted 
-and, as such, he appears in the novel from its very beginning. 
And, this being so, the fondness for him by Father John, an ardent 
admirer of music, is intelligible. . . .  
"But this has not been explained in the novel ! "  you will 
exclaim, in a fit of violent anger.-No, it has partly been explained ; 
much should be surmised in the story, though it is swift and brief. 
But supposing that not everything has been explained--why should 
it be ? So long as it be plausible. And if you eliminate the fraudulent 
shuffling regarding the veil, everything becomes plausible. 
Yes, Mr. Nedolin's story is somewhat condensed ; but do you 
know, Father, you are not a literary man ; you proved it, too-l 
will tell yࢿ.:u frankly •hat a great many contemporaneous stories 
and novels would gain if they were condensed. What is gained by 
an author's dragging you through four hundred and eighty-odd 
pages, and then, for no reason whatsoever, abandoning his narrative 
in Petersburg or Moscow, dragging you somewhere to Moldavo­
Wallachia with the sole intent of recounting to you how a flock 
of crows and owls took wing from some Moldavo-Wallachian roof ; 
and, having given this account, suddenly he deserts the crows, leaves 
Moldavo-Wallachia, as if they had never existed, and in the re­
maining portion of the story not once does he return to them. 
Why, the reader is finally left in a state of utter co;;iusion. People 
write for money, and the more pages-the better ! Mr. ' :edolin wrote 
dfferently and, perhaps, he was right. 
"But the wife, the wife l "-1 can hear you exclaiming and 
rolling your eyes-"how could the wife permit it ? Why didn't she 
'claim' the husband legally, by force I "-And precisely here, Father, 
on this feminine point, you have failed most emphatically. In your 
article you became so playful that you even started composing a 
romance yourself : namely, how the wife has finally repatriated her 
sexton ; how she began beating him again ; how he "escaped" to 
another monastery ; how she had him sent back, and how he finally 
escaped to Athos, where he found peace under "Moha:nmedan" 
administration of the Sultan (imagine 
up to the present time I 
have been thinking that the Sultan is a Christian I ). 
Leaving all jokes aside : remember, Father, that because of 
your office alone, you should know, though slightly, the human 
heart ; yet you don't know it at all. Despite the fact that you are 

94 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
a mean author, you might, nevertheless, if you should take up your 
pen, depict the genre aspect of the clergy more correctly than 
did Mr. Nedolin ; but as far as the human heart goes, Mr. Nedolin 
knows more than you. A woman who spends entire days standing 
at a monastery wall and wailing, will not go serving petitions, nor 
will she resort to force. Enough of force ! You keep coming back to 
beating all the time : in a trance of an author's enthusiasm you 
continue the romance, and again you inject the beating. No, enough 
of beating ! Recall, Father, in Gogol 's Wedding-in the last scene, 
after Podkolesin had jumped out of the window-Kochkarev shouts : 
"Make him come back ! :\lake him come back ! "-imagining that 
a fiance, after he had jumped out of the window, is still in a mood 
for a wedding. Now, you are arguing exactly in the same manner. 
Kochkarev is restrained by the matchmaker's words : "Eh, thou 
dost not understand the wedding business ; it might have been all 
right if he had walked through the door, but once he flew through 
the window, there's nothing further to be done I "  
Ennoble the case of Podkolesin and i t  will exactly fit the 
situation of the poor sexton's wife, deserted by her husband. No, 
Father, the beatings had come to an end ! That woman is an excep­
tional character, a passionate and strong creature-by her spiritual 
powers far superior, by the way, to the artist, her husband. 
Under the influence of her environment, habits, lack of education, 
this woman, indeed, could have started with the beating. A rea­
sonable, understanding man would certainly appreciate the realism 
of the event, and Mr. Nedolin has acted masterfully when he did 
not mollify the reality. ·women with excessive spiritual force and 
character, particularly if they are passionate, cannot love other­
wise than despotically, and they even have a special predilection 
for such weak and childish characters as that of the artist-sexton. 
Why did she take a liking for him ? Does she know it ? He weeps 
and she cannot but despise his tears ; but carnivorously, suffering 
herself, she is delighted with his tears. She is jealous : "don't you 
dare sing before gentlemen I "  It seems, she could swallow him alive 
from love. 
But he escaped from her-she would never have believed it ! 
She is proud and self-confident ;  she knows that she is beautiful and 
-this is a strange psychological problem-would you believe that 
all the time she is tonvinced that he is as much in love with her 
as she with him ; that he cannot live without her in spite of the 
beatings I For this was her whole faith. More than that : on this 
point she had no doubts. -And, suddenly, everything comes to light : 
that child, the artist, does not love her at all ; had ceased to love 
her long ago ; perhaps, too, in the past he had never loved her I 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
95 
At once she feels humbled ; she hangs her head ; she feels crushed. 
Even so, she has no strength to renounce him ; she loves him madly, 
even more madly than before. Still, because she is endowed with 
a strong, noble and unusual character, she rises way above her 
former way of life and her former environment. No, now she is 
not going to claim him by force. If force has to be resorted to, she 
will not have him-even for nothing. She 1s still immensely proud, 
but now her pride is of a different kind-it has already been en­
nobled : she would die right there on the grass beside the wall rather 
than resort to force, write petitions and start proving her rights. 
Oh, Father, therein is the whole novel, and not at all in the genre 
aspect of the church folks. No, Father, this minute little story is 
far more significant than it may seem to you-far deeper. 
I reiterate : you could not have written so, nor would you 
have understood the gist of the matter. You have, in a certain 
measure, Kochkarev's soul (in a literary sense, of course ; I don't 
go any further) , as I had the honor to report to you. 
As for your authorship and your artistic understanding, Push­
kin's w<:!li-!୉nown epigr:tm is fully applicable to you in this con­
nection : 
Subjecting once an artist's sketch to close inspection, 
A cohbler in the boots discovered some defect ; 
The artist with his brush forthwith made the correction. 
"There's something more"-the cobbler said-"I can detect : 
"That face looks slightly curved-such is my estimation ; 
"Besides, that breast, to me, seems much too nude and bare ! "  
Impatiently Apelles stopped the cobbler's dissertation : 
"Judge not above the boots-this is your only c;:.;·,. ! "  
You, Father, resemble to the dot that cobbler, with the only 
difference that you have failed to tPach l\Ir. N( iolin, even with 
respect to boots, a fact which, I hope, I have amply proved to 
you. And fraudulent shuffling in no way helps. Here, you see, to 
be able to undl'rstand something in a human soul and "to judge 
above the boots," one has to he more developed in a different 
direction ; one has to have less of that cynicism, oi that "spiritual 
materialism," less of that contempt of people, less disrespect for 
and indifference towards them ; less of that carnivorous covetous­
ness, and more faith, hope and love ! Look, for example, with what 
coarse cynicism you are dealing witb me personally ; with what 
want of decency, quite improper to your office, you are talking 
about miracles. When I read to myself these lines of yours, I 
refused to believe them : 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
"Yet, how is it possible that these things are unknown to the 
editor, l\Ir. Dostoievsky, who has recently so protractedly announced 
that he is an ardent Christian, and, in addition, one of Orthodox 
faith, orthodoxly believing in the most amazing miracles ? Does he, 
perchance, class among miracles this admission to a monastery of 
a married man ?-Then it's a different thing . . .  
" 
To begin with, Father, this, too, is an invention (what a 
passion for inventions you have I ).-Never did I declare myself 
personally as regards my faith in miracles. All this is your inven­
tion, and I challenge you to state where you have found it. Permit 
me one more word : had I, F. Dostoievsky, anywhere declared this 
about myself (which I never had), believe me, I would not have 
renounced my words for some liberal fear, or for some Kastorsky 
fear. The simple matter is that nothing of the kind had taken 
place, and this I am stating as a fact. But even if it were so­
what is your concern about my faith in miracles ? What relation 
has this to the matter ? And what are arnazing and not amazing 
miracles ? How do you, yourself, manage to reconcile such divisions ? 
Generally speaking, I wish you to leave me alone in this respect­
if only for the reason that, despite all your modern education, it 
does not become you to annoy me with all this. You, a clergyman, 
and so irritable I Shame on you, Mr. Kastorsky I 
And do you know that you are not Mr. Kastorsky at all­
still less : priest Kastorsky ? All this is counterfeit and humbug. 
You are a mummer-exactly like one performing during Christmas 
season. And do you know what else ? I haven't been deceived by 
you-not even for a brief little moment : I at once recognized you 
as a mummer, and this·gives me pleasure because I can see from 
here your long nose. You were fully convinced that I would mis­
take the jester's mask of crude workmanship for a genuine face. 
You should know that I have answered you somewhat too un­
ceremoniously, solely because I at once recognized a mummer. 
Had you, in fact, been a clergyman, I would have-notwithstanding 
all your rudeness, which in the concluding part of your article 
reaches the level of some triumphant seminary neighing-answered 
you "with observance" ; not because of personal respect for you, 
but because of respect for your high office, for the lofty idea con­
tained in it. Since, however, you are only a mummer, you must 
suffer the penalty. I shall begin the castigation with a detailed 
explanation of why I have recognized you-(entre nous, I had even 
guessed beforehand who precisely is hiding behind the mask, but 
for the time being I shall not announce the name aloud)-and, of 
course, this will be very \7exing to you. 
And, if you have guessed beforehand-you may ask me-why 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
97 
did you frame your reply as if it were addressed to a clergyman ? 
Why did you, in the first place, write superfluous things ? 
Because one meets a man in accordance with his dress-! 
answer you. And if I wrote something disagreeable to Mr. "Priest," 
let this weigh upon the conscience of the fellow who has resorted 
to the unworthy device of disguising hims.df as a priest. Yes, this 
is an unworthy device, and he felt it himself. Moreover, he sought, 
as much as he could, to protect himself. He did not sign his name : 
"Priest P. Kastorsky" ;  but he signed abbreviatedly : "Pr. P. Kas­
torsky." "Pr."-if it comes to close reasoning-is still not equivalent 
to "Priest," since it could always be maintained that the abbrevia­
tion stood for "priest-like," or something of the kind. 
I recognized you, Mr. :Mummer, by the style. You see, here 
is the main trick : contemporaneous critics will sometimes praise 
present-day belles-lettrists, and the public is even pleased (since, after 
all, what will it be reading ?). However, criticism, too, has long been 
on the decline, while most of our drawers of pictures resemble 
poster-p::intrrs more th୊n artists. Of course, not all of them. There 
are a few endowed with talent, but the majority are impostors. 
In the first place, Mr. :Mummer, you hav(' it over-salted. Do 
you know what it means to speak in terms of essences or patterns ? 
You don't ? Well, I will explain it to you. A contemporary "belles­
lettrist" who delineates certain types and who segregates for himself 
some special field in literature (depicting, for example, merchants, 
peasants, and so forth) usually walks about all his life equipped 
with a pencil and a copybook ; he keeps eavesdropping and record­
ing characteristic little words ; at length, he manages to collect 
several hundreds of such words. After fhat he em! ·  ·rks upon a 
novel, and the moment a merchant or a clergyman st. . s speaking, 
he begins to concoct his speech from the expressions recorded in 
the copybook. Readers laugh and praise it : it seem- so authentic­
copied directly from nature. Yet it proves to be worse than a lie 
precisely because the merchant or the soldier in the novel speaks 
in terms of essences, that is, as no merchant and no soldier ever 
speaks in real life. For instance, in reality he may utter a certain 
sentence-one that has been recorded as spoken by him-but it 
will be one phrase out of eleven ; the eleventh little word is char­
acteristic and ugly, but the ten preceding words are all right, akin 
to those of all other people. But in the case of the sp.·cialized 
author he will utter characteristic sentt-· .ୋes all along, exactly ac­
cording to the record, and the result is-fabehood. The delineated 
character converses as though he were reading from a book. The 
public gives its praise, but you cannot deceive an old experienced 
writer. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
Mostly this is signboard and house painters' work. Yet, in 
the long run, the "artist" comes to consider himself a Raphael and 
it is impossible to dissuade him ! It is good and useful to record 
these little words, and one cannot do without them ; however, one 
should certainly not employ them quite mechanically. 
True, there are nuances even among "artists-recorders" : one 
is still more talented than the other and, therefore, he uses these 
expressions with resignation, taking into account the epoch, the 
locality, the man's mental level, and abiding by a certain propor­
tion. Even so, he cannot avoid the essence-standard. The precious 
rule that an uttered word is silver and the unuttered one is gold 
has long ago ceased to be the fashion among our artists. There 
is little faith. The sense of measure is fast disappearing. 
Finally, one should also consider that our artists (as any 
group of commonplace people) are beginning to take sharp notice 
of the phenomena of reality, paying attention to typicalness and 
treating a given character in art when, in most cases, it has already 
passed out of existence or is vanishing, degenerating into some 
other pattern in accordance with the character of the epoch. Thus, 
almost invariably we are being served at our table old food under 
the guise of fresh fare. And they themselves believe that it is fresh 
and new, and not something obsolescent. 
However, to our author-artist, this observation is, perhaps, 
a little too sophisticated ; perhaps he will not understand it. Never­
theless, I will state that only an ingenious writer or one endowed 
with a great talent divines and produces a type on time ; whereas 
triviality merely follow·s his path more or less slavishly, laboring 
in accordance with ready patterns. 
For instance, in all my life, never did I meet a single clergy­
man-even among the most enlightened ones-in whose manner of 
speech there would not be some characteristic peculiarities per­
taining to his professional milieu. There is at least a drop of some­
thing. Meanwhile, if one were to record his conversation steno­
graphically, and later have it printed, perhaps no peculiar char­
acteristics would be discernible-at least in the case of some highly 
educated priest who had long been frequenting society. In the 
opinion of the majority of the readers, plebeians in Pushkin's stories 
speak worse than those in the writings of Grigorovich, who, all his 
life, has been depicting peasants. I believe this also is the opinion 
of many artists. Grigorovich will not tolerate having a priest, for 
instance, speak almost without any typicalness peculiar to his call­
ing, his environment ; therefore, he will not have him in his novel, 
but will introduce a most typical one. Thus, he will sometimes 
compel a present-day priest, living in given circumstances and in 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
99 
a given environment, to converse as a priest of the beginning of 
the century who had also been living in specific circumstances and 
in a given milieu. 
Priest Kastorsky begins as any other-for a while scarcely 
reminding one of his environment. So long as he keeps praising 
the artistic merits of the writer Leskov, he speaks, as any other, 
without employing typical little idioms and thoughts peculiar to 
the profession. But this was the author's intent ; the profession had 
to be set aside in order that the literary praise sound more serious 
-and the censure of Mr. Nedolin, more rigid, since a funny and 
typical phrase would have toned down the rigidity. But suddenly 
the author, having grasped the fact that the reader, perhaps, might 
not believe that it iᆰ a priest who is writing, got scared and threw 
himself headlong into typicalities, and of these we have a whole 
cartload : every single word is a typical word ! And, naturally, in 
this haste and bustle, typicality becomes false and disproportionate. 
The principal trait of an uneducated man-but one who for 
some reason is compelled to resort to a language and conceptions 
not of hi!> owu cavironmcnt-is a certain inaccuracy in the employ­
ment of words, the meaning of which, let's suppose, he even knows, 
but he is unfamiliar with all the nuances of their usage in tbe 
sphere of conceptions of some other profession. "And, therefore, to 
leave without notice such injurious attempts . . .  
" ;  "ignorance again 
manifested in the same magazine . . .  
" ; "in it is portrayed a sexton 
with a high-sounding voice," etc. The latter word "high-sounding 
is much too coarse, specifically because Pr. Kastorsky, seeking to 
express the conception of a person endowed with a beautiful voice, 
believes that the word "high-sounding" conveys the meaning. The 
author-specialist forgot that although, cf c-ourse, eve•· in our day 
there are among the clergy poorly educated peopk only very 
few of them would be ignorant to the extent of not comprehending 
the meaning of words. This, l\Ir. Mu:nmer, woulC. do in fiction, 
but it does not stand the test of reality. Such an erroneous expres­
sion might be expected from some vestry-keeper, but certainly not 
from a priest. 
I do not list all idioms and expressions, yet-I repeat-of 
these there is a whole cartload roughly piled up from the copybook. 
But, worst of all, is the fact that the author-pattern-drudge (if 
one may speak of an author-artist, one may equally entertain the 
idea of an author-artisan, while the word pattern-drudge denotes 
manual work or handicraft) portrayed '1is character in a light 
which was morally so unattractive. Be that as it may, but Pr. 
Kastorsky should have been depicted as a dignified and virtuous 
man, and typicality would have been no impediment. But the 

IOO 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
pattern-drudge, on his own part, was placed in a difficult position, 
out of which he was unable to extricate himself : willy-nilly, he 
had to give a scolding to his confrere-the author-to ridicule him, 
and so he, the mummer, of necessity was obliged to impose his 
lofty impulses upon his priest. 
And, as regards miracles, the pattern-drudger utterly failed 
to restrain himself. As a result-an awful absurdity : a clergyman 
ridiculing miracles and dividing them into amazing and unamazing 
ones I Bad, Mr. Pattern-drudge I 
I believe that the "Psalm-Reader," too, is the product of the 
same pen : the incompetent artisan at the end displayed too much 
naivete, in the part dealing with the psalm-reader's "fears," which 
certainly do not sparkle with intelligence. 
Briefly, gentlemen, this whole signboard job may somehow 
be all right in novels, but, I repeat, it will not survive in a collision 
with reality ; it will promptly betray itself. Not even you, gentle­
men-artists, can deceive an old litterateur. 
What, then ?-Are these jests on their part ? Oh no, by no 
means jests. This is Darwinism, as it were, a struggle for existence. 
Don't you dare to enter our field. But in what way-how, gentle­
men, can Mr. Nedolin injure you ?-1 assure you that he has no 
intention whatsoever to portray the genre aspect of the clergy ; 
you can rest at peace. True, for a moment I was confused by one 
strange circumstance : indeed, if the mummer-pattern-drudge at­
tacked Mr. Nedolin, then, by scolding him, in contradistinction 
he would have praised himself. (In this connection, these people 
have absolutely no self-respect : with utter impudence they are 
ready to write in their own handwriting, and publish, praises to 
themselves.) And yet, much to my surprise, the pattern-drudge 
puts forward and commends the talented Mr. Leskov, and not 
himself. Here there must be something different, and certainly it 
will be clarified. Yet that he is a mummer is beyond a shadow of 
doubt. 
And what is the part of The Russian World in this matter ?­
! haven't the slightest idea. I have had no relations whatever with 
The Russian World, nor do I intend to have any. God only knows 
why people will jump at one. 
The Citizen, 1873, No. 18. 
VISIONS AND REVERIES 
In the preceding . issue of The Citizen we again raised the 
question of drunkenness-or rather, of the possibility of curing 
the ulcer of general popular drunkenness-of our hopes, of our faith 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
101 
in the immediate better future. However, involuntarily the heart 
feels afflicted with sorrow and doubts. Of course, owing to current 
important affairs (and we all look like such important business­
men ) ,  there is no time-and it seems foolish-to speculate as to 
what is going to happen in ten years or by the end of the century, 
that is, when we shall no longer be living. The motto of the genuine 
businessman of our times is-apres moi le deluge. But idle, not 
practical, people-those who have no business-truly may be excused 
for meditating, if they be inclined to meditate, now and then about 
the future. Didn't Poprischin (in Gogel's Memoirs of a Lunatic) 
meditate about Spanish affairs ?-"All these events killed me, shook 
me so, that I . . .," etc., wrote he forty years ago. I confess : many 
things make me, too, quiver sometimes and, in truth, I feel de­
spondent over my reveries. The other day, for instance, I was 
pondering over the status of Russia as a great European power, 
and what thoughts did not occur to me on this sad theme l 
To begin with, consider that at all cost we must become a 
great Eun.p":tn power :1s soon as possible. True, we are a great 
power, but what I mean to say is only that this costs us much 
too much-greatly in excess of what it costs other great powers, 
and this is a very bad symptom. So that whole thing becomes 
unnatural, as it were. 
However, I hasten to make this rc.servation : I am judging 
solely from the Westerners' standpoint ; and from this angle I am, 
indeed, drawing my conclusion. The case appears different from 
the national-and, so to speak, a bit Slavophile-point of view : 
here, as is known, there is faith in some inner independent forces 
of the people-in some popular, altogether individu'l; ᆱnd original 
powers inherent in our people, which are supportir.. and saving 
them. 
But having read Mr. Pypin's articles, I bPcame sober. It 
stands to reason that, much as hitherto, I continue to wish with 
all my heart that the precious, solid and mdependent principles, 
inherent in the Russian people, be actually existing. Nevertheless, 
you will also concede this : what are these principles which Mr. 
Pypin himself does not perceive, hear and discern ; ᆲi1ich are hid­
den, have hidden themselves, and have no intention of being re­
vealed at all ? And consequently, willy-nilly, I have to do without 
these principles consoling one's soul. 
Thus, I come to the thought thᆳ· . as yet, we are .Jumsily 
clinging to our summit of a great power, exerting all our efforts 
to prevent our neighbors, as long as possible, from taking notice 
of this. In this we can be greatly assisted by the general European 
ignorance of everything concerning Russia. At lc.lst, thus far this 

102 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
ignorance could not have been doubted-a fact over which we 
should not be lamenting. On the contrary, it would be to our great 
disadvantage if our neighbors were to perceive us more minutely 
and from a shorter distance. In the fact that, so far, they have 
understood nothing about us-lay our great strength. But the point 
is that at present it seems, alas, that they are beginning to com­
prehend us better than heretofore : this is very dangerous. 
Our colossal neighbor is relentlessly scrutinizing us and, it 
seems, he sees through many things. Without going into details, 
let us take the most obvious things striking one's eyes. Take the 
area occupied by us and our borders (inhabited by foreigners and 
aliens who, from year to year, have been consolidatng the indi­
viduality of their own alien, and partly foreign, neighboring ele­
ments) .  Take these things and consider : in how many points are 
we strategically vulnerable ?  To protect all these we have to main­
tain a far greater armed force than those of our neighbors (at 
least, in my opinion as a civilian) .  Also, consider that in our day 
wars are conducted not so much with ammunition as with brains, 
and you will agree that the latter circumstance is particularly dis­
advantageous to us. 
At present weapons are being changed every ten years, and 
even more frequently. In another fifteen years or so, people will 
use for shooting not rifles but some kind of lightning, some sort 
of a machine emitting a holocaustal electrical stream. Tell me : 
what can we invent in this line so as to surprise our neighbors ? 
What if in fifteen years every great power will have secretly stored 
away onP. such surprisᆴ for any kind of eventuality ? Alas, we are 
merely capable of imitating and purchasing ammunition from others, 
and-at best-of repairing it at home. To invent such machines we 
should have to have our own independent, and not purchased, sci­
ence, not an imported but a free one-one that has taken root in 
our soil. As yet we do not possess such a science, nor do we even 
have a purchased one. 
Again, take our railroads : consider our distances and our 
poverty. Compare our capitals with those of the other great powers 
and try to understand : what would be the cost of the road net­
work needed by us as a great power ? And please bear in mind 
that they have built their networks long ago, and gradually, while 
we have to hurry .and catch up. Their distances are short, while 
all of ours are on a Pacific-like scale. Even now we feel painfully 
the burden of the cost of nothing but the beginning of 011r net­
work, and what a heavy; one-sided diversion of capital it has meant 
to the detriment, let us say, of our poor agriculture and any other 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
IOJ 
industry. And the point here is not so much in the monetary sum 
as in the extent of the nation's effort. 
Why, we should never come to the end if we were to enumerate, 
one by one, our needs compared with our poverty. Finally, con­
sider education, that is, science : and think only how much we 
have to expend to catch up with the others in this respect. Accord­
ing to my humble way of thinking, we should be expending annually 
for education at least as much as for the army, if we were to 
attempt to catch up with any of the great powers. And we should 
also take into account that much time has already been lost ; that 
we do not possess commensurate monetary resources, and that, in 
the long run, all this would merely constitute a spurt and not a 
normal undertaking-as it were, a concussion, and not education. 
Of course, all these Hre but dreams ; but . . .  I reiterate, one 
begins to dream along these lines despite one's self, and so I will 
continue to meditate. Please note that I am evaluating everything 
in terms of money. Yet is this the correct way to reckon ?-Under 
no circumstance can money purchase everything : only an ignorant 
shopkeeFr .i . .  m1 l\fr. Oᆵtrovsky's comedy would argue to the con­
trary. With money, for example, you may build schools, but you 
would be unable forthwith to produce teachers. A teacher is a 
delicate proposition ; a popular, national teacher is the product of 
centuries ; he is maintained by tradition, by endless experience. 
But let us suppose that with money you would produce not 
only teachers but, eventually, even scientists. Even so, you would 
not produce men. What is there in the fact that a man is a scientist 
if he does not understand business ? For instance, he will master 
pedagogy, and from his chair he will teach pedagogy quite efficiently, 
but nevertheless he will not become a pPdagogue. ശ·ഷ ᆶ-n, men-this 
is the most essential need. Men are dearer even th; . money. In 
no market, and no matter for what amount of money, can men be 
purchased, because they are neither salable nor prrchaseable, but, 
again, they a.re evolved by centuries ; well, and centuries require 
time-some twenty-five, or say, thirty years, even in our midst 
when centuries have long lost any value. 
A man of ideas and of independent learning, a man inde­
pendently versed in business, is capable of being muu!ded only by 
the long independent life of a nation, its century-long labors full 
of suffering ; in short, he is produced by the country's historical 
life in its totality. 
Now, our historical existence duri11g the last two centuries, 
after all, has not been independent. It is absolutely impossible to 
accelerate artificially the necessary and continual historical phases 

104 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
of national life. We see this in our own example : two centuries 
ago it was sought to hurry and speed up everything, and instead, 
we got stuck, since, notwithstanding all triumphant exclamations 
of our Westerners, we undeniably did get stuck. 
Our Westerners are people with extraordinary malignancy and 
triumph, who are trumpeting today through all the trumpets that 
we have no science, no common sense, no patience, no skill ; that 
we are destined to creep along behind Europe, to imitate her 
slavishly in everything ; and that, in view of European tutelage, 
it is even a crime to think of our own independence. Yet, tomorrow, 
if you should only dare to hint at your doubt as to the unques­
tionably salutary effect of the revolution which two centuries ago 
occurred in our midst, they would start shouting in a chorus that 
all your dreams about popular independence are nothing but kvas, 
kvas and kvas ; that two centuries ago we had been converted 
from a mob of barbarians into the most enlightened and happiest 
Europeans, and that we should be gratefully remembering this to 
the end of our days. 
But let us leave the Westerners alone, and let us suppose 
that with money everything may be accomplished ; that time itself 
may be purchased, and that even independence of life may some­
how be steamed up and re-enacted. The question is : where is such 
money to be found ?-Almost half of our present budget is paid 
for by vodka ; in other words, this means that, judging by the 
present, the whole future of the people is dependent upon national 
drunkenness and popular depravity. We are paying, so to speak, 
with our future for our stately budget of a great European power. 
We are cutting the tree at its very root, in order to get the fruit 
as quickly as possible. And who sought this ?-It happened involun­
tarily, of its own accord, as a result of the strict logic of historical 
events. Our people, liberated by the great word of the Monarch, 
are inexperienced in the new ways of life ; as yet, they have not 
lived independently, and they are merely taking their first strides 
along the new road : this is an enormous and extraordinary break ; 
it is almost wholly unexpected, almost unheard of in history by 
reason of its completeness and character. These first, and now inde­
pendent, steps of the liberated giant along the new path, fraught 
with great peril, require extraordinary caution. And yet, what did 
our people encounter at these first steps ?-Vacillation among the 
upper strata of soc.ety ; the alienation from the people of our in­
telligentsia which, for centuries, has been in existence (this is the 
principal thing ) ,  and on top of these-trash and the Jew. The people 
began revelling and drinking-first, from joy ; and later, from force 
of habit. Were they shown anything better than trashiness ? Were 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
105 
they diverted, were they taught anything ?-At present in some, 
even in many, localities, pot-houses are so numerous that they exist 
in the proportion of not only one to hundreds but even to dozens 
of inhabitants-moreover, to only a few dozen5. There are localities 
with some fifty dwellers, or less, and yet they have a pot-house of 
their own. 
The Citizen has already reported once in a special article the 
detailed budget of our present-day saloon : it is impossible to sup­
pose that these inns could be existing only on liquor. How, then, 
do they manage to be self-supporting ?-By popular depravity-theft, 
receiving stolen goods, usury, banditry, destruction of the family 
and by popular disgrace-this is how they manage to thrive I 
Mothers drink ; children drink ; churches are being deserted ; 
fathers are engaged in banditry : the bronze arm of Ivan Susanin 
has been sawed off and brought to a pot-house, and there it was 
received ! Do but consult medical science : what kind of generation 
can be begotten by such drunkards I But let-(and I pray God 
it may be £0 ! )-let this be a mere dream of a pessimist, exag­
gerating the calamity ten times I We believe and wish to believe, yet 
. . . if in the forthcoming ten or fifteen years the people's addiction 
to drunkenness (which is still undeniable) does not diminish, but 
persists, and, therPfore, expands-in this case wouldn't the vision 
itself be vindicatf'd ?-Here we have to hav̛ the budget of a great 
power and, therefore, we need money ever so badly. The question 
may be asked : who, then, is going to provide the money during 
these fifteen years, should this state of affairs persist ? Labor, 
industry ?-Since a sound budget is based only upon labor and 
industry ?-Yet what kind of labor is to be expected in the face 
of such pot-houses ? 
Genuine, sound capital accumulates in a country : r1 no other 
way than by being based upon a general labor prosperity ; other­
wise only capital owned by kulaks and Jews can come into ex­
istence. And thus it shall be if the people v. ill not come to their 
senses and the intelligentsia will not help them. If the people should 
fail to come to their senses, they, as a whole, will find themselves 
in a very short time in the hands of all sorts of Jews, :-.nd in such 
an event no commune io; going to save them : there will be merely 
uniformly equal paupers, mortgaged and enslaved as a whole com­
mune, while, in their stead, Jews and kulaks will be providing the 
money for the budget. ̜here will emerge ̝e_̞ty,_̟e̡̠ed ar:rl̢n 
little bourgeois, and ll c_̣̤!!_tle̥_ Qf p̦up̧,!_ensJ̨v̩ 
them-such _wil be !!1.! _pictl!r:ti Yiddishers will oe soaking up the 
bl̪ the people and Silisisting on their debauch and humilia­
tion ; inasmuch, however, as they-these Yiddishcrs-will provide 

106 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
money for the budget, they will have to be supported. This is a 
bad, horrible dream and, praised be the Lord, it is merely a fancy I 
-titular councilor Poprischin's dream-1 concede. But it will not 
come true I Not only once have the people saved themselves I They 
will find within themselves a protective force which they have 
invariably been finding ; they will discover within themselves pro­
tective and salutary principles, those very principles which our 
intelligentsia stubbornly refuses to perceive in the people. They 
themselves will reject the pot-houses ; they will start longing for 
work and order and honor-and not for the saloon I 
And, thank God, all this-it seems-is being corroborated ; at 
least, there are indications to this effect : we have already men­
tioned temperance societies. True, these are in only an embryonic 
state ; these are but weak, scarcely noticeable, endeavors-but let 
them only not be impeded in their development, under some special 
pretexts I On the contrary, how desirable it is to support them I 
What if, on their own part, they be supported by all our progres­
sive minds-our litterateurs and socialists, by the clergy and by 
all those in the press who, from month to month, are succumb­
ing under the burden of their indebtedness to the people. What if 
they be supported also by the schoolteachers who are now coming 
into being ! I know that I am not a practical man (at present, 
after the recent notorious speech of Mr. Spasovich, it is even 
gratifying to make this· confession) ,  but-can you imagine ?-! am 
convinced that even the poorest schoolteacher of some sort may 
accomplish a great deal by his initiative, if only he should wish to I 
Herein is the real potnt : that in this matter the personality and 
character are important ; the businessman is of moment, one who 
is really capable of exercising his will. 
At present, teachers' positions are mostly occupied by our 
young men who, even when intending to do some good, do not 
know the people ; they are suspicious and distrustful ; after the 
first, at times most ardent and noble, endeavors they quickly be­
come tired ; they look sombre and they begin to regard their posi­
tions merely as transitory to something better ; and then · they 
either become accomplished topers or, for the sake of ten extra 
rubles, they quit everything and run away, no matter whither, even 
without being paid anything, even to America, in order "to ex­
perience free lab,Qr in a free state." This used to happen and 
continues to take place even now, it is said. There, in America, some 
vile contractor starves the schoolteacher on some manual job, cheats 
him and even beats him with his fists, and after every blow our 
schoolteacher fondly exclaims to himself : "God I How reactionary 
and dishonorable are these blows in my native land and, on the 

THE D!ARY OF A WRITER 
107 
contrary, how noble, tasty and liberal they are here I "  And so it 
will seem to him for a long time ; but why should he renounce his 
convictions because of such trifles I 
However, let us leave him alone in America. I will continue 
my thought. My thought-let me remind you-is that even a most 
insignificant rural schoolteacher could, if hr only would, assume 
the whole initiative of the liberation of the people from the bar­
barous passion for drunkenness. On this subject I even have a plot 
for a novel and, perhaps, I shall risk revealing it to the reader prior 
to the writing of the story. 
The Citizen, r873, No. 2 1 .  
APROPOS O F  A NEW DRAMA 
This new drama is one uy Mr. Kishensky : Drinking to the 
Last Drop Will Yield No Good Crop, the last three acts of which 
we ventured to print iu toto in this 25th issue of The Citizen, 
notwithstan,Jin߅ the fact that it has consumed nearly half of our 
space. But we sought not to break the impression, am\ maybe the 
readers will agree that the drama deserves their special attention. 
It is conceived for the popular stage and it is written with knowl­
edge, precision and talent-and this is the main thing, especially 
nowadays when virtually no new talents 11 rc to be found. 
These are all characters of the factory pattern, of a "factory 
hamlet" ; they are most heterogeneous and sharply delineated. The 
plot is here, and we shall not dwell upon it in detail. The idea is 
serious and profound. This is essentially a tragedy whose fatum is 
vodka ; vodka has bound, filled and directed everytt:ng, and ha߆ 
brought about ruin. 
True, the author, being a genuine artist, could not have failed 
to perceive the world depicted by him from a broader point of 
view, even though in the title of his drama he had proclaimed that 
Drinking to the Last Drop Will Yield No Good Crop. Here, in 
addition, we find a reverberation of the enormous economic and 
moral percussion resulting from the all-embracing reforms of the 
present reign. The former world, the old order, ba.! as it was, 
nevertheless constituted an order which has vanished forever. 
Strange! , the dark moral as ects of the old order-egotism, 
cymc1sm, s avery 
1sunit 
and vena]ity-not only 
ave n­
appeared with the a olition __ of serfdom hവ as it were, tl:q haye 
grown stronger, more developed and more numerous ; whereas from 
Uie_g_Ocf-mmiT a߇ecfs ofd_order.-whicn actuanydld ex..i.§l 
-:-there remains virtually nothing.\All this is also reflected in Mr. 
Kishensky's picture, at least as we understand it. Here everything 

108 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
is in a state of transition and vacillation, and, alas, there is nothing 
even hinting at a better future. 
The author energetically points to education as the salvation 
and the only solution ; meanwhile, however, vodka has captured 
and poisoned everything and, having invaded and enslaved the 
people, has made things worse. And Mr. Kishensky draws a somber, 
dreadful picture of this new slavery which befell the Russian peasant 
after he had been freed from the former one. 
Here we have two different sorts of types-of vanishing people 
and of those belonging to the new young generation. 
The author is familiar with the young generation. His favorite 
types, whom he conceives as the hope for the future and who 
represent the halo in the dark picture, are portrayed fairly well 
( this is strange, since "positive" types are hardly ever successfully 
conceived by our poets) .  At least, Maria is perfect. Ivan, her fiance, 
is drawn less successfully, notwithstanding the truth with which 
he is depicted. He is a young fellow, handsome, bold, literate-one 
who has seen much and learned new things, a kind and honest 
fellow. His whole defect consists in that the author has taken too 
much liking for him and has depicted him in too favorable a light. 
Had the author taken a more negative attitude toward him, the 
reader's impression would have been more favorable to his be­
loved hero. 
Still, as an artist of refinement, the author did not overlook 
even the most disadvantageous traits in his Ivan's character. He 
is endowed with vigorous energy and a good mind, but he is young 
and presumptuous. lfe believes, magnanimously, in truth and in 
the right way, yet he confuses truth with men and unjustly de­
mands from them the impossible. For instance, he is familiar with 
certain laws, so that the scribe "Levanid lgnatiich" is somewhat 
afraid of attacking him directly ; but Ivan believes too naively in 
his knowledge ; for this reason, he stands defenseless before evil, 
and not only does he not understand danger but he does not even 
suspect it. All this is so natural, and it could have come out per­
fectly because thus it must have been. Moreover, the author did 
not fail to take heed of a multitude of sympathetic details : Vimia, 
even comprehending the whole abomination of the scoundrels (who, 
in addition, are hostile to him ) ,  as a young, fresh and strong man, 
to whom everythi•lg in life is still so attractive, does not sufficiently 
loathe them, keeps company with them, and sings songs with them. 
This youthful trait greatly attracts the reader to him. 
Still-we repeat-lhe author took too much liking to him, 
and not even once does he look upon Ivan from above. It would 
seem to us that it is insufficient to set forth correctly all given 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
109 
qualities of a person : one has resolutely to illume him with one's 
own artistic vision. A genuine artist, under no circumstances, should 
remain on one level with the person portrayed by him, confining 
himself to mere realistic truth ; the impression will carry no truth. 
Had there been, on the part of the author at least, a little drop 
of irony for the self-confidence and youthful arrogance of the hero, 
he would have become dearer to the reader . Otherwise one may 
think that the author actually meant to make him appear altogether 
guiltless in the face of the calamity wrought upon him. 
Other persons of the younger generation-people lost almost 
since childhood, a "sacrificed generation"-are portrayed even more 
truthfully than the "positive types." There are two categories of 
them : the innocent ones and the guilty ones. Here, for instance, we 
have a little girl (Matriosha)-a sacrificed and unhappy creature ; 
and what is most horrible is that one feels that of such "unhappy" 
ones there are in Russia as many as you please, multitudes-all 
villages are full of them. The truthfulness of the description is apt 
to terrify a kindhearted man who intelligently envisages our future. 
This is a geut:tation wl-:ch grew up after the reform. In early 
childhood it came face to face with a family already in a state of 
decomposition and cynical with wholesale drunkenness ; and, later, 
it landed in the factory. Poor little girl ! She has indulged in de­
bauch, perhaps ever since the age of twelve, and she is almost 
unaware of the fact that she is depraved. On Christmas she went 
from the factory to her hamlet for a short stay, and she is sincerely 
surprised that her former companion, the peasant girl Masha, holds 
honor in greater esteem than fineries : "Now, Stepan Zakharych, 
ignorance sticks out"-says she.-"What's the harm in a shopkeeper, 
or a gentleman, playing around with a girl ?" This sl:'.' •1tters fully 
convinced of the truth and justice of her words, am· ဏven more 
-pitying Masha and the villagers. When Masha spurns a dirty 
little merchant, a despicable scoundrel, l\latriosha says frankly :  
"What's the use of talking to these people ! They're groggy I An­
other, in her place, would have been only too glad I She would have 
bewitched and attracted him, and she would have made something 
for herself and would have humored her brother I "  And, finally, 
when this unfortunate, in collusion with the miserable merchant, 
administers to Masha حorne sleeping powder, so that he may rape 
the poor, honest girl while she is lying unconscious, and when 
after that she climbs up onto the oven to ascertain whether the 
victim has fallen asleep, she commits tl · ' villainy not ouly with­
out any conception of wrong, but earnestly convinced that she is 
doing Masha, her former companion, a favor-a benefaction for 
which she, Masha, will later thank her. 

1 10 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
In the fifth act, in the ultimate horrible catastrophe, neither 
the despair of Masha, her father or her fiance, nor the murder 
wll.ich is about to be committed-nothing perplexes Matriosha ; of 
course, she is absolutely heartless, for how could she have acquired 
a heart ? She shrugs her shoulders and utters her pet word : "Ig­
norance I "  The author did not forget this exclamation, thus adding 
the artistic finishing touch to this character. Tragic fate 1-A human 
being is converted into some rotten worm, fully content with itself 
and its pitiful horizon. 
Here we have environment, the fatum : this unfortunate one 
is not guilty, and one understands it. But here is a different type 
-the most accomplished in the drama : the type of the depraved, 
tipsy, detestable factory lad, Masha's brother, selling his sister out to 
the miserable little merchant for three hundred rubles and a velvet 
jacket ; this one is surely a type belonging to the guilty ones of 
the "sacrificed" generation. Here we have not only environment ; 
true, the setting and the milieu are identical-drunkenness, family 
in a state of decomposition, and the factory. But this one does 
not naively, as Masha, embrace faith in debauch. He is not naively 
vile, as she, but lovingly ; he adds to meanness something of his 
own. He does understand that debauch is debauch ; he knows what 
is not debauch ; but he takes a conscious liking for perversity and 
he despises honor. Consciously does he reject the old order of 
family and tradition ; he is stupid and dull-this is true-but there 
is in him a sort of enthusiasm for sensuality and for the meanest, 
most cynical materialism. He is no longer a mere little worm, as is 
Matriosha, in whom everything is petty and withered. He stands 
there at a meeting of the village community, and one realizes that 
he no longer comprehends, or is capable of comprehending, any­
thing in it ; that he is no longer "of this world" with which he has 
completely severed all relations. He sells his sister with no rack­
ings of cor.science, and next morning he comes to his father's hut, 
to the scene of despair, in his velvet jacket and with a new har­
monica in his hands. There is one thing in which he believes, as in 
omnipotence ; this is vodka. With the dullest, yet most appropriate 
gesture, before every one of his undertakings, he offers vodka-bitter 
to the peasants, and sweet to their women-convinced that every­
thing will transpire according to his desires and that vodka can 
accomplish anyth;ng. To make irony complete in him, as he is 
portrayed, side by side with unrestricted cynicism, there dwells a 
longing for the polite manners of days gone by-for traditional 
peasant "civility." Having arrived in his village, and not yet hav­
ing seen his mother, he plants himself in the inn and politely sends 
her vodka. When he and Matriosha drag their mother into the pot-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
I I I  
bouse, i n  order to be a t  liberty to screw out of her the permission 
to sell her own daughter to the merchant for rape, he civilly offers 
her, before anything else, sweet vodka and, beckoning her to be 
seated, he says : "If you please, mother dear" ; and she is quite 
pleased with his "civility." 
Our author has been reproached by people who have read 
the first act, for the too natural speech of the peasants, maintaining 
that it could have been more literary. We ourselves feel displeased 
with this naturalness of the speech ; everything should be artistic. 
However, after attentively reading and then re-reading the drama, 
one is forced to concede that, in certain places at least, it would 
have been impossible to change the language without weakening 
the characteristic flavor of the play. This : "if you please, mother 
dear"-could not have been modified ; it would have sounded so 
mean. And please note that sonny respects his "mother dear," this 
miserable, stupid, tipsy old hag, as little as his own soul. 
Here are the tragic words of the father of that family-an 
old man addirtf'd to liquor-about the "sacrificed generation" : 
Zakhar (swallowing a glass of vodka) : "Drunkards ! Just think, 
friends : a factory workman keeps sitting all week long at his 
lathe ; his feet and hands will grow numb, and that head of his 
will be filled, as it were, with fog ! They're all crazy, so to speak ! 
They've lost human countenance I The premises are stuffy-the 
walls bare ; disgusting to look at I The sun never peeps into 
the place ! One sees it only on holidays I Well, friends, that 
holiday's coming : thou, grandfather, canst start reading the 
Scriptures ; another fellow will go to the field to look at the 
crop, or to the woods, maybe, to the l:':"CS, or elst : ,  , neighbors 
for a chat about zemstvo, let's say, or some meet 1g or corn 
prices-now, I ask you, where's the factory hand to go ? What's 
he going to talk about ?-To him, all things are measured and 
weighed I Only fines, maybe, are exacted-"Vho knows for what ? 
And rotten food is provided, or a ruble's worth of tea is being 
sold for two-fifty ; he's not to leave the gate so that provisions 
be bought from him1 and there be more debauch. Isn't this so ? 
-Well, there's but one road--to the pot-house ! It's nothing but 
idle talk about vodka and lewdness I " 
Vasily : "That's right ! "  
Zakhar: "Think, friends, one also wants to have rec• cation I 
Well, it's youth ! People gather for a rtJ od dance, songs, laughter 
-and a policeman disperses them I So the whole pack go to the 
saloon and the tavern 1 Then they'll start babbling about girls 
IThe factory owner. (B. B.) 

1 1 2  
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
and who's going to out-drink the other I Girls of twelve are look­
ing for sweethearts l Spool-workers lap up vodka like water I 
In the mill-obscenities, shamelessness ; the air is permeated with 
groans of cursing, regular hell ! Children are grownups l We send 
our children there for ruin ! Is there a single girl without lewd­
ness, a single lad not a toper-in factories, I mean ?" 
But the most characteristic scene of all in this popular drama 
is the third act-the peasants' community meeting. A strong thought 
is invested in this episode of the play. This meeting is all that is 
left of the firm, cornerstone foundations of Russian life ; its main 
traditional link and its future hope. And now this meeting already 
bears the element of decomposition ; it is already ailing in its inner 
content. One can perceive that in many respects it is merely a 
form, but its inner spirit and its inner secular truth are tottering­
they started tottering with the tottering people. 
At this meeting a most revolting injustice takes place : con­
trary to custom and law, the only son of a widow-Ivan, the hero 
of the drama-is being drafted into the army in place of a lad 
from a well-to-do family with three sons. And the worst thing 
is that this is being done knowingly, with deliberate disrespect for 
truth and custom : this is being done for liquor and money. Here 
it is not even a bribe-a bribe, after all, would not be so bad : it 
may be a solitary and· corrigible crime. No, here everything arises 
out of conscious disrespect for oneself, for one's own court, and, 
thus, for one's own traditional ways of life. Cynicism is already 
revealtd in the fact ·that, in violation of the custom and ancient 
rule, the community permits a drinking bout at the beginning of 
the meeting : "Better will be the judgment with some fumes in the 
head"-sneeringly declare the leaders of the gathering. 
Half of the assembled citizens have long ago lost faith in 
the authority of the communal decision and, consequently, in its 
necessity ; they almost consider it a futile form which may always 
be eluded-may be and must be, contrary to the truth and for the 
sake of an immediate advantage. In a short time, one feels, cheap 
wits of a more modern pattern will start regarding this lihole 
ceremony as mere foolishness, a futile burden, since the communal 
decision, no matter what happens, will be such as is sought by 
the rich and poWerful bloodsucker who is directing the meeting. 
So that, instead of the empty formalities, it is better to go straight 
into subjugation of this bloodsucker. And, in addition, he will 
be serving vodka. Do you see that the majority of these autonomous 
members have lost the very thought that their decision could be 
rendered contrary to the will of the strong man ? They have all 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
113 
"grown flabby" and their hearts have grown fat ; everybody is 
craving for sweets, for material gain. Essentially, they are all slaves, 
and they can't even conceive that a matter may be decided for 
the sake of truth and not for personal benefit. 
The young generation is present there, and they look at their 
fathers' business not only without respect, not only scoffingly, but 
as some obsolete nonsense-precisely as a foolish, futile form which 
manages to persist exclusively through the obstinacy of two or 
three stupid old men who, besides, may always be bought. Thus 
does Stepan stand and behave there-that tipsy, detestable lad 
who later sells his sister. 
All these episodes of the communal meeting are successfully 
portrayed by the author. And the main thing is that Stepan is 
almost right about the fact that not only does he understand noth­
ing transpiring in that communal meeting, but that he does not 
even deem it necessary to comprehend it. Of course, he could not 
have helped but notice that an external element was permitted to 
influence the meeting, namely, the merchant who had made up his 
mind to ruin Vanka and wrest from him his girl-fiancee. The com­
mune, having consumed the merchant's liquor, permitted his clerk 
to utter aloud to himself that, without him, the merchant-factory 
owner-who, through factory work provides them with their daily 
bread-"your whole volost would have been begging on church 
porches, but should they render a decision in accord with his 
dictate, 'his sedateness,'1 the merchant, would waive many a fine 
imposed upon the people." Of course, the matter is decided in 
favor of the merchant, and Vanka is drafted into the army. 
At this meeting (attended by most diverse personages and 
characters) there are two almost tragic persons : cne is Naum 
Egorov, an old man, who for twenty years has been ,. :upying the 
front seat at the meeting and directing it, and the other !S Stepanida, 
Ivan's mother. Naum Egorych is a reasonable, firm and honest 
old man with a lofty soul. He views communal decisions from an 
elevated standpoint. To him this is not a mဗ:re gathering of house­
owners of such and such a hamlet-no, spiritually, he has lifted 
himself to the broadest conception : in his view, a decision of a 
meeတng even of his own hamlet is, as it were, a parထ of the judg­
ment of all of peasant Russia, which persists and stands solidly 
only because of the peasants' commune and its judgment. 
But, alas, he rationalizes too much : he is unable to perceive 
the communal vacillation and the ori,·ntation whither : lte com­
mune has been swayed for some time. Untruth and villainy, of 
l A  title applied to Russian merchants of olden times-something akin to 
"his honor." ( B. B.) 

1 14 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
course, used to exist at meetings in days gone by-twenty years 
ago ; nevertheless, disrespect for the meeting on the part of its 
members, disrespect for their own business, was unknown or, at 
least, it was not raised to the level of a principle. People used to 
commit villainy but they knew that they were perpetrating a 
disgraceful thing, and that there was good ; at present, however, 
they do not believe in good, nor in its necessity. 
Still, Naum is a sort of a last Mohican ; he continues to be­
lieve in communal truth quand-meme, almost forcibly, and therein 
is his tragicalness. He is a formalist ; sensing that the content is 
slipping away, he clings all the more tenaciously to the form. Seeing 
that the commune is drunk, he is ready to make the request that 
the meeting be postponed, but when people begin to shout : "Better 
will be the judgment with some fumes in the head ! "  -he yields : 
"The commune has decided, and one shouldn't oppose the com­
mune." In his heart he knows only too well that, strictly speaking, 
their hired despicable scribe, Levanid Ignatiich, has the last say, 
and that the meeting is going to render such a decision as it will 
be ordered to render by the merchant's clerk. But the old man still 
continues, for the time being, though against his will, to deceive 
.himself :  he dismisses Levanid from his front seat and, as chairman 
of the meeting, reprimands the clerk for his discourteous words 
directed against the commune. 
Several truthful voices are raised in favor of Vanka ; they 
praise him ; they say that he is a good, sensible lad who is useful 
to the commune ; that a lad, such as he, should be spared. But, 
at this juncture, the voice of an old tipsy head, among others, 
exclaims : "Why, if he's better than the rest-let's make him a 
recruit ! "  This means deliberate scoffing at truth, a flagrant dis­
play of untruth, sport. . . .  The judge jokes about himself, and 
this in a matter involving the fate of a man ! 
Naum hears and, of course, realizes that his "commune" is 
coming to an end. Ivan's mother stands there. She is a proud, 
strong and not yet old woman. Long ago she became a young 
widow. As a widow, she has been persecuted and wronged 'by the 
commune. But she has endured everything : she has repaired . her 
humble little cottage ; she has raised her only beloved Vania:· for 
her joy and consolation, and now she is listening to the commune 
taking away from her her best hope, her last joy, her own son. Naum 
Egorych, foreboding the tipsy, unruly decision of the commune, 
hastily says to Stepanida : "Ekh, what's to be done I The commune 
is a power I Beg, Stepanida, beg the commune I "  But she does 
not want to beg ; instead, she haughtily accuses the commune of 
untruth, of bribery, of tipsy judgment, of envy toward her Vania. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1 15 
"Stepanida, thou shalt embitter the commune still more I "-exclaims 
Naum with alarm. "Dost thou not think, Naum Egorych"-replies 
Stepanida-"that if I saw law and conscience here-here's only 
vodka I 
.
.
.
 -If I knew that here it were possible to gain their 
compassion, I'd rub the skin off my knees against the bare ground ; 
I'd wash the floor in a hut clean with my tears ; I'd smash my head 
bowing to the commune ! But here they'll not listen to entreaties I 
They'll have no pity ! Dost thou not see that here everything is 
concocted and prearranged ? They, the crows, will ruin my bright 
falcon, they'll peck him to death I Ye sell your souls for vodka I 
What are ye worshipping ?-Vodka ! He who hath treated ye more 
-he hath bought ye ! See, Vania, thou hast offended the fat mer­
chant ! Don't ye know that the drunken fat merchant sought to 
cover with shame Vania's bride I Y e don't know this ! -Why, the 
merchant's vodka tastes good I Ye ribalds-bloodsuckers I Ye even 
reproached me for having adopted a homeless orphan ! But it's not 
going to be your way I It's just not going to be ! The mediator 
knows IJ'IY 17<>niu!\ha-hf''s not going to let ye offend him I "  (She 
walks away hastily.) 
This proud woman is one of the charactt'rs which our poet 
has portrayed very successfully. Be that as it may, gentlemen, 
but this is a potent scene. Of course, this is a Russian village­
and the person, a simple peasant woman who even cannot talk liter­
ately-but, by God, this monologue about skin-rubbed-off-knees, "if 
it were possible to gain their compassion," is worth many a pathetic 
scene in some tragedies of this kind. Here there are no classical 
phrases ; there is no beautiful language, no white curtain ; there 
are no glowing black eyes of a Rachel ; yet, I asst.re you, if we 
had our Rachel, you would have shivered in the tဒ · atre at this 
maternal malediction upon the communal court, at ..:.11 its unem­
bellished truth. The scene winds up with a most significant move­
ment-with the flight after truth to "the mediator," to complain 
to him against the communal decision. This b a distressing prophecy. 
It ·is almost superfluous to point further to all the best scenes 
in this work. But I cannot refrain from conveying my impression, 
and I will say frankly : rarely have I read anythinl:i more potent 
and more tragic than the finale of the fourth act. 
The victim-sold out by her mother and brother to the mer­
chant, drugged with a philter into a state of unconsciousness-falls 
asleep on the oven. Matriosha, that inno• Pnt delinquent, cli:nbs upon 
the oven to take a look, and, almost wnh joy, virtually convinced 
that now she has made Masha happy, announces to the miserable 
merchant : "Ready I She won't move even if she be cut up into 
pieces I "  The scribe Levanid, the merchant's companion, gets up 

1 1 6  
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
and walks out : "What a life is given to you merchants"-he utters 
enviously. And now, the merchant, before climbing onto his victim, 
is seized with a sort of exalted pathos : " 'Cause we're a power now I "  
-he exclaims voluptuously and prophetically. "We can do any­
thing we please. If a merchant fancies something nowadays, he can 
have it-'cause we're a power ! "-"Power-there's no argument I "­
confirms the victim's brother. Thereupon, those not needed leave 
the hut ; the scoundrel creeps toward Masha, while the drunken 
mother, who had sold her innocent daughter, the promised bride 
of unfortunate Vania, in a state of intoxicated unconsciousness, 
falls asleep right there on the floor at the feet of the hopelesly 
drunken father of this happy family .
. . .  Drinking to the Last 
Drop Will Yield No Good Crop. 
I do not enumerate all these traits of the dreadful picture 
which impress one with their truth ; I do not point to these criminals 
who almost fail to comprehend their crime-fail to comprehend and 
yet are already deprived of the right to curse their crime-such as 
the tipsy father of the family, upon whom the daughter tragically, 
straight to his face, invokes her daughterly malediction. 
There are some most keenly observed traits : Masha, during 
the first moments after she comes to her senses, is about to commit 
suicide ; but then she puts on the silk sarafan which the merchant 
had left for her with her mother ; however, she puts it on out of 
malevolence, for the sake of torture, in order to inflict more torment 
upon herself : "Now, look, I have become a harlot myself ! "  Here 
is the conversation between the "innocent" mother and the "inno­
cent" Matriosha on the day' after the calamity : 
Matriosha (walking in) : "Good morning, Aunt Arina l What's 
doing here? Yesterday-! confess-! was even scared to call on 
you ! "  
Arina : "Oh, oh, girlie, what fears we've endured I Awful ! 
When at morn the girl found it out, she grabbed a knife and 
was ready to kill us-and after that, herself !  With very great 
difficulty did we succeed in subduing her ! Now she'll not admit 
Stiopka to her eyes ! " 
M atriosha : "So he told me." 
Arina : "Well, towards evening, you know, she calmed down­
now she has become like a stone I 'God,' says she, 'punished me 
for Matriosha ; now,' says she, 'I am as she' ! Presently, girlie, 
I gave her the sarafan, the one Silanty Savelych had bought from 
you. She put it on : '1,' says she, 'turned into Matriosha, so I'll 
be wearing the sarafan' I That's the way things are ! "  

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1 1 7  
M atriosha : "Where is she now ?" 
Arina : "Oh, oh, girlie, she'll go to the shed, bury herself in 
the straw, and she'll be lying there face-down." 
Matriosha : "She's likely to take her life into her own hands­
in a passion, I mean." 
But the victim does not take her life into her own hands. 
"I got scared," she herself tells us later. Our poet possesses much 
psychological knowledge concerning the people. Here is Vania un­
expectedly returning from the mediator after an absence of twenty­
four hours. The poet did not spare his hero for the sake of realistic 
truth : in the first moments I van is in a state of bestial rage ; he 
blames Masha alone ; he is unjust and disgusting. However, hav­
ing at last grasped how the thing had happened, he involuntarily, 
as it were, proposes to Masha that she marry him even so. But the 
author knows only too well that according to the customs of our 
people this is almost inconceivable, if the love affair is an honorable 
one. A girl dishonored, even though by deceit, even without any 
guilt on iter part, is nevertheless regarded as unclean-if not al­
together dishonest. Besides, Masha, too, is prideful : "Don't soil 
yourself against me, Vania ! "-she shouts-" Go away ! Farewell, 
Vania I "  And then in the last monologue, she hurriedly approaches 
the table, pours a glass of vodka, and with a glowing glance at 
everybody she looks around and shouts with a desperate, malev­
olent twist : 
"Well, why have ye become sad ?-Rejoice, it's your job ! 
Mother dear ! Father dear I Let's all drink and be merry I Not 
alone shalt thou prowl about pot-houses ! - With your daughter I 
It's weary, mother dear, to drink in s'11:tude ; nol\ , =t's the two 
of us-with your daughter I Overflow, thou wine I Drt .. n my woe, 
my conscience ! " 
And she lifts the glass to her lips. Such is :he end of the 
drama. 
I don't mean to say that it is altogether faultless ; but there 
are so many genuine merits in this work that any mistakes seem 
almost insignificant. For example, Masha's tone in the monologue 
of the fourth act, which she winds up with a delightful and lofty 
psychic impulse : "Now, it has become so easy ! "-That tone is a 
bit too sweet. True, this is almost not a monologue at all, but a 
meditation, a sentiment-those very meditations and se:ttiments 
under whose influence, among Russian 1 •en with heart and poesy, 
all the songs of the Russian people have been conceived. For this 
reason also, Masha's meditation, essentially truthful in a high de-

1 18 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
gree and natural, could have assumed a somewhat lyrical form, 
as it were. Yet art has its limitations and rules, and the monologue 
could have been made shorter. 
Nor, perhaps, is Masha's tone quite correct at the end of 
the drama, after the catastrophe : it would have been better if she 
had talked a wee bit less. Her horrible words, addressed to her 
father, would have been far more forceful if they had been briefer 
and not so melodious. 
Still, all this is corrigible ; the author may well correct these 
things in the second edition, and-we repeat-<:ompared with the 
undeniable merits of his work, these are almost trifles. It would 
also be good if the author should altogether delete from his drama 
the appearance at the end (wholly unnecessary) of the virtuous 
old factory-owner, who is practically preaching about our "debt 
to the people." His appearance is all the more absurd as this is the 
very manufacturer who has enslaved all the neighboring population, 
exhausted them with wanton fines, and who is feeding his workers 
with rotten food. 
Finally, the master of the house, Zahar, is portrayed some­
what indeterminately. In his own explanation as to why he took 
to drinking, there is something false, something unexplained and 
strained, whereas the matter could have been presented much more 
simply and naturally. 
· However, this is only my opinion, and I may be mistaken ; 
but I am certain that I am· not mistaken about the solid merits 
of this serious work. I am only too glad to share my impressions 
with the reader. Of late, and perhaps for some considerable time, 
there has appeared in our Ii'terature nothing more serious. 
The Citizen, 1873, No. 25. 
LITTLE PICTURES 
1 
Summer, vacation-time and heat-heat and dust. It is pain­
ful to stay in town. Everybody is away. The other day I was 
about to start reading the manuscripts which have accumulated at 
the editorial office . . . .  However, let us postpone discussing manu­
scripts, although there is something to be said about them. 
One longs for air, ease, freedom, and instead of air and free­
dom, one roams alone through streets covered with sand and lime, 
and one feels as though offended by someone-truly, a feeling akin 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
119 
to it ! It is a fact that half of one's affliction vanishes if only 
someone can be found to share the guilt of it, and it is all the 
more disappointing if absolutely no one can be found. 
A few days ago I was crossing Nevsky Prospect from the 
sunny to the shady side. It is known that one crosses Nevsky Pros­
pect with caution-othҠ:rwise one may be ғromptly crushed ; one 
manreuvres, watchfully looks around, trustingly seizes a favorable 
moment before embarking upon the perilous journey ; one waits 
for a time when traffic will be clear, though only a little bit, of 
carriages rushing one after the other in two or three rows. 
In winter, for instance, two or three days before Christmas, 
it is particularly interesting to cross : one takes great chances, espe­
cially if a frosty fog has been blanketing the town since the morning 
dawn, when at a distance of some three steps one hardly recognizes 
a passer-by. Somehow one manages to slip by the first rows of 
coaches and cabmen rushing in the direction of the Police Bridge, 
glad that one no longer has to fear them : the trampling and rattling 
and coaclmacn's hoarse halloos are left behind one, and yet there 
is no time to rejoice ; one has only reached the middle of the 
dangerous crossing, while further on-it's risk and incertitude. 
Hastily and anxiously one looks around, and hurriedly one con­
jectures how to slip through the second row of carriages speeding 
in the direction of the Anichkov bridge. But one feels that there 
is even no time to think-and, besides, this infernal fog ; one metely 
hears trampling and cries, but one can see only a sajen around. 
And suddenly, out of the fog, one discerns swift, accelerated, hard, 
rapidly approaching sounds, dreadful and ominous at this minute 
-very similar to the sounds of six or seven men wit}! ., chaff-cutter 
chopping cabbage in a vat. "Where's one to escai-
? Forward 
or backward ? Will one have time or not ?" And one is lucky to 
have stood still : suddenly out of the fog, at a distance of only one 
step, there emerges the gray snout of a heavily breathing trotter, 
madly rushing at the speed of a railroad express train : foam on 
the pit, the bow slanting sideways, reins are strained, while the 
beautiful, strong legs, with every stroke, even and firm, measure 
off a sajen. One brief moment, a desperate halloo of ti.e coachman 
-and everything flasht>c; and flies out of the fog into the fog­
trampling and chopping and cries-everything vanishes again, like 
a vision. Verily, a Petersburg vision I One crosses one's sPlf, and 
almost disregarding the second row o' carriages, which only a 
minute ago seemed so frightening, one quackly reaches the welcome 
sidewalk, still trembling from the sensation just experienced, and, 
strangely, at the same time feeling for some unknown reason a 
feeling of pleasure-and not because one had escaped danger, but 

120 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
precisely because one had been subjected to it. A retrograde pleasure, 
no doubt, and, in addition, one that is useless in our age-all the 
more so as, contrariwise, one had to protest and sem not to 
have been experiencing pleasure, since the trotter is not liberal in 
the highest degree ; he reminds one of a hussar, or a reveling shop­
keeper. Consequently-inequality, impudence, Ia tyrannie, etc. 
This I know, and I am not arguing, but now I merely wish 
to finish. And so, the other day, with the customary winter caution, 
I started crossing Nevsky Prospect and, suddenly, awaking from 
musing, I stopped with astonishment in the very middle of the 
passage : there's no one-not a single carriage, not even some jarring 
cabman's droshky I The place is empty some fifty sajen on either 
side : one could stop and start discussing Russian literature with 
a friend-it is safe to that extent I It's even insulting. When was 
such a thing ever known ? 
-+. 1)ust and heat, strange odors, raked-up pavement, and houses 
in a state of reconstruction. Mostly, it is faҔdes that are being 
remodeled ; old ones are being modernized-just for flaunt, for the 
sake of typicality. To me, this present-day architecture of ours 
sems astonishing. And, generally, the architecture of the whole 
of Petersburg is extremely characteristic and original ; it has always 
struck me precisely by the fact that it expresses its whole lack of 
character and its impersonality throughout the entire period of its 
existence. Of typicalness, in a positive sense, of its own, there are, 
perhaps, only these wooden, rotten little houses still surviving, even 
in the most fashionable streets, side by side with enormous houses, 
and suddenly striking oneҕs eye as a heap of firewood near a marble 
palazzo. 
r As regards palazzi, it is precisely in them that the character­
less lclea is reflected, the whole negatory substance of the Petersburg 
period, from its beginning to the end. In this sense there is no 
such city as Petersburg : from an architectural standpoint it is a 
reflection of all architectures in the world, of all periods and 
fashions : everything has been gradually borrowed and disto.-.I in 
its own way. In these buildings one may read, as from a book, the 
tides of all ideas, and petty ideas, which, justifiably or at random, 
have flown to us from Europe and which have gradually subdued 
and enslaved us. J 
Here is the characterless architecture of the past century ; 
there, a pitiful copy, in Roman style, of the beginning of our 
century ; and still further-we come to the epoch of the Renaissance 
and a building in old Byzantine style, said to have been discovered 
during the preceding reign by the architect Thon. 
And then we se several edifices-hospitals, institutes and even 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1 2 1  
palaces of the first decade of our century-these in the style of 
Napoleon I :  colossal, pseudo-majestic and incredibly weary ; some­
thing strained and deliberately invented at the time, together with 
those bees on Napoleon's mantle, intended for the expression of 
the grandeur of the epoch, which just then had begun, and of the 
unheard-of dynasty claiming everlastingness. 
Next, we behold mansions-almost palaces-of some of our 
noble families, but of very recent times : these are in the fashion 
of certain Italian palazzi, or in a not quite pure French style of 
the pre-revolutionary epoch. But there, entire generations, one after 
the other, throughout centuries have died out or are dying out in 
those Venetian and Roman palazzi, whereas we have planted our 
palazzi only during the past reign but, it seems also with a claim 
to everlastingness : the order of things which had then come into 
existence seemed all too solid and encouraging, and in the appearance 
of these palazzi the faith in that order, as it were, was reflected : 
they, too, meant to live for centuries. All this, however, has occurred 
almost on the eve of the Crimean War and, afterwards, came the 
liberation of the peasant'" . . · 1  x 
I shall feel very sad if sotfi'e day, on such a palazzo, I should 
read a signboard of a tavern with an amusement garden, or of a 
French hotel for travelers. 
And, finall}', here we have the architecture of a modern, 
enormous hotel : this is a businesslike trend-Americanism, hundreds 
of rooms, a formidable industrial enterprise. One sees at once that 
we, too, have built railroads, and that all of a sudden we have 
become businessmen. 
And now, now . . . in truth, one rloes not know how to define 
our present architecture : here we have something nonr ... ဓ::-:ript which, 
however, is in full accord with all the nondescript ( 'lgs of the 
present moment. Here we see a lot of very high (height being their 
main characteristic) houses for tenants. with extrerrely thin walls, 
it is rumored, and stingily constructed, displaying an amazing num­
ber of architectural styles of faf;ades : here we have Rastrelli, and 
late yococo ; doge balconies and windows, by all means CEils-de­
btz໇/, and also by all means five stories-and all these in one and 
the same fat;ade. "Now, brother, at all cost stick in a cluge window, 
because in what way am I inferior to some of their belly-pinched 
doges ? well, and as regards the five stories, these must nevertheless 
be erected-for tenants ; window-to-window, and stories shryuld be 
stories since I can't be losing our capit ഴ for playthings uuly I "  
However, I am not a Petersburg feuilletonist, and I started 
to talk about altogether different matters : I began with editorial 
manuscripts and wound up with a matter that is of no concern to me. 

122 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
2 
Dust and heat. It is said that for those who have remained 
in Petersburg several parks and amusement establishments have 
ben opened, where one can "breathe" fresh air. I don't know if 
there is any air to breathe there, because as yet I have been no­
where. In Petersburg, it is better, more stifling, more melancholy. 
One roams, meditates in full solitude-this is better than the fresh 
air of the Petersburg amusement parks. Besides, in the city itself 
many parks have been opened, unexpectedly, in places where they 
would never have been suspected. Virtually in every street, at some 
gate-entrances, at times piled up with lime and bricks, one finds 
a sign : "Entrance to the tavern's garden." There, in the courtyard, 
in front of a little old shanty, some forty years ago, a minute grass 
plot-ten steps long and five steps wide-had ben fenced off. Well, 
then, this is now the "tavern's garden." 
Tell me : why is it that on Sundays in Petersburg one feels 
far sadder than on weekdays ? Is it because of vodka ? Because of 
drunkenness ? Because drunken peasants lie and sleep on Nevsky 
Prospect amidst bright . . .  evening, as I have witnessed myself ? 
-I don't think so. Revellers from among the working people do 
not disturb me and, having now stayed on in Petersburg, I got quite 
used to them, although formerly I could not stand the sight of 
them, even to the point of hate. On holidays they sometimes roam 
around drunk, in crowds, .crushing and running into people-not 
because of unruliness, but just because a drunken person cannot 
help running into and pushing people, cannot but curse aloud 
despite the presence of whole crowds of children and women whom 
they encounter ; and it is not due to impudence, but just because 
a toper can use no other language than an obscene one. Precisely, 
this is a language, a whole language-of this I recently became con­
vinced-a most convenient and original language, adapted to the 
drunken or only slightly intoxicated state, so that it was likely 
to come into being, and, if it were altogether nonexistent, il faudrait 
l'inventer. I am not joking at all. Consider : it is known t.hM, to 
begin with, in a state of intoxication the tongue becomes tied'" and 
moves tightly, whereas the influx of thoughts and sensations in an 
intoxicated person, or in anyone who is not as drunk as a fiddler, 
increases nearly ten times. For this reason, naturally it becomes 
necessary that a medium be found which should satisfy the two 
conflicting states. Such a language, from time immemorial, has 
been found and adopted throughout the whole of Russia. This simply 
takes the form of one unprintable noun, so that this whole language 
consists of only one worန which is extraordinarily easy to pro-
nounce. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1 23 
Once, late in the evening on a Sunday, I chanced to take some 
fifteen steps side by side with a group of six drunken workmen ; 
and suddenly I became convinced that it is possible to express all 
thoughts, feelings, and even profound arguments, by the mere ut­
terance of that one noun which, besides, is composed of very few 
syllables, indeed. First, one of the lads sharply and energetically 
pronounces this noun to express his contemptuous negation of some­
thing that had been the general topic of their conversation. Another 
lad, answering him, repeats the same noun, but in an altogether 
different tone and sense-namely, in the sense of complete doubt 
as to the veracity of the former's negation. The third fellow sud­
denly blows up with indignation against the first lad, bitterly and 
excitedly bursting into the conversation, and he shouts to him the 
same noun, but this time in the sense of invective and abuse. At 
this juncture the second lad again butts in, incensed against the 
third one, the offender, and stops him, as if inferring : "Now why 
did you, young fellow, break in ? We've been talking calmly, and 
whence did you come ?-Why do you start scolding Filka ?" And 
he expres!:Җs .l.is whole thought by uttering the same forbidden 
word, the same strictly monosyllabic appellation of a certain object, 
and was ready to lift his hand and grasp the third lad by his 
shoulder. But, unexpectedly, a fourth little chap-the youngest in 
the whole group-who until that moment had kept silent, but prob­
ably has suddenly discovered the solution to the initial difficulty 
which had caused the altercation, raises his arm and shouts with 
delight . . .  Eureka, you would think ? Found it ? Found it ? No, 
not Eureka at all ; nor did he find anything : he merely keeps re­
peating the same unprintable noun, only one word- nothing but one 
word, but with delight, with screams of rapture, perh.lr•·; a bit too 
enthusiastic ; but to the sixth morose lad, the oldest on· . it did not 
"seem" so, and he promptly takes down the youngster's enthusiasm, 
turning towards him and repeating in a morose, didro:tic bass . . .  
the same noun that shouldn't be mentioned in the presence of 
ladies, and which this time clearly and precisely meant : "What art 
thou straining thy throat and brawling about ?" 
Thus, not once having uttered any other single word, they 
repeated six times this one pet little word of theirs, in strict suc­
cession, and they fully understood each other. This is a fact which 
I have witnessed. 
"Have pity ! "-I shouted at them, suddenly, for no .-eason. 
(I was in the very middle of the crowd.) ·'You took only ten steps 
and you have uttered (I mentioned the word) six times ! This is 
a shame ! Aren't yoq ashamed of yourselves ?" 
All of them suddenly began to stare at me, as one stares at 

124 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
something wholly unexpected, and for a moment they kept silent. 
I thought they would start abusing me, but they did not ; only the 
youngster, having walked off some ten steps, turned toward me 
and, as he continued on his way, he shouted : 
"And why dost thou thyself mention him the seventh time if 
thou counted six times to our credit ?" 
There sounded a burst of laughter, and the group walked off 
without taking further notice of me. 
3 
No, I am not speaking about these revellers, and it is not 
because of them that I feel particularly sad on Sundays. Recently, 
I have discovered with great astonishment that in Petersburg there 
are peasants, commoners and workers who are quite temperate and 
who do not "use" liquor even on Sundays. And it was not this that 
astonished me, but the fact that of such people there are, it seems, 
infinitely more than I had hitherto supposed. 
Now, to me it is even sadder to behold these than the tipsy 
revellers, and this is not from compassion for the former. Nor is 
there any reason to feel compassion for them ; but even so-a 
strange thought keeps coming to my mind . . . .  
On Sundays, toward evening (on weekdays they are not seen 
at all) a great many of these absolutely sober people, engaged all 
week in work, go out into the streets. Precisely, they come out for 
a walk. I have noticed that they never go on the Nevsky : mostly 
they stroll near their homes, or they walk along "leisurely," re­
turning with their famiJies after visiting some people. (It seems 
that there are also a great many married workers in Petersburg.) 
They walk along sedately and with awfully serious faces, as if it 
were not just a walk, conversing very little with each other, espe­
cially husbands with their wives-almost silently, but invariably in 
their holiday clothes. 
Their clothing is old and had-on women, it is many-colored ; 
but everything is cleaned and washed for the holiday, intentionally 
-perhaps, for this hour. There are some in Russian dresses, but 
many are in German clothes, with shaved beards. 
The most annoying part is that they really and seriously 
imagine, it seems, that by strolling in this manner they are pro­
viding themselves with genuine Sunday recreation. Now-one may 
ask-what pleasure is there on this wide, bare, dusty street-still 
dusty after sunset ?-That's exactly the point : to them this seems 
paradise. So, everybody to his own. 
Quite frequently tliey are accompanied by children ; there 
are also a lot of children in Petersburg, and yet it is said that here 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
us 
a great number of them die. As far as I could observe, they are 
mostly very young children, of the earliest age ; they can barely 
walk, or they have not yet learned to walk. Is the reason why there 
are so few children of an older age that they do not survive, but 
die ? Here I see in the crowd a solitary worker, but with a child, 
a little boy ; they are both lonely, and they both look so lonely. 
The worker is about thirty ; his is a lean, unhealthy face. He is in 
his holiday clothes : a German suit, worn out at the seams ; the 
buttons are rubbed off and the collar of the coat is quite greasy ; 
his breeches are "accidental"-they are third-hand pants from a 
rag fair ; yet everything has been cleaned up as well as possible. 
A calico shirt-front, a necktie, a top hat-quite rumpled. He has 
shaved his beard. Probably he is working in a locksmith shop or is 
employed in some capacity in a printing office. The expression of 
his face is gloomy, morose, pensive, hard, almost spiteful. He holds 
the child by its hand, and it wobbles, behind him, swinging some­
how from side to side. It is a little boy, slightly over two years, 
very weak, veࢳ·y pale, but he is dressed in a tiny kaftan ; he wears 
little boots with a red edging, and a hat with a little peacock feather. 
He is tired ; father said something to him-probably nothing much, 
but it seemed as if he had scolded the child. The boy grew still. 
But after having t..t.ken another five steps or so, the father stooped 
down, cautiously lifted the child, took him into his arms and car­
ried him. The boy, in an accustomed manner and trustfully, clung 
to him, clasped his neck with his little right hand and, with childish 
astonishment, began to gaze at me : why do I follow them and look 
at them in this way ? I was about to nod and smile, but he frowned 
his little brows and still more tightly clutched at his f ·җҘer's neck. 
Probably, the two are great friends. 
I like, when roaming through the streets, to look attentively 
at certain wholly strange passers-by, to study their faces and to 
conjecture : who are they, how do they live, what is their occupation 
and what, at . this particular moment, attracts their particular in­
terest ? 
As regards the worker with the little boy, it occurred to me 
at the -time that only some two months before his wiiҙ must have 
died, and necessarily-! don't know why-of consumption. Tem­
porarily, the little motherless boy is being cared for by some little 
old wench (father is working all week in the shop) in a bac;ement 
where they are renting a tiny room or nerhaps, a cornc1-space. 
Now, however, on a Sunday, the widower and his son have been 
somewhere far away, to the Viborgskaia, for a visit to a sole sur­
viving relative-most probably, to a sister of the deceased-on whom, 
in the past, they did not call so very frequently ; she is married 

1 26 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
to some non-commissioned officer with a stripe who must be living 
in some huge governmental building, and also in a basement, but 
in a separate apartment. The woman, perhaps, had heaved a few 
sighs about the deceased, but not much ; the widower, I am sure, 
also did not sigh much during the visit, but was morose, spoke 
rarely and little, and suddenly turned to a special business topic, 
but shortly he stopped talking even about that. Probably a samovar 
was brought and tea was drunk with little nibbles of sugar. The 
little boy was sitting shyly all the time on a bench in the corner, 
kept knitting his brows and, finally, fell asleep. The aunt and her 
husband paid little attention to him, but still, after a while, they 
did give him some milk with bread, and the host-the non-com­
missioned officer, who up to that time had quite ignored the boy 
-made, by way of endearment, some witty remark about the child ; 
but it was a salty and inopportune remark which made him (but 
him only) laugh, while the widower, on the contrary, at just that 
moment sternly-no one knows what for-started scolding the little 
fellow, in consequence of which he immediately began to feel a 
need to use the toilet ; at this juncture father, now refraining from 
chiding and with a serious air for a minute, carried the child out 
of the room . . . . 
They parted as gloomily and ceremoniously as they had carried 
on their conversation, abiding by all conventions and decorum. 
Father took the boy into his arms, carrying him home from the 
Viborgskaia to Liteinaia. Tomorrow, he is going back to his shop, 
and the little boy-back to the old woman. 
And thus, I am roaming and roaming around and keep invent­
ing for my own diversion such trifling little pictures. There is no 
sense in this and "nothing instructive can be derived therefrom." 
This is the reason why on Sundays, while on vacation, I am ex­
periencing spleen in the dusty and gloomy Petersburg streets. Did it 
never occur to you that streets in Petersburg are gloomy ?-To my 
way of thinking, this is the gloomiest city in the world I 
True, on weekdays, too, a great number of children are being 
taken out, but on Sundays, toward evening, there are almost teҚ ·times 
more of them in the streets. What lean, pale, emaciated, amemic, 
gloomy little faces they all have-particularly those still carried 
in the arms. And those who already can walk all have crooked 
little legs and all of them, when walking, keep rocking from side 
to side. Still, almost all are dressed with great care. But, good Lord, 
a child is like a flower, like a tiny leaf set on a tree in spring : it 
needs light, air, ease, freқh food-and, instead of all these, a sultry 
basement with some kvas or cabbage odor, with a disgusting stink 
at night, unhealthy food, cockroaches and fteas, humidity, damp-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
ness dropping from the walls, and outside-dust, bricks and lime. 
But these people are fond of their pale and emaciated chil­
dren. Here, a little three-year-old girl, good-looking in a fresh little 
frock, hastens toward mother, who is sitting at the gate in a big 
group assembled from the whole house for a one- or two-hour chat. 
Mother prattles but keeps an eye on the child, who is playing ten 
steps away from her. The little girl bows down to pick up some­
thing, some little pebble, and incautiously she steps with her little 
feet on her skirt, and now she is unable to get up ; she tries it 
twice, falls down and starts crying. Mother was about to get up 
to help the child, but I lifted it first. The girl stood up ; she looked 
at me quickly and curiously, still with little tears in her eyes, and 
suddenly, slightly frightened and confused, she leaped to her mother. 
I approached and politely inquired about the age of the girl ; 
mother replied cordially but with great reserve. I told her that I, 
too, have such a girl, but to this there came no reply. "Perhaps, 
you are a good man"-silently the mother looked at me-"but what 
business is it of yours to stand here ? You'd better get going." All 
the people, whc. Lad bee .. conversing, likewise became silent, as 
though struck by the same thought. I touched my hat and walked 
away. 
Here, at a busy street crossing, another little girl became 
separated from her mother, who up to thPn was leading her by 
her hand. True, some fifteen steps away, the little peasant woman 
saw a girl-friend who was coming to visit her, and, hoping that 
the child would know its way, she dropped its hand and ran to meet 
her guest ; but the child, suddenly finding itself alone, became 
frightened, started crying and, in tears, tried to catrh up with 
its mother. 
A grey-haired passer-by-a total stranger, a bearded · 
.. ommoner 
-unexpectedly stopped the running woman whom he did not know, 
and seized her by the hand : 
"What's the use of racing ! Can't you "ee the child behind 
is crying ; this won't do I It may get frightened I "  
The little peasant woman started to make a lively rebuttal, 
but she did not make it ; she changed her mind : without any hurt 
feelings or impatience, she picked the girl up in her arms, who 
bad by then run up to her, and now with decorum she walked up 
to her guest. The commoner sternly waited for the denouement and 
then proceeded on his way. 
Trivial-most trivial-little scenes, v.: 'ch are even not worth 
being recorded in the diary. Henceforth, I shall try to be much 
more serious. 
The Citizerr, 18.73, No. 29. 

1 28 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY: 1873 
TO A TEACHER 
A Moscow columnist-it seems, from chastity-has scolded me 
in our Petersburg Voice (No. 2 10) for my recent "three little pic­
tures" (The Citizen, No. 29) on the ground that in picture No. 
2, having referred to the obscene language of our tipsy folks, I 
mentioned, of course without naming directly, a certain indecent 
object. . . .  "It could never even have occurred to me what limits 
can be reached by a feuilletonist in his writings when he has no 
appropriate material at his disposal"-says my Moscow accuser 
about me. Thus, it appears that I have resorted to an unbecoming 
subject solely for the purpose of adding animation to my feuilleton, 
for the sake of Cayenne pepper. . . .  
This makes me sad, since I even thought that people would 
draw an opposite deduction from my article, i.e., that I have derived 
little from a vast amount of material. I thought that the title might 
save me : little pictures, and not large pictures ; from little ones­
less is to be expected. And thus I jotted down but a few sad thoughts 
about the holiday pastime of our Petersburg manual workers. The 
scarcity of their joys and recreations ; the paucity of their spiritual 
life ; the basements where their pallid, scrofulous children are 
growing up ; the weary, wide Petersburg streets-stretching out 
straight as a cord-as places for their walks ; that young widower­
workman with a child by _the hand (a true little picture)-all these 
seemed to me sufficient material for a feuilleton, so that-I repeat 
-I could have been reproached in an altogether contrary sense, 
namely, that I have derived little from such abundant material. 
I felt consoled by the fact that I at least hinted at my prin­
cipal inference : that in the overwhelming portion of our people, 
even in Petersburg basements, even within a most pitiful spiritual 
setting, there is nevertheless a longing for dignity, for a certain 
decency, for genuine self-respect ; that love for family and children 
is preserved. I was particularly impressed with the fact that they 
love their sickly children genuinely and even tenderly. Precisely, 
I was gladdened by the thought that disorder and debauch io the 
family life of the people, even in the face of a setting such as in 
Petersburg, are still exceptions-although, perhaps, numerouS-and 
I sought to share this fresh impression with the readers. 
Just at that ti_me I had recently read in a feuilleton a very 
candid admission on· the part of a certain unquestionably intelligent 
man apropos of the publication of an official book, viz. : that, 
essentially, it is an idle. occupation to dwell upon the question 
as to whether or not the reform proved beneficial to the people ; 
that even had the reform not been useful to the people-let every-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
129 
thing go on the..rocks, for it had to take place (and in this, perhaps, 
there is much truth in accordance with the principle pereat mundus, 
despite the approach to the question) .  And, finally, as far as the 
people-the peasants-are concerned, the feuilletonist admitted very 
frankly-"in truth, strictly speaking, our people were not worthy 
of the reform . . .  and that if, prior to the reform, in literature 
and criticism we-together with Messrs. Marko-Vovchok and Grigo­
rovich-have been crowning the peasants with laurel and roses, 
we know very well that we have merely been crowning lousy heads . 
. . . But, at the time, this was necessary for the purpose of pushing 
the matter," and so on and so forth. 
Such is the gist of the idea (I am not expressing it verbatim) 
set forth in the article with such candor and no longer with the 
slightest suggestion of the former ceremony. I confess, this is all 
too candid a thought ; its very bareness which, for the first time, 
had revealed itself with such gratification, threw me into a rather 
curious mood. I recall that I concluded then that we, for instance, 
in The cit:ze,., CVf'n thouҜh being in accord with the first part of 
the proposition, i.e., the reform regardless of any consequences­
nevertheless, under no circumstance, do we share the latter part 
of that fatal contention, and we are firmly convinced that the 
lousy heads were !'till worthy of the reform and in no sense inferior 
to it. I believe that such a conviction may constitute precisely one 
of the characteristic aspects of our own orientation. This is why 
I am mentioning it now. 
As to my feuilleton . . . .  In passing, my Moscow literary 
confrere believes-! don't know why-that I am ::tshamed of the 
name feuilletonist, and he asserts in Frenc-h that I am '· Pus feuille­
toniste que Jules Janin, plus catholique que le pape." 
Of course, this French language from l\Ioscow is there to 
make people believe that the author is of bon ton : still I don't 
understand-what is the sense of the avowal of Catholic religion 
attributed to me, and why was it necessary to drag into the matter 
the poor Pope ? 
Now, as regards myself, I have merely stated that I am not 
a "Petersburg" feuilletonist, and by this I meant to say, for any 
eventuality in the future, that in my Diary, strictly speaking, I 
am writing and intend to write not only about Pt-tersburg life, 
and consequently, there is no point in expecting from m•' very 
detailed reports on Petersburg life whene• r I should find it neces­
sary to allude to it. If, however, my Moscow teacher chooses quand­
meme to call my Diary a feuilleton, let him do so ; I am quite 
satisfied. 
My Moscow teacher assures me that my feuilleton created a 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
sensation in Moscow "among shopkeepers and in Zariadie,"1 and 
he calls it a bazar feuilleton. I am very glad that I gave so much 
pleasure to the readers from those quarters of our ancient capital. 
But the venom of it is that I, as it were, purposely sought to be 
sensational : because of the lack of more intellectual readers, I was 
looking for readers in Zariadie, and it was with this aim in mind 
that I started speaking about "him," and, thus, I am "the shrewdest 
among all feuilletonists . . . .  
" 
"Now, I can't grasp it lwrites the teacher describing the effect 
of my feuilleton in Moscow]-1 can't grasp it : 'What's the wonder 
that there's such a demand for The Citizen ?' a newsboy said to 
me with surprise, in answer to my question as to the demand for 
The Citizen. When I explained to him what the reason was, he 
ran to Mecklenburg and Jivarev-our wholesale newspaper dealers 
-to pick up the remaining copies, but they were all sold out : 'The 
point is that the shopkeepers' district learned that an article about 
him has been printed in The Citizen, and so the shopkeepers, in­
stead of buying Diversion, rushed for The Citizen. . . .' " 
Well now, this is not bad at ali-I mean, this news-and you 
are vainly shaming me about shopkeeper-readers. On the contrary, 
I should be very anxious to enlist their support, since my opinion 
of them is far more favorable than yours. You see, they have been 
buying for fun, of course, and also because there developed a 
scandal. Everybody is eager for a scandal ; such is the nature of 
every man, especially in Russia (you, for instance, pounced on me), 
so that the shopkeeper.s should not be particularly despised for 
this. As for diversion and fun, there are different diversions and 
a different kind of laughter even in most seductive cases. However, 
my teacher makes a reservation ; he adds : "I am convinced that 
the pen of the author of 'the little picture about him' was inspired 
by the best intentions when he was writing this shopkeepers' 
feuilleton" ; in other words, the teacher honors me by admitting 
that, when mentioning him, I was not primarily and directly 
prompted by the aim of corrupting the people. We are grateful 
at least for that. Since the author also writes for The Voice, this 
magnanimous reservation is, perhaps, useful-knowing that Andrei 
Alexandrovich would not hesitate to accuse me of whatever it be, 
even of perversive intentions with regard to the people and Russian 
society. (For didn't he accuse me of favoring serfdom I )  Under your 
pen, Andrei Alexandrovich also revealed himself in a remarkable 
reverse conjecture : "And if such 'little pictures' of yours should 
contribute nothing toward the reform of the revellers from among 
lA section in Moscow, in the rear of a row of shops, running parallel 
to Varvarka. (B. B.) 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
IJI 
the working people . . .  "-you say. Such a conjecture emanates 
straight from the head of Andrei Alexandrovich 1 So it did occur 
to him that I was writing with the direct and immediate purpose 
of curing (of ribaldry) our cursing working people ! But they have 
never heard not only about us, but even about Andrei Alexandrovich 
-I mean, these workers whom I have depicted in my feuilleton I 
No, I was writing with a different intentiOn about that "noun" 
-"unmentionable before the ladies . . . but most generally used 
among drunkards," and I insist that I had a rather serious and 
excusable aim-and this I shall prove. 
My idea was to point out the chastity of the Russian people, 
the fact that even if, in a state of intoxication, our people are 
resorting to invectives, in a sober state they are using obscene 
language far rarer, they are doing so not from love for profane 
words, not from pleasure in cursing, but simply because of a bad 
habit which has almost grown into a necessity, so that they even 
express thoughts and feelings ever so remote from ribaldry in 
obscene words. 
Furtl.crnll'u :, I havf' .:.lated that the main cause of this cursing 
habit is to be sought in drunkenness. You may think whatever you 
please about my conjecture that in a tipsy state-when the tongue 
moves tightly, and yet there is a strong desire to talk-there arises 
a necessity to use flrief, conventional and expressive words. But it 
was worth while to point out that our people are chaste, even when 
they are using obscene language. 
I even venture to assert that the zsthetically and mentally 
developed strata of our society are infinitely more depraved in 
this sense than our coarse, and most hackward, common people. 
Among men-even those belonging to the h!IZhest socit.:; and even 
among gray, star-covered, elderly fellowsҝit sometin: 
happens 
that after supper, when all important matters, occasionally state 
matters, have been settled, they gradually veer over to touch :esthet­
ically upon themes. These themes, in turn, are promptly converted 
into such depravity, such ribaldry, such lewd thinking, that popular 
imagination would never conceive anything of the kind. That 
happens very often among all subdivisions of that circle of men 
who stand so far above the people. Men reputed to possess the 
loftiest and most ideal virtues-even churchgoers and most romantic 
poets-eagerly participate in these conversations. Here the really 
important point is that some of these men are unquesthnably 
respectable and, also, are doing many b ·1d deeds. They are at­
tracted, precisely, by filthiness and the refinement . of filthines­
not so much by the obscene word itself as by the 1de1t expressed 
in it ; they are attracted by the depth of corruption-precisely, 

IJ2 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
by the stink, much as Limburger (unknown to the people) is 
relished by a refined gastronome. Here there is essentially a crav­
ing for smearing, for the odor, for relishing the odor. 
Of course, they laugh, they speak haughtily about their filth, 
but one can see that they are attracted to it and that they no 
longer can remain without it, though it be only in conversation. 
The people's laughter, even at the same themes, is different. I am 
sure that in your Zariadie they have been laughing not for filth's 
sake, not from love for it and not for art's sake, but with extremely 
naive, not depraved, healthy, though slightly coarse, laughter-alto­
gether different from that of some of the smudgers in our society 
or in our literature. The people use obscene language without reflec­
tion, and often without meaning what they utter. Our people are 
not depraved, and they are even very chaste, notwithstanding the 
fact that they are the most ribald people in the whole world. Now, 
in truth, it is worth while giving at least a little thought to this 
contrast. 
My Moscow teacher winds up his feuilleton about me with 
excessive, almost satanic, haughtiness : 
"I shall avail myself of the example of my esteemed colleague 
[meaning me] "-says he-"when I should happen to be writing a 
feuilleton, and I should have no material at all [what contempt ! J ,  
but just now there is no need for me to take advantage o f  the 
example set forth before me [in other words : a clever man, even 
without 'him,' is always full of thoughts] , since even in Moscow 
we also have 'dust and heat,' 'heat and dust' [those are the opening 
words in my feuilleton-this is to put me to shame once more], 
but through this dust [ah-ah, now we come to the vital point : now 
he is going to show us forthwith what a clever Moscow head may 
deduce from this 'dust,' compared with Petersburg heads] , through 
this dust and from beneath this heat [what does 'from beneath this 
heat' mean ? l it is possible, with a certain attentiveness, to perceive 
[hear ! hear ! ]  that the living pulse of our Whitestone capital, beat­
ing much weaker in the summer, begins, so to speak, to grow more 
lively and, throbbing more and more energetically, it reaches in 
winter months that intensity which the pulse of Moscow life no 
longer can exceed." 
What a thought I That's how things are in our Moscow ! And 
what a lesson to me ! And do you know what, teacher ?-It does 
seem to me that you have intentionally pilfered from me the thought 
about him, in order to make your feuilleton more entertaining 
(otherwise, what is that intensity ! )  ; perhaps you became envious 
of my success in Zariadfe ! This may well be so. You would not 
be rummaging and smearing so much, and referring to it so many 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
IJJ 
times ; not only did you mention it and smudge, but you were 
even smelling . . . 
". . . even so, we have grown up to the point where, at least, 
we can smell when we are offered something that shoots up into 
our noses, and we are capable of evaluating it regardless of the 
author's intentions . . . .  
" 
Now, what does it smell like ? 
The Citizen, 1873, Ҟo. 32. 
SOMETHING ABOUT LYING 
Why is everybody here lying-every single man ? I am con­
vinced that I will be immediately stopped and that people will start 
shouting : "Oh, what nonsense, by no means everybody ! You havt­
no topic, and so you are inventing things in order to begin in a 
more imposing fashion." I have already been upbraided for the 
lack of themes. But the point is that now I am earnestly convinced 
of the unive1 s:1Jity of our lying. One lives fifty years with an idea, 
one perceives and feels it, and all of a sudden it appears in such 
an aspect as to make it seem that one had hitherto not known it 
at all. 
Lately, I wa<: suddenly struck by the thought that in Russia, 
among our educated classes, there cannot be even one man who 
wouldn't be addicted to lying. This is precisely because among us 
even quite honest people may be lying. I am certain that in other 
nations, in the overwhelming majority of them, only scoundrels are 
lying ; they are lying for the sake of material gain, that is, with 
directlv criminal intent. 
Well, in our case, even the most esteemed people n , ' be lying 
for no reason at all, and with most honorable aims. Wt. are lying 
almost invariably for the sake of hospitality. One wio;hes to create 
in the listener an resthetical impression, to give him pleasure, and 
so one lies even, so to speak, sacrificing oneself to the listener. 
Let anyone J:ecall : has it not happened to anyone to add 
twenty times, let us say, the number of versts which, in one hour, 
horses have driven him, if only this be needed to s;umgthen a 
pleasurable impression nn the listener. And, indeed, wasn't the 
listener pleased to such an extent that he would start at once to 
assure you that a certain troika, which he had known, on a bet 
outran a railroad train, and so on, and so ''ҟrth. 
Well, what about hunting dogs ? Or uow, in Paris, teeth were 
replaced in ont-'s mouth ? Or how, here, you were cured by Botkin ? 
Regarding your illness, haven't you related such wonders that you 
started believing them yourself by the time you had reached the 

IJ4 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : I87J 
middle of your story (since by the middle of a story one always 
begins to believe it) , but, when going to bed at night and recollect­
ing with pleasure how agreeably your listener had been impressed, 
you would suddenly stop and involuntarily utter : "Eh, how I lied I "  
However, this is not a convincing example, since there is 
nothing more agreeable than to talk about one's illness, if only a 
listener can be found ; and once you start talking, it is no longer 
possible to refrain from lying ; this will even cure a patient. But, 
returning from abroad, didn't you speak about a thousand things 
which you beheld "with your own eyes . . .  " ? No, I shall withdraw 
this example : for a Russian returning home it is impossible not 
to exaggerate things about "abroad," for otherwise why should he 
have been journeyng thither ? 
But take, for instance, natural sciences I Did you not discuss 
natural sciences or bankruptcy cases and escapes over the border 
by different Petersburg, and other, Jews, understanding nothing 
about them and not knowing the A B C of natural sciences ? 
Excuse me-did you not relate some anecdote, as if it hap­
pened to you, to the very person who had told it to you as if it 
had happened to him ? Did you possibly forget how, by the time 
you reached the middle of the story, suddenly you recalled and 
guessed this fact, which was clearly confirmed in the suffering look 
of your listener, who was intently staring at you (since in such cases 
people, I don't know why, stare at each other with an intensity 
magnified ten times) ? Do you remember how, despite the loss of 
all your humor, nevertheless, with a courage worthy of the great 
cause, you continued to. lisp your story ? And then, when hurriedly 
you did get through with it, you both, with nervously hasty civili­
ties, shook hands, smiled and ran in opposite directions from each 
other ?-So that when, for no reason, in an ultimate convulsion, 
some demon drove you to cry to the listener, running down the 
staircase, a question about his auntie's health, he did not turn to 
you and made no reply-which fact stuck in your recollection as 
the most painful thing in the sum total of the incident that hap­
pened to you ? 
Briefty, if to all this anyone should answer me with a nay, 
namely, that he did not relate the anecdotes, did not touch upon 
Botkin, did not lie about Jews, did not shout on the staircase about 
auntie's health, andrthat nothing of the kind ever happened to him 
-I would simply not believe it. I know that the Russian liar, time 
and again, lies without even noticing it himself, so that one may 
not perceive the fact that he is lying. See what happens : no sooner 
will a man tell a successful lie, than he will include the anecdote 
among the unquestioned facts of his personal life, and then he acts 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
135 
quite conscientiously because he fuUy beJieves it ; besides, it is 
unnatural sometimes not to believe it. 
"Eh, rubbish I "  -1 wiU be told-"These are innocent Jies ; there 
is nothing universal about them." Be this as it may, I agree that 
all this is quite innocent, and merely hints at noble traits in one's 
character-for example, at a feeJing of gratitude. Because if you 
were Jistened to when you were lying, it is impossible not to Jet 
the listener lie, if only from mere gratitude. 
Courteous reciprocity in lying is virtualJy the prime condition 
of Russian society-of aU Russian meetings, evening entertainments, 
dubs, scientific bodies, etc. Indeed, it is only a dulJ blockhead who, 
in cases of this kind, will suddenly begin to doubt the number of 
versts driven by you, or the miracJes which Botkin performed when 
treating you. But these are heartless and hemorrhoidal creatures 
who themselves are forthwith punished, wondering thereafter why 
they have to suffer punishment. Men without talent. 
Still aU this lying, despite its innocence, hints at some very 
momentous fundamental traits of ours to such an extent that here 
the elemem of universality almost begins to reveal itself. For ex­
ample : first, that we Russians are primarily afraid of truth-i.e., 
we are not really afraid, if you please, but we always regard truth 
as something too weary in our intercourse, something prosaic, in­
sufficiently poetic, too banal ; and thereby, always evading truth, 
we, finalJy, made it something most extraordinary and rare in our 
Russian world (I am not referring to the newspaper by this name). 
Thus we have totally forgotten the axiom that truth is the most 
poetic thing in the world, especially in its pure state. More than 
that : it is even more fantastic than thf' ordinary human mind is 
capable of fabricating and conceiving. 
In Russia, truth almost invariably assumes a fan.· :;tic char­
acter. In fact, men have finally succeeded in converting all that the 
human mind may lie about and belie into somethh.ْ more com­
prehensible than truth, and this prevails all over the world. For 
centuries truth will lie right on the table before people but they 
will not take it : they will chase after a fabrication precisely because 
they look upon it as something fantastic and utopian. 
Second, this is a hint at the fact that our wholesale Russian 
lying suggests that we are all ashamed of ourselves. Indeed, every 
one of us carries in him an almost innate shame of himself and 
of his own face ; and the moment Russians find themselves in com­
pany, they hasten to appear at all cost .
•
 
mething different from 
what they in reality are ; everyone hastens to assume a different face. 
Already Hertzen has remarked about Russians abroad that 
they don't know how to behave in public ; they speak in a loud 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
manner, when everybody else is silent, and they cannot utter a 
single word politely and naturally when it is necessary to speak. 
And this is true : at once we observe a twist, a lie, a painful cramp ; 
at once there arises the urge for being ashamed of everything that 
is actual, of concealing and effacing one's own face, given by God 
to the Russian, and of assuming a different, an alien, as un-Russian 
a face as possible. All this comes from the firm inner conviction 
in every Russian that one's own face is necessarily trivial and shame­
fully comic, and that if he should assume a French, an English­
in brief, somebody else's-face, something more respectable would 
come of it, and that in this guise he would not be recognized. 
In this connection I will note something very characteristic : 
this miserable petty shame of one's self and this vile self-negation 
are, in most cases, unconscious ; this is something convulsive and 
unconquerable ; yet, consciously, the Russians-even the most ardent 
self-negators among them-do not readily admit their triviality, and 
by all means demand respect for themselves : "I am, indeed, quite 
like an Englishman"-the Russian argues-"therefore, I should be 
respected, since everybody respects the English." 
This fundamental type of our society has been moulding itself 
over a period of two hundred years, in accordance with the express 
principle formulated two centuries ago : "Never, under any circum­
stance, should one be himself ; one should assume a different face, 
bespitting one's own face once and forever ; one should always be 
ashamed of one's self and one should never resemble one's self." 
The results proved most complete. There is no German, no French­
man, there is no Englishman in the whole world, who, when meet­
ing other people, would be ashamed of his own face, provided he 
be honestly convinced that he had perpetrated nothing bad. A 
Russian is perfectly aware of the fact that there is no such Eng­
lishman, while an educated Russian also knows that the essential 
point of self-respect is not to be ashamed of one's own face, wherever 
it be. This is the reason why he hastens to assume the appearance 
of a Frenchman or of an Englishman, precisely so as to be taken 
as quickly as possible for a person who never, and nowhere, is 
ashamed of his face. 
"Innocent things ; old stuff ; it has been told a thousand times 
already," people will say again. Be that as it may, but here is 
something even more typical. There is one point on which any 
Russian of the educated pattern, appearing in society or in public, 
is extremely exacting, and which he will yield under no circum­
stance. This point is intellect-the desire to appear more clever than 
he is, and-this is remarkable-this is in no sense a desire to seem 
more clever than the rest or even more clever than anyone in par-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
137 
ticular, but merely-not more stupid than anyone. "Concede," he 
means, "that I am not more stupid than anyone, and I will concede 
that you are not more stupid than anyone." 
Here, again, we have something on the order of reciprocal 
gratitude. As is known, for instance, a Russian bows before Euro­
pean authority with happiness and haste, evt:n without permitting 
himself to analyze : in such cases he is particularly opposed to 
analysis. Oh, it's different if a man of genius should descend from 
his pedestal, or merely cease to be in vogue : then, and with regard 
to such a person, there is no one harsher than the Russian in­
telligentsia ; then there is no limit to its haughtiness, contempt and 
scoffing. Later, very naively we wonder if somehow we happen 
to learn that in Europe people still continue to look with respect 
upon the person who descended from his pedestal and to value 
him according to his merit. Yet that same Russian who had bowed 
before a genius in vogue, even without any analysis, nevertheless, 
under no circumstance and never, will admit that he is more stupid 
than this gcni.Aٓ. hcfore wl,om he had just bowed, no matter how 
ultra-European he may be. "Well, Goethe-all right, Liebig-now 
then, Bismarck ; why, all right ; nevertheless, I too, am a some­
body,"-so it necessarily seems to every Russian, even from among 
the most miserablr and rascally, if it should come to that. And not 
that he may be pretending, because here tlJere is hardly anything 
conscious, but only that he is pulled in that direction. There is an 
incessant feeling of idle ambition, knocking about the world, an 
ambition in no way justifiable. In a word, a Russian of the upper 
classes will never, and under no circumstance, reach that level­
perhaps, the highest level-of the manifestation of hu .. ·--:n dignity, 
where a man admits that he is more stupid than an, 'er, when 
the latter is, in fact, more intelligent. I even do not know whether 
there are exceptions in this respect. 
Let people refrain from laughing at my "paradox." Liebig's 
rival may not have terminated his high-school term, and, of course, 
he will not start arguing about his supremacy over Liebig should 
he be told and shown that this is Liebig. He will keep his mouth 
shut but, even so, he will he tempted even in Liebig s presence . 
. . . It would be different if, let us suppose, he should meet Liebig, 
without knowing it, somewhere in a railroad car. And should there 
ensue a conversation about chemistry, and should our fello'v suc­
ceed in getting into the conversation, he "Ould keep up tll\ most 
learned dispute, knowing but one word 
m chemistry : chemistry. 
Of course he may surprise Liebig, but-who knows ?-in the opinion 
of the listeners he might turn out the victor. Since in the Russian 
there is virtually no limit to the arrogance of his scientific language. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
At this juncture there develops a phenomenon encountered 
in the soul only of the Russian educated classes : in that soul, the 
moment it feels itself in public, not only is there no doubt about 
its intellect, but even about its supreme learnedness, if only it 
comes to erudition. One may, perhaps, understand such an attitude 
toward intellect, but it would seem that as regards one's erudition 
every man must possess the most accurate information on the 
subject. . . .  
Of course, all this transpires only in public, when strangers 
are around. But at home, in one's mind . . .  Why, at home, in­
wardly, no Russian ever troubles himself about his education and 
erudition ; he never even raises a question regarding them. But 
even if he should raise it, most probably at home, too, he would 
decide it in his favor, notwithstanding the fact that he would have 
most accurate knowledge about his erudition. 
Not long ago I personally, while sitting in a railroad car, 
chanced to listen during two hours of the journey to a whole 
treatise on classical languages. One man was speaking and all the 
others were listening. The speaker, unknown to the other passengers, 
was a middle-aged man, of an imposing, reserved and seigniorial 
appearance, who dropped his words weightily and slowly. He aroused 
everybody's interest. It was obvious from his very first words that 
not only did he speak but probably, had thought about this theme 
for the first time. So this was merely a brilliant improvisation. 
He emphatically rejected classical education, and its intro­
duction into our schools he termed "historical and fatal folly" ; but 
this was the only sharp word which he had permitted himself. He 
had adopted too lofty a tone which restrained him from flying into 
passion, from contempt itself for the subject. The grounds on 
which he stood were most primitive, permissible, perhaps, to a 
thirteen-year-old schoolboy-practically the same ones which up 
to the present are being adhered to by some of our newspapers cam­
paigning against classical languages, to wit : "Since all Latin works 
have been translated, Latin is not needed," and so forth and so 
on, along these lines. 
In our car he produced an extraordinary effect ; many people, 
when parting with him, thanked him for the treat he had given 
them-especially, the ladies. I am convinced that he departed with 
the greatest respec: t for himself. 
Nowadays in public (be it in railroad cars or elsewhere) 
conversations differ very much in comparison with olden times ; 
now people are eager to listen and are craving for instructors in 
political and social subjects. True, our convenations ensue with 
but great effort ; all keep back for a long time before making 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
IJ9 
up their minds to start talking, but, once they have started, they 
will be seized sometimes with such a pathos that one almost 
has to hold their hands. More reserved and solid, so to speak, 
more elevated and isolated conversations pivot on stock exchange 
and governmental topics, but from a secret, travestied point of view, 
claiming knowledge of the highest mysteries unknown to the 
uninitiated public. The latter listen meekly and respectfully, while 
babblers gain in their demeanor. It stands to reason that few of 
them believe each other but, as a rule, they part quite content with 
each other and even in a somewhat grateful mood. 
The problem of making a pleasant and joyous trip on our 
railroads consists in the skill of letting others lie and of believing 
as much as possible ; then you, too, will be given a chance to tell 
a lie impressively if you, also, be tempted to do so. Thus it is a 
reciprocal advantage. 
However, as I have stated, there are general, burning, press­
ing topics of conversation in which the whole public takes part, 
and not onl}' ളn!' the purpose of enjoying their time. I repeat : they 
are thirsting for knowledge, for explanation of contemporary dif­
ficulties ; they are craving for teachers, particularly women and 
especially mothers of families. 
It is noteworthy that despite all this extraordinarily curious 
and most significant thirst for social advist:rs and guides-notwith­
standing all these noble impulses, people are too easily satisfied, 
sometimes in a most unexpected manner ; they believe everything ; 
they are very poorly prepared and armed-much more weakly than 
one's most flaming fantasy could have imagined SC"Veral years ago 
when it was more difficult to form a precise judgl'T•,.nt on our 
Russian society than at present when more facts and · 
· formation 
are available. 
It can be positively asserted that every chatterbox with but 
moderately decent manners (our public, alas, up to the present 
has a prejudicial weakness for good manners, despite the ever-ex­
panding education disseminated through feuilletons) may win out 
and convince his listeners of anything he pleases, receiving thanks 
and departing with deep respect for himself. It goes without saying 
-one doesn't even have to mention it-that he has got to be liberal : 
this is a condition sine qua non. 
Another time, also in a railroad car, and also recel'ltly, I 
happened to hear a whole treatise on atl.·'ism. The orator-
J. man 
of a socialite and engineering, though gloomy, appearance, and with 
a pathological thirst for an audience-began with monasteries. About 
the monastery problem he understood nothing at all, not even the 
A B C of it. He regarded the existence of monasteries as something 

140 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
inseparable from the dogmas of faith, imagining that monasteries 
are maintained by the state, and cost much to the crown. For­
getting the fact that monks constitute an altogether voluntary asso­
ciation of persons, just like any other association, he insisted-in the 
name of liberalism-that they be abolished as a sort of tyrannical 
institution. He wound up with absolute and unlimited atheism on 
the basis of natural sciences and mathematics ; to these he made 
abundant references without, however, citing in the course of his 
whole dissertation a single fact from these disciplines. 
Again, this man alone talked, while all the others were merely 
listening. "I shall teach my son to be an honest man-that's all,"­
he uttered in conclusion, with the full and obvious conviction that 
good deeds, morality and honesty are something given and abso­
lute, depending upon nothing whatsoever ; something that can al­
ways be found in one's pocket, whenever it be needed, without 
labor, doubts and misunderstandings. 
This gentleman, too, scored an extraordinary success. Here 
there were officers, old men, ladies and grown-up children. When 
parting with him, the people thanked him warmly for the pleasure 
he had given them, and one lady-a mother of a family, smartly 
dressed and quite good-looking, with a charming giggle-declared 
that now she was fully convinced that in her soul "there was noth­
ing but vapor." This gentleman must have gone away with a feeling 
of unusual self-respect. 
· 
Now, this self-respect is the thing that confuses me. That 
there are fools and chatterers is, of course, not surprising ; but 
this gentleman was obٔiously no fool and certainly, also, neither 
a villain nor a swindler ; it may even be that he was an honest 
man and a good father. Only, he understood nothing about the 
problems which he ventured to solve. Is it possible that an hour, 
a day, or a month later the thought would not occur to him : "My 
friend, Ivan Vasilievich (or whatever his name is)-now, you have 
argued, but you understand nothing about the things you discussed. 
You know this better than anyone. You referred to natural sciences 
and mathematics, but you know better than anyone else that you 
long ago forgot the scanty mathematics which you learned in your 
technical school and which, even then, you did not know thoroughly, 
while about natural sciences you never did have any conception. 
How, then, did }'flu venture to talk ? How could you teach ?­
Indeed, you must ·realize that you were only lying, and you feel 
proud about yourself .-Aren't you ashamed of yourself ?" 
I am sure that he. could have asked himself all these ques­
tions, notwithstanding the fact that, perhaps, he is engaged in 
"business" and that he has no time to spare on idle questions. I 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
141 
am quite certain that these questions, though in passing and minc­
ingly, have visited his brain. But he was not ashamed/ He did not 
രറ/ 
. 
Now, this dishonesty of a certain kind in the educated Rus­
sian is, to me, a decisive phenomenon. What is there in the fact 
that with us it is so common and that aJI of us got used to it 
and it seems so familiar ? Even so, it remains an astonishing and 
extraordinary fact. It bears witness to such an indifference for 
one's judgment of one's own conscience, or-which is the same 
thing-such extraordinary disrespect for one's self, that one is 
seized with despair, one loses all hope for something independent 
and salutary for the nation-even in the future-from such people 
and such a society. 
The public-that is, the exterior-European appearance, the 
law once and forever enacted by Europe-this public produces in 
every Russian a crushing effect : in public he is a European, a 
citizen, a knight, a republican, with conscience and with his own 
firmly established opinion. At home, to himself : "Eh, what the 
devil do I care about opinions ! Let them even whip me I "  Lieu­
tenant Pirogov, who forty years ago, on the Bolshaia Meschan­
skaia, was whipped by the locksmith Schiller, was a dreadful 
prophecy-a prophecy oi a genius who had divined so terribly, 
since of the Pirogovs there is an immensr quantity, so many that 
it is even impossible to whip them all. Please recall that after the 
incident the lieutenant forthwith ate a puff-paste patty, and that 
same evening, at a saint's day party of an important government 
official, he distinguished himself while dancing the mazurka. What 
would you think : when he capered that mazurka a:Jd exhibited, 
while performing the steps, his so recentiy offended Ͳ 
1bs-did he 
think about the fact that only two hours earlier 1.ല had been 
whipped ?-Unquestionably, he did. But was he ashamed ?-Un­
questionably, he was not ! 
Waking up next morning, he no doubt said to himself :  "Eh, 
what the devil ! Is it worth starting something if no one is going 
to find out ! . . .  
" This "is it worth starting"-of course, on the 
one hand, suggests such a predisposition to accon:;-:-10dation to 
anything whatsoever, 1nd at the same time, such a breadth of 
our Russian nature that, in the face of these qualities, even the 
unlimited is dimmed. The two-hundred-year disuse of the slightest 
independence of character and the two-hmrlred-year spitt hg upon 
our own Russian face have expanded RٞJssian conscience to such 
a fatal boundlessness, from which may be expected . . .  well, what 
would you think ? 
I am convinced that the lieutenant was, perhaps, capable of 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
reaching such limits, or such an unlimitedness, .as to avow his love 
that same evening and make a formal proposal to his partner in 
the mazurka-the host's elder daughter. Infinitely tragic is the image 
of that young miss fluttering with the fellow in a lovely dance and 
ignorant of the fact that only two hours before her cavalier had 
been whipped and that he does not mind it a bit. Well, and what 
would you think if she were to learn this fact, and the proposal, 
nevertheless, had been made anyway ? Would she marry him (of 
course, on condition that no one would find out) ?-Alas, unfail­
ingly, she would marry him ! 
Even so, from among the Pirogovs and, generally, "the bound­
les ones," it seems, the overwhelming number of our women should 
be excluded. In our women one observes more and more sincerity, 
perseverance, seriousness and honor, sacrifice and search for truth, 
and in Russian women all these qualities have always been more 
pronounced than among the men. This cannot be doubted, not­
withstanding all present-day deviations. The woman lies less, some 
of the women do not lie at all, whereas of the men who do not 
lie there are hardly any. I am speaking of the present moment in 
the life of our society. 
The woman is more persistent and patient in work ; she seeks, 
more seriously than the man, work for work's sake, and not merely 
for the sake of pretending. Perhaps it is from her that we must 
expect great help I 
The Citizen, 1873, No. 35· 
ONE OF THE CONTEMPORANEOUS FALSEHOODS 
Some of our critics have observed that in my last novel The 
Possessed I have made use of the plot of the notorious Nechaiev 
case ;  but they hastened to add that, strictly speaking, there are 
no portraits in my novel and there is no literal reproduction of 
that story ; that I took a phenomenon and merely sought to explain 
the possibility of its occurrence in our society as a social phenomenon 
and not in an anecdotal sense of a mere depiction of a particular 
Moscow episode. 
On my own part, I may say that all this is quite correct. I 
have not discussed in my novel the notorious Nechaiev and his 
victim Ivanov. The face of my Nechaiev, of course, does not re­
semble that of the real Nechaiev. I meant to put this question and 
to answer it as clearly as possible in the form of a novel : how, in 
our contemporaneous, transitional and peculiar society, are the 
Nechaievs, not Nechaiev himself, made possible ? And how does 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
143 
it happen that these Nechaievs eventually manage to enlist followers 
-the Nechaievtzi. 
And recently-true, already about a month ago-I have read 
in The Russian World the following curious lines : ". . . it seems 
to us that the Nechaiev case could have demonstrated the fact that 
our student youth does not participate in such follies. An idiotic 
fanatic of the Nechaiev pattern manages to recruit prffiselytes only 
among idlers, defectives-and not at all among the you 
s attending 
to their studies." 
And further : 
". . . all the more so as only a few days ago the Minister 
of Public Education had declared ( in Kiev) that after the inspection 
of the educational institutions in seven districts he could state that 
'in recent years the youth has adopted an infinitely more serious 
attitude toward the problem of learning, and has been studying far 
more diligently.' " 
These lines, taken by themselves, and judged abstractly, are 
rather trivia! (the authnr, I hope, will excuse me) .  But in them 
there is a twist-an old habitual lie. Their fully developed and 
fundamental idea is that if, at times, the Nechaievs appear in our 
midst, they are all necessarily idiots and fanatics, and even if they 
succeed in recruiting proselytes, these are necessarily found "only 
among the idle defectives and not at all among youths attending 
to their studies." 
I do not know exactly what the author of the article in The 
Russian World sought to prove by this twist : did he mean to flatter 
the college youth ? Or did he, on the contrary, by this crafty 
manreuvre, so to speak, under the guise of flattery, r ,  y to cheat 
them a little, but only with the most honorable motive .
.
 
d for their 
own benefit ? And, to achieve this, did he resort to the well-known 
device which governesses and nurses apply in the case of little 
children : "Here, dear children, see how those bad, unruly kids are 
screaming and fighting : they'll surely be spanked because they're 
so 'undeveloped' ;  but you are such nice, commendable, sweet little 
things ; here, at your table you sit up straight ; you do not swing 
your little feet under the table, and for this you Will surely be 
given candies." 
Or, finally, did the author simply attempt to. "shield" our 
college youth from the government, resorting for this purpose to 
a device which he, perhaps, considers 
· :vtraordinary, craity and 
refined ? 
I will say candidly : even though I did raise all these questions, 
yet the personal motives of the author of the article in The Russian 
World do not interest me in the least. And, in order to make myself 

144 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
fully understood, I will even add that the lie and the old worn-out 
twist expressed in that thought by The Russian World, I am in­
clined to regard as unintentional and accidental, i.e., that the author 
of the article fully believed his own words and took them for the 
truth with that sublime naivete which, in any other case, would be 
so laudable-and even touching, by reason of its defenselessness. 
However, aside from the fact that a lie mistaken for the truth 
always assumes a most dangerous appearance (even though it be 
printed in The Russian World), one is struck by the thought that 
never before had this lie been revealed in so naked, precise and art­
less a form as in this little article. Verily, make some man pray God 
-he will smash his forehead. Now, it is interesting to analyze this 
lie in this particular guise-exposing it, if possible, to the light­
because one may be waiting long for another instance of candidness 
as unskillful as this one. 
From time immemorial in our pseudo-liberalism, in our news­
paper press it has become a rule to "shield the youth"-from whom ? 
from what ?-Often this remains concealed in the gloom of uncer­
tainty, and, therefore, assumes a most absurd and even comic aspect, 
especially in attacks directed against other periodicals in the sense 
that "we are more liberal, whereas you are upbraiding the youth 
and, consequently, you are more retrograde." 
I may parenthetically remark that in the same article in The 
Russian World there is an accusation directly pointed against The 
Citizen to the effect that in it there are wholesale charges against 
our college youth in Petersburg, Moscow and Kharkov. Even leaving 
aside the fact that the author of the article himself knows perfectly 
well that in The Citizen there is nothing, and never has been any­
thing, akin to wholesale and incessant accusations, I shall ask our 
prosecutor to explain : what does it mean to accuse youth by the 
wholesale ? This I do not understand at all I Of course, this means 
that, for some reason, one dislikes the youth as a whole-and even 
not so much the youth, as our young men of a certain age. What 
twaddle I Who would believe such a charge ?-It is clear that both 
the accusation and the defense were made haphazardly, without giv­
ing the matter much thought. Indeed, is it worth while to deliberate 
upon this : "I have shown that I am liberal ; that I praise the youth ; 
that I am scolding those who do not eulogize them-and this suffices 
as far as subscriptions are concerned, and that's all there is to it I "  
Precisely, "that's all there is to it," since only the bitterest enemy 
of our young people would venture to defend them in this manner 
and to bump into such a strange twist as that into which the naive 
author of the article in The Russian World has bumped (accidentally 
-of this I am now convinced more than ever) .  

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
145 
The real importance of the matter is that this device is the 
invention not only of The Russian World-it is a device common to 
many periodicals of our pseudo-liberal press, and there, perhaps, it 
is being used not quite so naively. Its essence is : first-in wholesale 
eulogies of the youth, in everything and quand-meme, and in coarse 
attacks on all those who occasionally venture to take a critical 
attitude toward the young people. This device is based upon the 
ridiculous assumption that they are still so immature and so fond 
of flattery that they will not understand and will accept everything 
at its face value. And, in truth, we have reached the point where 
quite a few among our young men (we are firmly convinced that 
by no means all of them) actually do grow fond of coarse praise, 
and do seek to be flattered, and are ready to accuse recklessly all 
those who do not applaud everything they do, particularly in certain 
respects. However, here we have as yet a temporary damage : with 
experience and age the views of our youth are likely to change. 
But there is another side to the lie which entails direct and material 
harm. 
Th1s other aspect of the device of "shielding our youth from 
society and from the government" consists of simple denial of the 
fact, at times most impudent and coarse : "There is no fact, there 
never has been, never could have been ; he who says that the fact 
did take place, calumniates our youth and, therefore, is their 
enemy ! "  
Such is the device. I repeat : the bitterest enemy of our young 
people could not have invented anything more injurious to their 
direct interests. This I want to prove by all means. 
By the denial of a fact quand-meme one may acHeve amazing 
results. 
Well, gentlemen, what will you prove and in \\ 1at manner 
are you going to facilitate the problem, if you start asserting (and 
God only knows for what purpose) that the "led-astray" youth­
that is, those who are capable of bring "led astray" (even though 
by Nechaiev)-must necessarily be composed of none but "idle de­
fectives"-those individuals who do not study at ali-in a word, 
good-for-nothings with the worst propensities ?-In fhis way, by 
isolating the matter, l>v withdrawing it from the sphere of those 
who attend to their studies and by focusing it quand-meme on 
none but "idle, defective" individuals, you are thereby condemning 
in advance these unfortunate young mPn and defmitely f····saking 
them : "it's their own guilt-they are u • . .  uly fellows, idlers, who 
would not sit still at the table." 
By isolating the case and by depriving it of the right to be 
examined in conjunction with the generic whole ( rLnd therein con-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
sists the only possible defense of the unfortunate udelusioned" 
ones), you thereby, as it were, not only seal the final verdict against 
them, but you even alienate from them mercy itself, because you 
are directly asserting that their very errors were caused solely by 
their repulsive qua1ities and that these youths, who even are guilty 
of no crime, must arouse contempt and disgust. 
On the other hand, what if it should happen that some case 
were to involve by no means "defectives"-not the unruly ones 
swinging their feet under the table, and not merely idlers-but, on 
the contrary, di1igent, enthusiastic youths precisely attending to 
their studies, even endowed with good, but only misdirected, hearts ? 
(Please grasp the word : misdirected. Where in Europe will you find 
more vacillation in all sorts of tendencies than in Russia in our 
day I )  And now, according to your theory of "idlers and defectives," 
these new "unfortunate" ones would prove three times more guilty : 
"they were well provided ; they completed their education ; they 
worked diligently-they have no justifications ! They are worthy 
of mercy three times less than the idle defectives I "-Such is the 
result directly derived from your theory. 
Please, gentlemen (I am speaking generally and not merely 
to the contributor of The Russian World), you are asserting on 
the strength of "the denial of the fact" that the "Nechaievs" must 
necessarily be idiots-"idiotic fanatics." Well, is this really so ? Is 
it correct ? In this case I am setting aside Nechaiev, and I am 
referring to the "Nechaievs," in the plural. 
Yes, among the N echaievs there may be very gloomy crea­
tures-disconsolate and -distorted ones-with a thirst for intrigue 
of a most complex origin and for power, with a passionate and 
pathologically premature urge to reveal their personalities, but why 
should they be "idiots" ?-On the contrary, even real monsters among 
them may be highly developed, most crafty and even educated people. 
Or you may think, perhaps, that knowledge, "training," little bits 
of school information (picked up even in universities) finally mould 
a youth's soul to the extent that, upon the receipt of his diploma, 
he immediately acquires an irrevocable talisman enabling him once 
and forever to learn the truth, to avoid temptations, passions and 
vices ? Thus, according to you, all these graduating youths will at 
once become something on the order of so many little infallible 
Popes. 
And why do you believe that the Nechaievs must necessarily 
be fanatics ?-Very often they are simply swindlers. "I am a swindler 
and not a socialist"-says one Nechaiev ; true, in my novel The 
Possessed, but, I assure you, he could have said it in real life. There 
are swindlers who are very crafty and who have studied precisely 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
147 
the magnanimous phase of the human, usually youthful, soul so 
as to be able to play on it as on a musical instrument. 
And do you really and truthfully believe that proselytes whom 
some Nechaiev in our midst could manage to recruit are necessarily 
good-for-nothings ? I do not believe it : not all of them. I am an 
old "Nechaievetz" myself ; I also stood on the scaffold, condemned 
to death ; and I assure you that I stood there in the company of 
educated people. That whole group had graduated from the highest 
institutions of learning. Some of them, subsequently, when every­
thing had passed, have distinguished themselves by remarkable 
works in special fields. No, Nechaievtzi are not always recruited 
from among mere idlers who had learned nothing. 
I know that you, no doubt, will say in rebuttal that I am 
not one of the Nechaievtzi at all, and that I am only a "Petra­
shevetz." All right-a Petrashevetz. (Although, in my opinion, this 
is an incorrect name, since a much rarger number-compared with 
those who stood on the scaffold, but quite as we Petrashevtzi-have 
been left int:1ct and unrlisturbed. True, they have never known 
Petrashevsky, but it was not he who was the crux of that long-past 
story. This is merely what I meant to observe.) 
But all right-a Petrashevetz. How do you know that the 
Petrashevtzi couh1 not have become the Nechaievtzi, i.e., to have 
chosen the "Nechaiev" path, would things have turned that way ? 
Of course, in those days this could not even have been imagined­
meaning that things could have taken such a turn. Times were 
altogether different. But permit me to speak about myself only : 
probably I could never have become a Nechaiev, but a Nechaievetz 
-for this I wouldn't vouch, but maybe J could hav'- ' ·ecome one 
. . . in the days of my youth. 
Now, I have started speaking about myself in order to be 
entitled to speak about others. Nevertheless, I sha'l continue to 
speak only about myself, and if I should mention others it will 
be only in a general and impersonal sense, quite abstractly. 
The Petrashevtzi's case is such an old one, belonging to such 
ancient history that, perhaps, it will be of no harm if I should 
remind people of it, particularly in such a slippery and abstract 
sense. 
Among us Petrashevtzis (among both those who stood on the 
scaffold and those who had been left intact-it is the same) there 
were neither "monsters" nor "swindlers.' I do not think anyone 
would contradict this statement of mine. That among us there 
were educated people-this, too, as I have remarked, is probably 
not going to be contradicted. However, undoubtedly, among us 
there were but few who could have managed to struggle against 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
a certain cycle of ideas and conceptions which had a strong grip 
upon youthful society. We were contaminated with the ideas of the 
then prevailing theoretical socialism. In those days political so­
cialism was nonexistent in Europe, and the European ringleaders 
of the socialists even used to reject it. 
Louis Blanc was vainly slapped on his cheeks and pulled by 
his hair (as if on purpose-his was very thick, long black hair I )  
by his colleagues-members of the National Assembly, Rightist 
deputies, from whose hands he was then, on that ill-starred morning 
in May, 1848, torn by Arago ( the astronomer and a member of 
the government-now dead) ,  when the Chamber was invaded by 
a mob of impatient and starving workers. Poor Louis Blanc, for 
a while a member of the provisional government, had in no way 
incited them : he had merely been reading at the Luxembourg Palace 
to these pitiful and hungry people about their "right to work"-to 
people who had lost their jobs, owing to the revolution and the 
republic.-True, since he was still a member of the government, 
his lectures on this subject were awfully tactless and, of course, 
ridiculous. 
Considerant's journal, as well as Proudhon's articles and 
pamphlets, were seeking intel' alia to propagate a·mong these same 
starving and penniless workers profound disgust for the right of 
hereditary property. Unquestionably, from all this (i.e., the im­
patience of hungry people inflamed with theories of future felicity) 
subsequently there arose political socialism, the substance of which, 
notwithstanding all aims proclaimed by it, thus far, consists of the 
desire for universal robbery of all property-owners by the destitute 
classes, and thereafter "be that as it may." (Since, properly speak­
ing, so far nothing has been decided as to how future society is 
going to be shaped-and up to date such is the whole formula of 
political socialism. )  
But at that time the affair was conceived i n  a most rosy and 
paradisiacally moral light. Verily, socialism in its embryo used tC' 
be compared by some of its ringleaders with Christianity and was 
regarded as a mere corrective to, and improvement of, the latter, in 
conformity with the tendencies of the age and civilization. All these 
new ideas of those days carried to us, in Petersburg, a great appeal ; 
they seemed holy in the highest degree and moral, and-most im­
portant of all-cos!>1opolitan, the future law of all mankind in its 
totality. Even long before the Paris revolution of '48 we fell under 
the fascinating influence of these ideas. Already in '46•! had been 
initiated by Bielinsky into the whole truth of that future "re­
generated world" and into the whole holiness of the forthcoming 
communistic society. All these convictions about the immorality 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
149 
of the very foundations (Christian) of modern society, the im­
morality of religion, family, right of property ; all these ideas about 
the elimination of nationalities in the name of universal brother­
hood of men, ٕbout the contempt for one's native country, as an 
obstacle to universal progress, and so on, and so forth-all these 
constituted such influences as we were un:tble to overcome and 
which, contrarywise, swayed our hearts anJ minds in the name 
of some magnanimity. At any rate, the theme seemed lofty and 
far above the level of the then prevailing conceptions, and precisely 
this was tempting. 
Those among us-that is, not only the Petrashevtzi, but gen­
erally all contaminated in those days, but who later emphatically 
renounced this chimerical frenzy, all this gloom and horror which 
is being prepared for humankind under the guise of regeneration 
and resurrection-those among us were then ignorant of the causes 
of their malady and, therefore, they were still unable to struggle 
against it. And so, why do you think that even murder a la Nechaiev 
would hٖvt! ٗtopped-of ("Ourse, not all, but at least, some of us­
in those fervid times, in the midst of doctrines fascinating one's 
soul and the terrible European events which, forgetting altogether 
our fatherland, we have been watching with feverish tension ? 
Unquestionably, the monstrous and disgusting Moscow murder 
of Ivanov was represented by the murderet Nechaiev to his victims 
-the "Nechaievtzi"-as a political affair, useful to the future "uni­
versal and great cause." Otherwise, it is impossible to understand 
how several youths (whoever they may have been) could agree to 
commit such a saturnine crime. 
And in my novel Tile Possessed I m;de the att-:.::·,·>t to depict 
the manifold and heterogeneous motives which may ࢲ "Jmpt even 
the purest of heart and the most naive people to take part in the 
perpetration of so monstrous a villainy. The horro- lies precisely 
in the fact that in our midst the filthiest and most villainous act 
may be committed by one who is not a villain at ali i This, however, 
happens not only in our midst but throughout the world ; it has 
been so from time immemorial, during transitional epochs, at times 
of violent commotion in people's lives-doubts, negations, scepticism 
and vacillation regardi'1g the fundamental social convictions. But 
in our midst this is more possible than anywhere else, and precisely 
in our day · this is the most pathological and saddest trait of our 
present tim-the possibility of consider: "' oneself not as .. villain, 
and sometimes almost not being one, wiule perpetrating a patent 
and incontestable villainy-therein is our present-day calamity I 
By what -in particular is our youth protected in comparison 
with other ages which makes you, gentlemen-defenders of youth, 

150 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
unhesitatingly demand from them-just as son as they have studied 
diilgently and learned-such firmness and maturity of convictions 
as have not been possesed by their fathers and which nowadays 
are scarcer than ever. Our young men belonging to the educated 
clases, brought up in the fold of their families where, as a rule, 
one encounters dissatisfaction, impatience, coarse ignorance (despite 
the fact that these are educated classes) ,  and in which, almost 
everywhere, for genuine education is substituted impudent negation 
of other people's opinions ; where material motives prevail over the 
loftiest idea ; where children are brought up without foundation, 
without natural truth, with disrespect for, and indifference to, their 
native land and with a scoffing contempt for the people, which has 
been spreading so fast, particularly in recent times-is it from here, 
from this wellspring, that our young men will draw the truth and 
faultlessness of their convictions during the initial stage of their 
lives ? 
Herein is the root of evil : in tradition ; in the succession of 
ideas ; in the century-old national self-suppression of any inde­
pendence of thought ; in the conception of the rank of a European 
subject to the express condition of disrespect for one's self as a 
Russian I 
But, probably, you will give no credence to these all too 
general statements. "Education"-you keep repeating-"diligence" ; 
"idle defectives"-you keep saying. Please note, gentlemen, that all 
the9e high European teachers, our light and our hope-all those 
Mills, Darwins and Strausses-sometimes consider the moral ob­
ligations of modern mah in a most astonishing manner. And yet 
these are by no means sluggards who have learned nothing, nor 
unruly fellows swinging their feet under the table. 
You will start laughing and you will ask : why did it occur to 
you to start talking precisely about these names ?-For the reason 
that it is even difficult to conceive-speaking of our intelligent, 
enthusiastic and studious youth-that these names, for instance, 
would escape them during the initial stages of their lives. Is it pos­
sible to conceive that a Russian youth would remain indifferent 
to the influence of these and similar leaders of European progressive 
thought, and especially to the Russian aspect of their doctrines ?­
This is a funny expression : "Russian aspect of their doctrines" ; 
let people excuse i•; I am using it solely because this Russian 
aspect does actually exist in these doctrines. It consists of those 
inferences from these doctrines which, in the form of unshakable 
axioms, are drawn only in Russia, whereas in Europe, it is said, 
the possibility of such deductions is not even being suspected. 
Perhaps I may be told that these gentlemen do not in any 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
ISI 
manner teach villainy ; that if Strauss, for example, hates Christ 
and made it the business of his whole life to spit upon and scoff 
at Christianity, he nevertheless adores humankind as a whole, and 
his teaching is as lofty and as noble as it can be. It is very possible 
that all this is true, and that the aims of all modern leaders of 
European progressive thought are philanthropic and grand. Still I 
firmly believe that if all these modern, sublime teachers be given 
ample opportunity to destroy the old society and to build it up 
anew, there would result such a darkness, such chaos, something 
so coarse, so blind, so inhuman, that the entire edifice would crumble 
away to the accompaniment of the maledictions of mankind, even 
before it would finally have been constructed. The human mind, 
once having rejected Christ, may attain extraordinary results. This 
is an axiom. Europe, in the persons of her highest intellectual 
representatives, renounces Christ, while we, as is known, are ob­
ligated to imitate Europe. 
There are historical moments in the life of men when flagrant, 
impudent യl"rl the coarsest villainy may be deemed a grandeur of 
the soul which breaks out of its fetters only through the noble 
courage of mankind. Are examples really needed-are there not 
thousands, tens and hundreds of thousands of examples ? . . . Of 
course, the theme is a complex and boundless one ; it is very dif­
ficult to touch upon it in a feuilleton art:cle ; nevertheless, in the 
long run, my conjecture may also be entertained : that even an 
honest and naive boy, even one who had studied diligently, may, 
at times, turn out a Nechaievetz . . . .  Of course, I repeat, if he 
should run into a Nechaiev ; this, naturally, sine qua non. 
We, Petrashevtzis, stood on the scaffold and Ji-.t٘ned to our 
verdict without the slightest repentance. lt stands h 
·eason that 
I cannot testify for all of us, yet I believe that I sr1all not err 
if I state that then, that minute, the majority of us, if not every 
single one, would have considered it an ignominy to renounce his 
convictions. This is an old story and, for this reason, perhaps, the 
question may be asked : is it possible that obstinacy and non­
repentance were merely the result of the ill nature of defectives 
and unruly persons ? 
No, we were not unruly and, perhaps, we were even not bad 
young men. The verdict of capital punishment, by facing a firing 
squad, preliminarily read to all of us, had been read by no means 
jestingly : almost all the condemned we .. ' convinced that .iമ would 
be carried out, and they endured at least len dreadful, boundlessly 
horrible minutes awaiting death. During these last minutes several 
among us-this I know positively-instinctively wrapped ourselves 
deep in our thoughts and momentarily glanced over our whole, 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
still so youthful, lives, even perhaps repenting some of our bad 
deeds (those which in every man lie secretly buried in his con­
science) .  But the deed for which we were convicted ; those ideas 
and conceptions which ruled our spirit, were regarded by us not 
only as not requiring repentance but even as something purifying­
as martyrdom, for which we would be forgiven much I And thus 
it has lasted long. Not the years of exile-not suffering-have sub­
dued us. On the contrary, nothing has subdued us, and our con­
victions merely tended to support our spirit by the realization of 
a fulfilled duty. No, something different has changed our outlook, 
our convictions and our hearts (of course, I venture to speak only 
of those among us whose changed convictions have become known 
and who, in one way or another, have themselves attested to them). 
This something different was the direct contact with the people, the 
brotherly merger with them in a common misfortune, the realization 
of the fact that one has become even as they, that one has been made 
equal to them, and even to their lowest stratum. 
I repeat : this did not occur so quickly, but gradually-and 
after a long, long time. Not pride, not self-love, prevented confes­
sion. And yet I was, perhaps, one of those (again, I am speaking 
only about myself) to whom the return to the popular root, to the 
understanding of the Russian soul, to the recognition of the people's 
spirit, has been made particularly easy. I descended from a pious 
Russian family. As far as I can remember myself, I recall my 
parents' affection for me. We, in our family, have known the Gospel 
almost ever since our earliest childhood. I was only ten when I 
already knew virtually all the principal episodes in Russian history 
-from Karamzin whom, in the evenings, father used to read aloud 
to us. Every visit to the Kremlin and the Moscow cathedrals was, 
to me, something solemn. Others may not have had recollections 
such as I had. Very often I stop to think, and I am now asking 
myself : what kind of impressions do our contemporaneous youth 
mostly derive from their childhood ? And now, even if I, who natu­
rally could not have haughtily and indifferently passed by that 
new and fatal environment into which misfortune had cast me ; if 
I, who could not have taken a superficial and haughty attitude 
toward the manifestation of the spirit of the people ; if 1-1 say­
had so much difficulty in finally convincing myself of the deceit 
and falsehood of p ·actically everything which hitherto we used to 
regard as light and truth, what must others have experienced-those 
who had severed more radically their bonds with the people, those 
in whom the rupture was·a successional and hereditary one, acquired 
from their fathers and grandfathers ? 
It is very difficult for me to tell the story of the regeneration 

THE DIARY OJ:o, A WRITER 
ISJ 
of my convictions, all the more so as, perhaps, it is not so interesting 
and somehow it does not fit a feuilleton article . . . .  
Gentlemen-defenders of our youth, please consider the milieu, 
the society in which they are growing up, and ask yourselves : is 
there anything in our day that is less protected against certain 
influences? 
First, please pose this question : if the fathers themselves of 
these youths are not better, not firmer and not healthier in their 
convictions ; if, from their earliest childhood these children have 
encountered in their families nothing but mere cynicism, haughty 
and indifferent (mostly) negation ; if the word "fatherland" has 
been uttered in their presence not otherwise than with a scoffing 
expression ; if for the cause of Russia all those who have been 
bringing them up have maintained contempt or indifference ; if the 
most magnanimous among the fathers and the educators have kept 
talking about "cosmopolitan" ideas ; if, even in their childhood, 
their nurses have been dismissed because, over their cradles, they­
those nurseo:-said the prayer "Mother of God"-tell me : what may 
one demand from these children, and is it humane, when defending 
them, if defense be needed, to get off by a mere negation of the fact ? 
Recently in the newspapers I came across the following en­
treftlet : 
"The Kama-l' olga Gazette reports th"lt a few days ago three 
high-school pupils of the Second Kazan High School, in their third 
year, were charged with some crime connected with their contem­
plated flight to America." (St. Petersburg Messenger, November 13.) 
Twenty years ago the news of high-school boys of the third 
grade fleeing to America would have seemed an absurf.!ty. But the 
fact itself that in our day this does not ࢱtern to me a' 
ud, but a 
thing which I comprehend-this fact in itself appears to me its 
justification. 
Justification I Good Lord, is it possible to say so ? 
I know that these are not the first schoo:boys to embark upon 
such a venture ; that, before them, others have fled and those be­
cause their elder brothers and their fathers had fled. Do you recall 
Kelsiev's story about a poor army officer who fled r:-: foot, via 
Tomeo and Stockholm . to Hertzen in London, where the latter 
gave him employment as a compositor in his printing plant ? 
Do you recall Hertzen's own story about that cadet who pro­
ceeded I believe to the Philippine Islandٙ for the purpose cT estab­
lishing' a commne bequeathing 2o,ooo h .. nc5 for the future emi­
grants ?-And yet ah these are already ancient history I Since then, 
old people fathers brothers maidens, guard-officers . . . have fled 
I 
I 
I 
" 
• 
f 
to America to have a taste of "free labor 
m a rei! country .
.
.
• 

154 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1873 
Perhaps only pupils of theological seminaries were not included 
among these fugitives. Should we be blaming such little children 
-these three high-school boys-if they have mastered with their 
weak little heads the grand ideas about "free labor in a free coun­
try" and the commune and the inter-European man ; should we 
blame them if all this rubbish is conceived by them as religion, 
while absenteeism and treason to the fatherland is conceived as 
a virtue? And if one should be blaming them-to what extent ?­
That's the question. 
In support of his idea that in our midst only idlers and good­
for-nothing defectives participate in "such follies," the author of 
the article in The Russian World quotes the well-known and en­
couraging words of the Minister of Public Education, recently 
spoken by him in Kiev, to the effect that as a result of the inspec­
tion of educational institutions in seven school districts, he had 
been convinced that "in recent years the youth has adopted an 
infinitely more serious attitude toward the problem of learning and 
has been studying far more diligently." 
Of course, these are encouraging words in which, perhaps, our 
sole hope resides. In the educational reform of the present reign­
lies almost all our future, and this we know. However, if I cor­
rectly recall, the Minister of Education himself stated in that same 
speech of his that the results of the reform would have to be 
awaited for a long time .. We have always believed that our youth 
is quite capable of adopting a more serious attitude towards learn­
ing. Still, thus far, we have been enveloped in such a fog of false 
ideas ; so many mirage& and prejudices surround us and our youth, 
while our social life, the life of the fathers and mothers of that 
youth, is assuming ever so strange an aspect that, willy-nilly, one 
begins to look for all sorts of means to overcome the perplexity. 
One of such means is for us to be less insensible, not to be ashamed 
if, even on!y occasionally, someone should call us a citizen, and 
sometimes to speak the truth, even though to your mind it be not 
liberal enough. 
The Citizen, 1873, No. so. 

1
8 7 6 


January 
C HAPTER l 
1 
In lieu of a preface on the Great and Littk Bears, on tht 
prayer of tht great Goethe and, generally, on bad habits . 
. . . KHLESTAKOV, at least, lied-lied at the bailiff's house 
-even so, he was a bit afraid that presently he might be thrown 
out of the drawing room. Modern Khlestakovs are afraid of nothing 
and they lie with a perfect peace of mind. 
Nowadays all people have perfect peace of mind : they are 
calm and, perhaps, even happy. It is doubtful if anyone renders 
an account to oneself ; everybody is acting "simply," and this al­
ready is complete happiness. Nowadays, much as heretofore, every­
body is corroded with egoism, but heretofore egoisl!" 'Jsed to enter 
timidly, feverishly looking around, staring at faces. 
1id I enter 
as I should have ? Did I speak as I should have ?"-But nowadays 
everyone, entering anywhere, is convinced from the !'tart that every­
thing belongs to him alone. And, if not to him, he does not even 
grow angry, put instantly settles the problem. Haven't you heard 
about little epistles such as : 
"Dear papa, I am twenty-three, and as yet I have accom­
plished nothing ; being convinced that nothing will come of me, I 
have decided to commit suicide . . . .  
" 
And he shoots himself. Still, here at least something may be 
comprehended : "What, if not pride, is the point of livinr ?" But 
another fellow will look around, will ro. 
:1 awhile and will silently 
shoot himself, solely because he has no mor.ey to hire a mistres. 
This is already utter swinishness. 
It is being maintained in the press that theirs is a case of 
too much thinking. "He thinks and thinks and then he emerges 
1 57 

ISS 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r876 
exactly at the contemplated spot." On the contrary, I am convinced 
that he does not think at all ; that he is wholly incapable of form­
ing a judgment ; that he is savagely undeveloped, and if he should 
long for anything, he could be longing not consciously but in an 
animal-like fashion-simply perfect swinishness-and there is noth­
ing liberal about it. 
And in this connection-not a single Hamletian question : 
But that the dread of something after death . . .  
And in this there is much that is strange. Is it possible that 
it is thoughtlessness in Russian nature ?-I say : thoughtlessness, and 
not absurdity. All right : do not believe, but at least give thought. 
In our felo-de-se there is even no shadow of doubt, no shadow of 
suspicion that he is called "I" and that he is an immortal creature. 
It seems as if he had even never heard anything about this. And 
yet neither is he an atheist. Do recall former atheists : having lost 
faith in one thing they would promptly start passionately believing 
something else. Do recall the fervent faith of Diderot, Voltaire . 
. . . In our case-a perfect tabula rasa, and where does Voltaire 
come in here ?-Simply, there's no money to hire a mistress ; noth­
ing more. 
The self-destroyer Werther, when committing suicide, in the 
last lines left by him, expresses regret that he would nevermore 
behold "the beautiful constellation of the Great Bear" and he bids 
it farewell. Oh, how was the then still youthful Goethe revealed in 
this little trait I Why were these constellations so dear to young 
Werther ?-Because, whenever contemplating them, he realized that 
he was by no means an atom and a nonentity compared with them ; 
that all these numberless mysterious, divine miracles were in no 
sense higher than his thought and consciousness ; not higher than 
the ideal of beauty confined in his soul, and, therefore, they were 
equal to him and made him akin to the infinity of being . . . .  And 
for the happiness to perceive this great thought which reveals to 
him who he is, he is indebted exclusively to his human image. 
"Great Spirit, I thank Thee for the human image bestowed 
on me by Thee." 
Such must have been the lifelong prayer of the great Goethe. 
In our midst this image bestowed upon man is being smashed quite 
simply and with no German tricks, while no one would think of 
bidding farewell not only to the Great, but even to the Little, Bear, 
and even if one should think of it, he would not do it : he would 
feel too much ashamed . .  
What in the world did you start talking about ?-an astonished 
reader will ask me. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
159 
I was about to write a preface, since it would be violating 
the rule to have no preface at all. 
In this case you had better explain your orientation, your 
convictions. Explain what kind of a man you are and how you did 
venture to announce A Writer's Diary. 
This, however, is very difficult, and I can see that I am not 
an expert in writing introductions. A preface is, perhaps, as difficult 
to pen as a Jetter. As for liberalism (instead of the word "orienta­
tion," I shall simply use the term "liberalism,") as regards liberalism, 
the Stranger, well known to everybody, in one of his recent feuiiJe­
tons-when speaking about the way in which our press has greeted 
the new 1876th year, inter alia-remarked, not without sarcasm, 
that everything came off fairly liberally. I am glad that in this 
connection he displayed sarcasm. Verily, our liberalism, of late, 
has been converted everywhere into a profession or into a bad 
habit. That is, in itself this wouldn't be a bad habit at all, but 
among us it has somehow turned out to be one. And it is even 
strange : tJtar liberalism, ;t would seem, belongs to the category of 
pacified liberalisms-pacified and pacific-which, to my way of 
thinking, is bad, since quietism, it would seem, is least capable of 
getting along with liberalism. And yet, despite such a quietude, 
everywhere we see unmistakable signs to the effect that in our 
society the conception of what is, and what JS not, liberal is gradually 
disappearing altogether, and in this respect we begin to be very 
much confused. There are even examples of utter confusion. 
In brief, our liberals, instead of becoming freer, have bound 
themselves with liberalism as with ropes and, therefore, I, too, 
taking advantage of this curious situation shall keep . :Jent on the 
details of my liberalism. But, generally speaking, I m1, .t say that 
. I consider myself more liberal than the rest, if only because I 
have no desire whatever to be pacified. And now, £"tough of this. 
And as regards the question of what kind of a man I am, I may 
say. about myself : "le suis un homme heureux qui n'a pas l'air 
content,"-meaning in Russian : "I am a happy man but one dis­
pleased with something." 
With this I am bringinٚ my preface to a close. Besides, I 
wrote it only for the ٛ!ke of form. 
2 
THE FuTURE NovEL. AGAIN AN "AccmENTAL FAMILY" 
At the artists' club there was a Christmas tree and a chil­
dren's dancing party, and I went to see the children. Even formerly, 

r6o 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
I always used to observe children, but now I am especially observ­
ing them. Long ago I set myself the ideal of writing a novel about 
contemporaneous Russian children and, of course, about their pres­
ent-day fathers, in their actual mutual interrelation. The poem is 
ready ; it was conceived before anything else-and so it must always 
be in the case of a novelist. I shall take fathers and children, if 
possible, from all strata of society and I shall trace the children 
from their earliest childhood. 
When some eighteen months ago Nikolai Alexeevich Nekrasov 
asked me to write a novel for The Domestic Records, I was 
about to start on my Fathers and Sons, but, thank God, I refrained 
from doing so ; I was not ready. In the meantime I have written 
merely A Raw Youth-this first proof of my thought. But there the 
child has already outlived his childhood and appears merely as an 
unready man, timidly and yet boldly seeking to take the first steps 
on the path of his life. I took an innocent soul, but one already 
polluted with the dreadful possibility of depravity, early hate, be­
cause of his nothingness and "accidentalness," and that breadth 
with which a still chaste soul already admits vice to his thoughts, 
fondles it in his still bashful but already daring and tempestuous 
visions-all this left solely to his own forces, his own reasoning 
and, perhaps, in truth, to the will of God. They are all cast-offs 
of society, "accidental" members of "accidental" families. 
Everybody has recently read in the papers about the murder 
of the common woman Perova and the suicide of her murderer. 
She had cohabited with him ; he was a worker in a printing plant, 
but he had lost his j6b. She rented an apartment and took in 
roomers. Discord ensued. Perova asked him to leave her. The mur­
derer's character was on the ultra-modern pattern : "if it's denied 
to me, no one shall have it." He gave her his word that he would 
"leave her," and then barbarously butchered her at night, delib­
erately and with premeditation, and after that he cut his own 
throat. Perova left two children, boys of twelve and nine-illicitly 
begotten by her, not by the murderer, however, but before she had 
become acquainted with him. She loved them. They had witnessed 
how, in the evening, during a terrible scene, he tortured her with 
reproaches till she fainted ; they asked her not to go to his room, 
but she did go. 
Tile Voice appeals to the public for help for the "unfortunate 
orphans," of whom the elder attended the Fifth High School, while 
the other one was still living at home. Here, again, is an "accidental 
family"-again, children with gloomy impressions in their adolescent 
souls. The dark picture will remain there forever, and it may patho­
logically cripple their youthful pride from those days-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
When all impressions of existence 
To us are still so strangely new. 
I6I 
And, hence, problems beyond one's powers : the early suffering 
of vanity ; the blush of false shame for the past ; and the dull, in­
wardly concealed hatred of people-and th1.1s it may persist during 
one's whole life. Let God bless the future of these innocent children, 
and let them continue to love throughout their whole lives their 
poor mother, without reproach and without shame for their love. 
But help them we must by all means. In this respect our society 
is responsive and noble. Is it conceivable that they ought to be 
leaving high school once they have started there ? The elder one, 
it is rumored, is not going to leave it, and his fate seems to have 
been assured. But the younger one ? Is it possible that people will 
collect seventy or a hundred rubles, and will then forget all about 
them ? And thanks are due to The Voice for reminding us about 
these unfortunate ones. 
3 
CHRISTMAS TREE AT THE ARTISTS' CLUB. REASONING CHIL­
DREN AND RELIEVED CHILDREN. "GLUTTONous YouTH." 
"YEs-GIRLs . ' '  JosTLING RAw Youi HS . THE HuRRYING 
:Moscow CAPTAIN. 
Naturally, I am not going to depict in detail the Christmas­
tree party and the dance at the Artists' Club ; all this has long 
ago been described and I myself have re:J.d about i'. •,·ith pleasure 
in other feuilletons. I will merely say that prior to th 
I had been 
nowhere for quite a long time-at no meeting-and I have long led 
a solitary life. 
First, the children danced-all of them in charming dresses. 
It is curious to trace how the most complete conceptions are being 
quite imperceptibly inoculated into the child who, being still in­
capable of connecting two thoughts, sometimes grasps the deepest 
phenomena of life. A learned German once stated that. every child, 
upon completing the f1rst three years of his life, has already ac­
quired a full third of the ideas and knowledge with which, as an 
elder, he will be laid in his grave. 
Here there were even six-year-oiL .-hildren, but I know for 
sure that they understood perfectly why and for what purpose they 
had been brought here all dressed up in such expensive little dresses, 
while at home thev are accustomed to wear slovenly clothes (with 
the present-day m
'
eans of the middle class, unfailingly they must 

162 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
be wearing slovenly clothes). Even more : they certainly compre­
hended that this must be precisely so-that is, in no way a deviation 
from, but a normal law of, nature. Of course, they could not express 
this in words, but inwardly they knew-and yet this is an extremely 
complicated thought. 
Among the children I liked most the smallest ones : these are 
very charming and unrestrained. Those a little older also are un­
restrained, but with a certain boldness. It stands to reason that the 
most unrestrained and cheerful are those who in the future will 
belong to mediocrity and be without talent : this is a general rule ; 
mediocrity is always unrestrained, be it among children or among 
parents. More gifted and segregated children are always more re­
served, and if they are joyous, it is invariably with a knack at 
leadership and bossing. 
It is also a pity that nowadays everything is being made easy 
for children, not merely study, acquisition of all knowledge, but 
even plays and toys. Just as soon as a child begins to lisp its first 
words, forthwith people begin to relieve it. At present pedagogy is 
altogether dedicated to the task of relieving. At times easement 
does not signify progress but, on the contrary, constitutes a devia­
tion. Two or three thoughts, two or three impressions, deeply felt 
in childhood as a result of one's own effort (or, if you please, also 
as a result of suffering) ,  will enable a child to penetrate life much 
more deeply than the easiest school which frequently produces some­
thing that is neither this nor that, neither good nor bad-something 
that even in depravity is not depraved, and in virtue not virtuous. 
Have oysters come ?-They have ! Oh, grand ! 
Youth gluttonous is quick at hand 
To swallow them . 
. . 
Now this "gluttonous youth" (the only one bad verse in Push­
kin because it is written with no irony but almost with praise)­
now this gluttonous youth must be the product of something. Nasty 
and undesirable youth ; and I am convinced that too easy education 
is very instrumental in its production, while products of this kind 
we have galore I 
Little girls somehow are more comprehensible than boys. Why 
is it that girls, almost up to the time of full age (but not later) 
are always more developed, or seem to be more developed, than 
boys of the same age ? Girls are particularly comprehensible in the 
dance : one promptly discerns in some of them a future "yes-girl" 
who will never succeed in getting married, notwithstanding all her 
longing for it. I call "yes-girls" those maidens who almost up to 
the age of thirty answer one : "yes" and "no." However, there are 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
others who-it may be seen even now-will soon marry, just as soon 
as they make up their minds. 
It is quite cynical, in my opinion, to dress a virtually grownup 
girl in a childish frock : it is really bad. When, at midnight, the 
children's ball came to an end and parents began to dance, some 
of these girls in short dresses and with bare kٜs, stayed on-dancing 
with the grownups. 
However, I was quite pleased with everything, and if only 
raw youths had not pushed around, everything would have been 
fully satisfactory. In fact, adults were elegantly, and in a holiday­
like manner, polite, but the youngsters in their teens (not children, 
but youngsters-future young men in all sorts of uniforms, who 
were quite numerous) kept jostling intolerably without apologizing 
and passing by as if fully entitled to this kind of behavior. I was 
shoved some fifty times ; maybe they are being taught to do so 
in order to develop in them a sense of unrestraint. Nevertheless, 
after long want of habit, everything pleased me despite suffocating 
heat, electrir "suns," and the frantic, commander's cries of the 
dance master. 
The other day I picked up a copy of The Petersburg Gazette, 
and there I read a correspondence from Moscow about holiday 
scandals at the nobility club, in the artistic circle, at a masquerade, 
etc. If one should helieve the correspondent (who, when reporting 
vice, may have deliberately kept silent on virtue) ,  our society never 
has been closer to scandal than at present. And strangely : why is 
it that all my life, ever since childhood, the moment I would find 
myself at a large holiday assembly of Russian people, I would at 
once begin to feel that they were merely pretending, ar:i suddenly 
they would get up and start a row just i1::. dt home. T· 
ͱ thought 
is a nonsensical and fantastic one-and how ashamed .i. felt of 
myself, how I reproached myself for this thought-even in child­
hood ! -A thought that will not stand the test of even the mildest 
criticism. Oh, of course, storekeepers and capt.-.ins about whom our 
truthful correspondent (I fully believe him) tells his story-these 
have been known in days gone by ; they have always existed-they 
are an undying type ; even so, they used to be more afrai::! and they 
used to conceal their feelings ; at present, however, at intervals, 
such a fellow will suddenly burst forth to the very foreground, and 
he seems convinced that this is his newly acquired right. 
And it cannot be denied that in the last twenty years 
·· very 
great number of Russians suddenly, for so ..• e unknown reason, be­
gan to imagine that they have received full right to infamy ; that 
nowadays this is quite all right, and that they will be praised there­
for, instead of being thrown out. On the other hand, I also under-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
stand that it is very pleasing (oh, to quite a few, quite a few I )  to 
stand up in the midst of a gathering-with ladies, cavaliers and 
even authorities all around, where everybody is so sweet-tongued, 
so polite and so equal one to another, as if it were really in Europe 
-to stand up amidst those Europeans and to bawl in the purest 
national dialect, to deliver a cuff to somebody, to pour forth some 
filth to a maiden and, generally, to perform some obscenity right 
there in the hall : "See, this is to reward you for the two centuries 
of European ism ; and I am just as they, just as we all used to be ;  
we disappeared nowhither." This is pleasing. But even so, the 
savage will be mistaken : he is not going to be recognized and he 
will be ejected. Who will eject him ?-The police force ?-No, not 
in the least the police force, but, precisely, those same savages as 
he-that savage I Herein is the force. I will explain it. 
Do you know to whom this European and holiday appearance 
of Russian society, convening in a European fashion, is most pleas­
ing and precious ?-Precisely to the Skvoznik-Dmukhanovskis, the 
Tchitchikovs and, perhaps, even to Derjimorda, that is, to those 
very people who at home, in their private lives, are nationalistic 
in the highest degree. Oh, they have gatherings and dances of their 
own, there at their homes ; but they do not appreciate and respect 
them ; they do, however, treasure the governor's ball, the ball of 
the beau monde, about which they have heard from Khlestakov. 
And why ?-Exactly because they themselves do not resemble good 
society. This is the reason why European forms are dear to them, 
although they are firmly aware of the fact that they will return 
home from a European ·hall the same fistfighters as before ; yet they 
are consoled because they had paid homage to virtue even though 
in an ideal. Why, they know well that all this is a mirage ; still, 
having attended the ball, they ascertained the fact that the mirage 
continues to persist ; it persists through something, through some 
invisible but extraordinary force, and they did not have the nerve 
to come forward and plant themselves in the middle of the gather­
ing and to bawl something in a national dialect. And the thought 
that they have not been, and henceforth will not be, permitted to 
do so, is immensely pleasing to them. 
You will not believe how strongly a barbarian may become 
fond of Europe : thereby he participates, as it were, in the cult. No 
doubt, oftentimes, he is unable to determine of what this cult con­
sists. Khlestakov, for example, maintained that this cult was ex­
pressed in a hundred-ruble watermelon which was served at the 
balls of the beau mond1. Perhaps Skvoznik-Dmukhanovsky to the 
end clung to the belief in the watermelon, notwithstanding the fact 
that eventually he did learn who Khlestakov was and did despise 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
x6s 
him ; and yet the bailiff is glad to pay homage to virtue even in 
the form. of a. watermelon. And this is by no means hypocrisy, but 
perfect smcenty ; more so-a necessity. Besides, here hypocrisy fits 
the situation well, since what is hypocrisy ?-It is a ransom which 
vice is compelled to pay to virtue-which is an extremely comfort­
ing thought to him who wishes to remain v :dous in practice but 
at the same time not to sever, in his soul at lc.ast, with virtue. Oh, 
vice is very fond of paying ransom to virtue, and this is good : 
temporarily we should be satisfied with even that much-isn't this 
so ?-And, therefore, the captain who started bawling in the middle 
of the hall continues to be a mere exception and a hurrying man 
-1 mean, temporarily at least ; still even "temporarily" is consoling 
in our unsteady times. 
Thus the ball is decidely a conservative affair in the best 
sense of the term and, when I say so, I am not joking at all. 
4 
THE GoLDEN AcE IN THE PocKET 
And yet I also felt weary-that is, not weary but a little 
annoyed. The children's dancing party came to an end, and the 
father's ball began.-Oh, Lord, what inc(;mpetence !-Everybody 
wearing new clothes, and no one knows how to wear them ; every­
body makes merry and no one is merry ; everybody is ambitious 
and no one knows how to make the most of himself ; everybody 
is envious ; everybody keeps silent and everybody shuns everyone 
else. They even do not know how to dance. Look at tl,;" whirling, 
very short officer (such a brutishly whirling, very short 
'ficer one 
is sure to encounter at every middle-class ball) .  His whule dance, 
his whole technique boils down to this : almost brutisltly, as if by 
saccades, he turns his lady-partner around, and he is capable of 
turning her thirty or forty times in succession, and he feels proud 
of it. But what is there graceful about it ! A dance is almost an 
avowal of love (do recall the minuet ! ), whereas he fights. And the 
most fantastic, the wildest, thought occurred to me : "\Vi1at if"-I 
started conjecturing-"all these nice and respectable guests should 
make up their minds to become sincere and naive, even for a mo­
ment ? What would become of this stuffy hall ? What if each one 
of them should suddenly learn the whole f ··rf't ? What if ea .. ࢰ. one 
of them should suddenly learn how much straightforwardness, 
honesty, most !':incere, heartfelt cheerfulness, purity, magnanimous 
feelings, good wiii, intellect-nay, what's intellect ?-wit, mٝst refined 
and communicative wit, there is in him-in each om·, decidedly-in 

166 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
each one of them I Yes, gentlemen, in each one of you all these 
are present and contained, and not one-even not one-of you knows 
anything about it I Oh, dear guests, I swear that each one of you 
-whether lady or gentleman-is cleverer than Voltaire, more sen­
sitive than Rousseau, infinitely more seductive than Alcibiades, 
Don Juan, the Lucreces, the Juliets and the Beatrices I You do 
not believe that you are so beautiful ?-But I give you my word 
of honor that in neither Shakespeare nor Schiller, nor in Homer, 
if they all be put together, could there be found anything more 
charming than could be found among you this very moment in 
this very ballroom. What is Shakespeare ! -Here we should behold 
such things as are not dreamed of by our sages. 
But the trouble is that you do not know yourselves, how 
beautiful you are I Do you know that each one of you, if only 
he would so desire, could at once make everybody in this hall happy 
and captivate everybody ? And this power is within each one of 
you, but it is so deeply hidden that long ago it began to appear 
incredible. And is it really possible that the golden age exists only 
on porcelain cups ? 
Don't frown, your excellency, at t'he words golden age : I give 
my word of honor that you will not be compelled to wear golden 
age attire with a fig leaf ; your whole general's uniform will be left 
with you. I assure you that even people with the rank of a general 
may be admitted to the golden age. Why, you have only to try 
it, your excellency, right now ; you are highest in rank, the initiative 
is yours-and you will see for yourself what a, so to speak, Piron 
wit you could reveal quite unexpectedly to yourself. You laugh ; 
this seems incredible to you ? I am glad I made you laugh, and yet 
all the things I have just been exclaiming are not a paradox but 
a perfect truth. . . . Your trouble is that, to you, they seem in­
credible. 
CHAPTER II 
1 
A Boy with his Hand Stretched out for Alms 
CHILDREN ARE strange people ; I dream about them-they 
appear in my visions. Right along, before Christmas, and on the 
very day of Christmas Eve, I have been meeting on a street, at 
a certain corner, an urchin-certainly not older than seven. In a 
terrible frost be was clad almost in summer clothes, but he had 
around his neck some kind of old rags, which would mean that 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
somebody bad been equipping him before sending him out on his 
mission. He was wandering "with a little hand" ; this is a technical 
expression meaning-begging alms ; it has been invented by the 
boys themselves. 
There are a multitude of children such as this one ; you keep 
meeting them along your way ; they howl .>omething learned by 
heart, but this one did not howl ; he was utttt ing words innocently 
somehow, and he looked into my eyes unwontedly and confidently ; 
thus, he was only beginning his profession. In answer to my in­
quiries, he told me that he had an ailing sister who was out of 
a job ; this may have been true, but later I learned that there are 
a whole lot of such urchins ; they are being sent out "with a little 
hand" even during the severest frost, and if they fail to collect 
anything a beating is unfailingly awaiting them. 
Having collected a few kopecks, the boy, with red, numb 
hands, returns to some basement where a gang of peddlers are 
fuddling-those very fellows who "having quit their work on a 
Sunday eve, rPturn to wnrk not before evening on Wednesday." 
There, in those basements, the hungry, beaten wives of these fel­
lows take part in the drinking bout ; and there too, their hungry 
sucklings are squeaking. Vodka and filth and depravity, but prin­
cipally-vodka. The urchin with the collected kopecks is at once 
being sent to the pot-house, and he brings svme more liquor. Some­
times, for fun, they will pour a glass of vodka into his mouth, and 
they will laugh merrily when, with breath cut short and almost 
fainting, he drops on the floor. 
. . . and pitilessly horrid vodka 
He poured and poured intC' :ny mouth. 
When he grows older they promptly get rid of him ; he is 
being sent to some factory ; yet whatever he managPs to earn, he 
has to bring to those peddlers, and they, in turn, spend it all on 
drinks. However, even before these children reach the stage of the 
factory, they become accomplished criminals. They prowl about the 
town, and they know spots in different basements through which 
one may climb and spend the night without being de.l:cted. One 
of them spent several nights unnoticed in some basket at the 
quarters of a house-porter. 
Of course, they become petty thieves. Pilfering grows into a 
passion even among eight-year-old childrr· 
at times, withoui. their 
realizing the criminal character of their def'ds. At length, they 
will endure anything-hunger, cold, beatings-for but one thing : 
freedom ; they will run away from their peddlers. to embark upon 
vagabondage, now for their personal benefit. Sometimes these savage 

168 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
creatures understand nothing at all, not even where they are living ; 
they do not know to what nation they belong, whether there is a 
God or a Czar. Such things are even told about them as seem quite 
incredible, and yet they are all actual facts. 
2 
A LITTLE BoY AT CHRIST's CHRISTMAS TREE 
But I am a novelist, and it seems that one "story" I did 
invent myself. Why did I say "it seems," since I know for certain 
that I did actually invent it ; yet I keep fancying that this hap­
pened somewhere, once upon a time, precisely on Christmas Eve, 
in some huge city during a bitter frost. 
I dreamed of a little boy-very little-about six, or even 
younger. This little boy woke up one morning in a damp, cold 
basement. He was clad in a shabby dressing gown of some kind, 
and he was shivering. Sitting in the corner on a chest, wearily 
he kept blowing out his breath, letting it escape from his mouth, 
and it amused him to watch the vapor flow through the air. But 
he was very hungry. 
Several times that morning he came up to the bedstead, where 
his sick mother lay on bedding thin as a pancake, with a bundle 
of some sort under her bead for a pillow. 
How did she happen to be here ?-She may have come with 
her little boy from some faraway town, and then suddenly she had 
fallen ill. 
• 
Two days ago the landlady of this wretched hovel had been 
seized by the police ; most of the tenants had scattered in all direc­
tions-it was the holiday season-and now there remained only two. 
The peddler was still there, but he had been lying in a drunken 
stupor for more than twenty-four hours, not even having waited 
for the holiday to come. In another corner of the lodging an eighty­
year-old woman was moaning with rheumatism. In days past she 
had been a children's nurse somewhere. Now she was dying in 
solitude, moaning and sighing continuously and grumbling at the 
boy so that he grew too frightened to come near her. Somehow he 
had managed to find water in the entrance hall, with which to 
appease his thirst : but nowhere was he able to discover as much 
as a crust of bread. Time after time he came up to his mother, 
trying in vain to awaken her. As it grew dark, dread fell upon him. 
Though it was late evening, the candle was not yet lit. Fumbling 
over his mother's face he began to wonder why she lay so quiet, 
and why she felt as cold as the wall. "It's rather chilly in here," 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
he said to himself . . . .  For a moment he stood still, unconsciously 
resting his hand on the shoulder of the dead woman. Then he began 
to breathe on his tiny fingers in an attempt to warm them, and, 
suddenly, coming upon his little cap that lay on the bedstead, he 
groped along cautiously and quietly made his way out of the base­
ment. This he would have done earlier had he not been so afraid 
of the big dog upstairs on the staircase, which kept howling all 
day long in front of a neighbor's door. Now the dog was gone, and 
in a moment he was out in the street. 
"My God, what a city I "-Never before had he seen anything 
like this. There, in the place from which he had come, at night, 
everything was plunged into dark gloom-just a single lamp-post 
in the whole street I Humble wooden houses were closed in by 
shutters ; no sooner did dusk descend than there was no one in 
sight ; people locked themselves up in their homes, and only big 
packs of dogs-hundreds and thousands of them-howled and barked 
all night. Ah, but out there it was so warm, and there he had been 
given somcthh.ࣾ:, to eat, ''· hile here . . .  "Dear God, I do wish I 
had something to eat ! "-And here-what a thunder-ing noise I What 
dazzling light I What crowds of people and horses and carriages I 
And what biting frost ! What frost ! Vapor, which at once turned 
cold, burst forth in thick clouds from the horses' hot-breathing 
muzzles. Horseshoes tinkle as they strike the stones through the 
fluffy snow. And men pushing each other about . . . .  "But, good 
heavens, how hungry I am ! I wish I had just a tiny bit of some­
thing to eat I "  And suddenly he felt a sharp pain in his little fingers. 
A policeman passed by and turned his head away, so as not 
to take notice of the boy. 
"And here is another street.-Oh, how wide it is : _·-Iere I'll 
surely be run over ! And how people shout and run and drive along I 
And what floods of light ! Light everywhere I Look, v·hat's this ?­
Oh, what a huge window and, beyond it, a hall with a tree reaching 
up to the ceiling. It's a Christmas tree covered with gleaming lights, 
with sparkling bits of gold paper and apples, and all around are 
little dolls, toy-horses. Lots of beautifully dressed, neat children 
running about the hall ; they laugh and play, and they eat and 
drink something. And sec, over there, that little girl-now she starts 
to dance with a boy I What a pretty little girl she is I And just listen 
to the music ! You can hear it from inside, coming throu࣫'. the 
window I "  
The little boy gazes and gazes and wonders ; he even starts 
laughing, but . . .  his toes begin to hurt, while the little fingers 
on his hand have grown quite red-they won't bend any longer, and 
it hurts to move them. And when at last he became fully aware of 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
the sharp pain in his fingers, he burst into tears and set off running. 
Presently, through another window, he catches sight of a 
room, with trees standing in it, and tables loaded with cakes, all 
sorts of cakes-almond cakes, red cakes, yellow cakes I 
. . . Four 
beautifully dressed ladies are sitting in the room ; whoever enters 
it is given a cake . . . .  Every minute the door opens, and many 
gentlemen come in from the outside to visit these ladies. 
The boy stole up, quickly pushed the door open, and sidled 
in. Oh, how they started shouting at him and motioning him out I 
One of the ladies hurried toward him, thrust a small copper coin 
into his hand, but she opened the door into the street. How fright­
ened he was I The coin rolled from his hand, bouncing down the 
steps he was just unable to bend his little red fingers to hold on 
to it. 
Very fast, the little boy ran away, and quickly he started 
going, but he himself did not know whither to go. Once more he 
was ready to cry, but he was so frightened that he just kept on 
running and running, and blowing on his cold little hands. How 
dreadfully lonesome he felt, and suddenly despair clutched at his 
heart. 
But lo ! -What's going on here ?-ln front of a window people 
are standing crowded together, lost in admiration . . . .  Inside they 
se three tiny dolls, all dressed up in little red and green frocks, 
so real that they seem a:live I A kindly-looking old man is sitting 
there, as if playing on a big violin ; and next to him-two other men 
are playing small violins, swinging their heads to the rhythm of 
the musi࣬; they look ai each other, their lips move, and they talk 
-they really do, but one simply can't hear them through the win­
dow pane. 
At first the little boy thought that these moving figures were 
alive, but when at last he realized that they were only small puppets, 
he burst into laughter. He had never seen such figurines, and he 
didn't even know that such existed I He felt like crying, and yet 
the dolls looked so funny to him-oh, how funny ! 
Suddenly he felt as if somebody grabbed him by his dressing 
gown : a big bully of a boy, standing close by, without warning, 
struck him on the head, tore off his cap and kicked him violently. 
The little fellow fell down, and the people around began shouting. 
Scared to death, he jumped quickly to his feet and scampered off. 
All of a sudden he found himself in a strange courtyard under the 
vault of a gateway, and leaped behind a pile of kindling wood : 
"Here they won't find nie I Besides, it's dark here 1 "  
He sank down and huddled himself up in a small heap, but 
he could hardly catch his breath for fright. But presently a sen-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
sation of happiness crept over his whole being : his little hands and 
feet suddenly stopped aching, and once more he felt as comfortable 
and warm as on a hearth. But hardly a moment later a shudder 
convulsed him : "Ah, I almost fell asleep. Well, I'll stay here awhile, 
and then I'll get back to look at the puppets"-the little boy said 
to himself, and the memory of the pretty dࣽ"lls made him smile : 
"They seem just as though they're alive I "  Ami all of a sudden he 
seemed to hear the voice of his mother, leaning over him and 
singing a song. "Mother dear, I'm just dozing. Oh, how wonderful 
it is to sleep here ! "  
Then a ·gentle voice whispered above him : "Come, little boy, 
come along with me I Come to see a Christmas tree I "  
His first thought was that it might be his mama still speaking 
to him, but no-this wasn't she. Who, then, could it be ? He saw 
no one, and yet, in the darkness, someone was hovering over him 
and tenderly clasping him in his arms . . . .  The little boy stretched 
out his arms and . . .  an instant later-"Oh, what dazzling light I 
Oh, what a f'hristmas tree ! Why, it can't be a Christmas tree,"­
for he had never seen such trees. 
Where is he now ?-Everything sparkles and glitters and shines, 
and scattered all over are tiny dolls-no, they are little boys and 
girls, only they are c:o luminous, and they all fly around him ; they 
embrace him and lift him up ; thPy carry l>im along, and now he 
flies, too. And he sees : yonder is his mother ; she looks at him, 
smiling at him so happily. "Oh, Mother ! Mother ! How beautiful 
it is here ! "-exclaimed the little boy, and again he begins to kiss 
the children ; he can hardly wait to tell them about those wee 
puppets behind the glass of the window. 
"Who are you, little boys ? Who art: you, little - ࣭Is ?"-he 
asks them, smilingly, and he feels that he loves them ah. 
"This is Christ's Christmas Tree,"-they tell him. "On this 
day of the year Christ always has a Christmas Tree for those little 
children who have no Christmas tree of their own." 
And then he learned that these little boys and girls were all 
once children like himself, but some of them have frozen to death 
in those baskets in which they had been left at the doors ࣮f Peters­
burg officials ; others had perished in miserable hospital wards ; still 
others had died at the dried-up breasts of their famine-stricken 
mothers (during the Samara famine) ; these, again, had choked to 
death from stench in third-class railroad rars. Now they ࢯ: , . all 
here all like little angels, and they are a__ with Christ, and He 
is in' their midst, holding out His hands to them and to their sinful 
mothers. . . . And the mothers of these babes, they all stand there, 
u short distance off, and weep : each one recognizes her darling-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
her little boy, or her little girl-and they fly over to their mothers 
and kiss them and brush away their tears with their little hands, 
begging them not to cry, for they feel so happy here . . . .  
Next morning, down in the courtyard, porters found the tiny 
body of a little boy who had hidden behind the piles of kindling 
wood, and there had frozen to death. They also found his mother. 
She died even before he had passed away. 
Now they are again united in God's Heaven. 
And why did I invent such a story, one that conforms so 
little to an ordinary, reasonable diary-especially a writer's diary ? 
And that, after having promised to write stories pre-eminently about 
actual events ! But the point is that I keep fancying that all this 
could actually have happened-! mean, the things which happened 
in the basement and behind the piles of kindling wood. Well, and 
as regards Christ's Christmas Tree-! really don't know what to 
tell you, and I don't know whether or not this could have happened. 
Being a novelist, I have to invent things. 
3 
A CoLONY oF JuvENILE DELINQUENTS. GLOOMY CREA­
TURES. CoNVERSION OF VIciOus SouLs INTO INNOCENT 
ONES. l\lEASURES REcOGNIZED AS MosT ExPEDIENT THERE-
FOR. LITTLE AND BoLD FRIENDS oF MANKIND. 
On the third day ·of the holiday season I saw all these "fallen" 
angels-a whole group of fifty of them. Please do not think that 
I am jesting when calling them "fallen" angels : that they are 
"insulted'' children there can be no doubt. Insulted by whom ? 
How ? In what way ? And who is to be blamed ?-As yet, these are 
idle questions, to which there is nothing in reply. Better that we 
get down to business. 
I was at the colony of juvenile delinquents, which is located 
beyond the Powder Plant. I have long sought to go there, but 
somehow I could not manage it, and here, unexpectedly, I hap­
pened to have some spare time, and kind people came forward and 
volunteered to show me everything. 
We went there on a warm, somewhat overcast day ; having 
passed the Powder Plant, we came directly to a forest in which 
the colony is situated. 
How beautiful is a forest in winter, covered with snow ; how 
fresh ; how pure the air, and how isolated. Here, some five hundred 
dessiatins have been donated to the colony, which consists of 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1 73 
several handsomely constructed, wooden houses, standing a certain 
distance apart. Everything has been built with donated money ; 
each house cost about three thousand rubles, and in each one of 
them there lives a "family." The family is a group of twelve to 
seventeen boys, and each family has its instructor. 
It is planned to house eventually ur to seventy boys, in 
accordance with the colony's size, but at pre࣯cnt, for some reason, 
there arc but fifty pupils. It has to be admitted that money has 
been provided on a liberal scale, and each juvenile delinquent costs 
annually a considerable sum. Also, it seems strange that sanitary 
conditions in the colony, as has recently been reported in the 
papers, are not quite satisfactory : of late, there has been considerable 
sickness, despite the fact that the air and the upkeep of the children 
are so excellent I 
We spent several hours at the colony-from eleven in the 
morning till dusk. But I came to the conclusion that one visit is 
insufficient to provide time for looking into everything and for 
grasping ev"rvthing. The director invited me to come and stay 
with them two days, or so. This is very tempting. 
The director, P. A-ch R-sky, is known in literature. From 
time to time his articles appear in The Messenger of Europe. He 
gave me a most cordial reception and exhibited much complaisance. 
At the office there is a book in which visitors, if they wish, may 
inscribe their names. Among those who have signed their names 
I observed many prominent persons : this means that the colony 
is known and that people lake an interest in it. However, in spite 
of all his complaisance, the esteemed director, it would seem, is 
a very reserved man, although he emphasized to us. almost with 
delight, the encouraging aspects of the Lv1ony-at thr ;arne time, 
however, soft-pedalling everything disagreeable and L wrganized. 
I hasten to add that this reserve-so it seemed to me-is caused 
by a most ardent affection for the colony and for the project under­
taken. 
All four instructors ( I  believe there are four of them, in 
accordance with the number of the families) are not old men ; 
they are almost young ; each receives a salary of th:-ee hundred 
rubles, and almost all of them are graduates of theological semi­
naries. They live quite in common with their pupils, and they even 
wear practically the same clothes as the latter-something akin to 
blouses girded with leather belts. 
When we inspected the wards, thtJ were empty : it was a 
holiday and the children were playing somewhere ; this made the 
inspection of the premises all the easier. There is no superftuous 
luxury, nothing too profuse, inspired by excessive kindness or 

174 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
humaneness of the donors and founders of the institution ; this could 
easily have been the case, and this would have been a grave error. 
For instance, the iron folding cots are most simple ; the bed 
linen is of rather rough cloth ; nor is there anything fancy about 
the blankets, but they are warm. The pupils get up early and, all 
together, they get dressed ; then they clean the wards and, when­
ever necessary, wash the floors. Near some cots I could discern 
a certain smell, and I learned an almost incredible thing : that 
some pupils (not many, but still eight or nine of them) ,  not too 
young either, of the age of twelve or even thirteen, urinate during 
their sleep, without getting up from their cots. In answer to my 
question as to whether this was due to some ailment, I was told 
that such was not the case at all, but that this was due to the fact 
that they were savage-savage to such an extent that they even 
could not comprehend that one could and should behave differently. 
But in this case, where-in what wretched haunts-<ould they have 
been growing up and whom did they see I There is no peasant family 
so destitute which, on an occasion such as this, would not teach 
a child how to behave, and where even the tiniest little boy would 
not know it. Thus, it may be asked, what sort of people did the 
young inmate encounter ? And what a bestially indifferent attitude 
did they take toward his existence I 
However, this is a true fact and I consider it very important. 
Let people refrain from laughing at me because I am "inflating" 
this dirty little fact to such an extent ; it is more serious than it 
may seem. It signifies that thus there are, indeed, human specimens 
so gloomy and dreadful •that all signs of humanity and civility are 
obliterated in them. One can also comprehend into what such a 
savage little soul may be converted in the face of such forsakenness 
and isolation from social intercourse. 
Yes, these children's souls did see sombre pictures and they 
are used to strong impressions which, of course, will forever be 
retained by them and which will come back to them all through 
their lives in dreadful dreams. Thus, reformers and instructors of 
such children should seek to overcome these horrible impressions ; 
to eradicate them and to plant new ones. This is a momentous 
problem. 
"You would not believe in what a savage state some of them 
are when admitted here"-P. A-ch said to me.-"Some of them 
know nothing either about themselves or about their social status. 
They have been prowling about almost unconsciously, and the 
only thing they know in ·this world-the only thing they were able 
to conceive-was their liberty, the freedom of vagrancy. We have 
a little boy here, not older than ten ; up to this day he is wholly 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1 75 
unable to refrain from stealing things. He pilfers with no aim or 
profit-solely for the sake of stealing, mechanically." 
"How, then, do you expect to reform such children ?" 
"Work ; an altogether different way of living, and fairness in 
our dealings with them. Finally-the hope that after three years 
their old predilections and habits will be fo:-gotten of their 
nwn 
accord, by the mere lapse of time." 
I inquired whether among the boys there were certain other 
notorious and vicious children's habits. In passing, I may state 
that here there arc boys between the ages of ten and as old as 
seventeen, even though only children not older than fourteen are 
admissible. 
"Oh, no ; no such bad habits can exist," promptly replied 
P. A-ch. "Their instructors are undeviatingly and incessantly keep­
ing their eye on them in this respect." 
However, to me, this seemed incredible. In the colony there 
are several boys who formerly had been inmates in the now abolished 
division of juvenile delinquents at the Lithuanian Castle. I have 
visited that prison, some three years ago, and I have seen these 
boys. Later I positively ascertained that extraordinary perversion 
has been prevalent among those inmates in the Castle ; and also 
that those vagabonds kept at the Castle, who, at the time of their 
admission there, had not yet been contaminࣰted with lewdness and, 
at first, loathed it, subsequently submitted to it almost against 
their will, because their comrades scoffed at their chastity. 
"Were there many recidivists ?"-1 inquired. 
"Not so many : out of the total number of those who had 
been discharged from the colony, there were only aL:lut eight."" 
(Still, this is not a small figure.) 
I may observe that the pupils are discharged moࣱ.;y in the 
capacity of artisans, and "preliminary" lodging quarters are secured 
for them. Formerly, passports issued to them by the colony con­
stituted a great handicap in their existence. However, at present 
ways have been found to issue passports from which, at least at 
first glance, it cannot be perceived that its bearer comes from the 
delinquents' colony. 
"But," P. A-ch h1stened to add, "we have among our dis­
charged men some who even now cannot forget the colony, and 
just as soon as there is a holiday, unfailingly they come to visit 
us and stay with us for a while." 
Thus the strongest means of re-ed1..:ation, of converting a 
stunted ad vilified soul into a serene and honest one is work. 
The day begins with work in the ward, and after that the pupils 
go to workshops. In the locksmith and carpentry shops their wares 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
were shown to me. The products are good, within the limits of 
possibility, but, of course, they will be greatly improved as the 
business is better organized. These wares are being sold for the 
pupil's benefit, so that by the time of his discharge from the colony 
each one has accumulated a certain sum of money. The r.hildren are 
engaged in work in both the morning and afternoon, but without 
suffering fatigue. And it does seem that work, in fact, exercises a 
rather potent influence upon their moral being : they compete with 
each other to do a better job and they are proud of their success. 
Another means toward their spiritual development is, of 
course, autonomous justice instituted among them. Everyone guilty 
of something is tried by his respective "family" court : the boys 
either acquit him or convict him. The only punishment is the ex­
clusion from games. Comrades who refuse to submit to their fellows' 
judgments are punished with total excommunication from the 
colony. For this end they have their "Petropavlovka" : thus the 
boys have labelled a special remote hut, equipped with cells, for 
those temporarily expelled. However, it seems that confinement in 
the "Petropavlovka" depends solely upon the director's decision. 
We visited that "Petropavlovka" ;  at that time there were 
only two inmates there. And I may note that boys are incarcerated 
there with the exercise of due caution and discretion-for something 
reaJly important and inveterate. These two inmates were kept under 
lock and key, in separate cells, but they were not shown to us. 
Essentially, this autonomous court is, of course, a good thing, 
but it smacks of somel.hing bookish. There are many proud children 
-proud in a good sense-who may feel insulted by this self-governing 
authority of boys and delinquents such as themselves ; and thus 
they may misunderstand this authority. There may happen to be 
some individuals much more talented and clever than the rest of 
the "family," and the judgment of their milieu may thwart thei:: 
ambition and instill hate into them. And the milieu is practically 
always the average, the mediocre. Besides, do the boys themselves, 
when passing judgment, properly understand their business ? On 
the contrary, is it not possible that among them, too, there might 
develop children's groups of some rivalling boys, stronger, more alert 
than the others, who always and unfailingly appear among children 
in all schools, and who give tone to the rest and lead the others 
as by a rope ?-At'ter all, these are only children-not adults. 
Finally, will the convicted, and those who have suffered punish­
ment, later treat their .former judges as simply and as brotherly as 
heretofore, and does not this autonomous justice impair the spirit 
of comradeship ?-Of course, this formative pedagogic device has 
been conceived and founded upon the idea that these hitherto de-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1 77 
linquent children, by means of such right to autonomous justice, 
get used, as it were, to lawfulness, self-restraint and truth, about 
which they formerly have known nothing, and that they will develop 
within themselves a sense of duty. All these are beautiful and lofty 
thoughts, but somehow they are also double-edged. As for punish­
ment, of course, the most effective and re<:fraining one has been 
selected-that is, deprivation of one's freed ow. 
In passing, I may here interject a strange nota bene. The 
other day, by accident, I happened to hear a rather unexpected 
comment on corporal punishment, which has been abolished in all 
our schools : "Well, in schools everywhere, they have abolished cor­
poral punishment, and it is a good thing they did, but what, inter 
alia, was achieved thereby ?-Only that among our youth there are 
more cowards than in days past. They are afraid of even the slight­
est physical pain, of any suffering, privation, or even offense, of 
any sting to their ambition, to such a degree that some of them­
as examples illustrate-hang or shoot themselves when they are 
called upon ' fl  face even some paltry threat-some difficult lesson or 
examination." 
Indeed, it is most appropriate to explain several of these 
actual cases by nothing but the cowardice of lads when confronted 
by something disagreeable or threatening. Yet this is a strange 
point of view on the subject, and this ob·ervation is, to say the 
least, original. I record it for memory. 
I have seen all the boys at dinner. Meals are most simple, 
but healthful, abundant and excellently cooked. We tasted the food 
with pleasure before tht> pupils had arrived. Yet, the cost of food 
for each boy per day is only fifteen kopecks. Porridge "r sour cab­
bage soup with meat was served ; for tht: ::.econd cou1 - -gruel or 
potatoes. In the morning, wht>n the boys get up, they arჅ given tea 
with bread, and between dinner and supper-bread with kvas. They 
are quite satiated. At the table they were being waited on in turn 
by pupils on duty. Before taking their seats at the table all the 
boys sang excellently the prayer : "Thy Nativity, 0 Christ, Our 
Lord." They are taught to sing prayers by one of the instructors. 
Here, at dinner, when all the pupils were assr჆bled, the 
thing that interested mf' most was to study their faces. These are 
not too bold or arrogant, but simply the faces of boys who are 
abashed by nothing. There was hardly a single stupid face (although 
I was told that there are stupid ones arnoT'Ⴧ the pupils, parti.·ltlarly 
among the former inmates of the foundlir.6 hospital) .  On the con­
trary, there are even quite intelligent faces. Th჈re are plenty of bad 
faces, but not physically bad ; the features of virtually all the fa჉es 
are almost handsome, yet in some of them there ჊(;ems something 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
too deeply hidden. Also, there are few smiling faces, despite the 
fact that the pupils behave in an easy manner in the presence of 
both their superiors and strangers, although not quite in the same 
way as more open-hearted children. And probably quite a number 
of them are longing to steal away from the colony. Many of them 
are anxious not to betray themselves in speaking : this is apparent 
from the expression of their faces. 
The humane and obliging-to the point of refinement-treat­
ment of the boys by their instructors (however, when necessary, 
they know how to be severe) ,  in some cases, it seems to me, does 
not reach their hearts-and certainly not their consciousness. You 
is used in addressing them, even the youngest ones. This you sounded 
to me somewhat strained and, perhaps, a little superfluous. Maybe 
the boys admitted here will consider this a gentleman's fancy. 
Briefty, this you is, probably, a mistake, and even a somewhat 
serious one. To my way of thinking, it alienates, as it were, the 
children from their instructors : in that you there is something 
formal, bureaucratic, and it would be a pity if some boy should 
take it as something contemptuous toward him. Indeed, he will 
not believe that he who had witnessed most extraordinary scenes 
and who had listened to most unnatural obscene cursing ; he who 
had been engaged in unbridled thieving, for some reason, deserves 
this kind of gentleman's treatment. In a word, in my opinion, thou, 
in these circumstances, would resemble more real truth, whereas 
here everybody seems to be pretending a little. Certainly it would 
be far better if the children would at length realize that their in­
structors are not tutors·, but fathers, and that they themselves are 
but naughty children who must be reformed. 
On the other hand, perhaps, this you will not spoil the boy 
and when, later, the thou, or the cursing which he will inevitably 
hear again on the very same day of his discharge from the insti­
tution, will shock him, he might, with so much more affection, 
heave a sigh for his colony. 
Among the lagging things is reading. I was told that the 
children are very fond of reading, that is, to listen when they are 
being read to on holidays or at spare moments, and that among 
them there are skilled readers. I heard but one of them : he read 
well, and it is said that he likes very much to read aloud to all 
of them and to be listened to. However, there are among them 
some who can hardly read and also some quite illiterate ones. But 
what do they read ?-After dinner, I saw on the table of one of the 
"families" a volume by· some author ; and there they are reading 
about Vladimir and how he conversed with some Olga on different 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1 79 
profound and strange subjects, and how subsequently the ines­
capable milieu 11shattered their existence." 
I have sen their 11library" : it is a bokcase containing Tur­
genev, Ostrovsky, Lermontov, Pushkin, and others ; there are also 
several useful travel stories, etc. The whole collection is a scattered 
and accidental one, which also has been don;ᆿted. 
Of course, once reading has been permitted, it must be con­
ceived as a very formative influence ; yet I know that if all our 
educational agencies in Russia, headed by pedagogical boards, sought 
to determine and outline exactly what should be read by these 
children and under these particular circumstances, they would cer­
tainly adjourn without having decided upon anything, because this 
is a very difficult problemᇀne which will never be finally settled 
at some meeting. On the other hand, in our literature there are 
uo books whatsoever which would be comprehensible to the people. 
ᇁeither Pushkin nor The Sebastopol Stories ; neither Evenings on 
a Farm nor the tale about Kalashnikov, nor Koltzov (Koltzov in 
particular) J.rr at all intP.lligible to the people. Of course, these 
boys are not the people, but, so to speak, God knows who-such 
specimens of human beings as can hardly be classified and assigned 
to any division or type. However, even were they to understand 
something, they wr-uld not have treasured it because all this wealth, 
as it were, would have fallen from heaven , but for this, owing to 
their past record, they would not be prepared. 
As for accusatory writers and satirists-do these poor children, 
who have seen so much filth, need such spiritual impressions any­
way ? Perhaps these little folks have no desire at all to laugh at 
people. Maybe these souls, plunged into gloom, woulfl gladly and 
affectionately lay themselves open to the most naive 
most ele­
mentary and simple-minded impressions, quite childish and plain, 
which would be disdainfully scoffed at by a contemporary high 
school or lyceum pupil of the same age as these delinquent children. 
The school is also in its infancy, but iL is being planned to 
have it organized in the very near future. Drawing and painting 
are virtually not being taught. There is no religious instruction at 
all. There is no priest on the premises. But they wi:: have one 
after the church is built. It is to be a wooden church which is now 
under construction. The superiors and architects are proud of it. 
In fact, the architecture is not bad, though in a somewhat official, 
conspicuously Russian style, of which onr is tired. 
I might observe in passing that unqᇄ.estionably religious in­
struction in schools-whether for criminals or our other elementary 
schools-should not be entrusted to anyone but priests. But why 

180 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
couldn't even schoolteachers relate simple episodes from the history 
of the Church ?-No doubt, among the great multitudes of village 
schoolteachers there may be some really bad persons. However, 
if such a bad person should sek to teach a boy atheism, he could 
do so without teaching the history of the Church-by merely speak­
ing of a duck and "what it is covered with." 
On the other hand, what do we bear about our clergy ?-Oh, 
I have no intention of offending anyone, and I am convinced that 
in the schools for criminals there will be a most deserving "ba­
tiushka." Still, of late, what were practically all of our papers re­
porting with special zeal ? Most disturbing facts were reported to 
the effect that there were religious teachers who, by the dozens 
and wholesale, deserted the schools and refused to teach in them 
without an increase in their salaries. No doubt, "he who works has 
got to be paid," but this everlasting howling about a raise in com­
pensation hurts one's ear and tortures one's heart. Our papers side 
with those who are howling, and, of course, I, too, am favoring 
them. Even so, in this connection I always dream of those ancient 
ascetics and preachers of the Gospel who went around, naked and 
barefooted, enduring blows and suffering, preaching Christ without 
any increase in their salaries. 
Why, I am not an idealist, and I fully realize that nowadays 
times are different. But would it not be nice to hear that even a 
tiny drop of good will had been acquired by our spiritual enlight­
eners before their salaries had been raised ? I repeat : let them take 
no offense : everybody knows perfectly well that among our clergy 
the spirit i!l not exhausted" and that there are zealous workers in their 
midst. And I am convinced in advance that such will be the priest 
in the colony. But it would be best if the pupils were simply told 
episodes from the history of the Church without any special bureau­
c::atic moral, temporarily confining the religious instruction to 
this alone. A series of pure, holy, beautiful pictures would exercise 
a potent influence upon their souls craving beautiful impressions. 
However, I bade farewell to the colony with a comforting 
feeling in my heart. If there are things which are not yet "fixed," 
there are, on the other hand, facts of great achievement with respect 
to the aims of the institution. I will recount two of them-thus 
bringing my story to an end. 
At the time w1en I visited the colony there was incarcerated 
in the "Petropavlovka" a pupil of the age of about fifteen. Before 
that he had been kept for a while in the prison of the Lithuanian 
Castle when it still mainiained a division of juvenile delinquents. 
Having been ordered to join the colony, he escaped from it-twice, 
I believe. Both times he had been caught-once already outside the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
r8r 
boundaries of the institution. Finally, he frankly declared that he 
would not obey, and for this he had been subjected to solitary 
confinement. On Christmas relatives brought him some presents 
which, however, were not permitted to be delivered to him, since 
he was kept imprisoned, and the instructor confiscated them. This 
greatly impressed and offended the boy, ani! during the director's 
inspection of the "Petropavlovka," he began to complain bitterly, 
harshly accusing the instructor of having confiscated the package 
with the gifts for his own benefit. At the same time, angrily and 
scoffingly, he spoke about the colony and about his companions. 
He blamed everybody. "I sat down at his side and spoke to him 
earnestly."-P. A-ch told me.-"All the time he remained gloomily 
silent. About two hours later he sent for me, imploring me to come 
and see him. And what would you think ?-He rushed to me with 
eyes full of tears, in a state of violent commotion, quite transformed. 
He began to repent, accusing himself, and he started telling me 
things which heretofore he had been concealing-things that hap­
pened to him in the past. He also divulged the secret that for a 
long time he has been audicted to a shameful habit, of which he 
could not rid himself, and that this tormented him. Briefly, this 
was a full confession. I spent about two hours with him," added 
P. A-ch. "We conversed. I suggested certain remedies to overcome 
his habit, and so forth." 
Recounting all this, P. A-ch refrained from telling what they 
had been conversing about. But one has to admit that it is a gift 
to know how to penetrate the ailing soul of a profoundly embittered 
young criminal, who had heretofore never known what truth meant. 
I confess, I wish I knew the details of that conversatioP. 
Here is another fact. Every instru(.ࣲࣳr in each 
. .  • mily" not 
only sees to it that the pupils set their wards in order, " .tshing and 
cleaning them, but he also takes part in the work. There, floors are 
washed on Saturdays. The instructor not only shows i.10W the wash­
ing should be done, but he proceeds along w!th them to wash the 
floor. This is a most perfect understanding of one's vocation and 
of one's human dignity. Where, for example, will you find in bureau­
cratic circles such an attitude toward business ? And if in reality, 
in truth, these men make up i.heir minds to tie the aims of the 
colony to their whole lives, of course, matters will be "fixed," despite 
any theoretical errors, even should such occur in the beginning. 
"Heroes !-You, gentlemen-novelists, kP.ep looking for herf'IP.S I "  a 
man of vast experience said to me the ott, : day : "And not finding 
heroes in our midst, you feel angry ; you grumble against all of 
Russia. But I will tell you an anecdote. Once upon a time, long 
ago, during the reign of the late Emperor, there lived a certain 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
government official. First, he served in Petersburg, and later, I be­
lieve, in Kiev, and there he died. This, apparently, is his whole 
biography. And yet, what would you think ?-This little fellow, 
modest and taciturn all his life, was so grieved, inwardly, over serf­
dom, over the fad that, in Russia, man-God's own image-so 
slavishly depended upon a man just like himself that he began to 
accumulate savings out of his negligible salary, denying to himself, 
his wife and children almost the bare necessities ; as he would 
manage to save enough money, he would redeem from a landowner 
one of the latter's serfs and would set him free-of course, only 
one man every ten years. Thus, during his lifetime he had redeemed 
three or four men, and, when he died, he left nothing to his family. 
All this occurred without any notoriety-quietly, obscurely. Of 
course, what kind of a hero is he ! -Merely 'an idealist of the 
Forties,' perhaps even a funny and incompetent one, since he sought 
to cure the whole calamity with a microscopical, isolated instance. 
And yet it would seem that our Potugins should take a kindlier 
view of Russia and not throw mud at her for everything, at random." 
I am recording here Ws anecdote (which, perhaps, is quite 
irrelevant) only because I have no grounds for doubting its authen­
ticity. 
However, those are the men we need ! I am awfully fond of 
this comic type of little fellow, earnestly imagining that with his 
microscopical effort and perseverance he will be able to help the 
general cause without awaiting a general upswing and a common 
initiative. A little chap of this kind, perhaps, would also come in 
handy in t,he colony of jtJvenile delinquents . . . Oh, it goes with­
out saying-under the guidance of more enlightened and, so to speak, 
higher supervisors. . 
. 
. 
However, I have spent only a few hours in the colony, and 
I could have falsely conceived, skipped and mistaken many things. 
At any rate, I find that the means for converting vicious souls into 
innocent ones are as yet inadequate. 
CHAPTER III 
Russian Societ)' for the Protection of Animals. Courier. 
Green Liquor. Itch for Debauch and Vorobiev. From the 
End or from the Beginning 'I 
IN ISSUE No. 359 of The Voice I happened to read about the 
solemn celebration of the tenth-year anniversary of the Rusian 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Society for the Protection of Animals. What a nice and humane 
Society ! As far as I could understand, its basic aim is almost fully 
expressed in the words taken from the address of Prince A. A. 
Suvorov, the President of the Society. 
"In fact, the aim of our new charitable institution seemed all 
the more difficult of achievement as the majul'ity was not prepared 
to perceive in the protection of animals thost moral and material 
advantages to men which result from a humane and rational treat­
ment of domestic animals." 
Indeed, not only little dogs and shabby jades are dear to the 
Society but, equally, man-the Russian, in whom the human image 
must be restored1 and who has to be humanized-a task in which 
the Society for the Protection of Animals, no doubt, can assist. 
Having once learned to pity the animals, the peasant will also begin 
to pity his wife. And, therefore, even though I am very fond of 
animals, I am only too glad that not only animals but also callous, 
inhuman men, half-barbarians awaiting enlightenment, are dear to 
our esteemPd !'N'iety. 
Every educational means is precious, and it is to be hoped 
that the aim of the Society, in reality, will become a means of 
enlightenment. Our children are being brought up and grow up 
beholding many a repulsive picture. They see a peasant who, having 
excessively loaded a. cart, whips across its ;.;yes his jade, his bene­
factrix, that is sinking in the mud ; or, for instance-this I recently 
witnessed myself-a peasant who, having loaded a big cart with 
ten or more calves which he was to drive to a slaughterhouse, got 
into the cart and unhesitatingly seated himself on one of the calves. 
It felt soft to sit on the animal, as if on a springy CC'11.-h, but the 
calf, with its tongue sticking out of its mouth and with • 
protrud­
ing eyes, may have heaved its last even before it had rt.:ached the 
slaughterhouse. This little scene, I am 'iure, incenSf'd no one in 
the street : "All the same, they are being driven to be slaughtered." 
Yet scenes of this kind make man bestial and have a demoralizing 
effect, especially upon children. 
True, the esteemed Society has been attacked ; not only once 
have I heard jibes about it. For instance, it has been sait.i that some 
five years ago the Society brought charges against a cabman, ac­
cusing him of cruel treatment of his horse, and that a fine of fif­
teen rubles was imposed on him. Of course, this was a fau% pas 
because after such a verdict had been rl'· •dered many pe<)IJle did 
not know whom they should pity : the Cd.Dman or his horse. At 
lObra::it is a popular word, meaning. to _restore in man the h  
People say to a man who has ben dnnkȋng hard Ǜor a long time:. Thou 
shouldst obra.=it thyself." I have heard thts expresston among convicts. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
present, however, on the strength of the new law, it is provided that 
a fine should not exceed ten rubles. 
Also, I have heard that the Society busies itself too much 
about the problem that stray and, therefore, harmful dogs which 
have lost their masters be put away under chloroform. In this con­
nection it has been observed that so long as human beings in our 
famine-stricken provinces are dying from starvation, such tendࣴr 
care with respect to little dogs hurts, as it were, one's ear. 
However, all these objections cannot stand the test of criticism. 
The aim of the Society is more enduring than any temporary acci­
dentals. The aim is a fair and just one ; sooner or later it will strike 
root and triumph. Nevertheless, considering the question from an­
other viewpoint, it is very desirable that the activities of the Society 
and "the temporary accidentals," mentioned above, should, so to 
speak, arrive at a state of mutual equilibrium. Of course, then the 
salutary and beneficial path along which the Society may achieve 
abundant and-what is more important-practical results in the 
actual realization of its aims, would be more clearly revealed. Per­
haps, I do not make myself fully understood. I shall relate an anec­
dote-a true event-and I hope that by its perspicuous account I 
shall convey my thought more graphically. 
This incident happened long ago in my, so to speak, pre­
historical times-in 1837-when I was about fifteen years old and 
was en route from Moscow to Petersburg. My elder brotber and 
I were going with our late father to Petersburg for matriculation 
in the Chief Engineering School. It was in May and it was hot. 
We drove with hired horses almost at a footpace, halting at stations 
for as long as two or three hours. I remember how, at length, we 
had grown weary of this journey which had lasted almost a whole 
week. My brother and I were then longing for a new life ; we were 
meditating intensely about something, about everything "beautiful 
and lofty" : in those days these were still novel words and they 
used to be uttered without irony. And, at the time, how many beau­
tiful little words were in use I We passionately believed in some­
thing, and although we knew well everything that was required for 
the examination in mathematics, we dreamed only about poetry and 
poets. My brother wrote verses, three poems every day, even during 
our journey, while I kept busy planning in my mind a novel dealing 
with Venetian life. 0nly two months1 before, Pushkin had died, 
and en route brother and I agreed to visit without delay the place 
of the duel and to try to make our way into the former apartment 
1Dostoievsky made a mistake : Pushkin died on January 29, 1837, i.e., 
over three months prior to the event described here ("it was in Ma.y and 
it was hot"). B. B. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
185 
of Pushkin, in order to behold the room in which he had pased 
away. One evening we were stopping at a station, an inn, in some 
village-the name of which I have forgotten-in the province of 
Tver, if I correctly recall. It was a large and well-to-do village. In 
half an hour we were to resume our journey and, meanwhile, I was 
looking through the window, and I saw the following : 
Across the street, directly opposite the inn, was the station 
building. Suddenly a courier's troika speed1ly drove up to the 
station's platform ; a courier jumped out of the carriage ; he was 
in full uniform, with narrow little flaps on the back, as was the 
fashion in those days, and he wore a large three-cornered hat with 
white, yellow and, l think , green plumes. (I have forgotten this 
detail, which I could check ; but I seem to recall the glimpse of 
green plumes too.) The courier was a tall, very stout and strong 
chap, with a livid face. He ran into the station house and there, 
surely, must have "swallowed" a glass of vodka. I recall that our 
coachman then told me that such couriers always drink a glass of 
vodka at every station, for without it they would be unable to 
endure "such a turment." 
Meanwhile, a fresh, spirited, substitute troika drove up to 
the postal station, and the yamschik, a young lad of about twenty, 
in a red shirt and holding an overcoat in his hands, jumped into 
the coachman's sr.tl. Forthwith, the courier came running down the 
staircase and seated himself in the carriage. The yamschik stirred 
on, but hardly hart he started to move than the courier rose up and 
silently raised his hardy right f1st and, from above, painfully brought 
it down on the back of the yamschik 's head . He jolted forward, 
lifted his whip and, with all his strength, lashed the wheel horse. 
The horses dashed forward but this in no ·ny appeascu 
• 'le courier. 
Here there was method and not mere irritation-somett 
• .
. g precon­
ceived and tested by long years of experience-and the dreadful fist 
soared again ami again and struck blow: on the bad .. of the head. 
And then, again and again, and tllll჋ it contirmed until the troika 
disappeared out of sight. Of course, the yamschik, who could hardly 
keep his balance, incessantly, every second, like a madman, lashed 
the horses and, finally, he had whipped them up to the noint where 
they started dashing at top speed, as if possessed. 
Our coachman explained to me that virtually all couriers are 
riding in approximately the same manner, but. that this one is 
particularly notorious and everybody knows him ; that after jump­
ing into the carriage, he begins with the .. ating and he beats "al­
ways in one and the same fas1tion," for no reason, regularly, swing­
ing his fist up and down, "holding the yamschik at his mercy under 
the blows of his fist, for a verst or so, and then he stops beating. 

186 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSK.Y : 1876 
Should he grow weary, he might renew the ordeal in the middle of 
the journey, but God may prevent it. But on approaching a station, 
he invariably gets up on his feet : he starts at a distance of ap­
proximately one verst and he keeps swinging his fist up and down, 
in the same manner, until he reaches the station, so that everybody 
in the village should gaze at him with amazement. Well, after that 
one's neck hurts for a whole month." Upon the return of the lad, 
people laugh at him : "See, the courier cudgelled your neck ! "  And 
that same day he may beat his wife : "At least, you'll pay for it ! "  
Maybe also because "she looked and saw . . .  
" 
No doubt, it is inhuman on the part of the yamschik to lash 
the horses so ferociously : of course, they reach the station all out 
of breath and quite exhausted. Still, who among the personnel of 
the Society for the Protection of Animals would venture to bring 
a charge against the peasant lad for his inhuman treatment of his 
little horses ? Am I right ? 
This disgusting scene has remained in my memory all my life. 
Never was I able to forget it, or that courier, and many an infamous 
and cruel thing observed in the Russian people, willy-nilly, I was 
inclined for a long time thereafter to explain obviously in a too 
one-sided sense.-You will realize that I am speaking of times long 
past. This little scene appeared to me, so to speak, as an emblem, 
as something which very graphically demonstrated the link between 
cause and effect. Here every blow dealt at the animal leaped out 
of each blow dealt at the man. In the late Forties, during the period 
of my most unrestrained and fervent dreams, it suddenly occurred 
to me that should I ever· happen to found a philanthropic society, 
I would by all means engrave this courier's troika on the seal of 
the society, as an emblem and warning sign. 
Oh, no doubt, today the situation is not as it used to be forty 
years ago : couriers no longer beat the people, but the people beat 
themselves, ha'Ving retained the rods in their own court. And the 
point is not in this, but in the causes which produce effects. There 
is no courier but there is poison liquor. Well, in what way is "green 
liquor" comparable with the courier ?-It certainly is in that it also 
may make man bestial and cattle-like ; it makes him cruel and 
detracts him from serene thoughts ; it makes him dull and unre­
ceptive to any constructive propaganda. A drunken man has no com­
passion toward anirrals ; he deserts his wife and his children. A 
drunken husband came to his wife, whom he had deserted and 
whom, along with her children, he had failed to support for many 
months, and demanded vodka from her ; he began to beat her so 
as to extort more vodka from her ; then she, that galley-slave work­
ing-woman (please think of how, thus far, woman's labor has ben 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
rated I ) , who did not know how she could manage to feed her 
children, seized a knife and thrust it into him. This happened re­
cently and she is going to be tried. But there is no point in my 
speaking about her ; such cases may be counted by the hundreds 
and the thousands-one has merely to open the papers. 
However, the main point of similarity hrtween liquor and the 
courier is in the fact that it dominates the huma'l will as inescapably 
and as fatally as the courier. 
The esteemed Society for the Protection of Animals has seven 
hundred and fifty members who may be potentially influential. 
What if it should make up its mind to assist in the reduction-at 
least a little-of drunkenness among the people and of the poisoning 
with liquor of a whole generation ! In fact, the strength of the 
people is being drained, the source of fulure wealth is becoming 
exhausted, intelligence and development have become poor. And 
what will present-day children of the people, brought up on the 
filth of their fathers, carry off in their minds and hearts ?-A fire 
broke out in thf' village and it spread to the church. Presently, the 
innkeeper appeared on the scene and cried out to the people that 
if they would cease putting out the fire in the church, but would 
save his pot-house, he would give them a barrel of liquor. The church 
burned down, but the pot-house was saved. These are but insig­
nificant incident!' compared with the innuMerable horrors of the 
future. 
Should the esteemed Society desire to assist in the elimination 
of the prime causes, it would thereby unquestionably facilitate its 
most worthy propaganda. Because how is one to make people com­
passionate if things have precisely shaped themselves so ࢮR to elimi­
nate in man every sign of humaneness ? 
And is it only liquor that plays havoc with, and ࣵfbauches, 
the people in our amazing times ?-Everywhere there seems to be 
soaring some sort of a drug, as it were, jimson, some itch for de­
bauch. The people have become affected with a.n unheard-of distor­
tion of ideas and a wholesale worship of materialism. By ma­
terialism, in this case, I mean the worship of money by the people, 
their adoration of the power inherent in a bag of gold The idea 
sems to have burst forth to tht: people that the bag contains all 
the power, and that everything he has been told and taught up to 
the present by his fathers-is all nonsense. It would be a calamity 
should the people become confirmed in sue" a belief. And yrࣶ. how 
can they be reasoning differently ? Do you 
.• tink, for instance, that 
the recent wreck on the Odessa railroad, of the train which trans­
ported the Czar's recruits, in which more than one hundred of them 
were killed-do you think that such neglect on tbࣷ part of the 

1 88 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
authorities would not have a demoralizing effect upon the people ? 
The people see and wonder at such power : "they do what they 
please"-and, willy-nilly, they begin to doubt : "here, then, is where 
the real power lies ; here is where it has always resided ; get rich, 
and everything is yours, and you may do as you please." No more 
demoralizing an idea can exist. And yet it soars everywhere and 
gradually penetrates everything. The people, however, are in no 
way protected from such ideas-by no enlightenment, by no propa­
ganda whatsoever of .opposing ideas. 
All through Russia we see railroads stretching out-almost 
twenty thousand versts of them-and everywhere along them even 
the lowest functionary appears as a propagandist of this idea ; he 
poses as a man invested with unlimited power over you and your 
fate, over your family and your honor-just only dare to be caught 
by him on a railroad. Not long ago a station-master, by his own 
authority and with his own hands, dragged out of a car a lady pas­
senger, in order to turn her over to some man who had complained 
to that station-master that this was his wife who had deserted him. 
And this-without any court proceedings, without any suspicion even 
that he, the station-master, had no right to act in this way. It is 
obvious that if he had not been in a state of delirium, still he must 
have gone crazy over his own authority. 
Now, all such incidents and examples burst forth over the 
people as a stream of uninterrupted temptations ; day after day, 
they are beholding them, and are drawing the inevitable conclu­
sions. Formerly, I almost used to condemn Mr. Suvorin for his 
incident with Mr. Golubev. It seemed to me that one should not 
drag an a:Jtogether innocent man into disgrace, especially with a 
full description of his psychic emotions. But, at present, I am view­
ing even this incident in a somewhat different light. What is it 
to me that Mr. Golubev is not guilty ! Mr. Golubev may be as 
clear as a crystal, yet Vorobiev is guilty. Who is Vorobiev ?-I have 
no idea ; I am convinced that there is no such man ; but he is the 
very Vorobiev who rages on all lines ; who imposes arbitrary taxes ; 
who forcibly drags passengers out of the car ; who wrecks the trains ; 
who, over a period of many long months, keeps merchandise rotting 
at stations ; who, with immunity, causes damages to entire cities, 
provinces, to the whole Empire, and who, in a savage voice, shouts : 
"Get out of my way I I am coming along t "  
However, the principal guilt of this newcomer is that he has 
placed himself over the people as a demoralizing idea. However, 
why do I attack Vorobiev so bitterly ? Is he alone domineering, as 
a seductive idea ?-I repeat : something permeated with materialism 
and scepticism is soaring through the air : an adoration of gratuitous 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
gain, of enjoyment without labor, has ensued ; every fraud, every 
villainy, is perpetrated in cold blood ; people are being murdered 
for the mere purpose of stealing, be it only one ruble, out of a man's 
pocket. 
Of course, I know that in days past there has also been much 
evil ; hut at present it has unquestionably incrf'ased ten times. Some 
three weeks ago, in Petersburg, a cabman-a young lad, hardly of 
age-was driving an old man and an old woman ; having noticed 
that the old man was drunk and in a state of complete unconscious­
ness, the cabman drew out a penknife and began to slash the old 
woman. He was arrested, and the little fool confessed then and 
there : "I don't know how this happened, and how I came to have 
the little knife in my hands." And, verily, he did not know it. Indeed, 
we are dealing precisely with environment :  he was caught and 
dragged, as into a machine, into the contemporaneous itch for de­
bauch, into the present-day popular tendency-gratuitous gain. Why 
shouldn't one try, even with a little penknife ? 
"No, thi .. i:; no tiror for propaganda for the protection of 
animals : this is a gentleman's fancy."-This is the very phrase I 
have heard, but I reject it emphatically. Not being a member of 
the Society, nevertheless I am ready to serve it, and, it seems, I 
am already servin!; it. I do not know if I have made clear, though 
partly, my desire about "the equilibrium I.Jf the activities of the 
Society with the temporary accidentals," which I have mentioned 
above ; but, realizing the humane and humanizing aims of the 
Society, I am profoundly devoted to it. I was never able to under­
stand the thought that only one-tenth of the people r.hould have the 
benefits of higher education, while the remaining nine-t .: :- :  hs should 
merely serve as material and means therefor, continui1· . to dwell 
in darkness. I do not wish to think, or even to live, other wise than 
with the faith that all of the ninety millions of us, ࣸussians (or 
whatever number of them may eventually be born ), will some day 
all be educated; humanized and happy. I know that universal educa­
tion can harm none of us. I even believe that the reign of reason 
and light may be inaugurated in our Russia, perhaps even sooner 
than elsewhere, since even now, in Russia, no one would favor the 
idea of the necessity of hestializing one part of the people for the 
well-being of another part representing civilization, as we find it 
all over Europe. In Russia, serfdom was abolished voluntar'ly by 
the upper class headed by the Czar's w:· · : And, for this 1 eason, 
once more I elcome most warmly and with all my heart, the 
Society for the Protrction of Animals ; I merely meant to express 
the thought that it would be desirable to act not always from the 
end but, at least partly, from the beginning. 

190 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
2 
SPI.RJTJSM. SOMETHING ABOUT DEVILS. EXTRAORDINARY 
CRAFTINESS OF THE DEVILS, IF ONLY THESE ARE DEvn.S. 
Now, however, I have written all over the paper, and there 
is no room any more, and yet I was about to discuss the war and 
our border regions ; I meant to dwell on literature, the Decembrists 
and, at least, on some fifteen topics or more. I can see that I must 
write more compactly and that I ought to compress myself : this 
is something to be remembered in the future. 
In passing-a few words about the Decembrists, so as not to 
forget. One of our journals, when announcing the recent death of 
one of them, stated that he was among the very last survivors of 
the Decembrists. This is not quite correct. Among the surviving 
Decembrists are : Ivan Alexandrovich Annenkov-the same one 
whose original story has been distorted by the late Dumas-pere in 
his well-known novel Les M emoires d'un M aitrc d' Armes ; Matvei 
lvanovich Muraviev-Apostol, the brother of the executed one ; Svis­
tunov and Nazimov. Perhaps there are other survivors also. 
Briefly-many things have to be postponed until the February 
issue. Still, I should Jike to bring my January diary to a close with 
something more jolly. There is a humorous theme and-this is 
important-it is in vogue ; namely, the topic of devil:;, of spiritism. 
Indeed, something strange is taking place. For instance, they write 
me that a young man seated himself in an armchair, crossing his 
legs in a Turkish fashion, and the armchair started jumping all 
over the room.-Mind you, this happened in Petersburg, in the 
capital ! Why, indeed, in days gone by, no one ever jumped, with 
crossed legs, in armchairs, and everyone was serving and modestly 
earning their ranks. 
People assert that in some province, in the house of a certain 
lady, there are so many devils that there aren't even half as many 
of the.m in the cabin of Uncle Eddy. Indeed, why shouldn't there 
be devils in our midst ?-Gogol, writing to Moscow from the world 
beyond, positively asserted that these are devils. I have read the 
letter : the style is his. He urges us not to evoke the devils, not to 
turn tables, not to ·have anything to do with them. "Don't tease 
the devils ; don't traffic with them. It is a sin to tease the devils . 
. . . If at night you should begin to suffer from nervous insomnia, 
don't get angry, but pray : those are devils. Cross your breast and 
say a prayer." 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
191 
Clergymen are raising their voices ; they are counselling science 
itself not to trafic with magic, not to investigate "that witchery." 
And if the clergy have raised their voices, this means that the 
thing is asuming momentous proportions. But the trouble is : are 
they devils ? Now, this question should be settled by the committee 
formed in Petersurg for the investigation of lhe whole subject of 
spiritism. Because, should it be finally determined that those are 
not devils, but some kind of electricity, some new modality of 
universal energy, then, at once complete disenchantment would 
ensue. "What a prodigy I "-they would say ; "What a tedium ! "  
And, promptly, everybody would forsake and forget spiritism, and 
they would start, as heretofore, attending to business. However, in 
order to determine whether or not these are devils, it would be 
necessary that at least one of the scientists, on the formed com­
mittee, be capable and be given the possibility to admit the ex­
istence of devils-even as a mere hypothesis. But there will be 
hardly one found among them who would believe in the devil, not­
withstandinƿ thP fact that among those people who do not believe 
in God there are very many who, with pleasure and readiness, 
believe in the devil. For this reason, the committee is incompetent 
in this matter. 
My whole tro11ble is that I, too, cannot believe in devils ; this 
is really a pity, sinct' I have conceived a very .. lear and most remark­
able theory of spiritism, but one exclusively based upon the ex­
istence of devils : without them, my whole theory comes to nought 
of its own accord. Now, it is this theory which, in conclusion, I 
intend to expound to my readers. The point is that I am defending 
the devils : for once, they are being attacked without ; u .  •· guilt on 
their part, and they are considered fools. lJon't worry : . ǀy know 
their business ; and this is what I intend to prove. 
To begin with, people write that the spirits are stupid (that 
is devils, the evil spirits, for what spirits other than devils can 
there be ?) ; that when they are being evoked and questioned (by 
means of table-turning), they respond with mere trivialities ; that 
they do not know the grammar ; that they have conveyed not one 
new thought, not a single invention. To judge thus is a gad.Ve error. 
What would have been the result, for instance, should the devils 
at once reveal their might and overwhelm men with inventions ? 
If, let us say, all of a sudden they were to invent electrical telegrǁphy 
(that is, if it had not already been invente'"''· or to divulge to man 
various secrets : "Dig over there, and you will find a treasure, or 
deposits of coal" (by the way, firewood is so expensive ! )-well, all 
this is but a mere trifle ! Of course, you understand that human 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
science is still in its infancy-actually, it is only beginning its work ; 
that if it did achieve anything solid, it is only that, for the time 
being, it stands firmly on its feet. And, unexpectedly, a series of 
inventions would come showering down, such as the fact that the 
sun remains motionless while the earth revolves around it (because 
surely there are many identical inventions, in magnitude, which 
have not yet been discovered, and of which our sages have not even 
dreamed) .  All of a sudden all knowledge would descend upon human­
kind, and-what is most important-altogether gratis, in the form 
of a gift I I ask you : what, in such an event, would happen to men ? 
-Oh, it goes without saying that, at first, they all would be seized 
with rapture. People would be ecstatically embracing one another ; 
they would rush to study the discoveries (and this would take time) ; 
they would feel, so to speak, bestrewn with happiness, interred in 
material blessings ; perhaps, they would be walking or flying in the 
air ; they would be flying over immense distances, ten times more 
quickly than they are now travelling on railroads ; they would be 
extracting out of the earth fabulous harvests ; maybe they would 
be chemically creating organismࣹ, and there would be three pounds 
of meat for every person, as our Russian socialists are wont to 
dream. Briefly : eat, drink and be merry. "Well," all philanthropists 
would exclaim in unison, "now that man is provided for, only now 
is he going to reveal himself ! There are no more material privations, 
there is no more of that · degrading 'milieu' which used to be the 
cause of all vices, and now man is going to become beautiful and 
righteous l There is no more incessant work for one's subsistence, 
and now all men will occupy themselves with lofty and profound 
thoughts, and with universal phenomena. Only now has sublime life 
begun I "  And what clever and good people, perhaps, would shout 
all this in unison and, possibly, in the beginning they would sway 
all others, and they would all start vociferating in one common 
hymn : "Who is equal to this beast ? Praise to him who has brought 
us fire from heaven l " 
But it is doubtful if these raptures would suffice even for one 
generation ! People would suddenly realize that there is no more 
life for them ; that there is no freedom of spirit, no will, no per­
sonality ; that someone has stolen everything from them ; that the 
human image has vanished and the bestial image of a slave, the 
cattle image, has come into being, with that difference, however, 
that the cattle do not know that they are cattle, whereas men would 
discover that they had become cattle. And mankind would begin 
rotting ; people would l>Kome covered with sores and ulcers ; they 
would start biting their tongues with pain, seeing that their lives 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
193 
had been taken away from them in exchange for bread, for "stones 
turned into bread." Men would grasp the fact that there is no 
happiness in inaction ; that idling thought must die ; that it is not 
possible to love one's neighbor by sacrificing to him one's labor ; 
that it is a nasty thing to be living gratuitously, and that happiness 
is not in happiness but in its pursuit. Tediurr. and anguish would 
ensue : everything has been accomplished-thert is nothing more to 
accomplish ; everything is known-there is nothing more to know. 
There would be crowds of felos-de-se, and not as at present-merely 
in miserable tenement houses ; people would be gathering in mul­
titudes, seizing each other by the hand, and spontaneou჌ly annihilat­
ing themselves by the thousands by means of some new device 
revealed to them along with other inventions. And, then, maybe, 
the remaining ones would cry out to God : "Thou art right, oh 
Lord : Man shall not live by bread alone ! "  Then they would rise 
against the devils and would forsake witchery . . . .  Oh, never would 
God inflict such a torture upon mankind ! And the devils' kingdom 
will be dest"oyd.! ࢭ No, the -:!evils will not commit a political error 
as momentous as this. They are shrewd politicians, and they pursue 
their goal by the most subtle and sanest means (that is, if devils 
actually exist) .  
The principle ,.i their kingdom is discord-or rather i t  is upon 
discord that they seck to found it. Why do Lhey need discord pre­
cisely here ?-Certainly : think only that discord, in itself, is a ter­
rible power ; discord, after a protracted strife, leads men to folly, 
to blindness and to distortion of reason and feelings. In discord the 
affronter, having realized that he was the one who gave the offense, 
does not go to make peace with the offt>nrled, but l- ;.:  ;ays : "I 
offended him, and so I must avenge myself on him." But . 1e main 
point is that the devils know world history perfectly well, and they 
especially remember everything that was hased upon .-liscord. For 
example, they know that if sects persist in Europe-those which 
detached themselves from Catholicism-if they continue to adhere 
to their beliefs as to a religious creed, this is solely due to the 
fact that in days past blood was shed on their account. Were, let 
us say, Catholicism to come to an end, the Protestant sects would 
of necessity be drstroyed . in this evrnt what would there be left 
to protest against ? Even now, virtually all of them are iჍclined 
to embrace some sort of "humanity," or even outright athei჎m­
this, by the way, has long been observed in '•eir midst-and it they 
continue to vegetate as religions, this is due to the fact that they 
are still protesting. Even last year they were protesting, and how ? 
They aimed at the Pope himself. 

194 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
Why, of course, in the long run the devils will have it their 
own way, and they will crush man, like some fly, with "stones turned 
into bread" : this is their fundamental aim, but they will embark 
upon this venture not otherwise than by securing in advance their 
future kingdom against man's rebellion, and thereby they will assure 
longevity of their reign. But how is man to be tamed ? Naturally, 
by "divide et impera" (split the enemy and you will triumph) .  
For this, discord is needed. On the other hand, people will grow 
weary of stones turned into bread, and, therefore, it is necessary 
to find occupation for them so that they will not grow weary. And 
isn't discord an occupation for men I 
Now, please observe how the devils sow discord among us, and, 
so to speak, they start our spiritism with discord. Our disturbed 
time in this respect comes to their assistance. How many people, 
among those believing in spiritism, have already been offended I 
They are shouted at ; they are being ridiculed because they believe 
in "tables," as though they had committed, or were contemplating, 
some dishonest deed ; but they stubbornly continue to investigate 
their problem in spite of the discord. Indeed, how can they give 
up their inquiries : the devils begin from the far end, they arouse 
curiosity, but they are causing confusion instead of explaining the 
thing ; they perplex people and laugh at them straight before their 
eyes. An intelligent man worthy of every respect stands and knits 
his brow ; he keeps asking ·himself : "What is this ?" Finally, he is 
ready to give up the problem, to leave it alone, but laughter among 
the public grows merrier, and the affair expands to the point where 
the adept, willy-nilly, must stay on out of mere amour-propre. 
We have before us the committee for the investigation of the 
subject of spiritism, fully armed with science. There is expectancy 
among the public. And what ?-The devils do not even pretend to 
offer any resistance ; on the contrary, most humiliatingly, they 
"pass" : seances are unsuccessful ; deceit and trickery are disclosed. 
Angry laughter sounds on all sides ; the committee leaves with con­
temptuous glances ; adepts in spiritism are plunged into shame ; a 
spiteful feeling creeps into the hearts on both sides. Now, it would 
sem that there is nothing left to the devils but to perish. But no ! 
-The moment scientists and serious-minded people turn their heads, 
the devils promptly perform some even more supernatural trick to 
their former adepts, :.nd they are again convinced-even more firmly 
than before. Again temptation ! Again discord I 
Last summer, in Paris, a photographer was tried for spiritistic 
frauds : he had been evoking deceased persons and photographing 
them. He had been getting heaps of orders. But he was "pinched," 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
195 
and made a full confession at the trial ; he even produced the lady 
who had helped him by representing the evoked shadows. What 
would you think ? did those who had been deceived by the photog­
rapher believe it ?-Not in the least. One of them was reported to 
have said : "Three of my children have died : no pictures of them 
were left ; now, the photographer has taken traeir pictures for me ; 
they all resemble them-I recognized them all. What is it to me 
that he has confessed his frauds to you ?-This is up to him, but 
I hold in my hand a fact ; and do, please, leave me in peace." This 
appeared in the newspapers. I don't know if I have correctly stated 
the details, but the gist of the matter is correct. 
Now what, for instance, if an incident such as this should 
happen here ?-The moment the Committee, after finishing its busi­
ness and exposing the pitiful tricks, would turn away, the devils 
would seize one of its most obdurate members-say, Mr. Mendeleev 
himself, who has exposed spiritism at public lectures-and would 
catch him in their net, as they have, in the past, caught Crookes 
and Olcott : wht if. after 'hat they would take him aside, would 
lift him in the air for five minutes, and would materialize for him 
some deceased person with whom he used to be acquainted, and 
all this in a manner precluding any doubt-well, what would happen 
then ? As a genuinP scientist, he would have to recognize the fait 
accompli-he who h;.s been delivering lectu, es ! What a tableau, 
what a shame, what a scandal ; what cries and what indignant vocif­
eration ! -Of course, this is merely a jest, and I am convinced that 
nothing of the kind will happen to Mr. Mendeleev, although in 
England and in America the devils, it would seem, arted exactly in 
accordance with this plan. 
And what if the devils, having prepared the grounL 
'ld hav­
ing sufficiently sown discord, should suddenly decide to expand un­
limitedly their activities and turn to real. serious bus; ness ? They 
are sarcastic and unpredictable folks, fully capable of such a thing. 
What, for instance, if they should unexpectedly, together with lit­
eracy, burst into the common people's midst ? And our people are so 
defenseless, so addicted to darkness and debauch, and in this respect 
they have, it would seem, so few leaders ! The people m1ght take 
passionate credence in thece new phenomena (don't they believe in 
the 11lvans Filippovichs"?)-then, what a delay in their spiritual de­
velopment, what damage, and for ow l
.
on჏! Wha.t an idolat_!'ous 
worship of materialism, and what d1scora ! 
Vha.t Iscord.r -A &lUn­
dred a thousand times more than before, anu th1s IS precisely what 
the devils are after. And discord would unquestionably ensue, espe­
cially should spiritism succeed in invoking restrictions and pene-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
cution (these would inevitably follow on the part of the rest of the 
people who would not take credence in spiritism) ;-in this case it 
would instantly diffuse itself, as burning petroleum, and everything 
would be set afire. Mystical ideas enjoy persecution ; they are 
created by it. Every persecuted idea is similar to that petroleum 
which was poured over the floors and walls of The Tuileries by the 
incendiaries before the conflagration in the building whic!1 they 
were supposed to guard. Oh, yes, the devils know the power of an 
interdicted belief, and maybe they have been waiting many a cen­
tury for mankind to stumble against tables. Of course they are 
ruled by some immense evil spirit, some dreadful force-one far 
smarter than Mephistopheles who, according to the assertion of 
Yakov Petrovich Polonsky, has made Goethe famous. 
Naturally, I have been jesting and laughing from the first 
word to the last ; yet this is what I wish to express in conclusion : 
if one were to regard spiritism as something carrying within itself 
a new creed (and virtually all spiritists, even the sanest among 
them, are a bit inclined toward such a view), certain of the above 
J;tatements could be accepted-even not in a jesting sense. And, 
for this reason, may God speedily bring success to a free investiga­
tion by both sides ; this alone will help to eradicate, as quickly as 
possible, the spreading stench, and this might enrich science with 
a new discovery. But to აbout at each other, to defame and expel 
each other from society an account of spiritism-this, to my way 
of thinking, means nothing but consolidating and propagating the 
idea of spiritism in its worst sense. This is the beginning of in­
tolerance and persecution. 
And this is precisely what the devils are after ! 
3 
A WoRD APROPOS OF MY BIOGRAPHY 
The other day I was shown my biography printed in The 
Russian Encyclopedic Dictionary, published by Professor I. N. 
Berezin of the St. Petersburg University (Second Year, Issue V, 
2nd Book, z875 )  and compiled by Mr. V. Z. It is difficult to imagine 
that so many errors could have been crowded into half a page. 
I was born not irf t8r8, but in 1822.1 My late brother, Mikhail 
Mikhailovich, the editor of the magazines Time and Epoch, was 
my elder brother, and not my junior by four years. After the ex­
piration of my term at hind labor, to which I was sent in 1849 as 
1 Dostoievsky himself made a mistake : he was born not in 1822, but on 
October 30, 1B2r. (B. B.) 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
197 
a state criminal (not a word is mentioned by Mr. V. Z. on the nature 
of my crime, it being merely stated that I was "mixed up with the 
Petrashevsky case," i.e., God knows what the crime was, since no 
one is obliged to know and remember the Petrashevsky case, while 
an Encyclopedic Dictionary is designed for general information, and 
people might think that I was exiled for roLi.ery)-after the term 
of my conviction, by the will of the Emperor, I was immediately 
inducted as a private, and three years later I was promoted to the 
rank of officer. But I was never deported [settled] to Siberia, as 
Mr. V. Z. states. The order of my literary works is mixed up : stories 
belonging to the earliest petiod of my literary career are attributed 
in the biography to the latest pedod. There are many such errors, 
and I am not enumerating them in order not to bore the reader ; 
however, if I should be challenged, J will indicate them. But there 
are pure fabrications. 1\lr. V. Z. asserts that I was editor of The 
Russian World. In answer to this, I declare that I was never editor 
of the newspaper The Russian World ; moreover, never did I have 
a single linP J•r:Pff'l] in that esteemed publication. 
No doubt, l\lr. V. Z. [:\lr. Vladimir Zotov ?) may adopt his 
own point of view ; he may regard as the least important matter 
the presentation, in a biographical sketch of a writer, of correct 
information on thP year of his birth, the adventures he has ex­
perienced, where, w llბn and in what order his works have been pub­
lished ; which of them should be considered as the initial ones, and 
which the concluding ones ; which publications he has edited, and 
to which ones he has contributed. Nevertheless, for the sake of 
mere accuracy, one would wish more sense. Otherwise, perhaps, 
readers may think that all the other sketches in Mr. ll"• '"z:in's dic­
tionary are compiled as slovenly as the one relating to my 
'lgraphy. 
4 
A TuRKISH PI<.OVERB 
In passing, and at all events, I will interject here a Turkish 
proverb (a real Turkish one and not an invented one) : 
"If thou hast starter! out to rt>arh a certain goal, and if 
thou shouldst be stopping en route to throw stones at everგ· dog 
barking at thee, thou shalt never reach "Y goal." 
As far as possible, I shall in my Diary try to abide by this 
wise proverb, even though I should not wish to bind myself before­
·hand with promises. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
FF.RRlTA R V  
CHAPTER I 
1 
On the Subject that We All are Good Fellows. Resem­
blance between Russia11 Society and Marshal MacMahon. 
THE FIRST issue of A Writer's Diary has been received 
cordially : almost no one has scolded it-I mean, in literature ; as 
for the rest, I don't know. If there has been literary abuse, it has 
been unnoticeable. The Petersburg Gazette hastened to remind the 
public that I do not like children, youngsters in their teens and the 
young generation ; and in the same issue, in its feuilleton at the 
bottom, it reprinted from my Diary a whole story, A Little Boy at 
Christ's Christmas Tree, which, at least, goes to prove that I do not 
hate children wholeheartedly. Of course, these are mere trifles, and 
I am interested only in the question : is it, or is it not, good that I 
have pleased everybody ? Is it a good or a bad sign ? For it may be 
a bad sign. But no : why should it be ?-Better accept it as a good 
and not a bad sign. I shall stop at that. 
Indeed, we are all good fellows-except the bad ones, of course. 
Yet, I shall observe in passing that among us, perhaps, there are 
no bad people at all-maybe, only wretched ones. But we have not 
grown up to be bad. Don,.t scoff at me, but consider : we have reached 
the point in the past where, because of the absence of bad people 
of our own ( I  repeat : despite the abundance of all sorts of wretches) ,  
we used to be ready, for instance, to value very highly various bad 
little fellows appearing among our literary characters, mostly bor­
rowed from foreign sources. Not only did we value them, but we 
slavishly sought to imitate them in real life ; we used to copy them, 
and in this respect we were ready to jump out of our skins. Do 
please recall : didn't we have a number of Pecborins who, in fact 
and in reality, committed many villainies after having read A Hero 
of Our Days ? The forefather of these bad men in our literature was 
one Silvio in the story The Shot, which was borrowed by the naive 
and beautiful Pushli in from Byron. Besides, Pechorin himself killed 
Grushnitzky only because be was not showy enough in his uniform, 
and at balls in the Petersburg beau monde he little resembled, at 
least in the opinion of the fair sex, a real dashing fellow. 
And if, in those days, we used to value and respect these evil 
people, it was solely due to the fact that they appeared as men of 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
199 
solid hate in contradistinction to us, Russians, who, as is well known, 
are people of very fragile hate, and this trait of ours we have always 
particularly despised. Russians are unable to hate long and seriously, 
and not only men but even vices-the darkness of ignorance, des­
potism, obscurantism and all the rest of these retrograde things. At 
the very first opportunity we are quick and e.tger to make peace. 
Isn't this so ?-In point of fact, please consider . why should we be 
hating each other ? For evil deeds ?-But this is a very slippery, most 
ticklish and most unjust theme-in a word, a double-edged one ; at 
least, in our day one should not be touching upon it. There remains, 
then, the hatred arising out of convictions, but in this respect I 
disbelieve altogether the seriousness of our hatreds. For instance, in 
the past we had our Slavophiles and Westerners, and they used to 
fight bitterly with each other. But at present, with the abolition of 
serfdom, Peter's reform has been terminated, and there has ensued 
a general sauve qui peut. And now Slavophiles and Westerners are 
agreed on one and the same thought : that at present one has to 
expect everytl.i.,g from the !Jeople, that they have arisen and they 
are marching, and that they-and they alone-will utter the last 
word. It might have seemed that on this basis peace between Slavo­
philes and Westerners could be brought about, but things have hap­
pened differently : Ϳlavophiles believe in the people because they 
admit in them thr uistence of their own }Jrinciples, peculiar to 
them ; whereas Westerners are ready to believe in the people, on 
the express condition, however, that the people be devoid of their 
own principles. So the fight continues. Now. what would you make 
of this ?-1 even refuse to believe that there is a fight ; fighting is 
fighting, but love is love. And why couldn't fighters a• the same 
time love each other ?-On the contrary, in our midst thi. 'appens 
quite often in cases where really good people come to blows. And 
why aren't we good fellows (again : except the wretch"d ones) ?­
The point is that we are fighting primarily and solely because now 
it is no longer a time for throries, for journalistic skirmishes, but 
the time for work and practical decisions. All of a sudden it became 
necessary to pronounce positive judgments-on education, pedagogy, 
railroads, zemstvos, medical matters, etc., on hundreds o; topics­
and what is most import.,nt, it has got to be done right away, 
as 3uickly as possible, in order not to delay the work. And since 
we all due to two centuries of lack of habit of work, have prrwed 
altogether incapable of any, even of the mr ·t trifling, work, Uc!tU­
rally people are clutching each other's h_ai, , al"'d even the more 
incompetent one feels, the mo.re eager he IS to ?gt. Wha, I may 
ask you, is there bad about 1t ?-Only, that th1s 
_
Is touchmg-and 
nothing more. Look at children : they fight prec1sely at the age 

200 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
when they have not yet learned to express their thoughts-exactly 
as we. Well, in this there is absolutely nothing discouraging ; on the 
contrary, this merely proves to a certain extent our freshness and, 
so to speak, our virginity. True, in literature, because of the absence 
of ideas, people scold each other, using all invectives at once : this 
is an impossible and naive method observed only among primitive 
peoples ; but, God knows, even in this there is something almost 
touching : exactly that inexperience, that childish incompetence even 
in scolding in a proper manner. I am by no means jesting ; I am 
not jeering : among us there is a widespread, honest and serene 
expectation of good (this is so, no matter what one might say to 
the contrary) ; a longing for common work and common good, and 
this-ahead of any egoism ; this is a most naive longing, full of faith 
devoid of any exclusive or caste tinge, and even if it does appear 
in paltry and rare manifestations, it comes as something unnotice­
able, which is despised by everybody. This is very important-and 
do you know why ?-In that this is not only little but, indeed, ever 
so much. 
Well, this would seem plenty for us, and why should we be 
looking for "solid hate" ?-The honesty and sincerity of our society 
not only cannot be doubted, but they even spring up into one's 
eyes. Look attentively and you will see that, in our case, first comes 
faith in an idea, in an ideal, while earthly goods come after. Yes, 
nasty folks in our midst, too, manage to arrange their affairs in 
a very different sense ; and this seems to be true in our day even 
infinitely more than ever before ; yet these wretches never com­
mand public opinion, they do not lead ; on the contrary, even when 
enjoying top honors, time and again, they have felt compelled to 
adapt themselves to the tone of idealistically inclined, young, ab­
stract, poor people, who seem funny to them. In this respect our 
society is akin to the people, who also treasure their faith and their 
ideals above anything mundane and transient, and herein is the 
main point of contact between society and the people. This idealism 
is pleasing both here and there : should it be lost, it couldn't be 
retrieved with any amount of money. 
Even though our people are addicted to debauch-now more 
strongly than at any time in the past-as yet, in them, there has 
never been a sense of lawlessness, and even the basest scoundrel 
among the people didn't say : "One has to act as I do,"-but, con­
trariwise, he always lamentingly believed that he was doing wrong ; 
that there exists something far superior to him and his doings. 
And our people do· have ideals-lofty ones, too-and this is 
the main thing : circumstances will change ; matters will improve, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
201 
and perhaps debauch will spring away from the people, while the 
noble principles will be held still steadier, with even greater rever­
ence than ever before. Our youth is longing for glorious exploits and 
sacrifices. The lad of our days, about whom so many controversial 
things are said, often adores a most naive paradox, sacrificing for 
it everything-the world, his fate, his very life ; but this is due 
only to the fact that he regards his paradox ns the truth. Here we 
are merely confronted with lack of enlightenment. When light ap­
pears, different viewpoints will arise of their own accord ; paradoxes 
will vanish, but the purity of heart, the thirst for sacrifice and 
exploits, which gleam in him so brightly, will not fade. And this 
is what really counts. 
Of course, this is another matter and an altogether different 
question : wherein do all of us, longing for the general welfare and 
hoping in full accord for the success of the common cause-precisely 
wherein do we perceive the means therefor ? One has to admit that 
in this respect we have as yet by no means reached any agreement, 
so that our !"rP!';t'nt-day c;ociety closely resembles Marshal Mac­
Mahon. During one of his most recent journeys through France the 
esteemed Marshal, in one of his solemn addresses in response to 
the mayor's greetings (and the French are so enthusiastic about 
all sorts of greetiP΀s and speeches in reply ! ) , declared that, in his 
opinion, the whob' policy may be expressr d in the motto : "Love 
of fatherland." This opinion has been uttered at a time when the 
whole of France, so to speak, strained herself in expectation of 
what he would say. This is a strange, unquestionably laudable, and 
yet remarkably indeterminate, opinion, since that mayor could have 
answered in rebuttal that some love rna} drown the fat:;,.rland. But 
the mayor said nothing-no doubt, because he was afra 
of receiv­
ing the reply : "J'y suis, et j'y reste !"-a phrase beyond which, it 
seems, the honored Marshal will not go. 
Even so : this is exactly as in our society : we all agree on 
our love, if not of our native land, then-of the ..:ommon cause (words 
mean nothing), but wherein we perceive the means-not only the 
means, but the common cause itself-on this point there prevails 
in our midst the same confusion as in :\larshal ΁.:acMahon's 
mind. 
For this reason, even though I have pleased everybody, and 
despite the fact that I am, indeed, very grateful that a hand has 
been extended to me, nevertheless I anticir'lte that in furthe! details 
there may arise very substantial differem . ..:s, o;ince I am unable to 
be in accord with everybody no matter .how accommodating a man 
I may be. 

202 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
2 
ON THE LOVE OF THE PEOPLE. THE KECESSARY CONTRACT 
WITH THE PEOPLE. 
For instance I have written in the January issue of my Diary 
that our people are coarse and ignorant, addicted to darkenss and 
debauch ; that they are "barbarians awaiting the light." Since then, 
I have just read in Brotherly Help (a volume published by the 
Slavic Committee for the benefit of the Slavs fighting for their 
freedom), in an article of the unforgettable late Konstantin Aksakov, 
so dear to all Russians, that the Russian people have been enlight­
ened and "educated." What then ? Was I taken aback by such an 
apparent difference of opinion between myself and Konstantin Ak­
sakov ?-Not in the least : I share his opinion, and I have long and 
ardently sympathized with it. How do I reconcile the contradiction ? 
-The point is that, to my way of thinking, it is very easy to recon­
cile it, whereas, according to others, much to my surprise, the two 
propositions are irreconcilable. 
One has to be able to differentiate in a Russian belonging to 
the common people between his beauty and his alluvial barbarism. 
Owing to circumstances, almost throughout the whole history of 
Russia, the people have been so addicted to debauch, they have 
been subjected to so much depravity and seduction, to so much 
torture, that it is really surprising how they have managed to succeed 
in preserving their human image, not to speak of its beauty. Yet 
they did preserve also the beauty of their image. A true friend of 
mankind whose heart has but once quivered in compassion over the 
sufferings of the people, will understand and forgive all the impas­
sable alluvial filth in which they are submerged, and will be able 
to discover diamonds in this filth. 
I repeat : judge the Russian people not by those villainies 
which they frequently perpetrate, but by those great and holy things 
for which they long amidst the very villainy. Besides, the people 
are not composed of scoundrels only ; there are also genuine saints 
-and what saints I They themselves are radiant and they illuminate 
the path for all of us ! Somehow, I am blindly convinced that there 
is no such villain or scoundrel among the Russian people who 
wouldn't admit that,he is villainous and abominable, whereas, among 
others, it does happen sometimes that a person commits a villainy 
and praises himself for it, elevating his villainy to the level of a 
principle, and claiming that l'ordre and the light of civilization are 
precisely expressed in that abomination ; the unfortunate one ends 
by believing this sincerely, blindly and even honestly. No, judge 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
203 
our people not by what they are, but by what they strive to become. 
And their ideals are vigorous and sacred ; they have saved the 
people during the ages of their martyrdom. These ideals have grown 
into their very soul, rewarding it with candor and honesty, with 
sincerity and a broad, all-receptive mind-and all these, in an 
attractive harmonious blending. If, despite tltis, there is so much 
filth, the Russian himself suffers from it most and believes that it 
is something alluvial and transient, a diabolical suggestion ; that 
darkness will disappear arid perpetual light will beam. 
I will not recall the people's historical ideals, their Serges, 
Theodosiuses Pechersky and even Tikhon Zadonsky. By the way, 
do many people know about Tikhon Zadonsky ? Why should one 
be so blankly ignorant ; why should one promise oneself not to 
read ? Is it for lack of time ? Believe me, gentlemen, much to your 
astonishment, you would be learning beautiful things. But I had 
better turn to our literature : all that is genuinely beautiful in it 
has been borrowtd from the people, starting with the humble, in­
genious tyoc of Belkin conceived by Pushkin. Indeed, in Russia 
everything emanates from Pushkin. His turning to the people at 
so early a period of his work is so unprecedented and amazing ; 
in those days it was such an unexpectedly new idea that it may 
be explained, if no• by a miracle, then by the extraordinary great­
ness of his geniul> which, I will add in passing, we are as yet unable 
to evaluate. I shall not mention the purely national types which 
have appeared in our time, but do recall Oblomov and Turgenev's 
Gentlefolk's Nest. Of course, here we are not dealing with the 
people ; yet all that is lasting and beautiful in these types of Gon­
charov and Turgenev-all this is due to the fact that, tl•-ough them, 
they established contact with the peoplt:. This conta · 
with the 
people has conveyed to them extraordinary potency. · . hey have 
borrowed the people's candor, purity, gentleness, breadth of mind 
and benignancy, in contradistinction to everything that is distorted, 
false, alluvial and slavishly imitative 
Don't be surprised that unexpectedly I have started to speak 
about Russian literature. Our literature precisely has the merit 
that, almost without any exception, its best representa•:ves, ahead 
of our intelligentsia-please not«: this point-bowed before the popu­
lar truth, and recognized the people's ideals as genuinely beautiful. 
In fact, literature was compelled to adopt them as standards, almost 
involuntarily. Verily, in this respect, it was prompted by · rtistic 
instinct rather than by free will. However, 1 Jr the time.being, enough 
has been said about literature ; besides, I started speaking about it 
only apropos of the people. 
The question concerning the people and one's upinion of them 

204 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
-of understanding them-is at present the most momentous ques­
tion from the standpoint of our whole future ; moreover, in our 
day, it is, so to speak, our most practical question. And yet, to 
all of us, the people are still a theory and they continue to loom 
as an enigma. We all, lovers of the people, regard them as a theory, 
and it seems that none of us like them as they really are, but as 
each one has represented them to himself. Even more : should the 
Russian people, at some future time, turn out to be different from 
our conception of them, we all, despite our love of them, would 
possibly renounce them without any regret. I am speaking about 
everybody, not excepting Slavophiles ; these would, perhaps, re­
nounce the people more bitterly than the rest. 
As for myself I shall not conceal my convictions, precisely in 
order to give a clearer outline of the future orientation which my 
Diary is goin΂ to assume-just to avoid misunderstandings-so that 
everybody should know in advance whether or not it is worth while 
extending to me his literary hand. 
I think this way : hardly are we so good and beautiful as to 
set ourselves up as an ideal to the people and to demand from them 
that they should become as we quand-meme. Please don't be sur­
prised at the nonsensical way in which the question has been put. 
However, we never did put this question differently :  "Who is better 
-we or the people ?  Do the people have to follow us, or do we have 
to follow the people ?"-This is what everybody says-among those 
who are at least not devoid of a shadow of thought in their heads 
and a drop of concern in their hearts for the common cause. For 
this reason I shall candioly reply : it is we who have to bow before 
the people and await from them everything-both thought and ex­
pression ; it is we who must bow before the people's truth and 
recognize it as such-even in that dreadful event if it has partly 
emerged out of the Acta Martyrum. In a word : we must bow like 
prodigal children who, for two hundred years, have been absent 
from home, but who nevertheles΃ have returned Russians-which. 
by the way, is our great merit. 
On the other hand, however, we must bow on one condition 
only, and this-sine qua non: that the people accept from us those 
numerous things which we have brought with us. Indeed, we cannot 
completely exterminate ourselves in the face of the people, or even 
-before any truth of theirs, whatever it may be. Let our own remain 
with us, and for nothing in the world shall we part with it, not 
even-if it should come to this-for the happiness of the fusion 
with the people. In the reverse case, let us separate and let us both 
perish, apart. But there will never be a "contrary case." And I 
am firmly convinced that this something which we have brought 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
205 
with us really does exist ; it is not a mirage, but it possesses both 
form and weight. Nevertheless, I repeat, there is much ahead of 
us that is an enigma-so much, in fact, that one dreads to keep on 
waiting. 
For instance, it is being predicted that civilization will spoil 
the people : supposedly, it might assume a (.1 1urse in which, along 
with salvation and enlightenment, there will bllrst in so much that 
is false and deceitful, so many nasty habits and so much agitation 
that, perhaps, only in some future generations-in two hundred years 
maybe-will healthy seeds grow up, while we and our children must 
probably anticipate something dreadful. Is this your opinion, gen­
tlemen ? Are our people predestined to pass through an additional 
phase of debauch and deceit, similar to that through which we 
have passed when we have been inoculated by civilization ? ( I  be­
lieve that no one will deny that we have started our civilization 
directly with debauch ! )-In this connection I should like to hear 
something more encouraging. I am strongly inclined to believe that 
our people rnn ޽!޾ute such " ll  immensity that in it all the new muddy 
currents, should they happen to spring up from somewhere, will be 
eliminated of their own accord. 
To this end-let me have your hand ; let us jointly help to 
carry out the taslr -each one by his own "microscopical" action­
in a straighter am: ;ess erroneous manner. ':"rue, in this respect we 
ourselves are devoid of any skill ; we merely "love our fatherland" ;  
we shall lind no common language on the questions of means ; we 
shall quarrel many a time. Still, if it has been decided that we are 
good fellows, then, no matter what the outcome may be, in the 
long run things will adjust themselves. 
Such is my creed. I reiterate : here we have a h. -hundred­
year-old want of habit of work-nothing more. Owing ttJ this lack 
of habit, we have terminated our "cultured period" with the fact 
that all of us have ceased to understand one another. Of course, I 
am speaking only about serious and sincere people : only, these do 
not understand each other ; speculators-well, that's a different af­
fair : they have always understood each other. 
3 
PEASANT MARth 
However, all these professions de fo,, I believe, must make 
weary reading. Therefore, I will relate an anecdote ; why, even not 
an anecdote : just a remote reminiscence which, for some reason, I 
am quite eager to recount precisely here and now, in conclusion of 

.:!06 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
our treatise on the people. I was then only nine years old . . . .  1'\o, 
I had better start with the time when I was twenty-nine. 
It was the second day of Easter Week. The air was warm, 
the sky was blue ; the sun stood high-a "warm," bright sun-but in 
my soul it was very dark. I was roaming in the rear of the barracks ; 
I was looking at and counting the planks of the solid prison fence ; 
but still I had no desire to count them, although this became a 
habit with me. It was on the second day that, in the prison, "merri­
ment was in full swing" : convicts were not taken out for work ; 
there were many drunken people ; revilements and quarrels ensued 
every minute in every corner. Hideous, nasty songs ; card-playing 
beneath the sleeping-boards ; several convicts, already beaten al­
most to death for exceptional turbulence, by verdict of their com­
panions, were lying on the boards and covered up with sheepskin 
coats till such time as they might revive and come to their senses ; 
knives, already drawn several times ;-all this in the course of the 
two-day holiday had exhausted me to the point of sickness. Never 
could I stand without disgust drunken popular rakishness, and 
particularly in this place. On these days even the authorities avoided 
the prison ; no searches were conducted ; nor was liquor looked for ; 
they understood that, after all, once a year it was necessary to 
permit even these outcasts to indulge in merriment, thereby pre­
venting worse happenings. 
Finally, anger arose in my heart : I met a Pole, M-tzki, a 
political criminal. He looked at me gloomily, his eyes flashing ; his 
lips began to tremble : "Je hais ces brigands !"-he told me in a low 
voice, grinding his teeth, and passed by. I returned to the barracks, 
notwithstanding the fact that only a quarter of an hour before I 
had run out of it, like a madman, when six robust peasants, all 
together, threw themselves upon the drunken Tartar Gazin, in order 
to subdue him, and started beating him ; they beat him foolishly­
a camel could be killed with such blows, but they knew that it was 
difficult to kill this Hercules, and so they beat him without fear. 
As I came back I noticed in the far end of the barracks, on sleeping­
boards in the corner, the now unconscious Gazin, with almost no 
signs of life. He lay there, covered with a sheepskin coat, and every­
body passed around him in silence : they firmly believed that by 
the next morning Gazin would come to his senses, "but of such 
blows the man-God forbid-might, perhaps, die." I made my way 
to my place opposite a window barred with an iron grating and 
lay down on my back, throwing my arms behind my neck and clos­
ing my eyes. I was fond of lying in that position : people will not 
annoy a sleeping person, and yet one may be meditating and think­
ing. But somehow I could not meditate : my heart was beating 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
207 
irregularly, and in my ear:; I could hear 1\I-tzki's words sounding : 
"le hais ces brigands !" However, what is the use of describing my 
impressions : even now, at times, I have dreams about this at night, 
and none of my dreams are ever more poignant than this one. 
Perhaps I will be reminded that up to the present day almost never 
have I spoken in print about my life in pri ,on, whereas I wrote 
my Letters from a Dead House fifteen years .1go under the name 
of a fictitious person, a criminal who supposedly had murdered his 
wife. In passing, I may add, by way of detail, that since that time 
many people have been under the impression, and are even now 
asserting, that I was exiled for the murder of my wife. 
By-and-by, I really forgot myself and became absorbed in 
reminiscences. Uninterruptedly, I was recalling all of the four years 
of my forced labor and, it seems, once more I was living my whole 
life over again in these recollections. They invaded my mind of 
their own accord, and only on rare occasions did I evoke them by 
a deliberate effon of my will. It used to begin with some speck, 
some trait-a! tirnes almo޿t imperceptible-and then, gradually, it 
would grow into a complete picture-some strong and solid impres­
sion. I used to analyze these impressions, adding new touches to 
things long ago outlived, and-what is more important-! used to 
correct, continuallv correct, them. Therein lay my whole diversion. 
On this occasion J ,uddenly realized one irr perceptible moment in 
my early childhood, when I was only nine years old-a moment 
which, so it seemed, was altogether forgotten by me ; but in those 
days I used to be particularly fond of reminiscences about my 
earliest infancy. I recalled the month of August in our village : a 
dry and clear day, though somewhat chilly and windy ; :he summer 
was coming to an end, and soon I should uave to go · 
Moscow, 
again to be wearied all winter over l'rench lessons ; anc. I was so 
sad over the fact that I would have to leave the country. I went 
beyond the barns and, having descended to a ravine, 1 climbed up 
to the "Losk"-thus was called a thick shrub߀ery on yonder side 
of the ravine, which extended as far as the grove. Presently I 
plunged deeper into the bushes, and then I heard not far off-some 
thirty steps away-in a field, a solitary peasant plowii:;;. I knew 
that he was plowing stf'eply uphill, that it was difficult for the 
horse to get along, and, from time to time, I heard the man's 
halloos : "Giddap-giddap I " I knew virtually all of our peasants, 
but I didn't recognize the one now plowi11g ; but this wa!' Jf no 
concern to me, since I was absorbed in m) task-I also was busy : 
I was trying to hreak a walnut whip for myself, to hit frogs ; walnut 
whips are so pretty, though not solid-no comparison with birch 
ones ! I was also interested in insects and beetles ; T was collecting 

208 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
them-among them there are very neat ones. I was also fond of 
little agile lizards with tiny black dots ; but I was afraid of little 
snakes ; these, however, were found far more rarely than lizards. 
Here, there were few mushrooms-to find mushrooms one had to go 
to the birch grove, and I intended to proceed thither. And in all my 
life nothing have I loved as much as the forest, with its mushrooms 
and wild berries, its insects and birds and little hedgehogs and 
squirrels ; its damp odor of dead leaves, which I so adored. Even 
now, as I am writing these lines, it seems that I can smell the odor 
of our country birch grove : these impressions remain intact through­
out one's whole life. Suddenly, amidst the profound silence, clearly 
and distinctly, I heard the cry : "A wolf's running ! "  I let out a 
scream and, beside myself with fright, and vociferating, I ran out 
into the field, straight up to the plowing peasant. 
This was our peasant Marei. I don't know if there is such a 
name, but everybody called him Marei ; he was almost fifty years 
old, stocky, pretty tall, with much gray hair in his bushy flaxen 
beard. I knew him, but up to that time I had never had occasion 
to talk to him. When he heard my cries, he stopped his little filly, 
and when I, in the heat of running, seized the plow with one hand, 
and with the other-his sleeve, he sensed my dread. 
"A wolf's running I "-I shouted, quite out of breath. 
He raised his head and impulsively looked around, for an 
instant almost believing my words. 
''Where's the wolf?" 
"Shouted . . .  someone had just shouted : 'a wolf's running I ' " 
-I lisped. 
· 
"What's the matter with you ?-What wolf ?-This appeared 
to you in a dream ! Look I How can a wolf be here I "-he muttered, 
trying to enhearten me. But my whole body was trembling and 
I was clinging ever so fast to his coat. I must have looked very 
pale. He looked at me with an uneasy smile, apparently alarmed 
on my account. 
"See, how thou art frightened I Oh, oh ! "-he said, shaking his 
head. "Never mind, dear. See, little kid I Oh I "  
H e  extended his hand and stroked me on my cheek. "Do 
stop fearing I Christ be with thee. Cross thyself." 
But I did not cross myself ; the corners of my lips quivered 
and, I believe, this was what impressed him most. Slowly he stretched 
out his thick finger, with the black nail soiled with earth, and 
gently touched my trembling lips. 
"See I Oh I "-And· he looked at -Rte with a long motherly 
smile.-"Good Lord I What's this ? Oh, oh 1 "  
Finally, I grasped the fact that there was no wolf, and that 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
209 
the cry "a wolf's running" must have been falsely heard by me. 
Still, there was a clear and distinct cry, but pseudo cries of this 
kind had been heard by me two or three times before, and I was 
aware of this. (Later, with childhood, these hallucinations disap­
peared.) 
"Why, I'll go ! "-I said, questioningly ... 1d timidly looking at 
the peasant. 
"All right, go ! And I shall be keeping thee in sight ! Be sure, 
I shall not surrender thee to the wolf I "-he added with the same 
motherly smile.-"Well, Christ be with thee. Now, go I "-And he 
crossed me with his hand and then crossed himself. I started, but 
every ten steps I kept looking back. To be frank, I was a little 
ashamed that I got so frightened in his presence. Yet, on my way 
I was still quite afraid of the wolf till I had reached the slope of 
the ravine, and then the first barn. There, fright left me altogether. 
Presently, as if from nowhere, our house dog Volchok rushed to 
me. Well, of course, with Volchok I felt quite safe, and so, for the 
last time, T t ••rnf>d back toward Marei. No longer was I able to 
discern him distinctly, but I felt that he still kept tenderly smiling 
at me and nodding. I waved my hand to him ; he waved his hand, 
too, and stirred his filly. 
"Giddap ! Gir!dap ! "-sounded his distant halloo, and the filly 
again started pull! :  •J the plow. 
All this I recalled at once-I don't know why-but with re­
markable precision in the details. All of a sudden I awoke, seated 
myself on the sleeping boards and, I remember, I still felt on my 
face the calm smile of reminiscence. For a minute or so, I still kept 
on recollecting. 
Upon my return home from Marei, 1 told no on 
about my 
"adventure." Besides, what kind of an adventure was lhis I And 
very soon I also forgot about Marei. Subsequently, when meeting 
him on rare occasions, I never even spoke to him-not only about 
the wolf, but about anything. And suddenly now-twenty years 
later, in Siberia-I was recalling that meeting, so distinctly, in every 
minute detail. This means that it had hidden in my soul imper­
ceptibly, of its own accord, without any effort of 
m) will, and 
then it came to my mini! at the needed time : that tender, motherly 
smile of a poor peasant serf, his crosses, the shaking of his head : 
"See, how thou art frightened, little kid I "  I remembered particu­
larly that thick finger of his, soiled with earth, with whic1. he so 
calmly, with such timid tenderness, toucht.u my trembling lips. No 
doubt, anyone would have cheered up a child-but here, at this 
solitary meeting, something, as it were, altogether different had 
happened ; and if I had been his own son, he could not have be-

2 1 0  
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
stowed upon me a glance gleaming with more serene love. And yet, 
who had prompted him ?-He was our own peasant serf, while I 
was a nobleman's son anyway. No one would find out how he had 
caressed me and no one would reward him. Was he, perhaps, ex­
tremely fond of little children ?-There are such people. The meet­
ing was a solitary one, in a vacant field, and only God, maybe, 
perceived from above what a profound and enlightened human senti­
ment, what delicate, almost womanly, tenderness, may fill the heart 
of some coarse, bestially ignorant Russian peasant serf, who, in 
those days, had even had no forebodings about his freedom. 
Tell me : was it not this that Konstantin Aksakov had in mind 
when he spoke about the high educational level of our people ? 
And when I climbed down off the boards and gazed around, 
I suddenly felt that I could behold these unfortunate men with a 
wholly different outlook, and, suddenly, by some miracle, all the 
hatred and anger completely vanished from my heart. I went along, 
gazing attentively at the faces which I encountered. This intoxicated, 
shaven and branded peasant with marks on his face, bawling his 
hoarse drunken song-why, he may be the very same Mare! ; for 
I have no way of peering into his heart. 
That same evening I met M-tzki once more. Unfortunate ! ­
Perhaps he could not have had reminiscences about any Mare·is, and 
he could not have viewed these men differently than : "le hais ces 
brigands !" Yes, the Poles in those days had endured more than we ! 
CHAPTER II 
1 
Apropos the Kroneberg Case 
I BELIEVE THAT everybody knows about the Kroneberg 
case, which was tried a month ago in the St. Petersburg Circuit 
Court ; everybody has been reading reports, as well as newspaper 
comments, on this case. It was a very noteworthy one and the 
reports thereon were quite heated. Being a month old, I shall not 
dwell upon it in detail, but I feel an urge to utter my apropos, too. 
I am in no sense: a jurist ; yet here there was revealed so much 
deceit on all sides that it appears clear even to a non-jurist. Such 
cases spring up, as if by chance, and they merely tend to confuse 
society-and even, perhaps, the judges themselves. But, inasmuch 
as at the same time they involve general and most precious interest, 
it is clear that they sting to the quick, so that, at times, it is 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
2II 
impossible to refrain from discussing them, even after a month's 
delay, which sems an eternity. 
I will remind the reader about the case : a father flogged a 
child, his seven-year-old daughter, too cruelly-according to the 
indictment-and he had treated her cruelly previously. A stranger 
--a woman of low birth-could not stand the Ⴚ::reams of the tortured 
daughter who, again according to the indictrrent, had been crying 
for a quarter of an hour under the rod : "Papa ! Papa ! "  And in the 
opinion of one of the experts, the rods proved not to be rods, but 
"Spitzruten," i.e., absolutely inappropriate to the age of seven. Be­
sides, they lay there in court, among the other exhibits, so that 
everybody-including :\Ir. Spasovich himself-<:ould see them. The 
prosecutor has mentioned the fact, among others, that when the 
father, prior to the flogging, was told by someone that at least a 
certain twig should be broken off, he replied : "Ⴛo, this will add 
zest." It is also known that the father, following the punishment, 
almost fainted himself. 
I remclT'hPr t he impression produced upon me by the issue of 
The Voice in which 1 read about the beginning of the trial, the 
first account of the case. This occurred after nine o'clock in the 
evening, altogether accidentally. I had spent all of that day at the 
printing office, anrl_ I had no chance to see The Voice earlier, and 
so I knew noth.1·Ⴜ; about the case. After having read it, I made 
up my mind to find out that same evening, notwithstanding the 
late hour, about subsequent developments in the case-in the sup­
position that, perhaps, the trial might have been finished that same 
day, which was a Saturday-knowing that reports invariably appear 
in newspapers with delays. I decided to proceed forႽhwith to a 
very well-known man with whom, howc:vl!r, I was · 1t slightly 
acquainted, on the theory that, for certain reasons, a: that par­
ticular moment he was more likely than any other of my ac­
quaintances to know about the outcoml! of the case, and that he 
1nust surely have been personally present in .:ourt. I was not mis­
taken : he had been in court and had just returned from there. I 
found him shortly after ten in the evening and he told me about 
the acquittal of the defendant. I was indignant againႾႿ the court, 
the jurors and the defense lawyer. This all happened three weeks 
ago, and in many respects I have changed my opinion after having 
personally perused the newspaper accounts and having listened to 
several weighty outside opinions. I am •·ery glad that at )resent 
I can regard the father-defendant no lonbჀr li S  a villain, as a man 
taking delight in the torture of his children (such types do exist) ,  
and that here we are confronted with "nerves" only, and that-to 
use his lawyer's expression-he is but a "bac:' peჁagogue." Essen-

212 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
tially, I wish to dwell in some detail upon the speech of the defense 
lawyer, so as to make it clear in what a false and absurd position 
a noted, talented and honest man may be placed-solely because 
of the false foundation upon which the case itself bad initially been 
built. 
Wherein lies the falsehood ? First of all-here is a little girl, 
a child ; she was "tortured, racked" ; the judges wish to protect her. 
Indeed, what a noble case, it would seem I Yet, what does it come 
to ?-They were on the verge of making her unhappy forever. Maybe 
they already have made her unhappy I In point of fact, what would 
have happened had the father been convicted ? The prosecution 
presented the case in such a way that in the event of a "yes, guilty" 
verdict, the father could have been exiled to Siberia. The question 
may well be asked : what then would have been left to that daughter, 
now a child devoid of all understanding-to her soul in the future, 
for all her life, even if she were later forever after rich and "happy" ? 
Would not the family have been destroyed by the court itself, 
which, as is known, is supposed to protect the sanctity of the family ? 
Further, take into account another feature : the girl is seven 
years old-and what impression is created at this age ?-Her father 
was not sent into exile-he was acquitted ; this is good (although, 
in my opinion, the jurors' verdict should not have been applauded ; 
yet, it is said, there has been applause) .  Even so, the little girl had 
been dragged into the courtroom ; she did make her appearance ; 
she did see and hear everything ; she did make the self-confession : 
"le suis voleuse, menteuse." The secret vices of this little child 
(of seven years only ! )  were ·revealed aloud before the whole public 
by grown-up, serious and even humane people.-What a monstrosity I 
Mais il en reste toujours quelque chose, for one's whole life-do com­
prehend this I And this will remain not only in her soul but, perhaps, 
will project itself in her fate. Something foul and bad has touched 
her in that courtroom, leaving an ineradicable trace. And, who 
knows ?-Maybe twenty years hence someone will tell her : "Even 
as a child you appeared in a criminal court." 
However, once more I see that, not being a jurist, I Ⴢo not 
know how to express it and, therefore, I had better turn directly 
to the defense lawyer's speech : in it all these misunderstandings 
were graphically revealed of their own accord. The lawyer for the 
defendant was Mr. Spasovich. He is a man of talent. Wherever 
people begin to speak about Mr. Spasovich he is mentioned as being 
a "man of talent." I am very glad of this. I may note that Mr. 
Spasovich was appointed as . defense-attorney by the court and, 
consequently, he conducted the defense, so to speak, under certain 
coercion .
.
.
•
 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
2IJ 
Again, on this point I feel incompetent, and I shall keep 
silent. However, before turning to the above-mentioned remarkable 
speech, I wish to say a few words about lawyers in general, and 
talented ones in particular-! wish to convey to the reader several 
impressions and doubts of mine, which, of course, may seem in no 
way serious to competent people. But I am writing my Diary for 
myself, and these thoughts have stuck firmly in my head. I should 
confess, perhaps, that these are hardly thoughts-rather, some kind 
of sensations. 
2 
SOMETHING ABOUT LA WYERS IN GENERAL. My NAIVE AND 
INcOMPETENT PRESUMPTIONS. SoMETHING ABOUT TALENTS 
IN GENERAL AND IN PARTICULAR. 
However-only two words specifically about lawyers. The mo­
ment I took up the pen, I began to be afraid. I am blushing in 
advance bt:causc of the natvete of my questions and presumptions. 
It would be too naive and innocent on my part to be dwelling, for 
instance, on the question of how useful and pleasant an institution 
the bar is. A man, let us say, has committed a crime ; he does not 
know the law ; he is ready to confess, but then the advocate appears 
and proves to him that not only is he, the criminal, innocent, but 
that he is a saint. The lawyer finds the applicable laws and leading 
decisions of the Cassation Department of the Senate which, unex­
pectedly, convey to the case an altogether different aspect, and he 
finishes up by pulling the unfortunate fellow out of the hole. What 
a pleasant thing I 
True, it may be argued and contended that this, 1 J a certain 
extent, is immoral. Yet here stands before you an innocent, alto­
gether innocent, simpleton, but the evidence has bee.il set forth by 
the district attorney in a manner which would seem to doom the 
man for somebody else's guilt. Besides, the man is ignorant-he 
hasn't the faintest idea about the law-and he merely keeps mum­
bling : "I know nothing. I'm guilty of nothing I '"-which, at length, 
begins to irritate the jurors and the judges. But presently the ad­
vocate appears ; his knowledge of the law is perfect ; he cites a 
certain section, a leading decision of the Cassation Department of 
the Senate ; he manages to confuse the district attorney, and the 
innocent is acquitted.-No, this is useful. What would the innocent 
be doing in Russia without an advocate ? 
All these-! repeat-are naive and commonly known considera­
tions. I have experienced this feeling myself when, once upon a 

2 14 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
time, while editing a certain newspaper, by mere oversight (which 
may happen to anyone), I unintentionally endorsed for publication 
a news item which should not have been printed without the express 
permission of the Minister of the Imperial Court. And thus I was 
notified that I must appear in court as a defendant. I had no in­
tention of defending myself ; my "guilt" was obvious, even to my­
self ; I did violate a clearly expressed law; and legally there could 
be no argument. But the court appointed a lawyer for my defense 
(a man whom I had known slightly and who was a member of a 
certain Society of which I, too, was a member). Much to my sur­
prise, he told me that not only was I not guilty but that I was 
absolutely right, and that he was firmly determined to defend me 
by all means. Of course, I listened to this with pleasure. However, 
when it came to the trial, I confess, I gained a wholly unexpected 
impression. I saw, and listened to, my lawyer, I heard him speak, 
and the thought that I ,  an undeniably guilty man, was quite inno­
cent, was so amusing and, at the same time, somehow so attractive, 
that I confess that I consider this half hour in court the jolliest 
in my Jife. But, of course, not being a jurist, I did not comprehend 
that I could be quite innocent. Naturally, I was convicted-writers 
are judged sternly : I paid a fine of twenty-five rubles and, in addi­
tion, I spent two days in jail at the Sennaia ; there I spent the 
time very pleasantly, even with some profit-striking up acquaint­
ance with certain people and certain things. However, I feel that 
I have gone far afield, and I shall return once more to serious 
matters. 
It is moral and touching in a high degree when an advocate 
employs his time and talents for the defense of the unfortunate 
ones : he is a friend of humanity. But then the thought occurs to 
you that he is deliberately defending and acquitting a guilty one ; 
even more-that he is unable to act differently, even if he desired 
to do so. I shall be told that the court cannot deprive any criminal 
of a lawyer's assistance, and that an honest defense attorney will 
invariably remain honest,· since he will always seek and determine 
the true measure of his client's guilt, and will merely prevent the 
court from punishing him in excess of his guilt, etc. This is so, 
although this supposition is akin to the most boundless idealism. 
It seems to me that, generally speaking, it is as difficult for an 
advocate to avoid falsehood and to preserve honesty and conscience 
as for any man to attaih a paradisiacal state. Indeed, have we not 
had occasion to hear lawyers in court almost swearing-addressing 
themselves to the jurors-that they undertook the defense of their 
clients because they had convinced themselves of their clients' inno­
cence. And when one hears these oaths, the nastiest suspicion at 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
215 
once inevitably creeps into one's mind : "Well, what if he's lying 
and is merely doing this for money ?" And, in fact, subsequently 
it often developed that the clients, defended so ardently, proved to 
be fully and undeniably guilty. I do not know if in our annals there 
have been cases recorded where lawyers, seeking to maintain con­
sistently the appearance of men fully convinced of the innocence 
of their clients, would have fainted when jurors rendered a "guilty" 
verdict. But that they did shed tears, this seems to have already 
happened in our still youthful courts. Whatever you may say, there 
is in this institution, in addition to that which is undeniably beau­
tiful, something sad. Truly, one can hear : "Plotters ! Ticks ! "­
and also the popular saying : "Advocate-hired conscience." But 
the principal point is that one seems to be haunted with the 
most nonsensical paradox that a lawyer is never able even to act 
in accord with his conscience ; that he cannot but play with it, 
even if he wished not to do so ; that he is a man doomed to dis­
honesty, and, finally, that-and this is the most important and most 
serious point in the whole matter-this sad state of affairs has been, 
as it were, legalized uy ,omebody and something, so that it is 
regarded not as a deviation at all but, on the contrary, as a most 
normal condition. . .
. 
However, let us leave this ; I fully realize that I began to 
speak on a theme which is not mine. And I am even convinced that 
in jurisprudence all these misunderstandings have long ago been 
settled to everybody's satisfaction, and that it is only I, among all 
people, who know nothing about it. Better let us speak about talent : 
on this point I am at least a bit more competent. 
What is talent ? To begin with, talent is a most useful thing. 
Literary talent, for example, is the ability to say or e':press well 
that which a nullity will say and express badly. You might say 
that, above all, orientation is needed, and only after that-talent. 
All right. I agree : I meant to speak not about the artistic quality, 
but merely about certain properties of talent in general. The proper­
ties of talent, speaking generally, are extremely diversified and 
somtimes really unbearable. First, talent oblige, "talent obliges"­
to what, for instance ? At times, to very bad things. There arises 
an insoluble question : does talent possess man, or man possess his 
talent ?-As far as I am able to observe men of talent, both living 
and dead, it does seem to me that in the rarest cases only is a man 
capable of mastering his gift ; and that, contrarywise, talent almost 
always enslaves its owner-grabbing him, ::o to speak, by his neck 
(quite so-oftentimes in this humiliating manner) , carrying him far 
away from the right road. In Gogol (I have forgotten where) a liar 
started relating something, and, perhaps, he would have told the 

216 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
truth, "but, of their own accord, there developed in the story such 
details" as made it impossible to tell the truth. This I am men­
tioning merely for the sake of comparison, although there do exist 
liars' talents or talents of lying. The novelist Thackeray, depicting 
a certain socialite liar and wit belonging to good society, who used 
to saunter from one lord's house to another, tells us that this chap, 
when departing from somewhere, was wont to save his funniest 
sally or witticism for his exit. Do you know : it seems to me dif­
ficult to remain and, so to speak, preserve oneself as an honest man, 
when one is anxious to save the wittiest word for the finale in 
order to leave behind one's self a burst of laughter. Besides, if a 
witty word for the exit has not been saved, one has to invent one, 
and for a witty word and a fad-
One spares neither mother nor dad. 
I might be told that if such be the requirements, it wouldn't be 
worth living. However-you must admit-in every man of talent 
there is nearly always a certain ignoble and excessive "responsive­
ness" which tends to lead the soberest man astray. 
Whether 'tis beast that roars in gloomy woods, 
or whatever else may happen, the man is ready and eager to be 
carried away ; he leaps for joy, he swells, he is allured. Bielinsky, 
in one of his conversations with me, has compared this excessive 
"responsiveness" with "prostitution of talent" and strongly despised 
it. In its antithesis, of course, he perceived a certain fortitude of 
the soul capable of resisting responsiveness even in the presence 
of a most ardent poetic mood. Bielinsky said this about poets, but 
all men of talent are poets, though in slight degree-even carpenters, 
provided they are talented. Poesy is, so to speak, the inner fire of 
every talent. And if even a carpenter may be a poet, then certainly 
a lawyer, if he is endowed with talent. I am by no means denying 
that with rigidly honest principles and spiritual firmness even a 
lawyer may succeed in mastering his "responsiveness" ; yet there 
are cases and circumstances where a man will be unable to resist : 
"of their own accord there will develop such details"-and the man 
will be carried away. 
Gentlemen, everything I am saying here about this responsive­
ness is really not nonsf'nse ; much as it may seem simple, yet it is 
an extremely important matter in everybody's life-even in yours 
and mine. Please investigate carefully ; render an account to your­
selves, and you will see that at times it is most difficult to remain 
honest, precisely because of this excessive "responsiveness," spoiled 
with overindulgence and compelling us to lie uninterruptedly. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
217 
However, the words "honest man" I am using here only in the 
11loftiest sense," so that we may remain calm without growing 
alarmed. Besides, I am sure that on account of my words no one 
will grow alarmed. 
I continue. Does anyone among you, gentlemen, remember 
Alphonse Lamartine, the former ringleader, so to speak, of the 
Provisional Government during the February revolution of '48 ?  
It is said that, to him, tbere was nothing more pleasing and more 
delightful than to deliver endless speeches to the people and to 
the various deputations, which in those days used to come from 
all over France, from all the cities and small towns, to introduce 
themselves to the Provisional Government, during the first two 
months following the proclamation of the Republic. Of such ad­
dresses he has delivered, perhaps, several thousand. He was a poet 
and a man of talent. His whole life was innocent, and full of inno­
cence ; all this-<oupled with a handsome and most impressive ap­
pearance, created, so to speak, for keepsakes. I do not at all com­
pare this historical personage with those types of responsively poetic 
men who, as It were, art born of mucus in the nose, even though 
he did write Harmonies Poetiques et Religieuses-an unusual tome 
of endlessly protracted verses, over which three generations of col­
lege-graduate demoiselles got hopelessly stuck. As against this, he 
later wrote an extremely talented book A History of the Girondists, 
which won for him popularity and, finally, the position, as it were, 
of chief of the Provisional Revolutionary Government. That's when 
he delivered so many endless speeches, in the first place feasting 
on them himself and floating in some everlasting rapture. A certain 
talented wit, pointing at him, exclaimed : "Ce n'tst pas l'homme ; 
c'est une lyre !" (It is not a man ; it is a lyre I )  
This was a commendation but it was uttered w.· H profound 
cunning, since, please concede, what can be more comic than to 
compare a man with a lyre ? Just touch it-and fc. thwith it will 
begin to tinkle ! It goes without saying thჃt it is impossible to 
compare Lamartine, the man who has ever been speaking in verse, 
that orator-lyre, with some of our dexterous advocates, roguish even 
in their innocence, always self-possessed, always resourceful, always 
managing to grow rich. Would they be the ones who wouldn't know 
how to make use of the1r lyres ? Yes, is this so ? Is this true, gentle­
men ? Men are yielding to praise, and even a rogue is Ⴤ<responsive." 
To some of our talented advocates, instead of a "lyre," tht·re may 
happen-in an allegorical sense-someu. 1g on the order of the 
thing that happened to a certain Moscow merchant. His papa died 
leaving him some capital ("capital" should be read with an accent 
on the i). But his mama was also engaged, in her own name, in 

2 18 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
some commercial pursuit, and she got in a hole financially. It was 
necessary to come to mama's assistance, that is, to put up a large 
sum of money. The little merchant loved his mama dearly ; yet 
he began to hesitate : "Why, we can't think of being without the 
capital. To lose the capital does not suit us at all, 'cause it's im­
possible for us to remain without the capital." So he gave nothing 
to his mama, and she was dragged into the insolvent debtors' jail. 
Please take this allegorically and substitute talent for capital, and 
you would have the following speech : "Why, we can't think of 
being without glitter and display." And this may happen even to 
a most serious, most honest talented advocate, at the very minute 
when he starts his defense, even though the case be repulsive to 
his conscience. I was reading once that in France, long ago, a 
certain lawyer, having convinced hiHtself in the course of the trial 
of the guilt of his client, bowed to the court when the time came 
for him to make his defense speech, and silently took his seat. In 
our midst, I believe, this could not have happened. 
"How is it possible for me not to win if I am a man of 
talent ? And is it conceivable that I myself should be ruining my 
reputation ?" Thus, not money alone is to be feared by a lawyer 
as a temptation (all the more so as he is never afraid of money ) ,  
but his own power of talent. 
However, I repent for having written all this, since it is a 
matter of general knowledge that Mr. Spasovich, too, is a remark­
ably gifted lawyer. To my way of thinking, his speech in this 
case is a climax in art. Nevertheless it produced in me an almost 
disgusting impression. You- see that I am starting with most sincere 
avowals. Yet the blame should be laid at the door of the false­
hood of all circumstances which, in this case, grouped themselves 
around Mr. Spasovich ; from this falsehood he was unable to ex­
tricate himself, owing to the very force of things. Such is my opinion. 
Therefore, all that was strained and extorted in his status as defense 
lawyer, ipso facto, also reflected itself in his speech. The case was 
so framed that in the event his client were found guilty, he could 
have suffered a very heavy, incommensurate punishment. This 
would have been a calamity : a disintegrated family ; no one would 
have been protected and all would have been left unhappy. His 
client was charged with "torture"-and it was precisely this premise 
that was dreadful. Mr. Spasovich opened his defense with an em­
phatic rejection of the very idea of torture. "There was no torture, 
there was no offense inflicted upon the child ! "  He denied every­
thing : "spitzrutens," bruises, blows, blood, integrity of witnesses 
of the opposing side, everything, everything-an extraordinarily bold 
device, an onslaught, so to speak, against the jurors' conscience ; 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
219 
but Mr. Spasovich knows his strength. He has even rejected the 
child, its infancy ; he extracted out of the hearts of his listeners 
pity itself, its very root. The cries to the accompaniment of the 
flogging, which lasted a quarter of an hour (even if it were five 
minutes) : "Papa I Papa ! "-all this has disappeared, and, instead, 
there appeared in the foreground "a mischievous little girl with a 
rosy face, laughing, artful, spoiled and with secret vices." Listeners 
almost forgot that she is seven years old. Mr. Spasovich has adroitly 
confiscated the age as a thing most dangerous to him. Having de­
stroyed all this, he, naturally, scored a verdict of acquittal. Yet 
what could he have done ? "What if the jurors should find my client 
guilty ?" -So that, by inertia, he was unable to hesitate before any 
device, or to use kid-glove methods. "All means are good if they 
lead to a lofty goal." But let us examine this remarkable speech 
in detail ; it is well worth it. You will see. 
3 
MR. SPASOVICH s SPEECH. ADROIT METHODS. 
Even beginning with the first words of the speech you feel 
that you are dealing with an extraordinary talent, with a power. 
1\Ir. Spasovich at once fully reveals himself ; and he is the first to 
point out to the jurors the weak element of the defense which he 
undertook ; he reveals its weakest spot, the thing which he himself 
dreads most. (By the way, I am citing this speech from The Voice. 
It is such a wealthy periodical that, probably, it is in a position 
to employ a good stenographer.) 
"I am afraid, gentlemen of the jur, ·· -says Mr. 
· 1asovich­
"not of the verdict of the Court of Appeal ; not of t: c charges 
brought forth by the district attorney . . . .  I am afraid of an 
abstract idea, of a phantom ; I am afraid of the fact t11at the crime 
-as it is being called-has as its object a weak, defenseless creature. 
The very words 'torture of a child,' first of all, arouses a feeling 
of great compassion for the child and, secondly, a sensation of 
strong indignation against him who was its torturer." 
This is very clever. Extraordinary sincerity. The listener who 
had bristled himself up ; who had in advance prepared himself to 
hear something by all means crafty, devious, deceitful, and who 
had just said to himself : "Now, brother, lPt's see if you can deceive 
me"-is suddenly struck with the virtual dt :.!nselessness of the man. 
The supposed trickster himself is seeking protection-and precisely 
from you, from those whom he sought to deceive I By this device 
1\Ir. Spasovich at once breaks the ice of suspicior. and, through 

220 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
this one little drop he infiltrates into your heart. True, he speaks 
about the phantom ,· he says that he is afraid merely of a "phantom," 
that is, almost of a prejudice. As yet you have listened to nothing 
further ; but already you feel ashamed that you may be held to be 
a man with prejudices. Isn't this so ?-Very clever. 
"Gentlemen of the jury"-continues Mr. Spasovich-"1 am not 
a partisan of the rod. I can quite understand that a system of 
education may be introduced [but don't you worry, all these are 
such novel expressions, and they are borrowed in toto from various 
pedagogical treatises] ,  from which the rod will be eliminated ; never­
theless I have as little hope for a complete and absolute eradication 
of corporal punishment as for the condition where you would cease 
functioning in court because of the discontinuance of criminal deeds 
and the violation of that truth which must prevail in both the 
family and the state." 
So, then, the whole affair is confined to a rod, and not to a 
bundle of rods, not to "spitzrutens." You begin to look attentively, 
you are listening-no, the man speaks seriously ; he is not jesting. 
So the whole turmoil was started only over a little rod in connection 
with childish age, and the question as to whether or not the rod 
should be used. Was it worth our while to assemble ?  True, he 
himself is not a partisan of the rod : he declares himself that, but, 
on the other hand . . . 
"In a normal state of affairs normal measures are employed. 
In the case at bar an obviously abnormal measure has been re­
sorted to. Yet, if you should scrutinize the circumstances which 
have called forth this measure ; if you should consider the nature 
of the child, the temperament of the father, those aims which 
prompted him at the time of the punishment, you would compre­
hend many a thing, because a profound understanding of the case 
inevitably leads to a condition where much becomes intelligible and 
will appear natural and not necessitating a penal reaction. l\ly task 
is to explain the case." 
So you see, it's "punishment," not "torture'' ;  so he says him­
self. Thus, it is only a case of a father who is being tried because 
he has beaten the child a little too hard. Think of the times we 
have come to I However, if one should scrutinize more deeply . . .  
Now, that's really the point : neither the Court of Appeal nor the 
district attorney knew how to scrutinize. And once we, the jury, 
manage to scrutinize, ߁e will acquit, since "profound understanding 
leads to acquittal"-so he says himself, while this means that only 
on our bench is there profound understanding. "The darling must 
have ben waiting and waiting for us ! He got weary of dealing 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
221 
with courts and district attorneys." In a word : "flatter, flatter I "  
This is an old routine method, and yet how very reliable I 
Next, Mr. Spasovich turns directly to the expose of the his­
torical part of the case, and he begins ab ovo. Of course, we shall 
not quote him verbatim. He recounts the whole life history of 
his client. Mr. Kroneberg, you se, had gonf' through a full cur­
riculum : first, he had studied in the University at Warsaw, then 
in Brussels, where he became fond of the French ; after that-again 
in Warsaw, where, in 1867, he graduated from the Superior School 
with the degree of master of laws. At Warsaw he struck up an 
acquaintance with a certain lady, his senior, and had a liaison with 
her ; he parted with her because he could not marry her, but when 
parting he was even unaware of the fact that he was leaving her 
pregnant by himself. Mr. Kroneberg was grieved and started look­
ing for distraction. During the Franco-Prussian War he joined the 
French Army and took part in twenty-three battles ; he received the 
Order of the Legion of Honor and retired with the rank of second 
lieutenant. II'! those days, we Russians, all of us, had been wishing 
every success to the French ; somehow we heartily dislike the Ger­
mans although, intellectually, we are prepared to respect them. 
Upon his return to Warsaw, he again met that lady whom he had 
loved so much ; she had already married and she told him, for the 
first time, that he had a child who was then in Geneva. The mother, 
at the time, had made a special trip to Geneva to deliver the child, 
who had been placed in the care of some farmers for monetary 
remuneration. Having learned about the child, Mr. Kroneberg at 
once expressed the desire to provide for it. At this juncture Mr. 
Spasovich uttered several stern and liberal words abouჅ our legis­
lation for its severity toward illegitimate children, but br promptly 
consoles us with the statement that "within the boundanes of the 
Empire there is a country, the Kingdom of Poland, which has its 
own special laws." Briefly, in that country it is easier and more 
convenient to adopt an illegitimate child. Mr. Kronberg "wished to 
do for the child the maximum of what could be done according 
to the law, even though at that time he did not have an independent 
fortune. But he was sure that his relatives, in case of his death, 
would take care of the little girl bearing the name of Kroneberg, 
and that if worse should come to worse, she could be placed in 
some governmental educational institution in France, as a daughter 
of a Knight of the Legion of Honor." After that Mr. Kroneberg 
took the little girl from the Geneva fam1ers and placed her in 
the home of pastor de Comb, also in Geneva, for upbringing ; the 
pastor's wife was the girl's godmother. Thus passed the years 1872, 

222 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
1873 and 1874 till the beginning of 1875, when, because of some 
change in circumstances, Mr. Kroneberg again went to Geneva and 
took the little girl to Petersburg-this time into his own home. 
Mr. Spasovich states, among other things, that his client is 
a man craving for family life. Once he was about to marry but 
the wedding was called off, and one of the main obstacles in this 
connection was precisely the fact that he did not conceal that he 
had a "natural daughter." This is the first little drop ; Mr. Spasovich 
adds nothing, but you comprehend that Mr. Kroneberg has partly 
sufered for his good deed, for the fact that he had recognized his 
daughter, whom he could have abandoned forever with the farmers. 
Thus, he had the right, so to speak, to repine at this innocent 
creature : at least one feels so. However, in these little, delicate, 
as it were, fleeting, but incessant, innuendoes, Mr. Spasovich is the 
greatest master, and an unrivalled one, of which you will become 
convinced further. 
After that, unexpectedly, Mr. Spasovich begins to speak about 
Miss Jesing. You see, Mr. Kroneberg has met in Paris a Miss Jesing, 
and, in 1874, he brought her with him to Petersburg. 
"You could appreciate"-suddenly announces Mr. Spasovich­
"to what extent Miss Jesing does or does not resemble those women 
of the demi-monde with whom fleeting liaisons are being formed. 
Of course, she is not )lr. Kroneberg's wife, yet their relations pre­
clude neither love nor respect." 
Well, this is their own personal, subjective business, and to 
us it makes no difference. However, Mr. Spasovich seeks to solicit 
respect by all means. 
· 
"You could see whether this woman is heartless and whether 
or not the child loves her. She tried to do all possible good to the 
child . . . .  " 
The whole point is that the child called this lady "maman," 
and that the girl took out of "maman's" chest a prune, for which 
she had ben flogged. Now, you must not think that jesing is hostile 
to the child, that she falsely derogates the girl and thereby incites 
Kroneberg against her. Well, we do not think it ; we believe that 
this lady has no reason for hating the child : the child is inured 
to kiss her hand and to call her "maman." It even appears from 
the case that the lady, having become afraid of the "spitzrutens," 
begged (although with no result) just before the flogging had started, 
to be permitted to break off a certain dangerous twig. According 
to Mr. Spasovich's statement, Jesing was the one who suggested 
to Kroneberg the idea of removing the child from de Comb in Geneva. 
"At that time Kroneberg had no definite intention of taking the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
223 
child, but he made up his mind to go to Geneva to se for him­
self . . . .  
" 
This is important news ; let us bear it in mind. It appears 
that at that time Mr. Kroneberg was not yet much concerned about 
the child, and he had no heartfelt urge at all to have her live with 
him. 
"In Geneva he was astounded : the child whom he had visited 
by surprise, not at a fixed time, was found in a sullen state ; she 
did not recognize the father." 
Take special notice of the phrase : ''she did not recognize the 
father." I have mentioned before that Mr. Spasovich is a great 
master of casting such little words : it might seem that he had 
merely dropped the phrase accidentally ; yet, toward the end of 
the speech, it will bear its result and fruit. If the child "had not 
recognized the father," this means that it is not only sullen but 
also depraved. All this will be needed further on ; we shall se later 
that Mr. Spasovich, by casting his little phrases here and there, 
will at length utterly disillusion you about the child. Instead of 
a seven-year-old mfant, in.,Lead of an angel, there will appear before 
you a "mischievous" girl, an artful, obstreperous girl with a bad 
disposition, who cries when she is ordered into the corner ; who 
is "great at screaming" (what Russicism ! ) ;  a liar, a pilferer, un­
tidy and with a filthy secret vice. The whole trick comes to this : 
your sympathy for the child must somehow be destroyed. Such is 
human nature : one does not pity him to whom one takes a dislike 
or to whom one feels an aversion, and, more than anything else, 
Mr. Spasovich fears your compassion : otherwise, if you should 
start pitying the child, you might find the father guilty. Herein 
is the falsehood of the situation. Of course, ; he whole g! · uping, all 
these facts clustered by him over the child's head, taken 1·parately, 
are not worth an empty egg-shell, and later you will, no doubt, 
notice this yourselves. For instance, nG man is igr 
• .Jrant of the 
fact that a three- or, even, four-year-old cHid, relinquished by 
someone, will necessarily forget the face of that person, will forget 
even the most minute circumstances connected with that person, 
as well as everything pertaining to the time ; and that a child's 
memory, at this age, does not extend to more than one year or 
even nine months back. fhe blame here lies with those who have 
abandoned the child for so many years, rather than in the depraved 
nature of the child. And it stands to reason that a juror, too. would 
understand this, had he the time and de!.. ࢬ to think and reason ; 
but he has no time for reasoning : he is under the sway of the 
irresistible pressure of talent ; he is dominated by the grouping ; 

.224 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
the case does not revolve around any individual fact but, so to 
speak, a cluster of facts. And say what you wish, these insignificant 
facts, grouped together in a bunch, at length create, as it were, 
a hostile feeling toward the child. Jl en reste toujours quelque chose : 
this is an old and notorious device, particularly if it be a skillful 
and studied grouping. 
Looking forward, I shall refer to another, similar, example of 
Mr. Spasovich's art. By resorting to this device, at the end of his 
speech he absolutely annihilates with one stroke Agrafena Titova­
the most damaging witness from the standpoint of his client. Here 
there is even no grouping : he merely caught one little word and, 
of course, pounced on it to his advantage. Agrafena Titova is Krone­
berg's former housemaid. She, together with the porter's wife, 
Ouliana Bibina, at the summer cottage in Lesnoie which Mr. Krone­
berg was then renting, was the first to bring charges of torturing 
the child. As for me, I may remark in passing that, in my opinion, 
Titova and, particularly, Bibina, are nearly the most attractive 
personalities in the whole case. They love the child. The child was 
weary. Having just been brought from Switzerland, the girl almost 
never saw her father, who was occupied with the affairs of some 
railroad ; he used to leave the house in the morning and return 
late in the evening. When, upon his return at night, he would learn 
of some childish prank of the girl, he would flog her and beat her 
on her face (these facts have been corroborated and Mr. Spasovich 
himself did not deny them) .  The poor little girl, as a result of 
such a cheerless life, had grown sullen, feeling more and more 
melancholy. "At present the girl always sits alone and will speak 
to no one"-these are the exact words which Titova used, when 
making her complaint. They have the sound not only of profound 
sympathy, but one may perceive in them the delicate glance of 
an observer-a glance permeated with inner compassion for the 
sufferings of an insulted tiny creature of God. It is only natural 
that the little girl grew fond of the servants in whom alone she 
sensed love and tenderness, and at times she used to run down to 
visit the porter's wife. For this Mr. Spasovich blames the child, 
attributing her vices "to the corrupting influence of the servants." 
Please note that the girl spoke nothing but French, and that Ouliana 
Bibina, the porter's wife, could not understand her well ; therefore, 
she must have grown fond of her from mere pity, mere sympathy 
for the child, which is so typical of our common people. 
"One evening in July (so it is stated in the indictment) Krone­
berg again started flogging. the little girl, and this time he flogged 
her so long and she cried so dreadfully that Bibina became fright­
ened, fearing that the girl might be beaten to death ; therefore, 

. THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
225 
jumping out of her bed, just as she had been lying there, in her 
nightgown, she ran to Kroneberg's window and shouted that the 
flogging of the child must be stopped, threatening to summon the 
police ; then the flogging and the cries ceased." 
Can you visualize that hen-that brood-hen-shielding her 
chicks, spreading out her wings to protect them ? These pitiful hens, 
when protecting their chicklings, sometimes beeome most dreadful. 
During my childhood, in the country, I used to know an urchin, 
from among the house servants, who was terribly fond of torturing 
animals and particularly of killing chickens with his own hands, 
whenever they had to be cooked for the master's dinner. I remember 
he used to climb on the straw roof of the barn in search of 
sparrows' nests : upon finding one, he would immediately begin 
wringing off their heads. Now, imagine this same torturer being 
awfully afraid of a hen when, in a fury, with its wings spread out, 
it stood in front of him, shielding its chicklings. On such occasions 
he used to hide behind me. 
So, then, about three days later, having lost all patience, this 
pitiful hen, after all, did go to the authorities to make her complaint, 
taking along with her that bundle of rods with which the girl had 
been flogged, as well as her blood-stained underwear. In this con­
nection, please consirier the aversion of our common folk to courts 
and their fear of getting mixed up with thPm, when one himself 
is not dragged into court. Yet she did go to plead and complain 
on behalf of a stranger-a child-knowing that, in any event, she 
would receive no other reward than bother and disappointments. 
Now, it is when referring to these two women that l\Ir. Spaso­
vich speaks of "the corrupting influence of servants upon :he child." 
Moreover, he snatches at the following hule fact : tht 
·hild, as 
will be seen further on, had been charged with theft. (L.ter you 
will see how adroitly Mr. Spasovich twisted the takin჆ of a prune 
without permission into a theft of banknotes.) However, at first, 
the girl did not confess to theft, and even stated Lhat she "had taken 
nothing from them." 
"The girl [says )lr. Spasovichl answered with st ubborn 
silence ; thereafter, several months later, she recounted that she 
meant to take the money fnr Agrr.Jjena. If he [i.e., the girl's father] 
had investigated more carefully the circumstances of the theft, he 
might have come to the conclusion that the corruption which had 
sneaked into the girl should be 
tributed t o  the influence ,,i the 
people close to her. The girl's very silence was proof of the fact 
that the child did not wish to betray those with whom she was on. 
good terms." 
"She meant to take the money for Agrafena"-that's the little 

226 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
phrase ! "Several months later," of course, she invented the story 
that she sought to take the money for Agrafena ; she fabricated this 
as a mere fantasy, or because this had been suggested to her. Indeed, 
didn't she say in court : "Je suis voleuse, menteuse," whereas she 
had stolen nothing but a berry, a prune, while during these months 
the irresponsible child was made to believe that she had been steal­
ing ; they made her believe it even without persuasion, but solely 
because of the fact that incessantly, day in and day out, everybody 
around her had been saying that she was a thief. 
However, even if it were true that the girl meant to take the 
money for Agrafena Titova, yet from this it would not follow that 
Titova herself taught her this and that Titova herself had urged 
her to steal the money for her. Mr. Spasovich is skillful : under no 
circumstance would he state this in express terms ; in the absence 
of direct and solid evidence, he would not inflict such an offense 
upon Titova ; as against this, however, forthwith after the girl's 
words that "she meant to take the money for Agrafena," he dropped 
his little insinuation that "the corruption which has sneaked into 
the girl should be attributed to the influence of the people close 
to her." And, of course, this is enough. Naturally, the thought seps 
into the juror's mind : "Ah, such are these two principal witnesses ; 
it is for them that she has been thieving ; they themselves have 
taught the child to steal ; considering that, what is their testimony 
worth ?" 
True : this thought cannot be avoided by one's own mind, once 
it has been suggested under circumstances such as these. And thus, 
dangerous testimony is cr.ushed and destroyed, and precisely at the 
moment when it is convenient to Mr. Spasovich-at the end of his 
speech, as a last resort, as a winding-up effect. Yes, this is skillful. 
Burdensome, indeed, is the task of an advocate placed in such a 
difficult situation. What else can he do ?-He has got to save his 
client. Still, all these are but little flowers ; the berries come later. 
4 
LITTLE BERRIES 
I have already stated that Mr. Spasovich denies all cruelty, 
all torture, inflicted upon the little girl ; he even scoffs at such a 
supposition. Turning"'to "the July 25th catastrophe," straightway, 
he begins to count the scars, the bruises-each gash, each little scab ; 
tiny bits of fallen-off skin.; then he puts all these on the scales : 
"So many zolotniks-there was no torture ! "  Such is his opinion ; 
such is his device. The press has already called Mr. Spasovich's 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
227 
attention to the fact that these calculations as to scars and gashes 
are irrelevant and even ridiculous. However, to my way of thinking, 
all this bookkeeping must have created a weighty impression on 
the public and on the jurors : '·See ! What precision ! What conscien­
tiousness ! "  I am convinced that among the listeners there must 
have been men who were especially pleased to learn that inquiries 
concerning some tiny particular scar had been made in Geneva, and 
information had been sought from de Comb. )Jr. Spasovich trium­
phantly points out that there were no gashes of the skin : 
"Despite all the unfavorableness to Kroneberg of the opinion 
of Mr. Lansberg (the doctor who, on July 29th, examined the 
punished girl and whose opinion Mr. Spasovich very caustically 
derides)-I am using for the defense many data set forth in his 
findings of July 29th. Mr. Lansberg had positively certified that on 
the posterior parts of the little girl's body there were no gashes of 
the skin, but only dark purple subcutaneous stains and identical 
red streaks . . . .  " 
Only I Ph•ase note this little word. And-this is most important 
-five days after the torture ! I could prove to )Jr. Spasovich the 
fact that these dark purple subcutaneous stains disappear very 
quickly, with not the slightest danger to one's life. Still, don't they 
constitute torment, suffering and torture ? 
"The majority of these stains appeared in the left ischial 
region, spreading also to the left hip. Having found no traumatic 
marks, nor even scratches, Mr. Lansberg certified that the streaks 
and stains constitute no danger whatsoever to lik Six days later, 
on August sth, when the girl had been examined by Professor 
Florinsky, he had observed not stains but merely streaks-some 
short, others longer ; yet he did not at all find that th• e streaks 
constituted an important injury of any kind, even thm.:gh he did 
acknowledge that the punishment was a harsh one-particularly in 
view of the instrument with which the child had been chastised." 
I will state to Mr. Spasovich that in Siberia, in the convicts' 
wards in the hospital, I chanced to see the backs of prison inmates 
immediately after they had been subjected to flogging with spitz­
rutens (driven through the ranks) after five hundred, one thou­
sand and two thousand blows inflicted at a time. This I saw several 
dozens of times. Would you believe me, Mr. Spasovich, that some 
backs swelled one vershok thick, and yet think how little flesh 
there is on one's back ! These backs were precisely of a dark purple 
color, with a few gashes from which blot.J would be oozing. Be 
sure, no one among our present-day medical experts has ever ob­
served anything like this ; (besides, what chance do we have, in our 
-times, to observe things ! ) . These chastised men, provided they had 

228 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
received not more than one thousand blows, used to come in main­
taining a vigorous air although, apparently, in a highly nervous 
state, and that-only during the first two hours. As far as I can 
remember, not one of those inmates would lie down, or sit down, 
during these first two hours ; they merely kept pacing back and 
forth in the ward, their whole bodies shuddering at times, with a 
wet bed sheet over their shoulders. The whole treatment consisted 
of this : a bucketful of water was brought to the inmate, and from 
time to time he soaked that bed sheet in it, when it would dry 
on his back. To the best of my recollection, they were all quite 
eager to be discharged from the ward as quickly as possible (be­
cause prior to that, they had been kept locked up for a long time 
awaiting trial) ,  while others simply sought again to escape at the 
earliest possible opportunity. And here is a fact : such chastised 
men got discharged from the hospital on the sixth-at most, on the 
seventh-day after the punishment, because during that period the 
back would almost completely heal up, save for some slight-com­
paratively speaking-remnants ; however, after ten days, for example, 
everything would have disappeared without leaving any traces. 
The punishment with spitzrutens (i.e., in fact, with sticks) , 
if inflicted not too excessively-that is, not more than two thousand 
blows at a time-constituted not the slightest danger to one's life. 
On the contrary all those sentenced to hard labor and military in­
mates (and they see sights ! )  many a time and always told in my 
presence that rods are more painful, more "shrinky" and far more 
dangerous, since one can endure even more than two thousand 
blows with sticks, whereas after only four hundred blows with rods 
one may die ; five or six hundred blows with rods at a time results 
in imminent death ; this can be endured by no one. 
Now, I will ask you, Mr. Defense-Lawyer, I will ask you this 
question : even though these sticks did not threaten one's life and 
had caused no injury whatever, isn't such a punishment cruel and 
doesn't it constitute torture ? Indeed, didn't the little girl suffer 
during a quarter of an hour under the dreadful rods, which lay 
on the table in court as an exhibit, crying : "Papa ! Papa ! " ?  Why, 
then, are you denying her suffering, her torture ? 
However, I have stated above why there is such confusion 
here. I repeat : the point is that in our Code of Punishments, accord­
ing to Mr. Spasovich, in the conception and definition of torture, 
there is "an ambigu1Ly, a deficiency, an omission." 
". . . On this ground the Ruling Senate has held, in those 
very decisions upon whicb the prosecution is relying, that, on the 
other hand, by torture and racking should be meant such infringe­
ments upon the person and personal inviolability of man as are 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
229 
accompanied by torment and cruelty. In the opinion of the Senate, 
physical pain caused by torture and racking must necessarily repre­
sent the highest degree of suffering and one more lasting than in 
ordinary, though severe, beating. If beating cannot be called severe 
-and torture must be more severe than severe beating-if no one 
of the experts qualified it as severe, except Mr. Lansberg, who him­
self has disclaimed his findings, then it may he asked how is it 
possible to apply to this deed the definition of torture and racking! 
I believe this to be impossible." 
Herein, then, is the point. In the Code of Punishments there­
is an ambiguity, and to Mr. Spasovich's client, charged with torture, 
one of the most rigid sections of the law could have been applied, 
which, in any event, should have been inapplicable to the measure 
of his violation of the provisions of the law ; and the latter entail 
a punishment altogether incommensurate with his "deed." It would 
seem that one should simply explain to us this misunderstanding­
"true, there was torture, yet not such as is being defined by the 
law, that is, n(lt more severe than severe beating, and, for this reason, 
my client cannot be charget.l with torture." But Mr. Spasovich does 
not wish to yield anything ; he seeks to prove that there has been 
no torture at all, neither lawful nor unlawful, and also no suffering 
-not a bit of it ! But, for goodness' sake, what is it to us that the 
torture and rackinܐ of this girl do not comryly with the letter of 
the legal definition of torture ?-You have stated yourself-have you 
not ?-that there is an omission in the law. All the same the child 
did suffer : indeed, didn't she suffer ? In truth, hadn't she been sub­
jected to torture ? Is it permissible to deceive us to such an extent ? 
Yes, Mr. Spasovich has specifically undertaken this verܑ· task ; he 
makes a determined attempt to lead us as.rJ.y : the chll'· -says he 
-next day "had been playing'' and "attending to a less • .  u." I do 
not think that the child had been playing. On the contrary, Bibina 
testified that when she had examined the girl-before sue had gonf' 
to lodge her complaint-" the girl bittt'rly wept and kept uttering : 
'Papa I Papa ! '  " 
Good heavens ! Such little children are so impressionable, so 
receptive ! -What does it matter if, next day, she did, perh'tps, play 
a little-with those dark purple stains still on her body ? I have 
seen a five-year-old boy, almost dying of scarlet fever-in a state 
of complete impotence and exhaustion-and yet he was lisping about 
a doggie which some people had promised to ܒive him, and he lwܓged 
that all his toys be brought and placed ar·_ .md his tiny bed : "at 
least I can look at them I "  
But the climax of skill is reached by Mr. Spasovich when he 
manages to "confiscate" altogether the age of the child ! He keeps 

2JO 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
talking about some girl, corrupted and vicious, caught several times 
at thieving, with a secret, lewd vice in her soul ; and he completely 
forgets, as it were (and we-with him), that we are dealing here 
only with a seven-year-old infant, and that this very flogging-for 
a whole quarter of an hour-with those nine sorb-tree "spitzrutens" 
would certainly have been ten times lighter not only to an adult 
but even to a fourteen-year-old youth than to this wee bit of a 
creature I Willy-nilly, one asks onself :  why does Mr. Spasovich 
require all this ? What is his purpose in denying so stubbornly the 
suffering of the little girl ? Why should he be wasting virtually 
his whole skill and resourcefulness on an attempt to lead us astray ? 
Is it only because of mere advocate's vanity : "I'll not only save 
my client's skin, but I'll manage to prove that the whole case is 
nothing but ridiculous nonsense, and a father is being tried because 
on one occasion be beat a bad girl with a rod" ? But I have already 
stated that he has got to destroy in you all sympathy for the girl. 
And, although to this end he has abundant supplies in store, to 
be u!;ed in the future, nevertheless he fears that the child's suffering 
might-who can tell ?-evoke in you humane feelings. And it is 
precisely such feelings that are dangerous to him : maybe you will 
become angry at his client ; he must crush these feelings in advance ; 
he must distort and ridicule them ; briefly, it would seem, He must 
embark upon some impossible venture-impossible because of the 
fact alone that we have before us the very clear, precise and most 
outspoken testimony of tlie father who has firmly and truthfully 
admitted the torture of the child : 
"On July 2 sth, irritated by his daughter (testified the father) ,  
he beat her with this bundle ; he beat her severely and, on this 
occasion, he beat her long, frantically, unconsciously, at random. 
Whether, during this last beating, the rods broke, he does not know ; 
but he does remember that when he began to flog the little girl, 
they were I onger." 
True, despite this testimony, at the trial the father did not 
plead guilty to having tortured his daughter, and stated that prior 
to July 25th he had always punished her lightly. I may observe in 
passing that the opinion on lightness and severity, in a case such 
as this, is an individual matter : blows on the face of a seven-year­
old infant, with blood trickling from the nose, which is denied by 
neither Kroneberg nor his lawyer, are obviously regarded by both 
of them as light puni::;hment. In connection with this, Mr. Spasovich 
has other precious pranks-many of them. For example :  
"You have heard that the marks on the elbows almost unques­
tionably appeared only because during the punishment she was held 
by her arms." 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
231 
Do you hear : only because I They must have been held pretty 
hard if bruises had been caused thereby I Oh, Mr. Spasovich does 
not assert-in so many words-that all this is just fine and sweet­
scented. Here, for instance, we have another little argument : 
"They say that this punishment exceeds the scope of ordinary 
ones. This definition might have been excellent if we could determine 
what an ordinary punishment is ; but so long as there is no such 
definition, anyone would be at a loss to state whether it exceeded 
the scope of ordinary punishments [and this-after the father's testi­
mony that he beat long, unconsciously and frantically I]. 
"Let us admit that this is true. Well, what does this mean ?­
That this punishment is one that, in the majority of cases, should 
not be administered to children. However, there may be exceptional 
cases even among children. Don't you admit that parental authority, 
in exceptional cases, may be placed in a position where a father 
must resort to a severer measure than ordinarily-one which does 
not resemble ordinary measures employed habitually." 
However. this is all that Mr. Spasovich is willing to concede. 
He reduces, then, the whole torture to ''a measure severer than 
ordinarily." Yet he repents even for this concession. At the end of 
his defense speech he retracts all this and says : 
"A father is being tried ; for what ? For abuse of authority. 
The question may he asked : where is thr limit of this authority ? 
Who can determine how many blows, and in what circumstances, 
a father may administer without injuring, at the same time, the 
child's organism ?" 
Does it mean : without fracturing the child's leg ? And so long 
as he does not fracture the child's limbs-everything is ܔrmissible ? 
Are you speaking seriously, Mr. Spasovich ;· Do you senr• .,)y claim 
that you do not know where the limit of this authori _. is, and 
11how many blows, and in what circumstances, a father may ad­
minister" ? If you do not know, I will teli you where .his limit is ! 
The limit of this authority is that one shoulܕ not flog with nine 
sorb-tree "spftzrutens," flog for a quarter of an hour a seven-year­
old, altogether defenseless, wee bit of a creature, despite all its 
11vices" (which must be corrected in a wholly different manner)­
a creature in the image of an angel, incomparably purer and more 
sinless than you, Mr. Spaܖovich, and me, than all those in the court­
room who have been judging and condemning this little girl-one 
shouldn't be flogging this child and listening to her cries : "l'apa I 
Papa 1 "  which almost drove mad and made :antic a simple peasant 
woman, that porter's wife I Finally-according to the man's own 
confession he 11beat long, frantically, unconsciously, at random"­
one should not be beating frantically becau!'e there is a limit to 

232 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
all rage, even against a seven-year-old irresponsible infant over a 
little berry, a prune, and a broken knitting needle I 
Yes, skillful defense lawyer, there is a limit to everything, 
and if only I had not known that you are saying all this purposively, 
that you are pretending to the best of your ability to save your 
client, I should have added, specifically for your own benefit, that 
there is even a limit to all sorts of "lyres" and advocates' "respon­
siveness," and that the limit consists in that one should not be 
giving vent to the verbosity which has led you, Mr. Defense Lawyer, 
as far afield as the pillars of Hercules. But-alas ! -you were sac­
rificing yourself on behalf of your client, and I have no right to 
speak to you about limits, and I am merely wondering at the great­
ness of your sacrifice. 
5 
HERCULES' PILLARS 
But the pillars, the real pillars of Hercules, earnestly begin 
where Mr. Spasovich comes to "the just wrath of the father." 
"When this bad habit in the girl had been revealed"-says 
Mr. Spasovich-(that is, the habit of lying)-"added to all her other 
defects ; when the father learned that she had been stealing, he was 
really seized with great wrath. I believe that each one of you would 
have been seized with a similar wrath, and I believe that to prose­
cute a father because of the fact that he has severely, but deservedly, 
punished his child, is pGor service to the family, poor service to 
the state, because the state is solid only when it can rely for its 
support upon a solid family . . . .  If the father grew indignant, he 
was fully within his rights . . . .  
" 
Now, wait, Mr. Defense-Lawyer ! For the moment I am not 
interrupting you at the word "stealing," which you have used. But 
let us talk briefly about that "just wrath of the father." And the 
upbringing-since the age of three in Switzerland at de Comb's, 
where you testify yourself that she had been corrupted and had 
acquired bad habits ?-At such an age, in what way could she per­
sonally have been guilty of any bad habits, and, if so, where is the 
justness of the father's wrath ? I insist upon the total irresponsibility 
of the girl in this CfSe, even if it be admitted that she did have 
bad habits. And no matter what you may say, you cannot refute 
this irresponsibility of a seven-year-old child. She does not, and can­
not, possess sufficient intelligence to observe evil in herself. Look : 
we all-perhaps, even you, Mr. Spasovich-we all are no saints, not­
withstanding the fact that we possess more intelligence than a 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
2JJ 
seven-year-old child. How, then, can you cast upon this wee bit 
of a creature the burden of responsibility which you yourself have 
no strength to bear ? The words : "for they bind them heavy burdens 
and grievous to be borne" come to one's mind. You may say that 
we must improve the children. Listen : we should not be taking 
pride in ourselves over children-we are worse than they. And if 
we teach them anything so that they be better, they, on their part, 
are teaching us many a thing, and they, too, are making us better 
merely by our contact with them. They humanize our souls by 
their mere presence in our midst. This is why we must respect them 
and approach their angels' images (assuming that we have some­
thing to teach them) ; their innocence, notwithstanding some vicious 
habit contracted by them ; their irresponsibility, and their touching 
defenselessness. But you, on the contrary, are asserting that beat­
ing on the face, till blood begins to trickle, by a father-is just 
and inoffensive. The child had some scales in its nose, and you say : 
"Perhaps, blows on the face have accelerated the discharge 
of that blood from the scrofulous scurf in the nostril, but this is 
in no sense an injury : blood would have run a little later even 
without a wound or injury. Therefore, this blood constitutes nothing 
prejudicial to Kroneberg. At the time when he had delivered the 
blow, he may not have remembered, he may even not have known 
that the child was subject to nosebleeding." 
"He may not have remembered, he may even not have 
known ! "-For goodness' sake, can you suppose that Mr. Kroneberg 
had knowingly struck on a sore spot ?-Certainly, he did not know. 
Thus, you yourself testify that the father did not know about his 
child's malady and, yet, you insist upon his right to bea:. the child. 
You claim that the father's blows on the face are inoffen.-.ive. Yes, 
for a seven-year-old infant they may, perhaps, be inoffensive, but 
the insult ? In the course of your whole speech, Mr. Defense Lawyer, 
you have mentioned nothing about the moral, heartfelt insult ; you 
kept talking about physical pain merely. And for what has she 
been beaten on her face ? Where are the pretexts for such horrible 
wrath ? Is she an important criminal ? This little girl, this criminal, 
will presently run to play "robbers" with little boys. Here we are 
dealing with the age of seven-only seven-years ; this has to be 
constantly remembered in this case. Indeed, all that you are saying 
is a mirage I And do you know what it means to insult a rhild ? 
Children's hearts are full of innocent, almoܗt unconscious, lo\'L, and 
such blows evoke in them a sorrowful astonbhment and tears which 
God beholds and will count. For their intellect is never capable of 
grasping their full guilt. Have you ever seen, or heard about, tor­
tured little children-say, little orphans in some strange, cruel 

234 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
families ? Have you ever seen a child hiding in a corner, so that 
he may not be seen, and weeping there, twisting his little hands 
(yes, twisting the hands-I have seen it myself) and striking his 
chest with his tiny fist, not comprehending what he was doing, not 
fully grasping his guilt and the reason why he was being tortured, 
but realizing only too clearly that he was not loved ? Personally, 
I know nothing about Mr. Kroneberg ; I do not wish to, nor am 
I in a position, to invade the souls and hearts of himself and of 
his family, since, not knowing him at all, I may commit a grave 
injustice. Therefore, I am judging him solely by your words and 
statements, Mr. Defense Lawyer. You said about him in your speech 
that he was "an inept pedagogue." In my opinion, this is the same 
as an inexperienced-or better, let us say, unaccustomed-father. I 
will explain it : only then do these creatures penetrate our souls and 
take hold of our hearts when we, having begotten them, are watch­
ing over them ever since their childhood, never parting with them 
from the time of their first smile, and thereafter continuing spiritu­
ally to be mutually drawn closer to each other, day after day, 
hour after hour, throughout our whole lives. This is family ; this 
is sanctity ! For the family, too, is created, and is not given to us 
ready-made ; and here no obligations are made to order, but they 
all result one from the other. Only then is this unit solid ; only 
then-holy. And the family is created by the incessant labor of love. 
However, Mr. Advocate, you admit that your client committed two 
logical errors (are they only logical ? ) ,  and that one of these, inter 
alia, consists of the fact that he "has acted too rashly : he has sup­
posed that it is possible to eradicate at once, by one stroke, the evil 
which has been sown and which reared up in the child's soul over 
a period of years. But this can't be done ; one has to act slowly 
and with patience.'' 
I swear that not much patience would have been required, 
since the little creature is only a seven-year-old girl. Again and 
again-this "seven years'' which vanishes everywhere in your speech 
and in your speculations, Mr. Defense Lawyer. "She was stealing I "  
-you exclaim-" She was thieving ! "  
"On the 2 5th of July the father came to his summer cottage 
and learned with surprise that the child had been rummaging in 
Jesing's chest, breaking the hook (that is, a knitting needle, and 
not any kind of lock) ,  and was reaching out for the money. I don't 
know, gentlemen, 1f one may be indifferent to such acts of a 
daughter ? It is said : 'For what ?' Is it permissible to punish so 
l'everely for a few prunes and sugar ? I believe from prunes to 
:-ugar, from sugar to the money, from the money to the banknotes 
-is a straight path, an open road." 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
235 
I will tell you a little anecdote, Mr. Defense Lawyer. A father, 
earning his livelihood by hard work, is sitting at his desk. He is 
a writer, just as myself ;  he is writing. Presently, he puts down his 
pen, and his little girl, six years old, comes up to him and begins 
to tell him that he should buy her a new doll, and then-a caleche, 
a real one, with horses ; she will seat herself in the carriage with 
the little doll and her nurse, and she will drive to Sasha, the nurse's 
granddaughter. "Then, papa, you must also buy me . . ... etc., etc. 
-there's no end to the purchases. All these she has just invented 
and fabricated in her little corner, while playing with the doll. In 
these six-year-old infants imaginatiOJf is boundless, and this is ex­
cellent ; therein is their development. The father is listening smil­
ingly : 
"Ah, Lilia, Lilia"-suddenly says he half-jestingly, hair-sadly 
-"I would buy you everything, but where shall I get the money ? 
You don't know how difficult it is to earn money ! "  
"Then, papa, do this"-exclaims Lilia, with a \'ery serious 
and confidential expression. "Take a small pot, take a small shovel 
and go to the woods ; there, dig under the bush, and you'll dig up 
money ; put it into the pot and bring it home." 
I assure you that that little girl is by no mean;; stupid ; yet 
this is the idea she has concܘived as to how money is procured. Do 
you really think that the seven-year-old girl OJ.ltdistanced greatly 
the six-year-old one in her conception of money ?-Of course, per­
haps, she may already have learned that money can't be dug up 
from under a bush ; but whence, in fact, it is derh•ed : subject to 
what laws ; what are banknotes, stock certificates, concessions-this 
she can hardly know. For goodnf'ss' sake, l\lr. Spasovich, can one 
say about such a one that she has been reacl:ing out for l;,.. money ? 
This expression, and the meaning implied in it, are applk ·· •>le only 
to an adult thief who understands what money is and how it is 
being used. Even if such a one had taken the mont/. it would 
not have been a theft at all ,  but merely a childio;h prank-the same 
as if taking a prune, because she has no idea what money is. But 
you have made up the story that she is not far removed from 
banknotes, and you are shouting that "this threatens the state ! "  
If that be true, is it possible, is it permissible to conceive the thought 
that for such a prank the kind of flogging to which this girl had 
been subjected is just and justifiable? However, she does not need 
money ; heavens ! -is she going to run away to America with i , or, 
maybe, she is going to obtain a railroad cm. !ssion. As a matter of 
fact, you do say : "from sugar, it is not far to bank notes." Why, 
then, should you recoil from concessions ? 
Aren't these pillars, :\lr. Defense Lawyer ? 

2J6 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
"She has a vice, a secret, filthy vice . . .  
" 
Now, wait-halt, gentlemen-prosecutors ! Is it possible that 
there was no one to grasp the whole impossibility, the whole mon­
strosity of this picture. A tiny little girl is brought before people 
-serious-minded and humane people, too-a child is being disgraced, 
and they speak aloud about its "secret vices" ! And what is there 
in the fact that she does not yet understand her ignominy and 
says : "Je suis voleuse, je suis menteuse"? Say what you please, 
but this is impossible and intolerable ; this is an insufferable false­
hood. And who has ventured, who has dared to utter about her 
that she has been "stealing," that she has been "reaching out for 
the money" ? Is it possible to utter such words about an infant ! 
Why is she befouled with "secret vices" ?-so loudly that the whole 
courtroom may hear ? Why was so much mud splashed on her­
to leave its stain forever ?-Oh, do acquit your client as quickly as 
possible, Mr. Advocate, if only to drop the curtain at the earliest 
opportunity and to rid us of this spectacle. But, at least, leave 
us our pity for this infant : do not judge her with such a serious 
air, as if you were convinced of her guilt. This pity is our treasure, 
and it is dangerous to exterminate it in society. If society should 
stop pitying the weak and persecuted, it would be painfully affected 
itself ; it would grow hard and wither ; it would become lewd and 
sterile . . . .  
"Why, if I should leave you your pity-what if, out of great 
pity, you should convict my client ?" 
Such, indeed, is the situation ! 
6 
THE FAMILY AND OuR SANCTITIES. A CoNCLUDING WoRD 
ABOUT A CERTAIN YouNG ScuooL. 
In conclusion, Mr. Spasovich utters a pithy word : 
"In conclusion, I take the liberty of stating that, in my opinion, 
the entirE" prosecution of Kroneberg has been framed altogether 
incorrectly-namely, that the questions which are going to be pro­
pounded to you cannot be decided upon at all." 
Now, this is Qlever ; therein is the whole gist of the case, and 
from this follows its whole falsehood. However, Mr. Spasovich adds 
a few rather solemn words on the subject : "I take it, you will all 
concede that there is family and parental authority . . . .  
" Earlier 
he has been exclaiming that "only then is the state solid, when 
it is founded upon solid family." 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
237 
In this connection, I shall take the liberty of interjecting one 
little word only-and this metely in passing. 
We Russians are a young people ; we are just beginning to 
live, even though we have already lived one thousand years, but 
a big vessel is designed for sailing on a long journey. We are a 
fresh people, and we do not possess sanctities quand-meme. We 
love our sanctities but only because they are, in fact, holy. We 
support them not only to defend l'ordre by using them. Our sanc­
tities are founded not upon their utility but upon our faith in 
them. We shall even refuse to defend those sanctities should we 
ever cease to believe in them-unlike those ancient priests who, at 
the end of paganism, continued to defend their idols which they 
had long since ceased to regard as gods. Not even one of our sanc­
tities need ever fear a free scrutiny, but this is only because it 
is in reality solid. We love the sanctity of the family when it is 
in reality holy, and not because the state is solidly founded upon 
it. And, believing in the solidity of our family, we should not be­
come afraid even if the abuse of parental authority should be 
brought to liდhl dill.! proseculed. We shall not defend this authority 
quand-meme. The sanctity of a genuinely sacred family is so solid 
that it would never topple as a result of this, but would grow even 
more sacred. However, at any rate, there is a limit, there is a 
measure-this we too are ready to realize. I am not a jurist ; still, 
in the case of Kroneberg, I cannot help but admit some deeply 
rooted falsehood. Here there is something wrong ; something must 
have been different, despite the actual guilt. l\Ir. Spasovich is pro­
foundly right where he speaks of the framing of the question. Still, 
this settles nothing. Perhaps we need a penetrating and impartial 
revision of our laws in this connection, in order to fill the gaps 
and to measure up to the character of our society. I car:; .:>t make 
up my mind as to what is needed here ; I am not a jurist. . . .  
However, willy-nilly, I exclaim : yes, the bar is :m excellent 
institution but, somehow, also a sad one. This I have stated in 
the beginning, and I repeat it again. So it does seem to me, and 
unquestionably only because I am not a lawyer-therein is my whole 
trouble. I keep visualizing a certain young school turning out shrewd 
minds and dry hearts-a school distorting every sane feeling when­
ever occasion calls for such distortion ; a school of all sorts of 
challenges, fearless and irresponsible ; a continual and incessant 
training, based on need and demand, raised to the level of some 
principle-and because of our want of habit- to the level of prowess, 
which is applauded by everybody. 
Well, do I encroach upon the bar, upon the new courts ?­
God forbid me this : the only thing I desire is that we all should 

2J8 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
become a little better. This is a modest desire, but-alas-a most 
idealistic one. I am an incorrigible idealist ; I am seeking sancti­
ties ; I love them ; my heart thirsts for them, because I have been 
so created that I cannot live without sanctities ; stiJI I should like 
to see sanctities just a bit more holy ; otherwise, there is no point 
in worshipping them t 
One way or the other, I have spoiled my February Diary by 
excessively enlarging upon a sad theme-but only because it had 
so astounded me. But, il faut avoir le courage de son opinion, and 
this wise French saying, it seems, could serve as a guide to those 
many who are looking for answers to their queries in our confused 
time. 
MARCH 
CHAPTER I 
1 
Is the Proposition Correct : "Better Let's Have Bad 
I deals as Long as Reality is Good"? 
I HAVE READ the following comment in Mr. Gamma's 
"Leaflet" (The Voice, No. 67) on my words concerning the people, 
in the February issue of The Diary: "Be that as it may, we have 
from one and the same writer, within the stretch of only one 
month, two opposite views concerning the people. And yet, this 
is not vaudeville, not a painting at a traveling exhibition ; this is 
a verdict on a living organism ; it is the same as if one were manipu­
lating a knife in human flesh. Mr. Dostoievsky extricates himself 
from the real or imaginary contradiction by suggesting that we 
judge the people 'not by what they are but by what they strive 
to become.' The people, you see, are actually awful rascals but 
their ideals, on the contrary, are good. These· ideals are 'vigorous 
and sacred,' and 'they have saved them during the ages of their 
martyrdom.' One wouldn't be apt to feel too well as a result of 
exculpations of this kind I Indeed, hell itself is paved with good 
intentions, and Mr "'' Dostoievsky knows that 'faith without works 
is dead.' Besides, whence have these ideals become known ? What 
prophet or heart-reader is able to penetrate and unscramble them, 
if the total reality contudicts them and is unworthy of them ? 
Mr. Dostoievsky exonerates the people in the sense that 'they may 
be overcharging some, yet they don't drink-be it vodka or rum.' 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
2J9 
However, from here it is not far to the moral : •better let's have 
bad ideals as long as reality is good.' " 
The most important point in this excerpt is Mr. Gamma's 
question : .. Whence have these ideals (i.e., ideals of the people) 
become known ?" I positively refuse to answer such a question, since 
no matter how long we might be debating this theme with Mr. 
Gamma, we should never come to any agreement. This is a most 
protracted controversy and, to us, it is most momentous. Have the 
people ideals, or haven't they?-This is a question of our life or 
death. This controversy has lasted all too long, and it has reached 
the point where to some of the contestants the ideals have been 
revealed as clearly as sunlight, while the others do not notice them 
at all and definitely refuse to take heed of them. Who is right ?­
This question will be decided not by us, but it will be settled, per­
haps, rather soon. Lately, several opinions have been expressed 
to the effect that in Russia there can be nothing conservative, since 
here .. there is nothing to conserve." Indeed, if we have no ideals 
of our own, is it worth while to take care of anything or to con­
serve anything ? W t:ll, if tl.1s idea brings about so much peace­
all the better . 
.. The people, you see, are actually awful rascals, but their 
ideals, on the contrary, are good." This phrase, or this thought, 
I have never expressed. Solely with a view to clarifying this point, 
I am answering Mr. Gamma. It is quite the reverse : precisely, I 
have observed among the people, too, that "there are genuine saints, 
and what saints ! -They are radiant themselves and they illuminate 
the path to all of us I "  They exist, my esteemed publicist, they 
do actually exist, and happy is he who can discern them. I believe 
that, in this connection, specifically in my '".V•""rding then· ·sn't the 
slightest ambiguity. Besides, ambiguity is not always L • c  result 
of the fact that a writer is ambiguous, but at times it is produced 
by altogether different causes. 
As for the moral-"better let's have bad ideals as long as 
reality is good"-with which you wind up your article, I will tell 
you that this is a desire wholly impossible of achievement : with­
out ideals, that is, without even vaguely specified longinp:s for the 
better, no good reality can ever ensue. It may even be positively 
asserted that there would ensue nothing but still more obnoxious 
abomination. I, at least, am leaving a loophole : if things look un­
becoming at present, but with a clearly conceived desire to 1M-come 
better ( that is, with ideals of a better futU! ǚ), some day we may 
make up our minds and really become better. In any event, this 
is not at all impossible ; it is more conceivable than your proposi­
tion to become better with "bad" ideals, i.e., with evil aspirations. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
I hope, Mr. Gamma, you will not grow angry with me for 
these few words of mine. Let each one of us adhere to his own 
opinion and wait for the denouement. I assure you that the de­
nouement is, perhaps, not too remote. 
2 
A CENTENARIAN 
"That morning I was much too late"-a lady was telling me 
the other day-"and I left home almost at noon, and, as if on 
purpose, there was a heap of things I had to attend to. On Niko­
laievskaia Street I had to make two calls, one not far from the 
other. First-at an office ; and at the very gate of the building I 
met that Jitt1e old woman ; she seemed to me so very old and 
stooping, with a walking cane. Still I could not guess her age. 
She came up to the gate and, right there in a corner, she sat down 
on the porter's bench-just for a little rest. However, I walked 
by, merely glancing at her. 
"Some ten minutes later I left the office, and only two houses 
farther down there is a store, where last week I had ordered a pair 
of shoes for Sonia, and, taking this opportunity, I went to fetch 
them. Now, the little old woman was sitting on the bench at the 
gate of this house, and she was looking at me. I smiled at her, 
walked into the store and took the shoes. Well, this took three 
or four minutes, and I proceeded farther, in the direction of the 
Nevsky.-Lo ! there, agܙin, is my old woman, at a third building, 
also near the gate, but not on a bench-there was none at this gate 
-but seated snugly on a projection. Willy-nilly, I suddenly stopped 
in front of her : why-the thought came to me-does she seat herself 
at every house ? 
" 'Are you tired, little old woman ?'-1 asked her. 
" 'I'm getting tired, dearie ; I feel tired all the time. It's warm 
-I ponder-sun is shining ; why shouldn't I go for dinner to my 
granddaughter's ?' 
" 'So you're going to have dinner, good woman ?' 
" 'To have dinner, dear, to have dinner.' 
" 'But this way you'll not get there.' 
" 'No, I'll get ,there ; see, I walk a few steps, and then I rest 
myself ; afterwards I get up and again start going.' 
"I looked at her and became very curious. The woman-a 
tiny, neat, old little creature, wearing old clothes-probably one of 
the commonalty-with a small cane ; her face pale, yellow, the skin 
drying on the bones ; colorless lips-a regular mummy ; but she 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
sits and keeps smiling, and the friendly sun is shining straight 
on her. 
" 'Probably, you are very old, little grandmother ?' I asked 
her, jestingly, of course. 
" 'Hundred and four, darling ; I'm only (she said jokingly) a 
hundred and four years old. . . . And where are you going ?' 
"And she looked at me and laughed. Pr lli)ably, she was glad 
that there was someone to talk to ; but that curiosity as to where 
I was going seemed, to me, strange in a centenarian. 
" 'See, grandmother'-said I, laughing too-'1 called at the 
store for these shoes for my girl, and now I am taking them home.' 
" 'Look, what tiny bits of shoes they are ; yours is a little girl ? 
That's good. Any other children ?' 
"And she kept on laughing and looking at me. Her eyes were 
dim, almost lifeless eyes, and yet a warm ray, as it were, radiated 
from them. 
" 'Grandmother, won't you plea!-.e take five kopecks ; buy your­
self a loaf of white bread'-said I, handing her the coin. 
" '\Vhy shvL•l.J you be ,ffering m e five kopecks ?--Well, thanks, 
I'll take your money I ' 
" 'Take it, grandmother, don't mind it.'-She took it. One could 
see that she was not begginე, that she had not been reduced to that 
state, and she accPpted my money so gracefully-not at all as if 
it were charity, but somehow as from mere politeness or because 
of kindheartedness. However, this may have pleased her, since who 
would start conversing with an old woman ? Whereas now someone 
i:; not only talking to her but taking tender care of her. 
" 'Well, good-bye, grandmother'-! !'aid. 'Reach your destina­
tion in good health.' 
" 'I shall, dearie- [ shall. And you go along to Yl· 
· grand­
daughter ! '-said the old woman, losing the thread of our con­
\'ersation and forgetting that I had a dauვhter and r')t a grand­
daughter. Apparently she must have been thinking that everybody 
had granddaughters. 
"I started going, and turned to look at her for the last time. 
l saw her getting up slowly, with difficulty ; she tapped her cane and 
crawled along the street. Perhaps, ten times more would she repose 
herself before she finally nached her folks 'for dinner.' And whither 
does she go to dine ? Such a strange little old woman I "  
That morning I had listened to this story-why, not enზn a 
story, but some sort of an impression of m· . •ing a centenarian (in 
truth, when does one meet a woman centenarian, especially a 
woman so full of spiritual life ?)-and I forgot all about it. Only, 
l.ate at night ; having read a magazine article and having put aside 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
that periodical, I suddenly recalled that old woman, and promptly 
put the finishing touches to the picture of how she had reached her 
folks for dinner. And there emerged another, maybe quite plausibleܚ 
little picture. 
Her granddaughters-perhaps even great-granddaughters, but 
all the same she called them "granddaughters"-are probably some 
artisans and, naturally, married women ; otherwise, she would not 
be calling on them for dinner ; they are living in a basement, or 
maybe renting some barber shop ; they are poor people-this stands 
to reason-and yet they are subsisting and keeping their home in 
good order. She dragged herself up to them, possibly sometime after 
one o'clock. She wasn't expected ; even so, they greeted her rather 
cordially. 
"There she is, Maria Maximovna ; come in, come in ; be wel­
come, God's servant I "  
The old woman walks in, with a little laugh ; the doorbell 
continues to ring-long, sharply, in a thin tinkle. Her granddaughter 
is, most probably, the wife of that barber, while he is not yet an 
old man-a man of thirty-five or thereabouts, as steady as his 
trade, even though that trade is a frivolous one ; of course, he is 
wearing a suit as greasy as a pancake-is it because of the pomade ? 
-I can't tell, but I have never seen "barber-surgeons" looking other­
wise ; and also the collars of their coats invariably look as if they 
had been rolled in flour .. Three youngsters-a boy and two little 
girls-came running in a jiffy to their great-grandmother. Usually, 
such all too old little women are somehow on intimate terms with 
children ; they themselves become spiritually akin to children-some­
times to the very dot. The old woman seated herself. Maybe a guest 
or someone calling on business-a man of about forty, an ac­
quaintance-was about to leave the host. Besides, a nephew-the 
sister's son, a lad of seventeen-is staying with them for a while ; 
he hopes to find a job in some printer's shop. The old woman crosses 
herself, and sits down, looking at the guest. 
"Oh, I'm tired I Who's this with you ?" 
"You mean me ?"-says the guest, laughing. "Now, Maria 
Maximovna, is it possible you didn't recognize me ? Only two years 
ago-don't you remember ?-we'd been planning-you and I-to go 
to the woods after golden-brown mushrooms ?" 
"Oh, yes, now I know who you are, you teaser I I remember 
you ; only I forgot your name ; but I remember. Oh, how tired 
I am i "  
"Now, Maria 1\faximovna, esteemed old woman, I meant to 
ask you, why don't you grow at all ?"-the guest continues to joke. 
"Go on l "-laughs the grandmother, apparently pleased, how­
ever. 

THE DIARY OF. A WlUTER. 
24.J 
"Maria Muimovna, I'm a good fellow." 
"And it's nice to speak to a good fellow. Oh, mother, I'm al­
ways out of breath. I see you've already sewn Serejenka's over­
coat."-She points at the nephew. 
The nephew, a chubby and healthy young urchin, gives a broad 
smile and comes up closer ; he is wearing a brand-new, gray over­
coat and, as yet, he is unable to put it on with an indifferent air. 
Indifference will come only in a week maybe, but now every minute 
he keeps looking at the cuffs, the facing and, generally, at himself, 
in the mirror, and he feels a special respect for himself. 
"Now, come and turn"-chatters the barber's wife. "Just look, 
Maximovna, what an overcoat we've tailored I Six roubles to the 
kopeck ! Prokhorych says that nowadays 'tisn't worth starting the 
job for less ; you'd be shedding tears yourself, while this one-there 
will be no end to its wear. See, what cloth i -Do turn, you ! What 
a lining ! And how solid ! -Turn, I'm telling you ! Thus money 
flows away, Ma.ximovna ! That's the last we saw of our kopecks I " 
"Yes, dt>ar, living has grown so expensive nowadays-simply 
impossible ! Better you diun't talk about this : it just upsets me" 
-spiritedly remarks Ma.ximovna, who is still out of breath. 
"Now, that's enough I "  observed the host. "It's time to have 
a bite I What's that, Maria Maximovna, I can see you must be 
quite tired out ! "  
"Why, good man, indeed I am tired-d'you se, it's a warm 
day ; sunny. Now-1 ponder-I'll call on them . . . .  What's the 
use of lying all the time ! Oh ! . . . On my way here I met a little 
lady, a young one ; she bought shoes for her children. 'You're tired, 
old dear'-she says. 'Here, take five kopecks and buy yourself a loaf 
of white bread ! '  And, d'you know, I did takܛ the five kopf· ks . . . .  
" 
"Now, grandmother, first you better rest a while. !lee, how 
you're losing breath today ! "-suddenly observed the host, with em­
phasized solicitude. 
Everybody is looking at her : indeed, suddenly she has grown 
so pale ; her lips have turned quite white. She also is staring at 
everybody, but somehow dimly. 
"Here"-1 ponder-"gingerbreads for little children . . .  see, 
the five kopecks . . . .  " 
And again she stops, to catch her breath. Everybody becomes 
silent, just for about five seconds. 
"What's the matter, grandmother ?" asks the host, t-r·•1ding 
over her. 
But grandmother made no reply. Again there was silence for 
about five seconds. The old woman, as it were, had become even 
· whiter, while her whole face had shrunk. Her t>yes became motion­
less and a smile (roZt' on her lips. 

244 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
"A priest should be sent for i . . .  "-the guest suddenly, half 
aloud, speaks from behind them. 
"Yes . . .  but . . .  isn't it too late ?" . . .  mumbles the host. 
"Grandmother I Hear I 
Grandmother I "-cries the barber's 
wife, turning to the old woman and suddenly seized with alarm. 
But grandmother is immobile, only her bead begins to incline side­
ways. In her right hand, which rests on the table, she is holding 
that five-kopeck coin, while her left band remains on the shoulder 
of her great-grandson Misba-a boy of six. He stands motionless 
and, with his eyes wide open, stares at his great-grandmother. 
"She bas pased away I "-measuredly and solemnly pro­
nounces the host, stooping and crossing himself lightly. 
"That's it I I could se her all sinking down"-warmly and 
abruptly says the guest. He is quite astounded and looks around 
at everybody. 
"Oh, God I What a thing ! How are we going to manage it, 
Mak.arych ? Shall we put her there ?" the hostess hastily twitters, 
quite upset. 
"Hither-thither"-sedately retorts the host. "We'll manage 
it ourselves. Isn't she a relative of yours ? But I must go and 
report it." 
"A hundred and four years ! Just think ! "-the guest keeps 
repeating in a state of ever-increasing affection. Somehow, be even 
turns red all over. 
"Yes, in recent years she began to forget life itself"-still 
more solemnly and more soberly remarks the host, looking for his 
hat and taking his cloak.· 
"And only a minute ago she was laughing, and how cheerful 
she was ! See, the five-kopeck coin in her hand ! 'Gingerbreads'-she 
said. Oh, ob ! Such is our life ! " 
"Well, let's go, Petr Stepanych ! "-the host cuts short his 
guest, and they both depart. 
Of course, over such a one no tears are shed. A hundred and 
four years-"and she passed away painlessly and unashamed." The 
hostess sent to the neighbors for help. The neighbor women came 
running in haste, listening almost with pltasure to the news, sigh­
ing and screaming. 
It goes without saying that, to begin with, a samovar was 
brought in. Children with an astonished air, hiding in a corner, stare 
at the dead grandmother. No matter how long Misha may live, 
he will remember the little old woman-how she died, pressing her 
hand upon his shoulder. Well, and when he dies, no one on earth 
will learn that once upon a time there lived such an old woman, 
and that she had lived one hundred and four years-how and what 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
245 
for, God only knows. Thus, millions of people pas away : they 
live unnoticed and they die unnoticed. Only, perhaps, in the instant 
of death itself of these centenarians-both men and women-there 
is something touching, as it were, and calm, even solemn and 
pacifying : even in our time, one hundred years strangely afect 
men. God bless the lives and deaths of simple, kind folks I 
However, this is but a light and themeless little scene. Truly, 
one intends to recount, from among the things heard in the course 
of the month, something more entertaining, but when one starts 
writing, it develops that the thing either cannot be recorded or that 
it is irrelevant, or else that "one shouldn't tell everything one 
knows," and, in the long run, there remain only the most pointless 
subjects . . . .  
3 
"SEGREGATION" 
And yd, i am writint, about "things which I have seen, heard 
and read." It is fortunate that I did not bind myself with the 
promise to write about everything which "I have seen, heard and 
read." And, in truth, I hear strange things mostly. How is one 
to recount them if everything, of its own accord, drifts asunder 
and stubbornly refuses to shape itself into one bundle I Verily, I 
keep thinking that we have reached an epoch of some universal 
"segregation." Everybody segregates himself, keeps aloof 
from 
others ; everybody seeks to invent something of his own, something 
new-never before heard of. Everybody sets aside al that which 
formerly used to be shared in common-ill ideas and :.ܜntiments­
and begins with his own thoughts and feelings. Everyb· . .  y strives 
to start from the beginning. Former ties are being severed without 
regret and everybody acts by himself, and in this a1one does he 
find consolation. If he doesn't act, he wishes he could act. True, 
a great many people are not starting anything and never will start ; 
even so, they are detached ; they stand apart, staring at the empty 
spot and idly waiting for something. We all art> awaiting some­
thing. Meanwhile, in almost nothing is there moral accord : every­
thing has been, or is beiug, broken up, and not even into groups 
but into units, and-what is more important-sometimes with the 
easiest and most satisfied air. 
Take our contemporaneous belles-le1 · ist-I mean, one of the 
new ones. He embarks upon his profession and refuses to know 
anything of the past ; he acts on his own behalf and al by him­
self. He preaches new things, unhesitatingly setting forth the ideal 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
of the new word and of the new man. He is unfamiliar with either 
European literature or with that of his own country. Not only 
has he not read Pushkin and Turgenev but, truly, he has hardly 
read his own writers, i.e., Bielinsky and Dobroliubov. He depicts 
new heroes and new women, and their whole novelty boils down 
to the fact that they take their tenth step, forgetting the first nine 
-thus, suddenly, ·  finding themselves in a situation as false as can 
be conceived-and they perish for the edification and seduction of 
the reader. The whole edification is limited to this falsehood of 
the situation. In all this there is very little that is new ; on the 
contrary, there is a great deal of shabby, old rubbish. But this is 
not the entire point :  the point is that the author is firmly convinced 
that he has uttered a new word ; that he stands by himself ; that 
he has segregated himself-and, of course, he is very pleased. True, 
this is a trifling and old example, but only the other day I heard 
a story about a new word. There was a certain "nihilist" : he denied 
and suffered, and after many troubles, and even exile, he suddenly 
discovered a religious feeling in his heart. Now, what do you think 
he did forthwith ? In a jiffy "he went into retirement and segre­
gated himself" ; promptly and carefully, he shoved away our Chris­
tian faith ; he set aside all former things and, without delay, in­
vented his own religion-also a Christian religion, but "his own." 
He has a wife and children. He does not live with his wife, while 
the children have ben placed with strangers. The other day he 
ran away to America, most probably with a view to propagating 
there his new religion. 
In a word-everybody by himself, everybody in his own way. 
Is it possible that they all seek merely to appear original, that 
they are only pretending ?-Not in the least. Now we are living 
through a truthful, rather than reflective, period. Many people­
perhaps a great many of them-actually languish and suffer ; they 
did in truth-and most seriously-sever all their former ties and 
are compelled to begin anew, since no one is offering them any 
light. And the sages and ringleaders merely cater to them-some 
of them for fear of the jews (why not, they argue, let him go 
to America ?-isn't it liberal to run away to America ?) ; others­
simply to make money on them. And thus fresh energies perish. 
I may be told that these are but two or three facts which mean 
nothing, and that, on the contrary, everything is consolidating itself 
and uniting even closer than hitherto ; that banks, companies and 
associations are being formed. But, would you really, and in truth, 
point at this mob of triumphant Jews and Yiddishers who have 
sprung upon Russia ?-Triumphant and enraptured-for in our day 
there have appeared even enraptured jews of Hebrew and Orthodox 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
247 
faiths. And imagine, even about them, it is stated in our newspapers 
that they go into retirement and that, for instance, the foreign press 
is making great fun of the conventions of representatives of our 
Russian agricultural banks, on account of "the secret meetings of 
the first two conventions, asking not without irony : how and by 
what right have the Russian agricultural credit institutions the 
nerve to expect to gain public confidence if they, at secret meetings 
held behind the Chinese wall which carefully protects them, are 
concealing everything from the public, thereby hinting to it that, 
in fact, something suspicious is taking place . . . .  
" 
So that even these gentlemen segregate and closet themselves, 
devising something all their own, in their own fashion and not 
as things are being transacted all over the world. However, I inter­
jected my remark about the banks jestingly : this, as yet, is none 
of my business ; I am merely speaking about segregation. How 
best should I explain my thought ? In passing, I may state a few 
considerations about our corporations and associations, borrowing 
them from a manuscript-not my own, but one that has been sent 
to me and which has been published nowhere. The author addresses 
his provincial opponents : 
"You say that the arteli, asociations, corporations, co-opera­
tives, commercial, and all other, companies are founded upon the 
gregarious instinct in man. Defending the Russian artel which, thus 
far, has been studied too little to make any positive statements 
about it, we believe that all these corporations, associations, etc.­
all these are but unions of certain groups against others, unions 
founded upon the instinct of self-preservation and generated by the 
struggle for existence. This opinion of ours is corroborated by the 
history of the origination of these unions, \'"hich were .U;·t formed 
by the poor and the weak against the rich and the strc. · ,. ; subse­
quently, the latter began to utilize this weapon of their adversaries. 
Indeed, history undeniably shows that all these unio.:s came into 
being because of fraternal strife, and they are based not upon the 
need of intercourse, as you maintain, but upon a feeling of fear 
for one's existence, or upon the desire for gain, profit, or interest 
-even at the expense of one's neighbor. And, analyzing the organiza­
tion of all these offshoots of utilitarianism, we perceive that their 
principal concern is to establish firm control of everyone over every­
body and of everybody over everyone-simply wholesale espionage, 
from fear that one fellow may cheat the other fellow. All these 
asociations, with their internal control an,: their external activities 
envious of everything extraneous, present a perfect parallel with 
things taking place in the political world, where the mutual rela­
tions of the nations are characterized by armed pear;e, interrupted 

248 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
by bloody conflicts, and their internal life-by an endless strife of 
the factions. In this connection, how can one speak of communion 
and love ? Is it not because of this fact that all these institutions 
are so slowly domesticated by us, since we are still living spaciously ; 
that there is still no reason for us to arm ourselves against each 
other ; that we still possess a good deal of affection for, and faith 
in, each other, and that these feelings prevent us from organizing 
such a control-such an espionage-against each other as is required 
when all these associations, commercial co-operatives and similar 
companies are organized, while, in the case of insufficiency of con­
trol, they cannot function and inevitably go on the rocks ? 
"Shall we lament over these defects of ours compared with 
our better educated Western neighbors ? No, we, at least, perceive 
in these defects our wealth ; we see that in us there still lives, with 
certain vigor, that feeling of unity without which human societies 
cannot exist, notwithstanding the fact that this feeling, dwelling 
in people unconsciously, leads them both to great exploits and, quite 
often, great vices. Yet he in whom this feeling has not yet been 
killed, is capable of everything, on condition that it be converted 
from an unconscious one, from an instinct, into a conscious power 
which should not toss one hither and thither, by the blind caprice 
of accident, but be directed by us toward the realization of sensible 
aims. However, without this feeling of unity, of mutual affection, 
of intercourse between men, nothing great is conceivable, since so­
ciety itself is inconceivable." 
In other words, you see, the author, perhaps, does not quite 
damn the associations and corporations, but he merely asserts that 
their present-day fundamental principle is confined to nothing but 
utilitarianism plus espionage, and that is in no sense the communion 
of men. All this is youthful, fresh, theoretical, impractical, but, in 
principle, it is quite correct, and is expressed not only sincerely 
but with sufering and compassion. And, note a general trait : our 
whole problem resolves itself into the fit:st step-to practice-whereas 
everybody, to the last man, is shouting and busying himself about 
principles ; and practice, willy-nilly, has slipped into the hands of 
Jews alone. 
The history of the manuscript from which I took the above 
excerpt is as follows : its distinguished author (only I don't know 
if he is a young man or one of those young old men) published 
a short sketch in some provincial periodical, the editor of which­
having given space to that sketch-also printed a note of reserva­
tion, partly disagreeing with the author. Thereupon, when the latter, 
in refutation of the editor's note, wrote a whole article-not too 
long, however-the editorial office refused to print it, under the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
249 
pretext that "it is more a sermon than an article." The author then 
wrote me a letter, and mailed the manuscript and asked me to 
read it, think it over and express my opinion of it in my Diary. 
First, I wish to thank him for his confidence in my opinion, and, 
second-for the article, since it gave me great pleasure : rarely have 
I read anything more logical. And even though I am unable to 
print the article in toto, nevertheless I made the above excerpt with 
an intent which I shall not conceal : the point is that in the author, 
who advocates genuine communion of men, I also perceived an 
extraordinarily "segregated" diapason in a certain sense-specifically, 
in those portions of the manuscript which I do not risk quoting ; 
it is so segregated that one seldom finds anything like it. Thus, not 
only the article but the author himself, as it were, corroborates my 
idea about the "segregation" of units and the extreme, so to speak, 
chemical decomposition of our society into its component parts, 
which has occurred suddenly in our time. 
I may add, however, that if nowadays everybody is "on his 
own and by himself," still one is not without a link with the past. On 
the contrar;,•, !-.:Jch a link Ⴧust exist, even though everything would 
seem scattered and out of tune with everything else, and it is most 
interesting to trace this link. In a word, I admit : this is an old 
simile-our Russian educated society reminds one of that antiquated 
bundle of twigs which is solid only on condition that the twigs 
are tied together, but just as soon as they <>re disjoined, the whole 
bundle falls apart into so many tiny blades which will be scattered 
by the first gust of wind. Now, it is this bundle that has fallen 
apart in Russia. Is it not true, however, that our government, 
throughout the twenty-year period of its reform!\, has failed to 
receive full support on the part of our educated str;ua ?-Isn't it 
true that the overwhelming majority of our young, fresh cl·d precious 
elements have gone in some queer direction-into S<.offing and 
threatening segregation-and precisely in order to take all at once the 
tenth step, forgetting that the tenth step without the preceding nine, 
in any event, must be reduced to a fancy, even if it meant something 
by itself. The point most to be regretted is that perhaps only one out 
of a thousand of these apostates has some comprehension of the mean­
ing of this tenth step, while the rest have merely heard the sound of 
the bells without knowing whence it comes. The result is that a 
hen has hatched a chatterbox. Have you sen a forest fire during 
hot summer ? How pitiful it is to observe it I What a sad sight I 
What a mass of precious material perishes in vain I How much 
energy, fire and warmth is absorbed to no purpose, uselessly, with­
out leaving any trace. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
4 
MEDITATIONS ABOUT EUROPE 
"And in Europe-why, everywhere-isn't it the same ? Haven't 
all these cohesive forces, which we had so trusted, been converted 
into a sad mirage ? Isn't their decomposition and segregation even 
worse than ours ?" These are questions which cannot be evaded by 
a Russian. Besides, what true Russian doesn't think first about 
Europe ? 
Quite so, judging by appearances, there, perhaps, things are 
worse than at home ; only the historical causality of the segrega­
tions is more obvious ; but, maybe, this is all the more cheerless. 
Precisely in the fact that at home it is most difficult to trace any 
reasonable cause and to pick up all the loose ends of our torn 
threads-precisely in this fact there is some consolation for us : at 
length it will be ascertained that the dissipation of energy is im­
mature, altogether insensate, half-artificial, and, maybe, an accord 
will be agreed upon. So there still is hope that the bundle will 
again be rejoined. But over there, in Europe, no bundle will ever 
be tied together ; there, everything has become segregated in a 
manner different from ours-maturely, clearly and with precision ; 
there, groups and units are living their last days, and they them­
selves are aware of it ; yet they refuse to cede anything, one to 
the other ; they would rather die than yield. 
By the way, at hoiJle everybody is talking peace. Everybody 
predicts lasting peace ; everywhere, clear horizons, alliances and 
new energies are being discerned. Even in the fact that in Paris a 
republic has been established, people perceive peace ; moreover, 
even in the fact that that republic has been established by Bis­
marck-even in this, people perceive peace. In the accord of the 
great Oriental powers people unhesitatingly see great pledges for 
peace, while some of our newspapers begin to observe even in the 
present Herzegovina disturbance unmistakable symptoms of the 
stability of European peace, instead of their former apprehension. 
By the way, is it not because the key to the Herzegovina problem 
also turned up in Berlin, and also in Prince Bismarck's casket ? 
But at home it is the French Republic that cheers us most. In 
passing, why does France continue to occupy the front place in 
Europe despite victorious Berlin ? To this day, the most insignificant 
happening in France aroqses in Europe more sympathy and atten­
tion than any important Berlin event. It is unquestionably because 
that country has been invariably the land of the first step, the first 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
251 
test, the fiܝst ideational initiative. This i s  why thence everybody also 
firmly expects "the beginning of the end." Who, but France-before 
anyone else-will take this fatal and ultimate stride ? 
This is, perhaps, the reason why yonder, in that "progressive" 
country, there has appeared the maximum number of the most 
irreconcilable "segregations." Peace "to the very finish" is alto­
gether impossible there. Acclaiming the republic, everybody in 
Europe has been asserting that it is needed by both France and 
Europe by the fact alone that only its existence will render the 
"revanche" war with Germany impossible, and that the republic 
alone-among all the governments that have been only recently 
claiming power in France-will neither risk nor desire it. And yet 
all this is a mirage : the republic has been proclaimed precisely for 
the purpose of war, if not with Germany, then with a still more 
dangerous adversary, an adversary and enemy of the whole of 
Europe-communism. And now, with the republic, this adversary 
will rise sooner than under any other form of government ! Every 
other government would have compromised with it, and would 
thereby have postponed tl•e denouement, whereas the republic wil 
make no concession to it and will even provoke the combat, and 
will be first to compel the enemy to engage in it. Thus, let people 
not maintain that "the republic is peace." 
Indeed, who was it this time that proclaimed the republic ? 
-All bourgeois and small proprietors. Since when have they become 
such staunch republicans ? And didn't they fear the republic more 
than anything, perceiving in it nothing but chaos and the one step 
toward communism dreaded by them ?-The Convention, at the 
time of the first Revolution, split up the large estates 11f the emi­
grants and of the Church into small lots J."d started ܞt 11ing them 
because of the continual financial crisis of those days. T1· ,  measure 
had enriched the overwhelming majority of the French and it 
enabled them, eighty years later, to pay the five-billܟon contribu­
tion, almost without a frown. But, having P.nhanced temporary 
prosperity, this measure for many long years paralyzed democratic 
aspirations by excessively increasing the army of proprietors and 
by surrendering France to the boundless sovereign power of the 
bourgeoisie-the outstanding foe of the demos. Without this measure 
the bourgeoisie, having replaced her former masters, the nobility, 
would under no circumstances have retained power in France. But 
as a result of this, the demos became irreconcilably enragP•J : the 
bourgeoisie itself distorted the natural cou, 
! of democratic tenden­
cies, converting it into a thirst for vengeance and hate. The segre­
gation of the parties has assumed such proportions that the state 
. organism has been utterly demolished, beyond any possibility of 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
repair. If France continues to stand, as if it were intact, this is 
solely due to that law of nature on the strength of which even a 
handful of snow cannot thaw prior to a determined time. It is this 
phantom of wholeness that the unhappy bourgeois-and with them 
a multitude of naive people in Europe-continue to treat as a living 
force of the organism, deceiving themselves with hope and at the 
same time trembling from fear and hatred. But, essentially, com­
munion has vanished completely. Oligarchs are thinking only about 
the interests of the rich ; democracy is thinking only about the 
interests of the poor-but the commonweal, the good of all people 
and the future of France as a whole-is at present nobody's con­
cern there, save that of socialistic and positivistic dreamers boost­
ing science and expecting everything from it, that is, a new com­
munion of men and new principles on which the social organism 
should be founded-for once, mathematically secure and immovable 
principles. However, science, from which so much is expected, is 
hardly in a position to tackle this task forthwith. It is difficult to 
conceive that it should possess such a thorough knowledge of 
human nature as to devise unmistakably new laws for the social 
organism. Since, however, this problem cannot be held in suspense 
and in a state of oscillation, there naturally arises the question : 
is science ready for this particular task forthwith, even if in its 
future development this task be not exceeding the efficacy of sci­
ence ? (For the present we shall refrain from asserting that this 
problem unquestionably surpasses the efficacy of human science, 
even in its combined future development.) 
Inasmuch as science 
undoubtedly will refuse to heed such an appeal, it is clear that the 
whole movement of the demos is now ruled in France (and also 
in the whole world) by mere dreamers, and the dreamers-by all 
sorts of speculators. Besides, aren't there dreamers in science itself ? 
True, the dreamers have captured the movement with full right 
since they alone in all France concern themselves with the com­
munion of all people and with the future ; for this reason, succes­
sion in France, as it were, on moral grounds passes unto them, 
notwithstanding their apparent weakness and fantasticality. This 
is being felt by everybody. But the most dreadful thing in this 
connection is the fact that, aside from everything fantastic, there 
developed a most cruel and inhuman tendency which is by no means 
fantastic, but, indeeti, quite real and historically inevitable. It is 
fully expressed in the saying : "6te-toi de la, que je m'y mette !" 
("Get out of there, so that I may place myself in your stead.") 
To the millions of the demos-save for all too rare exceptions-the 
plunder of property-owners is the principal object, the crown of all 
desires. Yet one cannot blame the paupers : the oligarchs themselves 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
253 
have kept them in ignorance to such an extent that, save for 
insignificant exceptions, all these millions of wretched and blind 
people, no doubt, actually and most naively believe that they will 
enrich themselves precisely as a result of this robbery, and that 
the whole social idea, which their ringleaders preach to them, con­
sists exactly of this. Besides, how can they understand their ring­
leader-dreamers or any of their prophecies ahout science ? Never­
theless, they will unquestionably be victorious and, if the rich do 
not yield in good time, dreadful things will ensue. But nobody is 
going to yield in good time-maybe, because the time for conces­
sions is over. Nor will the paupers themselves desire them ; they 
would reject any accord even if they were given everything ; they 
would keep thinking that they were being misled and cheated. 
They wish to take the law into their own hands. 
The Bonapartes held their ground only because they held out 
the promise of a possible compromise with the paupers ; they even 
made microscopical efforts-however, invariably treacherous and in­
sincere-to th!s Pnd. But the oligarchs lost their faith in these efforts ; 
nor does the demos believe them even a bit. 
As for the government of the kings (the senior line), essen­
tially, these can offer the proletarians, as a means of salvation, 
nothing but the Roman Catholic faith, which not only the demos, 
but likewise the overwhelming majority in France, has long for­
gotten and does not wish to know. It is rumored that, of late, among 
proletarians-at least, in Paris-spiritism has been spreading with 
extraordinary vehemence. The junior Orleans line of the kings is 
hated by the bourgeoisie itself, even though for a time that dynasty 
was considered, as it were, the natural leader of the Frenc'l property­
owners. But their ineptness became obvious to everybr·' •. Never­
theless, the proprietors had to save themselves ; they l. ere faced 
with the necessity, by all means and as quickly as possible, to pick 
a leader for the great and last battle with the dreadful future 
enemy. This time, reason and instinct. whisper.:;d to them the right 
solution, and·they chose the republic. 
There is a political-perhaps even natural-law which consists 
in that two powerful and adjacent neighbors, no matter he .. , friendly, 
always in the long run ܠeek to annihilate each other and, sooner 
or later, they do succeed in their scheme. (We, Russians, should 
be giving more thought to this law of strong neighborship.) "It 
is a direct transition from the red republic to communism •· This 
is the thought which, so far, has been Ltimidating the French 
property-ownerܡ. And so much time was designed to elapse until 
suddenly they-the overwhelming majority of them-grasped the 
fact that the nearest neighbors, by virtue of the mere principle 

254 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
of self-preservation, would become their bitterest enemies. In point 
of fact, despite the close neighborship of the red republic with 
communism, what can be more hostile, more radicaly opposed to 
communism than a republic, even the bloody republic of '93 ?-In 
a republic the republican form of government stands above every­
thing else : "La republique avant tout, avant la France." The form 
is the whole hope of the republic : let there be "MacMahonia," 
instead of France, but let it be called a republic-such is the char­
acteristic of the present "victory" of the republicans in France. 
Thus, salvation is sought in the form. On the other hand, what 
does communism care about the republican form if, in substance, 
it rejects not only every form of government, but the state itself 
and modern society ? 
This outright contrast and mutual antithesis of the two op­
posing forces should have been conceived by the French masses 
eighty years ago. Finally they did grasp it, and inaugurated the 
republic : and, at length, they confronted the enemy with the most 
dangerous and most natural adversary. The republic, after making 
its transition to communism, under no circumstance will agree to 
annihilate itself. Essentially, a republic is the most natural expres­
sion and form of the bourgeois idea ; besides, the French bourgeoisie 
in toto is a child of the republic ; it was begotten and organized 
exclusively by the republic, at the time of the first Revolution. Thus, 
ultimate segregation was achieved. 
It might be said that war is still remote. Hardly is it so re­
mote. Perhaps it is better not to seek postponement of the denoue­
ment. Even now, socialism has corroded Europe, while by that time 
it will finally have undermined her. Prince Bismarck is aware of 
this, but in a too German-like fashion he relies on blood and iron. 
But what can one accomplish with blood and iron in a situation 
such as this? . . .  
5 
DEAD FoRCE AND FuTuRE FoRcEs 
It might be argued : still, at present, there isn't the slightest 
ground for alarm ; everything is clear ; everything looks bright : in 
France-"MacMahonia" ; in the East-the concord of the powers ; 
military budgets are swelling excessively everywhere-isn't this 
peace ? 
But the Pope ? Today or tomorrow he will die-then what ? 
Is it conceivable that Roman Catholicism will consent to die with 
him for company's sake ?-Oh, never did it thirst to live so intensely 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
255 
as at present I However, can our prophets do otherwise than scoff 
at the Pope ? We haven't even raised the question of the Pope ; it 
has simply been reduced to naught. And yet this is an all too 
enormous "segregation," replete with boundless and incongruent 
aspirations to agree to renounce it for the sake of universal peace. 
And for what, for whose gratification should it be renounced?­
For the sake of humankind ? Why, it has long considered itself 
above mankind as a whole. So far, it has been plotting only with 
those possessing mundane power and has been relying upon them 
to the last moment. But that time is over, it seems, forever, and 
Roman Catholicism will unquestionably forsake the earthly po­
tentates who, in truth, have long ago betrayed it and instigated 
in Europe a universal baiting campaign whose organization is at 
present fully completed. Why, Roman Catholicism is known to 
have made even sharper turns : once upon a time, when this was 
necessary, it did not hesitate to sell Christ in exchange for mundane 
power. Having proclaimed the dogma that "Christianity cannot sur­
vive on earth without the earthly power of the Pope," it thereby 
has proclaimed a new Chnst, not like the former one, but one who 
has been seduced by the third temptation of the devil-the tempta­
tion of the kingdoms of the world : "All these things will I give 
thee if thou wilt fall down and worship me I "  
Oh, I have heard ardent refutations C'f this thought : I have 
been told that faith and the image of Christ up to the present con­
tinue to dwell in the hearts of many Catholics in all their original 
truth and purity. This is unquestionably true, but the main well­
spring has been made muddy and has been befouled forever. Be­
sides, Rome has only too recently proclaimed its as!:߂nt to the 
third temptation of the devil in the fom1 of a solid c1 · ߃ma, and 
for this reason, as yet, we have had no time to discern aU Lhe direct 
consequences of this momentous decision. It is noteworthy that the 
promulgation of this dogma, this revelation of "the wbole secret," 
took place precisely at that moment when unit..:d Italy was already 
knocking at the gates of Rome. In Russia, in those days, many 
people used to joke : "angry, but weak . . .  
" Only hardly is he 
weak. No, such men, capable of such decisions and tur߄s, cannot 
die without fighting. Tht're might be the objt'Ction that thus it 
has always been in Catholicism, at least that it was implied, so 
that, essentially, no revolution has occurred. Quite ; but there al­
ways has been a secret : during many centuries the Popes havC' ben 
pretending that they were satisfied with t .. eir tiny dominion-the 
Papal State ; but all this was for the sake of mere allegory ; still, 
the important point is that in this allegory there was always hidden 
the kernel of the main idea, coupled with the induhiLable and per-

zs6 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
petual hope of papacy that in the future the kernel would grow 
into a grand tree which would shar\e the whole world. And now, 
at the very final moment, when the last acre of his earthly dominion 
was to be taken away from him, the lord of Catholicism, seing 
his approaching death, suddenly arose and proclaimed urbi et orbi 
the whole truth about himself : "So you thought that I was satisfied 
with the mere title of King of the Papal State ? Know that I have 
ever considered myself potentate of the whole world and over all 
earthly kings, and not only their spiritual, but their mundane, 
genuine master, sovereign and emperor. It is I who am king over 
all kings and sovereign over all sovereigns, and to me alone on 
earth belong the destinies, the ages and the bounds of time. And 
now I am proclaiming this in the dogma of my infallibility."-Nay, 
in this there is power ; this is solemn and not funny ; this is the 
resurrection of the ancient Roman idea of world dominion and 
unity, which never did die in Roman Catholicism ; this is the 
Rome of Julian the Apostate, but not of him who had been con­
quered, but, as it were, of Christ triumphant in the new and final 
battle. Thus, the sale of the true Christ in exchange for the king­
doms of the world has been consummated. 
And in Roman Catholicism it will be actually consummated 
and brought to an end. I repeat : this dreadful army is equipped 
with too sharp eyes not to discern, finally, where at present lies 
the real power upon whic;:h it may lean. Having lost its allies­
the kings-Catholicism, no doubt, will rush to the demos. It has 
at its disposal tens of thousands of tempters, profoundly wise and 
adroit heart-readers and-psychologists, dialecticians and confessors 
of faith, while the people everywhere are straightforward and kind. 
Besides, in France-and nowadays also in many other parts of 
Europe-even though the people hate religion and despise it, never­
theless they have no knowledge whatever of the Gospel-at least in 
France. All these heart-readers and psychologists will rush to the 
people and will bring to them their new Christ, the one who has 
acceded to everything and who has been proclaimed at the last 
impious sobor in Rome. "Why, friends and brethren"-they will 
say-"everything you are busying yourselves about-all this we have 
had in store for you in this book for a long time-all this has been 
stolen from us by your ringleaders. If, thus far, we have talked 
to you a little differently, it is only because up to the present you 
were like little children, and it was too early for you to learn 
the truth ; but now the time has come for your truth, too. Know 
that the Pope holds the keys of Saint Peter, and that faith in God 
is but faith in the Pope who has been instituted on earth for you 
by God Himself in His stead. He is infallible, and Divine power 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
:!57 
has ben conferred upon him, and he is the sovereign of ages and 
bounds of time. He has decided that your term, too, i.; now due. 
In days past the main force of faith consisted of humility, but 
now humility must come to an end, and the Pope has the authority 
to abrogate it, since he possesses the full power. Yes, you are aJJ 
brethren, and Christ Himself has ordained th჈჉ all be brethren ; if, 
however, your elder brothers refuse to accept you as brethren, arm 
yourselves with sticks and enter their houses and compel them to 
become your brethren by force. Christ has long waited for your 
corrupt elder brothers to repent, and now He grant;, you His own 
permission to proclaim : 'Fraternite ou Ia mort !' ('Be my brother 
or else death to you ! ') Should your brother refuse to share with 
you his property, half and half, take it all away from him, since 
Christ has long waited for his repentance, but now the time for 
wrath and vengeance has come. You should also know that you are 
innocent of all your former and future sins because all your sins 
have been caused merely by your poverty. And if thi;;. has already 
been announceil to you bv your former ringleaders and teachers, 
you should know that even though they spoke the truth to you, 
they had no authority to announce it prematurely. ჊ince this au­
thority is possessed only by the Pope from God Himself. And the 
proof of it is in the fact that your teachers have led you to nothing 
sensible-merely to executions and the wor჋t calamities, and each 
one of their undertakings collapsed of its own accord. Besides, they 
have all been cheating, in order to appear stronger, relying upon 
you, and afterwards selling themselves at a higher price to your 
enemies. But the Pope will not sell you because there is no one 
stronger than he, and he is the foremost among the first You must 
believe only-not in God-but only in the i-'llpe and th : 
he alone 
is the earthly king, while all others shall perish because ჌beir time 
bas come. So rejoice now and be exceeding glad, since the earthly 
paradise has now been established : you shall all become rich and, 
through wealth, righteous because all your desires shall be :>atiჍfied, 
and every cause of evil will be thus eliminated." 
These are flattering words but the demos, no doubt, will ჎ccept 
the offer : they will discern in the unexpected ally a ,;real con­
solidating force accedinJ! to everything and hindering nothing, a 
real and historical force in lieu of ringleaders, dreamers and specu­
lators in whose practical ability-and, at times, honesty-they often 
do not believe even in our day. Here thr ,.,oint of the appkation 
of force is suddenly provided, and the lever JS put into their hands ; 
it suffices that the whole mass press upon it and turn it. And aren't 
the people capable of turning it ? Aren't they the mass ? Besides, 
· on top of it, once more they are provided with faith and thereby 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
many a heart will be assuaged, since many among them have long 
felt anguish without God . . . .  
On one tA:casion I have already discussed al these things, 
but merely in passing, in a novel. Let people excuse my self-reli­
ance, but I am convinced that, in this or that form, all this will 
come to pass in Western Europe, i.e., that Catholicism will thrust 
itself into democracy, into the people, and will forsake the earthly 
kings because they, on their part, forsook it. All public authorities 
in Europe despise it, since now it sems so destitute and crushed ; 
still they do not picture it to themselves in so comic an appearance 
and state as it is being naively conceived by our political publicists. 
However, Bismarck, for example, would not have persecuted Ca­
tholicism so strongly if he had not sensed in it a dreadful, proximate 
enemy in no distant future. Prince Bismarck is too proud a man 
to waste in vain so much energy on a comically impotent foe. Yet 
the Pope is stronger than he. I repeat : in our day papacy is, per­
haps, the most dreadful among all "segregations" threatening uni­
versal peace. And the world is threatened by many a thing : at no 
time in the past has Europe been loaded with such elements of 
ill-will as at present. It seems that everything is undermined and 
loaded with powder, and is just waiting for the first spark . . . .  
"And what's this to us ? All this is there, in Europe, and 
not at home I "-Well, it is our concern because Europe will be 
knocking at our door, crying for help and urging us to save her 
when the last hour of her "present order of things" strikes. And 
she will demand our help, as it were, by right ; she will demand 
it with a challenge, commandingly. She is going to tell us that we 
too are Europe ; that, consequently, we have exactly the same "order 
of things" as she ; that not in vain have we imitated her during two 
hundred years, boasting that we were Europeans, and that by sav­
ing her, we are thereby saving ourselves. Of course, perhaps we 
might not be disposed to settle the matter exclusively in favor 
of one party ; but should we be equal to such a task, and haven't 
we long ago lost the habit of all reasoning on the question as to 
what is our real "segregation" as a nation and what is our genuine 
role in Europe ? Nowadays, not only do we fail to comprehend 
such things, but we even do not admit such questions and we con­
sider it folly and backwardness to listen to them. And should Europe 
actually knock at our .. door, urging us to get up and march to save 
her l'Ordre, then, perhaps, for the first time, all of us would grasp 
at once to what extent all the while we did not resemble Europe, 
despite our two-hundred-year craving for, and dreams about, be­
coming Europe-dreams which used to reach the proportions of 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
259 
passionate fits. But even then, perhaps, we would not grasp it, 
since it would be too late. And, if so, we should naturally fail to 
understand what Europe would be expecting and soliciting from 
us, and how, actually, we could help her. And, on the contrary, 
should we not, maybe, march to subdue the enemy of Europe and 
of her order with the same iron and blood as even Prince Bismarck 
did ? Oh, well, in the event of such an exploit, we could boldly 
congratulate ourselves upon being thorough Europeans. 
But all this is the future l All these are such fancies l But 
the present is so bright, so bright ! 
CHAPTER II 
1 
Don Carlos and Sir Watkin. Again, Symptoms of "the 
Begi,ming of the End." 
I HAVE READ with great interest about Don Carlos' entry 
into England. People are wont to say that reality is weary and 
monotonous ; to dbtract themselves they reܢort to art, to imagina­
tion and to the reading of romances. To me, on the contrary, what 
can be more fantastic, more unpredictable than reality ? Even, at 
times, what can be more incredible than reality ? Never can a 
novelist conceive such impossibilities as reality offers us daily by 
the thousands in the guise of most ordinary things. Sometimes 
even no imagination is capable of invent:&g them. An. ' what an 
advantage compared with fiction ! Try to invent in a novel an 
episode such as, for instance, happened to attorney-at-law Kuper­
nik ; fabricate it yourself, and next Sunday a critic, in i1is feuilleton, 
will prove to you clearly and irrefutably that you are in a state 
of delirium ; that in reality this never did take place, and-this is 
the main point-that it never could occur on this and that 
ground. In the long run you will agree, with shame. Hܣwever, an 
issue of The Voice is brought to you. Unexpectedly, you read in 
it a full account about our sharpshooter-and what ?-At first, you 
read with surprise, with the greatest astonishment-so great that 
while you are reading you refuse to believf' :tnyone. But just :t" son 
as you have read to the last dot, you pt.- the paper aside and, 
suddenly, without knowing the reason why, you boldly say to your­
self : "Yes, all this must have happened exactly this way." And 

260 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
some people may even add : "I forboded it I "  Why such a difference 
in the impressions one derives from a newspaper and from fiction ? 
I don't know, but such is the privilege of reality. 
Don Carlos quietly and solemnly enters into England as her 
guest, after the blood and slaughter in the name of "King, Faith 
and the )!adonna'' ; here is another figure, one more "segregation" ! 
Now, is it possible for one to invent such a thing I Apropos, do 
you remember the episode-two years ago-of Count Chambord 
(Henry V) ? He is also a King, a legitimist, and he was also claim­
ing his throne in France, at the very same time when Don Carlos 
was claiming hi჏-in Spain. They may even be considered relatives : 
they belong to one and the same family, to the same branch-but 
what a contrast ! One-firmly wrapped up in his convictions-a 
melancholic, elegant and humane figure. At the most fatal moment, 
when he could have actually become king (of course, for an instant 
only ! ) , Count Cham Lord was tempted by nothing ; he did not 
surrender his "white banner," thereby proving that he was a mag­
nanimous and true knight, almost a Don Quixote, an ancient 
chevalier with the vow of chastity and poverty, a figure worthy 
of bringing to a close his ancient lineage of kings. (It seems solemn, 
and only, maybe, a little funny, but without comicality there is 
no life.) He renounced power and the throne solely because he 
sought to become King of France, not merely for his personal 
benefit, but for the salvation of France ; and inasmuch as her sal­
vation, in his opinion, was incompatible with the concessions which 
were demanded f• Jm him (quite feasible concessions), he refused 
to assume power. What a .contrast with the recent Napoleon, the 
swindler and proletarian, promising everything, surrendering every­
thing and cheating everybody only to attain power ! 
I have just paralleled Count Chambord with Don Quixote, 
but I know not any greater praise. Who was it-Heine, was it not ? 
-who recounted how, as a boy, he had burst into tears when, 
reading Don Quixote, he had reached the place where the hero was 
conquered by the despicable and common-sense barber-surgeon Sam­
son Carasco. In the whole world there is no deeper, no mightier 
literary work. This is, so far, the last and greatest expression of 
human thought ; this is the bitterest irony which man was capable 
of conceiving. And if the world were to come to an end, and people 
were asked there, somewhere : "Did you understand your life on 
earth, and what concl11Sion have you drawn from it ?"-man could 
silently hand over Don Quixote: "Such is my inference from life.­
Can you condemn me for it ?" I am not asserting that man would 
be right in stating so, but . . 
. 
Don Carlos is a relative of Count Chambord ; he is also a 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
261 
knight, but in that knight the Great Inquisitor may be perceived. 
He has shed rivers of blood ad majorem gloriam Dei and in the 
name of the Mother of God, the benign supplicant on man's behalf, 
"the ardent intercessor and assistant," as our people call Her. To 
him, much as to Count Chambord, proposals were made and he, 
too, had rejected them. This, if I am not mistaken, took place 
shortly after Bilbao and immediately after his great victory, when, 
during the battle, the commander-in-chief of the Madrid army 
lost his life. At that time emissaries were sent to him from Madrid : 
"What would he say if he were let into l\'ladrid ? And would he 
not outline some little program with a view to opening negotia­
tions ?" But he haughtily declined the very thought of negotiations 
-and, of course, not from mere pride, but also because of the prin­
ciple deeply rooted in his soul : he could not recognize those who 
had sent emissaries as belligerents, and he, the "King,·• could not 
enter into any agreements with "the revolution" !  Tersely, by a 
mere inkling, but clearly, he let it be known that "the King him­
self knows wh,t he shall hltve to do when he reaches his capital," 
and to this he added nothing. Of course, people promptly turned 
their backs on him, and shortly after that they summoned King 
Alfonso. The favorable moment was lost, but he continued to wage 
the war ; he kept '.•;riting manifestoes in a stately and high-ftown 
style ; and he was the first fully to believe :n them ; haughtily and 
majestically he kept shooting his generals for "treason" and sub­
duing the rebellions of his tired-out soldiers. And in all justice to 
him as a warrior it should be said that he had fought to the very 
last inch of his soil. At present, when departing from France to 
England, he announced to his French friends, in a g!.lomy and 
haughty epistle, "that he was pleased with their servict _ and sup­
port ; that by serving him, they have been serving themselves, and 
that he was ever ready to draw his sword in answer to an appeal 
of his unhappy country." Don't you worry : he will appear again. 
Apropos, this letter to "friends" throws a little light on the riddle : 
with what means and with whose money did this horrible man 
(they say he's young and handsome) wage the war so long and 
so relentlessly ?-Apparently these friends are both numerous and 
strong. Who could they he ?-Most likely he got the greatest sup­
port from the Catholic Church because he was its last hope in 
kings. Otherwise, no friends could have raised so many millions 
for him. 
Please note that this man who had so haughtily and sharply 
rejected any compromise with "the revolution," went to England, 
and he knew perfectly well that he should go to seek hospitality 
'in that free-minded and liberal country-revolutionary according to 

262 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
his way of thinking. Indeed, what a compatability of conceptions I 
And at the time of his arrival in England an insignificant but char­
acteristic episode occurred to him. He took a boat in Boulogne, to 
disembark at Folkestone. However, on the same boat there were 
sailing to England, also as guests, members of the Boulogne mu­
nicipality, who had been invited by the English for the peaceful 
celebration of the inauguration of a new railroad station at Folke­
stone. On the English shore a crowd of English people-authorities, 
smartly dressed ladies, guilds and delegations of various societies, 
with banners and bands-were assembled to greet these guests, 
among whom there was also a deputy from the department of Pas 
de Calais. There happened to be there a member of Parliament, 
Sir Edward Watkin, accompanied by two other members of Parlia­
ment. Having learned that among the landing passengers was Don 
Carlos, he promptly went to him to introduce himself and to pay 
him homage. With the utmost politeness he led him to the station 
and placed him in a private compartment of a car. But the rest 
of the public was not as polite : as Don Carlos was proceeding to 
the station and boarding the train, sounds of whistling and hissing 
broke out. Such behavior on the part of his compatriots greatly 
shocked Sir Edward. However, he personally described the incident 
in a newspaper, toning down as much as possible the rude reception 
of the "guest." He stated that a mere accident was responsible 
for the whole episode ; othܤrwise, it would have turned out dif­
ferently. "At the time"-he tells us-"when we were approaching 
the platform and Don Carlos lifted his hat in acknowledgment of 
the acclamations of several-persons greeting him, the wind unfurled 
the banner of the Odd Fellows association, and on the banner there 
appeared the picture of Mercy protecting children with the motto : 
'Do not forget widows and orphans ! '  The effect was spontaneous 
and extraordinary : grumbling broke out in the crowd, but it sig­
nified sorrow rather than outbursts of anger. Even though I regret 
the incident, nevertheless I must say that no people, assembled for 
a jolly celebration and suddenly being placed face to face with the 
leading actor in a bloody, fratriCidal war, could have shown greater 
politeness than that which was exhibited by the overwhelming ma­
jority of the Folkestone public." 
What a peculiar viewpoint, what a firmness of one's personal 
opinion, and what a jPalous pride in one's own people I 
Perhaps 
many of our liberals would regard the conduct of Sir Edward Wat­
kin ahܥost as infamy ; as a manifestation of base feelings in in­
gratiating himself with a famous man ; as a trivial, pert show-off. 
However, Sir Edward's reasoning differs from ours. Of course, he 
himself knew that the newly arrived guest was the leadiog actor 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
in a bloody and fratricidal war ; but by meeting him he thereby 
satisfied his patriotic pride and served England to the utmost of 
his ability. Extending his hand to a blood-stained tyrant, in the 
name of England, and as a member of Parliament, he told him, as 
it were : "You are a despot, a tyrant, and yet you came to the 
land of freedom to seek refuge in it. This could have been expected : 
England receives everybody and is not afraid to give refuge to 
anyone : entree et sortie libres. Be welcome." And it was not the 
mere rudeness of "a small portion of the assembled public" that 
grieved him, but also the fact that in the unrestraint of the senti­
ment, in the whistling and hissing, he discerned a faux pas' against 
personal dignity which every true Englishman must irrevocably 
possess. "Let it be considered excellent, there on the Continent, and 
among mankind at large, when the people do not restrain their 
insulted feelings and publicly brand the villain with contempt and 
whistle, even though he be their guest. But all this will do very 
well for some Parisians and Germans : an Englishman must behave 
differently. Ir: "uch moments he must be cool-headed, as a gentle­
man, and he should not express his opinion. It is far better if the 
guest learns nothing about what those meeting him think of him. 
It would have been best if everyone had been standing motionles, 
crossing his arms behind his back, as befits an Englishman, and 
staring at the newcomer with a glance full of chilly dignity. Several 
polite exclamations, but hushed and moderate, would have been of 
no consequence : the guest would promptly have understood that 
these were but mere custom and etiquette, and that, essentially, 
he could have evoked no emotion in anyone, even if he were a 
genius. And now, since they did start shouting and wl>·c;ა.ling, the 
guest may think that this was a senseless street mob, : >t as on 
the Continent." Apropos, I recall a rather amusing anecdote, which 
I have recently read-where and by whom I don't renu•mber-about 
Marshal Sebastiani and a certain Englishman ; this happened in 
the beginning of the century under Napoleon I. Marshal Sebastiani, 
then an important personage, wishing to pay his respects to an 
Englishman-and in those days the English were treated as under­
dogs because they were waging a cuntinuous and releudess war 
against Napoleon-after lavishing eulogies upon his nation, said to 
him with a polite air : "If I were not a Frenchman, I should like 
to become an Englishman." The Englishman listened but was in 
no way moved by the compliment, and pr · '"l'lptly replied : "And if 
I were n.Jt an Englishman, I should still hke to become an Eng­
lishman." 
Thus in England all Englishmen equally respect themselves, 
perhaps soiely because they are Englishmen. This alone, it would 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
seem, should prove sufficient for a close bond and the people's 
communion in that country. And yet, as a matter of fact, even 
there we see the same as everywhere else in Europe : a passionate 
craving for living and the loss of the sublime sense of life. Here, 
I shall cite-as an example of originality-the view of an English­
man on his religion, Protestantism. We must recall that, in their 
overwhelming majority, the English are extremely religious people : 
they are thirsting for faith and are continually seeking it. How­
ever, instead of religion-notwithstanding the state "Anglican" re­
ligion-they are divided into hundreds of sects. Here is what Sydney 
Dobell says in his recent article, Thoughts on Art, Philosophy and 
Religion: 
"Catholicism is (potentially) great, beautiful, wise, powerful, 
one of the most consistent and congruous constructions man has 
made ; but it is not educational and will, therefore, die ; nay, must 
be killed as pernicious in proportion to its excellence. 
"Protestantism is narrow, ugly, impudent, unreasonable, in­
consistent, incompatible : a babel of logomachy and literalism : a 
wrangling club of half-thinking pedants, half-taught geniuses, and 
untaught egotists of every type : the nursery of conceit and fanati­
cism : the holiday of all the 'fools that rush in.' 
"But it is educational and therefore it will live ; nay, must 
be fed and housed, cared for and fought for, as the sine qua non of 
the spiritual life of Man."1 
What impossible reasoning ! And yet, thousands of Europeans 
are seeking their salvation in similar inferences. In fact, is a society 
wholesome, in which, seriously and with so great ardor, such in­
ferences as to the spiritual quests of man are being propounded ? 
"Protestantism-you see-is vulgar, ugly, narrow and stupid, but it 
is educational, and therefore it should be conserved and protected I "  
To begin with-what utilitarianism in a matter such as this and 
in such a question ! The matter to which everything must be sub­
ordinate (if Sydney Dobell is actually concerned about faith)­
this matter is, on the contrary, considered solely from the point 
of its utility to the Englishman. And, of course, such utilitarianism 
1Thoughts 011 Art, Philosophy and Religion was not an "article," as 
Dostoievsky calls it, but a posthumous anthology "selected from the un­
published papers of Sidney Dobell with an introductory note by John 
Nichol, M.A. Oxon, etc." . . . published by Smith, Elder & Co., London, 
1876. The paragraphs quoted are an isolated note, "gathered from a chaos 
of Memoranda-thrown together with no attempt at method and of various 
date-and arranged under heads," i.e., by Dobell's literary executrix. The 
above lines appear under the 1'head" RELIGION, sub-head "Theoretic." 
It is possible that Dostoievsky found them quoted in some "article" about 
the book or extracted from the book. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
is worthy of that non-educational seclusiveness and finality of 
Catholicism for which this Protestant damns it so resolutely. And 
aren't these words akin to those statements of "the profound think­
ers among politicians and statesmen" in all countries and nations 
who, sometimes, utter wise apothegms such as this : "Of course, 
there is no God, and religion is humbug, but it is needed for the 
plebs, because without it they could not be restrained." The dif­
ference, perhaps, comes down to the fact that this dictum of the 
wise statesman is, essentially, based upon cold and cruel depravity, 
whereas Sydney Dobell is a friend of humanity and busies him­
self merely about its immediate interest. However, his view on 
utility is precious : the whole utility-don't you see ?-consists in 
the fact that the gate is thrown wide open to every judgment and 
every inference ; to and from one's mind and heart-entree et sortie 
libres ; nothing is kept under lock, nothing is protected ; nothing 
brought to an end. Swim in a boundless sea and save thyself as 
thou pleasest. Besides, the judgment is a broad one, very broad 
like that bo1n,clec:s sea, anrl, of course, "in its waves there's nothing 
one can see" ; as against this-it is a national judgment. Oh, here 
we are met with profound sincerity ; yet, isn't it true that this 
sincerity borders, as it were, on despair? Here also the method 
of reasoning is characteristic ; the things people over there are 
thinking and writing about are characteristic. Now, would our pub­
licists, for instance, write and concern themselves about these fan­
tastic subjects and, besides, place them on so high a plane ? So 
that it may even be said that we, Russians, are people possessing 
a far more realistic, profound and prUient view than all those 
Englishmen. But the English are not ashamPri of their ,:-.·nvictiom; 
or of our opinion of them : in their extraordinary sin: . ·ity one 
perceives, at times, even something pathetically touching. 
Here, for instance, is what an observer who k ӎeps a keen 
eye on these things in Europe, told me about the character of 
certain altogether atheistic doctrines and sects in England : "You 
enter into a church : the service is magnificent, the vestments are 
expensive ; censers ; solemnity ; silence ; reverence among those pray­
ing. The Bible is read ; everybody comes forth and kisses the Holy 
Book with tears in his eyes, and with affection. And what do 
you think this is ? This is the church of atheist!.'. Why, then, do 
they kiss the Bible, reverently listening to the reading from it and 
shedding tears over it ?-This is because, h;, :ng rejected God, they 
began to worship 'Humanity.' Now they believe in Humanity ; 
they deify and adore it. And what, over long centuries, has been 
more sacred to mankind than this Holy Book ?-Now they worship 
it because of its love of mankind and for the love of it on the 

266 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r876 
part of mankind ; it has benefited mankind during so many cen­
turies-just like the sun, it has illuminated it ; it has poured out on 
mankind its force, its life. And 'even though its sense is now lost,' 
yet loving and adoring mankind, they deem it impossible to be 
ungrateful and to forget the favors bestowed by it upon hu­
manity . . . .  
" 
In this there is much that is touching and also much en­
thusiasm. Here there is actual deification of humankind and a 
passionate urge to reveal their love. Still, what a thirst for prayer, 
for worship ; what a craving for God and faith among these atheists, 
and how much despair and sorrow ; what a funeral procession in lieu 
of a live, serene life, with its gushing spring of youth, force and 
hope I But whether it is a funeral or a new and coming force-to 
many people this is a question. 
I take the liberty of quoting here a passage from my recent 
novel A Raw Youth. Only recently have I learned about this 
uchurch of Atheists"-a long time after I had finished and published 
my novel. I am also speaking of atheism ; but this is but a dream 
of a Russian of our times-the Forties-a former landowner, a 
progressive, a passionate and noble dreamer, side by side with our 
Great Russian breadth of life in practice. This landowner also has 
no faith and he, too, adores humanity "as it befits a Russian pro­
gressive individual." He reveals his dream about future mankind 
when there will vanish from it every conception of God, which, in 
his judgment, will inevitably happen on earth. 
"I picture to myself, my dear"-he began, with a pensive 
smile-"that the battle is over and that the strife has calmed down. 
After maledictions, lumps of mud and whistles, lull has descended 
and men have found themselves alone, as they wished it ; the former 
great idea has abandoned them ; the great wellspring of energy, 
that has thus far nourished them, has begun to recede as a lofty, 
inviting Sun, but this, as it were, was mankind's last day. And 
suddenly men grasped that they had been left all alone, and forth­
with they were seized with a feeling of great orphanhood. My dear 
boy, never was I able to picture people as having grown ungrateful 
and stupid. Orphaned men would at once begin to draw themselves 
together closer and with more affection ; they would grasp each 
other's hands, realizing that now they alone constituted everything 
to one another. The grand idea of immortality would also vanish, 
and it would become necessary to replace it, and all the immense 
over-abundance of love for Him who, indeed, had been Immortality, 
would in every man be focussed on nature, on the universe, on 
men, on every particle of matter. They would start loving the earth 
and life irresistibly, in the measure of the gradual realization of 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
their transiency and finality, and theirs would now be a different 
love-not like the one in days gone by. They would discern and 
discover in nature such phenomena and mysteries as had never 
heretofore been suspected, since they would behold nature with 
new eyes, with the look of a lover gazing upon his inamorata. They 
would be waking up and hastening to embrace one another, hasten­
ing to love, comprehending that days are short and that this is 
all that is left to theni. They would be laboring one for another, 
and every man would be surrendering to all men all he possessed, 
and this alone would make him happy. Every child would know 
and feel that everyone on earth is his father and his mother. 'Let 
tomorrow be my last day'-everyone would think, looking at the 
setting sun-'but all the same, I shall die, yet they all will remain, 
and after them, their children'-and this thought that they will 
remain, as ever loving and palpitating, would replace the thought 
of the reunion beyond the grave. Oh, they would be losing no time 
to love, so as to quench the great sorrow in their heart5. They 
would be prnt.ad :md bold C\'1 their own behalf, but they would be 
timid on each other's behalf ; everyone would be trembling for the 
life and happiness of every man. They would grow tender toward 
one another and would not be ashamed of this, as at present, and 
they would fondle each other, even as children. Meeting one another 
they would be beholding each other with a deep and meaningful 
look, and in that look there would be love and sorrow . . . .  
" 
Isn't there here, in this fantasy, something akin to that actually 
existent "Atheists' Church" ?  
2 
LORD REDSTOCK 
By the way-speaking of these sects. It is rumored that just 
at this moment Lord Redstock is in Petersburg-the same one who 
some three years ago had been preaching here all winter and also 
had founded something on the order of a .new !icct. At that time 
I happened to hear him preaching in a certain "hall," and, as I 
recall, I found nothing ࢪࢫ artling ; he spoke neither particularly 
cleverly nor in a particularly dull manner. And yet he performs 
miracles over human hearts ; people are flocking around him ; r..any 
· of them are astounded : they are looking 
r the poor, in order, 
as quickly as possible, to bestow benefits upon them ; they are 
almost ready to give away their fortunes. However, maybe, this 
is only here in Russia ; abroad, it would seem, he is not as prominent. 
On the other hand, it is difficult to assert that the full strength 

268 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
of his charm can be attributed to the fact that he is a lord, an 
independent man, and that he preaches, so to speak, a "pure," 
seigniorial religion. True, all these sectarian preachers always de­
stroy, even against their will, the image of faith given by the 
Church, substituting for it their own image. The present success 
of Lord Redstock is based, essentially, solely on "our segregation" 
-our detachment from our own soil, from the nation. It appears 
that at present we-i.e., the educated strata of our society-are an 
altogether alien little people, very little, quite insignificant, but a 
people who have their own customs and their own prejudices, which 
are taken for originality, and-as it now develops-with a desire 
for a religion of their own. 
Strictly speaking, it is difficult to state of what the teaching 
of the lord consists. He is an Englishman, but it is rumored that 
he does not belong to the Anglican Church and that he is severed 
from it ; instead, he is preaching something jndependent. This is 
so easy in England : there, as well as in America, there are, perhaps, 
even more sects than among our "common people." The sects of 
jumpers, Shakers, convulsionaries, Quakers, awaiting the millenni­
um, and, finally, the Khlysti (a universal and very ancient sect) ­
why, it's impossible to enumerate all o f  them. Of course, I a m  not 
speaking scoffingly of these sects side by side with Lord Redstock ; 
he who has detached himself from the true Church and contemplates 
establishing his own, even· to all appearances a most respectable 
one, will of necessity wind up in the same way as these sects. And 
let the lord's admirers refrain from frowning : in the philosophical 
essence of these very sect;-these tremblers and Khlysti-sometimes 
there lie concealed very profound and vigorous ideas. It is said that 
around the Twenties, at the home of Tatarinova, in the Mikhailov­
sky Castle, alongside with herself and her guests-among them, for 
example, a 1\finister of those days-her serf domestics also used to 
whirl and prophesy. This means that there must have been an 
impetus of thought and emotion if such an "unnatural" communion 
of the believers could have arisen ; and it would seem that Tata­
rinQva's sect belonged to the Khlysti or to one of their innumerable 
ramifications. Among the accounts about Lord Redstock I have 
not heard any suggesting that people attending his meetings were 
whirling and prophesying (whirling and prophesying is a most 
essential and most allcient attribute of virtually all these Western 
sects, and also of our sects-at least, of their overwhelming ma­
jority. The Templars, too, used to whirl and prophesy, and for this 
they were burned at the ·stake, and subsequently eulogized and 
praised in song by French thinkers and poets prior to the first 
Revolution) .  I have merely heard that Lord Redstock teaches 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
rathǙr peculiarly about the "descent of the blessing," and that, ac­
cordmg to one of the informants "Christ is" in the lord's "pocket" 
• 
I 
-m other words, that he treats Christ and the felicity quite tri-
ftingly. I must confess, however, that I did not understand what was 
reported about people throwing themselves upon cushions and await­
ing some sort of inspiration from above. 
Is it true that Lord Redstock is contemplating a trip to 
Moscow ?-It would be desirable that on this occasion no one among 
our clergy vouch for his sermons. Nevertheless, he does produce 
extraordinary transformations and inspires in the hearts of his 
followers magnanimous sentiments. True, this is as it should be : 
if he is genuinely sincere and preaches a new religion, he must, 
of course, be inspired with the spirit and zeal of a founder of a 
sect. I repeat : here we are faced with our lamentable segregation, 
with the ignorance of the people and our detachment from our 
nationality, but principally with our poor and negligible knowledge 
of Orthodoxy. It is remarkable that, with a few exceptions, our 
press keeps almost silent on Lord Redstock. 
3 
A LITTLE WoRo ON THE REPORT OF THE SciENTIFIC 
CoM M ITTEE oN SPIRITISTIC PHEl"OMENA 
Are the spiritists a "segregation" ?-I think-yes. Our em­
bryonic spiritism, to my way of thinking, threatens to become in 
the future an exceedingly dangerous and nasty "segregation." "Seg­
regation," indeed, signifies disunion. It is in this sense tӏat I am 
saying that in our youthful spiritism one nlay discern sl r ng ele­
ments tending to amplify disunion among the Russians, · ..
• 1ich is 
assuming ever more impetuous and progressive proportions. To me, 
it seems foolish and vexing to read now and then in the writings of 
our thinkers that our society is asleep, or slumbers idly and 
apathetically. On the contrary : never in the past has there been 
noticeable as much restlessness, as much tossing hither and thither, 
as strong a quest after something upon which one might morally 
lean, as in our day. Even the most insensible little idea, if it 
presages the slightest hope for solving something, is sure to meet 
with undeniable success. And its success is invariably confined to 
'the "segregation" of some new handful of P"0ple. This is also true 
of spiritism. And what a disappoinment it \ , d.s to read at last in 
The Voice the report of the well-known Committee, about which 
there has been so much clamor and notoriety, on spiritistic phe­
nomena which have been observed throughout the winter, in the 

2 70 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
house of Mr. Aksakov. And I was so anxious and hopeful that 
this report would crush and annihilate this profligate (in its mys­
tical meaning) , novel doctrine. True, it would seem that in Russia 
there are no doctrines and that we are still conducting mere "ob­
servations." However, is this actually so ? It is a pity that just 
now I have neither time nor space to expound my thought in more 
detail ; but in my next, April, Diary, I shall, perhaps, venture to 
raise again the question concerning the spiritists. Still, maybe, I 
am condemning the committee's report unjustifiably : it cannot 
be blamed for the fact that I have trusted it so much and that 
I baYe been expecting something impossible from it-something 
which, perhaps, it never could have achieved. At any rate, the 
Report is faulty in the method of its exposition, in its wording. 
The exposition is such as wiH surely enable the opponents of the 
Report to find a "preconceived" attitude toward the matter (and, 
consequently, a most unscientific one ) ,  even though, perhaps, there 
wasn't so much of this "prejudice" as to justify such charges. (Well, 
there was a little prejudice ; but we cannot really avoid that.) 
However, the wording is undoubtedly faulty. For instance, the 
Committee ventures to draw conclusions on some spiritistic phe­
nomena (on the materialization of the spirits, for example) which, 
according to its own admission, it had not observed at all. True : 
it did so, as it were, in the form of a moral, in a moralizing and 
admonishing sense, anticipating things in the interest of society, 
in order to save light-minded people from seduction. The intent 
is a noble one but hardly an opportune one in this particular case. 
Well, what of it : is it possible that the committee, composed of 
so many learned men, was seriously hoping to quash the silly idea 
in its very inception ? Alas, bad the Committee produced even the 
most obvious and direct proofs of "forgeries" and bad it caught 
and descried the "cheats" in action, so to speak, seizing them by 
their arms-which, however, did not happen-even then no person 
among those carried away by spiritism, or those who are merely 
desirous of being captivated by it, would believe it, owing to that 
primordial law of human nature, on the strength of which in mys­
tical ideas even the most precise mathematical proofs mean abso­
lutely nothing. And here, in this embryonic spiritism of ours, I 
swear, the mystical idea is the focal point. Well, what are you 
going to do about it ? Faith and mathematical proofs are two in­
compatible things. He who makes up his mind to believe in some­
thing, can't be stopped. And besides, here, the proofs are far from 
being mathematical. 
Even so, the Report might have been useful. It might unques­
tionably have ben useful to all those not yet corrupted and still 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
indifferent to spiritism. But now, with the "desire to believe," the 
desire might be equipped with a new weapon. Besides, the much 
too contemptible and presumptuous tone of the Report should have 
been soft-pedaled. Verily, when reading it, it may be supposed 
that the two esteemed parties, for some reason, had engaged in a 
personal quarrel. On the rank and file, this will bear a reaction 
unfavorable to the Report. 
4 
ISOLATED PHENOMENA 
But there comes into existence another class of phenomena, 
a rather peculiar one, especially among young people. True, as yet, 
these are but isolated phenomena. Side by side with accounts about 
several unfortunate young men "going into the thick of the people," 
stories about an altogether different kind of youth are beginning 
to circulate. 1'l.c.;c new yr'Jng men are also restless ; they keep 
writing letters to you or they come to you in person, with their 
articles, quests and unexpected ideas ; yet they are in no way akin 
to those whom up to now we have been used to encountering. So 
that there is definitP ground to suppose that among our youth there 
is originating a movement diametrically opposed to the former one. 
Well, perhaps, this should have been expected. In point of fact : 
whose children are they ?-They are, precisely, the children of those 
"liberal" fathers who, at the beginning of Russia's renaissance dur­
ing the present reign, detached themselves en masse from the 
general cause, imagining that therein lay progress and !:r.eralism. 
And yet-since all of this is more or less a matter of l . . past­
were there then many true liberals, many who had been really 
suffering, pure and simple people-like, for instance, Bie1insky, who 
had then recently died {not to speak of his intellect) ?  On the 
contrary, the majority was still made up of a mass of coarse, petty 
atheists and great scoundrels-in substance, mere extortioners and 
"petty tyrants," but braggarts of liberalism in which they managed 
to perceive nothing but a right to infamy. And just think what 
hasn't been said and asserkd ; what abominations haven't been set 
forth under the guise of honor and prowess I In substance, that 
. was a vulgar stream into which an honest idea had been launched. 
And just then the liberation of the peasani 
bad come, and along 
with it-the decomposition and "segregation" of our educated society 
in every conceivable sense. People did not recognize each other, 
and liberals failed to recognize their kindred liberal!i. And after 
that-how many sad misunderstandings and painful disillusions I 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
The most shameless reactionaries would sometimes suddenly come to 
the forefront as progressives and leaders, and they met with success. 
What, then, could children of those days have beheld in their 
fathers ? What reminiscences could they have retained about their 
childhood and their youth ?-Cynicism, scoffing, pitiless assaults on 
the earliest, tender, holy beliefs of the children ; and thereupon­
not infrequently-the open debauch of fathers and mothers, with 
assurances and "instruction" that thus it should be and that these 
are genuinely "sane relations." To this should be added a great 
many disintegrated fortunes, and, as a consequence, impatient dis­
content, high-strung words screening mere egotistical, petty anger 
against material reverses. Well, at length, our youth managed to 
decipher and rationalize all this I And since youth is pure, serene 
and magnanimous, it may, of course, have happened that some of 
them refused to follow such fathers and rejected their "sane" in­
structions. In this way such a "liberal" upbringing could have 
caused altogether reverse consequences, at least in certain instances. 
These, perhaps, are the young men and the raw youths who are 
now seeking new paths ; and they begin with a direct repudiation 
of that cycle of hateful ideas with which they had been faced in 
childhood, in the nests of their pitiful parents. 
5 
ABOUT u RIJ SAMARIN 
And firm people-men of conviction-are passing away : Urij 
Samarin died-a most gifted man with unyielding convictions, a 
most useful worker. There are people who command everybody's 
respect, even the respect of those who disagree with their ideas. 
The New Times gave a very characteristic story about him. So 
recently-in the latter part of February-on his way through Peters­
burg, Samarin read in the February issue of The Domestic Records 
an article "Black Earth and its Future," by Prince Vasilchikov. 
It created such an impression upon Samarin that he could not sleep 
all night. "This is a very good and sound article"-Samarin said 
to a friend of his in the morning. "I read it last evening, and it 
produced such an impression upon me that I couldn't sleep : all 
night I kept visualiziag the picture of an arid, woodless desert into 
which our central black-earth region of Russia was being converted, 
as a result of a continuous, almost unhampered deforestation." 
"Are there many people among us who would lose sleep over 
worries about their native land ?"-adds The New Times. I think 
that such people can still be found, and-who knows ?-at present, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
2 73 
judging by our alarming situation, more than ever before. We al­
ways did have enough worrying people in every conceivable sense 
-nor are we sleeping as soundly as is being maintained about us. 
But the point is not that worrying people are plentiful among us, 
but in the way they reason ; and in the person of Urij Samarin 
we have lost a firm and vigorous thinker-therein is our loss. Elderly 
men are passing away, while our eyes are being dazzled when we 
look at the future ones. 
APRIL 
CHAPTER I 
Ideals of V Pgetative Still Life. Kulaks and Bloodsuckers 
of Peasants. Higher-Ups Whipping Russia Forward. 
IN THE MARCH issue of The Russian Messenger of this 
year there appeareti a "criticism" of me by Mr. A., i.e., Mr. Av­
seenko. There is no advantage in my answering Mr. Avseenko : it is 
difficult to imagine a writer giving less thought to the things he is 
putting down on paper. However, even if he had given thought, 
the result would have been identical. Everything in his article that 
concerns me is written on the subject that not we, cultured men, 
should be bowing to the people-since "popular idel'iӐӑ are pre­
eminently ideals of vegetative still life"-but, on the con' tary, the 
people should seek enlightenment from us, cultured men, and adopt 
our ideas and our guise. In a word, Mr. Avseenko Wt>'> very much 
displeased with my statements about the people in the February 
issue of the Diary. I believe that this is a mere misunderstanding, 
for which I myself am to be blamed. This misunderstanding should 
be cleared up, but it is literally impossible to answer Mr. Avseenko. 
What can one have in common with a man who suddenly utters 
the following words about the people : "On their shoulders [i.e., 
on the people's shoulders] ,  on their patience and self-sacrifice, on 
their viable strength, ardent faith and magnanimous contempt for 
their personal interests-Russia's independence has been founded, 
her strength and fitness for an historical mission. They have pre­
served the purity of the Christian ideal, a lofty heroism, humble 
in its grandeur, and those beautiful traits of the Slavic nature which, 
having been reflected in the vigorous sounds of Pushkin's poetry, 

274 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
continually thereafter kept feeding the living stream of our litera­
ture .
. .
. " And no sooner had this been written, that is, rewritten 
from the Slavophiles, than Mr. Avseenko states on the very next 
page exactly the reverse about the same Russian people : "The 
point of the matter is that our people have failed to give us the 
ideal of an active personality. All that is beautiful, in our observa­
tion of them, and which our literature, to its great honor, accus­
tomed us to love in them, appears merely on the plane of elemental 
existence, of a secluded, idyllic [ ?] mode of living, or of a passive 
life. Just as soon as an active, energetic personality emerges from 
the midst of the people, its fascination usually vanishes, and more 
often than not the individuality assumes the unattractive features 
of a peasants' bloodsucker, a kulak, a stupidly-willful person. As 
yet, there are among the people no active ideals, and to rely upon 
them wonld be equivalent to starting from an unknown, perhaps 
an imaginary, quantity." And just think of uttering all this imme­
diately after having declared on the preceding page that "on the 
shoulders of the people, on their patience and self-sacrifice, on their 
viable strength, ardent faith and magnanimous contempt for their 
personal interests Russia's independence has been founded" !  But 
in order to reveal a viable energy one cannot be merely passive I 
And in order to build Russia it was impossible not to reveal 
strength I In order to reveal magnanimous contempt for personal 
interests, it was absolutely .necessary to reveal magnanimous and 
active vigor in the interest of others-that is, in common, fraternal 
interest. In order to "carry through on one's shoulders" Russia's 
independence, one could 11ot have been passively sitting in one 
place, but it was absolutely essential to get up from one's seat 
and to take at least one step-at least, to do something. And yet, 
it is promptly added that no sooner do the people begin to do 
something than they assume the "unattractive features of a peasants' 
bloodsucker, a kulak or a stupidly-willful person." It means, then, 
that kulaks, bloodsuckers and stupidly-willful people have carried 
Russia through on their shoulders. This means that all these saintly 
metropolitans (the people's protectors and the builders of the 
Russian state), all our pious princes, all boyards and rural people 
who have worked for, and served, Russia to the point of sacrificing 
their lives, whose names history has reverently preserved-they all 
are mere bloodsuckerӒ. kulaks and stupidly-willful persons ! Per­
haps, it might be said, Mr. Avseenko speaks not of the former but 
of the contemporary ones, and that history is but history, and 
that all this has happened . under Czar Gorokh. But in this case 
would it mean that our people have undergone a radical transforma­
tion ? And about what contemporary people does Mr. Avsenko 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
275 
speak ? Where does he trace their beginnings ?-In Peter's reforms ? 
In the cultural period ? In the final establishment of serfdom ? But 
if it be so, the cultured Mr. Avseenko betrays himself :  everybody 
will ask him : what was the use of making you cultured in exchange 
for corrupting the people and converting them into mere kulaks and 
swindlers ? Is it possible, Mr. Avseenko, that you possess to such an 
extent "the gift of seeing nothing but evil " ?  I:, it possible that our 
people who had been made serfs precisely for the sake of your cul­
ture (at least, according to General Fadeev's theory) ,  after two 
centuries of serfdom have earned from you-a man who has become 
cultured-instead of gratitude or even pity, nothing but a presump­
tuous spittle in connection with kulaks and swindlers ? !  (The fact 
that you have praised them formerly I discard altogether because 
you have annulled your commendations on the very next page.) 
It was for you that they were bound-arms and feet-so that you 
might be given a chance to improve your intellectual faculties, bor­
rowing them from Europe. And now that you have improved your 
intellectual fau.1!tiPӓ ( ?) , 1lorrowing thf"m from Europe, you-set­
ting your arms akimbo and standing before the bound one and 
looking down upon him from your cultured height-you suddenly 
come to the conclusion that the people "are bad and passive and 
that they have manifested but little activity [this-in a bound 
state I ] ,  revealing only certain passive virtues, which, though they 
kept feeding literature with living sap, essentially aren't worth a 
penny, since just as soon as the people begin to be active, they forth­
with turn out to be kulaks and swindlers." No, Mr. Avseenko does 
not deserve to be answered, and if I do answer, it is only because 
I admit my mistake, which I am explaininӔ below. :ӕ,_··,ertheless 
-inasmuch as we started speaking on the subject-! deer. 't oppor­
tune to give the reader a certain idea about Mr. Avseenko : as a 
writer, he represents a petty cultural type sui generis v hich is most 
interesting to observe and which bas a certain meaning ; this, indeed, 
is very bad. 
2 
CuLTURED LITl t.E TYPES. CoRRUPTED PEOPLE 
Mr. Avseenko has been writing criticisms for a long dme, 
for several years now ; and I confess that _ 'lave been entertaining 
hopes of him : "Well"-1 used to say to myself-"he'll keep writing 
and writing, and in the long run, he may utter somethi
_
ng." I per­
sisted in this error until the October issue of The Ruwan Messen­
ger for the year 1874, in which, apropos of Pisemsky's comedies and 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
dramas, he stated the folJowing : " . . . .  Gogol has led our writers 
to take too careless an attitude toward the inner content of their 
works and to rely too much on the artistic element only. This view 
of the aim of belles-lettres was shared by many in our literature 
of the Forties, and one has to seek in it the reason why that litera­
ture was deficient from the standpoint of its inner content [ ! ] " 
Now, think of literature of the Forties being deficient from 
the standpoint of inner content I Never in my life did I expect so 
strange a bit of news. This is the very literature whch gave us the 
complete collection of Gogol's works, his comedy The Wedding (de­
ficient in inner content-good heavens I )  ; which thereupon gave us 
his Dead Souls (deficient in inner content-why, that man should 
have said something different, any word occurring to him first I 
It would still have been more opportune ! ) ; which produced Tur­
genev, with his Sportsman's Sketches (are these, too, deficient in 
their inner content ?) ; and then Goncharov who, as early as the For­
ties, had written Oblomov, and who at that same time had published 
Oblomov's Dream-the best episode in the novel-which the whole of 
Russia has read with delight ! 
This is that very literature which, 
finally, has given us Ostrovsky-but it is precisely upon Ostrovsky's 
types that Mr. Avseenko, in the same article, spits most contemp­
tuously. 
"The milieu of government officials, for external reasons, is 
not fully accessible to the theatrical satire ; owing to this, our com­
edy burst forth with all the more zeal and predilection into the 
world of the ZamoskvorecӖie and Apraksin shopkeepers, into the 
midst of women pilgrims and matchmakers, drunken merchants' 
clerks, village bailiffs, churchmen and 'piterschiks.' The aim of the 
comedy has been incredibly narrowed down to the mirroring of the 
drunken or illiterate jargon, to the reproduction of the vulgar man­
ners of coarse types and characters offensive to human sentiments. 
On the stage, genre enthroned itself undividedly-not that warm, 
jolly, bourgeois [ ?] genre which, at times, is so fascinating on the 
French stage [is that petty vaudeville meant here, where a felJow 
crawls under the table and another one drags him out by his legs ?] 
-but a vulgar, slovenly and repulsive genre. 
Some writers-for 
example, Mr. Ostrovsky-have contributed to this literature much 
talent, heartfelt sentiment and humor ; on the whole, however, our 
theatre has reached the lowest intrinsic level, and soon it became 
apparent that it had nothing to say to the educated stratum of so­
ciety and that it had nothing in common with this portion of 
society." 
· 
Thus, Ostrovsky has lowered the level of the stage 1 Ostrovsky 
has said nothing to the "educated" stratum of society I Thus, it was 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
uneducated society that has been admiring Ostrovsky on the stage 
and has been reading and reading him over again I Oh, of course, 
educated society, you see, has been frequenting the Mikhailovsky 
Theatre where it could behold that "warm, jolly, bourgeois genre 
which, at times, is so fascinating on the French stage." But Lubim 
Tortz6v is "vulgar and slovenly." It would be curious to ascertain 
what kind of educated society Mr. Avseenko does speak about. ­
Filth is not in Lubim Tortz6v : "he is pure in heart" ; but filth is, 
perhaps, precisely where that "warm, bourgeois genre, which at 
times is so fascinating on the French stage," reigns supreme. And 
what's the idea about the artistic element precluding "the inner 
content" ? 
- On the contrary, the former, in the highest degree, 
contributes to the latter : Gogo] in his Correspondence is weak, al­
though typical. Gogol, in those sections of the Dead Souls where he 
ceases to be an artist and begins merely to reason, is simply weak 
and even not typical ; and yet his Wedding, his Dead Souls, are the 
most profound creations, richest from the standpoint of their inner 
content, precisely because of the artistic characters portrayed in 
them. The::.e delineations, so to speak, burden one's mind with the 
deepest, the most unbearable, problems ; they evoke in the Russian 
mind disturbing thoughts which, one feels, can be mastered only 
in the distant future ; moreover, it is a question whether they can 
ever be mastered. And Mr. Avseenko vociferates that in the Dead 
Souls there is no intrinsic meaning I But take Woe from Wit : it is 
potent only because of its brilliant artistic types and characters ; 
and it is artistic labor only that conveys to the work its entire inner 
content. However, the moment that Griboyedov abandons his role 
as an artist and starts reasoning on his own, on behalf "f his indi­
vidual intellect (through the mouth of TchJ.ӗzky, the we < est char­
acter in the comedy) ,  he immediately sinks to a rather l;nenviable 
level, even incomparably lower than that of his contemporaneous 
representatives of our intelligentsia. Tchatzky's didacticisms are 
on an infinitely lower level than the comedy itself and, partly, con­
sist of sheer nonsense. The whole depth, the whole content of an 
artistic work, is thus encompassed merely in types and characters. 
And this is almost invariably the case. 
So the reader can judge for himself with what kind of a critic 
he is dealing. And already I hear the question : why, then, do you 
mix with him ? - I reiterate : I am merely endeavoring to correct 
my own error, while, as stated above, I am dealing here speri•ically 
with Mr. Avseenko not as a critic but aӘ .J. separate and curious 
literary phenomenon. Here we have a type sui generis which is 
useful to my purpose. For a long time I could not understand Mr. 
Avseenko-i.e., I don't mean his articles : I never could understand 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
them, and, besides, there is nothing to understand or not to under­
stand in them. But ever since his article in the October 1874 issue 
of The Russian Messenger, I have given him up for lost ; however, 
I kept wondering all the while why articles of so muddled a writer 
should be appearing in such a serious journal as the Russian Mes­
senger. But presently there happened a comic episode, and at once 
I grasped who Mr. Avseenko was : in the beginning of the winter 
he began, unexpectedly, to publish his novel The Milky Way. (And 
why did they cease printing it ? )  All of a sudden this romance ex­
plained to me the whole character of Avseenko as a writer. Strictly 
speaking, it is not fitting for me to discuss the novel : I am a belles­
lettrist myself and I shouldn't be criticizing a confrȝre of mine. For 
this reason I shall in no way criticize it, especially as it gave me a 
few genuinely jolly moments. For example, the young hero of the 
novel-a prince-sitting in a box at the opera and having grown 
sentimental under the influence of the music, is publicly sobbing, 
while a lady of the beau monde fondly keeps pestering him : "You're 
crying ? 
You're crying ?" However, this is not the point at all ; 
the matter of the fact is that I had grasped the essence of the writer : 
as such, Mr. Avseenko represents a man who had lost his wits in his 
adoration of the beau monde. Briefly-he lies prostrate and adores 
gloves, coaches, perfumes, pomade, silk gowns (especially at the 
moment when a lady is about to sink into an armchair and the gown 
rustles around her feet and body), and, finally, lackeys going out 
to meet their mistresses as they return home from the Italian opera. 
He writes about all these things continually, reverently, imploringly 
and worshipfully-in a wor.d, he is celebrating, as it were, a Mass. 
I heard (I non't know, maybe this was said jeeringly) that this 
romance had been undertaken with the object of correcting Leo 
Tolstoy, who in his Anna Karenina had adopted too objective an 
attitude toward the beau monde, whereas he should have treated it 
more worshipfully, more kneelingly. And, of course, it wouldn't 
have been worth bringing up all these things at all, were it not for the 
fact-I repeat-that they interpret an altogether novel cultural type. 
It appears that in coaches, in pomade, and particularly in the fact 
that footmen are waiting on their mistresses, Mr. Avseenko, the critic, 
perceives the whole object of culture-all its achievements, the cul­
mination point of the two centuries of our debauch and suffering­
and he beholds all this not mockingly but admiringly. The serious­
ness and sincerity of this admiration constitute one of the most 
curious phenomena. 
The principal thing is. that, as a writer, Mr. Avseenko does 
not stand alone : even prior to him there have been "merciless Juve­
nals of calico shirts-fronts," but never of such an intensely reverent 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
2 79 
pattern. True, not all of us are fashioned in this way, but it is 
my misfortune that, even gradually, I did finally become convinced 
that there are a great many similar representatives of culture­
both in literature and in life-although not of so pure a pattern. 
I admit that I was enlightened, as it were : of course, after that, 
one can understand the pasquinades against Ostrovsky and that 
"warm, jolly, bourgeois genre which, at times, is so fascinating on 
the French stage." Why, neither Ostrovsky nor Gogel is really 
the crux of the matter I Nor the Forties (who cares about them I ) . 
Here it is simply a case of the St. Petersburg Mikhailovsky Theatre, 
patronized by the beau monde, to which people come driving up 
in coaches. That's all. This is what has lured and captivated a 
writer with merciless force ; this is what has seduced him, confusing 
his mind forever. 
I repeat, one should not be viewing this exclusively in a comi­
cal light : all this is much more curious. Briefly, in this respect we 
are dealing with a situation which is largely caused by a sort of 
mania-alJTloәt pathologic- by an infirmity, so to speak, for which 
one should have consideration. A beau-monde coach, let's imagine, 
is driven to a theatre : do, please, behold how it is being driven ; 
how the lights of the lanterns, gleaming through the windows of the 
coach, glamorize the lady sitting inside I This is no longer the prov­
ince of the pen : this is a prayer, and one must commiserate with 
this ! 
No doubt, many among them are bragging to the people 
about things ostensibly even loftier than gloves : among them 
there are a great many extremely liberal folks, almost republicans, 
and yet, unexpectedly, one is apt to run into a "glover." This weak­
ness, this mania, for bcau-monde pulchritudes, with tl:t>ir oysters 
and hundred-ruble watermelons ; this mania-innocent U ,  ;ugh it be 
-has generated in our midst, for example, even advocates of serf­
dom of a peculiar kind, i.e., among persons who nr·ver even did 
own serfs. But having once decided that coaches and the Mikhailov­
sky Theatre are the ultimate achievement of the cultured period of 
the Russian Empire, they suddenly became convinced advocates of 
serfdom. 
And, notwithstanding the fact that they haven't the 
slightest intention of restoring serfdom, at least they spit upon the 
people with utter candidness and with an air of the fullest cultural 
right. They are precisely the ones who shower upon the people the 
most astonishing accusations : they are teasing a people whc have 
been bound two hundred years in succe& ·1n with passiveness ; a 
pauper, from whom quit-rent tax has been mercilessly exacted, is 
being charged with slovenliness ; a man who bas been taught noth­
ing is reproached for lack of education, and one who has ben floged 
with sticks-for the coarseness of his habits ; at times, they are 

280 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
even ready to accuse him of the fact that he has not been pomaded 
and that his hair hasn't been dressed at a hairdresser's on the Bol­
shAia Morskaia. This by no means is an exaggeration ; this is liter­
ally so, and the whole point is that it is not a hyperbole. They have 
a furious disgust for the people, and even if, at times, they praise 
them-well, as a matter of politics-they do so merely by resorting, 
for the sake of politeness, to high-strung phrases, in which they 
themselves do not understand a single word, because a few lines 
further on they contradict themselves. 
By the way, I recall an incident which occurred to me two 
and a half years ago. I was going to Moscow by train, and at night 
I started a conversation with a landowner who was sitting next to 
me. As well as I could see in the darkness, he was a lean little fellow 
of about fifty, with a red, slightly swollen nose and, I believe, with 
ailing feet. He was a man of a very respectable type-in manners, 
in the way he talked, in his judgments-and he even spoke quite 
sensibly. He talked about the difficult and indeterminate situation 
of the nobility, the extraordinary economic disorganization through­
out Russia ; he spoke almost without bitterness, maintaining, how­
ever, a stern view on the subject, and I became intensely interested 
in him. And what would you think ? Unexpectedly, in passing, 
without paying the least attention, he said that in the physical 
respect too he considered himself superior by far to the peasant, and 
that this, of course, was an · undeniable fact. 
"In other words, you mean to infer-as a specimen of a morally 
developed and educated man ?"-said I, in an attempt to elucidate 
his thought. 
· 
"No, not at all : not only my moral, but likewise my physical 
nature is superior to that of a peasant : my body is superior to, and 
better than, that of a peasant, and this is so because throughout 
many generations we have evolved into a superior type." 
There was nothing to argue about : this weak little man, with 
a scrofulous nose and ailing feet (gout, perhaps-the noblemen's 
disease) ,  quite honestly considered hi01self physically, bodily, super­
ior to, and more perfect than, a peasant I I repeat : there was no 
bitterness in him, but you must admit that this kind man, even in 
his kindness, may unexpectedly and occasionally perpetrate a gross 
injustice against the people-quite innocently, calmly and honestly, 
precisely because of a contemptuous opinion of the people, an opin­
ion which is almost unconscious and independent of one's self. 
Nevertheless, I must correct my own error. I was then writing 
about the ideals of the people and suggested that we, "like prodigal 
children, returning to their home, must bow before the people's 
truth, awaiting from it alone both thought and expression. But 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
281 
that, on the other hand, the people, on their own part, must accept 
from us something which we have brought with us ; that this some­
tlzing exists in reality ; it is not a mirage, but possesses an image, 
a form and weight, and that, in the reverse case, should we fail to 
agree, it would be better to separate and to perish apart." It is 
precisely this-as I see now-that seemed misleading to everybody. 
First, people started asking : what are those ideals of the people 
before which we should bow ? And, secondly, what do I mean by 
that treasure which we have brought with us, and which the people 
must accept from us sine qua non? And, finally, would it not be 
simpler if not we but the people should bow before us, solely be­
cause we are Europe and cultured men-whereas the people are Rus­
sia, and they are passive ? Mr. Avseenko answers this question in the 
affirmative ; but I intend to give my reply not to Mr. Avseenko 
alone, but to all "cultured" people who have failed to understand me, 
beginning with "the merciless Juvenals of calico shirt-fronts" and 
including those gentlemen who have proclaimed that we have noth­
ing to conserve. Now, let's get down to business. If, at the time, I 
had not sc:Jghތ l tJ be brir ന and had been more explicit, of course, 
people might have disagreed with me, but, at least, my thoughts 
would not have been distorted and called misleading. 
3 
CoNFUSEDNEss AND INACCURACY OJ' THE CoNTESTED POINTS 
It is boldly declared that the people possess no truth whatso­
ever-truth is only in culture-and that it is being preserved only by 
the upper stratum of cultured men. To he quite houo: t, I shall 
accept our dear European culture in its loftiest sense, and ! ,Jt merely 
in the sense of coaches and footmen-namely, in the sense that, 
compared with the people, we have developed spiritu;.lly and mor­
ally, we have become humane and, thereby, to our honor, we radi­
cally differ from the people. Having made such an unbiased state­
ment, I shall ask myself this direct question : "Is it true that we 
are really so good, and that we have become so faultlessly culturized 
that popular culture should be brushed aside, and the people should 
bow before our own ? AuJ, in the last analysis, what did we bring 
to the people from Europe ?" 
However, before answering these questions, let us for thl' sake 
of orderly discussion discard all argumL _s-for instance, about 
science, industry, and so forth, on which Europe may justly pride 
herself over our country. Such an elimination would be quite cor­
rect, since at present we are dealing with a different matter, all the 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
more so as science is over there-in Europe-while we, the upper 
strata of cultured men in Russia, do not glitter with science, des­
pite the two hundred years of schooling, so that to bow before the 
cultured stratum because of science-at any rate, it is too early. 
Thus, science in no way constitutes an essential and irreconcilable 
differentiation between the two classes of the Russians-i.e., the 
common people and the upper cultured stratum-and, I repeat, it 
would not be at all correct, in fact, it would be an error, to set forth 
science as an essential distinguishing mark between us and the 
people. This distinction is to be sought in something wholly differ­
ent. Besides, science is a universal thing : it was invented not by 
some one people in Europe but by all peoples, beginning with the 
ancient world ; thus, science is a successional proposition. The 
Russian people, on the other hand, never have been hostile toward 
science ; moreover, it began to penetrate into Russia even prior to 
Peter. Czar Ivan Vassilievich exerted all efforts to conquer the 
Baltic Coast, one hundred and thirty years before Peter. Had he 
.conquered it and seized its harbors and ports, unavoidably he 
would have started building his ships, even as Peter ; and since 
ships cannot be built without science, the latter would inevitably 
have come from Europe, as under Peter. Our Potugins calumniate 
our people with railleries to the effect that Russians have invented 
nothing but the samovar ; it is doubtful, however, if the Europeans 
would join in on the chorus of the Potugins. It is only too clear and 
comprehensible that everything transpires in accordance with certain 
laws of nature and history, and neither imbecility, nor the low level 
of the faculties of the Russian people, nor shameful indolence c;an 
account for the fact that we have contributed so little to science and 
industry. A certain tree grows up in so many years, while another 
one-in twice as long a time. In this connection, everything depends 
upon how a people has been settled by nature and circumstances, 
and what they had to accomplish first. Here we are dealing with 
geographic, ethnographic and political causes-thousands of causes 
-all of them clear and precise. No one with common sense would 
start blaming and shaming a boy of thirteen because he is not 
twenty-five years old. "Europe"-they claim-"is more active and 
wittier than the passive Russians ; that's why she-and not they­
has developed science." Yet the passive Russians, while Europe 
has been developing science, have been displaying a no less amazing 
activity : they have been engaged in building up a Czardom and have 
deliberately created its unity. Throughout the entire period of one 
thousand years they have bލen repelling cruel enemies who, in the 
absence of the Russians, would have thrown themselves upon Eu­
rope. The Russians have colonized the remotest regions of their 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
boundless motherland ; the Russians were engaged in the defense 
and consolidation of their borderlands ; and they have succeeded in 
consolidating them so powerfully that we, the present-day cultured 
people, would hardly be able to measure up to them-and, contrari­
wise, we might even shake them loose. At length, after a thousand 
years, we have established a Czardom and a political unity which are 
unprecedented in world history, even to the extent that in this re­
spect England and the United States-the only two remaining 
states in which political unity is solid and original-would have to 
give way to us. Well, instead of this, in Europe, under different 
political and geographic conditions, science has grown up. 
As 
against this, alongside with its growth and consolidation, the moral 
and political condition of Europe has been undermined virtually 
everywhere. 
Thus, everyone to his own, and it is still to be seen who's going 
to envy whom. In any event, we shall acquire science, but the 
question is : what is going to become of the political unity of Europe ? 
Perhaps, only fifteen years ago, the Germans would gladly have 
agreed to excm:.nge half .A their scientific fame for that political 
unity which we possessed long ago. And the Germans-at least to 
their way of thinking-have now attained solid political unity ; but 
in those days they still did not have their German Empire, and­
of course, in silence-they have been envyinJ! us, notwithstanding all 
their contempt for us. 
Thus, the question should be posed not about science or 
industry, but, essentially, about the fact that we, the cultured 
people, having returned from Europe, have become morally and 
substantially superior to the people ; and also-about tJ•at priceless 
treasure which we brought to them in tl.c form of ot•· European 
culture. Why are we polished men, whereas the peop:·! are still 
vulgar ? Why are we everything, and the people-nothing ? I assert 
that on this point there is among us, cultured people, extraordinary 
confusion, and that few among the "cultured" would be able to 
answer these questions correctly. On the contrary, here there reigns 
utter discord, while railleries as to why a pine tree does not grow 
up in seven years but requires eight times more time +" reach its 
full growth-are still so common and ordinary that not seldom is 
one apt to hear them, not only from the Potugins but even from 
persons intellectually far superior to them. I am not even mention­
ing Mr. Avseenko. 
Now, I am turning directly to the 4. _estion appearing in the 
beginning of the chapter : are we, indeed, so good, and have we be­
come so faultlessly culturized that popular culture should be brushed 
aside, and the people should bow before our own ? And if we are 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
bringing something along, what precisely is it ?-I will directly an­
swer that we are much worse than the people, in near)}>' every 
respect. 
We are being told that ·just as soon as an active man appears 
among the people, he turns out to be a kulak and a swindler. (This 
is being asserted by others besides Mr. Avseenko ; anyway, never 
will he utter anything new.) First, this is a lie ; and, secondly, 
among the would-be Russians, aren't there swarms of kulaks 
and swindlers ? Maybe even a greater number than among the 
common people ; and the former should be more ashamed of them­
selves because they have acquired culture, while the latter haven't. 
But the principal thing is that it is not possible to maintain about 
the people that, just as soon as an active person appears in their 
midst, he almost invariably turns out to be a kulak and a swindler. 
I do not know where those asserting this have grown up, but I, 
since my childhood and all my life, have seen altogether different 
things. I was only nine years old, I recall, when once, on the third 
day of Easter week, after five in the evening, all our family-father 
and mother, brothers and sisters-were sitting at a round table, at 
a family tea, and it so happened that the conversation revolved 
around our estate and how we all should go there for the summer. 
Suddenly the door opened and at the threshold appeared our house­
servant, Grigory Vasiliev, who just before had arrived from the 
estate. In the absence of the masters, he used to be entrusted even 
with the management of the estate. And now, instead of the "super­
intendent" who always wore a German suit and displayed a solid 
appearance, there appeared a man in an old shabby peasant's coat, 
with bast shoes on his feet: He had come from the estate on foot ; 
he stepped into the room and stood without uttering a word. 
"What is it ?"-cried father, frightened.-"Look, what is it ?" 
"The estate has burned down ! "-said Grigory Vasiliev, in a 
bass voice. 
I shall not describe what ensued : father and mother were work­
ing, not rich, people-and such was their Easter present ! It devel­
oped that everything had been destroyed by fire-everything : huts, 
granary, cattle-shed and even spring seeds, some of the cattle, and 
even our peasant Arkhip was burned to death. Owing to the sudden 
scare, we thought that it meant utter ruin. We threw ourselves on 
our knees and began to pray ; mother was crying. Presently our 
nurse, Aliona Frolovna;• went up to her ; Aliona was a hired servant, 
not a serf, and belonged to the Moscow commoners' class. She had 
nursed and brought up all of us children. She was then about forty­
five years old ; she was a woinan of serene and cheerful disposition, 
and she used to tell us such wonderful tales ! For a number of 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
years she had refused to draw her salary : "I don't need it." It had 
accumulated to the amount of some five hundred rubles, which were 
kept on deposit at a loan office : "It will come in handy in my old 
age." 
Suddenly, she whispered to mother : "If you should need 
money, take mine ; I have no use for it ; I don't need it. . . .  
" 
We did not take her money ; we managed to get along without 
it. But here is the question : to what type belonged that humble 
woman who died long ago in an almshouse, where her money did 
come in handy ? For I believe that a woman like her cannot be 
classed among kulaks and swindlers ; and, if so, how is one to inter­
pret her action ? Did she reveal it "on the mere level of elemental 
existence, on the level of a secluded and idyllic mode of passive 
ways of life," or did she manifest something more energetic than 
passiveness ?-It would be very curious to hear how Mr. Avseenko 
would answer this question. It may be disdainfully argued that is 
an isolated case. However, during my lifetime, I personally have 
managed to observe many hundreds of similar cases among our 
common ܦeop:t , and yet, I am well aware of the fact that there 
are other ·observers who are able to behold the people without spit­
ting on them. Don't you remember how in Aksakov's Family 
Chronicle the mother, with tears in her eyes, had persuaded the 
peasants to drive her over thin ice across the wide Volga to Kazan 
to her sick child ? this was in the spring when, for several days 
already, no one had risked stepping on the ice which was just then 
beginning to break up and which, only several hours later, was swept 
downstream, after she had been taken across. Do you remember the 
delightful description of that crossing and how later, when it had 
been accomplished, the peasants refused t'l accept any ܧ;·oney, real­
izing that they had done all this because of a mother's t.·.1rs and for 
Christ, our Lord ? And this occurred during the darkest period of 
serfdom ! Well, are all these isolated facts ? And if the} be laudable­
are they still merely "on a level of elemental Pxistence, on the level 
of a secluded . and idyllic mode of passive ways of life ?" But is this 
so ? Are these merely isolated, accidental facts ?-Is it possible to con­
ceive an active risk of one's life out of compassion for a mother's 
affliction as mere passiveness ? Was it not, on the contrary, due to 
truth-to the people's truth ? Was it not because of mercy, all-for­
giveness and breadth of the popular view that this had occurred 
during the most barbaric-let's note-period of serfdom ? WPll-you 
might say-the people do not even know rel 6ion ; they are unable to 
say a prayer ; they worship a wooden board, mumbling some sort of 
nonsense about Holy Friday and about Frol and Lavr. To this I will 
answer that these particular thoughts have occurred to you as a 
resu1t of your continued contempt for the Russian people, which 

286 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
stubbbornly persists in Russians of the cultured pattern. About the 
faith of the people and about Orthodoxy we possess merely a 
couple of dozens of liberal and obscene anecdotes, and we delight 
in scoffing stories about how an old woman confesses her sins to the 
priest and how a peasant prays to Friday. Had Mr. Avseenko 
really understood what he has written about the people's religion­
and not copied something from the Slavophiles-he would not have 
directly insulted the people, calling virtually all of them "kulaks 
and bloodsuckers." 
But the point is that these men understand 
nothing about Orthodoxy, and for this reason they will never 
comprehend anything concerning our people. And yet our people 
know their Christ God-perhaps even better than we, although 
they did not attend school. They know, because throughout many 
a century they have endured much suffering, and in their sorrow, 
from the earliest days to our time, they have been accustomed to 
hear about this Christ God of theirs, from their saints who labored 
for the people and who defended the Russian soil- sacrificing their 
lives ; from those very saints whom they have revered up to the 
present day, remembering their names and praying at their graves. 
Believe me, in this sense even the most backward strata of our 
people are much better educated than you, in your cultured igno­
rance, suppose them to be, and, perhaps, even much better educated 
than you yourselves despite the fact that you have learned the 
catechism. 
4 
THE BENEFICENT DooRMAN LIBERATING THE RussiAN PEASANT 
Here is what Mr. Avseenko writes in his March article. I 
want to be quite unbiased and, therefore, I take the liberty of mak­
ing this very long quotation lest I be accused of having drawn out of 
the text scattered sentences. Besides, I regard specifically these 
words of Mr. Avseenko as the general opinion of the Westerners 
about the Russian people. 
"It is important to us to determine under what circumstances 
our educated minority has for the first time looked attentively across 
the wall which separated it from the people. No doubt, the things 
which appeared to its eyes must have amazed it and, in many re­
spects, satisfied the intimate needs which had been revealed in 
that minority. Men, dis5a:tisfied with the role of adopted children 
of Western civilization, found there ideals altogether different from 
European ones, and yet beautiful. Disillusioned people and, to use 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
the then prevailing expression, people torn asunder by the adopted 
culture, found there simple, whole characters, zealous faith remind­
ing one of the first centuries of Christianity, stern vigor of patriarchal 
ways of living. The contrast between the two modes of life, as 
stated, must have produced an extraordinary, irresistible effect. 
There arose a desire to refresh oneself in t.he unperturbed waves 
of this elemental existence, to breathe the fragrant air of field and 
forest. The best men were astonished by the fact that in that stale 
manner of life-alien not only to intellectual refinement but even to 
elementary literacy-there appeared traits of spiritual grandeur, 
before which the enlightened minority must bow. All these impres­
sions have created a tremendous longing for a rapprochement with 
the people. But what was specifically meant by this rapprochement 
with the people ? The ideals of the people were clear only because 
the life of the people streamed infinitely far away from the life of 
the educated class ; because the conditions and contents of these 
two modes of life were quite different. Let us recall that poorly 
educated men, who have been living in very close proximity to the 
people ami wno had long ago, in a practical and material manner, 
satisfied their longing for the rapprochement, did not at all notice 
the beautiful ideals of the people, and were firmly convinced that 
the peasant was a dog and a rascal. This is very important because 
it goes to show to what extent, as a practical matter, the educational 
influence of the people's ideals is weak, and that it is hardly pos­
sible to expect salvation from them. To grasp these ideals and to 
raise them to the level of a pearl of creation, a certain cultural 
degree is required. For this reason we deem it our right to state 
that our very worship of the people's ideals was thP product of 
the adopted European culture, and that v.iގhout the lat: 
Ͱ the peas­
ant, in our view, would have remained up to this day a dog and 
a rascal. Thus, the evil-the principal, the common evil-to both 
us and the people, lay not in 'culture' but in the weakness of cul­
tural foundations, in the deficiency of our 'culture.' " 
What a surprising and unexpected deduction ! 
In this crafty little assortment of words the most important 
point is the deduction that the popular foundations (and along 
with them Orthodoxy, since, essentially, all our popular foundations 
are wholly derived from Orthodoxy) constitute no cultural force 
whatever, not the slightest educational significance, so that in order 
to acquire all these things we had to jo11rney to Europe. " Poorly 
educated men living in very close proxin .. <y to the people," don't 
you see, have still not been noticing "the beautiful ideals of the 
people" and were still firmly convinced that the peasant was "a 

288 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
dog and a rascal" -not because they had been already corrupted to 
the marrow of their bones by culture, despite their poor education ; 
not because they had detached themselves from the people, in spite 
of the fact that they lived in close proximity to them, but because 
there was still not enough culture. Here the main point is the evil­
minded insinuation as to the weakness of educational meaning of 
the people's principles, coupled with the deduction that, on this 
ground, they lead to nothing, and that culture is everything. On 
my own part, I have long ago stated that we have started our 
European culture with debauch. But the following should be spe­
cially emphasized : it is precisely these poorly educated men who, 
however, have managed to culturize themselves, though feebly and 
externally-mostly in some acquired habits, in new prejudices, in new 
clothes-these men always begin with a contempt-at times to the 
point of hatred-for their former milieu, for their people and even 
for the latter's faith. Such is the case of certain superior "counts' 
lackeys"-petty government employees who have succeeded in ac­
quiring the rank of nobility, etc., etc. They despise the people more 
intensely than the "big guns" who are more soundly culturized, 
and this-contrary to Mr. Avseenko's attitude-should cause no 
surprise. 
In the first, January, issue of my Diary I have recalled one 
of my childish impressions : that little scene of a courier, a former 
peasant, who, no doubt, had been close to the people ; he had spent 
all his life on the highway, and yet he despised and beat the people. 
Why ?-Because he was terribly remote from the people despite 
the fact that he had been living in close proximity to them. Un­
doubtedly, he had acquired no culture but, as against this, he had 
received the courier's uniform with flaps which entitled him to 
beat uncontrollably, "to his heart's desire." And he was proud of 
his uniform and considered himself infinitely superior to the peasant. 
Approximately similar also was the status of the landowner whose 
country house was situated at a distance of only some hundred 
steps from the peasants' huts ; but it was not a question of a hundred 
steps : the point was that he had already partaken of the corruption 
of civilization. He was in close proximity to the people-only a hun­
dred steps distant from them-nevertheless within this space there 
was room for a whole gulf. Perhaps that landowner had in him 
merely a tiny drop of culture but that drop had completely cor­
rupted him. Such must be the average case at the beginning of a 
reform period. But I shall positively state that in this respect, 
too, Mr. Avseenko is as ignorant as an infant : not all poorly edu­
cated men have been corrupted, nor did they despise the people 
even in those days. On the contrary, there were others upon whom 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
popular principles did not cease to exercise a potent educational 
influence. Such a stratum has survived from the very epoch of 
Peter's reforms up to our time. There were many, even a great 
many, of those who had partaken of culture and who had returned 
to the people and to their ideals without losing their culture. Sub­
sequently, from this stratum of the "faithful," there emerged the 
stratum of Slavophiles, men highly culturized by European civiliza­
tion. However, it was not the high European civilization of the 
Slavophiles that was the cause of their remaining faithful to the 
people and their principles-not in the least, but, on the contrary, 
the inexhaustible, continual educational influence of the popular 
principles upon the minds and the development of a layer of gen­
uinely Russian people who, by reason of their natural faculties, 
proved able to withstand the impact of civilization without reducing 
themselves to a zero. This layer, I repeat, dates back to the very 
inception of the reform. I believe that to quite a few our Slavophiles 
seem to have fallen from the sky, and they will fail to trace their 
origin to tht' time of Peter ·:, reform, as a protest against everything 
that was erroneous and fanatically exclusive in it. Still, I repeat, 
there have been sparsely culturized men who have never regarded 
the people as dogs and rascals. 
However, our cultured people are harfily aware of this, and 
even if they are, they despise these facts and do not, and never will, 
take them into consideration because these sparsely culturized men 
who have not lost their Christianity would be standing in direct 
contradiction to their fundamental and victorious thesis concerning 
the paltry educational value of the popular principles. They would 
then have to concede that it is not the latt(.; who have br• 1 so weak 
and uneducational, but that, contrariwise, culture has oeen too 
corrupted, even though it was only in its embryonic state, and, 
therefore, it succeeded in ruining so m.1.ny unsteady men. (And 
unsteady ones are always in the majority.) !t is for this reason 
that Mr. Avseenko draws the bold conclusion that "the evil-the 
principal, the common evil-to both us and the people lay not in 
culture but in the weakness of cultural foundations" ; it "·as, there­
fore, necessary to run to Europe as quickly as possible to become 
fully cultivated, to the extent that one would no longer be looking 
upon the peasant as a dog and a rascal. 
And we have acted exactly in this manner : we used tr- jour­
ney to Europe ourselves and to import teac. ޏrs from there. Prior to 
the French Revolution, in the days of Rousseau and the correspond­
ence of the Empress with Voltaire, Swiss teachers were in vogue in 
.Russia--

290 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
And Swiss disseminating learning everywhere.1 
"Come, take the money-only humanize us I "-such, indeed 
was the vogue in those days. In Turgenev's Gentlefolk's Nest, in 
passing, is excellently depicted the portrait of a certain nobleman's 
son who, after having been culturized in Europe, returned to his 
father's estate. He boasted of his humaneness and intellectual re­
finement. The father started reproaching him for having seduced 
and dishonored an innocent maidservant, to which the son re­
marked : "What of it ?-I'll marry her." You remember that little 
scene when the father seized a stick and started after his son, and 
the latter, in an English blue dress-coat, in boots adorned with tufts, 
and in tightly fitting elk-skin trousers, scampered off through the 
garden and the barn, running at top speed ! And then, although he 
did make his escape, several days later he married the girl because 
of the then rampant ideas of Rousseau, but principally-because 
of caprice, unsteadiness of convictions, of will and of feelings, as well 
as of piqued ambition : "Now, look at me, all of you I See, what 
a fellow I am ! " He did not respect his wife, treated her with 
boundless contempt, wearied her out by separations, and finally 
deserted her ; he lived to old age and died in a state of complete 
cynicism-a wicked, trivial, vile, contemptible old man, cursing in 
his last moments and crying to his sister : "Glashka, Glashka-some 
broth, bring some broth ! "  
How delightful is this story of Turgenev's, and how true ! 
And yet, this is one who has been considerably culturized. But Mr. 
Avsenko has a different 'thing in mind : he insists on genuine cul­
ture, that is, contemporaneous culture, the kind which has made 
our Petersburg landowners cultured to such an extent that they 
have been shedding tears while reading Anton-The Poor Wretch, 
and after that they made up their minds and liberated the peasants 
with land and decided to address the former dogs and rascals with 
a "you." Indeed, what progress ! Still, later, after careful scrutiny, 
it was ascertained that these landowners who had been sobbing 
over Anton-The Poor Wretch proved ignorant of the people-of 
their life, of their principles-to such an extent that they almost 
mistook Russian peasants for French villagers or for shepherdesses 
on porcelain cups. And when the long and difficult work of the 
11 think this is CounL Khvostov's verse. I even remember the four lines 
in which the poet enumerates all the people of Europe : 
Turks, Persians, Prussians, French, revengeful sons of Spain, 
Italians and children of the German scientific brain ; 
Sons of mercantile pursuits vigilantly watching o'er their ware, 
[that is, Englishmen] 
And Swiss disseminating learning everywhere. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
291 
government in connection with the liberation of the peasants had 
begun, some of the opinions of these, even prominent, landowners 
amazed people by the virtually anecdotal ignorance on the subject 
of the village, of the people's life and of everything else pertaining to 
the popular principles. And yet, Mr. Avseenko specifically asserts 
that European culture has helped us to understand the people's 
ideals, although these are devoid of any educational significance. 
It could be presumed that for a comprehension of the people's ideals 
one had to go to Paris or, at least, to little vaudeville shows at the 
Mikhailovsky Theatre, to which coaches keep driving up. However, 
let it be said that progress and the understanding of the Russian 
ways of life have been conveyed to us solely from Europe. Be it so 
-and praised be culture ! "Can't you see what genuine culture can 
make of men I "-exclaims the throng of Messrs. Avseenkis ! "And, 
compared with it, what are all those petty popular principles with 
Orthodoxy at their head-they have no instructive effect ! 
Down 
with them ! "  
So be it ! However, gentlemen, please answer only one ques­
tion : why didn't these teސl:hers of ours, Europeans, these beneficent 
Swiss, these doormen,1 who have taught us to liberate the peasants 
with land-why didn't they, in Europe, liberate anyone not only 
with land but even bare and naked as mother bore them ? And 
thus it has happened everywhere. Why did liberation proceed in 
Europe not from the owners, barons and country squires, but from 
uprisings and rebellions, from fire and sword and rivers of blood ? 
And if, here and there, liberation was accomplished without rivers of 
blood, everywhere, without exception, it was carried out on proleta­
rian principles ; a people was set free as perfect slaves. Even so, we 
are vociferating that we have learned fron. Europeanޑ 1'1· v to liber­
ate. "We became culturized"-they say-"and we cease,: to regard 
the peasant as a dog and a rascal." Well, why then, in France, and 
everywhere in Europe, is every proletarian, every pen,tiless worker, 
looked upon as a dog and a rascal ?-and this, cf course, you will not 
deny. It stands to reason that on strict legal grounds he cannot be 
told that he is a dog and a rascal ; yet everything can be done to 
him exactly as to a dog and a rascal, while the crafty l;tw merely 
requires that in this connection politeness be complied with. "I'll 
be polite, but I'll not g1ve you bread-even though you starve to 
death as a dog"-that's how things stand nowadays in Europe. 
How's that ? What a contradiction I How is it that they ta11ޒht us 
something directly opposite ? Nay, gentlen .n, here, at home, some­
thing altogether different has happened, and also not in the manner 
1This is an untranslatable jeu de mots : scl!vcit::ar meanR ''doorman" ; 
Shveitzar is the archaic form of "Swiss." (B. B.) 

292 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
you claim. Think only : had we ceased to regard the peasant as a 
dog and a rascal only through culture, we should certainly have 
liberated him according to the cultural scheme, that is, on proleta­
rian principles, even as our teachers in Europe : "Go"-we should 
have said-"dear brother of ours, and have your freedom, bare and 
naked, as your mother had borne you, and consider this as an 
honor." Indeed, in the Baltic Provinces the people were liberated 
exactly in this manner. And why ? Because the Baits are Euro­
peans, while we are only Russians. And thus it appears that we have 
accomplished this task like Russians and not at all like cultured 
Europeans, and we did liberate the people with land-to the astonish­
ment and horror of our European instructors and of all beneficent 
"doormen." Yes, to their horror : in Europe, there sounded alarmed 
voices-don't you remember it ? They even started shouting about 
communism. Do you recall that little word of the now deceased 
Guizot concerning the liberation of our people : "How do you expect 
us, after that, not to be afraid of you ?"-said he to a certain Russian. 
Nay, we have liberated the people with land not because we 
have become cultured Europeans, but because we have sensed in 
ourselves Russians led by the Czar, exactly in the manner that 
forty years prior to that the landowner Pushkin had been dreaming ; 
specifically, during that epoch he had damned his European up­
bringing and had turned toward the principles of the people. It 
was precisely in the name of these popular principles that the Rus­
sian people have been liberated with land, and not because Europe 
has taught us to do so : on the contrary-because, suddenly, for the 
first time, we decided to bow before the people's truth. This was 
not only a -great moment in Russian life, when cultured men, for 
the first time, ventured to act in an original manner, but also a 
prophetic moment in our history. And, very soon, perhaps, the 
prophecy will begin to come true. . . . 
But . . .  at this point I shall break off. I see that my article 
would absorb the entire space in the Diary. Thus-till the next, 
May, issue of my Diary. And, of course, I am leaving for the May 
issue the most essential part of my explanations. As a matter of 
record, I shall enumerate here the things that will be included in it. 
I wish to point out the utter bankruptcy and even the triviality 
specifically of that aspect of our culture which, contrariwise, some 
of our gentlemen regard as our light, as our sole salvation and our 
fame before the people, and from the height of which they spit upon 
the people and consider themselves fully justified in doing so. Since, 
to eulogize "the people's principles," to delight in them, and in the 
same breath to be asserting that they are devoid of all force, of all 

. THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
293 
educational meaning and that all this is mere "passiveness," and 
thus-let's spit upon these principles. For example, to assert, as Mr. 
Avseenko does, that the people are nothing but pilgrims who have 
not yet chosen their path, and that "to expect thought and expres­
sion, from this enigma, this sphinx, which has not yet found for 
itself either thought or expression-is irony· -to assert this, I say, 
is merely the equivalent of not knowing that subject of which one is 
treating, i.e., of not knowing the people at all. Specifically, I wish 
to point out that the people are by no means as hopeless, in no 
sense as susceptible to unsteadiness and vagueness, as is, on the 
contrary, our Russian cultural stratum in which all these gentlemen 
take pride as the most precious, two-hundred-year-old acquisition 
of Russia. Finally, I should like to state that in our people is fully 
preserved that solid core which will save them from the excesses 
and deviations of our culture, and which will withstand the educa­
tion coming to the people without damage to their image and self­
expression. And even though I did say that "the people are an enig­
ma," it wޓs i.ޔ a o;ense qt!:te different from that which was under­
stood by these gentlemen. At the very end, I wish to explain fully, 
as I conceive it myself, the confusing question which arises of its 
own accord after all this wrangling : "Well, if we, the culturized 
Russian stratum. are so weak and unsteady, compared with the 
people, what, then, can we bring to them of so precious a value that 
they should bow before it and should accept that treasure sine qua 
non ?"-as I have stated myself in the February issue of my Diary. 
Now, this aspect of our culture, which should be conceived as a 
treasure and to which, however, all these gentlemen, titus far, have 
not paid the slightest attention, I wish to point out O:.ll i explain. 
Thus-till the May issue. As for myself, I cannot imagi: . anything 
more entertaining and pressing than these questions ; I don't know 
how the reader feels about them. But I promise-to t''e best of my 
ability-to be more brief, while I shall try to make no more mention 
of Mr. Avseenko. 
CHAPTER II 
1 
Something About Politicai ')uestions 
EVERYBODY SPEAKS about current political questions 
and everybody takes great interest in them. In fact how is it pos­
sible not to be interested ? Unexpectedly, en passant, a very seri-

294 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
ous man very seriously asked me : "Well, is there going to be a war 
or not ?" I was surprised : although I am following events very 
closely-like everybody else-nevertheless I haven't even raised 
the question of the inevitability of war. And, I believe, I was right : 
newspapers announce the forthcoming meeting-in the nearest future 
-at Berlin of three chancellors ; and, no doubt, that the endless 
Herzegovina problem will be settled and, most probably, in a sense 
satisfactory to the Russian sentiment. I confess, I was also not very 
much disturbed by those words of Baron Redic, spoken a month 
ago ; truly, when I first read them, I was merely amused. Mean­
while, it has seemed to me that Baron Redic not only did not in­
tend to pique anyone, but that in his utterance there was no "poli­
tics" at all : simply, it was a lapsus, a slip, an inconsiderate bit of 
nonsense about Russia's impotence. I even think that before he had 
made his statement about our impotence, he said to himself ; "Now, 
if we are stonger than Russia, this would mean that Russia is 
absolutely impotent. And in reality we are stronger because Berlin 
will never surrender us to Russia. Oh, Berlin might, perhaps, permit 
us to come to grips with Russia, but exclusively for its own amuse­
ment and for the purpose of determining more accurately who's going 
to beat whom, and what means both parties have at their disposal. 
However, should Russia conquer us and briskly pin us to the wall, 
Berlin would say : 'Halt, Russia ! '-nor would Berlin permit that 
great-that is, very great-harm be inflicted upon us, well, perhaps, 
just trifling harm. And since Russia will not venture to challenge 
us and Berlin together, the matter may be brought to an end with­
out great injury to us. As against that, we have this chance : should 
we beat Russia, we could be gaining a lot. Thus, we have a chance, 
on the one hand, to gain a lot, and, in the event that Russia should 
beat us, to lose very little-this is very good, very politic I And Berlin 
is our friend : she loves us greatly because she wants to annex our 
German dominions and will annex them in any event, and, perhaps, 
in the rather near future. However, because Berlin greatly loves us 
for this, she will, without fail, compensate us for our German 
dominions seized by her from us, and in exchange for these she will 
grant us jurisdiction over the Turkish Slavs. This she will do with­
out fail since this would be to her great advantage, because even 
if we were compensated with the Slavs, nevertheless we should in 
no way become stronger than Berlin, whereas should Russia com­
pensate herself with the Slavs, then she would grow stronger even 
than Berlin. This is why we-and not Russia-are going to get the 
Slavs. This is why I could not refrain from mentioning it in my 
address to the Slavic leaders. Indeed, it is necessary to prepare them 
little by little for the right ideas .
.
. . " 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
295 
Such ideas may be prevailing not only in Rodiޕ's mind but 
among Austrians in general. And, of course, here there is much 
choas . . . .  Imagine only that the Slavs might come under Austria's 
domination, and that, in the first instance, she would start German­
izing them, even after having lost her German dominions ! How­
ever, it is true that in Europe, not Austria alone is inclined to 
believe in Russia's impotence, and, furthermore-in Russia's ardent 
desire to bring the Slavs as quickly as possible under her rule. The 
fullest metamorphosis in Russia's political life will take place ex­
actly when Europe becomes convinced that Russia has no intention 
of annexing anything. When that time comes a new era will come 
into existence for us and for the whole of Europe. The belief in 
Russia's disinterestedness, if it should ever be held, would at once 
renovate and change the whole countenance of Europe. In the 
long run this conviction will arise without fail, but not as a result 
of any assurance of ours : Europe, to the very end, will refuse to 
give credence to any of our assurances, and will continue to look at 
us with hostility. It is difficult to conceive to what extent she is 
afraid of us. And if sht: is afraid of us, she must be hating us. 
Europe has always extraordinarily disliked us ; she never did like 
us ; she never regarded us as one of her own-as Europeans-but 
always has viewed us as disagreeable strangers. This is why, at 
times, she is so fond of consoling herself with the thought that 
Russia supposedly is "as yet impotent." 
And it is good that she is inclined to think so. I am convinced 
that the greatest calamity would have befallen Russia should she 
have won, for instance, the Crimean campaign and should she then 
have conquered the Allies ! Having perceived how pow"rful we are, 
everybody in Europe would then forthv,.ޖޗh have riser• against us 
with fanatical hatred. Of course, had they been crushed, .hey would 
have signed a peace treaty disadvantageous to them, but never could 
any peace have been achieved in reality. They would immediately 
begin to prepare themselves for a new war aiming at the annihila­
tion of Russi:i, and the principal point is that they would have had 
the support of the whole world. For example, in this event the 
year 1864 would not have cost us merely an exchang{' of caustic 
diplomatic notes : on the contrary, a wholesale crusade against 
Russia would have ensued. Moreover, by means of this crusade 
several European governments, at the time, would have improved 
their internal situation so that it woulrl have been profit1.ble to 
them in every respect. For instance, the . .!Volutionary parties and 
all those who were dissatisfied with the contemporaneous French 
government, would immediately have come to its support in view of 
"the most sacred aim" of expelling Russia from Europe. And such 

rnODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
a war would have been popular However, at the time fate had 
saved us by providing preponderance in strength to the Allies, and 
at the same time preserving and even exalting our military honor 
so that the defeat could be endured by us I Briefly, we have endured 
the debacle, but under no circumstance could we have endured the 
burden of our victory over Europe, notwithstanding our viability 
and strength. In the same way, another time fate saved us in the 
beginning of the century, when we threw off Napoleon's yoke in 
Europe ; it saved us specifically by the fact that it gave us Prussia 
and Austria as allies. Had we then conquered alone, Europe, the 
moment it would have recovered after Napoleon I, would have 
again-even without Napoleon-thrown herself upon us. But, thank 
God, things happened differently : Prussia and Austria, which we 
had liberated, forthwith attributed to themselves the honor of the 
victories, and subsequently-at the present time-they assert that 
in those days they won the war alone, and that Russia merely 
impeded their efforts. 
And, generally speaking, we have been placed in such a position 
by our European fate that under no circumstances should we be 
conquering in Europe, even if we could : it is disadvantageous and 
dangerous in the highest degree. Well, perhaps, some private, as it 
were, domestic, victories they might "forgive" us-for instance, the 
conquest of the Caucasus. Whereas war with Turkey, under the 
late Emperor, and the suppression of Poland, which took place 
shortly thereafter, almost caused a general explosion in Europe. 
At present, apparently, they "have forgiven" us our recent acquisi­
tions in Central Asia, but even so how they keep croaking at home I 
They can't calm down. 
Nevertheless, the course of events-so it seems-must change the 
attitude of the European nations toward Russia in the rather near 
future. In the March issue of my Diary I have recorded some of 
my meditations concerning the immediate future of Europe. How­
ever, no longer meditatingly but almost with certainty, it may be 
stated that very soon-perhaps, in the immediate future-Russia 
will prove stronger than any nation in Europe. This will come to 
pass because all great powers in Europe will be destroyed for the 
simple reason that they will be worn out and undermined by the 
unsatisfied democratic tendencies of an enormous portion of their 
lower-class subjects-their proletarians and paupers. In Russia, this 
cannot happen : our demos is content and, as time goes on, it will 
grow even more content because everything tends toward this con­
dition, as a result of the general mood, or-more correctly-by gen­
eral consensus. And therefore there will remain on the continent 
but one colossus-Russia. This will come to pas, perhaps even 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
297 
much sooner than people think. The future of Europe belongs to 
Russia. But the question is : what will Russia then be doing in 
Europe ? What role will she be playing ? Is !'he ready for that role ? 
2 
THE PARADOXICALIST 
By the way, apropos of the war and the war rumors. I have 
among my acquaintances a paradoxicalist. I have known him for 
quite a long time. He is a man whom no one knows-a strange 
character : he is a dreamer. Without fail I shall speak about him 
later in more detail. But just now I recall how once-true, several 
years ago-he started arguing with me about war. He was defending 
it on general principles and, perhaps, solely as a matter of sportive 
love for paradox. I may remark that he is a "civilian," and one of 
the most peaceful and good-natured men on earth and in Petersburg. 
"It is c1. wil:.l ޘdca"-h- said inter alia-"that war is the scourge 
of mankind. On the contrary, it is a most useful thing. There is 
but one kind of war which is hateful and really disastrous : this 
is civil, fratricidal war. It deadens and disintegrates the state ; 
invariably it lasts too long, and it brutalizes a people for whole 
centuries. But political, international war is useful in every respect, 
and, therefore, it is absolutely necessary." 
"But look here : one people rises against another one ; men 
go to kill each other. What is there necessary in this ?" 
"Everything, and in the highest degree. But-to begin with 
-it is a lie that men go to kill each othe: · this is nevޙ:· the case 
as a matter of prime design. On the contrary, they go • 
sacrifice 
their own lives ; this must stand in the foreground. And this is 
altogether different. There is no loftier idea than to 5.crifice one ·s 
own life, or even simply to defend the cause 'lf one's fatherland. 
Mankind cannot live without magnanimous ideas, and I am even 
inclined to suspect that mankind loves war precisely because it 
seeks to participate in a magnanimous idea. This is an urge." 
"But does mankind really love war ?" 
"Why, of course. Who feels depressed during the war ?-Quite 
the contrary : everybody is enheartened, everybody's spirit rises, 
and one does not hear about the usual apathy and boredom .ls in 
times of peace. And afterwards, when the 
• 1r is over, how people 
like to reminisce about it even in the case of defeat ! And don't 
believe people who, when meeting during a war, shake their heads 
:md say to each other : 'What a calamity I What things have come 
to pass ! '-This is mere politeness. On thr contrary, in every-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
body's soul there dwells a holiday spirit. You know, it is awfully 
difficult to admit certain ideas : people will say : 'brute,' 'reactionary' ;  
they will censure, and one is afraid of this. No one will dare to 
praise war." 
"But you are speaking about magnanimous ideas, about 
humanizing. Can't there be found magnanimous ideas without war ? 
On the contrary, in times of peace, it is easier to make oneself 
better." 
"Not at all ; the contrary is true. Magnanimity perishes 
during long periods of peace and, in its stead, there develop cyni­
cism, apathy, weariness, and, at most, spiteful raillery, and this­
almost for the sake of idle pastime, and not for any important pur­
pose. It may be positively asserted that protracted peace obdu­
rates people. When peace lasts long social preponderance invariably 
swings to the side of everything that is bad and vulgar in human­
kind-principally, to wealth and capital. Honor, humaneness, self­
sacrifice are still being respected, valued and rated highly immedi­
ately after the war, but the longer peace lasts-the dimmer, the 
more withered, the more torpid all these beautiful magnanimous 
things grow, while wealth and the spirit of acquisition take pos­
session of everything. At length, there is nothing left but hypocrisy 
-hypocrisy of honor, of self-sacrifice, of duty, so that these will 
still be respected, despite all the cynicism, but merely in boastful 
phrases and as a matter of form. There will be no genuine honor, 
and nothing but formulas will be left. Formulas of honor mean the 
death of honor. Lasting peace produces apathy, baseness of thought, 
corruption, and it dulls the feelings. Coarse wealth is incapable of 
cherishing magnanimity, but it requires more unassuming delights, 
that is, those directly gratifying the carnal instincts. Delectations 
grow carnivorous. Sensuality genecates lechery, and lewdness al­
ways produces cruelty. You cannot deny all these things because 
you cannot deny the principal fact that social superiority in times 
of lasting peace, in the long run, always passes over to vulgar 
wealth." 
"But science, the arts--<:an they flourish in times of war ?­
And yet, these are great and magnanimous ideas." 
"I catch you right at this point. Science and the arts progress 
precisely during the period immediately following a war. War re­
generates, refreshes them ; generates the thought and gives it an 
impetus. On the contrary, during periods of long-lasting peace 
science withers. No doubt, scientific pursuit requires magnanimity, 
even self-sacrifice. But how many scientists can remain immune 
to the plague of peace ? False honor, self-love, sensuality will get 
them, too. For instance, try to master a passion such as envy : it 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
299 
is vulgar and trivial, and yet it penetrates the noblest soul of a 
scientist. He, too, will be tempted to partake of general opulence 
and glamor. Compared with the triumph of wealth, what is the 
triumph of some scientific invention, unless it be as ostentatious as, 
for example, the discovery of the planet Neptune ? Do you think 
that there will be many genuine workers left ?-On the contrary, 
there will be craving for fame, and thus charlatanism, galloping 
after effect, and especially utilitarianism, will invade science since 
there will arise a thirst for wealth. The same is true of art : the 
same galloping after effect, after some subtility. The simple, clear, 
magnanimous and vigorous ideas will no longer be in vogue : some­
thing more unassuming will be required ; artificiality of passions 
will be in demand. Little by little, the sense of measure and harmony 
will be lost ; there will appear distortions of feelings and passions, 
so-called subtilities of sentiment which, in substance, are merely 
its vulgarization. Art invariably yields to this at the end of a long 
period of peace. Had there never been such a thing as war in this 
world, art would completely wither. All the loftiest ideas in art 
have been LontniJt.tcd by war and strUb"gle. Turn to tragedy, be­
hold the statues : here is Corneille's II or ace ; there-Apollo of the 
Belvedere, dealing a blow to a monster . . . .  
" 
"And the Madonnas ! 
And Christianity l "  
"Christianity itself admits the fact of war and prophesies that 
the sword shall prevail till the end of the world : this is very re­
markable and astounding. Oh, no doubt, in the loftiest, moral sense, 
it rejects war and prescribes brotherly love. I shall be the first to 
rejoice when swords are forged into plows. But the question is : 
when can this happen ? And is it worth while, at thi'i time, to 
reforge swords into plows ? Present-day peޚ·ޛ"" is alway:. :. •d every­
where worse than war-worse to such an extent that, at ޜޝngth, it 
becomes immoral to support it : there is nothing to treasure, nothing 
to censure ; it is shameful and trivial to conserve. Weal.h, vulgarity 
of delights generate indolence, and indolence g;ves birth to slaves. 
To keep slaves in a servile state it is necessary to depri"e them of 
free will and of the opportunity of enlightenment. For you cannot 
help but feel the need for a slave, no matter who you are, even 
though you be the most tenderhearted person I I may also remark 
that during periods of peace cowardice and dishonesty become firmly 
planted. Man, by virtue of his nature, is terribly inclined toward 
cowardice and shamelessness, and he is fully aware of it. Tnis is 
the reason why he is so strongly craving flJ war and why he loves 
it so : he senses a medicine in it. War promotes brotherly love and 
unites the nations." 
11What do you mean by 'unites the nations' ?" 

JOO 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
"By compelling them mutually to respect each other. War 
refrtshes men. Humaneness develops most strongly on a battlefield. 
It is even a strange fact that war embitters people less than peace. 
In fact, some political offense in times of peace, some insolent 
treaty, some political pressure, some arrogant interpellation-akin 
to the one Europe addressed to us in 1863-tends to cause more 
bitterness than a straightforward battle. Please recall : did we hate 
the French and the English during the Crimean campaign ?-On the 
contrary, we became, as it were, intimate with them, or even related 
to them. We used to take an interest in their opinion of our bravery ; 
we showed signs of kindness to their captives ; in periods of truce 
our soldiers and officers used to proceed to the outposts ; they almost 
embraced their enemies and drank vodka with them. Russia has 
ben reading in the papers about all this with delight, which, 
however, did not prevent us from putting up a superb fight. There 
developed a knightly spirit. And I shall even refrain from speaking 
about the material calamities of war : who does not know the law 
according to which everything, as it were, acquires new, regenerated 
force? The economic forces of the country are stimulated and decu­
pled as if a storm cloud had poured out abundant rain upon parched 
soil. War sufferers are being speedily given aid by everybody, 
whereas in times of peace whole regions are left to die from famine 
before we deign to scratch our necks or to send a three-ruble 
contribution." 
"But don't the people, more than anyone else, suffer during 
the war ? Don't they endure ruin and unavoidable burdens infmitely 
more onerous than the $per strata of society ?" 
"Perhaps, but only temporarily, whereas they gain much 
more than they lose. It is precisely for the people that war bears 
its best and most blissful consequences. Just as you please, you 
may be the most human person, but even so you consider yourself 
superior to a plebeian. Who, in our day, measures souls with the 
Christian measure-soul by soul ? Pocketbook, power, strength­
these are the yardsticks with which everything is measured, and 
plebeians en masse are well aware of it. 
"This is not exactly envy : there arises here some kind of an 
unbearable feeling of moral inequality which is too vexing to the 
common people. No matter how much you may be liberating them, 
no matter what laws you may be enacting, inequality cannot be 
eliminated in present-day society. The only medicine is war ; it is 
a palliative, a momentary medicine, but one welcomed by the 
people. War arouses the· people's spirit and their feeling of self­
respect. War equalizes everybody during the battle and reconciles 
master and slave in the supreme manifestation of human dig-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
JOI 
nity-in the sacrifice of life for a common cause, for everybody, 
for the fatherland. Do you really believe the mass, even the ignorant 
mass, of peasants and paupers, does not experience the need of an 
active manifestation of magnanimous feelings ? And in times of 
peace, in what can the mass reveal its magnanimity and human 
dignity ? We view-scarcely deigning to take notice of them-even 
the isolated manifestations of magnanimity among the common 
people, now with a smile of distrust, now simply refusing to believe 
them, and now-with suspicion. And when we happen to give cre­
dence to the heroism of some individual, we immediately herald 
this as something extraordinary. 
And what is the result ?-Our 
astonishment and eulogies are akin to contempt. During the war 
this disappears of its own accord and there arises a complete equal­
ity in heroism. Blood which has been shed is an important thing. 
The common exploit of heroism creates the firmest bond between 
inequalities and classes. The landowner and the peasant, fighting 
side by side in 1812, were closer one to the other than in the 
country at hemP. on a peaceful estate. To the masses war is a 
pretext for self-respect, and this is the reason why the people love 
war : they compose songs about it, and later, during long years, 
they listen with delight to war legends and stories . . . .  Blood which 
has been shed is an important thing ! Yes, war, in our day, is neces­
sary ; without it thr 'Vorld would have perishPd or, at least, it would 
have been converted into some sort of slime, into some wretched 
mire infected with putrid wounds . . . .  
" 
Of course, I stopped arguing. It is impossible to argue with 
dreamers. However, there is a very strange fact : at present people 
begin to argue about, and dPbate, such subjects as-so ;t seemed­
had long ago been settled and sent to the d;chives. N -· 
· all this 
is being dug up. And the important point is that this is L·'ing done 
everywhere. 
3 
AGAIN BuT ONE WoRD ABOUT SPIRITISM 
Again I have no room for an "article" on spiritism ; again I 
defer it to some future issue. And yet, it was as far back as February 
that I attended that spiritist seance with a "real" medium, which 
left on me a rather strong impression. nfhers who were f"Psent 
at this seance have given printf'd accountႿ of it, so that there re­
mained nothing for me except to record my personal impression. 
But up to the present, during these two whole months, I had no 
· desire to write anything about the matter, and con.;ealed my im-

J02 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
pression from the readers. I may state in advance that the seance 
was one of a most peculiar kind and that it virtually did not per­
tain to spiritism. This was an impression of something dfferent, but 
which merely revealed itself apropos of spiritism. I am very sorry 
that I must be postponing it again, all the more so as now I have 
acquired a desire to discuss the matter, whereas up to the present 
time I have felt a sort of disgust for it. Aversion was the result of 
suspiciousness. Even at that time I spoke to several of my friends 
about the seance ; one person whose opinion I profoundly treasure, 
having listened to me, asked me if I intended to describe it in the 
Diary. I said that I didn't know. And, unexpectedly, he remarked : 
"Don't write." To this he added nothing, and I did not insist, but 
I did grasp the meaning of the remark : obviously it would have 
displeased him if, in any manner whatever, I might have helped to 
promote spiritism. At the time I was all the more surprised as, in 
giving my account about the February seance, I repudiated spirit­
ism with sincere conviction. Yet this man, hating spiritism, must 
have discerned in my account something, as it were, favorable to 
spiritism, despite all my denials. This is why, up to the present, I 
have refrained from discussing the matter in print-precisely because 
of suspiciousness and mistrust of myself. But now, it seems, I 
fully trust myself and I have found an explanation of my suspicious­
ness. Besides, I became convinced that no articles of mine could 
help either to promote or to exterminate spiritism. Mr. Mendeleev, 
who at this very moment-as I am writing these lines-is delivering 
his lecture at the Solianoi Gorodok, probably views the matter from 
a different angle, and he"is lecturing with the noble aim of "crushing 
spiritism." It is always pleasing to listen to lectures with such 
excellent tendencies, but I believe that he who wishes to embrace 
faith in spiritism cannot be prevented from doing so by either 
lectures or entire committees, while the incredulous one, who does 
not wish to believe, will be swayed by nothing. It is exactly this 
conviction that I acquired at the February seance at A. N. Aksakov's 
house-then, at least, as a first strong impression. Until then I had 
simply denied spiritism, i.e., essentially, I was incensed with the 
mystical meaning of this doctrine (but I was never able to 
deny completely, nor am I able to do so now, especially now that 
I have read the report of the learned committee for the investigation 
of spiritism-spiritiMic phenomena with which I had been somewhat 
familiar even before the seance with the medium) .  However, after 
that remarkable seance, suddenly I guessed-or rather, learned­
that not only do I not believe in spiritism, but, even more, that I 
categorically do not wish to believe in it, so that no proofs will ever 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
JOJ 
shake me. This is what I derived from the seance and what I came 
to understand. And-I confess-the impression was almost a soothing 
one because I was a little afraid when I was about to go to that 
seance. I may add that this is not merely a personal impression : 
it seems to me that in this observation of mine there is also some­
thing general. I vaguely sense some peculiar law of human nature, 
a law common to everyone, specifically pertaming to faith and in­
credulity in general. Somehow I perceived tht!n, precisely through 
experiment-as a result of that very seance-what force incredulity 
may find and develop in one, at a given moment, altogether against 
one's will, although in accord with one's secret desire . . . .  This is 
also probably true of faith. This is what I meant to discuss. 
Thus-till the next issue. However, I will add a few words in 
amplification of what I have stated in the :March issue, specifically 
about that same Report of the now so widely-known "Committee." 
I said, then, a few words regarding the unsatisfactoriness of 
that Report and in what respect it may even be harmful to its own 
purpose. But I have not stated the principal thing. I shall now 
atlempt briefly ࢩu amplif) my statement, all the more so as this is 
quite a simple matter. The Committee did not wish to condescend 
to the most important need in this connection-to the need of society 
which has been awaiting its judgment. The Committee, it would 
seem, was so little concerned about the social need (otherwise one 
would have to presume that it simply was unable to understand that 
need) that it failed to comprehend that some "crinoline springlets 
glimpsing in the darkness" will dissuade no one and will prove noth­
ing, once people have already been harmfully affected. When reading 
the Report it positively begins to seem that these scientists of ours 
have labored under the presumption that S!liritism exist 
.. .-1 in Peters­
burg only in A. N. Aksakov's apartment, and that they - .1ew noth­
ing about the thirst for spiritism which has risen in society, nor 
concerning the grounds on which spiritism began t · spread spe­
cifically among us, Russians. However, they did know all this 
but merely neglected it. It is quite apparent that they have adopted 
toward all these matters an attitude exactly identical with that 
of private persons who, when listening to the accounts of the dis­
astrous passion of our society for spiritism, merely scoff at and 
giggle about it-and this only en passant, hardly condescending to 
give thought to the matter. But having formed a committee, these 
scientists have become social workers-they are no longer lay pޞrsons. 
They were entrusted with a mission, and . · is precisely-so it would 
seem-is what they refused to take into consideration : they seated 
themselves beside the spiritistic table still, as hitherto, merely as 

J04 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
lay persons, i.e., scoffing and giggling and, in addition, perhaps, 
vexed by the fact that they had been compelled to take up seriously 
so nonsensical a thing. 
However, let us admit that this entire house and A. N. Aksa­
kov's apartment are covered with springs and wires, and that the 
medium, besides, has some sort of a little mechanism which produces 
a cracking sound between his knees ( this ingenious conjecture of the 
committee has been subsequently reported in print by N. P. Wagner) .  
But every "serious" spiritist (pray, do not laugh at this word ; in 
truth-this is quite serious) ,  upon reading the Report, will ask : 
"Well, at my house where I intimately know everyone-my children, 
my wife, my relatives and acquaintances-well, how is it that at my 
house identical phenomena are taking place : the table swings and 
lifts itself, sounds are heard, intelligent answers are being received ? 
Now, I know for sure and I am quite convinced that in my house 
there are neither mechanisms nor wires, and that my wife and my 
children are not going to deceive me I " And the main point is that 
in Petersburg, in Moscow, and in all of Russia, there have appeared 
all too many of those who will talk or think along these lines. This 
should have been taken into account even at the risk of descending 
from the scientific height, for this is an epidemic and people have 
to be helped. But the presumptuousness of the committee prevents 
it from such reasoning : "These are simply light-minded and poorly 
educated people, and this is the reason why they believe." "All right, 
be it so"-continues to insist a serious and disturbingly convinced 
spiritist (since they are all in a state of prime astonishment and 
first alarm, the matter 'being so new and so extraordinary) .-"All 
right. Let's take it for granted that I am light-minded and poorly 
educated ; still in my house there is no mechanism which produces 
the cracking sound ; this I know for sure. Besides, I have no means 
for buying such queer instruments ; and where can these be bought ? 
Who is selling them ? I swear to God, we know nothing about these 
things. So, then, why do we hear cracks in our house ? How are 
these sounds produced ? You are telling us that we ourselves are 
unconsciously pressing upon the table. I assure you that we are not 
childish to such an extent, and that we are watching ourselves-ex­
actly, watching : whether we press ourselves. We are conducting 
experiments with curiosity and impartially . . . .  
" 
"There is nothing to answer you"-concludes the Committee, 
but already angrily. "You are also being deceived, and in the very 
same manner as all others. Everybody is being deceived ; all are 
simpletons. Thus it must be. Thus speaks science. We are-Science." 
Well, this is no explanation. "No, apparently here there's 
something different"-concludes the "seriously" convinced spiritist. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
305 
"It cannot be that these are mere tricks. It's all right in the case 
of :Madam Clire ; but I know my family : there's no one to pull 
tricks in my house." 
And spiritism persists. 
I have just read in The New Times an account of 1\Ir. !\len­
deleev's first lecture at the Solianoi Gorodok. ჁIr. :\lendeleev makes 
the following positive assertion in the form of a solid fact : 
"At spiritistic seances tables move and produce sounds both 
when hands are laid upon them and when they are not. Of these 
sounds, in accordance with a given alphabet, whole words, phrases 
and dicta arc formed, which invariably bear the impress of the men­
tality of that medium with whose aid the seance is being conducted. 
This is a fact. Kow, it must be explained : who does the rapping 
and how is it done ? l'or the elucidation of these questions there 
are the following six hypotheses." 
This is the main thing : "Who does the rapping and how is it 
done ?" Thereupon, six-as many as six-hypotheses already con­
ceived in huropt: <tre l1ein5 set forth. It would seem that even the 
most "serious" spiritist could be dissuaded. But to a conscientious 
spiritist seeking to elucidate the matter, the most curious point is 
not that there are six hypotheses, hut which of these does Mr. 
Mendeleev himself t'mbrace, what does he specifically maintain, and 
what precisely were the findings of the Committee ? Our own domes­
tic problems are closer to us, more authoritative, while those in 
Europe and in the United States-why, they are an obscure matter. 
And from the further expose of the lecture it appears that the 
Committee has still adopted the hypothesis of legerdemain, and 
not of simple tricks but precisely based on j-'! cconceivea " ·guery and 
mechanisms producing cracking sounds between the kne. · (I repeat 
-according to N. P. Wagner 's statement) .  But this scientific "pre­
sumptuousness " is insufficient, quite insufficient, to ..,ur spiritists ; 
it would have been insufficient even if the Cmnmittee were right, 
and here is the whole trouble. Besides-who knows ?-perhaps the 
"seriously" convinced spiritist is right when he concludes that even if 
spiritism were nonsense, nevertheless here we are dealinჀ with some­
thing different than mere coarse roguery-something which should 
be dealt with more cautiOusly, so to speak , more delicately, since 
"his wife, his children, his acquaintances are not going to deceive 
him," etc., etc. Believe me, he stands on hiპ; road from which \ ou are 
not going to lead him astray. He firm.. knows that here "not 
everything is roguery." Of this he has already convinced himself. 
In fact, all the other contentions of the Committee are almost 
equally presumptuous : "They are light-minded, .> ou see, uncon-

306 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
sciously they press upon the table, and this is the reason why it 
swings ; they seek to deceive themselves-and the table produces 
rapping sounds ; nerves are upset ; they sit in darkness ; the accor­
dion is playing ; tiny hooks are inserted into shirt-sleeves (this, 
however, is Mr. Rachinsky's conjecture) ; they are lifting the table 
with the toes of their feet," and so on, and so forth. And still all 
this is not going to disillusion anyone who wishes to be seduced. 
"For goodness sake, I have a table that weighs two poods ; under 
no circumstance can I move it by merely extending my foot and, 
of course, there is no way I can lift it up into the air. Besides, this 
cannot be done at all except, perhaps, by some fakir or juggler, or 
by that Mrs. Clire of yours with her crinoline device ; but there are 
no such jugglers or equilibrists in my family." 
Briefly, spiritism is undoubtedly a great, extraordinary and 
most foolish fallacy, a lecherous doctrine and ignorance ; but the 
trouble is that all this, perhaps, does not transpire around the table 
as the Committee orders us to believe, and, indeed, it is also im­
possible to call all spiritists humbugs and fools. This method 
merely tends to insult everybody, but thereby nothing can be 
achieved. It seems that this fallacy should be specifically dealt with 
in some correlation with our current social conditions, and for this 
reason both the tone and the method of the Report should have 
been different. The mystical meaning of spiritism-this most harm­
ful thing-should have been taken into particular consideration. Yet, 
the Committee has not given thought to this particular significance. 
Of course, under no circumstance, would it have been in a position 
to crush the evil ; but; at least, by different-not so naive and 
haughty-methods the Committee could have inculcated in spiritists 
even respect for its fmdings, while it could have exercised a strong 
influence on the wavering followers of spiritism. However, the 
Committee obviously deemed any approach to the matter other 
than legerdemain-and not a simple one but one fraught with 
roguery-degrading to its scientific dignity. Every presumption that 
spiritism is something besides a vulgar fraud or trick was incon­
ceivable to the Committee. Besides, what would have been said in 
Europe about our scientists ? Thus, deliberately assuming the con­
viction that the whole task in this respect comes down to the 
necessity of exposing a fraud and to nothing else, the scientists 
thereby have convr·yed to their judgment a preconceived char­
acter. Believe me, some clever spiritist-I assure you that there 
are also clever people who ponder over spiritism, and 
not 
only fools-some clever · spiritist, upon reading newspaper ac­
counts of Mr. Mendeleev's public lecture, and in that lecture the 
following sentence : "Of these sounds, subject to a given alphabet, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
whole words, phrases and dicta are formed which invariably bear 
the impress of the mentality of the medium with whose aid the 
seance is being conducted ; this is a fact . . .  "-having read this 
sentence, he may, perhaps, all of a sudden say to himself : "Why, 
this invariable intellectual impress of the medium . . . perhaps, 
this is the most essential point in the inquiry into spiritism, and 
the inference has been arrived at on the strength of the most ex­
haustive experiments, and now our Committee, having hardly seated 
itself by the table (indeed, long had they been engaged in the 
work I ), has forthwith determined that this was a fact. Come, come 
-a fact I Maybe the Committee, in this case, was guided by some 
German or French opinion, but, if so, where is its own experience ? 
This is merely an opinion, and not an inference drawn from its 
own experience. By Mrs. Clire alone they could not have drawn 
the conclusion as to the answers of the tables 'corresponding to 
the mentality of the mediums,' as a general fact. Besides, it is 
doubtful whether they have investigated even Mrs . .  Clire from the 
standpoint of her intellectual, upper, cerebral characteristics, but 
they mereiy fuund a cracl..ing mechanism-and this in an altogether 
different place. 1\lr. Mendeleev was a membet of the Committee, 
and when delivering his lecture he spoke, as it were, on behalf of 
the Committee. No, such a hasty and cursory judgment of the 
Committee, on so momentous a point of tl.e inquiry, and in the 
face of such scanty experiments-is much too presumptuous and, 
besides, hardly scientific. . . ." 
Verily, people may reason this way. Now, such a presump­
tuous shallowness of certain deductions will furnish society, and 
more particularly all these already convinced spiritists, with a pre­
text for becoming even more confirmecf in their fa!::.cies : "Pre­
sumptuousness"-they will say-"haughtiness, prejudict . premedita­
tion 1 They are much too petulant I . . .  " And spiritism will persist. 
P.S. I have just read the account about Mr. Y!!ndeleev's sec­
ond lecture on spiritism. Mr. Mendeleev already attributes to the 
Committee's report a remedial effect upon writers : "Souvorin no 
longer believes in spiritism as strongly as before ; Boborykin has 
also apparently been cured or, at least, he is on the way to recovery. 
Finally, Dostoievsky, too, has recovered in his Diary : in January 
he was inclined toward :.piritism, and in March he is already scold­
ing it." This, then, must be due to the Report. Thus, it would seem 
that the esteemed Mr. Mendeleev thought that in Januar·.· I was 
commending spiritism I Well, was it for ''e devils ? 
Mr. Mendeleev must be an extraordinarily kindhearted man. 
Imagine, having crushed spiritism by his two lectures, at the close 
of his second lecture he has paid tribute to it. And for what, would 

Jo8 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
you think ?-11Honor and glory to spiritists" (look, we have come 
to honor and glory-why so suddenly ?) "Honor and glory to 
spiritists"-said he-"for the fact that they have emerged honest 
and bold champions of what, to them, seemed to be truth, unafraid 
of prejudices I "  It is obvious that this has been uttered out of 
pity and, so to speak, delicacy caused by over-satiation with his 
personal success. Only, I don't know if it was delicate. This is 
identical with the attestations which proprietors of boarding schools 
sometimes give about pupils to their parents : "Now, while this one, 
unlike his elder brother, cannot boast of his mental faculties and 
will achieve little, nevertheless he is openhearted and his behavior 
is dependable." Think, only, how the younger brother must feel 
when hearing such a commendation I Mr. Mendeleev has praised 
spiritists (and again with 11honor and glory") because in our ma­
terialistic age they are taking an interest in the soul : thus, if not 
exactly firm in sciences, says he, they are firm in faith-they believe 
in God. The esteemed professor must be a great quiz. Well, if 
this was meant in a spirit of naivete, then he must be the opposite : 
a man utterly devoid of a sense of humor. 
4 
ON BEHALF OF A DECEASED PERSON 
With a painful feeling have I read in The New Times an 
anecdote, reprinted by this paper from the magazine The Cause, 
which is injurious to the memory of my brother Mikhail Mik­
hailovich, the founder and editor of the magazines Time and The 
Epoch, who died twelve years ago. I am quoting the anecdote 
verbatim. 
"In the year 1862, when Schapov decided to have no further 
dealings with the contemporaneous Domestic Records and while 
other magazines had been temporarily suspended, he sent his 
Runners to Time. In the autumn he was badly pressed financially, 
but the late editor of the magazine Time, Mikhail Dostoievsky, had 
been greatly delaying the payment of money due to Schapov. Cold 
weather set in, and Schapov did not even have warm clothes. 
Finally, he lost all patience. He asked Dostoievsky to come and 
see him, and on that rx:casion the following scene took place. 'Please 
wait, Afanasij Prokopievich, dear ; in a week I will bring you all 
your money'-said Dostoievsky. 'But do apprehend, at length, that 
I need the money forthwhh ! '-'Why forthwith ?'-'Look, I have no 
warm clothes.'-'! have an idea : I happen to know a tailor ; you 
can buy from him everything you need on a credit basis ; later I 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
J09 
will pay him out of your money.' And Dostoievsky drove Schapov 
to the tailor, a Jew, who fitted out the historian with some sort 
of an overcoat, a suit, a vest and a pair of trousers, of very dubious 
quality, for which he billed him exorbitantly, about which sub­
sequently even the impractical Schapov used to complain." 
This is quoted from an obituary of Schapov in The Cause. 
I do not know who wrote it ; as yet, I have made no inquiries at 
the office of The Cause, and I have not read the obituary itself. 
As stated, I am reprinting the above from The New Times. 
My brother died long ago, so that it is an obscure matter ; 
it is difficult to defend him, and there are no witnesses to the 
described episode. Thus, the accusation is devoid of proof. But I 
positively assert that this anecdote is mere humbug, and if some 
of the circumstances in it are not fabrications-at least, all the 
facts are distorted so that truth has been greatly impaired. This 
I will prove-as far as possible. 
To begin with, I wish to state that I never participated in the 
financial afhirs of my brother, either pertaining to the magazine 
or any of his former commercial transactions. While collaborating 
in the editorship of my brother's Time, I had no connection with 
any monetary matters. Nevertheless, I am fully aware of the fact 
that, considering the times, that magazine was a brilliant success. 
I also know that not only were no debts to writers incurred, but, 
on the contrary, time and again contributors used to receive sub­
stantial advance payments. This I know positively, and many a 
time have I witnessed it. Nor was the journal in need of con­
tributors : they used to come of their own accord, and ever since 
the first year of its publication articles used to be s.,.nt in great 
quantities : one has only to glance througl. ޟhe issues ot T ime cover­
ing the whole two and one-half year period of its pu .lication to 
become convinced that the overwhelming majority of the contem­
poraneous men of letters had been an10ng its comtibutors. This 
could not have been the case had my brother failed to pay them, 
or, more correctly, had he in any way disgracefully treated them. 
However, even at present many persons can attest to the fact that 
substantial advances had been paid. All this did not transpire in 
some dark corner. Many of Lhe former, and quite active, con­
tributors are still living and, of course, they will not refuse to 
state how, in their opinion and to their recollection, my brother 
had been conducting the affairs of the ma11azine. Briefly, my :)rother 
could not have been "delaying payment _ J  Schapov," especially if 
he had no clothes. However, if Schapov had asked my brother to 
come and see him, it was not because "he had lost all patience," 
but precisely with the object of soliciting an advan.;e, just as many 

JIO 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY: 1876 
others had done. Many letters and communications from con­
tributors addressed to the editorial office were preserved after my 
late brother's death, and I have not lost hope of finding some of 
Schapov's notes. In this event their mutual relations would be 
brought to light. But, aside from this, the fact that at that time 
Schapov had probably asked for an advance payment, is no doubt 
more in conformity with the truth and to all recollections, to al 
witness accounts, available even now, as to the manner in which 
Time was managed and published-witness accounts of which, I 
repeat, a considerable number could be obtained even at present 
despite the lapse of fourteen years. Notwithstanding his "business­
like ways," my brother used to be weak to solicitations and did 
not know how to refuse : he had paid out advances sometimes even 
without assurance of receiving an article of a writer for his maga­
zine. Of this I was a witness, and I would be in a position to name 
certain persons. But he also had experiences of a different kind. 
One of the steady contributors, having received from my brother, 
after insistent solicitations, ·six hundred rubles in advance, the very 
next morning set out to the Western Provinces, where, at the time, 
people were needed for governmental positions. There he remained, 
and my brother received from him neither article nor money. But 
it is most remarkable that my brother never made any move to 
recover the money, notwithstanding the fact that he had a document 
in his hands. Only, much later, my brother's family, through a 
court action, recovered that sum from that man (a man of means) .  
The case was tried publicly, and most accurate information con­
cerning this matter may 'be had. I merely mean to point out how 
easily and readily did my brother advance money, and that a man 
of his type would not have been delaying payment to a needy 
writer. Schapov's necrologist, listening to Schapov's account of his 
conversation with my brother, simply could not have known what 
money was then in question : money due from my brother, or an 
advance payment. It is quite possible that my brother had sug­
gested to Schapov that clothes be ordered for him on a credit basis 
from a tailor whom he happened to know. This is easily under­
standable :  not wishing to refuse to come to Schapov's assistance, 
he could, for some reason, have preferred this form of assistance 
to a direct payment of money to Schapov . . . .  
Finally, in the quoted anecdote I do not recognize my brother's 
conversation : he never did converse in such a tone. This is an 
altogether different person, an altogether different man. My brother 
never curried anyone's fa͵or ; he could not bustle around a man 
with sugar-coated phrases besprinkled with subservient little idioms. 
And, of course, he would never have permitted anyone to say to 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
311 
him: "But do apprehend, at length, that I need the money forth­
with ! "  After fourteen years, all these phrases have somehow got 
recoined and refabricated by the author of the anecdote into "remi­
niscences." Let all those who remember my brother-and of these 
there are many-recall whether he ever conversed in such a style. 
My brother was a scrupulously decent man ; he behaved and acted 
as a gentleman, which he was indeed. He was a highly educated 
man, a gifted writer, a connoisseur of European literature, a poet 
and a noted translator of Schiller and Goethe. I cannot imagine 
how such a man could have been standing on his hind legs before 
Schapov, as the anecdote implies. 
I shall refer to one more fact concerning my brother which, 
I believe, is little known. In 1849, he was arrested in connection 
with the Petrashevsky case, and he was sent to the fortress where 
he was then kept two months. After the lapse of two months several 
persons (quite a few) were released as guiltless and in no way 
involved in the affair. And, in truth, my brother did take no part 
in either the secret organizational association of Petrashevsky or 
in Durov'., group. Nevertheless, he did attend Petrashevsky's eve­
ning parties and used to borrow books from the secret, common 
library which was kept in the house of Petrashevsky. He was then 
a Fourierist and passionately studied Fourier. Thus, during these 
two months in the fortress by no means could he have considered 
himself safe and expect, with any measure of assurance, that he 
would be released. The fact that he was a Fourierist and that he 
had used the library had been discovered, and, of course, he could 
have anticipated exile-if not to Siberia, then to some remote locality 
-on the grounds that he was a suspicious individual. And many 
among those released after two months would have .. <>en exiled­
this I positively assert-had they all not been freed h 1ccordance 
with the will of the late Emperor ; this I learned at that time from 
Prince Gagarin who conducted the investigation of th-- Petrashevsky 
case. At least, I then learned the fact which concerned the release 
of my brother-a fact which was announced to me, just to gladden 
me, by Prince Gagarin, who had expressly summoned me for this 
purpose from the casemate to the commandant's house, where the 
case was being prosecuted. But I was single, unmarried, and I had 
no children. My brotht:r, however, at the time of being taken to 
the fortress, had left in his apartment his wife and three children, 
of whom the eldest was then only seven years old ; and, on top 
of that, he had left them penniless. My 
· ··other loved his \:hildren 
tenderly and ardently, and I can imagine what he must have en­
dured during those two months I And yet, he made no depositions 
which could have compromised other people, in order to alleviate 

JU 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
his own lot ; this he could have done since, although he took no 
part in anything, he did know many things. 
Now I will ask y'ou : would many in his place have acted 
this way ? I am boldly propounding this question because I know 
what I am talking about. I know and I have seen what men prove 
to be in calamities such as these ; I am not judging abstractly. 
Let people evaluate this act of my brother as they please, never­
theless, even for his own salvation, he did refuse to do something 
contrary to his convictions. I may remark that this is not merely 
a groundless statement on my part : at present I am in a position 
to corroborate all these contentions by most accurate data. And 
yet, during those two months, every day and every hour, my brother 
was tormented with the thought that he had ruined his family, 
and he suffered when calling to his mind those three dear little 
creatures and pondering over their future. . . . And this is the man 
whom people now seek to represent in collusion with some Jew 
tailor in order, by defrauding Schapov, to divide the profits with 
the tailor and to pocket a few rubles. Poh I What fiddlesticks ! 
MA Y 
CHAPTER I 
1 
From a Private Letter 
PEOPLE ASK me if I intend to write about the Kairova 
case. I have already received several letters containing the same 
question. One of the letters is particularly characteristic and it 
was obviously not intended for print. But I take the liberty of 
quoting several lines from it, naturally preserving strict anonymity. 
I hope that my esteemed correspondent will not object to this. 
Besides, I am quoting him because I am convinced of his absolute 
sincerity, which I fully appreciate. 
". . . It is with the most profound disgust that we have read 
about the Kairova case. As a focus in an object glass, it reflects 
the picture of carnal instincts for which the leading dramatis per­
sona (Kairova) has ben moulded by means of cultural prepara­
tion : her mother, during her pregnancy, took to drinking ; her father 
was a drunkard ; her own brother lost his mind as a result of dip­
somania and shot himself ; a cousin of hers murdered his wife ; 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
JIJ 
her father's mother was insane ; it was from this cultural milieu 
that a despotic person with uncontrollable carnal propensities had 
sprung. Even the proࣻecutors stood perplexed before the question : 
wasn't she insane ? Some experts positively denied it, while others 
admitted the possibility of insanity-not in her personally, but in 
her actions. Yet, throughout this whole trial one perceived not 
a lunatic but a woman who had reached the utmost limits of nega­
tion of everything sacred : to her there exist neither family nor 
the rights of any other woman-not only to her own husband but 
to life itself ; all these are for her alone and for her carnal gratifica­
tion. 
"She was acquitted, perhaps, on the ground of insanity-for 
this God be praised ! At least her moral depravity was attributed 
not to the progress of the mind but to the category of psychic 
maladies. 'However, in the lower section of the hall, which was 
occupied cxcl24sively by ladies, applause burst out.' (Stock-Exchange 
News) Applause to what ? To the acquittal of an insane woman 
or to the triumph of an unbridled passionate nature, to cynicism 
incarnated m the person ul a woman ? 
"Ladies applaud ! -Wives and mothers applaud ! Why, they 
should be weeping and not applauding in the face of such a desecra­
tion of the feminine ideal . . .  " 
(N.B. Here I am omitting several too harsh lines.) 
"Is it possible that you will remain silent ?" 
2 
A NEw REGIONAL WoRD 
To stir up Kairova's story (which, I believe, i!. ࣼenerally 
known, is now too late. Besides, I attach no significance whatsoever 
to my words as to such characteristic phenomena of our current 
life and amidst such typical moods of our puhlic. But apropos of 
this "case," it would seem worth while to say a few, though be­
lated, words. Since nothing ceases, therefore, nothing is too late : 
on the contrary, everything continues, assuming new forms, even 
though it has outlived its initial stage. And what is most im­
portant : let my correspondent forgive me for having quoted his 
letter. Judging by the letters which I am personally receiving, one 
could draw a conclusion as to an extremely remarkable phenmnenon 
in our Russian life, at which recently I 
ave already indirectly 
hinted namely : everybody is restless ; everybody sems to be con­
cerned' about everything ; everybody seeks to record his opinion 
and to express himself. And there is only one point on which I 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
am not clear : are they more anxious to segregate themselves in their 
individual opinions than to reach a general harmonious accord ? 
This is a provincial letter, a private one, but, in passing, 
I may remark that our provincial districts are decidedly seeking 
to establish a peculiar life of their own, almost completely eman­
cipated from the capitals. This is not merely my personal observa­
tion : a long time before, this has been recorded in the press. There 
has been lying on my desk-already for two months-a solid literary 
collection The First Step, published in Kazan ; some mention should 
have been made of it long ago, precisely because it came forth 
with a determined intention to utter a new word-one not echoing 
the capital, but a regional and "pressingly-needed" word. Well, 
all these are but new voices in the old Russian chorus ; therefore, 
they are useful and, at any rate, interesting. This new orientation 
must have its underlying cause. True, of all these projected new 
words, essentially, not one has yet been uttered ; but, perhaps, 
something as yet unheard-of may actually come from our provincial 
and border regions. Judging abstractly and theoretically, thus it 
should come to pass : till now, ever since Peter, Russia has been 
led by Petersburg and Moscow. But at present, when the role 
of Petersburg and of "the window cut through to Europe" has 
come to an end-at present . . .  but that's the question : can it be 
that the role of Petersburg and Moscow has come to an end? To 
my way of thinking, if it has changed, it has changed very little. 
Besides, in days past, during the entire period of one hundred and 
fifty years, did Petersburg and Moscow actually lead Russia ? Was 
this an actual fact? And, ·on the contrary, was it not Russia, as 
a whole, that has been flowing to Petersburg and Moscow and 
crowding there-during that entire period-and, in fact, has she 
not been guiding herself, uninterruptedly restoring herself through 
the afflux of fresh forces from her provinces and border regions, 
in which-1 may mention in passing-the problems were identical 
with those of all Russians, be it in Moscow or in Petersburg, in 
Riga or in the Caucasus, or anywhere else. Now, speaking theo­
retically and in principle, what can be more opposed, one to the 
other, than Petersburg and Moscow?-ln fact, Petersburg was 
originally founded, as it were, in opposition to Moscow and her 
whole idea. And yet, these two centers of Russian life, substantially, 
had formed one centf·r-and this happened forthwith, from the 
very beginning, at the time of the reform itself, and quite regardles 
of certain characteristics which separated them. Things that took 
birth and developed in Petersburg immediately, and precisely as 
independently, used to take birth, consolidate themselves and de­
velop in Moscow, and vice versa-to the dot. The soul was one, and 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
not only in these two cities, but in any two cities and in the whole 
of Russia, so that everywhere throughout Russia, in every place, 
there was the entire Russia. Oh, of course, we understand that 
every corner of Russia may, and must, have its local peculiarities 
and its full right to develop them. But are these peculiarities such 
as to threaten disunity or even some misunderstanding? Speaking 
generally, our future is "deep water," but concerning this point it 
is clearer than anywhere. In any event, let us pray God that every­
thing capable of development, be developing-good things of course ; 
this is first ; and the second and principal point : let us pray God 
that we shall not lose our unity-under no circumstance, despite 
any blessings, promises and treasures : better, together than apart 
-and this, quand meme. The new word will be uttered-this cannot 
be doubted ; still I do not believe that anything altogether too new 
or too particular will be said by our provincial and border regions 
-at least not now, not forthwith, and nothing unheard-of or dif­
ficult to bear. The Great Russian only now begins to live ; he is 
just arising t o  utter his new word-and, perhaps, to the whole 
world. In my judgment, Moscow-this center of the Great Russians 
-is designed to live long, and let's pray God that it be so. Moscow, 
thus far, has not been the third Rome ; and the prophecy that 
"there shall be no fourth Rome" must be fulfilled. Nor can the 
world do without a Rome. However, Peters:.,urg, more than ever, 
is now in accord with Moscow. And I confess that by Moscow, in 
the present sense, I mean not so much the city itself as a certain 
allegory, so that no Kazan or Astrakhan should take any offense. 
But we are glad of their collections, and should even The Second 
Step make its appearance, so much the better, so much .be better. 
3 
THE CouRT AND MRs. KAIROVA 
However, we have drifted far afield from the Kairova case. I 
only meant to point out to my esteemed correspondent that even 
though I agree with his view on "the depravity of the imhࣽncts and 
the despotic unrestraint or carnal propensities," nevertheless I find 
in his opinion too much severity, t'ven aimless severity (since he 
himself virtually considers the criminal an insane person) . too 
much exaggeration-all the more so as he •rinds up with thङ. ad­
mission of environment which has exercised its influence to the 
point where the struggle against it had become almost impossible. 
As for myself I am frankly glad that Kairova has been released; 
I am merely ot glad that she was acquitted. I am glad that she 

JI6 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
was released, although I do not believe a twopence in her insanity, 
notwithstanding the opinions of some of the experts ; let this be .  
a personal view which I keep to myself. Besides, without insanity 
one somehow feels more pity for this ill-fated woman. In a state 
of lunacy "she knew not what she did . . ." whereas without in­
sanity-just try to shoulder so much torment I Murder-if it is not 
committed by a confirmed rascal-is a painful and complicated 
proposition. These several days of irresolution on the part of 
Kairova when the legitimate wife comes to the former's lover ͳ this 
seething insult swelling by degrees, this offense growing more in­
tense every hour (oh, Kairova is the transgressor-! have not yet 
gone mad-but she is all the more pitiful as in her decay she was 
unable even to understand that she was the offender, whereas she 
believed and felt the reverse) ; and, finally, this last hour before 
the "exploit," at night, on the steps of the staircase, with the razor 
she had bought on the eve, in her hand-nay, all this is rather pain­
ful especially to such a disorderly and oscillating soul as that of 
Kairova I This is an unbearable burden, and one hears the groans 
of a crushed woman. And, after that, ten months of trials, insane 
asylums, experts-she has been dragged and dragged, and yet, this 
poor, grave criminal woman, who is fully guilty, essentially repre­
sents something so trifling, so absurd, so devoid of understanding, 
so abortive, so vain and emotional, so incapable of self-control, so 
trivial, to the very last minute of the verdict-that somehow one 
felt relieved when they let her go. It is only to be regretted that 
this could not have been done without acquitting her because, say 
what you please, this created a scandal. Attorney-at-law Mr. Outin, 
it seems, could without fail have anticipated an acquittal and, for 
this reason, he should have confined himself to a mere expose of 
the facts, instead of embarking upon eulogies of the crime, since 
he almost did commend the crime .
. .
. That's exactly the point : 
we know no limit in whatever it be. In the West, Darwin's theory 
is an ingenious hypothesis, while in Russia it has long been an 
axiom. In the West, the idea that crime is often but. a disease, has 
a profound meaning because it is being dealt with with great dis­
crimination, whereas to us this idea is absolutely meaningless, since 
we do not discriminate at all-and everything, every villainy per­
petrated even by a confirmed rascal, is treated as a malady, and 
-alas l -is looked upor. as something liberal ! Of course, I am not 
speaking of serious people (but, in this sense, do we have many 
serious people ?)-! am speaking of the street, of the inept mediocrity 
on the one hand, and the knaves trafficking in liberalism on the 
other, and these don't care a rap about anything so long as some­
thing be or appear liberal. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
31 7 
As regards attorney-at-law Outin, he "commended the crime" 
because, probably, he imagined that, as an attorney-at-law, he 
could not have acted differently. Thus, unquestionably clever men 
are being led astray, and the results are by no means clever. I 
believe that had the jurors been in a different position, i.e., could 
they have rendered a different verdict, they would have grown 
indignant over such an exaggeration on Mr. Ouࣾ.in's part, and thus 
he could have harmed his client. But, as a matter of fact, literally 
they could not have rendered a different verdict. In the press, some 
people have commended them for this verdict, while others-it is 
rumored-have censured them. I believe that here there is no place 
for either praise or censure : they rendered this verdict because of 
the absolute impossibility of uttering anything different. Please judge 
for yourselves. Here is what we read in a newspaper account : 
"To the question propounded by the court, pursuant to the 
request of the prosecution : 'Did Kairova, having beforehand de­
liberated upon her action, inflict upon Alexandra Velikanova, with 
the aim of murrlrring her, sf'veral wounds with a razor on her neck, 
head and chest, but was prevented from the final consummation 
of her aim to kill Velikanova by Velikanova herself and by her 
husband ?'-the jurors replied in the negative." Let us stop here. This 
is the answer to the first question. Now, can one answer a question 
framed in such tern1s? Who, whose conscie:Jce, would venture to 
answer such a question in the affirmative ? (True, here a negative 
answer is equally impossible, but we are merely speaking of the 
affumative decision of the jurors.) Here, a question thus framed 
could have been answered in the affirmative only by one possessing 
Divine omniscience. And Kairova herself could not havP known at 
all : 'would she slash her to death or not ?' and yet the j · us were 
positively asked : 'Would she or would she not have slu·.ned her 
to death if she had not been stopped ?' But even when, a day before, 
she had bought the razor, though she knew for what purpose she 
had bought it, nevertheless she still could not ha"e known : 'whether 
she would embe.rk upon the slashing, not to speak of whether or 
not she would have slashed to death.' More probable still that she 
knew nothing about it even when she had been sitting Oh the steps 
of the staircase, already J,oldin,e; the razor in her hand, while her 
lover and her rival were lying on her bed in the rear, behind her. 
No one-no one in the world-could have known anything about 
it. Moreover-even though this may !'OUT'.- absurd-! asser! that 
even when she had started cutting, site stit. may not have known 
whether or not she wished to murder her victim, and whether she 
had been inflicting the wounds with this specific purpose. Please 
·note that by this I do not at all mean that she wa'> in a state of 

JI8 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
unconsciousness ; I even do not admit the slightest degree of in­
sanity. On the contrary, unquestionably, at the moment when she 
had been wielding the razor, she knew that she was slashing, but 
did she wish to murder her rival-was this her deliberate purpose? 
-this she could well not have known at all, and for God's sake, 
don't consider this an absurdity : she could have been striking, 
incensed with wrath and hatred, without in the least thinking about 
the consequences. Judging by the character of this disorderly and 
jaded woman, this must probably have been the case. And please 
note that upon the answer-let us say, an affirmative answer to the 
effect that she would have killed, and what is most important, that 
she has been slashing with the express intent to kill-the fate of 
the ill-starred woman was dependent. This would have meant ruin, 
forced labor. How could the jurors have cast such a burden upon 
their conscience ? And they did give a negative answer because 
they were unable to modify their verdict. You may say that 
Kairova's crime was not a fabricated or reflective or bookish one ; 
that it was simply a 'female affair,' a very uncomplicated and 
simple one, and that, moreover, her rival lay on her bed. But is 
it as simple as that ? And what if, after having slashed Velikanova's 
throat with the razor a single time, she would have shuddered, 
screamed and started running ? How do you know that this could 
not have happened ? And had it happened, most probably the case 
would never have been brought to trial. But now they have pinned 
you to the wall and they are quizzing you, insisting that you posi­
tively answer the question : 'would she or would she not have 
slashed to death ?'-and, of course, with a view to sentencing or 
not sentencing her in accordance with your verdict. The slightest 
variation in it is equivalent to long years of imprisonment or forced 
labor I And, again, what would have happened if after slashing 
Velikanova a single time and having then become frightened, she 
should have started slashing herself and possibly have killed herself 
on the spot ? Finally, what if she not only would not have been 
frightened, but, on the contrary, having sensed the first splashes 
of hot blood, she would have sprung and, after slashing Velikanova 
to death, would have abused the corpse, chopping off the head, 
cutting off the nose and lips, and only later, suddenly, when that 
head would have been wrested from her, she would have grasped 
what she had done ? I .am asking these questions because all these 
things could have taken place and could have emanated from one 
and the same woman, from one and the same soul, in one and the 
same mood and in one and- the same setting. I am stating so be­
cause I feel that I am not mistaken. 
Thus, in view of the above, how could such an amazing ques-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
319 
tion of the court have been answered? Indeed, this was not a 
domestic conversation at the tea table ; this was the determination 
of one's fate. By propounding such questions one runs the risk of 
not receiving any answer. 
But-it might be argued-in this case it would never be pos­
sible to prosecute or to try a case of murder (Jr attempted murder 
provided the crime had not been consummated, or the victim had 
recovered.-No, it would seem to me that there is no ground for 
such fears since there are all too obvious cases of murder where, 
though the crime had not been consummated (even by the indi­
vidual volition of the criminal), nevertheless it is too obvious that 
it had been undertaken with the intention to kill, and that it could 
have had no other aim. And what is most important-to this end, 
we have the jurors' conscience ; this is the principal and great thing. 
Therein is the beneficence of the reformed courts. If in a moment 
as grave as this a man will sense in him the resolution firmly to 
answer : "Yes, guilty"-in all probability he will not err as to the 
guilt of the criminal. At least, it is proverbially seldom that errors 
are committed. Only one thing is desirable : that the jurors' con­
science be genuinely enlightened, genuinely firm and made steady 
by the civic sense of duty, and that it should avoid predilections 
on either side-that is, in the way of cruelty or disastrous senti­
mentality. True, the latter desideratum-! mean, concerning the 
avoidance of sentimentality-is rather difficult of fulfillment. Sen­
timentality fits everybody so well ; it is such a facile thing ; it 
requires so little effort ; it is so profitable : nowadays, sentimentality 
with orientation conveys even to an ass the appearance of a re­
spectable man. . 
. 
. 
Much in the same way also, the second question I-
· pounded 
by the court to the jurors : "Did she inflict these wounds, and with 
the same intention, in a state of wrath and irritation ?"-the jurors, 
again, could not have answered otherwise than in the negative-i.e., 
"no, she did not inftict,"-since here, too, the formula "with the 
same intention" meant "with a premeditated aim of murdering 
Velikanova.'• And it was particularly difficult to frame an answer 
to the question because "wrath and irritation," in an overwhelming 
majority of cases, preclude "premeditated aim," so that this second 
question of the court contains, as it were, a certain absurdity. 
However, in the third question of the court : "Did Kairova 
act in a state of firmly ascertained insa1 · 'v?"-there is a rather 
obvious absurdity, since in the presence of the first two questions, 
these two and the third one positively exclude each other: in case 
of negative answers to the first two questions, or even if they had 
been left unanswered, it wouldn't have been clear what the ques-

J20 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
tion was, or even what the word "act" meant, i.e., concerning which 
particular act the question was propounded and how it is being 
defined. But the jurors were in no position to modify their answer, 
because they were in duty bound to answer yes or no, without any 
variations. 
Finally, the fourth question of the court : "If she had acted 
not under the influence of insanity, is she guilty of the crime de­
scribed in the first and second questions ?"-the jurors also left 
unanswered, of course, because it was a mere repetition of the first 
two questions. 
Thus, the court let Kairova off. It goes without saying that 
in the jurors' answer : "No, she did not inflict . . .  
," there was an 
absurdity since the fact itself of the infliction of wounds was re­
jected-a fact which was contested by no one and which was obvious 
to everybody. Yet it was difficult for the jurors to give a different 
answer in the face of the questions as they had been framed. But, 
at least, it cannot be said that the court, by releasing Kairova, or 
even, so to speak, by pardoning her, had acquitted the defendant, 
whereas Mr. Outin precisely justified the act of the criminal woman, 
considering it almost righteous and good. Of course, this is incredible, 
and yet this was actually the case. 
4 
MR. DEFENSE LAWYER AND KAIROVA 
I shall not analyze l\'lr. Outin's speech ; after all, it was not 
even a talented speech : there was an awful lot of lofty style, of 
various "sentiments" and of that pseudo-liberal humaneness to which 
nowadays almost everybody-at times even utter ninnies (so that it 
did not suit :Mr. Outin at all )-are resorting in "speeches" and in 
literature, in order to convey to their productions a respectable ap­
pearance and, in that way, have them "passed." In Russia, as time 
goes on, this pseudo-liberal humaneness reveals itself ever more 
strongly. And everybody is aware of the fact that all this is merely 
a handy tool. I am even under the impression that at present this 
is no longer popular-not as it used to be ten years ago-whereas, 
lo, there is still so much simple-mindedness in people, especially 
in our Petersburg I And simple-mindedness is precisely the thing 
for which the "schemer" is craving. For instance, be has no time 
to look into a "case," to give it thought. Besides, virtually all of 
them, as the years roll by ·and successes accumulate, in a measure 
have grown hard, and they have sufficiently served the cause of 
humaneness ; they have earned, so to speak, the badge of humane-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
321 
ness so that they really can't be bothered with the misfortunes of 
some sufering and rattlebrained little soul of a foolish, obtruding 
client ; while in the breasts of many of them, in lieu of a heart, 
there beats a morsel of something bureaucratic. And ihus, once and 
forever, they "rent"-for all future emergency occasions-a limited 
supply of conventional phrases, little words, petty sentiments, 
microscopic thoughts, gestures and conceptions-of course, in strict 
accord with the latest liberal vogue-and thereupon they sink for 
a long time, for all their lives, into repose and felicity. And almost 
always they get away with it. I repeat, this definition of the modern 
"schemer" I am in no way applying to Mr. Outin : he is a man 
of talent and, probably, his sentiments are genuine, natural. Even 
so, he did infuse into his speech much too many crackling phrases, 
and this leads one to suspect-not exactly a lack of taste, but, 
indeed, a certain neglectful, and even, perhaps, not quite humane 
attitude toward a case, in this specific instance. It should be ad­
mitted that our lawyers, the more talented they are, the busier 
they are, anࣛ, therefore, they have no time to spare. Had Mr. 
Outin had more leisure, he would, in my opinion, have adopted 
a more hearty attitude toward his case ; and had he adopted a more 
hearty attitude, he would have given it more thought and he would 
not have started singing dithyrambs in honor of an essentially 
vulgar intrigue ; he would have refrained frt:m infusing lofty style 
about "aroused lionesses from which their young ones are being 
taken away" ; he would not, with so naive a fury, have attacked 
Mrs. Velikanova, the victim of the crime : he would not have re­
proached her for the fact that she had not been slashed to death 
(indeed, virtually so ! ) , and, finally, he would not ha Je uttered 
that most unexpected calembour of his, paraphrasing Chr · · · 's words 
in the Gospel about the woman taken in adultery. How(ver, per­
haps, in reality all this transpired differently, and Mr. Outin ac­
tually delivered his speech with a quite serious air. I was not in 
the courtroom ; but, judging from accounts, it appears that there 
was a certain, so to speak, contemptuous looseness . . . .  In a word, 
something utterly devoid of reflection and, on top of that, there 
was a great deal that was comical. 
Almost from the vrry beginning of the speech, I was non­
plussed and was at a loss to understand if Mr. Outin was jesting 
when he expressed his thanks to the prosecutor for the fact that 
his accusatorial speech against Kairova, in ac 1ition to being "b1 iliiant 
and talented, eloquent and humane," was n.ure an apologetic than 
an inculpatory one. That the prosecutor's speech was eloquent and 
humane, there isn't a shadow of doubt-nor can it be denied that 
It was an extremely liberal speech. And, generally speaking, these 

322 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
gentlemen praise each other quite a lot, and the jurors are listen­
ing to this. But having eulogized the prosecutor district attorney 
for his defense speech, Mr. Outin refused to be original to the end, 
and to start accusing his client, Mrs. Kairova, instead of defending 
her. This is a pity because it would have been amusing and, maybe, 
it would have fitted the case. Nor do I think that the jurors would 
have been much surprised because it is difficult to astonish our 
jurors. This innocent remark of mine, of course, is nothing but a 
jest : Mr. Outin did not accuse ; he defended, and, if there were 
defects in his speech, these were precisely due to the fact that he 
conducted his defense too passionately, so to speak, he "over-salted" 
it, which, as I have mentioned before, I attribute to a preliminary 
neglectful attitude toward the "case." "When the time comes, 111 
brazen it out with exalted style . . . .  That's all the 'gallery' de­
serves . . . .  
" Thus, pr,obably, argue some of our busiest advocates. 
For instance, Mr. Outin labors in the attempt to portray his client 
in a most idealistic, romantic and fantastic guise, whereas this is 
not at all necessary : without adornment, Mrs. Kairova is even 
more intelligible. However, the defense lawyer aims, of course, at 
the bad taste of the jurors. Everything in her is ideal ; every step 
of hers is remarkable, magnanimous, graceful, while her love is 
something seething-it is a poem I Kairova-just to mention one 
example-never having been on the stage, suddenly signs a contract 
for a job as an actress and departs to a remote Russian province, 
Orenburg. Mr. Outin does not set forth or insist upon the con­
tention that in this act of Kairova "her usual gentleness and self­
sacrifice is revealed," but- "there is here"-Mr. Outin continues­
"some ideality, some sort of extravagance, and, mainly-self-renun­
ciation. She had to look for a position to help her mother ; and 
so, she accepts a job which is not at all suited to her ; she leaves 
Petersburg and goes alone to Orenburg"-and so on, and so forth. 
Now, what's there in this ?-It sems that here there is nothing 
unusual or amazing : are there only a few people journeying hither 
and thither ? Are there only a few girls-poor, beautiful, ill-fated, 
talented-who accept out-of-town positions far inferior to that which 
Mrs. Kairova got ? But in the interpretation of the defense lawyer, 
as you se, this act signifies a sacrifice of self-renunciation, while 
the theatrical contract almost reaches the level of an heroic deed. 
And thus it goes on, along the same lines. 
Very soon Kairova "becomes intimate with Velikanov, the 
manager of the troupe. His business is bad : she busies herself try­
ing to help him ; she solicits and obtains a subsidy ; she arranges 
for his release." Again, what's there in all this ?-Nothing extraor­
dinary ; besides, many women, especially those with a lively, mo-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
323 
bile temperament, such as Kairova's, would start "stirring" for the 
sake of a man dear to them, once they had contracted a little love 
affair with him. Then there ensued scenes with Velikanov's wife, 
and, having depicted one of them, Mr. Outin remarks that from 
that very moment his woman client began to regard Velikanov as 
"her own," her creation, her "darling child." In passing, it is re­
ported that this "darling child" is a tall, stocky fellow of grenadier 
stature, with curling hair on the nape of his neck. Mr. Outin asserts 
in his speech that Kairova looked upon Velikanov as upon "her 
child," her "creation" ; that she sought to "elevate him and en­
noble" him. Mr. Outin apparently rejects the thought that she could 
have attached herself to Velikanov without this specific aim ; mean­
while, this "darling child," this "creation," does not become a bit 
nobler, but, on the contrary, as time goes on, grows worse and 
worse. 
In brief, in Mr. Outin's speech there always sounds too high 
a pitch-altogether incompatible with these individuals and this 
particular TJ'Ii!'ot' ''"-'1Cene. And, at times, one is left nonplussed. Then 
begins the adventure. The "darling child" and Kairova go to Peters­
burg ; shortly thereafter he leaves for Moscow to look for a posi­
tion. Kairova writes him hearty, cordial letters ; she is full of 
passion, of sentimf'nts, while he is decidedly a poor epistolarian, 
and, from this point of view, he is awfull:,' "ignoble." "In these 
letters"-says Mr. Outin-"one begins to discern that tiny cloud 
which later spread all over the sky and produced the thunder­
storm." And Mr. Outin does not know how to express himself in 
a plainer style ; this style he uses everywhere. Finally, Velikanov 
returns, and again they live in Petersburg-maritalemen, of course 
-and then suddenly the principal episode of the rorr.. ·ce takes 
place : Velikanov's wife arrives, and Kairova is "aroused as a 
lioness from which her young one is being taken away." At this 
juncture there ensues, indeed, a lot of eloquence. Had there been 
no such eloquence, one naturally would feel sorrier for this poor, 
foolish woman, tossing between the husband and the wife, not know­
ing what to undertake. Velikanov turns out a "treacherous"-more 
correctly, a weak-man. Now he deceives his wife, prc.u:sting his 
love for her ; now he journeys from his summer cottage to Peters­
burg, to Kairova, assuring her that his wife will soon go abroad. 
Mr. Outin presents the amour of his woman client not only in 
attractive hues but even in a didactic an:: so to speak, sublimely 
moral aspect. You see, she has even made up her mind to make 
an offer to Velikanova to cede to the latter her own husband for 
good (so that, obviously, she must have been convinced that she 
· was fully entitled to him). "If you wish to take him-take him. 

324 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
If you wish to live with him-go ahead and live with him ; but 
either you depart from here, or I will. But do decide upon some­
thing." This she meant to say ; only I don't know if she did say 
it. However, no one has decided upon anything, while Kairova, 
instead of departing (if she was so anxious to bring the matter to 
a solution of some kind) ,  continued to toss and boil, raising no 
questions and awaiting no miraculous solutions. "To surrendtr him 
without a struggle-she wouldn't be a woman ! "-suddenly exclaims 
Mr. Outin. Well, if so, what was the use of talking so much about 
desires, questions and "offers" ?  "She was in the throes of passion" 
-l\lr. Outin explains to the court.-"Jealousy has absorbed, anni­
hilated, her mind and compelled her to play a perilous game." And, 
again : "Jealousy has pulverized her mind-no trace of it was left. 
How, then, could she have controlled herself ?''-Thu'> it lasted for 
ten days : "She languished ; she was in burning fits of fever ; she 
wouldn't eat or sleep ; she escaped now to Petersburg, now to 
Oranienbaum, and when thus she had been wearied down, the ill­
fated Monday of the 7th of July had come." On that ill-fated Mon­
day the jaded woman came to her summer cottage, and she was 
told that Velikanov's wife was there ; she approached the bedroom, 
and . . .  
"Gentlemen of the jury, is it possible for a woman to remain 
calm ?-For then she would have to be a stone-she would have to 
be devoid of a heart. The man passionately loved by her is in her 
bedroom, on her own bed, with another woman I This was beyond 
her strength. Her feelings were like a stormy torrent which tears 
down everything encountered in its path : she tossed in a rage. She 
could have annihilated everything around her.( I l l ) If we should 
ask that torrent what it is doing, why it is causing harm, could it 
give an answer ? No, it would remain silent." 
See I What a multitude of phrases I What an array of "feel­
ings" I "The main thing is that it be hot, and some taste or other 
will be derived from it I "  But let us examine these phrases : they 
are very bad-worse yet, they are the cornerstone in Mr. Outin's 
defense. 
I readily agree with you, Mr. Defense Lawyer, that Kairova 
could not have remained composed in the scene which you have 
depicted, but only because she is Kairova, that 1s, a weak, sym­
pathetic woman, if yo\J please, easily becoming attached (however, 
about these qualities of Kairova, up to the present, I have learned 
only from your speech), but. at the same time-a loose woman, 
isn't this so ? I do not mean· the lewd looseness of her nature : she 
is an unfortunate woman, and I shall not insult her-all the more 
so as I would not venture to pass judgment concerning this point. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
I mean merely looseness of her mind and heart which, to me, is 
incontestable. It was due to that looseness that at this fatal moment 
she could not have decided the matter otherwise than she had 
decided it, and not because "she would have to be a stone and 
that she would be devoid of a heart," as you have defined it, Mr. 
Defense Lawyer. Think only : by asserting this, you, as it were, 
do not admit at all the possibility of a different outcome-a nobler 
and more magnanimous one. And if there had appeared a woman 
capable, at that moment, of throwing the razor away and of adopt­
ing a different course, you would thus have called her a "stone" 
and a "heartless" woman. In this way, as stated above, you would 
have virtually commended the crime. Of course, on your part this 
was but an impulsion, and, no doubt, a noble one ; but it is to be 
regretted that such heedless words are uttered from our still younˆ 
public tribunes. Please excuse me, :\Jr. Defense Lawyer, for taking 
your words so seriously. And, further, please considrr : there are 
higher types of, and higher ideals in, woman. And there is no question 
that such idealω actually have existed, and do exist, in reality. And 
what if Kairova herself, at the very last moment, when holding 
the razor in her hand, suddenly, with a clear eye, would have 
looked at her fate (don't worry, this may very well happen, and 
precisely at the la!'-t moment) , and would have apperceived her 
misfortune-for to 10\·e such a man is a misfortune-her whole shame 
and dishonor, her degradation (since, indeed, in these women "taken 
in adultery" there is not only "magnanimity," not only "self-renun­
ciation," but also much deceit, much shame, vice and degradation) ; 
if she suddenly would have sensed in herself a new woman, resur­
rected to a new life, one realizing that it was she wl:ࣿ was the 
"offender," and, in addition, that by leavmg this man 
te would 
have, to a ˆreater extent and more surely, ennobled him- :md hav­
ing realized all this, she would have gotten up and departed in 
tears, saying to herself :  "How low have I fallen ! "-now, were all 
this to have happened to lVIrs. Kairova herseH, is it possible that 
you would feel no pity for her, that you would find no responsive 
feelinˆ in your unquestionably kind heart, but you would have 
called this woman suddenly resurrected in her spirit a;:d in her 
heart-a "stone," a "heartlrss creature" and would have publicly 
branded her with your contempt from our young tribune to which 
everybody is so eagerly and attentively listening ? 
However, I hear voices : "Don't dr'lland this from !!Very 
woman-it is inhuman ! "  I know it, and 
Ǆ dn not demand it. I 
shuddered when reading that portion where she had been eaves­
dropping beside the bed. I can understand all too well what she 
·must have endured during that last hour, with the razor in her 

J26 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
hand. And I was very, very glad when they let K.airova go. And 
I am whispering to myself : "For they bind heavy burdens and 
grievous to be borne I "  But He who uttered these words, when 
forgiving the guilty woman, had added, "Go and sin no more." 
Thus, he had still called the sin a sin ; He forgave but did not 
condone it, while Mr. Outin says that "she would not have been 
a woman, but a stone, a heartless creature," and he even fails to 
understand how she could have acted differently. I merely venture 
to remark humbly that evil nevertheless should be called evil, and 
that it should not be extolled almost as a heroic deed, notwith­
standing any humaneness. 
5 
M:a. DEFENSE LAWYEl AND VELIKANOVA 
And if one does proclaim humaneness, one should also show 
pity for Mrs. Velikanova. He who has too much compassion for 
the offender, probably has no pity for the offended. Meanwhile, 
Mr. Outin deprives Mrs. Velikanova even of her role of "the victim 
of the crime." It seems to me that I am positively right in my 
conclusion that in the course of his whole speech Mr. Outin, time 
and again, has been tempted to say something bad about Mrs. 
Velikanova. I confess, this is too naive a device and, it seems, it 
is a most maladroit one ; it is too primitive and too hasty. For, 
perhaps, Mr. Defense Lawyer, it might be argued that you are 
humane only as far as youc clients are concerned-as a matter of 
professional duty ; yet is this true ? For instance, you seized and 
dwelt upon "the wild, horrible" scene when Velikanova, in a state 
of irritation, said aloud that she would "kiss the hands and feet 
of him who would rid her of such a husband," and that Kairova, 
who had been there at the time, promptly answered to this : "I'll 
take him,"-to which Velikanova, in turn, retorted : "Go ahead and 
take him." Having recounted this fact, you even remarked that 
from that time on Kairova began to consider this gentleman her 
own-to conceive him as her own creation, as her "darling child." 
All this is very naive. And, to begin with, what is there "wild and 
horrible" in this ? The scene and the words are unquestionably 
bad ; but you admit evӚn the possibility of excusing the razor in 
Kairova's hands and of contending that Kairova could not have 
remained composed. Why, then, don't you excuse an impatient, 
though nonsensical, exclamation of the unfortunate wife ? You ad­
mit yourself that Velikanov is an impossible man, to the point that 
the fact itself of Kairova's love for him may constitute ample proof 
of her madnes. Why, then, do Velikanova's words about "hands 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
and feet" surprise you ? With an impossible man, relations some­
times assume an impossible character, and, at times, impossible 
phrases are being uttered. But this-only at times, and this is but 
a phrase. And I must say that had Mrs. Kairova taken it seriously 
-that the wife surrenders her husband to her, and that beginning 
with that moment she had acquired the right to consider him "her 
own"-she would have been a very good banterer. All this, I take 
it, must have happened somehow differently. And one shouldn't be 
considering so haughtily some phrase of some poor, afflicted person. 
In these families (not in them alone-you wouldn't believe in what 
families I ) not only such phrases are being uttered. Sometimes there 
is poverty, there are burdens of life, and under their influence 
family relations, at times, begin to be vulgar, so that certain words 
are being exchanged, which Lord Byron, for instance, would not 
have said to his Lady Byron, even at the time of their final rup­
ture, or-to cite another example-Arbenin to Nina in Lermontov's 
Masquerade. Of course, this kind of slovenliness cannot be excused, 
even though tnऀँ is merely !mtidiness, a bad, impatient tone, while 
the heart, perhaps, remains better than ours, so that if one should 
consider the matter in a simpler way, the result, I assure you, 
would be more merciful. And, if you please, Kairova's sally "I'll 
take him" -to my v. cty of thinking-is much more detestable : here 
there is a terrible in::.ult to the wife, torture, outspoken scoffing of 
a triumphant mistress, who had wrested a husband from his wife. 
Regretting, for instance, the fact that Velikanova did not appear 
in court, but sent a doctor's certificate about her illness, you said 
to the jurors that had she appeared, that certificate would have 
lost all significance because the jurors would have behelc ,._ healthy 
and pretty woman. But what is your concern in this 
· 
_ "lnection 
about her beauty, vigor and health ? Further, you state : "Gentle­
men of the jury ! What kind of a woman is it who C'lmes to her 
husband, who is cohabiting with another woman-who comes to 
the house of the mistress of her husband, knowing that Kairova 
is residing there ; who decides to spend the night there and who lies 
down on the bed, in the bedroom ? . . .  This is beyond my com­
prehension ! "  Let it be beyond your comprehension-even so, you 
are too aristocratic and t:njust. And do you know, Mr. Defense­
Lawyer, that maybe your client has gained much owing to the 
fact that Velikanova did not appear in court ? In the cour·;e of 
the trial many bad things have been sai. about Velikanova-for 
example, concerning her character. I do not know what her char­
acter is but, for some reason, I am pleased that she did not appear. 
. . . Perhaps she did not appear because of the pride of an in­
sulted woman ; maybe even out of pity for her husband. For DO 
one can tell anything about why she failed to appear. . . . At any 

J28 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
rate, it is clear that ंhe does not belong to the category of those 
persons who are fond of telling in public about their passions 
and depicting urbi et orbi their feminine sentiments. And who 
knows, had she appeared, it might have been an easy matter to 
explain why she had stopped in the apartment of her husband's 
mistress-a fact which puzzles you so much and which you impute 
to her as a special shame. It seems to me that she was staying not 
in Kairova's, but in the apartment of her repentant husband who 
had summoned her. And there is nothing to show that she had been 
expecting that Kairova would continue to pay the rent of the apart­
ment. Perhaps, immediately upon her arrival it was difficult to 
ascertain who was paying the rent and who was the host. The 
husband had asked her to come to him, so he must have taken 
the lease in his own name ; and it is very probable that he had so 
stated to her, since at that time he was deceiving both women. 
The same is applicable to your finesses concerning the bedroom 
and the bed. Here, some hairbreadth, some infinitessimal detail 
could forthwith have explained everything. 
Generally speaking, it seems to me that everybody has been 
unjust to this poor woman, and I am inclined to think that had 
Velikanova surprised Kairova in the bedroom with her husband 
and had she killed her with a razor, in her awful capacity of a 
legitimate wife, she would have been rewarded with nothing but 
filth and forced labor. Kow,. is it possible, Mr. Defense Lawyer, 
to say, as you have, that in this "case" Velikanova has sustained 
no damage, since several days after the event she had already ap­
peared upon the theatrical hoards and had subsequently played all 
winter, whereas Kairova had been confined for ten months in 
prison. We pity your poor client in no lesser measure than you, 
but you must admit that Velikanova, too, had endured a good deal. 
Not speaking of what she had endured as a wife and a self-respect­
ing woman (the latter I decidedly can't take away from her), please 
recall, Mr. Advocate-you, such a fine jurist and a man who re­
vealed himself as so humane in his speech-please recall how much 
she must have endured that dreadful night ! She endured several 
(much too many) minutes of deadly fear. Do you know what 
deadly fear is ?-He who has never faced death at close range can 
hardly comprehend it. She had been awakened at night by the 
razor of her murderess, who slashed her on her throat ; she saw 
bending over herself an infuriated face ; she defended herself while 
the other kept slashing her. Of course, during those first, unbearable 
minutes she was sure that she would be killed and that death wa.ः 
inevitable. Indeed, this is unbearable ;  this is a delirious nightmare 
experienced while awake, and thus a hundred times more torturous. 
This is almost akin to a death sentence to a man tied to a post 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
329 
to be shot and when a hood is already pulled over his head. 
For heaven's sake, Mr. Advocate, you consider this kind of torture 
a trifle I And is it possible that no one among the jurors even 
smiled when listening to this sort of thing ?-And what is there in 
the fact that two weeks later Velikanova was already able to act 
on the stage : does this lessen the horror of what she had endured 
two weeks before, or the guilt of your client ?--Recently, a step­
mother threw out from the fourth floor her six-year-old stepdaughter, 
but the child stood up on her feet wholly unharmed. Now, does 
this in any way change the cruelty of the crime, and is it possible 
to maintain that the child had endured no sufering? 
By the way, I imagine how advocates will be defending that 
stepmother : we shall hear about the helplessness of her situation, 
and about the fact that she is a recent bride of a widower whom 
she married under the compulsion of force, or by mistake. We shall 
have pictures drawn portraying the miserable existence of destitute 
people, their never-ending work. She, the naive, the innocent, when 
marrying, wa!\ ऄPliPving, as an inexperienced little girl (particularly 
under our system of upbringing ! ), that married life brings nothing 
but joys-and here, instead of them-washing of dirty linen, cook­
ing, bathing the child : "Gentlemen of the jury, it is only natural 
that she started hating that child (who knows, maybe there will 
appear a 'defense lawyer' who will begin to smear the child and 
will find in a six-year-old girl some bad and hideous qualities I )­
in a moment of despair, in a state of madness, almost without re­
membering herself, she seized that girl, and . . .  Gentlemen of the 
jury, who among you wouldn't have done the same thing? Who 
among you wouldn't have thrown the child out of the "'indow?" 
Of course, my words are but a caricature, but if o:· should 
undertake to compose this speech, something similar cvuld be 
really said, that is, something along the lines of a carirature. Pre­
cisely, it is abominable that it is akin to this caricature, wherea!' 
the act of this monster stepmother is, indeed, too queer, and per­
hap!' it warrants a subtle and profound analysis which might even 
tend to alleviate the lot of the delinquent woman. For this reason 
one is, at time!', vexed by the naivete and standardizath 
.. u of the 
methods which, owing to v:1rious causes. are beginning to be used 
by our most talented lawyer>. On the other hand, I reason this way : 
the tribunes of our new courts are unquestionably an ethical school 
"for our society and our people. Indeed, tr. 
people learn in this 
school truth and morality ; how, then, shall we remain indifferent 
to things which once in a while are uttered from those tribunes? 
However, sometimes, most innocent and jovial things are being 
uttered. Mr. Advocate, at the end of his speech, applied to his 
client the words from the Gospel : "She loved much, and much is 

JJO 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
forgiven her." Of course, this is very nice-all the more so as the 
advocate is fully aware of the fact that Christ forgave the woman 
11taken in adultery" not for this kind of love. I consider it a sacrilege 
to refer in this connection to this great and touching passage in the 
Gospel. At the same time I cannot resist the temptation to quote 
an old remark of mine, very trivial, yet rather characteristic. This 
remark, naturally, does not concern Mr. Outin in the least. Since 
childhood, more correctly, since my military college years, I have 
observed that among a great many raw youths-high school pupils 
(some), military college boys (more), and most of all among former 
cadets-there is implanted since their school days, for some reason 
or other, the belief that Christ forgave the sinning woman precisely 
for amours, or, to be more accurate, for the abuse of amours ; 
that He, so to speak, had pity for this attractive infirmity. This 
conviction was also widely prevalent in our day. I recall that now 
and then I would ask myself the question : why is it that these 
boys are so prone to interpret in this sense this passage in the 
Gospel ? Is it because their religious instruction is so neglected?­
Yet the other portions of the Gospel are understood by them more 
or less correctly. Finally, I came to the conclusion that principally 
here, so to speak, physiological causes are at work : in the face 
of the undeniable kindheartedness of the Russian boy, there must 
probably operate in him, in some manner or other, that peculiar 
overabundance of forces storʹd up in military college youths, which 
is set in action whenever he looks at any woman. 
However, I feel that is just humbug, which should not have 
been mentioned at all. I repeat, Mr. Outin knows perfectly well 
how this text is to be interpreted, and I do not doubt that at the 
end of his speech he simply cracked a joke-what for, I do not 
know. 
CHAPTER II 
1 
Something About a Certain Building. Respective Thoughts. 
Deceit and Falsehood on Every Side ! This Is What Is 
Sometimes Unbearable I 
JUST AT the time when the Kairova case was being tried, I 
chanced to visit the Foundling Institution, in which I had never 
been before but which, for a long time, I had been eager to visit. 
Thanks to a doctor, an acquaintance of mine, we inspected every-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
331 
thing. However, I shall leave for the future the details about my 
impressions : I have not even. jotted down anything, nor have I 
recorded years and figures. From the very first step it became clear 
that in the course of one visit it would be impossible to make a 
thorough inspection, and that it would be well worth while to go 
there several times more. And thus it was agrr.ed by my esteemed 
guide, the doctor, and myself. I even intend to take a trip to the 
villages, to the Finnish women in whose care infants have been 
placed. Consequently, I am leaving my descriptions for the future ; 
meanwhile, I am merely recording glimpses of reminiscences : 
Betzky's monument ; a range of gorgeous halls in which the infants 
are kept ; the remarkable cleanness (which hampers nothing) ; the 
kitchens ; the nursery where calves are "made ready" for vaccina­
tion ; the dining rooms ; groups of little children sitting at the 
table ; a group of five- and six-year-old girls playing "horses" ; a 
group of older girls, perhaps of the ages of sixteen and seventeen, 
former pupils of the Institution, training to become nurses and 
trying to impr'>ve their education-they do already possess some 
knowledge : they nave read Turgenev ; their views are clear, and 
they converse with you very nicely. But I was more pleased with 
the stewardesses : they have such a kindly air (certainly they were 
not feigning kindnesअ becau5>e of our visit) ; they have such good, 
composed and intelligent faces. Some of therr. apparently are edu­
cated. I was most interested in the fact that the mortality rate of 
infants brought up in that Institution (that is, in this building) 
is incomparably lower than that among outside infants, in families. 
But this is not so in the case of infants placed in villages. Finally, 
downstairs I saw that room into which mothers bring tht:r infants 
to leave them there forever . . . .  But all this is for the 
1ture. 
I recall only that I gazed at these nurslings with a peculiar 
and, probably, strange look. Much as it may sound absurd, they 
seemed to me awfully arrogant, so that-this I remember-innerly 
I smiled at my thought. In fact, he was born somewhere ; he was 
brought here-but look, how he cries, how he vociferates, announc­
ing that his wee chest is healthy and that he wants to live ; he 
bustles with his tiny red hands and legs, and screams as ii he had 
the right to disturb you ; ht looks for the breast as if he is entitled 
to it, as if he has the right to be cared for ; he demands care as 
if he has absolutely the same right as those other children, in the 
fold of families : as if everyone is going to leआ '"I and run unto him­
arro):!;ance, arrogance ! And truly, I am sayu1g this without any 
humor. One looks around and, willy-nilly, the thought comes : what, 
in fact, if he should offend somebody ? And what if someone should 
suddenly rebuke him : "Look here, youngster, are you a prince's 

332 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
son ? Are you ?" And aren't they being rebuked ?-This is not a 
fancy : they are even being thrown out of windows. Once upon a 
time-some ten years ago-a certain stepmother, I believe ( I  have 
forgotten already, but it would be better if it were a stepmother) ,  
having become tired of dragging along a child who was left to her 
by the former wife, and who kept crying and crying because of 
some pain, went to a boiling and bubbling samovar, set the hand 
of the disagreeable child under the faucet and turned the peg. At 
the time this was reported in all the newspapers. This was certainly 
a rebuke on the part of the dear woman ! I don't know what kind 
of a sentence she received. In fact, has she ever been tried ? Don't 
you think that "she deserves every consideration" ?-At times 
these kids keep crying and crying ; this affects one's nerves, and, 
besides-poverty, washing ; isn't this so ? On the other hand, some 
mothers, even when they "rebuke" a bawling little fellow, do it 
in a much more humane manner : a pretty, sympathetic girl will 
sneak into some comfortable, secluded corner-and, suddenly, she 
will faint there. She remembers nothing more, and all of a sudden 
a little child, an arrogant bawling little fellow, appears on the scene 
-whence, no one knows ; well, by accident, he falls into that water 
and chokes. To choke, nevertheless, is pleasanter than that faucet. 
Isn't that so ? Such a one shouldn't even be tried ! -Poor, deceived, 
sympathetic girl : she should be eating nothing but candies, and 
instead-a sudden fainting fit, and, besides, if one recalls Faust's 
Marguerite (among jurors sometimes there are very literary-minded 
men)-well, how can such a creature be tried ? Impossible ! -lnstead, 
a collection should be takeइ up ! 
So that one is really glad for all these babies, because they 
happen . to be housed in this building. And I have to confess that 
perfectly idle thoughts and funny questions then kept popping up 
in my mind. For instance, I asked myself, and I was terribly anxious 
to ascertain : just when do these children begin to learn that they 
are worse than the rest-i.e., that they are not such children as 
'·those others," but much inferior, and that they are living not 
because they have the right to live but solely, so to speak, as a 
matter of humaneness ? This cannot be ascertained without great 
experience, without much observation of the children, but never­
theless, a priori, I have decided and I am convinced that they 
learn about this "hum ''leness" at a very early age-so early that 
it might not be believed. In fact, were the child to develop only 
with the aid of scientific devices and scientific games, and were 
he to gain knowledge about the world through the "duck"-I think 
he would never reach such an incredible depth of understanding, 
through which he manages to master-in what manner no one knows 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
333 
-certain ideas seerr. ngly altogether inaccessible to him. A child of 
five or six, at times, knows such remarkable things, and so unex­
pectedly profound, about God, about good and evil, that one, willy­
nilly, has to conclude that nature has provided an infant with some 
different means of acquiring knowledge whk'lt, however, are not 
only unknown to us but which, on the basis of pedagogy, would be 
virtually repudiated. Oh, it stands to reason that a child does not 
know facts about God, and were a clever jurist to test a six-year-old 
child's conceptions of good and evil, he would merely burst into 
laughter. But you should be a bit more patient and more attentive 
(for it is worth it) ; forgive the child, for instance, for certain facts ; 
admit certain absurdities and try to get to the essence of the uPZder­
standing, and suddenly you will perceive that he knows about God 
perhaps, as much as you know, while, about good and evil, what 
is shameful and what is laudable-perhaps even much more than 
you, subtlest lawyer, but one who is sometimes swayed by haste. 
Among such terribly difficult ideas, so unexpectedly and in so 
mysterious d. way d.Cquireu by children, I class, as stated above, 
this initial but firm conception-one that remains unshaken through­
out his whole life-that "they are worse than the rest." And I am 
convinced that the child does not learn about this from governesses 
and wet nurses. Moreover, he lives in such a manner that he does 
not see "those other" children, and, therefore, he is not in a posi­
tion to make comparisons-and yet when you begin to look atten­
tively, you see that he already knows an awful lot, that he has 
already penetrated many a thing with most unnecessary haste. 
Of course, I am philosophizing-but just then I w:".s utterly 
unable to control the stream of my thoughL. ... For insta1· 
• ,  unex­
pectedly, the following aphorism occurred to me : If fate ,,as de­
prived these children of family and of the happiness of being 
brought up by their parents-since, indeed, not all parents throw 
their children out of windows or scald them with boiling water­
will it not reward them in some other manner ?-For example, with 
the fact that they will have the advantage of being brought up in 
this magnificent building ; that a name will be given to tई::m, and 
after that-education, the highest possible education ; that they 
will be seen through universities ; that thereupon-positions will 
be found for them, and they will be started on a given road ; 
·briefly-that as long as possible they will n0t be forsaken, an' l all 
this, so to speak, by the entire state adopt .• g them as common, 
state children. Verily, if one forgives, one should be grantil!g a 
full pardon. At that time another thought came to my mind : maybe, 
some people would say that this would tend to encoun ... ge debauch, 
and that people wo!Jld become incensed. But what a funny thought 

334 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
this is : imagine only that all these charming girls might purposely 
and intensively start conceiving children just as soon as they would 
learn that their babies eventually would be sent to universities . . . .  
"No,"-1 kept pondering-"they should be forgiven, and for­
given completely ; if it is forgiveness, let it be a full pardon I " 
It is true that a great many people would begin to envy-the most 
honest and industrious people would begin to envy : "How is it that 
I, for instance,"-someone might say to himself-"who have worked 
like an ox all my life ; I who have not committed a single dishonest 
act ; I who have loved my children ; I who have struggled all my 
life in order to give them an education, to make citizens of them, 
and who have failed ; I who have failed even to see them through 
all the grades of high school . . . now, I have started coughing­
! have contracted asthma ; maybe, I will die next week-and fare­
well, my dear children, the whole eight of you ! . . .  You all will 
stop learning and will set off wandering hither and thither through 
the streets or you will start off to cigarette factories-and this, at 
the best · . . . while those outcasts will be graduating from univer­
sities and will be obtaining positions. . . . And, on top of all this, 
it was I who annually, directly or indirectly, have contributed to 
their subsistence ! " 
This monologue will be uttered without fail. And, yet, what 
contradictions I In fact, why is everything so organized that noth­
ing can be brought into accord ? Think only : what-it would seem 
-<:an be more legitimate and m.,re just than this monologue ? And 
yet, at the same time, it i,.<; illegitimate and unjust in the highest 
degree. So that it is at once legitimate and illegitimate. What a 
mess ! 
Nor can I refrain from completing my account of certain 
things which had then occurred to rne. For example : if they should 
be forgiven, will they, in turn, forgive ? This is certainly a ques­
tion. There are beings of a sublime type ; these will forgive. Others, 
maybe, will avenge themselves on their own behalf-on whom, on 
what, they will never determine or comprehend ; even so, they will 
avenge themselves. However, as regards "vengeance upon society" 
on the part of the "outcasts," should such be taking place, I might 
state this : I am convinced that this vengeance would always be of 
a negative, rather than a positive, nature. Directly and deliberately, 
no one is going to avenge himself ; besides, he himself would not 
surmise that he even wished to avenge himself. On the contrary, 
only give them education {Lnd very many among those emerging 
from this "building" will come out with a thirst for respectability, 
parentage and family life. It will be their ideal to build their own 
nest, to initiate a name and to acquire prestige, to bring up children 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
335 
and love them, and in their upbringing-under no condition to be 
resorting to the "building" or to state subsidies. And, generally, 
their first resolution will be to forget the way to this building, 
its very name. Contrariwise, this new progenitor will feel happy 
if, at his own expense, he sees his children through a university. 
Why, this is a thirst for the established bourgt-ois order, which will 
persist throughout his whole life. What is it : »ervility or supreme 
independence ? In my view-the latter ; however, all his life his soul 
will nevertheless remain not quite independent, not quite a master's 
soul, and, for this reason, much will be quite unbecoming, although 
it will be absolutely honest. Complete spiritual independence is 
given through something different. . . .  But this comes later and 
this, too, is a long story. 
2 
A CERTAIN INAPPROPRIATE THOUGHT 
However, just now I mentioned the word "independence." 
But do we love independence ?-That's the question. And what is 
our independence ? Are there any two persons who would under­
stand it in one and Lhe same sense? Nor do I know if there is 
among us even a single idea which would Le seriously believed. 
Our rank and file-whether rich or poor-love to think about noth­
ing and, without giving much thought, simply to indulge in debauch 
as long as strength permits and one does not become bored with it. 
Men standing away from the routine "segregate" themselves into 
groups and pretend that they believe in some-thing, bu. > would 
seem that they are straining themselves, merely as a n .  उter of 
diversion. There is also a special kind of people who have adopted, 
and are exploring, the formula "the worऊe-the better " Finally, 
there are paradoxicalists-sometimes even very honest, but usually 
rather inept ; among these, especially the honest ones, countless 
suicides are being committed. And in truth, of late, suicides in 
Russia have become so frequent that nobody even speaks of them. 
The Russian soil seems to have lost the strength to hold people 
on it. And how many un'1uestionably honest men, particularly, 
honest women I Our women are beginning to arise and, maybe, 
they will manage to save much. I shall discuss this later on. \V ornen 
are our great hope ; perhaps, at the fatal mu ऋnt, they wil render 
a service to all Russia, but here is the trouble : we have many-a 
great many-honest ones ; that is, you see, good rather than honest 
ones, but none of them knows what honor is ; none of them believes 
in·any formula for honor, and they even deny the clearest formulas 

JJ6 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
of earlier times, and this is true almost everywhere and among every­
body. What's the wonder ? Whereas the so-called "living force"­
the live feeling of being-without which no society can exist and 
the state is liable tc totter-vanishes, God only knows whither. 
And why did I start pondering over suicides in that building, look­
ing at that nursery and those infants ? Indeed, a most inappropriate 
thought ! 
We have many inappropriate ideas, and that is what oppresses 
one. In Russia an idea crashes upon a man as an enormous stone 
and half crushes him. And so he shrivels under it, knowing not 
how to extricate himself. One fellow is willing to live, though in 
a half-crushed state ; but another one is unwilling and kills himself. 
. . .  Very typical is a letter of a girl who took her life into her 
own hands ; it has appeared in The New Times ; it is a long letter. 
She was twenty-five years old. Her name was Pisareva ; she was the 
daughter of formerly well-to-do landowners. But she came to Peters­
burg and paid her tribute to progress by becoming a midwife. She 
succeeded in passing the examinations and found a position as a 
zemstvo midwife. She herself admitted that she was not in need, 
and was able to earn a decent living ; but she grew tired, very tired 
-so tired that she decided to take a rest. "And where can one rest 
better than in a grave ?" As a matter of fact, she did become ex­
ceedingly tired. Even the letter of this unfortunate girl is permeated 
with fatigue. This is a snarling, impatient letter : "Do but leave 
me alone I I am tired, tired ! . . .  Don't forget to pull off me the 
new shirt and stockings : on my night table you will find an old 
shirt and a pair of old stockings. These should be put on me." 
She did not use the words "take off," but she wrote-"pull off" ; 
and so it is in everything : terrible impatience. All these harsh 
words are caused by impatience, and impatience-by fatigue. She 
even uses abusive language : "Did you really believe that I was 
going home? What the devil would I go there for ?" Or : "Now, 
Lipareva, forgive me, and let Petrova forgive me [it was in the 
latter's apartment that Pisareva took poison]-particularly Petrova. 
I am committing a swinish act, a filthy thing . . . .  " Apparently 
she was fond of her relatives, but she wrote : "Don't let Lizanka 
know, because she will inform sister, and she will come here and 
will start howling. I don't wish that people should be howling over 
me, but all relatives without exception howl over their relations." 
-"Howl" and not "weep"-all this is, apparently, the result of 
grumbling, impatient fatigue : "Let's hurry, let's get it over as 
quickly as possible-and let me rest ! "  Of grumbling and cynical 
incredulity there was much, painfully much, in her ; she did not 
believe even in Lipareva and Petrova, for whom she had so much 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
337 
affection. Here are the opening words of the letter : "Don't lose 
your head ! Don't start crying 'ah ! '  and 'oh ! .' Make an effort and 
read to the end, and then decide what's the best course. Don't 
frighten Petrova. Maybe nothing will come of it, anyway, except 
laughter. My passport is in the cover of the trunk." 
"Except laughter !" This thought that sht!, her wretched body, 
will be laughed at, and who would be the ones to laugh ?-Lipareva 
and Petrova ? This thought flashed through her mind in a moment 
such as this ! That's awful ! 
The financial instructions concerning the paltry sum which 
she had left preoccupied her to the point of queerness : "Such and 
such monies should not be taken by the relatives ; this sum should 
be given to Petrova ; twenty-five rubles which the Chechotkins 
loaned me for the journey should be returned to them." The im­
portance attributed to money was, perhaps, the last echo of the 
main prejudice of her whole life-"that these stones be made bread." 
In a word, there may be discerned the guiding conviction of her 
whole life, i.e., · if evcryo.•t! were provided for, everybody would 
be happy ; there would be no poor and no crimes. There are no 
crimes at all. Crime is a pathological condition resulting from 
poverty and unhappy environment," etc., etc. It is precisely of 
this that consists that petty, conventional and most typical finite 
catechism of convictions to which they dedicate themselves during 
their lives with such ardent faith (despite the fact that very soon 
they grow tired of both their convictions and of life), and for 
which they substitute everything : the elan of life, the ties with 
the soil, faith in truth-everything, everything. Obvious!:·. she had 
grown tired because of the tedium of life, b·,ring lost n • '  faith in 
truth, all faith in any kind of duty. In a word-a total 1L' ;3 of the 
sublime of existence. 
And thus, a good girl has died. I am not howling over you, 
poor girl, but at least let me pity you ; do permit me this. Let me 
hope for your soul a resurrection to a life in which you would no 
longer grow weary. You, nice, good, honest girls-(all these qualities 
you possess ! )-whither do you depart ? Why is that rlჂrk, dull 
grave so dear to you ? Look : a bright spring sun shines in the 
sky ; trees are budding, Lut you feel tired even without having 
lived ! How, then, can your mothers help but howl over you-those 
mothers who have brought you up and whn have so admireil you 
when you were still infants ! Here, I look ' _ all these "outcasts" : 
how they long to live, how boldly they declare their right to exist ! 
You, too, were an infant and you also desired to live ; and your 
mother remembers this ; and she compares your dr.Ⴣd face with 
that laughter, witჄ that joy which she beheld and which she re-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
members in your pretty little baby face-how can she refrain from 
"howling," how can she be reproached for doing so ? Just now 
they showed me a little girl, Dunia ; she was born with a crooked 
leg, that is, altogether without a leg ; instead of it, there hung 
something resembling a string. She is only eighteen months old ; 
she is healthy and remarkably good-looking. Everybody babies her ; 
she nods her little head to everyone, she smiles at everyone, and 
she greets everybody with a smack of her lips. As yet, she knows 
nothing about her leg ; she does not know that she is a deformed 
being and a cripple. But is this one, too, designed to contract 
hatred toward life ? "We will make her an artificial leg ; we will 
give her crutches ; we will teach her to walk, and she even will not 
notice it," said the doctor, fondling her. And let's pray God that she 
shouldn't notice it. Nay, to grow tired, to contract hatred toward 
life, which means hate for everybody . . . .  Nay, this pitiful, ugly, 
abortive generation of human beings, shriveling under stones that 
have fallen upon them, will pass out of existence ; a new great 
idea will begin to shine like that bright sun and will strengthen 
the vacillating mind, and all people will say : "Life is good, but 
we have been bad." It is no indictment when I say that we are 
bad. Here, I see that peasant woman, that vulgar wet-nurse, that 
"hired milk"-! see her suddenly kissing that baby, that "outcast" I 
I could not even imagine that, here, wet-nurses would be kissing 
these children. Why, to behold this-for this alone-it would have 
been worth the trouble to visit this place ! And she had kissed the 
child without seeing or suspecting that I was observing her. Is it 
for money that they grow fond of the babies? They are being 
hired to feed the children and nobody demands that they be kissing 
them. I was told that children placed in villages in the care of 
Finnish women are treated worse ; even so, some of these women 
grow so accustomed to their nurslings that they weep when sur­
rendering them to the Institution ; and, later, they come from afar 
expressly to look at them, and they bring from the villages little 
presents for them, and "howl over them." No, here it is not a 
question of money, "all relatives who are howling," as Pisareva 
expressed herself in her suicide note ; but these women, too, come 
to howl and to kiss and to bring along with them those humble 
peasant presents. These are not merely hired breasts, which have 
replaced mothers' brea\ts ; this is motherhood, that "ilan of life" 
of which Pisareva had grown so tired. After all, is it true that 
Russian soil is ceasing to hold Russian people on it ? Why, then, 
right alongside, does life spout as a hot spring? 
And, it stands to reason that here there are many infants 
born of those pretty mothers who are sitting there, on the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
339 
steps of the villas, and are grinding razors to use on their female 
rivals. I will state in conclusion : in a sense, these razors may be 
very nice things, but I did very much regret the fact that I chanced 
to come here, to this building, at the time when I had been follow­
ing the Kairova trial. I know nothing about Kairova's biography 
and, most decidedly, I am in no position, ar1d have no right, to 
connect her in any way with this building ; but her whole love 
affair, that eloquent description at the trial of her passions, some­
how lost all significance for me and killed in me all sympathy as 
soon as I left this building. This I candidly confess, and it is, 
perhaps, for this reason that I have written so insensibly about 
the Kairova "case." 
3 
UNQUESTIONABLE DEMOCRACY. WoMEN 
I feel th<>t T must anc;wer one more letter of a certain cor­
respondent. In the preceding, April, issue of the Diary, referring 
to political matters, among other things I interjected, let us say, 
a fantasy. 
"Russia will p!"ove stronger than any nation in Europe. This 
will come to pass because all great powers in Europe will be de­
stroyed, for the simple reason that they will be worn out and under­
mined by the unsatisfied democratic tendencies of an enormous 
portion of their lower-class subjects-proletarians and paupers. In 
Russia this cannot happen : our demos is content anrt, as time goes 
on, it will grow ever more content because everything tt••,ds toward 
this condition, as the result of a general mood-or, morL ·orrectly, 
bl. general consensus-and, therefore, there will remain on the Con­
tuient but one colossus-Russia." 
In answer to this opinion my correspondent cites a most curi­
ous and instructive fact, given as his reason for doubting that 11our 
demos is content" and satisfied. My esteemed correspondent will 
fully understand-if he should happen to read these lines-why just 
now I am unable to take up the fact referred to by hun and to 
answer it, although I am not losing hope for an opportunity to 
discuss specifically the fact in the nearest future. Now, however, 
I wish to say a word in explanation about the demos-all the more 
so as I have been informed about other oऌ :nions disagreeing with 
my conviction as to the contentment of our ·demos." I merely wish 
to call my opponents' attention to one line in the above passage 
quoted from the April issue : "because everything tends toward this 
tondition, as a result of the general mood-or, more correctly, by 

340 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
general consensus." In fact, if in my opponents themselves this 
"common mood or consensus" had been missing, they would have 
left my words without raising any objections. And, therefore, this 
mood unquestionably exists : it is unquestionably a democratic and 
disinterested mood. Moreover, it is a universal mood. True, in 
present-day democratic pronouncements there is much deceit, much 
journalistic roguery, much ecstasy-for instance, in exaggerated at­
tacks against the opponents of democracy, of whom-it may be 
stated in passing-nowadays there are very few in Russia. Never­
theless, the honesty, disinterestedness, straightforwardness and can­
dor of democracy of the overwhelming majority of Russian society 
can no longer be subjected to any doubt. In this respect, perhaps, 
we have revealed, or are beginning to reveal, a phenomenon which, 
thus far, has not been encountered in Europe where democracy, 
even to our day, has been commonly revealing itself from below ; 
there, it is still struggling while the (supposedly) vanquished upper 
strata are still offering fierce resistance. Our upper strata have not 
been vanquished ; they became democratic-or rather, popular-of 
their own accord. Who can deny this ?-And if this be so, our demos 
can expect a happy future. If at present there is still much that 
is unbecoming, it is permissible at least to entertain great hopes 
that the temporary misfortunes of the demos will unfailingly be 
mitigated under the unceasing and uninterrupted influence of such 
enormous principles (for otherwise they cannot be denoted) as the 
universal democratic mood and general consensus in this respect 
of all Russians, starting from the very top. It was in this sense 
that I said that our demos ·was satisfied, and that "as time goes 
on they will be satisfied more and more." Well, in this it is not 
difficult to beiteve. 
-· 
., 
And, in conclusion, I wish to add one more word about the 
Russian woman. I have already stated that in her resides our only 
great hope, one of the pledges of our revival. The regeneration of 
the Russian woman during the last twenty years has proved un­
mistakable. The rise in her quests has been lofty, candid and fear­
less. From the very start it has commanded respect or, at least, 
made people think of it, despite several parasitic anomalies which 
have revealed themselves in this movement. At present, however, 
it is already possible -10 render an accounting and to draw an 
undaunted conclusion. The Russian woman chastely ignored all ob­
stacles and all scoffs. She resolutely announced her desire to par­
ticipate in the common cause and proceeded in this direction, not 
only disinterestedly but even self-denyingly. During these last 
decades the Russian man has become terribly addicted to the de-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
341 
bauch of acquisition, cynicism and materialism. But the woman 
has remained much more faithful to the pure worship of the idea, 
to the duty of serving the idea. In her thirst for higher education 
she has revealed earnestness, patience, and has set an example of 
the greatest courage. The Writer's Diary has given me an oppor­
tunity of beholding the Russian woman at closer range. I have 
received several remarkable letters. They ask me, the incompetent, 
"what to do?" I value these questions, and I make up for any 
lack of competency in my answers with sincerity. I regret that I 
am unable, and have no right, to recount here many a thing. How­
ever, I also perceive certain faults in the contemporary woman, 
and her principal fault-her extraordinary dependency upon several 
essentially masculine ideas ; her inclination to accept them credu­
lously and to believe in them without scrutiny. I am by no means 
speaking of all women ; but this defect is also proof of excellent 
qualities of the hP.art : women value most a fresh feeling, a live 
word ; but what they treasure even more is sincerity, and once 
they believt: in smc.erity, .,ven if it be a false one, they are in­
spired by certain opinions-and this, at times, excessively. In the 
future, higher education could be of great help in this respect. By 
admitting, sincerely and fully, higher education for women, with all 
the rights granted Ly it, Russia once more would take a great and 
original stride in advance of all Europe in the great cause of the 
renaissance of mankind. Let us also pray that God will help the 
Russian woman to experience fewer disillusions, to grow less "tired," 
than, for example, Pisareva. Let her rather, like Schapov's wife, 
assuage her sorrow by self-sacrifice and love. But both women are 
painful and unforgettable phenomena ; on..! - by the so 
oorly-re­
warded, lofty feminine energy ; the other-as a poor, tireCJ, retiring, 
sUccumbed and vanquished woman. . . 
. 
JUNE 
CHAPTER I 
1 
The Death of George S" d 
THE PRECEDING, May, issue of the Diary was already 
ऍet in print and on the press when I read in the newspapers about 
the death of George Sand (she died on May 27/)une 8 ) .  And so, 

342 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
I had no time to say even a word about this death. And yet, only 
having read about it, I understood what that name has meant in 
my life ; how many delights, how much veneration this poetess has 
evoked in me at the time, and how many joys, how much happiness 
she has given me ! I am putting down every one of these words 
unhesitatingly because this was literally the case. She was un­
reservedly one of our (i.e., our) contemporaries-an idealist of the 
Thirties and Forties. Hers is one of those names of our mighty, 
self-confident, and at the same time sick, century, replete with 
most obscure ideals and unattainable desires-those names which, 
having arisen over there, in "the land of sacred miracles," have 
enticed from us, out of our Russia, which is eternally in a state 
of creation, all too many thoughts, all too much love, holy and 
noble enthusiasm, elan vital, all too many dear convictions. But 
we shouldn't be complaining about this : by exalting such names 
and worshipping them, Russians have been, and are, serving their 
direct designation. Let these words of mine cause no surprise­
especially as applied to George Sand, about whom even in our days 
there may be arguments, and whom half of the people in Russia, 
if not nine-tenths of them, have forgotten. But, nevertheless, in 
the past she did accomplish in Russia her task, and who if not we 
-her contemporaries of the whole world-should gather at her grave 
to say a word in her memo.ry ? We, Russians, have two mother­
lands-Russia and Europe-even in cases when we call ourselves 
Slavophiles : let them not be angry at me for this remark. This 
should not be disputed. The greatest among their great future 
designations, already apperceived by the Russians, is the designa­
tion common to the whole human race-service rendered to mankind 
as a whole, not only to Russia, not only to Slavs in general, bufto hu: 
mankind in toto. Think of it, and you will agree that the Slavophiles 
held an identical view, and this is why they urged us to be more 
rigid, firmer and more responsible Russians, specifically realizing 
the fact that the conception of universality of man is the principal 
personal characteristic and designation of a Russian. However, all 
this requires much explanation : the fact itself that service to the 
universal idea of humankind and the light-minded roving from 
place to place, all over Europe, voluntarily and grumblingly for­
saking the fatherland-are two things diametrically opposed one 
to the other, whereas they are still being confused. On the con­
trary, much indeed, very much of what we have taken from Europe 
and transplanted to Russia, we did not copy like slaves from their 
masters, as the Potugins invariably insist, but we have inoculated 
it into our organism, into our flesh and blood ; some things we 
have lived through and even independently suffered through, ex-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
343 
actly as they, over there, in the West, to whom all these were 
germane. Europeans emphatically refuse to believe it : they do not 
know us, and for the time being this is all the better ; all the 
more imperceptibly and quietly will the necessary process take 
place-a process which will subsequently astound the whole world. 
This very process may be best and most coHcretely traced to a 
certain extent in our attitude toward the literary productions of 
other nations. Their poets are to us-at least, to the majority of 
our educated men-as germane as to them over there-in the West. 
I assert and repeat that every European poet, thinker, humanitarian 
is, among all countries of the world, with the exception of his native 
land, always most intimately understood and accepted in Russia. 
Shakespeare, Byron, Walter Scott, Dickens are more akin and 
intelligible to Russians than, for instance, to Germans-of course, 
notwithstanding the fact that compared with Germany, with her 
abundance of books, in Russia not even one-tenth of the number 
of copies of these authors, in translation, are being sold. Even 
though the FrऎPrh Conventifln of 1 793, when sending the certificate 
of citizenship Au poetc allemand Schiller, l'ami de l'humanite,1 did 
perpetrate a beautiful, stately and prophetic act, nevertheless it 
did not suspect that at the other end of Europe, in barbarous 
Russia, that same Srhiller was much more national and much more 
akin to the barbanan Russians than to Frat.ce-not only in those 
days but even later, throughout our whole century-where Schiller, 
the French citizen and l'ami de l'humanite, was known, and then 
but slightly, only by professors of literature, and not even by all 
of them. Yet, in Russia, together with Jukovsky, he soaked into 
the Russian soul, left an impress upon it, and almost '"<'.rked an 
epoch in the history of our development. This measure L Russian 
attitude toward world literature is an almost unprecedented phe­
nomenon among other nations and all thrc>ugh world Hstory ; and 
if it really be our national, Russian, peculiarity, what chauvinism 
would have the right to object to this phenomenon and to refuse 
to discern in it a very promising and most prophetic fact in any 
conjectures as to our future. Oh, of course, many will smile maybe 
when reading what significance I attribute to George ::.and ; but 
those who might be amuωPd would not be right : much time has 
now elapsed since all these past events, and George Sand herself 
has died-an old woman of seventy-having, perhaps, long ago out-
. lived her fame. But everything in the bei .. of this poetesए that 
constituted a "new word," all that was "universally human" in her 
-all this, at the time, was promptly reflected in our Russia as a 
strong and profound impression ; it did not escape us, thereby 
ITo the German poet Schiller, the friend of humanity. 

344 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
proving the fact that every poet-innovator in Europe, everyone who 
appeared there with a novel thought and with fresh vigor, cannot 
help but become forthwith a Russian poet, cannot avoid Russian 
thought, and almost becomes a Russian force. However, I do not 
intend to write a critical article on George Sand : I meant merely 
to say a few farewell words to the deceased at her fresh grave. 
2 
A FEw WoRDs ABouT GEORGE SAND 
George Sand's debut in literature coincided with the years 
of my early youth, and now I am very glad this happened so long 
ago because at present-over thirty years since-! can speak almost 
quite candidly. It should be observed that in those days this-that 
is, fiction-was the only thing permitted, whereas the rest, virtually 
every thought, especially coming from France, was strictly for­
bidden. Oh, it stands to reason that very often we did not know 
how to behold things, and, indeed, where could we have learned 
this ?-Even Metternich did not know how to behold things, not 
to speak of our imitators. Therefore, "dreadful things" used to 
slip through (for example, all Bielinsky slipped through) .  To 
avoid any possible mistake, especially at the very end of that 
period, almost everything began to be interdicted, so that, as is 
known, it came to the point that one had to read between the 
lines. Nevertheless, novels were permitted-in the beginning, in the 
middle and at the very end of that period. And right here, specifically 
in the case of George Sand, the guardians committed a grave error. 
Do you remember the verses : 
·. 
Tomes by Thiers and by Rabeau­
Those he memorizes, 
And, like raging Mirabeau, 
Liberty he eulogizes. 
These are exceptionally talented verses ; they will survive for­
ever, because they are historical verses ; but they are all the more 
precious as they were written by Denys Davydov, a poet, a lit­
terateur and a most honest Russian. And even if Denys Davydov, 
in those days, considered-whom of all men ?-Thiers (of course, 
for his History of the Revolution) dangerous and placed him in 
that verse side by side with some fellow Rabeau (there must have 
ben, then, such a man, too ; however, I know nothing about him) 
-officially, then, too little could have been permitted. And what 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
345 
was the result ?-That which in those days burst into Russia in 
the form of novels not only did in like manner serve the cause, 
but even so, perhaps, proved the most "dangerous" form, as things 
stood in those days, since there would have been but few lovers 
of Rabeau, whereas there came forth thousands of lovers of George 
Sand. At this point it may be remarked that notwithstanding all 
the Magnitzkys and Liprandis, ever since the Eighteenth Century, 
every intellectual movement in Europe invariably became promptly 
known in Russia, and it used to be forthwith transmitted from the 
upper strata of our intellectuals to the rank and file of the think­
ing, or even slightly interested, people. Exactly the same took place 
in the case of the European movement of the Thirties. Very soon, 
at the very beginning of the Thirties, we took cognizance of that 
immense European literary movement. The names of many newly 
appearing orators, historians, tribunes and professors were already 
known. Though partly and only superficially, it became known 
whither this movement tf'nded. And most passionately it has re­
vealed itse:r iu a:-t, in fi .don, and principally-in George Sand. 
True, Senkovsky and Bulgarin had warned the public against George 
Sand even before Russian translations of her novels had appeared. 
They scared the Russian ladies particularly by the fact that she 
wore trousers ; it was sought to frighten them with the idea of 
depravity and to ridicule her. Senkovsky himself, who had been 
planning to translate George Sand in his magazine Library for 
Reading, began to call her in print :\Irs. Egor1 Sand, and it seems 
that he was earnestly pleased with his wit. Later, in 1848, Bulgarin, 
in his Northern Bee, printed accounts to the effect that day after 
day she had been attending drinking bouts i;1 compan)' , ... th Pierre 
Leroux somewhere near the town gates, and that she to. ·, part in 
"Athenian parties" at the Ministry of the Interior, sponsored by 
the robber and Minister of the Interior Ledru-Rollin. This I have 
read myself, and I remember it well. But tbl'!n, in 1848, George 
Sand was known by virtually all the reading public in Russia, 
and no one gave credence to Bulgarin. For the first time, she 
appeared in Russian translation about the middle of thf' Thirties. 
It is a pity that I do not remember and do not know when and 
which of her works were translated in Russia. But all the more 
startling must have been the impression. I imagine that much as 
I, then a young lad, everybody in those days was impresseri with 
the chaste, sublime purity of the characte. and of the ideals, and 
the modest charm of the austere, reserved tone of the narrative­
and such a woman wears trousers and engages in debauch ! I must 
have been about sixteen years old when I first read her novel 
lEgor is a Russian masculine name. (B. B.) . 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
Uskok, one of the most delightful of her early works. I recall that 
I was in a state of fever all night. 
I believe I do not err when I say that George Sand-judging 
at least by my personal recollections-promptly assumed in Russia 
virtually the first place among a whole Pleiad of new writers who 
at that period suddenly rose to fame and won renown all over 
Europe. Even Dickens, who appeared in Russia about the same 
time as she, was, perhaps, less popular with our public. I am not 
even speaking of Balzac who came earlier than she and who, how­
ever, in the Thirties, produced such works as Eugenie Grandet and 
Pȝre Goriot (to whom Bielinsky was so unjust, having completely 
missed his significance in French literature) . However, I am telling 
all this not from the standpoint of any critical evaluation, but I 
am simply recalling the tastes of the rank and file of the Russian 
readers and of the impression directly produced on them. The 
main thing is that the reader managed to extract even from novels 
everything against which he was being guarded. At least, in the 
middle of the Forties, the rank and file Russian reader knew, even 
though partly, that George Sand was one of the most brilliant, 
stern and just representatives of that category of the contem­
poraneous Western new men who, when they appeared, started 
with a direct negation of those "positive" acquisitions which brought 
to a close the activities of the bloody French-more correctly, Euro­
pean-revolution of the end of the past century. After it had come 
to an end, after Napoleon I, it was sought to express the new 
longings and the new ideals. Progressive minds had only too well 
grasped the fact that despotism had merely assumed a new guise ; 
that nothing but "ote-toi de lcl, que je m'y mette" had taken place ; 
that the new world conquerors (the bourgeois) proved, perhaps, 
even worse than the former despots (the nobility) ; that "Liberte, 
Egalite, Fraternite" is but a high-sounding phrase, and nothing but 
a phrase. Moreover, there came into being certain doctrines, in 
which such lofty phrases had been converted into impossible phrases. 
The conquerors would be scoffingly uttering-rather recalling-these 
three sacramental words. Even science, in the persons of its brilliant 
representatives (economists) , then came, as it were, with its new 
word, to the assistance of mockery and in condemnation of the 
Utopian meaning of tfese three words for which so much blood 
had been shed. Thus, s1de by side with the triumphant conquerors, 
despondent and sad faces, frightening the triumphers, began to 
appear. It was precisely at .that epoch that suddenly a new word 
had been uttered and new hopes had arisen : men came who boldly 
proclaimed that the cause had been interrupted in vain and un­
justly ; that nothing had been accomplished by the political shift 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
347 
of the conquerors ; that the cause had still to be pursued ; that the 
renovation of humanity must be radical and social. Why, of course, 
along with these mottoes, a great many of the ugliest and most 
noxious inferences were drawn ; yet, the cardinal point was that 
once more hope began to gleam and faith bejitan to be regenerated. 
The history of this movement is known ; it ऐtill continues, and it 
would seem that it does not intend to come to a stop at all. I do 
not wish to speak here either for or against the movement : I 
merely meant to indicate George Sand's true place in it. Her place 
must be sought at its very inception. At that time people in Europe 
were saying that she preached a new status for woman and she 
prophesied "the rights of free wifehood" (this is Senkovsky's ex­
pression about her). But this was not quite so, since her sermons 
were by no means confined to woman alone ; nor did she ever 
invent the term "free wifehood." George Sand belonged to the 
whole movement, and not to the mere sermons on women's rights. 
True, being a woman herself, she naturally preferred to portray 
heroines rऑ1her than hero.:s, and, of course, women of the whole 
world should now don mourning garb in her memory, because one 
of their loftiest and most beautiful representatives has passed away, 
and, in addition, an almost unprecedented woman by reason of 
the power of her mind and talent-a name which has become his­
torical and which is destined not to be forgotten by, or to dis­
appear from, European humanity. 
As for her heroines, I reiterate, I was astonished from the 
very start-ever since the age of sixteen-by the strangeness of the 
contradiction between what people had been writing and saying 
about her, and what in reality I personally pP.rceived. In '1ct, many 
-at least, several-of her heroines represented a type of su.· .. elevated 
moral purity that it could not have been conceived without an 
immense ethical quest in the soul of th-.:- poetess her ,elf ; without 
the confession of most complete duty ; without the comprehension 
and admission of most sublime beauty and mercy, patience and 
justice. True, side by side with mercy, patience and the acknowl­
edgment of the obligations of duty, there was the extraordinary 
pride of the quest and of the protest ; yet it was precisely that 
pride which was so preciOus because it sprang from the most sub­
lime truth, without which mankind could never have retained its 
place on so lofty a moral height. This prifle is not rancour quand 
meme, based upon the idea that I am bett, than you, and you are 
worse than me ; nay, this is merely a feeling of the most chaste 
impossibility of compromise with untruth and vice, although-! re-
. peat-this feeling precludes neither all-forgiveness nor mercy. More­
over, commensur.ately with this pride, an enormous duty was to 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
be assumed. These heroines of hers thirsted for sacrifices and 
heroic deeds. I was then particularly fond of several girl characters 
in her early works, which were portrayed, for example, in the 
then so-called Venetian novels ( to which Uskok and Aldini be­
longed also)-types which culminated in the romance Jeanne, an 
altogether ingenious work setting forth a serene and, perhaps, an 
incontestable solution of the historical question of Joan of Arc. 
In a contemporary peasant girl she suddenly resurrects before 
the reader the image of the historical Joan of Arc, and graphically 
justifies the actual possibility of that majestic and miraculous event. 
This is a typically Georgesandesque task, since no one but she 
among contemporary poets bore in the soul so pure an ideal of 
an innocent girl-pure and so potent by reason of its innocence. 
These girl characters, to which I am referring, reiterate in several 
successive works one and the same problem, one and the same 
theme ( not only girls, however : this theme was later reiterated 
in the magnificent novel La Marquise, also one of her early works) .  
A straightforward, honest, but inexperienced, character of a young 
feminine creature is pictured, one possessing that proud chastity 
which is neither afraid of, nor can even be contaminated by, con­
tact with vice-even if that creature should accidentally find herself 
in the very den of vice. The want of magnanimous sacrifice (sup­
posedly specifically expected from her) startles the youthful girl's 
heart, and unhesitatingly, without sparing herself, disinterestedly, 
self-sacrificingly and fearlessly, she suddenly takes the most peril­
ous and fatal step. That which she sees and encounters does not 
in the least confuse or intimidate her ; on the contrary, it forth­
with increases courage in the youthful heart which, at this juࣜcture, 
for the first time, realizes the full measure of its strenࣝ-the 
strength of innocence, honesty and purity ; it doubles the energy; 
reveals new paths and new horizons to a mind which up to that 
time had not known itself, a vigorous and fresh mind not yet 
soiled with the compromise of life. Added to this is the most per­
fect and delightful form of the poem. George Sand was particu­
larly fond of winding up her poems happily-with the triumph of 
innocence, sincerity and youthful, fearless naivete. Could these 
images disturb society or arouse doubts and fear ?-On the contrary, 
the severest fathers and mothers began to permit in their families 
the reading of George S!nd, and they merely kept wondering : "Why 
did everybody say such things about her ?" But right here, at this 
point, warning voices began . to sound : "Precisely in this pride of 
woman's quest ; in this irreconcilability of chastity with vice ; in 
this rejection of any compromises with evil ; in this fearlessness 
with which innocence rises to the struggle and looks brightly into 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
349 
the eyes of the offense-therein precisely is the venom, the future 
poison of woman's protest, of woman's emancipation." 
Well, perhaps, they were correct about that poison ; poison 
did actually come into being. But what was it seeking to destroy, 
what was to perish and what was to survive as a result of its 
action ?-Such were the questions which immediately arose and 
which for a long time remained unsolved. 
In our day all these questions have long been settled (so it 
seems) .  In passing, it may be remarked that by the middle of 
the Forties George Sand's fame, and the faith in the power of her 
genius, stood so high that we all, her contemporaries, had been 
expecting from her something incomparably greater in the future 
-some new, yet unheard-of word, even something finitively decisive. 
These hopes did not materialize : it developed that by that time 
-by the end of the Forties-she had already said everything which 
she was destined and predestined to express, and now over her 
fresh grave the last word about her can be said. 
Georgt ദ'nrl was not a thinker but she was one of the most 
clairvoyant foreseers (if this flourishing term be permitted) of 
a happy future awaiting mankind, in the realization of whose ideals 
she had confidently and magnanimously believed all her life-this 
because she herself was able to conceive this ideal in her soul. 
The preservation of this faith to the end is usually the lot of 
all lofty souls, of all genuine friends of humanity. George Sand 
died a dcistc, with u staunch belief in God and in her immortal 
life. But this does not fully cover the ground : in addition, she was, 
perhaps, the most Christian among all persons of her age-French 
writers-even though she did not confess Christ (as d(\P•' a Roman 
CathoUc) .  Of course, being a Frenchwoman, in accord w, 
the con­
ceptions of her compatriots, George Sand could not cunsciously 
adhere to the idea "that in the whole universe thert• is no name 
other than His through which one may be saved"-the fundamental 
idea of Orthodoxy-yet, despite this seeming and formal contradic­
tion, George Sࣞnd,' I  repeat, was perhaps, without knowing it her­
self, one of the staunchest confessors of Christ. She based her 
socialism, her convictions, her hopes and her ideals upon the moral 
feeling of man, upon the c;piritual thirst of maukind and its long­
ing for perfection and purity, and not upon "ant-necessity." All 
her life she believed absolutely in human personality (to the point 
of its immortality) , elevating and broade1 · :-g this concept m each 
one of her works ; and thereby she concurred in thought and feel­
ing with one of the basic ideas of Christianity, i.e., the recognition 
of human personality and its freedom (consequently, also of its 
responsibility). Hence, the recognition of duty and the austere moral 

350 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r876 
quests, and the complete acknowledgment of man's responsibility. 
And, perhaps, in the France of her time there was no thinker and 
no writer who understood as clearly as she that "man shall not live 
by bread alone." As to the pride of her quests and of her protest 
-I repeat-this pride never precluded mercy, forgiveness of offense, 
or even boundless patience based upon compassion for the offender 
himself. On the contrary, time and again, in her works George 
Sand has been captivated by the beauty of these truths and on 
more than one occasion she has portrayed characters of the most 
sincere forgiveness and love. It is said that she died an excellent 
mother, working to the last days of her life as a friend of neigh­
boring peasants, boundlessly beloved by her friends. It seems that 
she was partly inclined to value the aristocracy of her extraction 
(on her mother's side she descended from the Royal House of 
Saxony) , but, of course, it may be positively asserted that if she 
did value aristocracy in people, she must have based it on the 
perfection of the human soul : she could not help but love the great, 
she could not reconcile herself with the base or cede an idea-and 
in this particular sense she may have been excessively haughty. 
True, she did not like to depict in her novels humble people, right­
eous but yielding, religious fanatics and downtrodden folks, such as 
appear in almost every novel of the great Christian-Dickens. She, 
on the contrary, haughtily placed her heroines on a pedestal as true 
queens. This she loved to do, and this peculiarity should be noted, 
since it is rather typical. 
CHAPTER II 
1 
My Paradox 
AGAIN THERE is a skirmish with Europe (oh, not yet war : 
they say that we, i.e., Russia, are still far from war). Again the 
interminable Eastern question has appeared on the scene. Again 
Russians are distrustfully looked upon in Europe . . . .  However, 
why should we be chasing after Europe's confidence? Has Europe 
ever looked upon Russians confidently ? Can she ever look upon 
us with trust and without animosity ? Oh, of course, some day 
this attitude will change ; some day Europe will better discern and 
comprehend us. And some day it will be well worth while to discuss 
this topic, but in the meantime, meanwhile, an extraneous, as it 
were, a side question, has occurred to me, and recently I have been 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
351 
much preoccupied with its solution. No one needs to agree with 
me, but it seems to me that I am at least partly right. 
I have said that Russians are disliked in Europe. That they 
are disliked, I believe, this no one will dispute. Inter alia we, all 
Russians without exception, are being accused in Europe of being 
awful liberals-moreover, revolutionists-and of the fact that we 
are always inclined to join the destructive, rather than the con­
servative, elements of Europe. For this reason many Europeans 
look upon us scoffingly and with haughty hatred : they cannot under­
stand why we should be negators in an alien cause. They positively 
deny our right to European negation, on the ground that they 
do not regard us as belonging to "civilization." They rather perceive 
in us barbarians knocking about Europe and rejoicing over the 
thought that something somewhere may be destroyed-destroyed 
for the sake of destruction, from the pleasure of beholding how 
all this will fall apart, much as Huns ready to invade ancient 
Rome and to tear down a sanctity, even without any conception 
of what a pre:ions thing thPy were destroying. That the majority of 
Russians have presented themselves as liberals in Europe is true ; 
and this is even strange. Has anyone raised the question in his 
mind : why is this so ? Why, practically nine-tenths of the Russians, 
all through this century, culturalizing themselves in Europe, in­
variably have joim·d that stratum of the Europeans which was 
liberal, the "left camp," i.e., that camp which itself denied its own 
culture, its own civilization-of course, more or less (that which 
Thiers denies in civilization and that which the Paris Commune 
of 187 1 denied in it-are altogether different things) .  In the same 
way "more or less" and equally in many different W½:" ?  are Rus­
sians_;also liberal in Europe ; nevertheless, 1 repeat, the. 'lre more 
inclޠned than Europeans to side, directly and from the "cry start, 
with the extreme left than to hover first in the lower grades of 
liberalism. Briefly, among Russians one fmds a lesser number of 
Thierses than of Communards. And please note that these are by 
no means some empty-stomached fellows, but even people having 
a solid and civilized appearance-sometimes almost in the category 
of 1\linisters. This precisely is why Europeans distrust u., . "Grattez 
le Russe et vous verrez le Tartare" [Scratch a Russian and you will 
find a Tartar 1 -they say. All this may be correct, but this is what 
has occurred to me : do the majority of Russians, in their inter­
course with Europe, side with the extrer " left because thൊ:r are 
Tartars and are fond of destruction, as uarbarians, or are they 
prompted by o1 her motives ?-That's the question ! And you must 
admit that it is a rather curious one. Our skirmishes with Europe 
· are coming to an end : the role of a window cut through to Europe 

352 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
is finished and there ensues-or, at least, must ensue-something 
different, and this is being realized by everyone who is in the 
least capable of reasoning. In a word, we begin to feel more and 
more that we must get ready for something, for some new, and 
now much more original, encounter with Europe than heretofore. 
Whether this will take place in connection with the Eastern ques­
tion or in some other connection-who can tell ? . . . And for this 
reason all such queries, analyses, conjectures and even paradoxes 
are curious because of the fact alone that they may be suggestive 
of some answer. And is it not a curious phenomenon that it is 
precisely those Russians who most consider themselves Europeans, 
who are known in Russia as "Westerners," who are vainglorious 
and pride themselves on this nickname, and who, even up to this 
day, taunt the other half of the Russians by labelling them 
"kvasniks"1 and "zipynniks,"2-is it not curious, I ask, that they 
are precisely the ones who join the negators of civilization, its 
destroyers ; who side with the "extreme left" ; and that in Russia 
this causes no surprise whatsoever and this was never even ques­
tioned ?-Certainly, this is curious ! 
I will say at once : I have framed an answer, but I shall not 
try to prove my idea ; instead, I will merely expound it slightly, 
seeking only to develop the fact. Besides, it cannot be proved, be­
cause not everything is capable of proof. 
This is what I think : is . there not revealed in this fact (that 
is, in the siding with the extreme left-essentially, with the negators 
of Europe-even by our most ardent Westerners) -is there not re­
vealed in this the protesting·Russian soul, to which European 'cul­
ture in many of its manifestations has always, ever since ;peter, 
been hateful and has always been felt alien to the Russian&soul ? 
-I do think so. Of course, it stands to reason that this protest has 
nearly always been an unconscious one ; but the thing that is 
precious is the fact that the Russian instinct has not died : the 
Russian soul, though unconsciously, has been protesting precisely 
in the name of its Russism, in the name of its Russian own, and 
against its suppression. Of course, even if this be so, it might be 
said that there is no ground for rejoicing : "Nevertheless he is a 
negator-a Hun, a barbarian, a Tartar ; he denied not in the name 
of something sublime, but because he was so mean that even, in 
the course of two centuries, he has been unable to discern European 
loftiness.'' 
This, unquestionably, is what will be said. I agree that this 
1 K vas drinkers. 
2"Zipun" is a peasant coat ; hence, "zipynnik"--one who wears a peasant 
coat. (B. B.) 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
353 
is a question, but precisely this question I will not answer ; with­
out producing any proof I merely declare that I emphatically deny 
the Tartar hypothesis. Of course, who, among all Russians-espe­
cially now when everything is over (because, in fact, that period 
has come to an end)-who would challenge the Peter cause, the 
window cut through ; who would rebel against it and who would 
be dreaming about the Moscow Czardom ? Nor is this the point 
at all, and never was this the subject of my discussion, but the 
fact that no matter how good and useful all this has been-I mean, 
everything which we beheld through the window-nevertheless in 
that there was so much that was bad and detrimental that the 
Russian instinct never ceased to revolt against it, never ceased to 
protest (although that instinct got so absolutely lost that, in an 
overwhelming majority of cases, it did not comprehend what it 
was actually doing) .  It protested not because of its Tartarism but, 
in fact, perhaps, because it conserved in itself something loftier 
and better than that which it perceived through the window. . . . 
(Well, of course, it protested not against everything ; we did re­
ceive a gre<u man} beautlࣟul things, and we do not wish to be 
ungrateful ; but, at least, against half of the things it had the 
right to protest.) 
I repeat that all this took place in an extremely original 
manner : precisely, our most ardent Westernf'rs, the champions of 
the reform, became at the same time the negators of Europe and 
joined the ranks of the extreme left. . . . And thus it happened 
that eo ipso they revealed themselves as most fervent Russians­
as champions of Russia and of the Russian spirit. Of course, if, at 
the time, this had been explained to them, they would either have 
burst'into laughter or have been terrified. '!'here is no C• 1bt that 
they .tflemselves did not conceive any loftiness in this prt ., est. On 
the contrary, all along, throughout the two centuries, they have 
been denying their loftiness, and not only their loftine::.s but their 
very self-respect (there existed even such amate:.trs I ) , and to such 
an extent that they have set Europe to wondering. And yet, it 
develops that, precisely, they have proved to be genuine Russians. 
Now, it is this conjecture of mine that I call a paradox. 
Bielinsky, for example, who by nature was a passionately 
enthusiastic man, was ont: of the first Russians straightway to 
join European socialists, who denied the whole order of European 
· civilization. At the same time, in our Russinn literature it W'"! · he 
who fought the Slavophiles to the very e. J, apparently for an 
altogether opposite cause. How surprised he would ha\'e been had 
those very Slavophiles then told him that precisely he was the 
utmost champion of the Russian truth, of the Russian individuality, 

354 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
of the Russian principle-specifically of everything which he denied 
in Russia for the sake of Europe, which he considered mere fiction ; 
moreover, if it were proved to him that, in a certain sense and 
essentially, precisely he was a conservative for the very reason 
that in Europe he was a socialist and a revolutionary. And, in 
truth, this was nearly so. 
Here, there occurred one great mistake on the part of both 
camps ; above all, in the fact that Westerners of those days had 
confused Russia with Europe, taking the former seriously for the 
latter, and, by denying Europe and her order of things, they be­
lieved the same negation was applicable to Russia, whereas Russia 
was by no means Europe, but merely wore the European uniform ; 
however, under that uniform there was an altogether different 
being. And Slavophiles did urge people to grasp the fact that she 
was not Europe, but a different being. They directly pointed out 
that Westerners equalize things dissimilar and incommensurate, and 
that the inference which holds good in the case of Europe is in 
no way applicable to Russia, partly because all that which they 
seek in Europe has already been long existent in Russia-at least 
in embryo form and as a potentiality-and that it even constitutes 
her substance, only not in a revolutionary guise but exactly in that 
form which the ideas of universal revival of mankind must assume 
-in the form of God's truth, of Christ's truth, which some day 
must be realized on earth and which is fully preserved in Ortho­
doxy. Slavophiles insisted that Russia be studied first and that 
only after that should inferences be drawn. However, at the time, 
it was impossible to study, apd, besides, in truth, no means the࣠for 
were available. Furthermore, who, in those days, could have known 
anything about Russia ?-Of course, Slavophiles knew a h1f1dred 
times more than Westerners (and that's the minimum) ; yehven 
they were virtually groping, reasoning metaphysically and ab࣡ 
stractly, rather than relying upon their extraordinary instinct. It 
is only during the last twenty years that it has become possible 
to gain any knowledge. But even in our day, who knows anything 
about Russia ?-At best, a foundation for the acquisition of knowl­
edge has been laid ; but just as soon as an important question 
arises, forthwith there ensues general discordance among us. For 
example, at present the Eastern question is again being raised : 
well, please confess, are there many of us-and who are they ?­
who are capable of reaching a common decision relative to it ? 
And yet, for us, this is such a momentous, fatal and national ques­
tion I But why should one speak of the Eastern question ? Why 
should one be taking up such big questions ? Look at hundreds and 
thousands of our domestic, everyday, current problems : what a 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
355 
universal unsteadiness ; what a lack of crystallized opm10n ; what 
want of habit of work ! Here Russia is being deforested ; land­
owners and peasants alike are destroying the forests as if in a 
state of rage. It may be positively asserted that our forests are 
being sold at one-tenth of their real value, since how long can 
supply continue ? Our children will not yet hऒve grown up when 
there will be only one-tenth of the present timber in the market. What 
will happen then ?-Perhaps, ruin ! And yet, go and talk to any 
one about the curtailment of the right to deforestation ! And what 
will you hear ?-On the one hand, state and national necessity ; 
and on the other, violation of the right of private property-two 
opposite ideas. Forthwith two camps will be formed, and it is 
uncertain with which of them the liberal, all-decisive opinion will 
side. In truth, will there be two camps ?-And the matter will be 
delayed for a long time. Who is it who dropped the witty remark­
liberal in our present-day fashion-to the effect that there's no 
evH without good, and should all Russian forests be destroyed, 
there would bओ the advantage that corporal punishment with rods 
would be definitely obliterated since the peasant volost courts would 
have nothing with which to flog the delinquent peasants and peasant 
women. Of course, this is a consolation but, somehow, one doesn't 
believe it : even tho•1gh no forests be left, there will always be 
enough left for flog:;ing-rods would be iiT'ported from abroad. 
Now Jews are becoming landowners-and everywhere people write 
and shout that Jews are draining the soil of Russia ; that a Jew, 
after having invested a certain amount of capital in the purchase 
of ah estate, in order to retrieve the capital plus interest, promptly 
exhausts all productive forces of the purchased land. औ'f't try to 
say sbmething against this and people will munediately s· -t vocif­
eratlfig about the violation of the principle of economic ireedom 
and civil equality. But what kind of equality is this if we have 
here an obvious and Talmudic status in statu-above all and in 
the first place ; if this is not only the exhaust:on of the soil but 
also the future exhaustion of our peasant, who, having been liberated 
from the landowners, unquestionably and very soon will be driven 
-as a commune in corpore-into a much worse slavery of far more 
pernicious landowners-thn!ie game new landowners who have al­
ready drained the sap out of the peasant in Western Russia ; those 
who are now purchaging not only estates and peasants, but who 
have begun to buy liberal opinion, and whP '"ontinue to do so quite 
successfully. Why do we have all these th •• 1gs? Why such inde­
cision and disagreement with regard to every decision, even to any 
decision ? Please note, isn't this true? To my way of thinking, this 
is by no means due to our ineptitude or our incapacity for work, 

356 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
but to our continued ignorance of Russia-her essence and indi­
viduality, her significance and spirit-despite the fact that, com­
pared with the times of Bielinsky and the Slavophiles, we have 
already had twenty years of schooling. Even more : during these 
twenty years of schooling the study of Russia, as a matter of fact, 
has advanced very considerably, while the Russian instinct, so it 
would seem, has diminished compared with the past. What is the 
reason ? But if Slavophiles in those days used to be saved by 
their Russian instinct, this instinct was also present in Bielinsky 
to such a degree that Slavophiles could have regarded him as their 
best friend. I repeat : here there was a great misunderstanding on 
the part of both camps. Not in vain did Apollon Grigoriev, who 
also sometimes spoke rather sensitive things, say that "were Bielin­
sky to have lived longer, he would no doubt have joined the Slavo­
philes." In this phrase there is thought. 
2 
DEDUCTION FROM THE PARADOX 
Thus, I may be told : "You assert that every Russian, turning 
into a European Communard, thereby forthwith becomes a Russian 
conservative."-No, it would be too risky to draw such a conclu­
sion. I merely meant to observe that in this idea, even if it be 
taken literally, there is a little drop of truth. Here, there is much 
that is unconscious, while on my own part there may be too strong 
a faith in the unceasing ·Russian instinct anq in the viabllity 
of the Russian spirit. But let it be so : let us admit that I myself 
know that this is a paradox. However, this is what I shoulft like 
to set forth in conclusion : this too is a fact and a deduction 'there­
from. I have said before that the Russians in Europe distinguis!\ 
themselves by liberalism, and that at least nine-te_nths of them side 
with the left-and the extreme left-the moment they come in 
contact with Europe. I am not insisting on ·the figure : perhaps they 
do not constitute nine-tenths ; but I do merely insist upon the 
fact that the liberal Russians are incomparably more numerous 
than the non-liberals. Yet there are non-liberal Russians. Yes, in­
deed, there are-there always have been-Russians (the names of 
many of them are known) who not only did not deny European 
civilization but who, on the contrary, have worshipped it so ardently 
that they lost the last traces of their Russian instinct, their Rus­
sian individuality, their language ; who forsook their native land 
and, if they did not become foreign subjects, at least they did stay 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
357 
in Europe, generation after generation. But it is a fact that, as 
opposed to liberal Russians with their atheism and communism, 
the former forthwith joined the right-and the extreme right-and 
became awful European conservatives. 
Many of them changed their religion and embraced Roman 
Catholicism. Aren't these conservatives? Isn't this the extreme 
right ?-But, if you will permit : conservatives in Europe and, on 
the contrary, utter negators of Russia. They became destroyers of 
Russia, enemies of Russia I This is what it meant to be ground 
from a Russian into a genuine European, to become at last a true 
son of civilization.-This is a remarkable fact derived from two 
hundred years of experience. The deduction is that a Russian who 
has become a genuine European, cannot help but become at the 
same time a natural enemy of Russia. Was this what those who 
had cut through the window desired ? Did they have this in mind ? 
And so there developed two types of civilized Russians : the Euro­
pean Bielinsky who, in those days, denied Europe, proved a Rus­
sian in the strictest sense, notwithstanding all errors which he had 
uttered abo.!t i\.:.::;:.;ia ; wh_reas the full-blooded, ancient Prince 
Gagarin, having become a European, deemed it necessary not only 
to embrace Catholicism but straightway to leap over to the Jesuits. 
Which, then, of the two-tell me now-is a greater friend of Russia? 
Which of the two rf':nained more Russian ? And does not this second 
example (of the extreme right) corroborate my initial paradox to 
the effect that, to begin with, Russian European socialists and 
Communards are not Europeans, and that, in the long run, when 
the_. misunderstanding shall have been dispelled and they know 
Russia, they will again become full-blooded and good Russians ? 
And, कecondly, that under no circumstance r:l'l a Rusख: .... ; be con­
verted' into a real European as long as he remains the .!ast bit 
:ausfian. And, if this be so, it means that Russia is something 
independent and peculiar, not resembling Europe at . .11, but im­
portant by itself. Besides, Europe herself is, perhaps, not in the 
least unjust when condemning Russians and scoffing at their revolu­
tionary theories : it means that we are revolutionists not merely for 
the sake of destruction where we did not build-like the Huns and the 
Tartars-but for the sake of somf'thing different, something which, 
in truth, we do not kno\\ ourselves (and those who know, keep 
silent) .  In a word, we are revolutionists, so to speak, because of 
some personal necessity-if you please, by reason of conserva: ism . 
. . . But all this is transitory, as I have alr, · :iy stated, extraneous, 
a side issue-at present we have on the stage the interminably 
insoluble Easteru question. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
3 
THE EASTERN QuESTION 
The Eastern question l Who among us, this month, did not 
live through rather extraordinary sensations ? And what a lot of 
newspaper comment ! What confusion in our mir:ds l What cynicism 
in some opinions ! What honest trepidation in some hearts l What 
hubbub in some veins ! But one thing is certain : there is nothing 
to fear, although there were many who kept frightening us. Besides, 
it is difficult to imagine that there could be many cowards in 
Russia. She has deliberate cowards-this is true-but, it seems, they 
made a mistake in the matter of time and, even for them, it is 
now too late to lose courage, and, besides, it does not pay : they 
would score no success. But deliberate cowards, too, know their 
limit and they would demand no dishonor from Russia, such as 
when, in ancient times, Czar Ivan Vasilievich, the Terrible, sent 
envoys to King Stephen Bathory and demanded from them that, 
if necessary, they endure even flogging if only peace be granted. 
Briefly public opinion, so it would seem, has manifested itself, 
and will submit to no flogging for the sake of any kind of peace. 
Prince Milan of Serbia and Prince Nicholas of Montenegro, 
trusting in God and in their right, have taken the field against the 
Sultan, and, perhaps, when these lines are being read, we shall 
have news about some important encounter, or even a decisive 
battle. Now things will develop quickly. Irresolution and procras­
tination on the part of the .great powers ; the diplomatic twi࣢ of 
England which refused to ratify the findings of the Berlin "Con­
ferences ; thereupon, the sudden revolution which broke out in 
Constantinople and the outburst of Mohammedan fanaticisࣣ and 
finally, the dreadful slaughter by the bashibazouks and the'"C;ir­
cassians of sixty thousand peaceful Bulgarians-old men, women 
and children-all these simultaneously caused the conflagration and 
led to war. The Slavs have many hopes. If all their forces are 
added up, they possess up to one hundred and fifty thousand fight­
ing men, of whom more than three-quarters belong to the fairly 
well-trained regular army. But the main thing is the spirit : they 
are taking the field, believing in their right and in victory, whereas 
among the Turks, despite their fanaticism, there is a serious lack 
of discipline, as well ai confusion. It would not be surprising if 
even after the first encounters confusion turned into panic. I be­
lieve that it may already b!e predicted that if Europe does not 
intervene, the Slavs will without fail be victorious. Apparently, non­
intervention on the part of Europe has been decided upon, yet it 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
359 
is difficult to assert that there is, at the present moment, anything 
firm and finite in European politics. In the face of the suddenly 
arisen immense problem, tacitly-as it were-everybody has decided 
to wait, postponing the final decision. However, it is rumored that 
the triple alliance of the great Eastern powers continues and per­
sonal meetings of the three Monarchs are still taking place, so 
that non-intervention in the struggle of the Slavs, from this side, 
for the time being, may be considered certain. England, which 
isolated herself, is looking for allies ; whether she will find them­
is a question. If she should find them, it will probably not be in 
France. Briefly, all Europe will be watching the struggle of the 
Christians against the Sultan, without intervening, but . . . only 
for the time being . . .  till the division of the heritage. But is this 
heritage conceivable ? It is a question whether there is going to 
be any heritage at all. If God crowns the Slavs' efforts with success, 
what limit shall Europe set to their success ? Will she permit the 
sick man to be dragged from his bed for good ? This is hard to 
suppose. On thP contrary, after a new and solemn concilium, will 
she not decide to mmister unto him again ? . . .  So that the Slavs' 
efforts, even in the case of huge success, may be rewarded with 
rather weak palliatives only. Serbia took the field, relying upon 
her strength ; but, of course, she is aware of the fact that her 
ultimate destiny fuilࣤ· depends upon Russia. She knows that only 
Russia will save her from ruin-in case of a big calamity ; and 
that also Russia, through her potent influence, will in the event 
of success help her to retain a maximum gain. She knows this and 
reliࣥ upon Russia, but she is also cognizant of the fact that all 
Europe is looking upon Russia with concealed distrust. and that 
Russia'· is in a troubled situation. In a wt.rJ, everythinࣦ: rests in 
the Juture. But what action will Russia take ? 
· · Is it a question ? To every Russian this should not, and must 
not, constitute a question. Russia will at.:.t honestly ; such is the 
full answer to the question. Let the Prime Minister in England, 
because of political reasons, distort the truth before Parliament and 
report to it that the massacre of sixty thousand Bulgarians was 
the work not of the Turks, not of the bashibazouks, ll1lt of the 
Slav emigrants. And let the whole Parliament, also because of 
political reasons, believe him and tacitly approve his lie. In Russia 
nothing of the kind can or will take place. Some people might say 
that Russia, in any event, should not act tn her own direct <letri­
ment. However, wherein is Russia's beneh . .  ) Her benefit is pre­
cisely in that, if necessary, she must act to her direct detriment, 
she must make a sacrifice, lest justice be violated. Russia cannot 
afford to betray a great idea, bequeathed to her over a whole range 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
of centuries, to which, thus far, she has been undeviatingly adher­
ing. This idea-among other things-is the general Slavic com­
munion ; but this general communion is not seizure, not violence, 
but supreme service to mankind. Besides, when-how often-has 
Russia acted in politics for the sake of her direct benefit ? Contrari­
wise, hasn't she, during her entire Petersburg period, served mostly 
alien interests with a disinterestedness which might have surprised 
Europe, could she but have been seeing clearly, and not viewing us 
distrustfully-with suspicion and hate ? In Europe no one, and in 
no respect, would believe in Russian disinterestedness ; they would 
rather believe in roguery and stupidity. But we do not have to 
be afraid of their verdicts : in the self-denying disinterestedness of 
Russia is her whole power, so to speak, her whole individuality 
and the whole future of Russian destiny. Only, it is to be regretted 
that this power, at times, has been misdirected. 
4 
THE UTOPIAN CONCEPTION OF HISTORY 
Throughout these hundred and fifty years after Peter we 
have done nothing but live through a communion with all human 
civilization, affiliating ourselves with their history and their ideals. 
We have learned, and trained ourselves, to love the French, the 
Germans and everybody, as if they were our brethren-notwith­
standing the fact that they never liked us and made up their minds 
never to like us. However,· this was tbe essence of our reform­
the whole Peter cause ; we have derived from it, during that cen­
tury and a half, an expansion of our view, which, perhaps, was 
unprecedented, and cannot be traced in any other nation, wǘher 
in the ancient or in the new world. The pre-Peter Russia was aCtive 
and solid, although politically she was slow to form herself ; she 
had evolved unity within herself and she had been ready to con­
solidate her border regions. And she had tacitly comprehended that 
she bore within herself a treasure which was no longer existent 
anywhere else-Orthodoxy ; that she was the conservatrix of Christ's 
truth, genuine truth-the true image of Christ which had been 
dimmed in all other religions and in all other nations. This treasure, 
this eternal truth inherent in Russia and of which she had become 
the custodian, according to the view of the best Russians of those 
days, as it were, relieved their conscience of the duty of any other 
enlightenment. Moreover, in Moscow the conception had been 
formed that any closer intercourse with Europe might even exercise 
a harmful and corrupt influence upon the Russian mind and the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Russian idea; that it might distort Orthodoxy itself and lead Russia 
along the path to perdition "much in the same way as all other 
peoples." Thus ancient Russia, in her isolation, was getting ready 
to be unjust-unjust to mankind, having taken the resolution to 
preserve passively her treasure, her Orthodoxy, for herself, to 
seclude herself from Europe-that is, mankind-much 
as 
our 
schismatics who refuse to eat with you from the same dish and 
who believe it to be a holy practice that everyone should have his 
own cup and spoon. This is a correct simile because prior to Peter's 
advent, there had developed in Russia almost precisely this kind 
of political and spiritual relation with Europe. With Peter's reform 
there ensued an unparalleled broadening of the view, and herein­
I repeat-is Peter's whole exploit. This is also that very treasure 
about which I spoke in one of the preceding issues of the Diary­
a treasure which we, the upper cultured Russian stratum, are bring­
ing to the people after our century-and-a-half absence from Russia, 
and which the people, after we ourselves shall have bowed before 
their truth, must accept from us sine qWl non, "without which the 
fusion of both strata would ࣧrove impossible and everything would 
come to ruin." Now, what is this "expansion of the view," what 
does it consist of, and what does it signify ?-Properly speaking, 
this is not enlightenmP-nt, nor is it science ; nor is it a betrayal 
of the popular Rusࣨi..tn moral principles for the sake of European 
civilization. No, this is precisely something mherent only in the 
Russian people, since nowhere and at no time has there ever been 
such a reform. This is actually, and in truth, almost our brotherly 
love. of other peoples, which was the result of the hundred-and­
fifty-year-long living experience of our intercourse with them. This 
is our 'lrge to render universal service to hurr;1nity, somei.i·.·ࣩs even 
to the detriment of our own momentous and immediate •
•
 erests. 
ThV is our reconciliation with their civilizations ; cognition and 
excuse of their ideals even though these be in discord .vith ours ; 
this is our acquired faculty of discovering and revealing in each 
one of the European civilizations-or, more correctly, in each of 
the European individualities-the truth contained in it, even though 
there be much with which it be impossible to agree. Finally, thi5 
is the longing ; above all, to be ju!'ot and to seek nothing but truth. 
Briefly, this is, perhaps, tl1t: beginning of that active application 
of our treasure-of Orthodoxy-to the universal service of man­
·kind to which Orthodoxy is designated and which, in hct, 
constitutes its essence. Thus, through Pete. 
reform our former 
idea-the Russian Moscow idea-was broadened and its conception 
was magnified and strengthened. Thereby we got to understand our 
universal mission, our individuality and our role in humankind ; 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
at the same time we could not help but comprehend that this mis­
sion and this role do not resemble those of other nations since, 
there, every national individuality lives solely for, and within, 
itself. We, on the other hand, will begin-now that the hour has 
come-precisely with becoming servants to all nations, for the sake 
of general pacification. And in this there is nothing disgraceful ; 
on the contrary, therein is our grandeur because this leads to the 
ultimate unity of mankind. He who wishes to be first in the King­
dom of God must become a servant to everybody. This is how I 
understand the Russian mission in its ideal. After Peter the first 
step of our new policy was revealed of its own accord : it had to 
consist in the unification of the whole Slavdom, so to speak, under 
Russia's wing. And this communion is to be effected not for the 
sake of usurpation, not for the sake of violence, not for the purpose 
of the annihilation of Slavic individualities in the face of the Rus­
sian colossus-but with the object of their own regeneration, so 
that they may be placed in a proper relation to Europe and to 
mankind, and that they may finally be given an opportunity to 
compose and repose themselves after their never-ending secular 
plight, to restore their spirit, so that when they shall have per­
ceived their new strength-they be given a chance to contribute their 
own mite to the treasury of the human spirit and to utter their 
word to civilization. 
Oh, of course, you might laugh at all these "fancies" about 
the Russian mission ; however, tell me : do not all Russians desire 
the resurrection of the Slavs precisely on this basis-precisely for 
the sake of their full individpal liberty and the resurrection of tJleir 
spirit-and not at all for the purpose that Russia may politically 
acquire them and, through them, increase her political power ? Yet 
it is exactly of this that Europe suspects us. Indeed, isn't this so ? 
-And thus, at least partly, are my "fancies" substantiatedl Of 
course, it is for the same purpose that, sooner or later, Constln­
tinople must be ours. . 
. . 
God, what a sceptical smile would appear on the face of some 
Austrian or Englishman, were he to peruse all the above fancies, 
and suddenly read the passage concerning the positive deduction : 
"Constantinople, the Golden Horn, this most important political 
spot in the whole world . . .  isn't this seizure ?" 
Yes, the Golden Horn and Constantinople-they will be ours, 
but not for the purpose of seizure, not for the sake of violence-! 
would reply. To begin with, this will come to pass of its own accord, 
precisely because the hour ࣪as come, and even if it has not yet 
arrived, indeed it will come in the near future ; all symptoms point 
to this. This is a natural solution-so to speak, the word of nature 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
herself. If this has not occurred before, it has been precisely because 
the time has not yet been ripe. In Europe, people believe in some 
"Testament of Peter the Great." It is nothing but a forged docu­
ment, written by the Poles. However, even had the thought then 
occurred to Peter to seize Constantinople, instead of founding 
Petersburg, I believe that, after some deliberation, he would have 
abandoned this idea-granted that he was power! nl enough to crush 
the Sultan-since in those days the time was inupportune and the 
project could even have brought ruin to Russia. 
If in Finnish Petersburg we did not elude the influence of 
the neighboring Germans who, though useful, had paralyzed Rus­
sian progress before its genuine path had been ascertained, how 
then in Constantinople-so enormous and original, with her rem­
nants of a most powerful and ancient civilization-could we have 
managed to elude the influence of the Greeks, men far more subtle 
than the coarse Germans, men who have infinitely more points 
in common with us than the Germans who do not rf'semble u:; at 
all-numerous courtiers who would promptly have surrounded the 
Throne and "' ho, ;!ilഥad of t\e Russians, would have become edu­
cated and learned, who would have captivated Peter himself, not 
to speak of his immediate successors, taking advantage of his weak 
spot by their skill in seamanship. 
Briefly, they , •. tmld have captured Russia politically ; they 
would forthwith have dragged her along some new Asiatic path­
again into a seclusion of some sort-and the Russia of those days, 
of course, could not have tmdured this. Her Russian strength and 
natiqn_ality would have been arrested in their development. The 
mighty Great Russian would have remained in estrangement in 
his grim, snowy North, serving merely as -naterial ftJI the re­
generatगd Constantinople, and, perhaps, in the long run, t.· would 
havelmade up his mind not to follow her at all. At the same time 
the''Russian South would have been capture•1 by the Grt.:!ks. More­
over, there might have occurred a schism in Orthodoxy itself which 
would have been divided into two worlds-the regenerated world 
of Constantinople and the old Russian . . . .  In a word, this would 
have been a most untimely event. At present things are auite dif­
ferent. 
Today, Russia has already visited Europe and is herself edu­
cated. l\lore important still : she has become conscious of her 
-strength-and is, indeed, strong. She has also learned wherein o;he 
is strongest. Now Russia understands that l nstantinople may be 
ours not at all as her capital, whereas had Peter, two centuries ago, 
captured Constaminople, he could not have helped but transfer 
thither his capital-and this would have spell ruin, sirce Constan-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
tinople is not Russia and could not have become Russia. Even if 
Peter might have avoided this error, his immediate successors would 
not have eschewed it. However, if Constantinople may be ours, not 
as the capital of Russia, it may be ours not as a capital of Slavdom 
as a whole-as some people are dreaming. Slavdom without Russia 
would exhaust itself there in its struggle with the Greeks, even in 
the event that it might succeed in forming from its parts some 
political whole. But, for the Greeks alone to inherit Constantinople 
is at present altogether impossible : it is impossible to surrender 
to them so important a spot on the globe ; this would be something 
altogether out of proportion. Slavdom with Russia at its head is a 
wholly different proposition, but whether or not it is a good proposi­
tion is again a question. Would it not resemble a political seizure 
of the Slavs-a thing we do not need at all ? Thus, in the name 
of what, by virtue of what moral right could Russia claim Con­
stantinople ? Relying upon what sublime aims could Russia demand 
Constantinople from Europe ?-Precisely as a leader of Orthodoxy, 
jlS its protectress and guardian-a role designated to her ever since 
Ivan III, who placed her symbol and the Byzantine double-headed 
eagle above the ancient coat of arms of Russia, a role which un­
questionably revealed itself only after Peter the Great when Russia 
perceived in herself the strength to fulfill her mission and factually 
became the real and sole protectress of Orthodoxy and of the people 
adhering to it. Such is the ground, such is the right to ancient 
Constantinople, which would be intelligible and not offensive even 
to the Slavs most sensitive to their independence, even to the Greeks 
themselves. Besides, therehy would be revealed the true esseܨ of 
those political relations which inevitably must develop between 
Russia and all other Orthodox peoples-whether Slavs or Greeks 
makes no difference. Russia is their guardian, or even their)e,der, 
perhaps, but not their sovereign ; their mother, but not their ܩis­
tress. Even i f  she were to become their sovereign some time in 'the 
future, it would be only by their own election and subject to the 
preservation of everything by which they themselves would define 
their independence and individuality. So that eventually, and in 
the long run, such a union could even be joined by non-Orthodox 
European Slavs who would see for themselves that common unity 
under the protection of Russia is merely the assurance to each of 
his independent personality, whereas in the absence of this immense 
unifying force, they ܪould, perhaps, again exhaust themselves in 
mutual strife and discord, even if they should some day become 
politically independent of .the Mohammedans and Europeans to 
whom they now belong. 
What's the use-it may be said-of juggling with words : what 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
is this "Orthodoxy" ? And wherein, here, is there a peculiar idea 
-a special right to the unification of the peoples ? And would it 
not be a purely political union like all other similar ones, founded 
upon the broadest principlrs, akin to the United States of America 
-or even broader ? Such may be the questions propounded to me. 
And these I will answer.-Xo, this would not be the same, and 
this is not verbal jugglery : here there is in reality something pe­
culiar, something unheard-of. This would not be merely a political 
union and, of course, not one for the sake of political usurpation 
and violence-this seems to be the only way Europe can conceive 
the proposition. And it would be a union not for mercantile pursuit, 
prrsonal gain-those invariable and eternal deified vices, under the 
guise of official Christianity which is believed by no one but the 
plebs. No, this would be a genuine exaltation of Christ's truth, 
preserved in the East, a new exaltation of Christ's Cross and the 
final word of Orthodoxy, which is headed by Russia. This would 
precisely constitute a temptation to the mighty of this world, to 
those who th•1<; far have been triumphant in it and who have 
always looked upon such "expectations" with disdain and derision ; 
to those who are even unable to understand that one may seriously 
believe in the brotherhood of men, in the general reconciliation of 
the nations, in a urion founded upon the principles of common 
service to mankind 
:md, finally, in man's regeneration based on 
the true principles of Christ. And if the belief in this "new word" 
which may be uttered by Russia, heading united Orthodoxy, is a 
"Utopia" worthy of nothing but ridicule, let people class me, too, 
amoࣺ these Utopians, while the ridicule-leave that to me. 
"But"-it may perhaps be argued-"that Russia will ever be 
permitted to head the Slavs and to enter c൉. •. ࣻLantinople, . 
in itself 
a Uࣼpia. One may be dreaming about it, and yet the!> 
are but 
dreains ! "  
In truth, is this so ? But, aside from the fact that Russia 
is strong and, maybe, much stronger than sl:e herself realizes­
aside from this, have there not arisen before our eyes, during recent 
decades, immense powers which have reigned in Europe, one of 
which has been reduced to dust, swept away by God's t"rnpest in 
a day, and in its place a new Empire has come into being-an 
Empire which, seemingly, has never before been surpassed in 
strength ? And who, in good time, could have predicted this ? And 
if such sweeping changes, which have alre;.dy occurred befor, our 
eyes in our day, are possible, can the hun .. n mind unmistakably 
predict the fate nf the Eastern question ? Where are the real grounds 
for despair in the resurrection and unity of the Slavs ? Who knows 
Lhe ways of Providence ? 

J66 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
5 
AGAIN AsouT WoMEN 
All the newspapers have already become sympathetic with 
the cause of the Serbs and the Montenegrins who have arisen for 
the liberation of their brethren, while society and even the people 
are enthusiastically watching the successes of their armed forces. 
But the Slavs need help. Information-what seems to be accurate 
information-has been received that the Turks are being helped, 
though "anonymously" yet very actively, by the Austrians and the 
English. At that-almost not "anonymously." Help is given in thl' 
form of money, ammunition, shells-and also with men. There are 
many foreign officers in the Turkish army. An enormous British 
fleet is anchored off Constantinople . . .  because of political con­
siderations-more correctly, for any eventuality. In Austria, an 
enormous army is kept ready-also for any eventuality. The Aus­
trian press maintains an irritable attitude toward the Serbs and 
Russia. It should be noted that if Europe at present looks upon 
the Slavs i1zsensibly, this of course is due to the fact that Russians 
are also Slavs. Otherwise, the Austrian newspapers would not be 
so fearful of the Serbs-too negligible an armed force compared 
with the Austrian might, and they would not be comparing them 
with Piedmont. . . .  
Therefore, Russian society must again come to the assistance 
of the Slavs-of course, even though it be only with money and 
some equipment. General Cherniaiev has already sent wr;Jtd to 
Petersburg that the sanitary facilities throughout the whole घerbian 
army are extremely poor : no doctors, no medicaments, inscient 
care of the wounded. The Slavic Committee in Moscow has hiunfhed 
an energetic appeal throughout Russia for help to our insurgent 
brethren, and its members attended in corpore, in the presence of 
a huge crowd, a solemn Te Deum at the Church of the Serbian 
Hospice, held for the granting of victory to Serbian and Montenegrin 
armies. In Petersburg there begin to appear in the newspapers 
letters from the public, accompanied by donations. Obviously, the 
movement is expanding, even despite the so-called "dead summer 
season." But it is dead in Petersburg only. 
I was about to f\Jlish my Diary and I was already reading 
the proof when, unexpectedly, a young girl called on me. She had 
met me during the winter, after I had started the publication of 
my Diary. She is planning to-take a rather difficult examination for 
which she is studying energetically, and, of course, she will pass 
it. She comes from a well-to-do family and does not need money, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
but she is quite concerned about her education, and she used to 
call on me for advice as to what to read and to what she should 
be paying particular attention. She visited me not oftener than 
once a month, staying not longer than ten minutes ; she spoke 
exclusively about her problems, but not loquaciously-modestly, al­
most shyly, and with remarkable confidence in me. However, it 
was impossible not to discern in her a very reႫulute character, and 
I have not been mistaken. This time she carue in and directly 
stated : 
"In Serbia the sick lack care. I have made up my mind to 
postpone for the time being my examination, and I want to go 
to take care of the sick. What would you say ?" 
And almost timidly she looked at me, but meanwhile I dis­
tinctly read in her glance that she had already decided upon the 
matter and that her decision was unalterable. But she also needed 
my approbation. I am not in a position to recount our conversation 
in detail lest I betray her anonymity by some most minute trait, 
and I am merely recording its general contents. 
Suddedy : ff'lt pity 'or her-she is so young. To scare her 
with pictures of hardships, war, typhus in hospitals, would have 
been absolutely superfluous ; this would have meant pouring oil on 
fire. Here there was solely a thirst for sacrifice, for heroism, for a 
good deed, and-mr,t important, most precious-was the fact that 
there was no vaingiury, no S{'lf-infatuation, uut merely the desire 
"to care for the wounded," to render service. 
"But you don't know how to care for the wounded ! "  
"Quite, but I will manage it, and I have called on the Com­
mittee Those enlisting are given two weeks' training and, of course, 
I will Ft prepared." 
&td, no doubt, she will get prepared ; here the " 
· d is not 
in disႬord with the deed. 
"Look here"-1 told her-"I do not wish to scart> or dissuade 
you, but consider my words and weigh them honestly. You grew 
up in totally different surroundings ; you have seen only good 
society, and you have never seen people otherwise than in a calm 
state, in which they would not transgress the bon ton. But these 
same men during a war, under crowded conditions, amtdst hard­
ships and labours, someti·nes become quite different. Suppose you 
cared for the sick, served them, got exhausted ; you might be hardly 
able to stand on your feet, and, suddenly, a doctor-possibly Ll very 
good man in se, but tired, overstrained-•· ·Ⴍo had just amputated 
several arms and legs, turns to you in a state of irritation and 
says : 'You are only spoiling things ; you are doing nothing ! Once 
_you have decided to shoulder the task, you've got to serve ! '  etc., 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
etc. Wouldn't it be difficult for you to endure this ? And yet, this 
must necessarily be anticipated, and I am revealing to you only 
the tiniest glimpse. Reality is sometimes unpredictable. And, fmally, 
are you sure that you would be able, despite the firmness of your 
resolution, to undertake that very nursing ? Wouldn't you faint 
at the sight of some death or wound or operation ? This occurs 
unconsciously, without one's will . . .  
" 
"If I should be told that I am spoiling things, and not serv­
ing, I would quite understand that the doctor himself is irritated 
and tired out, and to me it would suffice to be inwardly convinced 
that I am not guilty and that I did everything as it should have 
been done." 
.. 
" But you are so young ! How can you vouch for yourself ?" 
"Why do you think I am so young ? I am already eighteen : 
I am not at all so young . . . .  
" 
"Well, God be with you ! "  I said. "Go-but as soon as the 
thing is over, do return promptly." 
"Oh, of course, I have to pass the examination. But you 
wouldn't believe how you have gladdened me." 
She left with a beaming face, and, of course, in a week she 
will be there. 
In the opening part of my Diary, in the article on George 
Sand, I wrote a few words concerning her girl characters which 
particularly pleased me, in her novels of the first, earliest, period. 
Now, this one is precisely in the genre,of those girls. Here we have 
precisely the same straightforward, honest but inexperienced young 
feminine character-with that proud chastity which dot's not fear 
and cannot be soiled even by contact with vice. Here is an urge 
for sacrifice, for work supposedly expected from her, and te con­
viction that it is necessary and that she must start herself, first, with­
out any excuses, all the good which she expects and demands flDm 
other people-a conviction which is sound and moral in the highest 
degree, but one which, alas, is inherent mostly in youthful purity 
and innocence. But the main point is-1 repeat-that here there 
is only work and not the slightest vainglory ; not the slightest self­
conceit and self-infatuation with one's personal exploit, which­
contrariwise-we often perceivt' in our contemporaneous young 
men, even among mere raw youths. 
After she had left, the thought again involuntarily occurred 
to me about the necessi1y in Russia of higher education for women 
-a most urgent necessity, particularly now in view of the serious 
quest of work in the present-day woman, quest of education, of 
participation in the common· cause. I believe that the fathers and 
mothers of these daughters should be insisting on this themselves 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
and for themselves, if they love their children. In fact, only the 
highest science possesses sufficient seriousness, fascination and 
power to pacify this virtual agitation which has ensued among 
our women. Only science is capable of answering their questions, 
of strengthening their minds and, so to speak, of placing under its 
tutelage their seething thought. As for this girl, though I pity her 
youth, still, aside from the fact that I could nut have stopped her, 
I believe that in a way this journey may, perhaps, even prove useful 
to her : all the same, this is not a bookish world, not an abstract 
conviction, but an enormous forthcoming experience which God, 
Himself, in His infinite goodness, has sent her to save her. Here 
is a forthcoming lesson for her active life-an ensuing broadening 
of her thought and views ; here is a future reminiscence, for her 
whole life, of something dear and beautiful, in which she had 
taken part and which will make her treasure life and not get tired 
of it without actually having lived-like that unfortunate suicide 
Pisareva, about whom I spoke in the preceding, May, issue of my 
Diary. 
JUL Y-A UGUST 
CHAPTER I 
1 
Departure Abroad. Something about Russians in Rail­
road Cars. 
; TWO MONTHS have elapsed since I have convt : :;ed with 
the reader. Having brought out the June issue (which completed 
the first half-year of my publication ) ,  forthwith I LOOk a train 
and proceeded to Ems-oh, not for a rest, but ror that purpose for 
which people journey to Ems. And, of course, this is an altogether 
too personal and private matler ; yet the point is that sometimes 
I am writing my Diary not only for the public but also r,.,r myself. 
-( Possibly, this is the rt•ason v.hy there are some asperities and 
surprises in it, i.e., thoughts quite familiar to me which have long 
been moulding themselves within me, but which, to the reader, 
may seem to be something that has suddf'nly leaped out of ·.orne­
where without any connection with precedit.C"> thoughts.) And hence, 
why should I also be omitting from my Diary my departure abroad ? 
Of course, had I my own choice, I should have gone somewhere 
[0 the south of Russia-

370 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
Where the rich and fertile fields, 
Through the bounty of their soil, 
Bring the tiller fat crop yields 
In exchange for his slight toil ; 
Where in meadows, fresh and green, 
Springs purl flowing toward the glade, 
Herds of wild mares may be seen 
Roaming proud and unafraid. 
But alas ! It seems that there, too, things are quite different 
from those about which the poet dreamed in that land : not only 
in exchange for "slight toil" but even for heavy work, the tiller 
is not going to harvest "fat crops." Likewise, as regards those mares, 
the description should be considerably tuned down. By the way, 
recently, in The Moscow Gazette, I came across an article on the 
Crimea-on the eviction from the Crimea of the Tartars and on 
"the desolation of the region." The Moscow Gazette sets forth a 
bold idea-to the effect that there is no need for pitying the Tartars : 
let them be evicted and, in their place, Russians had better be 
colonized. Unhesitatingly, I call this a bold thought : this is one 
of those ideas, one of those questions, about which I spoke in the 
June issue of the Diary-the moment they arise "there forthwith 
ensues general discordance among us." In fact, it is difficult to 
decide whether everybody will agree with the opinion of The M os­
cow Gazette, with which I wholeheartedly agree, since I have long 
been thinking the same way concerning "the Crimean question." 
Decidedly, this is a risky gpinion, and it is a question whether it 
will be shared by liberal opinion, which has the last say in every­
thing. True, The Moscow Gazette expresses the desire that "the 
Tartars be not pitied," etc.-not only because of the political aspect 
of the matter, not only for the consolidation of the border regions­
but, likewise, because of the economic needs of that region. It sets 
forth the fact that the Tartars have proved their inability ration­
ally to cultivate the Crimean soil, and that Russians-specifically 
the South Russians-are much more fitted for this task, and, as 
proof oi this, it points to the Caucasus. Generally, if the colonization 
(of course, gradual ) of Russians in .the Crimea should necessitate 
some extraordinary expenditures even on the part of the state, 
such disbursements arႮ.  well worth risking and would prove very 
profitable. In any event, should Russians fail to settle in the Crimea, 
the Jews without fail would fall upon her and would exhaust her 
soil. 
The journey from Petersburg to Berlin is a long one-it lasts 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
J7I 
almost forty-eight hours-and, for this reason, I took with me, for 
any eventuality, two pamphlets and several newspapers. Precisely 
"for any eventuality"-because I am always afraid to stay in a 
crowd of strange Russians of our educated class ; this, everywhere 
-be it in railroad cars or on boats, or in any kind of gatherings. 
This, I confess, is a weakness which I attribute, in the first place, 
to· my personal suspiciousness. Abroad, in a Lrowd of foreigners, 
I always feel more at ease : there, everybody walks quite direct to 
the place of his destination, but our Russian walks and keeps look­
ing around : "What"-thinks he-"will people say about me ?" How­
ever, his appearance is firm and unshaken-yet, in reality, there 
is nothing more wavering and less self-confident than he. A Rus­
sian stranger, if he starts a conversation with you, always speaks 
to you in a remarkably confidential and cordial manner. However, 
beginning with his very first word, you perceive profound mistrust 
-and even hidden suspicious irritation-which, the moment any­
thing goes against his grain, promptly leaps out of him in the form 
of a caustic remark, or even rudeness, notwithstanding all his 
"upbringing," 
.. ::d · what iႯ most important-for no reason what­
soever. Everyone, as it were, wishes to revenge himself upon some­
body for his nullity ; and yet he may be not at all an insignificant 
man-at times he is just the reverse. No man oftener than a Rus­
sian is ready to repeat : "What do I care what people will say 
about me ?" or : '·! don't give a rap about public opinion." And 
there is no man more than a Russian (again, a civilized one) 
who would be more afraid of, and intimidated by, public opinion 
and what people will say or think about him. This is precisely 
caused by disrespect for himself, deeply rooted in him, of course, 
despite unlimited self-conceit and vainglory. These twႰ. contradic­
tions are rooted in virtually every intelligent Russian . be is the 
fijst to whom they are unbearable, so that each one of tht!m carries 
"IleU in his soul." It is particularly painful to be meP.ting Russian 
strangers abroad somewhere, face to face, so that it is no longer 
possible to run away in the event of some calamity-for instance, 
if you were locked up with him in one and the same car. And 
yet-it would seem-"it is so nice to meet one's compatriot in a 
foreign country." Even the conversation usually begin::. with this 
very phrase. Upon findin/ out that you are Russian, the compatriot 
without fail begins : "You arc Russian ? How nice to meet a com­
patriot in a foreign country ! I, too, am here . . .  
"-and, right away, 
frankness ensues, precisely, in a most corc!' Ⴑl, so to speak, brutherly 
tone befitting two compatriots who have embraced each other 
in a foreign land. But don't trust this tone : even though the com­
patriot is smiling, nevertheless he is looking at you with suspicion ; 

372 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
this you can see from the expression of his eyes, from the way 
he lisps when he speaks to you and gently scans his words. He 
is taking your measure ; he is already afraid of you ; he is ready 
to start lying. After all, he cannot help but look at you with sus­
picion and lie exactly because you also are a Russian and, willy­
nilly, he compares you with himself, perhaps, because you really 
deserve this. It is also noteworthy that invariably-at least, not 
infrequently-the Russian stranger abroad (there oftener, almost 
invariably) ,  after the first three sentences, hastens to inter­
ject a word to the effect that just a few minutes before he 
met So-and-so, or that he heard something from So-and-so­
i.e., from some of our eminent or distinguished Russian men­
but he interjects this in the nicest and most familiar tone, just 
as a friend-not only his friend but yours, too : "Of course, you 
know the poor fellow is wandering from one local medical celebrity 
to another ; they are ordering him to watering places ; why, the 
man is in absolute despair. Are you acquainted with him ?"-Should 
you answer that you don't know him at all, the stranger will 
promptly discover in this circumstance something offensive to him­
self : "You might have thought that I meant to brag to you about 
my acquaintance with a prominent man." You can read this ques­
tion in his eyes, and this, in fact, could have been the case. On 
the other hand, if you answer that you know the man, the stranger 
will feel still more offended-why ?-1 have really no idea. Briefly, 
insincerity and animosity are ·growing on both sides and, suddenly, 
the conversation breaks up and comes to an end. Your compatriot 
turns away from you. He is ready to go on conversing all the time 
with some Gr.rman baker sitting opposite him, rather than with 
you-and, specifically, he wishes you to notice this. Having begun 
in such a friendly manner, he severs all relations and connections 
with you, and rudely notices you not at all. When night come$Ⴒ 
he stretches out on the cushions, if there be room, reaching you 
with his feet-perhaps, purposely touching you with his feet-and 
when the journey is over, he leaves the car without even nodding 
toward you. "Why did he get so offended ?"-one thinks with sor­
row and perplexity. 
Best of all is to meet Russian generals. A Russian general 
abroad is, above all, concerned with the fact that Russians meeting 
him should not venture to talk to him, ignoring his rank, on the 
alleged ground that 
"v. e are abroad and, therefore, we are all 
equals." For this reason, beginning with the very first moment, he 
sinks into a stern, marble silence, and this is good-at least, he 
disturbs no one. By the way, ·a Russian general proceeding abroad 
is sometimes very fond of donning civilian clothes, which he orders 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
373 
from one of the most fashionable Petersburg tailors. On his arrival 
at a spa, where there are always so many pretty dames from all 
over Europe, he loves to flaunt himself. At the end of the season, 
he lets himself be photographed, with particular delight, in civilian 
attire so as to make presents of his picture to his acquaintances 
and to make some devoted subordinate of his happy with the gift. 
But, at any rate, the book or the newspaper brought along is of 
great help during the journey, precisely as a protection against 
Russians : "You see, I am reading. So leave me alone." 
2 
ON THE PUGNACITY OF THE GERMANS 
Just as soon as we reached German soil, all of the six Germans 
in our compartment-the moment we had been locked up in it 
-started conversing among themselves about war and Russia. To 
me, this appeared curious ; and, although I knew that in the Ger­
man press, just now, Lherl.! is a great deal of talk about Russia, 
nevertheless I did not think that they too would be discussing the 
question in public squares. These were by no means "upper-class" 
Germans ; no doubt, amor.g them there was not a single baron, 
and even not a sinl(le army off1cer. Besides, they were not discussing 
la haute politique, but merely the actual strength of Russia-more 
particularly, her military strength-with reference to the immediate 
present. With triumphant, and even somewhat haughty, calmness 
they told each other that at no time in the past had Russia been 
so weak from the standpoint of armaments, etc. A grave and tall 
German, who was on his way from Petu·-burg, ann•J•:· ced in a 
most competent tone that, supposedly, we possess not 
10re than 
two hundred and seventy thousand decent repeating ritles, while 
the rest are merely negligently remodeled old firear .. 1s, and that 
the aggregate number of repeating rifles doP'> not reach half a 
million ; that our supply of metal cartridges is not over sixty mil­
lions-i.e., only sixty cartridges per soldier, if the total war-time 
army be reckoned at the figure of one million men. However, they 
conversed pretty merrily. It should be noted that they were aware 
that I was a Russian but, apparently judging by the few words 
which I exchanged with the conductor, they must have concluded 
that I did not know German. But even though I speak bad G,_ rman, 
nevertheless I do understand it. After a .vhile I deemed it my 
"patriotic" duty to retort as calmly as possible-in accord with 
their tone-that all their figures and data were exaggerated in a 
negative sense ; that already four years ago the eql!ipment of our 

374 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
troops had reached a very satisfactory level, and that since then 
it has constantly been improved and that this is being continued 
uninterruptedly, so that we are able to compete with anyone. They 
listened to me attentively, despite my poor German, and even 
prompted me with this or that German word every time I would 
forget it, stopping short in my speech, and encouragingly nodded 
their heads, indicating thereby that they understood me. (N.B. 
If you speak poor German, you will be the more easily understood 
the more educated your German listener is. It is altogether dif­
ferent with a crowd in the street or, for instance, with servants : 
these are slow in understanding you, though you might have for­
gotten only one word in a whole sentence, and especially if you 
should happen to use, instead of some common word, a less cus­
tomary one : at times, you would not be understood at all. I don't 
know if this is true about Frenchmen and Italians, but it was told 
and reported about Russian Sebastopol soldiers that they conversed 
-of course, by means of gestures-with the captured French soldiers 
in the Crimea and were able to understand them. Thus, had they 
known only half of the words spoken by the Frenchman, they 
would have fully understood him.) 
The Germans made not even one refutation ; they merely kept 
smiling at my words-not haughtily, perhaps, even approvingly­
fully convinced that I, as a Russian, was speaking merely in defense 
of Russian honor ; but I could set from the expression of their eyes 
that they did not believe a single word I was saying and that they 
continued to adhere to their own opinion. However, five years ago, 
in 1871, they were by no means as polite. I was then living in 
Dresden, and J remember how the Saxon troops returned after the 
war. The city then arranged for their triumphant entry and an 
ovation. I also remember the same troops one year before that8 
when they were just going to war, and when, suddenly, on all street 
corners and in all public places posters appeared with the words : 
"Der Krieg ist erkliirt !" ("War has been declared ! ") -printed in 
large type. I then beheld these troops, and willy-nilly, I admired 
them : what vigor in those faces, what a serene, cheerful and, at 
the same time, grave expression in their eyes ! They were all young 
men and, when looking at some marching company, it was impos­
sible not to admire their wonderful military drill, their orderly step, 
their rigidly punctiliouo; alignment, and, at the same time, the 
remarkable freedom which I had never before observed in a soldier, 
the conscious resoluteness which manifested itself in every gesture, 
in every step of these brave -lads. It could be perceived that they 
were not driven, that they were going of their own accord. There 
was nothing stiff, notliing that would remind one of the corporal's 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
3 75 
rod. And that, in Germans-those very Germans from whom, when 
under Peter we organized our army, we borrowed both the corporal 
and the rod ! I\ o, these Germans marched without being driven 
with a rod-as one man, with perfect resoluteness and full certitude 
in victory. The war was a popular one : in the soldier there gleamed 
the citizen, and, I confess, I felt afraid for the French, despite 
the fact that I was still firmly convinced that : !ley would beat the 
Germans. After that it is easy to imagine how 1hese same soldiers 
had entered Dresden one year later after the victories which they 
had won over the French, from whom, throughout the whole cen­
tury, they had endured all kinds of humiliations. Add to this usual 
German boastfulness-their nation-wide boundless self-conceit in 
case of some success, their petty bragging bordering on childishness 
and invariably attaining in Germans the level of arrogance, which 
is a rather unbecoming and almost surprising characteristic in this 
people. They have too much right to pride themselves over many a 
thing-even when compared with any other nation-to be displaying 
such triviality. It was apparent that this honor was so novel to 
them that tl:cy Ⴓ!;cmsclves 1തad not expected it. And, in fact, they 
then became so drunk with success that they began to insult the 
Russians. At that time there were many Russians there, and later 
quite a few of them reported that everyone-even a shopkeeper­
the moment he wouႴ.J start talking to a Russian-say, walking into 
his shop to buy suhh!thing-would forthwith try to interject a re­
mark such as this : "Now that we have fmished with the French, 
we will get ready for you ! "  This malice against the Russians in 
those days broke out among the people spontaneously, notwith­
standing everything the papers used to say then which understood 
Russia's policy during the war-a policy without whirl. perhaps, 
fle Germans would not have been crowned w1th laurels. · rue, this 
was the first blaze of their military success-indeed, so u .. l'xpected 
-yet, the fact is that in that ardor they immediately recalled the 
Russians. This animosity against the Russians, which manifested 
itself almost spontaneously, at the time surprised even me, al­
though I knew all my life that the German always and e,·erywhere, 
ever since the time of the German Village in l\Ioscow, has disliked 
the Russian. A Russian lady, Countess K., who in iႵ.use days 
resided at Dresden, was ·itting in one of the seats provided for 
the public on the occasion of the triumphal ovation to the troops 
marching into the city. Behind her several excited Germans hegan 
to scold Russia in a most awful manner. 
· J  turned to the.,. and 
abused them, using plebeian language"-she Jater told me. The Ger­
mans remained :.ilent ; they are very polite to the ladies, but, had 
it been a Russian man, they would have come back. At the time 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
I myself read in our newspapers that bands of drunken Germans, 
residents of Petersburg, used to provoke quarrels and f1ghts at some 
drinking bouts with our soldiers, precisely under the pretext of 
"patriotism." By the way, most of the German newspapers are at 
present full of raging outbursts against Russia. Referring to this 
fury of the German press, alleging that the Russians seek to seize 
the East and the Slavs and, after strengthening themselves, to start 
an onslaught against European civilization, The Voice observed in 
one of its recent editorial articles that all this raging chorus is 
all the more surprising as it started, as if on purpose, immediately 
after the friendly conventions and meetings of the three Emperors, 
and that the matter, to say the least, was strange. This is a subtle 
remark. 
3 
THE VERY LAsT WoRD oF CIVILIZATION 
Yes, in Europe there is gathering something seemingly un­
avoidable. The Eastern question is growing and rising as a tidal 
wave and, perhaps, in reality it will ultimately engulf everything 
so that no peaceableness, no prudence, no firm determination not 
to incite war will be able to withstand the pressure of circum­
stances. But the thing which is most important is that even now 
the dreadful fact is revealed-the fact that this is the last word of 
civilization. This last word has been uttered and revealed ; now 
it is known, and it is the result of the whole development of 
eighteen centuries-of the whole humanization of humanity . .  All 
Europe, at least her leading representatives-those same men and 
nations who vociferated against slavery ; who abolished Negr• 
trade ; who destroyed their domestic despotism ; who proclaimed 
the rights of men ; who created science and astounded the world 
with its power ; who animated and captivated the human soul with 
art and its sacred ideals ; who kindled enthusiasm and faith in 
the hearts of men by promising them in the very near future justice 
and truth-these same peoples and nations, suddenly at this instant, 
all of them (nearly all) are turning their backs on millions of 
unfortunate beings-Christians, men, their own brethren-who are 
perishing, who have been dishonored, and who are waiting, waiting 
hopefully and impatiently, till, one after another, they will all 
be crushed like reptiles, like bugs ; till, finally, their desperate 
clamor and appeals for their salvation are silenced-clamors which 
annoy and disturb Europe. Precisely-like reptiles and bugs ; even 
worse : tens, hundreds of thousands of Christians are being mas-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
3 77 
sacred as pernicious scabs, are being obliterated from the face of 
the earth, to their very roots. In the presence of their brothers, 
sisters are being assaulted ; in the presence of their mothers, infants 
are being thrown up into the air to be caught on rifle-bayonets ; 
villages are being annihilated ; churches smashed into splinters ; 
everything, without exception, is being exterminated-and this by 
a savage, disgusting Mohammedan horde, the sworn enemy of 
civilization. This is systematic extermination ; this is not a gang 
of robbers which accidentally jumped out in the midst of a re­
bellion and war chaos but which is still afraid of the law. No, 
here we are faced with a system, a war method practiced by a 
huge Empire. Robbers are acting pursuant to ukases and instruc­
tions of ministers and rulers of the state-of the Sultan himself. 
And Europe, Christian Europe, the great civilization, looks on 
with impatience . . . .  "When are these bugs going to be crushed, 
one after another ?" Moreover, in Europe facts are being disputed ; 
they are being de'lied in people's parliaments ; they do not believe 
-a pretense io; made that they do not believe. Each one of those 
leaders of the pc:uvle kno •• s that this is all true, but all of them, 
a qui mieux micux, hasten to divert the other one's attention : "This 
is not true ; this did not happen ; this is an exaggeration ! It is 
they themselves whfl have massacred sixty thousand of their own 
Bulgarians to lay •. he blame on the Turks ! "  "Your Excellency, she 
has flogged herself ! "  The Khlestakovs, the Skvoznik-Dmukhanov­
skys are in trouble l But why is this ? What are these people afraid 
of ? Why don't they want to see and listen, but instead are lying 
to themselves and disgracing themselves ? Hut, you see, here Russia 
comes into play : "Russia would be strenႶthened ; she would occupy 
J}le East, Constantinople, the Mediterranr1-:, the port., . Ⴗhe would 
1eize the trade. Russia, as a barbarian horde, would . .  recipitate 
herself against Europe and would destroy civilization l "-(that 
very civilization which tolerates such barbaric things l :  This is what 
they are shouting in England, in Germany, :tnd, again, they are 
lying by the wholesale ; they themselves do not believe a single 
word of these accusations and apprehensions. All these are but 
words designed to incite hatred in the popular masses. There isn't 
a man in Europe, though sligh!ly reasoning and barely educated, 
who would believe toda) that Russia intends or is able to destroy 
civilization. Let them not believe in our disinterestedness ; let them 
attribute to us every bad intention : this is intelligible. Y t ! it is 
incredible that, after so many examples an. Ⴘxperiences, they should 
believe that we are stronger than all Europe combined. It is in­
credible that they should be ignorant of the fact that Europe is 
twice as strong as Russia, even if the latter held Constantinople 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
in her hands ; that Russia is exceedingly strong only at home, when 
she is defending her land against an invasion, but that she is four 
times weaker in an offensive. Oh, all this they know perfectly well, 
but they fool, and continue to fool, everybody and themselves solely 
because there, in England, there are several merchants and manu­
facturers who are pathologically suspicious and pathologically 
greedy when their interests are involved. But even thest men know 
perfectly well that Russia, even under circumstances most advan­
tageous to her, would nevertheless be unable to overpower their 
industry and commerce : that is still a matter of centuries to come. 
Yet even the most negligible expansion of anybody's trade, the 
slightest strengthening of anybody's sea power, causes alarm amonႹ 
them-a panic, anguish for profits. This is why the whole "civiliza­
tion" suddenly turns out to be nothing but a puff. Well, but what 
is the Germans' concern ? Why is their press sounding an alarm ? 
-Because Russia stands behind their backs and ties their hands : 
because it was due to her that they missed the opportune moment 
once foP"all to obliterate France from the face of the earth so as 
never in the future to have to bother about her. "Russia hinders ; 
Russia must be pushed back into her boundaries. Rut how is one 
to squeeze her in if, at the other end, France still stands intact ?" 
Yes, Russia is guilty because of the fact itself that she is Russia, 
and that Russians are Russians-that is, Slavs. Hateful is the Slavic 
race to Europe-les esclavcs, so to speak, slaves ; and the Germans 
have so many of these slaves : who knows, they might rebel. And 
thus eighteen centuries of Christianity, humanization, science and 
progress suddenly-the moment the weak spot is touched-proves 
mere humbug, a fable for schoolchildren, an A R C moraL But 
therein is the trouble-the horror that this is "the last word ol 
civilization," that it was uttered, it was not ashamed of being 
uttered. Oh, don't point out that in Europe, too, in England her­
self, public opinion did protest and appeal for monetary contribu­
tions for the relief of slaughtered mankind. This is all the more 
sad ; all these are but individual cases ; these merely go to prove 
how impotent they are over there against their general, state, na­
tional tendency. The questioning man stands perplexed : "Where 
is truth ? Is it possible that the world is still so far from it ? When 
will an end be put to strife ? Will men ever get together ? What 
stands in their way ? Will truth ever be so strong as to subdue the 
depravity, cynicism and egoism of man ? Where are the truths which 
have been evolved and acquired with so much pain ? Where is 
humaneness ? Indeed, are these truths at all ? Aren't they mere 
exercises for 'lofty' sentiments, or for schoolboys to keep them 
under control, whereas the moment it comes to real business-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
379 
P'actical business-everything seems to be tossed aside, and to the 
devil-all ideals I "  
Ideals are humbug, poesy, verses ! And i t  is true that once 
more the Jew has enthroned himself everywhere ! Why, not only 
has he "enthroned himself," but he never ceased to reign ! 1 
CHAPTER II 
Idealists-Cynics 
AND DOES anyone remember the article by the unforgettable 
professor and unforgettable Russian-Timofei Nikolaievich Granov­
sky-on the Eastern question, which he wrote-if this be true-in 
the year I855, in the very midst of our war with Europe, when 
the siege of St>bastopol had already begun ? I took it with me on 
the train, and 1 have rerc.dd it precisely now in view of the fact 
that the Eastern question is being raised anew ; and this old re­
spectable article suddenly appeared to me extraordinarily curious, 
much more so than when I read it for the first time and when I 
was in full acconႺ with it. This time I was struck by one particular 
consideration : first, by the view of a Westerner of those days 
concerning the people ; and, secondly-and this is the important 
point-by the, so to speak, psychological significance of the article. 
I cannot refrain from conveying my impression to the reader. 
Granovsky was the purest of all men of those days ; he was 
irreproachable and beautiful. An ideal isႻ d the Ftu ·- · Ⴜs-in the 
loftiest sense-he possessed the most individually pt.. ,Jiiar and 
original nuance among our progressives of a certain pattern of his 
time. He was one of the most honest Stepan Trofimo·. ichs (a char­
acter of an idealist of the Forties portrayed by me in the novel 
The Possessed, which our critics considered correct ; and I love 
Stepan Trofimovich and profoundly respect him )-and, maybe, 
without the slightest comical trait rather inherent in this type. 
But I said that I was impressed with the psychological significance 
of the article, and this thought struck me as being amusing. I 
don't know if you will agree with me, but when our Russian idealist, 
an unquestionable idealist who knows that he is taken men·ly for 
such-so to speak, for a "patented" preac, r of "the beautiful and 
the lofty"-suddenly finds it necessary to state or record his opinion 
on some matter (but a "real," practical, current matter, and not 
1This article was written as early as in July. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
on some question of poetry-on some momentous and serious, al­
most civic, matter) , and to record it not somehow in passing, but 
in order to express a decisive and weighty judgment, and one which 
by all means may be influential-unexpectedly, by some miracle, 
he turns not only into an ardent realist and prosaist, but even 
into a cynic. Moreover, of that cynicism and prosaism, he is par­
ticularly proud. He records his opinion, and he almost cracks with 
his tongue. Ideals-let's toss them aside ; ideals are humbug, poesy, 
verses ; let's have in their stead nothing but "realistic truth." Yet 
he manages to over-salt it, to the point of cynicism. He seeks and 
presumes realistic truth in cynicism. The coarser, the drier, the 
more heartless it is-the more, in his judgment, realistic it is. Why 
is this so ?-Because, in a case such as this, our idealist, without 
fail, will be ashamed of his idealism. He will be ashamed and will 
fear that he might be told : "Look here, you idealist : what do you 
understand in 'business' ?-Go ahead, and preach there the beau­
tiful, but leave it to us to judge 'business' matters." This trait was 
present even in Pushkin : time and again, the great poet used to 
feel ashamed of the fact that he was only a poet. Perhaps this 
trait may also be found in other nations, but I don't think so­
at least, not in such a degree as in us. Over there, owing to the 
long-standing and common habit of work, occupations and sig­
nifications of men, over a period of centuries, had the time to sort 
themselves, and almost everyone knows, understands and respects 
himself in his own profession and capacity. In Russia, however, 
in view of the two-hundred-year Jack of habit of any work, the 
situation is somewhat diffarent. Concealed, profound inner disre­
spect for oneself does not miss even such men as Pushkin and 
Granovsky. And, in truth, having found it necessary to turn sud­
dt·nly from a professor of history into a diplomatist, this most 
innocent, most truthful man, in his judgments, denies the very 
possibility of Austria's gratitude to us for the fact that we helped 
her in her strife with the Hungarians and literally saved her from 
disintegration. And he denies this not because Austria was "crafty" 
and we should have known this in advance ; no, he perceives no 
cunning and directly asserts that Austria could not have acted 
differently. Even more than that : he states that she should not 
have acted differently, and, on the contrary, that she should have 
acted as she did and t9at, for this reason, our hopes for Austria's 
gratitude merely constitute an unpardonable and ridiculous blunder 
of our policy. A private person-he implies-is one proposition, 
and the state-a different one. The state has its supreme immediate 
aims, its own advantages, so that it is simply ridiculous to demand 
gratitude even to the prejudice of that state's own interests. "In 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Russia"-says Granovsky-"Austria's craftiness and ingratitude have 
become commonplace. But to speak of ingratitude and gratitude 
in political matters merely signifies lack of understanding. A state 
is not a private person ; it cannot, because of gratitude, sacrifice 
its interests-all the more so as in political matters magnanimity 
itself iם never disinterested." (That is, it should not be disinterested. 
Is this so ?-This is precisely the thought.) f,riefly, the esteemed 
idealist has uttered a whole lot of clever, but chiefly realistic, things. 
"You sec, we are not merely composing verses ! "  True, this is 
clever-all the more so as it is not new ; it is as old as the times 
when diplomats came into existence ; even so, to justify so 
ardently Austria's act--and not only to justify it but to prove 
directly that she should not have acted otherwise-say what you 
will, but this somehow cuts the mind in two. Here there is some­
thing with which one cannot agree, which one loathes to accept, 
despite the extraordinary practical and political cleverness so unex­
pectedly expressed by our historian, poet and priest of the beau­
tiful. For this admission of the sacredness of immediate advantage, 
of direct :l:ld : , . . ,1 y gain 
this avowal of the justness of spittle 
upon honor and conscience merely for the sake of snatching a tuft 
of wool-may lead one very far. This, perhaps, may vindicate l\Jet­
ternich's policy on the ground of supreme and realistic state aims. 
Besides, do only r,, actical advanta).(eS and immediate profits con­
stitute a nation's 1 1::al benefit and, therefor.:, its "supreme" policy 
as opposed to all these "Schiller" sentiments, ideals, and so forth ? 
That's the question. On the contrary, isn't the best policy of a 
great nation precisely a policy of honor, magnanimity and justice, 
even if seemingly it is (in reality, it nPver is) detrimental to its 
interests ? Is it possible that our historian was not :'.'-':".re of the 
fact that precisely these great and honest ideas (an. 
11ot mere 
profit and a tuft of wool) ,  in the long run, triumph owr peoples 
and nations, despite all their apparf'nt impracticability, and not­
withstanding all their idealism, so humiliating in the view of the 
diplomatists, the l\1etternichs ; and that the policy of honor and 
disinterestedness is not only the supreme but, perhaps, the most 
advantaxrous policy for a great nation, exactly because it is great ? 
The policy of current practicality and of continually throwing one­
self where there is more 1·rofit and where it is more practical reveals 
triviality, inner impotence of a state-an unfortunate condition. 
The diplomatic mind, the mind of practical and vital ga:n, in­
variably proved inferior to truth and bon. 
while truth and t10nor, 
at length, always triumphed. And if they did not triumph, they 
will-because men have invariably and eternally sought this and 
are seeking this. When Negro trade was about to be abolished, 

J82 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
were not profound and wise objections raised to the effect that 
this "abolition" was impractical, that it would be detrimental to 
the vital and most essential interests of the nations and the states ? 
People went so far as to assert that Negro trade was a matter 
of moral necessity ; it was justified by the natural racial differences, 
and the inference used to be drawn that a Negro is almost not 
a man . . . .  
When the North American colonies of England rebelled 
against her, did not people in practical England shout, year after 
year, that the liberation of the colonies from England's possession 
would mean the ruin of English interests, violent commotion, 
calamity ? 
When peasants were about to be liberated in Russia, weren't 
the same shouts heard in provincial districts ? Didn't "profound and 
practical minds" assert that the state was embarking upon a bad 
road, unexplored and dreadful ; that this would shake the state 
to its foundations ; that not such should be a supreme policy look­
ing to realistic interests and not those derived from modish economic 
considerations and theories, which have not been empirically as­
sayed, as well as those founded on "sentimentality" ?  
Well, why should one be looking so far away ?-Here we are 
faced with the Slavic question. Should we, at this time, forsake 
the Slavs for good ?-Even though Granovsky insists that we are 
merely seeking to strengthen ourselves with the Slavs, and that 
we are acting only for our practical advantage, nevertheless, to 
my way of thinking, here he made a slip. Indeed, what is our 
practical benefit with them,. even in the future ? And how are we 
going to strengthen ourselves ?-Through the Mediterranean in soqJ,e 
future time ? Or through Constantinople "which will never be 
ceded to us" ? But this is nothing but a crane in the sky : even 
if we should manage to catch him, we would be merely adding 
to our troubles-for a whole millennium. Is this prosperity ? Is this 
a wise man's view ? Is this real practical interest ?-There is nothing 
but bother and trouble with the Slavs-especially now when they 
are not yet ours. It is because of them that Europe, for a hundred 
years, has been looking askance at us. And at present not only is 
she looking at us askance, but at our slightest move she draws her 
sword and sights a gun at us. Simply, let us forsake them for good, 
and once and forever appease Europe. And we should not only 
forsake them : possibly, Europe would not believe that we did for­
sake them ; no, we should have to forsake with proof in hand ; we 
should throw ourselves upon the Slavs and crush them in a brotherly 
fashion in order to give our support to Turkey : "Can't you see, 
dear Slavic brethren, a state is not a private person ; it cannot, for 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
the sake of magnanimity, sacrifice its interests. Didn't you know 
this ?"-And how many benefits-practical, real and immediate 
benefits, and not some visionary future ones-would Russia derive 
at once ! Forthwith the Eastern question would come to an end ; 
Europe, even though only for a while, would restore her confidence 
in us. As a result, our military budget would be curtailed ; our 
credit would be improved ; our ruble would ue quoted at its real 
exchange rate-and not only this : the crane would fly away no­
where ; he would keep circling right here ! Wttll, just now we will 
act against our conscience ; we will wait awhile : "The state is not 
a private person ; it should not be sacrificing its interests-but in 
thtt future . . .  Well, if the Slavs are destined not to get along 
without us, they themselves will join us when the time is ripe, 
and then we will again stick to them with love and brotherhood." 
However, Granovsky perceives precisely this in our policy. 
He specifically asserts that during the whole last century our policy 
did nothing but oppress the Slavs, "denouncing and betraying them 
to the Turks" : that our Slavic policy has always been a policy of 
seizure and violt:nce, and that it could not have been different. 
(Does this mean that it. should have been such ? Indeed, he does 
vindicate the others for such a policy ! Why shouldn't he vindi­
cate us ?) 
But is it re;. o ly true that such was our traditional policy in 
the Slavic question ? Is it possible that even now it has not been 
clarified ?-That's the question ! 
2 
Is IT SHAMEFUL To BE AN 1 T'EALIST ? 
Of course, Granovsky was ambitious, but I believe that am­
bition, at times-even hot-tempered arnbition-mus. have been 
prevalent in all our capable men of those chys-precisely owinK 
to the absence of work ; because of the impossibility of finding an 
occupation, so to speak, because of anguish for work. It used to 
come to the point where people seemingly engaged in some pursuit 
(a professor, for example, or a writer, a poet, even a great poet) 
placed little value on their profession-not merely because of the 
constraint in which they found themselves and their profession, 
but also because virtually each one of them was inclined I n  pre­
sume in himself a touch of some other voca. 
m which, in his opinion, 
was higher, more useful, more civic than the one in which he was 
engaged. Irritableness of ambition in our best progressive and 
capable men (in some of them, of course) is extnordinary even 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
nowadays and, invariably, it is due to the same cause. (However, 
I am speaking only of capable and gifted men and, for the time 
being, I make no mention of the ugly, impermissibly irritable self­
conceit and vainglory of so many inept and vain contemporaneous 
"workers" who imagine themselves geniuses-although this phe­
nomenon is particularly conspicuous in our day.) This anguish for 
work-this perpetual quest of occupation-which is exclusively 
caused by our two-hundred-year-long indolence and which has gone 
so far that at present we do not even know how to approach a 
task-moreover, even to determine where the task is and what it 
consists of-greatly irritates men in Russia. There appears self­
conceit-sometimes even indecent self-conceit, taking into account 
the moral level of the man-which makes him almost ludicrous. 
But all this is caused precisely by the fact that this lofty moral 
person was never able to gauge himself, to ascertain his forces and 
his significance, to determine, so to speak, his own specific gravity 
and his real value in practical matters, in work. Had he ascertained 
all this, as a highly spiritual man, he would not deem it humiliating 
to admit that he has no aptitude for certain things. Nowadays, 
however, he is touchy and, owing to his irritableness, oftentimes 
embarks upon work for: which he is not fitted. 
Granovsky's article-1 repeat-is cleverly written, although it 
contains political errors which subsequently were proved in Europe 
by facts which certainly could be specified, but I am not speaking 
of these mistakes and, besides, it is not for me to judge Granovsky 
in this respect. This time I was merely impressed with the extraor­
dinary irritableness of the· article. Oh, I am not attributing it to 
ambition, nor am I attacking a certain tendentiousness of the 
article. I can readily understand the "cri du jour" which is reflected 
in this paper, the feeling and sorrow of a citizen. After all, there 
are moments when even the most just man cannot be impartial. . . .  
(Alas, Granovsky did not live to see the liberation of the peasants, 
and he could not have imagined it even in his dreams ! )  No, I am 
not attacking this. But why does he, in this Eastern Question of 
his, look so contemptuously upon the people, and why does he 
not give them what is due to them ? In this matter he refuses to 
perceive the people's participation, their thought. He positively 
asserts that concerning the cause of the Slavs and the contem­
poraneous war, the prople held no opinion whatever and merely 
felt the burden of requisitions and taxes. It seems that the people 
should have had no opinion. Says Granovsky : 
"In the first place, it- is necessary to set aside the thought 
that this war (i.e., of rBsJ-'54-'55 )  is a holy war. The government 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
sought to convince the people that it rose in detense of the rights 
of the co-religionists and of the Christian Church. The defenders 
of Orthodoxy and of the Slavic race hoisted this banner with glad­
ness and preached a crusade against the Mohammedans. But the 
age of crusades has passed: in our day no one will be prompted 
to rise in defense of the Holy Sepulchre [and in defense of the 
Slavs, too ?] ; no one regards the M ohammeda" · as eternal enemies 
of Christianity ; the keys to the Bethlehem temple serve as a mere 
pretext for the attainment of political aims." [In another place 
this is also directly stated concerning the Slavs.] 
Of course, we are also willing to agree that in the Slavic 
question the Russian policy, during this last century, was perhaps, 
at times, not flawless. At certain moments it may have been too 
reserved and cautious, and for this reason, in somebody's impatient 
view, it may have seemed insincere. Perhaps there may have been 
excessive concern about current interests, ambiguity caused by cer­
tain external diplomatic pressure, half-measures, suspense ; yet, es­
sentially, on the whole, Russia's policy was hardly concerned only 
about bring:ng ࢨ: .. : Slavs P"'!der her domination in order thereby 
to increase her power and political influence. Of course, this was 
not so, and in substance our policy in the Slavic, i e., the Eastern, 
question, even through the entire Petersburg period of our history, 
hardly differed frO'., our most ancient historical covenants and 
traditions, and fran. Lhe popular opinion. AnJ our government was 
always firmly aware of the fact that the moment the people would 
hear its appeal in this matter, they would wholeheartedly respond 
to it, and this is why in Russia the Eastern question was always 
essentially a popular question. 
However, Granovsky does not at all admit it. Oh .-:·anovsky 
had a profound affection for the people ! In his article hl ·xpresses 
sorrow and laments about their sufferings during the war, about 
the burdens endured by them. Indeed, can men like Gnnovsky fail 
to love the people ? In this compassion, in this love, his beautiful 
soul was fully revealed. At the same time, however, involuntarily 
was revealed the opinion concerning the people of a sworn Westerner, 
always ready to admit in the people admirable beginnings, but 
merely "in a passive state,'' and on the level of a "secluued idyllic 
mode of existence," where ·•s "one had better refrain from speaking 
about their actual and potential activity." To him, the people, under 
all circumstances are a backward and a mute mass. And what 
would you think : we-almost all of us-in · · '1Se days, believeo him. 
This is why I do not venture to "attack' Granovsky, and I am 
merely accusing his times-and not him. His article passed from 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
hand to hand, and it exercised influence. . . .  That's the point : 
more than by anything, I was impressed with the parallel between 
this remarkable article, with its remarkable point of view, and 
our current, present moment. No, even the Westerner Granovsky 
today would be amazed and, possibly, would believe : these volun­
tary sacrifices and the people's contributions to the Orthodox Slavs ; 
these sacrifices of the Old-Believers who, through their congrega­
tions, are sending sanitary units ; these donations of artel workers 
collected from their last pennies, or subscriptions, initiated by com­
munal resolutions, by whole villages ; donations of soldiers and 
sailors out of their salaries ; finally-Russians belonging to all 
classes, who go to fight and shed their blood for their oppressed 
Orthodox brethren-no, this is something manifest, something that 
cannot be called passive and which must be reckoned with. The 
movement has been exposed and it cannot be denied. Women, 
prominent ladies, are collecting alms in the streets for our Slavic 
brethren, and the people are gravely and fondly observing this 
penomenon which is novel to them : "This means that once more 
we all are getting together ; that not always are we drifting apart ; 
that we are all Christians."-This is what the people certainly feel 
and, perhaps, what they already think. And, o£ course, the news 
does reach them : they listen when newspapers are read to them ; 
they themselves begin to read them. And, no doubt, they have 
heard and prayed in church for the repose of the soul of Nikolai 
Alexeevich Kireev who gave his life for the cause of the people. 
And-who knows ?-they might compose their folksong about that 
dt•ath and that sacrifice-
Though he did fall, he still will live 
Forever in the people's thought­
For all he bravely chose to give, 
For his free soul, for all he'd fought ! 
Death for the people is a glorious death ! 
Yes, this was a "death for the people," and not only for the Slavic 
people, but also for the common Orthodox and Russian cause, 
and the people will always understand it. No, our people are not 
materialists and, spiritually, they have not yet been corrupted to 
the point where they would be thinking only about material proti.ts 
and positive interests. •At heart they are glad when there arises 
a great goal and they accept it as spiritual bread. And is it possible 
that the people now, at this minute, do not realize that further 
developments in this "SlaviC cause" may threaten with war even 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
us, that they may precipitate war ?-If so-just as twenty years 
ago, during the Eastern war-the people would have to endure 
requisitions and burdens. But look at them now : are they afraid of 
anything ?-No, in our people there are more spiritual and active 
forces than some of our "connoisseurs" are inclined to think. Better 
had Granovsky left this opinion to others, to that multitude of 
"connoisseurs of the people" and, perhaps, to ;:;orne of our writers 
about the people who, although they have buried themselves in 
the Russian peasant, have forever remained foreigners. 
In conclusion, I repeat : in Russia, idealists often forget that 
idealism is in no sense a shameful thing. In both the idealist and 
the realist, if only tht>y be honest and magnanimous, the substance 
is identical-love of mankind-and their object is identical-man ; 
it is only the forms of the representation of the object that are 
different. 
There is no reason for being ashamed of one's idealism : this 
is the same road to the same goal. So that, in substance, idealism 
is as realistic as realism, and it can never vanish from the world. 
It is not for the l.t .:muvണl-ys to be ashamed of the fact that they 
come into being specifically for the purpose of preaching "the beau­
tiful and the lofty." And should even the Granovskys become 
ashamed and, for ft>:1r of the scoffmg and haughty sages of the 
Areopagus, should -ide with those who are next to the Metternichs 
- ·who, then, would be our prophets ? And it is not for Granovsky, 
the historian, to be ignorant of the fact that to the peoples there 
is nothing more precious than to possess and preserve ideals, and 
that some sacred idea, no matter how weak, impractical and 
ri9iculous it may appear to the sages, will always 1.arry an appeal 
to some member of the Areopagus and ' ,, "the wot•. n named 
Thamar'' who, from the very start, will believe in it a •
.
 , will be­
lieve the preacher ; who will join the noble cause, not fearing 
severance from the sages. And thus a negligible, untii.1ely, imprac­
tical "tiny idea" begins to grow, to expand, and, at length, it con­
quers the world and the wise men of the Areopagus are silenced. 
3 
THE GERMANS AND WoRK. INcoMPREHENSIBLE TRICKS. 
ON WIT. 
Ems is a brilliant and fashionable , 'ace. Sick people, pre­
eminently with chest ailments, with "catarrhs of the pulmonary 
tract," come here from all over the world and are successfully 

J88 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r876 
cured at her springs. Every summer there are some fourteen or 
fifteen thousand visitors-of course, mostly rich people or, at 
least, those who are in a position not to deny themselves the 
privilege of taking care of their health. But there are also poor 
people who go there on foot to take the cure. Of these, there are 
about one hundred persons and, maybe, they too do not come on 
foot but use some other means of locomotion. 
I became very much interested in the fourth-class cars in­
augurated on German railroads-only T don't know if they are de­
signed for everybody's use. At some stop on the journey I asked a 
conductor (almost all conductors on German railroads are not only 
men of executive ability bat they are also attentive and kind to 
the passengers) to explain to me what that fourth class meant. He 
showed me an empty car which had nothing but walls and a floor. 
It developed that passengers must stand on their feet. 
"Perhaps, they sit down on the floor ?" 
"Oh, of course, people do as they please." 
"How many places are there in a car ?" 
"Twenty-five.'' 
Upon measuring mentally the dimensions of this vacant car 
for twenty-five persons, I concluded that they must necessarily be 
standing-even, shoulder to shoulder. So that in case they might 
actually crowd in twenty-five people-that is, to full capacity­
not one of them could sit down, despite the "as they please." Of 
course, everyone must be holding his baggage in his hands. How­
ever, they probably have but small bundles with them. 
"Yes, but here prices are half of what they are in the third 
class, and this is quite an advantage for a poor man." 
Well, that's really worth something. 
So, "the poor" arriving in Ems are not only medically treated 
but even maintained at the expense of . . .  why, I don't know at 
whose expens<:. Shortly after one's arrival there, and when one 
has occupied a lodging at a hotel (in Ems all houses are hotels) , 
without fail on the second or third day two collectors of dona­
tions, with books for recording them, one after the other, will call 
on you. They are of humble and patient appearance, but with some 
self-respect. One of them collects for the maintenance of these 
destitute sick people. Appended to the book is a printed appeal 
of the Ems doctors t.o their patients to remember the poor. You 
make a contribution within your means and inscribe your name 
in the book. I looked through it and I was amazed by the scantiness 
of the contributions : one mark, half a mark, rarely three marks, 
and very rarely five marks. And yet, it would seem that here the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
public is not being annoyed with requests for contributions : aside 
from these two collectors, there are no others. While you are 
making your contribution and recording your name in the book, 
the functionary (well, let's call him that) is humbly standing in 
the middle of your room. 
"Do you collect much in the course of the season ?"-1 asked. 
"Up to one thousand taler ; but this is tu·J small a sum com­
pared with the need : there are many of then:, up to a hundred 
persons, and we fully maintain them-we treat and feed them, and 
provide lodgings for them." 
Verily, this isn't much. One thousand taler is equal to three 
thousand marks. If some fourteen thousand people be visiting the 
place, what would the per capita contribution amount to ? Thus, 
there must be people who contribute nothing ; they refuse to give 
and expel the collector (they actually expel him, as I subsequently 
learned) .  And yet this is a brilliant, most brilliant, public. Go 
out and look at that crowd when they are drinking mineral waters 
or when the music is playing. 
By tht W<•)' , ,, ._ f;-r b;vk as in the spring I read in our papers 
that we, Russians, have contributed very little to the insurgent 
Slavs (of course, this was reported before the present contribu­
tions had been made), and that, compared with us, everybody in 
Europe has contrib", [('d much more, not to speak of Austria which 
contributed many \ r )  millions of guldens fur the maintenance of 
the families of the insurgents who, by the tens of thousands, have 
made their way into her territory ; that in England, for example, 
people ha\'e contributed much more than we-even in France and 
in Italy. However, say what you may, I do not believe in the 
enႽrmity of these European contributions to the Slave ':luch has 
been said about England ; however, it would be curiot. 
to learn 
the actual amount of her contributions which, it would seem, no 
one knows precisely. 
As for Austria, which from the very beginning of the uprising 
has been contemplating the acquisition of a portion of Bosnia (this 
matter is already being discussed in diplomatic circles) ,  her con­
tributions were thus not disinterested, having been made with a 
view to her future interests. Besides, this was not a public con­
tribution but simply a gr ·ernmental appropriation. Yet, even here 
"the many" millions of guldens may be questioned. There have 
been contributions-more correctly, monetary appropriation"-but 
whether the actual relief was substantial, ·._ a matter whill. may 
be ascertained only in the future. 
The other functionary-! mean, the Ems collector of dona-

390 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
tions-who invariably calls immediately after the first one, is col­
lecting for "blodige Kinder," i.e., little idiot-children. Such is the 
name of the local institution. Of course, it is not only Ems that 
supplies the establishment with idiots ; and it would be most un­
becoming for so small a town to be begt>tting so many idiots. There 
is a government appropriation for the maintenance of this institu­
tion, but apparently it also has to resort to charity. A brilliant 
man or a gorgeous lady is cured and restored to health, precisely 
owing to the local mineral springs, and not from gratitude to this 
place, but as a souvenir they leave two or three marks for these 
destitute, forsaken, unfortunate little creatures. In this second book 
the contributions also amount to one mark, two marks, and only 
very rarely does there appear a contribution of ten marks. This 
second functionary collects in the course of the season fifteen hun­
dred talers : "Things used to be better : formerly people contributed 
more liberally"-he added sadly. 
In this book my attention was arrested by one contribution, 
so to speak, with a "tendency" : 5 pfennigs ( I 0  silver copeck) .  
This reminded mt' of a donation of a certain Russian State Coun­
cillor, recorded in the book at Piatigorsk for the erection of a 
monument to I.ermontov : he contributed one silver co peck, and he 
signed his name. About a year ago this was reported in the press, 
but the name of the donor was not revealed, and, in my opinion, 
with no good reason since he had personally signed his name-and, 
perhaps, precisely dreaming about fame. However, the State Coun­
cillor apparently meant to reveal his mental vigor-his point of 
view, his orientation : he protested against art, against the nullity 
of poetry in our age of "realism," steamships and railroads, if·· 
against everything which is usually being denounced by the liberal 
(more correctly-echoing somebody else's liberal ideas) rabble of 
the lowest order. But this one-the local Bliidigc, what did he mean 
to express by his five pfennigs ?-I really fail to understand wherein 
is the tendency in this case. Blodige Kinder are little unfortunate 
creatures, outcasts of the poorest families. Why should one be dis­
playing wit in a matter such as this ? "And if you give a poor 
wretch but one glass of water, even this will be credited to you 
in the Heavenly Kingdom." However, what am I talking about ?-A 
glass of water at Ems certainly does not cost more than five pfennigs 
-by no means-so that even for five pfennigs one may be admitted 
to Paradise. Precisely, the fellow has estimated the minimum ex­
pense for admission to Paradise. "What's the use of paying extra ?" 
-Simply, a child of his age ! Nowadays, don't you see, no one 
can be duped ! 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
391 
Ever since my first visit to Ems-three years ago-ever since 
the first day of my sojourn there, I have been intrigued with one 
fact ; it continues to interest me on each one of my visits. The 
two most popular springs at Ems-even though there are others­
are Krenchen and Kesselbrunnen. Over these springs a house has 
been erected, and the springs themselves are fenced off from the 
public by a balustrade. Behind it stand several girls-three at each 
spring-courteous, young and neatly dressed. Y ou hand them your 
glass which they promptly fill with the water. During the two 
hours designated for the morning drinking thousands of patients 
come to the balustrades ; in the course of these two hours, each 
patient drinks several glasses-two, three, four-as many as are 
prescribed for him. The same takes place during the evening drink­
ing hours. Thus, each one of the three girls fiiis and hands a 
great number of glasses. Yet not only is this being done in perfect 
order-unhurriedly, with poise, methodically, so that no one is 
ever being delayed-but what is most surprising is the fact that 
each of the Ⴕiris, in my opinion, possesses almost supernatural 
apprehension. Only once, ttႸe first time after your arrival, you say 
to her : "Here iӇ my glasӇ. I have to have so many ounces of 
Krenchen and so many ounces of milk"-and during the whole 
month of your cure r:ot even once will she make a mistake. More­
over, she knows y 1 1 1  "by heart" and Ӈhe recoႶnizes you amidst the 
crowd, which is densr ; people stand in several rows ; everyone is 
stretching out his hand with his glass ; she takes them-six or seven 
glasses at a time-fills them in some quarter of a minute and, with­
out spiiiing or breaking them, returns the glass to each patient 
without a mistake. She hands you your glass herstlf and, amidst 
the thousands of glas!>es, she knows that tl: ;. 'Jne is you. 
that one 
-somebody else's, and she remembers by heart how mr. J ounces 
of water and how many ounces of milk should be poured into it, 
and how many glasses you have to drink according to Ⴗ.he prescrip­
tion. N rver docs even the slightest mistake orcur : I myself have 
been watching, and I have been making specific inquiries. And 
the principal thing : here there are several thousands ot patients. 
Possibly this is a most ordinary thing in which there is nothing 
surprising, but to me, for the t!1ird year, it seems almost incom­
prehensible, and I still reღ;drd this as an inconceivable legerdemain. 
And even though it is ludicrous to be surprised at anything, this 
problem I am positively unable to solve. Apparently, it is nec-·<osary 
to conclude that these German women l- >sess an extraordinary 
memory and quickness of apprehension ; on the other hand, per­
haps, this may be nothing but habit of work, adaptation to work 

392 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
from early childhood, or, to employ a metaphor, victory over work. 
As far as work specifically is concerned, the observing Rus­
sian also feels perplexed. Living one month in the hotel-(strictly 
speaking, not in a hotel : here every house is a hotel, and the 
majority of these hotels, with the exception of several big ones, 
are simply apartments with service and board by stipulation)-! 
kept wondering at our maidservant. In the hotel where I lived 
there were twelve apartments, all of them occupied ; in some of 
them whole families were living. Everyone rings the bell ; everyone 
orders something ; everyone has to be served ; many times during 
the day she has to run up and down the staircase. And for all this 
there was in the hotel only one servant-a nineteen-year-old girl. 
Moreover, the hostess sent her around on errands : to fetch wine 
for dinner for this tenant, to a pharmacy-for that one ; to the 
laundry-for the third one ; to the grocery-for the hostess herself. 
That hostess, a widow, had three children ; somehow they had to 
be taken care of, served ; in the mornings they had to be dressed 
for school. Every Saturday the maid had to wash all the floors in 
the house ; every day every room had to be cleaned, bed and table 
linen had to be changed, and each time after the departure of 
a tenant his entire apartment had to be immediately washed and 
cleaned, without waiting for Saturday. The girl went to bed at half 
past eleven in the evening, and in the morning the hostess would 
wake her up with a bell -at five o'clock. All this is literally so, 
as I am stating it, and I do not exaggerate in the least. Add to 
this the fact that she worked for a most modPst remuneration­
inconceivahle in Petersb\lrg-and, on top of that, she had to be 
neatly dressed. Please note that there was nothing contrite or aOp­
pressed in the appearance of that maidservant : she was cheerful, 
bold, healthy-with a perfectly contented air and an unperturbed 
calmness. 
Nay, in Russia people do not work this way : for no amount 
of money will our Russian maidservant accept such a "hard-labor" 
position. Besides, the quality of her work is different : a hundred 
times will she forget things ; she will spill something ; she will fail 
to bring things ; she will break something ; she will make a mistake ; 
she will grow angry or "fresh." Whereas here, during the whole 
month, there was absolutely nothing to complain about. 
To my way of thinking, this is remarkable and, as a Russian, 
I don't know whether this should be lauded or censured. Well, I 
will venture to laud it, although here there is something to think 
about. Here, everyone has· accepted his status as it is, and is satis­
fied without envying, apparently without ever suspecting anything 
-at least, this is true of the overwhelming majority. Nevertheless, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
393 
work is tempting-settled work which, in the course of centuries, 
has become crystallized ; work with a manifest method and manner 
which is given to everyone almost at his birth. For this reason 
everyone knows how to approach his task and to completely master 
it. Here, everybody knows his task, although nothing but his task. 
I am saying this because here everybody works-not only maid­
servants, but also their employers. 
Look at a German functionary, say, a postoffice employee. 
Everybody knows what Russian functionaries are-especially those 
among them who are in daily contact with the public : a Russian 
functionary is something of an angry and irritable creature ; and 
even if, at times, irritation is not manifest, yet one feels that it is 
concealed, and this may be guessed by his expression. He is pre­
sumptuous and haughty, something on the order of Jupiter. This 
is particularly noticeable in the tiniest midgets-say, among those 
who are givng information to the public, or who are receiving 
money, issuing tickets, and the like. Look at one of them : he is 
busy, he is "at work." The public gathers in a crowd ; a line is 
formed ; eve&) Ullc i:. anxio•· J to obtain his bit of information, to 
receive an answer, to get his receipt, to purchase his ticket. And 
here, he pays not the slightest attention to you. Finally, you are 
"next" ; you are standing there, you speak to him-he doesn't listen, 
he doesn't look at yr-u ; he turns his head and talks to a functionary 
sitting behind him ; he picks up some paper and checks something, 
but you are ready to suspect that he is merely pretending, and that 
there is nothing he needs to check. However, you are prepared to 
wait. Presently he gets up and walks out. Suddenly the clock 
strikes, and the office closes. Public, get out ! 
Our functionary, compared with the r.f'rman, sp.:;:: 's much 
less time at his work. Rudeness, inattention, neglect, 
: . .  imosity 
against the public for the sole reason that it is the public, and 
most of all-petty Jupiterism. He is anxiot•Ⴙ by all meC''lS to prove 
to you that you depend upon him. "Look at me : you there, behind 
the balustrade, you can do nothing to me, and I can do to you 
whatever pleases me, and if you grow angry, I shall call a guard 
and you will be ejected .. , He seeks to take vengeance upon someone 
for some kind of offense, to take vengeance upon you for his noth­
ingness. 
Here, at Ems, in the postoffice there are usually two, a 
maximum of three, functionaries. During the season there are 
months ( for example, June and July) whe• ··isitors gather by the 
thousands. One can imagine what a mass of correspondence must 
be accumulating dnd what a volume of work the postoffice must be 
handling. Except for some two hours for dinner, the functionaries 

394 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
work all day long. Correspondence has to be received and dis­
patched ; a thousand persons are coming to claim their poste restante 
or to make some inquiry. For each one the functionary looks through 
heaps of letters ; be listens to everybody and gives him information 
or explains something ; and he does all this patiently, kindly, 
politely-at the same time preserving his dignity. From a tiny 
midget he is being converted into a man, and not vice versa . . . .  
After my arrival in Ems, for a long time I did not receive a certain 
letter which I was impatiently awaiting ; and every day I inquired 
about it at the paste restante window. One morning, after return­
ing to my hotel from the "water-drinking," I found that letter on 
my desk. It had just arrived, and the functionary who remembered 
my name, but did not know where I was stopping, made a special 
search for my address in a printed list recording the arrivals of 
visitors and their addresses, and sent me this letter by special 
delivery, despite the fact that it was addressed "poste restante"­
all this solely because on the eve when I came to inquire he had 
noticed my great anxiety. Well, would anyone of our functionaries 
do this ? 
As regards German wit and German apprehension, which have 
come to my mind specif1cally in connection with German work and 
everything I have stated above about it, there exist several opinions. 
The French, who even before never liked the Germans, always have 
considered, and now regard, the German mind as being a bit tight 
but, of course, by no means blunt. They perceive in the German 
intellect, as it were, some inclination to avoid always the straight 
issue in everything, and, on the contrary, an invariable desire to 
resort to something intermediary, to make out of a single proposi­
tion something bisyllabic, biarticulate. Among us, Russians, there 
has always circulated a great number of anecdotes about the tight­
ness and dullness of the Germans, notwithstanding all our sincere 
admiration of their learnedness. But it seems to me that the Ger­
mans merely possess too strong a distinctiveness, too obstinate a 
national peculiarity, to the degree of haughtiness, which, at times, 
makes one indignant, and which, for this reason, leads to erroneous 
conclusions regarding them. However, at first, on a foreigner­
especially if he is a newcomer in Germany-the German, in truth, 
sometimes, produces a strange impression in social intercourse. 
On my way from Berlin to Ems the train made a four-minute 
stop at a certain Sldtion. This was at night-time : I was tired of 
sitting in the car, and I wanted to take at least a brief walk and 
to smoke a cigarette in the open air. In all the cars everybody 
was asleep, and no one but myself came out of the entire long 
train. Presently the ,bell rang and I suddenly noticed that, owing 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
395 
to my usual absentmindedness, I had forgotten the number of my 
car, the door of which, when I was leaving it, I myself shut. Per­
haps only a few seconds were left ; I was about to go to the 
conductor who stood at the other end of the train when, suddenly, 
I heard someone signalling : "Pst! Pst ! "-"This must be my car ! "  
I said to myself. In point of fact, Germans sitting in the cars in 
their small compartments which accommodate a maximum number 
of eight persons, are watchfully observing each other during the 
journey. When the train stops at a big station, where dinner or 
supper is being served, a German, on leaving his car, without fail 
goes to the trouble of waking up his sleeping neighbor so that he 
won't be sorry that he slept through supper, etc. So I thought it 
was one of my awakened companions in my car who called to me, 
noticing that I had lost my seat. I came up, and an anxious German 
face looked out. 
"Was suchcn Sic?" ("What are you looking for ?") 
"My car. Am I sitting with you ? Is this my car ?" 
"No, this isn't your car, and your seat is not here. But where 
is your car ?'' 
"That's the point : I've lost track of it ! "  
"Nor do I know which is your car." 
Only at the very last second the conductor, who had come 
to my rescue, showrd me my car. The question arises : why did that 
German call and interrogate me ? But if you should stay awhile 
in Germany, you would learn that every German would act in the 
same manner. 
Some ten years ago I went to Dresden. Next day, upon leav­
ing my hotel, I intended to go straight to the picture gallery. I 
did not inquire about my way to it. The D• .ᅿsden pict1.11 .· gallery 
is such a remarkable institution, in the whole world, th. 
I was 
sure every Dresden resident, belonging to the educated class, would 
show me my way. And so, having passed a certain street, I stopped 
a German with a very serious and educated coUT'Itenance. 
"Permit me to ask you-where is the picture gallery here ?" 
"The picture gallrry ?"-said the German, pondering over my 
question. 
"Yes." 
"The Royal Picture Gallery ?" (He laid particular emphasis 
on the word : "Royal.") 
"Yes." 
"I don't know where that gallery is." 
"But . . .  is there any other gallery ?" 
"Oh no, there is no other gallery." 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
CHAPTER III 
1 
The Russian or the French Language 
WHAT A CROWD of Russians there are at all these German 
spas-particularly at the fashionable ones, such as Ems. Generally, 
Russians are very fond of taking cures. Even at Wunderfrau's, the 
sanatorium near :\Iunich, where, by the way, there are no mineral 
springs, it is said that the main contingent of patients is provided 
by Russia. True, this Frau is frequented mostly by solid persons, 
so to speak, of the rank of generals ; they send along their bathing 
paraphernalia in advance, and they entreat for reservations in that 
institution as early as in the winter. This Frau is a formidable and 
unyielding woman. 
At Ems, naturally, you recognize Russians above all by the 
manner in which they talk, that is, by that Russian-French dialect 
which is characteristic only of Russia and which is beginning to 
startle even foreigners. I say : "is beginning to startle," since up 
to the present we have only been praised for it. I know, people 
will argue that it is terribly out of fashion to attack Russians for 
their French language, and that both this theme and its moral 
are altogether too worn out. But, to me, the surprising fact is not 
that Russians should not be speaking Russian among themselves 
(it would be even strahge if they should be speaking Russian) ,  
but that they imagine that they speak good :French. Who knocked 
this silly prejudice into our heads ? No doubt, it persists only 
because of our ignorance. Russians who speak French (that is, the 
overwhelming majority of the educated Russians) may be divided 
into two general categories : those whose French is undeniably bad, 
and those who imagine that they speak like genuine Parisians (our 
whole beau monde) ,  whereas their French is undeniably just as 
bad as that of the first category. Russians of the latter class border 
on absurdities. For example, during a solitary evening walk on 
the border of the Lanne, I once met two Russians-a man and a 
lady, both elderly people-who conversed with a most preoccupied 
air about some family matter which, to them, was apparently of 
great import and which interested and even disturbed them both 
a good deal. They spoke in an agitated tone, but in French, ex­
pressing themselves very poorly, bookishly, in dead, clumsy phrases 
at times, experiencing great difficulty in formulating a thought, 
or a nuance of a thoueht, so that impatiently they prompted one 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
397 
another. This they did, yet they were utterly unable to grasp the 
fact that they should start conversing in Russian. On the contrary, 
they preferred to express themselves poorly, even at the risk of 
being misunderstood so long as they spoke French. Suddenly I was 
startled with this, and it appeared to me as incredible nonsense, 
evᆀn though I had observed these things a hundred times in my 
life. Most important is the fact that in case!> such as this there 
is no preference-even though I have just said "they preferred to 
express themselves" -or any choice of the language : simply they 
speak bad French by habit, as a matter of custom, even without 
raising the question in which language it is easier to converse. In 
this inept, dead speech the coarse, inept and r:iead pronunciation 
is disgusting. 
The Russian-French dialect of the second category, that is, 
of the beau monde, is also characterized above all by the pronun­
ciation. In fact, seemingly, a fellow speaks like a Parisian, whereas 
this is not at all sc : deceit betrays itself from the very first sound 
-and in the rro;t place precisely by that strained handling of the 
pronunciation, by the coarseness of the counterfeit, by the exag­
gerated rolling of "r's"-the grasseyment-by the indecent pronun­
ciation of the letter "r," and, finally, by the moral aspect : that 
insolent self-conceit with which they pronounce those trilling letters ; 
that childish vanitᆁ. rot even concealed from Pach other, with which 
they flaunt one before the other the imitation of the language of 
the gar(on in a Petersburg hairdresser's shop. Here the self-conceit 
with all this servility is repulsive. 
Say what you will, but even though all this is obsolete, it 
continues to be surprising precisely because living people, in the 
bloom of health and vigor, venture to use .!;: emaciattll vithered, 
sickly language. Of course, they themselves do not realizt :he piti­
fulness and misery of that language (i.e., not the French, but the 
one they speak) ,  and, owing to lack of mental deveivpment, the 
abortiveness and scantiness of their thoughts, te!lporarily, they are 
awfully pleased with the material which they choose for the expres­
sion of their petty thoughts. They are unable to comprehend that, 
once they were born and grew up in Russia, it was forever irnpossible 
for them fully to degenerate into Frenchmen, despite the fact that, 
aping their nurses, they d1d lisp their very first words in French, 
and at a later age they practiced it when being taught by their 
tutors and in society ; and that, for this reason, this dia)P. t of 
theirs must always be a dead, and not a 
. Je, one-an unnatural, 
fantastic, insane language, precisely because it is taken for a 
genuine one ; briefly-not at all the French language, since Russians, 
just like any other foreigners, are impotent to adopt al! the principal 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
generic elements of the living French language, since they were 
not born French ; and since they are merely adopting an alien jargon 
and, at most, a hairdresser's insolence of phrase, and after that 
-perhaps insolence of thought. This is, as it were, a stolen language, 
and, for this reason, not one of the Russian Parisians is able to 
beget in his whole life a single expression of his own, a single original 
word which might be caught and start circulating in the street-a 
thing, however, which any hairdresser's garȞon is fully capable of 
achieving. 
Turgenev, in one of his novels, tells an anecdote about one 
such Russian who, in Paris, entering the Cafe de Paris, shouted : 
"GarȞon, beftek aux pommes de terre !," while another Russian who 
had already managed to ape the novel manner in which beefsteak 
is being ordered, came in and shouted : "GarȞon, beftek-pommes !" 
The Russian who gave the order in the old-fashioned manner : "aux 
pommes de terre," was in despair because he didn't know and had 
missed the new expression : "beftek-pommes," and because he feared 
that now, perhaps, the gar{ons might look at him with contempt. 
Apparently this story is an account of a true event. Slavishly 
crawling before the forms of the language and the opinion of the 
garfons, Russian Parisians, naturally, are also slaves to French 
thought. Thereby they doom their poor heads to the sad lot of 
never in their lives having a single thought of their own. 
Yes, the discussion of the harm in adopting, since early child­
hood, an alien language instead of one's own, is unquestionably 
a ludicrous and old-fashioned theme-naive to the point of inde­
cency-yet it does seem· to me that this topic is not worn out to 
the extent that one should not be attemping to say a few words 
concerning it. Besides, there is no such old theme about which 
something new could not be said. I do not pretend at anything new 
(how could I ?) ,  but I shall risk it-just for the sake of clearing 
my conscience : even so, I will say it. I am very eager to set forth 
my arguments in a most popular style in the hope that some dear 
mama of the beau monde may read them. 
2 
WHAT LANGUAGE SHOULD A FuTURE PILLAR OF His 
MOTHERLAND SPEAK? 
I would ask dear mama the following question : does she know 
what a language is, and · how does she understand the purpose for 
which the word was created ? Undeniably, the language is the form, 
the flesh, the membrane of the thought (I am not explaining what 

THE DIARY OF A \\'RITER 
399 
thought is) , so to speak, the last and concluding word of organic 
evolution. Hence, it is clear that the wealthier the material-the 
forms provided for the thought which I adopt for its expression­
the happier I shall be in life, the more distinct and intelligible I 
shall be to myself and to others, the more sovereign and victorious ; 
the quicker I shall say to myself that which I wish to say, the 
deeper I shall express it and the deeper I myse!f shall comprehend 
that which I sought to express, the firmer and the calmer will my 
spirit be, and-it stands to reason-the wiser I shall be. 
And, again, does mama dear know that, even though man 
is capable of thinking with the velocity of electricity, in fact he 
does not think so quickly, but in an infmitely slower tempo, though 
infinitely more quickly than, for example, he speaks. Why is this 
so ?-Because nevertheless, of necessity, he thinks in some language. 
Verily, we may not be conscious of the fact that we are thinking 
in some particular language, yet this is so ; and if we are not think­
ing in terms of words, that is, by uttering words, be it only mentally 
-nevertheless we think, so to speak, by "the elemental underlying 
power of tha.r hu:guagc'" ir: which we choose to reason, if it be 
permitted to express it this way. Of course, the more flexiuly, the 
more wealthily, the more multilaterally we master that language in 
which we choose to think, the more easily, the more multilaterally we 
shall express our thought in it. Essentially, why do we learn Euro­
pean languages-French, for instance ? First, simply to be able to read 
French and, secondly, to be able to converse with the French when 
we happen to come in contact with them-yet, under no circum­
stance, to converse with Russians and with one's self. For a loftier 
life, for depth of thought, a foreign language is insufficient precisely 
because it always will remain alien to us ; f'Jr this pui t- ' ;e one's 
native tongue is required, with which-so to speak-one 
; born. 
But right here we stumble over a difficulty : Russians-at least those 
uelonging to the upper classes-have long ceased to be born with 
a live language ; only subsequently do they acquire some kind of 
an artificial language, while they get to learn Russian virtually in 
school, by the grammar. Why, certainly, with eager desire and much 
diligence, one may, in the long run, re-educate oneself and, to a 
certain extent, learn the live Ru,.sian tongue, having been born 
with a dead one. I used to n.now a certain Russian writer who won 
a name for himself. He had learned not only the Russian language 
but even the Russian peasant and, in later days, he wrote nc. .·els 
dealing with peasant life. This comical case i. 1ot uncommon among 
us. At times, it assumed formidable proportions : the great Pushkin, 
according to his own admission, had been compelled to re-educate 
himself, and he learned the popular language and the people's spirit, 

400 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
inter alia, from his nurse Arina Rodionovna. The expression "to 
learn the language" is particularly fitted to us, Russians, because 
we, the upper class, are sufficiently detached from the people, that 
is, from the living language ("language" and "people," in our tongue, 
are synonymous, and what a wealthy, profound thought this is ! ) .  
However, i t  may be said : if we have to "learn" a live language, 
it makes no difference whether we learn Russian or French. But 
therein is the point : to a Russian, the Russian tongue is neverthe­
less easier, despite the governesses and the mise-en-scene ; and, by 
all means, one has to take advantage of this ease, while there is 
time. In order to master the Russian tongue in a more natural way, 
without special strain, and not merely scientifically (of course, by 
science I mean not only the school grammar) ,  it is necessary, fol­
lowing the example of Arina Rodionovna, to borrow it from early 
childhood from Russian nurses without fearing that these might 
impart to the child various prejudices-for instance, about the three 
whales (Good Lord ! what of it if these whales should remain 
during one's whole life ! ). In addition, it is necessary not to fear 
the common people, even servants, against whom parents are warned 
by some of our performers. After that, while in school, one must 
by all means memorize specimens of the Russian tongue beginning 
with the most ancient epochs-from annals, legends, even from the 
Church-Slavic language-precisely to learn these by heart notwith­
standing the backwardness of the method of memorizing. Having 
thus· mastered our native tongue-i.e., the one in which we think­
to the best of one's ability, at least to the extent that it resembles 
something living, and having necessarily accustomed ourselves to 
think in it, we shall thereby derive a benefit from our peculiar 
Russian ability to learn European languages, from our polyglottism. 
Indeed, only after having mastered with the utmost perfection 
the prime material-i.e., one's native tongue-is one in a position 
to master, also with the utmost perfection, a foreign language, but 
not prior to that. We shall then imperceptibly appropriate from a 
foreign language several forms, alien to our tongue, and, also im­
perceptibly and involuntarily, we shall bring them in accord with 
the modalities of our thought, and we shall thereby broaden it. 
There is a significant fact : in our unorganized and youthful 
language we are able to translate the most profound manifestations 
of the spirit and th9\lght of the European languages : all European 
poets and thinkers are translatable and expressible in Russian, and 
some of them have already been most perfectly translated. At the 
same time, a great many specimens of the Russian popular tongue 
and of our belletristic works have, thus far, remained untranslatable 
and inexpressible in European languages-particularly, in French. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
401 
I cannot recall without laughing a translation into French (now a 
bibliographical rarity) from Gogo!, which was made in the middle 
of the Forties by Mr. Viardot, the husband of the famous singer, 
in collaboration with a certain Russian, now a deservedly famous 
author-then, merely a beginner. Instead of Gogo! some galimatias 
was produced. Much of Pushkin is also untranslatable. I believe 
that were one to attempt to translate such a thing as The Narration 
by archpriest Avvakum, the result again would be nonsensical­
or, more correctly, nothing would come of it. Why is this so ?-It 
is dreadful to say that, perhaps, the European spirit is not as 
multifaceted and is more peculiarly secluded than ours, notwith­
standing the fact that it is undeniably more structuralized and that 
it has been revealed more graphically than ours. But if this is a 
dreadful statement, at least one cannot help but admit with hope 
and gladness that the spirit of our language is unquestionably mul­
tifaceted, wealthy, universal and all-embracing, since even within 
its unorganized forms it has proved able to express the gems and 
treasures of European thought, and we feel these have been ex­
pressed corrt:ctly ᆂnd with precision. And it is of such "material" that 
we ourselves are depriving our children. What for ?-Unquestion­
ably, to make them unhappy. We despise this material, we consider 
it a coarse, "under-hoof" language in which it is unbecoming to 
express the beau-monde feeling or the Leau-monue thought. 
By the way : exactly five years ago we inaugurated the so­
called classical reform of education. l\Iathematics and the two 
ancient languages-Latin and Greek-were recognized as the most 
effective means of mental, and even spiritual, development. It was 
not we who recognized and invented this : this is a fact, an un­
deniable fact, empirically ascertained by thr whole of fo urope in 
the course of centuries. We merely adopted it. But here is .e point : 
along with the most intense teaching of these two great ancient 
languages and mathematics, the teaching .,r Russian h.-.d been vir­
tually suppressed. The question arises : if the Russian language is 
in neglect, how, hy what means, through the medium of what ma­
terial are our children going to master the forms of those two 
ancient tongues ? Is it possible that the mere mechanics of the 
instruction (and this-by Czech teachers) of these two languages 
constitute their developmental force ? Besides, even the mechanics 
cannot be mastered without a parallel most intense and profound 
instruction in the living language. The whole morally developm:·ntal 
effect of these 1 wo ancient languages, th. 
ͯ two most perfectly 
structuralized forms of human thought-which, in the course of 
centuries have lifted the barbarian West to the highest level of 
' 
. 
dvilization-this whole effect will, naturally, be mtsserl by the new 

402 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
school precisely because of the decline in it of the Russian tongue. 
Or did our reformers imagine that we do not have to study Russian, 
except as to where one should be employing the letter "yat," because 
we are born with it ? But therein is the whole point : in the upper 
classes we are ceasing to be born with the living Russian language 
-and this has existed for a long time. But the living Russian tongue 
will come into being not prior to the time when we completely 
merge with the people. But I got excited : I began to talk to mother 
dear, and I shifted to the classical reform and to the merger with 
the people. 
Of course, mother dear is weary of listening to all this : in­
dignantly she waves her pretty little hand, and scoffi.ngly she turns 
away. To mama it makes not a particle of difference in which 
language her sonny is going to think, and if it is going to be in the 
Parisian dialect-why, all the better : "It is more elegant, more 
clever, there is more taste \ "  But she even fails to understand that 
for this one has to be fully reborn into a Frenchman, whereas with 
the help of governesses and tutors this happiness cannot be at­
tained, and that one may possibly reach only the first station-i.e., 
to cease to be a Russian. Oh, dear mama does not know what 
poison she is injecting into her child beginning at the age of two 
by engaging a governess for him. Every mother and every father 
is aware, for instance, of a certain dreadful childish physical habit 
which is acquired by some unhappy children as early as at the 
age of ten, and which, if neglected, may sometimes convert them 
into idiots, into flabby, decrepit old men while they are still in 
their youth. I venture tᆃ state directly that a governess-i.e., the 
French language from early childhood, from the very first lisping 
of the babe-is equivalent, in a moral sense, to the physical effect 
of this dreadful habit. All right if he is by nature stupid or dread­
fully dull : if so, he will even Jive his whole life with his French, 
jestingly, with short little ideas, with a hairdresser's mentality, and 
he will die without ever noticing that all his life he was a fool. 
But what if he be an able man, with thoughts in his head and with 
magnanimous impulses in his heart ? Can he be happy ?-Without 
possessi-ng the material for the structuralization within him of the 
whole depth of his thought and his spiritual quests ; all his life 
possessing a dead, sickly, stolen language, with timid, mechanically 
learned, coarse form!j. which will not expand before him-he will 
eternally agonize as a result of an unceasing effort and strain, both 
mental and moral, in the endeavor to express himself and his soul. 
(Good heavens, is it so difficult to comprehend that this is a dead 
and unnatural language ! )  Painfully, he himself will notice that his 
thought is abortive-lightweight and cynical-precisely cynical be-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
cause of its abortiveness, by reason of the insignificance and triv­
iality of the forms in which it has been expressed all his life. Finally, 
he will observe that his heart, too, is corrupt. Debauch will come 
as a result of anguish. Oh, of course, his career will not suffer : 
all of these, born with governesses, are unfailingly designated by 
their mamas for the role of future pillars of their motherland, and 
they entertain the pretension that they are indispensable. He will 
glitter, issue orders and "prompt" ;  he will introduce new rules and 
he will know how to manage things. Briefly, very often he will 
even be very much pleased with himself, especially when he will 
be delivering long addresses replete with other people's ideas and 
alien phrases in which there will be plus de rwblesse que de sin­
eerieל. And yet, if he be only slightly human, on the whole he will 
be unhappy. He will continually agonizt' as a result, as it were, 
of some kind of impotence, precisely like those youthful old men 
who suffer from premature exhaustion of virility caused by that 
bad habit. 
But-alao;-mama dear will not believe me that all these mis­
fortunes may be c.aused by the French language and the governesses ! 
I have the presentiment that it is not only mama who will tell me 
that I am exaggerating, and yet, strictly speaking, I have told the 
truth without exaggeration. It may be argued that, on the contrary, 
it is even better tl1at one lives with an alien language ; that one 
is apt to live with it in an easier, more lightweight and agreeable 
manner ; that precisely these questions and quests of life should 
be avoided, and that it is precisely the French language that furthers 
all this-not the French language, as such, but as an alien tongue 
adopted instead of one's own. "What do you mean i' This brilliant 
young man, this charmeur of the salons, t!1!,: coiner oi l · 1ns mots, 
will be unhappy ? He is so elegantly dressed, his hair is . 
_, smartly 
combed, his face is of such an aristocratic color ; he wears such 
a lovely rose in his buttonhole ! "  Mama dear is co .. temptuously 
smiling. 
Even so, even without it-1 mean, without French education­
educated Russians, the overwhelming majority of them, are still 
nothing but intellectual proletarians, creatures without solid ground 
under their feet, with neither soil nor principle, international mental 
"neither-here-nor-there" men driven by any stray European wind. 
But this one who has gone through the experience of governesses 
and tutors, even at his best-even if he happens to think ·tbout 
something or to feel something-is, nevert. less, essentially hardly 
anything more than a gorgeously-gloved young man who, maybe, 
has swallowed a few fashionable "ouvrages," but whose mind is 
·continually groping in obscurity, while the heart is craving for 

404 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
nothing but "argent." Of course, he is going to become a pillar of 
his motherland, if he should rise to the proper rank. 
Well, to mama dear, it's enough for the time being ; but only 
to mama . . . .  
CHAPTER IV 
Which Gives Relief at Spas : Mineral Water or Bon Ton? 
I SHALL NOT describe Ems ; besides, there are most detailed 
descriptions of Ems in Russian-for instance, Dr. Hirschhorn's 
booklet Ems and Her Mineral Springs, published in Petersburg. 
From this booklet everything may be learned, beginning with 
medicinal data concerning the springs, and including the minutest 
details about hotel life, hygiene, walks, sites, and even about the 
public. As for myself, I am not skilled in descriptions, and were 
I-now that I have returned home-compelled to describe Ems, I 
should in the first place recall the bright sun, the truly scenic gorge 
of Taunus, in which Ems is situated, the huge elegant cosmopolitan 
crowd, and my profound, most profound solitude amidst that crowd. 
Nevertheless, despite the solitude I even like such crowds-of course, 
in a peculiar way. In the Ems crowd I found a Russian acquaintance 
of mine, that very paradoxicalist who, in days past, long ago, when 
arguing with me, defended war-perceiving in it every kind of 
virtue and truth which cannot be found in present-day society 
(se the April issue of the Diary) . It is well known that we, Rus­
sians-more correctly, Petersburg residents-have so arranged our 
lives that we see strangers and, at times, mingle with God only knows 
whom, whereas-even though not forgetting our friends-can a 
Petersburg denizen forget anything or anybody ?-We simply do 
not see them, sometimes year after year. At Ems my friend also 
drank some kind of water. He is about forty-five, maybe younger. 
"You are right"-he said to me.-"One somehow likes this 
local crowd, even without knowing why. True, one likes a crowd 
everywhere-of course, a fashionable crowd, the cream. One may 
not be trafficking with anyone among this society, but as yet there 
has been nothing better in the world." 
"Go on ! . . .  
" 
"I am not arguing wit:h you. I am not arguing"-he hastened 
to agree with me. "When a better society comes into being on 
earth, and man makes up his mind to live, so to speak, more 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
405 
rationally, we shall not deign to look at, or give a thought to, this 
present-day society, mentioning perhaps merely two words about 
it in a world history. But, today, what better society can you produce 
in its stead ?" 
"Is it true that even nowadays it is impossible to conceive 
of anything better than this idle crowd of well-to-do people-people 
who, were they not jostling at spas, as now, would not know what 
to undertake or how best to waste their days ? Isolated persons are 
good ; this is so ; they may also be found in this crowd, but, on 
the whole-not only does it not deserve special commendation but 
even not special attention I . . .  " 
"You speak like a profound misanthrope1 or simply in ac­
cordance with the prevailing vogue. You say : 'They wouldn't know 
how best to waste their days ! '  Believt' me, each one of them has 
his own occupation, and even one on which he has wasted his 
whole life, and not merely a day. Certainly you cannot blame each 
one of them for the fact that he was unable to carve a paradise 
out of his life, and that, in consequence, he is suffering. Well, it 
pleases me to look at tht:se sufferers here, and to watch them 
laughing." 
"Don't they laugh out of mere politeness ?" 
"They laugh by force of habit which breaks them all and 
compels them to play their part in the 'gamP. of paradise,' if you 
wish to call it so. They do not believe in paradise, and they are 
playing this game reluctantly, but still they are playing it, and 
this amuses them. The habit is too deeply rooted. Here you will 
find some people who are taking it seriously-and, of course, this 
is all the better for them : they feel as if they were in a real 
paradise. If you love them all (and you mu 
.. t love them } . 
ou must 
rejoice over the fact that they are given a chance to rest a:d forget 
themselves, even though in a mirage." 
"Why, you are laughing ! And why should I be lo. ing them ?" 
"But this is mankind ; there can be no !'ther mankind, and 
how can one fail to love humanity ?-Here there is a Russian lady 
who is very fond of mankind. Nor am I laughing at all. And so 
as not to persist on this topic, J shall directly tell you in rnnclusion 
that every bon-ton societv-this fashionable crowrl, for instance­
possesses some positive merits. For example, every fashionable so­
ciety is good by the very fact that, although it is caricatural, never­
theless it comes in closer contact with nature than any other -.::x:ial 
group-let us say, even the agricultural ont: .vhich, in its majority, 
is still living quite unnaturally. I don't mention factories, troops, 
schools, universities : all these represent the climax of unnatural­
ness. But these people here are freer than the rest bf'cause they are 

406 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
wealthier and, at least, they can live as they please. Of course, 
they come in contact with nature only as far as politeness and 
bon ton will permit. To expand, to become dissolved in, or to 
open themselves fully to, nature-to that golden ray of sun over 
there, which shines on us sinners, without discrimination, from 
the blue sky-whether or not we are worthy of it-this, no doubt, 
would be unbecoming, at least in the measure you and I, or some 
poet, would like it at this moment. A small steel lock of bon ton, 
as heretofore, hangs over each heart and each mind. Even so, one 
has to admit that bon ton has taken a little step along the road 
of touching nature, not only in the course of this century but 
even in our generation. I draw a direct conclusion from my personal 
observations : in our age people are more and more awake to the 
fact that contact with nature is the last word of all progress­
of science, common sense, taste and perfect manners. Go and sink 
your thought into that : you will see joy and cheerfulness on their 
faces. They all speak with one another kindly, that is, very politely ; 
everybody is benign and cheerful. One may think that the whole 
happiness of that young man with a rose in his buttonhole is to 
cheer that fat, fifty-year-old lady. In fact, what makes him try 
so hard to please her ? Is it possible that he really wishes her hap­
piness and cheerfulness ?-Of course not : unquestionably there are 
some special and purely personal reasons-they do not concern us 
-which make him try so hiird. But the most important point is 
that, perhaps, nothing but bon ton compels him to act this way­
without any particular and personal reasons-and this in itself is 
an important fact : it shoW6 to what an extent in our age bon ton 
can tame even the unruly nature of some lad. Poetry produces the 
Byrons, and they produce the Corsairs, the Harolds, the Laras. 
But look : how little time has elapsed since their appearance, and 
yet all these personages have already been discarded by bon ton 
and declared to be a most disreputable company. This is all the 
more true of our Pechorin and the Caucasian Captive : these turned 
out to be altogether-mauvais ton ; they proved only to be Peters­
burg bureaucrats who for a brief moment have been in vogue. 
"Why were these discarded ?-Because these personages are 
indeed wicked, impatient and are candidly looking exclusively to 
their own interests ; they disturb the harmony of bon ton which 
by all means has got to pretend that each one lives for all, and 
all live for each one. Look, flowers are being brought : these are 
bouquets for the ladies, and those single roses-are for the gentle­
men's buttonholes. Look : how cultivated, how neatly selected the 
roses are, how they are sprayed with water I Never will a maiden 
of the fields and meadows select or cut anything so elegant for 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
her peasant lad sweetheart. And yet these roses are brought for 
sale at five and ten German groschen, and the maiden of the fields 
has never even touched them. 
"The golden age is a matter of the future, while this is an 
age of industry. But what is your concern ? And does it make any 
difference to you whether it is 'Paradise' or 'like Paradise' ?  And 
yet, think : how much taste ! What a sound idea ! What is more 
appropriate to the drinking of mineral water-i.e., to the hope of a 
cure, to health-than these flowers ? Flowers are hopes. How much 
taste in this idea ! Please recall the words : 'And why take ye 
thought for raiment ? Consider the lilies of the field, how they 
grow . . . even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one 
of these. Wherefore . . .  shall God not much more clothe you ? 
. . .  ' I do not recall the exact text, but what beautiful words ! In 
them is the whole poesy of life, the whole truth of nature. How­
ever, while we have to wait for the time when the truth of nature 
shall reign and men, in the simplicity and gladness of their hearts, 
shall crown each other with flowers of sincere human love -all this 
may be bougi1t ar:d sold fo. five groschen without love. Again, I 
ask you, what difference does it make to you ?-To my way of 
thinking, this way it is handier, because, in truth, from some love 
one is apt to scamper away because it demands too much gratitude, 
while here you take out a penny-and we are square. And yet in 
reality we get a semblance of the golden age ; and if you are a 
man with imagination, you are satisfied. 
"Yes, present-day wealth should be encouraged even though 
at other people's expense : it brings luxury and bon ton-things 
the remaining mass of mankind can never give. Here I have with 
me a beautiful painting which gladdens me, <md one mu,., always 
pay for diversion. Gladness and joy were always the most t · t•ensive 
things, whereas I, a poor man, without paying anything, am able 
to take part in general rejoicing at least, by crackinb with my 
tongue. Listen : music is beginning to sound ; penple are laughing ; 
the ladies are elegantly dressed, of course, like no one in the days 
of Solomon. And even if all this is but a mirage, still you and I 
are rejoicing. And, after all-speaking honestly-am I a decent man ? 
(I am speaking only of myself.)- Owing to mineral water, I am 
in company with, so to speak, the cream of the cream of humanity. 
And with what appetite you will now go to drink your abominable 
German coffee ! This is what I call the positive aspect of 1!'·10d 
society. 
"Well, you are laughing ! Besides, this is not new at all ! "  
"I am laughing. But tell me, has your appetite improved 
since you came here to drink the water ?" 

408 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r876 
"Oh, very much so." 
"Thus, the positive aspect of bon ton is so strong that it 
even affects your stomach ?" 
"What do you mean ?-This is the effect of the mineral waters, 
and not of bon ton I " 
"Unquestionably, the effect of bon ton, too. So that it is 
not certain which helps more at spas-mineral water or bon ton. 
Even the local physicians are in doubt as to which of the two 
deserves more credit. And, generally, it is difficult to express what 
an enormous, progressive stride medicine has made in our age : at 
present it is even begetting ideas, whereas in days past it used 
to have nothing but medicaments." 
2 
ONE oF THosE BENEFITED BY MoDERN WoMAN 
Of course, I am not going to record all my conversations 
with this old-fashioned man. I knew, however, that to him the 
most ticklish theme was-women. And so, on one occasion we 
started a discussion about women. He remarked to me that I was 
staring attentively at something. 
"I am staring at the Englishwomen ; and I am doing so with 
a special object. I took with me for the journey to Ems two 
pamphlets by Granovsky-one on the Eastern question-and the 
other, -on women. In the latter pamphlet there are several excellent 
and most mature thoughts. But can you imagine, one sentence 
perplexed me. The author writes : 'And yet, it is known to the 
world at large what an Englishwoman is : she represents a lofty 
type of feminine beauty and feminine spiritual qualities, and our 
Russian women cannot compete with this type.' Why, I cannot 
agree with this. Is it really possible that Englishwomen represent 
so high a type compared with our Russian women ? I profoundly 
disagree with this.'' 
"Who is the author of the pamphlet ?" 
"Since I have not commended the things which deserve praise 
in the pamphlet, and because I extracted from it only one sentence 
with which I disagree, I shall not reveal the name of the author." 
"Probably the aythor is a bachelor, and he did not have the 
opportunity of finding out all the qualities of the Russian woman." 
"Although you said this from a desire to be sarcastic, never­
theless you spoke the truth about the 'qualities' of the Russian 
woman. Indeed, it is not for a Russian man to renounce his women. 
In what sense is our woman inferior to any other ?-1 shall not 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
point to the crystallized ideals of our poets, beginning with Tatiana 
-to Turgenev's and Tolstoy's women, even though this, in itself, 
is strong evidence : if ideals of such beauty were incarnated in art, 
they must have come from somewhere ; they were not created out 
of nothing. Therefore, such women exist in reality. Nor shall I 
speak of the wives of our Decembrists, of thousands of other 
generally known examples. And how can we, wllo are familiar with 
Russian reality, fail to know about thousand::. of women, about 
thousands of their unheralded exploits-seen by no one-and, at 
times, amidst such a shocking setting, in such dark, dreadful 
corners and dens, amidst such vices and horrors ! Briefly, I shall 
not defend the rights of the Russian woman to a high place among 
the women of all Europe, but I shall merely say this : isn't it true 
that there seems to exist a natural law among peoples and nations 
by virtue of which every man must pre-eminently look for and love 
the women of his people and nationality ? If a man begins to place 
women of other nations above his own and be pre-eminently fasci­
nated by them, there must ensue an era of vacillation and decom­
position of t!1at J•iltionality God knows, here in Russia, during the 
last hundred years something of the kind has begun to develop, 
precisely in proportion to our severance from the people. We used 
to be fascinated by Polish, French and even German women. Now­
adays there are pPuple eager to place Englishwomen above our 
own. In my judgment, there is nothing comforting in this symptom. 
Here there are two possibilities : either spiritual detachment from 
one's nationality or else-simply a harem taste. It is necessary to 
return to our woman, to learn our woman if we have unlearned to 
understand her . . . .  
" 
"I am readily willing to agree with vou in evt'r_; : '1ing, al­
though I don't know if there is such a law of nature or n; "onality. 
But let me ask you : why did you think that I sarcastically re­
marked that the author, being a bachelor, probably ha i no oppor­
tunity to learn all the highest qualities of the Russian woman ?­
On this point there can be not even the slightest sarcasm on my 
part because of the one fact that I myself was, as it were, benefited 
by a Russian woman. Well, whoever I be, whatever I may seem to 
you, during a certain period of my life I was the fiance of a Russian 
woman. This girl was, so to speak, socially more prominent than 
I ;  she was surrounded by suitors ; she was in a position to select, 
and she . . .  
" 
"Chose you ? Excuse me, I didn't knO\· . . .  
" 
"No, she did not choose me, but precisely she discarded me, 
but therein is the whole point. I will be frank with you : so long 
ac; I was not yet her fiance, everything was all right, and I was 

410 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
happy in the mere fact that I was able to see the girl almost daily. 
I will even venture to remark-though quite in passing-that I 
did not produce an altogether unfavorable impression. I will add 
that the girl was given much freedom in her home. And one day, 
at a strange moment-which, I daresay, was unlike anything I have 
known-she suddenly promised to marry me. You wouldn't believe 
what I felt then. Of course, all this was kept secret by us, but 
when on that day, in a state of amazement, I returned to my apart­
ment, the thought that I should be the possessor and the other half 
of so glamorous a creature crushed me like a weight. My glance 
skimmed over my furniture, over all those shabby belongings of 
a bachelor and little things of mine-which, however, were indis­
pensable to me-and I felt so ashamed of myself, of my position 
in society, of my figure, my hair, and of these trifling possessions 
of mine, of the narrowness of my mind and heart, that I was even 
ready to curse my lot a thousand times at the thought that I, the 
most insignificant of all men, should possess treasures which suited 
me so little. I am telling you all this in order to note a rather 
unknown aspect of marital truth-or, more correctly, a feeling 
which, unfortunately, is all too rarely conceived by fiances-i.e., 
that in order to marry one must have in store a great deal of the 
silliest haughtiness, a great deal, you know, of some most stupid 
and trivial pride-and all this, coupled with a most ridiculous tone 
to which a delicate man can never get used. How can one, even 
for a moment, compare oneself with such a creature-a socially 
prominent girl, with such refined perfection, beginning with her 
upbringing, her curls, her .tulle gowns, her dancing, her innocence, 
with that naive, but at the same time socialite, charm in her judg­
ments and feelings ? And only to imagine that all this will enter 
my apartment, and I shall be in my morning gown-you are laugh­
ing ? And yet, this is a dreadful thought ! And then there is also 
this problem-one may be told : 'If you are afraid of such perfection, 
and if you consider yourself not suited for her-choose an outcast 
(i.e., in no event a moral outcast).' Oh, but this, one refuses to do 
-even with indignation ; one is not prepared to lower his bid. 
"Well, I am not going to describe the details-they are all 
alike. For instance, when I lay down on my couch (I must say­
the worst couch in the whole world, bought at a rag-fair, with 
broken springs) the following insignificant little thought occurred 
to me : 'Now, I am going to marry and, at least, there will always 
be around tiny pieces of cloth, say from patterns-to wipe pens.' 
Now, what is there, it would seem, more ordinary than this thought, 
and what is there dreadful in it? No doubt, it flitted through my 
mind unexpectedly, in passing-this you will understand yourself ; 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
41 1  
since God only knows what thoughts, at times, may flash through 
one's soul, and even at a moment when that soul is being dragged 
to a guillotine. This thought occurred to me probably in conse­
quence of the fact that I hate, to the point of a nervous fit, to 
leave the steel pens unwiped-a thing which, however, is indulged 
in by everybody in the world. And would you believe, I bitterly 
reproached myself for this thought that same minute : in anticipa­
tion of an event of so great a magnitude, to Le dreaming about 
rags for wiping pens, to be giving thought to such a trivial com­
monplace idea-'after that, what are you worth ?'-Briefly, I per­
ceived that my whole life would be now spent in self-reproach for 
every thought, for my every action. 
"And then, a few days later, when suddenly she declared to 
me, with a smile on her face, that she had jested and that, on the 
contrary, she was going to marry a certain man of high rank, 
I-I .
.
.
 Why, at this juncture, instead of joy, I got so frightened, 
I felt such a degradation, that she herself got scared and ran for 
a glass of water. I recovered but my fright served me to good pur­
pose : she ur.Jer::.t•Jud how T loved her . . .  and how highly-yes, 
how highly-! valued her . . . .  'And I thought'-she said to me 
later, after she got married-'that you were so proud, so learned, 
and that you would be despising me.' Ever since, I have had a 
friend in her, and, 1 repeat, if there was anyone who has ever 
been benefited by a woman-rather, by a Russian woman-this is 
certainly I, and this I shall never forget." 
"So you became a friend of that person ?" 
"In the highest degree, but we see each other seldom-once 
a year, and even less frequently. Russian friends usually see each 
other once every five years, and many of th!"!l would r.ࢧ! be able 
to stand more frequent meetings. At first, I did not call 
. 1 them 
because her husband's standing in society was higher than mine ; 
at present, however . . .  at present, she is so unhappy that I find 
it difficult to look at her. To begin with, her husband is an old 
man of sixty-two and, a year after their wedding, a criminal charge 
was brought against him. In order to make up a deficency in govern­
ment funds, he was compelled to surrender virtually his entire for­
tune. While his case was being tried, his feet failed him and now 
he is being wheeled arounu in Kreuznach, where I saw them both 
some ten days ago. While he is being pushed in a wheel chair, she 
always walks beside him at his right side, thereby complying ·.vith 
the lofty duty of a contemporary woman. 
1d note, all the time 
and incessantly she has to listen to his malignant reproaches. I 
found it so painful to look at her-more correctly, at both of them­
!'ince even up to this day I don't know which one I should be 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
pitying the more-that promptly then and there I left them and 
came here. I am very glad that I did not mention her name to 
you. Besides, even during that brief interview I had the misfortune 
to make her angry-and, perhaps, forever-by candidly stating to 
her my view on the happiness and duty of the Russian woman." 
"Of course, you could not have found a more opportune occa­
sion." 
"You criticize me ? But who would have told her this ? On 
the contrary, it always seemed to me that, at least, to know why 
one is unhappy is the greatest happiness. And permit me-as long 
as this came up in our conversation-to state also to you my opinion 
on the happiness and duty of the Russian woman. At Kreuznach 
I did not complete my statement." 
3 
CHILDREN's SECRETS 
But, for the time being, I shall stop here. I merely meant to 
characterize the man and to introduce him to the reader in a 
preliminary way. Besides, it was my intention to characterize him 
only as a narrator, as I am in no way in accord with his views. 
I have already explained that he is a "paradoxicalist." And his 
view on "the happiness and duty of the Russian woman" even 
glitters with originality, despite the fact that he outlines it almost 
with anger. One is inclined to think that this is his sorest spot. 
Simply-according to his .understanding-a woman, in order to he 
happy and to fulfill her duty, must by all means marry and, while 
sbe is married, she must bear as many children as possible, "not 
two, not three, but six, ten children, to the point of exhaustion, 
to the point of impotence. . . . Only then will she come in contact 
with real life and will come to know it in all its diverse manifesta­
tions." 
"For goodness sake-without leaving her bedroom I "  
"On the contrary I On the contrary I I foresee and know in 
advance all objections. I have weighed everything : 'universities, 
higher education, etc., etc.' But even leaving aside the fact that 
among men only one out of ten thousand becomes a scientist, I 
will ask you seriously : in what way can the university obstruct 
marriage and child-bearing ? On the contrary, all women should 
be attending universities-both future scientists and simply edu­
cated people, but after the university-'marriage, and bear children.' 
As yet, there has been invented nothing cleverer in the whole world 
than bearing children. For this reason the more learning one ac-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
413 
cumulates for this purpose, the better things will turn out. Indeed, 
was it not Tchatzky who proclaimed that 
. . . to bear children, 
Whose mind has ever proved unequal ? 
"And he did so proclaim because he himself was a highly 
uneducated :Moscow denizen, vociferating all h1s life-as an echo 
of someone else's voice-about European educat10n, so that, as it 
turned out later, he did not even know how to write a will, leaving 
his estate to an unknown person-'to my friend, Sonechka.' This 
witticism about 'whose mind has ever proved unequal ?' persisted 
over a period of fifty years because throughout these fifty years 
we had no educated people. At present, thank God, educated people 
are beginning to appear also in Russia. Ami, believe me, before 
anything else, they will grasp the fact that to bear and have children 
-is the principal, the most serious, thing in the world ; it always 
has been and never ceased to be. 'Whose mind has ever proved 
unequal ! '  Can you imagine ?-Well, it does prove unequal : the 
modern woman Jr. Europe l1as ceased to bear children. For the 
time being, I shall keep silent about our women." 
"What do you mean by 'ceased to bear children' ?" 
At this point I will reJTlark in passing that in this man there 
is one unexpectedly strange trait : he is fond of children, he is a 
connoisseur of children, precisely of those babies who still retain 
"the angels' rank." He loves them so much that he runs after 
them. At Ems he has even become notorious in this respect. What 
he likes most is to walk in those avenues whither children are 
brought or taken out. He got acquainted with them, even with 
one-year-old ones, and succeeded in having ·ᆄ•:ny of the•. recog­
nize him-awaiting him, smiling at him and extending to }. .1 their 
tiny hands. He always finds out from the German nurse the age 
-in years or months-of the child, he prais,•:; it and, im.:irectly, he 
also compliments the nurse, which flatters her. Tn a word, in him 
this is sort of a passion. He was always particularly delighted when 
every morninR, in avenues at the springs, suddenly among the 
public there appeared crowds of children going to school-all dressed 
up, with sandwiches in their hands and with little knapsacks on 
their backs. One has to admit that these crowds of youngsters are 
truly very pleasant, especially those composed of four-, five-, and 
·six-year-old children -that is, the youngest ones. 
"Tel que 1•ous me voyez, today I bot., ··t two reed pipes"­
he told me one morning, with an extremely pleased air-"not for 
these, not for the school childr<'n, these are big ones, and only yester­
day I had the pleasure of striking up an acC}uaintancᆅ with their 

414 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
schoolmaster-he is the most worthy man that could be imagined. 
No-for two little fatties, two brothers-one of the age of three, 
and the other one a two-year-old boy. They stopped before a kiosk 
with toys, their mouths wide open, in that state of silly and charm­
ing childish delight which is the most pleasing thing that exists. 
The storekeeper, a sly German woman, promptly guessed what my 
glance meant and, in a jiffy, she thrust a reed pipe into each one's 
hand. I had to pay two marks-yes, sir I The fatties' delight was 
beyond description : they walk and keep on piping. This was an 
hour ago, but just now I went there to make inquiries : they still 
keep on piping. 
"Some time ago, when referring to the local society, I said 
to you that for the time being the world can produce nothing better. 
I told you a lie, and you believed it-don't deny it-you did believe 
it. On the contrary, here is what is best, here is where perfection 
is : the crowds of Ems children, with sandwiches in their hands and 
knapsacks behind their shoulders going to school. . . .  Well, the 
sun, Taunus, children, their laughter, sandwiches and the elegant 
crowd of lords and marquises from all over the world-all these 
combined are charming. Did you notice the crowd always admires 
the children : this is a symptom of taste and an urge for serious­
ness. But Ems is stupid ; Ems cannot help but be stupid ; this is 
why she continues to bear children, whereas Paris has already sus­
pended child-bearing." 
"What do you mean-suspended ?" 
"There is in Paris an enormous industry known as Articles 
de Paris which, along with silk, French wines and fruits, has helped 
to pay the five-billion contribution. Paris greatly reveres that in­
dustry and is so busily engaged in it that she even forgets to 
produce children. And Paris is backed by the whole of France. 
Every year the Minister solemnly announces to the Chambers that 
' 'le population reste stationnaire.' You see, children are not being 
born, and if they are born, they do not last. 'As against this, how­
ever,'-adds the Minister with commendation-'our old men enjoy 
longevity.' But, to my way of thinking, if only they would all die, 
I mean the old ones . . .  with whom France loads her Chambers. 
Much is there to rejoice over their longevity ! Is so little sand 
strewn over there ?" 
"I still don't unǗerstand you. What's the point about Articles 
de Paris?" 
"This is simple. However, being a novelist, you may not 
know one of the muddiest- French writers and idealists of the old 
school-Alexander Dumas-fils. He has generated several, so to speak, 
movements. He insists that the French woman be bearing children. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
41 5 
Moreover, he directly announced a secret, known by everybody, 
that women belonging to the well-to-do bourgeoisie in France, uni­
formly, bear two children. Somehow they manage to arrange things 
with their husbands in such a way as to bear just two children­
no more and no less. They bear two, and then they go on a strike. 
All of them-and the secret spreads with remarkable speed. Even 
two descendants constitute posterity, and besides two will acquire 
a larger estate than if it were to be divided between six. That's one 
thing. Well, secondly, the woman preserves herself for a longer 
period : beauty and health last longer ; more time is left for social 
affairs, dresses and dancing. And, as regards 'Parents' love-so to 
speak, the moral aspect of the question-one loves, they say, two 
children even more than six ; the six might get naughty ; they might 
become annoying ; they might break something-go and busy your­
self with them ! Start reckoning what their shoes alone would cost 
-it would make you sick and tired ! And so on, and so forth. 
"However, the point is not that Dumas is angry ; the point 
is that he openly ventured to declare the existence of the secret : 
two-no more, no 1ᆘ:ss-and besides they live with their husbands 
maritalement to their heart's pleasure, in a word-everything is 
saved. Malthus, who was so afraid of the increase of the world's 
population, could not have conceived, even in his dreams, this 
kind of means. Well, all this is altogether too seductive. In France, 
as is known, there are an awful lot of property-owners-urban and 
rural bourgeoisie. To them this is a godsend. This is their inven­
tion. But this find will overstep the boundaries of France. Not 
more than a quarter of a century will elapse, and you will see 
that even stupid Ems will grow wiser. It is rumored that Berlin, 
in this respect, has already become very mᆖ,;ch wiser. 
"However, even though the number of children is a ᆆ. reasing, 
nevertheless the Minister in France would have failed to notice 
the difference, were this confined to the bourgeoisie alune-i.e., the 
well-to-do class-and were there not another a!lgle to the matter. 
The other angle-the proletarians-eight, ten, perhaps as many as 
twelve million proletarians, unbaptized and unmarried people, liv­
ing, instead of in wedlock, in 'rational associations'-'to avoid 
tyranny.' These, unhesitatingly, throw their children out into the 
street. Gavroches are born, they die, they do not survive ; however, 
when they do survive, they fill the foundling institutions and the 
prisons for the under-aged criminals. Zola. a so-called reali"i .  in 
his novel Le Ventre de Paris, has a very 
ivid depiction of the 
contemporary workers' marriage, i.e., of marital cohabitation. And 
note : the Gavroches are no longer Frenchmen ; but the most re­
markable thing is that those, in the upper class, who are born 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
property-owners, by twos and in secret-they, too, are not French­
men. At least, I venture to assert this-so that both ends, the two 
opposites, meet. This is the first result : France begins to cease to 
be France. (Indeed, is it possible to maintain that these ten millions 
regard France as their fatherland ! )  I know there will be some 
who will say : 'All the better-the French will be obliterated, but 
human beings will remain.' But are they human beings ? Let's say 
they are, but they are future savages who will swallow up Europe. 
By-and-by, but firmly and undeviatingly, out of them the insensible 
rabble is being hatched. That the generation is deteriorating physi­
cally and growing impotent and vile, in my opinion, there can be 
no shadow of doubt. Well, and the physique drags morality behind 
it. Such are the fruits of the reign of the bourgeoisie. To my way 
of thinking, the whole cause is-land, i.e., soil and its present-day 
distribution. All right, I will explain it to you." 
4 
THE LAND AND THE CHILDREN 
"Land is everything"-my paradoxicalist continued. "I am 
drawing no line between the land and the children ; this inference 
of mine comes of its own accord. However, I am not going to 
enlarge upon this point ; you will understand it yourself if you 
give thought to it. The whole point is the result of an agrarian 
error ; even all the rest-all the other human misfortunes-they all 
are, perhaps, derived front that agrarian error. Millions of paupers 
do not possess land, especially in France, where there is a scarcity 
of land anyhow. And so there is no place where they could be 
giving birth to children-they are compelled to bear them in base­
ments, and not children but Gavroches, half of whom cannot name 
their fathers, while the other half-even their mothers. This is at 
one end. At the other-the upper end-1 believe, is also the agrarian 
error, but of a different kind, an opposite one. It dates back, per­
haps, to the times of Clovis, the conqueror of Gaul : there, each 
one has too much land ; the usurpation is too great, dispropor­
tionate ; besides, they have too strong a hold on the land ; they 
refuse to make any concessions, so that both here and there-there 
is abnormality. Som' thing is liable to happen ; something must 
change, because everybody must have land, while children must 
be born on the soil and not on the pavement. I don't know-1 really 
don't-how this is going to· be remedied ; but I do know that over 
there there is no place where children can be begotten. 
"I believe it is all right to work in a factory : the factory also 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
41 7  
is a legitimate proposition ; it arises beside cultivated land-such 
is the law. But let every factory hand know that somewhere there, 
there is a garden under the golden sun and the vineyards-his own 
garden, or, to be more correct, a common, i.e., communal, garden­
and that in this garden lives his wife, a fine woman-not from the 
pavement-who loves him anrl waits for him ; anti with his wife are 
his children, who play 'little horses,' and all of whom know their 
father. Que diable I Every decent healthy urchin is born simultaneously 
with a 'little horse' ; every decent father must know it if he wishes 
to be happy. 
"Thus, the factory worker will bring thither the money which 
he earns, and he will not squander it on drinks in 'pubs' with females 
picked up on the pavement. And although, in the long run, that 
garden (in France, for example, where land is so scarce) cannot 
provide subsistence for himself and his family, so that the factory 
cannot be avoided, still let him know at least that tftere his children 
are growing up in association with the soil, the trees, the quails 
which are being raught ; that they are attending school, and that 
the school stands in a tield, and that he himself, after having worked 
all his life, will still go there to rest and, later-to die. 
"And-who knows ?-perhaps that garden will provide full sub­
sistence and, besides, maybe the factory should not be feared because 
it will be built amidst the garden. Briefly, I h"ve no idea how all 
this will shape itself, but this will come to pass ; remember my word 
-it will come to pass even if it be a hundred years hence ; and then 
recall the fact that I told you these things at Ems, amidst an 
artificial garden and amidst artificial people. 
"Mankind will be regenerated in the Garden, and thr Garden 
will restore it-such is the formula. You see hu"' all this ha:- ened : 
at first, there were castles, and beside them-mud huts. The Jarons 
lived in the castles-and the vassals, in the mud huts. Thereupon 
the bourgeoisie began to rise behind fenced towns-slowly, on a 
microscopic scale. Meanwhile, the castleᆇ came to uil end, and kings' 
capitals came into existence-big cities with kings' palaces and court 
hotels ; this has lasted up to our century. In our century a dreadful 
revolution took place, and the bourgeoisie came out vicᆈ:>rious. 
With the bourgeoisie there :rose horrible cities which were never 
even dreamed of. Cities, such as spranᆉ up in the Nineteenth Cen­
tury, mankind had never seen before. These are cities with crystal 
palaces. with intrrnational exhibitions, bar.h, budgets, polh;: .:d 
rivers, ǖailway platforms, with all kinds of asso_,ations-and, around 
them, factories and mills. At present people are awaiting the third 
phase : the bourgeoisie will expire and a regenerated mankind will 
come in its wake. It will distribute the land among communes, and 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
will start living in the Garden. 'It will be regenerated in the Garden, 
and the Garden will restore it.' Thus-castles, cities and the Garden. 
If you wish to understand the full meaning of my idea, I will say 
that, in my judgment, children-! mean, real children-must be born 
on the soil, and not on the pavement. Later on, one may be living 
on the pavement, but a nation-an overwhelming portion of it­
should be born and should be sprouting on the land, on the soil 
upon which corn and trees grow. But, in our day, European prole­
tarians-all of them-are nothing but the pavement. 
"In the Garden, however, little children will be springing 
straight from the earth, like Adam, and at the age of nine, when 
they are still eager to play, they will not be sent to factories ; they 
will not be breaking their spines bending over a lathe, nor dulling 
their minds facing the wretched machine-which the bouregois wor­
ships-tiring and ruining their imagination in front of an endless 
row of gas lamps, and their morality by factory debauch which 
exceeds that of Sodom. And those are urchins and little ten-year­
old girls ! And where ?-All right here-but in Russia where there 
is so much land ; where factories are still nothing but a joke, where 
miserable little towns are built to accommodate just a handful­
say, three-of petty government clerks l 
"Even so if I perceive anywhere the kernel or the idea of 
the future-it is in Russia. Why so ?-Because we have a principle, 
which still persists in the .people, that land is everything to them ; 
that they derive everything from, and out of, the land-and this is 
true of the overwhelming majority of the people. But the principal 
thing is that it is preci!rely the normal law of man. In the earth, 
in the soil, there is something sacramental. If you wish to regenerate 
1.1ankind into something better, if you wish to make men virtually 
out of beasts-give them land, and you will achieve your purpose. 
At least in Russia, the land and the commune-! admit they are 
in a most miserable state-constitute the great nucleus of the future 
idea ; and therein is the whole trick. At least, it is my opinion 
that in, and from, soil order is derived, and thus it is everywhere 
in mankind as a whole. All order in every country-political, civic, 
any kind of order-is always connected with the soil and with the 
character of its agriculture ; everything else has been evolved within 
the frame of that character. If, in Russia, at present there prevails 
the greatest disordt>r, it is in the sphere of landownership, in the 
relations between the owners and the workers, and between the 
latter among themselves, as well as in the character of the cultiva­
tion of the soil. And so long as these are not going to be put on 
a right basis, don't expect solid organization in the rest. You see, 
I am blaming no one and nothing-it is a matter of world history, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
419 
we understand. In my judgment, we have paid so small a ransom 
for ridding ourselves of serfdom because of the consensus of the 
country. On this 'consensus' I am staking everything ; it is one of 
those popular principles which up to this day are being denied by our 
Potugins. Well, and as regards all our railroads, those new banks 
of ours, associations and credits-all these, to my way of thinking, 
are still nothing but twaddle. Among all our railroads I admit 
but the strategic ones. All this should have come after the settle­
ment of the land problem ; then it would have come naturally, 
whereas at present it is but stock-exchange speculation, the awaken­
ing of the Jew. You are laughing ; you do not agree-all right. But just 
recently I read the memoirs of a certain Russian landowner, which 
he wrote in the middle of our century. As early as in the Twenties 
he made up his mind to liberate his peasants. In those days this 
was a rare and novel thing. Apropos, having visited his village, 
he established there a school and began to teach the peasant chil­
dren choral church singing. His neighbor, also a landowner, called 
on him and listened to the choir. Then he said : 'You have conceived 
a clever idea ; i1 you train them, you will find, without fail, a 
buyer who will purchase the whole choir. People love it, and you 
will get good money for the choir.' 
"Thus, at the time when it was still possible to sell 'for ex­
port' choirs of little children, tearing them away from their fathers 
and mothers, setting the peasants free was still a perplexing and 
novel proposition in Rus.o;ia. Presently, he started talking to the 
peasants about that novelty. They listened, began to wonder and 
grew frightened. Long did they discuss the matter, and they came 
to him. 'Well, what about the land ?'-'The land is mine : you will 
have your huts, your farm buildings, while "r.nually yo1. .. ·ill have 
to till my land on a fifty-fifty basis.' They scratched the . .  heads : 
'No, let it be as of old : we are yours, and the land is ours.' Of 
course, this surprised the landowner : 'Well, one might sa/-a savage 
people ; in their moral degradation, they even refuse to accept 
liberty, liberty-that first blessing of man . .  .' etc., etc. Subse­
quently, this saying-'We are yours, and the land is ours'-became 
generally known ; it surprises no one, especially nowadays. 
"However, the main question is : whence could this idea have 
come ? Whence could there: have arisen such an 'unnatural and 
unparalleled' conception of world history, if one compares it with 
· that of Europe ? And, mind you, it was just then that amon૧ our 
wise fellows war had been raging with part1, lar fury on the ques­
tion : 'Are there really in Russia such principles of the people as 
would merit the attention of our educated men ?' No, sir, permit 
me to say : this means that the Russian, from the very beginning, 

420 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
could not imagine himself without land. But the most surprising 
thing is that even after the abolition of serfdom the overwhelming 
majority of the people has retained the essence of this formula 
and can still not imagine themselves without land. Now if they 
rejected freedom without land, this means that land to them is 
the principal thing-the basis of everything. Land is everything, 
and everything else emanates from it, i.e., liberty and life and 
honor and family and children and order and church-in a word, 
everything that is precious. It was owing to this formula that they 
have retained such an institution as the commune. And yet what 
is the commune ?-At times, it is a heavier burden than serfdom ! 
Everybody has been discussing back and forth communal land­
ownership ; everybody knows how strongly it impedes, say, economic 
progress. At the same time, does it not contain the grain of some­
thing new, a better future ideal which awaits all men, as to which no 
one knows how it will come to pass, but which only we possess in 
embryo, and which can come to pass only in Russia, since it will 
come not through war and rebellion-but again, by great and 
universal consensus. Yes, consent-because even now great sac­
rifices are made for the achievement of that 'something.' 
"And so little children will be born in the Garden ; they 
will be set right, and no longer will ten-year-old girls be drinking 
bad liquor at inns with factory workers ! Yes, sir, it is difficult, 
in our day, for children to be growing up ! Indeed, I did disturb 
you ! But little children-they are the future, and one lovt>s only 
the future ! Who bothers about the present ?-Of course, not I and, 
certainly, not you. This is why one loves children more than any­
thing 
. . . . ·· 
5 
A PEcULIAR SuMMER FOR RussiA 
Next day I said to my odd fellow : "You keep talking about 
children, and in the casino I just read in the Russian newspapers, 
around which-1 may remark-all local Russians are crowding, a 
news item about a certain mother, a Bulgarian woman, over there 
in Bulgaria where people have been massacred by whole counties. 
She is an old woman living in a village ; she lost her mind and 
wanders about amidst. her ash-heaps. When she is being asked how 
all this happened, she does not answer in ordinary words, hut at 
once presses her right hand against her cheek and begins to sing 
and-in a sing-song manner, in improvised verses-she tells the 
story about how she used to have a house, a family, a husband­
about her six children and how the elder ones also had little chil-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
42 1 
dren, her grandsons. Then her torturers came and burned to death 
her old man at the wall, slaughtered her falcon-children, assaulted 
a little girl, abducted the other one-a beauty-ripped the infants' 
stomachs with yataghans, and threw them all into the raging fire. 
All this she had witnessed and she had heard the babies' shrieks." 
"Yes, I too have also read about this"-said my queer friend. 
"Remarkable, very remarkable. The principal thmg-in verses. And 
in Russia, our Russian critics, though at times th!!y did laud verses, 
still invariably they were inclined to believe they were created 
mostly for mischief. It would be curious to trace the spontaneous 
epic poetry, so to speak, in its elemental inception. This is a ques­
tion of art." 
"Stop pretending. However, I have observed that you are 
not all too fond of speaking about the Eastern question." 
"No, I also sent my contribution. If you insist, it is true 
that there are certain things which do not appeal to me in the 
Eastern question." 
"Precisely what ?" 
"Why, al.Jundar.cc of lvve, for example." 
"Look here, I am sure . . .  
" 
"I know, I know : don't finish ; and you are absolutely right. 
Besides, I sent my contribution in the very beginning. You see, 
in Russia the Eastern question is still, so to say, a question of 
love, and it used to emanate from the Slavophiles. In fact, on sen­
timentality many a people have made good, especially last winter 
with the Herzegovinians ; there even ensued several sentimental 
careers. Please note that I am saying nothing ; besides, sentimen­
tality, in itself, is a most excellent thing ; but even a jade may be 
wearied to death. This is what I have been fe-.rlng ever siuv' spring, 
and this is why I did not believe it. Later, in the sumrr. , , even 
here, I was afraid that suddenly all this brotherliness might some­
how be washed away from us. But at prese;1t-now I an_ no longer 
afraid. Yes, Russian blood has been shed, and snilled blood is an 
important thing-a uniting thing ! "  
"And is it really possible that you thought that our brother­
liness might be washed off ?" 
"I plead guilty : I did think so. And how otherwise could 
it be supposed ? However, now I am no longer thinking so. You 
see, even here, in Ems, some ten versts from the Rhine, news was 
received, so to speak, straight from Belgrade. Tourists arrived, <:nd 
they themselves heard that in Belgrade Russi. was blamed. On the 
other hand I myself have read in Temps and in Debats that after 
the Turks 'had invaded Serbia, people in Belgrade cried : 'Down 
with Cherniaiev.' However, other correspondents and evewitnesses, 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
on the contrary, maintain that all this is nonsense, and that the 
Serbians adore Russia and are expecting everything from Cherniaiev. 
You know, I believe the news on both sides ; surely, there must 
have been cries of all kinds : Serbia is a young nation ; she has no 
soldiers ; they don't know how to fight ; there is a lot of magnanimity 
and no business sense whatsoever. There Cherniaiev was compelled 
to build an army, but I am sure they-the overwhelming majority 
-fail to realize what a task it is to build an army in so short a 
time and under existing circumstances. Later they will understand, 
but then it is going to be world history. However, even though 
far from all, nevertheless among their wisest ministerial heads there 
are some to whom it does seem that Russia is treacherous ; that 
she is just dreaming of conquering and swallowing them. And so 
I was fearing that all this might pour cold water on our brother­
liness. Yet the contrary happened-so contrary that even to many 
a Russian it was unexpected. Suddenly the whole of Russia arose 
in commotion, and promptly she uttered her principal word. Soldier, 
merchant, professor, God's little old woman-they were all unani­
mous. And mind, not a sound about usurpation : 'Here,' they said, 
as it were, 'here's my contribution to the Orthodox cause.' And­
not only pennies for the Orthodox cause-each one is ready right 
away to sacrifice his life. And, again, please note the words : 'for 
the Orthodox cause'-this is a most momentous political formula 
both in our day and in the future. It may even be said that it is 
the formula of our future. And that there is not a sound from 
anywhere about 'usurpation' is most peculiar. Europe under no 
circumstance could have 8elieved it because she herself would have 
been acting not otherwise than with usurpation, so that-strictly 
speaking-she cannot be blamed for her outcries against us-do you 
know that ?" 
"In a word, this time it is the beginning of our final conflict 
with Europe, and . . .  could it have begun otherwise than with a 
perplexity ? To Europe, Russia is a perplexity, and Russia's every 
act is a perplexity, and thus it shall be to the very end. Yes, it 
has been long since Russia has manifested herself so consciously 
and so accordantly ;  besides, in truth we did find our kinsmen and 
brethren, and this is no longer elevated style ; these we found not 
merely through the Slavic Committee, but verily through our land 
at large. Now, to me, this was unexpected, and this I would never 
have believed. Even if anyone would have predicted it, it would 
have been difficult to believe in our general and, so to speak, sudden 
consensus. And yet what happened-did happen. You were telling 
me about that ill-starred Bulgarian mother, but I know that this 
summer another mother made her appearance : Mother Russia has 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
found her own new babies, and a great compassionate outcry has 
sounded. Precisely-babies, and precisely-great motherly lamenta­
tion. And, mind you, here again we have a grand political indication 
for the future : 'their mother, and not their mistress 1 '  And even 
though it so happened that the new babies, failing to understand 
things-for only a brief moment, however-should start repining at 
her, she should not be listening or paying attentiort to it ; she should 
continue to be charitable with infinite and patient motherhood as 
every real mother should. Do you know that this present summer 
will be recorded in the annals of our history ? Well, it was not spent 
in vain ! And what a number of Russian perplexities were cleared 
at once ; to what a number of Russian questions answers will at 
once be received ! For Russian consciousness, this summer was al­
most an epoch. We are prepared to exercise charity and, perhaps, 
even to spill our blood, and yet, do you know, we ourselves have 
acquired much. What do you think ?" 
PosT-SCRIPTUM 
"At times, the Russian people conspicuously fail to be veri­
similar."-This little phrase I have also heard this summer and, 
of course, again because, to the man who uttered it, much of that 
which happened thb !'Ummer was unexpected :nd, perhaps, in fact, 
did not have the appearance of "verisimilitude." However, what 
was there new in what had occurred ?-On the contrary, everything 
that was revealed, has it not been long, even always, present in 
the heart of the Russian people ? 
First of all, there arose the popular idea, and thf' popular 
sentiment was revealed : the sentiment of di!,;;૨terested alir· ion for 
their unfortunate and oppressed brethren, while the popu:i:r idea 
was the "Orthodox cause." And verily, in this alone something un­
expected was revealed. Unexpected (however, by no medns to all) 
was the fact that the people had not forgetter. their great idea, 
their "Orthodox cause" ; that they have not forgotten it in the 
course of their two-hundred-year slavery, dark ignorance, and in 
recent times-of despicable debauch, materialism, Jewry an૩ :tlcohol. 
Secondly, unexpected was the fact that with the popular idea, the 
"Orthodox cause," were allied virtually all shades of opinion of 
the most educated strata of Russian society-those very elements 
·which we regarded as completely detached fmm the people. In Ibis 
connection one should note the extraord1. .1ry enthusiasm and 
unanimity of our press . . . .  God's little old woman tends her cop­
per coin for the Slavs, and she adds-"for the Orthodox cause." The 
j଑:mrnalist catches this word and records it in the newspaper with 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
genuine veneration, and one ca1;1 see that with all his heart he favors 
that same "Orthodox cause" ; one feels it, when reading his article. 
Perhaps, even our utter disbelievers have finally come to under­
stand what, in substance, Orthodoxy and the "Orthodox cause" 
mean to the Russian people. They have grasped the fact that this 
is by no means mere ritual churchism and, on the other hand, by 
no means fanatisme rcligieux (as people in Europe are beginning 
to call this present common Russian movement) ,  but that it is 
precisely human progress, universal humanization of man-spe­
cifically thus conceived by the Russian people, who, deriving every­
thing from Christ and incarnating their whole future in Christ and 
in His truth, are even unable to imagine themselves without Christ. 
Liberals, deniers, sceptics, as well as preachers of social ideas, they 
all-their majority at least-suddenly turned out to be ardent Rus­
sian patriots. 
Well, this means that they were such. However, can it be as­
serted that we have known this all along ?-On the contrary, is it 
not true that until recently many bitter mutual reproaches have 
been made-reproaches which, in many respects, have proved futile ? 
Of Russians, of real Russians, there proved to be an infinitely 
greater number than had been estimated even by genuine Russians. 
What is it, then, that has united these men, or-more correctly­
what is it that has showed them that in the main, in the essential, 
even heretofore, they had not been disunited ? 
But herein is precisely the point : the Slavic idea, in its loftiest 
sense, has ceased to be merely a Slavophile idea ; suddenly, under 
the pressure of circumsta૪ces, it has thrust itself into the very heart 
of Russian society ; it has graphically revealed itself in common 
consciousness, while in the live sentiment it has coincided with the 
popular movement. But what is this "Slavic idea in its loftiest 
sense" ? It became clear to everybody what it is : above all-i.e., 
prior to any historical, political, etc., interpretations-it is a sac­
rifice, even a longing for self-sacrifice in behalf of one's brethren, 
a feeling of voluntary duty on the part of the strongest among 
the Slavic tribes to intercede in defense of the weaker, in order 
to make him equal in liberty and political independence to him 
-the strongest-and thereby, henceforth, to establish the great all­
Slavic communion in the name of Christ's truth, i.e., for the benefit, 
love and service of .mankind as a whole, for the defense of all 
the weak and oppressed throughout the world. 
This is by no means a theory : on the contrary, in the present 
Russian movement-disinterested and brotherly to the point of 
deliberate readiness to sacrifice its most vital interest, even includ­
ing peace with Europe-this has been revealed as a fact, while, in 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
the future, can the all-Slavic communion come to pass for any 
other purpose than for the defense of the weak and for service to 
mankind ? This must be so because the majority of the Slavic tribes 
have themselves been brought up and developed through nothing 
but suffering. Now, we wrote above that we are wondering how 
it is that the Russian people-who have been kept in serfdom, in 
ignorance and oppression-did not forget their great "Orthodox 
cause," their great Orthodox duty ; how it is that they have not 
become completely bestialized ; that they have not been converted 
into gloomy, secluded egoists looking to nothing but their personal 
advantage. But, probably, such is their nature as Slavs, that is, 
their ability to rise spiritually in suffering, to gain political strength 
under oppression, and-amidst slavery and humiliation-to unite in 
mutual affection and Christ's truth. 
Thee, my land, in days distressing, 
Christ, our Lord, in slavish dress, 
Burdened with the crucial stress, 
T,' ::md fro tr;.versed, blessing. 
Precisely because the Russian people themselves have been 
oppressed and, over many centuries, have endured the crucial burden, 
they have not forgotten their "Orthodox cause," and their suffering 
brethren ; this is why the people rose spirituallv with perfect readi­
ness in their hearts to help the oppressed in every way. This is 
what our elite intelligentsia has grasped-wholeheartedly backing 
the people's aspiration. And, having joined them, it suddenly and 
completely felt in communion with them. The movement, which 
seized everybody, was a magnanimous and humane one. Every sub­
lime and cohesi'.•e idea, every sound cohesive ::::'ntiment, l:l'' ·titutes 
the greatest happiness in the life of a nation. This happil,: ·.s was 
bestowed upon us. We could not help but clearly perceive the in­
creased consensus, the clarification of many a former perplexity, 
our augmented self-consciousness. All of a sucden the political 
thought, clearly conceived by society and the people, was revealed. 
Alert Europe at once discerned this, and is now watching the Rus­
sian movement with extraordinary attention. To her, a rnnscious 
political thought in our people comes as a complete surprise. She 
forebodes something new wnich must be reckoned with ; we have 
grown in her respect for us. The very rumors about the political 
and social disintegration of Russian society, as a national ent,ty, 
which have been accumulating in Europe, m 
,L at present, in her 
opinion, unquestionably become subject to strong refutation. It 
developed that, when necessary, Russians know how to unite. Be­
sides, our disintegrating forces-should she be persisting in her 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
belief in them-must naturally assume a different orientation and 
face a different outcome. Indeed, as a result of this epoch, many 
a view will henceforth have to be modified. Briefly, this general 
and accordant Russian movement bears witness, in a considerable 
measure, to our national maturity, and cannot help but command 
respect for it. 
Russian officers are going to Serbia, and they are sacrificing 
their lives there. The flow of Russian officers and veteran Russian 
soldiers into Cherniaiev's army has been continually growing and, 
progressively, continues to increase. It may be said : "Those are 
lost people who had nothing to do at home and who went just to 
go somewhere-careerists and adventurers." However (according to 
many accurate data) ,  aside from the fact that these "adventurers" 
have received no monetary gains, and that the majority of them 
have barely managed to reach their destination-some of them, 
who were still in active service, unquestionably must have suffered 
a loss as a result of at least temporary retirement. But whoever 
they may be-what do we hear and read about them ?-They are 
dying by the dozens on battlefields and are heroically performing 
their task. The young army of insurgent Slavs, built up by Cher­
niaiev, is already firmly relying on them. They glorify the Russian 
name in Europe and, with their blood, they unite us with our 
brethren. This blood that has been heroically shed will not be 
forgotten and will be placed to their credit. Nay, they arc not 
adventurers ; they are the conscious initiators of a new epoch ; 
they are the pioneers of the Russian political thought, of the Rus­
sian aspirations, of the R11ssian will which they have declared before 
Europe. 
One other Russian personage has come to light-gravely, 
calmly and even majestically : this is General Cherniaiev. His mili­
tary operations, up to the present, have been developing with al­
ternate success but, as yet, on the whole to his advantage. In Serbia 
he has built up an army ; he has revealed a stern, firm, undeviating 
character. In addition, when proceeding to Serbia, he staked his 
whole military renown, which he had acquired previously in Russia, 
and, consequently, his future also. As it has recently become known, 
he agreed to assume command in Serbia merely of a separate de­
tachment, and only lately has he been confirmed in the rank of 
commander in chie૫ The army with which he took the field con­
sisted of the militia, of recruits who had never seen a rifle, of 
peaceful citizens-taken straight from the plow. The risk was 
very great and success was doubtful : verily, this was a sacrifice 
for a great cause. Having created the army, trained and organized 
it as well as possible, General Cherniaiev began to operate more 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
firmly, more boldly. He succeeded in scoring a very considerable 
victory. Of late, he has been compelled to retreat under the pressure 
of an enemy three times stronger. But he carried out the retreat in 
time-saving the army, unbeaten and strong-and he occupied a 
formidable position which the "victors" did not dare to attack. 
Judging strictly, General Cherniaiev is only be૬inning his major 
operations. However, his army can no longer expect support from 
any source, whereas the enemy army can still substantially increase 
its strength. Besides, political considerations of the Serbian govern­
ment may greatly handicap him and prevent him from completing 
his task. 
Nevertheless, this personage has already been firmly and 
clearly revealed : his military talent is unquestioned, while his char­
acter and the lofty impulse of his soul, no doubt, stand on the level 
of Russian aspirations and aims. However, the full story about 
General Cherniaiev is yet to be told. It is noteworthy that after 
his departure to Serbia he acquired extraordinary popularity in 
Russia ; his name became popular. And no wonder : Russia under­
stands that h૭ has i.1itiated, dnd is pursuing, a cause coinciding 
with her best and most heartfelt aspirations, and that by his act 
he has declared her intentions to Europe. No matter what may 
happen later, he can already he proud of his work and Russia will 
not forget him, but will love him. 
SF.PTEk!BER 
CHAPTER I 
1 
Piccola Bestia 
ABOUT SEVEN years ago I happened to be spending all 
summer, up to September, in Florence. In the opinion of the Italians, 
in summer Florence is the hottest-and in winter the coldest-city 
in all Italy. They consider summer far more tolerable in Naples 
than in Florence. And so, ouce, in the month of July, in the apart­
ment which I rented from a landlord, an alarm broke out : all of 
! sudden two maidservants, led by the mistress, burst into my rnnm 
-they had just seen a piccola bestia runnink i?to my room from 
the corridor outside ; it had to be found and k1lled by all means. 
Piccola bestia is a tarantula. 
Presently they began to search under the chair!", under the 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
tables, in all corners, in the furniture ; thereupon they started sweep­
ing under the cupboards and stamping their feet to frighten it and, 
thereby, to lure it out of its hiding place. Finally, they rushed into 
the bedroom, continuing their search under and in the bed, in the 
linen, and . . .  -they did not find it. The tarantula was found 
only the next morning when the room was being swept and, it 
stands to reason, it was promptly executed. Even so, I had to spend 
my night in bed with the uncomfortable feeling that in my room, 
keeping me company, a pic cola bestia was also spending the night. 
It is said that the sting of a tarantula is rarely deadly, even 
though I did know, in my days at Semipalatinsk, exactly fifteen 
years before my sojourn at Florence, about a case wl1en a line 
Cossack died of a tarantula's sting, despite medical treatment. As 
a rule, however, the sickness is confined to a burning fever or 
ordinary fever attacks, while in Italy, where there are so many 
physicians, it may be an even less serious matter. I don't know­
! am not a doctor ; even so, that night I felt "jittery." At first, I 
tried to banish the thought ; J even laughed when I recalled and 
recited by heart Kuzma Prutkov's didactic fable The Conductor 
and a Tarantula (a perfect gem sui generis) ,  and finally I fell asleep. 
But my dreams were decidedly unpleasant :  about the tarantula, 
I did not dream at all, but I did dream about something most 
unpleasant, painful and nightmarish ; I awoke frequently, and only 
in the morning, after sunrise, did I begin to sleep more quietly. 
Do you know why this little anecdote came to my mind at 
present ?-In connection with the Eastern question ! . . .  However, 
I am not wondering in ·the least : nowadays, what only do people 
not write and talk about the Eastern question ! 
I think this way : in connection with the Eastern question, 
there has run into Europe some piccola bestia which does not give 
to all good, peace-loving people a chance to calm down-people who 
love mankind and wish to see it flourishing, all those who are 
longing for that bright moment when, finally, at least this primitive, 
coarse strife of the nations will come to an end. In fact, if one 
gives thought to it, it does seem that with the final solution of the 
Eastern question, all other political strife in Europe will be termi­
nated ; that the formula-"the Eastern question"-comprises, per­
haps unknowingly to itself, all other political questions, perplexities 
and prejudices of Furope. In a word, there would ensue something 
quite new, and, for Russia, an altogether different phase, since now 
it is obvious that only after the final settlement of this problem 
would Russia finally be in a position-for the first time in her whole 
history-to come to terms with Europe and to become intelligible 
to her. And now, precisely some piccola bestia stands in the way 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
of all this happiness. It was always there but since the Eastern ques­
tion arose, it keeps running into the rooms themselves. Everybody 
is in a state of waiting ; everybody is alarmed ; some kind of a night­
mare hangs over everybody ; everybody has bad dreams. But who 
or what that piccola bestiu is, which causes such confusion, is im­
possible to determine because of the condition of ᆊeneral madness : 
everyone conceives it in his own way, and no one understands the 
other. And yet it seems that all have already been stung. The sting 
immediately causes most extraordinary fits : in Europe, one might 
think, people cease to understand each other, just as at the time 
of the Tower of Babylon ; moreover-everyone ceases to comprehend 
what he himself wants. There is but one thing that everybody agrees 
upon : at once everybody points to Russia and everybody is sure 
that the pernicious vermin invariably runs out of there. And yet 
only in Russia is everything bright and clear, except, of course, for 
the great sorrow over her Eastern Slavic brethren-a sorrow which, 
however, illuminates the soul and lifts the heart. Eve1y time the 
Eastern question is raised in Russia things shape themselves in a 
manner direcdy OtJpusite tr. that of Europe : rach one begins to 
understand the other more clearly ; everyone correctly perceives 
what he wants, and all feel that they are in accord with one another. 
The poorest peasant knows what he should be longing for as much as 
the most educated man. The beautiful and noble feeling of disin­
terested and magnanimous assistance to brethren, crucified on the 
cross, promptly unites all Russians. Europe, however, believes 
neither in Russia's nobleness nor in her disinterestedness. That 
"disinterestedness" is precisely the whole source of the uncertainty, 
of the temptation, of everything that tends to cause the confusion 
-a condition which is repulsive and hateful t r- everybo:.: .• · this is 
the reason why no one wants to believe it and everyone 
. some­
how, inclined to doubt it. Were it not for "disinterestedness," the 
matter would immediatt'ly have become ten r imes simple_· and more 
understandable to Europe, whereas, in the presence of this disinter­
estedness, everything is darkness, uncenainty, puzzlement, mystery ! 
Oh ! -those who are stung are in Europe ! And it stands to reason 
that in the conception of those who are stung the whole mystery 
is in Russia alone which, they argt!e, refuses to divulge anything to 
anyone, and which is firmly and unde\'iatingly pursuing some aim 
-craftily and silently deceiving everybody. 
Already for two hundred years Europe has been living ., ith 
Russia which forced her entry into the fanu. 
of European nations 
-into ivilization. But Europe, foreboding evil, always has looked 
askance upon Russia, as upon a fatal riddle which arose God only 
knows whence-but which, however, must be solved quand-meme. 

430 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
And thus, precisely, every time the Eastern question arises, this 
uncertainty-this perplexity of Europe as regards Russia-increases 
to a pathological degree, and yet nothing is being solved. "Indeed, 
who and what is it in the long run ? And when shall we learn it ? 
Who are they-those Russians ?-Asiatics, Tartars ? At least, it would 
be nice were the matter clear ! But no-it isn't. That's the point­
it isn't clear, and we have to confess this to ourselves. And yet they 
resemble us so little . . . .  Besides, what is that communion of the 
Slavs ? What is it for, and what are its aims? What will-what can 
-this perilous alliance tell us that is new ?" And they wind up, as 
hitherto and as always, by solving these questions in accordance 
with their own yardsticks : "Usurpation, seizure"-they claim­
"means conquest, dishonesty, craftiness, future annihilation of civ­
ilization, a united l\Iongol horde, Tartars ! "  
However, hatred itself of Russia is impotent fully to unite those 
who have been stung : every time the Eastern question arises, the 
apparent wholeness of Europe begins, much too obviously, to fall 
apart into personal, segregatedly national egoisms. There, everything 
is derived from the false idea that somebody wants to seize and 
grab something : "I should be in this, too, because-see-everybody 
is grabbing, and I'm getting nothing ! "  So that every time this fatal 
question appears on the scene, all former inveterate political con­
flicts and ailments of Europe begin to ache and fester. For this 
reason, naturally, everybody seeks to quench the question-at least 
temporarily ; principally-to quench it in Russia, somehow to divert 
Russia from it-somehow to exorcise, to conjure, to scare her. 
And so Viscount ·Beaconsfield-an Israelite by birth (ne 
Disraeli)-in an address at some banquet, suddenly divulges to 
Europe an extraordinary secret, to the effect that all those Russians, 
headed by Cherniaiev, who rushed into Turkey to save the Slavs­
that they all are Russian socialists, communists, communards­
briefty, all those Russian destructive elements with which Russia 
is supposedly loaded.-"Indeed, you may believe me for I am 
Beaconsfield, the Premier, as I am called in Russian newspapers 
in order to give more weight to their articles ; I am the Prime 
Minister ; I have secret documents, so that I know better than you, 
and I know very much."-This is what glimmers through every 
phrase of that Beaconsfield. I am convinced that it was he who 
invented for himself this family album name-reminiscent of our 
Lenskys and Gremins-when he was entreating the Queen for his 
noble rank, since he is a novelist. 
By the way, when, a- few lines above, I wrote about the mys­
terious piccola bestia, it suddenly occurred to me : what if the reader 
should imagine that in this allegory I sought to depict Viscount 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
431 
Beaconsfield ?-I assure you that this is not so : piccola bestia is 
merely an idea, and not a person ; besides, it would be granting too 
much honor to Mr. Beaconsfield, although one has to admit that 
he does very much resemble a piccola bestia. 
Asserting in his speech that Serbia, having declared war upon 
Turkey, has perpetrated a dishonest act, and that the war which 
Serbia is waging at present is a dishonest war-alld having thus spat 
into the face of the whole Russian movement, the whole Russian 
enthusiasm, the sacrifices, the aspirations, the entreaties about which 
he could not help but know-that Israelite, that new judge of the 
honor of England, continues thus ( I  am quoting him verbatim) :  
"Of course, Russia was glad to get rid of all these destructive 
elements by sending them into Serbia, although she failed to take 
into account that there they would unite their forces, achieve 
cohesion, reach an understanding, organize and grow into a power." 
. . .  "Europe should take notice of this threatening force."­
Beaconsfield stresses, menacing the English farmers with future 
socialism in Ruo:sia and in the East. "Also in Russia will they take 
notice of this insiuuating purase of mine"-of course, he says to 
himself. "Russia, too, has to be scared." 
Spider, spider-piccola bestia ; indeed, he awfully resembles 
it-indeed, a small, shaggy bestia ! And how swiftly does he strike I 
For it was he who pt>rmitted the massacre of the Bulgarians ; nay, 
more-he also plotted it, for he is a novelist, and this is his chef­
d'reuvre. And yet, he is seventy years old, and soon he will have 
to retire into the earth-this he knows himself. And how he must 
have rejoiced over his rank of viscount I Surely, he must have 
dreamed about it all his life, when he was still writing hio: novels I 
What do these people believe in ? How do l!lcy manage · 1 sleep 
at night ? What kind of dreams are they dreaming ? What Jo they 
do in solitude with their souls ?-Oh, their souls must be full of 
elegance ! . . .  Day in and day out they eat such delight;ul dinners 
in company with such refined and witty interloc•Jtors ; in the eve­
nings they are fondled in the cream of society by such lovely ladies 
-oh, their lives are so respectable ;  their digestion-so wonderful ; 
their dreams-so light, like those of infants I . . .  
Recently, I have read that ba૮hi-bazouks crucified two priests ; 
they died after twenty-four hours of tortures surpassing all imagina­
tion. Even though, in the beginning, Beaconsfield had denied in 
'Parliament any kind of tortures, even the slightest-of coursP. to 
himself he knows about these two crosses, tଏ. , "since he has docu­
ments.': No doubt, he chases away these trivial, trashy, even filthily 
indecent, pictures ; however, these two black contorted corpses on 
the crosses may suddenly leap into the head at a most unexpected 

432 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
moment-say, for example, when Beaconsfield, in his gorgeous bed­
room, feels ready to fall asleep with a serene smile, recapitulating 
in his mind the brilliant evening which he has just spent, and all 
those delightful, witty things which he has said to this or that 
gentleman, to this or that lady. 
"Well"-Beaconsfield might think-"these black corpses on 
the crosses . . .  hm . . .  of course . . .  However, 'the state is not 
a private person ; it cannot, from mere sentimentality, sacrifice its 
interests, all the more so as in political matters magnanimity itself 
is never disinterested.' It is wonderful, what beautiful mottoes there 
are"-Beaconsfield ponders-"even so refreshing, and principally-
so well-proportioned ! . . .  Indeed, isn't the state . . .  But I had 
better go to bed . . . .  Hm . . .  After all, what are these two 
priests ? Two 'popes' ?-Tht.y call them 'popes,' 'les popes.' It's their 
own fault that they happened to be around ! Why didn't they hide 
somewhere . . .  under a soft . .
. mais, avec votre permission, mes­
sieurs les deux crucifies, I am terribly tired of you with your silly 
adventure, et je vous souhaite la bonne nuit a tous les deux." 
And Beaconsfield falls asleep sweetly, gently. He dreams all 
the time that he is a viscount, and all around him are roses and 
lilies of the valley, and lovely, lovely ladies. Presently he makes 
a most delightful speech : what bons mots I Everybody applauds I 
He has just crushed the coalition . . . .  
And now, all our captains and majors, veteran Sebastopolians 
and Caucasians, in their crumpled old suits, with little white crosses 
in their buttonholes (so many of them have been described ! )-they 
all are socialists ?-Of course, some of them will take a drink ; we 
have been hearing about this : in this respect the service man is 
rather weak, yet this is in no sense socialism I As against this, 
please behold how he is dying in battlE" ; what a dandy, what a hero 
he is at the head of his battalion, glorifying the Russian name and, 
by his personal example, converting even cowardly recruits into 
heroes I So, according to you, he is a socialist ?-Well, and what 
about these two youths whom their mother brought by the hand 
(this fact, too, did take place ! ) -are they communards ?-And that 
old warrior over there with his seven sons-does he really seek to 
burn down the Tuileries ?-These elderly soldiers, these Don Cos­
sacks, these Russian contingents arriving with sanitary units and 
field chapels-is it possible that they are dreaming about nothing 
but shooting an archbishop ? These Kireevs, these Raievskys-they 
all are our destructive elements whom Europe has to dread ? And 
Cherniaiev, this most naive of all heroes,-in Russia, former editor 
of The Russian World-he, too, is a ringleader of Russian socialism ? 
Fie, how incredible ! Had Beaconsfield known how, in Russia, all 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
433 
this sounds ill-proportioned . . .  anrl shameful, he would, perhaps, 
not have ventured to interject so ridiculous a passage in his speech. 
2 
\VoRos, WoRvs, \VoRos თ 
Several opinions-both our own and European-on the solution 
of the Eastern question arc decidedly surprising. By the way, in our 
journalistic world there are also some who, as it were, have been 
stung. Oh, l shall not enumerate all my impressions--this would 
make me tired. "Administrative autonomy" also is apt to cause 
paralysis of one's brain. Do you sec, if things could be arranged so 
as to grant nulgaria, Herzegovina and Bosnia equal rights with the 
Mohammedan population, and forthwith to find means how to 
guarantee their rights-"we dcfmitcly see no reason why the Eastern 
question could not he brought to a close," etc., etc. This opinion, 
as is known, enioys particular authoritativeness in Europe. Briefly, 
a combination is ccnccived, t:.c realization of which is more difficult 
than to create all Europe anew, or to separate water from earth, 
or anything else you please : and yet people believe that they have 
settled the problem, and they feel calm and content. 
Nay, Russia h.Ls agreed to this only in principle, but the 
execution of this scheme she wants to supervise herself, and in her 
own way ; and, of course, -'lessrs. Idle-Talkers, she would not let 
you derive the benefits therefrom. '·To grant autonomy" ?-"To find 
a combination" ?-Why, how can it be done ? And who is going to 
do it ? Who is going to obey ? And who is going to enforce obedience ? 
Finally, who rules Turkey ? What partieი ancl what forceკ: : s there 
even in Constantinople, which is still better educated thar: !le rest 
of the Turks, a single Turk who in reality, by inner conviction, 
would recognize a Christian community to :ლuch an exte მt equal to 
himself that anything factual could come of that "autonomy" ? I 
say-"a single man" . . .  And, if so-if there is not even one-how 
is it possible to conduct negotiations and enter into treaties with 
such a people ?-"Organize supervision, find a combination"-guides 
keep insisting. Go ahead, try to find a combination I There are 
problems of such a nature as are absolutely impossible precisely 
of that solution for which people crave at a given moment. It was 
impossible to disentangle the Gordian knot with fingers, and yet 
people kept wracking their brains over hov. · o disentangle it pre­
cisely with their fingers. But Alexander came and dissected it with 
a sword and, in this way, solved the riddle. 
Then, for example, there is a certain journalistic opinion-

434 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
in truth, not only a journalistic One : it is an old diplomatic opinion 
-as well as an opinion shaf'ed by many scientists, professors, feuille­
tonists, publicists, novelists, Westerners, Slavophiles, and so forth, 
to wit : that, eventually, Constantinople will belong to nobody ; that 
she is going to be something on the order of a free international 
city-in a word, something like a "common place." She is going 
to be guarded by "European equilibrium," etc. Briefly, instead of 
a direct and clear solution-the only one which is possible-there 
comes some complicated and unnatural scientific combination. Now, 
to ask but one question : what is European equilibrium ?-Up to the 
present, such an equilibrium has been conceived in relation to several 
most powerful European states-say, five, for example-of equal 
weight (i.e., it was presumed, so to speak, from delicacy that they 
were of equal weight). Thus, five wolves will lie down around the 
choice piece (Constantinople), and each one of the five will be 
engaged in nothing but guarding the prey against the others. And 
this is being called a chef-d'reuvre, a Meisterstuck of the solution 
of the problem ! But does this solve anything ?-The fact alone is 
that all is based upon a primitive absurdity, upon a fantastic, non­
existent and even unnatural fact-upon equilibrium. In reality, has 
political equilibrium existed in the world at any time ?-Positively 
not 1 This is merely a tricky formula invented by crafty men in 
order to cheat simpletons. And although Russia is not simple­
minded, yet she is honest, and, for this reason-1 believe-she, more 
frequently than the rest, has believed in the inviolability of the 
truths and laws of that equilibrium, and many a time has she sin­
cerely complied with them and acted as their protectress. In this 
respect Europe has most impudently exploited Russia. As for the 
others-suspended in a state of equilibrium-it seems that not one 
of them has been giving serious thought to these equilibria) laws, 
even though, for the time being, complying with formalities ; how­
ever, as soon as, according to one's calculations, some gain was in 
sight, he violated that equilibrium without concern for anything 
else. The funniest part of it is that such tactics invariably succeeded, 
and "equilibrium" would again ensue. However, when Russia, too, 
without violating anything, gave a little thought to her own in­
terests-at once all other equilibriums got together and moved 
against Russia : "thou viola test the equilibrium 1 "  
Well, the same is going to happen i n  the case of an interna­
tional Constantinople : five wolves will be lying around baring their 
teeth at each other, and each one will be silently inventing a com­
bination-how to unite with the neighbors and how, after extermi­
nating the other wolves, to divide the choice piece in a most ad­
vantageous manner. Is this a solution ?-Meanwhile, among the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
435 
wolves-guardians, there arise sui generis new combinations : sud­
denly, one of the five wolves-and even the grayest one-on a certain 
day and hour, by some mishap, is converted from a wolf into a 
little lap dog which cannot even bark. There you are : the equilibrium 
is shattered ! Moreover, in the future of Europe, it may happen 
that out of five powers of equal weight simply two will be formed, 
and in this case where will your combination be, Messrs. Wise­
Heads ? . . .  By the way, I venture to set forth the following axiom : 
"Never will there be such a moment in Europe, never such a 
political state of things, when Constantinople would not be some­
body's, i.e., that she would not belong to someone." Such is the 
axiom, and it seems to me that it cannot be otherwise. And if you 
will permit a little joke, I might say that at the eleventh hour, 
at the last decisive moment, Constantinople will suddenly be seized 
by the English, just as they have seized Gibraltar, Malta, and so 
forth. And this will happen precisely at a time when the powers 
will still be entertaining the idea of the equilibrium. Precisely, these 
very Englishme11 who, with such tender motherly care, are at present 
guarding the inviolability of l'urkey, who prophesy to her the pos­
sibility of a great future, of civilization ; who believe in her creative 
principles-precisely these Englishmen, when they perceive that the 
matter has come to an issue, will swallow the Sultan, together with 
Constantinople. This is in line with their char::.cter and orientation 
-so akin to their customary impudent arrogance, their oppression, 
their malice ! Of course, just now all this is but a jest, and I am 
giving it out as such. However, it wouldn't be a bad idea to re­
member this joke : it smacks so of truth. 
3 
CoMBINATIONS AND CoMBINATIONS 
Thus, in the solution of the Eastern que:;tion all sorts of 
combinations arc being admitted with the exception of the clearest, 
sanest, simplest, the most natural, one. It may even be said that 
the more unnatural the solution that is being suggested, thf' quicker 
is public opinion and common opiuion to seize upon it. 
Here, for example, is another "unnaturalness" : it is suggested 
that "should Russia openly declare her disinterest, so that all Europe 
could hear it, the matter would at once bP solved and settlt·d." 
But happy he who believes I Should Russia .ot only declare, but 
de facto prove, her disinterest, this, perhaps, would still more con­
fuse Europe. What if we should annex nothing-what if we should 
"Lestow benefits" and should return without having taken advantage 

436 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
of anything, merely proving to Europe our disinterestedness ?-Why, 
Europe would feel still worse : 11The more disinterestedly you have 
benefited them, the more strongly you have proved to them that you 
are not seeking to violate their independence, the more devoted to 
you they will become-henceforth they will justly regard you as their 
sun, as a summit, as a zenith, as their Empire. What of it that they 
would be autonomous, and not your subjects ? Still, in their souls 
they would deem themselves your subjects ; unconsciously and in­
voluntarily they would adopt this attitude." It is precisely this 
inevitability of the moral affiliation of the Slavs with Russia-sooner 
or later-this, so to speak, naturalness, the legitimacy of this fact, 
so dreaded by Europe, that constitutes her nightmare, her principal 
future fears. On her part, it is only forces and combinations­
whereas, on our part, it is a law of nature, naturalness, kinship, 
truth. Now then, to whom will the future of Slavic countries belong ? 
Meanwhile, there is precisely in Europe a certain combination 
based upon ·a directly opposite principle, and such a probable one 
that, perhaps, it may have a future. This new combination is also 
11made in England" ; this is, so to say, a corrective to all errors 
and slips of the Tory Party. This combination is based upon the 
idea that England herself forthwith bestow benefits upon the Slavs, 
on condition, however, that they be converted into eternal enemies 
and haters of Russia. It is suggested to renounce the Turks, to 
exterminate them as a lost people, good for nothing, and to form 
a union of all Christian peoples of the Balkan Peninsula, with 
Constantinople as its center. The liberated and grateful Slavs would, 
naturally, lean toward "England as their savior and liberatress, 
which then would open their eyes on Russia : 11She"-they would 
say-" is your worst enemy ; under the guise of concern for you, 
she is dreaming of swallowing you and of depriving you of your 
inevitable glorious political future." Thus, when the Slavs would 
become convinced of Russia's treacherousness, they would at once 
form a new and powerful bulwark against her, and "then Con­
stantinople will slip out of Russia's hands ; they will not permit 
her thither-never." 
At first glance it might seem that nothing cleverer, nothing 
more to the point, can be conceived. The main thing is that this 
is so simple and is based upon an existing fact. In passing, I have 
already mentioned that fact. It comes down to this : among a certain 
portion of the Slavic intelligentsia, among certain outstanding repre­
sentatives and leaders of the Slavs, there dwells in truth a concealed 
mistrust of Russia's aims, and, as a result of this-even animosity 
against Rusia and the Russians. Oh, I am not speaking of the 
people, the masses. To the Slavic peoples-the Serbians, the Mon-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
437 
tenegrins-Russia is still their sun, their hope, their friend, their 
mother and their protectress, their future liberatress I But the Slavic 
intelligentsia is a different proposition. Of course, I am not speaking 
of the intelligentsia as a whole ; I would not even venture, or take 
it upon myself, to speak of all of them. "However, even though far 
from all, nevertheless among their wisest ministerial heads (as I 
expressed myself in my August Diary) ,  there :-tre some to whom 
it does seem that Russia is treacherous ; that she is just dreaming 
of conquering and swallowing them." There is no point in con­
cealing from ourselves that, perhaps, quite a large number of edu­
cated Slavs do not like us, Russians, at all. For instance, they still 
consider us ignorant, almost barbarians, compared with them. They 
are by no means greatly interested in the progress of our civic life, 
our internal organization, our reforms, our literature. Perhaps only 
the very learned among them know about Pushkin, and even among 
those who do know about him, only a few would agree to recognize 
him as the great Slavic genius. Many educated Czechs, for instance, 
are convinced that they had forty poets like Pushkin. Besides, all 
these Slavic s.:grtg<.L!ons, in 'hat state in which they are at present, 
are politically ambitious and irritable, as inexperienced nations 
which do not know life. Among such ones the English combination 
could meet with success provided it could come into vogue. And 
it is difficult to conceive why it shouldn't if, with the Whig victory 
in England, that combination were placed on her agenda. And yet 
how much artificiality, unnaturalness and deceit there is in that 
combination-how impossible it is I 
To begin with, how is one to unite such disparate ethnographic 
units of the Balkan Peninsula, and at that-with a CP.nter in Con­
stantinople ?-There, there are Greeks, Slavs, Fumanians. f·J whom 
will Constantinople belong ?-To all ? That would be the , .૯inning 
of friction and dissension, say, between the Greeks and the Slavs­
to start with (even if it should be presumed that all "lavs be in 
accord among themselves) . It may be said : it is possible to appoint 
a sovereign, to found an Empire-thus, it seems, it is contemplated 
in the dreams of the project. But who is going to be emperor-a 
Slav, a Greek, or maybe one of the Hapsburgs ? In any event there 
would at once ensue dualisms, bifurcations. ThP. important thing 
is that the Greek and Sla, elements are incompatible : either ele­
ment has enormous, altogether incommensura૰e and false, dreams 
·about its forthcoming glorious political future. No, should Eng૱and 
really make up her mind to forsake the Tur' 
she will fix all Lhese 
things on a more solid foundation. Right here, ::;o it seems to me, 
that combination might be put over which I have earlier denoted 
a.<; a jest-Lhat is, England herself might swallow Constantinople 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
"for the benefit, so to speak, of the Slavs."-"! shall form of you, 
Slavs, a union and a bulwark in the North against the Northern 
colossus so as not to let him into Constantinople, for once he should 
seize Constantinople, he would also seize all of you. In such an 
event you would be deprived of your glorious political future. Also 
you, Greeks, don't you worry : Constantinople is yours. Precisely, 
I want her to be yours, and this is why I am occupying her. This 
I am doing merely in order not to give her to Russia. The Slavs 
will be protecting her from the North, and 1-from the sea, and 
we shall let no one in. And I shall stay in Constantinople only for 
the time being until you gain strength and form a firm and mature 
federal Empire. But until that time comes, I shall be your leader 
and protectress. Are the places few where I have stayed ? I have 
Gibraltar, Malta . . . .  And didn't I return the Ionian Islands ? . . .  
" 
In a word, should this Whig product come into vogue, it would 
be difficult, I repeat, to doubt its success-of course, only a tem­
porary one. Moreover, that time could be prolonged for many a 
year, but . . .  all the more inevitably would all this collapse when 
the natural limit is reached ; then it would be a final collapse since 
the whole combination is based upon calumny and unnaturalness. 
The deceit is in the fact that Russia was calumniated. No 
fog can withstand the rays of truth. There will come a time when 
even the Slavic nations will comprehend the whole truth of Russian 
disinterest, and by then t4eir spiritual communion with us will 
have been consummated. For our active communion with the Slavs 
has begun very recently, but now-now it will never cease and will 
continue stronger and stronger. At length, the Slavs will convince 
themselves-despite any kind of calumnies-of Russian brotherly 
afection for them. They will become affected by the irresistible 
witchery of the great and mighty Russian spirit which is akin to 
them. They will perceive that they cannot develop spiritually within 
petty coalitions, dissensions and envies, and that this is possible 
only on a full, all-Slavic scale. The enormity and might of the 
Rusian communion will no longer frighten them ; on the contrary, 
they will be irresistibly attracted by that enormity, and that might, 
as toward a center and a beginning. The religious concord will also 
serve as a very strong bond. Russian religion, Russian Orthodoxy, 
is everything the Russian people regard as their sanctity : in it are 
their ideals, the whole, truth and rectitude of life. And what united 
and what kept the Slavic nations alive in the days of their distress, 
during the four centuries of the Mohammedan yoke-what but their 
religion ? They have endured for it so much suffering that this 
alone must have made it dear to them. Finally, Russian blood was 
already shed for the Slavs, and blood is never forgotten. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
439 
Crafty people have overlooked all this. The possibility of 
calumniating Russia to the Slavs inspires them with success and 
with faith in the firmness of success. But such a success is of no 
long duration. Temporarily, however-! repeat-it may be realized. 
The combination decidedly may come into vogue if the Whigs 
should triumph, and this has to be taken into account. The English 
will risk it simply to anticipate Russia when the final hour strikes : 
"We ourselves shall manage to bestow benefits." 
By the way, speaking of bloodshed. What if our volunteers, 
even without Russia's declaring war, should finally defeat the Turks 
and liberate the Slavs ? It is rumored that so many volunteers come 
from Russia, and contributions flow so uninterruptedly, that, per­
haps, in the long run, a whole Russian army might be formed under 
Cherniaiev. In any event, Europe and her diplomats would be very 
much surprised with such a result : "If volunteers alone defeated 
the Turks, what would have happened if the whole of Russia would 
have taken up arms?" An argument such as this would not be 
missed in EurPpe. 
God bless the Russian volunteers with success ! -It is rumored 
that Russian officers by the dozens are again being killed in battle. 
You, dear ones ! 
It is not out of place to make one more little remark which, 
in my judgment, is rather pressing. As thf> number of Russian 
volunteers in Serbia increases and in view of their many heroic 
deaths on battlefields, our papers have started collections under a 
new heading : "For the benefit of families of Russians fallen in 
the war with the Turks for the liberation of the Balkan Slavs." 
Contributions begin to flow. The Voice has already collert.ed under 
this heading up to three thousand rubles, J.lld the me·. 
people 
contribute-the better, of course. There is only one thil·s which 
is not quite all right : to my way of thinking, the formula for the 
collection is framed incompletely. Contributions are being received 
only for the benefit of families of Russians fall.:n in the war, etc. 
And what about the families of men who had been crippled ? Is 
it possible that they will receive nothing ? Yet these families might 
be in a more difficult position than those of the killed. He who 
has fallen-has fallen ; he is being mourned ; but that one came 
home a crippled man, without his feet, without his arms, or so 
badly wounded that henceforth his health will always require in-
. creasing care and medical attention. BesidPs, even though he is 
crippled, nevertheless he eats and drinks, a .J, consequently, in a 
poor family an extra mouth is added. Besides, in my opinion, there 
is one more erroneous indeterminateness : "For the benefit of families 
of Russians fallen 
.
.
.
 " etc. But there are well-to-do ar less needy 

440 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
families ; on the other hand, there are quite destitute and very 
needy families. If money is distributed among all, the poor will 
receife much too little. Therefore, it seems to me that the wording 
of the heading should be changed thus : "For the benefit of the needy 
families of Russians falle" or crippled in the war with tire Turks 
for the liberation of the Balkan Slavs." 
However, I am merely setting forth an idea, and if someone 
should succeed in framing a more accurate formula-of course, all the 
better. It is only to be hoped that contributions under this heading 
may accumulate more quickly and more abundantly. This is most 
useful, quite indispensable, and it may exercise a strong moral 
influence upon our magnanimous volunteers who are fighting for 
the Russian idea. 
4 
MoRNING GowNs AND SoAP 
Among the opinions on the Eastern question I came across 
a perfect oddity. Recently, there appeared in the foreign press a 
strange argument : in ardent, virtually fantastic, terms people began 
to speculate as to what would happen to the world should Turkey 
be annihilated and pressed back into Asia. It was claimed that a 
calamity, a terrible repercussion, would ensue. Predictions were even 
made to the effect that in Asia, somewhere in Arabia, there would 
arise a new caliphate ; that fanaticism would be resurrected, and 
that once more the Moha"mmedan world would make an onslaught 
against Europe. More profound thinkers confined their opinion to 
the argument that to evict a whole nation from Europe into Asia 
is an impossible and altogether unthinkable proposition. When I 
was reading all this, I somehow felt very surprised ; even so, I 
was unable to guess what this actually meant. But, suddenly, I 
understood that all these diplomat-dreamers de facto are putting 
the question in a literal sense, i.e., that concretely it comes down 
to the proposition that after the political destruction of the Turkish 
Empire, actuaJly, literaJly and physically, all the Turks should be 
taken and transported somewhere to Asia. 
How a thing of this sort could have been conceived-I simply 
cannot understand. Yet at banquets and meetings people were 
unquestionably scared by the prediction : a terrible repercussion, a 
calamity will ensue. Even so, it seems to me that nothing at all 
would happen, and that not a single Turk would have to be deported 
to Asia. In Russia something of this kind did happen once. When 
the Tartar Horde came to an end, the Kazan Czardom unexpectedly 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
441 
began to increase in strength, and this to such an extent that there 
was a time when it would have been difficult to predict to whom 
the Russian land would belong-to Christianity or Mohammedanism. 
That Czardom ruled the present-day Russian East ; it was in com­
munication with Astrakhan ; it held the Volga iu its hands, while 
at Russia's flank there appeared a most welcome ally of Kazan 
in the person of the Khan of the Crimean Horde -a terrible robber 
and plunderer from whom Moscow had suffered much. The situation 
was pressing, and the youthful Czar Ivan Vasilievich-at that time 
not yet Terrible-made up his mind to settle the Eastern question 
of those days by capturing Kazan. 
The siege was a terrible one, and subsequently Karamzin 
described it most eloquently. The Kazan residents defended them­
selves desperately, perfectly, stubbornly, tenaciously and unwaver­
ingly. However, their saps were blown up, and the Russians stormed 
Kazan and captured her. Well, what did Czar Ivan Vasiliev1ch 
undertake when he entered Kazan ? Did he order a wholesale ex­
termination of her inhabitants-as he later did in the case of ૲ov­
gorod the Grc:.t .. ,. that henr"forth they should not be in his way ? 
Did he deport them to the steppes in Asia ?-Not in the least : not 
even a single Tartar urchin was deported ; everything remained 
as hitherto, and the heroic, formerly so dangerous, Kazan residents 
became pacified forever. And this came to pass in a most simple 
and most peculiar manner : just as soon as thL city had been cap­
tured, the icon of the Mother of God was carried into it ; for the 
first time since Kazan's foundation a Te Deum was officiated. There­
upon the foundation of an Orthodox church was laid ; arms were 
assiduously conf1scatecl from the inhabitants ;  Russian administra­
tion was inaugurated, while the Czar of Kazan was sent tn ,'! proper 
place-that's all. And the whole thing came to pass in · st one 
day. A little while after that Kazan inhabitants began to sell us 
morning gowns, and still later-also soap. (T believe that this took 
place precisely in the indicated order-first came the morning gowns, 
and then-the soap.) Such was the end uf the whole affair. Exactly 
in the same manner the matter would also be settled in Turkey, 
should the happy thought be conceived fmally to abolish the 
Caliphate politically. 
First a Te Deum would be officiated in the Saint Sophia 
Church ; thereupon the Patriarch would consecrate it anew ; by 
that day, I believe, a bell would have been brought from Moscnw ;  
the Sultan would be sent to a proper place-
'ld this would be the 
end of everything. True, the Turks have a Jaw, almost a dogma 
of the Koran, to the effect that only a Mohammedan may and shall 
cl\rry arms, while a Gentile is denied this right. Of late, however, 

442 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
they have begun to grant permission also to Gentiles to possess 
arms, but only subject to a high tax, and in this way they even 
invented a new source of state revenue ; still, comparatively speak­
ing, there are but very few who actually carry arms. Well, perhaps, 
this one law could be amended on the very first day-i.e., on the 
day of the first Te Deum at Sophia-in the reverse sense that only 
a Gentile may and shall carry arms, whereas a Mohammedan shall 
be denied this right altogether, even for a high tax. Now, then, this 
would be all that would be needed to assure peace and quiet ; I 
insist, nothing more would be required. After a little while, Turks 
would also start selling us morning gowns, and later-also soap, 
perhaps even of a better quality than that of Kazan. As regards 
agriculture, tobacco industry and wine manufacture-these branches, 
I believe, under the new administration and under new laws, would 
improve so quickly and so successfully that, by-and-by, of course, 
they would make it possible to pay the irredeemable debts of the 
former Turkish state to Europe. Briefly, nothing would happen 
except the best and most suitable things ; there would be even 
not the slightest repercussion, and-I repeat-not even a single Turk­
ish urchin would have to be evicted from Europe. 
Nor would anything happen in the East. True, perhaps, a 
caliphate would arise somewhere-somewhere in the Asiatic steppes, 
in the sands. However, to carry out an onslaught against Europe 
in our age, so much money, so many pieces of artillery of the latest 
design, so many rifles equipped with the repeating mechanism, so 
many baggage-transports, so many equipment factories and plants 
are required that not only Mohammedan, but even English, fanati­
cism itself would be impotent in whatever manner to come to the 
assistance of the new caliphate. In a word, absolutely nothing but 
good would ensue. And God grant us this good as quickly as possible 
for, indeed, there is so much that is bad I 
CHAPTER II 
1 
Antiquated People 
"EVERY SUBLIME and cohesive idea, every sound cohesive 
sentiment, constitutes the greatest happiness in the life of a nation. 
This happiness was bestow.ed upon us. We could not help but 
clearly perceive the increased consensus, the clarification of many 
a former perplexity, our augmented self-consciousness." 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
443 
This is what I expressed in the concluding article of the 
preceding, August, issue of my Diary. A sound cohesive sentiment 
in the life of nations is, indeed, happiness. If there was something 
in which I was mistaken, it was, perhaps, only in that I have some­
what exaggerated the degree of our "augmented accord and self­
consciousness." But even on that point I am not ready to accede. 
He who loves Russia has long felt painfully that alienation of the 
upper Russian strata from the lower ones-from the people and 
their life-which, as an actual fact, at present is doubted by no 
one. Now, this alienation, according to my view, has partly given 
way and weakened in the face of the genuine all-Russian move­
ment of the current year in connection with the Slavic cause. It 
stands to reason that it is impossible to conceive that our detach­
ment from the people should have definitely come to an end and 
been cured. It will persist for a long time ; still, such historical 
moments as we have lived through this year, no doubt, help both 
"our augmented accord and the clarification of perplexities" ; in 
a word, they help us more clearly to understand the people and 
Russian life, on L!1c one ha.1d, while--on the other-they help the 
people themselves to become better acquainted with men, as it 
were, alien to them, not Russians, as it were-with "masters," as 
the people still call us. 
It must be admitted that in this all-Russian movement of 
the current year the people have revealed themselves in a saner, 
clearer and more precise aspect than many persons belonging to 
our intelligent class. In the people a direct, simple and strong sen­
timent has manifested itself, and-what is most important-with 
a remarkable consensus and accord. Among them there was even 
no argument as to "why the Slavs should be }'1.-lped."-"SlJ•_·· tld they 
be helped ?" "Who should be helped more and better 
. ·  ·d who 
should not be helped at all ?" "Shall we not, perchance, corrupt our 
morality, and shall we not impede our civi.: progress b) giving too 
much help ?" "With whom should we fight, and is it necessary 
to fight at all ?"-and so on, and so forth. In brief, thousands of 
perplexities did, however, arise among our intelligentsia-particu­
larly in certain of its portions, specifically among those which 
still maintain a haughty attitude tnward the people, despising them 
from the heights of Eurupean education (at times, altogether 
imaginary) .  There-in those upper "segregations"-there were re-
· vealed quite a few extraordinary dissonances. instability of opil ;ion, 
a strange lack of understanding of the rr. 
t elementary things, 
almost ridiculous vacillation on the questions-what to do and what 
not to do, etc. "Should the Slavs be helped or should they not ? 
And if they should bt! helped, why should they ? And on what ground 

44 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
is it more moral, more graceful, to help-on this or on that ?"­
All these traits, at times most surprising, were actually reflected 
in conversations, in facts and in literature. However, no stranger 
article along these lines have I read than the one in the current 
September issue of The Messenger of Europe, in the section entitled 
"Domestic Survey." The article specifically treats of the present­
day current Russian movement, apropos of brotherly help to the 
oppressed Slavs, and seeks to express on the subject as profound 
an opinion as possible. The portion of the article dealing with the 
Russian people and with society is not long-four or five short 
pages ; therefore, I shall venture to dwell upon them, so to speak, 
one after another, without, of course, quoting everything. To my 
way of thinking, these pages are extraordinarily curious, and they 
constitute, as it were, a document. The object of my undertaking 
will become apparent of its own accord, at the end of my review, 
so that, I believe, it will not be necessary to draw any special moral. 
However, in the way of brief information, I may merely men­
tion the fact that the author obviously belongs to that antiquated 
school of the theoretical Westerners which, a quarter of a century 
ago, formed, so to speak, the zenith of our educated forces. At 
present, however, it bas grown so obsolete that in its pure primitive 
state it is encountered very rarely. Those are, as it were, fragments 
-the last Mohicans of the theoretical Russian Europeanism-de­
tached from the people and from life, which, though at the time it 
did have its place and the necessary causes of its existence, bas 
left in its wake, in addition to its sui generis usefulness, a great 
deal of most harmful, prejudicial fiddle-faddle which continues to 
he damaging even to the present day. The principal historical use­
fulness of those men was a negative one and it lay in the extremity 
of their inferences and final judgments ( for they were so haughty 
that they pronounced their judgments not otherwise than in a final 
form) ,  in those farthest pillars of Hercules which they have reached 
in their ecstatic theories. This extremism, willy-nilly, tended to sober 
the minds, and it brought about the shift toward the people and 
the merger with them. At present, after a whole quarter of a cen­
tury, after so many new and hitherto unheard-of facts have been 
revealed through practical study of Russian life, these "last Mo­
hicans" of the antiquated theories, of necessity, appear in a comic 
light, despite their e3aggeratedly respectable deportment. Their 
main comic trait lies m the fact that they still continue to regard 
themselves as the youthful and sole guardians and, so to speak, 
''sign-bearers" of those paths along which, in their opinion, real 
Russian life should be developing. But they are so far behind life 
that they definitely cease to recognize it, and for this reason they 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
445 
are dwelling in a wholly fantastic world. This is why it is so very 
curious and so instructive, at a moment of so strong a public en­
thusiasm, to trace to what an extent this theoretical Europeanism 
has falsely alienated itself from the people and from society, to 
what an extent its views and dicta, at certain extraordinary mo­
ments of public life-though presumptuous anri haughty as hereto­
fore-are, essentially, weak, unsteady, obscure and erroneous in 
comparison with the clear, simple, firm and unflinching inferences 
of the popular sentiment and mind. But let us turn to the article. 
However, in all justice to the author it must be said that 
he also admits-rather agrees to admit-the popular and public 
movement in favor of the Slavs, and he concedes that it is suf­
ficiently sincere. Of course, how could he not have conceded this ! 
-Even so, for so antiquated a "European," this is no slight merit. 
And yet for some reason all the time he seems to be displeased 
with something ; true, he does not directly state that he is dissatisfied 
with the fact that this movement has come into being ; but, as 
against this. l:f' keeps grumbling and cavilling at details. I believe 
that Granovsky, one of the purest initial exponents of our theoretical 
Westernism, who in his own time also wrote on the Eastern 
question, and on the popular movement during the war of x8s4-
I8S6-only partly akin to the present one (see my article on Granov­
sky in the August issue of my Diary)-Gr:novsky, I say, would 
also, I believe, have been displeased with our present popular move­
ment. And, of course, he would have preferred to perceive our 
people as heretofore, in the form of a motionless and backward mass, 
rather than to see them revealing themselves in such partly unde­
veloped and, so to speak, primitive forms unfit for our European 
age. And, generally, even though all thest: old theoret:, 3.ns were 
fond of the people (however, this is not quite certain) ,  yet they 
were fond in theory only, i.e., in those fanciful representations and 
forms in which they wished to perceive them, so that, m substance, 
they did not love the people at all. Rut it shuuld be admitted in 
their defense that they did not know the people at all, never 
deemed it necessary to know them or to have intercourse with 
them. Not that they distorted the facts, but they simr!y did not 
understand them at all, so that on many-all too many-occasions, 
the purest gold of the people's spirit, reason and lofty sentiment 
was attributed by them to insipidness, ignorance and dull Russian 
imbecility. Had the people revealed themselves, though !'li૳htly, 
not in those guises and images which pleas૴J them (mostly-in the 
guise of the Parisian mob), they would probably have renounced 
them altogether. "First of all"-exclaims Granovsky, in his brochure 
on the Eastern question-"thc thought should be :J.ltogether dis-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
carded that this is a sacred war. In our day no one is going to 
be prompted to a crusade. This is a different age : no one will 
move to redeem our Lord's sepulchre,"-and so on, and so forth. 
The theoretician of The Messenger of Europe adopts an identical 
attitude : he is displeased with the headings, he cavils at them. 
For instance, he is quite disappointed with the fact that the people 
and our society are not sending their contributions under the head­
ing he would like. He would rather have a view, so to speak, more 
suited to our age, more enlightened. But, again, we have deviated 
from the subject. 
I am omitting the beginning of the portion of the article 
with the Russian movement in support of the Slavs-a beginning 
which, in a sense, is quite characteristic, but I cannot be dwelling 
upon every line. Here is what the author states further. 
2 
KIFO-MOKIEVSCHINA 
"However, the fact cannot be denied that among the many 
statements which have appeared in this connection in our news­
papers, there have been some strange and tactless ones. Leaving 
aside those which indicated a desire to show off one's own per­
sonality-since this is of no importance-we must point to those 
which reveal inquisition as regards the sentiments of Russian citi­
zens-not Great Russians. It is to be regretted that we have still 
been unable to rid ourselves of this bad habit, whereas the very 
nature of the matter in question necessitates special caution with 
regard to other nationalities which form part of the general Rus­
sian population. Let us also remark that, speaking generally, one 
should not be attributing to the movement in support of the Slavs 
too religious a character, constantly mentioning 'our fellow-be­
lievers.' To prompt Russian society to give help to the Slavs, those 
motives which can unite all citizens are quite sufficient, whereas 
such motives as may cause discord among them are superfluous. 
Should we seek to explain our sympathy with the Slavs, primarily 
by the fact that they are our fellow-believers, what attitude should 
we adopt toward those of our Mohammedans who would start col­
lections for the benefit of the Turks, or who would declare their 
desire to join the Turkish army ? . . .  Agitation which has been 
recorded in certain localities of the Caucasus should remind us of 
the fact that the Orthodox Great Russian is living in a family, 
that he is the elder but not the only son of Russia." 
Even this one passage would suffice to show the extent of the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
447 
rupture with the public sense, the level of idle 11Kifo-Mokievschina" 
that can be reached, in our day, by certain 11sign-bearers" grown 
old in the obstinacy of their Europeanism. The author propounds 
to us, and has vexed himself with, questions which astound one by 
their artificiality and fictitiousness, by their extreme fantastic theo­
reticalness and-above all-by their aimlessness. "If we donate be­
cause we embrace the same religion, what should be our attitude 
toward those of our Mohammedans who would start collections for 
the benefit of the Turks, or who would declare their desire to join 
the Turkish army ?" Now, is any such question possible, and can 
there be the slightest hesitation in answering it ? Any ordinary, 
not twisted, Russian would promptly give you a most precise 
answer. And not only a Russian but any European, any North 
American, would give you a clear answer-only a European, per­
haps, before replying, would gaze at you with extreme surprise. 
In passing, it may be observed that, generally, our Russian West­
ernism-i.e., Europe-aping-taking root in Russian soil, quite fre­
quently, little by little, assumes a nuance which is far from Euro­
pean, so thaL certa૵n Eurc...,ean ideas imported to us by 11the 
guardians of signs" become altogether unrecognizable because they 
have undergone radical changes, in the process of being ground 
down by Russian theories and their application to Russian life, 
which, besides, our theoretician does not know at all and which 
he does not deem necessary to know. Do you see-"what attitude 
should we adopt toward our Mohammedans who," etc. ? A very 
simple one : first, if we be at war with the Turks, and, for instance, 
our Tartars should begin to help the Turks with money, or should 
start joining the Turkish army-before society would have time 
to adopt any kind of attitude, the governr:,૶nt itself, .1 ··aresay, 
would adopt toward them such an attitude as toward tr .. 1.ors to 
their country, and, no doubt, would manage to stop them in time. 
Secondly, if war should not yet have been declared, and the Turks 
should start massacring the Slavs, with whom all Russians are 
equally in sympathy, then, in case Russian Mohammedans should 
begin to contribute to Turks either money or men-do you think 
that any Russian would treat such a fact otherwise than with an 
insulted feeling and with indignation ? . . .  In your opinion, the 
whole trouble lies in the religious character of the contributions, 
i.e., if only a Russian is helping a Slav, as his fellow-believer, how 
can he, without violating civil equality and justice, prohibit a 
Russian Tartar from making a similar contr. ution for the benefit 
of his co-religionist, the Turk ? On the contrary, he may have, and 
has a full right to do so, because a Russian, when extending help 
to  Slav against the Turks, has not the slightest thcught of be-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
coming an enemy of the Tartar or of waging war against him. 
However, a Tartar, by helping the Turk, severs his relations with 
Russia, becomes a traitor to Russia, and, by placing himself in 
the ranks of the Turks, wages a direct war against her. Besides, 
when I, a Russian, send my contribution for the benefit of a Slav, 
fighting the Turk, even because I am his co-religionist, I am hoping 
for his victory not because the Turk is a Moslem, but only because 
he is massacring the Slavs, whereas a Tartar, joining the Turks, can 
do so for the sole reason that I am a Christian, and that I allegedly 
seek to destroy Mohammedanism. Yet I am not at all seeking to 
destroy it-what I want is to protect my fellow-believer . . . .  By 
helping the Slav, not only do I not attack the Tartar's religion, but 
I am even indifferent to the Mohammedanism of the Turk himself : 
let him be a Moslem as long as he wishes, on condition that he does 
not attack the Slavs. Perhaps, it may be argued : "If you assist 
your co-religionist against the Turks, you are thereby opposing the 
Tartars and their religion since they have a 'shariat,' and the Sultan 
is the caliph of all l\'J oslems. A Gentile, however, on the strength of 
the Koran itself, cannot be free and have equal rights with a Moham­
medan ; by helping the Gentile to acquire equal rights, the Russian 
thereby, in the opinion of every Moslem, opposes not merely the 
Turks but Mohammedanism as a whole." But such being the case, 
not I, but the Tartar, is the instigator of the religious war, and you 
must concede that this is an argument of an altogether different 
nature, and that no tricks or headings can help the situation. 
Now, it is your contention that the whole trouble lies in the 
fact of the commonness of religion, and that were I to conceal from 
the Tartar that I am helping the Slav as my co-religionist, and, on the 
contrary, were I to stress the fact that I am helping him under some 
other caption-say, because he is oppressed by the Turk, deprived of 
freedom, "that first blessing of man"-the Tartar would believe me. 
But I venture to assert that in the view of any Moslem, help given to 
a Gentile against a Mohammedan, no matter under what pretext, 
is absolutely equivalent to help given to a Gentile on the ground of 
religion. Didn't you really know this ? And yet this is what you are 
precisely writing : "To prompt Russian society to give help to the 
Slavs, those motives which can unite all citizens are quite sufficient, 
whereas such motives as may cause discord among them are super­
fluous . . . .  " Here you are specifically referring to commonness of 
religion as a motive tending to bring about discord, and-to Russian 
Moslems-this you have actually explained. You are suggesting 
"fight for freedom," as the -best and loftiest pretext-or "motive," 
as you put it-for Russian contributions for the benefit of the Slavs ; 
and, apparently, you are fully convinced that "the Slavs' struggle 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
449 
for freedom" would greatly appeal to the Tartar and would forth­
with appease him. But again I assure you that to a Russian Moham­
medan-if he be a man who would venture to go and help the 
Turks-all motives are equal, and that no matter under which par­
ticular caption war be started, nevertheless, in his view, it would 
be a religious war. However, it is not the Ru૷૸ian's fault that the 
Tartar holds such a view. . . 
. 
3 
CONTINUATION OF THE PRECEDING 
I am really sorry that I had to go to all this length. Were a 
war between France and Turkey at any time possible, and, in this 
connection, were agitation to begin among Moslems belonging to 
France-Algiers Arabs-do you really believe that the French would 
not promptly subdue them in a most energetic manner ? Would the 
French resort to kid gloves and shamefully conceal their best and 
noblest "motives•· from fear that their l\loslems, perchance, might 
take offense and feel insulted ? You are writing in a stately lan­
guage a moral for the whole of Russia : "Agitation which has been 
recorded in certain lncalitie:> of the Caucasus [N. B., by the way, 
thus you admit that there has been agitation l should remind us of 
the fact that the Orthodox Great Russian is living in a family, that 
he is the elder, but not the only, son of Russia." Let us admit that 
this is expressed grandly-however, what would the Great Russian 
have to do should the Caucasians really grow rebellious ? What is 
the fault of that elder son in the family that the Mohammedan Cau­
casian, that youngest son in the family, ;::, 30 touchy 
')out his 
faith and that he holds the view that the elder son, by opૹ )sing the 
Turks, eo ipso opposes Mohammedanism as a whole ?-You fear 
that "the elder son in the family" (the G1 eat Russian) might, per­
chance, hurt the feelings of the youngest son (the Tartar or the 
Caucasian ). Indeed, what a humaneness, what an anxiety full of 
enlightenment ! You are stressing the point that the Orthodox Great 
Russian "is the elder but not the only son of Russia." Wh'lt is this, 
may I ask ?-The Russian land belongs to the Russians, to the 
Russians alone ; it is Russian land, and in it there isn't an inch of 
Tartar land. The Tartars are the former tormentors of the Russian 
land ; they are aliens in this land. But thP Russians, havinrr sub­
dued the Tartars, having recaptured from 11 .m their land and hav­
ing conquered them, did not punish the Tartars for the tortures 
of two centuries ; they have not humiliated them in the manner in 
which the Moslem Turks have humbled the Gentiles who have never 

450 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
offended them ; on the contrary, the Russians have granted the Tar­
tars such full civic equality as, perhaps, you will not find in the most 
civilized countries of the West, which, according to you, is so en­
lightened. Perhaps the Russian Mohammedan, at times, has even 
abused his high privileges to the detriment of the Russian-the 
owner and master of the Russian land . . . .  Nor did the Russians 
humble the Tartars' religion ; they have neither persecuted nor 
oppressed them. Believe me, nowhere in the West, nowhere in the 
whole world, will you find such a broad, such a humane, religious 
tolerance as in the soul of a real Russian. Believe me also that it is 
rather the Tartar who is inclined to shun the Russian (precisely 
because of the former's Mohammedanism) than vice versa. This 
will be corroborated by anyone who has lived among the Tartars. 
Nevertheless, the master of the Russian land is the Russian (Great 
Russian, Little Russian, White Russian-they are all the same) .  
Thus it shall always be. And, believe me, should i t  ever become neces­
sary for the Orthodox Russian to fight the Mohammedan Turk, 
never will the Russian tolerate that anyone should veto him on 
his own land. But, to handle the Tartars with such genteelness 
that one would have to fear to reveal to them the most magnanimous 
and spontaneous feelings, which are offensive to no one-feelings of 
compassion for the jaded Slav, though he be a co-religionist ; and, 
moreover, to conceal carefully from the Tartar all that constitutes 
the designation, the future, and-this is the main point-the mission 
of the Russian-why, such a demand is ridiculous and humiliating 
to a Russian . . . .  In what way do I insult a Tartar by being in 
sympathy with my religion·and with my co-religionist ? And where 
is my fault if, according to his conceptions, each war of ours with 
the Turks necessarily assumes a religious character ? Certainly, 
Russians are impotent to change the fundamental conceptions of 
Mohammedanism as a whole. You say : "If so, be genteel, conceal, 
and try not to insult. . . .  " But if, indeed, he is so touchy, he may, 
perhaps, be insulted by the fact that in the same street where his 
mosque is, there also stands our Orthodox church.-Why not de­
molish it so that he may not feel insulted ? Certainly, the Russian 
doesn't have to run away from his own country I Certainly, he 
doesn't have to crawl somewhere under a table, so that he shouldn't 
be heard or seen, because of the fact that the youngest brother, the 
Tartar, lives in the Rૺian land I 
You started talking something about "inquisition."-"We must 
point to those [articles in the Russian newspapers) which reveal 
inquisition as regards the sel'ltiments of Russian citizens-not Great 
Russians. It is to be regretted that we have still been unable to rid 
ourselves of this bad habit, whereas the very nature of the matter 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
451 
in question necessitates special caution with regard to other nation­
alities which form part of the general Russian population." What 
is this habit of ours ?-I venture to assure you that this is merely 
a false note of antiquated theoretical liberalism which is even in­
capable of applying sensibly a liberal idea imported from Europe. 
No, sir, it is not for you anri me to teach the pૻople religious toler­
ance or to deliver lectures to them on freedom of conscience. In 
this respect the people can teach both you and the whole of Europe. 
However, you speak of newspapers, of Russian journalism. Now, 
then, what is this inquisition ? And what inveterate habit of ours 
are you regretting ?-The habit of inquisition in our literature ? But 
this is a fantasy which has no foundation in reality. I assure you 
that in Russia no one was ever denounced in literature for either 
religion or any local patriotic sentiments. And even if there may 
have been individual cases, these were so isolated and exceptional 
that it is sinful and shameful to raise them to the level of a general 
rule : '·We have still been unable to rid ourselves of this habit." 
Besides, what i.; tienouncement or inquisition ? There are facts about 
which it is impossibie not tu speak. I do not know to what articles 
you are referring and what you are insinuating. I do recall reading 
something about disturbances of fanaticism which flared up in the 
Caucasus. But you yourself have just written about these disturb­
ances in the sense oi rr fact which has actually occurred. It is ru­
mored that preachers of fanaticism also came from Turkey to the 
Crimea ; however, whether any disturbances actually did or did not 
take place, I shall not discuss-and, in truth, I myself do not know 
for certain. I shall merely ask you : is it possible that, should some 
newspaper report such a rumor, or actual fact, this could be called 
"inquisition as regards the sentiments of ot.t dissidents" :- Suppos­
ing these facts of disturbances did actually occur, how wo· ·•d it be 
possible to keep silent about them, especially in a newspaper whose 
object it is to report facts ? Thereby the newspaper prevents a 
danger. For, were silence maintained and were t!le matter-! mean, 
fanaticism-permitted to grow, both the fanatics and the Russians 
living in their midst would suffer. Of course, should a newspaper 
deliberately report false facts in order to denounce to th(' govern­
ment and to instigate persecution, this would be inquisition and 
denouncement. Yet, if the lacts are correct, should one keep silent 
about them ? Besides, who has ever persecuted aliens in Russia for 
'their religion, even for certain "religious c:entiments" or simply 
feelings in the broadest sense of the term ?-L..t the contrary, in this 
respect, almost always things were rather lax in Russia-not at all 
as, for example, in certain most enlightened European countries. 
As regards religious sentiments, even schismatics nowadays are being 

452 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
persecuted in Russia by virtually no one-not to speak of aliens. 
And if, of late, there have been several rare, quite isolated, cases of 
persecution of Stundists, these were forthwith sharply condemned by 
our entire press. By the way, shouldn't we agree with certain German 
newspapers which have been, and still are, accusing us of torment­
ing and persecuting our Baltic Germans for their religion and senti­
ments ?-It is very, very regrettable that you do not ᆋpecify the .trticle 
and the fact so as to be sure to what inquisition you are referring. 
One must know and understand the usage of words and one should 
not be jesting with such words as "inquisition." 
What particularly displeases you is the heading "common­
ness of religion." Go and help h1m, but for other motives-but not 
because of commonness of belid. But, to beᆌin with, this "mo­
tive" is not invented : it has not Lcen searched for ; it came and re­
vealed itself of its own accord ; it was revealed by everybody at 
once. This is an historical motive, and its history persists up to the 
present day. You write : '"One should not be attributing to the move­
ment in support of the Slavs a religious character, constantly mention­
ing 'our fellow-believers.' " But, what shall we do about history and 
actual life ? Should or should one not be attriLuting religious charac­
ter, it appears of its own accord. Please consider : the Turk slaughters 
the Slavs because the latter-being a Christian, a Gentile-dares to 
seek equal rights with him. Were a Bulgarian to embrace Moham­
medanism, the Turk would forthwith cease to torture him ; on the 
contrary, he would at once recognize him as his kinsman-thus it 
is according to the Koran. Consequently, if Bulgarians are endur­
ing such ferocious tortures'", of course it is because of their Chris­
tianity ; this is as clear as daylight. How, then, can a Russian, send­
ing his contribution to the Slav, avoid "the religious question" ?  
Why, to a Russian, it will not even occur to avoid it. 
And, aside from the historical and current necessity, the Rus­
sian knows nothing, and even can conceive nothing, loftier than 
Christianity. He has denoted his entire land, all commonnesss, the 
whole of Russia, as "Christianstvo," "Krestianstvo."1 Please give 
thought to Orthodoxy : it is by no means merely churchism and 
ritualism. It is a live sentiment which, in our people, has become 
one of those basic living forces without which nations cannot exist. 
Strictly speaking, in Russian Christianity there is no mysticism at 
all-there is humanenfᆍ, the mere image of Christ ; at least, this 
is the essential. 
In Europe, clericalism and churchism have long and justly 
been viewed with apprehension : over there, particularly in certain 
lin Russian the word "Christianity" is "Christianstvo" ; the word "peas­
antry"-"Krestianstvo." (B. B.) 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
453 
localities, they are impeding the free course of life, every progress 
of life, and-it goes without saying-religion itself. But does ouc 
calm, humble Orthodoxy resemble the prejudicial, gloomy, plotting, 
intriguing and cruel clericalism of Europe ? How, then, t:an it not be 
dear to the people ? Popular aspirations are generated by the whole 
people, and they are not concocted in the journalistic editorial 
offices. "Should one or should one not"-the thing is going to be as 
it actually is. 
For instance, you write further : ''The noble cause of free­
dom perceived in the ranks of its defenders-Russians. From this 
viewpoint alone, which is even more exalted than sympathy resulting 
from common belief and even commonness of ract:, the Slavic 
cause is a sacred cause."-You are right : this is a very lofty motive ; 
however, what does the motive of common belief express ? It spe­
cifically signif1es a jaded, crucified unfortunate, and it is against 
his oppression that I am rising with indignation. This means : "Give 
thy life for the oppressed, for thy neighbor ; no nobler deed exists" 
-this is what the motive of common faith expresses ! 
Besides, I vemure to remark-this, however, merely in gen­
eral-that it is dangerous to seck "captions" and "headings" for good 
deeds. If, for instance, I am helping a Slav, as my fellow-believer, 
this is not a heading at all ; this is merely a designation of his 
historical status at a given moment : "He is a fellow-believer-con­
sequently, a Christian-and because of this he is being oppressed 
and tortured." But if I should say that I am helping him because 
of "the noble cause of freedom," thereby, as it were, I am setting 
forth the reason for my help. And if the reason for help be sought, 
Montenegrins, for instance, and Herzegodnians, who have mani­
fested the noble longing for freedom more th:.:: the rest, Wl'ࢦ •· d prove 
more worthy than others ; Serbians-a little less, while i .
.. lgarian 
men and women did not rise at all for liberty, except, perhaps, in 
the beginning, in small bands in the mountams. They sin.ply howled 
when finger after finger-with interval!' of five ᆎinutes to prolong 
the torture-was chopped off their little children by their tor­
mentors, and this in the presence of the fathers and mothers. They 
even did not defend themselves and, merely wailing and ;ᆏonizing, 
as if in a state of madness, they kis:>ed the feet of the brutes-to make 
them cease their torture and restore to them their poor beloved ones. 
Well, maybe, these should be helped least since they have only 
suffered, and did not rise to the level of thr noble cause of fref'dom 
-"this first blessing of man." Let us admit t. _Lt you will not reason 
so nastily, but you should concede that, by introducing reasons and 
"motives" for humaneness, one is almost always apt to arrive at 
t.unclusions somewhat of this kind. It is best to help simply because 

454 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
a man is unhappy. Help, to a co-religionist, means precisely this. 
I repeat : the word "fellow-believer," in Russia, does by no means 
signify a clerical caption, but merely a historical designation. Be­
lieve .me, "commonness of religion," too, is quite devoted to, and 
cherishes, the noble and great cause of freedom. Moreover, it is and 
always will be ready to die for it, when the need comes. And at 
present I am only voicing my opposition to the erroneous applica­
tion of European ideas to Russian reality . . . .  
4 
FEARS AND APPREHENSIONS 
The funniest part is that the esteemed theoretician forebodes 
in the contemporaneous enthusiasm for the Slavs a serious dan­
ger to us, and exerts his efforts to hasten to warn us against it. He be­
lieves that in a moment of self-seduction we will issue to ourselves 
a "certificate of maturity" and will go to sleep on the oven. Here 
is what he writes : 
"In this sense we deem dangerous all deliberations-frequently 
coming to our notice-apropos of contributions for the benefit of 
the Slavs to the effect that : 'these facts reveal in Russian society 
a comforting animation ; they prove that Russian society has grown 
mature . . .  .' The inclination to admire ourselves in a mirror, apropos 
of international questions and declarations of sympathy with this or 
that nationality, then to be falling asleep as soundly as hard-working 
men who have fulfilled their duty, is so great in us that all such 
deliberations, though partly correct, are positively dangerous. For 
we did triumph over our readiness for sacrifices at the beginning 
of the Crimean War ; we did celebrate our public maturity in con­
nection with the communiques of our Chancellor in r863, and the 
cordial welcome given by us to the officers of the North American 
battleship, and the collection for the benefit of the Candiots, and 
the ovations given to Slavic writers in Petersburg and Moscow. 
Read what had been written in the newspapers at that time, and you 
will be convinced that certain phrases at present are being literally 
reiterated . . . .  Let us ask ourselves : what has come of all those 
'maturities' which we celebrated one after another, and did those 
moments in which w஼,celebrated them advance us ? . . .  But we 
should remember that by following an inclination we do not acquire 
the rights to the issuance to us of 'a certificate of maturity' . .  .'' 
To begin with, everything here-from the first word to the 
last-is in discord with reality. "The inclination to be falling asleep 
as soundly as hard-working men who have fulfilled their duty, is 

mE DIARY OF A WRITER 
455 
so great in us," etc. This "inclination to be falling asleep" is one 
of the most prejudicial and erroneous accusations of antiquated 
theory, which was fond of chattering much and of doing nothing, 
and which precisely always lay on the oven preaching morals from 
the top of it and, in self-enchantment with its beauty, continually 
looked at itself through the mirror. This prejudidal, and at present 
incredibly bureaucratized, accusation came into being at a time 
when the Russian, even if he lay on the oven or did nothing but 
play cards, acted in this way solely because he was not permitted to 
do anything ; he was prevented from doing anything and prohibited 
from doing anything. But the moment fences in Russia were pushed 
asunder, the Russian forthwith revealed feverish restlessness and 
impatience for, and even perseverance in, work rather than the desire 
to get up on the oven. However, if work is still lagging, it is not 
because it is not being done but because in the face of a two-hundred­
year desuetude from any work it is impossible to acquire at once 
the faculty of grasping business and approaching it correctly, and 
the ability to h:mdle it. In accordance with the old custom, you 
delight in preaching morals and in scolding the Russian. I am say­
ing this to the old theoreticians, who from the heights of their gran­
deur never deigned to give thought to Russian life, to learn at least 
something of it, or, say, to check and correct their prejudicial views 
of days long gone by. 
However, this apprehension is quite worthy of Kifa Mokievich 
-I mean concerning "the certificate of maturity." We-it is argued­
shall issue to ourselves a certificate of maturity, and then we shall 
rest and fall asleep. This is antiquated theoretism which, on the 
contrary, has long ago issued to itself a certificate of Maturity, 
which is inclined to self-adoration, to preachil•!; morals and · l sweet 
half-slumber. But such youthful, beautiful, unifying mo\ ·஽ments, 
carried on by society in toto, as have been registered this year, are 
apt to prompt further progress and perfection. Such moments leave 
in their wake nothing but a beneficent trace. 
And whence could you deduce that Russian society is inclined 
toward self-admiration and looking at itself in a mirror ?-All the 
facts contradict this contention. On the contrary, it is the mாst self­
distrusting and self-castigating society in the whole world I 
.
.
.
 Not 
only did we sympathize with the Slavs : we have also liberated the 
peasants. Yet, look : has there ever in the history of the Russian 
people been a more sceptical, a more self-analyzing moment t han 
that which we have lived through during thesv last twenty years ?­
During these years, in the distrust of ourselves, we have reached 
pathological extremes, inadmissible scoffing at ourselves, undeserved 
contempt for ourselves, and certainly we were far removed from 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
self-enchantment with our perfection. You say that we sympathized 
with the Cretans, that we gave welcome to a battleship, and that 
on every occasion we wrote about our maturity, whereas nothing 
came of it. After that, you are ceasing to understand the most every­
day phenomena not only of Russian but of universal life. For if, at 
the time, we have somewhat exaggeratedly rejoiced over ourselves 
and our successes-this is so natural in a youthful society longing 
for life, still too credulous of life and seriously looking upon its 
mission ! This happens to any people, always and everywhere. Take 
any ancient book in the world-and you will see that such an iden­
tical first youthful delight with one's own success was peculiar even 
to the most ancient peoples, and, therefore, it has existed since the 
beginning of the world, provided these peoples were young and full 
of life and of the future. We may have experienced a too premature 
joy caused by our successes and by the fact that, finally, we did 
give up playing cards and began to attend to business. However, is 
this in the least dangerous, as the warner declares with anxiety ?­
On the contrary, these very men who accept actual life seriously 
and joyously, with such a feeling and such a heart-these very men 
will not let themselves fall asleep through over-confidence. Believe 
me that life which has been once aroused and which has started gush­
ing forth as a hot spring, shall not stop. Self-enchantment will in­
stantly vanish, and the stronger it was, the surer the salutary sober­
ing is going to ensue to the accompaniment of the forward, and ever 
forward, motion. But though we shall grow sober, nevertheless we 
shall respect our recent salutary, youthful, noble and innocent de­
light. You ask : what has rome of these "maturities" ? What do you 
mean ?-Perhaps this present moment is their outcome. And if there 
had been no enthusiasm about the Cretans and the reception of the 
Slavic guests-nothing would have ensued at present. Society has 
grown more serious ; it became acquainted with a certain cycle of 
ideas and conceptions. For goodness' sake, everything in the world 
is forming gradually ; the peoples, too, are forming gradually and 
are not born, ready-made, petty, sober-minded little pedants. And 
what makes you angry ?-"We"-you allege-"are too excited about 
the movement." But premature wisdom, pedantry in youth playing 
the part of old men, is more dangerous. You dislike every live 
movement ; you prefer didacticism-well, this is your taste. Oh, of 
course, you immediately cite the example of Europe : "France"­
you say-"has done far more for Italy than we are presently doing 
for the Slavs. However, did French society, after the liberation of 
Europe, consider itself maturer than theretofore ?" This is what you 
write. Now, this is impossible ! Whom did you find for us as an ex­
ample of modesty ?-France ?-But when did a Frenchman not look 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
457 
at himself through a mirror ? When did he not admire himself ?­
Under Napoleon I, for instance, the French incited general European 
hatred against themselves by their intolerable haughty air, their 
boundless self-contentment and their all-embracing beatitude. Strictly 
speaking, such they were always, till the very year of 1871. How­
ever, at present France is internally too disunited a nation and, for 
this reason, it is difficult to survey her in this respect. Well, what 
would you say about the English and, in particular, the Germans ? 
-How they dislike to look at themselves in a mirror ! How they 
dislike to brag-especially the Germans ! And how sound are your 
historical inferences : "France"-you claim-"has done far more for 
Italy than we are presently doing for the Slavs . . . .  " I assure you 
that France, as such, has done nothing at all for Italy. Napoleon III 
has liberated Northern Italy in accordance with his own political 
schemes, and we do not know at all whether the French people, 
of their own accord, would have liberated Italy without 2\:'apoleon 
III and his political considerations. At least, it is very difficult to 
determine whether the liberation of the Italians would have been 
for their liberatior. or for a J:...>litical usurpation of a certain kind . . . .  
Now, we still believe that both Napoleon III and France herself, 
subsequently, have been beholding, without any too great admiration, 
the exploits of Cavour, and when that very loud "Jamais !" of the 
French government had sounded, with respect to the further claims 
of the Italians to Rome, the French people listened to this "jamais," 
perhaps, very approvingly. 
Of course, nevertheless, it is true that France did more for 
Italy than we, Russians, so far have done for the Slavs. The matter 
is not yet closed, and its subsequent results are known only to God. 
Still, it is difficult to suppose that a moverrr;ி so sinceூ< a move­
ment full of love and already supported by exploits of th greatest 
self-denial-the Rus!'ian movement in support of the Slavs-should 
need such instructive examples of valor as the liberation 1f Northern 
Italy by Napoleon III . . . .  
However, you are setting forth to the Russian people as an 
example of magnanimity even the Hungarians. Particularly now the 
Hungarians are lovely and magnanimouீ! Are they ? What a nar­
row hatred they nourish against any thought of the alleviation of 
the lot of the Slavs ! Wh<tt co. hatred againுt Russia ! How could 
such an example and such a people come to your mind ? . . .  
Post-Scr; plum 
I repeat : I regret very much that J have dwelt at such length 
on this subject, but in these words-quite innocent-of the unques-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
tionably clever and kind, but somewhat antiquated, author-in the 
tone in which these words were uttered, I seem to have discerned 
sounds of voices, perhaps of the very near and bad future, and, for 
this reason, I could not restrain myself . . . .  Of course, these future 
potential voices have nothing in common with the voice from The 
Messenger of Europe, but somehow I seem to have heard them. 
Indeed, should it so happen that by force of circumstances all 
this kindly, noble Russian movement in support of the Slavs should 
come to naught, that the cause should prove a failure and every­
body, then, return and keep silent-oh, what new outcries we 
should then be hearing, and in what a victorious and triumphant 
tone, no longer innocent but sarcastic-malignant outcries, celebrat­
ing victory I Then, voices would freely sound, which at present-for 
the time being-are hushed or which sing in unison with "the noble 
impulse." Laughter would burst out straight into the face of this 
noble impulse, and men of the noble impulse would again grow shy 
and timid, while quite a few of them would believe-"yes, this 
should have been anticipated" ;  this what they, poor things, would 
say. "Aha, did you win, you believers ?"-would vociferate the vic­
torious ones. "What came of your communion, of your 'unifying 
thought' ?  You were duped, you valiant knights ! Clever men knew 
in advance how the thing was going to end I Could this have been 
otherwise ? The cause is not worth a broken egg-shell ! So, you have 
issued to yourselves a certificate of maturity-eh ? Have you now 
grown more mature, gentlemen ? No, brother, recoil to your corner 
and keep giggling into your hand as heretofore-that will be better I "  
This is what is going to sound, and also many other things-all of 
which cannot be recorded. And how much cynicism would again at 
once appear, how much incredulity in our forces-incredulity in Rus­
sia herself. Once more a requiem would be sung over her. And how 
many rascals would appear ! And how many youths pure in heart 
would run away from society I Again-disunion I Again-vacillation I 
By the way, Viscount Beaconsfield, when speaking of our 
destructive elements, of course, knew he was lying. Perhaps he may 
have foreboded that even if we have destructive elements, they must 
assume a new orientation as a result of the new impulse of Russia. 
And such a thought would be rather vexing to Viscount Tarantula. 
Now, however-! mean, in case of failure of the "impulse"-the 
tarantula would feel very happy-he knows why ! But . . .  but does 
this resemble truth ? Will this come to pass ? What a bad dream 1 
A dream-that's all . . . .  

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
OCTOBER 
CHAPTER I 
1 
A Simple but Tricky Case 
459 
ON OCTOBER 1 5  the court rendered a decision in the case 
of that stepmother who, five months earlier, in May, threw her little 
stepdaughter, a child of six, out of the window on the fourth floor. 
Through some miracle the girl was unharmed and remained in good 
health. That stepmother, a peasant woman, Ekaterina Kornilova, of 
the age of twenty, was married to a widower who, according to her 
testimony, used to quarrel with her ; he did not permit her to visit 
her relatives, and did not receive them at home ; he reproached her 
over his late wife-for the fact that when the latter was alive his 
business was better, etc. In a word, "he drove her to the point 
where she ceased to Jove him,· and, in order to take revenge upon 
him, she made up her mind to throw out of the window his daughter 
by his former wife, about whom he reproached her-and this she did. 
Briefly-leaving aside the miraculous salvation of the child-the 
story appears to be rather simple and clear. The court has considered 
the case from this viewpoint-i.e., from the standpoint of its "sim­
plicity"-and very simply, too, has sentenced Ekaterina Kornilova, 
"who at the time of the perpetration of the crime was older than 
seventeen and younger than twenty years, to forced labor for a term 
of two years and eight months, and upon the expiration of that term 
-to exile to Siberia for life." 
However, despite all the simplicity and clearness, the. · is in 
the case something, as it were, unexplained. The defendant (a woman 
with a rather pretty face) was tried in the lJ.st period of her preg­
nancy, so that, for any eventuality, a midwife harl been summoned 
into the courtroom. As early as in l\Iay, when this crime took place, 
I wrote in the May issue of my Diary (however, only cursorily and 
in passing, when discussing the routine and bureaucratic methods 
of our bar) the following words : "Precisely, it is abominable . . . .  
whereas the act of this monstt!r stepmother is, indeed, too queer, and, 
perhaps, it warrants a subtle and profound analysis which might 
௃en tend to alleviate the lot of the delinquent woman." This is 
what I wrote at the time. Now, please exam. 
ͮ the facts. 
First, the defendant pleaded guilty-and this immediately after 
the commission of the crime : she had reported it herself. At that 
time she told at the police station that already on the e,·e she made 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
up her mind to get rid of the stepdaughter whom she began to hate 
because of her malice against her husband, but in the evening on that 
eve she had been prevented from carrying out her design by the 
presence of her husband. Next day, however, when he went to work, 
she opened the window, removed the flower pots to one side of the 
window sill, and then ordered the girl to climb up on it and to look 
down through the open window. Naturally, the girl obeyed, even read­
ily so, thinking that she might see below the window-God only knows 
what. But as soon as she had climbed onto the window sill, kneeled 
down and, leaning with her hands against the window, looked down 
through it, the stepmother lifted her legs from behind, and the child 
fell into the open space. According to her own story, the delinquent 
woman, after looking down upon the fallen child, closed the window 
and went to the police station to report the above. Such are the facts. 
What, it would seem, is simpler than this-and yet how fantastic ! 
Isn't it ?-Our jurors have been accused, and often so, of some very 
fantastic acquittals of defendants. At times even, so to speak, the 
moral feelings of perfect strangers were incensed. We understand 
that one may pity a criminal, nevertheless it is impossible to call 
evil good in so important a matter as a court of justice. And yet, 
there have been acquittals of this kind, i.e., when evil was virtually 
called good-at least, not far from it. There appeared either false 
sentimentality or the lack of understanding of the principle itself 
of justice-lack of understanding of the fact that in court the first 
thing, the major principle, consists of defining evil, of specifying 
it, If possible, and of branding it as evil, urbi et orbi. Afterwards, 
the mitigation of the s=riminal's lot, care for his correction, etc. 
-all theSt! are different problems, very profound and great problems, 
but altogether different from the cause of justice, and belonging to 
other departments of public life, departments which, one has to 
admit, have not yet been clearly defined or which, in Russia, have 
not even been formulated. It may be said, perhaps, that with respect 
to these branches of public life not even the first word has been 
uttered. 
l\Jeanwhile, these two different ideas are being confused in 
our courts, and there has ensued God only knows what. It develops 
that a crime is not at all being recognized as such. On the contrary, 
it is, as it were, proclaimed to society-and this by the court itself­
that there is no such thing as crime, that crime, don't you see, is 
merely sickness cabsed by the abnormal condition of society-an 
idea which, in certain individual applications and in specific cate­
gories of phenomena, is _ correct to the point of ingeniousness, but 
wholly erroneous in its application to the total and general, since 
here there is a certain line which cannot be transgressed without 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
altogether depriving man of his individuality ; without taking away 
from him all his selfhood and life ; without placing him on the level 
of a tiny bit of down depending upon any stray gust of wind-briefly, 
without proclaiming some kind of a new nature of man which has just 
been discovered by some novel science. However, now there exists 
no such science, even in its inception. So that all these merciful 
jurors' verdicts (save in rare cases when they were verily appropiate 
and unmistakable) in which, at times, a clearly proved crime sub­
stantiated by a full confession of the criminal was directly denied : 
"No, not guilty ; he did not commit it ; he did not murder"-all these 
merciful verdicts surprised the people, arousing scoffs and perplexity 
in society. 
And now, having just read about the fate of the peasant woman 
Kornilova (two years and eight months of forced labor) ,  it has sud­
denly occurred to me : "Here is one time when they should have 
acquitted ; here is one time when they should have said : ·There was 
no crime ; she did not murder ; she did not throw anyone out of the 
window."' Howrver, I shall not dwell upon abstractnesses and senti­
ments in order to expound my thought. Simply it seems to me that 
here there was a most legitimate ground for the acquittal of the 
defendant-specifically, her pregnancy. 
It is a well-known fact that during prrgnancy a woman (es­
pecially with her firs1 child) is subject to certain strange influences 
and impressions which strangely and fantastically affect her psyche. 
These influences, at times-however, in rare cases only-assume 
extraordinary, abnormal, almost absurd, forms. But what of the 
fact that this occurs rarely ( i.e., as exceptional phenomena) ?  In the 
present case, to those who had to decide upon the fate of ࢥ human 
being, it should have been sufficient that thLy do occur, 1v 1 even 
only that they may occur. Doctor Nikitin, who examined .ne de­
linquent woman (after she had committed the crime) ,  declared 
that in his opinion Kornilova committed her crime conscivusly, even 
though irritation and affect may be admitted. B·Jt, to begin with, 
what is the significance here of the term-consciously ? People rarely 
do things unconsciously, save in a state of lunacy, in delirium, in 
delirium tremens. Isn't medical science itself cognizant of the fact 
that an act may be perpetrated, though quite consciously, neverthe­
less irresponsibly. Let us take the insane : the majority of their in­
sane acts are perpetrated quite consciously, and they remember them : 
moreover, they can render an account of th,.m ; they will dE'fc'nd 
these acts ; they will argue with you about .hem, and sometimes 
so logically that you might be nonplussed. 
Of course, I am not a medical man, but I recall, for instance, 
a ·story which I heard in childhood about a certain Moscow lady 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
who, each time she was pregnant, and during certain periods of her 
pregnancy, used to be affected by an irresistible passion for theft. 
She stole articles and money from acquaintances whom she came to 
visit, in shops where she would be buying something. Afterward, 
these stolen articles used to be returned to their respective owners 
by her family. That lady, however, was by no means poor ; she was 
educated and she belonged to good society. After the laspe of several 
days of this strange passion, it would not even have occurred to her 
to commit a theft. Even so, it stands to reason that she stole con­
sciously and with full knowledge. Consciousness was fully retained 
-only she was unable to resist the impulse. It may be presumed that 
even at present, concerning these phenomena, medical science is 
hardly in a position to assert anything with certainty-! mean, with 
respect to their psychic aspect : subject to what specific laws do 
there occur in the human soul such crises, such submissions and in­
fluences, such insane impulses without insanity ; and what, strictly 
speaking, does consciousness signify in these phenomena and what 
role does it play ? It suffices that the possibility of influences and 
extraordinary submissions during a woman's pregnancy seems in­
contestable . . . .  And what-1 repeat-of the fact that these excessive 
influences occur rarely ? To the conscience of the judge, in cases of 
this kind, it must be sufficient that, nevertheless, they may occur. 
True, it may be argued : She did not intend to steal, as that other lady ; 
nor did she conceive anything extraordinary. On the contrary, she 
did everything specifically pertinent to the matter, i.e., she avenged 
her hated husband by means of the murder of his daughter by his 
former wife, about whom she, the defendant, had been reproached. 
Still, you tnust admit that although this is intelligible, nevertheless 
it is not simple ; even though it was logical, yet you must concede 
that had there been no pregnancy, this logic, perhaps, would not 
have developed at all. This, for instance, might have taken place : 
alone with ht:r stepdaughter, after having been beaten by her hus­
band, incensed by malice against him, in a state of bitter irritation, 
she might have said to herself : "Wouldn't it be nice, just to punish 
him, to throw that nasty little girl out of the window I "-this might 
have occurred to her, and she would not have done it. She might 
have sinned mentally, but not by deed. However, in the condition of 
pregnancy, she did it. In either case the logic would have identical, 
but the difference would have been great. 
At least, if the jurors had acquitted the defendant, they could 
have relied on something : 11Although such pathological affects are 
rare, nevertheless they do occur. What if in the present case, too, 
there was an affect of pregnancy ?" This is something to be considered. 
At least, in such a case, mercy would have been intelligible to every-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
body and would not have produced mental vacillation. And what if 
there should have been an error ?-Better an error in mercy than in 
castigation-all the more so since in a case such as this nothing could 
have been verified. The delinquent woman is the first to consider 
herself guilty : she confessed immediately after having committed 
the crime ; she also confessed six months later in court. Thus, 
perhaps, she will go to Siberia, sincerely and profoundly deeming 
herself guilty ; thus she might also die, repenting in her last hour, 
and considering herself a murderess. And it will never occur to her 
or to anyone in the world that there is such a thing as a pathological 
affect which occurs in the condition of pregnancy, which precisely 
may have been the cause of everything, and that, had she not been 
pregnant, nothing would have happened . . . .  Nay, of two errors 
it is better to select the error of mercy. One will sleep more peace­
fully . . . .  
But what am I talking about ?-A busy man cannot be think­
ing of sleep. A busy man has a hundred similar cases, and he falls 
asleep soundly juo;t as soon as he hits the pillow in a state of fatigue. 
It is the idle fellow who, duriog a whole year, happens to run into 
one or two such cases, who has much time for deliberation. It is to 
him, perchance, that a thought of this kind may occur-just from 
indolence. In a word, indolence is the mother of all the vices. 
By the way, a midwife was sitting in the courtroom : having 
convicted the delinquent woman, they also convicted with her her 
unborn infant. Isn't this strange ? Let us say that this is not true ; 
but you must concede that this seems to be very much like the 
truth-the fullest truth, too. In fact, even before his birth he is sen­
tenced to Siberia with his mother, who must bring him U!". If he 
goes with his mother, he will be deprived of h௄::. father ; an௅ ·hould 
things turn out in such a way that the father would take · 1m (I 
don't know whether he could do it now), he would be deprived of his 
mother . . . .  Briefly, even prior to his birth he has been dt:prived of 
family-this is to begin with. And later, when he t;rows up, he will 
learn everything about his mother, and he will . . .  However, many 
a thing may happen. It is best to take a simple view of the case. If 
one looks at it simply, all phantasmagorias will vanish. 'T'bus it 
should be in life. I even think that all these things which appear 
so extraordinary are, in fact, handled in a most ordinary, a most 
prosaic manner-to the point of indecency. Indeed, look : this Kor­
nilov is again a widower ; his marriage is diՐՐl)lved by the exilP :>f 
his wife to Siberia. And now his wife-not hb Nife-in a few days 
wil bear him a son (because she will certainly be permitted to de­
liver the child before she starts on her journey), and while she will 
be ·recovering she will be kept in the prison hospital or wherever 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
she may be sent for that period. I'll bet you that Kornilov will 
visit her in a most prosaic fashion and-who knows-perhaps with 
that same little girl who flew out of the window. They will get to­
gether and they will be speaking about the simplest, everyday things 
-say, about some miserable cloth, or warm shoes and felt boots for 
her journey. Who knows if they will not, perhaps, get together in the 
heartiest manner, now that they have been divorced ? And formerly 
they used to quarrel. Perhaps there will be no word of mutual re­
proach-just a bit of sighing about fate and, compassionately, one 
about the other. And this little girl who flew out of the window, I 
repeat, she will, without fail, be daily running on errands-from her 
father to "mama dear," bringing her "kolaches."1 "Here, mama 
dear, papa is sending you a kolach, together with tea and sugar ; 
tomorrow he will come to you himself." Perhaps the most tragic thing 
that is going to happen will be when bidding each other farewell 
at the railroad station, at the last moment, between the second bell 
and the third, they will start howling at the top of their voices. Fol­
lowing their example, the little girl will be howling, too, with her 
mouth wide open. Without fail, husband and wife, one after the 
other, will make low bows to each other : "Forgive me, mdtushka 
Katerina Prokofievna ; don't nourish a grudge against me I "  And 
she, in turn : "Forgive me, too, batiushka Vasily lvanovich (or what­
ever his name may be) .  I'm culpable before you. My guilt is 
great. . . .  " At this juncture the nursling-who most certainly will 
be there-will start vociferating, no matter whether she takes him 
with her or he be left with the father. In a word, with our people 
there will never ensue ·a poem-isn't this so ? They are the most 
prosaic people in the world, so that in this respect one feels ashamed 
of them. How differently all this would transpire, for instance, in 
Europe. What passions I What revenge ! And how much dignity ! ­
Just try to describe this case i n  a novel, step by step, beginning 
with the young bride's life at the widower's home up to the minute 
when she throws the girl out of the window, up to the moment when 
she peeps out of the window to see if the child is hurt and hastily 
goes to the police station ; up to the time when she is sitting in the 
courtroom with the midwife at her side and these farewells and 
bows . . . .  And imagine-I was about to write : "and nothing would 
come of it," whereas, perhaps, it might come out better than all our 
poems and novels, 'fith their heroes "full of sublime foresight, whose 
lives are torn asunder." You know, I really cannot understand 
what our novelists are looking for : here is a theme for them, and 
let them describe it step- by step-the whole truth I However, I for-
1"Kolach"-special white loaves which used to be very popular in 
Russia. (B. B.) 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
got the old saying : not the subject but the eye is the main thing. 
If one has an eye one will always find a subject. If, in you, the eye 
is missing, if one is blind, one will find nothing in any subject. Oh, 
the eye is all-important : what to one eye appears to be a poem, to 
another one will be merely a heap . . . .  
And is it true that at present this Kornilova's verdict could 
not be mitigated ? Is it altogether impossible ? Verily, here there 
might have been an error . . . .  I keep thinking that it was an error ! 
2 
A FEw REMARKS ON SIMPLICITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 
Now-about another thing. Now, I should like to state some­
thing about simplicity in general. I recall a little old incident which 
happened to me. Some thirty years ago, during our most "confused" 
epoch, which in some people's view was the most "rectilinear"­
once upon a timெ in winter, I stopped at a certain library in my 
neighborhood, on Meschanskaia Street (as it was then called) .  I 
was at the time pondering over a critical article, and I needed a 
certain novel by Thackeray-for quotations. At the library I was 
met by a certain miss (a damsel of those days) . I asked for the 
novel. She listened to me with a stern expression : 
"We don't keep such trash"-she cut me short with indescrib­
able contempt, which, honest to God, I did not deserve. 
Of course, this did not surprise me, since I understood what 
this meant. In those days there appeared many such phenomena ; 
they sprang up somehow suddenly-with enthusiasm and sporotaneity. 
An idea was launched into the street and assuu,cd a most str et-like 
appearance. It was then that Pushkin got a terrible scold1. =g, and 
· "boots" were exalted. Nevertheless, I made an attempt to talk the 
matter over : 
"Do you really regard Thackeray as trash ே" 
"You should be ashamed of yourself for asking me this. Now­
adays, olden times are a thing of the past. At present, there is 
rational demand for . . .  
" 
And thus I walked out, leaving the damsel very pleased with 
herself and with the lesson she taught me. However, the simplicity 
of the view produced an awful impression on me, and it was pre­
cisely then that I started pondering over simf'licity in general, and 
our Russian eagerness for generalization, in pcuticular. This satis­
faction of ours with the simple, the small and the petty, to say the 
least, is surprising. It may be argued that it is an insignificant and 
trivial incident, that the damsel was a little undeveloped fool, and-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
what is most important-an uneducated girl, so that it was not worth 
while to recall the anecdote, especially as the girl could easily have 
imagined that before she came into existence everybody and Russia 
as a whole were fools, and then suddenly all people, including herself, 
had grown wise. I know all this, and I am also aware of the fact 
that, judging by the expression on the girl's face, she surely was able 
to utter nothing but those words about "rational demand" and 
Thackeray-and even that much was merely an echo of somebody 
else's opinion. Even so, the incident has ever since been retained 
in my memory as a comparison, an apology, almost an emblem. 
Please give thought to present-day opinions, to the contem­
poraneous "rational demand" and to current judgments-not only on 
Thackeray but also on the Russian people as a whole : what a sim­
plicity I What a rectilinearness ! What a ready disposition to acqui­
esce, without further verification, in the little and the trivial ! What 
a general impetuosity for the sake of appeasing oneself as quickly 
as possible, of pronouncing a judgment so as never to be bothered 
about it in the future ! And, believe me, all this will persist in our 
midst for a long time. Look : everybody believes in the sincerity 
and effectiveness of the popular movement of this year. And yet 
faith seems already insufficient, and something simpler is sought. 
A member of a certain committee told in my presence that he had 
received quite a few letters with questions such as these : "Why 
are Slavs so essential ? Why do we support the Slavs as Slavs ? If 
Scandinavians had been in the same position, would we be helping 
them as we are helping the Slavs ?"-In a word, what is the use of 
this "Slavs" caption ? (Do you recall the concern about the heading 
of common belief in The Messenger of Europe, about which I spoke 
in the preceding issue of my Diary?) At first glance it would seem 
that here we are faced not with simplicity, not with an endeavor to 
simplify things : on the contrary, in these questions there sounds 
restlessness. However, in this case, simplicity resides precisely in the 
attempt to attain the nihil and the tabula rasa-consequently, in a 
way, to become composed. And what is simpler, more pacifying, 
than a zero ? Also please note that in these questions-though in­
directly-there begins to sound "the rational demand" and "you 
should be ashamed of yourself." 
No doubt, there are a great many most intelligent and, so 
to speak, highly eduqated Russians who were very much displeased 
with this calm and humble, but firm and potent, popular dictum­
and not because they failed to understand it but, on the contrary, 
because they understood it all too clearly, so that they were even 
puzzled. Unquestionably there are symptoms of a strong reaction. I 
am not referring to the innocent voices which could also be heard 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
before, in the form of involuntary mumbling and disagreement due 
to antiquated petty principles concerning some old themes-for in­
stance, "one shouldn't be hurrying so much and be so enthusiastic 
over such a cause as the support of the Slavs, who are coarse and 
unenlightened anyway, on the ground that they are some kind of 
'brethren' of ours," etc. Nay, I am not speaking of these sensibly 
liberal little old men who are chewing obsolete phrases.-! am 
referring to the real reaction against the popular movement which, 
according to all indications, will very soon raise its head. This 
reaction naturally and unwittingly sides with those gentlemen who, 
having long ago simplified their view on Russia to the extreme limits 
of lucidity, are ready to say : "The whole phenomenon should be 
prohibited so that everything will be lying, as hitherto, in an inert 
order." And imagine that all these simplifiers are displeased with 
this "phenomenon" not because of its fantasticalness-i.e., for ex­
ample, in the sense that such an inert and dull simplicity suddenly 
should have dared to raise its voice as if in reality it were some­
thing conscious and live. Well, such a view would be intelligible : 
simply, they ைclt uffended-nl)thing more. On the contrary, they are 
displeased with this phenomenon because suddenly, instead of being 
fantastic, it became so intelligible to everybody : "How did it dare 
to become suddenly intelligible to everybody ? How did it dare to 
assume such a simpli1ied and sensible appearance ?" It is precisely 
this kind of indignation, as stated before, that also found its sup­
port in our intelligent little old men who are exerting their efforts 
in an endeavor to "simplify" and drag the "phenomenon" down 
from the conscious plane to something elemental, primordial, and, 
though good-natured, yet ignorant and potentially injurious. Briefly, 
reaction, above all, is trying its best and is resorting to eve1·v means 
to bring about simplification . . . .  
However, as a result of such an excessive simplification of 
views on certain phenomena, the cause itself is at time' being lost. 
In some cases simplicity is apt to harm the simplifiers themselves. 
Simplicity does not change ; it is "rectilinear," and, in addition­
haughty. Simplicity is the enemy of analysis. Very often it winds 
up in one's ceasing-because of his simplicity-to understand the 
subject or not. perceiving it at all, so that the reverse ensues-i.e., 
one's view from a simple one, co ipso, turns into a fantastic one. 
In our midst this is caused by the mutual, prolonged and ever-
·increasing detachment of one Russia from the other. Our detach­
ment originated precisely because of the simplicity of one Russia's 
view of the other one. It came into existence, as is known, quite a 
long time ago-as early as during Peter's epoch when, for the first 
time, there had been evolved an extraordinary simplification of upper 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
Russia's view of the people's Russia. Since then, from generation to 
generation, this view has steadily persisted in its simplification. 
3 
Two SuiciDES 
Recently I happened to discuss with one of our writers (a 
great artist) the comicalness in life and the difficulty of defining 
a phenomenon by its proper word. Before that I had made the 
remark that I, who have known Woe from Wit for almost forty 
years, only this year have properly understood one of the most 
vivid characters in the comedy, namely, Molchalin-after this same 
writer with whom I conversed had explained to me Molchalin 
when, unexpectedly, he had portrayed this character in one of his 
satirical sketches. (Some day I am going to dwell on Molchalin. 
It is a great theme.) 
"Do you know"-suddenly said my interlocutor, who ap­
parently had long ago been impressed with his idea-"do you know 
that no matter what you might write or depict, no matter what 
you might record in a belletristic work, you would never be equal 
to reality ? No matter what you might delineate, it would always 
be weaker than actual life. You might think that in some work 
you have reached the maximum of comicalness in this or that 
phenomenon of life, that you have caught its most ugly aspect­
not at all ! Reality forthwith will reveal to you such a phase along 
similar lines that you have never suspected, and one that exceeds 
everything your own observation and imagination was able to 
create ! .  . .  
" 
This I had known ever since 1846, when I started writing­
perhaps even before that. Time and again I used to be impressed 
with this fact, and the apparent impotence of art made me wonder 
about its usefulness. Indeed, trace a certain fact in actual life­
one which at first glance is even not very vivid-and if only you 
are able and are endowed with vision, you will perceive in it a 
depth such as you will not find in Shakespeare. But the whole 
question is : compared with whose vision, and who is able 'I Indeed, 
not only to create and write artistic works, but also to discern a 
fact, something of an artist is required. To some observers all 
phenomena of life develop with a most touching simplicity and 
are so intelligible that they are not worth thinking about or being 
looked at. However, these same phenomena might embarrass an­
other observer to such an ·extent (this happens quite often) that, 
in the long run, he feels unable to synthesize and simplify them, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
to draw them out into a straight line and thus to appease his 
mind. He then resorts to a different kind of simplification and 
very simply plants a bullet in his brain so as to extinguish at once 
his jaded mind, together with all its queries. Such are the two 
extremes between which the sum total of human intelligence is 
enclosed. But it stands to reason that never rl!n we exhaust a 
phenomenon, never can we trace its end or its beginning. We are 
familiar merely with the everyday, apparent and current, and this 
only insofar as it appears to us, whereas the ends and the beginnings 
still constitute to man a realm of the fantastic. 
By the way, last summer one of my esteemed correspondents 
wrote me about a strange and unsolved suicide, and all the time 
I have been meaning to speak about it. In that suicide everything 
is a riddle-both from the outside and from within. Of course, con­
forming to human nature, I sought somehow to unravel the enigma 
so as to stop at something and "to appease myself." The suicide 
was a young girl of twenty-three or twenty-four, the daughter of 
a well-known Rac;c:.ian emigrant ; she was born abroad, of Russian 
parents, but almost not a Russian at all by upbringing. I believe 
there was a vague mention of her in the newspapers at the time, 
but the details are most curious : "She soaked a piece of cotton 
in chloroform, tied it around her face and lay down on the bed. 
. . . And thus she died. Before she died, she wrote the following 
note : 
" 'Je m'en vais entreprendre un long voyage. Si cela ne reussit 
pas qu'on se rassemble pour feter rna resurrection avec du Cliquot. 
Si cela reussit, je prie qu'on ne me laisse enterrer que tout a fait 
morte, puisqu'il est tres desagreable de se reveiller dans U:" •:ercueil 
sous terre. Ce n'est pas chic !' "  
Which means : 
"I am undertaking a long journey. If I should not succeed, let 
people gather to celebrate my resurrection with a bottle of Cliquot. 
If I should succeed, I ask that I be interred only after I am alto­
gether dead, since it is very disagreeable to awake in a coffin in 
the earth. It is not chic !" 
In this nasty, vulgar "chic," to my way of thinking, there 
sounds a protest, perhaps indignation, anger-but against what ? 
'simply vulgar persons destroy themselves hy suicide only owing 
to a material, visible, external cause, where .. .; by the tone of the 
note one may judge that no such cause could have existed in her 
case. Against what, then, could the indignation be ?-Against the 
simplicity of the visible, against the meaninglessness uf life ? Was 

470 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
she one of those well-known judges and deniers of life who are 
indignant against the "absurdity" of man's appearance on earth, 
the nonsensical casualness of this appearance, the tyranny of the 
inert cause with which one cannot reconcile himself ? Here we 
seem to be dealing with a soul which revolted against the "rectilinear­
ness" of the phenomena, which could not stand this rectilinearness 
conveyed to her since childhood in her father's house. The ugliest 
thing is that, of course, she died devoid of any distinct doubt. It 
is most probable that her soul was devoid of distinct doubt or so­
called queries. Likewise, it is quite probable that she implicitly 
believed, without further verification, everything which had been 
imparted to her since childhood. This means that she simply died 
of "cold, darkness and tedium" with, so to speak, animal and un­
accountable suffering ; she began to suffocate as if there were not 
enough air. The soul unaccountably proved unable to bear rectili­
nearness, and unaccountably demanded something more com­
plex . . . .  
About a month ago there appeared in all Petersburg news­
papers a few short lines, in small type, about a Petersburg suicide : 
a poor young girl, a seamstress, jumped out of a window on the 
fourth ftoor "because she was utterly unable to find work for her 
livelihood." It was added that she jumped and fell to the ground, 
holding a holy image in her hands. This holy image in the hands 
is a strange, as yet unheard-of, trait in a suicide I This was a timid 
and humble suicide. Here, apparently, there was no grumbling or 
reproach : simply it became impossble to live, "God does not wish 
it"-and she died, having said her prayers. 
There are certain things-much as they may seem simple­
over which one does not cease to ponder for a long time ; they 
come back in one's dreams, and one even thinks that he is to be 
blamed for them. This meek soul which destroyed itself involun­
tarily keeps vexing one's mind. It was precisely this death that 
reminded me of the suicide of the emigrant's daughter, which was 
communicated to me last summer. But how different are these 
two creatures ; they seem to have come from two different planets 1 
How different these two deaths ! and which of these two souls had 
suffered more on earth-if such an idle question is becoming and 
permissible ? 
4 
THE VERDICT 
Apropos, here is the deliberation of a suicide out of tedium­
of course, a materialist. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
471 
". . . Indeed, what right did this nature have to bring me 
into this world pursuant to some of her eternal laws ? I am created 
with consciousness and I did conceive nature : what right had she, 
therefore, to beget me without my will, without my will as a con­
scious creature ?-Conscious implies suffering, but I do not wish 
to suffer, since why should I consent to suffering ? Nature, through 
the medium of my consciousness, proclaims to me some sort of 
harmony of the whole. Human consciousness has produced reli­
gions out of this message. Nature tells me-even though I know 
well that I neither can nor ever shall participate in this 'harmony 
of the whole,' and besides, that I shall never even comprehend 
what it means-that nevertheless I must submit to this message, 
abase myself, accept suffering because of the harmony of the 
whole, and consent to live. However, if I were •to make a con­
scious choice, of course I should rather wish to be happy only 
that moment when I exist, whereas I have no interest whatever 
in the whole and its harmony after I perish, and it does not con­
cern me in the least whether this whole with its harmony re­
mains in the worm ::.ftcr me or whether it perishes simultaneously 
with me. And why should I bother about its preservation after 
I no longer exist ?-that's the question. It would have been better 
to be created like all animals-i.e., living but not conceiving myself 
rationally. But my consciousness is not harmony, but, on the con­
trary, precisely disharmony, because with it 1 am unhappy. Look : 
who is happy in this world and what kind of people consent to 
live ?-Precisely those who are akin to animals and come nearest 
to their species by reason of their limited development and con­
sciousness. These readily consent to live but on the specific con­
dition that they live as animals, i.e., eat, d .. ink, sleep, L,,ild their 
nest and bring up children. To eat, drink and sleep, in tt human 
tongue, means to grow rich and to plunder, while to build one's nest 
pre-eminently signifies-to plunder. Perhaps I may bt told that 
one may arrange one's life and build one's nest on a rational basis, 
on scientifically sound social principles, and not by means of 
plunder, as heretofore.-All right, but I ask : What for ? What is 
the purpose of arranging one's existence and of exerting so much 
effort to organize life in society soundly, rationally and righteously 
in a moral sense ? Certainly no one will ever be able to give me 
an answer to this question. All that could be said in answer would 
· be : 'To derive delight.' Yes, were I a flower or a cow, I sh,lUld 
derive delight. But, incessantly putting q. stions to mysell, as 
now, I cannot be happy even in the face of the most lofty and 
immediate happiness of love of neighbor and of mankind, since 
1 know that tomorrow all this will perish : I and all the happiness, 

472 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
and all the love, and all mankind will be converted into naught, 
into former chaos. And on such a condition, under no consideration, 
can I accept any happiness-and not because of my refusal to accept 
it, not because I am stubbornly adhering to some principle, but 
for the simple reason that I will not and cannot be happy on 
the condition of being threatened with tomorrow's zero. This is a 
feeling-a direct and immediate feeling-and I cannot conquer it. 
All right : if I were to die but mankind, instead of me, were to 
persist forever, then, perhaps, I might nevertheless be consoled. 
However, our planet is not eternal, while mankind's duration is 
just as brief a moment as mine. And no matter how rationally, 
happily, righteously and holily mankind might organize its life on 
earth-tomorrow all this will be made equal to that same zero. 
And even though all this be necessary, pursuant to some almighty, 
eternal and fixed law of nature, yet, believe me, in this idea there 
is some kind of most profound disrespect for mankind which, to 
me, is profoundly insulting, and all the more unbearable as here 
there is no one who is guilty. 
"And, finally, even were one to presume the possibility of 
that tale about man's ultimate attainment of a rational and scien­
tific organization of life on earth-were one to believe this tale 
and the future happiness of man, the thought itself that, because 
of some inert laws, nature found it necessary to torture them thou­
sands and thousands of years before granting them that happiness 
-this thought itself is unbearably repulsive. And if you add to 
this that this very nature which, finally, had admitted man to 
happiness will, for some . reason, tomorrow find it necessary to 
convert all this into zero despite all the suffering with which man­
kind has paid for this happiness and-what is most important­
without even bothering to conceal this from my consciousness, as 
it did conceal it from the cow-willy-nilly, there arises a most 
amusing, but also unbearably sad, thought : 'What if man has been 
placed on earth for some impudent experiment-just for the purpose 
of ascertaining whether or not this creature is going to survive 
on earth ?' The principal sadness of this thought is in the fact that 
here, again, there is no guilty one ; no one has conducted the ex­
periment ; there is no one to damn, since everything simply came 
to pass as a result of the inert laws of nature, which I do not 
understand at all, and with which my consciousness is altogether 
unable to reconcile it௉lf. Ergo : 
"Inasmuch as to my questions on happiness I am receiving 
from nature, through my o-yvn consciousness, only the answer that 
I can be happy not otherwise than within the harmony of the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
473 
whole, which I do not comprehend, and which, it is obvious to 
me, I shall never be able to understand--
"lnasmuch as nature not only does not admit my right to 
demand an account from her, but even gives me no answer what­
soever-and not because she does not want to answer, but because 
she is unable to give me an answer--
"Inasmuch as I have convinced myself that nature, in order 
to answer my queries, designates (unconsciously) my own self and 
answers them with my own consciousness (since it is I who say 
all this to myself)--
"Finally, since, under these circumstances, I am assuming 
both the roles of a plaintiff and of a defendant, that of an accused 
and of a judge ; and inasmuch as I consider this comedy, on the 
part of nature, altogether stupid, and to be enduring this comedy 
on my own part-even humiliating--
"N ow, therefore, in my unmistakable role of a plaintiff 
and of a defendant, of a judge and of an accused, I sentence this 
nature, which hd.ഡ S'J unceremrmiously and impudently brought me 
into existence for suffering, to annihilation, together with myself. 
. . .  And because I am unable to destroy nature, I am destroying 
only myself, weary of enduring a tyranny in which there is no guilty 
one. 
N. N." 
CHAPTER II 
1 
A New Phase in the Eastern fduestion 
THE EASTERN question has entered its second period, 
while the first period has come to an end, but not because of the 
alleged defeat of Cherniaiev. In this way also Suvorov was de­
feated in Switzerland, since he was compelled to retreat : but can 
we concede that Suvorov was defeated ?-He was not to be blamed 
for the fact that he led the Russian people to France u11der im­
possible circumstances. Wr are not comparing Cherniaiev with 
Suvorov ; we merely wish to say that there are circumstances in 
.which even the Suvorovs retreat. True, at present in Petershurg 
some of our future army chiefs are loudly .-riticizing the military 
operations of Cherniaiev, while politicians are beginning to vo­
ciferate that he is specifically guilty of the fact that he led the 
Slavs and the Russian people into battle "under impossible cir­
cumstances." However, all these future army chiefs of ours have 

474 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
not, as yet, experienced the pressure to which Cherniaiev was 
subjected. All these military men are still civilians who seek to 
invent powder, never having smelled it. And, as for politicians, they 
had better recall the legend about the Suvorov ditch in Switzerland, 
into which he jumped, ordering the soldiers to fill it up with earth 
"if they refuse to obey him and follow him." Our good soldiers 
burst into tears, took him out of the ditch and began to follow 
him. Well, it seems that it is the Russian people who will extricate 
Cherniaiev from the ditch which the Serbian intrigue has dug 
for him. You have forgotten, gentlemen, that Cherniaiev is a popular 
hero, and it is not for you to bury him in a ditch. 
The Eastern question has entered its second period as a 
result of the thunder-word of the Czar which resounded in the 
hearts of all Russians, as a benediction-and in the hearts of all 
enemies of Russia, as dread. The Porte yielded and accepted the ul­
timatum, but what will happen further is now more unknown than 
ever. There are rumors of a conference in Constantinople (or 
wherever it may be-what difference does it make ?)-of a diplomats' 
convention. Thus, again it is diplomacy-to the joy of those who 
adorn it ! 
And now, after Russia's thunder-word, the European press 
will again begin to preach to us. For even the Hungarians, on the 
eve of our ultimatum, wrote and printed about us that we were 
afraid of them and that, for this reason, we were manreuvring before 
them, not daring to announce our intent. Once more the English 
will start intriguing and telling us what we should be doing, 
imagining that we are so ·afraid of them. Even a France of some 
sort, even she with a haughty and bombastic air, will utter her 
word at the conference, stating "what she wants and what she 
doesn't want," whereas what do we care about France, and why 
the devil should we be interested in what she wants or doesn't 
want ? At pre!'.ent, it is not 1853 and, perhaps, never has there 
been a moment when Russia's enemies have been more harmless 
to her than in our day. But let diplomacy begin to reign, to the 
consolation of its Petersburg amateurs. However, Bulgaria, the 
Slavs-what is going to happen to them in the course of these two 
months ? This is a pressing matter which cannot be postponed even 
for a minute. What is going to happen to them in the course of 
these two months ? P•·rhaps Bulgarian blood will flow again I For 
the Porte has to prove to her softas that it was not from cowardice 
that she accepted the ultimatum. And Bulgaria will have to pay for 
this : "You can see we are not afraid of the Russians if we slaughter 
the Bulgarians at the time of the conference itself I "  Now, what 
are we going to do in an event which is so probable ? Shall we 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
475 
declare our indignation right there-at the conference ?-But the 
Porte will immediately deny the massacre, will put all the blame 
on the Bulgarians themselves, and, perhaps, she will assume a 
nobly offended air, and will promptly appoint an investigating 
committee : "You can see for yourselves, gentlemen-representatives 
of Europe, how I am being affronted and how Russia keeps nagging 
at me ! "  Meanwhile, they will keep slaughtering the Bulgarians and, 
maybe, the European press will once more lend its support to the 
bashi-bazouks ; it may contend that Russia keeps nagging because 
of her amour-propre ; that she is deliberately intriguing against the 
conference, that she wants war and . . . And it is very possible 
that Europe will again suggest a peace which would be worse than 
war-an intensely armed peace, a peace fraught with restlessness 
and agitation of the peoples, with gloomy expectations-and this, 
perhaps, for a whole year ! . . . Again, a whole year of uncertainty ! 
. . .  Well, and in a year-after such a peace-of course there will 
be war. The Slavs are in need of peace but not of such a peace. 
Nor is peace at :111 needed at present-but simply an end. 
However, voices have been raised against Cherniaiev-and 
these are but first skirmishes. Wait : later the chorus will grow 
larger and stronger. The main point here is not Cherniaiev : this 
is a reaction agaiP5t the movement of this year as a whole. The 
Petersburg Gazette, in an excellent article, ir: rebuttal to the attacks 
against Cherniaiev, foretold to The Stock-Exchange Gazette that it 
would lose its subscribers and that the public would turn away 
from it. At present this will hardly come to pass : nowadays there 
are a great many people with whom The Stock-Exchange Gazette 
is singing in unison. "Those are the very people in w!.om, during 
this year, there has accumulated much bmerness-ang. 
and irri­
tated people who call themselves pre-eminently men of order. To 
them the whole movement of this year is nothing but disorder, 
while Cherniaiev is merely a scoundrel : 'a lieutenant-general, and 
yet he rushed to seek adventure like some condottiere ! '  These, 
however, are men, so to speak, of bureaucratic order. But there are 
other amateurs of order, men belonging to the upper strata of 
the intelligentsia, who perceive with a bleeding he<" t that so 
many forces are wasted on such a medieval cause, so to speak, 
whereas schools, for example . . .," etc. Those attacking Cherniaiev 
are vociferating that Russian blood has been spilled in vaiP with­
out any profit to Russia. The New Time · ·lmirably retorteu l.ln the 
question of profit, and what profit means-iL retorted directly and in 
plain words, without being ashamed of the idealism of the words, 
of which everybody is so ashamed. 
As early as in June, at the inception of the movement, I 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
happened to write in the Diary on the subject of how, in this case, 
the profit to Russia should be conceived. Such a lofty organism as 
Russia is should also be radiating an enormous spiritual meaning. 
Russia's gain is not in the seizure of Slavic provinces, but in a 
sincere and animated concern about them-in their protection, in 
brotherly union with them, and in the conveyance to them of our 
spirit and view on the reunion of the Slavic world. Such a lofty 
organism as Russia cannot be satisfied with mere material gain­
with "bread" alone. And this is not an ideal, not phrases : the 
Russian people in toto and their whole movement of this year are 
proof of this. This is a movement which is unprecedented in other 
peoples in its self-renunciation and disinterestedness, in its devout 
religious thirst for suffering for a right cause. Such a people cannot 
inspire fear with respect to order ; this is not a people of disorder 
but a people of firm views and indomitable principles, cherishing 
sacrifice and seeking truth ; a people who know where truth is ; a 
meek, but strong, honest people, pure in heart, like one of their 
lofty ideals-that valiant knight Ilya-Murometz, who is venerated 
as a saint. The heart of the Keeper of such a people should rejoice 
when beholding them-and it does rejoice, and the people know 
it I No, there was no disorder here. 
2 
CHERNIAIEV 
. 
At present, even Cherniaiev's defenders regard him not as a 
genius but merely as a valiant and a brave general. However, the 
fact itself that in a Slavic cause he has headed the whole move­
ment constitutes ingenious foresight, and only an ingenious force 
is capable of resolving such problems. The Slavic cause, of nece:;­
sity, had to begin at last-i.e., to embark upon its active phase 
-and without Cherniaiev it would not have reached such develop­
ment. It might be said that herein lies the trouble-that he gave 
it a push, that he has swelled it to such proportions ; that herein is 
his fault, and that he has started it at an inopportune moment. 
Even so, the great Slavic question had to be raised, and, in truth, 
I do not know whether it is possible to argue about its opportune­
ness. But once the Slavlc cause has started, who, if not Russia, 
should have headed it ?-Herein is Russia's mission, and Cherniaiev 
grasped it and hoisted the bொnner of Russia. To make this deci­
sion, to take this step-nay, nay, this could not have been done 
by a man devoid of a special power. 
It may be said that all this was caused by ambition-that 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
477 
be is an adventurer, seeking to distinguish himself. Yet, in such 
cases, ambitious men prefer to play a sure game, and even if they 
do take any risk, it is to a certain extent only : in circumstances 
threatening sure failure, they immediately forsake the cause. A 
sure failure of immediate military success, with no one but the Serbs 
and without the help of the Russians, Cherniaiev has, of course, 
anticipated long ago. At present too much b already known, too 
much has been fully explained in this story, for entertaining any 
doubts concerning this point. But he was unable to desert the 
cause since it is not confined to immediate military success : the 
future of both Russia and the Slavic countries resides in this cause. 
At any rate, his hope for Russia's immediate help was not mistaken 
since Russia has finally uttered her great decisive word. Had it 
been uttered only a little earlier, Cherniaiev would have erred in 
nothing. Indeed, in his place many a man would have refused to 
wait so long-namely, ambitious men and careerists. I am convinced 
that not a few among his critics would not have suffered half of 
the things which he has endured. However, Cherniaiev was serving 
an enormo:.s .... u>"f' and r:>t merely gratifying his ambition, and 
he preferred to sacrifice everything-his fate, his fame, his career, 
perhaps his very life-rather than to forsake thl' cause, since he 
was laboring for the honor and benefit of Russia, and of this he 
was conscious. For the Slavic cause is the Russian cause, and 
ultimately it must be settled by Russia alune and in accord with 
the Russian idea. He stayed also because of the Russian volunteers 
who had converged under his banner for the sake of an idea which 
he represented. Certainly he could not have left them alone-and, 
again, in this there is an element of magnanimity. How many of 
his critics would have abandoned everything and evp··:-body-the 
idea, and Russia, and volunteers, as many of them as ' ૼre might 
be I For one must tell the truth. 
Cherniaiev is also criticized by the military. However, to 
begin with, these military were not in Cherniaiev's position ; and, 
secondly, after all, the task which Cherniaiev has actually accom­
plished "under impossible circumstances," could not, perhaps, have 
been achieved by any one of his critics. These "impossible cir­
cumstances," which exercised such a strong inftueuu: upon the 
military developments, ૽૾!so belong to history. Still, their salient 
traits are already known, and they are so typical that they cannot 
be overlooked even from a strategic standpoint. If it is true that 
the intrigue against Cherniaiev has reac. ࢤ ••d the point where the 
highest bureaucrats of the country, in their distrustful hatred against 
a Russian general suspected by them, at the most critical moments 
have left his most urgent requests and demands for the army withoul 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
answer, and even on the eve of the last and decisive battles left 
him without artillery shells-is just criticism of the military opera­
tions possible without the elucidation of this point ?-All these in­
trigues, all this irritation, are unprecedented : anyhow, this general, 
suspected by them, was the leader of their armed forces, and he 
defended the doorway to Serbia. And, swayed by anger and hate, 
they sacrificed everything-the army and even their fatherland­
merely for the sake of destroying a man disagreeable to them. At 
least, such is the situation according to most accurate information. 
The unquestionable fact of an intrigue is certified by all 
correspondents and all European papers : it started in Belgrade 
and all the time emanated thence, ever since Cherniaiev's arrival 
in Serbia. This intrigue was strongly fostered by the English as 
a matter of politics ; it was also furthered by certain Russians­
why by these no one knows. It is very possible that in the begin­
ning Cherniaiev in some way piqued the amour-propre of the 
Serbian bureaucrats. However, no doubt, the main source of their 
distrustful and unquenchable irritation against him was that about 
which I have already spoken before-i.e., the preconceived idea 
entertained by many Serbs that should the Slavs be liberated by 
the Russians, this would be done solely for Russia's benefit, and 
that Russia would annex them and deprive them of "their so 
eminent and indubitable political future." As is known, they ven­
tured to declare war on Turkey even prior to Cherniaiev's arrival, 
precisely because they dreamed of heading the Slavic movement, 
and-after the defeat of the Sultan-of forming a united Slavic 
Serbian Kingdom with a population of several millions and "with 
so eminent a future." A large and influential Serbian party has 
been dreaming of nothing but that. Briefly, those were dreamers 
resembling little seven-year-old children who put on toy epaulets 
and imagine themselves generals. Cherniaiev and the volunteers, 
naturally, must have frightened the party "by the ensuing seizure 
by Russia coming in their footsteps." And, no doubt, at present, 
after the recent military reverses, there will arise among them-it 
has already arisen-strong friction. All these dreamer!'i will now 
silently-and, perhaps, even aloud-begin to abuse the Ru!'isians, 
asserting that it was precisely due to the Russians that calamity 
befell them. Still, after a while, salutary reaction will set in, since 
all these suspicious Serbs are, nevertheless, ardent patriots. They 
will recall the Russian 4dead who gave their lives for their Serbian 
country. The Russians will depart but the great idea will remain. 
The great Russian spirit will leave its imprint in their souls, and 
out of the Russian blood which has been shed for them, their own 
valor will grow. For some day they will convince themsel\'es that 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
479 
Russian help was disinterested and that none of the Russians, 
who were killed for them, had any idea of annexing them ! 
However, all this should not alienate us from the Slavs. 
There are two Serbias : the upper Serbia, impetuous and inex­
perienced, which as yet has neither lived nor acted, but which is 
passionately dreaming about the future-the Serbia already having 
her parties and breathing with intrigues which, at times, reach such 
proportions (again because of impetuous inexperience) as cannot 
be encountered in any nation which has lived long and which is 
infinitely greater and more independent than Serbia. But alongside 
this upper Serbia, which is in such haste to live politically, there 
is the popular Serbia which deems the Russians only to be their 
saviors and brethren, and the Russian Czar their sun-the Serbia 
which loves the Russians and trusts them. It is impossible to 
formulate the view on this subject better than did The Moscow 
Gazette, undeniably our best political newspaper. Here are its 
words : 
"We arோ rnnvinced that the sentiments of the Russian people 
toward Serbia will not change as a result of the success of the 
intrigue inimical to both sides. The Serbs of the dukedom are an 
agricultural and peaceful people who, in the course of a long period 
of peace, have forgotten their militant traditions, and who have 
not yet had the time to evolve a firm popular consciousness such as 
cements every historical nation. Lastly, the Serbs of the dukedom 
cannot be called a people : they are but a fragment of a people 
devoid of organic significance. However, we cannot forget that the 
Serbs enthusiastically and unanimously arose in support of their 
consanguineous brethren who are being villainously tn.-tured. . . .  
The Russian people will not desert the ::,erbs at this , ௌoment so 
terrible to them, and the blood shed by the Russians l.as proved 
how pure their sympathy was, how heroically disinterested their 
sacrifice was and how absurd are the hostile calumnies to the effect 
that Russia seeks to derive for herself some profits from Serbia's 
plight. Let the memory of the valiant Russian men who gave their 
lives for Serbia become a link of brotherly love between two 
peoples so close to each other by blood and religion.·· 
In conclusion, I will say : admitting that we, Russians, have 
sufferrrl, in addition to all troubles ( ?) , material damages-having 
expended, maybe, tens of millions whir.h, however, were sprnt for 
the organization and improvement of our ,rmed forces (which, of 
course, is also good) ; nevertheless, the fact itself that as a result 
of the movement of this year we have learned who our best merr 
are-this fact alone is an incomparable achievement. Oh, if only 
·all the peoples, even the grandest and most intelligent peoples in 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
Europe, would firmly know and would unanimously agree as to who 
should be considered their genuinely best men-would Europe and 
European mankind appear in its present state ? 
3 
BEST MEN 
Best men-this is a theme on which it is worth while to say 
a few words. 
Best men are they without whom no society and no nation 
can live and stand even in the face of the broadest equality of 
rights. Best men are, naturally, of two kinds : ( 1 )  those before 
whom the people themselves and the nation itself voluntarily of 
their free accord bow, revering their valor ; and (2) those before 
whom everybody, or very many of the people or the nation, bow 
by reason, so to speak, of a certain coercion, and even if they 
conceive them to be "best men," they are doing so to a certain extent 
conditionally, and not altogether and as a matter of fact. 
One should not repine at the existence of this "conditional" 
class of best men, officially recognized as such because of the 
supreme considerations of order and stability of administration, 
since this sort of "best men" exist by reason of an historical law 
and, thus far, they have always, from the beginning of the world, 
existed in all nations and states, so that no society could have 
formed itself and united into an entity without a certain voluntary 
autocoercion. Every society,· in order that it may survive and live, 
has got to respect somebody and something, and-what is most 
important-society as a whole, and not as a matter of individual 
choice. Inasmuch as the best men of the first class-they who are 
genuinely valiant, before whom everybody, or the overwhelming 
majority of the nation, bows heartily and unhesitatingly-are, at 
times, somewhat elusive because they are ideal (at times they are 
hardly definable, are queer and peculiar, and outwardly not seldom 
have even a slightly incorrect appearance), in their stead best men 
are inaugurated conditionally in the form of a caste of best men 
under official patronage : "These you must respect." And if, be­
sides, these "conditional" ones actually coincide with the best men 
of the first class (since not all men in the latter class have an 
incorrect appearance) and are genuinely valiant, not only is the 
aim achieved but it is doubly achieved. In Russia such best men, 
initially, were the members of the prince's bodyguard ; later, the 
boyards and the clergy (but only the highest dignitaries), and even 
some eminent merchants-of these, however, there were very few. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
It should be noted that both in Russia and elsewhere, i.e., in 
Europe, these best men always elaborated for themselves a rather 
harmonious code of valor and honor, and even though this code 
on the whole was, of course, pretty contingent and, at times, greatly 
at variance with the ideals of the people, nevertheless in certain 
points it used to be quite lofty. For instance, the "best" man was 
unconditionally bound to give his life for his fatherland whenever 
such a sacrifice was required of him, and hf' did actually die as 
a matter of duty and honor "since otherwise great dishonor would 
be cast upon my family." And it goes without saying that this 
was incomparably better than the right to dishonor where a man, 
in a moment of danger, deserts everything and everybody and runs 
into hiding : "Let everything on earth perish so long as my life 
is safe." Thus it prevailed in Russia during a very long time ; and 
it should also be observed that these conditional best men quite 
often, and in many a thing, agreed in their ideals with the uncon­
ditional, or popular, best men. Of course, not in everything-far 
from it-but at least it may be positively asserted that in those 
days there v. ;:c infinitely more moral solidarity between the Rus­
sian boyards and the Russian people than almost anywhere else in 
Europe at that time-between the conquerors-tyrants, the knights, 
and the vanquished slaves-the people. 
All of a sudden, however, there occurred in the organization 
of our best men a certain radical change . by virtue of a Czar's 
ukase, all best men were divided into fourteen categories, under 
the names of "classes," one higher than the other-in the form of 
a ladder-so that there came into existence fourteen grades of hu­
man valor bearing German names. In itഠ subsequent development 
this change partly failed to attain the initial purpo!'• for which 
it had been organized, since the former "best men" p. 'lptly oc­
cupied and filled all of the fourteen classes-only, instead ui boyards, 
they began to be called "nobility." However, to a ்ertain extent 
this change did attain its purpose because it has considerably 
stretched out the old fence : there ensued an influx of new forces 
from the lower strata of society-according to our terminology : 
democratic forces-especially from among seminarians. This influx 
has brought about, in the ranks of the best men, much Ll1at proved 
vivifying and productivr, since there appeared gifted people with 
new conceptions, with a level of education which in those days was 
still unheard-of, who, at the same time, however, greatly dl.'spised 
their origin and avidly hastened to tran rflrm themselves, Ly thf' 
acquisition of titles, into full-blooded noblemen. 
It should be noted that, aside from seminarians, only a few 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
individuals from among the people and the merchants found their 
way into the category of "best men," and the nobility continued 
to head the nation. This class was strongly organized, and whereas 
in all Europe money, property, the gold bag, were honestly and 
wholeheartedly conceived as everything that is valiant and best 
in and among people, in Russia-and this even we can remember­
a general, for instance, was so highly esteemed that even the richest 
merchant deemed it a great honor to lure him into his home for 
dinner. Even recently I read an anecdote-which I should not have 
believed if I had not known that it was perfectly true-about a 
Petersburg lady belonging to the beau monde who, at a concert, 
publicly drove from her seat a merchant-woman, worth ten millions, 
occupied her place and, in addition, gave her a scolding-and this 
occurred only some thirty years ago I 
However, the fact should be noted that these "best" men, 
who had so firmly planted themselves in their seats, acquired several 
good rules-for example, virtual obligation for them to have some 
education-so that this whole caste of best men became pre-emi­
nently Russia's educated class, the guardian and bearer of Russian 
enlightenment, wǕatever it may have been. It goes without saying 
that it was also the sole guardian and bearer of the rules of honor 
-however, quite Jn accord with the European standard, so that 
the letter and form of the rules, in the long run, subdued the sin­
cerity of the content : there _was much honor, but of honest men 
there finally remained but few. 
During that. period, particularly at its close, the class of "the 
best" had already forsaken its ideals of "the best men," taken from 
the people, so that it began to scoff openly at almost all popular con­
ceptions of "the ·best." But suddenly there occurred one of the 
most colossal and sweeping changes ever experienced by Russia : 
serfdom was abolished and everything underwent a profound trans­
formation. True, the fourteen classes remained as hitherto, yet the 
"best men" began, as it were, to vacillate. All of a sudden the 
former reverence among the rank and file of society was lost and 
the conceptions of "the best" somehow changed. True, they also 
partly changed for the better. Moreover, in the understanding of 
what is best there ensued something altogether confusing and inde­
terminate. Nevertheless, the former view was no longer satisfactory, 
so that in the minds of a great many people most momentous 
questions arose : "Who, then, should be conceived as the best ones 
and-most important of all-whence should they be expected, where 
are they to be found, who will take it upon himself to proclaim 
௎hem as the best, and on what grounds ? Finally, are these new 
t 
·I 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
grounds known, and who will believe that they are precisely those 
ones on which so much has to be erected ?" Verily, these questions 
began to arise in the minds of a great many people. 
4 
AnouT THE SAME 
The whole thing was that the patronage of authority had 
been, as it were, withdrawn from the former "best men" and of­
ficialism was destroyed. Thus, there was this immediate consola­
tion, that even though the former caste pattern of "the best men" 
had not been completely demolished, nevertheless it had considerably 
yielded and expanded so that any one of them, if he should seek 
to retain his former significance, willy-nilly, had to pass from the 
"conditional" best men to the category of the "natural" ones. There 
arose the beautiful hope that the ''natural" ones would thus, little 
by little, ass:rnP the places of all the former "best men." But how 
this would come to pass remained, of course, a riddle. However, to 
many respectable, but impetuous and liberal, people here there was 
no riddle at all. In their camp everything had been decided, as 
though by statute. 'Vhile some of them believed that everything had 
actually been achi••ved, and that if today the "natural" man has 
not yet assumed the first place-tomorrow, with the first rays of 
dawn, he will assume it without fail. Meanwhile, more reflective 
people kept pondering over questions .arising out of the former 
theme : "Who are they--the natural ones ? Does anyone know how 
they are called at present ?  Haven't we completely lost their ideal ? 
Where is the generally acknowledged 'best ,nan' ? Wha · md whom 
should society in corpore revere and whom should it .:nitate ?" 
Perhaps all these questions were not specifically framed in 
such terms and were not expressed in the form of these questions, 
nevertheless undoubtedly all this "agitation" has been felt by our 
society in some form or other. Ardent and enthusiastic people 
shouted to the sceptics that "the new mau" exists, that he has been 
found, defined and given. Finally, it was decided th:;.t this new 
and "best" man is simrly the enlightened man, a man of science 
and one devoid of former prejudices. This opinion, however, was 
unacceptable to many people by reason of this most simple con­
sideration : that an educated man is not always honest and that 
science does not guarantee valor in man. !OL that moment of general 
vacillation and indeterminateness there were men who were about 
to suggest that we should apply to the people and resort to popular 
principles. But, to many of us, the term itself "popular principles" 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
has been repulsive and hateful for a long time. Besides, the people, 
after their liberation, somehow did not hasten to reveal themselves 
in their valiant aspect, so that it was doubtful whether it would 
be possible to seek in them a solution to these queries. On the 
contrary, there were rumors about disorderliness, depravity, dread­
ful alcoholism, unsuccessful self-government, about kulaks and 
bloodsuckers of peasants, who have taken the place of the former 
landowners, and, finally-about the Jew. Even the "cleverest" 
writers have announced that the kulak and the bloodsucker are 
reigning supreme over the people and, besides, that the people 
themselves accept them as their genuine "best" men. 
Finally, there came into being even a perfectly liberal view­
in the strict sense of the term-to the effect that our people cannot 
be competent in the moulding of the ideal of a best man ; that not 
only are they themselves incompetent, but they are impotent to 
participate in this exploit ; that first they have to be taught how 
to read and write ; that they have to be humanized and developed ; 
that schools must be built, etc. It should be confessed that many 
a sceptic felt nonplussed, not knowing how to answer these con­
tentions . . . .  
Meanwhile, a new storm was coming up, a new calamity 
was arising-" the gold bag ! "  In lieu of the former "conditional" 
best men, a new contingency ensued which, in Russia, all of a 
sudden has acquired an awful ·significance. It goes without saying 
that "the· gold bag" existed also in the past : it always existed, in 
the form of the merchant-millionaire ; however, at no time in the 
past has it been placed so high-never has such a significance been 
attributed to it as in our day. Our former merchant, notwithstand­
ing the role which everywhere in Europe capital and the millionaires 
have played, in Russia, comparatively speaking, occupied a rather 
insignificant place in the social hierarchy. To tell the truth-he 
did not deserve anything better. I will say in advance : I am speak­
ing only about rich merchants, while the majority of them, who had 
not yet been corrupted by wealth, were living in the fashion of 
Ostrovsky's characters. Perhaps they were not worse than many 
others, again speaking comparatively, while the lowest and most 
numerous merchants virtually merged with the people. But the richer 
the former merchant grew, the worse he became. Essentially, he was 
nothing but a peasant-௏ely a corrupted peasant. 
The former millionaire-merchants were divided into two 
classes : some of them continued to wear beards, despite their mil­
lions, and, in spite of the mirrors and inlaid floors in their huge man­
sions, lived somewhat swinishly-both in a moral and in a physical 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
sense. The best that there was in thrm was their love of church 
bells and of vociferous deacons. However, notwithstanding this love, 
morally they wrre already detachrd from the people. It is difficult 
to conceive anything morally more contrasting than the people, 
on the one hand, and certain merchant-manufacturers, on the other. 
It is said that Ovsiannikov, when he was recently transported 
through Kazan to Siberia, kicked out with his feet the donated 
copper coins which the people na"ively threw iuto his carriage : this 
is the ultimate degree of the moral alienation from the people-a 
complete loss of the least understanding of the people's thought 
and spirit. And never have the people been in a worse bondage 
than in the factories owned by some of these gentlemen ! 
The other class of our millionaire-merchants was characterized 
by dresscoats and shaven chins ; by the gorgeous European furnish­
ings of their houses ; by the upbringing of their daughters with 
the French and English languages, with pianos, and-not infre­
quently-by some badge acquired as a result of substantial dona­
tions ; by intolerable scorn for everyone lower than they ; by con­
tempt for an cnlinary " 1inner"-general, and, at the same time, 
by the most servile humiliation before a high dignitary, especially 
whenever that merchant succeeded-God only knows through what 
intrigues and by what devices-in enticing such a dignitary to a 
ball or dinner wh1ch, needless to say, was given for him. This 
preoccupation with the problem of giving a dinner for a dignitary 
became the program of life. This was anxiously looked for : it was 
virtually for this alone that the millionaire lived on earth. It stands 
to reason that this former rich merchant worshipped his million 
as God : in his virw the million was t'\'erything ; the million had 
extricated him out of nothingness and h1rl made hili< :mpressive. 
In the vulgar soul of this "corrupted peasant" (he c . .  tinued to 
be that, despite all his dress-coats) there never could be conceived 
a single thought, a single feeling, which, though for a ᆐecond, would 
raise him in his consciousness above that million of his. Naturally, 
despite the outward polish, the family of such a merchant grew 
up without any education. The million not only was not conducive 
to education but, on the contrary, it usrd to constitute in such cases 
the principal cause of ignorance : why should the son of such a 
millionaire study in a 'llniversity if, without any study, he could 
have everything, especially since these millionaires, upon acquiring 
their million, quite often acquired the rights of nobility Aside 
from debauch since the earliest youthful 
ears, and the most dis­
torted conceptions of the world, the fatherland, honor and duty, 
wealth contributed nothing to the souls of that carnivorous and 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
arrogant youth. And the distortion of the world outlook· was mon­
strous since, above all, there prevailed the conviction which assumed 
the form of an axiom : "With money I can buy everything, every 
distinction, every valor ; I can bribe everybody and I can bail 
myself out of everything." It is difficult to imagine the extent of 
the aridness of heart in youths who grew up in those rich families. 
From boastfulness and a desire not to lag behind others, such a 
millionaire, at times, donated enormous sums for the benefit of 
the fatherland-for instance, in the case when it was threatened 
with danger (although this occurred but once, in 1872 )-yet he 
made these donations in anticipation of rewards, while he was 
always ready, any minute of his existence, to join the first stray 
Jew, in order · to betray everybody and everything, provided this 
yielded profit : patriotism, the feeling of civic duty, is almost non­
existent in these hearts. 
Oh, of course, I am speaking of our Russian commercial 
millionaire merely as a class. There are exceptions always and 
everywhere. In Russia, too, merchants can be pointed out who 
possessed European education and who distinguished themselves 
with worthy civic deeds. However, of such there are very few 
among our millionaires ; every one of them is known by name. 
Because of exceptions, a class does not lose its character. 
Now, the former limits of the merchant of days gone by 
were suddenly, in our day, widely set asunder. Suddenly he became 
affiliated with the European speculator, hitherto unknown in Rus­
sia, and the stock-exchange gambler. The contemporaneous mer­
chant no longer needs to entice to his "dinner party" a "dignitary" 
or to give balls in his honor. He affiliates himself and fraternizes 
with the dignitary at the stock exchange, at a shareholders' meet­
ing, in a bank which he establishes together with the dignitary. 
Nowadays he himself is somebody ; he himself is a dignitary. The 
main point is that all of a sudden he found himself decidedly in 
one of the highest places in society, which in Europe has already 
long ago been officially and sincerely assigned to the millionaire. 
And, of course, he did not doubt that he was actually worthy of 
the place. 
Briefly, he becomes more and more wholeheartedly convinced 
that it is precisely he who nowadays is "the best" man on earth, 
in lieu of all the formQr ones. But the pending calamity is not 
that he entertains such nonsense, but the fact that others also, it 
would seem (and already quite a few), begin to reason in the same 
way. In our day, the bag is unquestionably conceived by a dreadful 
majority to be the best of everything. Of course, these fears will be 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
disputed. However, our present-day factual veneration of the bag 
is not only indisputable, but, by reason of the proportions it has 
assumed, it is also unprecedented. I repeat : also in the past the 
power of the bag was understood in Russia by everybody, but 
never until now has the bag been regarded as the loftiest thing 
on earth. In the official classification of Ruo:sians-in the social 
hierarchy-the former merchant's bag could not outweigh even a 
bureaucrat. At present, however, even the former hierarchy, with­
out any coercion from the outside, seems to be ready to remove 
itself to the second place, ceding its place to the lovely and beau­
tiful novel "condition" of the best man "who for so long a time 
and so erroneously did not assume his true rights." The present-day 
stock-exchange gambler enlists in his service litterateurs ; the advo­
cate pays court to him. "That young school turning out shrewd 
minds and dry hearts-a school distorting every sane feeling, when­
ever occasion calls for such distortion ; a school of all sorts of 
challenges, fearless and irresponsible ; a continual and incessant 
training, baser! on offer and demand"-this youthful school already 
has fallen in line w1th the stock-exchange gambler and begun to sing 
hymns of praise in his honor. Please do not think that I am hinting 
at "the Strusberg case" ; advocates in that case who proclaimed 
their "pinched" clif'nts as ideal men, who sang hymns to them 
as "the best men in all Moscow" (precis,.ly, something of the 
kind)-these advocates have missed their mark. They have proved 
that they themselves are men devoid of the least serious conviction 
and even of poise, men with no sense of measure ; and if they are 
playing in our midst the role of "European talents," it is solely 
because in the kingdom of the blind the one-eyed is kir.;!. 
In fact, even as diplomats, they havt. charged : • · highest 
possible fee in order to obtain the maximum for the i!linimum : 
"Not only are they not guilty-they are holy ! "  It is rumored that 
at one point the public even began to hiss. However, an advocate, 
to begin with, is not a diplomat : the compurison is essentially 
erroneous. It would have been more correct, far more correct, to 
ask-pointing at the client-the question propounded in the Gospel : 
"Gentlemen of the jury, who among you is 'he that ::; without 
sin' ?"-Oh, I am not criticizing the verdict ; the verdict is just­
and I bow before it ; it had to be rendered if it were only against 
the bank. Precisely this case was of such a nature that to convict 
by "public conscience" this "pinched," ill-starred Moscow Loan 
Bank meant to convict at the same time a.. our banks, the whole 
stock exchange, all stock-exchange gamblers, even though they had 
not yet been caught-what difference does it make ? Who is without 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
sin, without that same sin ?-Honestly, who ? Somebody has already 
said in print that they were leniently punished.-! must explain 
that I am not referring to Landau : he is really guilty of some­
thing extraordinary which I have no intention of even discussing. 
But, in all conscience, Danila Schumacher, convicted of "swindling," 
got a terrible punishment. Let us look into our hearts : are there 
many among us who would not have committed the same thing ?­
One needn't confess aloud, but let him tacitly admit it. However, 
long live justice I -AII the same, they were jailed ! -"Take that, for 
our stock exchange and depraved times ; take that, as a reward for 
the fact that we are all egoists, that we all profess such villainous 
materialistic views on happiness in life and its delights ; for our arid 
and treacherous feeling of self-preservation I "  Nay, it is useful to 
convict even one bank for our own sins. . 
. . 
My God I Whither have I wandered ? Is it possible that I, 
too, am writing "about the Strusberg case" ? Enough ! I hasten to 
cut this short. For I was speaking about "the best man," and I 
merely meant to draw the conclusion that in Russia the ideal of 
the real best man, even of the "natural" pattern, is in great danger 
of growing muddy. The old has either been destroyed or is worn out ; 
the new is still borne on the wings of fantasy, whereas in actual life 
we behold something abominable which has reached unheard-of pro­
portions. The fascination which is being attributed to this new force 
-the gold bag-even begins to inspire fear in some hearts, which 
are all too suspicious, for instance, as regards the people. Indeed, 
even though we-the upper. stratum of society-might be seduced 
by the new idol, nevertheless we should not vanish without leaving 
a trace : not in vain has the torch of education been shining for us 
throughout two centuries. We are armed with enlightenment, and 
we should be able to repel the monster. At a moment of most filthy 
debauch, didn't we convict the Moscow Loan Bank ? But our people 
-that "inert, corrupt, insensible mass"-into which the Jew has 
thrust himself, what are they going to set against the monster of 
materialism, in the guise of the gold bag, marching on them ?­
Their misery ? Their rags? Their taxes and their bad harvests ? 
Their vices ? Liquor ? Flogging ? We were afraid that the people 
would forthwith fall prostrate before the increasing power of the 
gold bag, and that before even one generation should pass they 
would be enslaved wone than ever before-and that they would 
be driven into submission not only through coercion, but that they 
would submit morally, with their whole will. We were afraid that 
it is precisely they, before anyone else, who would say: "This is 
the main thing ; here is where power, tranquillity and happiness 
reside ! This is what we shall worship and follow I "  

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Such were the things of which one could have been justly 
afraid-at least for a long while. Many people started pondering­
and suddenly . 
Suddenly something happened last summer which I shal 
discuss in the next issue of the Diary. I want to speak about it 
without "humor," but wholeheartedly and more plainly. That which 
happened last summer was so touching and gladdening that it is 
even incredible.-Incredible because we had already given up the 
people for lost and we considered them grossly incompetent to 
utter their word on the question : what should the Russian "best 
man" be ? We believed the whole organism of that people was 
already contaminated by material and spiritual debauch ; we be­
lieved that the people had already forgotten their spiritual tenets, 
that they had not preserved them in their hearts, having lost or 
distorted them amidst misery and debauch. And suddenly all this 
"uniform and inert mass" (i.e., in the opinion of our wiseacres, 
of course) which, in its hundred-million bulk, noiselessly and 
breathless!y l>i.J etched itௐ-Jf out on a surface of many thousands 
of versts, in a state of perpetual begetting, and recognized eternal 
impotence to say or perform anything-in the guise of something 
everlastingly elemental and obedient-all of a sudden all this Russia 
awoke, rose and humbly but firmly uttered urbi et orbi her beau­
tiful word. Moreover, Russians, taking tl1eir staffs, in scores of 
hundreds, escorted by thousands of people, started on some novel 
crusade (thus the movement is already being called ; the English 
were the first to compare the Russian movement with a crusade) 
to Serbia in support of some brethren of theirs because rumors 
had reached them that those brethren ovPr there w௑௒,. being tor­
tured and oppressed. A father-an old soldier-instead 
r living in 
peace, suddenly takes up arms and proceeds on foot, inquiring 
about his way, thousands of versts away, to fight thf' Turk in sup­
port of his brethren, taking along with him his nine-year-old 
daughter (this is a fact) : "Christians will be found who will care 
for my daughter while I am wandering"-says he, in answer to 
questions-"but I will go and serve God's cause." And thus he goes. 
. . . And there are thousands of such cases ! 
Now, had anyon . 
told ahead of time-say, last winter­
that this would happen in Russia, we should not have believed it 
-we should not have believed in this "crusade" which, b0wever, 
has actually begun (but is by no means :1ded) . Even now, though 
one sees it openly, willy-nilly one asks oneself at times : "But how 
could this happen ? How could such a wholly unforeseen event 
occur ?" Russia has proclaimed aloud everything-what she reveres 

490 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
and what she believes in ; she has stated what she deems to be 
"best" and what men she considers "best." Now, it is the dis­
cussion of the question-"what kind of people are these men 
and what ideals have been revealed ?"-that I am postponing 
till the next issue of the Diary. Essentially, these ideals, these 
"best men" are clear and may be perceived at the first glance : 
in the conception of the people, "the best man" is he who has not 
bowed before material temptation ; who is incessantly seeking work 
for God's cause ; who loves truth and, whenever the occasion calls 
for it, rises to serve it, forsaking his home and his family and 
sacrificing his life. I mean to state specifically why we, the educated 
ones, at present can boldly and firmly hope that not only has the 
image of "the best man" not been lost in Russia, but that, on the 
contrary, it is radiating more brightly than at any time in the 
past ; that its provider, guardian and bearer nowadays is precisely 
the common people whom we, in our enlightened haughtiness­
and, at the same time, naive ignorance-have considered so "incom­
petent." More particularly, I should like to dwell upon the ques­
tion how the quests and requirements of our "enlightenment" even 
now could be brought into full accord with the people's conception 
of 11the best man," notwithstanding the obviously naive and artless 
forms in which the people express that conception. Not the form 
but the content is essential (even though the form, too, is beau­
tiful). The content, howeverr is incontestable. This is why we can 
joyously embrace the new hope : our horizon has cleared and our 
new sun rises all too brightly . . . .  
And if only it might prove possible that we should all agree 
and share the people's understanding of whom henceforth we should 
consider "the best man"-perhaps, beginning with this last summer, 
a new period in Russian history would come into existence. 
NOVEMBER 
THE MEEK ONE 
A FANTASTIC STORY 
The Author's Foreword 
I APOLOGIZE to my readers that this time, instead of the 
"diary" in its usual form, I- am merely printing a story. However, 
the greater part of the month I was occupied with this story. In 
any event, I ask the readers' indulgence. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
491 
Now-about the story itself. I called it "fantastic," although 
I consider it real in the highest degree. However, actually, there 
is in it an element of the fantastic-specifically, in its form-and 
this I deem necessary to explain in advance. 
The point is that it is neither a story nor a diary. Please 
imagine a husband whose wife, a suicide, is lying on a table ; 
several hours earlier she threw herself out of the window. He is 
in a state of consternation and, as yet, he has been unable to com­
pose his thoughts. He keeps walking around in his rooms and is 
endeavoring to rationalize the event, "to collect his thoughts into 
one focus." At that, he is an inveterate hypochondriac-one of those 
who talk to themselves. And thus he talks to himself ; he relates the 
event, and rationalizes it to himself. Despite the seeming consecu­
tiveness of the speech, several times he contradicts himself-both 
in the logic and in his sentiments. He at once justifies himself and 
accuses her, and embarks upon other obiter dicta : we perceive 
here vulgarity of thought and heart, and also-profound feeling. 
Little by little. he actually rationalizes the affair to himself and 
collects "his thoughi.:o into vne focus." A range of reminiscences 
evoked by him irresistibly leads him, at length, to truth, and truth 
irresistibly exalts him-his mind and heart. By the end the tone 
itself of the narrative changes, compared with its incoherent begin­
ning. Truth reveals ll'ielf to the unhappy man rather clearly and 
distinctly-at least, so it appears to him. 
Such is the theme. It stands to reason that the process of 
the narrative lasts several hours, with interruptions and interludes, 
in a confused form : now he speaks to himself, now he addresses, 
as it were, an invisible listener-some kind of a judge. Th11s it also 
takes place in real life. If a stenographer co;1!d have eaVt'௓- 'ropped 
on him and transcribed everything after him, the sketc.- would 
have been rougher and less polished than it appears in my version ; 
nevertheless, it seems to me that the psychological mJer would, 
perhaps, have been the same. Now, this supposition relative to the 
stenographer who had recorded everything (after whom I have 
edited his record) is what I denote as fantastic in this story. How­
ever, something partly similar to this has been resorted to several 
times in art. For example, Victor Hugo-in his masterpiece The 
Last Day of a Man Condemned to Death-has resorted to an al­
most identical device ; and although he did not portray a stenog­
·rapher, nevertheless he has introduced a ௔till greater unreaiity 
when he presumed that a man condemned 
J death would have 
been able (and would have had the time) to keep a diary not only 
on his last day, but even in his last hour-and, literally, during his 
last minute. However, had he not resorted to this fantasy, the 

492 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
work itself would have been nonexistent-the most realistic and 
verisimilar of all his writings. 
CHAPTER I 
1 
Wuo WAs I AND WHo WAs SuE ? 
. NOW, AS LONG AS she is here-everything is still all 
right ; I come up and look at her every minute ; but tomorrow she 
will be carried away-and how shall I remain alone ? Now she is on 
a table in the hall-two card tables were put together-while the 
coffin will be here tomorrow, a white one-white "gros-de-Naples."­
However, this is not the point. . . .  I keep walking, and I want 
to explain it to myself. I have already kept walking for six hours, 
yet I am still unable to collect my thoughts into one focus. The 
point is that I keep walking, walking, walking . . . .  This is how it 
transpired. I will simply relate it in the order it happened. (Order I )  
Gentlemen, I am far from being a litterateur, and you can see it ; 
let it be so, but I shall relate it as I understand it myself. Therein 
is my whole horror-that I comprehend everything : 
If you wish to know, that is, if I should start from the 
beginning, she simply called on me then to pawn some articles 
in order to pay for an "ad" in The Voice-to the effect that So­
and-so, a governess, was· prepared to accept an out-of-town posi­
tion and aiso to give lessons at private residences, etc. This was 
in the very beginning and, of course, I did not distinguish her 
from the others : she came like the rest-well, and so forth. Later, 
I began to distinguish. She was so lean, fair-medium tall in size ; 
with me she was always rather clumsy, abashed (I believe she 
was the same with all strangers and, of course, to her I was just 
like any other, that is, considered not as a pawnbroker but a man). 
As soon as she would get the money she would turn around and 
go away. And she always kept silent. Others would argue, beg, 
bargain to get more ; this one-no ; what she would get . . . It 
seems, I am all confused . . . .  Yes-first of all, I was impressed 
by her ornaments : lilver, gilded earrings, some miserable locket 
-twenty-kopeck articles. She herself knew that their value was 
little, but from the expression on her face I saw that to her they 
were precious and, in fact, these were all that was left by her 
father and mother-this I learned later. Only once did I permit 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
493 
myself to smirk at her things. That is, you see, this I never permit 
myself in my dealings with the public ; with the public I maintain 
a gentleman's tone : few words-polite and strict. "Strict, strict, 
strict." But once, unexpectedly, she ventured to bring some rem­
nants (literally so) of a hare-mantelet-and I couldn't restrain 
myself, and suddenly I uttered something on the order of a witti­
cism ! Heavens ! How she flared up ! Her blue, big, pensive eyes­
how inflamed they grew I But she didn't utter a single word ; she 
took her "remnants" and walked out. It was just then that I 
noticed her especially for the first time, and I thought about her 
something of this kind-that is, something of a special kind. Yes, 
I recall also another impression-that is, if you please, the main 
impression, the synthesis of everything : specifically that she was 
awfully young, as if she were fourteen, whereas at that time she 
was already almost sixteen-only three months youhger than that. 
However, it isn't this that I meant to say : the synthesis lay not 
in this at all. Next day she came again. Later I found out that she 
had been at Dobronravov's and Moser's with that mantelet, but 
they accept nothlᆑtg Lut golu ; they even refused to talk. But once 
I took a cameo from her (a pretty miserable one) ,  and thereupon, 
having thought the matter over, I felt surprised : I, too, accept 
nothing but gold and silver, yet I allowed her to pawn a cameo. 
This, then, was my !>econd thought about her-this I remember, very 
clearly and distinctly. 
This time-that is, after Moser-she brought an amber cigar­
holder, a thing so-so, amateurish, but to us, again, it was worth 
nothing because we're interested only in gold. Because she came 
after yesterday's refusal, I received her sternly. :Vly sternness 
is dryness. However, when handing her t\';o rubles, I f'' uld not 
restrain myself and told her, as it were, with some irritatil'!l : "This 
is only for you, and l\J oser would not accept such an article from 
you." The words "for you"-I emphasized particularly , and pre­
cisely in a rcrtain sense. I was angry. Again, she flushed upon 
hearing this "for you" ; she didn't say anything ; she didn't throw 
the money back ; she took it-well, that's poverty ! But how she 
flared up ! I understood that I had stung her. When she had left, 
suddenly I asked myself : "Is it possible that this triumph over 
her costs me two rubles ?-Hee, bee, bee ! "  I specifically recall 
repeating this question twice : "Is it worth it? Is it worth it ?'' 
·And, laughingly, I answered this question to myself in the affi· rna-
tive. I was quite amused at the time. But t1. j wasn't an evil feel­
ing ; it was deliberate, intentional : I meant to test her because 
suddenly certain thoughts in connection with her began to rove 

494 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
through my mind. This was my third special thought about her . 
. . . Well, this was the beginning of everything. Of course, 
at once I sought to find out indirectly all circumstances, and I 
awaited her visit with particular impatience. For I had a presenti­
ment that she would come soon. When she came, I started an amiable 
and most polite conversation. I am not badly brought up and I 
have manners. Hm I It was then that I guessed that she was kind 
and meek. The good and meek ones do not resist long, and though 
they do not readily reveal themselves, nevertheless they are abso­
lutely unable to evade a conversation : they give curt answers, but 
still they answer, and the further-the more, only don't get tired 
yourself, if there is anything you need from them. Naturally, at 
that time she told me nothing. It was later that I found out about 
The Voice and about everything. In these days she went to the limit 
in her advertising campaign-at first, naturally, in a presumptuous 
tone : "Governess, ready to accept out-of-town position. Offers to 
be mailed in sealed envelopes."-And later : "Willing to do anything 
-teach, act as companion, take care of the household, nurse a 
sick lady ; able to sew," etc.-old stuff l Of course, all these ads 
were full of variations, but at length, when she had reached the 
point of despair, the ad read : "Without salary-for food." No, she 
couldn't find a position l Then I decided to test her for the last 
time. Suddenly I took that date's issue of The Voice and showed 
her an ad : "Young person·; fatherless and motherless orphan ; de­
sires position as governess of minor children ; may be useful 
m 
household." 
"You see, this person placed her ad in the morning, and in 
the evening she will find a position without fail. This is how one 
should advertise I " 
Once more she flared up ; again her eyes grew inflamed ; she 
turned around and forthwith walked out. This pleased me very 
much. However, by that time I was certain of everything, and I 
was not afraid : no one was going to accept cigarette-holders. Mean­
while, she had even disposed of these. To be sure : two days later 
she came-so pale, so agitated : I guessed that something must have 
happened at home, and something had happened. In a minute I shall 
explain what actually happened, but now I wish merely to recall 
how suddenly I assumed airs and how I grew in her opinion. All 
of a sudden I concei..red this intention. The point is that she brought 
that holy image (she took the resolution to bring it) . . .  Oh, but 
listen l Listen to me I Now it begins, because all along I keep 
faltering . . . .  The point "is that now I want to recall everything, 
every detail, every wee trait. All along I am endeavoring to collect 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
495 
my thoughts into a focus-and I can't, and now these tiny traits, 
these little traits . . .  
The image of the l\Iother of God. The Mother of God with 
the Infant-a domestic, ancient family image with a silver gilded 
trimming. ·Cost ?-Well, about six rubles. I see-she treasures the 
image ; she pawns the whole image without removing the trimming. 
I say to her : "Would be better to take off the trimming, and take 
back the image because, somehow, you know, nevertheless it's an 
image." 
"Is this prohibited to you ?" 
"No, not that it is prohibited, but so . . .  perhaps, you your-
self 
" 
"Well, remove it." 
"You know, I am not going to remove it ; instead, I shall place 
it over there-in the image case"-1 said, after deliberation-"along 
with the other images, under the image lamp''-ever since I had 
opened my pawnshop, the image lamp has been kept lit-"and simply 
pay ten rubles." 
"I don't neeu ten rublt-:-;. Give me f1ve. I'll redeem it without 
fail." 
"And you don't want ten ? The image is worth it"-I added, 
again noticing u flash in her eyes. She kept silent. I brought her 
five rubles. 
"Don't think ill of me. 1 myself have been in such straits, 
even in worse ones, and if today you lind me engaged in this kind 
of occupation . . .  this is after everything I have endured . . . .  
" 
"You are avenging society ? Yrs ?"-she unexprctedly inter­
rupted me with a rather caustic smile in which, however, there 
was much innocence (I mean-indifference, Ⴞtcause at t :  lt time 
most decidedly she did not distinguish me from others, ,o that 
she said it almost inoffensively) .-Ah ! -I said to myself-this is the 
kind you are : character manifests itself-ont of the new urientation. 
"You see"-1 promptly remarked, half-jeo;tingly, half-mys­
teriously-"! am part of that part of the whole which seeks to 
do evil and does good . . . .  
" 
Quickly and with great curiosity-in which, howev"'r, there 
was much that was childish-she glanced at me. 
"Wait . . .  What is this thought ? Whence is it ?-I have heard 
it somewhere . . .  
" 
"Don't ransack your brain : in these words Mephistoph··les 
introduces himself to Faust. Have you reao .7aust ?" 
"Not . . .  not attentively." 
"In other words-you haven't read it all. You should read 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
it. However, again I see a sarcastic twist of your lips. Please do 
not suspect in me so little taste that I am trying to veil my role 
of pawnbroker by introducing myself as a 1\fephisto. A pawnbroker 
remains a pawnbroker. We know it." 
"Somehow, you are strange . . .  I didn't mean at all to tell 
you anything . . .  
" 
She meant to say : "I didn't expect that you would be an 
educated man." But she didn't say it ; however, I knew that this 
was her thought. I gratified her immensely. 
"You see"-I observed-"in every profession one may be doing 
good things. Of course, I am not referring to myself : let's admit 
that I am doing nothing but evil things but . . .  
" 
"Of course, in every station in life one may be doing good" 
-said she, looking at me with a quick and penetrating glance. 
"Exactly-in every station"-she added suddenly. 
Oh, I remember-1 remember all these moments ! And I wish 
to add that when youth, dear youth, wants to utter something clever 
and penetrating, suddenly, all too sincerely and naively it betrays 
by the expression of its face that thought, "you see, I am now 
telling you something clever and penetrating," and not from vain­
glory, as we ; but one perceives that youth itself treasures all this 
very highly and believes and respects it, convinced that you, too, 
respect it even as itself. Oh, sincerity ! This is how they conquer ! 
And in her everything was so charming ! 
I remember. I forget nothing ! When she left, at once I 
made up my mind. That same day I embarked upon my fmal 
investigations and I learned all the rest of her current "ins and 
outs" ; all her former secrets I already knew through Lukeria, who 
was then their servant and whom, several days before, I had bribed. 
These "ins and outs" were so drradful that I fail to understand 
how she could have managed to laugh, as just now, and to take an 
interest in the words of Mephistopheles, when she herself was fac­
ing such a horror. But-that's youth ! It is precisely this that I 
then thought about her with pride and gladness, since here there 
was also magnanimity : "See, I am on the brink of perdition, but 
still Goethe's great words are shining ! "  Youth is always-at least, 
a bit-magnanimous, be it even in a crooked direction. That is, I 
am speaking about her, about her alone. And the main thing-even 
then I was looking at her as if mine, and I didn't doubt my power. 
Do you know, this is an awfully sensual thought when one no 
longer doubts ? 
But what is the matter with me ? If I go on this way, I shall 
never collect everything into one focus. Let's hurry, let's hurry !­
This is not the point at all. Oh, God I 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
497 
2 
MARITAL PROPOSAL 
I shall explain in a few words the "ins and outs" which I 
learned about her : her father and mother had died long ago, three 
years before that, and she had to stay with disorderly aunts. It is not 
enough to call them disorderly : one aunt, a widow, with a large 
family-six children, one much younger than the others ; the other 
aunt, an old maid, and bad. Both bad. Her father was a functionary, 
a former scribe ; he was but a personal, and not a hereditary, noble­
man. Briefly-everything suited me. I came, as it were, from a higher 
plane : anyhow, a retired captain of a brilliant regiment, a hereditary 
nobleman, independent, and so forth-and, as for the pawnshop, 
the aunts could regard Lhis with nothing but respect. At her aunts' 
she had been kept a <>lave for three years ; nevertheless, she managed 
to pass some kind of examination, snatching the time for this, 
despite the merCII.:s:. Jaily .uil ;-and this certainly meant some­
thing : it was evidence of her longing for the sublime and noble I 
Why did I want lo marry her ?-However, I don't give a hoot about 
myself ;  this comes later . . . .  And is this the point ?-She gave 
lessons to her aunt's ._hildren ; she sewed-at the end not only under­
wear-and she waslfed the floor, and her with a bad chest I In plain 
language-they even beat her and used to reproach her for every 
piece of bread. At length they sought to sell her. Pshaw ! -I am 
omitting the filthy details ! Later she told me everything in detail. 
All this had been observed during a whole year by a fat shopkeeper 
-not an ordinary shopkeeper, but the owner •.f two groct• · stores. 
He had already buried two wives and was on the lookc. . , for a 
third one, and his choice fell on her : "She is gentle"-said he-"she 
grew up in poverty, and I will marry her for my orpl.J.ns." It is 
true-he did have orphans. He started courting her and began to 
negotiate with the aunts. Besides-he was a man of fifty. She was 
horror-stricken. It was at this juncture that she began to frequent 
me in order to pay for her ads in The Voice. Finally, she asked that 
her aunts grant her a wee bit of a respite to think the matter over. 
This wee bit she was gramed, but only one ; she was refused the 
second one. They nagged and nagged her : "We don't know what 
·we shall be eating ourselves-even without an extra mouth ' ., I 
was already aware of all this, and that c. .
.
 '-after the morning 
incident-! had made up my mind. In the evening the shopkeeper 
called on her ; he brought a pound of candies from his store, at 
fi.fty kopecks. She was sitting with him, and I called Lukeria out 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
of the kitchen and told her to go back and to whisper to her that 
I was waiting at the gate, and that I wished to tell her something 
without any delay. I was pleased with myself. And, generally, all 
that day I was awfully content. 
Right there at the gate, in the presence of Lukeria, much to 
her amazement-she was amazed by the fact itself that I had called 
her out-I explained to her that I would deem it a happiness and 
an honor . . .  Secondly, that she should not be surprised at my 
manner-that this was taking place at the gate : "I am a straight­
forward man"-said I-"and I have studied the circumstances of 
the case." And I wasn't lying that I was straightforward. Oh, hang 
it I And I spoke not only politely-that is, showing that I was a 
man of good manners-but also with originality-and this is the 
essential thing. Well, is it a sin to be admitting this ? I wish to 
judge myself and I am so judging. I must speak pro and con, and 
this is what I am doing. Even later I was recalling the incident 
with delight, although this was silly. Straightway, without fluttering, 
I announced, first, that I was a man of no great talent, not too 
clever, perhaps even not very kind-a rather cheap egotist (I re­
member this expression : I devised it on my way to her, and I 
was pleased with it) , and that it was quite possible that I had 
many unpleasant qualities also in other respects. All this was 
uttered with some sort of pride-well, you know how such things 
are said. 
It stands to reason that I had enough taste-after having 
nobly announced my shortcomings-not to embark upon the enu­
meration of my merits : 11 As against this"-as people say-"I have 
this, that and the other to my credit." I could see that she was still 
terribly afraid, but I didn't soft-pedal anything ; moreover, seeing 
that she was afraid, I deliberately strengthened my statements : I 
told her directly that she would have enough to eat, but as for 
gowns, theatres, balls-there would be nothing of that, unless in 
some future time when my aim would have been attained. Decidedly 
this stern tone fascinated me. I added-and this as much en passant 
as possible-that I had chosen this occupation, meaning the pawn­
shop, because I had a certain goal-there was, so to say, a particular 
circumstance . . . .  But I had the right to speak this way : I actually 
did have a goal, and there was a circumstance. Wait, gentlemen : 
I was the first to ha௕ ࢣ that pawnshop all my life but, substantially 
-even though it is silly to speak to oneself in mysterious phrases 
-I was "avenging society"-verily, verily so ! So that her morning 
witticism about my "avehging" was unjustified. You see, had I 
directly told her in so many words : "Yes, I am avenging society," 
she would have burst into laughter, as in the morning, and the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
499 
thing would, in fact, have appeared amusing. Well, but through an 
indirect hint, by uttering a mysterious phrase, it proved possible 
to trick the imagination. Besides, by that time I was already afraid 
of nothing ; I knew that the stout shopkeeper was in any event 
more repulsive to her than I and that, standing there at the gate, 
I would appear to her as her liberator. Indeeri. this I did under­
stand. Oh, man understands villainies particularly well ! But were 
these villainies ? How can a man be judged in a situation such as 
this ? Didn't I already love her then ? 
Wait : of course, then I didn't mention to her even a word 
about benefaction ; on the contrary, oh, on the contrary : "It is /" 
-I implied, as it were-"who is overwhelmed with benefits-not 
you." So that I even expressed this specifically in words-couldn't 
restrain myself-and, perhaps, it came out stupidly, because I noticed 
a fleeting wrinkle in her brow. But, on the whole, I decidedly won. 
Wait, if one is to recall all this filth, I shall also mention the last 
swinishness. I was standing there, and the thought occurred to me : 
you are tall, wPll-built, good-mannered and, finally-speaking with­
out swagger-you are handsome. This is what flashed through my 
mind. 
Naturally, then and there, at the gate, she said ''Yes" to me. 
But 
. .
. I must add · right there, at the gate, she pondered for 
a long while before ௖:1ying "Yes." She grew SC' pensive, so pensive, 
that I was ready to ask her : "Now, what's your answer ?" In truth, 
I could not restrain myself, and actually asked her with a little 
ostentation in the tone-"ௗow, what's your answer ?" 
"Wait, I'm thinking." 
And so serious was her dear little face, so serious tltat even 
then I could have read I 
.
. . And-imagin..: :: felt bur• 
"Is it 
possible"-as I asked myself-"that she is choosing between !le and 
that shopkeeper ?" Oh, then I did not yet comprehend ! Then I 
understood nothing-nothing at ali i Not until today ha"l! I under­
stood ! 
I remember, Lukeria came running after me, when I had left ; 
she stopped me in the street, and hurriedly she said : "God will 
reward you, sir, for sheltering our dear girl ! Only, don't tell her 
that-she is so proud ! "  
Well, proud ! I am fond of the proud ones myself. The proud 
ones are particularly beautiful when . . .  when yo.u no longer doubt 
· your power over them.-Eh ? Oh, mean, rnaladro1t man ! Oh, Pow 
pleased I was ! You know when she stood t. re, at the gate, deep 
in thought about answering "yes" to me, and I kept wondering­
do you know that she may have been pondering over this thought : 
"lf it is misfortune there and here, wouldn't it be better to choose 

sao 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
directly the worst, that is, the shopkeeper-let him, in a drunken 
fit, beat me to death I " Eh ? What do you think ?-Could such a 
thought have occurred to her ? 
But even now I don't understand ; even now I understand 
nothing I Just a moment ago I said that this thought may have 
occurred to her-to choose between two misfortunes, the worst one 
-meaning the shopkeeper. But who of the two was worse to her 
at that time-I or the shopkeeper?-The shopkeeper or the pawn­
broker reciting Goethe ? This is still a question I What question ?­
Even this I don't understand : the answer lies on the table, and 
yet I say-"question" I Well, I don't give a rap about myself I I 
am not the point at all . . . .  By the way, what is it to me now 
whether I am the point or not ? This, to be sure, I can't settle at all. 
I had better go to bed. I have a headache. 
3 
THE Nom.EsT oF MEN-BuT I DoN'T BELIEVE IT MvsELF 
Couldn't fall asleep. How could I ?-Something raps in my 
head, like a pulse. Wish I could master all this-all this filth. Oh, 
what filth ! Out of what filth I extricated her at that time ! Cer­
tainly, she must have understood this, and should have prized my 
action ! I also liked certain thoughts-for instance, that I was forty­
one, and she-only sixteen. This captivated me-l mean, this feeling 
of inequality ; it is very delightful, very delightful. 
Now, for example, I i'ntended to arrange our wedding a l'an­
glaise-that is, no one but the two of us, save, perhaps, two witnesses 
of whom Lukeria would be one. And immediately after that-I was 
planning to take a train, say, for Moscow (where, by the way, I 
had some business to attend to) , stopping at a hotel for a fort­
night or so. She protested ; she would not permit it, and so I was 
compelled to pay my respects to the aunts, as her relatives from 
whom I had taken her. I gave in and the aunts got what was due 
them. I even gave these creatures a hundred rubles each and 
promised to give more-naturally without mentioning it to her, in 
order not to sadden her with the meanness of the mis-en-scime. The 
aunts immediately became as sweet as honey. 
There also was an argument about the trousseau : she had 
nothing-almost literally so-but she didn't insist on anything. How­
ever, I succeeded in proving to her that it wouldn't do for her to 
bring nothing, and so I bought her the trousseau-since who else 
would have bought it for her ? Well, I don't give a hoot about 
myself I Neverthele௘s, right then, I did convey to her some of my 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
SOJ 
ideas, so that at least she was aware of them. Perhaps I even hastened 
to do so. The main thing is that from the very beginning, much 
as she tried to restrain herself, she threw herself at me with love ; 
every evening when I came home she used to meet me at the door ; 
with delight she would tell me in her lisp (that charming lisp of 
innocence) about her whole childhood-her infancy, her parents' 
home, her father and mother. But at once I threw cold water on all 
this ecstasy. Precisely therein was my idea. I reacted to these 
transports with silence-benevolent, of course . . . .  Still, she soon 
perceived that I was an enigma. And it was the enigma that I 
principally aimed at ! Maybe it was for the purpose of proposing 
a riddle that I perpetrated this stupidity I First, sternness-it was 
in the spirit of sternness that I admitted her to my home. In a 
word, even though I was content, at that time I devised a whole 
system. Oh, it developed without any strain, of its own accord. 
Besides, it was impossible to have had things otherwise ; I was 
compelled to devise a system owing to a circumstance beyond my 
controL-What the devil do I slander myself for ! It was a genuine 
system. No, just h;,ten-if •• man is to be judged, his case should 
be laid bare. . . . Listen ! 
How should I start, since it is very difficult ? Just as soon 
as I began to exculpate myself-the difficulty arose. You see : youth, 
for instance, despbes money. So I started at once to stress the 
money question ; I pressrd that question. And l stressed it so strongly 
that she grew more and more silent-she would open her eyes wide, 
she would listen and look at me, and she would grow silent. D'you 
see, youth is magnanimous-! mean, good youth-magnanimous 
and impulsive, but it possesses little tolerance : the moment any­
thing goes against thf:'ir grain, they grow con௙emptuous. Bu• I sought 
breadth, I meant to inoculate breadth straight into her 1 "-lrt, into 
her heartfelt views-isn't it so ? I'll take a trivial example : how, 
Jet's say, could I have explained my pawnshop to a d 
. .  tractt'r such 
as hers ? Naturally, I did not directly bring up the subject because 
it might have appeared as though I was apologizing for the pawn­
shop : no, I acted, so to speak, with pride-I spoke almost tacitly. 
And I am a master at speaking tacitly : all my life I have spoken 
tacitly, and silently I have lived through whole tragedies. Oh, in­
deed, I was unhappy ! I was cast out by everybody, thrown out 
and forgotten. Not a soul, not a single soul knows it. And all of 
a sudden this sixteen-year-old one got possession of certain cktails 
about me-from mean people-imagining th௚ · she knew everything, 
whereas the secret Jay concealed in the breast of that man ! All 
the time I kept silent, especially with her-till yesterday. Why did 
I keep silent ?-Why ?-Just because I am a proud man. It was 

soz 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
my desire that she should learn of herself, without me, but not from 
the tales of mean people ; that she should herself guess everything 
about that man and that she should comprehend him I Admitting 
her to my house, I desired full respect. I wished that she should 
look at me worsh௛pfully for all my suffering-and I deserved it. Oh, 
I was always proud, and I always sought either everything or noth­
ing !-Because I'm not a half-way man where happiness is concerned, 
for this reason was I then compelled to act as I did : "Guess your­
self"-so to say-" and appraise ! "  Because you must concede that 
had I myself started explaining to her and prompting her, had I 
started wriggling and soliciting respect, it would have been the 
same as if I should be begging alms. . . . However . . . however, 
why do I speak about this ? 
Stupid, stupid, stupid and stupid ! Directly and mercilessly 
(I emphasize the fact that it was mercilessly) I explained to her 
in a few words that youth's magnanimity is delightful, but that 
it isn't worth a penny. Why isn't it worth anything ?-Because they 
acquire it cheaply ; it comes about without their having lived ; it 
is, so to speak, "the first impressions of existence" ; but let's look 
at you in process of work ! Cheap magnanimity is alway௜ easy ; 
even to give one's life-even this is cheap, since it is nothing but 
boiling blood, an over-abundance of energy, a passionate craving 
for beauty ! No, assume a deed of magnanimity which is difficult, 
tranquil-one about which nothing is heard, one without glamour, 
one entailing calumnies, in which there is much sacrifice and not 
a drop of glory in which you-radiant man-are represented to every­
body as a villain, whereas· you arc the most honest man on earth 
-now, just take a try at this sort of a deed ! Nay, you will refuse 
it ! And I-all my life I have been doing nothing but carrying out 
such a deed. At first she argued-how hotly ! -but later she left off 
speaking and, finally, she grew quite silent ; only, when listening, 
she would open her eyes awfully wide-such big, big eyes, so atten­
tive . . . .  And . . .  and, besides, suddenly I noticed a smile-a dis­
trustful, silent, wicked smile. :r\ow, it was with this smile that I 
admitted her to my house. It is also true that she could have gone 
nowhere else. . 
. . 
4 
ALL PI.ANS ;\NO PLANS 
Which one of us was it that started it first ? 
No one. It started by itself from the first step. I said that 
I admitted her to my home in the spirit of sternness. However, 
I softened that spirit from the very first step. Even when she was 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
SOJ 
still my fiancee I told her that she would be in charge of accepting 
articles in pawn and paying out money, and then she said nothing 
(please note this fact) .  :\loreover, she began to work, even with 
zeal. Well, of course, the apartment anrl furniture-all this remained 
as heretofore. The apartment-two rooms : one-a big hall with a 
balustrade, behind which the cash oftice is situated ; the other one 
-also a large room, our common room, which also serves as a 
bedroom. Mine is scanty furniture ; even at the aunts' it was better. 
My image case, with an image lamp, stands in the hall where the 
cash office is situated ; in my room there is a cupboard in which 
there are several books and my linen ; I have the key for it.-Well, 
the bed, tables, chairs. I told her, when she was still my fiancee, 
that one ruble, and no more, was appropriated for our subsistence 
-I mean. food-that is, for me, her anrl Lukt>ria, whom I had lured 
over into my service. "I need"-1 said-"thirty thousand in three 
years ; otherwise, one can't make money."' Shr did not object, but 
I myself increased the appropriation Ly thirty kopeck,;. Same thing 
about the theatrf'. J told my fiancee that there would be no theatre, 
and yet I conceded the Lhea.re once a month, a nd in a decent way, 
too-in the orchestra. We went toget her, and we were there three 
times. We saw Pursuit of Happiness and Singing Birds-so I think. 
( Oh, I don't give a rap ! I don't give a rap ! ) \V e went there and 
returned home sileJJtly. Why is it that from the very beginning 
we kept silent ?-For, at first, there wrre no quarreb, and yet silence 
was maintained. I remember she kept looking at me stealthily, 
as it were. The moment I noticed this I made my silence still more 
persistent. True, it was I who had bren stressing silence-not she. 
On her part, once or twice there were outbursts when she would 
start kissing me ; since, however, these outl'Pi'>ts were u; 
· ,  patho­
logical, hysterical character-whereas I needed solid hapr. .ess, to­
gether with her respect-! reacted coldly. And I was right : after 
every outburst, the next day there was a qt•arrel. 
Then again, there were no quarrels, but there was silence­
and an increasin?;ly arrogant air on her part. "Rebellion and inde­
pendence"-that was the thing ; only she didn't know how to go 
about it. Yes, this meek face grew more and more impertinent. 
Would you believe it ? I had become repugnant to her-this I learned. 
And the fact that she wouid lose her temper in outbursts could not 
be doubted. Well, for example, how could the fact be accounted for 
· that, having emerged from such f1lth and poverty, having wa-.hed 
floors, she started sniffing at our poverty ?-
ͭ ·  ou see, this was not 
poverty but economy, and only in certain things-even luxury, say, 
in linen in cleanness. Evrn in days gone by, I always used to 
Lelieve that cleanness in the husband appeals to thl' wife. How-

504 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
ever, she turned up her nose not at poverty but at my alleged 
stinginess in economy : "He pursues some purpose ; he makes a 
display of his firm character." Suddenly she herself renounced the 
theatre. And that mocking look became more and more pronounced. 
. . . And more and more intense silence on my part. 
Certainly I wouldn't try to exculpate myself ! -The main thing 
was that pawnshop. Permit me to say that I knew that a woman 
-a sixteen-year old woman-could not help but completely submit 
to a man. There is no originality in women ; this is an axiom. Even 
now, even now, to me this is an axiom ! What does it matter that 
she lies there, in the hall : truth is truth, and Mill himself can do 
nothing about it ! While a loving woman-oh, a loving woman deifies 
even the vices and villainies of her beloved one. He himself couldn't 
find such excuses for his villainies as she manages to frame. This 
is magnanimous but not original. Women were ruined solely through 
lack of originality. And what does it matter, I repeat, that you are 
pointing to that table over there ? Well, is the thing on the table 
original ? Oh ! -Oh I 
Now, listen : I was always convinced of her love. Even then, 
didn't she fling herself at my neck ?-This means that she loved­
more correctly, sought to love. Yes, thus it was : she wished-she 
sought-to love. And, what is most important, in this case there have 
been no villainies for which she should have been finding justifica­
tion. You say "pawnbroker!'-everybody says it. And what of it ? 
This means that there must, indeed, have been reasons why a most 
magnanimous of all men became a pawnbroker. You see, gentlemen, 
there are ideas . . . that is, you see, if a certain idea be expressed 
in words, it would sound perfectly silly. One would be ashamed of 
himself. And why ?-For no reason whatsoever. Because we are all 
good-for-nothings ; we cannot tolerate truth-or just why, I don't 
know. I just said-"most magnanimous of all men." This sounds 
ridiculous, and yet this was so. But this is true-that is, the most 
truthful truth I Yes-at that time I had the right to provide for 
myself and to open the pawnshop : "You, people, you have renounced 
me ; you drove me away with contemptuous silence. You answered 
my passionate impulse toward you with an offense that will be felt 
by me all my life. Therefore, now I have the right to protect my­
self against you by a wall, to raise thirty thousand rubles and 
to finish my life somnrhere in the Crimea, on the Southern Shore, 
in the mountains and among vineyards, on my own estate bought 
with this thirty thousand, and-what's most important-far away 
from all of you, but with no anger against you, with an ideal in my 
soul, with a beloved woman next to my heart, with a family-should 
God bless me with one-helping the neighboring farmers." 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
sos 
Naturally, it is good that I am now saying this to myself, 
but what could be more ridiculous than if I should have then said 
all these things aloud ?-This is why there was proud silence ; this 
is why we were sitting without uttering a word. Because how much 
would she have understood ?-Sixteen years ! Early youth ! -Indeed, 
what could she have comprehended of my justifications, of my 
sufferings ? Here were straightforwardness, ignorance of life, cheap 
youthful convictions, chicken blindness of "beautiful hearts"-and 
the main thing, here was the pawnshop, and basta ! (was I a villain 
in the pawnshop-didn't she see how I acted and how I overcharged 
people ? ) .  Oh, how dreadful is truth on earth ! This charming one, 
this meek one, this celestial one-she was a tyrant, an intolerable 
tyrant of my soul, and a torturer ! I should calumniate myself if 
I did not tell this ! You think that I did not love her ? Who can 
say that I did not love her ? You see, there was irony here-the 
wicked irony of fate and nature ! We are damned ; generally, man's 
life is damned ! (l\'line in particular ! )  At present, I understand 
that here I did make some mistake ! -Somehow things developed 
here not as ,bey ::.hould ha . e. Everything was clear ; my plan was 
as clear as the sky. "Severe, proud and needing no moral consola­
tions by anyone ; suffering silently." Thus it really was : I didn't 
lie, I didn't ! "Later she herself will perceive that here was mag­
nanimity-only she proved unable to notice this ! -and the moment 
when some day she guesses this, her esteem will be ten times 
greater ; she will fall prostrate, worshipfully folding her hands." 
Such was the plan. But right there I forgot something, or failed 
to take something into consideration. I proved unable to do some 
one thing. But enough, enough ! . . .  What's finished is finished. 
Be bolder, man ! And be proud ! Thou art roo௝ guilty ! . 
Well, I will tell the truth ; I will not be afraid t· face the 
truth : she is guilty. She is guilty ! 
5 
THE MEEK ONE REDELS 
Quarrels started because of the fact that all of a sudden she 
decided to loan the mon(_y according to her ideas, to appraise the 
articles in excess of their value-and on two occasions she even 
deigned to start arguing with me on the subject. I did not :tgree 
with her. But at this juncture a captain's ͬ -tow happened to come 
into the picture. 
An old woman-a captain's widow-came with a locket, a 
.present from her late husband-well, of course, a souvenir. I gave 

so6 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
her thirty rubles. She started lamenting and begging that the article 
be preserved-why, of course, we would preserve it. Well, briefly, 
all of a sudden-some five days later-she came to exchange the 
locket for a bracelet which was not worth even eight rubles. 
Naturally, I refused. Probably she must have then guessed some­
thing by the expression in my wife's eyes, and so she came again 
in my absence, and my wife exchanged the locket. 
Having learned this that same day, I started talking mildly, 
but firmly and reasonably. She was sitting on the bed, with her 
eyes fixed on the floor and her right toe striking against the rug 
(her gesture) ; a wicked smile was on her lips. Then, without in 
the least raising my voice, I calmly told her that the money was 
mine ; that I had the right to look at life through my eyes, and 
that, when I invited her to my house, I concealed nothing from her. 
Suddenly, she jumped to her feet , her body trembling all 
over-and what would you think ?-She started stamping her feet 
at me. This was a beast ; it was a fit ; it was a beast in a fit. I 
grew numb from amazement : never did I expect anything of the 
kind. But I didn't lose my head ; I didn't even move-and, again, 
in the former calm voice I told her directly that from then on I 
was depriving her of the right to participate in my business. Straight 
to my face, she burst into laughter and left the apartment. 
The point is that she had no right to go out of the apartment. 
Without me-nowhere ; such .was the stipulation when she was still 
my fiancee. In the evening she came back. On my part-not a word. 
Next morning she went out again, and also the following 
day. I locked the pawnshep and went to the aunts. At the time 
of the wedding I had severed my relations with them : ever since 
neither did I invite them nor did I call on them. It developed that 
she had not been to see them. They listened to me with curiosity, 
and they laughed at me-straight in my face : "This is what you 
deserve." But I expected their laughter. Right then and there I 
bribed the younger aunt, the maiden, with one hundred rubles, 
and I gave her twenty-five on account. Two days later she came 
to me : "Here"-she said-" an officer, a Lieutenant Efimovich-your 
former regimental mate-is involved." I was quite amazed. That 
Efimovich had caused me most of the trouble in the regiment, but­
being a shameless man-about a month ago, under the pretext of 
pawning something, ௞ had come to the pawnshop once, then a 
second time, and I recall that he began to laugh with my wife. 
Right then I went up and told him that, considering our former 
relations, he shouldn't dare- to call on me. However, I didn't even 
dream about any such thing, and I merely said to myself that he 
was an impudent fellow. Yet now the aunt informed me that my 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
wife had already had a rendezvous with him and that the whole 
affair was being handled by a former acquaintance of the aunts, 
Ulia Samsonovna, a widow-and, besides, a colonel's widow. "It is 
she" -she said-"whom your wife now frequents." 
I shall cut this picture short. This business cost me up to 
three hundred, but two days later it was so arranged that I should 
be standing in the next room, behind a closed door, and I should 
be listening to the first eye-to-eye rendezvous of my wife with 
Efimovich. However, in anticipation of this, on the eve there had 
occurred between us a brief-but, to me, a rather significant-scene. 
She had come home toward evening ; she sat down on the 
bed looking mockingly at me and stamping her little foot on the 
rug. While I was looking at her the thought flashed through my 
mind that all during the last month, or rather the last two weeks, 
her disposition was altogether not her own ; it may even have been 
called-an inverted disposition : here was a turbulent, aggressive­
! wouldn't say, shameless-but disorderly creature deliberately look­
ing for trouble. Meekness, however, stood in her way. When such 
a creature Legins tv revolt, even if she exceeds the limit, still one 
can see that she is merely coercing herself, that she is prompting 
herself, but that she herself is impotent to overcome her chastity 
and shame. This is why st1ch ones, at times, exceed all limits so 
that you refuse to believe your own observing mind. On the con­
trary, a soul accustomed to debauch will always soft-pedal things, 
will act more filthily but in an orderly and respectable manner, with 
a pretense of superiority. 
"And is it true that you were kicked out of the regiment 
because you were afraid to accept the challenge to a duel ?"-she 
asked suddenly, out of a clear sky, and }:., .. eyes glistt:IJ •d. 
"It is true : I was asked to leave the regiment in CL: .iequence 
of the decision of the officers' court, although before that I had 
already sent in my resignation." 
"Kicked out as a coward ?" 
"Yes, they decided I was a coward. But I refused the duel 
not because I was a coward, but because I refused to submit to 
their tyrannical decision to challenge a man when I mvself per­
ceived no offense. You should know"-1 couldn't refrain from stating 
at this point-"that to oppose such a tyranny by action and to 
accept all its consequences meant to manifest more courage than 
to participate in any kind of a duel." 
I couldn't restrain myself : by utteril. 
this phrase I started, 
as it were, exculpating myself, and this was all she needed ; what 
she needed was to humiliate me once more. She laughed angrily. 
"And is it true that after that you were loitering for three 
I 

soB 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
years in the streets of Petersburg, as a vagabond-begging for dimes 
and spending nights under billiard tables ?" 
"I also used to spend nights in the Sennaia, at the Viazemsky 
house. Yes, this is true : after the regiment there was much disgrace 
in my life, much degradation, but not moral degradation because 
even then I was the first to despise my actions. This was merely 
degradation of my will power and of my mind, caused by the despair 
over my situation. But this has passed." 
"Oh, now you are a personage-a financier I "  
That was a hint at the pawnshop. But by that time I was 
able to compose myself. I could see that she was craving for my 
humiliating explanations which I did not give. At this juncture a 
pawner rang the bell and I went to him, into the hall. An hour 
later, when unexpectedly she got dressed to leave the house, she 
stopped in front of me and said : 
"However, before the wedding you didn't tell me a thing 
about it ?" 
I did not answer, and she left. 
Thus, the next day I was standing in that room, behind the 
door, and I was listening : my fate was being decided, and I had 
a pistol in my pocket. She was dressed up. She sat by the table 
while Efimovich kept making wry faces. And what happened ?­
The thing (this I say to my honor) ,  exactly the thing which I 
dreaded and supposed-without, however, realizing that I was dread­
ing and supposing it. I don't know if I am making myself clear. 
The following happened. I was listening for a whole hour, 
and during that entire hour I was present at a contest between 
a most noble and lofty woman and an aristocratic, depraved, blunt 
creature with a cringing soul. And where-I was asking myself in 
a state of amazement-did this naive, this meek, this taciturn one 
learn all this ? The wittiest author of a beau-monde comedy could 
not have cont.:eived that scene of mockeries, naive laughter and 
sacred contempt of virtue for vice. And how much brilliancy was 
there in her words and casual expressions ; what witticisms in the 
perspicacious replies, what truth in her condemnation I And at the 
same time how much of an almost girlish naivete I She laughed to 
his face at his avowals of love, at his gestures and his proposals. 
Having come with a coarse approach to the task and anticipating 
no resistance, he suddenly sank. 
At first I was ready to suppose mere coquetry on her part­
"coquetry on the part of a creature, although depraved yet witty, 
to exact a higher bid." But no : truth began to shine as the sun, 
and it was impossible to doubt. It was from fancied and impulsive 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
509 
hatred against me that she, the inexperienced, could have ventured 
to arrange this rendezvous, but just as soon as it came to business, 
at once her eyes were opened. She was simply a creature tossing 
about with one aim in her mind-to insult me at any cost ; but, 
having embarked upon this kind of filth, she felt unable to stand 
the disorder. And was it she, the sinless and rhaste, cherishing an 
ideal, whom Efimovich, or any other of these beau-monde creatures, 
could have seduced ?-On the contrary, he merely made her laugh. 
The whole truth rose from her soul, and indignation evoked 
sarcasm from hrr heart. I repeat : this jester, at length, grew quite 
grave and sat there knitting his brow, scarcely answering her, so 
that I began to fear that he might venture to insult her from mean 
vengeance. And I repeat once more : to my honor, I listened to 
that scene almost without surprise-as if I had encountered some­
thing familiar. I went there as though for the purpose of encounter­
ing it. I had come believing nothing, no accusation, despite the 
fact that I took the pistol-this is the truth I And could I have 
imagined her rlifferent ? Indeed, for what did I love her ? Why did 
I esteem her ? Why did I marry her ?-Oh, it stands to reason that 
I became only too well convinced how she hated me ; still I also 
became convinced how chaste she was. Suddenly I opened the door, 
and thus cut the scrne short. Efimovich jumped to his feet. I took 
her by the hand and asked her to leave with me. Ready-witted, 
Efimovich burst into loud and rolling laughter : 
"Oh, I'll not argue against the sacred marital rights I Lead 
her away I Lead her away ! And, do you know"-he shouted to me 
as I was leaving-"although a gentleman should not be duelling 
with you, nevertheless out of respect for your lady, I ?rn at your 
service . . .  if, however, you'll risk it. . . .  
' -
"You hear ! "-I stopped her for a second at the th· eshold. 
After that not a word was said till we got home. I led her 
by the hand, and she did not resist. On the contr<Lry, she was 
awfully surprised-but only up to the time we reached the house. 
But when we arrived home, she seated herself on a chair and began 
to gaze at me. She was terribly pale ; although her lips creased 
themselves into a mocking smile, she was looking witJ-o a solemn 
and severe challenge and. during the first few minutes, I believe, 
she was seriously convinced that I would shoot her with the pistol. 
However, I silently took out the pistol and put it on the table. 
She looked at me and then at the pistol (Note : this pistn! was 
familiar to her. I had bought it and loal:.௟d it at the time itself 
when I had opened the pawnshop. It was then that I decided 
neither to keep enormous dogs nor to employ a robust footman, 

510 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
as Moser did. At my house visitors are admitted by the cook. How­
ever, people engaged in our kind of business cannot be deprived­
for any eventuality-of the means of self-protection. And so I bought 
a loaded pistol. The first days-after she had entered my house­
she took a lively interest in this pistol ; she asked questions about 
it, and I even explained to her the mechanism and its system. 
Moreover, once I persuaded her to shoot at a target. Note all this.) 
Paying no attention to her frightened air, I lay down on the bed, 
half-dressed. I was quite exhausted. It was about eleven o'clock. 
She remained sitting in the same place, without moving, for an­
other hour or so ; then she blew out the candle and she, too, lay 
down, without undressing, on the couch near the wall. It was the 
first time that she did not lie down beside me-please note this, too. 
6 
THE DREADFUL REMINISCENCE 
Now, this dreadful reminiscence . . . .  
I woke up in the morning-! believe, shortly after seven­
and the room was almost light. I awoke at once, with full con­
sciousness, and suddenly opened my eyes. She was standing by 
the table holding the pistol in her hand. She did not notice that 
I had awakened and that I was looking at her. And, suddenly, 
I saw that she started moving toward me with the pistol in her 
hand. Instantly I closed my eyes, pretending that I was sound 
asleep. 
· 
She came up to the bed and stood over me. I heard every­
thing, and though there ensued dead silence, I could hear that 
silence. At this moment there occurred a spasmodic movement, 
and all of a sudden, irresistibly, against my will I opened my eyes. 
She looked straight into my eyes, and the pistol was already at 
my temple. But we looked at each other for just a second. I forced 
myself to close my eyes again and that very moment I decided, 
with all the power of my will, that I wouldn't move and wouldn't 
open my eyes-no matter what might be awaiting me. 
In fact, it does happen that a man who is sound asleep sud­
denly opens his eyes, even raises his head for a second, looks around 
the room and, thereupon, after an instant, unconsciously places his 
head on the pillow and continues to sleep, without remembering 
anything. When, having met her gaze and felt the pistol at my 
temple, I instantly closed my eyes without moving-as a man sound 
asleep-and most decidedly she could have supposed that I was 
actually sleeping, that I saw nothing, all the more so as it would 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
51 1  
have been altogether incredible to close one's eyes at such a moment 
after having seen what I had beheld. 
Yes, incredible. Nevertheless she could have guessed the truth, 
and this suddenly-that same moment-flashed through my mind. 
Oh, what a whirl of thoughts and feelings rushed past through 
my brain in less than an instant, and long live the electricity of 
the human thought ! In this case (I felt) ,  if she had guessed the 
truth, known I was not sleeping, I should have crushed her by my 
readiness to accept death, and now her hand might waver. The 
former determination might be shattered by a new extraordinary 
impression. It is said that people standing on an altitude are drawn, 
as it were, of their own accord downward into the abyss. I believe 
that many suicides and murders have been committed for the sole 
reason that the pistol had been taken in the hand. This is also 
an abyss-a forty-five degree slope on which one has got to slip 
down, and one is irresistibly impelled to pull the trigger. However, 
the realization of the fact that I had !\een everything, that I know, 
and that I am silently awaiting death at her hand, might keep 
her back on the slope. 
Silence persisted, and suddenly I felt about my temple, at 
my hair, the cold touch of iron. You may ask : did I firmly hope 
that I would be savf'd ? I will answer you as before God : I had 
no hope-save, perhaps, one chance in a hunrired. Why, then, was 
I accepting death ? But I will ask you : what did I need life for 
after the pistol had been pointed at me by the creature beloved 
by me ? Besides, I knew with all the force of my being that, at 
that same moment, between us there was a struggle in progress, 
a dreadful combat for life or death, a duel involving that very 
coward of yesterday, kicked out for cow..:.ruice by h1௠ nates. I 
knew this and so did she-provided she had guessed the l; uth that 
I was not sleeping. 
Perhaps this did not happen ; perhaps I did not even think 
about these things at that time ; nevertheless t'his must have hap­
pened, though without thought, !'>ince, thereafter, every hour of my 
life, I have been doing nothing but thinking about this. 
But you will again ask me : why did I not save her from the 
crime ?-Oh, thousands of times I have asked myself this question 
-every time when, with a cold sweat on my spine, I have been 
recalling that second. However, thl'n my soul was in gloomy despair :  
I was perishing, I myself was perishing-so whom, then, cn௡.1ld I 
be saving ? And how do you know that .' had the intention of 
saving anyone ? Who knows what I could then have felt ? 
All the same, consciousness was astir ; seconds passed ; there 
was dead silence. She was still standing over me-and, suddenly, 

512 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
I shivered from hope I Quickly I opened my eyes. She was no 
longer in the room. I got up from my bed : I had conquered-and 
she was forever vanquished I 
I came out for tea. The samovar was always served in the 
front room, and she always poured the tea. Silently I took my 
seat at the table and accepted a glass of tea from her. After about 
five minutes I glanced at her. She looked dreadfully pale, even 
more pallid than yesterday, and she was looking at me. And sud­
denly-suddenly seeing that I was looking at her, she smiled wanly 
with pallid lips, with a timid question in her eyes. "This means 
that she is still doubting and asking herself: 'Does he or doesn't 
he know ? Did he or didn't he see ?' . . .  " Indifferently I turned my 
eyes away. After tea I locked the pawnshop, went to the market 
and bought an iron bed and a screen. Upon my return home, I 
ordered that the bed be placed in the hall, enclosing it with the 
screen. This was a bed for her but I didn't say a word to her. She 
understood without words, by reason of that very bed, that I "saw 
everything and knew £'verything,'' and that there could be no further 
doubt. For the night I left the pistol, as usual, on the table. When 
night came, she lay down silently on this new bed of hers : the 
marriage was dissolved-"vanquished but not forgiven." During the 
night she became delirious, and in the morning brain fever de­
veloped. For six weeks she was confined in bed. 
CHAPTER II 
1 
The Dream of Pride 
LUKERIA HAS just announced that she is not going to 
stay with me, and that just as soon as the mistress has been buried, 
she will quit. I have prayed on my knees for five minutes, but 
I meant to pray an hour ; but I keep thinking and thinking, and 
all thoughts are ill thoughts, and the headaches-what's the use 
of praying ?-Nothing but sin !-It is also strange that I don't want 
to sleep : in a deep, very deep sorrow, after the first strongest out­
bursts, one always wants to sleep. It is said that those condemned 
to death sleep soundly on the last night. Yes-so it should be ; this 
is in accord with nature, otherwise one couldn't endure it 
.
.
.
.
 
I lay down on the couch but didn't fall asleep . . . .  
. . . During the six weeks of her illness we nursed her day 
and night-1, Lukeria and a trained nurse from a hospital, whom 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
I had engaged. I wasn't counting the money, and I even wanted 
to spend it on her. I invited Doctor Schroeder and paid him ten 
rubles for every visit. After she regained consciousness, I began 
to come more rarely into her sight. However, why do I describe 
this ?-When she had completely recovered, quietly and silently she 
seated herself at a special table which I also bought for her then . 
. . . Yes, it is true-we kept absolutely silent ; that is, later we 
did begin to talk-but only about ordinary things. Of course, on 
my own part, I deliberately refrained from talking too much, but 
I distinctly observed that she, too, was glad, as it were, not to 
utter a superfluous word. This seemed to me quite natural on her 
part : "She is too upset and too vanquished"-! used to say to my­
self. "Of course, she must be given time to forget and to get accus­
tomed to things." And thus we kept silent, but every minute I 
kept silently preparing myself for the future. I thought that she 
was doing the same, and it intrigued me awfully to conjecture : 
"What, precisely, is she now thinking about ?" 
I will alf'o say : oh, of course, no one knows how much I 
have endured groaning over her during her sickness. But I groaned 
silently, suppressing the groans in my breast even from Lukeria. 
I couldn't imagine, I couldn't even suppose, that she might die 
without learning everything. However, when she was no longer in 
danger and her health began to come back-this I remember-! 
calmed down, and quickly so. Moreover, I decided to postpone our 
future as long as possible, leaving everything temporarily in its 
present state. Yes, at that time there occurred to me something 
strange and peculiar-! don't know how to call it otherwise : I grew 
triumphant, and the very knowledge of it provt'd sufticie'lt to me. 
Thus winter passed. Oh, I was content as Jh:·.er before- · 1d this, 
all winter. 
You see, in my life thPre was one dreadful external circum­
stance which, up to that time-i.e., up to the very moment of my 
wife's catastrophe-weighed heavily upon me CVLry day and every 
hour, namely-the loss of reputation and the retirement from the 
regiment. Briefly, it was a tyrannical injustice against me. True, 
my mates were not fond of me because of my difficult di௢::>osition, 
although it often happens that a thing which seems lofty and sacred 
to you, which is revered by you, for some reason makes the crowd 
of your associates laugh. Oh, I was never liked, not even in school. 
· Always and everywhere, I was disliked. E'•en Lukeria is un:tble 
to like me. And the incident in the regiment, .nough unquestionably 
it was accidental, was a consequence of the dislike for me. I am 
telling this because there is nothing more offensive and intolerable 
than to perish as a result of an accident which might not have 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
happened-as a result of an unfortunate conglomeration of circum­
stances which might have passed by as clouds. To an intelligent 
person this is humiliating. This was the incident. 
In a theatre, between the acts, I went to the refreshment 
room. Suddenly a hussar, A-v, entering the room, in the presence 
of all the officers and public assembled there, started loudly telling 
two of his mates, also hussars, that Captain Bezumtzev of our regi­
ment had just caused a scandal in the corridor, and that "he seemed 
to be drunk." The conversation died away and, besides, it was a 
mistake, since Captain Bezumtzev was not intoxicated and, strictly 
speaking, the scandal was not a scandal. The hussars began to talk 
about something else, and that was the end of it. However, the 
next day the story reached our regiment, and forthwith people 
started telling that 1 alone of all the regiment had been in the 
refreshment room and that when the hussar A-v made an impudent 
reference to Captain Bezumtzev, I did not come up to A-v and 
did not stop him with a reprimand. But why should I have ? If 
he had a grudge against Bezumtzev, this was their personal affair, 
and why should I have become embroiled in it ?-Meanwhile, the 
officers maintained that this was not a personal matter but one 
which also concerned the regiment, and since of all the officers 
of our regiment I was the only one present there, I thereby proved 
to all the officers and public assembled in the refreshment room 
that in our regiment there are officers who are not too touchy about 
their honor and that of their regiment. I could not agree with 
such a judgment. I was informed that I could remedy the situation 
should I at least now-even though belatedly-have a formal talk 
with A-v. I didn't want to do so and, since I was irritated, I 
refused with haughtiness. Thereupon I immediately sent my resig­
nation-and this is the whole story. I resigned-proud but with a 
shattered spirit. My will power and my mind grew weak. It so 
happened that at that time my sister's husband had squandered 
our modest fortune, including my share in it-a microscopic share, 
but I found myself in the street without a penny. I could have 
accepted private employment, but this I didn't do : after my brilliant 
uniform I found it impossible to take a position at some railroad. 
And so-if it's shame, let it be shame ; if it's disgrace-let it be 
disgrace ; if it's degradation-let it be degradation ; the worse, the 
better-this is what I chose. Then came three years of gloomy 
reminiscences, including the Viazemsky house. 
Some eighteen months ago a wealthy old woman, my god­
mother, died in Moscow, and unexpectedly she left me, among 
others, three thousand in her will. I thought the matter over and 
a t  once chose my fate. I decided to open a pawnshop, without 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
SIS 
asking people's forgiveness : money, a home and a new life away 
from the former reminiscences-such was my plan. ᆒevertheless 
my gloomy past and the reputation of my honor, lost forever , op­
pressed me every hour, every minute. But then I married. Was 
it by accident or not ?-I don't know. But, in admitting her to 
my house, I thought that I was admitting a friend : I needed a 
friend too badly. But I clearly perceived that the friend should 
be prepared, that a finishing touch should be added to her and 
that she should even be conquered. And could I have explained 
anything at once to this sixteen-year-old and prejudiced one ?-For 
instance, how could !-without the accidental help brought about 
by the dreadful catastrophe with the pistol-have made her believe 
that I was no coward, and that in the regiment I was unjustly 
accused of cowardice ? But the catastrophe came at the proper 
time. Having endured the pistol, I had avenged my whole gloomy 
past. And although no one has learned about this, nevertheles,. she 
learned it, and to me this was everything because she herself was 
everything to me-my whole hope for the future, in my dreams ! 
She was the only human Lung whom I had been building up for 
myself, and no one else was needed-and now she had learned every­
thing ; at least she found out that unjustifiably she had hastened 
to join my enemies. This thought delighted me. ᆓo longer, in her 
opinion, could I ha"ve remained a coward-maybe, just a queer man ; 
yet even this thought-after everything that happened-did not 
displeast me at all : queerness is no vice ; on the contrary, some­
times it even attracts women. In a word, I deliberately postponed 
the denouement : for the time being, that which did Lake place 
was quite enough for my peace, and it comprised many a picture, 
much material for my dreams. Therein is tᆔ·· nastiness-• ·. al I am 
a dreamer ; there was enough material for me, and, as ; , her, I 
reasoned that she could wait. 
Thus passed the whole winter, in ar:ticipation of something. 
I liked to look stealthily at her when <;he woulrl be sitting by her 
table. She was occupied with some work, mending linen, and in 
the evenings, at times, she read books which she took from my 
cupboard. The selection of the books in the cupboard must have 
borne witness in my favor. However, she went out hardly any­
where. Daily before dusk, after dinner, I took her out for a walk, 
for exercise, but not altogether silently as heretofore. I sought to 
pretend that we did not maintain silence but were conve:sing 
understandingly ; however, as stated befor, we did it in such a 
way as not to speak too much. I did it deliberately and, as to 
her, I thought she had to be "given time.'' Of course, it was strange 
that not once, almost tiJI the end of winter, did the thought occur 

516 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
to me that while I liked to look stealthily at her, never throughout 
the whole winter did I catch even a single glance of hers at me I 
I thought that this was timidity on her part. Besides, she looked 
so timidly meek, so exhausted after her illness. No, it was better 
to wait-and "suddenly, of her own accord, she will come up to 
thee . . . .  
" 
This thought irresistibly delighted me. I will add one thing : 
at times, as though deliberately, I excited myself and actually 
worked up my spirit and my mind to the point where, as it were, 
I began to feel offended by her. And thus it lasted for some time. 
But my hatred was never able to ripen and to strike root in my 
soul. Besides, I myself felt that this was merely a game. Even 
then, though I had dissolved the marriage, having bought the bed 
and the screen, never was I able to perceive in her a delinquent 
woman. And this not because I judged her crime lighlmindedly, 
but because I had a reason for forgiving her completely, from the 
very first day-even before I had bought the bed. In a word, this 
was queerness on my part, because morally I am stern. On the 
contrary, in my view she was so vanquished, so humbled, so crushed 
that at times I painfully pitied her, notwithstanding the fact that 
in the face of everything I was sometimes pleased with the idea 
of her humiliation. The idea of this inequality of ours pleased 
me . . . .  
That winter I purposely perpetrated several good deeds. I 
cancelled two debts and gave a poor woman some money without 
taking any pawn. I told my wife nothing about it, and I did this 
in such a way that she should not Jearn of it. But the woman, 
of her own accord, came to thank me almost on her knees. In this 
way the matter became known. I was under the impression that 
she learned with pleasure about the incident with the woman. 
But spring was approaching. It was already the middle of 
April ; the storm windows had been removed and the sun, in bright 
patches, began to light our taciturn rooms. But a shroud was hang­
ing before me, blinding my mind. That fatal, dreadful shroud ! How 
did it happen that all of a sudden it all dropped from my eyes, 
and I recovered my sight and grasped everything ? Was it by acci­
dent, or had the destined day come, or was it a ray of sun that 
kindled the thought and the guess in my blunted mind ?-No, it 
wasn't a thought or a guess ; it was a little vein, a tiny, almost 
atrophied vein ; it began to shiver and came to life, and it illumi­
nated my dulled soul and my diabolical pride. I then, as it were, 
jumped from my seat. Besi-des, it happened all of a sudden, unex­
pectedly. This happened toward the evening hour, around five 
o'clock, after dinner . . . .  

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
2 
SUDDENLY THE SHROUD FELL 
But first-two words. Even a month ago I observed in her a 
strange pensiveness, not silence but precisely pensiveness. This I 
also noticed. unexpectedly. She was sitting at work-her head bent 
over some sewing ; she did not see that I was looking at her. And, 
right then, I was suddenly struck by the fact that she had grown 
so thin, so lean ; that her face was so pale and her lips had become 
wl1ite ; all these combined, together with her pensiveness, struck 
me suddenly and extraordinarily. Even before that I had heard a 
little dry cough, especially at nighttime. Right away I got up and, 
without telling her anything, I went to summon Schroeder. 
Schroeder came the next day. Shr was quite surprised and 
kept looking now at Schroeder, now at mr. 
"Yes, I feel well"-said she, with an indeterminate smile. 
Schrorder did not examinf' her too attentively (these physi­
cians sometimes are haughttly negligent ) ,  and he merely told me 
in the other room that this was the after-effect of her illness and 
that, it now being spring, it would be a good idea to take her some­
where to the srashore or, if this were impossible, to go away for the 
summer to some country place. Jn a word, he said nothing except 
that she was weak-or somethin႖ of the sort. After Schroeder had 
left, suddenly she said again, looking at me with a very serious 
expression : 
"I feel well-quite well." 
However, after having said this, she suddenly bl•tshed-ap­
parently for shame. Apparrntly, this was slj;,ome. Oh, now I under­
stand : she was ashamed that I, still hrr husband, was ႗oncerned 
about her just as if I were a real husband. But then I did not under­
stand, attributing her blush to humility (႘hroud ! ) . 
And so, a month later, after four o'clock in the afternoon, 
in the month of April, on a bright sunny day, I was sitting at the 
cash desk checking some accounts. Suddenly I heard her, sitting 
in our room by the table and working, begin to sing gently, gently. 
This produced upon me an overwhelming impression which, even 
now, I cannot comprehend. Prior to that, I almost never heard 
her sing, save in the very first days after I had admitted her to 
roy house, when we still could be merry rond shoot at the 1 .trget 
with the pistol. At that time she still ha..: a rather strong and 
sonorous voice, which, though not true, was very agreeable and 
healthy. Now, however, her little song was weak-not exactly 
melancholy (this was some canzonet) ,  but in the voice there was 

5 18 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
something half-split, broken-as though the little voice was out 
of control-and the song itself was a sickly one. She sang in a 
lowered voice which, having risen, suddenly broke off-such a poor 
little voice and it broke off so pitifully ! She coughed, and there­
upon began to sing in a faint voice. . . 
. 
People may laugh at my agitation, but no one will ever under­
stand why I felt so troubled ! No, I was not yet sorry for her ; 
this was something altogether different. In the beginning-at least 
in the first few minutes-I was perplexed and terribly surprised ; 
it was an awful and strange surprise-pathological and almost spite­
ful : "She sings-and in my presence ! Did she forget about me ?" 
All upset, I remained motionless and then, suddenly, I got 
up, took my hat and walked out, as if unconscious. At least, I 
didn't know why and where T was going. Lukeria began to help 
me with mv overcoat. 
'·She is singing ?"-1 said to Lukeria automatically. She didn't 
understand me and looked at me still at a loss to comprehend the 
meaning of my quest ion. True, I was unintelligible. 
"Is it the first time she has been singing ?" 
"!\o, sometimes she does sing in your absence"-answered 
Lukeria. 
I remember everything. T descended the stairnt,;t•, got out in 
the street and went along without thinking whither I was going. 
I walked to the corner and .began to gaze-1 don't know in what 
direction. People passed by, pushed me, but I didn't feel it. I hailed 
a cabman and told him to drive me to the Police Bridge-God knows 
what for. After a while, however, I suddenly got out of the cab 
and gave the coachman twenty kopecks : 
"This is because I disturbed you"-1 told him, insensibly 
laughing at him, but in my heart some kind of ecstasy began to rise. 
I turned back home, and walked with ever more rapid strides. 
The half-split, poor, broken little note again began to ring in my 
soul. Something took my breath from me. The shroud was falling 
off my eyes ! If she started singing in my presence, this means 
that she forgot about me-this was clear and dreadful. It was the 
heart that sensed it. Yet ecstasy gleamed in my soul, overcoming 
fear. 
Oh, irony of fate ! -Indeed, all winter there was, and could 
have been nothing in rpy soul but this ecstasy ! But where was I 
all winter ? Was I in communion with my soul ?-I ran up thᆕ 
staircase, in a great hurry : I don't know whether I entered timidly 
or not. I only remember that the whole floor was undulating and 
I was drifting, as it were, downstream. I entered the room ; she 
was sitting in the same place sewing, her head bent down, but 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
she was no longer singing. Casually and indifferently she glanced 
at me, but it was not a glance-it was a mere gesture, an ordinary 
and indifferent gesture, as when somebody enters a room. 
Straightway I came up and, like a madman, I sat down on 
the next chair, quite close to her. Quickly she looked as though 
frightened. I took her hand, and I don't remember what I said to 
her-i.e., what I meant to say-because I even could not speak 
correctly. My voice broke down and wouldn't obey me. In fact, I 
didn't know what to say. I was merely out of breath. 
"Let's have a talk . . . .  You know . . .  say something I "-I 
babbled something stupid . . . .  Oh, well, could I think of reason ?-
She shivered and shook herself away from me in great fear, looking 
into my face. But, suddenly, her eyes expressed stern surprise. Yes, 
surprise-and stern surprise. She looked at me with big eyes. That 
sternness, that stern surprise, with (lne blow shattered me into 
pieces. "So you also are after love ?"-such was the question in that 
astonishment of hers, even though she remained silent. But I read 
everything, everything. Everything quivered in me, and I fell down 
at her feet. ::,he P• ul ll!Jtly jtunped to her feet, hut with extraordinary 
force I held her by both of her hands. 
And I fully realized my despair-oh, I understood it ! But 
would you believe that ecstasy was boiling in my heart so irresistibly 
that I thought I slwnld die. I kissed her feet in a state of rapture 
and happiness. Yes, happincss--infmite and boundless-and this, 
fully comprehending my hopeless despair !  I wept, I was uttering 
something, but I could not refrain from talking. Fear and astonish­
ment suddenly gave way in her to some anxious thought, some 
extraordinary question, and she was strangely-even wildly-look­
ing at me ; she sought to grasp something :1ͫ. quickly a:: possible, 
and she smiled. She felt awfully ashamed that I was k: ,sing her 
feet, and she tried to draw them away, but immediately I began 
to kiss that spot on the floor where her foot had been resting. She 
saw it and, unexpectedly, she started laughing from shame (you 
know how people laugh when they are ashamed) .  Then she was 
seized with an hysterical fit ; I saw her hands shudder-! wasn't 
thinking about this, but I kept mutlering that I loved her, that 
I would not get up : "Let me ki.'s your dress . . .  let me pray to 
you all my life . . . .  " I Lion't know, I don't remember. Suddenly, 
she broke into tears and began to be convulsed. There ensued a 
dreadful fit of hysterics. I had frightened hP.r. 
I carried her to the bed. When the l ࢢ was over, she sat up 
in the bed and, with a desperate air, she seized my hands, entreat­
ing me to calm down. "Please stop, don't torture yourself, calm 
-down ! "-and again she began to cry. All that evening I didn't leave 

520 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
her even for a moment. I kept telling her that I would take her 
to Boulogne for sea-bathing right away, in a fortnight ; that her 
little voice was so shaky ; that I just heard it ; that I would close 
the pawnshop and sell it to Dobronravov ; that a new life would 
begin, but the main thing-lloulogne, Boulogne ! She was listening 
to me, but all the time with apprehension. Her dread grew stronger 
and stronger. Yet to me this was not the important point ; the main 
point was that more and more irresistibly I longed to lie at her 
feet and to kiss the ground upon which her feet stood, and pray 
to her ; "and I shall ask nothing, nothing more from you"-1 kept 
repeating every minute.-"Don't answer anything ; don't notice me 
at all, and only permit me to look at you from the corner ! Convert 
me into a thing of yours, into a dog ! . . .  " She wept. 
"And I thought you would leave me so" -this suddenly and 
involuntarily burst out of her, so involuntarily that, perhaps, she 
didn't notice at all that she had said it. And yet, this was the 
most important, the most fatal, the most intelligible word of hers 
during that evening, and it slashed, as it were, my heart as a 
knife I It explained everything to me, !Jut so long as she was there, 
at my side, before my eyes, I was irresistibly hoping and was 
terribly happy. Oh, that evening I tired her out awfully, and I 
understood it, but I kept incessantly thinking that I would at once 
transform everything. Finally, late in the evening she became quite 
exhausted, and I persuaded her to go to sleep-and, promptly and 
soundly, she fell asleep. I was expecting that she would grow 
delirious, but there was but the slightest delirium. During the night 
I got up almost every minute ; quietly, in my slippers, I came to 
look at her. I wrung my hands over her, beholding the ill creature 
on this cheap little cot-this iron bed which I had bought for 
three rubles. I knelt before her, but I didn't dare to kiss her feet 
(without her will ! ) . I was on my knees and prayed God, but then 
again I jumped to my feet. Lukeria was gazing at me, and time 
and again she came out of the kitchen. I went to her and told her 
to go to bed, and that tomorrow "something altogether new'' would 
begin. 
And I believed in this blindly, insanely, awfully. Oh, ecstasy, 
ecstasy deluged me ! I was only waiting for tomorrow. What was 
most important-! did not believe in any calamity despite the 
symptoms of it. Reason had not yet returned to me completely, 
notwithstanding the fallen shroud, and it didn't return for a long, 
long time-oh, till today, till this very day l And how could it 
have returned then ? indeed; then she was still alive ; she was here 
before me, and !-before her : "Tomorrow she will wake up and 
I will tell her everything, and she will perceive everything." At the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
$2I 
time such was my way of reasoning, simple and clear-and ecstasy I 
The main thing was that journey to Boulogne. Somehow, I thought 
all the time that Boulogne was everything, that there was some­
thing final in Boulogne. "To Boulogne I To Boulogne I 
.
.
.
 " In­
sanely, I was waiting for the morning. 
3 
I UNDERSTAND Too CLEARLY 
And this was only several days ago-five days, only five days, 
last Tuesday ! No, no, if only she had waited just a little longer, 
I should have dispelled the darkness ! -And didn't she calm down ? 
For the next day she listened to me with a smile, despite the con­
fusion. . . . Most important of all was the fact that during all 
that time-all five days-there was confusion, or shame, in her. She 
was also afraid, very much afraid. I'm not going to argue ; I'm not 
going to contr႙rlict like a madman. "There was fear, but how 
could she not have ueen afraid ?"-Because it was so long that we 
had been estranged, separated one from the other, and suddenly 
all this . . . .  But J disregarded her fear : the new life was gleam­
ing ! . . . The truth, the unquestionable truth is that I did make 
a mistake. Just as we awoke the next day, th<t very morning ( this 
was on Wednesday) ,  suddenly I made a mistake : suddenly, I 
made her my friend. I hastened much too much, but confession 
was imperative-why more than confession ! I didn't conceal even 
that which all my life I hid even from myself. I told her frankly 
that all winter long J had been fully convinced of her lnve. I ex­
plained to her that the pawnshop was bu. ::. degradatir• 
of my 
will and my reason, a personal idea of self-flagellation .:nd self­
praising. I explained to her that then, in that refreshment room, 
I actually did get scared-owing to my dbposition, my suspicious­
ness : I was struck by the mis-en-scene, by the :efreshment room ; 
I was struck by the thought : how am I going to come forward ? 
Will it not be ridiculous ? . . .  I grew cowardly not over the duel, 
but over the thoug-ht that it would be I idiculous . . . .  And, later, 
I did not wish to admit this, and kept torturing everybody ; and 
it was for this that I had been torturing her, too, and that I 
married her in order to torture her for this. Generally, I spoke 
· mostly like a person in delirium. She herself took me by my hands 
and asked me to stop : "You are exaggerG .mg . . . you are tor­
turing yourself I "-and again there were tears, again almost fits I 
She kept entreating that I shouldn't be telling all these things, 
t:hat I shouldn't be reminiscing. 

522 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
I disregarded the entreaties, or I paid insufficient attention 
to them : Spring-Boulogne I Over there, there is sun, our new 
sun 1 -This is what I was telling her all the time I I would close 
the pawnshop, turning over the business to Dobronravov. Sud­
denly I suggested giving everything away to the poor, except the 
initial three thousand, inherited from my godmother, which we 
would expend for the journey to Boulogne ; and then, upon our 
return, we would start a new, working life. Thus it was decided 
·because she said nothing . . .  she merely smiled. And, it seems, 
she smiled more from sensitiveness, so as not to offend me. For 
I did see that I oppressed her : don't think that I am so stupid 
and so egoistic that I didn't see it. I saw everything to the last 
dot ; I saw and knew better than anyone : all my despair stood out 
clearly ! 
I told her everything about myself and about her. Also, about 
Lukeria. I told her that I wept. . . . Oh, I also changed the con­
versation ; I tried by all means not to remind her about certain 
things. She even grew animated once or twice-indeed, this I re­
member, I do l Why do you say that I looked but saw nothing ? 
Had only this not have occurred, everything would have been 
resurrected. Didn't she tell me-only two days ago, when the con­
versation turned to the topic of reading and what she had read 
that winter-didn't she recall with a laugh and tell me about that 
scene of Gil Bias with thႲ Archbishop of Granada. And what 
a childish, charming laugh that was I Just like the time when 
she was my fiancee (an instant ! an instant I ) . And how glad I 
was I However, I was awfully surprised-! mean, about the Arch­
bishop : thus she did possess so much serenity of spirit and so 
much happiness that she could laugh when she sat reading a mas­
terpiece that winter l This means that she was then beginning 
to be completely appeased ; that she believed I would leave her 
so. "And I thought you would leave me so"-this is what she had 
uttered on Tuesday l Oh, this was the thought of a ten-year-old 
girl ! And, indeed, she believed, actually believed, that everything 
would remain so : she by her table, 1-at mine ; thus the both of 
us, till the age of sixty. And suddenly-here I come forward, I, the 
husband, and a husband needs love I Oh, what a misunderstanding I 
Oh, this blindness of mine l 
It was also a mistake that I was looking at her with transport : 
I should have restrained myself, because ecstasy was frightening. 
But I did restrain myself, since no longer did I kiss her feet. Not 
once did I make it appear .that I was a husband-this never even 
came to my mind-I merely worshipped I still, it was impossible 
to keep absolutely silent ! It was impossible not to talk at all ! 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
SZJ 
Suddenly I told her that I was delighted with her conversation, 
and that I considered her incomparably better educated and more 
intelligent than myself. She blushed deeply and, with embarrass­
ment, she said that I was exaggerating. At this juncture, being 
unable to restrain myself, I stupidly told her with what delight, 
standing there behind the door, I had listenrd to her duel-the 
duel of innocence-with that creature, and how I enjoyed her in­
tellect, the brilliancy of her, coupled with such childish naivete. 
She shivered all over, as it were, again muttering something to 
the effect that I Wll,s exaggerating, but suddenly her whole face 
darkened ; she covered it with her hands and broke into tears . 
. . . No longer could I restrain myself :  again I fell at her feet, 
kissing them-and, once more, she had a fit even as on Tuesday. 
This occurred yesterday evening-and this morning . . . 
In the morning ? Onႚ madman, this was today, this morning, 
only recently, only recently ! 
Please listen and thinl : when only a few hours ago we met 
at tea with thE' ႛamovar ort the table (after yesterday's fit) she 
even astonished me by her coanposure-thus it was ! And I trembled 
all night from fear over yestႜrday's incident. Suddenly she came 
up to me, stood before me ar\d, crossing her hands (so recently, 
so recently) ,  she started tellibg me that she was a delinquent 
woman ; that she kn('W this ; that her crime weighed upon her all 
winter, that it also tormented her at present . . .  that she valued 
highly my magnanimity .
. . .  "I will be your faithful wife, I will 
respect you . . . .  
" Then I jumped to my feet and, like a lunatic, 
embraced her ! I kissed and kissed her face, her lips, like a husband 
-the first time after a long estrangement. And why d!i I leave 
her-for two hours only . . .  our foreign pa:.sports. 
. 
. 
. 
• '1, God I 
Had I returned only five minutes earlier ! . . .  And then ti,IS crowd 
at our gate . . . those looks at me . . . Oh, Lord ! 
Lukeria says (oh, now, under no circumstance wJll I let her 
go ; she knows everything, she stayed with us -.II winter ; she will 
be relating everything to me)-she says that after I left the house, 
and only about twenty minutes before I came back, she unex­
pectedly went to the mistress in our room, to ask her ah;ut some­
thing-! don't remember what-and she saw that her ikon (that 
same image of the Mother of God) had been taken out of the 
image case, and was standing on the table before the mistress, 
and that it was her impression that she, •he mistress, had l.>een 
just praying before it. "What is it, madam . "-"Nothing, Lukeria, 
you can go i-Wait, Lukeria"-she went and kissed her.-"Are you 
happy, madam ?"-asked Lukeria.-"Yes, Lukeria."-"L.ong ago my 
master should have come to you and asked your forg1veness .
.
•
•
 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
Thank God that you have made up."-"All right, Lukeria"-she 
said-"go now," and she smiled, but strangely somehow-so strangely 
that some ten minutes later Lukeria went back to look at her : 
"She was standing near the wall, quite close to the window, pressing 
her hand against the wall and her head against her hand. She 
stood there musing. And so deep in her thoughts was she that 
she didn't hear me and notice that I stood looking at her from 
the other room. I saw that she was smiling, as it were ; she stood 
there pondering and smiling. I looked at her, quietly turned around 
and walked out wondering. Presently I heard the window being 
opened. Immediately I returned and said to her : 'It is cool out­
side, madam ; beware of catching a cold.ႝ Suddenly, I saw that 
she got up on the window sill, standing upright at the open window, 
with her back turned to me, holding the ikon in her hands. My 
heart sank, and I cried, 'Madam ! Mad.am I '  She heard me, made 
a move to turn toward me but didn't turn, took a step, pressing 
the image to her breast-and leaped out of the window ! "  
I remember only that when I entered the gate she was still 
warm. The main thing-they were all gazing at me. First, they 
were shouting, but then they all grew silent and gave way before 
me . . .  and she lay with the ikon. I dimly recall that I approached 
and kept looking at ht:r for a long while. They all gathered around 
me and were telling me something. Lukeria was there but I didn't 
see her. She said she spoke to me. I only remember that commoner : 
he kept shouting at me : "A handful of blood I "-pointing to blood 
on the stone. I believe, I touched the blood with my finger and 
stained it ; fvr I looked at · my finger (this I remember) ,  while he 
kept saying : "A handful, a handful ! "  
"And what's that about a handful ?"-I cried at the pitch 
of my voice and, so they say, I lifted my arms and started at 
him . . . .  
Oh, how odd, how odd ! Misunderstanding ! It's untrue I Im­
possible ! . . .  
4 
I WAs ONLY FIVE MINUTES LATE 
Isn't this so ? Is this plausible ? Can it be said that it is 
possible ? Why ?-For lf'hat reason did this woman die ? 
Oh, believe me, I understand . . . .  Yet, for what reason did 
she die ?-This is still a question. Did she become afraid of my 
love and did she seriously ·ask herself whether or not to accept 
it, and, being unable to bear this question, did she prefer to die ? 
I know, I know-there's no point in cracking the brain : she gave 

TIE DIARY OF A WRITER 
too many promises, she grew frightened lest she wouldn't be able 
to keep them-that's clear. Here there are several circumstances 
which are perfectly horrible. 
Because what did she die for ? This question still stands 
lllanswered. This question hammers, hammers away at my brain. 
And I would have left her so if she should have wished that it 
remain so. She didn't believe it-that's it I No-no, I am lying­
it's not at all this. Simply because with me it had to be honest : 
if it were love, it had to be full love-and not the kind of love she 
would be meting out to the shopkeeper. And inasmuch as she was 
too chaste, too pure to accede to such a love as would have satisfied 
the shopkeeper, she did -not wish to deceive me. She didn't want 
to deceive me with half-· or quarter-love, under the guise of love. 
They are too honest-that's the point I I meant to inculcate breadth 
of heart-you remember ?-Queer thought I 
I'm awfully curious to·know this : did she respect me ? I don't 
know whether she despised me or not. I don't think she despised 
me. Awfully strange : why is it that throughout the whole winter 
the thought never occun ed to me that she despised me ? I was 
firmly convinced of the contrary till that very moment when she 
looked at me with stern surprise. Stern-precisely. Then, at once, 
I grasped that she despised me. I grasped this irrevocably, forever ! 
Ah, would that she had despised me even for the rest of my life, 
but would that she had lived, lived ! Only recently she walked, 
she conversed. I'm quite at a loss to understand how she could 
leap out of the window ! And how could I have supposed it even 
five minutes before I called Lukeria. For nothing in the world 
shall I now let Lukeria go ! 
Oh, we still could have reached ar. agreement. f'.1ly during 
the winter we got frightfully alienated from each other-t. .1t couidn't 
we have become accustomed ? Why, why couldn't we have gotten 
together and started a new life ? I am magnanimou႞, and so was 
she-and here was the junction point ! A few more words-two 
days, no more-and she would have understood everything. 
The thing that is most offensive is that this is all an accident 
-a simple, barbarous, inert accident ! This is the offPnse ! Five 
minutes, only five minutes late was I !  Had I come five minutes 
earlier-the instant would have floated away as a cloud, and later 
it would never have occurred to her. And it would have come to 
the point where she would have graspec'l everything .
.
 
\nil now­
again these empty rooms, again I am alone fhe pendulum is swing­
ing ; to it it makes no difference ; it regrets no one. There's nobody 
-that's the trouble I 
I keep pacing and pacing. I know, I know-dou't prompt me : 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
to you it seems funny that I am complaining of the accident and 
of the five minutes ? But this obviousness. Think : she didn't even 
leave a note to the effect : "Don't blame anyone for my death"­
as they all do. Is it possible that she could not reason out that 
they might cause trouble even for Lukeria : "You were alone with 
her"-they might have said-"and you must have pushed her." At 
least, they might have worn her out were it not for the fact that, 
from the windows in the wing of the building and in the court­
yard, four people saw how she stood with the ikon in her hands 
and leaped out of her own accord. But this, too, is an accident­
that people were standing there and witnessing the scene. No, all 
this was an instant, merely an unaccountable moment. Suddenness 
and fantasy ! What does it matter that before that she had been 
praying before the ikon ? This did not mean-before death. The 
entire spell lasted, maybe, some ten minutes only-the whole resolu­
tion-precisely as she was standing at the wall, leaning, with her 
head in her hand, and smiling. The thought flew into her head, 
it started whirling-and she was unable to withstand it. 
Here is an obvious misunderstanding-say what you please. 
She still could have lived with me. And what if it was anremia ?­
Simply from anremia, from exhaustion of vital energy ?-She grew 
tired that winter, that's it. . . .  
I was late ! ! ! 
How lean she is in th႟ coffin ! How sharp her little nose has 
become ! Her eyelashes lie like arrows. And she only fell-she didn't 
fracture or break anything I Only "a handful of blood"-that is, 
a little dessert spoonful.· Internal concussion. Strange thought : 
what if it were possible not to bury her ? Because if she should 
be carried away, then . . .  Oh, no : it is almost impossible that 
she be carried away ! Oh, I know that she must be carried away 
-I am not a lunatic, and I am not at all in delirium. On the con­
trary, never before has my mind been so clear.-But how is it going 
to be ?-Again there will be nobody in the house. Again, the two 
rooms-and I alone with those pawned articles. Delirium, delirium 
-that's delirium I I wore her out-that's it I 
Now, what do I care about your la.ws ? What use have I 
for your customs, your habits, your life, your state, your religion ? 
Let your judge judge me ; let them take me into your court, your 
public court, and let t}lem declare that they reject everything. The 
judge will shout : "Keep silent, officer ! "  And I will shout to him : 
"\Vhat authority do you possess which would now compel me to 
obey you ? Why did dark ..inertia smash to pieces that which was 
dearest of all ? What use have I now for your laws ?-I segregate 
myself." Oh, it's all the same to me. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
She's blind, blind ! Dead ! She hears nothing ! You don't 
know with what paradise I would have surrounded you. Paradise 
would have been in my soul, and I would have planted it all around 
you ! All right, you wouldn't love me-all right. What of it ? And 
everything would have been so ; everything would have remained 
so. You would be conversing with me as a friend-and we should 
be rejoicing, laughing happily and looking into each other's eyes. 
And thus we should be living. And even if you should love someone 
else-all right, all right ! You would be walking with him and 
laughing, and I should be beholding you from across the street . 
. . . Let everything be as it may-only let her once again open her 
eyes ! -For a moment, for one instant only ! Would that she would 
glance at me only, as she did so recently when she stood before 
me and took the vow that she would be my faithful wife ! Oh, 
in one glance she would have grasped everything I 
Inertia ! Oh, nature ! Men on earth are alone-this is the 
calamity ! "Is there in the field a living man ?"-shouts the valiant 
Russian lrniნ)!t. I -not ., knight-am shouting too, and no one 
responds. People say that the sun vivifies the universe, and look 
at it-isn't it a corpse ? Everything is dead, and everywhere-noth­
ing but corpses. Only men and, around them, silt•nce-such is earth. 
"Love each other."--Who said this ? Whose covenant is this ? The 
pendulum is swinging insensibly and disg..tstingly. It's night-two 
o'clock. Her little shoes stand by her dear little bed, as if awaiting 
her . . . .  No, seriously-tomorrow, when they carry her away, what 
will I do Ⴀ 
DECEMBER 
CHAPTER I 
1 
Again About a Simple but Tricky Case 
EXACTLY TWO months ago, in the October issue of my 
Diary, I made some comments on an unfortunate criminal woman, 
Katerina Prokofieva Kornilova-that very stepmother who, in the 
month of May, prompted by anger agai . c;t her husband, Ⴁ.tst out 
of the window her six-year-old stepdaughter. This case is particu­
larly notorious, due to the fact that the little stepdaughter who 
was thrown out of the window on the fourth floor, was not hurt­
she was not injured, and she is now alive and in good health. 

528 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
I shall not recapitulate in detail my October article ; perhaps the 
readers have not forgotten it. I shall only remind them of the object 
of that article : from the very beginning I felt that the case was 
altogether too extraordinary, and I at once became convinced that 
it should not be treated too simply. The ill-starred delinquent 
woman was pregnant ; she was irritated by her husband's nagging, 
and she languished. But it was not this-i.e., the desire to take 
vengeance upon her reproachful and offensive husband-that was 
the cause of the crime, but "the affect of pregnancy." In my 
opinion, at that time-during several days or weeks-she had been 
living through that peculiar, quite unexplored, but undeniably ex­
istent state, affecting certain pregnant women, when in a woman's 
soul there occur strange twists, queer submissions and influences­
insanity without insanity which, sometimes, may reach the propor­
tion of conspicuously potent and ugly abnormalities. I cited a case, 
which I have known since childhood, of a Moscow lady who, in­
variably, during a certain period of her pregnancy, acquired a 
strange desire and submitted to a queer whim-of stealing. And yet 
that lady had a carriage of her own· and did not at all need those 
articles which she stole ; however, she did this deliberately-fully 
conscious of her acts. Consciousness was fully retained, but she 
was unable to resist the strange impulse. 
This is what I wrote two months ago and, I confess, I wrote 
this with the most remote, · almost hopeless, aim to help somehow 
and in some manner, and to alleviate the fate of, the unfortunate 
woman despite the dreaqful sentence imposed upon her. I was 
unable to refrain in my article from stating that if our jurors have 
given verdicts of acquittal so many times, mostly to women, not­
withstanding their full confessions of the crimes they had com­
mitted, and despite the obvious evidence of those crimes ascertained 
by the court-it would seem that they could also have acquitted 
Kornilova. (Precisely several days later, after the verdict in the case 
of poor, pregnant Kornilova who was sentenced to forced labor and 
exile to Siberia for life, the strangest criminal, a murderess Kirilova, 
was acquitted altogether.) However, I shall quote what I wrote 
at the time. 
"At least, if the jurors had acquitted the defendant, they 
could have relied on something : 'Although such pathological af­
fects are rare, nevertheless, they do occur. What if in the present 
case, too, there was an affect of pregnancy ?' This is something to 
be considered. At least, iႢ such a case mercy would have been 
intelligible to everybody and would not have produced mental 
vacillation. And what if there should have been an error ? Better 
an error in mercy . . .  
" 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Having written all this, lured by my thoughts, I started 
meditating and I added in my article that this poor twenty-year-old 
delinquent woman, who at the time was about to give birth to a 
child in prison, had perhaps already made up with her husband. 
Maybe the husband (who is now free and has the right to marry 
again) calls on her at the prison, while she is waiting to be trans­
ferred to the hard-labor penitentiary, and they are both grieving and 
crying. Perhaps the victim-that little girl-also visits her "Mama," 
having forgotten everything, and caresses her wholeheartedly. I 
even pictured the scene of their farewell at the railroad station. 
All these "meditations" came from my pen not for the sake of 
effect and not for mere delineation, but simply because I felt the 
living truth, consisting of the fact that although they both, husband 
and wife, unquestionably consider her a criminal woman-he, his 
wife, and she, herself-nevertheless, as a matter of fact, they could 
not help but forgive each other and reconcile themselves with each 
other-and not only because of the Christian feeling, but precisely 
as a result of an involuntary instinctive sentiment that the per­
petrated crime-i>o uuviou:i and unquestionable to their simple way 
of thinking-essentially, perhaps, is not a crime at all, but something 
that has strangely occurred and has been strangely perpetrated, as 
if not by their will, but by God's judgment-for the sins of both of 
them . . . .  
Having finished that article and having brought out the issue 
of the Diary-and being still under the impression of all my med­
itations-! made up my mind, by all means, to interview Kornilova 
while she was still in the local jail. I confess that I was very curious 
to ascertain whether there was any truth in my conjf'<:tures about 
Kornilova and in my subsequent dreams c:.mcerning ll"• case. It so 
happened that there soon occurred a circumstance wi . . .  h enabled 
me to visit Kornilova and make her acquaintance. Now, I myself 
was surprised that at least three-quarter:; of my med • .:ations proved 
to be true : my guesses were as correct as if 1 had been present at 
what actually happened. The husband, in fact, did call on her and 
continues to visit her ; the two, in truth, are weeping and lamenting 
over each other ; they are bidding farewell-one to thႣ other-and 
they are forgiving. "The little girl would have come to see me"­
Kornilova herself told me-"but at present she is in some school 
where pupils live as inmates." I regret that I am not in a position 
to relate everything I learned about thf' life of this disin!••grated 
family, even though here there are some v :y curious traits-well, of 
course, sui generis. Indeed, in certain things I was mistaken, but 
not in the essential ones : for instance, whereas Kornilov is a peasant, 
he wears German clothes ; he is much younger than I supposed he 

530 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
was ; he works as a scooper1 at thႤ Government Printing Office, 
and his monthly wages are rather substantial for a peasant ; this 
means that he is much better off than I presumed in my conjectures. 
And she is a seamstress ; she was a seamstress, and even now, in jail, 
she is engaged in sewing ; she gets orders and is earning good money. 
In brief, it is not all "cloth and felt boots for her journey, or tea 
and sugar" ;  the conversation is on a somewhat higher plane. When 
I first went to visit her, she had already given birth to a child-not 
a son, however, but a daughter, etc. These are slight disparities 
but, in the main, in the essentials, there was no mistake. 
At that time, during the period of her accouchement, she was 
kept in a special compartment, and she was sitting in a corner ; be­
side her, on a bed, lay the newly-born child who had been christened 
only on the eve. When I came in, the infant gave a faint cry, with 
that singular little crack which is peculiar to all newly-born. Ry the 
way, for some reason, this jail is not called a prison but a "house 
of preliminary detention of criminals." However, they keep there 
quite a few criminals, especially of certain peculiar categories, about 
whom, perhaps, in due course of time I shall have something to say. 
But I may add apropos that I have gained a very comforting im­
pression-at least, in this women's division-from observing unques­
tionable humaneness in the relations between the inspectresses and 
the women inmates. Later I visited other cells-for instance, the one 
in which criminal women with nurslings are kept in common. I my­
self saw the concern, attention and care accorded to them by their 
respectable immediate mistresses. And even though I had been ob­
serving them but a short while, nevertheless there are such traits, 
such words, such actions and movements, as are at once indicative 
of many a thing. 
The first time I stayed with Kornilova about twenty minutes : 
she is a very young, good-looking woman, with an intelligent expres­
sion on her face, but very naive indeed. In the beginning, the first 
couple of minutes, she was somewhat surprised over my visit, but 
soon she believed that she beheld beside her one of her own, who 
sympathized with her, as I introduced myself to her when I came 
in, and then she became quite frank with me. She is not very lo­
quacious ; nor is she too perspicacious in conversation, but what she 
does say she says firmly and clearly, apparently truthfully and in­
variably kindly, withctut any sugar-coating and servility. She spoke 
to me not exactly as her equal, but almost as one of her own. At that 
time, probably still under the influence of recent childbed, and also 
the recent verdict in her case (in the very last days of her preg­
nancy) ,  she was somewhat excited and she even began to weep when 
10ne who ladles out the liquid in which bank notes are dyed. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
531 
she recalled certain testimony given against her in court-about some 
alleged words which, supposedly, she had uttered on the day of her 
crime, but which in reality she never did utter. She was very grieved 
over the injustice of that testimony but the thing that struck me was 
the fact that she spoke without the slightest bitterness, and only once 
did she exclaim : "Thus, such was my fate : "  When immediately I 
brought up the subject of her newly-born daughter, at once she be­
gan to smile : "Yesterday"-she said-"we christened her."-"What's 
her name ?"-" Just as mine-Katerina." That smile of a mother sen­
tenced to hard labor, at her child who was born in prison immedi­
ately after the sentence and who, while still unborn, had been con­
victed together with her mother-that smile produced on me a 
strange and painful impression. When, cautiously, I started ques­
tioning her about her crime, the tone of her answers pleased me 
very much. She answered everything clearly, in a straightforward 
manner, not at all evasively, so that I perceived at once that no 
special precautions were needed. She fully confessed that she was a 
criminal ႥuH•y of everything of which she had been accused. It also 
struck me that when speaking about her husband (in a state of anger 
against whom she had pushed the girl out of the window) not only 
did she say nothing-not even a bit-spiteful or accusatory, but on 
the contrary therP was kindness in her tone.-"Well, how did all this 
come to pass ?"-And she frankly said to ·11e : "I meant to commit 
something wicked ; only here it was not my will, as it were, but 
somebody else's." I remember she added (in answer to my question) 
that even though she did go at once to the police station to report 
the incident, nevertheless "I didn't want to go, but somehow I went 
there-I don't know what for-and I confessed to evf'r 1thing of my 
own volition." 
Even on the eve of my visit, I learned that her lawyer, Mr. L., 
had filed a cassation complaint. Thus there was still some hope­
though only a faint one. However, in my mind I entertained another 
hope about which, for the time being, I shall keep silent, but which, 
at the end of our interview, I conveyed to her. She listened to me 
without much reliance on the success of my project, but she believed 
wholeheartedly in my sympathy for her and, right the11, thanked me 
for it. In answer to my ouestion as to whether I could be useful to her 
in any way-promptly guessing what I had in mind-she said that 
she needed nothing, that she had both money and work. However, 
in these words there sounded no touchinf'·<; whatsoever, so Lhat, had 
she been without money, perhaps she \\oulti not have refused to 
accept from me a small contribution. 
Subsequently, I called on her a couple of times. Among other 
things, I spoke to her once about the full acquittal of the murderes 

532 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
Kirilova, which took place only several days after her, Kornilova's, 
conviction-but I noticed · not even the slightest envy or murmur on 
her part. Positively she is inclined to consider herself a grave crim­
inal. Observing her more closely, involuntarily I noticed that at the 
bottom of this rather curious feminine character there was much 
steadiness, orderliness and-this aroused my particular interest­
cheerfulness. Nevertheless, apparently, reminiscences weigh heavily 
on her : with sincere grief she regrets that she had been stern with 
the child-" I took a dislike to her" ;-that she beat her after listen­
ing to her husband's incessant nagging on the subject of his late 
wife, of whom, as I guessed, Kornilova was jealous. She is notice­
ably disturbed by the thought that now her husband is free and may 
even marry, and it was with great pleasure that she told me that 
once when her husband had recently visited her, he said to her : "Is 
it possible, under these circumstances, to think about marriage l "  
Thus-1 said to myself-she must have been the first to bring up this 
subject. I repeat : she fully realizes that after the sentence imposed 
upon her, her husband is no longer her husband and that the mar­
riage is annulled. The thought occurred to me that some truly 
peculiar rendezvous and conversations must be taking place be­
tween them. 
In the course of these visits I had occasion to speak abour 
Kornilova with several prison inspectresses and with Madam A. 
P. B.-the assistant to the warden. I was surprised by the apparent 
sympathy which Kornilova has aroused in all of them. Among other 
things, Madam A. P. B. r:onveyed to me a curious observation, 
namely : when Kornilova (shortly after the crime) had been ad­
mitted to the prison, she was an altogether different creature-dis­
c:>urteous, malicious, quick at wicked answers. However, in less than 
t\Vo or three weeks she changed suddenly and completely : she grew 
kind, naive, meek-"and thus she still is." This statement seemed 
to me very relevant to the case. The trouble is that the case has 
already been adjudicated and the sentence pronounced. But the 
other day I was informed that the court's verdict, which had been 
appealed, was rescinded ( because of the violation of Section 693 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure) ,  and that the case will be tried 
by a jury in another division of the court. 
Thus, at the preمnt moment Kornilova is again a defendant, 
and not a hard-labor convict ; and again she is the legitimate wife 
of her husband, and he-her legitimate husband ! This means that 
hope again is gleaming upon her. Let us pray God that this youthful 
soul, which has already endured so much, be not completely crushed 
by a new "guilty" verdict. It is hard for a human soul to endure 
such shocks : they are akin to a situation where a man condemned 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
533 
to die before a firing squad would suddenly be untied from the post ; 
hope would be restored in him ; the bandage would be removed from 
his eyes ; once more he would be seeing the sunlight-but five 
minutes later he would again be tied to the post. 
Indeed, is it possible that not the slightest attention wiii be 
paid to the fact of the pregnancy of the defendant at the time of 
the commission of her crime ? Naturally, the most important part 
of the prosecution consists of the fact that, nevertheless, she had 
consciously committed the crime. But I am asking again : what role 
does consciousness play in such a case as this ? Consciousness may 
have been fully retained and, despite the most lucid consciousness, 
she was unable to resist the insane and perverted pathological affect. 
In fact, does this seem so impossible ?  Had she not been pregnant 
at the moment of her angry irritation she would, perhaps, have said 
to herself :  "Bad girl-she should be thrown out of the window ; that 
would stop him from reproaching me every hour over her mother." 
Thus she might have reasoned, and still might not have done it, 
whereas in a pregnant state she could not resist, and did it. Couldn't 
this have .rait::-.;_Ji:·ed prec:Jely in this way ? And what does it matter 
that she herself testified that already on the eve she had made up 
her mind to throw the child out of the window, but that she was 
prevented by the presence of her husband ?-Even so, all this crim­
inal deliberation, so logically and firmly conceived, and next morn­
ing so methodically put into effect (including the removal of the 
flower pots, etc.) ,  under no circumstance can be attributed to ordi­
nary intentional villainy : here there happened something unnatural 
and abnormal. 
Think about one thing : having pushed the girl out of the 
window and having looked through it to "ee how tht: Ⴆhi fell (the 
first moment she fainted and was unconscious, so th;.: . looking at 
her through the window, Kornilova, of course, could have considered 
her dead) ,  the murderess closed the window, got dr .·ssed and went 
to the police station to denounce herself. However, what would have 
been the purpose of denouncing herself if she might have planned 
the crime firmly and calmly, with cold-blooded deliberation ? Who 
and where were the witnesses to the fact that she had thrown the 
child out, or that the girl hersPlf fell owing to incautiousness ?-She 
could also have convinLed her husband, upon his return, that the 
little girl fell due to her own fault, and that she, Kornilova, was 
guilty of nothing (thus she would have injured her husb;,nd and 
at the same she would have exonerated 1terself). Even if she had 
then-after looking through the window-become convinced that the 
child was not hurt and was alive, so that it might later testify 
against her-even so Kornilova would have had nothing to fear : 

534 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
what significance could have attached at the trial, to the testi­
mony of a six-year-old girl to the effect that she had been lifted from 
behind by her feet and pushed out of the window ?-Any medical 
expert could have contended that it might have seemed to the girl 
at the moment when she had lost her balance and was falling (i.e., if 
in fact she should have fallen through her own fault) , that someone 
from behind had seized her by her little feet and pushed her down­
ward. And if this be so, why did the criminal woman go forthwith 
to denounce herself ?-Of course, it might be said : "She was in de­
spair and sought to commit suicide one way or another." In fact, no 
other explanation can be found ; yet this explanation itself shows 
in what state of psychic tension and derangement was this pregnant 
woman. Her own words are curious : "I didn't want to go to the 
police station, but somehow I went there all the same." This means 
that she acted as if in delirium-"as if not by her own will," despite 
the full confession. 
On the other hand, the testimony of Madam A. P. B. also ex­
plains a whole lot : "This was an altogether different creature-rude 
and angry-and suddenly, two weeks later, she changed radically : 
she became meek, placid, kind." Why so ?-Precisely because a 
certain pathological period of pregnancy had come to an end-a 
period of sick will and of "insanity without insanity" ; with it the 
pathological affect came to an end, and a new creature came into 
being. 
Look here : once more she will be sentenced to hard labor ; 
again she, who has already been so shocked and who has endured 
so much, will be shocked and crushed by the second sentence, and 
she, the twenty-year-old one, who has almost not yet begun to live, 
with a nursling in her arms, will be cast into a hard-labor peniten­
tiary. And what will be the result ? Will she derive much from hard 
labor ? Will not her soul harden ? Will it not be depraved and ex­
asperated forever ? Whom and when did hard labor ever reform ? 
And the most important thing-all this in the presence of an utterly 
unexplained and not refuted doubt concerning the pathological affect 
of her pregnant condition at the time. 
Again I repeat, just as two months ago : "better to err in mercy 
than in chastisement." Acquit the unfortunate and, perhaps, a young 
soul will not perish-a soul which, maybe, has so much life in the 
future and in which tbere are so many good potentialities therefor. 
In prison all this will unfailingly be ruined, since the soul will be 
depraved, whereas now the terrible lesson, already endured by her, 
will guard her, perhaps, for her whole life, against an evil deed ; and 
-what is most important-it will help to develop and ripen those 
seeds and beginnings of good which apparently and unquestionably 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
535 
are present in this youthful soul. And were her heart truly hard and 
spiteful, mercy would unfailingly soften it. But I assure you, it is 
far from being hard and spiteful, and I am not the only one to 
bear witness to this. Is it not possible to acquit her-to risk acquit­
ting her ? 
2 
BELATED :\IORAL 
That October issue of my Diary has also caused me trouble­
in a way, of course. In it there is a short article The Verdict, which 
had left me in some doubt. That Verdict is the confession of a sui­
cide, recorded by himself immediately before he shot himself with 
a pistol-recorded for his justification and, maybe, as a moral. Several 
of my friends, whose opinion I treasure most highly, even praised 
the article but corroborated my doubts. They praised it for the fact 
that actually a lormula, as it were, of suicides of this pattern had 
been found--.. formula wl·ich clearly expressed their basic ideology. 
But these friends of mine were wondering if the object of the article 
would be understood by each and all of my readers. Wouldn't it, 
contrariwise, produce on someone some altogether opposite im­
pression ? l\loreovLr, wouldn't some of them-those very people who 
had already beguu to dream about the pistul or the noose-wouldn't 
they be seduced by the reading of my article, and wouldn't they 
feel even more confirmed in their unfortunate intentions ? In a word, 
doubts were expressed which were identical with those that had earlier 
occurred to me. And, as a result, I came to the deduction that it 
would have been necessary to give, directly and sirن·ly, in clear 
words at the end of the article, the author's explanatiiJ 
of the ob­
ject with which it had been written-and even to add a moral. 
With this I was in accord. Besides, while I w'\s writing the 
article I myself felt that a moral was necessary, but somehow I was 
ashamed to write it. I felt ashamed to presume, even in a very naive 
reader, so much simplicity that he wouldn't guess the underlying 
motive of the article, its object, its moral. To me this object was so 
clear that, willy-nilly, I supposed it to be equally clear Lo everybody. 
I proved to be wrong. 
Correct is the observation which was made several years ago 
by a writer to the effect that in days gone by it was consiiered a 
shame to admit the lack of understandin. ')f certain thingه because 
it was direct proof of the dullness of him who made such an admis­
sion, of his ignorance, of the defective development of his mind and 
heart, of the weakness of his mental faculties. At present, on the 
contrary, the phrase-"! don't understand it"-is often being uttered 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
almost with pride or, at least, with an important air. This phrase 
promptly places the" man, in the opinion of his listeners, on a ped- ' 
estal, and-what is still more comic-in his own opinion, too ; and 
he isn't in the least ashamed of the cheapness of the pedestal thus 
acquired. Nowadays the words : "I understand nothing about Raph­
ael," or "I have purposely read all of Shakespeare and, I confess, I 
found absolutely nothing particular in him"-these words today 
may be accepted not only as a sign of profound intellect, but even 
as something valiant, virtually as a moral exploit. And is it only 
Shakespeare or Raphael who is subjected to such judgments and 
to such doubts ? 
This observation concerning uppish ignoramuses, which I 
have recorded here in my own words, is rather correct. In point of 
fact, the pride of the ignoramuses has become boundless. Poorly 
developed and dull people are not ashamed of these unfortunate 
qualities of theirs ; on the contrary, a situation has developed where 
these very qualities "add zest" to them. I have also often observed 
that both in literature and in private life there have developed great 
segregations, and many-facetedness of knowledge has disappeared : 
people who vehemently challenge their adversaries throughout whole 
decades have not read a single line of the latter's writings : "I have 
different convictions"-they say-"and I am not going to read non­
sence." Verily-a penny's worth of ammunition and a ruble's worth 
of ambition. Such an extreme one-sidedness and isolation, such seg­
regation and intolerance, have developed only in our day-i.e., pre­
eminently during the last· twenty years. Coupled with these, there 
arose in many a man some sort of impudent boldness : men of negli­
gible knowledge laugh-and even to one's face-at people possessing 
ten times more learning and understanding. And what is worst of all 
-as time goes on "rectilinearness" develops in an ever-increasing 
measure : for example, the instinct for adaptation, for metaphor, for 
allegory, begins to disappear. Noticeably, people cease (generally 
speaking) to understand jest, humor-and this, according to the 
observation of a certain German thinker, is one of the surest symp­
toms of the intellectual and moral degradation of an epoch. Instead, 
there come into being gloomy blockheads with frowning brows and 
narrow minds moving in one direction only-along the straight line 
toward one fixed point. Do you think that I am speaking only of 
the young ones and the liberals ?-I assure you that I am referring 
also to old fellows and conservatives. As though in imitation of the 
young ones (at present already gray ones) , some twenty years ago 
there came into being queer single-track conservatives-irritated old 
men who understand nothing about current affairs, about the new 
people and the younger generation. Their rectilinearness, if you 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
537 
please, was sometimes even more rigorous, more cruel and more 
obtuse than that of "the new men." Oh, possibly, all this developed 
in them as a result of the superfluity of good intentions and of mag­
nanimous feelings which, however, had been vexed with the latest 
follies. Nevertheless, at times they are blinder than the modern 
rectilinearists. However, I am afraid that, while denouncing recti­
linearness, I myself have digressed much tou far. 
The moment my article had been printed I was swamped-by 
letters and personal calls-with inquiries as to the meaning of my 
Verdict. "What do you mean to say, and is it possible that you are 
justifying suicide ?" Some of the people-so it seemed to me-were 
even rejoicing over something. And the other day a certain author, 
a Mr. N. P., sent me a brief and politely denunciatory article of his 
which he had published in the Moscow Wf'ekly Recreation. I do not 
subscribe to this periodical, and I do not suppose that its editor 
sent me this issue ; therefore, I ascribe its receipt to the courtesy of 
the author himself. He condemns my article and ridicules it : 
"I received the October issue of the Writer's Diary ; I read 
it and began ta ponder Lver it : there are many good things in this 
issue, but also many strange ones. Let me state my perplexity in the 
briefest terms. For instance, what was the purpose of printing in 
this issue the 'deliberations' of a suicide from tedium ? Positively, 
I fail to underst • .md the reason. These 'deliberations' -if thus may 
be denoted the delirium of a half-crazy man-are well known, of 
course, somewhat differently worded, by everybody whose concern 
this is, and, therefore, their appearance, in our day, in a diary of 
such a writer as F. M. Dostoievsky, serves as a ridiculous and miser­
able anachronism. Ours is an age of cast-iron conceptions, positive 
opinions-an age which displays on its tz,l!ler the mp; o :  'To live 
by all means ! '  It stands to reason that everywhere a,.و.l in every­
thing there are exceptions : there are suicides with and without de­
liberation, but nowadays no one pays the slightest a.tention to this 
trivial heroism, since this heroism is altogethf'r too silly I There was 
a time when suicide, particularly with deliberation, used to be raised 
to the level of the greatest 'consciousness'-only of what 1-and of 
heroism, consisting of no one knows what ; however. these rotten 
times have irrevocably passed- and, thank God, there is nothing to 
regret about them. 
"Every suicide who dies with deliberation similar to that re­
corded in Mr. Dostoievsky's Diary deserves no sympathy ; he is a 
coarse egoist, a man seeking honors, anl a most harmful member 
of human society. He is even unable to perpetrate his stupid act 
without being talked about ; even here he fails to adhere to his role, 
to his fancied character : he writes a deliberation even though he 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
could easily have died without any deliberation . .
. . Oh, Falstaffs 
of life I Stilted knights ! "  
Having read this, I was even seized with despondency. Good 
Lord, is it possible that I have many such readers, and can it be that 
Mr. N. P., in asserting that my suicide does not deserve sympathy, 
seriously maintains that I depicted him for the purpose of arousing 
his, Mr. N. P.'s, "compassion" ?-Of course, Mr. N. P.'s isolated 
opinion would be of little importance. But the point is that in this 
case undoubtedly he expresses a whole type, a whole collection of 
fellows of his own pattern, an impudent type in a way akin to that 
about which I spoke above-impudent and bigoted-a type of 
those very "cast-iron conceptions" to which Mr. N. P. himself refers 
in the lines which I have quoted from his article. This is a suspicion 
concerning a whole collection. Honest to goodness-! am scared. Of 
course, maybe I am taking the matter too seriously. However, I will 
state this : notwithstanding my great susceptibility, I would not have 
given an answer even to the "collection," and not because of disdain 
for it-why should one not have a little chat with people ?-but simply 
because space is scarce in this issue. Thus, if I am now answering 
and sacrificing space, I am doing so in answer to my own doubts­
as it were, to myself. I see that to my October article there should, 
without delay, be appended a moral, that. its purpose should be ex­
plained and defended. At least, conscience will be clear. That's it. 
3 
ARBITRARY AssERTIONS 
My article-The Verdict-refers to the basic and loftiest idea 
of human exis.tence-the necessity and inevitability of a belief in the 
immortality of the human soul. The underlying idea of this confes­
sion of a man perishing as a result of "a logical suicide" is the neces­
sity of the immediate inference that without faith in one's soul and 
its immortality, man's existence is unnatural, unthinkable, impos­
sible. Now, it seemed to me that I have clearly expressed the formula 
of a logical suicide, that I have discovered it. In him there is no faith 
in immortality ; this he explains in the very beginning. Little by 
little, the thought of his aimlessness and his hatred of the muteness 
of the surrounding inertia lead him to the inevitable conviction of 
the utter absurdity of man's existence on earth. It becomes clear as 
daylight to him that only those men can consent to live who resemble 
the lower animals and who come nearest to the latter by reason of 
the limited development of their minds and their purely carnal wants. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
539 
They agree to live specifically as animals, i.e., in order 11to eat, drink, 
sleep, build their nests and raise children." Indeed, eating, sleep­
ing, polluting and sitting on soft cushions will long attract men 
to earth, but not the higher types. Meanwhile, it is the higher types 
that are, and always have been, sovereign on earth, and invari­
ably it so happened that, when the time was ripe, millions of people 
followed them. What is the loftiest word, the )l)ftiest thought ? This 
word, this thought (without which mankind cannot exist) is often 
uttered for the first time by the poor, imperceptible people without 
any significance, who even frequently are persecuted and who die 
in exile and in obscurity. But the thought, the word uttered by them, 
never dies, never disappears without leaving a trace ; it can never 
vanish if it has once been uttered ; and this is noteworthy in man­
kind. And in the next generation, maybe twenty or thirty years 
later, the thought of the genius is embraced by everything and every­
body-it lures everything and everybody-and the result is that not 
the millions of people, not the material forces, apparently so dread­
ful and imm•1table, not money, not the sword, not might are trium­
phant-but the thought imperceptible at first, and often the thought 
of an apparently most insignificant man. l\lr. N. P. writes that the 
appearance of such a confession in my Diary "serves- [serves what ?] 
-as a ridiculous and miserable anachronism," since "ours is an age 
of cast-iron conceptions, positive opinions, a'1 age which displays on 
its banner the motto : 'To live by all means ! '  . . .  " (Quite so ! Quite 
so ! Probably this is the reason why in our day suicides among the 
educated class have so increased.) I assure the esteemed N. P. and 
people of his type that this "cast iron," when the time comes, is con­
verted into down in the face of some idea-no matter htw insignifi­
cant it might seem in the beginning to ft:ilows of "ca · iron con­
ceptions." However, to me personally, one of the most d;eaded ap­
prehensions for our future-even our near future-is the fact that, 
in my view, in much too large a portion of our Russian educated 
stratum, by some strange . . .  well, let us say, predestination-there 
is spreading with ever-increasing rapidity complete disbelief in one's 
soul and in its immortality. And not only does this disbelief strengthen 
itself by a sort of conviction (as yet we have but few convic­
tions of any kind) but also by !>orne strange universal indifference 
-at times even scoffing at this loftiest idea of human existence. God 
knows by virtue of what laws it spreads among us, and it is in­
difference not only toward this particular idea but toward every­
thing that is vital-for the truth of life, .... r t>verything that gen­
erates and nourishes life, that brings health, that annihilates decom­
position and fetidness. In our day, this indifference--<:ompared, 

540 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
let us say, with the feelings of other, European, nations-is almost a 
Russian peculiarity. It has long ago penetrated the Russian edu­
cated family, having almost destroyed it. 
Neither man nor nation can exist without a sublime idea. And 
on earth there is but one sublime idea-namely, the idea of the im­
mortality of man's soul-since all other "sublime" ideas of life, which 
give life to man, are merely derived from this one idea. On this point 
I may be contradicted (that is, on the question of this unity of the 
source of everything sublime on earth) ,  but as yet I am not going 
to argue, and I am setting forth my idea arbitrarily. In one breath 
it is impossible to explain it, so it is better to elucidate it by degrees. 
For this, there will be time in the future. 
My felo-de-se is precisely a passionate exponent of his idea-i.e., 
the necessity of suicide-and not an indifferent, not a cast-iron man. 
He really suffers and is tormented, and, it would seem, this I have 
expressed clearly. To him, it is quite obvious that he cannot live, and 
he knows only too well that he is right and that it is impossible to 
refute him. Irresistibly, there stand before him the loftiest, the most 
pressing questions : "What is the use of living if he has already con­
ceived the idea that for man to live like an animal is disgusting, ab­
normal and insufficient ? And what, in this case, can retain him on 
earth ?" He cannot solve these questions and he knows it, since even 
though he realizes that there is what he calls a "harmony of the 
whole," still he says : "I do not understand it, I shall never be able to 
understand it, and of necessity I am not going to partake of it ; this 
comes of its own accord." Now, it is this lucidity that finished him. 
Well, where is the trouble P In what was he mistaken ?-The trouble 
is solely in the loss of faith in immortality. 
However, he himself ardently seeks (that is, he was seeking 
while he was living, seeking sufferingly) conciliation ; he meant to 
find it in "love for mankind."-"Not I but, perhaps, mankind will be 
happy and some day may attain harmony. This thought could retain 
me on earth"-he drops the word. And, of course, this is a mag­
nanimous thought and one full of suffering. But the irresistible 
conviction that the life of mankind-just as his own-is, substan­
tially, a fleeting moment, and that on the morrow of the realization 
of "harmony" (if one is to believe that this dream can be realized) 
mankind will be reduced to the same zero even as he, by the force 
of the inert laws of aature, and that-after so much suffering en­
dured for the attainment of that dream-this thought completely 
stirs his spirit ; this sets him in revolt precisely because of his love 
of mankind ; it insults him on behalf of mankind as a whole, by 
the law of the contagion of ideas ; it even kills in him love itself 
of mankind. Similarly it has been observed many a time that in 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
54 I 
a family dying from starvation, father and mother-when at length 
the suffering of their children grew intolerable-began to hate them, 
those hitherto beloved ones, precisely because of the intolerableness 
of their suffering. Moreover, I assert that the realization of one's 
utter impotence to help, to render some service, or to bring allevia­
tion to suffering mankind-and at the same time when there is a 
firm conviction of the existence of that suffering,-may convert in 
one's heart love for mankind into a hatred of it. Gentlemen of cast­
iron ideas, of course, will not believe this and will be utterly unable 
to understand it : to them, love of mankind and its happiness are 
such cheap things ; everything is so conveniently fixed ; everything 
has been set and described so long ago that these things are not 
worth being given a thought to. But I intend to make them really 
laugh : I assert (again, as yet, without producing any proof) that 
love of mankind is unthinkable, unintelligible and altogether im­
possible without the accompanying faith in the immortality of man's 
soul. Those who, having deprived man of the faith in his immortality, 
are see kin;; to ,..,11 •<;1 itute f Jr it-as life's loftiest aim-"love of man­
kind," those, I maintain, are lifting their arm against themselves, 
since in lieu of love of mankind they are planting in the heart of 
him who has lost his faith seeds of hatred of mankind. Let pundits 
of cast-iron ideas ::ohrug their shoulders at this assertion. But this 
thought is wiser than their wisdom, and unhesitatingly I believe 
that some day humankind will embrace it as an axiom although, 
once more, I am setting forth this idea without any supporting 
proof. 
I even assert and venture to say that love of mankind in 
general, as an idea, is one of the most il"'romprehensiL:,. ideas for 
the human mind. Precisely as an idea. Sentiment aim . - can vin­
dicate it. However, sentiment is possible precisely only in the 
presence of the accompanying conviction of the iumortality of 
man's soul. (Another arbitrary assertion.) 
It is clear, then, that suicide-when the idea of immortality 
has been lost-becomes an utter and inevitable necessity for any 
man who, by his mental development, has even slightly lifted him­
self above the level of cattle. On the contrary, immortality-promis­
ing eternal life-ties man all the more strongly to earth. Here 
there is a seeming contradiction : if there is so much life-that is, 
if in addition to earthly existence there is an immortal ont•-why 
should one be treasuring so highly his e;,;-thly life ? And yet, the 
contrary is true, since only with faith in his immortality does 
man comprehend the full meaning of his rational destination on 
earth. However, without the faith in his immortality, man's ties 
with earth are severed, they grow thinner and more putrescent, 

542 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
while the loss of the sublime meaning of life (felt at least in the 
form of unconscious angqish) inevitably leads to suicide. 
Hence, the reverse moral of my October article : "If faith 
in immortality is so essential to man's existence, it is, therefore, 
a normal condition of the human race and, this being so, the 
immortality itself of the human soul exists undeniably." In a 
word, the idea of immortality is life itself-"live life," its ultimate 
formula, the mainspring of truth and just consciousness for hu­
mankind. Such was the object of my article, and I supposed that, 
willy-nilly, everyone who had read it would so comprehend it. 
4 
A FEw WoRDs ABOUT YouTH 
Well, by the way. Perhaps it may be pointed out to me that 
in our age suicide is being committed by men who have never 
dwelt upon any abstract problems ; nevertheless, they kill them­
selves mysteriously, without any apparent reason. In truth, we do 
perceive a great number of suicides (their abundance is also a 
mystery sui generis) ,  strange and mysterious, committed not by 
reason of poverty or some affront, without any apparent reasons 
and not at all because of material need, unrequited love, jealousy, 
ill-health, hypochondria or· insanity-but God only knows why. In 
our day, such cases constitute a great temptation, and since it is 
impossible to deny that they have assumed the proportions of an 
epidemic, they arise in the minds of many people as a most dis­
turbing question. Of course, I am not venturing to explain all 
these suicides-this I cannot do1-but I am firmly convinced that 
the majority of the suicides, in toto, directly or indirectly, were 
committed as a result of one and the same spiritual illness-the 
absence in the souls of these men of the sublime idea of existence. 
In this sense our indifference, as a contemporary Russian illness, 
is gnawing all souls. Verily, in Russia there are people who pray 
God and go to church but who do not believe in the immortality 
of their souls-i.e., not that they do not believe in it, but they 
simply never think of it. Even so, at times they are by no means 
people of the cast-iron, the bestial, pattern. However, as stated 
above, the whole sublime purpose and meaning of life, the desire 
and the urge to live, emanate only from this faith. I repeat, there 
are many people desirous to live without any ideas, without any 
sublime meaning of life--=simply to pursue an animal existence, as 
1 I am receiving a great many letters giving the facts pertaining to 
suicides, with questions : how and what do I think about these suicides, 
and how do I explain them ? 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
543 
some lower species. And yet there are many individuals-what is 
most curious, apparently extremely coarse and vicious ones-whose 
nature, however, perhaps without their knowledge, has long been 
craving for sublime aims and the lofty meaning of life. These will 
not be appeased by love of eating, by the love of fish-pies, beautiful 
trotters, debauch, ranks, bureaucratic power, the adoration of their 
subordinates and the hall porters at the doors of their mansions. 
Men of this caliber will precisely shoot themselves apparently for 
no reason, and yet it will be necessarily because of anguish, un­
conscious perhaps, for the sublime significance of life which they 
have found nowhere. On top of that, some of them will shoot them­
selves after having preliminarily perpetrated some scandalous vil­
lainy, abomination or monstrosity. Of course, looking at many of 
these cases it is difficult to believe that they committed suicide 
because of the longing for the sublime aims of life : "Why, they 
never thought about any aims ; they never spoke about any such 
things, and they merely committed villainies ! "-such is the com­
mon opinion. But let us admit that they were not concerned about 
these thing:. and that the_,. did perpetrate villainies : do you posi­
tively know how, by what devious ways, in the life of society this 
sublime anguish is being conveyed to one's soul and contaminates 
it ?-Ideas soar through the air but necessarily in accordance with 
some laws ; ideas live and spread in accordance with laws which 
are too difficult for us to record ; ideas are contagious. And do you 
know that in the general mood of life a certain idea or concern 
or anguish, accessible only to a highly educated and developed 
intellect, may suddenly be imparted to an almost illiterate, coarse 
creature who was never concerned about anything, anrl may con­
taminate his soul with its influence ? Ag;,:;., I may u•_ told that 
in our age even children are committing suicide, or such • tw youths 
as have had no life experience. Even so, I am secretly convinced 
that it is our youth that suffers and agonizes beىause of the 
absence of sublime aims of life. In our familieo: practically no men­
tion is made about the sublime aims of life, while not only do they 
not give the slightest thought to the idea of immortality but much 
too frequently a satirical attitude is adopted toward it-and this 
in the presence of children from their early childhuod, and perhaps 
with an express didactic purpose. 
"But we have no family at all"-recently remarked one of 
our most talented writers, when arguing with me. Well, ي !lis is 
partly true : with our universal indiffere1. : for the sublime aims 
of life, perhaps in some strata of the nation our family is already 
in a state of decomposition. At least it is obviously clear that our 
. young generation is destined to seek ideals for itself, :1nd the loftiest 

544 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
meaning of life. But its segregation, this abandonment of youth 
to their own resources-this is what is dreadful. This problem is 
all too important at this moment of our existence. Our youth is so 
placed that absolutely nowhere does it find advice as to the loftiest 
meaning of life. From our brainy people and, generally, from its 
leaders, youth-! repeat-can borrow merely a rather satirical view, 
but nothing positive, i.e., in what to believe, what should be re­
spected and adored, what should be sought ; and yet all this is so 
needed, so indispensable to youth ; there is, always has been, crav­
ing for all this in all ages and everywhere I And even if in the family 
or at school youth could still be given some sound advice, never­
theless, again, the family and the school (of course, not without 
exceptions) have grown too indifferent to these things because of 
many other more practical and contemporaneously interesting prob­
lems and aims. The youths of December 6, at the Kazan Square, 
were undoubtedly but "a driven herd" in the hands of some crafty 
swindlers, judging at least by the facts made public in The Moscow 
Gazette. What will come of this affair, what is going to be revealed 
-1 do not know. No doubt, here there was folly-wicked, immoral, 
apish imitativeness of somebody else's behavior ; nevertheless, they 
could have been brought together only by the conviction that they 
had been convened in the name of something lofty and beautiful, 
in the name of some remarkable self-sacrifice for the greatest aims. 
Even if only a very few of them possessed this "quest of one's 
ideal," still these few would reign over the rest and lead them­
this much is clear. Now, who is guilty that their ideal is so ugly ? 
-Of course, they themse1ves are guilty, too, but not they alone. 
No doubt, even the present reality surrounding them could have 
saved them from their ugly segregation from everything essential 
and real, from their coarsest lack of understanding of the simplest 
things ; but the point is that apparently the time has arrived when 
detachment from the soil and from the people's truth in our younger 
generation must astound and terrify even "the fathers" themselves 
who have so long ago detached themselves from all that is Russian 
and who are finishing their lives in beatific tranquillity and peace 
as superior critics of the Russian land. 
Now, this is a lesson-a lesson to the family, to the school 
and to the blissfully convinced critics : they themselves do not 
recognize tlleir constquences which they renounce. However, again, 
can they-those "fathers"-can they be completely blamed ? They 
themselves-aren't they products and consequences of some peculiar 
fatal laws and predestinations which have been hanging over the 
entire educated stratum of Russian society for almost two cen­
turies, virtually until the time of the great reforms of our reign ? 

TIIE DIARY OF A WRITER 
545 
Nay, it seems that the two-century-long detachment from the soil 
and from work of every kind cannot remain unpunished. It is 
insufficient to blame ; one has to seek remedies. 
To my way of thinking remedies are still available : they are 
in the people, in their sanctities and in our communion with the 
people. But . . .  this is something for the future. I embarked upon 
my Diary partly for the purpose of speaking about these remedies 
as long as strength will permit. 
5 
ON SUICIDE AND HAUGHTINESS 
But it is time to finish up with Mr. N. P. To him happened 
the thing which happens to many people of his "type" : what is 
clear to them and what they can most readily comprehend they 
conceive to be stupid. They are much more inclined to despise 
lucidity th<.n to Ǔr:.Lise it. 1 .  is different if a flourish or a fog accom­
panies something : "This we don't understand-therefore, it is deep." 
He says that the "deliberation" of my suicide is merely "the 
delirium of a half-crazy man," and that that is "well known." I 
am very much inciined to believe that the "deliberation" became 
"known" to him only after he had read my article. As to the 
"delirium of a half-crazy man" (is this known to :Mr. N. P. and 
the whole collection of the N. P.'s ?) , it-i.e., the inference of the 
necessity of suicide-is too much to many people in Europe, as 
it were, the last word of science. I have expressed this "last word 
of science" in brief terms, clearly and r"pularly, v.i, ࢡ, the sole 
purpose of refuting it-not by reasoning or logic, since .t cannot 
be refuted by logic ( I  challenge not only Mr. N. P. but anyone 
to refute logically this "delirium of the insane") , l ut by faith, 
by the deduction of the necessity of faith in the immortality of 
man's soul ; by the inference of the conviction that this faith is 
the only source of "live life" on earth-of life, health, sane ideas 
and sound deductions and inferences. . . . And, in conclusion­
something altogether comic. In the same October issue I reported 
the suicide of an emigral•ً's daughter : she soaked a piece of cotton 
wool in chloroform, tied it around her face and lay down on the 
bed. And thus she died. Before death she wrote a note : ''l am 
undertaking a long journey. If I should 
· ot succeed, let people 
gather to celebrate my resurrection with a bottle of Cliquot. If I 
should succeed, I ask that I be interred only after I am altogether 
. dead, since it is very disagreeable to awake in a coffin in the earth. 
This is not chic !" 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
Mr. N. P. haughtily grew angry with this "vain little" suicide, 
and came to the conclusion that her act "deserves no attention 
whatsoever." He also grew angry with me for my "exceedingly 
naive" question as to which one of the two suicides had suffered 
more on earth. At this juncture there ensued something comical. 
Unexpectedly he added : "I daresay that a man who desires to 
greet his return to life with a champagne glass in his hand-[of 
course, in his hand] -did not suffer much in this life if, with such 
triumph, once more he enters it without changing in the least its 
conditions, and even without thinking about them . . . .  
" 
What a funny thought and what a ludicrous consideration ! 
Here he was mostly tempted by champagne : "He who drinks 
champagne cannot suffer." But were she so fond of champagne, 
she would have continued to live so as to drink it, whereas she 
wrote about champagne before her death-i.e., real death-knowing 
well that she would die without fail. She could not have believed 
much in the chance of her recovery to life ; nor did this chance 
present anything attractive to her, because recovery, of course, 
would have meant to her recovery to a new suicide. Thus, here 
champagne was of no consequence, i.e., not at all for the purpose 
of consuming it-and is it possible that this has to be explained ? 
And she wrote about champagne from the desire, when dying, to 
perpetrate some cynicism as abominable and filthy as possible.' 
And she selected champagne precisely because she could not con­
ceive a filthier, more abominable picture than this drinking bout 
at the time of her "resur:rection from the dead." She had to write 
this in order to insult, with this filth, everything she was forsaking 
on earth, to damn earth and her whole earthly life, to spit on it 
and to declare that spittle to her relatives whom she was leaving 
behind. 
Whence such a spite in a seventeen-year-old girl ? (N. B. She 
was seventeen, and not twenty, as I erroneously put it in my 
article. Subsequently I was corrected by those who know this 
incident better.) And against whom was that spite directed ? No 
one had offended her ; she was in need of nothing, and she died 
apparently also for no reason whatever. But precisely this note ; 
precisely the fact that at such a moment she was eager to perpetrate 
such a filthy and spiteful cynicism-and this is obvious-this pre­
cisely leads one to' think that her life was immeasurably more 
chaste than this filthy twist ; and that spite, the boundless exaspera­
tion of that twist, on the contrary, bears witness to the suffering 
and painful mood of her · spirit, to her despair in the last moment 
of her life. If she had died of some apathetic weariness, without 
knowing why, she would not have perpetrated this cynicism. One 
has to take a more humane attitude toward such a spiritual con-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
547 
dition. Here, suffering was obvious and certainly she died of 
spiritual anguish, having greatly suffered. 
What could have tormented her so much at the age of seven­
teen ?-But herein is the dreadful question of our age. I have set 
forth the hypothesis that she died of anguish (too premature an 
anguish) and of aimlessness of life, only because of the upbringing, 
perverted by theory, at her parents' home-an upbringing involving 
an erroneous conception of the sublime significance and aims of 
life, a deliberate extermination in her soul of all faith in its 
immortality. Let this be only my supposition. Yet certainly she 
did not die merely for the purpose of leaving after her that abject 
note-to cause surprise, as Mr. N. P. seems to think. "No man 
shall hate his flesh." Self-extermination is a serious thing despite 
any chic or display, while epidemic self-extermination, assuming 
ever-increasing proportions among the educated classes, is all too 
momentous a phenomenon which deserves relentless observation 
and study. 
Some eighteen months ago a highly talented and competent 
member of our JUJiciary ".lowed me a batch of letters and notes 
of suicides in their own handwriting, collected by him-notes which 
had been written by them immediately before, i.e., five minutes 
before, death. I remember two lines written by a fifteen-year-old 
girl. Likewise, I rel·all pencil scrawls written in a carriage in which 
the suicide shot himself before he had reached his destination. I 
believe that even if Mr. N. P. could have perused this intensely 
interesting batch, perhaps even in his soul there would have come 
a change, and consternation would have penetrated his tranquil 
heart. But this I do not know. In any event one should be dealing 
with these facts more humanely and not ͩͪ haughtily. ,-, •rhaps we 
ourselves are guilty of these facts, and in the future nl cast iron 
is going to save us from the calamitous consequences of our placidity 
and haughtiness-that is, when time comes for these .. onsequences. 
Enough, however. I have given my answer not to Mr. N. P. 
alone, but to many Messrs. N. P . . . .  
CHAPTER II 
1 
An Anecdote from Childre, s Lives 
J SHALL tell it so as not to forget it. 
On the outskirts-and even farther than th£ outskirts-of 
Petersburg there lives a mother with her twelve-year-old daughter. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
This is not a well-to-do family, but the mother has a job and earns 
her livelihood by her work, while the daughter attends school in 
Petersburg, and every time she goes to school or returns home from 
school she uses a public carriage which departs from the Gostiny 
Dvor and goes as far as the place where they live, and back, 
several times a day at fixed hours. 
And once upon a time, recently-some two months ago-when 
suddenly and quickly winter set in and the first sledging began, 
during a whole week of calm, bright days, with two or three degrees 
of frost-the mother, looking at her daughter, said : "Sasha, I see 
you are not learning your lessons. I have been observing this several 
evenings. Do you know your lessons ?" 
"Oh, dear 1\Iama, don't worry : I have prepared everything ; 
I have prepared everything even a week in advance." 
"If so-all right." 
The next day Sasha went to school, and shortly after five 
o'clock in the afternoon the conductor of the public carriage in 
which Sasha was due to return, as he was driving by their gate, 
jumped off the coach and presented a note to "dear Mama," read­
ing as follows : 
"Dear Mama, all this week I have been a bad girl. I received 
three zeros and I kept deceiving you. I am ashamed to come back 
to you, and I shall not return to you. Adieu, dear Mama, forgive 
me. Your Sasha." 
One can imagine what the mother must have experienced. 
Of course, her first impulse was to leave work at once and to 
proceed as quickly as possible to the city in order to find Sasha 
through some traces. But where ? How ?-A close acquaintance hap­
pened to be there at the time ; he took the matter close to his 
heart and volunteered to go at once to Petersburg and there, after 
making inquiries at the school, to search and search at the homes 
of all her acquaintances-if necessary, all night long. 
The main consideration-that Sasha, repenting her decision, 
might meanwhile return and, not finding mother home, might per­
haps again slip away-induced the mother to stay home and to 
place her trust in the hearty sympathy of a kind man. It was de­
cided that should Sasha not be found by the following morning, 
the police would be notified at dawn. Having remained home, the 
mother spent several painful hours which I am not depicting here 
since they will be understood without description. 
" . . .  And presently"-relates the mother-"around ten o'clock, 
suddenly I heard the familiar little steps on the snow in the court­
yard, and then-on the staircase. The door opened-and there was 
Sasha." 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
549 
"Dear Mama-oh, dear Mama, how glad I am that I came 
back to you I Oh I" 
She folded her hands, then covered her face with their palms 
and sat down on the bed. She was so tired, so exhausted. Well, 
of course, then ensued the first exclamations, the first questions. 
Mother was cautious ; to begin with, she did not dare to reproach 
her daughter. 
"Oh, dear Mama, just as soon as I lied to you yesterday about 
the lessons, I made up my mind to attend school no longer and 
not to return to you ; because how would it be : 1 shouldn't be 
going to school and I should be lying every day to you that I was 
attending school ?" 
"Well, what would you be doing with yourself ?  If you weren't 
at school and not at home with me, where would you be ?" 
"I thought-in the street. Every day, from early morning, 
I meant to walk in the streets. My little fur coat is warm, and 
should I feel cold I would go to the Passage. And, instead of my 
dinner, I c!eciJo J to buy J. loaf of bread every day, and as for 
drinking-I should have managed one way or the other ; at present 
there's snow. One loaf would suffice. I have fifteen kopecks ; three 
kopecks a loaf ; this would make five days." 
"And then ?" 
"After that, 1 don't know-1 hadn't thought of it." 
"But where would you be spending your nights ? Now, where ?" 
"Spending my nights ?-I thought about that. As it would be 
growing dark and late, I was planning to go to the railroad, far 
beyond the railroad station, where there is no one, and where there 
are an awful lot of cars. I would climb into one r. [ 
; hese cars 
which, I would notice, would not be moved anywhere, a . .' I would 
sleep there till morning. And I did go. I went thither, far beyond 
the station, and there there was no one, and I saw -ars standing 
at the side, such cars as are quite different from those in which 
everybody is riding. Now, I thought, I will climb into one of these 
cars and no one will see me. Just as I started to climb, suddenly 
a watchman shouted at me : 
" 'Where are you climbing ? In these cars corpses are trans­
ported.' 
"I heard this, jumped off and, by that time, I saw him ap­
proaching me. 'What do you want here ?'-he said. But I sٌarted 
running and running ; he shouted somel" ·,g but I ran away. I 
went along quite scared. I returned to the street and, as I walked, 
I suddenly saw a house-a big, stone house-under construction ; 
still nothing but bricks, without glass in windows or doors, which . 
were barred with boards ; around the house-a fence. I thought if 

sso 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
I could manage to get into the house somehow, no one would see 
me there because it was dark. I went along a by-lane and dis­
covered a spot through which, though it was barred, I could climb. 
This I did and I found myself straight in a ditch-still full of 
earth. I went gropingly along the wall toward the corner, and 
there there were boards and bricks. 'Here'-I said to myself-'! 
will spend the uight on the boards.' And so I lay down. Only, 
all of a sudden I heard something, as if people were talking in 
very low voices. I raised myself, and right in the corner I heard 
a conversation in low voices, and saw eyes as though gazing at me 
from there. I was very much frightened, and again I ran into the 
street through the same door, and I heard them call me. But I 
managed to slip away. And I had thought that the house was 
empty. 
"When I came out again, suddenly I felt tired. So tired, so 
tired. I walked through the streets ; people were moving around, 
and I didn't know what time it was. Presently I got out on the 
Nevsky Prospect and went by the Gostiny Dvor, my eyes full 
of tears. 'How nice it would be'-1 said to myself-'if a kind man 
would pass by and pity a poor lillie girl who has no place to 
spend a night.' I would confess to him and he would say to me : 
'Come and spend a night at our home.' While I was thinking about 
all this, suddenly I saw our bus standing and ready to start on 
its last trip in our direction, whereas I thought that it had left 
long ago. 'Ah'-1 said to myself-'! will go to Mama ! '  I got in, took 
a seat, and now, dear :Mama, I'm so glad I came back to you I 
Never more will I deceive you, and I'll study diligently ! Ah, dear 
Mama ! Dear Mama ! "  
"I asked her"-the mother went on with her story-"Sasha, 
is it possible that you have invented all this yourself-meaning, 
not to go to school and to live in the streets ?" 
"You see, dear Mama, long ago I struck up an acquaintance 
with a girl of my age ; but she attends another school. Only, would 
you believe that she almost never does go to school, and at home, 
day after day, she tells everybody that she attends school. And 
she told me that she got weary of studying, whereas in the streets 
she felt cheerful. 'The moment I leave the house'-says she-'1 keep 
walking, and already for two weeks I haven't showed up at school ; 
I am looking at the stores through the windows ; I go to the 
Passage ; I eat but one loaf of bread till evening when it is time 
to go home.' And when I .learned all this from her, I said to my­
self : 'I wish I did the same,' and I began to feel weary at school. 
Only I wasn't determined until yesterday, and yesterday-after I 
had lied to you-1 made up my mind .
.
.
.
 
" 
This anecdote is a true story. Of course, at present, measures 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
SSI 
have been taken by the mother. When this was related to me, I 
thought that it would not be superfluous to publish it in the Diary. 
I received permission to do so-naturally, subject to full incognito. 
Without question, I shall be immediately told : "This is an isolated 
case, and simply because the girl is very stupid." But I know for 
sure that the girl is by no means stupid. I know also that in these 
youthful souls, already emerged from early childhood but still far 
from having ripened to any, even preliminary, maturity, at times 
there may take birth astonishing, fantastic conceptions, dreams and 
resolutions. This age (twelve or thirteen years) is extraordinarily 
interesting in girls-even more so than in boys. By the way, speak­
ing of boys : do you remember a report, published four years ago 
in newspapers, about three very young pupils in the first years 
of high school who sought to run away to America ; they were 
caught quite a distance away from the city, and at the same time 
a large pistol in their possession was seized. Generally, in days gone 
by, one or two gf'nerations back, dreams and fantasies may have 
been roaming in the heads of these very youthful folks, just as in 
the contemporary unes. H(,wever, present-day youngsters are some­
how more resolute and much less inclined toward doubts and 
reflections. The former ones, having conceived a project (well, for 
example, to escape to Venice, after having read about Venice in 
the novels of Hoffmann and George Sand-I knew one such fellow) ,  
nevertheless did not proceed with the fulfillment of these projects, 
and at the utmost confided them under oath to some schoolmate, 
whereas the contemporary ones, having conceived something, put 
it into effect. However, the former ones used to be restrained by 
a sense of duty, by the feelin௭ of obligation toward th௮ir fathers 
and mothers, toward certain convictions an:1 principles. '' •t, nowa­
days these ties have undeniably grown somewhat more , .-:. There 
is less restraint in them, both outward and inward. This, perhaps, 
is the reason why the brain also works mort' one-sidtJly, and, of 
course, all this is caused by something. 
And the principal thing is that those are by no means isolated 
cases resulting from stupidity. I repeat, this mo௯t curious age re­
quires special attention on the part of pedagogues who, in our 
day, are busying themselves so much with pedagogy, and by parents 
who are so busy both with '·busine௰s" and with things not related 
to business. And how easily all this may happen-i.e., everything 
most to be dreaded-and to whom ?-To our own children ! To . hink 
only of that passage in this narrative ot ·he mother-where the 
little girl "suddenly felt tired" ; where she was walking and weep­
ing and dreaming of meeting a kind man who would pity her be­
.cause she had no place where she could spend the night and who 
would ask her to come along with him. To think only that this 

552 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
desire of hers, bearing witness to her youthful innocence and 
immaturity, could have been so easily realized since the streets 
and our wealthiest homes swarm precisely with such "kind fellows" I 
Well, and after that ? Next morning ?-Either the hole in the ice or 
the shame of confessing ; and as a sequence of that shame-the 
ensuing ability, after concealing everything within one's self, to get 
used to the reminiscence, and after that to start pondering over 
it but now from a different standpoint, and to keep thinking and 
thinking, but now with an extraordinary variety of images, and 
all this-little by little, of its own accord. Well, and at length­
perhaps the desire to repeat the experience, and then all the rest. 
And this-at the age of twelve ! And everything carefully con­
cealed. Indeed, carefully concealed in the strict meaning of the 
word ! And that other girl who, instead of attending school, spends 
her time on "window-shopping" and visits to the Passage, the one 
who taught our girl ! In days gone by I used to hear something 
of the kind about boys who were weary of studying but to whom 
vagabondage was amusing. (N. B. Vagabondage is a habit, a patho­
logical one and partly our national one, one of our distinctions from 
Europe-a habit which is eventually converted into a pathological 
passion and which frequently takes its inception from early child­
hood. Without fail, later on I shall speak about this national pas­
sion of ours.) But it now appears that vagrant girls are also pos­
sible. And let us say that here it is still complete innocence ; yet 
let her be innocent as a primitive creature in paradise, nevertheless 
she will not evade "the knowledge of good and evil," at least a 
wee bit of it-at least, in imagination, meditatingly. For the street 
is such a brisk school. And the most important thing-I repeat 
again and again-is that highly curious age, an age which still 
retains the most touching infantile innocence and immaturity, on 
the one hand-and, on the other, which has already acquired an 
avidly quick faculty of apperceiving and readily familiarizing itself 
with such ideas and conceptions as, according to the conviction 
of many parents and pedagogues, this age cannot even conceive. 
This split, these two so dissimilar halves of these young creatures, 
in their blending, constitute a great deal of critical danger in their 
lives. 
2 
EXPLANATION CONCERNING :\'}y PARTICIPATION IN THE 
FoRTHCOMING PuBLICATION OF THE MAGAZINE-"LIGHT" 
In A Writer's Diary (again in the same October issue) I 
printed an advertisement concerning the publication in the year 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
553 
1877, by Professor N. P. Wagner, of a new magazine Light. And 
just as soon as this announcement appeared, I began to receive 
inquiries about the forthcoming magazine and my participation in 
it. To everyone whom I had a chance to answer I stated that, at 
the request of N. P. Wagner, I have promised to contribute to 
that magazine one story, and that this is all that my participation 
in it will consist of. However, now I feel it necessary to state this 
in print since inquiries continue to be received. Daily I am getting 
letters from my readers from which I clearly perceive that for some 
reason they suddenly became convinced that my participation in 
the magazine Light would be much more elaborate than stated in 
Professor Wagner's announcement, i.e., that I am almost switching 
over to Light, embarking upon a new activity and expanding my 
former one, and that if I am not a co-publisher or co-editor of the 
forthcoming periodical, unfailingly I am a participant in its idea, 
design, plan, etc. 
In answer to this, I hereby state that in the coming year 
1877 I shal! Lt. puhlishing :mly the Writer's Diary, and that my 
entire work as an author will be dedicated to the Diary, much as 
in the past year. As to the new publication Light, I am not going 
to participate either in its plan or as co-editor. Even the idea itself 
of the future journar is not fully known to me, and I am awaiting 
the appearance of its first issue in order to fdmiliarize myself with 
it. I believe that my close affiliation with the magazine Light was 
inferred from the fact that the initial announcement concerning 
it was printed in the Writer's Diary, and subsequently it so hap­
pened that for a considerable time this advertisement has not been 
repeated in any other periodical. 
At any rate, the promise to contribute a story to !!· 1e other 
publication does not mean that I am going to relinquish my own, 
and switch over to that other, periodical. while my ௱incere wish 
to the esteemed N. P. Wagner for success to the venture is merely 
based upon my personal hope and even my conviction that in his 
journal there will be something new, original and useful. As to the 
rest and to any further details, I know nothing regarding the 
magazine Light. Its publication is alien to me, and thus far it is 
as little known to me as to any other person who has read the 
newspaper advertisement concerning it. 
3 
WHERE DoEs THE BusiNESS STAND ? 
A year has elapsed, and this twelfth issue brings to a close 
the first year of the publication of the Writer's Diary. On the part 

554 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
of my readers I have met most Battering sympathy, and yet I 
have not expressed even a hundredth part of what I have meant 
to express, while, as I se now, many of the things which I have 
stated I have not succeeded in expressing clearly from the start, 
so that I have even been misunderstood-for which, of course, I 
am mostly blaming myself. However, even though I have managed 
to say but little, ne"ertheless I hope that from what has been 
expressed during the current year my readers have grasped what 
the character and the orientation of the Diary will be in the forth­
coming year. Thus far, the main object of the Diary was to explain, 
as far as possible, the idea of our national spiritual independence, 
elucidating it in concrete facts as they appear. In this sense, for 
instance, in the Diary there has been considerable discussion of 
our sudden national and popular movement of this year in con­
nection with the so-called "Slavic problem." Let me say in advance : 
the Diary does not pretend to set forth monthly political articles ; 
but it will endeavor to find and, as far as possible, to point out 
our national and popular point of view also in current political 
events. For example, from my articles on the "Slavic movement" 
of this year the readers may have understood that the Diary merely 
sought to elucidate the substance and the meaning of this move­
ment pre-eminently as far as we, Russians, are concerned ; to 
emphasize the fact that for us the problem is not confined to' 
Slavism and to its political aspect in the contemporary sense. 
Slavism-i.e., the communion of all Slavs, in fellowship among 
themselves and with the. Russian people-as well as the political 
phase of the Eastern problem, i.e., the questions concerning the 
frontiers, the border regions, the seas and the straits, Constan­
tinople, etc.,-all these questions, even though undoubtedly they are 
oi the utmost importance to Russia and her future destinies, never­
theless they alone do not exhaust for us the substance of the Eastern 
problem, i.e., from the standpoint of its solution in our popular 
sense. In this sense these questions of major importance retreat 
to the second plan since the substance of the whole matter, as it 
is understood by the people, resides undeniably and entirely only 
in the destinies of Eastern Christianity, that is, Orthodoxy. Our 
people know neither Serbians nor Bulgarians : the Russian people 
are helping with their pennies and volunteers-not the Slavs and 
not Slavism ; but rurnors have reached them that Orthodox Chris­
tians, our brethren, are suffering for Christ's faith, from the Turks 
-the "godless Agarians." This is why-and this is the sole reason 
why-there originated this year a popular movement. In the present 
and future destinies of Orthodox Christianity lies the whole idea 
of the Russian people ; therein is their service to Christ and their 

mE DIARY OF A WRITER 
555 
thirst for the exploit on Christ's behalf. This is a genuine thirst­
a great and unceasing thirst-which has been burning in our people 
since the most ancient times, and this is an extremely important 
fact as it characterizes our people and our state. Moscow old­
believers have donated and equipped a complete (and excellent) 
sanitary unit which they have dispatched to Serbia ; and yet they 
knew perfectly well that Serbians are not old-believers and yet that 
their religion is the same as ours even though they are not in 
communion in matters relating to faith. Here there manifested 
itself precisely the idea of the future and ultimate-even though 
remote-destinies of Orthodox Christianity, and the hope for the 
future communion of all Eastern Christians. This means that, com­
ing to the assistance of the Christians against the Turks, the op­
pressors of Christianity, despite temporary differences they re­
garded the Serbians-like themselves-as genuine, be it even in 
the future, Christians. In this sense the donation has even a his­
torical significance, arousing comforting thoughts and partly cor­
roborating our statement that in the destinies of Christianity lies 
the whole object uf the RtJssian people, notwithstanding the fact 
that temporarily they are disunited by certain fictitious religious 
differences. Undeniably, there Jives in the people the firm belief 
that Russia exists for the sole purpose of serving Christ and pro­
tecting ecumenic Orthodoxy as a whole. If this thought will not 
be directly expressed by everyone among the people, nevertheless 
I assert that it will be quite consciously formulated by many of 
them, and these unquestionably exercise an influence upon the 
rest of the people. So that it may be said that in the people at 
large this is almost a conscious idea and not one that is merely 
concealed in popular sentiment. Thus, the !"'.astern qu௲:-; rm is in­
telligible to the Russian people in this sense alone. 1 
· ,;; is the 
principal fact. 
However, this being so, the view of the East-.rn question 
must assume, to all of us, an incomparably IT'ore definite aspect. 
Russia is strong owing to her people and their spirit, and not merely 
by education or, for example, by her wealth, enlightenment, etc., 
as certain European states which, as a result of their decrepitude 
and the loss of the Jive national idea, have become altogether 
artificial and, as it were, even unnatural. But if the people conceive 
the Slavic-and, generally, the Eastern-question only in the light 
of the destinies of Orthodoxy, it is clear that it is no lom•.'r an 
accidental, or temporary, or merely politic .. matter, but one which 
relates to the very substance of the Russian people, which means 
that it is eternal, perpetual, till its final solution. 
Russia, in this sense, can no longer renounce hrr Drang nach 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
Osten and cannot alter its objective lest she be renouncing herself. 
And if temporarily, in accordance with circumstances, this prob­
lem may, and unquestionably must have at times assumed a dif­
ferent orientation ; even if, at times, we wished, or were forced, 
to yield to circumstances, to restrain our aspirations, nevertheless, 
on the whole this problem, as the essence of the very life of the 
Russian people, unfailingly must some time attain its fundamental 
aim, i.e., the unification of all Orthodox groups in Christ and brother­
hood, without distinction between the Slavs and the other Orthodox 
peoples. This communion may not be political at all, while the 
Slavic question in the narrow sense, as well as the political ques­
tion, also in the narrow sense (i.e., the seas, the straits, Constan­
tinople, and so forth) ,  of course, will be automatically solved in a 
way which is in the least discord with the solution of the basic 
problem. Thus, I reptat, this question-from the standpoint of the 
people-assumes a firm and everlasting aspect. 
In this respect Europe, failing to comprehend completely our 
national ideals, or rather-applying to them her own gauge and 
merely attributing to us the thirst for usurpation, violence, con­
quest of countries-at the same time comprehends very well the 
essential meaning of the matter. 
From the standpoint of EuroiJ.!, it is of no consequence that 
at present we are not going to seize any countries and that we 
promise not to conquer anyone ; to her, it is far more important 
that, even as heretofore and always, we are inflexible in our de­
termination to help the Slavs, and that we have no intention of 
ever renouncing this help: And should this happen now, should we 
come to the assistance of the Slavs, in the eyes of Europe we 
should be adding another stone to that fortress which we are 
gradually erecting in the East-as Europe is convinced-against her. 
Since, by helping the Slavs, we are thereby continuing to affirm 
and consolidate the Slavs' faith in Russia and her might, and 
we are accustoming them more and more to look upon Russia as 
their sun, as the center of the whole Slavdom and even of the 
entire East. And the consolidation of this idea, in Europe's opinion, 
is worth the conquests, despite all concessions which Russia, hon­
estly and faithfully, is ready to make for the pacification of 
Europe. 
Europe understands only too well that in this planting of the 
idea, so far, is the basic substance of the matter-not merely in 
the material acquisition of the llalkan Peninsula. Europe also 
comprehends that Russian policy, too, distinctly conceives the es­
sence of its task. And if so, how can Europe fail to be afraid ?­
This is the reason why Europe sought by all means to take the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
557 
Slavs under her tutelage, so to speak, to steal them from us, and, 
if possible, to set them forever against Russia and the Russians. 
This is why she wants the Paris Treaty to continue as long as 
possible. Hence also, all these projects about Belgians, about Euro­
pean gendarmerie, etc., etc. Oh-anything, only not the Russians ; 
only to remove Russia from the eyes and thoughts of the Slavs ; 
to eradicate her from their memory ! This is where the matter 
stands now. 
4 
A LITTLE \VoRo :\nouT "PETER THINKING FoR A D,w''1 
Of Jatr, there has been much talk about the fact that among 
our eclucated strata the summer ecstasies were followed by allevia­
tion, by incredulity, cynicism and even irritation. Aside from in­
tense haters of our Slavic movement, all the others, I believe, can 
be divided into two general categories. The first catrgory comprises 
the, .:5o to spt'ak, Judai:crs. They keep hammering about the harm 
of war in the economic a!-.pect : they scare people with bank failures, 
the lowering of exchange rates, depression in commerce, even our 
military impotence-not only as compared with Europe but even 
with the Turks, fnrgetting that the Turkish bashi-bazouk is the 
torturer of the unarmed aml the defenseleႌ"• the beheader of dead 
bodies-ami, according to the Russian proverb-"a brave fellow 
against sheep, but against a brave fellow-himself a sheep," which 
unfailingly will prove true. 
Now, what are the Judaizers after ? The answer is clear : 
first and mainly, they were disturbed in their comfortable seats ; 
but without dwelling upon this moral aႍႎect of the1r 
· 1se, let us 
turn to-"secondly" : utter nullity of the historical a . .  ·- national 
understanding of the forthcoming task. The affair is conceived 
by them as a mt're fleeting lit tle caprice which may ue terminated 
any given momt'nt : "You frisked, so to sa:·, and now-enough ; 
now let's go back to business "-of course, stock-exchange business. 
The second category comprises the Europcani:crs ; this is 
our inveterate Europeanizing. From this camp we st ill hear the 
most "radical" questions : ''\\'hat do we care about the Slavs ? 
Why should we Jove the Slavs ? Why should we fight for them ? 
By chasing after the useless, shall we not harm our own develop­
ment, our schools ? Racing after nation;t)ity, shall we n('l, harm 
cosmopolitanism ? Finally, shall we not p1 .roke religious fanaticism 
in Russia ? And so on, and so forth. In a word-although these 
lThe exprrssion "obnduiat" is untranࢴlatahlc ; this is the clost·ࢺt version 
of the sense in which Dostoicvsky uses it. ( B. ll. ) 

ssB 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1876 
are radical questions, nevertheless they are long-worn-out ques­
tions. The main point here is the old, ancient, senile and historical 
fright before the insolent thought about the possibility of Russian 
independence. Formerly, in days gone by, they were all liberals 
and progressives and they were rated as such. But their historical 
time has passed, and at present it is difficult to conceive anything 
more reactionary than they. Meanwhile, in the blissful inertia of 
their ideas of the Forties and Thirties, they still consider themselves 
progressive. Formerly they were regarded as democrats, but at 
present it is difficult to conceive more squeamish aristocrats in 
their relation to the people. It may be said that they have de­
nounced in our people only the dark traits ; but the point is that, 
while denouncing the dark, they have ridiculed also everything 
that is bright, and it may even be said that it is precisely in bright­
ness that they perceive darkness. They fail to discern what is 
bright and what is dark ! Again, indeed, if all conceptions of our 
Europeanizing intelligentsia be scrutinized, it would be impossible 
to conceive anything more hostile to the sane, just and independent 
development of the Russian people. 
And all this-in the fullest innocence of their hearts. Oh, they, 
too, love the people but . . .  in their own way. And what does 
it matter that some day in Russia everything will come to an 
accord and will find its explanation ?-In the meantime great events 
may occur and they may take our intelligentsia unawares. Will it 
then not be too late ? The proverb says : "Catch Peter at morn ; 
if you give him the day to think, he'll begin to stink." The proverb 
is a coarse one and it is not elegantly expressed, but what it ex­
presses is true. Will not the same thing happen to the Russian 
Europeanizing man which happens to Peter when he has been 
thinking too long ? Hasn't he already been thinking too long ? 
That's exactly the point : it seems that something of the kind is 
beginning to happen. . . . 
And yet, to me it is almost an axiom that all our Russian 
isolations and segregations, from their very inception, have been 
based on nothing but the coarsest misconceptions and that there 
is nothing essential in them. The most vexing thing is that it will 
still take a long time before this is made clear to everybody. This 
is aJso one of our most curious themes. 

1 8 7 7 


January 
C H A P T E R  J 
1 
Cfhru Ideas 
I WTL'!' hf'gin my new year where I left off last year. The 
last sentence in the December issue of my Diary was to the effect 
that "virtually all our Russian isolations and segregations have 
been based on nothing but coarsest misconceptions in which there 
is nothing essenti:ll and unsurmountable." I repeat once more : all 
quarrels and segregations were caused 'lnly by the errors and 
deviations of the mind, and not of the heart, and it is this definition 
that comprises the whole essence of our segregations. 
This essence is rather comforting. The mistakes and per­
plexities of the mind vanish more quickly and imperceptibly than 
the errors of the heart ; they are cured not so much by disputes and 
logical explanations as by the irresistibit: logic of 1 '  ͨ events of 
the live, real life which very often bear in themselve: the neces­
sary and correct inference and indicate the straight road, even if 
not all at once, at the very moment of their occurrence, then, at 
any rate, at very early dates, sometimes ఙ:ven without awaiting 
the appearance of new generations. 
Different is the situation relating to the errors of the heart. 
These constitute a very momentous thing : there is a :::mtaminated 
spirit, at times, the spirit of the whole nation, which is frequently 
accompanied by such a degree of blindness that no facts can cure, 
no matter how persistently these point to the straight road. On 
the contrary, this kind of blindness remnriels facts to its own taste 
and assimilates them with its own couraminated spirit ; and it 
even happen!' that a whole nation would rather deliberately die, 
that is, holding onto its blindness, than be cured, refusing the 
cure. Let people not laugh at me in advance for my contention 
S6I 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
that the errors of the mind are all too lightly and quickly effaceable. 
And it would be most ridiculous for any one-not to speak of 
myself-to assume in this respect the role of an effacer firmly and 
calmly convinced that words are capable of bringing one to reason 
or of reversing the convictions prevailing in society at a given 
moment. I realize all this. Nevertheless, one shouldn't be ashamed 
of his convictions ; at present there is no necessity for this, and 
he who has some word to utter, let him say it without fearing 
that people will not listen to him or even that he will be ridiculed 
and that he will produce upon the minds of his contemporaries no 
impression whatsoever. 
In this respect the Writer's Diary will never deviate from 
its path, will never yield to the tendencies of the age, to the power 
of the reigning and prevailing influences should it consider them 
unjust ; it will not seek to adapt itself to them, to flatter and to 
use cunning. After a whole year of publication we believe it 
permissible to make this statement. Indeed, also last year we under­
stood well and were fully aware of the fact that many things about 
which we wrote with ardor and conviction, only harmed us sub­
stantially, and that it would have been far more profitable had 
we with equal ardor sung in a different unison. 
We repeat : it would seem to us that at present all people 
should be expressing themselves as candidly and directly as pos­
sible, without being ashamed of the naive nakedness of some 
thought. In fact, perhaps, extraordinary and enormous events are 
awaiting us, that is, all Russia. "Suddenly great events may occur 
and may takr. our intelligefttsia unawares. Will it then not be too 
late?"-as I said when winding up my December issue of the 
Diary. By this statement I did not mean merely political events 
in this "nearest future," although even these events cannot help 
but arrest the attention of the scantiest and most "Judaized" 
minds which are concerned about nothing except themselves. 
In point of fact, what awaits the world not only in the last 
quarter of the century but even (who knows?) perhaps, this year ? 
Europe is restless ; of this there can be no doubt. But is it tem­
porary, momentary restlessness ?-Not at all : apparently the time 
has come for something sempiternal, millenarian, for that which 
has been moulding itself in the world ever since the beginning of 
its civilization. 
Three ideas are arising before the world, and it seems that 
they are in a state of final formulation. On one side at the ex­
tremity of Europe-the condemned Catholic idea, awaiting in great 
suffering and perplexity-is it to be or not to be? Is it still going 
to live or has its end come ? I am referring not merely to the 

TilE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Catholic religion but to the whole Catholic idea, to the destiny 
of the nations which for a millennium have been shaping themselves 
under the influence of this idea and which are saturated with it 
through and through. In this sense France, for example, through 
the ages has been, as it were, the fullest incarnation of the Catholic 
idea,-the head of this idea which of course was inherited from 
the Romans and in their spirit. That France, which in toto has 
now lost virtually all of her religion (the Jesuits and the atheists 
there are one and the same) ; which several times has closed her 
churches and which on one occasion subjected God himself to 
ballot in the Assembly ; France which has evolved from the ideas 
of 1 789 her own peculiar French socialism, i.e., the pacification 
and organization of human society without and beyond Christ, as 
Catholicism has sought but failed to organize society in the name 
of Christ ; that same France with her revolutionists of the Con­
vention, with her atheists, with her socialists and with her present­
day communardӯ.-is, continues to be, in the highest degree, fully 
and altogether, a Catholic nation, completely contaminated with 
the spirit and lettt:r of L.atholicism, which by the mouths of her 
most arrant atheists is proclaiming : Liberte, Egalite, Fraternite­
ou la mort, i.e., exactly as this would be proclaimed by the Pope 
himself were he compelled to formulate the Catholic liberte, egalite, 
fratcrnite in his -,tyle, in his spirit, in the ௳enuine style and spirit 
of a medieval Pope. The present-day French socialism itself-seem­
ingly an ardent and fatal protest against the Catholic idea on the 
part of all men and nations tortured by and strangulated with it, 
who desire by all means to live, and to continue to live, but now 
without Catholicism and without its gods-this prCJtest itself which 
actually began at the end of the last cent:.:௴௵· (in fact, p.··ch earlier) 
is nothing but the truest and most direct continu௶ . Jn of the 
Catholic idea, its fullest, most final realization, its fatal consequence 
which has been evolved through centurit::>. French sot.:alism is noth­
ing else but a compulsory communion of ma .. kind,-an idea which 
dates back to ancient Rome and which was fully conserved in 
Catholicism. Thus, the idea of the liberation of the human spirit 
from Catholicism became vested there precisely in the narrowest 
Catholic forms borrowed from the very heart of its spirit, from its 
letter, from its materia11sm, from its despotic;m, from its morality. 
On the other side there arises the old Protestantism, which 
over a period of nineteen centuries has heen protesting again"'· Rome 
and her idea-the ancient pagan idea a, 
the renovated Catholic 
Idea-against her idea of possession of man on earth, both morally 
and materially ; against her civilization ; Protestantism which has 
been protesting ever since the time of Arminius and the Teutoburger 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Wald·. This is the German who blindly believes that in him alone, 
and not in the Catholic civilization, resides the rejuvenation of 
mankind. Throughout his whole history he has been dreaming 
of, and thirsting for, his unification, for the proclamation of his 
proud idea which had been powerfully formulated as early as the 
time of Luther's heresy, whereas now, five years after the debacle 
of France, the leading, principal and most Christian Catholic na­
tion, the German is already fully convinced of his triumph and 
that no one can assume his place at the head of the world and 
of its renaissance. He believes in this haughtily and undeviatingly ; 
he believes that there is nothing on earth higher than his spirit and 
his word, and that only Germany can utter it. To him it is even 
ridiculous to suppose that there be in the world, though merely 
in embryo, anything which Germany, predestined to ltad the world, 
would fail to contain. And yet it is not out of place to remark, 
though only in parentheses, that through the nineteen centuries 
of her existence Germany herself which has been doing nothing 
but protesting, has never uttered her own new word but has been 
living all along by negation and protest against her enemy. Thus, 
the strange event may very well occur that when Germany scores 
the final victory and destroys that against which she has been 
protesting nineteen centuries, suddenly, she herself will have to 
die spiritually, right after her foe, because there would be nothing 
to live for, there would be nothing to protest against. For the time 
being, let it be my chimera, nevertheless Luther's Protestantism 
is already a fact : his is a protesting and merely denying faith, 
and just as soon as Catholic:ism disappears from the earth, Protes­
tantism will unfailingly disappear, too, because there is going to 
be nothing to protest against, and it will turn into straight atheism, 
and that will be the end. But let us say that as yet this is merely 
my chimera. 
The German despises the Slavic idea just as much as the 
Catholic idea with that difference only that the latter he always 
evaluated as a strong and powerful enemy, whereas the Slavic idea 
not only did he deem worth nothing but, up to the very last moment, 
he even did not admit it at all. However, of late, he begins to look 
askance upon the Slavs with great suspicion. Even though up to 
now it seems ridiculous to him to suppose that they may possess 
any aims and ideas whatsoever, any hope "of uttering anything 
to the world," nevertheless ever since France's debacle his uneasy 
suspicions have been increasing, while last year's events and current 
events, of course, could not have alleviated his mistrust. 
At present Germany's situation is somewhat embarrassing : 
at any rate, before any Eastern ideas, she has to finish her task 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
in the West. Who will deny that France, only half-slaughtered 
France, does not and did not cause anxiety to the German-all these 
five years following her pogrom-specifically because he has failed 
to slaughter her to death? In 1875, this anxiety had assumed in 
Berlin extraordinary proportions, and Germany unfailingly would 
have rushed, as long as there still was time, to strike a death­
blow at her immemorial enemy, but certain f'Xtraordinarily strong 
circumstances prevented her from so doing. And now, this year, 
there is no doubt that France, which has been growing stronger 
every year, frightens Germany even more than two years ago. 
Germany knows that the enemy will not die without a struggle ; 
moreover, that when he feels that he has completely recovered, he 
will start the battle himself so that three years, five years, hence, 
it will be already too late for Germany. 
And now, in view of the fact that the European East is so 
completely absorbed by the idea which suddenly arose there, and 
that it is too busy with its own affairs,-it may very well happen 
that Germa!"ly. temporarily, finding her hands free, wiU make her 
final onslaught against her Western enemy, against the dreadful 
nightmare which tortures her,-and all this may come to pass· in 
the nearest future. It may be generally said that if the situation 
in the East is str<'ined and difficult, Germany is, perhaps, even in 
a worse positiou : she is faced with aliT'ost more anxieties and 
different scares notwithstanding her immeasurably haughty tone. 
This, at least, should be particularly noted by us. 
Meanwhile in the East there really begins to kindle and shine 
with unprecedented and never-heard-of light the third world idea 
-the Slavic idea-an idea which is coming into Ͷx-:ng,-perhaps 
the third future possibility of the solutio,! of Europear· 1nd human 
destinies. At present it is clear to everybody that wit1- the settle­
ment of the Eastern question, a new factor, a new element, will 
penetrate mankind, an element which, thus far, ha:. been passive 
and in a state of inertia, and which, to say the least, cannot fail 
to exercise a potent and decisive influence upon world destinies. 
What is this idea ? What does the Slavs' communion bring 
with it ? All this is still too indeterminate, but that scͲething new 
must be introduced and uttered,-this virtually no one doubts. 
And these three enormous world ideas almost at one and 
the same time have come together to their denouement. All this 
is, of course, no caprice, nor a war for soT"'e heritage or somr dispute 
of two prominent dames, as in the last ce: •• ury. Here we have some­
thing universal and final, which, though by no means solving all 
human destinies, brings with it the beginning of the end of the 
whole former history of European mankind,-the beginning of the 

566 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
solution of its further destinies, which are in the hands of God 
and about which man can guess almost nothing although he may 
forebode them. 
Now, there arises this question : Can such events be arrested 
in their course ? Can ideas of this magnitude be subjected to petty, 
Judaized, third-rate considerations ? Can their solution be post­
poned, and, finally, is it or is it not useful to do so ?-No doubt, 
wisdom must guard and protect the nations and must serve hu­
maneness and humankind ; still certain ideas possess their own 
inert, mighty and all-engulfing power. It is impossible to arrest 
with the hand the summit of a rock which has torn away and is fall­
ing. Of course, we Russians possess two dreadful powers, worth all 
others in the world-the unity, the spiritual indivisibility of the 
millions of our people, and their closest communion with the 
Monarch. The latter, no doubt, is incontestable ;  yet not only do 
our "Peters thinking for a day" not comprehend the popular idea, 
but they do not want to understand it. 
2 
MIRAGES : STUNDISM AND REDSTOCKISTS 
But is it only the "Europeanizing" and the "Peters thinking for 
a day" who do not wish to understand ?-There are others who are 
much more malignant. The "Peters," at least, acknowledge our 
popular movement of this year in support of the Slavs, whereas 
the others do not. The "Peters" commend this movement-of course 
in their own way-although much in it is not to tht'ir liking ; but 
the others deny the movement itself, contrary to Russia's testi­
mony : "There was nothing"-they say-"and that's the end of it." 
Not only was there nothing ; nothing could have been. "The people" 
-they claim-"were nowhere clamoring and declaring a desire for 
war." Well, our people are never vociferating and coming out with 
declarations ; our people are reasonable and calm ; besides, they 
do not want war at all, not in the least ; but with all their burning 
heart and soul they do sympathize with their brethren oppressed 
for Christ's faith. However, if it should prove necessary ; should 
the Czar's great word sound, they all will rise-the whole hundred 
million mass of them-and will do everything within the power 
of such a hundred million mass inspired by one impulse, in accord, 
as one man. So that in view of the mysterious future of the proximate 
destinies of all Europe, it is impossible not to value this power of 
cohesion, not to contemplate it in moments of our involuntary 
considerations and conjectures. And God forbid war I Who wants 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
it ?-Although in parentheses it may be remarked that blood shed 
"for a great cause" means much ; it may cleanse and wash many 
a thing ; it may vivify many things, and it may lift anew much 
that has been thus far downtrodden and polluted in our souls. 
However, these are but "words and thoughts." I merely 
mean to say that there are all-engulfing bi<;torical events which 
cannot be shaken off by either will or cunuing, just as it is im­
possible to arrest a sea tide and order it to return. Still this present 
triumphant cynicism after the summer ecstasies is insulting-this 
joy of cynicism, a joy over something nasty which allegedly has 
triumphed over men's enthusiasm ; insulting are these triumphant 
speeches of men not merely despising but even altogether denying 
our people in toto, and, it would seem, conceiving them, as here­
tofore, merely to be an inert mass and working hands, just as they 
have been regarded for two consecutive centuries until the great 
day of February nineteenth. "Should I imitate such people ? What 
kind of idea do they have ? Where did you find it ?"-those are 
questions which nowadays are heard incessantly. This disbelief in 
the spiritual Ic.rc.t: of thగ. people, naturally, is a disbelief in the 
whole of Russia. No doubt, here there are admixed many different 
factors guiding the deniers but would you believe it, there is much 
sincerity in them ! And what is most important of all-there is utter 
ignorance of Rus:,1a. 
Now, is it conceivable that some of them rejoice over our 
Stundism, that they are glad for, in behalf of, the people, for their 
benefit and their good ? "Nevertheless [they argue] this is something 
higher than the former popular beliefs ; nevertheless this can, at 
least, in some degree, ennoble the people." And don't think that 
these are but rare and isolated argumenL. 
By the way, what is this ill-starred Stundism ?-S · 1·eral Rus­
sian workers employed by German colonists grasped the fact that 
the Germans are better off than the Russians, a11d that is so 
because theirs is a different order. Pastors ·vho happened to be 
there explained that theirs is a better order because of the dif­
ference in religion. Thus groups of ignorant Russian people got 
together ; they began to listen to the interpretation of the Gospel ; 
they themselves started readinఛ=; and discussing,-and there ensued 
something which usually occurs in such cases. A vessel is carried 
with some precious vivifying liquid. But presently people get up 
on their feet and begin to shout : "Blind men ! Why do Y"U kiss 
the vessel ?-It is only the content, and 1 t the container, that is 
precious ; you are kissing glass, mere glass ; you are adoring a 
vessel ; you are attributing all the holiness to glass, so that you are 
forgetting its precious content I Idolaters ! Throw away the vessel ! 

s6& 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Break it I Worship only the liquid, and not the glass I" And they 
break the vessel and the vivifying liquid, the precious content, is 
spilled on the earth and, of course, vanishes there. The vessel is 
broken and the liquid is lost. However, while the liquid has not 
yet entirely vanished in the soil, there ensues a hubbub : to save 
something that still remains in the broken potsherds, people begin 
to shout that a new vessel should be promptly brought ; there arises 
a dispute as to how and in which form it should be made. The 
dispute arises from the very start, and promptly, beginning with 
the first two words, the altercation becomes confined to the letter 
of the matter. People are inclined to worship this letter even more 
than the former one so as only to acquire a new vessel as quickly 
as possible. But the dispute grows sharper ; men break up in 
antagonistic groups, and each group l:arries away for itself a few 
drops of the precious liquid, in special multiformed cups picked 
up at random, and the groups no longer communicate one with 
the other. Idolatry grows stronger in proportion to the number of 
the fragments of the broken vessel. 
This is an eternal story, a very old one which began much 
before the time of Martin lvanovich Luther ; but pursuant to 
historical laws almost an identical story repeated itself in our 
Stundism : it is known that they are already breaking up, disputing 
about letters, interpreting the Gospel, each one in accordance with 
his understanding, and the m;lin point is that this is taking place 
from the very start. Poor, unfortunate, ignorant people I And yet 
how much sincerity I How many good beginnings I How much de­
termination to endure, even suffering I How much helpless stupidity 
and petty pedantic hypocrisy, egoistic ambition, sweet gratifying 
haughtiness in this new rank of "saints," even roguery and chi­
caneries ; but the main thing-"from the very start," i.e., ever since 
the creation of the world, since the questions have arisen : What 
is man and what is woman ? What is good and what is evil ? Is there 
or is there not a God ? 
And would you believe that the very fact that they are so 
helpless, that they have to begin from the beginning, precisely 
this fact appeals to many of them, and especially-to some of them : 
"They will start living in accordance with their own ideas which 
means that without fail they will come to some kind of under­
standing." What an argtm1ent I So that the precious heritage, ac­
quired through ages, which should be explained to these ignorant 
people in its great true meaning, and not thrown away upon the 
earth as useless old rags of the past centuries, essentially has been 
irretrievably lost for them. Development, light, progress are again 
pushed far back from them, since from now on isolation will ensue 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
for them,-segregation and seclusion of sectarianism, and instead 
of the anticipated new "sensible" ideas, there will be erected old, 
most antiquated, generally familiar and very nasty idols,-and now 
try to smash them I 
However, there is no reason whatsoever to fear Stundism even 
though it certainly should be pitied. This Stundism has absolutely 
no future ; it will not expand widely ; it will come to a halt and, 
unfailingly, it will merge with some obscure sect of the Russian 
people, with the Khlystis, presumably this most ancient of all 
sects of the world which undeniably has its meaning and which 
conserves it in two ancient attributes : whirling and prophecy. Even 
the Templars were prosecuted for whirling and prophesying ; and 
the Quakers are whirling and prophesying ; and Pythia in ancient 
times whirled and prophesied ; and people used to whirl and prophesy 
at the home of Tatarinova ; and it is very possible that our Red­
stockists will wind up with whirling, while it seems that even now 
they are already prophesying. Let the Redstockists take no offense 
because of this comparison. 
By tne way . wany i:Jeople laugh at the synchronous coincidence 
of the origination in Russia of the two sects-Stundism among the 
common people, and the Redstockist in our most fashionable so­
ciety. And yet hen• there is much which isn't funny. As regards the 
coincidence of t1.r origination of our two sects, undoubtedly they 
arose out of one and the same ignorance, i.e., the utter ignorance 
of their religion. 
3 
FOMA DANILOV-THE RUSSIAN HERO '!'0RTURED 1'0 .-.EATB 
In the spring of last year all newspapers reprinted the news 
which appeared in The Russian Invali.l about the .nartyr's death 
of a non-commissioned officer of the 2nd Turlrestan Rifle Battalion, 
Foma Danilov ; he was taken a prisoner by the Kipchaks and 
barbarously murdered by them on November 2 1 ,  1875, at Margelan, 
after having been subjected to many refmed torture!' because he 
had refused to enter their service and to embrace Mohammedanism. 
The Khan himself promised him pardon, reward and honors on 
condition that he renounce Christ. Danilov answered that he could 
not betray the Cross, and that as a subject of the Czar though 
in captivity, he had to abide by his u .y toward the Czar and 
Christianity. The torturers, having· tortured him to death, were 
astonished by the force of his spirit and gave him the name of 
"bogatyr," which means "valiant knight." 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
At the time this news item, though printed in all newspapers, 
caused but little comment in society, while the papers having pub­
lished it in the form of a usual newspaper entre-filet, did not deem 
it necessary to dwell upon it particularly. In a word, in the case 
of Foma Danilov "it was quiet" in stock-exchange parlance. Sub­
sequently, as is known, the Slavic movement came into being ; then 
came Cherniaiev, the Serbians, Kireev, donations, volunteers, and 
the tortured-to-death Foma was completely forgotten (i.e., by the 
newspapers), and recently additional details amplifying the earlier 
account have been received. It is reported that the Samara governor 
has made inquiries about the family of Danilov, who was a peasant 
of the village Kirsanovka of the Buguruslan county of the Samara 
province, and it was found that he was survived by his wife 
Evfrosinia of the age of twenty-seven and a six-year-old daughter 
Oulita who were in a destitute condition. Relief was given to them 
on the noble initiative of the governor, who applied to several 
persons requesting them to help the widow and the daughter of the 
martyred Russian hero, and to the Samara, provincial zemstvo 
assembly-with the proposal to place Danilov's daughter as a 
stipendiary in one of the educational institutions. Thereupon 1320 
rubles were collected ; 6oo rubles were set aside till the daughter's 
majority, the remainder of the sum was turned over to the widow, 
and the daughter was placed in a school. In addition the Chief of 
the General Staff notified the governor that the Emperor gracefully 
ordered that an annual life pension of 120 rubles be paid by the 
State Treasury to the widow. Thereupon . . .  thereupon the matter 
probably will be again forgotten in view of the current anxieties, 
political fears, enormous problems awaiting their solution, bank­
ruptcies, and so on, and so forth. 
Oh, I do not mean to say that our society took an indifferent 
attitude toward this striking act as one not worthy of attention. 
It is merely a fact that little was said, or, more correctly, almost 
no one spoke about it particularly. However, perhaps, people some­
where did speak among themselves, among merchants, among the 
clergy, for instance, but not in society, not among our intelligentsia. 
Of course, the people will not forget this great death : this hero has 
suffered tortures for Christ and he is a great Russian. The people 
treasure this and will not forget, have never forgotten, such deeds. 
And now I alrea<W hear, as it were, those voices so familiar 
to me : 11No doubt, this is force ; this we admit ; nevertheless it is 
an obscure force which manifested itself in so-to-speak antediluvian, 
bureaucratized forms, and, therefore, why should we be particularly 
talking about the matter ? It does not belong to our world ; it would 
have ben different had this force revealed itself intelligently, con-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
571 
sciously. There are, you see, also other sufferers and other forces ; 
there are infinitely loftier ideas, for instance, the idea of cosmo­
politan ism. . . 
. " 
Notwithstanding these sensible and intelligent voices, it seemc; 
to me permissible and altogether justifiable to say something par­
ticular about Danilov. Moreover, I even ven.,Jre to maintain that 
our intelligentsia would have by no means humiliated itself had it 
dealt with this fact more attentively. For instance, first of all I 
am surprised that no astonishment was revealed-precisely, astonish­
ment. I am not speaking of the people : among them no astonish­
ment is needed and there will be none : Foma's deed cannot seem 
to them extraordinary for the mere reason of their great faith in 
themselves and in their soul. They will react to this heroic exploit 
only by a strong sentiment and a great emotion. However, were 
a similar fact to occur in Europe, that is, the manifestation of 
such a great spiritual force among the English or the French, they 
would have certa!nly heralded it all over the world. Nay, listen, 
gentlemen, dn you know how I represent to myself this obscure 
soldier of the Turkestan oattalion i'-Indeed, this is, so to speak, 
the emblem of Russia, of all Russia, of all our popular Russia, 
the true image of that very Russia in which our cynics and pro­
found sages are now denying the great spirit, every possibility of 
enthusiasm and of the revelation of a great thought and great feel­
ing. Listen, none the less you are not those cynics, you are merely 
intelligently Europeanizing, that -is, essentially, the kindest folk : in 
fact, you do not deny that in summer our people, here and there, 
did manifest extraordinary spiritual potency : men left their homes 
and children, and went to die for religion, for the opp:·pssed, God 
knows whither and God knows with whal means, exa 'y as the 
first crusaders nine centuries ago in Europe,-those ver} crusaders 
whose reappearance Granovsky, for example, would have considered 
almost ridiculous and offensive "in our age of positive problems, 
progress," etc. Let this summer movement vf ours be, in your 
opinion, a blind and even insensible movement, a so-to-speak 
"crusaders' " movement. Nevertheless, it cannot be denied that it 
was firm and magnanimous- if it be viewed from only a sliJ!;htly 
broader standpoint. A great idea was awakening, an idea which, 
at once, has lifted, maybe, hundreds of thousands and millions of 
souls from inertia, cynicism, debauch and ugliness in which. prior 
to that, these souls had been submerged. Y 'lU know, of cour:-t:, that 
our people are considered kindhearted and .:ven intellectually most 
gifted, but still an ignorant elemental mass devoid of consciousness, 
almost solidly addicted to vices and prejudices, almost solidly inde­
cent. But you see, I will venture to express, so to sp௷ak, an axiom : 

572 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
in order to judge the moral force of a people and what they are 
capable of in the future, one has to take into account not that 
level of indecency to which, temporarily, even though in their 
majority, they have sunk, but that elevation of the spirit which 
they are capable of attaining when the time comes. Indecency is 
a temporary misfortune, always dependent upon past and transitory 
circumstances, upon slavery, secular oppression, inveterateness, 
whereas the gift of magnanimity is a perpetual, elemental gift 
which is born with a people, one which is all the more to be valued 
if, despite centuries of slavery, oppression and misery, it is still 
preserved intact in the hearts of thl" people. 
Seemingly, Foma Danilov was one of the most ordinary and 
inconspicuous specimens of the Russian people, inconspicuous as 
the Russian people themselves. (Indeed, to still quite a few they 
are altogether inconspicuous.) Perhaps, in days past, he had been 
leading a loose life ; he may have been fond of drinking ; maybe, 
he even did not pray much, although, of course, he always remem­
bered God. And all of a sudden he is being ordered to change his 
religion under the threat of a martyr's death. In this connection 
one has to recall what these tortures, these Asiatic tortures are I 
He faces the Khan himself, who promises him his favors, and 
Danilov understands perfectly that his refusal unfailingly will 
anger the Khan, will vex the ambition of the Kipchaks because 
"this Christan dog dares to despise Islam to such a degree." Yet, 
notwithstanding everything that awaits him, this inconspicuous 
Russian man endures the cruelest tortures and dies astonishing 
his torturers. You know, .gentlemen, that none of us would have 
done this. To assume martyrdom in public, at times, is even sightly ; 
but here the thing transpired in utter obscurity, in a remote lo­
cality ; no one was looking at him ; besides Foma himself could 
not have thought, and certainly did not suppose, that his heroic 
deed would be heralded all over Russia. I believe some of the 
martyrs, even during the first centuries of the Christian era, when 
enduring their tortures, were partly consoled and alleviated by the 
conviction that their death would serve as an example for the timid 
and oscillating ones, and would increase the number of the fol­
lowers of Christ. For Foma even this great consolation could 
not have existed : who would find it out ?-He was alone among his 
torturers. He was still young. Over there, somewhere, were his young 
wife and daughter. Never is he going to see them again. But be 
it so : "Wherever I may be, I will not act against my conscience, 
and I will endure the tortures."-Indeed, this is truth for truth's 
sake, and not for the sake of ostentation I And no iniquity, no 
sophism with conscience : "1 shall embrace Islam ostensibly ; I shall 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
573 
not yield to temptation ; no one is going to see. Later I shall pray 
for forgiveness ; life is long. I shall perpetrate good deeds." There 
was nothing of the kind : astounding, primitive, elemental honesty. 
Nay, gentlemen, we should hardly have acted in this manner ! 
But this is-we, whereas to our people Danilov's exploit, I 
repeat, is, perhaps, even not surprising. Thrrcin is the point that 
precisely here we have, as it were, the portrait, the full picture 
of the Russian people. This is precisely what makes the thing 
dear to me and, of course, to you. Likewise our people love truth 
for its own sake and not for ostentation. And let them be coarse 
and ugly and sinful and inconspicuous, but when their time comes, 
and a cause of general popular truth arises, then you will be 
astounded by that measure of spiritual freedom which they will 
reveal despite the pressure of materialism, passions, pecuniary and 
material greed, and even in the face of dread of the cruelest martyr's 
death. And they will do and manifest all this simply, f1rmly, with­
out claiming any reward or commendation, without making a dis­
play of thelJl<>Plves : "That in which I believe, I confess." In this 
respect even the most obourate wranglers about "reaction" in the 
people's ideals have nothing to say, since it is unimportant whether 
or not an ideal is reactionary ; the important point is the ability 
to reveal the stronj!est will for the sake of a magnanimous exploit. 
(This ridiculous little idea about "reaction" I introduced here for 
the sake of complete impartiality.) 
You know, gentlemen, the question must be put squarely : I 
maintain that we have nothing to teach such a people. This is a 
sophism but sometimes it does come to my mind. Why, of course, 
we are more educated than the people, but the trouble L-what are 
we going to teach them ! Of cour5e, I am uot speakint •f trades, 
technique, mathematics ; these may be taught even by hi • .-d travel­
ling Germans, if we should fail to teach them. But what are we 
going to impart ? For we are Russians, brethren of this people, and 
this means that we must enlighten them. And )et what do we have 
to impart to them from among the things that are moral and lofty? 
What shall we explain to them ? With what shall we illume their 
"obscure" souls ? The enlightenment of the people-this, 6entlemen, 
is our right and our duty,-this is a right in the highest Christian 
sense : he who knows the good, the true word of life, must, is duty­
bound, to convey it to him who knows not, to his brother groping 
in darkness-thus it is according to the r'lspel. Now, what shall 
we convey to the groping that he does not know better than we? 
Of course, f1rst of all,-teaching is useful, and one has to 
learn. Isn't this so? But the people, even before us, said : "Knowl­
edge is light, ignorance is darkness." Eradication of prejudices, 

574 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
for instance, or the casting down of idols? But within ourselves 
there is such a mass of prejudices, and we have placed before our­
selves so many idols, that the people will unhesitatingly tell us : 
.. Physician, heal thyself." (And they know our idols ; they are 
quite able to discern things ! )-Well, is it self-respect ? Personal 
dignity ?-But our people as a whole respect themselves far more 
than we ; they respect and understand their dignity much more 
deeply than we. In fact, we are awfully ambitious, yet we do not 
respect ourselves at all, nor is there in us the feeling of personal 
dignity,-in no respect whatsoever. Well-to give an example-is it 
for us to teach the people respect for other men's convictions ? Our 
people, even prior to Peter, have proved their respect for other 
men's convictions, whereas we, even among ourselves, do not for­
give one another the slightest deviation from our convictions, and 
those even slightly disagreeing with us we consider scoundrels, for­
getting that he who is apt to lose respect for others, to begin with, 
does not respect himself. Is it for us to teach the people faith in 
ourselves, in our strength ? The people have their Foma Danilovs­
thousands of them, whereas we do not believe in the least in 
Russian strength, and, besides, we regard this disbelief as sublime 
enlightenment and virtually as prowess. 
What is it, finally, that we can teach ? We loathe to the point 
of wrath everything that our people love and respect, for which 
their heart longs. So what .sort of demophiles are we ? It may be 
argued that we love the people all the more if we loathe their 
ignorance wishing them good. Nay, gentlemen, not at all : In fact, 
if we truly loved the people-and not merely in articles and books 
-we should come closer to them ; we should take pains to study 
that which at present, altogether without thinking, abiding by 
European patterns, we seek to exterminate in them. If we should 
do this, perhaps, we ourselves might learn so many things that at 
present we cannot even imagine. 
However, we have one consolation, one great superiority to our 
people, and this is why we so despise them : it is that they are 
nationally-minded and adhere to this with all their strength, whereas 
ours are cosmopolitan convictions, and, for this reason, we have 
lifted ourselves far above them. Now, herein is our whole dissen­
sion, our detachment from the people. And I directly proclaim : 
should we settle this point, should we find the point of reconcilia­
tion, at once our whole discord with the people would come to an 
end. Such a point exists ; and it is very easy to find it. I repeat 
decisively that even our most radical disagreements, essentially, are 
nothing but a mirage. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
575 
CHAPTER II 
1 
A Conciliatory Dream Without Science 
FIRST OF ALL, I shall set forth the most controversial, the 
most ticklish proposition, and I begin with it : 
"Every great people believes, and must believe if it intends 
to live long, that in it alone resides the salvation of the world ; 
that it lives in order to stand at the head of the nations, to affiliate 
and unite all of them, and to lead them in a concordant choir toward 
the final goal preordained for them." 
I assert that it has been thus in the case of all great nations 
of the world ; the most ancient and the youngest ones ; that only 
this faith has raised them to the possibility, each one of them at 
its own time, of Pxercising an enormous influence upon the destinies 
of mankind. Such undeniably was the case of ancient Rome ; so 
it was likewise in the case of Rome during the period of her 
Catholic existence. When the Catholic idea had been inherited by 
France the same h<'ppened there, and during almost two centuries 
France, till her n1o௸t rPcent debacle and de .pondency, all the time 
and undeniably considered herself the mistress of the world at least 
in the moral domain, and at times also in the political field ; the 
leader of its progress and the guide of its future. However, Germany 
has been dreaming about the same, and as against the universal 
Catholic idea and its authority, she set forth as her bM.௹er Protes­
tantism and the unlimited freedom of consCience and 
· 1loration. 
This-I repeat-is more or less the case of all great natiuns in the 
zenith of their development. 
I may be told that all this is an error, and the confession of 
those very nations may be cited, the admissious of their scientists 
and thinkers, who have been specifically writing about the joint 
significance of the European nations which, jointly, participated in 
the creation and consummation of European civilizati(m, and, of 
course, I am not going to deny these admissions. However, leaving 
aside the fact that such final inferences of the admissions, generally, 
constitute the end of the active life of the peoples, I shall merely 
note that these very thinkers and confe&sr ·c;, no matter whai. they 
may have been writing about the univers.tl harmony of nations, 
at the same time and in most cases, with their immediate, live and 
sincere sentiment, continued to believe, exactly as the masses of 
their peoples, that in that choir of nations which constitute world 

576 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
harmony, and the jointly evolved civilization, they (the French, 
for instance) are heading the union ; that they are the most progres­
sive ones who are destined to lead, while the rest merely follow 
their leadership ; that suppose they even borrow something from 
the other nations, nevertheless it is only a tiny bit, whereas the 
other peoples will borrow from them everything, the most essential ; 
that these other nations can live only by their, the leaders', spirit 
and idea, and that they cannot act otherwise than embrace, in the 
long run, their spirit, and, sooner or later, merge with it. 
Even in present-day France, despondent and spiritually dis­
membered, there is one such idea which, to our way of thinking, 
constitutes a new, perfectly normal phase of development of her 
former universal Catholic idea ; virtually fifty per cent of the 
French believe even in our day that therein is concealed not only 
their salvation but that of the world, too,-that is, their French 
socialism. Of course this idea-their French socialism-is an er­
roneous and desperate one. However, at this juncture, it is not its 
quality that is important but the fact that it exists, that it actively 
lives, and that those who profess it entertain no doubts and are 
not despondent as the overwhelming portion of France. 
On the other hand, look at virtually any Englishman, whether 
of the highest or lowest status, whether a lord or a worker, whether 
learned or uneducated, and you will be convinced that every one 
of them, above all, seeks to be an Englishman, to preserve himself 
as such in all phases of his life-private and public, political and 
cosmopolitan, and that he even endeavors to love mankind not 
otherwise than in the gui"5e of an Englishman. 
It may be said that even if this were true, if everything were 
ࢠ I maintain, nevertheless self-intoxication and self-conceit would 
be humiliating to those great nations ; that their significance would 
be reduced by their egoism, by stupid chauvinism, and that not 
only would these fail to add to them vital energy, but, on the 
contrary, they would corrupt the life from the very beginning. It 
may be also argued that such insane and haughty ideas deserve not 
imitation but, on the contrary, extermination by the light of reason 
which destroys prejudices. 
Now, let us say that, on the one hand, this is very true. 
Nevertheless the matter necessarily has to be examined in its other 
aspect, and then it will appear not only not humiliating, but quite 
the reverse. What is there in the fact that a youth with no life 
experience is dreaming of some day becoming a hero? Believe me 
that such haughty and arrogant ideas are, perhaps, more vivifying 
and useful to that lad than the certain prudence of a boy who al­
ready at the age of sixteen believes in the wise rule : "happiness is 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
577 
better than knighthood." Believe me that the life of that former 
youth, even after the misfortunes and failures through which he 
might live, on the whole will still be more satisfying than the 
pacified existence of the prudent companion of his childhood even 
though he be destined to sit all his life on velvet. Such a faith in 
one's self is not immoral and not at all trivi௺.1 boasting. 
The same is true of the nations : let therr be prudent, honest, 
moderate pacific peoples devoid of any impulses-merchants and 
shipbuilders-living opulently and in extreme tidiness. Well, God 
bless them, but all the same they will not go far ; unfailingly, it 
will be mediocrity which in no way will serve the human race : 
such nations lack that energy, that great self-confidence, those 
three moving whales1 upon which all great peoples stand. The belief 
that one wishes and can utter the last word to the world ; that 
it can be revived through the abundance of one's vital force ; faith 
in the sacredness of one's ideals, in the strength of one's love, of 
one's thirst for serving mankind-nay, such a faith is a guaranty 
of the loftiest life of the nations, and it is only through this faith 
that they are in a position to render to humanity the full measure 
of that service which at the time of their inception, they have been 
destined to render by nature herself, and to bequeath to future 
mankind. Only a nation fortified with such a faith is entitled to 
sublime life. 
The ancient legendary knight believed that all obstacles would 
fall before him-all phantoms and monsters ; that he would con­
quer everything and everybody ; that he would achieve everything 
if only he abided by his vow of "justice, chastity and poverty." 
You may say that all these are legends and songs in · ·:l:tich only 
Don Quixote can believe, and that the laws ui actual lif ue quite 
different. If so, I will deliberately trap you, gentlemen, <..id I will 
prove that you are Don Quixotes yourselves ; that you yourselves 
possess an identical idea in which you believe and through which 
you seek to revive mankind. 
In fact, in what do you believe ?-You believe (and I share 
your belief) in cosmopolitanism, i.e., that the natural barriers and 
prejudices which until now have impeded the free intc. :ourse of 
nations by the egoism of their national aspiration, some day will 
fall before the light of reason and consciousness, and that the 
peoples will then start living in one congenial accord, like brethren, 
sensibly and lovingly striving for univer:-:௻ 1 harmony. Gent!\ men, 
what can be loftier, more sacred, than this .aith of yours ? And the 
main thing is that nowhere in the world will you any longer find 
lThis refers to the Norse legend in which the universe is pictured as 
testing on the backs of three huge, moving whales. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
this faith, for instance, in no people in Europe, where the indi­
vidualities of the nations are circumscribed very sharply ; where, 
if such a faith is to be found, it exists not otherwise than in the 
form of a metaphysical conception ; true, an ardent and burning 
conception but nevertheless an abstract one. And in you, gentle­
men, i.e., not only in you but in all us Russians, this is a universal, 
live, fundamental faith. In Russia everybody believes in this con­
sciously and simply, both the educated strata and, through live 
instinct, the common people to whom also religion prescribes 
belief in these same things. Yes, gentlemen, you think that you 
alone of all the Russian intelligentsia are cosmopolitans, while the 
rest are merely Slavophiles and nationalists. But this isn't so : 
Slavophiles and nationalists believe in identically the same things 
as you, and even more firmly than you ! 
I shall refer only to the Slavophiles : indeed, what have they 
been proclaiming through the mouths of their men of action, 
founders and representatives of their doctrine ?-In direct, clear 
and precise statements they have been asserting that Russia, in con­
junction with Slavdom, and at its head, will utter to the whole 
world the greatest word ever heard, and that that word will pre­
cisely be a covenant of universal human fellowship, and no longer 
in the spirit of personal egoism by means of which at present men 
and nations unnaturally, because of the struggle for existence, unite 
with each other in their civilization, setting moral boundaries to 
the free spirit by positive science, at the same time digging ditches 
for each other and spreading about each other lies, blasphemy and 
calumnies. The Slavophiles' ideal was communion in the spirit of 
true and broad love, devoid of deceit and materialism, and on the 
basis of the individual magnanimous example which the Russian 
people, at the bead of the free all-Slavic communion in Europe, 
is destined to set. 
You will tell me that you do not believe in this at all ; that 
all these are abstract speculations. Yet here the important matter 
is not the question how one believes, but the fact that in Russia, 
despite all the discordance, people still agree and concur in this 
ultimate general idea of the universal fellowship of men. This fact 
is undeniable and, in itself, is surprising because this feeling, in 
the form of so vivid and fundamental an urge, exists in no other 
people. And if this ǒ so, this means that in us, in all of us, there 
is a solid and specific national idea-precisely, national. Conse­
quently, if the Russian national idea, in the last analysis, is but 
the universal fellowship of. men, this signifies that our whole benefit 
should reside in the endeavor to finish, for the time being, our 
dissensions, and become Russians and national as quickly as pos-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
579 
sible. Our whole salvation is not to quarrel in advance about the 
question how, in what form, this idea will be realized, in yours 
or in ours, but for all of us to pass from the drawing-room directly 
over to business. 
But precisely here lies the difficulty. 
2 
IN EUROPE WE ARE MERE CANAILLE 
Now, how did you get down to business ? You started long 
ago, quite some time ago ; however, what did you accomplish for 
cosmopolitanism, for the triumph of your idea ? You began with 
aimless vagabondage throughout Europe led by the avid desire 
to be reborn into Europeans, at least outwardly. Throughout the 
entire eighteenth century we were doing nothing but imitating a 
guise. We were absorbing European tastes ; we were even eating 
all sorts of filth. trying not to knit our brows : "See what an Eng­
lishman I am ; I can eat nothing without cayenne pepper ! "  You 
think I am jeering ?-Not in the least. I understand only too well 
that it was impossible to begin differently. Even prior to Peter, 
still under the Moscow czars and patriarchs, one young Moscow 
dandy of those days, one of the progressiveӯ, donned a French cos­
tume with a sword hooked at his side. 
Precisely, we had to start with contempt for our own and 
for ours. If during two whole centuries we have remained at this 
point, without moving either backward or forward, such must 
have been the term fixed for us by nature. True, we dicl .௼!so move : 
contempt for everything that was our own as well as f, 
ours has 
been increasing more and more, especially when we began to under­
stand Europe more fully. However, the sharp segrcration of na­
tionalities and the sharply fixed patterns of national characters, in 
Europe, caused no confusion among us. We Legan precisely with 
a direct "elimination of all contrasts," and we thus evolved the 
cosmopolitan type of a "European," i.e., from the very beginning 
we discerned the general which unites them all,-this is 'iuite char­
acteristic. 
Thereupon, as time went on, having grown cleverer, straight­
way we laid hold of civilization, and at once we adopted a blind 
and faithful belief that, precisely, in civili 1tion resides that "uni­
versality" which is destined to unite manKind. Even Europeans, 
looking upon us, aliens and newcomers, used to express surprise at 
the enthusiastic faith of ours, all the more so as they themselves­
alas-began to lose, little by little, this faith in them௽elves. We 

sSo 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
greeted with rapture the advent of Rousseau and Voltaire ; together 
with the travelling Karamzin we touchingly rejoiced in 1 789 over 
the convocation of the "Etats Generaux," and if later, at the end 
of the first quarter of the current century, we, in accord with 
the progressive Europeans, despaired over their vanished dreams 
and shattered ideals, nevertheless we did not Jose our faith, and 
we even used to console the Europeans themselves. Even the "whit­
est" Russians at home, in their fatherland, forthwith grew red in 
Europe, which is also a most characteristic trait. 
Then, in the middle of our century, some of us gained the 
honor of joining French socialism, accepting it without the slightest 
hesitation as the ultimate solution of cosmopolitan communion, i.e., 
as the realization of that dream of ours which till then had rarely 
tempted us. Thus we mistook for the realization of our aim that which 
was the climax of egoism and barbarity ; the pinnacle of economic 
muddle and confusion ; the culmination of the calumny of human 
nature, and utter eradication of men's freedom. But this did not 
trouble us in the least. On the contrary, perceiving the sad per­
plexity of certain profound European thinkers, we, with utmost 
flippancy, forthwith called them scoundrels and blockheads. We 
completely believed-and still believe-that positive science is fully 
capable of determining the moral boundaries between the individual 
entities and the nations (as if science, were it capable of this, 
could reveal these mysteries prior to the completion of the experi­
ment, i.e., prior to the realization of all destinies of man on 
earth) .  
Our landowners sold their peasant serfs and proceeded to 
Paris in order to publish socialistic magazines, and our Rudins died 
on barricades. Meanwhile we became so detached from the Russian 
soil that we lost every conception of how much this doctrine dif­
fered from the soul of the Russian people. In truth, not only did 
we consider i.he Russian people's character as worthless but we 
even denied the existence of any character in them. We forgot to 
think of it, and with full despotic calmness we were convinced 
(even without raising any questions) that our people would imme­
diately accept everything which we told them, in fact, ordered them. 
In this connection there ci::culated among the people several very 
amusing anecdotes. Our cosmopolitans in every respect have re­
mained landowners in their relation to the people-even after the 
peasant reform. 
And what did we achieve ?-Strange results : mainly that in 
Europe everybody looked- upon us mockingly, while the best and 
unquestionably clever Russians were viewed with haughty conde­
scension. ot even emigration from Russia, that is political emigra-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
tion, and the fullest renunciation of Russia, saved them from that 
haughty condescension. Europeans did not want to recognize us 
as their own despite anything, despite any sacrifices -under any 
circumstances. This meant : Grattez lc Russc et vos verrez le 
Tartare. And thus it stands up to the present. Among them we 
became proverbial. And the more, to please tႏ • .  ႐m, we despised our 
nationality, the more they despised us. We wr:ggled before them · 
. 
1 
J 
subservient y we professed our "European" opinions and convic-
tions, and they haughtily did not listen to us, and usually added 
with a polite smile-as if seeking to get rid of us as quickly as 
possible-that we "did not properly understand them." Specifically 
they were surprised at the fact that we, being such Tartars (les 
Tartares) utterly failed to become Russians, whereas we never were 
able to explain to them that we sought to be not Russians but 
cosmopolitans. True, of late, they managed to understand some­
thing. They came to realize that we want something which they 
fear and which is dangerous to them ; they grasped the fact that 
there are mar.y nf us, eightv millions ; that we know and compre­
hend all European ideas, while they do not know our Russian ideas, 
and that should they even come to know them, they would not 
understand them ; that we speak all languages, while they-only 
their own.-\Vell, thf'y be)!;an to surmise and suspect also many other 
things. It came to the point where they dire-tly called us enemies 
and the future destroyers of European civilization. This is how 
they understood our passionate aim to become cosmopolitans ! 
And yet, under no circumstance can we renounce Europe. 
Europe is our second fatherland, and I am the first ardently to 
profess this ; I l1ave always professed this. To us all i':OJrope is 
almost as dear as Russia ; in Europe resides the entir, 'ribe of 
Japheth, and our idea is the unification of all nations dt:>cending 
from that tribe : even much farther-down to Shem and Ham. Now, 
what's to be done ? 
First of all and above all to become Rus5.ians. If cosmopoli­
tanism is a Russian national idea, then every one of us must be­
come a Russian, i.e., himself. Then everything will change-from 
the very first step. To become a Russian means to cease co despise 
one's own people. And ju!'t as soon as the European perceives that 
we have begun to respect our people and our nationality, he will 
at once begin to respect us. Indeed, the stronger, the more ;Ttde­
pendent we grow in our national spirit, • J,e more strong!) and 
closely shall we reflect ourselves in the Eurupe:m soul, ႑nd h႒႓ing 
become related to it we shall at once become more mtelhg1ble 
J 
0 
to it. Then they would no longer haughtlly turn away from us 
but would listen to us. Then we should even chang·႔ our outward 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
appearance. Having become ourselves, we should at last acquire a 
human, and not apish, countenance. We should acquire the ap­
pearance of free men, and not that of slaves, lackeys, of Potugin. 
Then we should be taken for human beings, and not for interna­
tional outcasts, not for "the canaille" of Europeanism, liberalism 
and socialism. We should even talk to them more intelligently than 
at present because we should find in our people, in their spirit, new 
words which unfailingly would become more intelligible to Euro­
peans. Besides, we ourselves should then understand that much of 
what we used to despise in our people is not darkness but precisely 
light ; not stupidity but reason. And having grasped this, unfail­
ingly, we should utter in Europe such a word as has never been 
heard before. We should then become convinced that the genuine 
social truth resides in no one else but our people ; that their idea, 
their spirit contains the living urge of universal communion of 
men, a fellowship with full respect for national individualities, for 
their preservation, for the maintenance of complete liberty of men, 
with the indication of what liberty comprises, i.e., loving com­
munion, guaranteed by deeds, by the living example, by the factual 
need of brotherhood, and not under the threat of the guillotine, 
not by means of chopping off millions of heads. . 
. . 
However, did I really intend to convince anyone ?-This was 
merely a joke. But man is weak : maybe, some lad belonging to 
the young generation will .read this. 
3 
RusSIAN SATIRE. Virgin Soil. Last Songs. OLD 
REMINISCENCES 
This month I was also occupied with literature, i.e., with 
belles-lettres, "elegant literature," and I read certain things with 
fascination. By the way, recently I have read a foreign opinion 
on Russian satire, i.e., on our present-day, contemporaneous satire. 
It was expressed in France. There is one remarkable deduction-! 
forget the exact words but this is the meaning : "Russian satire is 
afraid, as it were, of a good deed in Russian society. When it 
encounters such a deed, it begins to feel disturbed and does not 
calm down until it discovers somewhere, in the underlying motive 
of that deed,-a scoundrel. At this juncture the satire at once starts 
rejoicing and shouts : 'This is in no sense a good deed ; there is 
absolutely nothing to be glad of. You can see for yourselves that 
here, too, there sits a scoundrel ! ' "  
Is this opinion just ? I do not believe it is. I know only that 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
our satire has brilliant representatives who are very much in vogue. 
The public is very fond of satire ; nevertheless, it is at least my 
conviction that this very public is much more fond of positive 
beauty, that it craves and thirsts for it. Count Leo Tolstoy, un­
questionably, is the most beloved writer among the Russian public 
of· all shades. 
Our satire, no matter how brilliant, doe!'\ in truth suffer from 
a certain indeterminateness-this, perhaps, may be said about it. 
At times, it is impossible to conceive, in toto and generally, what 
exactly our satire seeks to express. It does seem that it has no 
underlying motive ; yet can this be so ? The things in which it 
believes, in the name of which it condemns-these seem to be sub­
merged in the darkness of uncertainty. It is impossible to determine 
what the satire itself considers to be good. 
And, strangely, one begins to ponder over this question. 
I have read Turgenev's Virgin Soil, and I am awaiting the 
second part. 
By the 'N:-tv. I have been writing for thirty years, and through­
out this whole period I have been struck by this amusing observa­
tion : all our critics-and I have been following literature almost 
forty years-those who are no longer and those still living, in a 
word, all those whr;n I remember ; the moment they would start 
writing, with a I·•·I௾:h of solemnness, some review of the current 
Russian literature-this is equally true of the present and of days 
past-(formerly our magazines used to give in January annual 
reviews), they would more or less invariably, and with great delight, 
resort to one and the same phrase : "In our day, when literature 
is in a state of sucli decadence," or "in our day wl-.. '" Russian 
literature is in a state of such stagnation,· or "in our 
terary ill 
times," or "wandering through the deserts of Russian l;terature," 
etc.-The same thought twisted a thousand different ways. 
Yet in the course of these forty years there appeared the 
last works of Pushkin ; Gogo! came and went ; we had Lermontov ; 
Ostrovsky, Turgenev, Goncharov and at least ten or more other 
most talented belles-lettrists who made their appear௿nces. And this­
in belles-lettres only ! It may be positively asserted that :a so short 
a period, never, in any literatun:, did there appear so many gifted 
writers as in Russia,-all along, without intervals. Even so, now, 
it must have been only last month, I was reading about stagnation 
in Russian literature and the "deserts cf ࢟ ussian belles-let tees." 
However, this is merely an amusing oo..;ervation-an altogether 
innocent thing which has no significance whatsoever. But it de­
serves a smile. 
Naturally, I am going to say nothing abom Virgin Soil; 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
everybody is awaiting the second part. Besides, it is not for me 
to speak. The artistic merit of Turgenev's creations is unques­
tioned. I shall only remark that on the top of page 92 of the novel 
(see Messenger of Europe) there are fifteen or twenty lines in 
which, in my opinion, is condensed, as it were, the whole idea of 
the work, the author's view of his subject. It is to be regretted 
that this view is quite erroneous, and I profoundly disagree with 
it. Those are the few words which the author says about Solomin, 
one of the characters in the novel. 
In the January issue of The Domestic Records I have read 
Nekrasov's Last Songs. Passionate songs and words not fully told, 
as always in Nekrasov, but what painful moans of a sick man I 
Our poet is very sick and-this he told me himself-he sees clearly 
his situation. But somehow I don't believe it. . . .  His is a strong 
and susceptible constitution. He is suffering terribly (he has some 
kind of an intestinal ulcer-a sickness which is even difficult to 
diagnose) ,  but I refuse to believe that he will not survive till spring, 
and then he can go to some spa abroad, with a different climate, 
and his health will be restored-of this I am convinced. 
Strange things happen to people. We rarely saw each other ; 
we also had misunderstandings, but there was in our lives one 
incident which I could never forget, namely, our first meeting. And 
imagine, recently I called on Nekrasov, and he, the ailing and the 
jaded, from the very first .words began to tell me that he remem­
bered those days. Then-this was thirty years ago ! -there happened 
something so youthful, so fresh and good which is forever preserved 
in the hearts of those who have lived through this experience. We 
were both slightly over twenty years old. I was then residing in 
Petersburg ; one year before I resigned from the engineers' corps, 
not knowing why, full of vague and uncertain aspirations. This 
was in May, 1845· Early in the winter, suddenly, I began to write 
Poor Folks, my first novel ; before that I had never written any­
thing. Having finished the novel, I did not know what to do with 
it, and to whom it should be submitted. I had no literary acquaint­
ances whatever, save D. V. Grigorovich ; but in those days he, 
too, had written nothing except a short article Petersburg Hurdy­
Gurdy Men for one of the almanacs. If I am not mistaken, he was 
about to leave for his estate for the summer, meanwhile living in 
Nekrasov's apartmenఀ. Having called on me, he said : "Bring your 
manuscript : [as yet he had not read it] Nekrasov intends to pub­
lish an almanac for the coming year ; I will show it to him." I 
brought my manuscript. Nekrasov I saw but for a moment ; we 
shook hands. I was perplexed by the thought that I had come with 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
my composition, and I quickly left having scarcely said a word 
to Nekrasov. I gave little thought to success, and I was afraid of 
"the party of The Domestic Records," as people used to call it 
in those days. I had been reading Bielinsky with enthusiasm for 
several years, but he seemed threatening and dreadful, and, at times, 
I would say to myself : "He will ridicule roy Poor Folks /"-but 
only at times. I wrote the novel passionately. almost with tears. 
"Is it possible that all this, all these minutes through which I have 
lived with pen in hand working on this novel,-can it be that all 
this is a lie, a mirage, a wrong sentiment ?"-But, of course, thus 
I thought only now and then, and doubt forthwith returned to me. 
In the evening of the same day that I submitted the manu­
script, I went far off to visit a former friend of mine. All night 
we spoke about Dead Souls and read the novel for how long a time 
-1 don't remember. In those days it used to be this way among 
young men ; two or three of them would get together : "Gentlemen, 
shall we read Gogol ?"-They would sit down and read, sometimes, 
all night. Then among the youth there were many who, as it were, 
were penetrated .viLh ఁome.hing and were awaiting something. 
I returned home at four o'clock, in a white Petersburg night, 
bright as a day. The weather was beautiful and warm, and upon 
entering my apartment I did not go to bed, but opened the window 
and seated myself i n  front of it. Suddenly T heard the bell ring. 
This surprised me very much. Presently Grigorovich and Nekrasov 
rushed upon me and in a perfect transport started embracing me, 
and both were almost crying. 
In the evening they came home early, took my manuscript 
and began to read it, just for a test. "We shall be ablం to judge 
from the first ten pages." But having read t.!a pages, th·· 
decided 
to read ten more pages, and thereupon, without interrup. !.JD, they 
sat all night till morning reading aloud and taking turns when one 
grew tired. "He is reading about the studt:nt's death,"-Grigorovich 
later told me, when we were alone-"and sudde;;ly I notice, in that 
place where the father runs behind the coffin, Nekrasov's voice 
begins to falter, once, then a second time, and then, losing control 
over himself, he raps upon the manuscript with his palrr:, exclaim­
ing : 'The rascal ! '-meaning you. And thus all night." 
After they had fimఃhed reading ( I I  2 pages in all), they 
unanimously decided to call on me immediately : "What does it 
matter that he is sleeping I We'll wake hirr up. This is moa im­
portant than sleep ! "  Subsequently, having ఄ.udied Nekrasov's dis­
position, I often wondered about this incident : his is a reserved, 
almost suspicious character, cautious and uncommunicative. At 

586 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
least, this is bow I always sized him up, so that the minute of 
our first meeting was in truth the manifestation of a most profound 
feeling. 
They stayed with me half an hour, or so, and during that 
time we managed to discuss God knows how many topics, under­
standing each other from the first syllable, hastening, with ex­
clamations. We spoke about poetry and truth and "the existing 
situation," and, it goes without saying, about Gogol, quoting from 
The Revizor and Dead Souls, but principally-about Bielinsky. 
"I will give him your novel today, and you will see-what a man ! 
What a man ! You will get acquainted ; you will see what a soul 
he bas ! "-Nekrasov was telling me enthusiastically, with both 
hands shaking me by my shoulders. "Well, now sleep, sleep ! We 
are leaving you, and tomorrow--come to us ! "  How could I sleep 
after their visit ! What ecstasy ! What a success ! And principally 
-the sentiment was dear. I remember distinctly : "A fellow meets 
with success, he is praised, people meet him, congratulate him ; 
but they came running with tears, at four o'clock, to wake me up 
because this is more important than sleep . . . Ah, how nice ! "  
This is what I was thinking. How could I sleep ! 
That same day Nekrasov brought the manuscript to Bielinsky. 
He worshipped Bielinsky, and it seems that he loved him more than 
any one else in his life. At that time N"ekrasov had not yet written 
anything as important as the things which he wrote shortly there­
after-one year thence. As far as I know, Nekrasov happened to 
come to Petersburg, all alone, at the age of sixteen. He also started 
writing almost at that ·age. I know little about his acquaintance 
with Bielinsky, but Bielinsky discovered him from the very begin­
ning, and, perhaps, has exercised a strong influence upon the mood 
of his poetry. Notwithstanding Nekrasov's youthfulness in those 
days, and the difference in age between them, there must have 
transpired such moments, and such words must have been uttered 
as have a lasting effect and bind people with indissoluble ties. 
"A new Gogol has appeared ! "-exclaimed Nekrasov entering 
Bielinsky's apartment with my Poor Folks.-"Gogols grow like 
mushrooms in your midst"-severely remarked Bielinsky ; but he 
took the manuscript. When, in the evening, Nekrasov again called 
on him, he found him in a state of real agitation : "Bring him, 
bring him along as soon as possible." 
And now (this, then, was already the third day) I was brought 
to Bielinsky. I recall that, at first glance, I was struck by his 
appearance, his nose, hiఅ forehead. For some reason I imagined 
him-"this awful, this dreadful critic"-quite differently. He met 
me very gravely and with reserve. "Well,"-I said to myself-"thus 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
it should be." However, it seems that not one minute had passed 
when the picture radically changed : it was gravity of an individual, 
of a great critic meeting a twenty-two-year-old author-beginner, 
but, so to speak, gravity coming from his respect for those feelings 
which he sought to convey to me as quickly as possible. He began 
to speak ardently with burning eyes. "But dr. you, yourself, under­
stand"-he repeated to me several times, screaming, as was his habit, 
-"what you have written ! "  He always screamed when he spoke 
in a state of great agitation. "You may have written, guided by 
immediate instinct, as an artist, but did you yourself rationalize 
all this dreadful truth which you have pointed out to us ? It is 
impossible that at your age of twenty you could have understood 
it. Now, this unfortunate functionary of yours-why, he has so 
long and desperately sweated in service, he has reduced himself 
to such a state that he does not even dare to consider himself 
unlucky-from humility, and he is almost inclined to treat the 
slightest complaint as an act of free-thinking ; he does not even 
dare claim his right to misfortune, and when a kind man, his gen­
eral, gives him that hunJred rubles,-he is crushed, annihilated 
by amazement that one like himself could be pitied by 'their 
excellency'-not 'his excellency' but 'their excellency' as he ex­
presses himself in your covel ! And that torn-off button ! That 
minute when he kisses the general's hand,-why, this is no longer 
compassion for this unfortunate-this is horror, horror ! In this 
very gratitude is his horror ! This is tragedy ! You have touched 
upon the very essence of the matter ; by one stroke you have in­
dicated the main thing. We, publicists and critics, we merely de­
liberate ; we try to explain this with words, but you an artist, 
with one trait, with one stroke, in an i ... .:.ge, you se' rorth the 
very gist, so that one can feel it with one's own hana, so as to 
enable the least reasoning reader to grasp everything at once ! This 
is the mystery of art ! This is the truth uf art ! This 1s the artist's 
service to truth ! To you, as an artist, truth is revealed and de­
clared ; it came to you as a gift. Treasure, then, your gift, be faith­
ful to it, and you will become a great writer ! "  . . .  
All this he was telling me then. All this he later •aid about 
me also to many others who are still living and who can corroborate 
my account. In a state of ecstasy I left him. I stopped at the 
corner "'f his house, looked at the sky, at the bright day, at passers­
by, and with my whole being I felt that a solemn momer.' had 
occurred in my life, a break forever ; th 
• .  something altogether 
new had begun, something I had not anticipated even in my most 
impassioned dreams. (And in those days I was an awful dreamer.) 
"And am I in truth so great ?"-I was bashfully asking myself in 

sss 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : t877 
a state of some timid ecstasy. Oh, don't you laugh I Later, never 
did I think that I was great, but then-was it possible to resist ? 
-"Oh, I shall prove worthy of this praise.-And what men I What 
men ! It is here that one finds men ! I shall earn this praise ! I 
shall endeavor to become as beautiful as they ! I shall remain 
'faithful' !  How lightminded I am ! And if only Bielinsky knew 
what nasty, shameful thoughts dwell within me ! And yet people 
keep saying that these litterateurs are haughty and ambitious. True, 
such men are to be found only in Russia ; they are lone, but only 
they possess the truth, and truth, the good, veracity always con­
quer and triumph over vice and evil. We shall triumph 1-0h, I long 
for them ! I long to be with them I "  
I was thinking all this ; I recall that moment with fullest 
lucidity. Thereafter I never coulJ forget it. This was the most 
delightful minute in my whole life. When I was serving my term 
of hard labor it fortified me spiritually every time I recalled it. 
Even now invariably I recall it with ecstasy. 
And now, after thirty years, as I recently sat at the bed 
of the sick Nekrasov, I recalled the whole minute, once more living 
through it. I did not remind him of it in detail ; I reminded him 
only of the fact that these minutes of ours did exist, and I could 
see that he remembered them. I knew that he did remember them. 
When I returned from Siberia he showed me a poem in his book. 
"At that time, this I wrote about you''-said he. Yet we have lived 
our whole lives apart. On his sick-bed he is now recalling his friends 
who are no longer : 
Their proplietic songs have been silenced : 
They fell victims of treason and spite 
In the blossom of youth, and their portraits 
Look on me with reproach and with blight. 
"With reproach"-indeed, these are painful words. Did we remain 
"faithful" ?  Did we ? Let everyone answer the question according 
to his own judgment, his own conscience. But do read these suf­
fering sons yourselves, and let our beloved and passionate poet be 
revived in your hearts I A poet with passion for suffering ! . . .  
4 
THE Boy CELEBRATING His SAINT's DAY 
Do you remember Count Tolstoy's Childhood and Youth 7 
There, there is a little boy, the hero of the story. But he is not 
an ordinary boy, not like other children, and not like his brother 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Volodia. He is only about twelve years old, yet such thoughts and 
feelings come to his mind as are not akin to those of children 
of his age. He gives himself passionately to his meditations and 
feelings, but he knows already that it is better to keep them to 
himself. Bashful chastity and lofty pride prevent him from reveal­
ing these dreams and Sf'ntiments. He envie" his brother and con­
siders him incomparably superior to himsel., especially as far as 
alertness and the features of the face are concerned, and yet he 
has a secret presentiment that his brother in all respects is inferior 
to him ; he tries to banish this thought which he regards as mean­
ness. All too frequently he looks at himself in the mirror, and 
he comes to the conclusion that he is very ugly. The thought 
glimmers in his mind that nobody loves him, that he is despised. 
In a word, this is a rather unusual boy, and yet one belonging 
to that type of faptily of the middle-upper nobility strata of which 
Count Leo Tolstoy, in accordance with Pushkin's bequest/ was 
the full-fledged poet and historian. 
Now, ఆuests gather at their house, a large Moఇcow family 
house ; the boy ':;, ::.i::.ter '-elebrates her saint's day. Adults are ac­
companied by their children, boys and girls. Games are started ; 
then dancing begins. Our hero is sluggish ; he dances worse than 
the rest. He seeks to distinguish himself by wit, but. in this he 
does not succeed -:md, as chance would have it, there are so many 
pretty girls here-and coupled with this is his perpetual thought, 
the persistent suspicion that he is the worst among all the others. 
In despair, he resolves to do something so as to astotmd everyone. 
In the presence of all the girls and all those uppish elder boys, 
who look down on him with utter neglect, suddenly, bPside himself 
with disheartenment, with that feeling \:!:_b which IJP· leaps into 
an abyss forming itself under one's feet, he shows his tL .gue to the 
tutor and with all his strength he strikes him with his fist ! "Now 
everybody knows what he is ! He has made a displaJ- of himself ! "  
Disgracefully he is dragged into a closet, and there he is locked up. 
Deeming himself lost forever, the boy begins to meditate : he will 
run away from home, he will enlist in the army ; in a battle he 
will kill many Turks, and then fall wounded. Victorv ! "Where 
is our savior ?"-cries everybod:;' ; he is kissed and embraced. Now 
he is back in ::\loscow. He strolls along the Tverskoy Boulevard 
with his bandaged arm. He meet the Emperor . . . .  And suddenly 
the thought that the door will be opened and the tutor wi,: enter 
with rods dispels those dreams like dusl. Jther dreams begin. All 
of a sudden he invents the reason why "everybody dislikes him 
lDostoicvsky made a mistake : Leo Tolstoy was born in 1828 ; Pushkin 
died in 1837· 

590 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
so" : probably he is a foundling, and this is being concealed from 
him. . . .  Tht' whirlwind increases in strength : now he is dying ; 
people enter the closet and find his body ; "Poor boy ! "  Everybody 
pities him. "He was a good boy ! It is you who ruined his life"­
the father says to the tutor . . . .  Tears choke the dreamer . . . .  This 
whole story winds up with the child's illness, fever, delirium. This 
is a most serious psychological essay dealing with a child's soul. 
It is wonderfully written. 
I have recalled this essay in detail intentionally. I received 
a letter from K-v in which the death of a child-also a twelve-year­
old boy-is depicted. And . . . possibly there is something similar 
here. However, I shall quote parts of the letter without changing 
a single word in the quotations. The topic is curious. 
"On November 8, after dinner, the news spread in town that a 
suicide had taken place : a twelve- or thirteen-year-old boy, a high­
school pupil, had hanged himself. Here are the circumstances of the 
case. A school-master teaching a subject, the lesson of which, that 
morning, the deceased boy failed to learn, punished the boy by 
retaining him at school till five o'clock in the evening. The pupil 
walked around for a while ; then he untied a rope from a pulley 
which he happened to notice ; he tied the rope to a nail on which 
usually the so-called golden or red plate hangs which, for some 
reason, had been removed that day, and hanged himself. The watch­
man who had been washing the floor in the adjacent rooms, upon 
discovering the unfortunate boy, hastened to the inspector. The 
inspector came running ; the suicide was extricated from the 
noose, but they failed to revive him . . . .  What was the cause of the 
suicide ? The boy was not inclined toward violence and bestiality ; 
generally speaking, he studied well, and only of late he had re­
ceived several unsatisfactory marks from his school-master, and for 
this he was punished . . . .  It is rumored that both the boy's father, 
a very severe man, and the boy himself, that day celebrated their 
saint's day. Perhaps the youngster, with childish delight, was medi­
tating how he would be greeted at home-by his mother, father, 
little brothers and sisters. . . . And now he has to sit all alone, 
hungry, in an empty building and ponder over the father's dreadful 
wrath which he will have to face, over the humiliation, shame and, 
perhaps, punishment which he will have to endure. He knew about 
the possibility of committing suicide (and who among children 
of our epoch do not know this ?). One feels terribly sorry for the 
deceased boy, for the inspector, an excellent man and pedagogue, 
whom the pupils adore ; one also feels afraid for the school within 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
59 I 
whose walls such phenomena take place. What did the classmates 
of the deceased and other children studying there, among whom 
in the preparatory classes there are perfect little darlings, feel 
when they learned about the incident ? Isn't this too harsh a train­
ing ? Isn't too much significance attached to marks-to twos and 
ones, to golden and red plates, on the nails 'lf which pupils hang 
themselves ? Isn't there too much formalism and dry heartlessness 
in the matter of our education ?" 
Of course, one feels awfully sorry for the little boy celebrating 
his saint's day, but I will not enlarge upon the probable causes of 
this sad inrident, and particularly upon "marks, twos, and exces­
sive severity," etc. All these also existed before, and there were 
no suicides, so that the cause is not to be sought here. I took the 
episode from Count Tolstoy's Youth because of the similarity of 
the two cases ; yet there is also an enormous difference. No doubt 
Misha, who celebrated his saint's day, killed himself not from 
anger and not merely from fear. Both these feelings-anger and 
pathological rpar-are too simple, and these would more probably 
find an outcome in tkemךetves. However, fea1 of punishment could 
have exercised some influence, especially in the presence of patho­
logical suspiciousness. Nevertheless, even in this case the feeling 
could have been m••ch more complex, and again it is very possible 
that there transp.n·d somethmg similar to what was depicted by 
Count Tolstoy, i.e., suppressed, not yet conscious, childish queries, 
a strong feeling of some oppressive injustice, an early suspicious 
and painful perception of personal nullity, a pathologically de­
veloped query : "Why does everybody so dislike me ?" a passionate 
desire to compel people to pity one, i.e., a passional" thirst for 
love on the part of them all, and a multit..:..i;., a multJtr· ࢞ of other 
complications and nuances. 
The point is that these or other such nuances, unfailingly, 
were there, but there were also traits of SLme new realu;y, altogether 
different from that which prevailed in the ;>acified and firmly, 
long ago structuralized landowner's family of the middle-upper 
stratum of which Count Tolstoy was our historian, and apparently 
at that very epoch when the former order of nobility "Stablished 
upon the earlier landowners' fou1;dations, was affected by some new, 
still unknown but radical change,-at least by some enormous re­
generation into novel, still latent, almost utterly unknown forms. 
There is here in this incident of the bov celebrating his ··.aint's 
day one particular trait distinctly belong .g to our epoch. Count 
Tolstoy's boy could meditate with valetudinary tears of effete emo­
tionalism in his soul that they would enter the closet and would 

592 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
find him dead, and that they would begin to love and pity him, 
and blame themselves. He could even have meditated about suicide, 
but only meditated : the rigorous order of the historically formed 
noble family would have had its effect, even upon a twelve-year-old 
child, and would have prevented the dream from being converted 
into reality, whereas here-the boy meditated and acted accordingly. 
However, in pointing this out, I am speaking not only about 
the present-day epidemic of suicides. One feels that here something 
is not so ; that an enormous part of the Russian order of life was 
left entirely without observation and without a historian. At least, 
it is clear that the life of our middle-upper stratum of nobility, so 
graphically depicted by our belles-lettrists, already constitutes an in­
significant and segregated little corner of Russian life. Who will 
be the historian of the other little comers, apparently, quite nu­
merous ? And if, in this chaos which has long prevailed-but which 
is particularly noticeable at present-in our social life, as yet, the 
normal law and guiding thread cannot be discovered, perhaps, even 
by an artist of Shakespearean magnitude,-who is going to elucidate 
at least a fraction of this chaos, even without the hope of finding 
the leading thread ? 
The principal thing is that, as yet, no one seems to be con­
cerned about this matter,-that it is still premature even to our 
greatest artists. Unquestionably there is in Russia a life which is 
in a state of decomposition, and consequently this brings about a 
disintegrating family. However, we have the essential and a life 
forming itself anew, on novel foundations. Who will discern and 
indicate them ? Who is· in a position to determine and express­
even though slightly-the laws of both this decomposition and the 
new construction ? Or is this still too early ? However, has even the 
old been fully noted ? 
FRoM THE EonoR's OFFICE 
Despite my categorical statement in the preceding December 
issue of the Diary, people still keep sending me letters with the 
question : "Am I or am I not going to publish the new magazine 
Light ?" and they enclose postage for replies. Once more, and for 
the last time, I am advising all inquirers that not I, but Nikolai 
Petrovich Wagner, is publishing the periodical Light, and that I 
am taking no part in its editorship. 
Madam 0. A. A-va, who wrote to Editor's Office concerning 
her work in connection with examinations, is requested to send 
her correct address. The former one, given by her, on Mokhovaia 
Street, proved erroneous. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
FEBRUARY 
CHAPTER I 
1 
Self-Appointed Prophets and Lame Coopers who Con­
tinue to Construct the Moon on Gorokhovaia Street. One 
of the Most Unknown Great Russian Men 
593 
THE EASTERN question, as heretofore, is before every­
body,s eyes. Much as we have tried to forget about it and divert 
ourselves with everything that happened to be around-with butter­
week, Virgin Soil, bankruptcies, avowed scoundrels,-much as we 
endeavored to embrace cynicism, assuring everybody-and in the 
first place ourseh•es-"That nothing at all has happened ; that every­
thing was f::Jhricated and counterfeited" ;  much as we sought to 
bury our heads under the pillow-like little children-to avoid see­
ing the grim phantom,-the phantom is still before our eyes ; it 
did not depart anywhere ; it stands and threatens as hitherto. Every­
one-the wrathful ':ynic and the sincere citizen and the debaucher 
serenely divertir ·V himself and the mere i-ller-everyone feels and 
remembers that there is this something,-something that has by 
no means been settled or finished, and yet pressing and necessary 
which, sooner or later, will unfailingly call and summon us for the 
denouement and that without fail 
Something surely must he done, 
Somehow this must be concluded. 
And the least we can do is to undertake something, or to conclude 
the thing somehow, and it would be be.,t to conclu1.1e the thing in 
the best way. 
:Meanwhile time rolls and rolls ; spring is on the way, and what 
is spring going to bring us ? Some people cry that it is too late. 
This only God knows : there is always time for a go(lif deed. Per­
haps something may work ibelf out at least by spring. Maybe 
something will be finaliy settled, that is, at least for one year. For 
at present no one makes plans in Europe in connection with the 
Eastern question for more than one ye;tr. all the more so ao: Turkey 
herself can hardly last one year. And t1. point is not in Turkey, 
but what will remain after her. These final European decisions for 
one year are, perhaps, advantageous ; well, to others-not very. 
And what is going to happen to the others, esperi11Iy those others 

594 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
who are beyond the Danube ? However, only the Russian people 
think about them. 
Yes, they do think. And say what you may, much as we have 
been exerting all our efforts, denying all winter our summer move­
ment, yet, in my opinion, it did continue all winter throughout 
Russia. exactly as in the summer-undeviatingly and faithfully, 
but calmly and with the hope for the Czar's decision. And, of course, 
it will continue to the very end, despite our prophets who managed 
to discern-and precisely last summer-in the image of Russia only 
a sleeping, hideous, drunken creature which extended itself from the 
"icy Finnish rocks to the flaming land of Colchis," with a colossal 
bottle in its hands. To my way of thinking, even if these prophets of 
ours fail to see what gives life to Russia, so much the better : they 
will not meddle and hinder ; and even should they start meddling, 
they would miss the target. 
You see, here the point is that our Europeanism and our 
"enlightened" European view on Russia-is the same old moon 
which the same journeyman lame cooper is constructing on Goro­
khovaia Street, and he is making it as badly as before,-this he is 
proving every minute. Only the other day he has also proved it. 
Henceforth he will be making it still more incompetently. Well, 
let him : a German, besides, a lame German. One has to have com­
passion. 
And what does Russia care about such prophets ? Nowadays 
we wouldn't even scratch our noses-past times have passed. 
Some time ago there was mention in the newspapers that 
this winter more than one party of poor little children, total orphans 
belonging to families disrupted by the war, was brought to Moscow 
from the Slavic lands. They are being placed in private homes and 
institutions. It would be nice if, at length, all this should continue 
and be organized all over Russia on the largest possible scale : well, 
this is only a favor, while these little ones must be looked after 
for they are all future Slavs. 
Apropos. I asked myself several times : how did those several 
hundred thousand mouths feed themselves-those Bulgarians, Bos­
nians, Herzegovinans and others who have fled from their torturers, 
after massacres and ruin, to Serbia, Montenegro, Austria and else­
where at random ? Taking into account the amount of money re­
quired for their subఈistence and knowing that neither the Serbians 
nor the Montenegrins have at their disposal such sums and that at 
present they themselves have hardly anything to eat,-one fails to 
understand how these hundreds of thousands could feed themselves 
with their little children, how they managed to clothe themselves 
and their children in winter. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
595 
It is said that recently another 11party of little ones," between 
the ages of three and thirteen years, was brought to Moscow ; they 
were adopted by the Pokrov Community of the Sisters of Charity. 
It is also reported that the Sisters have placed these little Serbian 
girls together with Bulgarian girls who arrived earlier, and that 
they are supervised by a Sister who speaks the Serbian language, 
which makes the children glad and happy. Of course, the children 
are kept warm and comfortable, but a friend of mine who recently 
returned from Moscow related to me a most characteristic anecdote 
about these same children : the Serbian girls are sitting in one 
corner, and the Bulgarian girls in another, and they refuse either to 
play together or to speak to each other. When the Serbian girls 
are asked why they do not want to play with the Bulgarian girls, 
they answer : "We gave them arms to fight the Turks with us, but 
they hid the arms and did not go to fight the Turks." In my opinion, 
this is very curious. If eight- and nine-year-old babies speak this 
language, they must have picked it up from their fathers, and if 
such words of the fathers pass on to the children, this means that 
there is alJ unGuc.stionab:Ⴇ and awful discorci between the Balkan 
Slavs. Yes, that eternal discord among Slavs ! They perpetuate it 
in their traditions and preserve it in their songs, and without their 
enormous unifying center-Russia, there can be no Slavic accord, 
the Slavs will 
v· .nish altogether from the face of the earth-no 
matter what SeriJ1an intelligentsia and European-civilized Czechs 
might be dreaming. . . . There are still many dreamers among them. 
Well, almost all of them are dreamers . . . .  
Do you remember in Pushkin's Songs of the We.;tern Slavs 
-The Song about the Battle at Great Zenitza ? There, the insurgents, 
headed by Radivoy, started a campaign :>Ⴈainst thf' J'·Irks. 
And Dalmatians, beholding our army, 
Turned up their long mustarhes, 
Put their hats on awry 
And said : "Take us along with you ! "  
Beglerbey with his Bosnians 
Against us marched from Banialuki 
But as soon ..LS their horses started neighing, 
And their crooked swords flashed in the sun 
On that sunny morn at the Great Zenitza, 
The Dalmatian traitors dispe_ ··d shamelessly ! 
By the way, I asked : "Do you remember The Songs of the 
Western Slavs," etc. I can answer in advance for everybody that 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
nobody remembers either The Song about the Battle at Great 
Zenitza or Pushkin's Songs of the Western Slavs themselves. Well, 
save some specialists, philologists, or some very old men. Perhaps 
I am badly mistaken, but of this I am firmly convinced. And yet, 
do you know, gentlemen, that The Songs of the Western Slavs is 
Pushkin's masterpiece among his masterpieces, not to speak of the 
prophetic and political significance of these verses which appeared 
fifty years ago. The fact of the appearance in those days of these 
Songs in Russia is important : this is a presentiment of the Slavs 
on the part of the Russians ; this is the Russians' prophecy to the 
Slavs about future brotherhood and communion. Even so I have 
never read in any criticism concerning these "Pushkin's composi­
tions" that they were his chef d'reuvre. They were considered­
so-so, whereas they are precisely a masterpiece, all that is sub­
lime by reason of its significance. 
In my judgment as yet, we have not begun to understand 
Pushkin : he is a genius who was many years ahead of Russian 
consciousness. He was already a Russian, a real Russian, who, by 
the power of his genius reshaped himself into a Russian, whereas 
we are still taking our lessons from the lame cooper. Pushkin was 
one of the first Russians who fully conceived in himself the Rus­
sian ; who drew the Russian out of himself, and showed by his 
example how the Russian should look upon his people, and the 
Russian family and Eu::ope, and the lame cooper, and the brethren 
Slavs. No Russian has ever held a more humane, a loftier, a saner 
view than Pushkin. 
However, for the .time being, I shall not enlarge upon this, 
but about The Songs I may merely remark that, as is known, they 
were borrowed by Pushkin from the French, from Merimee's book, 
La Gouzla, which, according to his own admission, he wrote hap­
hazardly, without leaving Paris. This most talented French writer, 
subsequently a senateur, almost a relative of Napoleon III, who 
is now dead, depicted in that Gouzla under the guise of Slavs, of 
course, only Frenchmen-even the French Parisians : they don't 
know how to write differently. To a real Frenchman there exists 
in the world nothing but Paris. Having read the book, and having 
addressed an inquiry to its author in Paris, Pushkin composed 
from it his Songs, i.e., from the French depicted by Merimee he 
restored the Slavs, and of course, now these Songs of the Western 
Slavs are songs of genuine Slavs who even became related to the 
Russians. 
It stands to reason. that no such songs exist in Serbia ; the 
Serbians have other songs, but this makes no difference : Pushkin's 
are all-Slavic, popular songs, which poured out of the Slavic heart, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
597 
expressing the spirit of the Slavs, their image, their meaning, their 
customs, their history. I would show to those highly educated 
Serbians, who last summer have been looking upon the Russians so 
distrustfully, for instance, Pushkin's song about Georgi the Black 
or that Song about the Battle at Great Zenitza. These two master­
pieces among The Songs are diamonds of the first magnitude in 
Pushkin's poetry, and precisely because of this they are utterly 
unknown in our schools not only by the pupils but most probably 
also by the teachers who will be astonished to hear, for the first 
time, that these songs, and not The Caucasian Captive, not The 
Gypsies, are such masterpieces. And yet it would have been a 
good idea, at least during last year, to popularize The Songs in 
our schools. 
However, judging by the course of events, it is doubtful that 
the Serbians will soon learn about this most unknown of all great 
Russian men. Thus, I believe, one can dt'fme our great Pushkin 
about whom thousands and tens of thousands among our intelligent­
sia do not know, that he was a poet, a Russian of great magnitude, 
for whose mor.u111ent, ur. to the present, we were unable to collect 
the necessary sum,-this trait will be noted in our history. And 
the Serbians, upon reading these Songs, of course, would perceive 
what we think abnut their liberty, whether or not we respect it, 
whether or not .ve are rejoicing over it, and whether or not we 
seek to subject them to our rult' and to deprive them of that liberty. 
However, enough has been said about poetry. And let people 
not smile haughtily at me : "See, what trifles he is talking about ! "  
This is no trifle : in Russia i t  is still necessary to speak much about 
Pushkin, and this for a long time in the future. 
2 
HoME-BAKEu GIANTS AND THE H•··••fiLlATED Sc 'l OF THE 
"NEST." AN ANECDOTE ADOUT THE SKIN STRIPPED FROM 
THE BACK. THE SUPERIOR INTERESTS OF CIVILIZATION 
AND "LET THEM BE DAMNED IF THEY ARE TO BE BouGHT 
AT SucH A PRICE" 
The Serbian Skupshtina which convened last month for one 
moment (for one hour and one-half-the papers reported) at Bel­
grade to decide upon one question only : "To conclude o; not to 
conclude peace ?"-that Skupshtina, as it : ; rumored, did not reveal 
a mood as exaggeratt!dly hasty and pacific as has been anticipated 
-taking into account all circumstances. It is said that it agreed 
to peace only because of some trick, some ministP.rial intrigue. At 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
any rate, if it is in the least true that the Skupshtina was not afraid 
of the continuation of the war, and taking into account their 
desperate situation, one, willy-nilly, asks himself : "Why did we 
shout so loudly about the cowardice of the Serbians ?" I have been 
receiving letters from Serbia and I have talked with those arriving 
from there, and I particularly remember a letter from a youthful 
Russian, who remained there, who wrote about the Serbians with 
enthusiasm, expressing indignation over the fact that in Russia 
there are men who believe that Serbians are cowards and egoists. 
The enthusiastic Russian emigrant exculpates the self-mutilation 
of the Serbian soldier under Cherniaiev and Novoselov : you see, 
they are so tenderhearted a people, they love so dearly their "nest," 
where each one has left behind a wife, children, or a mother, sisters, 
brothers, a horse and a dog, that they forsake everything, mutilate 
themselves, shoot off their fingers, in order to become unfit for 
service and to return to their beloved nest as quickly as possible I 
Imagine, I can understand this tenderheartedness, and I also under­
stand this whole process, and of course, in this case they are too 
tenderhearted a people, although, at the same time, they are rather 
dull children of their fatherland so that they do not themselves 
understand what their hearts are longing for. 
In his tenderheartedness the Serbian inhabitant of the "nest," 
in my opinion, reminds me very much of those children whom 
most probably you remember since your childhood : suddenly, 
from a family, or even from a disrupted family, they find them­
selves in a school. Up to then the boy has lived only at home and 
has known nothing but his home ; and suddenly-a hundred school­
mates, strange faces, noise, hubbub, everything quite different from 
things at home. God, what a torture ! At home, perhaps, it was 
cold and he was hungry ; still, he was loved, and even if he wasn't 
loved, nevertheless there it was home, he was alone at his home 
and by himself, whereas here-not. a word of endearment on the 
part of the superiors ; severity on the part of the tutors ; such dif­
ficult subjects ; such long corridors, and such inhuman mad-caps, 
afronters and mockers ; how merciless are his schoolmates : "As 
if they were devoid of heart I As if they had neither father nor 
mother I "  Thus far, he has been told that it was awful and dis­
graceful to lie and to offend, but here they all lie, cheat, offend 
and on top of that they laugh at his horror. For some reason here 
they took a dislike to him, because he weeps about his nest, he 
"pollutes the class." Presently the whole class begins to beat him 
mercilessly, all the time; with no reason, without anger-just for 
diversion. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
599 
I may note that in my childhood I met many such unfortunate 
children in various schools. And at times, what crimes of this kind 
are perpetrated in our educational institutions of every name and 
grade,-precisely crimes ! And let a boy stupidly venture to lodge 
a complaint, and he will be beaten almost to death (yes, even to 
death) .  School children beaten mercilessly antl heedlessly. For years 
they will tease him by calling him an "informఉr" ; they will refuse 
to talk to him and will make him a pariah. And at the same time 
-what heartlessness and merciless indifference on the part of the 
superiors ! In my childhood I do not recall a smgle pedagogue ; 
nor do I suppose there are many of them at present-only func­
tionaries receiving salaries. 
And yet these very children who when entering school yearn 
for their families and their native nests, precisely they in many 
cases subsequently develop into unusu:tl, talented and gifted men. 
On the other hand, those children who, taken away from their 
families, quickly adapt themselves to any given order, who instantly 
get used to everything, who never yearn for anything, and even 
at once begin to lead otuers,-they, as a rule, turn out inept or 
simply bad people, cunning fellows and intriguers ever since the 
age of eight. Of course, I am judging too generally ; nevertheless, 
in my opinion, he i:; a bad child who, when entering school, does 
not secretly year .. for his family, save in " case where he had no 
family at all, or the family was a thoroughly bad one. 
Willy-nilly, I compared such a boy, suffering during his first 
days at school, with the Serbian recruit-self-mutilator. I was un­
able to explain his unfortunate, unreasoning, almost animal-like 
desire to throw down the rifle too hastily and flee home otherwise 
than by the same feeling. The only differu::·.e is that 1P his desire, 
incredible, phenomenal dullness is reve:tled. He brush, · aside, as 
it were, the thought that if everybody, even as he, is going to 
disperse, there would be no one leit tc. protect the country, and 
thus some day the Turks would come to his "nest" too, and would 
destroy that beloved "nest" of his, and would slaughter his mother 
and fiancee and sister, and their horse and dog. In fact, in much 
too many Serbian hearts the suffering for the native nest did not 
attain the level of suffering for the native land, which is a strange 
phenomenon. True, no\'i that their war is finished and peace is 
concluded, it may be remarked that the hearts of the upper Serbian 
intelligentsia far from always attainerl the level of suffer. T'lg for 
their fatherland ; however, this was due 
J a different cause than 
in the case of the lower hearts. In the upper stratum this is caused, 
perhaps, by an excessively strong political ambition. Thus, because 

6oo 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
of the "superior" interests of their native land these superior hearts 
had almost no time to occupy themselves with the lower, popular, 
so commonplace interests. 
However, concerning the lower Serbian, I believe, it is never­
theless possible to make one curious remark. Indeed, one cannot 
attribute his self-mutilations, his flights from the battlefield, to 
anything but tenderheartedness and dullness of the mind. It seems 
to me that, when deserting his colors and fleeing home, he was 
quite able to understand that he was doing a bad thing, and very 
possibly he was the first to blame himself. At the same time, he 
never believed that, if he deserted, his native country would be left 
defenseless and without protection : "Oh, heroes will remain,-the 
Kireevs, Cherniaievs, the Russians, will remain, and even his stern 
Serbian superiors, while what is he ?-An imperceptible particle, 
trash-nothing else. He will quit, and no one will even miss 
him . . .  
" 
To my way of thinking this was the feeling that dwelt in 
him. This is very curious ; it is characteristic of the people : at 
the top, braggarts, civilized Europeans dreaming about the sub­
jugation of all Slavs into one Serbia, intriguing even against Russia, 
in a word, genuine Europeans, the Khorvatovichs and the 1\bri­
novichs just like the Moltkes and the Bismarcks. At the other end, 
side by side with these giants,-the humiliated son of the "nest," 
precisely humiliated by four centuries of slavery : it is due to this 
humiliation that he considers himself a nullity, an imperceptible 
particle : "The giants will stay where they are and no one will 
notice me. I am so tiny, \vhile they are such eternal-masters . . . .  
" 
I was reading somewhere that some of these stern masters, 
beholding a lower Serbian ready to desert his colors, straightway 
shot his head off with a pistol : "See, what iron dukes we too 
could manage to become I "  It would seem that they are treating 
their common people over there somewhat haughtily. 
Generally, the upper Slavs "with a glorious future"-in any 
event are extraordinary curious folk in political, civic, historical 
and all sorts of respects. 
At present, when Cherniaiev has already departed from there, 
and volunteers have been sent away, they, i.e., their military men, 
express a strategic thought about which we have heard nothing 
heretofore. They maintain that their Serbian is altogether unfit for 
service in a regular army in open battle, whereas the popular Serbian 
war is "the small war," i.e., guerrilla warfare, warfare conducted by 
bands in forests, passes, from behind stones and rocks. Well, this 
may be so. However, because they have already concluded peace, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
601 
it is now hardly possible to verify this. At least, they will remain 
with this strategic conviction. Well, this too is a consolation in 
misfortune. 
Will this peace last long ?-But to say a farewell word about 
this Serbian war in which we Russians, almost to the last man, 
so sincerely participated with our hearts, it seems to me that the 
Serbians are parting with us and with our assistance with even 
greater suspiciousness than they have been greeting us at the 
beginning of the war. One may also conclude that this suspicious­
ness toward us will be increasing as long as they themselves develop 
and grow mentally,-this means a very long time. This also means 
that above all we should be paying no attention to their suspicious­
ness and that we should be acting as we see fit. 
Concerning the Eastern question, we must relentlessly bear 
in mind one truth : that the main Slavic problem is not merely 
the liberation of the Slavs from their torturers but that this libera­
tion be accomplished, though with the assistance of the Russians 
(for it car.nnt be otherwise-if only they could do without the 
Russians I ) yet at least, so as to remain indebted to the Russians 
as little as possible. 
It is said-this was told to me by that same friend who re­
turned from Mo!'':ow-that among the Slavic children brought to 
Moscow there ; · 
'"L child, a little girl of the age of eight or nine 
years, who often faints, and she is being specially cared for. She 
is fainting from a reminiscence : she saw with her own eyes how last 
summer Circassians stripped the skin from her father-they tore 
it off completely. This reminiscence clings to her tenaciously, and 
quite probably will last forever, with years, perhaps, gr'>wing milder, 
although I wonder if in such a case it cc.rႳ !Je softened )h, civiliza­
tion I Oh, Europe, whose interests would so suffe1 should she 
earnestly forbid the Turks to strip the fatpers' skins in the presence 
of their children ! Of course, these superior intereႴLS of European 
civilization are : commerce, maritime naviga•ion, markets, factories 
-what in the eyes of Europe can be more important ? These are 
interests which not only fingers but even thought is not allowed 
to touch, but "let them be damned-the interests of Enropean civil­
ization ! "  This is not my exclamation. This is what The Moscow 
Gazette exclaimed, anu I deem it an honor to second this exclama­
tion : Yes, yes, let them bt: damned-these interests of civilization, 
and even civilization itself if for its preservation it be ner,·ssary to 
strip the skin from men. However, this 
j a fact : for the preserva­
tion of civili?.ation it is necessary to strip the skin from human 
beings. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
3 
ABOUT STRIPPING SKINS IN GENERAL AND v ARlO US ABER· 
RATIONS IN PARTICULAR-HATRED OF AUTHORITY COUPLED 
WITH LACKEYISM IN THOUGHT 
"From men ? From what men ?-Only from a tiny portion of 
human beings-somewhere there, in a little corner, from a Turkish 
subject about whom no one would even have heard had the Russians 
not heralded it. As against this, an enormous part of the organism is 
alive, healthy and thrives-trades and manufactures ! "  
This story about the little fainting Bulgarian girl was related 
to me in the morning, and that same day I happened to be on the 
Nevsky Prospect. There, shortly after three o'clock in the after­
noon, mothers and nurses take out children, and suddenly an in­
voluntary thought weightily fell upon my mind : "Civilization ! "­
I was saying to myself-"Who dares to speak against civilization ?" 
Nay, civilization does mean something : at least, these children 
of ours peacefully walking here, on the Nevsky Prospect, will not 
see how the skin is being stripped from their fathers ; nor will 
mothers behold how these children will be thrown up into the air 
and caught on bayonets, as happened in Bulgaria. At least this 
advantage of ours must be credited to civilization ! And let it exist 
only in Europe, i.e., only in one little corner of the globe, a corner 
which is rather small compared with the surface of our planet (a 
dreadful thought ! ). Nevertheless it does exist, even though in a 
little corner-it exists, true,· at the high price of skinning our own 
brethren somewhere there, at the border ; nevertheless, here, at 
least, it exists. To think that only formerly, even recently, solidly, 
civilization existed nowhere, not even in Europe, and if now we 
have it in Europe, it is for the first time since this planet has come 
into existence I Nay, after all, this has already been achieved and 
can never be retracted. This is an extremely important consideration 
which involuntarily penetrates one's soul ; it is not at all so small 
that it wouldn't be deserving of one's attention, all the more so 
as the world is still, as hitherto,-a mystery, despite civilization 
and its acquisitions. God knows with what things the world is 
pregnant, and what may happen in the future, even in the imme­
diate future. 
And as I was about to exclaim to myself with rapture : "Long 
live civilization," suddenly I began to doubt everything : "Well, 
has this been really achieved for these children on the Nevsky 
Prospect ? Say, isn't this a mirage even here, and are we not merely 
being deceived ?" 
Do you know, gentlemen, I came to the conclusion that it 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
603 
was a mirage, or-to put it more miJdly-almost a mirage. And 
if skins are not stripped from the fathers in the presence of their 
children on the Nevsky,-well, this is only by accident, so to speak 
"owing to circumstances beyond the public's control" and, of 
course, also because policemen are standinఊ on the corners. 
Oh, I hasten to explain : By no meanఋ am I alluding to some 
allegory ; nor am I hinting at the suffering of some present-day 
proletarian, or at a parent who says to his seven-year-old son : 
"Here's my covenant : if thou stealest five rubles, I shall damn 
thee ; if thou stealest one hundred thousand I shall bless thee." 
Nay, I am using my words literally. I mean literally skinning, that 
very stripping of skins which took place last summer in Bulgaria, 
and in which, it appears, the victorious Turks are so eager to in­
dulge. And it is about this skinning that I am asserting that if it 
does not occur on the Nevsky, il is "only by accident, owing to 
circumstances beyond our control," and, principally, because for 
the time being it is prohibited, whereas if we had our own way, 
perhaps tఌ1i5 wuuld be t.఍nspiring notwithstanding all our civiliza­
tion. 
To my way of thinking, if one were to tell the whole truth, 
they are simply afraid of some custom, some rule accepted with­
out proof,-almo<.t of a prejudice. However, if some "competent" 
men would "prove" that, at times, it is useful to the common cause 
to strip the skin from a certain back, and that even though this 
is repugnant, nevertheless "the aim justifies the means,"-were one 
to start saying these things in a competent style and in the presence 
of opportune circumstances, believe me, forthwith perfnrmers would 
appear, and besides,-from among the jc!!iest. 
Let this be a very droll paradox of mine ! I am the first to 
subscribe to this definition with my two hands, nevertheless, I 
assure you that precisely this would take place. Civi.ization exists ; 
its laws exist ; there is even faith in them. Yet were a new vogue 
to appear, a multitude of men would promptly change. Of course, 
not all of them ; still there would remain such a tiny handful of 
them that you, my reader, and I should be surprisf'ri, and who 
knows where we ourselves should land-among the skinners or the 
skinned. 
Naturally, people will start shouting straight to my face that 
all this is trash, that never can such a vogue come into exiఎtence, 
and that this much, at least, civilizatiu. did attain. Gentlemen, 
what naivete on your part ! You are laughing ? Well, and what 
about France in 1 793 (not to peep into more recent events) ? 
Hasn't there been firmly established there this very vogue of strip­
ping skins-and this under the guise of the most sacred principles 
of civilization ;-this after Rousseau and Voltaire I You may say 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
that all this is not at all so ; that this was very long ago. Still, 
please observe that, perhaps, I am resorting to history solely for 
the purpose of avoiding discussion of current things. Believe me, 
the most complete aberration both in the minds and hearts of 
men is always possible, and in Russia, specifically in our time, 
not only is it possible but, judging by the course of events, it is 
inevitable. Look : are there many among us who agree as to what 
is good and what is bad ? And this refers not only to so-called 
"truths" but even to any question taken at random. And how 
swiftly changes and metamorphoses are taking place among us l 
What are the Moscow "jacks of hearts"? It seems to me that they 
merely represent that fraction of Russian nobility which was un­
able to endure the peasants' reform. Even if they are not land­
owners themselves, they are the children of landowners. After the 
peasants' reform, they fillipped their cravats and started whistling. 
Nor was the peasants' reform the sole cause here : simply, they 
could not manage to endure the "new ideas." "If all the things 
we were taught were prejudices, what then shall we follow ? If 
there is nothing, this means that one may do everything-that's 
the idea ! "  Please note that this is an incredibly common idea : 
nine-tenths of the adherents of the new ideas are professing it ; 
in other words, nine-tenths of the progressives are even unable to 
understand them differently. In our midst Darwin, for example, 
is promptly converted into a pickpocket-that is what a "jack of 
hearts" is. 
It stands to reason .that mankind has stored a great number 
of humane rules which have formed themselves in the course of 
centuries, and some of these rules are taken as inviolable. But 
what I wish to say is that despite all these rules, tenets, religions, 
civilization, only the most imperceptible minority of mankind is 
saved by them. True, they are those who prove to be victors, but 
this-only in the long run, whereas in contemporaneous things, in 
the current course of history, men, as it were, remain always iden­
tical, i.e., in their overwhelming majority, they are devoid of the 
slightest firm conception of the sense of duty, of the sense of 
honor ; so that were a new vogue to come into existence, they would 
all start running about naked,-and with what pleasure l 
Rules are there., but men are in no manner ready for them. 
I might be told that"' it is not necessary to get ready, and that it 
is only necessary to discover what these rules are. But is this so ? 
Are these rules, no matter what they be, likely to survive for a 
long time if one is so eager to run about naked ? 
I think this way : it is possible to rationalize and to perceive 
a thing correctly and at once, but to become a man at once is 
impossible : one has to mould oneself into a man. Here discipline 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
6os 
is required. But it is precisely this relentless self-discipline that 
our present-day thinkers reject ; they say : "There was too much 
despotism ; liberty is needed." However, this liberty leads the over­
whelming majority to nothing but lackeyism before another man's 
thought, since people are awfully fond of things which are offered 
them ready-made. Moreover, thinkers are proclaiming general laws, 
i.e., such rules as will suddenly make everybody happy, without 
any refinement : let only these rules come into existence. Why, even 
if this ideal were feasible, no rules, even the most obvious ones, 
could be put into practice with unfinished men. Now, it is in this 
relentless self-discipline and uninterrupted work on one's self that 
our citizen could reveal himself. And it is with this magnanimous 
work on one's self that one has to begin in order to lift our Virgin 
Soil, otherwise there is no need of lifting it. 
Is this so ?-But the main thing is that we do not know what's 
good and what's bad. We have lost every instinct in this respect. 
We have smashed to pieces all former authorities and we have 
inaugurate\! IlL ,.. 
•Jncs. Y· . he among us who is slightly cleverer 
than the rest, doe!> not believe in them, while he who is bolder 
spiritually becomes "a jack of hearts." Moreover, honest to God, 
he wm begin to strip the skin, and on top of it, he will proclaim 
that this is useful to the general cause, and therefore sacred. How 
then, in what sense, can one start working for self-improvement 
if it is not known what's good and what's bad ? 
4 
THE F'IETTERNICHS AND THE DoN Qmxon:r 
But in order not to speak abstractly, let us tႧ:. il to this 
theme. Now, we actually do not strip the skins. Moreover, we do 
not like it. (Only, God knows : the amateur oftentii.1es hides ; he 
is little known ; he is bashful-for the time bPing, he is "afraid of 
prejudice.") However, if we don't like it at home and never do it, 
we should hate it in others. And it is not enough to hate : we must 
not permit anyone to strip the skins ; yes, we simplv must not 
permit it. And yet is this so in r('ality ?-The most indignant among 
us are not as indignant as they should be. I am speaking not only 
about the Slavs : if we are so compassionate, we should be acting 
in the measure of our compassion, and not within the limit:; of a 
ten-ruble contribution. I might be told 
• 11at it is impossible to 
give away everything. With this I agree, although I don't know 
why. Indeed, why not everything ? Precisely, that's the point : one 
does understand absolutely nothing even in one's own nature. And 
suddenly the question of "the interests of civilization" is set forth 
with enormous authority. 

6o6 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
The question is put directly, clearly, scientifically and with 
candid cynicism. "The interests of civilization are production, 
wealth, tranquillity required by capital. Enormous, uninterrupted 
and progressive production at lower prices is needed in view of 
the great increase in the number of proletarians. By giving employ­
ment to the proletarian, we are thereby placing at his disposal 
articles of consumption at reduced prices. The calmer it is in 
Europe, the lower are prices. Consequently, tranquillity must pre­
vail in Europe. The bustle of war will chase away production. 
Capital is cowardly ; it will be scared by the war and will go 
into hiding. If one were to restrain the Turks' right to strip the 
skin from the back of the Gentile, it would be necessary to start 
a war ; and if war were to break out, at once Russia would come 
forward ; this would mean such a complication in the prosecu­
tion of the war as would drag the whole world into it. Then­
good-by production, and the proletarian would be thrown out into 
the street. But the proletarian in the street is dangerous. In par­
liamentary speeches it is already being stated directly and candidly, 
aloud so that the whole world hears it, that the proletarian is 
dangerous, that among proletarians there is unrest, and that they 
listen to socialism. No, better let them there, somewhere in the 
wilderness, strip the skin. The inviolability of the Turkish rights 
must be upheld. It is necessary to quench the Eastern question and 
permit the skinning. Besides, what are these skins ? And are two 
or three some such skins worth the tranquillity of Europe-well, 
let's say-twenty, all rigqt-thirty thousand skins-what's the dif­
ference ? If we want, we will hear nothing ; we'll stop our ears . . .  
" 
Such is the opinion of Europe (perhaps, her decision) .  Such 
are the interests of civilization, and, again-let them be damned ! 
And all the more damned as the aberration of the minds (Russian 
minds in particular) is inevitable. The question is put squarely. 
What is better-that many tens of millions of workers be thrown 
out into the street, or that only units of the millions of Gentiles 
should suffer at the hands of the Turks ?-Numbers are set forth ; 
people are being scared with figures. In addition, politicians and 
wise teachers come forward : there is such a rule-they claim-such 
a doctrine, such an axiom which reads that the morality of one 
man, of one citizen, of a single unit-is one thing, and the morality 
of the state-another thing. Thus, that which in a single unit, in 
a single individual, is regarded as villainy, in the case of an entire 
state may acquire the gui!;e of greatest wisdom ! 
This doctrine is very popular and antiquated, but be it also 
damned. Principally, let them refrain from scaring us with figures. 
Let Europe have it as she pleases, but let it be different with us. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
It is better to believe that happiness cannot be purchased with 
villainy than to feel happy, knowing that villainy has been tolerated. 
Russia has never been able to produce her real Metternichs and 
Beaconsfields. On the contrary, during her whole European life 
she has lived not for herself, but for alien, precisely "cosmopolitan 
interests." 
Indeed, in the course of these two hundred years, perhaps, 
there may have been instances when, at times, she has endeavored 
to imitate Europe and bas set up at home her Metternicbs, but 
somehow it always turned out in the long run that a Russian 
Metternich suddenly-much to the surprise of Europe-proved to 
be a Don Quixote. Naturally, the Don Quixote was ridiculed. But 
it seems that now the time bas come, and the Don Quixote begins 
not to amuse but to frighten. The point of the matter is that he 
bas undeniably rationalized his status in Europe, and he is no 
longer going to fight against windmills. As against this he has 
remained a faithful knight, and this, to them, is the most dreadful 
thing. 
As a matter of fact, people shout in Europe about "Russian 
usurpations and Russian cunning" ; but this is done for one purpose 
only-to frighten her mob whenever necessary, whereas the bawlers 
themselves do nnL believe this at all-they never did. On the con­
trary, in the image of Russia, they are perplexed and frightened 
by something truthful, something too disinterested, honest, loath­
ing both graft and grab. They have a presentiment that Russia 
cannot be bribed with, and induced by, any political advantage 
to a covetous or violent act-save, perhaps, by decP.it. However. 
even though Don Quixote is a great kniႨr.t, nevertbeit· s, at times, 
he can be awfully sly so that he will not let himself 
· .. ࢝ deceived. 
England, France, Austria-in fact, is there over there even a single 
nation with which an alliance could not be formeC:, at an oppor­
tune moment, for a political gain with a forcible covetous aim ?­
It is only necessary not to miss the moment at which the bribed 
nation can sell herself at the highest price. Alone Russia cannot 
be lured into any unjust alliance,-at any price. And inasmuch as, 
at the same time, Russia is tხ:>rribly strong, and her organism is 
obviously growing and ,naturing not by days but by hours, which 
is perfectly understood in Europe (despite the fact that, at times, 
they are shouting that the colossus bas been undermineri ) ,-how 
can they not be fearing ? 
Apropos : this view on the incorruptibleness of Russia's foreign 
policy and her perpetual service to the interests of mankind as a 
whole, even to her detriment, is vindicated by history, and to this 
special attention should be paid. Herein is our distinction from 

6o8 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Europe. Moreover, this view of the character of Russia is so little 
known, that even in our midst there are but few who would believe 
it. Of course, errors of Russian policy should not be charged to 
Russia's account, since we are dealing here only with the spirit 
and ethical character of our policy, and not with its successes in 
the past and long past. In the latter respect, in ancient times, we 
actually did have windmills, but I repeat, it seems that their time 
has passed forever. 
Nay, speaking seriously : what is there in prosperity which 
is bought at the price of untruth and skinning ? Let that which 
is truth to man as an individual be also truth to the nation as 
a whole. Yes, of course, one may be temporarily put to a loss, 
one may be impoverished for the time being, deprived of markets ; 
one's production may be curtailed and the cost of living may in­
crease. But let the nation's organism remain morally healthy, and 
the nation will undoubtedly gain more, even materially. 
Let it be noted that Europe has unquestionably reached the 
point where she treasures most the current gain, the gain of the 
actual moment-even at any price,-since over there, they are liv­
ing merely from day to day, by the present minute only, and they 
even do not know themselves what is going to happen to them 
tomorrow. However, we-Russia-we still believe in something last­
ing, which moulds itself in Russia, and therefore we seek permanent 
and essential gains. It is also for this reason that we, as a political 
organism, have always believed in eternal morality, and not in a 
relative one, good but for a few days. 
Believe me, Don Quixote, too, knows his gains and knows 
how to calculate : he knows that he will gain in his dignity and 
in the cognizance of it if only, as heretofore, he remains a knight. 
Besides, he is convinced that, by following this road, he will not 
deprive himself of the sincerity in the quest of the good and truth, 
and that this knowledge will fortify him in his further career. 
Finally, he is convinced that such a policy is also the best school 
for the nation. It is imperative that the "jack of hearts" should 
not dare to tell me straight to my face : "Why, with you, too, 
everything is relative and based upon gain." It is necessary that 
also the enthusiastic lad should come to love his nation instead 
of going to seek truth and the ideal on the outside and without 
society. And when the time of our hard-terribly hard-school is 
over, he will end by loving his nation. Truth, even as the sun, 
cannot be hidden. Russia's mission, in the long run, will become 
clear even to the most distorted minds both in our midst and in 
Europe. Why are, at present, in Russia, such aberrations of the 
minds possible as nowhere else ?-Because, owing to an order of 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
things that has lasted a century and a half, our intelligentsia in 
toto did nothing but disaccustom itself from Russia, and it finished 
by a complete disacquaintance with her, maintaining relations with 
her only through the bureaucratic chancery. With the reforms of 
the present reign a new era came into existence. The work has 
started and it cannot stop. 
And Europe has read the autumnal mauifesto of the Russian 
Emperor and has memorized it ; she has memorized it not only 
for the current moment but for a long time to come, for future 
current moments. If necessary, we shall draw the sword on behalf 
of the oppressed and unfortunate, even though to the detriment 
of our immediate advantage. But let at the same time our faith 
grow still firmer that precisely herein lies Russia's genuine mission, 
her strength and truth, and that the self-sacrifice for the oppressed 
and forsaken by everybody in Europe, in the interests of civiliza­
tion, is a real service to its actual and true interests. 
Nay, it is necessary that in political organisms the same 
Christ's tru: l' hp recogoi7.ed as by any believer. Somewhere at 
least this truth must be preserved ; some nation at least must radiate. 
Otherwise what would happen ? Everything would be dimmed, dis­
torted and would be drowned in cynicism. Otherwise you would be 
unable to restrain the morality of individual citizens, too, and in 
this event how is the entire organism of we people going to live ? 
Authority is needed. It is necessary that the sun shine. The sun 
appeared in the East, and it is from the East that the new day 
begins for mankind. When the sun is shining in its full glory, 
then it will be understood what the real "interestႩ of civilization" 
are. Otherwise the banner bearing the inscription "A;•-כs nous le 
deluge" will be hoisted. Is it possible that this supposed!; ·o glorious 
"civilization" will lead the European man to such a motto and will 
be done with him ? It comes to this. 
CHAPTER II 
1 
One of the Principal Contemporaneous Questions 
PERHAPS MY readers have alrea - ,. observed that m pub­
lishing my Writer's Diary, now over one year, I endeavored to speak 
as little as possible about the current events in Russian literature, 
and even when I did venture to say a few words on this subject, 
they were in an enthusiastically eulogistic tone. And yet, in this 

610 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
voluntary abstinence of mine-what an untruth ! I am a writer, and 
I am writing A Writer's Diary. Why, perhaps I, more than anyone, 
have been interested all this year in the things that have been ap­
pearing in literature : is it necessary to conceal ?-1\Iaybe these were 
the strongest impressions. "You are a writer, a belles-lettrist your­
self,"-! would say to myself-"and therefore your every opinion on 
belletristic literature, with the exception of unconditional eulogy, 
would be regarded as partial ; unless you speak about phenomena 
of the remote past." This was the consideration which has been 
restraining me. 
Even so, this time, I shall venture to disregard this considera­
tion. I shall discuss nothing in a purely belletristic and critical sense 
unless I am forced to do so,-"apropos." And now there arises a 
pretext. The point is that a month ago I came across so serious 
and characteristic a work in current literature that I have read 
even with surprise because I have long ceased to expect in fiction 
anything of this kind, and on such a scale. In a writer-artist par 
excellence, pre-eminently a belles-lettrist, I read three or four pages 
of genuine "topics of the day"-everything that is of the greatest 
moment in our Russian political and social problems being as it 
were brought into one focus. And what is most important-with the 
utterly characteristic nuance of the current moment, precisely as 
this question is being put at this very moment,-as it is being put 
and is being left unsolved. ·I am referring to several pages in Anna 
Karenina by Count Leo Tolstoy, in the January issue of The Rus­
sian Messenger. 
ConcPming the novel itself I shall say only a word, and this 
only in the way of a most necessary preface. I started reading it, 
as we all did, very long ago. At fust, I liked it. Later, though the 
details continued to please me-so that I was unable to tear myself 
away from them-on the whole I began to like the novel Jess : 1 
kept thinking that I had already read it somewhere-precisely in 
Childhood and Youth, by the same Count Tolstoy, and in his War 
and Peace, and that there it was even fresher. The same story of 
a Russian noble family, although the plot was different : characters, 
such as Vronsky (one of the heroes of the romance) ,  who can speak 
of nothing but horses, and who is even unable to find a subject for 
conversation other than about horses, are, of course, curious from 
the standpoint of a:.certaining their type, but very monotonous 
and confined to a certain caste only. For instance, it seemed to 
me that the love of this "stallion in uniform," as a friend of mine 
called him, could have been depicted only in an ironical tone. 
However, when the author began to introduce me seriously into 
the inner world of his hero, I seemed to be bored. And then, sud-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
6 I I  
denly, all m y  prejudices were shattered : the scene of the heroine's 
death (later she recovers) explained to me the essential part of the 
author's design. In the very center of that petty and insolent life 
there appeared a great and eternal living truth, at once illuminating 
everything. These petty, insignificant and deceitful beings suddenly 
became genuine and truthful people, worthy of being called men, 
solely because of a natural law, the law ot human death. Their 
shell vanished, and truth alone appeared. The last ones developed 
into the first, while the first ones (Vronsky) all of a sudden became 
the last, losing their halo in humiliation ; but having been humbled, 
they became infinitely better, worthier, more truthful than when 
they were the first and the eminent. Hatred and deceit began to 
speak in terms of forgiveness and love. Instead of worldly, beau­
monde conceptions there appeared humaneness. They all forgave and 
acquitted one another. Caste and exclusivf'ness suddenly vanished 
and were rendered impossible, and these paper people began to 
resemble genuine human being:; ! There proved to be no guilty ones : 
they all u..:t:u,eu themse: .es unconditionally, and thereby they at 
once acquitted themselves. The reader felt that there is a living 
truth, a most real and ine3capable truth, which has to be believed, 
and that our whole life, all our troubles, both the petty and dis­
graceful ones aP:.t those which we often consider as our gravest 
ones,-they all are mostly but petty and fantastic vanity which 
falls and disappears even without defending itself before the mo­
ment of the living truth. 
The most important thinp; was the indication that such a 
moment actually exists, although it rarely appeais in its glaring 
fullness, and in some lives it does not arr· .. :tr at all. 
• 
' is moment 
was found and revealed to us hy the novelist in all its tt. · 1 ible truth. 
He proved that this truth actually exists not merely as a matter 
of belief, not only as an ideal, but in(·,·itably, ine:...:apably, obvi­
ously. It seems that this is precisely what the nnvelist sought to prove 
to us when he was conceiving his novel. The Russian reader has 
to be often reminded about this eternal truth : in Russia many 
people begin to forget it. This reminder was a good act on the 
part of the author-to say nothing about the fact that he executed 
it as a sublime artist. 
After that the romance continues to follow its course. But 
somewhat to my surprise, in the sixth part of the novel ; came 
across a scene reflecting the real "topic 
. · the day," and what is 
most important-it appeared not intentionally, not tendentiously 
but it arose prႪcisely from the artistic essence of the novel. Never­
theless, I repeat, this, to me, was unexpected and J was somewhat 
astonished. Somehow, I didn't think that the author would venture 

612 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
to lead his heroes, in their development to such "pillars." True, 
the whole purport of reality is in these "pillars," in this extreme­
ness of the deduction. Without it the novel would even have assumed 
an indeterminate appearance, in no way conforming to either the 
current or the essential Russian interests : there would be designed 
some little corner of life, with a deliberate neglect of the main 
and most disturbing element in that life. 
However, it seems that I am most decidedly embarking upon 
criticism, and this is no business of mine. I merely mean to point 
to one scene. It is nothing but two characters revealing themselves 
precisely in that aspect in which at present they may be most 
typical for us, and thereby that type of men, to which these two 
persons belong, is shown by thf' author in the most curious light 
from the standpoint of their contemporaneous social designation. 
They are both noblemen, hereditary noblemen and original 
landowners. Both are depicted after the peasant reform. Both used 
to be "serf landowners," and the question arises : What remains 
of these noblemen-in the sense of their noble status-after the 
peasant reform ? Inasmuch as the type of these two landowners 
is very common, the question is partly settled by the author. One 
of them is Stiva Oblonsky, an egotist, a refined Epicurean, a Mos­
cow resident and a member of the English Club. As a rule these 
men are regarded as innocent and amiable fast livers, pleasing 
egoists, standing in no one's way, witty, and living for their own 
pleasure. Not seldom these men have large families : they treat 
their wives and childrt;n kindly but they give little thought to 
them. They are very fond of easy women,-of course, of the re­
spectable pattern. They are little educated, but they love elegant 
things, arts, and they like to converse about everything. When the 
peasant reform came, this nobleman at once grasped its meaning : 
he calculated and understood that even so something had been 
left to him, and consequently, that there was no need to change 
his habits, and-apres moi lc deluge. He does not bother to think 
about the fate of his wife and children. By the remnants of his 
fortune and by his connections he is saved from the fate of a 
"jack of hearts." However, were his fortune ruined and were it 
impossible to receive a salary for nothing, perhaps, he would have 
become a "jack," naturally, exerting every effort of his mind-at 
times, a very sharp mind-to become a most respectable high life 
"jack." Of course, in olden days, when he had to pay a card debt 
or his mistress, now and then, he would send his men away as 
recruits. But such reminiscences never perplex him and, besides, 
he forgot them altogether. Even though he is an aristocrat, he 
never did attach any significance to his noble birth, and when serf-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
613 
dom was abolished, he began to regard this fact as a vanished 
thing. Among all people there remained to him only the lucky man, 
the bureaucrat beginning with a certain rank and the rich man. 
The railroad man and the banker, having become powers, he 
promptly established relations and friendship with them. 
And the conversation itself begins wiLh Levin, his relative 
and a landowner (but of a wholly opposite type who lives on his 
estate) ,  reproaching him for the fact that he frequents railroad 
men, attends their dinners and festivals, men, who in Levin's 
opinion, are equivocal and harmful. Oblonsky caustically refutes 
him. And, generally, after they had become related, there developed 
between them rather caustic relations. Besides, in our day, a scamp 
refuting an honest man is always stronger because he bears the 
appearance of dignity derived from common sense, whereas the 
honest man, resembling an idealist, looks like a fool. 
The conversation takes place at a hunting party, on a summer 
night. The hunters are spending the night in a peasant's barn and 
they are 1} ing eu hay. OlႫonsky is arguing that contempt for rail­
road men, for their intrigues, profiteering, their entreaties for con­
cessions, speculations-is meaningless ; that they are men like any 
other ; that they work anrl use their brains, as the rest, and as a 
result-they builil ..1 road. 
"But any acquisition in disproportion to work spent is dis­
honest"-says Levin. 
"But who is going to determine the proportion ?"-Oblonsky 
continues . . . .  "You did not draw a line between honest and dis­
honest work. The fact that I am receiving a higher salary than 
my head-clerk, even though he knows the Ⴌusiness bt:t • '  .. than l­
is this dishonest ?" 
"I don't know." 
"Well, I'll tell you : the fact that you are recei ,ring for your 
work on the estate an extra of, say, five thousand, whereas this 
peasant, no matter how much he may labor, will get not more 
than fifty rubles, is as dishonest as the fact that I am getting more 
than the head-clerk . . . .  
" 
"No, wait"-Levin continues-"You say that it is not fair 
that I am getting five tltvusand, and the peasant, fifty rubles : this 
is true. It is unfair, I feel it, but . . .  
" 
"Yes, you feel it, but you do not give away your estate 
to him," said Stepan Arkadievich as thoub · on purpose to provoke 
Levin . . . .  
"I do not give it away, because no one is demanding lhis 
. from me, and even if I wanted to, I couldn't give it away . . .  
and there is no one to whom I could give it away.'' 

614 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r877 
"Give it to this peasant ; he would not refuse to take it." 
"Well, how am I going to give it away to him ? Shall I go 
with him and execute a deed ?" 
"I don't know ; but if you are convinced that you have no 
right . . .  
" 
"I am not at all convinced. On the contrary, I feel that I 
have no right to give it away, that I have obligations toward both 
the land and the family." 
"No, wait ; but if you consider that this inequality is unjust, 
why don't you act accordingly ? . . .  
" 
"I do act, only negatively, in the sense that I am not going 
to seek to increase that difference in the status which exists between 
me and him." 
"No, if you forgive me, this is a paradox . . .  
" 
"That's it, my friend. It should be one way or the other : either 
to consider that the present organization of society is just, and 
then to defend one's rights, or to confess that one is enjoying 
unjust privileges, as I do, and to enjoy them with pleasure." 
"No, if it were unjust, you couldn't enjoy these benefits with 
pleasure,-at least, I couldn't ; to me, tile most important thing 
is to feel that I am not guilty." 
2 
"TOPIC OF THE DAY" 
Such is the conversation. And you must admit that this is 
"the topic of the day," even the most pressing thing in our topic 
of the day. And how many most typical, purely Russian traits ! 
To begin with, some forty years ago these ideas were hardly com­
ing into existence even in Europe ; even there, were there many 
who knew Saint-Simon and Fourier-the original '·idealistic'' in­
terpreters of these ideas ?-And in our midst-in our midst there 
were hardly fifty men in all Russia who knew about this new 
movement which had begun in Western Europe. 
And now, suddenly, these "questions" are being discussed 
by landowners at hunting parties spending the night in a peasant's 
barn, and they are being debated in a most characteristic and 
most competent matiner so that at least the negative side of the 
question is settled and signed by them irrevocably. True, these are 
landowners of the beau monde ; they speak at the English Club, 
they• read newspapers, they follow the trials through newspapers 
and other sources. Even so, the fact itself that such idealistic traႭh 
is recognized as a most vital topic for conversation among men 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
61 5 
who are by no means professors or specialists, but simply society 
people, Oblonskys and Levins,-this trait, I say, is one of the most 
characteristic peculiarities of the present-day state of the Russian 
minds. 
The second most characteristic trait in this conversation 
noted by the artist-author is the fact that the justice of these 
new ideas is being judged by a man who wouldn't give a penny 
for them, i.e., for the happiness of a proletarian, a poor fellow, 
and who, on the contrary, if occasion should arise, would bark 
him as a lime-tree. Yet, with a light heart and the jocundity of 
a punster, with one stroke, he attests to the bankruptcy of the 
whole history of mankind, declaring its present order the climax 
of absurdity. "I am"-he says, as it were-"in full agreement with 
this." Please note that these Stivas are always the first to agree 
with all this. With one stroke he has condemned the whole Chris­
tian order, the individual, the family-oh, this costs him nothing. 
Also, please bear in mind that in Russia science is non-existent ; 
yet these gcr.ച!cmf'n, witႮ utter shamelessness realizing the fact 
that they have no science, and that they began to speak about 
this only yesterday, and echoing somebody else's voice, are never­
theless deciding upon problems of such a magnitude without the 
slightest hesitatio11. 
But we have here a third most characteristic trait. This 
gentleman openly declares : "It should be one way or the other : 
either to consider that the present organization of society is just, 
and then to defend one's rights, or to confess that one is enjoying 
unjust privileges, as I do, and to enjoy them with pleasure." In 
other words, having in substance signed a ..entence '"' the whole 
of Russia and having condemned as well his family, .he future 
of his children, he openly declares that this does not concern him ; 
he says, as it were : "I admit that I am a villain, but ങ shall remain 
a villain for my pleasure. Apres moi le deluge." He is calm because 
he still has a fortune, but should it happen that he lost it,-why 
wouldn't he become a "jack" ?-this is the straightest road. 
This, then, is the citizen, the family man, the Russian-what 
a characteristic, purely Russian trait ! You might say that even 
so he is an exception. What exception ? And can this be so ?­
Please recall how much cynicism we have perceived during these 
last twenty years ; what ease in conversations and metamorphoses ; 
what an absence of fundamental convictiv ;, and what promptness 
in adopting the first passer-by only to sell him out tomorrow for 
a kopeck. No moral fund, except -Apres moi le deluge. 
But it is most curious that side by side with this very nu­
merous and prevailing type, there stands another type of Russian 

616 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
nobleman and landowner, a directly opposite one,-there can be 
nothing more opposite.-This is Levin. But of Levins, there is a 
vast multitude, almost as many as Oblonskys. I am not speaking 
about his face, his figure, which the artist created in his novel. 
I am referring merely to one trait of his essence, but the most 
basic one, and I assert that this trait is unbelievably widely dif­
fused among us, i.e., among our cynicism and Kalmuck attitude 
toward work. For some time this trait has been manifesting 
itself every minute. Men of this pattern convulsively, almost 
pathologically, seek to receive answers to their queries ; they are 
firmly hoping, passionately believing, despite the fact that they 
are unable to settle almost anything. This trait is perfectly re­
vealed in Levin's reply to Stiva : "No, if it were unjust, I couldn't 
enjoy these benefits with pleasure,-at least, I couldn't ; to me the 
most important thing is to feel that I am not guilty.'" 
And, in fact, he will not calm down until he settles the 
question whether or not he is guilty. Do you know to what extent 
he will fail to compose himself ? He will go to every extreme, 
if only it be necessary ; if he proves to himself that this is the 
thing to do, Levin, in opposition to Stiva, who says : "Even though 
as a villain, I continue to live for my own pleasure,"-will become 
a Nekrasov's "VIas" who, in a fit of great emotion and fear, gave 
away his fortune, and 
. . . went forth, in footfall measured, 
To collect God's churches' share. 
And if he is not going' "to collect God's churches' share," he will 
do something on a similar scale and with an equal zeal. Please 
note-I hasten to repeat what I said concerning this trait : there 
is a great multitude of new men, Russians, of this new root who 
thir5t for truth, truth alone without the conventional deceit, and 
who, in order to attain that truth, will give away everything. 
These men came into being during the last twenty years, and 
their number is steadily increasing, even though they could have 
always been anticipated-even before Peter's epoch. 
This is the forthcoming, future Russia of honest people who 
need nothing but the truth. Oh, there is also in them great in­
tolerance : because of inexperience they reject all conventions, 
even all explanations. But I strongly emphasize the fact that they 
are swayed by a genuine sentiment. Another characteristic thing 
about them is that there is a great deal of dissension among them, 
and, temporarily, they belong to most divergent strata and they 
hold all sorts of convictions ; we see among them aristocrats and 
proletarians, clergymen and disbelievers, rich men and poor, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
617 
learned men and ignoramuses, old men and little girls, Slavophiles 
and Westerners. The discord in convictions is great, but the aspira­
tion for honesty and truth is unshakable and inviolable : for the 
word of truth any one of them will forsake his life and all his 
privileges, and will-I reiterate-become a VIas. 
Perhaps people might start shouting that this is a wild 
fantasy ; that in our midst there isn't so much honesty and search 
for honesty. However, I specifically assert that side by side with 
terrible debauch, I foresee these future men to whom the future 
of Russia belongs ; that no longer can one fail to perceive them, 
and that the artist who juxtaposed that outlived cynic, Stiva, 
with his new man Levin, compared, as it were, this doomed, de­
praved, very numerous Russian society which, however, committed 
suicide by its own verdict,-with the society of the new truth 
which refuses to bear in its heart the conviction of its culpability, 
and which will give anything to clear its heart of its guilt. 
It is remarkable in this connection that our society actually 
is divided vir: Ⴏ::o.lly only :nto these two categories,-to that ex­
tent they are numerous and do completely embrace Russian life­
of course, if the altogether lazy, inept, and indifferent ones be 
disregarded. But the most typical, most Russian trait in the "topic 
of the day," pointrJ out by the author, consists of the fact that 
his new man, his Levin, does not know hov. to settle the question 
perplexing him. That is, he has almost settled it in his heart­
and not in his favor-suspecti11g that he is guilty, but something 
firm, straight and concrete rises in protest from his whole nature, 
and restrains him, for the time being, from pronouncing the final 
judgment. Stiva, on the contrary, to whom it makes r.:· :lifference 
whether or not he is guilty, settles the question without 
·e slight­
est hesitation ; he even feels that it is to his advantage : ··If every­
thing is absurd and there is nothing sacred, this meanႰ that every­
thing is permitted, while I still have much time ahead of me, 
since doomsday is not coming tomorrow." It is curious that ex­
actly this weak side of the question has perplexed Levin, bringing 
him to an impasse : this is strictly in line with the Russian fashion, 
which has been quite correctly noted by the author. '1 he whole 
point of the matter is th:•t all these ideas and questions in Russia 
are mere theory imported to us from an alien order of things ; 
from Europe, where they have long acquired their historica' and 
practical aspects. What is to be done?- -ǃ 'lth our noblemen are 
noblemen, and it is not easy for them to rid themselves of Euro­
pean authority ; here, too, they have to pay tribute to Europe. 
Now Levin, with his Russian heart, confuses the purely Russian, 
and the only possible, solution of the question with its European 

618 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
construction. He confuses the Christian solution with the historical 
"right." To make the thing clear, let us imagine this little picture : 
Levin stands, buried deep in his thoughts, after his night 
conversation with Stiva at the hunting party, and painfully-be­
cause his soul is honest-seeks to solve the question which has 
perplexed him, and which, consequently, must have been perplexing 
him heretofore. 
"Yes,"-he argues, half solving his query-"yes, speaking 
honestly, by what right do we, as Veselovsky said the other day, 
eat, drink, hunt, do nothing, and the poor man is eternally, 
eternally working ? Yes, Stiva is right, I must share my fortune 
with the poor and go to work for them." 
Beside Levin stands a "poor man," and he says : 
"Quite so, you really should and must give away your for­
tune to the poor, and you must go and work for us." 
Of course, by deciding the matter, so to speak, in a superior 
sense, Levin will be perfectly right, and the "poor man" altogether 
wrong. But herein is the whole difference in the approach to the 
question, since its moral solution should not be confused with 
the historical one ; otherwise there is going to be an everlasting 
confusion, which actually persists, especially in the theoretical Rus­
sian heads-in the heads of the scamp Stivas and in the heads 
of the pure-in-heart Levins. In Europe, life and practice have put 
the question-although absurdly, in the form of its ideal solution, 
nevertheless realistically as far as its current course is concerned, 
no longer confusing the two conflicting views-the moral and the 
historical-at least, as · far as possible. 
Let me explain my thought, though in a few words. 
3 
THE TOPIC OF THE DAY IN EUROPE 
In Europe there was feudalism and there were knights. 
However, in the course of one thousand years, or more, the bour­
geoisie gained strength, and finally, everywhere, it delivered a 
battle, defeating and driving away the knights, and planted itself 
in their place. Thus the saying, "6te-toi de la, que je m'y mettc" 
("Get out of there so that I may place myself there") was ful­
filled. But having placed itself in the stead of its former masters 
and having seized their property, the bourgeoisie completely dis­
regarded the people, tlie proletarian, and having refused to recog­
nize him as its brother, it converted him, in exchange for his daily 
bread, into a working force for its own welfare. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
619 
Our Russian Stiva decides for himself that he is wrong ; 
yet deliberately he wishes to remain a scamp, because he is living 
fatly and comfortably. The foreign Stiva does not agree with 
ours, considering himself altogether right, and on this point, in 
his own way, he is more logical, since in his opinion there is 
here no right whatsoever-there is only hist 
• .l"y, a historical course 
of events. He took the place of the knight Lecause he conquered 
the knight by force, and he understands perfectly that the prole­
tarian, who at the time of his, Stiva's, struggle against the knight 
was still insignificant and weak, may well gain in strength and 
is even growing stronger every day. He has a clear presentiment 
that when the proletarian gains full strength, he will displace him 
just as he, the bourgeois, had displaced the knight, will tell him ex­
actly the same thing. ·'Get out of there so that I may place myself 
there." Where, then, is there right ? There is here nothing but 
history. Oh, he would be ready to compromise, somehow to make 
up with the ene1ny. He has even endeavored to do so. Inasmuch, 
however, as !1n hac; guessen, anci, moreover, knows from experience, 
that the enemy is under no circumstance prepared to make peace ; 
that he is unwilling to share, but wants everything ; furthermore, 
that if he, Stiva, were to cede something, he would thereby merely 
be weakening hirr.self,-he resolved to cede nothing, and he is 
getting ready for Ⴑhe battle. Perhaps hiႲ situation is hopeless ; 
still because it is in accord with human nature to fortify one's 
spirit in anticipation of a battle,-he does not despair ; on the 
contrary, he is fortifying himself for the battle with ever increas­
ing energy, resorting to all means and exerting all his efforts, so 
long as he has the strength to do so ; he is weakenin, his adver­
sary, and, for the time being he is doing nothing but 
•at. 
Here is how the matter stands in Europe. Trut, recently, 
quite recently, over there, too, there was a moral aporoach to the 
problem : there were Fourierists and Cabetists ; there were inquests, 
disputes, and debates on various very delicate subjects. At present, 
however, the leaders of the proletariat, for the time being, have 
discarded all this. They simply seek to prepare for the battle ; they 
are organizing an army ; they are mustering it into regiments, 
they are raising funds, convinced of their victory : "And then, 
after the victory, everything will shape itself in a practical way, 
even though, possibly, after rivers of blood have been shed " The 
bourgeois understand that the leaders ,f the proletarians are 
tempting them with sheer plunder, and th1s being so, it isn't even 
worth while setting forth the moral aspect. However, even among 
the present-day chiefs there are ringleaders who are preaching also 
tႳe moral right of the poor. Strictly speaking, too, the commanders 

620 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
tolerate these ringleaders as a matter of flourish, in order to em­
bellish the affair and to convey to it a guise of supreme justice. 
Among these "moral" ringleaders there are many intriguers, but 
there are also many who are great and fervent believers. They 
openly declare that they are seeking nothing for themselves and 
that they are laboring for humanity ; that they seek to establish 
a new order of things for its happiness. At this juncture they are 
met by the bourgeois on a rather firm ground, and it is openly 
pointed out to them that they wish to compel him, the bourgeois, 
to become a brother of the proletarian and to make him share 
his prqperty with the latter-by club and blood. Although this 
rather resembles the truth, the ringleaders answer him that they 
do not consider the bourgeoisie capable of becoming brethren of 
the people, and it is for this reason that they are employing 
force against them, altogether excluding them from brotherhood ; 
"Brotherhood"-they say-"will ensue later, from among prole­
tarians, whereas you-you are the one hundred million heads 
doomed to extermination, and nothing more. We are finished with 
you-for the happiness of the human race." 
Other ringleaders openly declare that they do not need any 
brotherhood at all ; that Christianity is nonsense, and that future 
mankind will be organized on scientific foundations. Naturally, 
all this cannot shake and convince tht' bourgeois. He understands 
and answers that this society on scientific foundations is pure 
fantasy ; that they are representing man to themselves not at all 
as he has been created by nature ; that it is difficult for man to 
renounce unconditionafly the right of property, the family and 
liberty ; that they are demanding too great a sacrifice from their 
future man, as an individual ; that man can be reduced to this 
state only by means of terrible violence and on condition that 
dreadful espionage and unceasing control by a despotic government 
are established over him. In conclusion he challenges them to point 
to that force which would be capable of uniting the future man into 
an accordant, and not forcible, society. 
In answer to the above the ringleaders set forth utility and 
necessity which are conceived by man himself, and that he, of his 
own accord, will voluntarily agree to make all the required con­
cessions in order to save himself from destruction and death. They 
are being told that utility and self-preservation alone never can 
generate a complete and harmonious fellowship ; that no utility 
will ever replace willfulness and the rights of the individual ; that 
these factors and motives are too weak, and that, therefore, all 
this, even as before, remains uncertain ; that were they to resort 
merely to the moral aspect of the matter, the proletarian wouldn't 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
621 
even listen to them, and if he is following them and is organizing 
for the battle, this is solely because he is tempted by the promised 
plunder and is excited by the anticipation of the battle and the 
destruction. Therefore, in the long run, the moral aspect of the 
question should be altogether discarded since it does not stand 
the test of mildest criticism,-and one should simply be getting 
ready for the combat. 
Such is the European approach to the matter. Both sides are 
terribly wrong, and both will perish in their sins. I repeat, to us 
Russians, the most painful thing is that in Russia even the Levins 
ponder over these questions, whereas their only possible solution, 
a specifically Russian one, and not for Russians only, but for man­
kind as a whole, is the moral, i.e., Christian approach to them. In 
Europe such an approach is inconceivable, although even there, 
sooner or later-after floods of blood and one hundred million heads­
they will have to recognize it because in it alone lies the solution. 
4 
THE RussiAN SoLUTION TO THE PRoBLEM 
If you have felt that it is painful to you "to tat, drink, do 
nothing and engage in hunting," and if you have really felt it and 
you are genuinely sorry for "the poor," of whom there are so many, 
give them your property ; if you wish, make your contribution to 
the common cause, go and work for all men, and "you will be 
rewarded in heaven where they neither hoard nor covet " Go, even 
as VIas, whose 
. . .  whole soul's enormous power 
On a godly task was spent. 
And if you do not wish, like VIas, to IJlake a collection for 
God's church, take care of the enlightenment of the soul of that 
poor man, enlighten him, teach him. Even were everybody, like 
you, to give away their property to "the poor," all the rlistributed 
riches of the rich of this world would be merely a drop in the sea. 
Therefore, it is necessar} to pay more attention to enlightenment, 
science and enhancement of love. Then wealth would be really in­
creasing, real wealth, since it is not to be sought in golden garrnents, 
but in the joy of general communion an._· in the firm hope that 
everybody will extend a helping hand to him whom misfortune has 
befallen and to his children. And do not say that you are but a 
_weak unit, and that should you alone give away your property and 
go to serve, you would thereby accomplish and rectify nothing. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
On the contrary, even if there should be only a few like you,-even 
then things would start moving. 
Besides, as a matter of fact, it is not necessary to conceive 
the giving away of property as a binding condition, since in the 
matter of love constraint resembles a uniform, fidelity to the letter. 
The conviction that one has complied with tht' letter leads to 
haughtiness, formalism and indolence. One has to do only that 
which one's heart dictates : if it orders a man to give away his fortune 
-let him give it away ; if it orders him to go and work for all men 
-let him go and work. But even here, don't follow the example 
of certain dreamers, who straightway get hold of a wheelbarrow 
and say : "I am not a nobleman-! want to work as a peasant." 
The wheelbarrow, too, is a uniform. 
On the contrary, if you feel that you will be useful to every­
body in the capacity of a scientist, matriculate in a university and 
obtain some means therefor. Neither the giving away of property, 
nor the wearing of a peasant coat are obligatory : all this is mere 
letter and formality : only your resolution to do everything for the 
sake of active love, everything within the limits of your possibility, 
everything which you sincerely consider possible for yourself-is 
obligatory and important. However, to think that all these en­
deavors will render you one of the people is nothing but an assump­
tion of a false guise which is disc.:ourteous to them and which hu­
miliates you. You are · too complex to btcome one of them ; be­
sides, your education will prevent you from becoming a peasant. 
Better raise the peasapt to your "complexity." Only be sincere and 
artless : this is better than any kind of assumed "commonness.'' 
But above all-don't scare yourself ; don't say : "one man in the 
field is no soldier," etc. Anyone who sincerely seeks truth is awfully 
strong. Nor should you imitate certain idle talkers who keep repeat­
ing all the time so that people will hear them : "We are not 
permitted to do anything ; our hands are tied ; we are driven to 
despair and disillusionment I "  and so on, and so forth. They all 
are pompous talkers, heroes of mauvais ton poems, show-off idlers. 
He who wishes to be useful, can accomplish a world of good even 
if literally his hands are tied. The genuine worker, having embarked 
upon a Ct'rtain course of action, at once perceives so much work 
before himself that he is not going to complain that he is not per­
mitted lD act, anft unfailingly he will find and succeed in accom­
plishing something. All real workers know it. In our midst the mere 
study of Russia will ta_ke so much time, since only the rarest man 
among us knows our Russia. 
Complaints about disillusionment are perfectly stupid : joy 
resulting from the contemplation of the edifice which is being 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
62J 
erected must quench every soul's thirst, everybody's, even if, for the 
time being only minute grains of sand be brought for the construc­
tion of the edifice. You have but one reward-love, should you 
deserve it. Let us say that you are seeking no reward ; however, 
you are engaged in a work of love,-how, then, can you refrain 
from soliciting love ? 
But let no one tell you that you should have done all this 
even without love, so to speak, because of a personal interest, and 
that otherwise you would have been compelled by force. Nay, in 
Russia different convictions should be propagated, especially rela­
tive to the conceptions of liberty, equality and brotherhood. In 
the present aspect of the world, liberty is conceived as license, 
whereas genuine liberty is only in the mastering of one's self, of 
one's own will in order that one may eventually attain a moral 
condition where, at any given moment, one is a real master of 
himself. License of desires leads only to your enslavement. 
This is why almost the whole present-day world is conceiving 
liberty in 1inall'-i<J.l security and in laws guaranteeing it : "I have 
money, therefore, I can do what I please ; I have money, there­
fore, I am not going to perish and I will not solicit anyone's help, 
and not to be soliciting anyone's help is the supreme liherty." And 
yet, substantially, this is not freedom but, again, slavery, slavery 
based on money. On the contrary, supreme freedom is not to hoard 
money and not to base one's security upon it, but "to distribute 
one's property among all people and to go and serve everybody." 
If a man is capable of this, if he is capable of overcoming himself 
to such an extent-isn't he free after that ? This is the supreme 
manifestation of will-power ! 
Next, what is equality in the contemporaneous civil, · t:d world ? 
jealous watchfulness of one over the other, self-conceit and envy : 
'·He is clever, he is a Shakespeare, he prides himself Jn his talent. 
Let's humiliate and exterminate him." However, genuine equality 
says : "What is it to me that thou art more talented than I, cleverer, 
handsomer ?-On the contrary, I am glad of it because I love thee. 
But even though I am less important than thou, yet, as a man, 
I respect myself, and thou knowest this, and thou thyself respectest 
me, and I am happy over thy respect. If by reason of thy capa­
bilities, thou renderest me a hundred times more service than I 
can render thee, I bless thee for that, I admire thee and thank 
thee, and in no way do I regard my ad .. ·ration as something to 
be ashamed of. On the contrary, I am happy because I am grateful 
to thee, and I am working for thee and for everybody fn the measure 
of my weak capabilities-it is not at all with a v1ew to getting 
square with thee, but because I love all of you." 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Were all men to speak thus, most certainly they would be­
come brethren, and not for the mere sake of economic gain but 
because of the fullness of joyous life, because of the fullness of love. 
It may be said that this is a fantasy, that this "Russian 
answer to the problem" is "the Kingdom of Heaven," and is only 
possible in the Kingdom of Heaven. Yes, the Stivas would grow 
very angry were the Kingdom of Heaven to come. However, the 
fact itself should be taken into account that this fantasy of "the 
Russian solution to the problem" is incomparably less fantastic and 
infinitely more plausible than the European solution. Such men, 
i.e., "Vlases," we have already seen, we rather often perceive them 
now among all classes ; but, thus far, we have seen nowhere their 
"future man," and he himself promised to come only after crossing 
rivers of blood. Besides, even if there existed an order and prin­
ciples which would permit organization of sociE-ty in a faultless 
manner ; and were it even possible to achieve it before testing it,­
just so and a priori, deriving it from mer«; meditations of the heart 
and "scientific" figures borrowed at that from the former social 
order,-with unready, unfinished people, no rules would survive or 
could be put into effect, and, contrariwise, they would be felt only 
as a burden. 
However, I boundlessly believe in our future men, in those 
who already begin to appear, about whom I spoke above ; as yet, 
they have not reached any accord ; with respect to their convictions 
they are broken up into little groups and camps. As against this 
they all are seeking truႴh above everything else, and if they could 
only learn where truth is, they would be prepared to sacrifice for 
its attainment everything including life itself. Believe me : once 
they finally find the path of truth, they will inspire the rest to 
follow them-and not by violence but freely. 
This is what individuals can accomplish to begin with. This is 
the plow which can break our "virgin soil." Before preaching to the 
people "what they should be,"-show it to them through your own 
example ; fulfill it yourselves, and everybody will follow you. What 
is there Utopian or impossible in this proposition ?-I don't under­
stand I True, we are very depraved, very pusillanimous, and there­
fore we do not believe and are inclined to scoff. However, at present 
we are almost of no import ; it is the future ones who really count. 
The people are pure in heart ; what they need is education-this 
is the most momentous thing I In this we should believe above all, 
and this we should learႵ to discern. And to those pure in heart 
there is one advice : self-control and self-mastery before any first 
step. Before compelling others, fulfill it yourselves-herein is the 
whole mystery of the first step. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
An Answer to a Letter 
The editorial office of the Writer's Diary has received the follow­
ing letter : 
"Dear Fedor Mikhailovich : 
On January 12 I mailed you 2 rubles 5" kopecks, requesting 
you to send me your publication A Writer's Diary. I learned through 
the newspapers that the first issue came out on February 1 ; today 
is the 25th but, as yet, I have not received it I I am most curious 
to learn the reason for this. I don't know how you feel about the 
matter, but to me such an attitude toward the subscribers sems 
more than strange I 
Should you make up your mind to send me your publication 
some time, please address it to Dr. V. V. K-n of the Zemstvo 
Municipal Hospital, City Novokhopersk. February 25, 1877." 
The following is the answer of the editorial office : 
"Dear Sir: 
Much to our regret, complaints about the non-receipt of the 
issues are being received by us rather frequently, especially in the 
beginning of the :-ear. Upon checking in our books, we always find 
that the respective copies have been duly mailed long ago. There­
fore, they are being lost en route. Of course, the percentage of 
these losses in relation to the number of subscribers is very small ; 
nevertheless, they do invariably happen, and not only in the case of 
our publication but also in that of other periodicals As a rule, with­
out entering into explanations, and in order to satisfy tb: subscribers 
as promptly as possible, we send duplicate copies, sinc! .tow is one 
to trace a missing copy I In the middle of the year things begin 
to straighten out, and by the end of thP. year there -.re practically 
no losses. 
However, you, sir, among all the conjectures as to why 
the copy has not reached you, unhesitatingly chose one, namely 
fraud, on the part of the editorial office. This is clear from the 
tone of your letter, and especially from the words : ·Should you 
make up your mind to send your publication some time, please,' 
etc. Thus, you directly suppose that the editor deliberately held 
back your copy, and you do not refrain from expressing the doubt 
that you will ever receive it. In view l' ·· the above the editorial 
office hastens to return to you your 2 rubles and so kopecks and 
requests you not to bother it in the future. It is compelled to do 
so because of an intelligible and natural motive which, sir, prob­
ably will not astonish you." 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
MARCH 
CHAPTER I 
1 
Once More on the Subject that Constantinople, Sooner 
M Later, Must Be Ours 
LAST YEAR, in the June issue of the Diary, I stated that 
Constantinople, "sooner or later, must be ours." That was a fervent 
and glorious time : all Russia, her spirit and heart, was rising, and 
the people voluntarily went to sჱ>rve Christ and Orthodoxy against 
the pagans fot the cause of our brethren by faith and blood, the 
Slavs. Even though I have denoted that article of mine as "a 
Utopian conception of history," nevertheless I myself firmly be­
lieved in my words and did not regard them as a Utopia, and, 
besides, I am now ready to reiterate them literally. 
"Yes, the Golden Horn and Constantinople-they will be ours. 
To begin with, this will come to pass of its own accord, precisely 
because the hour has come, and even if it has not yet arrived, 
indeed it will come in the near future ; all symptoms point to this. 
This is a natural solution-so to speak, the word of nature herself. 
If this has not occurred before, it has been precisely because the 
time has not been ripe.'' 
Thereupon I expl5lined my contention why the time was not, 
and could not have been, ripe. "Had even the thought then occurred 
to Peter," I wrote in that issue, "to seize Constantinople instead 
of founding Petersburg, I believe that, after some deliberation, 
he would have abandoned this idea-granted that he was powerful 
enough to crush the Sultan-since in those days the time was in­
opportune and the project could even have brought ruin to Russia. 
"If in Finnish Petersburg we did not elude the influence of 
the neighboring Germans who, though useful, have paralyzed Rus­
sian progress before its genuine path had been ascertained, how 
then in Constantinople-so enormous and original, with her rem­
nants of a most powerful and ancient civilization-could we have 
managed to elude the influence of the Greeks, men far more subtle 
than the coarse Germans, men who have infinitely more points in 
common with us than the Germans, who do not resemble us at 
all-numerous courtiers _who would promptly have surrounded the 
Throne and who, ahead of the Russians, would have become edu­
cated and learned, who would have captivated Peter himself, pot 
to speak of his immediate successors, taking advantage of his weak 
spot by their skill in seamanship. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
627 
"Briefly, they would have captured Russia politically ; they 
would forthwith have draged her along some new Asiatic path­
again into a seclusion of some sort-and the Russia of those days, 
of course, could not have endured this. Her Russian strength and 
nationality would have been arrested in their development. The 
mighty Great Russian would have remained in estrangement in 
his grim, snowy North, serving merely as material for the re­
generated Constantinople, and, perhaps, in the long run, he would 
have made up his mind not to follow her at all. At the same time 
the Russian South would have been captured by the Greeks. More­
over, there might have occurred a schism in Orthodoxy itself which 
would have been divided into two worlds-the regenerated world 
of Constantinople and the old Russian. . . . In a word, this would 
have been a most untimely event. At prP.sent things are quite dif­
ferent. 
"At present," I wrote, "Russia could take possession of Con­
stantinople even without transferring thither her capital, which in 
Peter's times and long thereafter could not have been avoided. 
Now Constanunc,ple cou:J be ours, not as Russia's capital, but," 
I added, "also not as a capital of Slavdom as some people are dream­
ing. Slavdom without Russia would exhaust itself there in its 
struggle with the Greeks, even in the event that it might succeed 
in forming from :t-. parts some political whole. But for the Greeks 
alone to inherit Constantinople is at present altogether impossible : 
it is impossible to surrender to them so important a spot on the 
globe ; this would be something altogether out of proportion. 
"However, in the name of what, in the name of what moral 
right could Russia be aspiring for Constantinople ? Basing herself 
upon what superior aims could Russia c1?im Constau•.' 1ople from 
Europe ? 
"Precisely," I wrote, "as a leader of Orthodoxy, as its pro­
tectress and guardian-a role designated to her ever Ⴖince Ivan III, 
who placed her symbol and the Hyzantinf' double-headed eagle 
above the ancient coat of arms of Russia, a role which unques­
tionably revealed itself only after Peter the Great when Russia 
perceived in herself the strength to fulfill her mission and factually 
became the real and sole protectress of Orthodoxy and of the 
peoples adhering to it. Suჭ:h is the ground, such is the right to ancient 
Constantinople, which would be intelligible and not offensive even 
to Slavs most sensitive to their independence, even to thf' Greeks 
themselves. Besides, thereby would be rl ·aled the true essence of 
those political relations which inevitably must develop between 
Russia and all other Orthodox peoples-whether Slavs or Greeks 
makes no difference. Russia is their guardian. or e•:en their leader, 
perhaps, but not their sovereign ; their mothu, but not their miႷ-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
tres. Even if she were to become their sovereign some time in the 
future, it would be only by their own election and subject to the 
preservation of everything by which they themselves would define 
their independence and individuality." 
Naturally, all these considerations were conceived by me in 
the article of last June by no means as something which was sub­
ject to immediate fulfillment, but merely as something which un­
questionably has got to come when the historical moment and the 
predestined time arrive, the proximity or remoteness of which can­
not be predicted but may nevertheless be foreseen. 
Since then nine months have elapsed. I believe, it is not 
necessary to recall these nine months : we all remember those en­
thusiastic days, in the beginning full of hopes, and thereafter-so 
strange and disturbing, a period which up to the present has come 
to no solution, so that God only knows (I believe it is only in 
this way one may express oneself) what it will come to ; shall we 
draw the sword, or will the matter once more be postponed by 
some compromise ? But no matter what happens, for some reason, 
precisely now I wish to state a few additional and explanatory 
words in connection with my June meditations concerning the fate 
of Constantinople. No matter what happens-whether there is go­
ing to be peace, or new concessions on the part of Russia are made 
-sooner or later, Constantinople will be ours. This is what I wish 
to reiterate precisely at this time, but now from a certain new 
viewpoint. 
Yes, she must be ours not only because she is a famous port, 
•not only because of the·straits, "the center of the universe," 11the 
navel of the earth" ; not from the standpoint of the long-conceived 
necessity for a tremendous giant, such as Russia, finally, to get 
out of his locked room-in which he has already grown up to the 
ceiling-into free spaces where he may inhale the free air of the seas 
and oceans. I wish to set forth but one consideration, also of major 
importance, why Constantinople cannot evade Russia. I am setting 
forth this particular consideration in preference to others because 
it seems to me that no one takes this viewpoint into account, or, 
at least, people have forgotten to consider it, whereas, perhaps, it 
is the most important one. 
2 
THE RussiAN PEoPLE, FROM THEm STANDPOINT, HAVE 
FuLLY GROWN UP TO A SANE CoNCEPTION o:r THE 
E"ASTEilN PROBLEM 
Although this may sound absurd, nevertheless it is true that 
the four centuries of Turkish oppression in the East, in a certain 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
sense, were even useful to Christianity and Orthodoxy there,-nega­
tively, of course, and yet fostering their consolidation, and what 
is most important-their communion and unity, much in the same 
way as the two centuries of the Tartar yoke had helped in the past 
the consolidation of the Church in Russia. The oppressed and jaded 
Christian population of the East has perceiwd in Christ, in faith 
in Him, its sole consolation, and in the Church the only and last 
remnant of its national individuality and distinction. This was its 
last and sole hope, the last splinter of a wrecked ship, since the 
Church, in spite of everything, was preserving these tribes as a 
nationality, while the faith in Christ prevented them-at least a 
portion of them-from merging with the conquerors and forgetting 
their origin and their past history. The persecuted peoples them­
selves felt and fully understood all this and rallied closer around 
the Cross. 
On the other hand, ever since the conquest of Constantinople, 
the entire enormous Christian East, willy-nilly and suddenly threw 
its glance ::tL ႸႹmote RuႺria which had just then shaken off the 
Tartar yoke, and, as it were, foreboded her future might and the 
future all-uniting center of its salvation. And Russia forthwith 
unhesitatingly accepted the banner of the East, having placed the 
Byzantine double .:agle over and above its ancient coat-of-arms, 
thereby assuming, .1" it were, the obligation tJ Orthodoxy as a whole : 
to guard all the peoples professing it against final destruction. 
At the same time, the whole Russian people fully confirmed 
the new mission of Russia and their Czar in the future destinies 
of the entire Eastern world. Ever since that time the people have 
been-and still are-perceiving, firmly and undeviatinglv. the beloved 
title of their Czar in the word "Orthodox,'· ·'Orthodox ' mr." Hav­
ing thus named their Czar, the people, as it were, ac .. nowledged 
in this a(Jpellation his designation-the designation of a guardian 
and unifier, and when God's command thunders-also the designa­
tion of the liberator of Orthodoxy, and Christianity in toto profess­
ing it, from Mohammedan barbarism and Western herE-sy. 
Two centuries ago, especially beginning with Peter the Great, 
the beliefs and hopes of the Eastern peoples commen .. ..:d to come 
true : Russia's sword h.,s several times been shining in the East 
for its protection. It goes without saying that the peoples of the 
East, too, could not help but perceive in the Czar of Russia not only 
their liberator but also their future CJ:Ⴛ-
However, in tht: course 
of these two centuries there came to then1 European education and 
European influence. The upper, educated, portion of the people, 
their intelligentsia, both in Russia and in the East, little by little, 
grew more indifferent to the Orthodox idea ; it even began to deny 
the fact that in this idea resides the regeneration and resurrection 

6JO 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
to a new grand life of both the East and Russia. In Russia, for 
instance, the overwhelming part of her educated class ceased and 
even, as it were, disaccustomed itself, to perceive in this idea the 
main mission of Russia, the covenant of her future and her vital 
force. Contrariwise, all these began to be perceived in novel ideas. 
Many people, in a purely Western fashion, began to see in the 
Church nothing but dead formalism, segregation, ritualism, and 
starting with the end of the past century-even prejudice and 
hypocrisy : the spirit, the idea, the living force was forgotten. There 
appeared economic conceptions of the Western pattern, new political 
doctrines, new morality which sought to correct and supersede the 
former one. Finally, science made its appearance, and it could not 
help but introduce disbelief in the former ideas. . . . Besides, in 
the peoples of the East there began to awaken pre-eminently na­
tional ideas : suddenly there arose a fear that, after having shaken 
off the Turkish yoke, they would fall under the yoke of Russia. 
However, among the many millions of our common people 
and in their czars the idea of the liberation of the East and of 
the Church of Christ was never dead. The movement which seized 
the Russian people last summer proved that they forgot nothing 
of their ancient hopes and beliefs ; it even surprised the overwhelm­
ing mass of our intelligentsia to such an extent that they adopted 
a skeptical and scoffing attitude toward it, assuring everybody-and 
above all themselves-that the movement was invented and counter­
feited by disreputable men who were seeking to come to the fore­
front to occupy a showy place. 
Indeed, who, in our day, among our intelligentsia-save a 
small portion of it which detached itself from the general chorus­
could admit that our people are capable of consciously compre­
hending their political, social and ethical mission ? How could it be 
conceived that this coarse common mass, which only recently was 
kept in bondage and which now half-killed itself with vodka, knew 
and was convinced that its destiny was to serve Christ, and that 
of its Czar-to guard the Christian faith and to liberate Ortho­
doxy ? "Even though this mass always called itself Christian, never­
theless it has no conception of either religion or even Christ ; it 
knows not even the most ordinary prayers." This is what is usually 
being said about our people. Who is saying this ? You think-a 
German pastor who has organized our Stundism ; or a travelling 
European ; a correspondent of a political newspaper ; or some edu­
cated top Jew, from among those who do not believe in God and 
of whom suddenly nowadays so many have been propagated in 
our midst ; or, finally, one of those Russians residing abroad who 
pictures to himself Russia and her people not otherwise than in 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
631 
the guise of a drunken peasant woman with a square bottle in her 
hand ?-Oh, no I Thus thinks an enormous part of our Russian, 
very best society. Yet they do not suspect that even though our 
people do not know prayers, nevertheless the essence of Chris­
tianity, its spirit and truth, are conserved and fortified in them­
despite their vices-as st1 0ngly as, perhaps, :·1 no other people in 
the world. 
True, an atheist or a Russian European indifferent to religion 
even does not understand it otherwise than in the shape of formalism 
and hypocrisy. However, in the people they behold nothing akin to 
hypocrisy, and, therefore, they infer that the people understand 
nothing in religion ; that they pray, whenever they deem it neces­
sary, to a board, but that, essentially, they are indifferent and their 
spirit is killed by formalism. They do not at all discern in the 
people the Christian spirit, perhaps, because they have long ago 
lost it and do not know where it resides and where it blows. How­
ever, this "depraved" and ignorant people of ours loves the humble 
man and Gr..l'ഘ holy fool : in all their traditions and legends the 
people have preserved the belief that the weak and the humbled, 
unjustly suffering for Christ, will be raised above the eminent and 
the strong when God's judgment and ordainment are pronounced. 
Our people are al!''" fond of tellinp; the story of the renowned and 
grand life of thei1 s:-eat, chaste and humble (:hristian Knight, Ilya­
Murometz, the champion of truth, the liberator of the poor and 
weak, the meek and modest, the faithful and pure in heart. 
And possessing, revering and loving such a valiant knight, 
how can our people fail to believe in the triumph of oppressed 
peoples and our brethren in the East ? Our people revere the 
memory of their great and humble herrrli.::. and saint -
they are 
fond of reciting to their children the stories about the g cat Chris­
tian martyrs. They have learned and know these stories, and it 
was from them that I first heard them ; they were told with deep 
understanding and reverence and they beca:ne engraved in my 
heart. 
Besides, every year, there arise from the people's midst great 
repenting "Vlases" who give away all their property anႼ who, with 
touching emotion, engagP in the humble and great exploit of truth, 
work and poverty . . . .  
However, I will postpone my comments on the people : some 
day they will succeed in making themselvPs understood, or ͧl least, 
in being taken into consideration. It will L _ comprehended that the 
people, too, arP of some import. Finally the momentous fact will 
be realized that not even once, in the great or only slightly im­
portant moments of Russian history, could Russia do without her 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSK.Y : 1877 
people ; that Russia is popular ; that Russia is not Austria ; that 
in every significant moment of our historical life the issue has 
invariably been determined by the people's spirit and view, by the 
czars of the people in sublime communion with the latter. This 
extremely important historical fact is usually almost disregarded 
by our intelligentsia, and it is always being recalled suddenly some­
how, when the historical date rumbles. 
But I digressed. I was speaking about Constantinople. 
3 
THE MosT OPPoRTUNE THOUGHTS AT THE PRESENT TIME 
The Eastern Church, its representatives-the ecumenic patri­
archs-during all the four centuries of their enslavement lived in 
peace among themselves and with Russia-! mean, in matters con­
cerning religion : there have been no disturbances, heresies, schisms 
-for these there was no time. 
However, .during the current century, especially during the 
last twenty years, after the great Eastern war, one, as it were, 
could smell there the putrescent odor of a decomposing corpse : 
the presentiment of death and decomposition of "the sick man" 
and of the ruin of his czardom have become the main feeling. Oh, 
of course, the final liberation can be brought about only by Russia, 
that Russia which also now, at the present moment of general 
colloquies about the EaJ?t, alone raises her voice in Europe on their 
behalf, whereas all other nations and kingdoms of the enlightened 
European world, naturally, would be glad if all these oppressed 
peoples of the East would not exist at all. But-alas-virtually al 
the Eastern intelligentsia, while appealing for Russia's help, are 
nevertheless afraid of her, perhaps, as much as of the Turks : "Al­
though Russia will liberate us from the Turks, still she will absorb 
us, even as 'the sick man,' and will prevent the development of 
our nationalities"-such is their icUe fixe poisoning all their hopes ! 
Besides, the moment the first ray of education fell upon them, 
ever increasing national antagonisms began to harass them. The 
recent Greek-Bulgarian church strife, under the guise of an ec­
clesiastical conflict, was, of course, but a national one, constituting, 
as it were, a propht't.y for the future. The ecumenic Patriarch, cen­
suring the Bulgarians for disobedience and excommunicating their 
arbitrarily elected E:urch, pointed out that in religious matters 
the canons of the ChurCh and church discipline must not be sac­
rificed to .. the new and perilous principle of nationality." However, 
the Patriarch himself, being a Greek, by promulgating the u:com-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
munication of the B.ulgarians, was serving the same principle of 
nationality-only in favor of the Greeks against the Slavs. 
In a word, it may be predicted with probability that were 
"the sick man" to die, forthwith antagonisms and consternation 
would ensue among them-to begin with, specifically of an eccle­
siastical character, which would cause unquestionable harm even 
to Russia ; harm would be caused even in cll!.e Russia, by force of 
circumstances, should be compelled to withdraw from participation 
in the settlement of the Eastern question. It may even be said that 
these dissensions, perhaps, would be felt by Russia all the more 
painfully should she withdraw from active and predominant par­
ticipation in the destinies of the East. 
And yet suddenly people begin to shout (and not only in 
Europe, but even many of our superior political minds) that should 
the Turks happen to expire as a state, Constantinople must be 
regenerated not otherwise than as an "international city," i.e., as 
some kind of a half-way, free settlement, so as to avoid disputes 
concernint; ht.• No mort> erroneous thought can be conceived. 
First of all, because such an excellent spot of the terrestrial 
globe will simply not be permitted to become international, that 
is, nobody's ; unfailingly and promptly, let's say, the British will 
intervene with tl-.dr fleet, in the capacity of friends, specifically, 
in order to prote.:.i and guard this "interndtionality," but, in fact, 
for the purpose of taking possession of Constantinople for their 
benefit. And wherever they settle it is difficult to evict them thence 
-they are an adhesive people. 
Moreover, the Greeks, Slavs and Mohammedans of Constan­
tinople would call the English in, would clutch at tl'o,.,'!' with both 
bands, and would not let them thence, the reason 
·r it again 
being Russia : "They will protect us"-they would say-"against 
Russia, our Iiberatrix." And this woulri have been all right had 
they not perceived and understood what Englishmen, and Europe 
in general, are to them. Ob, even now they know better than any­
body that no one in Europe, except Russia, cares anything about 
their happiness, i.e., the happiness of the entire Christian com­
munity under the Mohammedans. That entire community knows 
perfectly well that werr it possible to repeat the Bulgarian borron 
of last summer (and this it would seem is quite possible) somehow 
silently and stealthily, the English would be the first in Europe 
to wish the repetition-be it even ten tin: ָ-of these massa.:..cs, and 
not because of bloodthirstiness, not in tl1e least : there the people 
are humane :1.od enlightened, but because these slaughters, were 
they repeated ten times, would completely exterminate the Chris­
tian community, so thoroughly that there would be no one left 

634 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
on the Balkan Peninsula to engage in uprisings against the Turks. 
And herein is the essence of the matter : only the dear Turks would 
remain, and Turkish securities would at once go up on all European 
stock-exchanges, while Russia "with her ambition and aggressive 
plans" would have to withdraw deeper into her own domains, be­
cause of the absence of any one to protect. 
The Christian community is perfectly cognizant that at present 
it may be expecting from Europe precisely this sort of sentiment. 
However, the situation would be quite different were "the sick 
man" finally to die, whether of his own accord or by Russia's sword. 
In this event Europe would promptly contract the fondest love for 
the regenerated peoples and would immediately rush "to save them 
from Russia." 
It may be presumed that Europe would be thႽ first to in­
troduce the idea of "internationality" into their new organization. 
Europe will grasp the fact that over the corpse of "the sick man" 
confusion, dissension and antagonism would arise among the lib­
erated peoples,-and this is precisely what she wants : a pretext 
for intervention, and most important of all-a pretext for inciting 
them against Russia which, no doubt, will not permit them to 
quarrel over the heritage of the sick man. And there would be 
no calumny which Europe would not launch against us. "It is 
because of the Russians that we haven't helped you against the 
Turks"-the English would then say to them. Alas, the peoples of 
the East are fully aware of this even now ; and they know that 
"England will never par-ticipate in their liberation, and will never 
give her consent thereto, if such consent be deemed necessary, 
because she hates those Christians by reason of their spiritual tic 
with Russia. It is England's intention that Eastern Christians should 
start hating us as strongly as she herself hates us .
. .
. " (Moscow 
Gazette, No. 63.) 
This is what these peoples know and what meanwhile they 
are silently memorizing, and this is what they have, of course, 
already charged to the future account of Russia. And yet we think 
that they adore us. 
In the international city, aside from the English protectors, 
the Greeks-the original masters of the city-will neverthless be 
the hosts. It may be,.presumed that the Greeks look upon the Slavs 
even with greater co'ntempt than the Germans. However, inasmuch 
as the Slavs will be dreaded by the Greeks, contempt will be re­
placed by embitterment. Of course, they will not be in a position 
to wage war against each other, or to be declaring war on one an­
other, at least, in a serious sense, because the protectors will not 
permit it. Well, but precisely in view of the imposibility of an 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
open and honest scuffle, there will arise among them all sorts of 
other dissensions which, in the first place, will acquire an eccle­
siastical character. This will be the start, since this would be the 
handiest way. And it is this that I meant to point out. 
I am maintaining this because the program has already ben 
set forth : the Bulgarians and Constantinople. from this standpoint 
the Greeks are in a strong position, and the)' understand it. And 
yet there can be nothing more dreadful in the future to the entire 
East, and also to Russia, than another church dissension which, 
alas, is so possible should Russia, even for one moment, withdraw 
her protection and rigid supervision. 
Even though all this belongs to the future and is even nothing 
but conjecture, yet it would be unpardonable to overlook it even 
as a mere conjecture. Indeed, should we too desire the continuation 
of the Turkish rule and good health to "the sick man'' ? Is it con­
ceivable that we too will come to this point ? Is it not clear that 
were this sick man to expire, and-what is most important-were 
Russia evtn pci! Lly to wit \draw her final and predominant influence 
upon the destinies of the East, were she to make this concession 
to Europe-it is more than probable that church unity of so many 
centuries would be rocked on the Balkan Peninsula and, maybe, 
still farther in tht- East. lt can even be put this way : whether or 
not dissensions would ensue, but should the sick man die, it is very 
probable that in any event a great church 5obor for the settlement 
of the newly regenerated Church would be. unavoidable. Why has 
this to be anticipated ? During these four centuries of persecution 
and oppression the representatives of the Eastern Church have 
always followed Russia's advice. Howevf'r, should trഗ·.· tomorrow 
be liberated from the Turkish yoke, and, in addition, sl. tid Europe 
extend protection to them, they would forthwith adopt a different 
attitude toward Russia. 
The moment Russia sided with the Slavs, the representa­
tives of the Eastern Church, i.e., principally, the Greeks, would 
probably declare to her that they have no further need of her or 
her advice. They would hasten to make such a declaration precisely 
because during four centuries they havf' been looking on Russia 
with arms folded in p1 ..1yer. And Russia's situation would be vir­
tually the most difficult one : those very Bulgarians would imme­
diately start vociferating that a new, Eastern, Pope had ascer:ded the 
throne at Constantinople, and-who km .. ·: Ⴞ-maybe they '' ould be 
right. In truth, international Constantinople could serve, even though 
temporarily, c1S a pedestal for the new Pope. ln this event were 
Russia to back the Greeks, it would mean that she would be losing 
the Slavs ; and should she come out in support of the Slavs, it 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r877 
would mean, perhaps, that she might be contracting most em­
barrassing and most serious church troubles. 
It is clear that all this can be avoided only "in good time 
in advance" by Russia's firmness in the Eastern question and her 
undeviating adherence to the great traditions of our ancient, secular 
Russian policy. In this matter we must make no concessions to 
any kind of Europe and for no considerations whatsoever, since 
this cause is our life or death. Sooner or later, Constantinople must 
be ours, be it only for the avoidance of painful and embarrassing 
church dissensions which may so easily arise between the young and 
inexperienced peoples of the East, and which have been exemplified 
by the dispute-with so sad an outcome-between the Bulgarians 
and the ecumenic Patriarch. 
Once we take possession of Constantinople nothing of the 
kind can occur. The peoples of the West who are so jealously watch­
ing Russia's every step, at this moment, do not know and suspect 
these as yet fanciful but all too plausible combinations. Should they 
even learn about them at this time, they would not understand 
them and would attach to them no special significance. However, 
subsequently, when it is too late, they will perfectly grasp these 
combinations and will attach significance to them. 
The Russian people who conceive the Eastern question not 
otherwise than in the sense of the liberation of Orthodox Chris­
tianity, as a whole, and of the future grand unity of the Church, 
should they contrariwise, observe new dissensions and discord, 
would be painfully shos:ked, and perhaps any new solution of the 
matter would affect them and their whole mode of existence, 
particularly if at length it were to assume pre-eminently an ec­
clesiastical character. For this reason alone we cannot, under any 
circumstances, relinquish or weaken our secular participation in 
this great problem. Not the excellent port alone, not only the road 
leading to the seas and oceans, binds Russia so closely with the 
solution of the destinies of this fatal question, nor even the unifica­
tion and regeneration of the Slavs . . . .  Our task is deeper, im­
measurably deeper. We, Russia, we are really necessary and un­
avoidable to Eastern Christianity in toto, to the whole future fate 
of Orthodoxy on earth, and to its unity. This was always conceived 
so by our people and their czars. . . . 
Briefly, this dreadful Eastern question constitutes almost our 
whole future fate. Therein lie, as it were, all our tasks, and what 
is most important-our c;mly exit into the plenitude of history. In 
this question is also our final conflict with Europe and our ultimate 
communion with her but only upon new, mighty and fertile founda­
tions. Oh, how can Europe at this time grasp the fatal and vital 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
importance to ourselves of the solution to this question ?-In a 
word, no matter what may be the outcome of the present, perhaps 
quite indispensable diplomatic agreements and negotiations, never­
theless, sooner or later, Constantinople must be ours, let it be only 
in the future, in a century I 
This, we Russians, all of us, must alw •. ys and undeviatingly 
bear in mind. This is what I meant to state, particularly at the 
present European moment. . . .  
CHAPTER II 
1 
"The Jewish Question" 
OH, PLEASE don't think that I mean to raise "the Jewish 
question" '  I •:!'"'Jte the title jestingly. To raise a question of such 
magnitude as the status of the Jew in Russia, and the status of 
Russia which among her sons has three million Jews-is beyond 
my power. The question exceeds my limits. Still, I can have a 
certain opinion of my own, and it now appears that some Jews 
begin to take in I t  1 <!st in it. For some tim-_ I have been receiving 
letters from them in which they seriously and with bitterness have 
reproached me for the fact that I am attacking them, that "I hate 
the Yiddisher," that I hate him not for his vices, "not as an 
exploiter," but specifically as a race, i.e., somewhat along the line 
that "Judas sold out Christ." This is being written h\ "educated" 
Jews, meaning, by such ones as (this I have noticed, but · · no means 
do I generalize my remark, and this I am emphasizing .a advance) 
always, as it were, endeavor to advise you that, because of their 
education, they long ago ceased to share "the prejudices" of their 
nation ; that they do not comply with their religious rituals, like 
other petty Jews ; that they deem this below the level of their 
enlightenment, and that, besides, they do not believe in God. 
I shall observe, parenthetically, that to all thoႿჀ gentlemen 
from among the "top _Tews" who are such staunch advocates of 
their nation, it is much too sinful to forget their forty-century-old 
Jehovah and to renounce him. And this is sinful not only because 
of national sentiment but likewise for "'ther momentous 
· !"asons. 
And strangely : a Jew without God is svmehow inconceivable ; a 
Jew without God cannot be imagined. However, this is a vast theme, 
and for the time being we shall leave it aside. 
The thing that surprises me most is how, 'lil what grounds, 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
have I been classed as a hater of Jews as a people, as a nation ? 
To a certain extent I am permitted by these gentlemen themselves 
to condemn the Jew as an exploiter and for some of his vices,­
but only ostensibly :  in fact, it is difficult to find anything more 
irritable and susceptible than the educated jew, more touchy than 
he, as a jew. But, again, when and how did I declare hate against 
the jews as a people ?-Since there never has been such a hatred 
in my heart, and those jews who are acquainted with me and have 
dealt with me know it, from the very outset and before I say a 
word, I withdraw from myself this accusation, once and forever, 
so as not to make special mention of it later. 
Am I not accused of hatred because sometimes I called the 
jew "Yiddisher" ? But, in the first place, I did not think that this 
is so abusive, and secondly, as far as I can remember, I have 
always used the word "Yiddisher" in order to denote a certain idea : 
"Yiddisher, Yiddishism, Yiddish reign," etc. This denotes a certain 
conception, orientation, characteristic of the age. One may argue 
about this idea, and disagree with it, but one shouldn't feel offended 
by a word. 
I shall quote certain passages from a long, and in many re­
spects, beautiful letter, addressed to me by a highly educated Jew, 
which aroused in me great interest. It is one of the most typical 
accusations of my hatred of the Jew, as a people. It goes without 
saying that the name of Mr. N. K., the author of this letter, is 
kept strictly anonymous. 
" . . .  But I intend to touch upon a subject which most de­
cidedly I am unable to explain to myself : this is your hatred of 
the 'Yiddisher' which is revealed virtually in every issue of your 
Diary. 
"I should like to know why are you protesting against the 
Yiddisher, and not the exploiter in general ? I, not less than you, 
cannot tolerate the prejudices of my nation,-not little have I suf­
fered from these-but I shall never concede that there dwells shame­
less exploitation in the blood of this nation. 
"Is it possible that you are unable to lift yourself to the 
comprehension of the fundamental law of any social life to the 
effect that all citizens of a state, without any exception, if they are 
paying all taxes required for the existence of the state, must enjoy 
all rights and advaatages of its existence, and that for the violators 
of the law, the harmful members of the society, there must be one 
and the same measure of punishment, common to all ? . . .  Why, 
then, should all the Jews be restricted in their rights, and why 
should special penal laws exist for them ? In what manner is alien 
exploitation (the Jews are nevertheless Russian subjects) by Ger-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
6J9 
mans, Englishmen, Greeks, of whom there iჁ so great a number in 
Russia, better than Yiddish exploitation ? In what way is the Rus­
sian Orthodox kulak, peasant-exploiter, inn-keeper, blood-sucker, 
who has propagated so profusely all over Russia, better than the 
one from among Yiddishers, who nevertheless is operating within a 
limited area ? Why is this one better than l •te other ? . . .  
" 
[At this juncture my esteemed correspondent compares several 
notorious Russian kulaks with Jewish ones in the sense that the 
Russians are just as bad. But what does this prove ? Indeed, we 
take no pride in our kulaks and we do not set them as examples 
for imitation, and on the contrary we agree wholeheartedly that 
both are no good.] 
"J could propound to you such questions by the thousand. 
"Meanwhile, speaking about the 'Yiddisher,' you include in 
this term the whole terribly destitute mass of the three-million 
Jewish population in Russia, of which at least 2,9oo,ooo are engaged 
in a desperate struggle for existence, a mass which is morally purer 
not only :ha •• 
i h(' other nationalities but also than the Russian 
people deified by you. Likewise, you have included in this term that 
considerable number of Jews with higher education who are dis­
tinguishing themselves in all fields of state life. Take, for in­
stance . . .  
" 
I Here there .tre again several nameჂ which, with the excep­
tion of that of Goldstein, I do not deem myself entitled to print, 
since some of them perhaps would be displeased to read that they 
are of Jewish origin.) 
"Take, for example, Goldstein [who died heroically in Serbia 
for the Slavic idea] and those who labor for the gt:',. .. 1 of society 
and of mankind. Your hate of the 'Yid' extends ever. 
'l Disraeli 
. . .  who, probably, knows not himself that his ancestorჃ some time 
in the past were Spanish Jews, and who, of course, cloes not direct 
English conservative policy from the standpoint of a 'Yiddisher. · 
"No, unfortunately, you know neither tne Jewish people nor 
their life-neither their spirit nor, finally, their forty-century his­
tory. Unfortunately-because you arc, at any rate, a sincere, abso­
lutely sincere, man ; yet, unconsciously you are cauჄi11g harm to 
an enormous mass of 1estitute people, whereas influential 'Yids' 
who receive in their salons the potent ones of this world, naturally, 
are afraid of neither the press nor even the impotent wrath of the 
exploited. But enough has been said on · '·is subject. Hardl) will I 
sway you to my view, but I am very anxiOus that you should con­
vince me." 
Such are the excerpts. Before I answer anything (because I 
don't want to bear so grave an accusation) I shJil call attention 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
to the vehemence of the attack and the degree of touchiness. Posi­
tively, during the whole year nf the publication of my Diary there 
has been no slur against the "Yiddisher" of such dimensions as 
would justify so strong an attack. Secondly, it should be also ob­
served that my esteemed correspondent, having also touched in 
these few lines of his upon the Russian people, could not bear, 
could not refrain from adopting toward the poor Russian people 
a somewhat too haughty attitude. True, in Russia even Russians 
have not left a spot not bespat (Schedrin's expression) ,  so it is all 
the more excusable for a Jew. However, in any event, this animus 
clearly shows how the Jews themselves look upon the Russians. 
Indeed, this was written by an educated and talented man (only I 
don't think that he is devoid of prejudices). What, then, should 
one be expecting from uneducated Jews, of whom there are so many, 
-what sentiments for the Russian? I am not saying this accus­
ingly: all this is natural ! I wish only to indicate that for the motives 
of our disagreement with the Jew, perhaps not only the Russian 
should be held responsible, and that, of course, these motives have 
accumulated on either side, and it is a question-on which side 
more. 
Having noted the above, I shall say a few words in my de­
fense, and generally, as to how I view this matter. And even though, 
as stated, this question is beyond my capacity, nevertheless I too 
can express at least something. 
2 
PRO-AND-CON 
True, it is very difficult to learn the forty-century-long his­
tory of a people such as the Jews ; but, to start with, this much 
I know, that in the whole world there is certainly no other people 
who would be complaining as much about their lot, incessantly, 
after each step and word of theirs,-about their humiliation, their 
suffering, their martyrdom. One might think that it is not they who 
are reigning in Europe, who are directing there at least the stock­
exchanges, and therefore politics, domestic affairs, the morality of 
the states. Let noble Goldstein be dying for the Slavic idea. Even 
so, if the Jewish idea in the world had not been so strong, maybe, 
that very "Slavic" question (of last year) would long ago have been 
settled in favor of the Slavs, and not of the Turks. 
I am ready to believe that Lord Beaconsfield has, perhaps, 
forgotten about his descent-some time in the past-from Spanish 
Yiddishers (for sure, however, he hasn't forgotten) ;  but that dur-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
641 
ing last year he did "direct EngJish conservative policy" partly 
from the standpoint of a Yid is, in my opinion, impossible to doubt. 
"Part]y"-cannot but be admitted. 
But let alJ this be merely verbaJism on my part,-Jight tone 
and light words. I concede. Nevertheless, I am unable fulJy to 
beJieve in the screams of the Jews that they '\re so downtrodden, 
oppressed and humiliated. In my opinion, the Russian peasant, and 
generalJy, the Russian commoner, virtualJy bears heavier burdens 
than the Jew. In another Jetter my correspondent writes me : 
"In the first place it is necessary to grant them [the Jews] 
aU civil rights (think, up to now they are deprived of the most 
fundamental right-of free selection of the place of residence, which 
leads to a multitude of awful restrictions for the whole Jewish 
mass) as to aU other aJien nationalities in Russia, and only after 
that may it be demanded from them that they comply with their 
duties toward the state and the native population." 
But Mr. Correspondent, you who write me in the same letter, 
on the next ;>:t!!'f'. that you "are far more devoted to, and pity 
more, the toiling mass of the Russian people, than the Jewish mass" 
(which, to be sure, for a Jew, is too strongly expressed) you, too, 
should remember that at the time when the Jew "has been restricted 
in the free selection r.f the place of residence," twenty-three millions 
of "the Russian t,J'l;ng mass" have been er<iuring serfdom which 
was, of course, more burdensome than "the selection of the place of 
residence." Now, did the Jews pity them then ?-I don't think so : 
in the Western border region and in the South you will get a com­
prehensive answer to this question. Nay, at that time the Jews also 
vociferated about rights which the Russian people therrselves did 
not have ; they shouted and complained tha1. •hey were de ·· 1trodden 
and martyrs, and that when they should be granted mt . I! rights, 
"then demand from us that we comply with the duties toward the 
state and the native population." 
But then came the Liberator and liberate;! the native people. 
And whCl was the first to fall upon them as on a victim ? Who pre­
eminently took advantage of their vices ? Who tied them with that 
sempiternal gold pursuit of theirs ? By whom-whenever ,ossible­
were the abolished landowners promptly replaced, with the differ­
ence that the latter, even though they did strongly exploit men, 
nevertheless endeavored-perhaps in their own interest-not to ruin 
the peasants in order to prevent the exhaustirm of labor, wherP૿•·• the 
Jew is not concerned about the exhaustion 01 :଀ussian labor : he grabs 
what's his, and off he goes. 
I know that upon reading this, the Jews will forthwith start 
·screaming that this is a lie ; that this is a calumny ; that I am 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
lying ; that I believe all this nonsense because I "do not know the 
forty-century-old history of these chaste angels who are incom­
parably purer morally not only than the other nationalities but also 
than the Russian people deified by me" (according to the words of 
my correspondent. See above) .  
But let, let them be morally purer than all the peoples of the 
world, nevertheless I have just read in the March issue of The Mes­
senger of Europe a news item to the effect that in America, in the 
Southern States, they have already leaped en masse upon the mil­
lions of liberated Negroes, and have already taken a grip upon them 
in their, the Jews', own way, by means of their sempiternal "gold 
pursuit" and by taking advantage of the inexperience and vices of 
the exploited tribe. Imagine, when I read this, I immediately re­
called that the same thing came to my mind five years ago, spe­
cifically, that the Negroes have now been liberated from the slave­
owners, but that they will not last because the Jews, of whom there 
are so many in the world, will jump at this new little victim. This 
came to my mind, and I assure you that several times during this 
interim I was asking myself : "Well, why doesn't one hear anything 
about the Jews there ; why do not newspapers write about them, 
because the Negroes are a treasure for the Jews ; is it possible that 
they would miss it ?" And at last my expectation came true, the 
newspapers have written it up,-I read it. 
Now, some ten days ago I read in The New Times (No. 3 7 1 )  
a most characteristic communication from Kovno to the effect that : 
"the Jews there have so assaulted the local Lithuanian population, 
that they almost ruined all of them with vodka, and only the Roman 
Catholic priests began to save the poor drunkards threatening 
them with the tortures of hell and organizing temperance societies." 
True, the enlightened correspondent strongly blushes on behalf of 
his population which still believes in its priests and in the tortures 
of hell, but he adds in this connection that following the example 
of the priests, enlightened local economists began to establish rural 
banks specifically with the object of saving the people from the 
Jew-the money lender, and also rural markets where "the destitute 
toiling mass" could buy articles of first necessity at real prices, and 
not at those set by the Jew. 
Well, I have read all this, and I know that instantly people 
will start shoutini that this proves nothing ; that all this is caused 
by the fact that the Jews themselves are oppressed ; that they are 
poor themselves ; that all this is but a "struggle for existence" ;  that 
only a fool would fail to understand it, and that were the Jews not 
so destitute themselves, were they, contrariwise, to grow rich,- they 
would instantly reveal themselves in a most humane light so that the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
whole world would be astounded. However, it goes without saying 
that all those Negroes and Lithuanians are even poorer than the Jews 
who are squeezing the sap out of them, and yet, the former (only read 
the correspondence) loathe the kind of trade for which the Jew is 
so eager. 
Secondly, it is not difticult to be humant: and moral when one 
rolls in butter, but the moment "the struggle for existence" comes 
into play,-don't you dare reproach me. To my way of thinking, 
this is not a very angelic trait. 
Third, of course, I am not setting forth these two news items 
from The Messenger of Europe and The New Times as capital and 
all-decisive facts. If one should start writing the history of this 
universal tribe, it would at once be possible to discover a hundred 
thousand of analogous and even more important facts, so that one 
or two additional facts would mean nothing in particular. However, 
it is curious in this connection that the moment you should require 
-say, in the course of an argument or in a minute of silent irresolu­
tion-infon .• at'"'' 1hrm1 t l'· Jew and his rloings,-don't go to public 
libraries ; don't ransack old books or your own old notes ; don't 
labor, don't search, don't exert your efforts, instead, without leaving 
your chair, stretch out your hand to any newspaper at random which 
happens to be ne;• you, and look at the second or third page : un­
failingly, you will 1'•nd something about je\\ .:; , and unfailingly-that 
which interests you ; unfailingly-that which is most characteristic, 
and unfailingly-one and the same thing, i.e.,-the same exploits ! 
Now, concede that this does mean something ; it does indicate 
and reveal to you something, even though you be an absolute ig­
noramus in the forty-century-long history of this tribe. ࢜!  'l question, 
I will be told that everybody is hatred-stricken, and the: ore every­
body is lying. Of course, it may happen that everyone ീo the last 
man is lying ; but if this be so, there ariSP.s at once a new question : 
if everybody without exception is lying and hatred-stricken, whence 
did this hatred arise ? Since this universal hatred does mean some­
thing ; as Bielinsky exclaimed once : "indeed, the word everybody 
does mean something ! "  
"Free selection of the place of residence ! "  But is .:.e "native" 
Russian absolutely free :n the choice of the place of residence ? Is 
it not true that also in the case of the Russian commoner, up to 
the present, the former restrictions in the complete freedom of the 
selection of the place of residence conth: "! to persist,-tho::.c unde­
sirable restrictions which are survivals of the times of serfdom and 
which have loug been attracting the attention of the government ? 
And as far as Jews are concerned, it is apparent to everybody that 
in the last twenty years their rights in the selection of the place of 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
residence have been very considerably expanded. At least, they have 
appeared throughout Russia in places where they have not been 
seen before. However, the jews keep complaining of hatred and 
restrictions. 
Let it be conceded that I am not firm in my knowledge of the 
Jewish modes of living, but one thing I do know for sure, and I am 
ready to argue about it with anyone, namely, that among our com­
mon people there is no preconceived, a priori, blunt religious hatred 
of the jew, something along the lines : "Judas sold out Christ." Even 
if one hears it from little children or drunken persons, nevertheless 
our people as a whole look upon the jew, I repeat, without a pre­
conceived hatred. I have been observing this for fifty years. I even 
happened to live among the pt'(\ple, in their very midst, in one and 
the same barracks, sleeping with them on the same cots. There there 
were several jews, and no one despised them, no one shunned them 
or persecuted them. When they said their prayers (and jews pray 
with screams, donning a special garment) nobody found this strange, 
no one hindered them or scoffed at them,-a fact which precisely 
was to be expected from such a coarse people-in your estimation­
as the Russians. On the contrary, when beholding them, they used 
to say : "such is their religion, and thus they pray" ; and would pass 
by calmly, almost approvingly. 
And yet these same jews in many respects shunned the Rus­
sians, they refused to take meals with them, looked upon them with 
haughtiness (and where ?-in a prison I )  and generally expressed 
squeamishness and av.ersion towards the Russian, towards the "na­
tive" people. The same is true in the case of soldiers' armories, and 
everywhere-all over Russia : make inquiries, ask if a jew, as a jew, 
as a Yiddisher, is being abused in armories because of his faith, his 
customs. Nowhere is he being abused, and that is also true of the 
people at large. On the contrary, I assure you that in armories, as 
elsewhere, the Russian commoner perceives and understands only 
too well (besides, the jews themselves do not conceal it) that the 
jew does not want to take meals with him, that he has an aversion 
toward him, seeking as much as possible to avoid him and segregate 
himself from him. And yet, instead of feeling hurt, the Russian com­
moner calmly and clearly says : "such is his religion ; it is because 
of his faith that he does not take meals with me and shuns me" 
(i.e., not becaust he is spiteful ) .  And having comprehended this 
supreme cause, he wholeheartedly forgives the jew. 
However, at times, I was fancying : now, how would it be if 
in Russia there were not three million jews, but three million Rus­
sians, and there were eighty million jews,-well into what would 
they convert the Russians and how would they treat them ? Would 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
they permit them to acquire equal rights ? Would they permit them 
to worship freely in their midst ? Wouldn't they convert them into 
slaves ? Worse than that : wouldn't they skin them altogether ? 
Wouldn't they slaughter them to the last man, to the point of com­
plete extermination, as they used to do with alien peoples in ancient 
times, during their ancient history ? 
Nay, I assure you that in the Russiar. people there is no 
preconceived hatred of the Jew, but perhaps there is a dislike of 
him, and especially in certain localities, maybe-a strong dislike. 
Oh, this cannot be avoided ; this exists ; but it arises not at all from 
the fact that he is a Jew, not because of some racial or religious 
hate, but it comes from other causes of which not the native people 
but the Jew himself is guilty. 
3 
STATUS IN STATU. FoRTY CENTURIES OF ExiSTENCE 
Hatred, and besides one caused by prejudice-this is what the 
Jews are accusing the native population of. However, if the point 
concerning prejudices has been raised, what do you think : does 
the Jew have fewr. prejudices against the Russian than the latter 
against the Jew ? Hasn't he more of them Ⴥ -I have given you ex­
amples of the attitude of the Russian common people toward the 
Jew. And here I have before me letters from Jews, and not from 
common ones, but from educated Jews. And so much hatred in these 
letters against "the native population" I And the main thing is : they 
write without realizing it themselves. 
You see, in order to exist forty centuries on ea1 • 
, i.e., vir­
tually the entir჆ historical period of mankind, and besic.-Ⴧ.s, in such 
a close and unbroken unity ; in order to lose so many times one's 
territory, one's political independence, laws, almost one's religion,­
to lose, and again to unite each time, to regt.nerate in the former 
idea, though in a different guise, to create anew laws and almost 
religion-nay, such a viable people, such an extraordinarily strong 
and energetic people, such an unprecedented people ir the world, 
could not have existed without status in statu which they have al­
ways and everywhere preserved at the time of their most dreadful, 
thousand, long dispersions and persecutions. Speaking of status in 
statu, I am by no means seeking to framP an accusation. Stil1, what 
is the meaning of this status in statu? Wh<:.. is its eternal, immutable 
idea ? Whereir is the essence of this idea ? 
It would be too long and impossible to expound this in a brief 
article ; besides, it would be impossible for the sa.ne reason that, 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
despite the forty centuries, not all times and seasons have arrived, 
and mankind's last word on this great tribe is still to come. How­
ever, without fathoming the essence and depth of the subject, it 
is possible to outline, at least, certain symptoms of that status in 
statu,-be it only externally. These symptoms are : alienation and 
estrangement in the matter of religious dogma ; the impossibility 
of fusion ; belief that in the world there exists but one national 
entity-the Jew, while, even though other entities exist, nevertheless 
it should be presumed that they are, as it were, nonexistent. "Step 
out of the family of nations, and form your own entity, and thou 
shalt know that henceforth thou art the only one before God ; 
exterminate the rest, or make slaves of them, or exploit them. 
Have faith in the conquest (If the whole world ; adhere to the 
belief that everything will submit to thee. Loathe strictly every­
thing, and do not have intercourse with anyone in thy mode of 
Jiving. And even when thou shalt lose the land, thy political indi­
viduality, even when thou shalt be dispersed all over the face of 
the earth, amidst all nations,-never mind, have faith in everything 
that has been promised thee, once and forever ; believe that all 
this will come to pass, and meanwhile live, loathe, unite and ex­
ploit, and-wait, wait. . . .  
" 
Such is the essence of that stat us in statu, and, in addition, 
there are, of course, inner and, perhaps, mysterious laws guarding 
this idea. 
You say, gentlemen-educated Jews and opponents-that all 
this is certainly nonsrnse, and that even if there be a status in 
statu (i.e., there has been, but at present, according to them, only 
the dimmest traces of it remain) ,  it is solely because persecution 
has brought it about ; religious persecution since the Middle Ages, 
and even earlier, has generated it, and that this status in statu 
came into existence merely from the imtinct of self-preservation. 
However, if it continues, especially in Russia, it is because the 
Jew has not yet been given equal rights with the native population. 
But this is how I feel : should the Jew be given equal rights, 
under no circumstance would he renounce his status in statu. 
Moreover, to attribute it to nothing but persecution and the in­
stinct of self-preservation-is insufficient. Besides, there would not 
have been enough tenacity in store for self-preservation during 
forty centuries ; the people would have grown weary of preserving 
themselves for so long a time. Even the strongest civilizations in 
the world have failed to survive half of the forty centuries, losing 
their political strength and racial countenance. Here it is not only 
self-preservation that constitutes the main cause, but a certain 
compelling and Juring idea, something so universal and profound 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
that on it, as stated above, mankind is perhaps still unable to 
utter its last word. That we are here dealing with something of 
a pre-eminently religious character-there can be no doubt. That 
their Providence, under the former, initial name of Jehovah, with 
his ideal and his covenant, continues to lead his people toward a 
firm goal-this much is clear. Besides, I re).J.!at, it is impossible 
to conceive a Jew without God. Moreover, I d J not believe in the 
existence of atheists even among the educated Jews : they all are 
of the !lame substance, and God only knows what the world has 
to expect from the educated Jews I Even in my childhood I have 
read and heard a legend about Jews to the effect that they are 
supposed to be undeviatingly awaiting the Messiah, all of them, 
both the lowest Yiddisher and the highest and most learned one 
-the philosopher and the cabalist-rabbi ; that they all believe 
that the Messiah will again unite them in Jerusalem and will bring 
by his sword all nations to their feet ; that this is the reason why 
the overwhelming majority of the Jews have a predilection but 
for one pr"fcs-჈::n the tr;rfE' in gold, and at the utmost-for gold­
smithery ; and all this, so it is alleged, in order, that, when Messiah 
comes, they should not need to have a new fatherland and to be 
tied to the land of aliens in their, the Jews' possession, but to 
have everything cr .JVerted into gold and jewels, so that it will be 
E'asier to carry th჉·.1. away when 
The ray of dawn begins to shine : 
Our flute, our tabor and the cymbal, 
Our riches and our holy symbol 
We will bring back to our old shrine, 
To our old homE'-to Palp<:tine. 
All this-1 repeat-! heard as a legend, but I belie· 1 that the 
substance of the matter unfailingly is there, in the form of an 
instinctively irresistible tendency. But m order that such a sub­
stance of thE' matter might be preserved, it is, of course, necessary 
that the strictest status in statu be preserved. And it is being 
preserved. Thus, not only persecution wa" and is its cause, but 
another idea. . 
. 
. 
If, however, amon" the Jews there exists in reality such an 
inner rigid organization as unites them into something solid and 
segregated, one almost may well give thought to the question whether 
equal rights with the native population !'-.,.ould be granted t•. them. 
It goes without saying that everyth_.Jg required by humane­
ness and justir", everything called for by compassion and the Chris­
tian law must be done for the Jews. But should they, in full armor 
of their organization and their segregation, their rac:al and religious 

FtoDOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
detachment ; in complete armor of their regulations and principles 
utterly opposed to that idea abiding by which the whole European 
world, at least up to the present time, has been developing ;-should 
they demand complete equalization in all possible rights with the 
native population, wouldn't they then be granted something greater, 
something excessive, something sovereign compared with the native 
population ? 
At this juncture, the Jews will, of course point to other aliens : 
11now, these have been granted equal, or almost equal, rights, 
whereas the Jews have fewer rights than all other aliens ; and this 
-because people are afraid of us, Jews : because we are supposedly 
more harmful than all other aliens. And yet in what sense is the 
Jew harmful ? Even if there bP bad qualities in the Jewish people, 
this is solely because these are being fostered by the Russian people 
themselves--by Russian ignorance, by the Russians' unfitness for 
independence, by their low economic development. The Russian 
people themselves demand a mediator, a leader, an economic warden 
in business, a creditor ; they themselves are inviting him and sur­
rendering themselves to him. On the contrary, look at things in 
Europe : there the nations are strong and independent in spirit ; 
they are peoples with strong national sentiment, with a long-stand­
ing habit and skill for work, and there they are not afraid to 
grant all rights to the Jew I Does one hear in France anything 
about the harm resulting from status in statu of the local Jews ?" 
Apparently, this is a strong line of reasoning ; however, in 
this connection therֹ arises in one's mind a notion-in paren­
theses, namely : Thus, Jewry is thriving precisely there where the 
people are still ignorant, or not free, or economically backward. 
It is there that Jewry has a champ fibre I And instead of raising, 
by its influence, the level of education, instead of increasing knowl­
edge, generating economic fitness in the native population,-in­
stead of this, the Jew, wherever he has settled, has still more hu­
miliated and debauched the people ; there humaneness wa:. still 
more debased and the educational level fell still lower ; there 
inescapable, inhuman misery, and with it despair, spread still 
more disgustingly. Ask the native population in our border regions : 
What is propelling the Jew-l1as been propelling him for centuries ? 
You will receive a unanimous answrr : mercilessness. "He has been 
prompted so mai;y centuries only by pitilessness for us, only by 
the thirst for our sweat and blood." 
And, in truth, the whole activity of the Jews in these border 
regions of ours consis-ted of rendering the native population as 
much as possible inescapably dependent on them, taking advantage 
of the local laws. They always managed to be on friendly terms 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
649 
with those upon whom the people were dependent, and, certainఏy, 
it is not for t]lem to complain, at least in this respect, about their 
restricted rig,ts compared with the native population. They have 
received from us enough of such rights over the native population. 
What, in the course of decades and centuries, has become of the 
Russian people where the Jews settled is att(;:ted by the history 
of our border regions. What, then ?-Point to al" y other tribe from 
among Russian aliens which could rival the Jew by his dreadful 
influence in this connection ! You will find no such tribe. In this 
respect the Jew preserves all his originality as compared with other 
Russian aliens, and, of course, the reason therefor is that status 
in statu of his, the spirit of which specifically breathes with piti­
lessness for everything that is not Jew, with disrespect for any 
people and tribe, for every human creature who is not a Jew. And 
what kind of justification is it that in Western Europe the nations 
did not permit themselves to be overwhelmed, and that thus the 
Russian people themselves are at fault ? Because the Russian people 
in the bordE"'" , ( ഖ; ""s of Ru.,.sia proved weaker than the European 
nations (and exclusively as a result of their. secular cruel political 
circumstances), for this sole reason should they be completely 
crushed by exploitation, instead of being helped ? 
And if referenr.! is made to Europe, to France, for example, 
-there too, hardly 11 1 ... their status in statu ber:1 harmless. Of course, 
there, Christianity and its idea have been lowered and are sinking 
not because of the Jew's fault, but through their own fault ; never­
theless, it is impossible not to note also in Euroఐ the great triumph 
of Jewry which has replaced many former ideas with its own. 
Oh, it goes without saying that man always, at all ఑imes, has 
been worshipping materialism and has bet:u inclined t · oerceive 
and understand liberty only in the sense of making h1. liTe se­
cure through money hoarded by the exertion of every effort and 
accumurated by all possible means. However, at no time in the 
past have these tendencies been raised so cyn:cally and so obvi­
ously to the level of a sublime principle as in our Nineteenth Cen­
tury. "Everybody for himself, and only for himself, and every 
intercourse with man solely for one's self"-such is the etఒical tenet 
of the majority of present-day pt!ople,1 even not bad people, but, 
on the contrary, laboring people who neither murder nor steal. 
And mercilessness for the lower masses, the decline of brotherhood, 
exploitation of the poor by the rich,-oh, Clr course, all this ,. .. ;o;ted 
,. tThe fundamental idea of the bourgeoisie which, at the end of the last 
century, took the place of the former concept of a world order,-an idea 
which has become the focal idea of the present century throughout the 
whole European world. 

6so 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
also before and always ; however, it had not been raised to the 
level of supreme truth and of science-it had been condemned by 
Christianity, whereas at present, on the contrary, it is being regarded 
as virtue. 
Thus, it is not for nothing that over there the Jews are 
reigning everywhere over stock-exchanges : it is not for nothing 
that they control capital, that they are the masters of credit, and 
it is not for nothing-1 repeat-that they are also the masters of 
international politics, and what is going to happen in the future 
is known to the Jews themselves : their reign, their complete reign 
is approaching I We are approaching the complete triumph of ideas 
before which sentiments of humanity, thirst for truth, Christian 
and national feelings, and even those of national dignity, must 
bow. On the contrary, we are approaching materialism, a blind, 
carnivorous craving for personal material welfare, a craving for 
personal accumulation of money by any means-this is all that 
has been proclaimed as the supreme aim, as the reasonable thing, 
as liberty, in lieu of the Christian idea of salvation only through 
the closest moral and brotherly fellowship of men. 
People will laugh and say that this is not all brought about 
by the Jews. Of course, not only by them, but if the Jews have 
completely triumphed and thriven in Europe precisely at the time 
when these new principles have triumphed there to the point of 
having been raised to- the level of a moral principle, it is impossible 
not to infer that the Jews, too, have contributed their influence to 
this condition. Our opponents point out that, on the contrary, the 
Jews are poor, pod'r even everywhere, especially in Russia ; that 
only the very summit of the Jews is rich-bankers and kings of 
stock-exchanges-while the rest, virtually nine-tenths of the Jews, 
are literally beggars, running about for a piece of bread, offering 
commissions and anxiously looking for an opportunity to snatch 
somewhere a penny for bread. Yes, this seems to be so, but what 
does this signify ? Does it not specifically mean that in the very 
toil of the Jews (i.e., at least, their overwhelming majority) , in 
their very exploitation there is something wrong, abnormal, some­
thing unnatural carrying in itself retribution. The Jew is offering 
his interposition, he is trading in another man's labor. Capital is 
accumulated labor ; the Jew loves to trade in somebody else's labor ! 
But, temporarily, this changes nothing. As against this, the summit 
of the Jews is assuming stronger and firmer power over mankind 
seeking to convey to it its image and substance. Jews keep vo­
ciferating that among them, too, there are good people. Oh, God ! 
Is this the point ?-Besides, we are speaking not al:>out good or bad 
people. And aren't there good people among those ? Wasn't the 
late James Rothschild of Paris a good man ?-We are speaking 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
about the whole and its idea ; we are speaking about Judaism and 
the Jewish idea which is clasping the whole world instead of Chris­
tianity which "did not succeed." . .  
4 
BuT LoNG LivE BROTHERH()(,D 
But what am I talking about and what for ? Or am I an 
enemy of the Jews ? Indew, is it true, as a noble and educated 
Jewish girl writes me (of \his I have no doubt-this can be per­
ceived from the letter, from the ardent sentiments expressed in 
this letter) , is it true that I am-to use her words-an enemy of 
this "unfortunate" tribe which I am "so cruelly attacking on every 
opportune occasion." "Your contempt for the Jewish tribe which 
'thinks about nothing except itself,' etc., is obvious." Nay, I pro­
te:>t against this obviousness, and besides, I deny the fact itself. 
On the cor.Ⴉ1 atJ .  l Ctm c;ay:·ഛg and writing that "everything required 
by humaneness and justice, everything called for by compassion 
and the Christian law,-all this must be done for the Jews." These 
words were written by me above, but now I will add to them that 
despite all considP, dtions already set forth by me, I am decidedly 
favoring full exte1."10n of Jewish rights in :ormal legislation, and, 
if possible, fullest equality with the native population (N. B., al­
though, perhaps, in certain cases, even now they have more rights, 
or-to put it better-more possibilities of exercising them than the 
native population itself). 
Of course, the following fantasy, for instance, runes to my 
mind : "Now, what if somehow, for some reason, our 
1ral com­
mune should disintegrate, that commune which is prob:ting our 
poor native peasant against so many ills ; what if. straightway, 
the Jew, and his whole kehillah should fall upon t.hat liberated 
peasant,-so inexperienced, so incapable of t"esisting temptation, 
and who up to this time has been guarded precisely by the com­
mune ?-Why, of course : instantly, this would be his end ; his entire 
property, his whole strength, the very next day, would :orne under 
the power of the Jew, a"rl. there would ensue such an era as could 
be compared not only with the era of serfdom but even with that 
of the Tartar yoke." 
Despite all the " fantasies" and f''""rything I have •·.to:itten 
above, however, I favor full and comple.Ⴊ equalization of rights 
because such : ,  Christ's law, such is the Christian principle. But 
if so, what was the point of writing so many pages, and what did 
I intend to express if I am so contradicting mysPlf ?-Specifically, 
the fact that I· am not contradicting myself, and that from the 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Russian native side I see no difficulties in extending Jewish rights ; 
I do, however, assert that these obstacle5 are incomparably greater 
on the part of the Jews than on the par: of the Russians, and that 
if up to the present the thing which one wishes wholeheartedly has 
not come to pass, the blame therefor is infinitely less on the Russian 
than on the Jew himself. Similarly what I was telling about the 
common Jew who refuses to maintain intercourse and share hiR 
meals with the Russians who were not angry with him, who did 
not retaliate but, on the contrary, at once grasped the situation 
and forgave him, saying : "this is becruse such is his religion,"­
similarly this we often perceive in the intelligent Jew-a boundless 
and haughty prejudice against the Russian. 
Oh, they do shout that they are fond of the Russian people ; 
one of them even wrote me that he was sorry that the Russian 
people were devoid of religion and :mderstood nothing in their 
Christianity. This is too strongly put 'for a Jew, and there merely 
arises this question : Does this highly educated Jew himself under­
stand anything about Christianity ?-But self-conceit and haughti­
ness are qualities of the Jewish character, which to us Russians, 
is very painful. Who, as between the two of us-the Russian or the 
Jew-is more incapable of understanding the other ?-I swear, I 
would rather exonerate the Russian : at least, he has no (positively 
no) religious hatred of. the Jew. And who has more prejudices of 
other kinds ? Now, the Jews keep vociferating that they have been 
oppressed and persecuted for so many centuries, that they are being 
oppressed and persecwted at present, and that this much, at least, 
should be taken into account by the Russian when analyzing the 
Jewish character. All right, we do take this into account, and this 
we can prove : among the educated strata of the Russian people 
on more than one occasion voices have been raised in favor of the 
Jews. Well, what about the Jews ?-Did they, and do they, take 
into account, when blaming, and complaining against, the Russians, 
all the oppression and persecution which the Russian people them­
selves have endured ? Is it possible to maintain that the Russian 
people, "in the course of their history" have endured fewer mis­
fortunes and ills than the Jews wheresoever it may have been ? And 
is it possible to assert that the Jew very frequently has not allied 
himself with the J>ersecutors of the Russian people, taking a lease 
on them from tiieir oppressors, and becoming himself their per­
secutor ?-Indeed, all this did happen, it did exist ; indeed, this is 
history, an historical fact. But we have never heard that the Jewish 
people repented for this, and yet they keep accusing the Russian 
people of the fact that they do not love the Jews enough. 
Still, "let it come to pass, let it come to pass I "  Let there 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
be full moral unity of the tribes and no discrimination in their 
rights I And for this purpose, in the first place, I implore my 
opponents and my Jewish correspondents to be more indulgent and 
just toward us Russians. If their haughtiness, their perpetual "sad 
squeamishness" toward the Russian race is merely a prejudice, an 
"historical excrescence," and is not concealed in some much deeper 
mysteries of their law and organization,-let <ll this be dispelled 
as soon as possible, and let us come together in one spirit, in com­
plete brotherhood, for mutual assistance and for the great cause of 
serving our land, our state and our fatherland I Let the mutual 
accusations be mollified ; let the customary exaggeration of these 
accusations, hindering the clear understanding of things, disappear I 
One can pledge for the Russian people : oh, they will accept the 
Jew in the fullest brotherhood, despite the difference in religion­
and with perfect respect for the historical fact of such a difference. 
Nevertheless, for complete brotherhood-brotherhood on the part 
of both sides is needed. Let the Jew also show at least some brotherly 
feeling for t"tP Russian people so as to encourage them. I know 
that even at present there are plenty of men among the Jewish 
people who are seeking and craving for the elimination of the mis­
understandings, men who, besides, are humane, and I shall not 
keep silent on this fact so as to conceal the truth. It is precisely 
in order that th•"-r useful and humane pPrsons should not grow 
despondent and low-spirited, and with a view to weakening, at 
least somewhat, their prejudices, thereby facilitating their first steps, 
that I should favor a full extension of rights to the Jewish race, 
at least, as far as possible, specifically, in so far as the Jewish 
people themselves prove their ability to accept and J'l'l.ake use of 
these rights without detriment to the na.i :c populal1C'• It would 
even be possible to make an advance concession, to 
1ake more 
steps forward on the part of the Russian side. The only question 
is : to what extent would these new, got჋d Jews suc .. eed and how 
far are they themselves adapted to the new and beautiful cause 
of genuine brotherly communion with men who are alien to them 
by religion and blood ? 
CHAPTER III 
1 
"The Funeral of the 'Un:ê· .. -ëal Man' " 
IN THI჊ March issue of my Diary I meant to discuss many 
things. And now again, somehow, it so happened that the things 
about which I had intended to say but a few words absorbed the 

654 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
entire space. And how many themes there are which all the year 
I have ben planning to dwell upon, and still I am unable to come 
to them. Indeed, about certain matters it would be necessary to 
say much, and inasmuch as it develops that much cannot be told, 
one does not embark upon the discussion of the subject in question. 
This time, leaving aside these "important" topics, I meant 
to say, in passing, at least a few words on art. I have seen Rossi 
in Hamlet, and I came to the conclusion that, instead of Hamlet, 
I saw Mr. Rossi. But it is better not to start talking if I do not 
intend to say everything. I wanted also to discuss (a little) Semi­
radsky's picture, but most of all I intended to interject a few words 
on idealism and realism in art, on Repin and Mr. Raphael-but I 
see that all these will have to be postponed until a more opportune 
time. 
Furthermore it was my intention to write-but this somewhat 
more elaborately-about some letters, particularly anonymous, which 
I have been receiving during the whole period of the publication 
of the Diary. Generally speaking, I am not in a position to answer 
all letters which I am receiving, especially the anonymous ones, 
and yet, during these eighteen months I have derived from this 
correspondence (on our common themes) several observations which, 
at least in my opinion, are noteworthy : in any event, it becomes 
possible to make several special notes, based on experience, con­
cerning our present-day Russian intellectual mood-the things in 
which our not idle minds are interested and toward which they are 
bent, and who exactly are these not idle minds. In this connection 
curiou჌ traits may ഩe recorded representative of agr, sex ,  social 
status and even of this or that locality of Rus5ia. 
I believe that some space should be devoted in one of the 
future issues of the Diary, for instance, to anonymous letters and 
their characteristics ; in my opinion this wouldn't be too borinഝ 
since these writings reflect variety of every kind. Of coursf', not 
everything-perhaps, not even the most curious-can be told and 
recorded. For this reason,-and not knowing whether I can manage 
to cope with this theme-1 hesitate to embark upon it. 
However, at this time I want to refer to a letter, not an 
anonymous one, from Miss L., a very young Jewish girl whom I 
know well and with whom I made my acquaintance in Petersburg. 
She writes me fr )Tl the city of M. Almost never did I converse with 
esteemed Miss L. on the subject of "the Jt>wish question," in spite 
of the fact that she seems to be one of those strict and serious­
minded Jewesses. I see that her letter strangely fits into the whole 
chapter on the Jews which I have just finished writing. It might 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
6ss 
be too much to dwell again on the same subject, but this is a dif­
ferent theme, or even if it is the same theme, nevertheless it reveals 
the opposite aspect of the question, and even, as it were, a hint 
at its solution. 
Let Miss L. magnanimously forgive me for taking the liberty 
of quoting here in her own words that part of her letter in which 
she describes the funeral of Dr. HindenLurg in the city of M., and 
which contains these most sincere and touchingly truthful lines 
written under the first impression of what she has seen. I did not 
wish to conceal the fact that this was written by a Jewess, and 
that these sentiments are those of a Jewess . . . .  
"I am writing this under the fresh impression of a funeral. 
It was the funeral of Dr. Hindenbrìrg, aged eighty-four. Because 
he was a Protestant, his body was first taken to a Protestant church, 
and only after that-to the cemetery. Never did I see at a funeral 
such sympathy, such warm tears ; never did I hear words which 
sprang so spontaneously from the soul. . . . He died in such poverty 
that tht!l e was no ! coney to takr care of his burial expenses. 
"He has been practicing in M. for fifty-eight years and how 
much good he did during that time. If you only knew, Fedor l\li­
khailovich, what a man this was ! He was a doctor and an ob­
stetrician ; Ius name will live here in posterity ; legends about him 
are already being told. All the common people called him 'father,' 
they loved and adored him, and only when he died did they com­
prehend what they have lost in this man. While his body lay in the 
coffin (in the church) ,  I think there wasn't a single person who 
did not come up to weep over him and to kiჍs his feet, particularly 
poor Jewcsses whom he has helped c:o much ; t}t പഫ· wept and prayrd 
that he be taken straight to Paradise. Today ou rormer cook, an 
awfully poor woman, called on us, and she ჎aid thdt when her last 
child was born he, ჎eeing that ther<' was no forti in her room, gave 
her thirty kopecks-to cook soup, and thereafter every day he came 
to see her leaving twenty kopecks for her ; and when she began to re­
cover, he sent her two partridges. Also, once having been called to 
a dreadfully poor woman in childbed (and such were the women 
who used to call him), hf', seeing that there wa჎ no cloth in which 
the baby could b჏ wrapped, took off his upper shirt and handker­
chief (he always wore a handkerchief on his head), tore them up 
and gave them to the woman. 
"He also cured a poor Jew, a ··ood-cutter ; afte1 that his wife 
and then her children fell sick. Every God's day, twice a day he 
called 011 them, and when he had put them all on their feet, he 
asked the Jew : 'How are you going to pay me ?' The Jew said that 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
he had absolutely nothing, except a she-goat which he would sell 
that day. This he did ; he sold the goat for four rubles, and brought 
the money to the doctor who, through his man-servant, gave twelve 
rubles, in addition to the four, ordered him to buy a cow, and 
meanwhile he told the wood-cutter to go home. An hour later the 
cow was brought to the latter, and he was informed that the doctor 
found that goat-milk was not good for them. 
"Thus he lived all his life. On some occasions, he would leave 
with the poor as much as thirty or forty rubles ; he also gave money 
to the poor peasant women in villages. 
"But he was buried like a saint. All the poor people closed 
their stores and ran after the coffin. It is a custom among Jews 
that at funerals little boys sing psalms, but it is forbidden to sing 
them when a person of non-Jewish faith is being buried. In this 
case, however, at the funeral procession boys marched before the 
coffin and sang these psalms. In all synagogues prayers were said 
for his soul, and bells in all churches pealed during the procession. 
There was a band of military music, and Jewish musicians called 
on the son of the deceased and begged-as for an honor-to be per­
mitted to play during the procession. All the poor people gave five 
or ten kopecks, while the rich Jews contributed much, and a gorgeous, 
enormous wreath of fresh flowers was ordered, with white and black 
ribbons at its sides on which in gold lettering his principal services 
were recorded, for instance, the foundation of a hospital, etc. I was 
unable to decipher what was written there, and besides, is it pos­
sible to enumerate all his merits? 
"At his grave orations were delivered by a pastor and a rabbi. 
Both wept, and he lay there in his old, worn-out uniform ; his head 
was tied with an old handkerchief-that dear head of his, and it 
seemed that he was merely !:.leeping so fresh was the color of his 
face . . . .  " 
2 
AN ISOLATED CASE 
"An isolated case"-people might say. Well, gentlemen, once 
more I plead guilty : again I perceive in an isolated case almost the 
beginning of the solution of the whole question . . . that same 
"Jewish questi01t1' with which I have entitled the second chapter 
of the Diary. By the way, why did I call the little old doctor a 
"universal man"? He was rather a common man, and not a "uni­
versal man." This city of M. is a big provincial town in the Western 
region ; it has a large Jewish population ; there are also Germans, 

THE DIARY Olt' A WRITER 
Russians, of course, Poles, Lithuanians ; and all these nationalities 
have recognized the righteous old man as their own. He himself 
was a Protestant and specifically a German, fully a German : the 
way he bought the cow and sent her to the poor Jew-this is a 
typically German "Witz." First, he baffled him : "How are you 
going to pay me ?" And it stands to reason that when the poor 
fellow was selling his last goat in order to pay his "benefactor," 
he did not repine in the least ; on the contrary, in his soul he was 
bitterly sorry that the goat was worth only four rubles, while "the 
poor old man laboring for all the poor folks has also got to live, and 
what is four rubles for all the favors he has bestowed upon the fam­
ily ?" Well, the little old man was no fool ; he smiled, and his heart 
said : "Now, I'll show him, the poor fellow, our German Witz !" And 
how heartily he must have laughed to himself when the cow was 
taken to the Jew, and he might have spent that night in a miserable 
shanty of some poor Jewess in childbed. And it would have been 
nice for the eighty-year-old man to get a good night's sleep, to give 
his old bones a little rest. 
Wt:re I a painter, I would have painted this "genre," that 
night at the Jewess' childbed. I am awfully fond of realism in 
art, but in the pictures of some of our modern realists there is no 
moral center, as a mighty poet and a refined artist expressed him­
self the other day, conversing with me about Semiradsky's canvas. 
I believe that here, in the subject .suggested by me for the "genre" 
there would be such a center. And for the artist it would be a 
gorgeous subject. First, the ideal, impossible, fetid misery of a poor 
Jewish shanty. Here much humor could be expressed and in a most 
opportune sense : humor is wit of a profound feeling, and I like 
this definition very much. With a refmed feelinJ, and intellect the 
artist may achieve much by the mere reshuffling of the roles of all 
these miserable household articles in a poor hut, and by this amus­
ing reshuffle he can at once touch your heart. Besides, light could 
be made interesting : on a warped taLie a greasy guttered candle 
is burning out, while through the hoary tiny window, covered with 
ice, glimmers the dawn of another difficult day for poor folks. Women 
subject to painful accouchement often bring fvrth the child at 
dawn : all night long they suffer great pains, and in the early morn­
ing they deliver the child. Presently, the tired little old man, turn­
ing for a moment from the mother, takes hold of thr child ; there 
is nothing to swathe him with ; thPre is even no duster (gentlemen, 
I swear that such misery exists ; 
u does exist, it's pure realism, 
realism reaching the level of the fantastic) .  And the righteous old 
man takes off his worn-out uniform, then he also removes from 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
his shoulders his shirt and tears it up for swaddles. The expression 
of his face is stern and concentrated. The poor newborn tiny Jewish 
baby squirms before him on the bed ; a Christian takes the little 
Jew into his hands and wraps him with a shirt from his shoulders. 
Gentlemen, this is the solution to the Jewish question : the 
eighty-year-old naked torso of the doctor, shivering from morning 
dampness, may assume a prominent place in the picture, not to speak 
of the face of the old man and that of the exhausted young woman 
in childbed looking at her new-born, and the doctor knows it : "This 
poor little Yiddisher will grow up, and, perhaps, he himself will 
take his shirt off his shoulders and, remembering the story of his 
birth, will give it to a Christian"-with naive and noble faith 
ponders the old man. Will this come to pass ?-Most probably not. 
However, this may come to pass, and there is nothing better on 
earth than to believe that this may and will come to pass. And as 
for the doctor, he has the right so to believe since in his case it 
has already materialized. "I did it, and someone else will do it. 
In what sense am I better than another ?"-he encourages himself. 
The tired old Jewess, the mother of the woman in childbed, 
in rags, busies herself at the stove. The Jew, who has been out 
to fetch a bundle of chips, opens the door of the hut, and chilly 
vapors, like a cloud, for an instant, break into the room. On the 
floor, on a felt bedding, two little Jewish boys are sound asleep. 
In a word, the mise-en-scene could be worked out very well. Even 
the thirty kopecks in copper on the table which the doctor has 
left for the soup of the woman in childbed might constitute a detail 
-a small copper pile of three-kopecks coins, methodically put to­
gether, and by no means tossed hither and thither. Even mother­
of-pearl could be delineated, just as in Semiradsky's picture in 
which a piece of mother-of-pearl is wonderfully painted : indeed, 
sometimes doctors are given pretty little presents (so as not to 
pay much in cash) ,-and the doctor's cigar case made of mother-of­
pearl lies there, next to the copper heap. Yes, it's all right, the 
picture would come out with a "moral center." I suggest that it be 
painted. 
Isolated case ! Some two years ago it has been reported that 
somewhere (I have forgotten where) in the south of Russia, a 
certain doctor who on a hot morning had just come out of a bathing 
house refreshed md invigorated, and who was anxious to go home 
as quickly as possible for a cup of coffee, refused to give assistance 
to a drowned man who had been taken out of the water nearby, 
despite the fact that a. crowd of people urged him to do so. I believe 
he was prosecuted for this. And yet, perhaps, he was an educated 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
659 
man with new ideas, a progressive, but one who "reasonably" de­
manded new general laws and rights for everybody, neglecting 
isolated cases. He might even have believed that isolated cases are 
rather harmful because they postpone the general solution to the 
problem, and that as far as these single cases are concerned, the 
principle "the worse-the better" should be in force. However, gen­
eral rights cannot very well be put into effect in the absence of 
isolated cases. 
The common ;nan, though he may have constituted an isolated 
case, succeeded in uniting at his grave a whole town. The Russian 
peasant women and the poor Jewesses kissed his feet, crowding 
around him and weeping all together. Fifty-eight year:> of service 
to humanity in this town ; fifty-eight years of unceasing love, united 
everybody, at least once, at his coffin in common ecstasy and tears. 
The population of the whole town turned out at his funeral ; the 
bells of all the churches were pealing ; prayers were sung in all 
languages. The pastor in tears delivered his oration over the open 
grave. Tlic rabbi, .,tanding by, waiteci for the pastor to finish his 
eulogy, and then he made his speech shedding tears, in turn. Indeed, 
at this moment this very "Jewish question" has been almost solved ! 
Since the pastor and the rabbi became united in common love ; 
they almoაt embraced each other at this grave in the presence of 
Christians and Jews. What of it, if, alter parting, each one embarked 
upon his old prejudices : the drop grinds the stone, and it is these 
"common people" who are conquering the world by uniting it. 
Prejudices will grow dimmer after every isolated case and, finally, 
will disappear. 
Legends will survive thr littl" 0ld man, " " ;  'S :\!iss L., also a 
Jewess, one who also has wept over that "dear .,ead·' of the hu­
manitarian. And legends-why, they are the first step toward work, 
this live reminiscence and continual remindt - about these "con­
querors of the world" to whom the future of the world belongs. 
And once you believe that they are the conquerors and that "they 
shall inherit the earth," you are almost united in everything. 
All this is very simple. It seems, however, that one thing is 
difficult : to become convinced that without these units the sum 
total can never [,., arrived at : everything will fall apart, but these 
will unite everything. These suggest the thought ; they inspire us 
with faith ; they constitute a living example and, ther..fore, a proof. 
And it is not at all necessary to 
•it until everybody becomes as 
good as they, or a great many : only very few of such men are 
needed to save the world-thus strong they are. And if so, how can 
one fail to hope ? 

66o 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
To Our Correspondents 
Novocherkassk. U. G. Please send the article on Stundism. 
• 
• 
• 
Mrs. N. N. is requested to proceed with the fulfillment of her 
promise to send information on events in the life of the peasants 
and on the Zemstvo work in her region. 
• 
• 
• 
This time we apologize to all those who have sent advertise­
ments about their periodicals for publication in the Diary : owing 
to the lack of space we were unable to fill their orders. 
APRIL 
CHAPTER I 
1 
War. We Are Stronger than the Rest 
"WAR I WAR has been declared I "-people were exclaiming in 
Russia two weeks ago. "Will there be war ?"-others were asking. 
"It has been declared, declared I "  -people replied to them. "Yes ; 
declared, but will there be war ?"-they kept asking . . . .  
Indeed, such questions did arise ; perhaps they are still being 
asked. And it was not only because of long diplomatic procrastina­
tion that people have utterly lost their faith ; here there was some­
thing different-the instinct. Everybody feels that something final 
has begun ; that some kind of an end of something that has been in 
the past is nearing,-of some long, protracted past, and that a step 
is made in the direction of something altogether new which splits 
the past into two, which regenerates and resurrects it for a new 
life . . . and that this step is being made by Russia ! Precisely 
herein is the incredulity of the "wise" fellows. There is instinctive 
presentiment but disbelief persists : "Russia ! But how can she ? How 
does she dare ? Is she ready ? Is she ready inwardly, morally­
not only materially ? . . . Over there is Europe ; easy to say­
Europe I While Russijl . . . What is Russia ? And such a step I "  
However, the people believe that they are ready for this 
regenerating and great step. It is the people themselves led by the 
Czar who have risen for war. When the Czar's word had sounded, the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
661 
people poured into churches, and thus it was all over Russia. When 
the Czar's manifesto was being read, the people were crossing them­
selves and they all congratulated one another upon the declaration 
of war. We saw this with our own eyes, we heard it, even here, in 
Petersburg. And again the same things, the same facts arose as 
last year. Peasants in volostis are m;.king, to the limit of their 
means, money contributions ; they give carts with horses. And sud­
denly, these thousands of men, as one man, began to exclaim : 
"What do those donations and those carts mean I Everyone of us 
will go to war ! " 
Here, in Petersburg, we have donors for wounded and sick 
soldiers ; they give as much as several thousand rubles each, and 
they insist that their gifts be listed as anonymous. Such instances 
are very numerous ; there will be tens of thousands of similar cases, 
and they will surprise no one. They merely signify that the people 
have risen for the truth, for a sacred cause, that they, as a whole, 
have risen for the sake of war and that they mean war. 
Oh, the wiseacres will deny even these facts as they did those 
of last year ; the wiseacres, even as of late, continue to ridicule 
the people although their voices have noticeably abated. Whence 
do they derive so much self-reliance ? Why do they laugh ? Precisely 
because thev still consider themselves a power without which noth­
ing can be done. And yet their powბr is coming to an end. They 
are nearing a terrible debacle, and when it breaks out they too 
will start speaking a different language, but then everybody will 
perceive that they are not muttering their own words but merely 
echoing somebody else's voice ; then people will turn away from 
them and will hopefully turn toward the Czar a'ld his people. 
We ourselves need this war ; 1.ot merely b .. :use our "Siavic 
brethren" have been oppressed by the Turks. We re also rising for 
our own salvation. The war will clear the air which we breathe and 
in which we have been suffocating, closeted in spiritual narrowness 
and stricken with impotence of decay. The wiseacres are shouting 
that we are perishing from our own domestic disorganization, and 
that, for this reason, not war but lasting peace should be sought 
so that we may be transformed from beasts ar.გ blockheads into 
human beings, so that v.e may learn order, honesty and honor :­
"then go ahead and help your Slavic brethren"-thus they wind up 
their song in accordant chorus. 
In this connection it would bf' curious to know lqw they con­
ceive that process by means of whL.l they expect to improve. And 
how can they acquire honor by means of flagrant dishonor ? Finally, 
it would be curious to find out how and by what means they would 
vindicate their severance from the universal a11d ubiquitous popular 

662 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
sentiment ?-Yes, the contention seems justified that truth can be 
acquired only through martyrdom. Millions of men are moving and 
suffering and are passing away without leaving a trace, as it were, 
predestined never to learn the truth. They are living by somebody 
else's ideas, seeking ready-made words and examples, and clinging 
to causes suggested from without. They are shouting that they are 
being backed up by authorities, by Europe. They are hissing at 
those who are not in accord with them, who despise lackeyism of 
thought and who believe in their own and in their people's inde­
pendence. In fact these masses of vociferating men are predestined 
to constitute an inert means for enabling but scattered individuals 
in their midst to approach the truth, though slightly, or, at least, 
to get a presentiment of it. It is these individuals who lead the 
masses, who dominate the movement, conceiving the idea and be­
queathing it to these tossing multitudes of human beings. We also 
have had such individuals. Some of us-even many-already under­
stand them. Yet, the wiseacres continue to laugh and still believe 
that they are a great power. "They'll take a walk and come back" 
-they say, referring to our troops which have crossed the border ; 
they speak so even aloud. "There will be no war. War I How can 
we conduct a war 1 -This is merely a promenade and manreuvres at 
the cost of hundreds of millions for the purpose of upholding honor." 
Such is their intimate view of the affair. At that-is it only an 
intimate view ? 
But even if it could so happen that we should be beaten, or 
though after beating the enemy, under pressure of circumstances, 
we should, nevertheless, have to make a trifling peace,-oh, then, 
of course, the wiseacres would triumph. And what hissing, rows 
and cynicism would again ensue for several years, what a bac­
chanalia of self-contempt, blows on the face and self-provocation­
and this not for inspiring resurrection and vigor, but precisely for 
the sake of the triumph of their own dishonor, faithlessness and 
impotence ! And the new nihilism, just as the former one, would 
begin with the negation of the Russian people and their independ­
ence. And the main thing is that it would acquire so much strength, 
it would become so fortified that it would unquestionably insult, 
even aloud, Russia's sacred things. And youths would again be spit­
ting upon their families and homes ; again they would start running 
away from their old people repeating over and over the mechanically 
learned old bori'ng words about European greatness, and about our 
duty to be as impersonal as possible. And what is most important­
the old song, old words, and nothing new for a long time I 
Nay, we need war and victory. With war and victory the new 
word will be uttered, and a new life will begin-not merely, as 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
heretofore, deadening chit-chat,-why, gentlemen,-not only as here­
tofore, as we have it now I 
But we must be ready for everything, and even if the worst, 
the impossibly worst, outcome of the war, which has begun now, 
be supposed, much bad experience as we may have to endure ; much 
as we may have to suffer from that old grief with which we are 
bored to death,-nevertheless the colossus is not going to be under­
mined, and sooner or later he will take his own. This is not merely 
a hope, but a full certitude, and in the impossibility of undermining 
the colossus is our whole strength in the face of Europe, where 
virtually everybody is afraid that their old edifice will be under­
mined and the ceilings will crash upon them. 
This colossus is our people. And the beginning of this present 
popular war as well as all recent facts preceding it have graphically 
demonstrated, to those who know how to behold things, the integrity 
and freshness of our people and the extent to which they remained 
immune to that decay which has putrefied our sages. 
And what se1 vice they have rendered to us in Europe ! Only 
recently they have been vociferating to the whole world that we 
were poor and negligible ; scoffingly they have been assuring every­
body that we had no such thing as popular spirit since there was 
no people, and that the people and their spirit have been invented 
by the fantasies of the home-baked Moscow dreamers ; that eighty 
million Russian peasants were merely inert, drunken taxation units ; 
that there was no unity between the Czar and the people ; that this 
was only text-book stuff ; that, on the contrary, everything was 
undermined and gnawed through by nihili.;m ; that our soldiers 
would throw down their rifles and ·დ·,.,uld start r • : •  ning as so many 
sheep ; that we had neither cartridges nor prov. Jns, and finally, 
that we ourselves perceived that we have been bluffing, that we 
have gone too far, and that we exerted all our ef..:>rts to find a pretext 
for a retreat without getting most ignominious blows on our face­
which "even we were unable to endure," and that we were praying 
that Europe might invent such a pretext for us. 
This is what our wiseacres have been swParing to, and one 
is almost unable to be angry with them, since such are their genuine 
views and conceptiOns. And in truth, in many a thing we are poor 
and pitiful. Yes, it is true : there is so much that is bad in Russia 
that a wiseacre, particularly if he is our "wiseacn ," could not 
"betray" himself and could not bel, but exclaim : "That's the end 
of Russia, and there is nothing to regret ! "  Well, these familiar 
ideas of our wiseacres have spread throughout Europe, especially 
through European correspondents who have invaded Russia on the 
eve of the war in order to investigate us on the spot, to inspect 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
us with their European eyes, and to estimate our strength with 
their European gauges. And it goes without saying that they have 
been listening only to our "wise and sensible" ones. They have all 
overlooked the people's strength, the people's spirit, and all over 
Europe the news has spread that Russia was perishing, that Russia 
was nothing at all, that she has been nothing, that she is nothing 
and will be reduced to nothing. 
But the hearts of our traditional enemies and haters whom 
for two centuries we have been vexing in Europe began to quiver 
-the hearts of many thousands of European Jews and of the mil­
lions of "Christians" Judaizing in accord with them, the heart of 
Beaconsfield-when he was told that Russia would endure every­
thing, including a most shameful blow in the face, but would not 
resort to war-such was, so to speak, her "peaceableness." But hav­
ing made them all blind, God saved us : too firmly were they con­
vinced of Russia's ruin and nothingness. But they did overlook the 
cardinal thing. They have overlooked the Russian people as a whole, 
as a living force, and the colossal fact-the union of the Czar with 
his people I Only this is what they have overlooked I 
Besides, they were utterly unable to understand and believe 
the fact that our Czar was really peaceable and that he, in truth, 
had such compassion : they thought that this was mere "politics." 
They see nothing even at present :  they are clamoring that it is 
only manifest that "patriotism has suddenly arisen in our midst." 
"Is this patriotism ?"-they ask. "Is this Czar's communion with 
the people for the sake of a great cause-is it only patriotism ?" 
Our principal strength is precisely in the fact that they do not 
understand Russia at all-they understand nothing about Russia I 
They do not know that nothing in the world can conquer us ; that 
we may, perhaps, be losing battles, but that nevertheless we shall 
remain invincible precisely because of the unity of our popular 
spirit, and by reason of the people's consciousness ; that we are 
not France, which is all in Paris ; that we are not Europe, which 
is altogether dependent upon the stock-exchanges of her bourgeoisie 
and the "tranquillity" of her proletarians which is being purchased 
-and this only for one hour-with the last resorts of their local 
governments. They do not comprehend and know that, if it be our 
will, neither the Jews of all Europe nor the millions of their gold 
-not even the millions of their armies, can conquer us ; that if it 
be our will, it is impossible to compel us to do something we do 
not wish, and that there is no such power on earth which could 
compel us. 
· 
The only trouble is that these words will be laughed at not 
only in Europe, but at home, too, and not only by our wise and 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
665 
sensible ones, but even by genuine Rusians of our educated strata 
-to such an extent we do not understand ourselves and our native 
strength which, thank God, has not yet been broken. 
These good men fail to understand that in our immense and 
most peculiar land, which does not resemble Europe, even war 
tactics (a thing so common I )  may be quite different from those 
of Europe ; that the basis of European tactics-money and scientific 
organizations of six hundred thousand men-strong military inva­
sions-may stumble over our land and knock against a new force 
unknown to them, whose foundation lies in the nature of our bound­
less Russian land and of our all-united Russian spirit. 
However, let our many good men, for the time being, fail to 
understand this (they do not know and are timid) .  Yet our Czars 
are aware of this and the people feel this. Alexander I was cog­
nizant of this peculiar force of ours when he said that he would 
grow a beard and retire with his people to the depths of the forests 
rather than lay down his sword and submit to Napoleon's will. 
And, of course, in a collision with such a force all Europe would 
be .sm .. ეhed becau',e for such a war she would not have sufficient 
money, unity and organization. 
When all our Russian men learn that we are so powerful, 
then we shall achieve a condition where we shall not have to conduct 
wars ; then Europe will begin to believe in us and she will then, 
for the first time, discover us, as m the past she has discovered 
America. But for this it is necessary that we, ahead of them, dis­
cover ourselves, and that our intelligentsia understand that it can 
no longer segregate and detach itself from its people. 
2 
NoT ALWAYS Is WAR A ScouRGE. SoMETIMES IT Is 
SALVATION 
But our wiseacres have also seized upon another aspect of 
the matter : they are preaching philanthropy and humaneness ; they 
are lamenting over blood that has been shed, over the fact that 
in the course of the war we shall grow still more bestial and defiled 
and that thereb) we shall be still farther removed from domestic 
progress, from the right road, from science. 
Yes, of course, war is a calamity ; still, there h much fallacy 
in these arguments, and, what is "lOSt important-we are surfeited 
with these bourgeois morals I The exploit of bloody self-sacrifice 
for the sake of everything that we regard as sacred, is, of course, 
more moral than the whole bourgeois catechism. The enthusiasm 

666 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
of a nation inspired by a magnanimous idea is a progressive im­
pulse and not bestialization. It stands to reason that we may be 
mistaken in what we consider a magnanimous idea, but if that 
which we deem to be our sanctity is disgraceful and vicious, we 
cannot evade punishment which will be conferred upon us by nature 
herself : ignominy and vice carry in themselves death, and, sooner 
or later, they punish themselves. For example, a war undertaken 
for the sake of acquisition of wealth, prompted by the insatiable 
greed of tht' bourse, may actually be derived from the same law 
of the development of one's national individuality, common to all 
peoples,-nevertheless there is a limit to this development which 
should not be exceeded ; beyond this limit any acquisition, any 
progress, signifies excess car:-ying in itself disease followed by 
death. Thus, were England, iT'! this present Eastern struggle, to 
back Turkey, completely neglecting, for the sake of her commercial 
profits, the groans of oppressed mankind,-no doubt, she would be 
drawing the sword against herself, and, sooner or later, that sword 
would fall on her own head. 
On the contrary, what is purer and more sacred than the 
exploit of a war such as Russia is undertaking at present ? It may 
be said : "But Russia, too, although she really undertakes the war 
only for the purpose of liberating the tortured tribes and restoring 
their independence, nevertheless, thereby acquires in these tribes 
future allies and, therefore, she is gaining strength, so that all 
this, naturally, expresses the same law of development of national 
individuality which England seeks to enforce. And inasmuch as the 
concept of 'Panslavi!im,' by its very immensity unquestionably 
may be intimidating Europe, she has the right, by virtue of the 
law of self-preservation, to stop us just as much as we have the 
right to go ahead, disregarding her fears and being guided in our 
movement by nothing but political foresight and prudence. Thus, 
in all this there is nothing either sacred or vicious,-merely the 
eternal animal instinct of the peoples by which all insufficiently 
and inadequately developed earthly tribes, without any exception, 
are abiding. Nevertheless, accumulated consciousness, science and 
humaneness, sooner or later, unfailingly are apt to weaken the 
eternal bestial instinct of the imprudent nations, inspiring all the 
peoples with the desire of peace, international fellowship and hu­
mane progress. Therefore, peace, and not blood, should nevertheless 
be preached." 
Holy words ! But in this case, somehow, they are inapplicable 
to Russia, or-to put it better-Russia at this historical moment 
constitutes, so to speakვ an exception. This is really so. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
667 
In fact, should Russia, which rose so distintere.;tedly and 
truthfully for the salvation and regeneration of the oppressed tribes, 
strengthen herself in the future with them, nevertheless, even in 
this case, she would constitute a most exceptional example which 
Europe in no way expects since she is measuring things with her 
own yardstick. Russia, by even greatly strengthening herself as a 
result of her alliance with the tribes hberated by her, would not 
fall upon Europe with the sword ; she would neither seize nor take 
away anything, as Europe, unfailingly, would do, if it were possible 
for her to unite all nations against Russia. In fact, all nations in 
Europe have been doing so throughout their whole histories when­
ever the possibility arose of strengthening themselves at the expense 
of their neighbors. 
This has been the case from the most savage primordial 
times down to the recent contemporaneous Franco-Prussian war. 
And what became then of their whole civilization ?-The most 
learned and enlightened of all nations fell upon another equally 
learned and enlightened nation, and seizing upon the opportunity, 
devuureli it as a ͦ .ild beast, drank itc; blood, squeezed out of it 
all its sap, in the form of billions in indemnity, and chopped off 
its whole side, in the form of its two best provinces. 
In truth, after all this, can Europe be blamed for being un­
able to understand Russia's mission ? Can they-these uppish, learned 
and strong ones-comprehend and presume, be it only in fantasy, 
that perhaps Russia has been predestined and created for their 
own salvation, and that it is she which, perhaps, will finally utter 
this word of salvation ? 
Oh, yes, of course, not only shall we not seize and take away 
anything from them, but the fact itself thaL ·oe shall greatly 
strengthen ourselves ( through the alliance of love .nd brotherhood, 
and not usurpation and violence) will, finally, enable us not to draw 
the sword, but, on the contrary, in the tranqu:Hity of our might­
to reveal an example of sincere peace, international fellowship and 
disinterestedness. 
We shall be the first to announce to the world that we seek 
to achieve our own welfare not through the suppression of national 
individualities alien to uc:, but, on the contrary, that we perceive 
our welfare in the freest and most independent development of an 
other nations and in brotherly communion with them. One nation 
will be amplifying the other ; we shall be grafting ut •On ourselves 
their organic peculiarities, and, on . r part, we shall give them our 
own twigs for grafting. We shall maintain spiritual intercourse 
with them, teaching them and learning from them, up to the time 

668 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY: 1877 
when mankind, as a grand and beautiful tree, having attained full 
maturity and universal brotherhood through the fellowship of all 
peoples, shades with itself the happy earth I 
Let our present-day "universal men" and self-renouncers laugh 
at these "fantastic" words, but we cannot be blamed for the fact 
that we believe in these things, i.e., that in this respect we are in 
full accord with our people who also believe in them. Ask the 
people ; ask the soldier : Why are they rising? Why do they go to 
war and what are they expecting from it ?-Everyone of them, as 
one man, will tell you that they are going in order to serve Christ 
and to liberate the oppressed brethren, and not one of them is think­
ing about usurpation. 
Quite so : precisely during this war we shall prove our idea 
concerning Russia's future mic-sion in Europe ; specifically we shall 
prove it by the fact that after liberating the Slavic .countries we 
shall acquirt" for ourselves not even a scrap of land (as Austria is 
dreaming on her behalf), and that, on the contrary, we shall watch 
over their own mutual accord and protect their liberty and inde­
pendence, be it even against all Europe. This being so, ours is a 
sacred idea, and our war is not "the eternal bestial instinct of 
imprudent nations," but specifically the first step toward the realiza­
tion of that perpetual peace in which we are happy to believe,­
toward the attainment in reality of international fellowship and of 
truly humane welfare I 
Thus, it is not always that peace and only peace must be 
preached, and salvation is not always only in peace quand-meme 
but sometimes also in war. 
3 
DoEs SPILLED BLooD SAVE ? 
"But blood, but nevertheless blood I" -the wiseacres keep 
saying. And truly all these bureaucratic phrases about blood are 
nothing but an array of most insignificant bombastic words for 
specific purposes. Stock-exchange brokers, for instance, nowadays 
are very fond of talking about humaneness. And many among those 
who are talking about humaneness are merely trading in it. Mean­
while, without war, perhaps, even more blood would be shed. 
Believe m..: that in certain, if not in all, cases (save in the 
case of civil wars) war is a process by means of which specifically 
international peace is_acbieved with a minimum loss of blood, with 
minimum sorrow and effort, and at least more or less normal rela­
tions between the nations are evolved. Of course, this is a pity, but 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
what can be done if this is so ? And it is better to draw the sword 
once than to suffer interminably. 
And in what manner is present peace, prevailing among the 
civilized nations, better than war ? The contrary is true : peace, 
lasting peace, rather than war tends to harden and bestialize man. 
Lasting peace always generates cruelti, cowardice and coarse, fat 
egoism, and chiefly-intellectual stagnation. It is only the exploiters 
of the peoples who grow fat in times of long peace. It is being 
repeated over and over again that peace generates wealth, but only 
for one-tenth of the people, and this one-tenth, having contracted 
the diseases of wealth, transmits the contagion to the other nine­
tenths who have no wealth. And that one-tenth is contaminated by 
debauch and cynicism. 
As a result of an excessive accumulation of riches in the 
hands of a few, coarseness of feeling is being generated in the 
owners of wealth. The sense of the elegant is converted into thirst 
for whimsical excesses and abnormalities. Voluptuousness spreads 
awfPlly. !t generatP<; cruelty and cowardice. The ponderous and 
coarse soul of the sensualist is more cruel than any other, even 
vicious, soul. A sensualist who faints at the sight of blood from 
a cut finger, will not forgive a poor devil and will send him to jail 
for the smallest debt. On the other hand, cruelty generates intense 
and cowardly anxiety concerning one'_, own security which at times 
of lasting peace, invariably very soon converts itself into panicky 
fear for one's self and transmits itself to all social strata ; this 
generates an awful thirst for the acquisition and accumulation of 
money. The faith in the solidarity of men, in their brotherhood, 
in the help of society disappears, and the mrtr:" "each one for 
himself" is being loudly proclaimed. The poor f, · ow sees clearly 
what the rich man is and what kind of brother to him he is, and 
so all men begin to isolate and segregate themఓ"!lves. 
Egoism kills magnanimity. Art alone fosters in society the 
higher aspirations of life and seeks to wake the soul which during 
the periods of protracted peace falls asleep. This is the reason why 
it has been suggested that art can flourish only in times of lasting 
peace. But this is a gross error : art, meaning genuine art, develops 
during the periodf of protracted peace precisely because it is op­
posed to the ponderous and vicious slumber of the souls. In such 
times artistic creations always invoke an ideal ; they renerate pro­
test and indignation ; they disturl c;ociety and not seldom they 
compel those to suffer who are anxious to awake and to get out 
of the stinking ditch. 
Thus it appears that, in the long run, the lasting bourgeois 
peace itself, almost invariably generates a war urge ; peace creates 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
this urge as a miserable consequence of itself, however, not in the 
name of some great and just cause worthy of a great nation, but 
for the sake of some trivial stock-exchange interests, some new 
markets sought by exploiters ; for the sake of the acquisition of 
new slaves needed by the owners of gold bags,-in a word-for 
reasons which are not justified even by motives of self-preservation 
but which, on the contrary, bear witness to the whimsical and 
pathological condition of the national organism. These interests, 
and the wars which are undertaken for their sake, debauch and 
even completely ruin the nations, whereas a war for a magnanimous 
cause, for the liberation of the oppressed, for a disinterested and 
sacred idea,-such a war merely clears the air contaminated with 
miasmas, cures the soul, chases away cowardice and indolence, sets 
forth and proclaims a firm aim, launches and clarifies the idea which 
this or that nation must put into effect. 
Such a war fortifies every nation with the realఔzation of self­
sacrifice, and the spirit of the entire nation-with the realization 
of mutual solidarity and unity of all members of which it is formed ; 
principally, however, with the realization of an accomplished duty 
a.nd a noble deed : "We are not quite degraded and debauched if 
something humane is left in us ! "  
And look : With what did our recent preachers of peaceable­
ness and humaneness begin their sermon ?-They began it with an 
outright inhuman cruelty. Not only did they themselves refuse to 
come to the assistance of the martyrs who were appealing to them, 
but they kept otbers back and prevented them from doing so. 
Ostensibly so humane and sensitive, they cold-bloodedly and scof­
fingly denied the necessity of self-sacrifice and of enterprise on our 
part. They sought to push Russia on a most trivial road, unworthy 
of a great nation,-not to speak of their contempt for the people 
who have recognized in the Slavic martyrs their brethren-and 
consequently of their haughty severance from the will of the people 
above whom they have placed their false "European" enlighten­
ment. Their pet motto was : "Physician, heal thyself." "You are 
endeavoring to heal and save others, whereas you haven't even built 
schools at home," they argued. Well, we are going to heal ourselves. 
Of course, schools are important, but they require spirit and orien­
tation ; so we are going now to provide ourselves with the spirit 
and to acquirt a sane orientation. And we shall acquire it if God 
sends us victory. We shall come back with the conviction of a task 
disinterestedly per(ormed by us, with the conviction that we have 
gloriously served humanity with our blood and that we have re­
stored our energy and strength, and all this-in the place of the 
recent disgraceful vacillation of our thought, in the place of our 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
deadening stagnation insensibly borrowed from Europeanism. And 
what is most important-we shall more closely affiliate ourselves with 
the people, because in them, and in them alone, we shall find the 
cure for our two-century-old illness and unproductive weakness. 
And, generally, it may be said that if society is infected and 
sick, even so good a thing as protracted peace, instead of benefiting 
it, becomes injurious to it. This is ab1> applicable to Europe as a 
whole. It is not without reason that in European history, as far 
back as it can be remembered, no single generation has lived with­
out a war. 
Thus it appears that war, too, is needed for some purpose, 
that it is salutary and that it alleviates mankind. This is abominable, 
if conceived abstractly, but in practice this seems to be so, and 
precisely because to an infected organism even so beneficial a thing 
as peace becomes harmful. 
Nevertheless, only that war proves useful which is under­
taken for an idea, in the name of a sublime and magnanimous 
principle, and not for the sake of material interests, greedy usurpa­
tiol' dl'd haughty violence. Such wars merely led nations along 
false roads and invariably ruined them. If not we, our children, 
will see how England is going to end. At present for everybody in 
the world "the time is close at hand." Well, it is time, too. 
4 
THE OPINION OF THE "GENTLEST'' CZAR ON THE EASTERN 
QUESTION 
I received an excerpt from a book which ".'as published last 
year in Kiev, The Moscow State under Czar A -.:ei Mikhailovich 
and Patriarch Nikon according to the records of Archdeacon Pavel 
of Aleppo, by Ivan Obolensky. Kiev, 1876 (paზes 9C>-C)I ) .  
This is a page from somebody else's work, but it is so char­
acteristic for this current minute of ours, while the book itself, 
probably, is so unknown to the bulk of the public, that I have 
made up my mind to print these few lines in the Diary. This is the 
opinion of Czar Alexei Mikhailovich on the Eastern question,-also 
a "Gentlest" Czar, but one who lived two centuries ago,-his lamen­
tation over the fact that he could not be a Czar-Liberator. 
"It was said that on Holy Easter (of the year 1თ56) the Czar, 
when kissing the Greek merchants. in commemoration of Christ's 
resurrection, among other things asked them : 'Do you wish and 
do you expect me to liberate and ransom you from captivity ?' And 
when they answered : 'How can it be otherwise ? How can we help 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY: 1877 
but wish so ?'-he added : 'Quite so. Therefore when you return to 
your land, ask all the monks and bishops to pray to God and 
celebrate liturgies for me, so that through their prayers I be given 
the strength to cut off the head of their enemy.' And having shed 
abundant tears, he then said, turning to the magnates : 'My heart 
grieves because of the enslavement of these poor people who are 
groaning in the clutches of the enemies of our faith. God, on the 
day of Judgment, will call me to account if, being in a position 
to liberate them, I were to neglect my duty. I do not know how 
long these 'bd conditions in state affairs are going to last, but ever 
since the times of my father and his predecessors, patriarchs, 
bishops, monks and simple beggars have been coming to us with 
complaints about the oppression of the enslavers, and not even 
one of them has come for any reason other than because he felt 
oppressed with severe sorrow and had to flee from the cruelty of 
his masters. I am afraid of the questions which the Creator, on that 
day, will propound to me. And I have decided in my mind that, 
if such be the will of God, I shall use all my troops, I shall drain 
my treasury, and I shall shed blood to the last drop in an endeavor 
to liberate them.' To all this the dignitaries answered the Czar : 'Oh, 
Lord, grant thy heart's desire.' " 
CHAPTER II 
The Dream of a Strange Man 
A FANTASTIC STORY 
1 
I AM A STRANGE man. Now they call me insane. It would 
have been a promotion in rank should I still have remained to them 
just queer, as before. But at present I am no longer angry ; at present 
they all are dear to me, even when they ]augh at me-then, for some 
reason, they are even particularly dear. I should myself laugh with 
them-not exactly at myself, but loving them-if I did not feel 
so sad looking at them. I am sad because they don't know the truth, 
and I know it. Oh, how painful it is to know the truth in solitude I 
But this they won't understand. No, they won't. 
But in days gone by I used to agonize because I semed strange. 
Not semed-but was strange. I was always funny, and I have been 
aware of this, perhaps ever since my birth. Perhaps already at the 
age of seven I knew that I was strange. After that I attended school, 
then a university, and what?-The more I studied the more 1 be-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
came convinced that I was funny. So that, to me, my whole uni­
versity training, in the long run, existed, as it were, only for the 
purpose of proving and explaining to me that I was strange. 
The thing which happened in the case of my studies repeated 
itself also in life. 
With every new year there grew and strengthened in me the 
conviction of my odd appearance in all respects. I was always 
laughed at by everybody. But no one knew or even suspected that 
if there was a man on earth who, more than anybody, knew that I 
was strange, this was I, myself, and precisely this was the most offen­
sive thing to me,-the fact that they didn't know it. However, this 
was my own fault. I was always so proud that never, for anything 
in the world, would I have consented to admit this. With the years 
this pride has been growing in me, and if it were ever to come to the 
point that I should permit myself to confess to anyone that I was 
strange,-it seems that right then and there, that same evening, I 
should have blown my brains out with a revolver. 
uh, how I suffp:-ed in my youthful years fearing that I might 
give way and suddenly confess to my schoolmates. But from the 
time I became a young man, even though year after year I became 
more and more conscious of my dreadful quality,-for some reason 
I felt slightly calmer. Precisely-"for some reason," because even 
up to the pre::.ent day I am at a loss to understand why. Perhaps 
it was because there was growi1•g in my soul a horrible anguish as 
a result of one fact which was infinitely greater than anything I 
was able to conceive, namely, the conviction which has formed itself 
in me that everywhere in the world nothing matters. This I fore­
boded long before, but the full convirtion arose "' •:-lehow suddenly 
during the last year. All of a sudden, I felt that to . 
it would make 
no difference whether the world existed or whether t11ere was nothing 
anywhere. I began to hear and feel with all my bPing that around me 
there was nothing. At first, it seemed to me that in the past there 
had been much, but later I guessed that in the past, too, there had 
been nothing, and only that, for some reason, there had seemed to 
be. Little by little I also became convinced that never will there 
be anything. Then suddenly I stopped being angry with people and 
almost didn't notil ,' them. Truly, this manifested itself even in 
most insignificant trifles : for instance, at times I would happen 
to be walking in the street and knocking against perple-not on 
account of pensiveness : what had I 
.... think about ? lu those days 
I ceased to think altogether : it made no difference to me. And this 
would have been all right had it solved the questions. Oh, I haven't 
solved a single one, and yet how many there were I But I began to 
feel that nothing mattered, and all the questions withdrew from me. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
And now it was after that that I learned the truth. I learned 
it last November, to be exact-on the third of November, and from 
that time on I can recall my every moment. 
It was a gloomy evening-the gloomiest that can ever be. 
Shortly after ten I was going home, and I specifically remember 
that the thought occurred to me that there could be no gloomier 
time. Even in a physical sense. Rain was pouring all day long, and 
this was the coldest and gloomiest rain-even some kind of a 
threatening rain-that I could recall,-full of obvious animosity to­
ward men. Suddenly, shortly after ten o'clock, it stopped raining, 
and an awful humidity ensued-colder and more humid than when 
it was raining. Everything emitted some sort of vapor-every stone 
in the street and in every by-lane if one looked into its farthest end, 
away from the street. 
Presently I began to imagine that were gas to be extinguished 
everywhere it would be more pleasant, whereas with gas one's heart 
feels sadder because it illumines all this. 
That day I hadn't had my dinner, and all evening, from the 
early hours, I spent at the apartment of an engineer and there were 
two friends of his besides. I kept silent all the time, and I believe 
they were bored with me. They were speaking about something 
provocative, and, suddenly, they even grew excited. But it made no 
difference to them-this I saw-and they kept up their excitement 
-only so. And suddenly I told them : "Gentlemen, this makes no 
difference to you." They took no offense, but they all laughed at me. 
This was because I made my remark without any reproach, and 
simply for the rea·son that it made no difference to me. And they 
did see that it made no difference to me, and this made them feel 
jolly. 
When, in the street, the thought about gas occurred to me, 
I looked up at the sky. It was awfully dark, and yet I could clearly 
discern torn clouds, and between them-bottomless black spots. Sud­
denly I noticed in one of them a tiny star and I started gazing at 
it. This because that little star suggested to me a thought : I decided 
to commit suicide that night. This I had firmly resolved two months 
ago and, poor as I was, I bought an excellent revolver which I loaded 
that same day. But two months had elapsed, yet it was still lying 
in the drawer ; however, to such an extent it made no difference 
to me that-for what reason I don't know-I sought to catch at last 
a moment when I should feel less indifferent. And, thus, throughout 
these two months, every night, as I was going home, I thought that 
I should shoot myself. All the time I was waiting for the moment. 
And now that tiny star suggested to me the thought, and I 
made up my mind that unfailingly this is going to take place that 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
675 
very night. And why that star had suggested the thought-! don't 
know. 
While I was thus looking at the sky, that little girl seized me 
by the elbow. The street was deserted, and there was almost no 
one around. In the distance a cabman was sleeping in his droshki. 
The girl was about eight years old ; she wore a handkerchief on her 
head and nothing but a shabby little dress ; she was all wet ; but 
I noticed particularly her wet torn shoes ; I remember them even 
now ; somehow they struck my eye. Suddenly she began to pull 
me by the elbow and to call to me. She did not cry, but she kept 
uttering in a broken voice some kind of words which she was unable 
to pronounce correctly because she was shivering and shaking with 
cold. For some reason she was panic-stricken and she shouted des­
perately : "Dear mama ! Dear mama ! "  I wa:; about to turn my 
face to her but I didn't say a single word and kept on walking ; how­
ever, she continued to run behind me pulling me by my arm. In 
her voice I heard a sound which in very frightened children signifies 
despair. I know that sound. Even though she did not pronounce her 
word, di,Lim:tly, ne1 ..:rtheless I understood that her mother was dy­
ing somewhere or that something had happened to them there, and 
now she had run out into the street in order to summon someone or to 
find somethinი to help mama. But I didn't follow her ; on the con­
trary, the thought suddenly occurred to me to drive her off. First I 
told her to find a policeman. But sobbing, out of breath, she kept run­
ning by my sidt, and then suddenly she folded her tiny hands as 
if in supplication. She wouldn't leave me. It was then that I stamped 
and shouted at her. She merely cried out : "Sir ! Sir ! "  left me and 
precipitately ran across the strt'f't ; there, there appeared some 
passer-by, and she must have rusherf to him. 
I went up to my fifth floor. I am living in . rooming house. 
Mine is a poorly furnished small room with one semicircular garret 
window. In my room there is an oil-cloth cou-h, also a table on 
which I keep my books, two chairs and an old, old-and yet Vol­
tairian-armchair. 
l sat down, lighted the candle and started thinking. In the 
room next to mine, behind a partition, the havoc continued. It had 
already lasted two days. That room is occupied by a retired captain ; 
he had visitors-m<.ybe six civilians ; they were drinking vodka and 
playing "faro" with old cards. Last night an affray broke out there, 
and I know that two of them, for quite a while, pullerl each other 
by the hair. The landlady meant h 1odge a complaint but she is 
terribly afraid of the captain. In our establishment there is but one 
other ten,mt-a skinny little lady, an army officer's wife, from out 
of town, with three little children who fell sick after they bad 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
moved into their lodging. But the lady and the children are afraid 
of the captain to the point of fainting ; at night they keep trembling 
and crossing themselves, and the youngest child was so frightened 
that he was seized with some sort of fit. 
I know for sure that this captain sometimes stops passers-by 
on the Nevsky and asks alms. People refuse to give him any em­
ployment, but strange to say (this is the point I am driving at) ,  
during all this month that he has been living here, he has never 
aroused in me any feeling of vexation. Of course, from the very 
beginning, I have declined acquaintanceship with him, and, besides, 
from the start he felt bored with me. Yet no matter how much they 
might have been shouting behind their partition, no matter how 
many of them might have been there,-it always made no difference 
to me. I sit all night long, :J'1d, truly, I don't hear them-to such an 
extent that I forget about them. Every night I don't sleep till dawn, 
-this has lasted for about a year. I sit all night in the armchair 
by the table doing nothing. I read books only in the daytime. I 
sit and I don't even think-just so : some kind of thoughts wander 
through my mind, and I let them loose. In the course of the night 
the whole candle burns up. 
Calmly I sat down by the table. I took out the revolver and 
put it before me. When I did so, I remember, I asked myself : 
"Right ?" and quite positively I answered : "Right." Meaning that 
I would shoot myself. I knew that that night I would unfailingly 
shoot myself, but how long I should sit by the table-that I didn't 
know. And, of course, I would have shot myself had it not been 
for that little girl.. 
2 
You see : even though it made no difference to me, neverthe­
less I did feel pain. Should anyone have struck me, I should have 
felt a pain. The same-in the moral sense : should anything pitiful 
have occurred, I should have felt pity exactly as in the days when 
I had not yet felt that "it made no difference." Just now I also felt 
pity : most certainly I would have helped a child. Why, then, did 
I not help that little girl ?-Because of a thought which occurred 
to me : as she was pulling and calling me, suddenly a question arose 
before me, and I couldn't solve it. It was an idle question but I 
grew angry. I grew angry because of the belief that, once I had de­
cided that I would commit suicide that night, everything in the 
world, more than ever, should have made no difference to me. Why, 
then, all of a sudden, did I feel that not everything was a matter 
of indifference to me and that I was pitying the little girl ? 
I recall that I felt great pity for her-to the point of some 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
strange pain, which was quite incredible in my situation. Truly, I 
am unable to describe better that fleeting feeling but it also per­
sisted at home, while I was already sitting by the table, and I was 
much irritated,-as I haven't been for so long. Deliberations followed 
one another. It seemed clear that if I were a man, and not yet a 
zero, and while I was not yet reduced Lll a zero, I was living, and, 
therefore, I could suffer, be angry and feel ashamed of my actions. 
All right. But if I should kill myself, say, in two hours, what would 
the little girl be to me, what would shame and everything in the 
world matter to me ?-I am being reduced to a zero-an absolute 
zero. And is it possible that the realization of the fact that in an 
instant I shall be completely nonexistent, and that, therefore, noth­
ing will exist, could have exercised no influence upon the feeling of 
pity for the little girl and the feeling of shame for the villainy which 
I have committed ?-For I stamped at the unfortunate child and 
shouted at her in a brutal voice because I said to myself : "Not only 
do I feel no pity, but even should I commit an inhuman villainy,­
now T c1n commit i• because in two hours everything will be ex­
tinct." Would you believe that this was the reason why I began to 
shout ? At present I am almost sure of that. 
It seemed clear that now life and the world were, so to speak, 
dependent or. me. It may even have been said that the world has 
been created for me alone : I will shoJt myself, and the world will 
not exist, at least for me. Not to speak of the fact that, perhaps, 
after me in reality nothing will exist for anyone, and that the mo­
ment my consciousness is extinguished the whole world, too, will 
vanish as a phantom, as an adjunct of my consciousness, and will 
become nonexistent, since, perhaps, this whole w • .  rld and all these 
men are nothing but I myself. 
I recall that while I was thus sitting and delibo.!rating, I turned 
all these new questions, which crowded in my rnind, one after an­
other, in an altogether different direction and conceived something 
radically new. For example, suddenly, a strange thought occurred 
to me : What if formerly I had lived on the moon or on Mars, and 
if there I should have perpetrated the most shameful and dishonest 
act that could possibly be conceived ; and, furtiu:r, that if over 
there I should hav,. been abused and dishonored in a manner that 
may be conceived and felt only in a dream, in a nightmare ; and 
if subsequently, finding myself on the earth, I should continue 
to be conscious of the act I had con: 'ttted on the othu planet, and, 
besides, that I should know that never, under any circumstance, 
should I return thither,-then, looking from the earth at the moon, 
would it, or would it not, make a difference ? Should I, or should I 
not, feel ashamed of my act ? 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
These were idle and superfluous questions since the revolver 
lay already before me, and with all my being I knew that this would 
unfailingly occur, yet they excited me and made me mad. Now-it 
seemed-! should be unable to die without having first solved some­
thing. 
In a word, that little girl saved me since, because of the 
questions, I had postponed the shot. Meanwhile, in the captain's 
room things began to quiet down : they finished their card game 
and now they were settling down for the night, and in the mean­
time they kept grumbling and were idly continuing to abuse one an­
other. At this juncture, suddenly, I fell asleep in the armchair by 
the table, which has never happened to me before. I fell asleep quite 
imperceptibly to myself. Dreams, as is known, are very strange 
phenomena : one thing appears with awful lucidity, with jewelled 
finish of detail ; but other things are skipped, as it were, quite un­
noticed-for instance, space and time. 
It would seem that dreams are generated not by the intellect 
but by desires, not by the brain but by the heart. And yet, at times, 
what extremely complicated things did my mind perform in sleep ! 
For instance, my brother died five years ago. Sometimes I see him 
in my dreams: he participates in my affairs ; we take a great in­
terest in them ; even so, through the whole dream, I distinctly know 
and remember that he died and was buried. Why am I not sur­
prised that, though· dead, he is still right here, at my side and 
busies himself together with me ? Why does my reason admit all 
this ? 
But enough. i am turning to my dream. Yes, I saw this dream, 
my dream, on the third of November ! They are teasing me by 
insisting that this was only a dream. But is it not all the same 
whether or not this was a dream, if it has enunciated to me the 
Truth ? For once you have learned the Truth, you have beheld it, 
you know that it is the Truth, that there is and can be no other 
Truth whether you be sleeping or waking. All right : let it be a 
dream ; let it ; but that life which you are so extolling, I sought 
to extinguish with suicide, and my dream, my dream-oh, it has 
enunciated to me a new, great, regenerated, vigorous life ! 
Listen ! 
3 
I have stated that I fell asleep unconsciously and even, as 
it were, continuing to deliberate upon the same subjects. Suddenly 
I dreamed that I was taking the revolver, and, seated, I was pressing 
it straight against my heart,-my heart, and not my head. Before 
that I decided to shoot myself through my head, specifically-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
through the right temple. Having aimed at my chest, I waited a 
second or two, and suddenly my candle, the table and the wall 
opposite me, started moving and rocking. I quickly fired the shot. 
In sleep, at times, you are falling down from an elevation, 
or you are being cut or beaten, but you never experience any pain 
unless, somehow, you actually hurt yourself in your bed : in this 
case you will feel the pain, and almo:st always you will wake up 
from the pain. 
Thus it was also in my dream : I felt no pain, but it seemed 
to me that after my shot everything within me shook, and sud­
denly everything became extinguished and grew terribly dark around 
me. I became blind and numb, as it were. Now I am lying stretched 
out upon my back on something hard. I see nothing and I am un­
able to make the slightest motion. People around are walking back 
and forth and shouting ; the captain is speaking in his bass ; the 
landlady is screaming,-and then suddenly, again an interval, and 
now I am being carried in a closed coflin. And I feel how the coffin 
is rocking, and I am deliberating upon this. But all of a sudden, 
for the ,:ჯ;t t imr, I :> ,n struck by the thought that I died, completely 
died ; I know it. I do not doubt it. I neither see nor move, and yet 
I feel and reason. However, soon I become reconciled to this, and, 
as it usually happens in sleep, I accepted reality without arguing. 
Presemly I am being interred. Everybody goes away. I am 
alone ; all alone. I do not move. Whe.1ever in the past, in a waking 
state, I used to think how I should be buried in a grave, strictly 
speaking, I had associated with the grave only the sensation of 
dampness and cold. Now, too, I felt very cold, especially in the tips 
of my toes ; otherwise I felt nothing. 
I lay, and, strange, I waited for nothing, 'i•:tepting without 
challenge the fact that a dead man has nothing 
1 wait for. But 
it was damp. I don't know how much time had e1apsed-one hour, 
or several days, or many days. Suddenly, howe•·er, a drop of water, 
which oozed through the cover of the coffm, fell on my closed left 
eye ; then after a minute-another one ; again,-after a minute,-a 
third one, and so on, and so forth-with intervals of one minute. 
Profound indignation flared up in my heart, and all of a sudden 
I felt a physical pain in it : "This is my wound-I said to myself 
-it's the shot, it't· the bullet there." . . .  And drops continued to 
fall-every minute-on my closed eye. Then, all at once, I appealed 
-not with my voice since I was motionless-but with :1ll my being, 
to the Sovereign of everything that was happening to me : 
"Whosoever Thou may be, but if Thou art ; if there exists 
something more sensible than that which is transpiring at present, 
grant that it be here. However, if Thou avengest my foolish suicide 

68o 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
with the ugliness and absurdity of continued being,-know that no 
torture to which I may be subjected will ever compare with that 
contempt which I shall silently experience be it during millions of 
years of martyrdom ! "  . 
. 
. 
I made the appeal and grew silent. Profound silence lasted 
almost one minute, and even one more drop fell, but I knew, bound­
lessly, inviolably I knew and believed that everything would forth­
with change. And suddenly my grave was thrown open. That is, 
I don't know whether it had been opened or excavated, but I was 
grasped by some dark creature, unknown to me, and we found 
ourselves in open spaces. Suddenly I recovered my sight : it was a 
dark night ; never, never was there such darkness ! We swept 
through space-already far away from the earth. I asked nothing 
of the one who was carrying me ; I was proud. I assured myself 
that I was not afraid, and I almost fainted from delight with the 
thought that 1 was not afraid. I do not remember how long we 
soared, and I cannot conceive it : everything transpired, as always 
in a dream, when one skips over space and time and the laws of 
being and reason, and stops merely on those points about which 
the heart is meditating. 
I remember that unexpectedly I noticed in the darkness a 
tiny star : "Is this Sirius ?"-I asked suddenly, failing to restrain 
myself, because I didn't want to ask any question. "No, this is 
that same star which you have observed amidst the clouds when 
you were on your way home"-answered the creature which carried 
me away. I knew that it possessed, as it were, a human image. 
Strange thing : I .did not like the creature ; I even felt profound 
disgust. I had expected complete nonexistence, and it was for this 
purpose that I shot J!'lyself through the heart. And now I was in 
the hands of a creature-of course, not a human one-which was, 
which existed. "So, there is life also beyond the grave ! "-1 thought 
with the strange lightmindedness of a dream, but the essence of 
my heart remained with me in all its depth : "If it is necessary to 
he again"-I said to myself-"and to live again by somebody's in­
flexible will, I don't want to be vanquished and humiliated ! "­
"Thou knowest that I am afraid of thee, and because of this thou 
hast contempt for me"-1 said suddenly to my fellow-traveller, again 
failing to refrain from the humiliating question which contained an 
admission, a11d sensing, as a pin's prick, humiliation in my heart. 
The creature made no reply but I felt that I was not being despised 
or scoffed at, and that I was even not being pitied, but that our 
journey bad a purpose-unknown and mysterious-which concerned 
me alone. 
Fear was growing in my heart. Numbly but painfully, as if 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
681 
piercing me, it was being conveyed to me by my silent companion. 
We were sweeping through dark and unknown spaces. I had long 
ceased to perceive the constellations familiar to my eyes. I knew 
that there were stars in the heavenly expanse whose rays reached 
the earth in thousands and millions of years. Perhaps we had already 
flown beyond these spaces. I was awaith1g something with dreadful 
anguish which oppressed my heart. And suddenly some familiar 
and highly appealing sensation shook me : suddenly I saw our sun ! 
I knew that this could not have been our sun which had generated 
our earth, and that we were removed from our sun at an infinite 
distance ; yet, with all my being, for some reason, I gathered that 
this was a sun identical with ours, its duplication, its alter ego. A 
sweet, appealing sensation filled my soul with ecstasy : the germane 
force of light, that which begot me, was reflected in my heart and 
resurrected it, and for the f1rst time after my grave I felt life, 
former life. 
"But if this be the sun, if it is a sun absolutely identical with 
ours"-T nvrJaimed-""Vhere then is the earth ?'' And my fellow­
traveller pointed at a tiny star which with emerald luster, shone 
in the darkness. We were dirt'ctly sweeping toward it. 
"And are such duplications really possible in the universe ? 
Is such, indePJ, the natural law ? . . .  And if the earth is yonder, 
is it possible that it is an earth identic . .t.l with ours . . .  absolutely 
identical-unfortunate, poor and eternally beloved, generating even 
in its most ungrateful children a painful love of itself ?"-! kept 
exclaiming shaken with irresistible, ecstatic love of that germane, 
former earth which I had abandoned. The image of the poor little 
girl, whom I have offended, flickered before me. 
"Thou shalt see everything"-saul my comp;. on, and some 
kind of a sorrow sounded in his words. 
But we were swiftly approaching the planet. It grew in its 
dimensions in my sight ; I was already discerning the ocean, the 
outline of Europe, and suddenly a strange feeling of some great, 
holy jealousy flared up in my heart. How can there be such a 
duplication ? What for ? I love, I can be loving, only that earth 
which I have left, upon which there remains the sp. "y of my blood 
when I, the ungrateful, with a shot through my heart, extinguished 
my life. Yet, never, never did I cease to love that earth, and on 
that night when I was parting with it, perhaps, I loved it even more 
painfully than ever. 
Is there suffering on this new t:arth ?-On our earth we can 
truly love only with suffering, only through suffering ! We do not 
know how to love otherwise and we know no other love. I am 
longing for suffering in order to love. I long, I thirst, this very 

682 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
minute, for an opportunity to kiss with tears in my eyes, only that 
earth which I have left, and I do not want, I do not accept life on 
any other earth I . 
. 
. 
However, my fellow-traveller had already left me. Suddenly, 
quite unnoticeably, I stood on this other earth in bright sunlight 
of a day as beautiful as paradise. I believe, I was standing on one 
of those isles which on our earth form part of the Greek Archipelago, 
or somewhere on the coast of the mainland adjacent to that Archipel­
ago. Oh, everything was exactly as on our earth, but it seemed 
that everything around radiated with some holiday, and with great, 
holy and finally achieved triumph. The calm emerald sea gently 
splashed against the shore embracing it with manifest, apparent, 
almost conscious love. Tall. beautiful trees stood there in full luxury 
of their bloom, and their countless leaflets-! am sure of it-wel­
comed me with their gentle, kind murmur, uttering, as it were, 
words of love. The grass sparkled with bright fragrant flowers. 
Little birds. in flocks, flew through the air, and, unafraid of me, 
alighted on my shoulders and hands, joyfully beating at me with 
dear little trepidating wings. 
And, finally, I saw and got to know the people of that happy 
land. They came to me themselves, they surrounded and embraced 
me. Children of the sun, of their sun,-oh, how beautiful they were ! 
Never did I see on our earth such beauty in man. Perhaps only 
in our children of tenderest age it is possible to find a remote re­
flection of that beauty. The eyes of these happy people were full 
of bright glitter. Their faces radiated with intelligence and some 
kind of consciousness which had reached the level of tranquillity ; 
yet these faces were cheerful. Innocent gladness sounded in the 
words and voices of these men. 
Oh, at once, at the first glance at their faces, I grasped every­
thing, everything ! This was an earth not defiled by sin ; upon it 
lived men who had not sinned ; they lived in a paradise similar to 
that in which, according to the tradition of all mankind, lived our 
fallen forefathers, with the only exception that here the whole earth, 
everywhere, was one and the same paradise. These men, laughing 
joyously, crowded around me and caressed me. They took me to 
their homes, and each one of them sought to assuage me. Oh, they 
asked me no questions, but it seemed to me that they knew every­
thing, and t11ey sought as quickly as possible to drive away suffering 
from my face. 
4 
Again, look here : All right, let this have been nothing but a 
dream ! But the feeling of love of these innocent and beautiful 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
people stayed within me forever, and I feel that their love pours 
thence upon me even now. I have seen them myself, I got to know 
them ; I became convinced ; I loved them and subsequently I suf­
fered for them. 
Oh, I understood at once, even then, that in many respects 
I should not comprehend them at all. To ;r.e, a contemporaneous pro­
gressive and hideous Petersburg resident, it seemed incredible, for 
instance, that they, who knew so much, did not possess our science. 
But soon I came to understand that their knowledge was amplified 
by, and derived from, revelations which differed from those on our 
earth, and that their aspirations were also altogether different. They 
had no desires and they were placid ; they did not aspire to the 
knowledge of life, as we seek to comprehend it, because their life 
was complete. Yet their knowledge was deeper and higher than 
that of our science, since the latter seeks to explain what life is ; 
science itself endeavors to conceive it in order to teach others how 
to live ; they, however, knew how to live even without science, and 
this I uniiPrstood ; but I was unable to comprehend their knowledge. 
They showed me their trees, and I failed to understand the measure 
of love with which they beheld them, as if they were speaking of 
creatures akin to them. And do you know that, perhaps, I am not 
mistaken when I say ihat they conversed with them ! Yes, they did 
discover their language, and I am con··inced that the trees under­
stood them. 
Thus they also looked upon the whole of nature,-on animals 
which lived peacefully with them and never attacked them ; they 
loved those men conquered with their own love. They pointed at 
stars and .spoke to me something about them whi::h I was unable 
to grasp, but I am sure that through :.orne meam bey communi­
cated, as it were, with these celestial bodies,-on.J not through 
thought but through some live medium. 
Oh, these men did not even endeavor to make me understand 
them ; they loved me without this ; on tht. other hand, I knew that 
they would also never understand me, and for this reason almost 
never did I speak to them about our earth. I merely embraced in 
their presence that earth on which they lived, and abred them with­
out words ; they saw this and permitted themselves to be adored, 
without being ashamed of being adored by me because they them­
selves loved much. They did not suffer on my behalf when, at times, 
with tears I kissed their feet, gladly !mowing in their -... carts with 
what force of love they would responu to me. 
SomPtimes I asked myself with surprise : How did they man­
age, all that time, not to insult one like me, and not even once to 
arouse in one like me a feeling of jealousy and envy? Many a time 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
I asked myself how was I, a braggart and a liar, able to refrain from 
speaking to them about my learning, about which, of course, they 
had no conception ? How was I able to refrain from speaking in a 
manner which would surprise them with that learning of mine, at 
least, by reason of my love of them. 
They were vivacious and joyous like children. They roamed 
through their beautiful groves and forests ; they sang lovely songs ; 
they subsisted on light food, on fruits from their trees, on honey 
from their woods, on the milk of the animals which loved them. 
They labored but little and slightly for their food and clothing. They 
were endowed with love and children were born to them, but never 
did I observe in them those impulses of cruel voluptuousness which 
affect virtually everybody on our earth,-everybody, and which are 
the sole source of almost all sin in our human race. They rejoiced 
over their newborn as new participants in their felicity. They never 
quarrelled and there was no jealousy amonკ them ; they did not 
even understand what these things meant. Their children were com­
mon children because they all formed one family. There were vir­
tually no diseases among them, although there was death. However, 
their old men passed away gently, as though falling asleep, sur­
rounded by men bidding them farewell , blessing them, smilinლ to 
them ; and they departed accompanied by serene smiles. On these 
occasions I perceived no sorrow, no tears ; there was merely love 
მrown to the level -of ecstasy, but c<tlm, composed, meditative ecstasy. 
One could imaკine that they continued to communicate with their 
dead even after their death, and that the earthly communion be­
tween them was not interrupted by death. 
They were almost unable to understand mr when I asked 
them about eternal life ; yet they were so unaccountably convinced 
of it that it did not constitute a question to them. They had no 
temples, but in them there was some kind of a daily, live, uncea,;­
ing communion with the whole of the universe. They had no reli­
gion, yet they possessed a firm belief that when they reach in their 
earthly gladness the full measure of earthly nature, there will en­
sue for them, both for the living and the dead, a still კreater ex­
pansion of their communion with the whole of the universe. They 
awaited this moment with joy, but without haste, without suffering 
about it, keeping it, as it were, in the anticipations of their hearts 
which they.t communicated to each other. In the eveninკs, before 
going to sleep, they were fond of singing in concordant choirs. In 
these songs they expressed all sentiments derived from the passinკ 
day ; they glorified it and bade it farewell. They glorified nature, 
the earth and seas and forests. They were fond of composing songs 
about one another ; they praised each other like children. Those 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
685 
were the simplest songs but they were evoked from 'the heart and 
penetrated it. And not only in songs but it seemed that they were 
spending all their lives in admiring each other. It was a sort of 
mutual complete and universal enamoredness. Some of their solemn 
and ecstatic songs I almost could not understand at all. Compre­
hending their words I never was able tfl penetrate their full mean­
ing. It remained inaccessible to my mind ; but my heart, as it were, 
was moved, more and more permeated with it. Often I told them 
that all this I had sensed long before ; that all this joy and this 
glory were vaguely expressed in me on our earth in the form of 
an appealing anguish which, at times, reached the level of unbear­
able sorrow ; that in the dreams of my heart and in the visions 
of my mind I anticipated them all and their glory, and that often, 
on our earth, I was unable to behold without tears the setting 
sun . . .  ; that in my hatred of men on our earth there has always 
been anguish : "Why was I unable to hate them without loving 
them ? Why was I unable not to forgive them ? And why was there 
anguish in my love of them ? Why was I unable to love them with­
out hating them ?''-'1 hey listened to me, and I could see that they 
could not comprehend the things I was telling them ; yet I did 
not regret my telling these things to them : I knew that they under­
stood the full measure of my anguish for those whom I had aban­
doned. Yes, when they lookf>d at me that dear expression of their 
eyes was permeated with love ; when I felt that in their presence 
my heart, too, became as innocent and truthful as theirs, I did 
not regret that I was unable to understand them. Breath failed me 
because of the sensation of the fullness of life, and silently I wor­
shipped them. 
Oh, everybody is openly Jaug:1ნng at me, -, ;uring me that 
even in a dream it is impossible to have seen such details as I am 
recounting now ; that in my dream I saw or foresaw nothing but 
a sentiment generated by my own J.eart in a slate of delirium, and 
that, on my awakening, I invented the details myself. And when 
I opened my mouth to tell them that perhaps all this was so in 
reality ,-God, how they burst into laughter right to my face, and 
what merriment I caused among them. 
Oh, yes, of course, I was vanquished by the mere sensation 
of that dream, and Jt alone was spared in my wounded and bleeding 
heart. As against this, the actual images and forms of my dream, 
that is, those which I have actually o;een at the time fll my dream, 
reached such a state of harmony ; .ney were so fascinating and 
beautiful, and they were so truthful that when I awoke I was, of 
course, unable to express them in our weak words. Thus they must 
have been, as it were, dimmed in my mind, and, for this reason, 

686 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
perhaps, I was in truth unconsciously compelled to invent those 
details, of course, distorting them especially because of my pas­
sionate desire to express them in one way or another as quickly as 
possible. 
However, W>w can I help but believe that all this did take 
place ? It might have been a thousand times better, brighter and 
more joyful than what I am telling here. 
Let this be a dream, but all this must have taken place. Do 
you know, I will tell you a secret : all this, perhaps, was not at all 
a dream ! Since here there occurred something so awfully real that 
it could not have been dreamed in a dream. Let us admit that my 
heart has generated the dream. However, could my heart alone have 
generated such a dreadful truth as has subsequently occurred to 
me ? How could I have invented or fancied it with my heart ? Is 
it conceivable that my trivial heart and my whimsical, petty mind 
could have raised themselves to such a revelation of truth ! Oh, 
judge for yourselves : up to the present I have been concealing the 
full truth, but now I am going to complete my story. The point is 
that I have . . . debauched them all ! 
5 
Yes, yes, it ended in the fact that I debauched them all ! 
How this could have happened,-I don't know. The dream has soared 
through millennia, and only in me it has left a feeling of wholeness. 
I merely know that I was the cause of the first apostasy. Much 
like a filthy trichina, or a pestilential germ infecting whole countries, 
so I contaminated with myself that happy earth which was innocent 
prior to my coming into being. They have learned to lie, they be­
came fond of the lie and they perceived its beauty. Oh, perhaps 
this started innocently, with a jest, with coquetry or an amorous 
intrigue,-perhaps just with an atom, but this atom of deceit pene­
trated their hearts and pleased them. Shortly after that voluptuous­
ness was born ; voluptuousness generated jealousy, jealousy-cruelty . 
. . . Oh, I don't know, I don't remember,-very soon the first blood 
spurted : they were astonished and terrified, and they began to part 
one from the other and segregate themselves. Unions appeared, but 
unions against one another. Then abuses and reproaches ensued. 
They became cognizant of shame, which they extolled as a virtue. 
The concepti .. n of honor was born, and each union hoisted its own 
banner. They began to torture the animals which fled from them 
to the forests and became their enemies. A struggle for segregation 
began-for disjunction, for individuality, for "mine and thine." They 
began to speak different languages. They became cognizant of sor­
row and they became accustomed to loving it ; they craved for 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
687 
suffering and claimed that Truth can be attained through sufering 
only. Then science came into existence. When they became wicked 
they started speaking about brotherhood and humaneness and 
grasped the meaning of these ideas. When they grew criminal they 
invented justice and enacted for themselves codes for its main­
tenance, and for the enforcement of tოeir codes they used the 
guillotine. They could hardly recall that which they had lost. They 
even refused to believe that sometime in the past they were inno­
cent and happy. They went so far as to ridicule the very possibility 
of their former happiness which they denoted as a fancy. They were 
even unable to imagine happiness in forms and images, but strangely 
and remarkably-having lost all faith in their former happiness, 
having called it a fairy-tale, so ardently did they begin to wish to 
become again innocent and happy that they fell prostrate before 
the desires of their heart, they erected temples in which they wor­
shipped their own idea, their own "desire," with tears of adoration, 
fully believing at the same time in the impossibility of its fulfill­
ment. 
However, should it so happen that they could return to that 
state of innocence and happiness which they had lost, or if someone 
should show it to them and ask them whether they would like to 
return to it, they would certainly refuse to do so. They used to 
tell me : "Let us admit that we are f'პceitful, wicked and unjust ; 
we know it and we deplore this and torment ourselves for this ; 
we castigate and rack ourselves harder, perhaps, than that merciful 
Judge who will be judging us and whose name we know not. But 
we have science at our command, and through it we shall again find 
the Truth which we shall then embrace consciouf!y. Knowledge is 
superior to feeling ; cognition of life iധ superior tG 
fe. Science will 
give us wisdom ; wisdom will reveal the laws, am.: the knowledge 
of the laws of happiness is superior to happiness." 
This is what they used to tell me, and after such words each 
one began to love himself more than the rest. Nor could they have 
acted differently. Each one became so jealous of his individuality 
that he exerted all his efforts merely to humiliate and belittle it 
in the others, conceiving this to be the aim of his 1:fe. 
Then came shvery-even voluntary slavery : the weak readily 
submitted to the strong on condition that the latter help them to 
oppress those who were still weaker than they themselves. There 
appeared godly men who went in tP,rs to these peopl.·, and spoke 
to them about their haughtiness, at...ut the loss of harmony and 
measure, about the loss of shame· by them. These righteous men 
were subjected to ridicule and stoned. Their holy blood was spilled 
at the thresholds of the temples. As against this, there appeared 

688 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
men who began to conjecture how to unite again all men so that 
each one, without ceasing to love himself above all others, at the 
same time should not hinder anyone and that all men might be 
thus living in a concordant society. Wars were waged for the sake 
of this idea. At the same time all the belligerents firmly believed 
that science, wisdom and the instinct of self-preservation, in the 
long run, would compel men to unite in a harmonious and rational 
society. In the meantime, in order to expedite matters, "the wise" 
sought to exterminate "the imprudent," those who could not under­
stand their idea, so as not to impede its triumph. 
However, soon the sense of self-preservation began to grow 
weaker : there came haughty men and sensualists who straightway 
demanded either everything or nothing. For the acquisition of every­
thing they resorted to villainy, and if they failed in it-to suicide. 
Religions sprang up which preached the cult of nonexistence 
and self-destruction for the attainment of eternal peace in nothing­
ness. Finally, these men grew tired of senseless labor, and suffering 
appeared on their faces ; then they proclaimed that suffering was 
beauty, because only in suffering there was thought. They exalted 
suffering in their songs. I moved among them wringing my hands 
and shedding tears over them, but I loved them, perhaps, even 
more than before when there was no suffering on their faces and 
when they were innocent and so beautiful. I grew fonder of their 
earth desecrated by them than when it was a paradise, for the sole 
reason that sorrow appeared on it. 
Alas, I always loved grief and sorrow, but oniy for myself, 
for myself, while 1 wept pitying them. I stretched my arms toward 
them in despair, accusing, damning and despising my:'elf. I told 
them that I, I alone d1d all this ; that it was 1 who brought to them 
debauch, contagion and deceit ! I implorecl them to crucify me·; 
I taught them how to make the cross. I could not, I had no strength 
to kilJ myself, but I wanted to suffer tortures inflicted by them ; 
I craved for torture ; I was anxious that my blood, to its last drop, 
be shed in these tortures. But they merely laughed at me and, 
finally, they began to consider me crazy. They defended me and 
said that they had received that which they had wished themselves, 
and that everything which existed now could not have not existed. 
Finally, they announced to me that I was beginning to be 
dangerous tc them and that they would place me in an insane 
asylum if I shouldn't keep silent. Then sorrow penetrated my soul 
with such force that my heart contracted, and I felt that I should 
die. And then . .  .- well, then I awoke. 
It was already morning, that is, it wasn't daylight, but it was 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
after five o'clock. I woke up in the same armchair. The candle had 
burned down to the end. In the captain's room people were sleeping, 
and all around there was silence such as is rare in our lodging. 
First of all, I jumped to my feet extremely surprised : nothing 
of the k.ind had ever happened to me-even as far as trifles and 
details were concerned : for instance, nP,er did I thus fall asleep 
in my armchair. Presჟntly, as I was stanrling trying to collect my 
thoughts, my eye caught sight of the revolver, ready and loaded. 
Instantly I pushed it away from me ! Oh, now I craved for life, 
life ! I raised my arms and appealed to eternal Truth. I did not 
appeal but I wept. Ecstasy, immeasurable ecstasy lifted my whole 
being. Yes, life, and-preaching ! I decided upon preaching that 
same moment-and for all my life ! I am going to preach ; I want 
to preach-what ?-Truth, since I beheld it ; I beheld it with my 
own eyes ; I beheld its whole glory ! 
Well, from that time on I have been preaching ! Besides, I 
love all those who are laughing at me more than the rest. Why 
this is !"o-I don't know, I cannot explain, but let it be thus. They 
say that even now I am confused, meaning that if even now I am 
so confused, what's going to happen in the future ? Very true : I 
am confused and, maybe, in the future it will be worse. And, of 
course, I shall becomრ disconcerted several times before I find out 
how to preach, that is, with what words and deeds, since this is 
very difficult to achieve. Even now I see all this as clearly as day­
light, hut listen : who doesn't get confused ! And yet all men are 
headed toward one and the same thing, or, at least, they all strive 
for the same thing-from the sage to the last robber, only they 
follow different roads. This is an ol(l Truth, bl!t hPre i:; what's new 
in it : even I cannot be greatly conh 
.. .: ::d. The red!:-" ' is that I saw 
Truth and I know that men can be beautiful am 
..
.
 1appy without 
losing their faculty of living on earth. I refuse and am unable to 
belirve that evil is a normal condit:on in men. :et they all laugh 
at this bt>lief of mine. nut how can 1 h"lp but have faith : I saw 
Truth-my mind did not invent it, and I saw, saw it, and its /i·ve 
image filled my soul forever. 
Thus, why should 1 be lt>d astray ? Of course. I may deviate­
even several times ; I may even be echoing in my words somebody 
else's thoughts, but not for a long while : thr live image of what 
I saw will always stay with me, and it will always correct and 
guide me. 
Oh, I am brave and brisk. I 
... , on my way even were my 
journey to last a thousand years. Do you know that at first I meant 
to conceal the fact that I have debauched everybody, but this was 
a mistake-here was the first mistake ! But Tr11th whispered to me 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
that I was lying, guarded and led me. But how to establish paradise 
-I don't know because I can't express it in words. After my dream 
I lost the words-at least, all most important and relevant words. 
But be it so : I will proceed, and I will be speaking incessantly 
because all the same I beheld the thing with my own eyes, even 
though I am unable to recount what I have seen. However, this 
is precisely what the scoffers don't understand : "You saw"-they 
say-"something delirious, an hallucination." Now, now ! Is this 
clever ?-Yet, they take such great pride ! Dream ? What's a dream ? 
And isn't our life a dream ?-I'll go further : let, let this never come 
true and let paradise never come to pass (this much I understand) ,  
-well, nevertheless I will be preaching. 
Meanwhile, this is so simple : in one day, in one hour, every­
thing would be at once established ! The main thing is-love thy 
neighbors as thyself. This is the cardinal point ; that's all, and 
nothing further is needed ; it would be at once discovered how 
things should be arranged. And yet this is but an old truth which 
has been reiterated and read a billion times ! Even so, it did not 
manage to stay with us ! "Cognition of life ·is superior to life ; 
knowledge of the laws of happiness is superior to happiness" -this 
is what has to be combated ! And I will combat it. If only every­
body would desire it, everything could at once be arranged. 
And I have found that little girl. And I will go ! I will ! 
Discharge of Defendant Kornilova 
On the twenty-second day of April of the current year the 
case of defendant Kornilova was tried for the second time at the 
local Circuit Court by new judges and a new panel of jurors. The 
former court verdict, rendered last year, has been rescinded by the 
Senate on the ground of the insufficiency of the medical tests. 
Perhaps most of my readers have a clear recollection of this 
case. A young step-mother (at that time still not of age), being 
in a state of pregnancy, prompted by anger against her husband, 
who kept reproaching her with his former wife, and after a violent 
quarrel with him, pushed her six-year-old step-daughter out of the 
window from the fourth floor ts.Vz sagenes) ,  her husband's daughter, 
and almost a miracle occurred : the child was not killed ; she sus­
tained neither fractures nor injuries, and soon regained conscious­
ness. At present the little girl is alive and in good health. 
Having waked up in the morning when the husband had 
already gone to work, she let the child sleep ; then she dressed the 
girl and gave her coffee. After that she opened the window and 
threw her out. Without even looking through the window to ascer-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
lain what had happened to the child, she closed the window, got 
dressed and went to the police station. There she reported the 
incident, answering questions in a rude and strange manner. When, 
several hours later, she was told that the child was alive, she, ex­
pressing neither joy nor vexation, quite indifferently and cold­
bloodedly, as if in a state of pensivenc . .  s, remarked : "How strong 
she is ! "  
Thereupon, for almost six weeks, while confined in two prisons, 
she continued to be morose, rude and uncommunicative. And, sud­
denly, all at once, all this disappeared : throughout the remaining 
four months till she was delivered of a child, as well as the rest 
of the time, during and after the trial, the mistress of the women's 
division of the prison was never tired of praising her : her disposi­
tion became even, calm, kind and serene. However, all this I have 
described before. Briefly,-the former verdict has been rescinded, 
and subsequently, on the twenty-second of April, a new verdict was 
announced by virtue of which Kornilova was acquitted. 
I 
w::t<; present in the court room, and I gathered many im­
pressions. It is only a pity that I am unable to record them, and 
that literally I am compelled to confine my account to but a few 
words. Besides, l am giving an account of this case solely because 
in the past l have written about it in rxtenso, and, therefore, I 
deem it not სuperfluous to inform tl" c readers about the outcome 
of the case. 
The trial lasted twice as long as the former one. The composi­
tion of the jurors was particularly remarkable. A new witness­
the mistress of the women's division of the prison-was asked to 
take the stand. Her testimony concerning Kor 1ilova's character 
was very weighty and favorable to her. Likewist he testimony of 
the defendant's husband was quite remarkable : \\ ; th extreme hon­
esty he concealed nothing-neither the quarrels nor the offenses on 
his part. He defended his wife and he spoke cordially, 5traight­
forwardly and candidly. He is only a peasant ; true, he is wearing 
European clothes ; he reads books and he receives a monthly salary 
of thirty rubles. 
Furthermore, the selection of expert witnc. :;es was also re­
markable. Altogether, six experts were summoned-all men of repute 
and celebrities in medical science. Five of them took the stand. 
Three experts unhesitatingly testified that a pathological condition 
peculiar to a pregnant woman C01111 have caused th• commission 
of the crime in this case. Only one -Dr Florinsky-dissented from 
this opinion, but, fortunately, he is not a psychiatrist, and his 
opinion proved of no consequence. The last man to testify was our 
noted psychiatrist Dukov. He spoke for almn::.t one hour answering 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
the questions propounded to him by the prosecutor and the presid­
ing justice. It is difficult to conceive a more refined understanding 
of the human soul and its pathological states. I was also amazed 
by the wealth and variety of extremely curious observations gath­
ered by him over a long period of years. As for myself, decidedly, 
I listened to certain statements of this expert with admiration. His 
opinion was altogether in favor of the defendant : he stated posi­
tively and conclusively that in his opinion the defendant, at the 
time of the perpetration oy her of the dreadful crime, was in a 
pathological psychic state. 
In conclusion, the prosecutor himself withdrew the charge of 
premeditation, i.e., the main malice in the indictment. Attorney­
at-law Lustig, the attorney for the defendant, very adroitly warded 
off several accusations, and one of the most important ones-the 
alleged hatred of the step-mother toward her step-daughter-he 
managed to reduce to naught, revealing in it nothing but back-yard 
gossip. 
After a long charge by the presiding judge, the jurors retired 
to the jurors' room, and in less than fifteen minutes they rendered 
a verdict of acquittal which was greeted almost with enthusiasm by 
the numerous public. Many people crossed themselves, others con­
gratulated and shook hands with each othf:r. The husband of the 
acquitted that same evening, after ten o'clock, took her home, and 
she, in a happy mood, returned to her home after an absence of 
almost one year, with the impression of a lesspn learned for all her 
life and of manifest divine fate in this wholl case-beginning with 
(to mention but one fact) the miraculous salvation of the child. 
To My Readers 
I am asking my readers for great indulgence. Last year, owing 
to my summer journey to Ems for the cure of my disease, I was 
forced to bring out the July and August issues of the Diary on 
August thirty-first, under one cover, of course with a double number 
of pages. This year, because of the aggravation of my illness, I 
am compelled to publish the May and June issues jointly, under 
one cover, at the end of June or in the very early part of July. 
Thereafter the July and August numbers, as last year, will also 
be publiShed in August. Beginning with the month of September 
the Diary will , be issued regularly on the last day of each month. 
Leaving Petersburg, following the doctor's advice, I wish to 
state that although the premises of the editorial office will be closed 
in Petersburg until September, nevertheless all out-of-town (as well 
as Petersburg) subscribers and readers, in case of need, may apply 
by mail to the editorial office much in the same way as hitherto. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
These letters will be forwarded forthwith by the office manager, 
and every complaint, misunderstanding, etc., as in the past, will 
be taken care of as soon as possible. Likewise all letters addressed 
to me will be immediately forwarded. Concerning this matter the 
editorial office has been given most explicit instructions. Subscrip­
tions will continue as hitherto : subscriptions will be immediately 
taken care of. 
I don't know if my readers and subscribers to A Writer's Diary 
will excuse me. In the face of such an unforeseen circumstance as a 
complication of one's illness, it is difficult to plan everything in 
advance. The overwhelming majority of my readers up to the present 
have maintained a benevolent attitude toward me, of which I am 
convinced by solid facts. I venture to rely upon their kindnesტ also 
at this time. 
MA Y-JUNF. 
CHAPTER I 
From thr Roof of Prrdictions by Johann Lichtenberger, 
in the year r p8 
I HAVE received a very strange document. This is an ancient , 
true, a hazy and allegorical, prediction concerning current t'vents 
and the prf'sent war. 
One of our young scientists has discovered in London, in the 
Royal Library, an ancient folio-vol••r.1უ, The B,,., :· of Predidu;ns­
''Prognosticationrs" by Johann Lichtenberger, edit . 
1 1 528, in Latin. 
This is a rare, perhaps even the only existing, copy. In this book 
the future of Europe and of mankind is set fo th in hazy pictures. 
This is a mystical book. I am reproducing here only those lines 
which were conveyed to me, and merel)' as a fact not devoid of 
certain interest. 
Following the prognostications about the French Revolution 
( 1 789) and Napoleon I who is called in the book-"the great eagle" 
(aquila grandis) ,  Lhe following is stated concerning the future Euro­
pean events : 
"Post haec veniet altera aquila quae ignem foV£-hit in gremio 
sponsae Christi et erunt tres adui. ··i unusque legitimus qui alios 
vorabit. 
"Exsurget aquila grandis in Oriente, aquicolae occidentales 
moerebunt. Tria regna comportabit. Ipsa eფt aquila grandis, quae 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
dormiet annis multis, refutata resurget et contremiscere faciet aqui­
colas occidentales in terra Virginis et alios montes superbissimos ; 
et volabit ad meridiem recuperando amissa. Et amore charitatis 
inflammabit Deus aquilam orientalem volando ad ardua alis duabus 
fulgens in montibus christianitatis." 
("After that a new eagle shall come who shall kindle fire in 
the bosom of Christ's bride, and there shall be three natural issues 
and one legitimate issue, and he shall devour the others. A great 
eagle shall arise in the East, and the Western islanders shall start 
wailing. He shall capture three kingdoms. This is the great eagle 
who sleepeth many a year ; though wounded he shall arise, and 
shall compel the Western sea-bound inhabitants of the land of the 
Virgin and the other proud summits to tremble, and he shall fly 
southward to retrieve that which had been lost. And God shall 
kindle the Eastern eagle with love of mercy so that he may fly on 
his two wings to accomplish that which is difficult, flashing upon 
the peaks of Christianity.") 
Of course, this is a bit foggy ; you must concede, however, 
that the great Eastern eagle who sleepeth many a year ; wounded 
(N. B.-Isn't this our war with Europe 22 years ago ?) he shall 
arise and shall compel to tremble the Western sea-bound inhabitants, 
-you must concede that somehow this is suggestive of the present, 
on condition, of course, that we disregard our Europeanizing wise­
acres who, contrary to the prophecy, still continue to tremble, as 
it were, before "the sea-bound inhabitants" at a time when the eagle 
has already flown away "flashing with his two wings." But it is only 
the wiseacres who -are trembling-not the eagle. 
F'urthermore, "the Western sea-bound inhabitants of the land of 
the Virgin" obviously signify England, if Johann Lichtenberger's 
prophecy be applied to the contemporary events. However, what in 
this case is the meaning of "the land of the Virgin" ?-In 1 528 Queen 
Elizabt:th had not yet been reigning. Doesn't Lichtenberger's al­
legory signify a land (British Isles) which has never been subjected 
to invasion in the sense in which in days gone by Napoleon ex­
pressed himself about European capitals which had suffered from 
his invasion : "A capital subjected to an invasion resembles a maiden 
who has lost her virginity."-However, according to the prophecy, 
the eagle will also compel other "proud summits" to tremble ; he 
will fly southv•ard to retrieve that which had been lost, and-this 
is most remarkable-that "God shall kindle the Eastern eagle with 
love of mercy so that he may fly on his two wings to accomplish 
that which· is difficult, flashing upon the peaks of Christianity." 
Concede that this is something very suggestive. Didn't our eagle 
take to his wings kindled with mercy for the oppresed and hurt? 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Was it not Christ's mercy that has prompted our whole people "to 
a difficult task"-both in the past and this year ? Who is going to 
deny this ? This people, these soldiers recruited from the people, 
who do not thoroughly know their prayers, U!>ed to pick up in the 
Crimea, near Sebastopol, wounded Frenchmen, and carried them 
to have their wounds dressed before th,.;r own Russians. ''Let these 
lie and wait ; anyone will pick up a Russian, but the French chap 
is a stranger-he should be pitied first." Isn't this Christ, doesn"t 
Christ's spirit sound in these naive and magnanimous jestingly ut­
tered words ? 
Thus, isn't Christ's spirit in our people, backward but kind, 
ignorant but not barbarian ? Yes, Christ is their strength-our Rus­
sian strength-now that the eagle has flown to achieve "the difficult 
task." And what does some single anecdote about Sebastopol sol­
diers mean compared with thousands of manifestations of Christ's 
spirit and "the fire of mercy" in our people, in reality, in full view 
and in everybody's sight, despite the wiseacres' endeavor to sup­
press ഽhf' thought and bury the fact of our people's participation, 
through theu spirit and heart, in the present-day destinies of Rus­
sia and the East ? 
And don't start pointing at "the bestiality and dullness·· of 
the people, 11t their 1gnorance and backwardness by reason of which 
they are supposedly unable to und,.rstand the things which are 
transpiring at present. They do perfectly understand the essence 
of the matter ; rest assured that they have been comprehending it 
for four centuries. Were they to learn about contemporaneous dip­
lomats, these they wouldn't understand at all. But who will under­
stand them ? Indeed our great pe(lp)e were brourht up like bel\sts ; 
they have suffered tortures ever sine...: tქ1ey came 1:- · 1 being, thro<Igh­
out the millennium of their existence,-tortures .1ch as no other 
people in the world could have endured, because they would have 
disintegrated and perished, whereaღ our people 111erely grew stronger 
and became more compact amidst their misfortunes. Do not , then, 
reproach them for "bestiality and ignorance," l\lessrs. Wiseacres, 
since you-precisely you-have done nothing for them. On the con­
trary, you abandoned the people two centuries "ყo, you have for­
saken them and alienated them from you ; you have converted them 
into a taxation unit, into a quit-rent item for your own benefit. 
The people have been growing-gentlemen, enlightened Europeans, 
-forgotten and downtrodden by yo•t, driven by you " · a beast into 
a haunt. But their Christ was wio .. them, and it was with Him 
alone that they lived to that great day when, twenty years ago, 
the Northern eagle, kindled with the flame of mercy, flapped and 
spread his wings and blessed the people with these wings . . . .  

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Yes, there is much bestiality in people, but do not point at 
it. This bestiality is the mire of centuries ; it will be cleansed. And 
the trouble is not in the fact that there still is bestiality but in a 
condition where bestiality would be extolled as virtue. 
I have seen robbers who had committed many bestialities and 
who, by reason of their depraved and weakened will-power, had 
fallen lower than the lowest depths. Yet these debauched and de­
graded beasts knew-at least within themselves-that they were 
beasts, and they felt how low they had fallen, and in pure and 
serene moments, which God sends even to beasts, they knew how 
to condemn themselves, even though often they were no longer 
able to rise. 
It is different when bestiality is placed above everybody, as 
an idol, and people worship it cons.irlering themselves virtuous pre­
cisely because of this. Lord Beaconsf1eld-and after him all Beacons­
fields-both our domestic and European ones-stopped their ears 
and closed their eyes to the bestialities and tortures to which entire 
human tribes are being subjected ; they have betrayed Christ for 
the sake of "the interests of civilization," and because of the fact 
that the oppressed tribes are called Slavs, i.e., because they carry 
within themselves something new. All the more reason, then, that 
they should be crushed to death-also for the sake of the antiquated 
rotting civilization. 
I'\ ow, this is bestiality-educated and extolled as virtue-which 
is being worshipped as an idol both in the West and still at home, 
in Russia. And didn't "the most beatific Pope, the infallible vicar 
of God,'' when passing away, during his last days on earth, didn't 
he pray for victory for the Turks, the torturers of Christianity, over 
the Russians who arose in Christ's name in defense of Christianity, 
for the sole reason that, according to his infallible judgment, the 
Turks are nevertheless better than the Ruso;ian heretics who do not 
recognize the Pope ? Isn't this bestiality ? Isn't this barbarism ? 
Indeed, Johann Lichtenberger's prophecy is strongly sugges­
tive of the present moment. And should we not conceive the Pope 
among other "proud summits" whom the eagle, flapping his wings, 
will compel to tremble ? By the way, to wind up with the prophecy : 
What did Johann Lichtenberger mean when speaking of the eagle 
"who shall kindle fire in the bosom of Christ's bride, and there 
shall be three natural issues and one legitimate issue, and he shall 
devour the others" ?-In religious and mystical parlance the expres­
sion "Christ's bride" has always meant the Church in general. 
What, then, are the three natural and one legitimate issues ?-It 
geems that if he should be considered a prognosticator,-three re-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
ligions : Catholicism, Protestantism and . . . which is the third 
illegitimate ? And which is the legitimate religion ? 
However, let us leave Johann Lichtenberger. It is difficult to 
speak seriously about all this. All this is but a mystical allegory 
though somewhat resembling the truth. 
And aren't there quite a few coincidences ? True, all this has 
been written and printed in 1 528, and th1s is curious. In those days 
there must have often appeared works (Jf this kind, and although 
that time preceded the wars of the great Protestant reformation, 
there had been already many Protestants, reformers and prophets. 
It is also known that later, especially in Protestant armies, there 
have always been many "ecstatic" prophets among the warriors­
prognosticators and convulsionaries. 
If I have recorded this Latin excerpt from an ancient book 
(which, I repeat, unquestionably exists) ,  it is solely as a significant 
fact,-not as a miracle. Besides, are only miracles miraculous ? Not 
seldom, most miraculous are things which occur in reality. Nearly 
always we perceive reality as we wish to perceive it, as we wish 
to ir.tcr}.ol .-1 it to o··rselves. If, at times, we start analyzing, and 
if in the visible we perceive not that which we sought to perceive 
but that which it is in reality, unhesitatingly we take that which 
we have perceived for a miracle. This happens quite often, and, 
at times, I <.wear, we would rather believe in a miracle and in an 
impossibility than in the truth which we do not wish to see. This 
always happens on earth-therein is the whole history of mankind. 
2 
AnouT ANoNYMous AllusiVE I.HT},;RS 
I did not go abroad and I am now in the p. vince of Kursk. 
My physician, having learned that I had an oppm ,unity of spend­
ing the summer in the country, and, besides, in such a province 
as that of Kursk, prescribed that I should drink in the country 
Essentuki water, adding that this woula be far more beneficial to 
me than Ems, to whose water, supposedly, I becamf' accustomed. 
I deem it my duty to state that I have received from my readers 
a great many letters with the expression of sin .. .!re sympathy in 
connection with I1Je announcement of my illness. And generally, 
I wish to mention, by the way, that during all the time of the 
publication of my Diary I have been, and still am, rerP.iving many 
signed and anonymous letters so ;; ,tifying to me, Sl. approbative 
of and so encouraging to, my worK, that I must unhesitatingly 
stte that I have never either expected so general a sympathy or 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
considered myself worthy of it. These letters I shall keep as a 
treasure, and what is there hypocritical in the fact that I am stat­
ing so in print ? Indeed, is it bad that I appreciate and treasure 
this general attention accorded to me ? But it might be said that 
now I am praising myself and boasting. Let them say so, but, in­
wardly, I know that the fact that I am merely expressing my 
gratitude, my sincere feeling, does not mean bragging ; besides, I 
am no longer young enough to fail to understand how this state­
ment will irritate certain gentlemen. It seems, however, that of 
these there aren't too many. 
Among several hundreds of letters received during the eighteen 
months of the publication of the Diary, there were at least one 
hundred (but surely more than that) anonymous ones, but out 
of this number only two letters were absolutely hostile. There were 
people disagreeing with my convictions, but then they directly set 
forth their objections, always seriously, sincerely, without the slight­
est personal insinuations-this is true of both the signed and un­
signed letters,-and I only regret that because of the large numbers 
of letters which are being received, I am utterly unable to answer 
each one of them. 
However, these two letters are exceptions. They were written 
not for the purpose of raising objections but for abuse. Now, these 
gentlemen, composers of these letters-will be irritated with my 
statement of thanks. The last of these letters deals precisely with 
the announcement of my illness. My anonymous correspondent was 
seriously angry : how, he maintains, did I dare Lo announce in print 
so private and personal a matter as my illness, and in his letter 
to me he wrote a most discourteous and rude parody on my an­
nouncement. But leaving aside the main object of the letter-abuse, 
willy-nilly I became interested in the following question : if, for 
instance, by reason of ill health, I was compelled to go away for 
a cure, and on this account I was deprived of the possibility of 
publishing the May issue of the Diary on time, but jointly with 
the June issue ; and inasmuch as every time, in each issue of the 
Diary, I have been announcing the date of the publication of the 
next number,-well, it seemed to me that a mere unmotivated an­
nouncement, devoid of any explanations, to the effect that the next 
issue of the Diary is going to appear jointly with the June one, 
would have been somewhat unceremonious. And, after all, why 
shouldn't I haშe explained the reason why this was to take place ? 
And have I, indeed, dwelt so much on my announcement of my 
illness ?-Of course, all this is but a trifle, and were the matter to 
emanate from a person seriously shocked in his feeling of literary 
and public decorum, there would have arisen a curious, yet, per-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
haps, in a way, respectable specimen of a gentleman, although 
standing outside of the literary profession, nevertheless one who, so 
to speak, burns with the commendable craving for compliance with 
literary decorum, and who although carrying his aspirations to the 
point of scrupulousness, nevertheless derives them from a worthy 
and curious source. But invectives spoiled the whole thing : it be­
came clear that the whole object lay iu them. 
No doubt, it wouldn't have been worthwhile to dwell here 
upon all this ; but I have been thinking for quite a long time of 
saying a few words about anonymous letters in general, i.e., abusive 
anonymous letters, and I am glad that the opportunity presented 
itself. 
The point is that I have long been under the impression that 
in our epoch, so vacillating and so transitional, so full of changes 
and so unsatisfactory (as, indeed, it must be) ,--<ertainly there must 
have appeared a great multitude of, so to speak, neglected, for­
gotten, slighted and vexed people : "Why are they everywhere, and 
not I ?  Why don't people pay attention to me, too ?" In this state 
of personai irritatit.n and, as it were, of dissatisfied ideal, a certain 
fellow is likely, at times, to take a match and commit arson,-to such 
an extent is this feeling painful. This I quite understand, and before 
condemning him one should arm himself with humaneness rather 
than with indignation. However, to he using matches for arson is 
the utmost limit and, so to speak, the lot of mighty Byronic char­
acters. Fortunately, there are less horrible outlets for characters 
not as mighty. Such an outlet is simply to do a certain dirty action, 
-well, to calumniate, to belie, to spread gossip or to write an 
anonymous letter. 
In a word, I have been long ͥ itspecting, "d  I still suspect, 
that our epoch, though unquestionably one of ჩ· ·ცat reforms and 
events, must at the same time be an era of intense anonymous let­
ters of an abusive charactrr. As regards lih.rature, this is true 
beyond a shadow of doubt : anonymouo; abusive letters constitute, 
as it were, an inviolable part of contemporaneous Russian litera­
ture and accompany it in all directions. And who, among editors 
and writers, is not receiving them ? I even madf' inquiries in some 
periodicals, and in one of them-precisely in one of those which 
suddenly met with good fortune, created an impression and pleased 
the public so greatly that they themselves did not expect such a 
success-an active contributor told me that they were receiving 
such a mass of abusive anonymou, letters that they weren't read 
at all,-they were merely opened. He was about to relate to me 
in detail the contents of some of .such epistles, but he burst into 
laughter. 

700 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Thus it must be :  our inexperienced anonymous scribes still do 
not suspect that the more their letters are abusive, the more innocent 
and harmless they are. This is a good trait : it signifies that al­
though our anonymous writers are ardent, they lack composure, 
and they do not understand that the more courteous and dignified 
the tone of a sarcastic anonymous letter is, the more biting it is 
and the stronger its impression. This means that Jesuitism as yet 
has made no progress among us, and that the matter has not yet 
reached its second, superior phase. Therefore, it is still in its in­
ception, and, consequently, it is merely the fruit of unbridled ardor, 
and not of a deliberated and strictly trained spiteful sentiment. 
This is not, so to speak, Spanish vengeance, which, for the attain­
ment of its goal, is even ready to make great sacrifices, and which 
has learned composure. 
Our anonymous abuser is still far from being that mysterious 
stranger in Lermontov's drama The Masquerade, a colossal figure, 
who having once upon a time received a blow on his face from 
a certain officer, retired into the wilderness where he spent thirty 
years deliberating upon his vengeance. No, it is still that same 
Slavic nature of ours which is anxious to resort to abusive language 
as quickly as possible, and finish with it (and at that-even to 
make peace right then and there). Concede that all this is in a 
certain sense gratifying because here, too, everything is green, young 
and fresh,-something on the order of life's spring, even though­
it must be confessed-a most disgusting spring. 
I deem it my duty to add one more observation : it seems 
that our young generation, i.e., very young, raw youths, do not 
write anonymous invective letters. I am receiving a lot of letters 
from young people, and they are all signed. Only those of them 
are unsigned in which too cordial feelings are expressed. But those 
youths who disagree with me in this or that always sign their 
names. (However, it is all too easy-on the strength of many in­
dications and devices resorted to-to find out that an anonymous 
abusive letter has been written not by one belonging to the young 
generation, not by a raw youth.) 
Thus, our youth, apparently, understands that, to begin with, 
it is possible to write even a very sharp letter but that the signa­
ture under it conveys to the wording a great value ; and that the 
whole charactPr of the letter is improved by the fact of the sig­
nature since it adds to it a spirit of straightforwardness, courage 
and readiness to defend and bear the consequences of one's con­
victions. Besides, the very sharpness of the expressions is merely 
indicative of the ardor of the conviction and not of the desire to 
insult. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
701 
Thus, it is clear that a scolder who does not sign his name 
seeks above all to use unprintable invectives ; he wishes to give 
himself this pleasure, and he has no other aim. And he knows him­
self that he is doing a dirty thing, that he is harming himself, i.e., 
the importance of his letter ; yet such is the urge for calling names. 
This trait, meaning-this urge, is we;rth noting since it still pre­
dominates among our educated society And let people ridicule me 
for my belief that this trait is predominant in our midst. I am 
convinced that I am not exaggerating, and that we, so to speak, 
en masse arf' standing at present on this level of development. 
Besides, take also into account the fact that it is possible 
not to write a single anonymous letter, and yet to carry all life 
long the soul of an anonymous scolder. This is an important con­
sideration. And what is there in the fact that during eighteen 
months I have received only two abusive letters ?-This merely goes 
to prove my innocence and negligibleness as well as thf' limited 
sphere of my activities, besides,-that I am dealing with decent 
peo!'ll,' However, nther workers who are more in the public eye 
than myself (and on this ground alone-more guilty than I )  and 
who, in addition, by the very nature and character of their periodicals, 
are compelled to opf'rate in a much wider sphere, are, perhaps, 
receiving e"cry eightef'n months two hundred, and not two, abusive 
letters. 
Briefly, I am convinced that European civilization has inocu­
lated into us very little humaneness, and that there are, perhaps, 
so many people in our midst who are willing to ll5f' invectives 
quickly and immediately at every opportunity that one is really 
afraid. And there a:-e still more of those who .;re inclined to use 
abusive language with impunity, anonymously a 
' saff'ly, from be­
hᅻnd the door. And it is precisely the anony1 . . uus letter which 
provides them with such a possibility : a lettf'r cannot be thrashed 
and it blushes not. 
In olden days we had no Europe.m honor. Our boyards used 
to scold each other and even fought each othf'r opf'nly, and a box 
on the ear was not regarded as a great and irrf'parable injury to 
one's dignity. As against this they had their ._wn honor though 
not in a Europea'l form-yet not Jess sacred and solemn than that 
in Europe. For the sake of this honor the boyard, at times, re­
nounced his whole fortune, his standing at the court and even the 
Czar's graces. However, with thr ᅼhange in our cJ,,; hing and the 
introduction of the European sworu, there ensued in Russia a new 
European honor, and during two centuries it has failed to take 
firm root. Thus the old has been forgotten and spat at while the 
new has been adopted suspiciously and sceptically. It was adopted 

702 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
mechanically, so to speak, whereas spiritually we forgot what honor 
meant, and the heart-felt need for it was lost, and this-dreadful 
though this admission be-with only very few exceptions. 
During these two centuries of our European and, so to speak, 
"sword period," honor and conscience, strange to say, were mostly, 
and even entirely, preserved in our people who have hardly been 
affected by the sword period of our history. Let it be admitted 
that the people are dirty, ignorant and barbarous. Let people merci­
lessly ridicule my presumption, but it is my life-long conviction 
that our people are incomparably purer in heart than our upper 
classes, and that the people's mind is not bifurcated to such an 
extent as to cherish, side by side with a noble idea, its dirty little 
antithesis. This we frequently see in our intelligentsia. Besides, they 
entertain both ideas at one and the same time, not knowing which 
to believe and give preference to in practice, denoting this state 
of their mind and soul as "wealth of development" and "blessings 
of European civilization." And they would rather die with this 
"wealth" of tedium and disgust than stop strongly ridiculing our 
people, not yet contaminated with an alien civilization, for their 
naivete and the uprightness of their beliefs. . . 
. 
But this is a broad subject. I shall simply say : I am sure that 
the coarsest among the people would be ashamed of some of the 
thoughts and impulses of some of our "superior workers," and 
would turn away with disgust from most of the actions of our 
educated men. I am convinced that he does not understand-and 
will not understand for a long time to come-that it is permissible, 
in solitude, behind" closed doors, when nobody sees it, to be com­
mitting filthy things and considering them morally quite regular 
for the sole reason that there are no witnesses and nobody spies 
on him. And yet, among our educated strata this sort of thing is 
being practiced on an alarmingly large scale, quite shamelessly 
and frequently even with the supreme satisfaction of the mind and 
the higher faculties of an enlightened spirit. According to the peo­
ple's conception that which is filthy in public is equally nasty behind 
closed doors. However, we specifically regard the people as ribald, 
vile men and reactionary scolders who delight in cursing and in­
vectives. 
In this connection it is not out of place to recall the following 
-all the more so as this has changed and passed long ago. In the 
days of my youth, the majority of our military men were convinced 
that the Russian soldier, as coming from the people, is extremely 
fond of using obscene language and ribaldries. On this ground some 
regimental commanders, in order to gain popularity, permitted them­
selves during drills, for instance, to curse, resorting to such phrases 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
and indecencies that the soldiers literally blushed and sought to 
forget in their barracks the things which they had heard from their 
superiors, shouting down the fellow who ventured to repeat them. 
I personally witnessed this. And how glad at heart were these regi­
mental commanders, imagining that they succeeded in mimicking 
the Russian soldier's spirit ! 
Why, even Gogo) in his Correspondence with Friends coun­
selled a friend of his, when publicly scolding a peasant serf, to use 
by all means strong language ; he went so far as to specify the 
words which should be used on such occasions, namely those which 
were strongest and contained, so to speak, more than outward 
ribaldry ,-more "refinement." 
Yet even though, unfortunately, the Russian people do use ob­
scene language, yet not all of them do so, far from all,-in fact, the 
negligible minority (will it be believed ?). The main thing, however, 
is that they revile automatically rather than with moral "refine­
ment" ; by force of habit rather than with dt'liberation. Revilement 
with l:!eliheration is observed only in very rare specimens of vaga­
bonds, drunkards and all sorts of gooJ-for-nothing idlers despised 
by the people. Although the latter do resort to vituperation by force 
of habit, they know themselves that this is a bad habit, and they 
condemn it. Thus, to break this habit of the people is simply a 
matter of mrr.hanical disust' and not "f a moral effort. 
Generally, this idea that our people are fond of using obscene 
language, in my opinion, has been implanted in our educated stratum 
at the time when its final moral break with the people became an 
accomplished fact, which, as we know, resulted in the present-day 
misconception of the latter on the part of the for"ler. It was at that 
time that there also appeared many uther erronec · 
· ideas about the 
Russian people. 
Even though my assertion, that the people are by no means 
such convinced scolders, may be disbelieved, nevertheless it is jus­
tified. And those hopes which I place in the people I place also 
in our young generation. The people and the young generation of 
our intelligentsia will suddenly come together and agree on many 
things, and they will understand each other much 'lOre successfully 
than our generatinn in its own times. There is seriousness in our 
youth, and I pray God only that it be directed more intelligently. 
By the way, speaking of youth : recently, a very young man 
in a letter addressed to me wrotP me a very sharp rebuttal in 
connection with a topic which I am not going to mention, and not 
only did he sign this sharp (but by no means discourteous) epistle 
en toutes lettres, but he also gave his address. I asked him to come 
and see me in order to clear up the matter. He came, and I was 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
impressed with the ardor and seriousness of his attitude toward the 
problem in question. He agreed with me on certain points, and he 
left in a state of hesitation. 
I may add that our young men evince a greater ability in 
arguing than our old men, i.e., in the manner in which they argue : 
they listen and let people speak. This is due to the fact that, to 
them, the elucidation of a matter is more important than their 
personal ambitions. When that young man was leaving me, he 
expressed his regrets for the sharpness of his letter, and he did this 
with natural dignity. 
Our youth is devoid of leadership-that's the point ! And yet, 
how badly they need it ! How often did they run with enthusiasm 
after men who were not worthy of it but only slightly sincere ! 
And who will the future leader or leaders be-whoever will it be ? 
And will our Russian fate send us such men ?-Such are the ques­
tions ! 
3 
THE PLAN oF A SATIRICAL NovEL DEALING WITH CoN­
n:MPORANEous LIFE 
But I am not yet through with the anonymous scolder. The 
point is that such a man may become a most serious literary char­
acter-in a romance or in a novel. The principal thing is that one may 
and must approach the matter from a different point of view­
from a broad and humane standpoint coordinating it with Russian 
character in generଛl, and the contemporaneous, current causes of 
the appearance in our midst of this type in particular. 
In fact, the moment you begin to analyze this type, you are 
compelled to admit that at present we cannot help but have such 
men, or, to be more precise, that, in our day, it is this kind of 
men that we mostly must expect, and that if of them there are still 
comparatively few, this is due to a special grace of God. 
Indeed, they all are men who have been urought up in our 
recent vacillating families, by discontented, sceptical fathers who 
have bequeathed to their children nothing but indifference for the 
present, and hardly anything more than some vague anxiety con­
cerning some fantastic future on which, however, even so-called 
ready realists and frigid haters of our present are inclined to pin 
their faith. In addition, these fathers, of course, bequeathed to their 
children sceptical, impotent laughter, though scarcely conscious yet 
always all-complacent. In the last twenty or twenty-five years was 
it only a few children who grew up in the families of these wicked 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
envious men who, having spent the last pennies of their redemption 
money, bequeathed to their children misery and the covenant of 
villainy-have there been few such families ? 
Now, suppose such a young man takes up some employment. 
He cuts no f1gure ; he is devoid of wit ; he has no connections. He 
has an innate mind which, however, an;. man possesses. But because 
his mind was brought up on idle snec:.ring-which for twenty-five 
years has been conceived as liberalism-our hero, naturally, takes 
his mind for genius. 
Oh, God ! How is it possible not to expect boundless selfish­
ness in a man who grew up without the slightest moral support ?  
At first, he swaggers dreadfully ; however, because he nevertheless 
has a mind ( for the type, I prefer to take a man intellectually some­
what above the average rather than below the average, since it is 
only in these two cases that the appearance of this type is con­
ceivable) ,-he soon discovers that sneering is a negative thing which 
leads to nothing positive ; and that if it satisfied his father, this 
was du .. ࢛o tht> fac• that he was a blockhead, even though a liberal 
fellow, whereas he, the son, is nevcrthless a genius who merely for 
the time being finds it difficult to reveal himself. Oh, of couse, in 
his soul he is ready for most any emphatic villainy, "since why 
shouldn't v;aainy Le resorted to for business ? And who, in our 
age, is aLle to prove that villainy is \ 1llainy ?"-etc. 
In a word, he has been brought up on these ready-made ques­
tions. But he abo soon guesses that even in order to resort to vil­
lainy he must wait long for an opening, and, besides, that, perhaps, 
even to him it is a long distancP between the moral readiness to 
commit a villainy and its actual commission, sn ' r."lt, first, he must, 
so to sprak , "get into line" in a practical sense. 0. 0urse, if he were 
more stupid, he would settle down in a jiffy : "Down with those 
higher aspirations ! The thing to ck is to ingrat:1te oneself with this 
man or that, to follow him, and to toil hard, obediently, with con­
viction,-and in the long run the career will be made." However, 
personal ambition and the conviction that he is a genius for a long 
while stand in his way : even in his thoughts he cannot put his 
supposedly so brilliant fate on the same level W i lli the lot of some 
Mr. So-and-So, 01 Mr. So-and-So : "No, sir : as yet we are in op­
position, and if they want me, let them come to me and beg me ! "  
Thus, he is waiting for someone to come and bq him ; he is 
angry ; he is full of keen resentr. 'lt, and he wait:;. Meanwhile, 
right next to him Mr. So and So has managed to outpace him ; 
another fellow has already settled down ; a third oaf has now be­
come hiଜ boss,-that very chap whom he himself had nicknamed 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
in that "superior school" of theirs and on whom he had composed 
an epigram in verse at the time when he was editing the hand­
written school magazine and was reputed to be a genius. 
"Nay, that's an affront I Why he and not I ?  And everywhere 
everything is occupied ! No"-says he to himself-"my career is else­
where. And what's the use of being employed ? It's only blockheads 
who stick to employment I My career is-literature." Presently he 
begins to mail his compositions to editorial offices-first incognito, 
and then-giving his full name. Naturally, people don't answer him. 
Seized with impatience, he begins to besiege in person one editorial 
office after another. Occasionally, when a manuscript is returned 
to him, he indulges in witticisms and bilious sneering, so to speak, 
to alleviate his heart. But all this doesn't help. "No, apparently, 
here, too, every place is occupied I "-he says to himself with a sad 
smile. 
Chiefly, he is kept tortured with the fatal trouble of finding 
always and everywhere as many men as possible who are worse 
off than he. Oh, he would never be able to understand how one 
may rejoice over the fact that there are people better off than he ! 
Well, it is at this juncture that the thought occurs to him for the 
first time to mail to some editorial office, the one where he had 
been most strongly affronted, a spiteful unsigned letter. He writes 
and mails it ; he does it a second time-the thing pleases him. Even 
so, nothing happens : much as hitherto everything around remains 
deaf, dumb and blind. "Nay, what kind of career is this l "-he 
decides at length, jlnd, finally, he makes up his mind "to ingratiate 
himself." 
He picks a person, namely, his boss-the director. In this, 
perhaps, chance and connections come to his aid. Even Gogol 's 
Poprischin made his debut by distinguishing himself in the business 
of sharpening pens : for this purpose he had been summoned to his 
excellency's apartment, where he saw the director's daughter for 
whom he sharpened two pens. However, the epoch of the Poprischins 
has passed ; besides, in our day, pens are no longer being sharpened. 
Nor can our hero betray his own character : not pens but most 
daring thoughts dwell in his mind. In brief, in the shortest time, 
he becomes convinced that he has captivated the director's daughter, 
and that she languishes for him. "Well, here's the career,"-he muses 
-"and what \tould be the use of women if a clever man couldn't 
make a career through them ? Realistically considered, this is the 
gist of the femininძ problem. And the main thing is that this isn't 
anything to be ashamed of : are there few men who found their 
road through women ?" But then at this juncture, just as in Popri­
schin's case, an adjutant turns up I Poprischin reacted to this in 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
accordance with his character : he grew insane over the fancy that 
he was the King of Spain. How natural ! What was there left to 
humilated Poprischin without any connections, without a career, 
without boldness or any kind of initiative, especially during the 
Petersburg period, other than to embark upon most desperate fancy­
ing and to believe in his visions ? Oar Poprischin, however, our 
contemporaneous Poprischin, would not believe for anything in the 
world that he is the same kind of Poprischin as the original one, 
merely one who has been duplicated thirty years hence. His soul is 
full of thunder and lightning, contempt and sarcasms,-and so he, 
too, embarks upon fancying but of a different kind. He recalls 
the fact that in this world there are anonymous letters, and that 
once upon a time he had resorted to them. And thus he risks his 
pretty little letter ; but now no longer is it addressed to an editorial 
office ; now it is a more daring venture : he feels that he is embark­
ing upon a new-practical phase. Oh, how carefully he locks him­
self up from his landlady in his tiny room ! How he trembles lest 
he he ,ഓiPrl upon ! Yet he scribbles and scribbles, changing his hand­
writing ! He composes four pages of calumnies and invectives I He 
reads them over and over again, and having spent the whole night 
in this occupation, at dawn he seals the letter and addresses it 
to the fianrl:-adjutant. He has altered his handwriting, and he is 
not afraid. 
Now he counts the hours : by this time the letter must have 
been received-the letter to the suitor about his fiancee. Why, of 
course, he will repudiate her ! He will be scared ! -For this is not 
a letter but a "chef-d'reuvre" !  And our young friend is fully aware 
of the fact that he is a wicked little villain ; Lnt he is only glad 
of it : "Now is the time for the bifurcation of th . ଝht, and breadth. 
Nowadays one cannot thrive by rectilinear thoug.; t I " 
It goes without saying that the letter produces no result : 
the wedding takes place ; yet the beginning has been made, and 
our hero, as it were, has hit upon his career. A mirage sui generis 
takes possession of him-much as in the case of Poprischin. With 
ardor he hastens to devote himself to the new activity-the writing 
of anonymous letters. He finds out things abo •• t his general ; he 
muses ; he pours 'lUt everything that has accumulated during the 
many years of disappointing service, vexed personal ambitions, bile 
and envy. He criticizes each and every action of thଞ general ; he 
ridicules him in a most merciless n' · nner, and this in -ଟveral letters, 
in a whole series of them. And how ple:tsed he is in the beginning I 
The actions of the general, his wife, his mistress, and the stupidity 
of their whole Ministry-all these, everything is depicted in his 
letters. By and by he turns to state considerations. He composes 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
a letter to the Minister in which, unceremoniously, he suggests that 
Russia be remodelled. No, the Minister cannot help but be struck : 
genius will impress him, and his letter might be brought to the 
attention of . . .  of such a person that . . .  In a word : courage, 
mon enfant I and they'll start looking for the author ; then, at once, 
I shall reveal my name, so to speak, without bashfulness. 
Briefly, he is intoxicated with his compositions, and every 
minute he visualizes how his letters are being opened, and what 
is reflected upon the faces of those persons . . . .  In such a mood, 
at times, he even indulges in a joke : jestingly he writes letters to 
some of the oddest fellows ; he does not neglect some Egor Egoro­
vich, his old head-clerk whom he really drives almost insane by 
anonymously assuring him that his wife is having a love-affair with 
the local police lieutenant (the main thing is that this may be 
half true). 
Thus some time elapses, but . . . but suddenly a strange 
thought occurs to him, namely, that he is Poprischin, nothing but 
Poprischin, that same Poprischin, only a million times viler, and that 
all these pasquinades from around the corner, his whole anonymous 
potency, in substance is a mirage and nothing more, besides,-a 
foul petty mirage, a filthy and disgraceful mirage, even much nastier 
than the fancy about the Spanish throne. 
At this point there occurs a serious thing-not something dis­
graceful : "What's disgrace ?-Disgrace is nothing ! Only apothecaries 
are afraid of disgrace ! "-but a really dreadful thing, quite dread­
ful l The point is that, although our hero has a mind, neverthele"s 
he cannot restrain bimself, and at the time of his intoxication with 
his new career-specifically, after his little epistle to the Miniଠter 
-he lets a word slip about his letters, and to whom ?-To that 
German landlady of his-well, not everything-she would not have 
understood everything ; of course, just a trifle, so, from the fullness 
of his heart. Yet how great is his surprise when, a month later, 
a gentle functionary in another :\Iinistry, who occupies a remote 
roomlet in the apartment of the same landlady, a spiteful and 
taciturn little chap, having suddenly grown angry with something, 
intimates to him, as he is passing through the corridor, that he 
-the timid fellow-is "a moral man, and that he does not write 
anonymous letters, as certain gentlemen do." Just think 1 At first 
our hero is no: greatly scared. Moreover, having interrogated the 
functionary-for this express purpose having humiliatingly made up 
with him-he convinces himself that the latter knows virtually noth­
ing. Well . . .  but what if he does know ?-Besides, for some time 
rumors have been rampant in his department to the effect that 
somebody has been busy writing and sending through the local 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
mails abusive letters to the superiors, and that for sure this must 
have been someone of the employees. 
The poor fellow begins to ponder ; he even doesn't sleep at 
night. In a word, one may graphically imagine the torments of 
his 5oul, his suspiciousness, his slips. Finally, he is almost fully 
convinced that everybody knows everଡ thing ; that he is not being 
told so only for the time being ; that his discharge from service 
has been decided upon, and that, naturally, this will not be the 
end of it. In a word, he is almost driven insane. 
One day, as he is sitting in the department, boundless in­
dignation against everyuody and everything arises in his heart : 
"Oh, wicked, damned men ! "-he exclaims to himself-"Is it pos­
sible to pretend to such an extent ! They know that this is I ;  every­
one of them knows it ! Whisperingly, they tell this, one to the 
other, when 1 happen to he passing by ! They are also aware of the 
document concerning me which lies ready there, at the office . . . .  
And they are all pretending ! They all conceal it from me ! They 
seeJ.- to ·:::jny it : tbry want to ଢee how I am going to be dragged off. 
. . . No, this ଣhall not come to pass ! No ! "  
An hour later, accidentally, he brings some paper to the office 
of his excellency. He walks in ; respectfully, he places the paper on 
the desk. Tତ.e general is busy ; he pays no attention. Our hero turns 
around ; he lS auout to leave the roum noiselessly ; he touches the 
handle of the door, and suddenly, as if he were falling into an 
abyഞs, he throws himself at the feet of his excellency, a second 
beiore that not e\'en having suspected that he would do this : "All 
the ଥarne. I have to perish ! Better to confes-; of my own accord ! "  
"Only be calm, your excellency ! Please be st;J . your excellency, 
so that no one may hear us outside ! I will t£: you everything, 
everything ! "-he implores like a madman the du1•1bfounded excel­
lency, foolishly clasping his hands uefore the reneral. 
And presently, uy fitS and starts, incoherently, he confesses 
everything, to the greatest amazement of his excellency who enter­
tained no suspicions whatsoever. Bilt here, too, our hero remains 
fully faithful to his character, because why does he throw himself 
at the feet of the general ? Of course, from illne:;ଦ, from suspicious­
ness, but mainly '·rcause he-he who got scared, he, the humiliated 
and the self-denouncing one-nevertheless much as heretofore, hopes 
like a little fool intoxicated with self-conceit, that, perhaps, his 
excellency, having listened to hi:: 
and, so to spt .. ;,;., impressed 
with his genius, will open his arms and stretching out those hands 
with which he has signed so many papers for the benefit of the 
f:.ttherland, will embrace him : " Js it possible that you have been 
dri\·en to this point, unfortunate but gifted young man ! Oh, it is 

710 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
I who am to be blamed for everything I I overlooked you ! I assume 
the full guilt I Oh, God I Here is what our talented youth is com­
pelled to resort to as a result of our antiquated order of things 
and prejudices ! But come, come to my heart, and share my office 
with me. And we . . .  we shall turn the department topsy-turvy I "  
But it did not happen thus. Later, a long time thereafter, in 
disgrace and humiliation, recalling the kick which he received from 
the toe of the general's boot, which directly fitted into his face, 
he accused fate and men almost sincerely : "Once in my life I fully 
opened my arms to embrace people, and what did I receive ?" 
Some most natural and contemporaneous finale may be con­
ceived : for instance, our hero, already dismissed from service, is 
hired, for one hundred rublf'!!'o. for a fictitious wedding, after which 
he departs in one direction, and she in another-to her grocer : "lovely 
and noble," as Schedrin's police lieutenant expresses himself in a 
similar situation. 
In a word, it seems to me that the character of an anonymous 
scolder is not a bad theme for a novel. And a serious one. Of course, 
here, Gogol would be needed, but . . . I am glad at least that ac­
cidentally I have come across this idea. Perhaps I shall really try 
to introduce it into a novel. 
CHAPTER II 
1 
Former Agriculturists-Future Diplomats 
BUT WHITHER did I deviate from my subject ? I started 
telling that I was in the country and was glad of it. It is quite 
a long time since I have lived in the country in Russia. However, 
I shall postpone the discussion about country life, and here I shall 
only mention that, among other reasons, I am glad that I am in 
the country and not abroad because I could not see Russians saunter­
ing there. 
As a matter of fact, in our times-so popular, so concordant 
and patriotic-when one is expressly looking at home for Russians, 
waiting and longing for them, needing them,-in such times it is 
too painful to behold abroad-whither for twenty years, year after 
year, our intelligentsia have been expatriating themselves and col­
onizing-the transformation of the purely Russian, raw and perhaps 
excellent material into a pitiful international canaille-faceless, de­
void of character and nationality, without a fatherland. I am not 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
7II 
speaking of the fathers,-they are incorrigible and God be with 
them-but of their unfortunate children whom they are ruining 
abroad. As to the fathers, in the long run they begin to look 
ridiculous even to our notorious Russian Europeans. 
Mr. Burenin, who is now a war correspondent, tells in one 
of his letters about an amusing meetii;;_; with one of our Europeans 
of the Forties, "with gray respectable rurls," permanently residing 
abroad, but who came expressly to observe the war (of course, 
from a very safe distance) ,  "the spectacle of the struggle." In the 
railroad car he started to make witticisms concerning all the things 
at which these genlemen have been poking fun now for forty 
years, i.e., the Russian spirit, the Slavophiles, and so forth. 
According to him, the reason why he is residing abroad is 
that in Russia "there is still nothing a serious-minded and respec­
table man can do." (N. B. I am citing from memory.) One of his 
most successful witticisms was that "orders already have been is­
sued to the railroads to ship in a special ear-in view of the entry 
of ntir troops into Bulgaria and the regeneration of the Slavs­
the shadow of Khomiakov." But it may be remarked to this gray­
curled gentleman that he is himself very much akin to the shadow 
of some, perhaps, quite respectable Western liberal babbler of the 
Forties wh0 -if after so many years he had lived to see his gray curls 
and had st arted repeating the same 'hings at which he had stopped 
in his Forties, were he Granovsky himself-would certainly look 
exactly like this buffoon, this fellow who spoke about the order 
to ship to the theatre of war in a railroad car the shadow of 
Khomiakov, and about the alleged fact that a decent man had still 
nothing to do in Russia. 
Twenty years ago it was mostly landowr 
:; who emigrated 
(I retain this word ) from Russia. Since then e1 .. 1gration has per­
sisted year after year. It goes without saying that among the emi­
grants there were many who were not landowners ; therE were all 
sorts of people. Still, the overwhelming majority, if not all of them, 
more or less hated Russia : some of them hated her on moral 
grounds, because of the conviction that "there was nothing such 
respectable and clever men as they could be .Joing in Russia" ; 
others simply hat<>d her without any convictions, so to speak, natu­
rally, physically-because of her climate, her fields, her forests, her 
status, her liberated peasants ; because of Russian history ,-in a 
word, hated her for everything. 
I wish to note that such a h:.Lrerl may also be quite passive, 
very calm and indifferent to the point of apathy. And at this junc­
ture redemption moneys began to pass through their hands. In 
addition, a great many of them suddenly became convinced that 

712 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
with the liberation of the peasants everything was lost-the village, 
landownership, the nobility, and Russia. True, with the liberation 
of the peasants, rural labor was left without sufficient organization 
and protection, and individual landownership, naturally, grew scared 
and perplexed as in no historical revolution in the past. And so 
landowners began to sell their lands, and part of them (quite a 
large part) rushed abroad. But no matter what they may be setting 
forth in their defense, nevertheless they cannot conceal from their 
countrymen and their children the fact that the principal cause of 
their emigration was also the lure of egoistic far nicnte. 
Now, ever since those days Russian individual landowner­
ship has been in a state of utter chaos : land is sold and resold ; 
owners change every minute ; even the appearance of the land is 
changing ; it is being deforested,-and what is it going to be reduced 
to ? who will ultimately own it ? of whom is the renovated Russian 
landowning class going to be composed ? what form will it finally 
assume ?-all these things arc difficult to predict. And yet, if you 
please, this is the principal question of the Russian future. 
It is a natural law of some kind-not only in Russia but all 
over the world : those who own the land in a country are its 
masters-in every respect. Thus it has been always and everywhere. 
It may be said, however, that in Russia, in addition, we have the 
commune,-so they are the masters. But is the question of the 
commune one of these which we have finally settled ? Hasn't this 
question, too, passed fifteen years ago into a different phase like 
everything else ? 
However, I shall reserve the discussion of all these things for 
the future. l\Ieanwhilc I shall wind up my thought without ࢚up­
porting evidence : if landownership in a country is seriously or­
ganized, in that country everything is going to be serious-in all 
respects both in a general sense and in all particulars. For instance, 
we are busying ourselves with education, with public schools. And 
yet I am of the opinion that only then will our schools be seriously 
and solidly organized when landownership and agriculture are es­
tablished on a serious and solid foundation, and that productive 
agriculture will be the result not of the school, but, on the contrary, 
a good school will come in consequence of productive agriculture, 
i.e., nationally organized landownership, and under no circumstance 
prior to that. 
·' . 
Parallel to this example is everything else : domestic affairs, 
laws, morality, the very genius of the nations. Finally, every correct 
function of the national organism can be organized only when solid 
landownership is firmly established. The same may also be said 
of the character of landownership : let it be aristocratic or demo-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
7IJ 
cratic, but the character of landownership determines the character 
of the nation. 
·· 
But at present our former landowners keep roaming abroad, 
in all the cities and spas of Europe, screwing up prices in restaurants 
and dragging after them, a:> rich men, governesses and nurses for 
their children, dressed in laces and Znglish co!ltumes ; with bare 
legs, exhibiting them to Europe. Anrl Europe looks at this and 
wonders : "See, how many rich people there are there l And-what's 
most important : how many educated people, craving for European 
enlightenment ! It was due to despotism that up to the present 
time they have been denied foreign passports l And, suddenly, look : 
how many landowners, capitalists and retired rentiers they have I 
-Yes, more than in France where there are so many rcntiers !" 
And try to explain to Europe that this is a strictly Russian 
phenomenon ; that there is nothing of the "rentier" business here ; 
that, on the contrary, this is the devouring of fundamental capi­
tal ; the burning of the candle at both ends,-of course, Europe 
woul.t nnt believP a phenomenon which is impossible there ; she 
would simply not understand it. 
And the important point is that these Sybarites sauntering 
in German spas and on the shores of the Swiss lakes ; these Lucul­
luses spenଧing their fortunes in the restaurants of Paris,-they know 
themselvrନ and even forebode with pain that they will finally eat 
up their funds, and that their children-these little cherubs in Eng­
lish dresses-perhaps, will have to beg in Europe (and they will 
beg ! ) or that they will become French and German workers (they 
will become French and German workers ! ) .  "But"-they say to them-
. selves-"apres 1tous lc deluge. And who's to bh.l'!le ?-Again it's our 
Russian order of things, our ponderous Russia 
· ·here there still is 
nothing a decent man can be doing." This is how they reason, 
while the most liberal of them, those who may be called the sub­
limest and purest Westerners of the Forties, say, perhap!>, to them­
selves : ''Well, what of it if the children be left destitute I As against 
this, they will inherit the idea, the noble leaven of the true and 
sacred mode of reasoning. Brought up away from Russia, they will 
not know the 'popes' and the stupid word 'f;;.L଩lerland.' They will 
understand that the fatherland is a prejudice-one of the most per­
nicious in the world. They will acquire noble cosmopolitan minds. 
We, and only we Russians, will initiate these new minds. By the 
fact itself that we are squanderh ": abroad our redt:mption moneys 
we are laying the foundation of tne new forthcoming international 
citizenc;hip which, sooner or later, will reform Europe, and all the 
honor therefor is ours because we have started ahead of all others." 
True, thus speak only the "gray-curled," i.e., only very few, 

714 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY: 1877 
since are there many progressives, indeed ?-The more practical, 
even from among the "gray-curled," those who are not so noble, 
in the long run, are still pinning their hopes on "connections." "It 
is true that we are here squandering our fortunes, nevertheles 
we are gaining something-well, acquaintances, connections which 
later on will prove useful in the 'fatherland.' Besides, even though 
we are bringing up our children in a liberal spirit, nevertheless we 
are bringing them up as gentlemen, and this, after all, is the main 
thing. They will hover in exclusive and high spheres, while liberalism 
in these spheres has always signified and accompanied gentility, 
because a gentlemen's liberalism is useful to the highest conserva­
tism, so to speak : in Russia this has always been recognized. And 
what's there in the fact that we are bringing up our children abroad ? 
-This precisely means that we are training them for the diplomatic 
service. How delightful are all these positions in conjunction with 
the embassies and consulates I How innumerable are these hand­
some positions and how delightfully they are situated I These will 
suffice for our children : easy, nice, moneyed and solid ; besides, the 
service always commands the public eye : clean, dandyish, gentle­
manly service I As to the work-well, it's a soft job ; what one 
has to do is to strike up acquaintances with Russians abroad­
from among those who are more respectable ; but those who are 
up to mischief and who seek consular protection, we shall treat 
haughtily, as authoritatively 11s possible : we shan't even listen to 
them : 'We don't believe you I You're causing trouble ! You imagine 
that you're still in our dear fatherland, whereas this is a clean 
place. Because of fellows like you we're likely to run into disagree­
ablenesses, and is it worthwhile to trouble the foreign authorities I 
Look at yourselves in a mirror-and you will see to what state 
you're reduced I '  Therein is the whole service I Briefly, our little 
children will know how to make their way. Yes, sir. Connections 
-that's what the parent's heart has to be concerned about ; the rest 
will come of its own accord when need arises." 
Thus, all the less noble-from among those squandering their 
fortunes abroad-are counting on connections. Yet what are these ? 
-Well, even if they mean something, nevertheless this cloth wears 
out very quickly. And it wouldn't be a bad thing at all, in addition 
to connections, to have in store, say, a little knowledge of Russia 
and a mind of one's own-for any eventuality. At present, however, 
in the epoch of reforms and new principles, in Russia, as if on 
purpose, everyone wishes to be guided by his own mind ; this 
is what everybody ·wants. To be sure, this is an enlightened idea, 
but the trouble is that at no time has there been in Russia less 
independent thought than in our day and this-in the face of a 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
universal desire to have it. Why this is so-l will not venture to 
decide ; besides, this would be difficult. Still, I do positively know 
one of the reasons why our little cherubs will unquestionably turn 
out to be fools : and even though this is an old factor, I shall 
specify it. 
However, this is the same thing which I have pointed out 
last year. The reason lies in the Rus!:.ian language, i.e., the insuf­
ficiency of the Russian native tongue because of upbringing abroad, 
with foreign governesses and nurses. This has always been prevalent 
in our midst, meaning, this deficiency ; but never to such an extent 
as now when so many little cherubs are being brought up abroad. 
Let us say that they are being trained for the diplomatic service, 
and, as we know, French is the diplomatic language, while it is 
sufficient to know the Russian language merely grammatically. But 
is this so ? Much as this question is obsolete to the point of triviality, 
nevertheless it is still so unsettled that recently it has been dis­
cussed in the press, though indirectly, apropos of Mr. Turgenev's 
work in French. 
Tht: opinion Has been expressed that "what difference would 
it make to Mr. Turgenev to write in either Russian or French," and 
tllat "in that there would be nothing prohibitory." Of course, there 
is nothing nrohibitory, especially to so great a writer and con­
noisseur 01 the Russian language a" Turgenev. And if it be his 
fancy, why shouldn't he write in French, particularly because he 
knows it almost as well as the Russian tongue ? On this ground­
not a word about Turgenev. 
But . . .  but I see that I am decidedly repeating myself ; last 
year I said exactly the same, referring to the same subject, and 
also in the same months spent abr0:.d, when I "' ; conversing with 
im outlandish Russian mama concerning the ha: m of the French 
language to her little cherubs. However, mama is now bringing up 
her darling ones for a diplomatic. vocation, al!d, strictly, speaking, 
it is only diplomacy that I intend tc touch upon, and although 
I feel it unpleasant to repeat myself, nevertheless I shall risk dedi­
cating to it a few words. 
"But French is the diplomatic language," mama interrupts 
me-this time even withollt giving me a chance to begin. Alas, since 
last year she has Leen preparing for this, and she treats me haughtily. 
"Quite so, madam"-I answer her-"yours is a strong argu­
ment, and I am in perfect accorci with you. But, 1 0  begin with, 
that which I have said about the 11 .• owledge of the Russian tongue 
is equally applicable to French-isn't this so ? For in order to be 
able to express the wealth of one's being in French one has got 
to master it, too, in a perfect manner. Well, you should know that 

716 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
there is such a mystery of nature, her law, by virtue of which man 
can have a perfect knowledge of that language only with which 
he is born, i.e., that which is spoken by the people to whom he 
belongs." You knit your brows ; I have offended you. You look 
scoffingly at me. You wave your little hand, and you assure me that 
you have already heard this last year, and that I am repeating 
myself. 
"Very well, I concede this ; besides, it is not a ladies' theme. 
I will simply concede and will agree with you that a Russian, too, 
may acquire a perfect knowledge of the French language, subject, 
however, to an all-important condition : that he be born in France, 
that he grow up there, and that, from the very first hour of his 
life, he be transformed into a Frenchman. 
"Oh, you are put into good humor ! You are smiling. How­
ever, please observe, madam, that even for you this will not be 
quite possible to effect as concerns your little cherub, notwith­
standing all conveniences, i.e., emigration, redemption monies, the 
Parisian nurse, and the like. Besides, you should also take into 
account the faculties inborn, so to speak : indeed, in the matter 
of these faculties, your little cherub, for example, cannot be com­
pared with Mr. Turgenev. Tell me, are many Turgenevs born ? . . .  
"Ah, no, now, what do I say ! -Again, I made a mistake, my 
tongue slipped : without fail, your little cherub will become a 
Turgenev, or three Turgenevs at once. Let's leave this, but . . .  
" 
"But"-you suddenly interrupt me-"all diplomats are cle\'er 
anyway, so why should one be so concerned about intellect ? Believe 
me : connections-that's the only thing needed. !\:Jon mari . . .  
" 
"You are quite right, madam,"-I hasten to interrupt her­
"connections-that's the thing, but leaving your husband as much 
aside as possible, I shall nevertheless observe that, in addition to 
connections, it wouldn't be bad to have a bit of brains. And, to 
begin with, diplomats are clever not because they are diplomats, 
but because they were clever men even before they became dip­
lomats. Believe me also that there are a great many diplomats who 
are remarkably stupid men." 
"Ah, not at all, no ! "-You interrupt me impatiently-"All dip­
lomats are always clever ; they all occupy such excellent positions ! 
And this is the noblest kind of service ! "  
"!\fadallt madam ! "-I exclaim-"You say : connections, knowl­
edge of languages. But connections can merely provide one with a 
position, and after that ? . . .  Now, please visualize : your little 
cherub is growing ·up in the midst of European restaurants. He 
is leading a fast life in the company of young cocottes, foreign 
viscounts and our Russian counts, but after that-what ? . . .  Well, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
he knows all languages, and for this reason alone-not a single 
one. Deprived of his native tongue, he, naturally, catches but the 
fragments of thoughts and sentiments of all nations ; his mind, 
ever since his youthful years, has been shaken up into some sort 
of a muddy concoction ; he becomes an international neither-here­
nor-there creature with short, aborth.• meagre ideas, with a dull 
narrowness of judgment. He is a diplomat, but, to him, the 
history of nations somehow shapes itself in a burlesque manner. 
He does not see, nor does he even suspect, how nations and people 
live, what laws govern their organisms, and whether there is whole­
ness in these laws, whether some general international law can be 
perceived in them. He is ready to deduce all world events from the 
mere fact that this or that queen has angered the favorite mistress 
of this or that king, and thus a war has broken out between two 
kingdoms . . . .  
"Let me please reason from your point of view. All right, let's 
say 'connections.' . . .  Hut to acquire connections character is 
neel႕el! ;.;.:niahility ::>f the character, mildness, kindness, and at 
the same time-firmness, perseverance. . . . For a diplomat has 
to be captivating ; he must, so to speak, charm, conquer,-isn't 
this so ? Well, will you believe me or not if I tell you directly and 
most posithdy that without the knowledge of one·s native tongue, 
without having mastered it, it is entirely impossible to build up a 
character, even if the little cherub is naturally well and richly 
gifted. In due course of time, thoughts, ideas and feelings will arise 
in him ; these ideas and sentiments will, so to speak, press upon 
him from within, seeking and demanding expression for themselves. 
Yet without the rich, ready forms of expressi"·' contractecl '5ince 
childhood, i.e., without the language, without it. ·ultivation, with­
out its fineness, without the mastery of its nuanLc:s,-your son will 
always be dissatisfied with him;,;el f. Fragment!' of thoughts will no 
longer satisfy him ; the material accumulating in the mind and 
in the heart will demand elaborate expression. . . . The young man 
will become preoccupied and absentminded, aimlessly pensive, and 
later-he will grow surly, intolerable ; he will lose his health ; per­
haps he will even be affected with indigestion.-\-vould you believe 
it? . . .  
"But I see you bursting into laughter. Well, once more I was 
carried away-I admit. (And yet, good Lord,-how tr'Je the things 
I am saying ! )  However, permit n; to finish. PermiL me to remind 
you that just now I gave in and agreed with you, for form's sake, 
that diplomats are nevertheless clever ; but you have driven me, 
madam, to the point where I am compelled not to conceal from 
you the most secret underlying reason for my v!ew on the subject. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Several times in my life, madam, as if on purpose, the thought bas 
occurred to me that in diplomacy at large, among all nations, there 
have been but very few clever men. It is even surprising. On the con­
trary, the dullness of this caste in the European history of the 
present century . . . That is, you see, they are all clever-more or 
less-this is undeniable ; they are all witty, but what are their 
minds ? Has a single one of them penetrated the substance of things 
and foreseen those mysterious laws which lead Europe toward 
something unknown, strange, dreadful, which, however, is already 
obvious at present, which is taking place quite evidently in the 
sight of those who are at least a little capable of foresight ? 
No, madam, it may be positively asserted that in this respectable 
and most privileged caste there wasn't a single diplomat, not a 
single mind of this caliber I (Of course, in making this statement, 
I am excluding Russia and everything domestic since, by our very 
esence, in this respect we are 'a different story.') Quite the reverse 
is true : throughout this whole century there appeared the craftiest 
diplomatic minds-this I admit ; intriguers with a pretense at the 
most realistic understanding of things. And yet none of them per­
ceived anything beyond their noses and beyond current interests 
(at that-the most superficial and erroneous ones I ) .  To tie a torn 
little thread, to put a little patch on a hole, 'to screw up the price, 
to gild a thing so it be taken for something new'-that's our job, 
that's where our work lies I 
"There are good reasons for all this : in my opinion the major 
reason is the disunity of the principles, the alienation from the 
people and the segregation of the diplomatic minds in too fashion­
able a sphere detached from mankind. 
"Take the instance of Count Cavour,-wasn't his a great 
mind ? Wasn't he a diplomat ?-I am citing him because his genius 
is generally recognized and also because he is dead. Yet what did 
he do, look : Oh, he did achieve his aim, he did unite Italy, but 
what was the result ?-For 2 ,coo years Italy bore in herself a 
universal unifying idea-not some abstract idea, not a speculation 
of some theoretical mind, but a realistic, organic idea ; the fruit 
of the national and universal life. This was the unification of the 
whole world-first, the ancient Roman and later-the papal unifica­
tion. The peoples who have been growing and disappearing in Italy 
in the course 'of these two and one-half millennia, understood that 
they were the bearers of a universal idea, while those who did not 
understand it felt _and divined it. Science, art-everything was in­
vested and permeated with this universal significance. Oh, let us 
admit that, at length, this universal idea became worn out and 
wasted there (although hardly so l ) . But what-in the long run-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
has come in its stead ? Upon what can Italy be congratulated ? 
What advantage has she achieved after Count Cavour's diplomacy? 
-There rose a united second-rate little kingdom which had lost 
every kind of a universal aspiration ; which exchanged it for the 
most worn-out, bourgeois principle-the thirtieth repetition of this 
principle since the French revolution a kingdom fully content with 
its unity which means nothing, a mt"r.hanical, and not a spiritual 
unity (i.e., not the former universal unity), and on top of that­
a kingdom burdened with insolvent indebtedness, and, in addition, 
-one specifically content with its own second-rateness. This is what 
came of it ; such was Count Cavour's creation I 
"In a word, the contemporaneous diplomat is precisely 'a 
great beast for petty affairs.' Count Metternich was considered 
one of the subtlest and most pntfound diplomats in the world ; 
and, undeniably, he did exercise an influence over the whole of 
Europe. And yet what was his idea ? How did he understand his 
epoch, which in his days was just marking its beginning ? How did 
he fcrf'ᅡP.P. the future ?-Alas, he decided to use police measures in 
dealing with all the fundamental ideas of the century which were 
coming into being, and he was quite sure of success I 
"Let's turn to Prince Bismarck,-this one is undeniably a 
genius, but 
.
.
.
 " "Finissons, monsieur"-sternly Mama interrupts 
me, haughtily, with an air of proft .. undly insulted dignity. It goes 
without saying that I am at once awfully scared. Of course, I am 
not understood : one shouldn't touch upon such themes with the 
mamas, and I have made a terrible lapse. But with whom, in our 
day, may one speak about diplomacy ?-That's the question.-And 
yet what an interesting theme, and specificallv - in our day ! How­
ever . . .  
2 
DIPLOMACY IN THE FAcE OF WoRLD PRonLEMS 
And what a grave theme I For what is the characteristic 
trait of our present time ? All those endowed with wisdom main­
tain that ours is pre-eminently a diplomatic i!J:I•lCh, a time when 
all world destiniPs have to be settled by diplomacy alone. It is 
asserted that supposedly somewhere there is a war in progress. 
I have even heard that there actually was a war iP progress, but 
I am told-this I read everywᅢ .. e-that if somt\\here there is 
something on the order of a war ,-dll this is understood in a wrong 
sense . . . .  
At all events, it has been decided that the war will impede 
nothing, that is, no healthy functions of the nation which-accord-

720 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : x877 
ing to the latest views of everything that is called "supreme wis­
dom"-are pre-eminently and solely centered in diplomacy ; and 
that all these military promenades, manceuvres, and so forth-ad­
mittedly necessary-in truth, constitute but one of the phases of 
superior diplomacy ,-nothing else. 
Thus we have to believe. For my own part, I am very much 
inclined to believe so, since all this is quite reassuring. Howevert 
this is what is curious and awfully conspicuous : The Eastern ques­
tion arose in Russia ; simultaneously, and even earlier it has also 
arisen throughout Europe, and this is quite understandable : every­
body and even non-diplomats (especially they) know that the 
Eastern question is, so to speak, one of the world questions, one 
of the fundamental divisions of the international and immediate 
settlement of human destil.;es, their new and forthcoming phase. 
It is known that the matter concerns not only the East of Europe, 
not only the Slavs, the Russians and the Turks, or specifically 
some sort of Bulgarians, but also Western Europe as a whole ; and 
that it is confined not only to seas and straits, entrances and exits, 
but that it is much deeper, more fundamental, more elemental, 
more vital, more essential, more primordial. Therefore, it is under­
standable why Europe is alarmed and why diplomacy is kept !'O 
busy. 
But what is diplomacy's business ?-This is my question ! 
With what is diplomacy (pre-eminently at present) occupied in the 
Eastern question ?--The business of diplomacy (otherwise it wouldn "t 
be diplomacy) at present is to suppress the Eastern question in 
all respects, and promptly to assure everybody concerned and not 
concerned, that no question at all has arisen, and that all these 
things are merely little manceuvres and promenades ; and also to 
assure, if possible, that not only has the Eastern question not 
arisen, but that it has never existed ; that it only comes to the 
fact thᅣt a century ago fog has been spread-also on diplomatic 
grounds-and that this unexplained foᅤ continues to persist. 
Frankly speaking, this could even be believed were it not 
for a certain riddle, but no longer a diplomatic one (that's the 
trouble l ) since diplomacy never, under any circumstance, tackles 
such riddles ; moreover, it turns away from them with contempt, 
considering them mere fantasies unworthy of superior minds. This 
riddle could bf' formulated thus : Why was it always so, especially 
of late, i.e., beginning with the middle of the nineteenth century 
-and the more lately the more graphically and concretely-why 
is it that the moment there arises in the world a matter concerning 
something universal, at once, side by side with such a universal 
question, parallel to it, all the other universal questions arise ? 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
721 
Thus, it doesn't suffice that at present there arises in Europe one 
universal question,-nay, suddenly, and unexpectedly, side by side 
with it, Europe raises in France another world question-the 
Catholic question. And this one not on the alleged ground that 
the Pope is soon going to die, and that France, as the representative 
of Catholicism, should see to it that nothing should change in its 
centuries-old organization, but also because, apparently, Catholicism 
has been chosen as a common banner for rallying the whole 
old order of things,-the product of nineteen centuries. This is an 
alliance against something new and forthcoming, vital and fatal,­
against the impending renovation of the universe through a new 
order of things ; against the social, moral and fundamental revolu­
tion in the whole Western European life. Or, at least, if there is 
going to be no revival, the alliance is to be directed against the 
dreadful concussion and the colossal revolution which undeniably 
threatens to shake all the bourgeois states throughout the world, 
wherever the bourgeoisie bas organized and flourished after the 
Fn.:nᇃ.:h j.Jattcrn of 1 709. and to overthrow it and to take its place. 
By the way : I shall deviate for a moment from my theme 
in order to make a nota bene because I have a presentiment that 
to some wist'acres, particularly the liberal ones, it will seem funny 
that in thf' very midst of the nineteenth century I call France a 
Catholic state and a representative of Catholicism I For this reason, 
in the way of explanation of my thought, I will state-as yet with­
out supporting evidence-that France is a country which, even if 
there shouldn't remain in it a single person believing in the Pope 
or even in God, will nevertheless continUE: to be a pre-eminently 
Catholic country, the represent a• ; .·e, so to 
!:-• . ak, of thl' entire 
Catholic organism, its banner ; it will continue l. ' be that for a long 
time, perhaps, incredibly long, when France ceases to he France 
and is transformed into something different. 
Moreover, socialism itself will hᅥgin in France in accordance 
with the Catholic pattern, with Catholic organization and leaven ; 
not otherwise-to such an extent that country is Catholic ! At present 
I am not going to prove these things in detail. For the time being 
I shall merely point, for instance, to the following · Why was it that 
MacMahon was suddenly, for no apparent reason, prompted to 
raise, precisely, the Catholic issue ? This brave general (however, 
almost everywhere beaten, and who in diplomacy di!:•;nguished him­
self with the brief phrase : "J'y ͤ. s et j'y reste") ,  it would seem, 
is by no means one of those men who are able to raise consciously 
an issuᇅ: of this kind. And yet, he did raise the most basic of the old 
European questions, and precisely in the form it had to be raised. 
But what is more important : Why was it raised exactly at the 

722 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
time when in another corner of the world another world issue had 
been raised-the Eastern question ? Why does one issue press itself 
upon the other ? Why does one question generate another notwith­
standing the fact that between them there is no apparent connection ? 
And not only these two issues were raised simultaneously : 
together with the Eastern question other questions were raised, and 
still others will be brought forward if the former issue develops 
correctly. Briefly, the fundamental problems of Europe and of man­
kind in our age are always set up simultaneously. And it is pre­
cisely this synchronism that is impressive. The condition that all 
questions necessarily arise simultaneously constitutes the riddle I 
But why am I saying all this ?-Because diplomacy looks 
upon these specific problems with contempt. Not only does it not 
recognize any such coincideHᅦes but it refuses even to think about 
them. According to diplomacy these are all mirages, nonsense and 
trifles : "There are no such things, and simply Marshal MacMahon, 
or rather his wife, had some sort uf a whim, and that's how it 
happened." And on this ground, even though at the beginning of 
this chapter I did proclaim that ours was pre-eminently a diplomatic 
epoch, while everything else was a mirage, nevertheless I am the 
first who must disbelieve this. Nay, here we are faced with a riddle I 
Nay, here it is not only diplomacy that settles the issue but also 
something else. I confess that I am very much perplexed with 
this inference : I was so inclined to believe in diplomacy I And all 
these new questions are but new bothers, and nothing else. 
3 
NEVER wAs RussiA MoRE PowERFUL THAN AT PRESENT 
-NOT A DIPLOMATIC DECISION 
Forsooth, I have merely put the question, but thus far I have 
dwelt upon it without supporting evidence. But I have always 
thought, and long before the present question was raised (i.e., the 
one dealing with the synchronism of the origin of all world issues 
the moment one of them is raised) ,  about another, incomparably 
more simple and most natural question to which-precisely because 
it is so simple and natural-men in their wisdom are paying vir­
tually no attenᅧion. 
This is the other question : All right, if diplomacy is,-has 
been, and will be in the future, always and everywhere-the ar­
bitratrix of all the fundamental and most important issues of man­
kind, nevertheless does the final settlement of European problems 
always depend upon diplomacy ? Isn't it, on the contrary, true 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
that in every question there comes a phase, a point, when it can 
no longer be settled by appeasing diplomatic means, that is-by 
little patches ? Undeniably, from the diplomatic standpoint, and 
consequently from the standpoint of common sense, all world ques­
tions are always explained by the mere fact that such and such 
states sought to expand their borders ; or this or that brave general 
had this or that desire ; or that some prominent lady was displeased 
with this or that, etc. (Let this be undeniable ; I will concede it 
because this is superlative wisdom.) Nevertheless, even were we to 
accept these realistic causes and explanations, isn't there a certain 
moment, a certain point in the progress of human affairs, a certain 
phase, when suddenly there appear some strange forces-true, in­
comprehensible and mysterious forces-which take possession of 
everything, seizing everything at once, and which drag everything 
irresistibly, blindly, as it were, downhill or, perhaps, into an abyss ? 
Essentially, I should like to know if diplomacy is always so 
reliant upon itself and its resources that it is not in the least afraid 
of these forces, and points and phases, maybe not suspecting their 
e"(iᅨt"r>re at all ?--Alas, it would seem-always. And therefore : how 
am I going to believe in it and trust it ? And am I able to accept 
diplomacy as the final arhitratrix of the destinies of still so whim­
sical and licentious a mankind ? 
Ala::., in Kaidanov's detailed history there is one of the great­
est phrases, specifically where, i.t modern history, he begins the 
description of the French Revolution and the appearance of Na­
poleon I. This phrase marks the beginning of a chapter, and my 
mind has retained it all my life. Here it is : "Profound silence reigned 
throughout Europe when Frederick the Great shut his eyes forever ; 
but never did such a silence precede so gre;:t :: storm ! "  
Tell me, do you know a greater phn. · ?-In fact, who in 
Europe in those days, i.e., when Frederick the Great shut his 
eyes forever, could have foreseen-even in a remote manner-the 
things which would happen to men and to Europe in the course 
of the subsequent thirty years ?-I am not speaking about some 
ordinary educated people, or even writers, journalists, professors. 
They all, as we know, were baffled at the time : for example, 
Schiller wrote a dithyramb on the opening oi the National Assem­
bly ; young K;ramzin, who was then journeying in Europe, beheld 
the same event with a touching quiver in his heart, while in Peters­
burg long before that a marble bust of Voltaire adorned his home. 
No, I shall directly turn to superlative wisdom-! shall ask 
the arbitrators of human destinies, that is, the diplomats themselves 
this question : Did they in those days foresee anything of what 
was to happen in the next thirty years ? 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
But here is the dreadful thing : Had I asked this question of 
the diplomats (and please note that almost all European diplomats 
were using "Kaidashka's" textbook) ,  and if they had deigned to 
listen to me, they surely would have answered with haughty laughter 
that "accidents cannot be foreseen, and that complete wisdom con­
sists of preparedness for any accidents." 
How do you like that I No, I shall tell you : this is a typical 
answer even though I conceived it myself, since I haven't bothered 
a single diplomat with questions (and I don't care to) .  But what 
I find horrible is that I am convinced that such precisely would 
have been their answer, and this is why I called it typical. For what 
-pray tell me-were, if not accidents, the events of the end of the 
last century in the opinion of the diplomats ? They were and are. 
And Napoleon, for instance, was an arch-accident. Had he died 
over there, in Corsica, at the age of three of scarlet fever, the tiers 
etat of mankind, the bourgeoisie, would not have proceeded, with 
its new banner in hand, to change the whole face of Europe (a pro­
cedure which continues up to the present time) ; would have stayed 
home in Paris, and, perhaps, would have died away in the very 
beginning ! 
The point is that, to my way of thinking, the present period, 
too, will end in Old Europe with something colossal, i.e., perhaps, 
not literally identical with the events which brought to an end 
the eighteenth century, nevertheless equally gigantic, elemental 
and dreadful,-and also entailing a change of thr face of the whole 
world, or, at least, in the West of Old Europe. 
Now, should our wiseacres assert that it is impossible to 
foresee accidents, et'C., moreover, if nothing concerning such a finale 
has occurred to them, then . 
. 
. 
In a word : little patches, little patches and little patches ! 
Well, let's be prudent. Let's wait. For patches, if you please, 
are also necessary, useful, prudent and practical things. All the 
more so, as patches may, for instance, deceive the enemy. 
At present we are at war, and should it so happen that 
Austria should make a hostile move against us, she could be de­
ceived by a "little patch," and she would readily fall in love with 
the deception, since what is Austria ?-She is at the point of death, 
she is ready to collapse ; she is as much "a sick man" as Turkey 
is, even worse, perhaps. She is a specimen of all sorts of dualisms, 
of every kind of internal hostile combinations, nationalities, ideas, 
different discords and conflicting tendencies : there, there are Hun­
garians and Slavs and Germans, and there, too, is the kingdom of 
the Jews. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Now, owing to the fact that diplomacy is courting her, she 
may, in truth, conceive the idea that she is a power which really 
means much, and which is capable of achieving much in the general 
settlement of destinies. Such a deceit of imagination, generated pre­
cisely by courtship and little patches, is useful from the standpoint 
of the settlement of the Slavic dt>o;tinies ; it is useful, since, for 
awhile it may divert the enemy, wherP.as by the time of the decision, 
when he suddenly sees that nobody is afraid of him, and that he 
is no power at all,-the deceit may bring him to a state of dejection, 
or simply perplex him. 
England is a different proposition : she is something more 
weighty, and besides, at present shr is terribly preoccupied with 
her own basic ventures. This one will not be lulled to sleep by 
wooing and little patches. Whatever she may be told, she will never, 
under any circumstance, believe that an enormous nation, at present 
the most powerful nation in the world, which has drawn its mighty 
sword, which has unfolded the banner of a great idea and which has 
alrPaciy crossed the Danube, might in reality consent to solve the 
problems which 1t intenrlo; to tacklf' to its obvious detriment, solely 
for England's benefit. For every improvement in the destinies of 
the Slavic nations constitutes at all events a conspicuous damage 
to England : no one, under any circumstance, is going to be ca­
joled by patches-they will not helieve them ! The point is that 
in England nobody will believe anything. Besides, what arguments 
can convince her ?-Is it, for instance, the allegation "I will begin 
just a bit, and T will not finish " ?  But in politics the beginning is 
everything, since, naturally, sooner or later, the beginning must 
. lead to the end. What is there in the fact that the end is not going 
· to be achieved today ?-All the !>.l;ne, it will c: · ,e tomorrow. 
In a word : they will not believe, and fo1 .:his reason we, too, 
should not believe the English, or, at least, we should believe 
them as little as possible-of LOurse, secret1y. It woulri also be a 
good thing if we should guess thaᅩ at present England is in a 
more critical situation than ever. It can be formulated in a pre­
cise manner in one word : Isolation. For never before, perhaps, 
has England been in so dreadful an isolation ᅪs she is at present. 
Oh, how glad she would be now to find in Europe an alliance, some 
entente cordiale. But the trouble is that in Europe there has never 
been a time at which it was more difficult to form an alliance, since 
precisely now everything in Europe has arisen si!l1U)taneously-all 
world issues at once, and at the _.J.me time-all world controversies, 
so that. every nation or state has its hands full with its own domestic 
affairs. And inasmuch as England's intere!"t is not a world interest 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
but one which has long ago been segregated from everybody and 
which exclusively concerns England alone,-for the time being, at 
least, she will remain in absolute isolation. 
Of course, for the sake of mutual benefits England would be 
in a position to reach an accord even with those pursuing a con­
flicting aim : "I will give thee this, and thou give me that." How­
ever, by reason of the nature of the present European troubles it 
would be difficult to form an entente cordiale of this kind-at least, 
at this moment,-and England will have to wait long for the time 
when, in the subsequent course of events, somehow, she will get 
a chance to fit into the picture with her alliance. 
Besides, England above all, needs a profitable alliance, i.e., 
one in which she will take everything, in return giving, if possible, 
nothing. Well, such a profitable alliance at present is least to be 
expected, and so England is in a state of isolation. Oh, if only we 
could successfully take advantage of this isolation ! But at this 
juncture we may utter another exclamation : "Oh, if we were less 
sceptical, and if only we could believe in the fact that there are 
world questions, and that they are not a mirage ! " 
The main point is that in Russia a very considerable part 
of our intelligentsia is, somehow, always inclined to perceive and 
accept Europe not realistically as it is constituted at present but 
as an antedated conception, from a retarded viewpoint ; it does not 
look into the future but is rather inclined to judge Europe by her 
past, even by her remote past. 
And yet world problems do really exist, and how can one­
especially we-fail to believe in them : Two of these issues have 
already arisen, being driven no longer by human wisdom but by 
their own elemental force, by their organic necessity. These can 
no longer be left without solution despite all the speculations of 
diplomacy. 
But there is likewise a third question, also a world question ; 
it is also arising and has already almost arisen. In particular, it may 
be designated the Germanic question ; essentially, however, it is con­
spicuously an all-European one, and it is insolubly and organically 
merged with the fate of Europe as a whole and with all other world 
issues. But to all appearances nothing can be more pacific and 
serene than present-day Germany : in the calmness of her terrible 
force she looks, observes and waits. Everybody more or less needs 
her ; everybody is more or less dependent on her. 
And yet all this is a mirage ! Therein is the whole point : 
at present everybody. in Europe is preoccupied with his own busi­
nes ; everybody is faced with his own problem of such paramount 
importance as almost entails his very existence-to be or not to 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
be. A similar problem has also arisen in Germany precisely at the 
moment when all other world issues have arisen, and-anticipating 
things-! may add that this condition of Europe is most beneficial 
to Russia at the present minute I For never has she been so needed 
by Europe, never has she been so powerful in Europe's opinion ; 
and yet never so completely segregated from the questions arising 
in Old Europe-most capital and dreadful questions, but her own, 
peculiar only to her, that Old Europᅫ,-and not to Russia. 
And at no time would an alliance with Russia have been more 
treasured by Europe than at present ; at no time could Russia have 
congratulated herself with more joy upon the fact that she is not 
the Old, but the New Europe ; that she is in se a separate and 
mighty world for which the time has now come to enter a new 
and superior phase of her potency, and to become more than ever 
independent of other, their, fatal questions with which decrepit 
Europe has bound herself I 
CHAPTER III 
1 
The Germanic World Problem. Germany Is a Protesting 
Country 
BUT WE started speaking about Germany, her present aim, 
and her present fatal problem, at the same time a world problem. 
What is this aim ? And why is it only now turning into such a 
'troublesome problem for GermaPy. and why ;. ·ts it not S\J before, 
recently, a year ago or even two months ago ? 
Germany's aim is one ; it existed before, always. It is her 
Protestantism-not that single formula of Pz 'ltestantism which was 
conceived in Luther's time, but her continual Protestantism, her 
continual protest against the Roman world, ever since Arminius,­
against everything that was Rome and Roman in aim, and subse­
quently-against everything that was bequeathed by ancient Rome 
to the new Rome and to all those peoples who inherited from Rome 
her idea, her f<n mula and element ; against the heir of Rome and 
everything that constitutes this legacy. 
I am convinced that some readers, upon rearᅬing these lines, 
will shrug their shoulders and w. : start laughing : "Why, is it pos­
sible in the nineteenth century, in the age of new ideas and science, 
to talk about Catholicism and Protestantism-as if we were still 
living in the Middle Ages I And, perhaps, if there be religious people, 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
even fanatics, they survive as an archzologic rarity ; they are con­
fined to specific localities and corners, condemned and ridiculed by 
everybody, and-what is most important-there are so few of them, 
just a miserable handful of backward folk. Thus, is it possible to 
regard them as a something in so high a matter as world politics ?" 
However, I speak not of the religious protest. I am not dwell­
ing upon the temporary formula: of the ancient Roman idea nor 
upon the eternal German protest against it. I am referring merely 
to the basic idea which originated two thousand years ago, and 
which has survived ever since, gradually transforming itself into 
different guises and formula:. Precisely in our day this extreme 
Western European world, which has inherited the Roman legacy, 
is in labor with a new metamorphosis of that inherited ancient 
idea. To those who can see, this is so obvious that it needs no 
explanations. 
Ancient Rome wa:; thP first to generate the idea of the uni­
versal unity of men, and was the f1rst to start thinking of (and 
firmly believing in) putting it practically into effect in the form of 
universal empire. However, this formula fell before Christianity 
-the formula but not the idea. For this idea is that of European 
mankind ; through this idea its civilization came into being ; for 
it alone mankind lives. 
Only the idea of the universal Roman empire succumbed, 
and it was replaced by a new ideal, also universal, of a com­
munion in Christ. This new ideal bifurcated into the Eastern ideal 
of a purely spiritual communion of men, and the Western Euro­
pean, Roman Catholic, papal ideal diametrically opposite to the 
Eastern one. 
This Western Roman Catholic incarnation of the idea was 
achieved in ib own way, having lost, however, its Christian, 
spiritual foundation and having replaced it with the ancient Roman 
legacy. Roman papacy proclaimed that Christianity and its idea, 
without the universal possession of lands and peoples, are not 
spiritual but political. In other words, that they cannot be achieved 
without the realization on earth of a new universal Roman empire 
now headed not by the Roman emperor but by the Pope. And 
thus it was sought to establish a new universal empire in full 
accord with the spirit of the ancient Roman world, only in a dif­
ferent form. 
Thus, we have in the Eastern ideal-first, the spiritual com­
munion of mankind in Christ, and thereafter, in consequence of the 
spiritual unity of all. men in Christ and as an unchallenged deduc­
tion therefrom-a just state and social communion. In the Roman 
interpretation we have a reverse situation : first it is necessary to 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
achieve firm state unity in the form of a universal empire, and 
only after that, perhaps, spiritual fellowship under the rule of the 
Pope as the potentate of this world. 
Since that time, in the Roman world this scheme has been 
progressing and changing uninterruptedly, and with its progress 
the most essential part of the Chrbtian element has been virtually 
lost. Finally, having rejected Christianity spiritually, the heirs of 
the ancient Roman world likewise renounced papacy. The dreadful 
French revolution has thundered. In substance, it was but the last 
modification and metamorphosis of the same ancient Roman formula 
of universal unity. The new formula, however, proved insufficient. 
The new idea failed to come true. There even was a moment when 
all the nations which had inherited the ancient Roman tradition 
were almost in despair. Oh, of course, that portion of society which 
in I 789 won political leadership, i.e., the bourgeoisie, triumphed 
and declared that there was no necessity of going any further. But 
all those minds which by virtue of the eternal laws of nature are 
de!>t:nPrl to dwell in a state of everlasting universal fermentation 
seeking new formul::e of some ideal and a new word indispensable 
to the progress of the human organism,-they all rushed to the 
humiliated and the defrauded, to all those who had not received 
their share in the new formula of universal unity proclaimed by 
the French revolution of 1789. The sf' proclaimed a new word of 
their own, namely, the necessity of universal fellowship not for 
the equal distribution of rights allotted to a quarter, or so, of the 
human race, leaving the rest to serve as raw material and a means 
of exploitation for the happiness of that quarter of mankind, but, 
on the contrary-for universal equality, witl-. P.ach and every one 
sharing the blessings of this wond, whatevet 
bese may prove. It 
was decided to put this scheme into effect by n·;orting to all means, 
i.e., not by the means of Christian civilization-without stopping at 
anything. 
Now, what has been Germany':. part in this, throughout these 
two thousand years ? The most characteristic and essential trait of 
this great, proud and peculiar people-ever since their appearance 
on the historical horizon-consisted of the ᅭᅮct that they never 
consented to ao;similate their destiny and their principles to those 
of the outermost Western world, i.e., the heirs of the ancient Roman 
tradition. The Germans have been protesting aᅯainst the latter 
throughout these two thousanrl vears. And even 
• hough they did 
not (never did so far) utter "th£,r word," or set forth their strictly 
formulated ideal in lieu of the ancient Roman idea, nevertheless, it 
seems that, within themselves, they always were convinced that they 
were capable of uttering this "new word" and of leading mankind. 

730 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
They struggled against the Roman world as early as the times 
of Arminius, and during the epoch of Roman Christianity they, 
more than any other nation, struggled for the sovereign power 
against the new Rome. 
Finally, the Germans protested most vehemently, deriving 
their formula of protest from the innermost spiritual, elemental 
foundation of the Germanic world : they proclaimed the freedom of 
inquiry, and they raised Luther's banner. This was a terrible, 
universal break : the formula of protest had been found and filled 
with a content ; even so it still was a negative formula, and the new, 
positive word was not yet uttered. 
And now, the Germanic spirit, having uttered this "new word" 
of protest, as it were, fainted for a while, quite parallel to an iden­
tical weakening of the former strictly formulated unity of the forces 
of his adversary. The outermost Western world, under the influence 
of the discovery of America, of new sciences and new principles, 
sought to reincarnate itself in a new truth, in a new phase. 
When, at the time of the French Revolution, the first attempt 
at such a reincarnation took place, the Germanic spirit became 
quite perplexed, and for a time lost its identity and faith in itself. 
It proved impotent to say anything against the new ideas of the 
outermost Western world. Luther's Protestantism had long out­
lived its time, while the idea of free inquiry had long been accepted 
by universal science. Germany's enormous organism more than ever 
began to feel that it had no flesh, so to speak, and no form for self­
expression. It was then that the pressing urge to consolidate itself, 
at least outwardly, ·into a harmonious organism was born in Ger­
many in anticipation of the new future aspects of her eternal 
struggle against the outermost Western world. 
At this point a rather curious coincidence should be noted : 
both traditionally adverse camps, both contestants of old Europe 
for sove;eignty over her, simultaneously (or nearly so) seized upon 
and carried out virtually one and the same task. The new, still 
meditated, future formula of the outermost Western world, i.e., 
the regeneration of society on new social foundations, a formula 
which almost throughout this century has been propagated only 
by dreamers, by its scientific representatives, all sorts of idealists 
and castle-builders, suddenly in recent years has changed its guise, 
its course, and resolved : To abandon, for the time being, the 
theoretical definition and elaboration of its task, and to embark at 
once, prior to any fancying, upon its practical phase, i.e., to begin 
the struggle. For this purpose-to start combining all future cham­
pions of the new idea into one organization, meaning the whole 
fowth estate defrauded in 1 789, all the needy, all workers, all 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
7JI 
beggars, and, having achieved this organization-to hoist the banner 
of a new, unheard-of world revolution. 
Thus the International came into existence ; there ensued in­
ternational intercourse among the beggars of this world, meet­
ings, conventions, new regulations, laws,-in a word, throughout the 
whole of old Western Europe there "Vas laid the foundation of a 
new status in statu designed to engulf the old order of this world 
prevailing throughout Western Europe. 
And now, while this was transpiring in the enemy camp, 
Germany's genius grasped the fact that it was the German task, 
too,-prior to any other business or undertaking, prior to any at­
tempt at a "new word" against the adversary who had reincarnated 
himself from the ancient Catholic idea-to complete her own po­
litical consolidation and the resluration of her political organism, 
and, only after having completed that-to face her eternal enemy. 
Thus it came to pass : having completed her unification, Ger­
many attacked her enemy, embarking upon a new phase of her 
strugglP. against hf'r, which she began with blood and iron. The iron 
business is finished, and now it has got to be completed spiritually, 
essentially. 
But, suddenly, Germany finds herself faced with a new con­
cern, with :1. new, unexpected turn of events terribly complicating 
the task. Now, what is this task anr! what is this new turn ? 
2 
A CERTAIN INGENIOUSLY SusPICious MAN 
This task, this new unexpectea concern l · Germany, it you 
please, has long been seeking to come out into tht open. At present, 
however, the whole trouble is cau<>ed by the fact that this concern 
suddenly sprang up into the limelight in consequence of the unex­
pected clerical revolution in France. 1his concern, in a way, may 
be formulated in the form of the following doubt : "Has, in truth, 
the German organism, been consolidated into one whole ? On the 
contrary, is it not, as heretofore, dismembered ഒu spite of the in­
genious efforts or the German leaders during the last twenty-five 
years ? More than that : Has it. become consolidated, at least po­
litically ? Is it not a mirage, despite the Franco-Pruᅰc;ian war and 
the promulgation thereafter of th' new, hitherto u.l!.card-of, Ger­
man Empire ?" Such is the difficull question. 
The whole difficulty of this question lies, principally, in that 
until quite recently it was even not supposed to be existent, at 
least, by the overwhelming majority of the IJermans. Self-intoxica-

732 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
tion, pride and absolute faith in their immense might, after the 
Franco-Prussian war, made almost all Germans drunk, without ex­
ception. A people who have rarely been vanquishers but who have 
been so strangely often vanquished,-that people unexpectedly con­
quered an enemy who nearly always conquered everybody ! And 
inasmuch as it was clear that they could not help but conquer 
because of the exemplary organization of their innumerable army, 
on altogether novel principles, and, besides, because it was headed 
by such ingenious leaders,-the German could not help but grow 
proud to the point of intoxication. In this connection it is not even 
necessary to take into account the habitual self-complacent boast­
fulness of every German-that inveterate trait of the German char­
acter. 
On the other hand, from a so recently dismembered political 
organism there suddenly arose such a harmonious whole that the 
German could not doubt the fact-and fully believed in it-that the 
consolidation had been achieved, and that a new brilliant and great 
pha5e of development had begun for the Germanic organism. 
Thus not only pride and chauvinism but almost levity came 
into being. What kind of questions could there arise-not merely to 
some pugnacious shopkeeper or shoemaker, but even to a professor 
or minister ? Even so, there was a handful of Germans who very 
soon-almost immediately after the Franco-Prussian war-began to 
doubt and ponder. It was unquestionably Prince Bismarck who 
stood at the head of the most remarkable members of that small 
group. 
No sooner had the German troops evacuated France than he 
clearly perceived the fact that too little had been accomplished 
with "blood and iron" and that-bearing in mind the magnitude of 
the goal-at least twice a5 much should have been accomplished­
taking advantage of the situation. True, the German side has re­
ceived immeasurably more military benefits, and these for a long 
time to come. After the cession of Alsace and Lorraine, territorially 
France has become so small a country for a great power that, in 
the case of a new war, after two or three battles successful to 
the German side, the German troops will at once be in the center 
of France, and from a strategic standpoint she will be lost. 
However, are victories so certain ? Is it possible to count 
certainly upon these two victorious battles ?-In the Franco-Prussian 
war, strictly speaking, the Germans conquered not the French but 
only Napoleon «.1nd his administration. Not always will France 
have troops so poorly organized and so incompetently commanded. 
Kot always will there be usurpers who, in dyna5tic interests, need­
ing partisan generals and civil servants, will be compelled to tolerate 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
733 
such lamentable defects as render the existence of a regular army 
impossible. Not always will Sedan be repeated, since, in truth, 
Sedan was an accident which happened only because of the fact 
that Napoleon could no longer have returned to Paris otherwise 
than by the grace of the Prussian King. Not always will there be 
such inept generals as MacMahon, and such traitors as Bazaine ! 
Intoxicated with triumph so unheard of in their case, the 
Germans-each one of them-of course, could conceive the belief 
that all this had been achieved exclusively by their talents. How­
ever, the doubting group could have thought differently, especially 
when the conquered foe, who only recently had been so disorganized 
and shaken, had suddenly, in one lump, paid three billion in in­
demnity, without even knitting his brows. Naturally, this has greatly 
saddened Prince Bismarck. 
On the other hand, the doubting group faced another, per­
haps more important question : Has the political and civil unifica­
tion within the organism been fully achieved ?-Everybody in Eu­
rope, and particularly we in Russia, have as yet never doubted 
tt.is. L.:t:ncrally ᅱᅲeaking, we Russians have accepted the things 
which transpired in Germany during the last ten or fifteen years 
as something final, not in the least accidental, but natural ; as some­
thing which must not change. The accomplished facts inspired us 
with extraordinary respect. However, in the opinion of such in­
genious men as Prince Bismarck, hardly everything that had to be 
accomplished had acquired final solidity. That which today may 
seem durable is, maybe, nothing but a fantasy. It is difficult to 
suppose that so inveterate a habit of political disunity will dis­
appear among the Germans as suddenly and as easily as one drinks 
a glass of water. The German by J,ic_: nature is l· 'adstrong. Resides, 
the present generation of the Germans has bel · ,  bribed with suc­
cesses ; it is intoxicated with pride, and is restrained by the iron 
hand of its leaders. Still, perhaps, in the noc distant future, when 
these leaders pass into another worlcl, ceding their place to other 
men, the questions and instincts which have temporarily been sup­
pressed will be brought to the foreground. It is also quite probable 
that the energy of the initial impulse of the consolidation will be 
exhausted, and, instead, the oppositional energy will again be re­
stored, and that 1l will undermine that which has been accomplished. 
There will arise a tendency for disintegration and segregation 
at the very moment when, in the West, the dreadful enemy fully 
recovers from the blow, the enem) 1ho even now is neither sleeping 
nor drowsing and who will begin with something that may be 
anticipated. 
And, in addition, there appears a law of nature, so to speak : 

734 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
all the same, in Europe Germany is a middle country : no matter 
how strong she is, on one side is France, and the other-Russia. 
True, as yet the Russians are courteous. But what if suddenly they 
should grasp the fact that they are in no need of an alliance with 
Germany, whereas Germany needs an alliance with Russia ; and, 
moreover, that the dependency upon an alliance with Russia espe­
cially after the Franco-Prussian war, seems to be Germany's fatal 
destiny. Therein is the point : that even a man as firmly convinced 
of his strength as Prince Bismarck cannot believe in too ardent a 
deference to Russia. 
True, until the last unexpected adventure in France which 
has suddenly changed the whole aspect of the matter, Prince Bis­
marck has still been hoping that the extraordinary esteem of Russia 
for a long time would remJ.in unshaken. And suddenly-that adven­
ture I In a word, something extraordinary happened. 
Extraordinary-to everybody, but not to Prince Bismarck I 
Now it appears that his genius had anticipated this whole "ad­
venture." Tell me, was it not his genius, his ingenious eye, that so 
long ago has discerned the principal adversary ? Precisely why did 
he develop such an intense hatred of Catholicism ? Why has he for 
so many years been pursuing and persecuting everything emanating 
from Rome (i.e., from the Pope) ? Why did he so foresightedly 
strive for the Italian alliance (it may be thus expressed)-if not for 
the purpose of crushing, with the assistance of the Italian govern­
ment, the papal principle on earth when the time of the election 
of a new Pope comes? He persecuted not the Catholic faith but 
its Roman foundation. 
Why, of course, he has been acting as a German, as a Protes­
tant ; he has been acting against the principal element of the ex­
ternal Western world which has always been hostile to Germany. 
Nevertheless, a good many most ingenious and liberal European 
thinkers regarded this campaign of the great Bismarck against the 
insignificant Pope as a struggle of an elephant against a fly. Some 
people were even inclined to explain all this by the queerness of 
genius, by the caprices of an ingenious man. The point, however, 
is that the ingenious politician was able-perhaps he alone among 
the politicians of the whole world-to evaluate the strength of the 
Roman tradition within itself and among Germany's enemies, and 
to perceive that it may serve in the future as a dreadful cement 
for the consolidation of all these adversaries into one force. He 
was able to divine that, perhaps, the Roman idea alone may find 
such a banner and at the fatal (and-in Bismarck's view-inevitable) 
moment will unite all the enemies of Germany, already crushed 
by him, into one dreadful whole. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
735 
And now the ingenious conjecture suddenly proved true : all 
parties in vanqu1shed France, from among those which could have 
initiated a movement against Germany, were dismembered ; not 
one of them was able to triumph and to seize the power in France. 
Nor were they able to combine, each one of them pursuing its own 
aims,-and, suddenly, the banner of t.he Pope and the Jesuits has 
united everything. The enemy arose, and the enemy is no longer 
France but the Pope himself. It is the Pope leading everybody and 
everything to whom the Roman idea had been bequeathed, who 
is ready to assault Germany. However, in order to give a clearer 
account of what has happened, let us examine more attentively the 
camps of Germany's adversaries. 
3 
BOTH ANGRY AND STRONG 
The Pope is dying. He will very soon pass away. The whole 
of Catholicism wh1ch accepts Christ in the guise of the Roman idea 
has long been in a state of awful agitation. The fatal moment is 
approaching. No error should be committed since it would spell 
the death of the Roman idea. 
It may so happen that the new Pope, under the pressure of all 
European governments will be elected "not freely," and he who is 
going to be proclaimed as Pope will consent to renounce forever, 
and as a matter of principle, mundane possessions and the title 
of the earthly Sovereign which Pius refused to renounce. (On the 
contrary, at the fatal moment when he had bPt .ͣ deprived of both 
Rome and the last parcel of land, and when onᅳ. the Vatican had 
been left in his possession,-at that same momtnt, as if on pur­
pose, he proclaimed his infallibility, and at the same time the 
thesis : Without mundane possessions Christianity cannot survive 
on earth ; i.e., strictly speaking, he proclaimed himself Sovereign of 
the world, having set Catholicism-now dogmatically-the direct 
aim of a universal monarchy for which he ordained it to strive for 
the glory of God and of Christ on earth.) 
Oh, of couro;e, at the time he made all wits laugh : "Angry 
but not strong-K.hlestakov's brother." And now should the newly 
elected Pope unexpectedly be bribed, and should even the conclave 
itself, under the pressure of Euror . be compelled to enter into an 
agreement with the adversaries of tue Roman idea,-well, then that 
would be its death. If once the regularly elected, infallible Pope 
should renounce in principle the title of the earthly Sovereign, this 
would signify that thus it would remain forever. 

736 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
On the other hand, should the Pope newly elected by the 
conclave firmly, and urbi et orbi, proclaim that he intends to re­
nounce nothing, and that he fully adheres to the former idea ; should 
he start with an anthema against all enemies of Rome and Roman 
Catholicism,-the governments of Europe might fail to extend 
recognition to him, and in this case, too, there may occur in the 
Roman Church a fatal and violent commotion whose consequences 
would be innumerable and unpredictable. 
Oh, isn't it true that this would sound funny and insignificant 
to politicians and diplomats of Europe ! The downtrodden Pope, 
imprisoned in the Vatican, appeared to them during the last years 
as such a nullity that it would have been a shame to pay any 
attention to him. Thus many progressives of Europe have been rea­
soning, especially the witty and liberal ones. The Pope delivering 
allocutions and issuing syllabuses, receiving devotionalists, damning 
and dying-in their view resembled a buffoon performing for their 
entertainment. The thought that an enormous universal idea which 
had been conceived in the brain of the devil when he was tempting 
Christ in the wilderness ; an idea which has been organically Jiving 
in the world one thousand years ; that this idea, nevertheless, would 
die in an instant-was taken for granted. 
Of course, here the mistake lay in the religious meaning of 
that idea, in that two meanings were intermixed : "It is so rare 
that men believe in God, especially in the Roman interpretation of 
God, while in France even the people do not believe in Him,-maybe 
only the upper class,-and even they do not believe but merely 
make wry faces,.!..what significance, then, can the Pope and Roman 
Catholicism have in our enlightened age ?" This is what wits are 
convinced of even in our day. 
However, the religious idea and the papal idea are essentially 
different. Now it was this papal idea which in our day, only two 
months ago, suddenly manifested such a viability, such a force 
that it has caused in France a most radical political revolution, 
has put a bridle upon her and slavishly dragged her along in its 
wake. 
In recent years in France the parliamentary majority has 
been republican. Republicans conducted their affairs decently, hon­
estly, quietly, with no commotions. They improved the army, al­
locating hugᅴ sums without raising any objections. However, they 
did not even think about war, and everybody understood both in 
France and in Europe that if there was a peaceable party it cer­
tainly was the republican party. Its leaders evinced restraint and 
extraordinary prudence. Essentially, however, they all were ab­
stract men and idealists. They were incorrigible and quite impotent 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
737 
people. These were liberal, gray-haired old men making themselves 
look younger and imagining themselves still young. They congealed 
in the ideas of the first French revolution, i.e., in the triumph of 
the tiers etat, and they are an incarnation of the bourgeoisie in the 
strictest meaning of the term. This was exactly the same as the 
July monarchy with the difference only that it was called a republic 
and that there was no king (i.e., of course, a "tyrant"). The only 
new thing they introduced was the p1 0mulgation, in 1848, of uni­
versal suffrage, which the July royal government was so afraid of 
and which had produced nothing dangerous ; on the contrary, it 
had contributed to the bourgeoisie much that was distinctly useful. 
Subsequently this idea proved very useful to the government of 
Napoleon III. 
In their parlance the word "republic" was something comically 
idealistic. It would set-m that thi:> innocent party could have fully 
satisfied France, i.e., the urban bourgeoisie and the landowners. 
However, the contrary proved true. In fact, why has the republic 
always seemed in France an unreliable government ? And if the re­
pu'IJlic.::ପ..; wt-re no• always hated, they were always despised by the 
overwhelming majority of the bourgeoisie for their impotence. Like­
wise the people almost never believed in them. The point is that 
every time a republic had been established in France, everything 
lost there its solidity and self-assurance. Up to the present time the 
republic has always been some kinl.l of a provisional interim-be­
tween social endeavors of the most dreadful dimensions, on the one 
hand, and some, at times most impudent, usurper. And inasmuch as 
this happened almost invariably, society became used to viewing 
the republic accordingly. And ju!'t as soon rs a republic came into 
existence, everybody always felt, '" it were, ::' a state of inter­
regnum ; and no matter how prudently republi· . 1.s governed, the 
bourgeoisie, under their administration, was alwa)'s convinced that, 
sooner or later, the red rebellion would thundr .. , or some kind of a 
monarchy would be proclaimed. 
It came to the point where the bourgeoisie took a greater 
liking to the monarchical form of government than to the republic, 
notwithstanding the fact that the monarchy, for example under 
Napoleon III, made attempts, as it were, to enter into an agree­
ment with the Sc.·:ialists, whereas no one on earth is more hostile 
toward socialists than the strict republicans. These are content with 
the mere word "republic," whereas socialists are C·<ncerned not 
about words but only about deedଫ 
o\ccording to the principles of 
the socialists, it makes no difference whether it be a republic or 
a mona1 chy, whether they be French or Germans, and, in truth, 
if somt-how it came to the point where the Pope should be of some 

738 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
service to them, they would also acclaim the Pope. Above all, they 
are concerned about their own business, i.e., about the triumph of 
the fourth estate and the equal distribution of rights to the bless­
ings of the world, and as to the particular banner-that's unessential, 
let it be despotism itself. 
It is noteworthy that Prince Bismarck hates socialism no less 
than popery, and that particularly of late the German government 
began to fear socialistic propaganda all too greatly. Unquestionably 
this is due to the fact that socialism deprives the national prin­
ciple of its individuality, undermining the very foundations of na­
tionality ; however, the principle of nationality is the fundamental, 
all-important idea of German unity, of everything that has occurred 
in recent years. But it is quite possible that Prince Bismarck takes 
even a deeper view, i.e., that socialism is thᅵ forthcoming power 
for all of Western Europe, and should papacy ever be forsaken 
and rejected by the governments of the world, it is more than likely 
to throw itself into the arms of socialism and merge with it. 
On foot and barefooted, the Pope will go to all the beggars, 
and he will tell them that everything the socialists teach and strive 
for is contained in the Gospel ; that so far the time had not been 
ripe for them to learn about this ; but that now the time has come, 
and that he, the Pope, surrenders Christ to them and believes in 
the ant-hill. 
Roman Catholicism does not need Christ. (This is all too clear.) 
What it strives for is universal sovereignty. It will say : "What you 
need is a united front against the enemy. Unite, then, under my 
power, since I aJone-among all powers and potentates of the world 
- am universal ; and let us go together ! "  Probably Prince Bismarck 
foreshadows this picture, because he alone among all diplomats was 
so quick-sighted as to prefigure the viability of the Roman idea and 
that energy with which it is determined to defend itself regardless, 
by any means. It is inspired with a devilish desire to live, and it 
is difficult to kill it-it is a snake ! This is what Prince Bismarck 
alone-the principal enemy of papacy and of the Roman idea­
realizes to the fullest extent. 
But the little old fellows who try to appear younger than 
they are-the republicans-are unable to comprehend this. From 
mere liberalism, they hated clericalism, but they considered the 
Pope to be impotent and despicable, and the Roman idea-altogether 
obsolete. It did not even occur to them to live on good terms with 
the dreadful clerical party-at least, politically-in order to fortify 
themselves. For _the time being, at least, they shouldn't have irri­
tated the clericals, they shouldn't have provoked them with so 
intentional a strife ; they might even have promised them some 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
739 
assistance in connection with the election of the new Pope. Yet 
they did precisely the reverse either because of ideal honesty or 
simply from light-mindedness. Of late, they have been persecuting 
the clericals with particular vigor,-and this at the very moment 
when France alone was left as a support of papacy which other­
wise had to face the dreadful char.l e of dying together with Pius 
IX. Since who else, in Europe, in case of need, could draw the 
sword in defense of the "freedom" of the election of the Pope and 
the freedom of the elected Pope ?-Besides, this must be a strong, a 
mighty sword. Save for France with her million-strong army, there 
was no other choice. And now, France is at the head of the enemies I 
True, :1\larshal MacMahon is obedient, but he is in their 
clutches, and he does not know how to extricate himself : the ma­
jority in the Chamber is republican and liberal, and no other party 
is in a position to replace it. In a word, it is impossible to over­
throw the republican majority, and, all of a sudden, those despised 
and impotent clericals come to l'darshal Macl\lahon's aid, revealing 
to th;- whole world such a potency as no one had any longer ex­
pected from them. They announce to the parties that they can 
unite only under the clerical banner, and these, impressed with the 
obviousness, at once agree with them. 
In fact, both to the legitimists and the Bonapartists the prin­
cipal and nearest foe is the repubtican majority. If each of these 
parties works apart for itself, it can achieve nothing ; yet, jointly, 
they can become a power conquering everything and disperse the 
republicans. And after they have crushed the republic, each party 
can take care of itself, and, of course, each of them will have all 
the more chance of success, the more it gratif:.-ᅶ the clericals. The 
latter have reckoned all this mathematically ; t· 
junction did take 
place, and the clerical majority of the Senate gave MacMahon 
permission to disperse the republicans. 
4 
THE BLACK ARMY. THE LEGIONS' OPINION AS A NEw 
ELEMENT OF CIVILIZATION 
Having mᅷ· nifested such unexpected strength and adroitness, 
the clericals, no doubt, will go further. At a moment which will 
be decisive for them, they will declare war on Germᅸ=ny-and this is 
what Prince Bismarck realized at ᅹce I They have a!ready achieved 
the main thing. MacMahon has agreed to throw France into a policy 
of adventure. Will the clericals stop at this juncture ?-Certainly, 
they don't have to pity France !-They need France, as everything 
else in the world, only as long as she is U!>eful to them. 

740 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Oh, they might have pitied her : that country is their only 
hope and it has served them so many centuries I At present, how­
ever, they stand before the most critical moment in the whole 
millennium, and if it is France that happens to be around, why 
shouldn't they suck her sap out, even if it kills her ? Why not risk 
her very existence ? It is imperative to take from her everything 
she can give. And what is more important still : it is impossible 
to tarry even for a minute-a little later and for them unquestionably 
it will be too late. So that precisely now the attempt should be 
made to check Bismarck, since, if anyone will be harmful at the 
time of the election of the Pope certainly it is he. And on top of 
that, Bismarck, as if on purpose, is alone precisely at this minute, 
alone, without allies. Russia (his whole hope) is now busy in the 
East. 
Finally, if they succeeded in taming Bismarck, though tem­
porarily, it would be necessary, as quickly as possible and in advance, 
to lay the foundation for the future. It would be necessary to take 
advantage of the successful moment, and once and forever to create 
out of France a faithful ally, obedient and ready to do anything. 
And for this purpose it would be indispensable to effect in France 
a revolution, but a serious one-radical and secular. No doubt, in 
all this there is much risk, but let others waver-not the Jesuit 
fathers. 
The main thing is that at this moment they have no choice 
other than to risk and risk. . . . 
They positively cannot confine themselves to the clerical coup 
d'etat accomplish"ed in France without a war with Germany and 
a serious revolution in France. They have precisely reached this 
state of affairs. They have to have everything or nothing : should 
they merely take a wee bit, confining themselves to the exercise of 
some sort of an influence in government circles, this would bring 
them no advantage whatsoever since at present their needs are 
great ! For this reason they must venture a most conspicuous and 
arrogant risk, because they must take the whole va-banque. Should 
the risk fail, for instance, should the Germans again conquer and 
crush France, all the same the clericals' situation wouldn't be worse 
than at present (i.e., had they kept quiet and had they not started 
their coup d'etat) :  they would keep what they have, what they had 
prior to the -beginning of the "adventure" ; in other words, they 
would be in a most miserable situation which couldn't grow worse. 
The case of France is different :  should she again be conquered 
she would perish. But are Jesuits such fellows as to retreat before 
a contingency of this sort ?-They know that were France victorious 
they would get everything and they would grow so strong in France 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
741 
that it would become impossible to exterminate them there. And 
for this they possess their special means, as yet unheard of in 
France. 
All other revolutionists, even the most rabid and reddest ones, 
having accomplished a coup d'etat, would nevertheless take into 
account-in a way, at least-certain general things which existed 
before, even lawful things. However. the Jesuit revolutionists can­
not act lawfully, they can act only uncommonly. This black army 
standing without the boundaries of mankind and its civic status, 
without civilization, emanates exclusively from within itself. This 
is a status in statu ; this is the Pope's army. It seeks but the triumph 
of its own idea,-and after that let everything standing in its way 
perish ; let all the other factors wither and perish ; let everything 
standing in discord with them die -civilization, society, science ! Un­
questionably it will be their task to cultivate France in a new and 
final manner if chance be on their side, and to sweep out of her 
all litter with such a mop as was unheard of, so as to eliminate 
every suggestion of resistance, conveying to the country a new 
organi<. ୌ.:unstitutwn under the strictest Jesuit tutelage-for ever and 
ever. 
All this, at first glance, may seem quite nonsensical. In the 
French papers (as well as in ours) all well-intentioned people are 
firmly convinced that thr clericals will unfailingly break their legs 
at the next election of the French Chamber. The French republi­
cans, in the innocence of their soul, are also fully convinced that 
all the acti1Jite devorante of the newly appointed prefects and 
mayors will achieve nothing ; that all former republicans will be re­
elected, and that they will form the previous 11ajority, vetoing all 
of l\Iacl\1ahon's schemes ; after .!i-.t the cler:• Is will be thrown 
out, and, perhaps, l\lacMahon himself with thl n. 
However, this confidence is altogether unfounded, and cer­
tainly in this respect the clericals are not very much worried. The 
point is that the naive and pure-in-hcJ.rt little old fellows, in spite 
of their long experience, still seem not fully to comprehend the 
sort of people they are dealing with. For should the election prove 
even slightly unfavorable to the clericals, tr:-y would oust the 
new Chamber, too, notwithstanding all its constitutional and legal 
rights. It may be objected that this would be unlawful and, there­
fore, impossible.-This is so, but what do laws matter to them, to 
that black army ? They will certai'lly suggest-and tlJere are already 
facts tending to support this con . .:ntion-to the obedient Marshal 
Macl\Iahon the desperate resolution of resorting to such a device as 
has never yet been employed even in France, namely-military 
despotism. People will exclaim that this iବ an old device ; that it 

742 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
has been resorted to several times-by the Napoleons, for instance I 
-Even so, I venture to remark that all this was different : this 
device in all its candor has never been employed in France. Marshal 
MacMahon, having enlisted for himself the devotion of the army, 
would be in a position simply with bayonets to disperse the new 
forthcoming Assembly of the French representatives, should it op­
pose him, after which he would announce to the whole country 
that such was the will of the army. Much like a Roman emperor 
of the epoch of the decadence of the Empire, he could declare that 
henceforth "he would take into consideration only the opinion of 
the legions." Then a general state of siege and military despotism 
would be inaugurated,-and you will see, you will, that these will 
please many people in France ! And believe me that, if this should 
prove necessary, there would be plebiscites which by a majority 
vote of all France would authorize war and would appropriate the 
funds needed therefor. 
In his recent address to the troops Marshal MacMahon spoke 
precisely in this spirit, and it was very favorably received by the 
army. There can be no doubt that the army is rather in favor of 
him. Besides, now he has gone so far that he cannot stop lest he 
lose his post, whereas his whole policy is expressed in one phrase : 
"J'y suis et j'y reste," that is, "Here I am, and here I'm going to 
stay." As is known, he did not go further than this phrase, and, 
of course, for the triumph of this motto he may even, perhaps, risk 
the very existence of France. 
Once, at the time of the Franco-Prussian war, he already 
proved his readiness for such a risk, when, under the influence of 
the Bonapartists, he deliberately ventured to deprive France of 
her army, from devotion to Napoleon's dynasty. The clericals, no 
doubt, have guaranteed him his "J'y suis et j'y reste." 
Having united the parties, i.e., the legitimists and the Bona­
partists, under their banner, certainly they must have been able 
adroitly to point out to MacMahon that, if necessary, it would be 
possible to do without both Chambord and Bonaparte ; that it 
would not be necessary at all to call them,-under no circumstance 
-but that simply he, Marshal MacMahon, should remain dictator 
and permanent ruler-that is, not for the term of seven years, but 
forever. 
This is how the motto "J'y suis et j'y restc" will come to 
pass-on condition of the army's consent ; however, France's subse­
quent acquiescence is inevitable because a firm dictatorial hand at 
the head of the government will appeal to the taste of quite a few. 
Such flattering suggestions, no doubt, have been made. Per­
haps doubt will be expressed that a man such as MacMahon would 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
743 
be able to undertake and achieve all these things. But, to begin with, 
he did undertake and achieve the first half of the task, that half 
which was in no way easier, from the standpoint of resoluteness, 
than the second future one. Secondly, it is precisely such men, not 
at all enterprising in se, if, suddenly, they fall under somebody's su­
preme and decisive influence, who are capable of revealing enormous 
and fatal resoluteness,-not because of great genius but precisely on 
account of the opposite reason. 
In this connection the main thing is-not reasoning, but simply 
-the push ; and once they are well pushed, they push on in one 
direction till they either break the wall with their head or break 
their horns. 
5 
A RATHER UNPLEASANT SECRET 
All this is well understood in Germany. At least, all semi­
effie:഑• 0rgans of the press, influenced by Prince Bismarck, are 
firmly convinced of the inevitability of war. Who is going to assault 
first and precisely when is not known, but there is much chance 
that war may break out. Of course, the storm may still blow over. 
The whole hope rests in the possibility that l\Iarshal MacMahon, 
like Ajax in the past, might unexpe..tedly grow afraid of everything 
he has assumed, and, perplexed, he might stop in the middle of 
the road. In this event he would risk perishing, and it is incon­
ceivable that he should not understand this. And as for the chance 
of perplexity in the middle of the road-even though it is a pos­
sibility, one can hardly firmly relv upon it. 
For the time being Prince Bismarck is wa '1ing with feverish 
attention everything transpiring in France : he is watching and 
waiting. T0 him the crux lies precisely in tl-ଭ fact that the affair 
has not begun at the moment he had expected. At present his hands 
are tied. But most troublesome is the fact that the ulcers, which 
had been carefully concealed, have come to light. I have already 
spoken about the major ulcer of all the Germans-about their fear 
that Russia might suddenly realize how mighty she is, and what 
weight her deciମ :ve word may acquire precisely at this moment, 
and principally that "the dependency upon an alliance with Russia, 
especially after the Franco-Prussian war, seems to be Germany's 
fatal destiny." This German seerଯ 
may now be suuucnly revealed, 
and this from the standpoint of the Germans would be rather awk­
ward. 
Much as Germany's policy during recent years toward us was 
frankly hostile, nevertheless all Germans did adhere to the secret. 

744 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
In this respect the press in particular was active. Until now the 
Germans assumed the quiet and haughty appearance peculiar to a 
power that needs no one's help. At present, however, this weak spot 
has to come to light. For should clerical France embark upon the 
fatal struggle, it would not suffice to conquer her, or merely to 
repulse her assault-should she be the first to attack-but it would 
be imperative to render her impotent forever, actually to crush her, 
taking advantage of the occasion-such would be the task I And 
inasmuch as France has an army of one million men, the task 
would have to be achieved without a hitch, it would have to be 
secured, since otherwise it shouldn't be undertaken at all. But there 
is no guaranty other than the guaranty of Russia's decisive word. 
Briefly, the most unpleasant thing is that all this comes so 
suddenly. All former calculatons are mixed up, and now events 
govern the calculations, and not vice versa. France might start today, 
tomorrow, just when she is restoring domestic order though only a 
little. She has embarked on a policy of adventure ; this is obvious 
to everybody, and this being so, who knows where the adventures 
will come to a stop ? Where is the wall, the boundary line ?-This 
is very disagreeable : so recently did the Germans display such an 
independent air, especially last year ! Let us recall that during that 
year Russia, too, has been trying to ascertain who in Europe were 
her friends, and the Germans knew about Russia's troubles, and 
they assumed a tri-umphant air appropriate to the occasion. 
Of course, every Slavic movement has always been somewhat 
disturbing to Germany ; even so, it may be distinctly stated that 
in Russia's declaration of war two months ago there was, perhaps, 
something pleasant to Germany : "ᅺay, now, under no circum­
stance, will they guess"-thus people reasoned in Germany two 
months ago-"that it is we who need them. On the contrary, at 
present, when they stand facing the Danube-a German river, 
they are fully convinced that they need us awfully, and that at 
the end of the war our weighty word cannot be avoided. And it 
is good that the Russians think so. This will be useful to us in the 
future." 
No doubt, many shrewd Germans have been thus thinking 
about us : their whole press has been so thinking and writing,­
and now, all of a sudden, that clerical mood has turned everything 
upside down ; "Oh, now they will guess ; they will guess everything I 
And, besides, it is necessary that Russia finish and free herself in 
the East as soon as possible. However, it would be disadvantageous 
to bring pressure opon her. Maybe, she will take fright of England 
and Austria, but this is hardly to be expected. One should not even 
be thinking of combining with England and Austria to bring pres-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
745 
sure upon Russia : later these won't help, while Russia will be angry. 
Strange situation ! Wouldn't it be an idea to help Russia so that 
she may finish quickly. This could be done without drawing the 
sword-by mere political pressure upon Austria, for example . . . .  " 
This is how the same politicians are reasoning at present, and it 
is very likely that all this is so in reality. 
In a word, I merely seek to express my conviction, my 
faith, that not only is Russia strong and powerful, as she always 
has been, but at present especially so ; she is the mightiest of all 
European countries, and never has Europe attached more weight 
to her decisive word than at this moment. Let Russia be occupied 
in the East, nevertheless her one decisive word may now, by her 
desire and will, turn the scales of European policy. 
Of course even England herself understands that in view 
of the possibility of most troublesome events in extreme Western 
Europe, she, too, may lose two-thirds of her prestige in the opinion 
of the Russians ; that at length even the most suspicious Russians 
will grasp the fact that under no circumstance will she risk a 
w<.r iu the face c ࢙ Russia's firm resolution to pursue her task, and 
that she, England, would rather count on the division of the heritage 
after "the sick man" than risk an open war in his defense at so 
troublesome a moment in Europe. 
Indeed, should it so happen that something unexpected and 
fatal should break out in Western Europe, England would never 
venture to interfere wholeheartedly with such a troublesome affair 
so different from the usual character of her interests. No doubt, in 
such an event she would adopt an attitude of keen watchfulness, 
awaiting, as is her custom, a convenient moment when she might 
snuff somewhere a division of spf"lilର in order 
, .  · become at c•nce a 
party to it. And to undertake at present (i.e., 1lrior to the final 
clarification of these Western events) something really serious with 
regard to Russia would be too imprudent on the part of England. 
On the other hand, left alone, what can Austria do ?-Besides, 
it seems incredible that the clerical complications in the extreme 
West of Europe should not have perplexed her, at least, to some 
extent. And, of course, much like all others, she awaits the further 
development of events, so that her hands, like those of the rest, 
are partly tied. Everybody's hands are bound, and only Rus­
sia's hands are free. This means that something unexpectedly fa­
vorable to us has ensued. After all, how can one faii to rely upon 
the unexpected in the determinat. 
n of human destinies ? 
The world is ruled by God and His laws, and should any­
thing new and complex break over Europe, this signifies that, sooner 
or later, this inevitably had to come to pas!'. But I pray the Lord 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
that I am mistaken ; that the gathering cloud may be dispersed, and 
that all my presentiments merely prove my own "ardent" fantasies­
fantasies of a man understanding nothing in politics. 
The question comes to this : are all semi-official organs of the 
press in Germany right when they await and prognosticate war ? 
On the other hand, all the ministers of MacMahon, even before any 
accusations have been framed, exert their efforts to assure the 
French and the whole world that France will not start the war. 
You must concede that all this is, at least, suspicious and that the 
clarification of the doubts, by the mere course of events, may 
come in the very near future. 
But now what if so much depends upon "the legions' opinion" ? 
It would be bad if it came to this : this would be the end of 
France. However, this could happen only in France-nowhere else 
in the whole world. And I pray the Lord that this shall not happen 
there, either : the beginning is bad ; the next step would be still 
worse. 
CHAPTER IV 
1 
Lovers of the Turks 
WELL, IN RUSSIA there have appeared quite a few lovers of 
the Turks-of course, apropos of the war with them. In days past 
never in my life did I hear anyone begin a conversation in order to 
eulogize the Turks. At present, however, I hear quite often about 
their defenders. I have even met some of them : they get quite 
excited. Of course, we are dealing here with an urge to appear 
original. Even so, those lovers are scientists, teachers, professors. 
"The Mohammedan world has contributed to Christian science. 
The Christian world was sunk in the darkness of ignorance when 
science had already been shining among the Arabs." 
You see, here, Christianity is supposed to have been the cause 
of ignorance. That's Buckle, even Draper. Thus, it appears that 
Islam is light and Christianity-the beginning of darkness. What 
a unique logic I This is probably why at present Mohammedanism 
is so enlightened compared with Christianity. Why did they ex­
tinguish their torch so soon ? 
"Yes, they, however, have 
monotheism, 
whereas 
Chris­
tians . . .  
" 
This eulogy of the Mohammedans for monotheism, i.e., the 
purity of the doctrine of the unity of God, supposedly higher than 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
747 
the Christian, is a hobbyᅻhorse of many lovers of the Turks. But 
here the main point is that these lovers have detached themselves 
from the people and do not understand them. And having dissociated 
themselves from the people, they have managed to form some strange 
conceptions about what transpires in the head of the Russian ple­
beian. Meanwhile the Russian plebeian, "understanding nothing in 
matters of religion and not knowing h1-. prayers"-as people are wont 
to speak about him-quite frequently, if not always, forms in his 
mind and in his soul a most peculiar but correct and precise con­
viction, fully satisfying him, about the things in which he believes, 
notwithstanding the fact that only a rare plebeian is able clearly 
and consistently to express his beliefs in words. 
This "intelligent'' Russian who has dissociated himself from 
the people would be surprised to hear that the illiterate peasant 
fully and unwaveringly believes in the unity of God, that there is 
but one God, and no God other than He. At the same time the 
Russian peasant knows and reverently believes (every Russian 
peasant knows it) that Christ is his true God ; that He was begotten 
of Got! :hᇂ' Father and was born of the Virgin Mary. 
To begin with, the educated Russian who has detached himself 
from the people will refuse to admit the very possibility that the 
Russian peasant, who has learned nothing, should possess such a 
knowledgf' : "He is so uneducated, so ignorant ; he is being taught 
nothing. Where is his teacher ?" T nat educated fellow will never 
understand that the teacher of the peasant "in the matter of his 
faith" is the soil itself, the whole Russian land ; that these beliefs, 
as it were, are born with him and are fortified in his heart together 
with life. 
But to some of those Russian thinkers rr:ᅼ'ᅽt incredible is the 
fact that the Russian common people canno• '>e led astray as 
regards their convictions ! He himself, having long lost every concep­
tion of what the great, immediate and arderᅾ faith of the people 
is, is unable to admit that reverently believing in the great Chris­
tian mystery of the incarnation of the Son of God, the plebeian 
at the same time adheres to the strictest monotheism. He is rather 
inclined to attribute this firmness of the immediate convictions 
of the Russian plebeian to the lack of the habit of reasoning, to the 
habit of confounding conceptions because of indolence and dullness 
of thought and the absence of the critical faculty in his mind. And 
he will attribute the "lamentable" state of the plebdans' intellect 
to his downtroddenness, poverty, d••bauchery, serfdom, etc. To this 
the Russian scientist, fotudying the Russian people, firmly clings. 
By the same process of reasoning, Orthodox Russians may be 
condemned, for example, for their worship of ikons. A Lutheran 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
pastor is at a loss to understand how it is possible to believe in 
the true God and, at the same time, to worship a "board," an 
image of a saint, and to avoid idolatry. The Russian educated man 
more often than not is inclined to agree with this argument of the 
pastor. And yet, there is not a single Russian peasant-whether man 
or woman-who, . worshipping an ikon, would confuse, though 
slightly, the "board" with God Himself, notwithstanding the fact 
that the people, at the same time, believe in the miraculousness 
of some ikons. But there isn't a single Russian who would attribute 
the miraculous force of an ikon to the ikon itself, and not to the 
will of God. And this is altogether different. Now, this view of the 
Russian common people neither the pastor nor the Russian who has 
detached himself from the people will ever admit. Well, they will 
even not believe that this is so. 
However, they had better recall Mohammed's paradise in order 
to amplify their conviction about the purity of Turkish concep­
tions dealing with the unity of God. Of course, I am saying all 
this not for the purpose of starting a theological dispute with the 
admirers of Turkish monotheism. Nor, in fact, did I start it. These 
admirers are rather concerned about the sane conceptions of the 
people, while they themselves, perhaps, don't give a rap who is 
going to believe or how. This is why I have discussed the que!>tion 
merely from the popular point of view. 
2 
GoLDEN DREss-CoATS. THE PIG-HEADED ONES 
In addition to the lovers of the Turks, there has appeared a 
great number of men with an urge for a separate opinion : "It's all 
nonsense ; there is no movement. Addresses are nothing but humbug. 
This is not in accord with the Russian manner. Sanitary units are 
fiddle-faddle. This is not Russian style. Sentimentalism. Slavs were 
fabricated. Bulgarians were fabricated. The Turks are better than 
the Bulgarians. It's all rubbish. I love the Turks . . . .  
" 
This sort of thing has not the malignantly shrewd design of 
tᅿe "haute politique." We do have a "haute politique"-this is un­
deniable ; but this is simply personal ambition. Ambition of two 
kinds : ( I )  either extremely suppressed, and as a result-the press­
ing urge of appearing original, just so as to distinguish, or some­
how to manifest oneself, and ( 2 )  ambition caused by extraordinary 
grandeur. 
The Russian "great man" more often than not is unable to 
bear his grandeur. Truly, were it possible to put on a golden dress-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
749 
coat made, say, of brocade, so as not to resemble all the rest, he 
would candidly don it and he wouldn't be ashamed. I am con­
vinced that if, as yet, I haven't seen any of our "great men" in 
golden dress-suits, it is, probably, because the tailors refuse to 
make them. "I am cleverer than the rest. I am great. They all 
think about themselves this way ; ...-, II, I don't want it their way. 
I'll prove that I am great. . . .  
" 
I am eager to speak especially about the golden dress-coat, 
the characteristically Russian social and psychological sources of 
its origin, the typical examples, and so on, and so forth.-This is 
a pet theme of mine. However, leaving the golden dress-coat in peace 
for the present, I shall say a few words about the pig-headed ones. 
There are all sorts of pig-headed ones-good and bad, clever and 
stupid, honest and dishonest, etc. Of these we have many. These 
aim at one point from which it is impossible to divert them : J'y 
suis et j'y reste. They are Russian MacMahons. 
News is reaching us from the army about the heroism and 
seJf.,,.rrifice of thP Russians, both soldiers and officers. This is our 
youth. So recently there prevailed disbelief in the youth-our hope. 
Many people perceived in them nothing but cynicism ; they were 
accused of blunt negation, coldness, indifference, dull suicides, and 
now, suddenly, the air apparently hag been cleared : these same 
young folks are manifesting mag.1animity, thirst for heroic im­
pulse, duty, honor and sacrifice. They march at the head of the 
soldiers ; they are the first to brave danger . . .  
"Yes, but it is only a drunken person or a lunatic who can 
deliberately throw himself into the arms of death. There is no other 
explanation." 
"What ? Don't you suppose there is in hL 
the magnanimous 
realization of the fact that he is sacrificing himst:!f for Russia, that 
he is serving her ? . . .  
" 
"With his fist ?" 
"What do you mean ? In a war one has to fight. How else 
could he be useful ?" 
"Hm. Schools, for example." 
"Schools-at a proper time. Subsequently he will bring with 
him into the srhool the realization of a fulfilled duty ; a mag­
nanimous reminiscence ; rapprochement with the people. 
"In general, solidarity for a common cause. Soldier and officer 
live over there in one spirit, in a ""mmon feeling. The intelligentsia 
allies itself with the people ; it returns to the people in deed, and 
not in theory ; it learns to respect the people from whose midst this 
soldier has been recruited, and it teaches the people to respect it­
no longer as chiefs or masters, but as men, spiritually. The recent 

750 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
story of a plebeian who, in tears, embraced General Cherniaiev 
in the Assumption Cathedral, is significant. You wish to educate 
the people ; but you will educate them more quickly by making 
them respect your ideas, your deeds, and by attracting their hearts 
to you. The more the people personally respect educated man, the 
more surely will public education be achieved. Thus, by earning the 
respect of the people, you are already serving the cause of public 
education, those very schools about which you are so concerned." 
"To earn respect through the fist ? To make the people respect 
the fist ?" 
"Here it is not only the fist. Above all, here is magnanimity, 
sacrifice of one's own life in everybody's sight. In public even 
death has its attraction. Now, you are asking me, what can compel 
a man in the prime of his life to sacrifice it almost with certainty ? 
You are baffled,-otherwise it is impossible to explain your words 
about the drunk and the lunatic : this is but an allegory, a mode 
of expression. What can compel a man ?-Thirst for fame, for an 
honest deed ; thirst for earning a good reputation, the praise of 
all fellow-countrymen who are now watching his deeds ; for re­
vealing his personality, for glorifying his name." 
"Aha, to make a career I " 
"But all these sentiments and impulses are magnanimous. 
There are thousands of them, and they are all combined. Man is 
not composed of .some one impulse ; man is a whole world : let only 
the basic impulse in him be noble. His own blood spilled, readi­
ness to spill it, ennobles a man, conferring upon him for all his subse­
quent life the duty of honor. In our press fear has already been 
e.\:pressed that these men may subsequently take an upper hand ; 
that self-satisfaction and haughtiness may appear ; that they may 
despise education, humble civilians ; that they may behave vio­
lently, and that these ideas may penetrate society. But these are 
futile fears. When is all this going to happen ?" 
"How is it possible that the Kopeikins, who 'so to speak, have 
been spiiiing their blood,' should fail to appear ?" 
"Quite so, but these fellows will only make people laugh and 
will harm themselves. However, the moral benefit will be bound­
less. The distress of cynicism will vanish, there will arise respect 
for honest achievement. . . .  
" 
"And for the fist." 
"We are dealing here not with mere pugilists. Here we find 
virtually children, children pure in heart. He has just been com­
missioned, and hP throws himself forward for an exploit, with the 
thought : Far away, what will his mother, his sister say, they with 
whom he had just parted ? . . . Is this merely funny and senti-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
751 
mental ?-Finally, why not admit in these heroes superior conscious­
ness ? They understand that Russia has taken upon herself a dif­
ficult task, and that it may become even more complex. They se 
that Russia is waging a war not only against Turkey ; that the 
Turkish armies are commanded by English generals ; that English 
officers, with English money, are building numerous fortifications ; 
that the English fleet is encouraging Turkey to continue the war ; 
finally, that English troops have already appeared (in Asiatic 
Turkey) . . .  They are aware of all these things, and they rush 
to their death, realizing that the time has come to render Russia 
a faithful service. I am not even mentioning the Bulgarians, the 
oppressed 'Slavic brethren,' tortured and insulted. To our shame 
this theme has already grown obsolete . . . but not in their hearts. 
Don't you really perceive in many of them superior consciousness, 
the thought that they are serving mankind, the oppressed and the 
insulted ? . . .  
" 
"Serving mankind with the fist I "  
"Permit me, apropos, to tell you an anecdote. I have already 
once relJorted thaL in Moscow, in one of the homes in which little 
Bulgarian children, orphans, are kept, who have been brought to 
Russia after the debacle over there, there is a girl, about ten years 
old, who has seen (and this she is unable to forget) the Turks 
skinning her live father. Well, in that same home there is also 
another invalid Bulgarian girl-she, too, is about ten years old­
and people were recently telling me about her. Hers is a strange 
illness : a gradual but ever increasing weakness and a continual 
desire to sleep. She sleeps all the time ; but sleep does not make 
her stronger, rather the opposite. lt is very ser:ous. This little girl 
may have already died. She has unl! unbeara't·' 
recollection. The 
Turks seized her little brother, an infant of tv. o or three years ; 
first they poked his eyes out with a needle, and then they impaled 
him. The child screamed long and terribly, until he died. This is 
an absolutely true story. Well, the Ettie girl is unable to forget 
this : all this took place in her presence, in her sight. Maybe, nature 
sends sleep to such an afflicted heart, because in a waking state 
she would be unable to live with such an uni:r:terrupted memory. 
Now, imagine that you had been present there, at the moment the 
child's eyes had been poked out. Tell me, wouldn't you have rushed 
to stop them, even with your fist ?" 
"Yes, but nevertheless, the fi.,t." 
"All right, don't beat then., if you wish. But take their 
yataghans away from them. Can this be done without resorting to 
force ?" 
Apropos. Is it possible that among U!:> there are such lovers 

752 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
of the Turks as would not wish to take their yataghans away from 
them ? I think and I believe that there are none such. 
JULY-A UGUST 
CHAPTER I 
1 
A Conversation with a Moscow Acquaintance of Mine. 
-A Note Apropos of a New Book 
HAVING ISSUED in Petersburg my belated May-June num­
ber of the Diary, on my way back to the province of Kursk, 
passing through Moscow, I had a chat about this and that with 
an old Moscow acquaintance of mine whom I see rarely but whose 
opinion I treasure greatly. I am not recording our conversation 
in toto even though in the course of it I learned certain curious 
things relating to the current situation which I had not suspected. 
However, as I was parting with my interlocutor, I mentioned, 
among other things, that I intended to make en route a small de­
tour, some hundred and fifty versts from Moscow, in order to 
visit the place of my early childhood and boyhood,-a village which, 
in days gone by, belonged to my parents, but which has long ago 
become the property of one of our women relatives. I have not 
been there for foity years ; although many times I sought to go there, 
yet I was always unable to do so, despite the fact that that small 
and inconspicuous spot had left a deep and strong impression upon 
me for my whole life, and that there everything to me was full 
of dearest memories. 
Well, we have such memories and such spots ; we all did 
have them. It would be curious to know : What will be precious 
in their recollections to our present-day youth, our present-day 
children and raw youths ? Will there be anything precious ? Chiefly 
-precisely what ? Of what character ? 
That our contemporary children will also have such sacred 
memories there can be no doubt, since otherwise "live life" 
would cease. Man cannot even live without something sacred and 
precious carried away into life from the memories of child­
hood. Some people, apparently, do not think about this ; neverthe­
less, unconsciously, they do preserve such recollections. They may 
even be painful and bitter ; however, even sufering endured in 
one's life may subsequently transform itself into a sanctuary of 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
753 
the soul. Generally speaking, man has been so created that he loves 
his past suffering. Besides, man, of necessity, is inclined to mark 
points, as it were, in his past in order to be subsequently guided 
by them and to deduce from them something whole-as a matter 
of routine and for his own edification. 
The strongest and most influential recollections are those pro­
duced in childhood. Therefore, unquestionably, those memories 
and impressions-possibly the strongest and most sacred ones-will 
be carried into life also by present-day children. However, what 
will there be in those memories, precisely what will they carry into 
their lives, what form will this precious stock assume ? All these, 
of course, are curious and grave questions. Were it possible to fore­
shadow, to a certain extent at least, an answer to them, many of 
the disturbing contemporary doubts could be quenched, and per­
haps many people would gladly place trust in the Russian youth. 
What would be most important, however,-if it were possible-would 
be to feel, even though faintly, our future, our Russian future, which 
is so .:r.igmatic. Put the trouble is that at no time has there been 
an epoch in our Russian life which yielded less data for presenti­
ment and foreknowledge of our always enigmatic future than the 
present one. 
Besides, never has the Russian family been shaken so loose, 
more distintegrated, more unsorteᆀ and more uninformed than at 
present. Where will you now find such "childhoods and boyhoods" 
as have been depicted so harmoniously and graphically, for in­
stance, by Count Leo Tolstoy when he portrayed his epoch and 
his family, or those portrayed in his War and Peace ? At present 
all these creations are nothing more than histor•'"·יl pictures of times 
long past. Oh, I do not mean to say that these 
ᆁre such beautiful 
pictures. In our day I should not like to see tnem repeated, and 
I am not speaking about this at all. I mer"ly speak about their 
character, about the completeness, precision and explicitness of 
their character, those qualities which made it possible to give such 
a clear and graphic representation of the epoch as we have in both 
creations by Count Tolstoy. 
Nowadays this does not exist ; there h. no explicitness, no 
clearness. The contemporary Russian family is becoming more and 
more casual. Precisely casual-such is the definition of the present­
day Russian family. It has lost its old features, som::how suddenly, 
even unexpectedly, while its new 
ᆂce . . .  will it bt: able to create 
for itself a new, desirable face satisfying the Russian heart ?-Some, 
even serious-minded, people positively maintain that at present the 
Russian family "does not exist at all." Of course, all this is being 
said about the educated Russian family, i.e., of the upper strata 

754 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
and not of the common people. Of the latter's family, however, is 
it not also a question ? 
"This is what is indisputable,"-my interlocutor told me. "It 
is undeniable that in the very near future new questions will arise 
among the people ; in fact, they have already arisen,-a heap, a 
whole mass of new, formerly nonexistent questions, never heard of 
by the people, and all this is natural. But who is going to answer 
these questions ? Who in Russia is ready to answer them ? And who 
is going to be first to do so ? Who is waiting and getting ready for 
this ? Such are the questions-our questions-which, besides, are of 
paramount importance." 
No doubt, they are of prime importance. Such a decisive 
break in our life as the reform of February nineteenth, as all subse­
quent reforms, and especially-literacy (even the faintest contact 
with it) ,-all these unquestionably will raise-have already raised­
questions, and later they may convey a form to them, group them 
together, communicate stability to them. And who, in fact, will 
answer these questions ? Who stands nearest to the people ? The 
clergy ? But they have long ceased to answer the questions of the 
people. Except for some priests who still burn with zeal for Christ 
-often imperceptible and utterly unknown precisely because they 
seek nothing for themselves, living only for their flock. Except for 
these, and alas it would seem very few others, the rest, when pressed 
for answers, may, perhaps, respond to them with denouncements. 
Still others to such an extent alienate their flock from themselves 
by altogether incommensurate levies that no one would even think 
to come to them with questions. This theme could be greatly 
elaborated, but I shall speak more about it later. 
Next, rural teachers are about the nearest to the people. But 
what are our rural teachers good for and what are they ready for ? 
So far, what has this new profession exhibited ? True, it is still 
merely in a state of formation ; nevertheless, by reason of its 
significance, it is all-important for the future. What can these men 
answer ?-It is better not to answer this question. 
Thus there remain casual answers-in towns, at stations, on 
roads and in streets, in marketplaces, by passers-by, by vagabonds, 
and finally by former landowners. (It stands to reason that I am 
not mentioning the authorities.) Oh, of course, there will be many 
answers, perhaps, even more than questions, good answers and bad, 
foolish and wise. Still, it seems that their principal effect will be 
that each answer will raise three new questions, and this will go 
crescendo. The result will be chaos. Well, chaos wouldn't be so 
bad : precocious solutions are worse than chaos. 
"And what is most important-there is nothing to talk about. 
The people will stand it." 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
755 
Of course, they will stand it ; they will stand it even without 
us-with or without the respondents. Russia is mighty. She has 
managed to endure things even worse than these. Besides, not such 
is her mission and aim that she should deviate without reflection 
from her secular path. Moreover ,-not such are her dimensions. He 
who believes in Russia knows that she will endure absolutely every­
thing-even the questions-and, essentially, she will remain the 
same, our holy Russi.a, as heretofore. And no matter how much her 
face may change, this should not be feared. Nor is it at all neces­
sary to delay or remove the questions. He who believes in Russia 
should even be ashamed of entertaining such thoughts. Her mission 
is so lofty and her inner presentiment of that mission is so clear 
(particularly in our epoch, especially at this moment) that he who 
believes in this mission, must be above all doubts and apprehen­
sions. "Here is patience and faith of the Saints," as it is said in 
the Holy Scripture. 
That morning I saw for the first time an advertisement in the 
p::peb aiJOut thr separate publication of the eighth and last part 
of Anna Karenina which had been rejected by the editor of The 
Russian Messenger in which the novel has been appearing begin­
ning with its first part. Everybody also knows that this last, eighth, 
part was rejected because its orientation was in discord with that 
of the magazine and the convictJOns of the editors ; specifically 
apropos of the author's opinion on the Eastern question and the war 
of last year. I immediately decided to buy the book, and as I was 
bidding good-by to my interlocutor, I asked him about it, knowing 
that he has been long familiar with its content. He began to laugh. 
"The most innocent thing there can L.-: · "-he answered-"! 
can't understand at all why The Russia1l Meī . 11gcr did not pub­
lish it. Besides, the author had granted the righl to any exceptions 
and annotations if the editors ci<;agreed wit'• him. Therefore, they 
should have simply made a footnote to the effect that the au­
thor . . . " 
However, I will not record here the contents of the footnote 
which my interlocutor had suggested, all the more so as he ex­
pressed it while he was still laughing. But at the end he added 
seriously : 
"Notwithstanding his enormous artistic talent, the author of 
Anna Karenina possesses one of those Russian inte!Jects which see 
clearly those things only which "tand directly beiore their eyes, 
and therefore, they push on toward that one point. Apparently, 
they are deprived of the faculty of turning the neck to the right 
or to the left in order to discern also that which is on the side : 

756 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
they have to turn the whole body. Then, maybe, they start say­
ing something entirely different, since, at all events, they are always 
strictly sincere. This twist may not occur at all, but it may also 
occur a month later, and then the respected author will begin 
to cry with equal passion that volunteers should be dispatched 
and lint should be plucked, and he will be saying everything we 
are saying . . . .  
" 
I bought that book, read it and found it in no way as "inno­
cent" as that. Despite my whole aversion to embarking upon a 
criticism of contemporary writers and their works, I have made 
up my mind without fail t'o discuss the book in my Dituy (perhaps 
even in this issue). I deemed it not out of place to record also my 
conversation with my interlocutor to whom I apologize for my in­
discretion. . 
. . 
2 
THIRST FOR RUMORS AND THE THINGS "CONCEALED."­
THE WoRD "CoNCEALED" MAY HAVE A FuTuRE, AND 
THEREFORE MEASURES SHOULD BE TAKEN IN ADVANCE. 
AGAIN ON A CASUAL FAMILY 
These "places of my childhood," whch I intended to visit, 
are only one hundred and fifty versts from Moscow, of which one 
hundred and forty versts are by railway. However, I was obliged 
to spend almost ten hours covering this distance : there are many 
stops ; one has to change trains several times, and at one station 
one has to wait . three hours before boarding the next train. And 
all this on top of the disagreeablenesses of a Russian railroad and 
the virtually haughty attitude toward one and one's needs on the 
part of conductors and "the authorities." 
Everybody knows well the motto of the Russian railway : 
"The road does not exist for the public, but the public exists for the 
road." There isn't a single railroad man, from the conductor to 
the director, who would doubt this axiom, and who wouldn't look 
at you with derisive surprise should you begin to tell him that 
the railroad exists for the public. But the main thing is that they 
won't listen. 
By the way, this summer I have travelled at least four 
thousand versts, and this time everywhere en route I was par­
ticularly impt"essed with the people : everywhere they speak about 
the war. Nothing can be compared with the interest and eager 
curiosity with which the common people inquired about, and listened 
to, the accounts concerning the war. In railroad cars I even noticed 
several peasants reading the papers, mostly aloud. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
757 
Several times I chanced to be sitting next to them : some 
commoner would cautiously look you over ; and, especially if he 
saw a newspaper in your hands or lying beside you, he would 
promptly and extremely politely inquire whence you came. And if 
you answered that you came from Moscow or from Petersburg (and, 
still more interesting to him-if you came from the South, from 
Odessa, for example) ,  he would unfailingly ask : "What's the news 
about the war ?" 
Thereupon if you inspired him-even a little-with confidence 
in your reply and your readiness to answer his questions, he would 
at once, although still cautiously, change his curious air to a mys­
terious one, and drawing closer to you and lowering his voice, he 
would ask : "And isn't there, so to speak, anything special ?" mean­
ing, extra special, not reported in the papers, something concealed. 
I may add that among the people there are none discontented with 
the government for the declaration of war,-even among the most 
malevolent types. And there are those who are malevolent. For 
inst:mrf', you walk down the station platform during a stop, and 
suddenly you hear : "Seventeen thousand of our men were killed­
a telegram was just received I "  You see a young fellow making a 
speech ; on his face there is an expression of ominous t>cstasy, and 
not becauo;e he is glad that seventeen thousand of our men were 
killed ; nay, this is something different, as if a man's property 
were destroyed by fire-everything was destroyed-hut, money, cat­
tle : "Look, Orthodox Christians ! -Everything perished ! I'm in rags, 
all alone in the world ! " At such moments on the face of the poor 
devil there also is an expression of some malevolent self-intoxica­
tion. 
However, speaking of the •·s.:venteen thl · and" there is also 
something additional : "there is such a telegra1 . •  ; only it is being 
delayed, concealed, not yet relt>ased . . .  we saw it, we read it 
ourselves . . .  
"-such is the meaning. 
All of a sudden, I couldn't reᆃuain myself, approached the 
group and said that it was all rubbish, foolish rumors, that seven­
teen thousand of our men could not have been slain, that everything 
was all right. The lad (he seems to have been <i .:ommoner, perhaps 
even a peasant) was somewhat abashed-very little though : "We are 
ignorant people. We are not uttering our own words-this is what 
we have heard."-The crowd promptly dispersed, and then the 
station bell rang. 
Now I find this incident CU&!OUs because it occurred on July 
19, around five o'clock in the afternoon. On the eve, that is July 18, 
the Plevna battle took place. What kind of a telegram could have 
been received by whomsoever, not to speak of anyone among those 

758 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
railroad passengers ? Of course, this was a mere coincidence. I do 
not think, however, that the lad himself was the spreader and 
inventor of false rumors : it is most probable that he had actually 
heard the story from somebody. I presume that this summer in 
Russia there must have appeared a lot of fabricators of false, and 
of course malicious, rumors about reverses and misfortunes ; such 
rumors have a design and they are being spread not from mere 
fondness of lying. 
In view of the ardent patriotic mood of the people during 
this war ; further taking into account that discernment concerning 
the meaning and the aims of this war which since last year has 
been revealed by our people ; finally, because of the fervent and 
reverent faith of the people in their Czar,-all these delays and 
secrets in the war communiques not only are not useful, but they 
are .positively harmful. Naturally, no one can either demand or 
desire that strategic plans, the numbers of troops, military secrets, 
etc., be revealed, before an action had been carried out. It is at 
least desirable that our papers be given information before it ap­
pears in the Viennese press.1 
Sitting in the station where I had to wait .:.hree hours to 
change trains, I was in a most miserable mood, and was vexed 
with everything. Because there was nothing to do, suddenly it 
occurred to me to analyze : why was I vexed, and wasn't there, in 
addition to general causes, some accidental immediate cause ?-I 
didn't have to look long for it, and having found it I began to 
laugh. The cause lay in a recent encounter which I had in the 
railroad car, two stations earlier. A certain gentleman entered the 
car, a perfect gentleman, very much resembling the type of Russian 
gentlemen roving abroad. He came in leading his little son, a boy 
who could not have been more than eight years old-even younger 
perhaps. He was very neatly dressed in a most fashionable European 
children's costume, in a charming little jacket, wearing elegant 
shoes and batiste linen. Apparently, the father took good care of 
him. No sooner bad they been seated than he said to his father : 
"Papa, give me a cigarette" I Papa promptly reached into his 
pocket, took out a mother-of-pearl cigarette case, picked two ciga­
rettes, one for himself, the other for the boy, lighted them, and 
they began smoking with a most habitual air obviously suggesting 
that this soiᆄ of thing, to them, was a common happening. The 
gentleman began to think about something, while the boy kept 
looking through the window of the car, smoking and inhaling. He 
1At present in tne main, this has been rectified : hardly a day passes 
without the public receiving wire communiques from the Commander-in­
Chief. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
759 
puffed up his cigarette very quickly. Scarcely fifteen minutes later, 
he said again : "Papa, give me a cigarette" ! -and again both started 
smoking. During the time they sat in the car with me-and we 
passed only two stations-the boy had smoked at least four ciga­
rettes. 
Nothing of the kind have I evrr witnessed before, and I was 
greatly astonished. The weak, tender and quite undeveloped chest 
of so little a child was already inured to such a horror. And whence 
could such an unnaturally precocious habit develop ?-Of course, 
it was the father's example : children are so imitative. But how 
could the father allow his child the use of such poison ?-Con­
sumption, catarrh of respiratory tracts, of the cavity of the lungs­
this is what is inevitably threatening the unfortunate boy ; thus it 
is in nine cases out of ten ; this is clear, known to everybody. And 
yet it is the father himself who encourages in his child an un­
naturally precocious habit ! 
What did this gentleman mean to prove thereby ?-Disdain 
of rreiudices ? Did he intend to emphasize the novel idra that 
everything hitherto prohibited was nonsense and that, on the con­
trary, everything was permitted ?-I can't understand it. This case 
remains unexplained to me ; it is almost a miraculous case. Kever 
in my life have I encountered such a father and, probably, I never 
shall meet such a one again. We come across strange fathers in 
our day ! 
However, I promptly ceased to laugh. I laughed only because 
I had discovered so quickly the cause of my bad mood. Presently, 
however, without any connection with the incident, I recalled yester­
day's conversation with my interlocutor relati:Jᆅ to the question : 
What will contemporary children (.arry into '· . ͢ which was dear 
and sacred in their childhood ? After that I beban to think about 
my idea of the casualness of the present-day family . . .  and again 
I sank into most disagreeable musing. 
It may be asked : What is that casualness ? What do I mean 
by this term ? I answer : To my way of thinking, the casualness 
of the contemporary Russian family consists of the loss by the 
modern fathers of every general idea about th.:o:r families, an idea 
general to all fathers, tying them all together, which they them­
selves believe in, and which they would teach their children to be­
lieve, conveying to them this faith for their Jives. 
Please note : This idea, this faith may, perha!J:., be erroneous 
so that the best of the children may subsequently renounce it, 
or, at least, correct it for their own children. Even so, the very 
existence of such a general idea binding society and the family 
is already the beginning of order, i.e., moral order, which, naturally, 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
is subject to change, progress, correction, J admit-but-order just 
the same. Nowadays, however, there is no such order because there 
is nothing general and binding, nothing in which all fathers believe. 
Instead there are : first, wholesale, sweeping renunciation of the past 
(renunciation and nothing positive) ; second, attempts to say some­
thing positive, yet neither general nor binding, but everyone in his 
own way,-attempts parcelled into units and individuals, devoid 
of experience, practice, even without full faith in them on the 
part of their inventors. At times these attempts have an excellent 
nucleus but they are unseasoned, abortive, and, occasionally-even 
ugly, in the form of a sweeping admission of everything heretofore 
prohibited on the theory that all that is old is stupid-this to the 
point of the silliest notions, such as the permission given to seven­
year-old children to indulge in smoking tobacco. 
Finally, an indolent attitude toward work : apathetic and in­
dolent fathers, egoists : "Eh, let things come as they will ! Why 
should we worry ! -Children will grow up like the rest. They'll 
adjust themselves. But they are a great bore ! Better had they 
been nonexistent." Thus, as a result-disorder, parcelling and casual­
ness of the Russian family, while hope is virtually in God alone : 
11Let's trust that He may send us some little general idea, so that 
we may again unite I "  
Of course, order of this kind produces disconsolateness ; the 
latter, in turn, increases indolence, and in hot-headed individuals 
cynical, angry indolence. However, even at present there are many 
by no means indolent but, on the contrary, very diligent fathers. 
These are mostly fathers with ideas. Some fellow listens, for in­
stance, to some things which in themselves are not stupid at all ; 
he reads two or three clever books, and all of a sudden he decides 
to reduce the whole upbringing and all his duties toward the family 
to nothing but beefsteak : 11Underdone bef-steak ; and, of course, 
Liebig . . .  
," etc. Another, most honest man in se, who in days 
gone by used to be considered a wit, has discharged three of his 
children's nurses : "These rascals are quite impossible : I strictly 
forbade it. And can you imagine, yesterday I walked into the chil­
dren's room and I saw her putting Lizochka in the cradle, crossing 
her, and I heard her teaching the child that prayer 'Mother of 
God'; 'Forgive papa and mama . .  .' This I strictly forbade I I 
have decided to engage an English woman. But will she be better ?" 
A third chap is busy trying to find a mistress for his son who is 
scarcely fifteen years old : 110therwise, you know, he may develop 
those dreadful hahits, or else someday he might pick up someone 
in the street . . .  contract a venereal disease . . .  No, it's better to 
take care of this matter beforehand." A fourth one initiates his 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
seventeen-year-old boy into the most progressive "ideas," and the 
lad in a most natural manner (since what can come of certain 
knowledge prior to the acquisition of life experience ?) reduces these 
progressive ideas (often very good ones) to the formula : "If there is 
nothing sacred, this means that one may perpetrate any villainy." 
Granted, in these cases the fathers are hot-headed ; yet, is it 
in many of them that this ardor is justified by something serious­
minded, by reasoning and suffering ? Do we have many such fathers? 
-Mostly it is nothing but liberal giggling, echoing somebody else's 
voice. And thus the child carries into life, aside from everything 
else, a comical memory of his father, his droll image. 
But these are the "diligent" ones, and there aren't so many 
of them. The lazy ones are incom(>arably more numerous. Every 
transitional and disintegrative state' of society generates indolence 
and apathyᆆ since in such epochs only very few are capable of 
seeing clearly what is ahead of them and of not being led astray. 
The majority, however, is confused, loses the thread, and, finally, 
gives it all up : "Eh, to hell with everything ! What are those duties 
when we ourselves are unable to say anything intelligently ! I wish 
I myself could manage to pull through life somehow, and why should 
I bother about duties ! "  And now, these indolent fellows, if they 
happen to be rich, are even complying with their duties in a suitable 
manner : they dress and feed thetr children well ; they hire gov­
ernesses and after that teachers ; finally, their children matriculate 
in universities, but . . .  there is no father, there is no family ; the 
lad enters life alone because his heart has not lived, it is not bound 
with the youth's past, with family or childhood. 
However, this refers only to ᆇhe rich m,.:' : these are well-off, 
but are there many who are well-off ?-The . ajority, the over­
whelming majority, are poor. Therefore, in the face of the fathers' 
indolence as regards the family, the childrer are altogether left to 
the mercy of chance ! Poverty, the troubles of their fathers are 
reflected in their hearts in gloomy pictures, in memories at times of 
a most venomous character. Till a very advanced age the children 
keep recalling their fathers' pusillanimity, quarrels in their families, 
accusations, bitter reproaches, even curses upon them, for extra 
mouths ; and what is still worse,-sometimes the baseness of their 
fathers, mean acts perpetrated for the sake of obtaining a position 
or acquiring money, foul intrigues, hideous servility. ,\nd long after, 
maybe all their lives, the children ᆈe inclined blindly to accuse these 
men, having derived nothing from their childhood that might miti­
gate that filth of their memories, and to size up truthfully, realis­
tically, and, therefore, acquittingly, those now elderly people in 
whose midst their early years dragged out so sadly. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
These, however, are still the best children ; whereas the ma­
jority of them carry into their lives not only the filth of memories, 
but the filth itself ; these deliberately provide themselves with it ; 
they fill their pockets with it in order to make practical use of it­
no longer with gnashing of pain, like their parents, but with light 
hearts. "Everybody"-they say-"lives in dirt. Only dreamers rave 
about ideals ; to be sure, it's more handy to be surrounded with 
filth. . . 
. " 
"But what do you wish ? What are those memories which 
children should have derived from childhood in order to sterilize 
the dirt of their families and to acquire an 'acquitting' attitude, as 
you say, toward their fathers ?" I answer : What can I, singlehanded, 
say if society in toto has no reply to it ?-There is nothing common 
among contemporary fathers, said I ;  there is nothing binding them 
togethᆉr. There is no great idea (it has been lost), no great faith 
in their hearts in such an idea. And it is only such great faith 
that is capable of generating the beautiful in children's memories 
-decidedly ! -despite the cruelest surroundings of their childhood, 
poverty and even moral filth itself which surrounded their cradles I 
Oh, there are instances when even the most degraded father, 
but one who has preserved in his soul even a remote former vision 
of the great faith in the idea, has managed to transplant its seed 
and the great sentiment into the susceptible and thirsting souls of 
his pitiful children, and later he has been wholeheartedly forgiven 
by them because of this benefit, despite everything else. 
Man should not step out of childhood into life without the 
embryos of something positive and beautiful ; without these a gen­
eration should not be permitted to start on its life journey. Look : 
do not the contemporary fathers, from among the ardent and dili­
gent, believe in this ? Oh, they fully believe that without a cohesive, 
general moral and civic idea it is impossible to bring up a genera­
tion and let it start on its life journey ! But they themselves have 
lost the general idea, and they are dismembered. They are united 
only h the negative, and even this in a negligent manner. They 
are disunited in the positive ; besides, essentially, they do not even 
believe in themselves, since they are echoing somebody else's voice, 
they have joined an alien life, an alien idea, and they have lost all 
connection with their native Russian life. 
Howevtr, I repeat, there are a few ardent ones ; thᆉre are 
infinitely more of those who are indolent. By the way, do you 
remember the Djunkovskys' trial ? This is quite a recent trial. It 
took place only on June IO of the current year at the Kaluga 
Circuit Court. Amidst the thunder of the current events, perhaps, 
only very few took notice of it. I have read the account of it in 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
The New Times, and I don't know if it has been reported in other 
papers. This was a case of the Przemysl landowners, Major Alex­
ander Afanasievich Djunkovsky, fifty years old, and his wife Eka­
terina Petrovna Djunkovsky, forty years old, charged with cruel 
treatment of their young children,-Nikolai, Alexander and Olga . 
. . . At this point it may be noted that the children in question 
were of the following ages : Nikolai, thirteen years old ; Olga, twelve 
years old, and Alexander, eleven years old. And-anticipating things 
-I may add that the defendants were acquitted by the court. 
In my judgment, this trial graphically reveals much that is 
typical in our present-day life, and yet the banality of it is the most 
surprising thing. One feels that there is nowadays an extraordinarily 
large number of precisely such Russian families, of course, not 
exactly identical ; not everywhere does one find such accidentals 
as scratching of heels (this will be discussed further) ,  but the essence 
of the matter, the fundamental trait of many similar families, is 
identical. This is precisely the type of an "indolent family," to 
which J have juᆊᆋ referred ;-if not a complete and not a wholly 
correct type (especially judged by certain most exceptional and 
characteristic details) ,  nevertheless a very remarkable specimen of 
that type. However, let the readers judge for themselves. The de­
fendants were committed to trial by decree of the Moscow Court 
of Appeals. Now, let me remind the readers of the indictment. I 
am reprinting it from The New Times, as it was stated there, i.e., 
in an abridged form. 
3 
THE CASE OF THE PARENT.> DJUNKOVSI< " 
AND THEIR 
OwN CuiLDREN 
"The defendants Djunkovᆌky, possessL1g a certain fortune, 
and employing a suitable number of servants, have placed their 
children Nikolai, Alexander and Olga in a position altogether dif­
ferent from that of their other children. Not only did they fail to 
treat them as parents, and fondle them, but having left them with­
out supervision, they g11ve them poor subsistence (living quarters, 
clothing, beds and meals) ,  compelling them to such occupations as 
scratching their heels, etc., thus inciting and maintaining in the said 
children a feeling of discontent and irritation, whir fJ led them to 
perpetrate upon their deceased sis1ᆍr an act which will be referred 
to further. All this combined could not fail to exercise a harmful 
influence upon the health of the children. It appears, for example, 
from the case, that Olga is suffering from epilepsy. 
"Besides not contributing by either supervision or care to the 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
moral development of these children, the defendants have been re­
sorting to measures which cannot be termed mild corrective meas­
ures for young children. Thus, the defendants used to lock up their 
children for a considerable time in the toilet room, left them home 
in a cold room, almost without food, or had them take dinner and 
sleep in a servant's room, thus placing them in company with per­
sons hardly capable of contributing to their correction ; finally, the 
defendants frequently beat their children with anything that hap­
pened to be around-even with fists, rods, switches, with a whip 
intended for horses-with such cruelty that it was frightful to be­
hold and (according to the testimony of the boy Alexander) so 
that the child's back ached five days after one of these castigations. 
Such beatings came as a result not always of some mischef, though 
trifling, but just incidentally-of mere caprice. 
"A soldier's widow, Sergeeva, who was employed by the Djun­
kovskys as a laundress, among other things, testified that the de­
fendants disliked their children Nikolai, Alexander and Olga, who 
slept separately from the other children, downstairs, in one room, 
on the floor, on felt ; that they were covered haphazardly (they had 
one torn blanket) ; that they were given servants' meals, resulting 
in their continual hunger. They were shabbily clothed : in summer 
they wore different kinds of shirts, and in winter-short fur cloaks. 
To these children Mrs. Djunkovsky was worse than a step-mother ; 
she beat them, especially Alexander, with whatever happened to be 
around, and at times simply with her fists. When she flogged 
Nikolai, it was horrible to behold. The children were naughty, but 
merely as children are. They were treated particularly badly in the 
evenings, when they had to scratch their mother's heels ; this lasted 
an hour, or longer,-till the mother fell asleep. Formerly this used 
to be done by the servants, includuing Sergeeva, who at length re­
fused to engage in this occupation because her hands swelled l 
"From the testimony of Ousachkova it appears that Alex­
ander and Olga wallowed on the floor, on dirty pillows, generally 
they were kept in a dirty state-in a pig's haunt it's cleaner than 
in their room. 
"Nobleman Lubimov, who lived as a tutor with the Djunkov­
skys until August 1875, asserted that Nikolai, Olga and Alexander 
were kept poorly, and that, at times, they had to go barefooted. 
From a statement by Miss Shishova-a graduate of the Nicholas 
Institute, who, until August 1874, was employed as governess of 
the defendants' children, and whose deposition, because of her non­
appearance, was read at the trial-it appeared that Mrs. Djunkovsky 
was an egoistic woman, who, just like her husband, never fondled 
her children Alexander and Nikolai. Shishova explained the general 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
absence of order at the home of the defendants and their indifference 
to their children by the neglect of the defendants of everything, 
even of themselves. Their business affairs were always embroiled, 
and they were continually in trouble ; they were incapable of keep­
ing house. Mrs. Djunkovsky, who was anxious not to be bothered 
with anything, entrusted her husba1ul with the task of punishing 
the children, which he did. And even though that witness had never 
been present at the castigations, nevertheless she stated that in 
punishments there was no cruelty. It happrned-further stated peda­
gogue Shishova-that Mrs. Djunkovsky, or even I, locked up the 
children for mischief in a room where there was a water closet, but 
that room was no colder than the other rooms in the apartment, 
and it was heated. Shishova herself punished the children with a 
leather lash, but it was a small lash. To the knowledge of the wit­
ness, the children have never been denied food for several days. 
"The boys Nikolai and Alexander made reserved depositions 
to the examining magistrate ; however, from them it appear5 that 
they }>ഐrl been ftoᆎᆏed with a leather lash used for horses, as well 
as with a switch, which was also employed by their tutor Lubimov. 
On one occasion Alexander's back ached for five days after he had 
been flogged by his mother because he had brought some potatoes 
from the kitchen to his sister Olga for her lunch. 
"Djunkovsky in hi!> defense referred to the fact that his 
children were utterly spoiled, and in support of his contention he 
related the following incident : when his eldest daughter Ekaterina 
died, and while her body was lying on a table, the boys Nikolai 
and Alexander cut some twigs in the garden, beat the deceased on 
her face with them, and kept sayinJ! : Now, wr··1 make fun of you 
for complaining against us l 
"At the trial the defendants pleaded 'not guilty.' Defendant 
Djunkovsky asserted that he was spending 'lore money for the 
upbringing of his children than his means permitted ; that he felt 
very sad that he had failed to achieve h1s aim, and that his children 
were growing from bad to worse. 
"The eldest son, Nikolai, before he had entered high school, 
used to be a good boy, but after he had attended school for a 
certain time he lt>arned to steal. Prior to his matriculation he used 
to know his prayers, but subsequently he forgot them-for the 
reason that in high school he declared himself a Catholic and re­
ceived no religious instruction wh.: ᆐoever, in spite oi the fact that 
Nikolai's certificate of birth had been produced, and therein it was 
stated that he was of Orthodox faith. 
"In her last speech Mrs. Djunkovsky stated that she had em­
ployed several governesses for her children, that unfortunately she 

766 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
had misjudged them all, as well as the tutor, but that now the 
father himself was taking care of the upbringing of the children, 
and that she hoped that they would be completely reformed." 
Such was the case. As stated above, the defendants were 
acquitted. Why not ? The remarkable thing is not that they were 
acquitted but that they were brought to trial and tried. What court 
could have found them guilty, and of what ? Oh, certainly there 
is a court which can find them guilty, clearly specifying their guilt, 
but not a criminal court with jurors who judge on the strength 
of statutory law. And in written law nowhere is there a provision 
making it a punishable offense for fathers to treat their children 
indolently, incompetently and heartlessly. Otherwise it would be 
necessary to condemn half of Russia-nay, far more than that ! 
Besides, what is "heartless treatment" ? It would have been dif­
ferent had there been cruel tortures-something dreadful and in­
human. But I recall in the trial of Kroneberg, who was accused of 
inhuman treatment of his child, the lawyer opened the Code of 
Laws and read some sections dealing with cruel treatment, brutal 
torture, etc., with a view to proving that the acts of his clients 
were not subject to any of them, in which it is clearly defined 
what is to be understood as cruel and inhuman torture. And I also 
recall that these definitions were so cruel that decidedly they were 
akin to the tortures of the Bulgarians by the bashi-bazouks, and 
if there was no impaling or cutting strips out of one's back, there 
were broken ribs, arms, legs-and what not ?-so that some leather 
lash, a small one at that according to Miss Shishova's statement, 
most certainly doᆑs not conform to that section of the Code of Laws 
and give ground for indictment. "They flogged with a rod"-they 
say. Well, who doesn't flog children with rods ? Nine-tenths of 
Russia practices this. By no means can this be subject to the provi­
sions of criminal law. "They flogged for no good reason, for pota­
toes."-"No, sir, not for potatoes"-Mr. Djunkovsky might have 
replied-"here, everything came together : for depravity, because 
they, the brutes, beat the deceased daughter Ekaterina on her 
face."-"We did lock them up in the toilet room. But the toilet 
room was heated-what more do you want ? A lock-up is always a 
lock-up."-"Why, then, did you feed them with servants' food, and 
why have you made them sleep virtually in a pigs' sty, on some 
sort of sprea4, with one torn blanket ?"-"Well, sir, this was also 
punishment, and besides, it is immaterial whether or not the blanket 
was full of holes. I am spending on the education of my children 
more than my melins permit, and the law doesn't have to dig into 
my pockets to count my money."-"This, then, is the reason why 
you didn't fondle your children ?"-"Now, wait, show me please a 
section in the Code of Laws which would prescribe to me, under 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
threat of punishment, to fondle my children-especially such 
naughty, heartless, miserable pilferers and brutes I "-"Finally, is it 
for the same reason that you have adopted a wrong system of 
bringing up your children ?"-"Well, what system of upbringing 
does the criminal 13;w prescribe under threat of punishment ?  Be­
sides, it isn't the business of the law . . .  
" 
Briefly, I maintain that it was impossible to drag the Djun­
kovskys' case into a criminal court. And thus it came to pass : they 
were acquitted, and nothing came of their prosecution. And yet 
the reader feels that there may-perhaps, already did-ensue a real 
tragedy. Oh, this is a case for a different court. What court ? 
What ?-Well, for example, l\Hss Shishova, a pedagogue-she 
makes her deposition and in it she renders a verdict. Let us note 
that this Miss Shishova-even though she herself did flog the chil­
dren with a leather lash ("only it was a small one"), nevertheless 
seems to be a clever woman : it is impossible to define the Djun­
kovskys' characters more precisely and in a more clever way than 
she diക it. "ᅽ'Irs. D.;unkovsky"-says she-"is an egoistic woman. The 
Djunkovskys' houᅾe is in disorder . . .  because of the deje1tda1tts' 
neglect of everything, includi1tg even themselves. Their business 
affairs are always embroiled ; they are always in trouble ; they do 
not know how to keep house, they suffer, and yet, more than any­
thing, they ::_.eek tranquillity : l\Irs. lJjunkovsky, who has been con­
tinually avoiding any disturbance, entrusted even the punishment 
of the children to her husband . . . .  " In a word, l\Iiss Shishova, 
having lived with the Djunkovskys, formed an opinion that they 
were heartless egoists, and mainly-indolent egoists. Of course in­
dolence was the cause of eternal r!i<:order in t!•' . : r  house, disorder 
also in their affairs, despite the fact that there 
·as nothing they 
sought more than tranquillity : "Eh, to hell with you ! Would that 
we could only_ pull ourselves thrC'ugh life ! "  
From whence do their indolence and apathy come ?-God 
knows l Is it because they suffer from the contemporary chaos of 
life, in which it is so difficult to understand anything ? Or has con­
temporary life given so little response to their spiritual aspirations, 
wishes and quests ? Or, finally, is it because of the failure to com­
prehend the thing.: taking place all around, that their own concep­
tions became disintegrated, so that they no longer could be collected, 
and disillusionment ensued ?-! don't know, I don't k tlow, but ap­
parently they are educated peoplt ,vho in days past-maybe even 
now-used to love things beautiful and lofty. The scratching of 
heels would not contradict this ; it is precisely something on the 
order of lazy, apathetic disillusionment, an indolent pastime, a 
thirst for solitude, repose and warmth. Here we are dealing with 
nerves,-and precisely not so much idleness as craving for rest and 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
solitude, i.e., segregation from all duties and obligations. Yes, of 
course, here there is egoism, and egoists are capricious and cowardly 
in the face of duty : in them there is a perpetual, cowardly aversion 
to binding themselves with any duty. 
It should be borne in mind that this continual and passionate 
craving to avoid any duty almost always generates and fosters in 
the egoist the conviction that, contrariwise, everyone with whom 
he is in contact is to be charged as regards him with some obliga­
tion, tax or liability. No matter how silly this fantasy is, neverthe­
less, in the long run, it takes root and develops into irritable dis­
content with the whole world, and into a bitter and often angry 
feeling toward everything and everybody. Noncompliance with these 
imaginary obligations is felt by the heart as an affront, so that 
you will never in your whole life surmise why a certain egoist is 
perpetually angry with you. This peevish feeling extends also to 
his own children-oh, to the children par excellence. Children are 
the predestined victims of this whimsical selfishness ; besides, they 
are the nearest at hand, and what is most important-there is no 
control : "They are my own children I "  
Don't be surprised that this hateful feeling, constantly irri­
tated by the reminder of the neglected duty toward the children, 
and the constant sticking before your eyes of these new little indi­
viduals demanding everything from you, and impudently (alas,­
not impudently but in a childish manner I ) , not understanding that 
you need your repose, and attaching to it not the least significance, 
-don't be surprised, I say, that this spiteful feeling even for one's 
own children may, at length, transform itself into real vengefulness, 
and, encouraged and provoked by impunity-even into bestiality. 
Indeed, indolence always generates bestiality and culminates in it ; 
bestiality not from cruelty, but precisely from laziness. These are 
not cruel, but specifically, indolent hearts. 
And now this lady who is so fond of repose, to the point of 
insisting that her heels be scratched, having finally grown irascible 
because she alone never has peace, everything around her being in 
a state of disorder and requiring her constant presence and atten­
tion,-this lady jumps from her bed, seizes a switch and flogs, flogs 
her own child unquenchably, insatiably, malignantly so that "it is 
horrible to look at her"-as the maid-servant testified-and why, for 
what reasolt? Because the boy brought from the kitchen to his 
hungry little sister (suffering from epilepsy) a few potatoes ; that 
is, she beats him for a kind act, for the fact that the child's heart 
has not yet been aepraved, has not yet grown callous. "All the same, 
I forbade it, but you did it. Now, then, don't do your kind thing, 
but do my wicked thing ! "  Nay, this is hysterics ! 
The children sleep in filth ; "in a pigs' sty it is cleaner," with 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
one torn blanket for the three of them : "Never mind, they deserve 
it"-reasons their own mother-" they don't let me rest 1 "  And she 
reasons thus not because her heart is cruel,-no, perhaps by nature 
her heart is kind and good,-but, see, they don't let her rest ; she 
can't attain tranquillity in her life ; the further it goes, the worse 
it grows, and here, on top of it, an• these children ("What for ? 
Why were they born ?") ; they grow, they are naughty, and every 
day they require more and more work and attention I Nay, if this 
be hysterics it has been accumulating over a period of whole years. 
Side by side with this sick mother of the family (brought to 
the state of sickliness) ,  stands before the court the father, Mr. Djun­
kovsky. Well, maybe he is even a very good man ; it seems that 
he is an educated man, not at all a cynic ; on the contrary, he 
understands his fatherly duty to such a point that his heart is 
afflicted. Almost with tears he complains in the court room about 
his young children ; he stretches out his arms : "I did everything 
for them, everything : I hired tutors, governesses. I spent more 
monev on them than my means would permit, and they, the brutes, 
began tc. sleal, tht:y beat their decea଱ed sister on her face." In a 
word, he considers himself right. 
The children stand right there, nearby. It is noteworthy that 
they made "reserved, cautious depositions," i.e., they complained 
little, and Jefended themselves but !"lightly, and I don't think that 
was due to mere fear of the parents, to whom they would have to 
return just the same. On the contrary, it would seem that the fact 
itself that their father was being tried for his cruel treatment of 
them might have made them bolder. Simply, they felt uneasy par­
ticipating in a trial against their father, to be ଲ·anding at his side 
and testifying against him, wherea:. he, heedless 
f the future, and 
without giving thought to the feelings which her:-:eforth would re­
main in the hearts of these children, not even suspecting what they 
would carry into their future from the experience of that day,-he 
accused them and revealed everything :hat was bad in them, their 
shameful deeds,-complaining to the court, to the public, to society. 
Even so, he considers himself right, while Mrs. Djunkovsky 
fully, unhesitatingly, believes in the future. Shଳ declares to the 
court that everything is the fault of bad tutors and governesses ; 
that she is disillusioned with them, but that now when her husband 
expects to take charge of their children's upbringing they "will be 
completely reformed." (Quite ! Quite I )  However, God help them. 
By the way, let me note son.ething concerning the mischief 
of the young Djunkovskys. 
The fact that they beat their deceased sister on her face 
with rods is, of course, disgusting and repulsive. But let us try to 
be impartial, and I swear that we shall find that even this is merely 

770 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
children's mischief-precisely childish "fantasticality." This is some­
thing caused by children's imagination and not by depraved hearts. 
Children's imagination, by its very nature, particularly at a certain 
age, is extremely susceptible and inclined toward fantastic things. 
This is especially true of those families in which-though people live 
in close proximity to one another, each one always before the eyes 
of the other-but in which, nevertheless, the children are segregated 
into a group apart-by reason of their fathers' perpetual troubles 
and lack of time. "Learn your lessons ! Stick to your books ! No 
mischief ! "-This is what they hear all the time ; and they sit over 
their little books, in their designated corners, not even daring to 
swing their feet. At night, in their pigs' sty, when falling asleep, 
or when learning their weary lessons, or while locked up in the 
toilet room, the little Dj1u1kovskys might have accustomed them­
selves to strange fantasies-both kind, heart-felt and spiteful ones, 
or simply in a children's fashion-to fairy, fantastic ones : "ᆒow, 
were I older"-thus the boy might have been fancying-"! would 
go to war, and then I would come back here. That despicable fellow, 
the tutor, would ask : 'Where have you been ? How did you dare to 
leave the class-room ?'-And I would pull the order of Saint George 
out of my pocket, and would insert it into my button-hole ! He 
would be scared and would fall on his knees ! "  
When the sister died, one of the three, trying to warm him­
self under the edge of his torn blanket, while falling asleep, could 
have invented this : "Do you know what, Kolia, God has deliberately 
punished her because she was wicked, and informed on us. Now 
she sees from above ; she would like to denounce, but she can't. 
Let's beat her tomorrow with rods. Let her look from above, let 
her see it and be angry that she can't complain ! "  
I swear that perhaps, a few days later, the kids repented in 
their hearts that they had perpetrated such a disgusting stupidity. 
Children's hearts are tender. In this connection I know this little 
incident. A certain mother of seven children died. One of the kids, 
a little seven- or eight-year-old girl, seeing her dead mama, began 
to wail desperately. She wept so much that she had to be carried 
to the children's room almost in an hysterical condition. People 
didn't know how to console her. A foolish woman, a hanger-on who 
happened to be there, comforting the little girl, suddenly told her : 
"Don't cry ! Why do you cry so bitterly ?-She didn't like you. Do 
you remember how she punished you ? How you had to stand in 
the corner ? Don't you remember ?"-The fool tried to make things 
better ; she must- have thought that the child would stop crying 
and would quiet down.-She did achieve her aim : suddenly the girl 
stopped crying. Moreover, both next day, and at the funeral, she 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
771 
displayed an indifferent, restrained, offended air, as if implying : 
"She didn't like me ! "  The thought that she was an offended, per­
secuted, disliked child appealed to her imagination. Will you be­
lieve it, this happened to an eight-year-old child. However, the 
child's "fantasticality" did not last long : several days later the 
little girl again began to grieve for her mother so strongly that 
she fell sick. After that, all her life, the daughter could think of 
her mother not otherwise than with reverence. 
It goes without saying that the little Djunkovskys should 
have been punished for their offense in connection with their late 
sister. But this was a childish, silly, fantastic offense which did 
not signify any depravity of their hearts. As to the prank of the 
boy Nikolai at high school declaring himself a Catholic in order 
to avoid religious instruction, it was a childish prank par excellence : 
he was showing off to impress his schoolmates : "See, you have to 
receive religious instruction, and I got rid of it ; I fooled all of 
them thanks to the fact that my family name sounds Polish." 
Deddedᆓy, this w<.s but a school-trick-a foolish and bad one, for 
which he should have been severely punished ; still, one shouldn't 
be despairing of the boy and imagining that he was so debauched 
that he had turned into a rogue. But Djunkovsky, the father, seems 
to have believed this ; otherwise he would not have complained so 
lamentingly in court. 
It happens in our courts that when defendants are acquitted 
(especially, when they are obviously guilty, but are freed only 
through the mercy of the court ) the presiding judge, announcing 
the defendant's discharge, sometimes utters a frw words for their 
edification on the subject of how tl.Ly should acr · 1t that acquittal, 
what they should derive from it for their lives am 
•
•
 1ow they should 
behave to avoid trouble in the future. In cases of this kind, the 
presiding justice speaks, as it were, on behalf 01 society as a whole, 
in the name of the state. 
Perhaps the verdict of acquittal was announced to the de­
fendants Djunkovskys without any such admonition.-This I do 
not know, but I am simply imagining what th::- presiding judge 
might have told them when announcing to them their discharge. 
This is what I believe he might have told them. 
4 
THE IMAGINARY SPEECH OF TilE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT 
"Defendants, you are acquitted. But rP:Ilember that in addi­
tion to thjs court, there is another court-that of your own con-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
science. Act so as to make that other court, too, acquit you, even 
though at some future time. 
"You have declared that now you yourselves intend to take 
charge of the upbringing and education of your children : had you 
done so previously, probably there would have been no trial in­
volving your children such as you have stood here today. But I 
am afraid : Do you possess sufficient strength for putting into effect 
your good intention ? It is not enough to venture upon such a task ; 
one has to ask oneself : Will there be sufficient zeal and patience 
to accomplish it ? I do not wish, I do not dare, to say that you are 
heartless parents who hate your children. Besides, to hate one's 
own children is almost an unnatural thing, and therefore impossible. 
And to hate children who are still so little is a nonsensical and even 
ridiculous thing. However, indolence, indifference, lazy desuetude 
of such prime, natural and highly civic duty as the upbringing of 
one's own children in reality are apt to generate even a dislike of 
them, almost hatred, virtually a feeling of some personal vengeance 
upon them, especially as they grow older, as their natural needs 
increase,-in the measure of your own realization of the fact that 
much must be done for them, much labor has to be invested, which 
means that much of one's own self-sufficient segregation and repose 
has to be sacrificed. 
"Moreover, ever increasing mischief of the neglected chil­
dren,-the inculcation in them of bad habits,-the apparent distor­
tion of their minds and hearts finally may implant a direct aversion 
to them even in parents' hearts. In your fervent, tearful complaints 
about the vices of your children we all heard here and perceived 
your profound, genuine sorrow,-sorrow of all ill-starred father of­
fended by his children. However, think a little and reason : what 
could have made them better ?-For instance, it developed at the 
trial that for their indolence and pranks you used to lock them 
up, at times, for several hours, in the toilet room. Of course : a 
lock-up is a lock-up, and, besides, your toilet room was heated 
so that here there was no cruel torture. However, is this so ?-While 
sitting there, feeling his humiliating and shameful situation, the 
child could be growing spiteful ; most fantastic perverted and cynical 
visions could have passed through his mind ; he could have com­
pletely lost .his love-love of his own nest and even of you, his 
parents, sinc:fe it could have seemed to him that you do not value 
his feelings for you at all, nor his human dignity, whereas even 
within a child, the smallest child, there is structuralized human 
dignity. This you should remember. It appears that you have given 
no thought whatsoever to the fact that these thoughts-mainly these 
strong, though childish; impressions of his-he will later carry into 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
773 
his life and will bear them in his heart, perhaps, till his very grave. 
"In the first place, have you yourself done at least something 
to avoid the humiliating necessity of placing the child in such a 
place, thereby shaming him and holding him up to ridicule ?-For 
later on in life, he will unfailingly raise this question, putting it 
squarely before himself. You maintain that you have done everything 
for your children, and it seems that you yourself are convinced 
of this. But I don't believe that you have done everything ; and 
when you uttered these words with such sorrowful feeling, I am 
sure that concerning this point you had grave doubts. You have 
stressed the fact that you have been hiring tutors and spending 
money in excess of your means. 
"No doubt children need a tutor, and in employing a tutor 
you have acted as a zealous father. However, to hire a tutor to 
teach the children certain subjects, of course does not mean to 
deliver the children to him, to forget all about them, to get rid 
of them, so that they may be of no further bother to you. It seems 
that )'C'll have done precisely this, believing that, having paid money, 
you have done everything, even more, everything in excess of your 
means ; whereas I wish to assure you that you have done the 
minimum of what you could have done for them. You merely 
ransomed yourself with money from a debt, from a parent's ob­
ligation, in the belief that you have already accomplished every­
thing. You forgot that their childish little souls require constant, 
uninterrupted contact with your parents' souls ; that spiritually you 
always will be for them, so to speak, on a mountain as an object 
of love, of genuine respect and beautiful imitation. Science is one 
thing, but a father must always be to his chiirlren a good, con­
spicuous example of that total moral inference I" bich their minds 
and hearts derive from science. Your heart-felt and invariably ap­
parent care for them, your love, would warm like a clement ray, 
everything sown in their souls, and of course this would yield an 
abundant and good crop. But it seems that having sown nothing 
yourself, and having delivered them to a sower alien to your family, 
you demanded a crop, and unaccustomed to this task, you demanded 
it too soon, and, having failed to get it, you grew irascible and angry 
with . . .  kids, your own children,-and also much too soon I 
"All this is because the upbringing of children is a labor, a 
duty-sweet to some parents even despite troubleᆔ, scarcity of 
means, poverty, and to others, to quite a few well-to-do-parents, 
a most oppressive and burdensome duty. This is why they seek to 
free themselves from it with money, if money is available. However, 
if money doesn't help, or if, as in the case of many, there is none, 
they usually resort to severity, cruelty, torture-to rods. I shall tell 

774 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
you what a rod is : In the family it is a product of the parents' 
indolence,-its inevitable result. Everything that could be achieved 
by labor and love, incessant training of children ; everything that 
could be accomplished by reasoning, explanation, admonition, pa­
tience, upbringing and example,-all these things, weak and im­
patient fathers, as a rule, hope to achieve by the rod : 'I shall not 
explain, but shall order ; I shall not suggest, but shall compel.' 
Now, what is the result ? A sly, secretive child will unfailingly 
submit ; he will deceive you, and your rod will not reform but 
merely deprave him. A weak, timid and kind-hearted child will be 
scared by your rod. Finally, a good-natured, naive child, with 
straightforward and candid heart, will first be offended and then 
embittered and you will lose his heart. 
"It is difficult, often very painful, for a child's heart to tear 
itself from one it loves ; however, once it does tear itself loose, there 
arise in it awful, unnaturally precocious cynicism, bitterness ; and 
the feeling of justice becomes distorted. Of course, all this takes 
place only when cruelty is caused by the parents' egoism,-when 
the owner of the field, having failed to sow it, expects a rich harvest. 
In such cases cruelty and injustice on the part of the fathers, unre­
strained, keep increasing-this is the usual course. 'Don't do the 
good that is yours, but do the bad which is mine.'-This is what, at 
length, becomes the motto, and the child is punished even for a 
good deed, for those potatoes which he brings to his sister from 
the kitchen.-How can the heart fail to grow embittered ? How can 
its conceptions fail to become distorted ? 
"Not being cruel and even loving your children, you punished 
them by your neglect of them, by humiliating them : they slept in 
a filthy room, on some sort of a spread ; they ate their meals not 
from your table, but with the servants. And of course you believed 
that, finally: they would feel their guilt and would be reformed. 
In the reverse case, one would have to suppose that you did so 
from hatred of them, from vengeance upon them-in order to wrong 
them. However, the court refused to find it so, and attributed your 
actions to the erroneous calculation of an educator. Now you intend 
to bring them up and tutor them : this is a difficult task, despite 
your wife's belief that it is an easy one. 
"Your children are not in the court room. I ordered them 
to be shown C'Ut, and, therefore, I am at liberty to touch upon the 
main point in this difficult task. The principal thing is that both 
sides will have to forgive much. They must forgive you the bitter 
and painful impressions of their children's hearts, their embitter­
ment and their vices. On your own part, you must ask them to 
forgive your egoism, your neglect of them, the distortion of your 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
775 
feelings toward them, your cruelty, and, finally, the fact that you 
were here standing trial because of them. I am saying so, since, 
upon leaving the court room, you will put the blame for everything 
not upon yourselves, but unfailingly upon them-of this I am sure I 
Thus, embarking upon the difficult task of bringing up your chil­
dren, ask yourselves : Can you accuse yourselves, and not them, 
of all the offenses and crimes which were your fault and not theirs ? 
-If you can, you will succeed in your task I This would mean that 
God has cleansed your sight and enlightened your conscience. If 
you can't, you had better not undertake your task. 
"The second difficult thing with which you will be faced in 
your work is the necessity of overcoming, exterminating and modi­
fying in their hearts many a former impression and memory. How­
ever, so much has to be obliterated, so much created anew, that 
I am wondering-how are you going to achieve it ?-Oh, if you 
should learn to love them,-of course, you would succeed in every­
thing. Still. even love is a labor, even in love one has to learn,­
wot:!d .) l•U believe it? Finally, do you believe, are you convinced, 
that in your beautiful undertaking you will not be stopped by some 
petty, most primitive and trivial every-day trouble, about which 
at present, perhaps, you are not even thinking but which may 
constitute a most important obstacle to your good intentions. Every 
zealous and sensible father knows, for instance, how important it 
is in every-day family life to restrain himself in the presence of 
his children from negligence, so to speak, in family relations, from 
a certain laxity and licentiousness, from bad and ugly habits, and, 
principally from inattentiveness to, and neglect of, their childish 
opinion of yourselves, the disagreeJ.!}e, ugly an'· comical impres­
sion which so easily may form itself in them "' 1en they behold 
haphazardness in family life. 
"Would you believe that, at times, a l.Onscientious father 
must radically re-educate himself for h!s children ? Oh, if parents 
are kind, if their love for their children is zealous and fervent, 
children will forgive them much and will later forget many a comical 
and ugly thing, and they will not unconditional!ᆕ, condemn them 
even for some of their altogether bad deeds ; on the contrary, their 
hearts will unfaili11gly find extenuating circumstances. But in dis­
cordant and spiteful families it might be quite different. Your wife, 
as it developed at the trial, has a pathological habit r i  having her 
heels scratched before her sleep. 'i '1e maid-servant has testified 
that even to her this duty was painful, that 'her hands swelled.' 
Now, imagine that boy, that son of yours, who is compelled to do 
the scratching instead of the maid-servant ! Oh, if the mother had 
loved him sincerely and tenderly, and he were convinced of this, 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
now and in the future he would recall this weakness of a person 
dear to him with a good-natured smile, even though he might have 
felt angry at the time when he was forced to scratch. But I imagine 
how he must have felt, what thoughts came to his mind, when he 
had been sitting for an hour or longer engaged in this ridiculous 
occupation before a creature who did not love him, who was ready 
every minute to jump up and start flogging him for no reason what­
ever. In this case, the insistence upon this service unfailingly must 
have seemed to him humiliating, disdainful and despicable. He 
could not fail to realize-or, to put it more correctly, to feel-that 
his mother did not need him as a son ; that as a son she despised 
him, forgot him, compelling him to sleep on some sort of a spread ; 
and if she remembered him, it was only in order to beat him, and 
that, therefore, she needed him not as a son but merely as some 
sort of a curry-comb I 
"And yet you are complaining that the children became cor­
rupted, that they are callous monsters, that 'they learned to steal ! '  
Strain your imagination a little ; try to visualize your son in the 
future, say, at the age of thirty, and think with what disgust, with 
what spiteful feeling and contempt, he will recall this episode of 
his childhood . . .  That he will remember it till his death hour, 
there can be no shadow of doubt. He will not forgive, he will begin 
to hate his memories, his childhood ; he will curse his parents' former 
nest and those who, at the time, were with him in that nest I 
"At present, without fail, you will have to exterminate these 
memories, to transform them, to drown them with other, new, 
potent and sacred sensations-what a colossal task I Dreadful to 
think of it ! Nay, thr task which you are about to undertake is 
much more difficult, far more difficult, than it seems to your wife ! 
"Don't be angry, don't take offense at my words. In address­
ing you, I am performing a pressing duty. I am speaking on behalf 
of society, in the name of society, the state and the fatherland. 
You are parents ; they are your children ; you are contemporary 
Russia ; they are future Russia. What would happen to Russia 
should the Russian fathers evade their civic duty, seeking solitude 
or-more correctly-indolent and cynical segregation from society, 
from their people and from their prime duties toward the latter ? 
"The most dreadful fact is that this is so common : you are 
not the only ones, even though others may be committing the same 
errors as yours under different formulae. Still more significant is 
the fact that you. are not only not the worst, but in many respects 
the best among contemporary fathers, since in your hearts the 
realization of your duty is not dead, even though you have failed 
to comply with it. In you there is no absolute negation of the duty. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
777 
You are not cold egoists. On the contrary you are irritated-whether 
against yourselves or against your children I shall not venture to 
ascertain. However, you have proved capable of taking to your 
hearts your failure and of being profoundly grieved by it I 
"And so, let God help you in your determination to correct 
your failure. Seek love, and store love in your hearts. Love is so 
omnipotent that it even regenerates ourselves. It is only with love, 
and not with our natural authority over our children that we can 
buy their hearts. Besides, nature herself, among all our obligations, 
helps us most in our duties toward children, having so provided 
that it is impossible not to love them. And how can one fail to 
love them ?-Should we cease to love children, whom then could 
we love ? And what would then become of us ?-Recall that it was 
only for the sake of children, for the sake of their little golden­
haired heads, that our Saviour promised us to curtail 'the times and 
the seasons.' It is for their sake that the suffering in the regeneration 
of human society into a more perfect one shall be curtailed. Let 
this pprfection come to pass, and let the suffering and perplexities 
of our civilization come to an end I 
"And now you may go,-you are acquitted . . . .  
" 
CHAPTEI'. II 
1 
Again Segregation. The Eighth Part of Anna Karenina 
NOWADAYS, MANY of the educated Ru. 'lns are wont to 
say : "What people ? I am the people myself I "  Ill the eighth part 
of Anna Karenina, Levin, the beloved hero of the author of the 
novel, says about himself that he himself is the people. Some time 
in the past, speaking of Anna Kareninu, I have called that Levin 
"pure in heart Levin.'' Still adhering to my belief in the purity of 
his heart, I do not believe that he is "the people." On the contrary, 
at present I perceive that he, too, is ardently seᆖᆗing segregation. 
I became convincerl of th1s after reading this eighth part of Anna 
Karenina about which I began to speak in the opening pages of the 
current July-August issue of my Diary. 
It stands to reason that Levil' as a matter of fa..:L, is not an 
actually existing person but merely &. fiction of the novelist. Never­
theless that novelist, a man of immense talent, endowed with a 
considerable intellect and very much respected by educated Russia, 
-that novelist portrays in this ideal, i.e., in a fictitious character, 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
partly also his own view of our contemporary Russian reality,­
which is clear to anyone who has read this remarkable work. Thus, 
when dwelling upon the nonexistent Levin, we shall thereby dwell 
upon the actual view of current Russian life of one of the most 
noted contemporary Russian men. This is a momentous subject 
for discussion even in our thunderous epoch permeated with so many 
colossal, horrible and quickly shifting events. 
This view of so renowned a Russian writer, precisely on a 
matter of so considerable interest to all Russians as the all-Russian 
national movement of the past two years in connection with the 
"Eastern question," is comprehensively and finally revealed in this 
eighth and last part of his work, which was rejected by the editor 
of The Russian Messenger as a result of his disagreement with the 
convictions of the author, and which recently was published in 
separate book form. The substance of this view, as I understood it, 
mainly comes down to this : First, that the so-called national move­
ment is by no means shared by our people, who do not even under­
stand it. Second, that all this was deliberately fabricated in the 
beginning by certain individuals ; that subsequently it has received 
the support of journalists prompted by motives of profit-to have 
their periodicals read. Third, that all volunteers were either lost 
men, or drunkards, or else-simply stupid fellows. Fourth, that this 
whole so-called enthusiasm of the Russian national spirit in support 
of the Slavs not only has been fabricated by certain individuals and 
supported by mercenary journalists, but that it has been counter­
feited contrary to, so to speak, our fundamental principles ; and 
Fifth, that all the barbarities and unheard-of tortures perpetrated 
against the Slavs are incapable of inciting in us Russians an imme­
diate sentiment of compassion, and that "such an immediate feeling 
for the oppression of the Slavs does not and cannot exist." The latter 
is expressed finally and categorically. 
Thus "the pure in heart Levin" has embarked upon a segrega­
tion, deviating from the overwhelming mass of the Russians. How­
ever, his view is neither novel nor original. It would have been 
quite useful and much to the taste of many people in Petersburg 
who last winter reasoned along the same lines. They were socially 
rather prominent men, and it is to be regretted that the book has 
appeared somewhat belatedly. 
What has caused such a gloomy segregation in Levin and 
such a gruff deviation on his part I cannot determine. True, he is 
an ardent, "restless" man, addicted to all-embracing analysis, and, 
strictly speaking, a man who does not believe anything within him­
self. Nevertheless, he is a man "pure in heart." This I maintain­
even though it is difficult to conceive by what mysterious, and at 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
779 
times ridiculous, paths a most unnatural, a most artificial and ugly 
feeling may penetrate the sincerest and purest heart. However, I 
may also remark that although many people assert-and as stated 
above, I clearly perceive it myself-that in the person of Levin the 
author in many respects expresses his own convictions and views, 
thrusting them into Levin's mouth almost forcibly, sometimes ob­
viously even sacrificing the artistic element, nevertheless I am by 
no means confounding the person of Levin, as portrayed by the 
author, with the person of the author himself. I am saying this 
in a state of a somewhat bitter perplexity, since although much 
of what the author expresses in the person of Levin obviously con­
cerns only the latter, as an artistically delineated character, never­
theless this is not what I had expected from such an author. 
2 
CoNFESSIONS OF A SLAVOPHILE 
Yes, not th1s. Here I am compelled to express some of my 
feelings, notwithstanding the fact that when I began to publish 
my Diary last year I made up my mind that literary criticism would 
have no pbce in it. But I shall reveal the feelings of a non-critic 
even though apropos of a literary production. 
In fact, I am writing a Diary, i.e., I am recording my im­
pressions apropos of everything that strikes me most in current 
events. This is why, for some reason, I prescribe for myself an 
artificial obligation to conceal, quand-meme, perhaps the strongest 
impressions I experience only on the grounds :hat they pertain to 
Rusian literature. Of course, at tlu: bottom of his decision there 
was also a correct thought, nevertheless a liteul adherence to it 
is incorrect. This I see, for the reason itself that this is but the 
letter of the proposition. Besides, the literary work, on which thus 
far I have kept silent, to me is no lonᆘer simply a literary product, 
but a whole fact bearing a different significance. 
Perhaps I shall express myself too naively ; still I venture to 
say this : this fact of an impression from a nove!, from fiction, from 
a poem, last spring coincided in my soul with the enormous fact 
of the declaration of the current war. And both facts, both impres­
sions, have found in my mind a real mutual connection and a point 
of mutual contact which, to me, i࢘ striking. Instead of laughing at 
me, you had better listen to me. 
In many respects I hold Slavophile convictions, even though 
I am not quite a Slavophile. In Russia, Slavophiles up to the present 
are conceived differently. To some people, even in our day, much 

780 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
as in the past,-for instance, to Bielinsky-the Slavophile doctrine 
signifies nothing but kvas and radish. Actually Bielinsky did not go 
beyond this conception of it. To others (and let me note to a great 
many, almost to the majority of the Slavophiles themselves) it 
means the desire to liberate and unite all the Slavs under the sov­
ereign rule of Russia-a rule which may not even be strictly po­
litical. 
Finally, to others still, the Slavophile doctrine, in addition to 
that assimilation of the Slavs under the rule of Russia, signifies 
and compriᆙes a spiritual union of all those who believe that our 
great Russia, at the head of the united Slavs, will utter to the 
world, to the whole of European mankind and to civilization, her 
new, sane and as yet unheard-of word. That word will be uttered 
for the good and genuine unification of mankind as a whole in a 
new, brotherly, universal union whose inception is derived from 
the Slavic genius, pre-eminently from the spirit of the great Rus­
sion people who have suffered so long, who during so many cen­
turies have been doomed to silence, but who have always possessed 
great powers for clarifying and settling many bitter and fatal mis­
understandings of Western European civilization. Now, I belong to 
this group of the convinced and the believing. 
Again, in this connection there is nothing to banter and laugh 
at : these are old words and an old faith, and the fact itself that 
this faith does not .die and that these words continue to sound, 
that on the contrary they grow increasingly stronger, that they 
expand, acquiring new partisans, new convinced workers,-this fact 
alone should finally compel adversaries and mockers of this doc­
trine to envisage it at least a little more seriously and to abandon 
vain and ossified animosity against it. But for the time being enough 
has been said. 
The point is that last spring our great war for the great exploit 
began. Sooner or later, despite all temporary reverses postponing 
the settlement of the matter, this exploit will be brought to an 
end, even though specifically during the present war it may not 
prove possible to carry it to its full and desired conclusion. This 
exploit is so great, and the aim of the war is so incredible to Europe, 
that of course she must be indignant over our cunning, she must 
disbelieve the declarations which we made when beginning the war, 
and she must i.D every way, by all means, harm us, and by allying 
herself with our enemy-though not through an open, formal po­
litical accord-struggle against us, even if only clandestinely, in 
anticipation of an open war. And all this, it goes without saying, 
is the result of our declared intentions and aims I 
"The great Eastern eagle, shining with his two wings on the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
peaks of Christianity, soared over the world." He seks no conquest 
or acquisition, no expansion of his borders ; but the liberation of 
the oppressed and the downtrodden, giving them new life for their 
benefit and that of mankind. For, no matter how one may reason, 
no matter how sceptically one may view the matter,-essentially, 
such is our aim, and it is this that f 
.. urope refuses to believe. And 
I assure you that Europe fears not so much the possible growth 
of Russia's strength as she fears the fact that Russia is capable of 
undertaking such tasks. This you should particularly bear in mind. 
To undertake something not for one's direct benefit seems to Europe 
so unusual, so in discord with international customs, that Russia's 
act is naturally regarded by Europe not only as the barbarity of 
"a backward, bestial and unenlightened nation" capable of vileness 
and stupidity, of embarking in our age upon something on the order 
of the crusades of the dark ages, but even as a most immoral fact 
fraught with danger to Europe and supposedly threatening her 
great civilization. 
:&..,,,,k, who : n Europe likes us, especially at present ?-Even 
our friends-our notorious formal friends, so to speak-even they 
candidly announce that they are glad of our reverses. A defeat of 
the Russians, to them, is more delightful than their victories : it 
cheers thPrn, flatters them. However, in the event of our success, 
these friends have already agreed to exert all efforts to derive from 
it more benefits than Russia herself might derive . . . .  
But this, too, is to be discussed later. I began to speak prin­
cipally about the impression which last spring, after the declaration 
of war, must have been felt by all those who believe in the great, 
universal significance of Russia. Thiഏ unheard·vᆚ war for the weak 
and the oppressed, for the sake of giving ther. life and liberty­
and not for the purpose of usurping them,-this aim of the war, 
long unheard-of in the world, suddenly beca:ne to all of us who 
believe in Russia a fact significantly and solemnly reaffirming our 
faith. This was no longer a dream, a conjecture, but a reality which 
began to come true. "Once it begins to come true, it must come 
to an end, to that great, new word which Russia, heading the Slavic 
union, will utter to Europe. And even that word is already about 
to reveal itself, despite the fact that Europe still does not under­
stand and will long refuse to believe it. All this is in full accord 
with the things which the believers have been mainᆛaining."-Yes, 
the impression was a solemn aDL' significant one, and of course 
the faith of the believers must have been still more tempered and 
strengthened. 
However, so grave was the matter that even in the minds 
of the believers disturbing questions began to arise : "Russiᆜ and 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Europe 1 Ru!\Sia draws her sword against the Turks ; yet, who knows, 
she may come to blows with Europe.-Wouldn't this be too early ? 
A conflict with Europe is something different from a conflict with 
the Turks, and it must come to pass not through the sword alone." 
-This is what the believers have always understood. But are we 
ready for that other conflict ?-True, the word already began to 
reveal itself ; even so, leaving Europe aside,-does everybody under­
stand it in Russia ? Now, we, the believers, are prophesying, for 
instance, that only Russia possesses those elements which are capa­
ble of solving the fatal all-European problem of the small fry, with­
out battle and blood, with neither hatred nor spite, but that Russia 
will utter that word when Europe is already stained with blood, 
since prior to that no one in Europe would hear our word ; even 
should they hear it, they would altogether fail to understand it. 
Yes, we, the believers, believe in this. Meanwhile, what do 
our own Russians in Russia answer ?-We are told that these are 
but ecstatic conjectures, convulsionism, mad dreams, fits. We are 
asked for proofs, firm indications and accomplished facts. At present 
to what shall we point in corroboration of our prophecies? To the 
liberation of the peasants,-to a fact which is still so little under­
stood by us as a measure of the manifestation of Russian spiritual 
strength ?-To the innateness in us and naturalness of our brother­
hood, which in our day is clearly brought to light, emerging from 
everything that for· centuries has been keeping it down, despite the 
litter and filth which it encounters, which smear and distort its 
features to the point of unrecognizability ? But suppose we should 
point to these fads : we should again be told that they all are con­
vulsionism, mad dreams, and not facts at all ; that they are being 
interpreted differently and confusedly, and that, as yet, they can 
serve as a proof of nothing. 
This is what virtually everybody would tell us. And yet we 
who understand ourselves so little and who have so little faith 
in ourselves-we come in conflict with Europe I Europe-but it is a 
dreadful and sacred thing-Europe I Oh, do you know, gentlemen, 
how this very Europe, this "land of sacred miracles," is dear to 
us, Slavophile dreamers,-according to you, haters of Europe I Do 
you know how these "miracles" are dear to us ; how we love and 
revere with a stronger than brotherly feeling, those great nations 
inhabiting hsr, all the great and the beautiful which they have 
created ! Bo you know what tears we shed, what pangs of the heart 
we feel when we suffer and fret over the destinies of that dear and 
kindred land of otirs ; how the dark clouds, overcasting more and 
more its horizon, frighten us !-Never did you, gentlemen-our Eu­
ropeans and Westerners-love Europe as strongly as we love her, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
we-Slavophile dreamers and, according to you-her inveterate 
enemies ! 
Nay, that land is dear to us ; dear is the peaceful victory of 
the great Christian spirit preserved in the East. . . .  And in our 
fear of colliding with Europe in the course of the present war, we 
are more than anything else afraid of the possibility that Europe 
may not understand us, that even as heretofore, as always, she 
may face us with haughtiness and contempt, with her sword, still 
as wild barbarians unworthy to speak in her presence. 
Yes, we have asked ourselves, what should we tell her, what 
should we show her so that she might understand us? Apparently, 
we still have so little of anything which is intelligible to her and 
for which she can respect us.-Our fundamental key idea, our em­
erging "new word"-she will not understand for a long, long time. 
She needs intelligible facts now, intelligible from her present point 
of view. She will ask us : "Where is your civilization ? Does one 
perceive harmony of your economic forces in that chaos which we 
all sࢗc !n Russia ? Where is your science, your art, your literature ?" 
3 
Anna Karcnma AS A FAcT oF SPECIAL SIGNIFICANCE 
And it was precisely at that time, i.e., last spring, one evening, 
that I happened to meet in the street one of our writers most 
beloved by me. We meet very rarely, once in several months, and 
always accidentally, mostly in the street. He is one of the most 
eminent members of that group of five or six ,;,f our belles-lcttrists 
whom in their conjunction, for some reason, ; . .  ople are used to 
call "the Pleiad." At least, critics, after the public, have specially 
segregated them from the rest of the belles-1£ •trists ; this has been 
in effect for some time-the same group of five, and "the Pleiad" 
does not increase in number. 
I like to meet this kind romancer of whom I am so fond, 
and it gives me pleasure to prove to him, among other things, that 
I flatly refuse to believe he has grown antiquated-as he maintains 
-and that he is not going to write anything else. From my brief 
conversation with him I always carry away some finP, perspicacious 
word. 
That time there were plent) •1f topics for conversation : the 
war had already begun. But at once and directly he turned to Anna 
Karenina. I had just then finished reading the seventh part, with 
which the novel came to a close in The Rus.זian Messenger. In his 
appearance, my interlocutor is not an enthusiastic man. But on 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
that occasion he impresed me with his firmness and ardent in­
sistence upon his opinion of Anna Karenina. 
"This is an unheard-of, outstanding thing. Who among our 
writers can match him ? And in Europe, who can exhibit at least 
anything equal to his ? Has there been in their literature, in recent 
years, and long before, a work which would be comparable to his ?" 
In this verdict-which I fully shared-! was chiefly impressed 
with the fact that this reference to Europe precisely fitted in with 
the questions and perplexities which, at that time, arose of their 
own accord in the minds of so many people. The book in my opinion 
directly assumed the proportions of a fact capable of giving Europe 
an answer on our behalf, of that long-sought fact which we could 
point out to Europe. Of course, people will start vociferating scof­
fingly that this is only literature, a novel of some kind ; that it is 
ridiculous to exaggerate so greatly and appear in Europe with noth­
ing but a novel. I know that people will vociferate and laugh, but 
this doesn't trouble me : I am not exaggerating and I am looking 
at things soberly. I know myself that, as yet, this is but a novel ; 
that this is but a drop of what is needed ; however, to my way of 
thinking the principal thing is that this drop already exists, it is 
given, it is here in reality and in truth. Therefore, if it exists ; 
if Russian genius has proved capable of generating this fact, it is 
not doomed to impotence ; it can create ; it can give something which 
is its own ; it can originate its own and finish uttering it when the 
times and the seasons come to pass. 
Besides, this is far from being only a drop. Here, too, I am 
not exaggerating : 1 am fully aware of the fact that not only in 
some individual member of the Pleiad, but in the Pleiad as a whole, 
strictly speaking, you will not find that which is called ingenious, 
creative force. In all our literature there have been but three un­
questioned men of genius with an unquestioned "new word"­
Lomonosov, Pushkin and partly Gogol. And this whole Pleiad (in­
cluding the author of Anna Karenina) emerged directly from Push­
kin, one of Russia's greatest men, who, however, is still far from 
being understood and explained. 
In Pushkin there are two principal, or guiding, ideas, and both 
comprise the symbol of the whole future character, of the whole 
future mission of Russia, and, therefore,-of our whole future 
destiny. The fkst idea is the universality of Russia, her responsive­
ness and actual, unquestioned and most profound kinship with the 
geniuses of all ages and nations of the world. This thought was 
expressed by Pushkin not as a mere suggestion, doctrine or theory ; 
not as a dream or prophecy, but it was actuaUy fulfilled by him, 
embodied forever in his ingenious creations and proved by the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
latter. He was a man of the ancient world ; he was a German ; he 
was an Englishman, profoundly cognizant of his genius, of the 
anguish of his aspirations (Feast During the Plague), and he was 
also the poet of the East. He said and proclaimed to all these 
peoples that Russian genius knew them, understood them,-was con­
tiguous with them, that, as a kim.man, it could fully reincarnate 
itself in them ; that universality was given only to the Russian spirit 
-the future mission to comprehend and to unite all the different 
nationalities, eliminating all their contradictions. 
Pushkin's second idea is his turn toward the people, his sole 
reliance upon their strength ; his covenant that in the people, and 
only in them, we shall fully discover our Russian genius and the 
cognizance of its destiny. And again, not only did Pusbkin point 
this out, but he was the first actually to achieve it. It was with 
him that in Russia began the conscious turn toward the people, 
which was unthinkable before him, ever since the time of Peter's 
reform. All our present-day Pleiad has been laboring pursuant to 
!lis dictates, ard after Pushkin it has uttered nothing new. All 
embryos were in him, and were indicated by him. Besides, the 
Pleiad has elaborated only the tiniest part of the things indicated 
by Pushkin. As against this, they elaborated that which they did 
with such opulence of power, with such depth and precision that 
Pushkin, of course, would have recognized them. 
It stands to reason that Anna Karcnina, in its idea, is not a 
new or unheard-of thing in Russia. On the contrary we could 
directly point out to Europe that its source is Pushkin, himself 
the brightest, firmest and most undeniable proof of the independ­
ence of Russian genius and its riకht to the 15• · • 1test, most universal, 
pan-human and all-assimilating significance 
. 1 1  the fuutre. (Alas, 
no matter how much we might point out, our writers would not 
be read in Europe for a long time to con_ఖ; and even should the 
Europeans start reading them, they would not understand and prize 
them. In fact, they are altogether unable to prize them, not because 
of the paucity of their intellectual faculties, but because we con­
stitute to them a wholly different world, as if we had descended 
from the moon, so that it is even difficult for them to admit our 
very existence All this I know, and I speak of "pointing out to 
Europe" only as my own conviction of our right to our independence 
in the face of Europe.) 
Nevertheless Anna Kart. ·na, as an artistic production, is 
perfect. It has appeared at an opportune moment, and in our epoch 
no work in European belles-lettres can compare with it. Secondly, 
by its idea, the novel is something inherently ours, our own, spe­
cifically something constituting our Russian peculiarity as distin-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
guished from the European world, our national "new word," or, 
at least, its beginning-precisely such a word as one doesn't hear 
in Europe, which, however, she needs so badly, despite all her 
haughtiness. 
I am unable to embark here upon literary criticism, and will 
merely say a few words. 
In Anna Karenina is expressed a view of human guilt and 
criminality. People are portrayed in abnormal circumstances. Evil 
existed before them. Caught in the whirl of deceit, people commit 
crime and fatally perish. It will be perceived that this is a thought 
dealing with the most beloved and antiquated European themes. 
However, how is this problem solved in Europe ? Everywhere in 
Europe it is solved in a twofold manner. 
First solution : The law has been laid down, framed, formu­
lated and conceived during millennia. Evil and good are defmed, 
weighed, measured, and their degrees have been historically ascer­
tained by the sages of mankind by means of uninterrupted training 
of the human soul and highly scientific elaboration of the extent 
of the cohesive force of human intercourse. It is ordered to abide 
blindly by this enacted code. He who fails to abide by it, he who 
violates it, pays for it with his freedom, his property, his life, pays 
literally and inhumanly. "I know"-says their own civilization­
"that this is blind, cruel, impossible, since a final formula of be­
havior cannot be elaborated while mankind is still in the middle 
of the road ; however, since there is no other solution, one has to 
abide by the written code,-abide literally and inhumanly ; without 
this it would be worse. At the same time, despite all the abnormality 
and absurdity of the organization which we call the great European 
civilization, let the forces of the human spirit be healthy and intact ; 
let not society be shaken in its belief that it is headed for per­
fection : let it not dare to think that the ideal of the beautiful 
and the lofty has been dimmed ; that the conceptions of good and 
evil are being distorted and twisted ; that normality is continually 
replaced by conventionalism ; that simplicity and naturalness are 
perishing, being continually suppressed by accumulating deceit l "  
The secoᆝd solution is the reverse : "Inasmuch as society is 
abnormally organized, it is impossible to make the human entity 
responsible for its consequences. Therefore, the criminal is irrespon­
sible, and at p. Lsent crime does not exist. To overcome crime and 
human guilt, it is necessary to overcome the abnormality of society 
and its structure. Since it takes long to cure the existing order of 
things, and besides, inasmuch as no medicine has been discovered, 
it is necessary to destroy society in toto and to sweep away the old 
order, as it were with a broom. After that everything has to be 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
started anew, upon different foundations, which are still unknown, 
but which nevertheless cannot be worse than the existing order and 
which, contrariwise, comprise many chances for success. The main 
hope is in science." 
Such, then, is the second solution : people are looking forward 
to the future ant-hill, and meanwhile the world will be stained with 
blood. No other solutions of guilt and human delinquency are being 
offered by the Western European world. 
However, in the Russian author's approach to culpability and 
human delinquency it is clearly revealed that no ant-hill, no triumph 
of ''the fourth estate," no elimination of poverty, no organization 
of labor will save mankind from abnormality, and therefore,-from 
guilt and criminality. This is expressed in an immense psychological 
analysis of the human soul, with tremendous depth and potency, 
with a realism of artistic portrayal hitherto unknown in Russia. 
It is clear and intelligible to the point of obviousness that evil in 
mankind is concealed deeper than the physician-socialists suppose ; 
that i഍എ no orgarization of society can evil be eliminated ; that the 
human soul will remain identical ; that abnormality and sin emanate 
from the soul itself, and finally, that the laws of the human spirit 
are so unknown to science, so obscure, so indeterminate and mys­
terious, tl1at, as yet, there can neither be physicians nor final judges, 
but that there is only He who Sdith : "Vengeance belongeth unto 
me ; I will recompense." He alone knows the whole mystery of the 
world and man's ultimate destiny. And man, as yet, with the pride 
of infallibility, should not venture to solve anything-the times 
and the seasons have not yet come. The human judge himself must 
know that he is not the final jndp:e ; that J:-. :,imself is a ;;inner ; 
that in his hands-scales and measures will 
. 
! an absurdity, if 
holding the scales and the measures he fails to submit to the law 
of the still insoluble mystery ?<ld to resort to the only solution­
to Mercy and Love. And that man should not perish in despair of 
the ignorance of his paths and destinies, of the conviction of the 
mysterious and fatal inevitability of evil, he has been given a solu­
tion. It is cleverly traced by the poet in the ingenious scene of the 
penultimate part of the novel,-in the scene ot the mortal illness 
of the heroine, when criminals and enemies are suddenly trans­
formed into superior beings, into brothers, who have forgiven each 
other everything ; beings who by mutual all-forgiv oness, have re­
moved from themselves deceit, g. წt and crime, and thereby at once 
acquitted themselves with full cognizance of the fact that they have 
become entitled to acquittal. 
But later, at the end of the novel, in a dark and dreadful 
picture of the degradation of the human spirit, traced step by step, 

788 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
in the delineation of that fatal condition when evil, having taken 
possession of man binds his every move, paralyzes every desire of 
resistance, every thought, every wish to combat darkness, invading 
the soul, which deliberately, with delight, with a passion for ven­
geance, is conceived by the soul as light,-in that picture there is 
so much edification for the human judge, for him who holds the 
scales and the measures that, of course, he will exclaim with fear 
and perplexity : "Nay, it is not always that vengeance belongeth 
unto me, and not always I who shall recompense." And he will 
not cruelly accuse the gloomily fallen criminal of having neglected 
the light of the solution,-always pointed out to him-and of having 
deliberately rejected it. At least, the human judge will not cling 
to the letter of the law. 
If we possess literary works of such power of thought and 
execution, why couldn't we later have our own science, our economic 
.and social solutions ? Why does Europe deny us independence, our 
own word?-These questions arise of their own accord. Indeed, one 
cannot presume the ridiculous thought that nature has bestowed 
upon us merely literary gifts. All the rest is a matter of history, 
of circumstances and of conditions of time. Thus, at least, our 
Europeans should be reasoning in anticipation of the judgment of 
the European Europeans. . . . 
4 
A LANDOWNER PRocuRING FAITH IN Goo FROM A PEASAN"I: 
Now that I have expressed my feelings, perhaps it will be 
understood how I was affected by the apostasy of such an author, 
by his segregation from the all-Russian great cause, and his para­
doxical untruth attributed by him to the people in his ill-starred 
eighth part of the novel, separately published by him. He simply 
robs the people of everything that is most sacred to them, depriving 
them of the principal sense of their life. It would have been far 
more agreeable to him should our people everywhere fail to rise 
with their hearts in defense of their brethren oppressed for their 
faith. It is only in this sense that he denies a fact despite its ob­
viousness. 
Of course, all this is merely expressed by the fictitious char­
acter of the nO¥el ; yet, I repeat, the author himself is too clearly 
visible by his side. True, this is a sincere book, and the author 
speaks from his heart. Even the most ticklish things (and in the 
book there are ticklish things) are fitted into it, as if by chance, so 
that despite all their ticklishness, you accept them at their face 
value without admitting the possibility of any crookedness in them. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Even so, I do not regard this book as such an innocent one. 
Naturally, at present it exercises-and can exercise-no influence 
whatever, save, perhaps, that it might once more sound as a "yea" 
to a certain secluded group. But the fact that such an author 
writes thus is very sad. This is sad for the future. But I had better 
get to business : I mean to object and to state precisely what has 
struck me. 
First, however, I shall deal with Levin-obviously, the prin­
cipal hero of the novel : in him the positive element is expressed 
in opposition, as it were, to those abnormalities which caused ruin 
and suffering to the other characters of the novel. Apparently, Levin 
was intended by the author to express all this. And yet, Levin is 
still not perfect ; he still lacks something. This should have been 
dealt with and settled so as to eliminate all doubts and questions 
as to who Levin is. The reader will later understand why I am 
dwelling on this and why I am not turning directly to the main 
subject. 
Lt"vin is 1-,a.ppy. The novel winds up with his glorification, 
but still he lacks inner, spiritual peace. He is tormented with the 
eternal problems confronting mankind : of God, eternal life, good 
and evil, and the like. He suffers because he is an agnostic and 
becauSt' he is unable to be appeased with the things which appease 
everybody, i.e., with personal benefit, self-adoration, or worship of 
one's own ideals, ambition, etc. This is a sign of magnanimity-is 
it not ? But nothing less could have been expected of Levin. By 
the way, it appears that he is well-read ; he is familiar with the 
works of philosophers, positivists and simple naturalists. But noth­
ing satisfies him. On the contr1.r:v, he becc,..,.·.; more conf<Jsed, so 
that in his leisure hours, when he is not occl: .ed with husbandry, 
he seeks refuge in woods and groves ; he even prizes his Kitty less 
than she deserves. 
And, unexpectedly, he meets a peasant, who, speaking about 
two morally different peasants, Mitiukha and Fokanych, expresses 
himself thus · 
"How can Mitiukha fail to get what's due him ! He'll bring 
pressure and collect his due. He has no pity for a peasant. But 
Uncle Fokanyᆞh,-is he going to skin a fellow ? Now he'll grant 
a loan ; now he'll let it go. This way, at times, he fails to collect 
his due in full, 'cause he's human." 
"Why should he let it go 1 
"No matter. See,-people are different : one fellow lives for 
no other purpose than his needs ; take Mituikha, for one ; he stuffs 
his belly-that's all. But Fokanych is a truthful old man. He lives 
for his soul, he remembers God." 

790 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
"What do you mean 'remembers God'? How does he live for 
his soul ?" Levin almost shrieked. 
"Why, that's simple :-according to truth, in God-like manner. 
People are different . . .  You for one, you'll not harm a man." 
"Yes, yes I So long I "-muttered Levin, losing his breath from 
emotion, and turning away, he took his cane and speedily went 
home. 
However, again he ran to the forest, lay down under aspens 
and began to think almost in a state of rapture. The word has been 
found ; all the eternal riddles have been solved,-and this by a 
simple peasant's word : "To live for one's soul ; to remember God." 
Of course, the peasant has told him nothing new ; he has known 
this for a long time. Nevertheless the peasant led his thought and 
prompted the decision at the most ticklish moment. 
Then there ensues a series of Levin's deliberations which are 
quite correct and pointedly expressed. This is the thought : Why 
should one seek with the intellect that which is already given by 
life itself, that with which every man is born, and by which (even 
against his will) every man abides and must abide ? Every man is 
born with conscience, with the conception of good and evil ; there­
fore he is born with a direct aim in life-to live for the good and 
to abhor the evil. With this the peasant and the master, the French­
man, the Russian, the Turk are born-they all revere the good (N. B. 
although many in an awfully peculiar manner of their own). And 
1-says Levin-sou,ght to perceive all this through mathematics, 
science, reason ; or else-1 was waiting for a miracle, whereas this 
was given me gratuitously,-it was born with me. And there is 
direct proof that it was given gratuitously : everybody in the world 
understands, or is able to understand that : "Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself." Essentially, this knowledge comprises man's 
whole law, and so it was enunciated to us by Christ Himself. And 
yet this knowledge is innate ; therefore, it is given gratuitously, 
since reason under no circumstance could have given it.-Why ?­
Because to "love one's neighbor," from. the standpoint of reason, is 
unreasonable. 
"Whence did I get this ?"-Levin asks himself-"Was it by 
reason that I arrived at the conclusion that one has to love his 
neighbor and hot oppress him ?-This I was told in my childhood, 
and I believed it gladly, because I was told that which was in my 
soul. And who rev.ealed it ?-Not reason. Reason discovered the 
struggle for existence and the law requiring that everybody who 
hinders the satisfaction of my desires should be oppressed. Such is 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
791 
the inference of reason. But to love one's neighbor could not have 
been conceived by reason since this is unreasonable." 
Furthermore, the recent scene with the children came to 
Levin's mind. The children began to roast raspberries in cups, over 
lighted candles, pouring milk, as from a fountain, into their mouths. 
The mother, having caught them in flagrante delicto, began to 
reprimand them, explaining that if they should spoil the plates and 
dishes and spill the milk, there would be neither vessels nor milk. 
Apparently, however, the children did not believe it, because they 
were unable to conceive "the full extent of that which they enjoyed, 
and therefore they were unable to understand that that which they 
were destroying was the very thing by which they lived." 
"This comes of its own accord"-so they reasoned-"there is 
nothing interesting or important in this, since this has always 
existed and always will exist. And everything is always the same. 
We don't have to think about it ; all this is ready. But we want 
to invent something which is ours, something new. And so we 
ᆟhot.ght of putting the raspberries into a cup and roasting them 
over a candle, pouring milk, as from a fountain, straight into our 
mouths. This is merry and new, and in no sense worse than drink­
ing from a cup." 
"Aren't we doing the same thing ; wasn't I doing it, when I 
was endeavoring to discover through reason the meaning of the 
forces of nature and the sense of man's life ?"-continued Levin. 
"And aren't all philosophical theories doing the same thing 
when they seek to lead man, by means of strange reasoning, un­
natural to him, to the knowledge of that which he has known long 
before, with such certainty that he could ࢕·'࢖ have lived without 
it ? Isn't it clear in the exposition of the li ·trine of every phi­
losopher that he knows in advance, as indubnably as the peasant 
Fedor,-and in no way more clearly than hn-the principal meaning 
of life ; and that he merely seeks to return by a doubtful rational 
path to that which is known to everybody ? 
"Now, what if children be let loose so that they may buy 
things themselves, manufacture plates and dishes, milk cows, and 
so forth ? Would they engage in mischief ?-Why, they would die 
of hunger. Well, what if we be let loose, with our passions, thoughts, 
bereft of the conception of the one God and Creator I Or without 
the conception of what is good, without the explanation of moral 
evil ! 
"Well, try to build something without these conceptions I We 
are merely destroying, because spiritually we are satiated. Precisely 
-children I " 
In a word, doubts are dissipated and Levin begins to believe. 

792 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
-In what ? As yet, he has not strictly ascertained this, but he be­
lieves. However, is this faith ? Joyously he puts this question to 
himself : "Is it possible that this is faith ?"-Presumably not. More­
over : men such as Levin can hardly possess final faith. Levin likes 
to call himself "the people," but he is a nobleman's son, a Moscow 
nobleman's son, of the middle-upper stratum whose historian Count 
Tolstoy pre-eminently has been. 
Even though the peasant has told Levin nothing new, never­
theless he has suggested an idea, and with this idea faith has begun. 
This alone should have demonstrated to Levin that he was not 
quite "the people," and that he had no right to speak thus about 
himself : "I myself am the people." But this I shall leave for further 
discussion. I merely wish to say that men like Levin, no matter 
how long tht'y be living amidst, or side by side with, the people, 
never will fully become the people. Moreover, in many ways they 
will never understand the people at all. Self-conceit, or an act of 
will-besides, so whimsical a will-is not enough to become the 
people of one's volition. Let him be a landowner, an industrious 
landowner ; let him be familiar · with peasants' pursuits ; let him 
mow and know how to yoke horses to a cart ; let him know that 
fresh cucumbers are served with honey. All the same, hard as he 
may try, there will remain in his soul a shade of what I believe 
may be denoted as sauntering, that very sauntering-physical and 
spiritual-which, much as he may resist it, was bequeathed to him, 
and which, of course, the people perceive in every nobleman, as, 
fortunately, they do not see things with our eyes. 
However, this too comes later. And he will again destroy his 
faith ; he will destroy it himself ; it will not persist long : some 
new twig will appear, and at once everything will fall apart. Kitty 
started to walk and stumbled. Now, why did she stumble ? If she 
stumbled, this means that she could not have not stumbled ; it is 
only too clear that she stumbled for such and such a reason. It is 
clear that in this case everything depended upon laws which may 
be strictly ascertained. And if this be so, this means that science 
governs everything. Where, then, is Providence ? What is its role ? 
Where is man's responsibility ? And if there is no Providence, how 
can I believe in God ? And so on, and so forth. Take a straight line 
and extend it into infinity. In a word, this honest soul is a most 
idle, chaotic soul, otherwise he wouldn't have been a contemporary 
Russian educated nobleman, and besides, of the middle-upper 
stratum of the nobility. 
This he brilliantly proves, hardly later than an hour after the 
acquisition of faith ; he argues that the people do not at all feel 
that which men in general are capable of feeling ; with one stroke 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
793 
he destroys the soul of the people in a most willful manner. More­
over, he announces that he has no pity for human sufering. He 
proclaims that "no immediate feeling of compassion for the op­
pressed Slavs exists or can exist," i.e., not only in him, but iD 
all Russians. "I am, so to speak, the people." Indeed, they value 
the Russian people much too cheaply. Well, they are old appraisers. 
Hardly an hour had elapsed after the acqui::;ition of faith, when 
raspberries again started roasting over the candle. 
CHAPTER III 
1 
Irritability of Amour-Propre 
CHILDREN CAME running in and announced to Levin that 
;;uc::.i.:- had arri· ed. "One of them swings his arms this way." It 
developed that guests had come from Moscow. Levin seated them 
under the trees ; honey and fresh cucumbers were served to them, 
and the guests at once embarked upon honey and the Eastern ques­
tion. 
All this, you see, dates back to last year. You recall : Cher­
niaiev, the volunteers, donations. Conversation promptly flares up 
because everybody is irresistibly attracted toward the main sub­
ject. Aside from the ladies, the interlocutors are : first, a Moscow 
professor, a nice but somewhat stupid fellow. Then comes a man 
(he is portrayed for this spedfiᆠ purpose) ./ enormouᆡ intellect 
and learning-Sergei Ivanovich Koznyshev, L( · .n's half-brother, by 
the same mother. This character is skillfully delineated in the novel, 
and, at length, he becomes intelligible (ᆢ man of the Forties). 
Sergei Ivanovich has just thrown himself-altogether and with zeal 
-into the Slavic work. The Committee has conferred upon him so 
many tasks that, recalling last summer, it is difficult to imagine 
how he could leave the work and go to the country for two whole 
weeks. True, if he had not come, there would have been no con­
versation at the apiary about the popular movement, and conse­
quently,-there would have been no eighth part of the novel, which 
was written exclusively for this conversation. 
You see, this Sergei Ivar. · 1ich, some two or three months 
prior to that, had published in Moscow some learned book on 
Russia, a book on which he had worked long and in which he had 
placed much hope. The book, however, pr'lved to be a failure, and 
a shameful failure. No one said anything about it and it pased 

794 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
unnoticed. At this juncture Sergei Ivanovich embarked upon the 
Slavic work with such zeal as could not have been expected from 
him. Thus it appears that he embarked upon it unnaturally : his 
whole enthusiasm for the Slavs was but an ambition rentrחe, and 
one feels that Levin cannot fail to be a victor over such a man. 
In the previous parts of the novel Sergei Ivanovich is very skillfully 
portrayed in a comital light. But in the eighth part it becomes quite 
clear that he has been conceived solely for the purpose of serving 
at the end of the novel as a pedestal for Levin's greatness. Still this 
character is delineated very successfully. 
As against this-the old Prince is one of the least successful 
characters. He also sits there and talks about the Eastern question. 
He is unsuccessful throughout the whole novel-not only in the 
part dealing with the Eastern question. This is one of the positive 
types designed to express positive beauty,-of course without sinning 
against realism : he has his weaknesses and almost comic traits, but 
he is quite respectable. He is the kindhearted character in the 
nᆣvel ; he is also the incarnation of common sense ; once he starts, 
he acts like a trained donkey : common sense and nothing but com­
mon sense. Nay, there is also humor in him, and, generally, human 
traits. The funny thing is that this old man is designed to represent 
wit. Having gone through the school of life, this father of numerous 
children, although they are well provided for in his old age, views 
everything around him with the calm smile of a sage,-with a smile, 
however, which is far from benign and inoffensive. He will give 
advice, but beware- of his jeu d'esprit-it is sharp as a razor. 
But unexpectedly an unfortunate thing happens : this man de­
signed to act as a wit ; this man full of common sense, God knows 
why, appears not only dev.oid of wit but is even somewhat trivial. 
True, he keeps trying-as he does throughout the novel-to say 
something witty, but absolutely nothing comes of his endeavors. 
The reader, finally, from delicacy, is ready to accept these attempts 
at wit, or, so to speak, throes of wit, for wit itself. But much more 
disappointing is the fact that this very man, in the eighth part of 
the novel,-true, published separately-expresses ideas which, I con­
cede, though also not witty (in this respect the old Prince is con­
sistent) are cynical and calumnious against a portion of our society 
and our peoplt;. Instead of a kindhearted fellow, there appears some 
sort of clubman who denies both the Russian people and everything 
that is good in them ; club irritation and senile bile sound in his 
words. However, the old Prince's political theory is in no sense new. 
It is a repetition for the hundred thousandth time of what, even 
without him, we hear every minute : "Here I am"-said the Prince 
-"I lived abroad, I read the papers, and I confess, prior to the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
795 
Bulgarian horrors, I was at a loss to understand why all Russians 
suddenly grew fond of their Slav brethren, whereas I feel no love 
for them. I was very grieved to think that I was a monster [this, 
you see, is a witticism : just fancy, he believes himself to be a 
monster I ] , or that Carlsbad afects me this way [double witti­
cism ! ] . However, having come bert', I calmed down [why, cer­
tainly I ] .  I see that, aside from myself, there are people who are 
interested only in Russia, and not in their Slav brethren." 
That's where we perceive real depth I One has to take interest 
only in Russia. So that help given to the Slavs is directly declared 
to be a non-Russian task. Were he to conceive it to be a Russian 
task, he would not have said that one has to take interest only in 
Russia, because to take interest in the Slavs would then naturally 
have signified an interest in Russia and her mission. Thus, the 
character of the Prince's conception comes down to a narrow under­
standing of Russian interests. Of course, we have heard these things ! 
A thousand times one may hear them I And in some circles one 
ht:ar::; co thing buᆤ this I 
However, here is something much more malignant. This is a 
conversation held a few minutes before that. The old Prince asks 
Sergei I vanovich : 
" ' . . .  For Christ's sake, explain to me, Sergei Ivanovich, 
whither are all these volunteers gomg ? With whom do they ftght ?' 
" 'With the Turks'-Sergci lvanovich, smiling, calmly replied. 
" 'But who has declared war upon the Turks ?-Ivan lvanovich 
Ragozov and Countess Lydia Ivanovna in company with Madam 
Staal ?' " 
[Here we are : he has betrayr:rl. himself. -͡ •u understand that 
this was the purpose of his questions. Perhap. this is the reason 
he hastened to come from Carlsbad. But this is a different matter, 
and the fact that the Prince started talking .. bout this, is, perhaps, 
even a good thing. Of course, this ic'lᆥa, too, is not new, but why 
is it reiterated ?-Last winter GUite a few people-those who needed 
it-kept asserting that somebody in Russia had declart'd war on the 
Turks. This was set forth. But this little idea started circulating 
and returned to its inYentors. Since last year no one at all had 
declared war on Lhe Turks, and such an assertion, to say the least, 
was an exaggeration. True, in the subsequent conversation Sergei 
Ivanovich gives joking replies, but naive and honE""ᆧ Levin, like a 
real enfant terrible, directly exprl. ,es that which is on the Prince's 
mind :] 
" 'No one has declared war ; but people sympathize with the 
sufferings of their neighbors, and they sE"ᆦk to help them'-said 
Sergei Iyanovich. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
11 'But the Prince speaks not of help'-said Levin, taking the 
side of his father-in-law-'but of war. The Prince says that private 
people have no right to take part in a war without the permission 
of the government.' 
[Now you see what Levin's concern is ? The question is put 
squarely ; besides, it is clarified by the stupid sally of Katavasov. 
Here is what Levin says further :] 
" 'Yes, my theory is this : on the one hand, war is such a 
beastly, cruel and awful thing that no man, not to speak of a Chris­
tian, can assume personal responsibility for its initiation ; this may 
be done only by a government which is instituted therefor and 
which is led to war inevitably. On the other hand, according to 
both science and common ʩense, in state affairs, especially in the 
matter of war, citizens renounce their personal will.' 
11Sergei Ivanovich and Katavasov, with ready objections, 
started speaking at the same time. 
11 'But that's the point, my dear, that there may be cases when 
the government does not comply with the will of the citizens, and 
then society declares its will'-said Katavasov. 
11Sergei Ivanovich, however, apparently, did not approve this 
objection." 
In a word it is pointed out, and insisted upon, that last year 
somebody in Russia, disregarding the government, declared war 
on the Turks. Levin, with his intellect, could have guessed that 
Katavasov was a little fool ; that Katavasovs may be found every­
where ; that last year's movement was precisely opposite to Kata­
vasov's ideas, since it was Russian, national, genuinely our move­
ment, and not a game in some sort of opposition. But Levin insists 
on his own ideas ; he pushes his accusation to the end. Not truth 
is dear to him but that which he has invented. Here are the argu­
ments with which he winds up his thoughts on the subject : 
". . . He [Levin] spoke, much as Mikhailych and the people 
who expressed their thought in the legend about the summoning of 
the Varangians : 'Rule over us and take possession of us. We gladly 
promise full obedience. We assume all labors, humiliations and 
sacrifices. But we shall not judge and render decisions.' And at 
present the people, according to Sergei I vanovich, have renounced 
this right which was bought at such a high price. He also meant 
to say that if public opinion is an infallible judge, why, then, are 
revolutions and the Commune not as lawful as the movement in 
support of the Slavs ?" 
Do you hear ? And no considerations will lead these gentlemen 
astray-no facts no matter how obvious. I have already said that 
it would have been better had the Prince and Levin refrained from 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
797 
such accusations. But who doesn't see that in one of them there 
is insulted amour-propre, while the other is a paradoxicalist. How­
ever, perhaps also in Levin there is piqued amour-propre, since no 
one knows what may suddenly pique man's vanity I 
\ 
And yet it is clear that the accusation is nonsensical ; besides, 
there can be no such accusation because it cannot exist. The facts 
were altogether different. 
2 
TOUT CE QUI N'EST PAS EXPIIESSEMENT PEIIMIS EST 
DEFENDU1 
War on Turkey was declared last year not by or in Russia, 
but in Slavic countries by the ruling princes, i.e., sovereigns-Prince 
Milan of Serbia and Prince Nicholas of ::\-lontenegro-who took up 
arms against Turkey because of the unheard-of persecutions, bar­
baritiᇆ;::., plunder .md massacres of her Slavic subjects, including 
Herzegovinans, who were compelled by these bestialities to rise 
against their oppressors. The incredible tortures and massacres to 
which Herzegovinans had been subjected became known in Europe. 
The news about these horrors also spread in Russia-first among the 
educated public, and later-among the people. Because it was in­
credible this news spread everywhere. Information was received 
that hundreds of thousands of human beings-old men, pregnant 
women, forsaken children, were leaving their homes, fleeing from 
Turkey to the bordering countries, anywhere, deprived of bread, 
shelter, clothing, driven by extre:!'!•ᆨ fear and ' .- '! instinct of self­
preservation. The princes, the Church and itᆃ dignitaries raised 
their voices in defense of the unfortunate ones and began to collect 
alms for them. Our people, too, started senᆩing them donations ; 
contributions to specific centers-editorial offices of magazines, 
branches of the forᆪr Slavic Committees-and in this there was 
nothing unlawful, anti-governmental or immoral. On the contrary, 
it may be boldly asserted that in this there wao: nothing but good. 
As to the Slavic princes who had started war against Turkey, 
neither Russia nor anyone in Russia was guilty of that. True, one 
of these ruling princes, namely, Prince Milan of Serbia, was not 
entirely independent ;  on the contrary, he owed the ിHI tan a certain 
vassal subordination so that in 01. 
of the Russian newspapers he 
was bitterly reproached for the fact that he was, so to speak, a 
rebel. And in order completely to abash him and put him to shame 
it was stated that he revolted against his "lord." But again, strictly 
!Everything that is not expressly permitted is prohibited. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
speaking, this is Prince Milan's personal affair, for which he alone 
can be held responsible. Neither Russia, however, nor any one in 
Russia, declared war last year, and therefore no one sinned against 
the Sultan. 
Meanwhile donations continued to be sent, but this is alto­
gether a different matter. Suddenly, one of the Russian generals, 
who at the time held no office, not yet an old man, only a major­
general, but one with a certain reputation because of his former 
rather successful military operations in Central Asia, of his own 
accord, proceeded to Serbia and offered his services to Prince Milan. 
His offer was accepted and he was enlisted in the service ; not, how­
ever, as commander-in-chief of the Serbian army, as it was rumored 
in Russia. This rumor persisted for a long time. 
It was at this juncture that Russian volunteers came into 
being. Unquestionably, however, there were volunteers even before, 
i.e., before Cherniaiev. Altogether, in the course of the past year, 
there were not so many volunteers, very few thousands, but they 
were seen off to Serbia decidedly by all Russia, especially by the 
people-the real people-and not by drunkards, as spiteful Levin 
particularly insists. He regards the volunteers also as drunkards. 
Yet this wasn't so ; the thing did not transpire in some secluded 
corner : it was known to everybody ; everybody could see it and be 
convinced ; i.e., all Russia decided that this was a good cause. 
On the part of the people there was revealed so much that 
was noble, touching and sound, that the whole movement last year 
by the Russian people in support of the Slavs, unquestionably will 
remain one of the best pages in their history. However, to defend 
the people from the Levins ; to prove to them that these were not 
drunkards, not seducers, but, on the contrary, men who knew 
what they were after,-to prove all this, in my opinion, is quite 
futile and unnecessary, and moreover, humiliating to the people. 
The main point is that all this transpired openly, in every­
body's sight. Facts have been reported which were remarkable and 
characteristic ;  they were recorded, memorized and will not be for­
gotten ; they can no longer be challenged. But I shall speak about 
the people later. 
As regards volunteers, it should have been expected that in 
their ranks, de by side with supreme self-sacrifice for one's neigh­
bor (e.g., Kireev) ,  there would be mere boldness, impulse, bravado, 
and so forth. All this came to pass exactly as it happens always 
and everywhere. True, no one has as yet counted the number of 
those tipplers and drunkards, those roving idlers, if such have ben 
among volunteers, who gave their lives there, far away, for a mag­
nanimous cause, so that there is no ground for attacking them so 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
799 
censoriously. even invectively. However, the assertion that the volun­
teers of last year were all revellers, drunkards and goodafor-nothing 
men is, to say the least, senseless, since-1 repeat-the thing trans­
pired not in some remote corner but in full view. 
But. at all events, last year positively none of the Russians 
declared war on a neighboring state, in defiance of the government. 
Ivan Ivanovich Ragozov and Countess Lydia lvanovna could not 
have declared war on the Turks had they even wished to do so. 
:Moreover, they did not rouse the volunteers, they did not lure or 
hire anyone ; everyone went absolutely voluntarily,-and this is 
known to everybody. But they did help the volunteers and, in 
addition, they did send money to the Slavic countries for the relief 
of the unfortunate, the exhausted and mutilated ; they did help 
with money the insurgents who rose in defense of the sufferers. This 
did take place, yes, it did, and was even accompanied with the most 
ardent wishes that the Turks, the blood-suckers, should break their 
necks.-Yes, this did take place. But the whole question is whether 
tJ:is i, ., declarat: ..n of war. If it is not,-is it or is it not forbidden 
by the government, i.e., is it forbidden to help with money those 
fighting for the Christians and to wish that the Turks should break 
their necks ?-Again, I do not believe at all that this is interdicted, 
since the matter was an open one, everybody saw, everybody par­
ticipated, while the volunteers received their foreign passports from 
the government itself. 
However, I do not know ; perhaps there is such a law "that 
private persons have no right to take part in a war without the 
permission of the government," i.e., that they have no right, with­
out a special permission of the grwrrnment, to · 'llist in the service 
of foreign sovereigns. Perhaps there actually 1. some such law, a 
very antiquated one, which has not yet been repealed. But the 
government itself could have invoked it, ᆫo why should Levin 
worry ? What has he got to do with all this ? And yet he is worried 
precisely about this . . . 
"Pardon, monsieur, mais il me semble que tout ce qui n'est 
pas expressement defendu est permis." 
"Au contraire, m(lnsieur: tout ce qui n'est pas expressement 
permis est defet;Ju." 
Which means : 
"I beg your pardon, sir : it seems to me that !·verything that 
is not expressely prohibited is pv ·nitted." 
"On the contrary, sir, everything that is not expressly per­
mitted is prohibited." 
This brief comical conversation of a man of order with a 
man of disorder took place in France. But this interpreter of order 

Soo 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
is appointed to keep order ; he is its interpreter and defender ; he 
is the proper person. But what is Levin's concern ? What kind of 
specialist in such a matter is he ? He keeps fearing that some kind 
of a right shouldn't be lost. Meanwhile the whole people, sym­
pathizing with the oppressed Christians, were perfectly aware of 
the fact that they were right, that they did nothing contrary to 
the will of their Czar, and that in their hearts they were in accord 
with him. Yes, the people knew this. Those who were equipping 
the volunteers thought exactly in the same way. Not one of them 
consoled himself, even though secretly, with the foolish thought 
that he was acting against the will of the government. The Czar's 
word was awaited with patience and great hope ; everybody had a 
presentiment of it, and they were not mistaken in it. In a word, 
the accusation dealing with the declaration of war is a fantastic 
one which falls of its own accord, and it cannot be sustained. 
But Levin and the Prince themselves exonerate the people 
from this accusation. They directly deny the participation of the 
people in the movement of last year. As against this they directly 
assert that the people understood nothing, could understand noth­
ing ; that everything was artificially incited by journalists in order 
to enlist subscribers ; that everything was deliberately fabricated 
by the Ragozovs, and so on, and so forth. 
" 'Personal opinions have no significance here'-said Sergei 
lvanovich.-'Personal opinions are of no import when all Russia­
the people-expressed their will.' 
" 'I beg your pardon. I don't see it. The people know abso­
lutely nothing'-said the Prince. 
" 'No, papa . . .  What do you mean that they know noth­
ing ? And Sunday, in church ?'-remarked Dolly, who was listening 
to the conversation. 
" 'Well, what about Sunday in church ? The priest was ordered 
to read. He read it. They understood nothing; they sighed as they 
do at every sermon'-the Prince continued. 'Then they were told 
that a collection was to be taken up in the church for a salutary 
cause, and they extracted a kopeck and gave it. But for what-they 
don't know themselves.' " 
This nonsensical opinion, standing in direct conflict with the 
facts coming from the Prince, is easily explained : it emanates from 
one of tht' fori'Cler guardians of the people, a former serf-owner who 
could not-no matter how good he was-help but despise his slaves, 
and consider himself immeasurably superior to them in understand­
ing. "Well, they sighed a little, and understood nothing.'' But here 
is Levin's opinion. He, at least, is not portrayed as a former slave­
owner. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
So I 
11 'I don't have to inquire,'-said Sergei lvanovich. 'We have 
seen and see hundreds and hundreds of men who have forsaken 
everything in order to serve the right cause ; they come from every 
part of Russia, and directly, clearly express their thought and their 
aim. They bring their pennies, and they tell directly why they do 
so. What does this mean ?' 
11 'This means, to my way of thinking'-said Levin, who was 
growing excited-'that among a people of eighty million there will 
always be, not hundreds, as at present, but tens of thousands of 
men who have lost their social status, reckless people, who are al­
ways ready to join a Pugachiov gang, to head for Khiva, Serbia . . .  .' 
" 'I am telling you that not hundreds and not the reckless, 
but the best representatives of the people I '-Sergei lvanovich said, 
with irritation as if he were defending the last bit of his property. 
'And donations ?-Here, the whole people are expressing their will.' 
" 'The word "people" is so indeterminate,'-said Levin. 'Volost 
scribes, teachers of peasant parentage, perhaps one out of a thou­
sand knows what the matter is about. The remaining eighty million, 
like Mikhailych, not only do not express their will, but they even 
haven't the slightest conception in what connection they should be 
expressing it. What right, then, do we have to say that this is the 
will of the people ?' " 
And, generally, it should be rc marked, once and for all, that 
the term "the will of the people" in relation to the movement of 
last year is altogether out of place ; it serves nothing because it 
expresses nothing. Last year it was not the will of the people that 
manifested itself but, first of all, their great compassion ; secondly, 
their zeal for Christ ; thirdly, their own repentaT'• ᆬas it were, some­
thing on the order of a preparation for the s . . '"ament ; truly it 
could be thus expressed. I shall explain this fl.l.cther, but here I 
may add that I am very glad to hear Levin utter such expressions 
about the volunteers of last year as being ready "to join a Pugachiov 
gang," etc. At least, now I cau no longer, under any circumstance, 
attribute these thoughts to the author. Of this I am very glad since 
I clearly understand that the author has exercised his rights as 
an artist : he has felt strongly that the excited hypochondriac Levin, 
as a character artistically conceived by him, at this moment of 
the dispute, could not help but fully reveal his disposition, i.e., 
wind up his comments on the volunteers and the R•1ssian people, 
who saw them off-with a most irnllting invective. 
Nevertheless, inasmuch as tht: people were actually blamed 
for the movement of last year, and for their stupidity and dullness, 
and because these accusations were circulated, while the insinuation 
about the Pugachiov gangs was also ready to spring up,-1 shall 

802 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
venture to explain here, as briefly as possible, how one should 
understand the riddle of the consciousness of our popular movement 
of last year in support of the Slavs. Since in certain circles this has 
actually grown into a riddle : "How"-they ask themselves-"how iᆭ 
it possible that the people who only yesterday, for the first time, 
heard about the Slavs ; who know nothing about either geography 
or history, suddenly begin to rave madly about the Slavs, suddenly 
take such a liking for them ! " 
Aside from some specific circles, this theme was seized upon 
in clubs by gray-headed chaps, like the old Prince ; apparently, it also 
appealed to Levin since it tended to lend support to the explanation 
he offered concerning the artificial fabrication of the movement by 
certain persons and for certain aims. 
True as against Levin, Sergei Ivanovich is set forth as a 
defender of the consciousness of the popular movement. But he 
defends his cause poorly ; he also grows excited, and generally, as 
stated, he is represented in a comical light. And yet the question 
of the consciousness and lucidity of the popular feeling for the 
oppressed Christians is so clear ; it can be defined so precisely that 
I could not evade the temptation to explain, how, in my opinion, 
this matter should be understood in order to avoid confusion and 
especially riddles. 
3 
ON THE UNMISTAKABLE KNOWLEDGE OF THE UNEDUCATED 
AND ILLITERATE RussiAN PEOPLE OF THE QuiNTESSENCE 
• 
OF THE EASTERN QuESTION 
Since the beginning of the Russian people and their state, ever 
since the baptism of Russia, pilgrims began to journey to the holy 
lands-to the Holy Sepulcher, to Athos, etc. 
As far back as the time of the Crusades, a Russian superior 
of a convent went to Jerusalem and was kindly received there by 
the King of Jerusalem, Baldwin, whom he eloquently depicted in 
the record of his journey. Thereafter pilgrimages to the East, to the 
Holy Land, have never ceased up to our days. Even at present 
among Russian monks in Russia then• are quite a few who used 
to live in Athos. Thus, the backward, wholly illiterate Russian 
people, i.e., the simplest village peasants, who know nothing about 
history and geography, are-and for a long time in the past have 
been-fully aware of the fact that the Holy Land and the local 
Eastern Christians have been conquered by the impious Moham­
medans, the Turks, and that Christians in the whole East have been, 
and are, enduring a hard and difficult life. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
The Russian people with afflicted hearts know this. And such 
is the Russian popular, historical, trait that the repentant exploits 
connected with pilgrimages to the Holy Land have always, since 
ancient times, been held in high esteem by our people. Penniless old 
men, discharged soldiers, old peasant women, without any knowl­
edge of geography, have left their vdlages with beggars' sacks on 
their shoulders, and have reached-true, at times, after many mis­
fortunes-the Holy Land. Upon their return home, the stories of 
their pilgrimages were reverently listened to. 
Generally, stories about "the Divine" are very much liked by 
the Russian people. Peasants, their children, commoners in cities, 
even merchants, listen to these stories with fondness and sighs. 
Here is, for instance, a question : Who has read the Acta Martyrum ? 
-Somebody in a monastery ; among laymen-some professor as a 
matter of duty, or some odd old fellow who fasts and attends 
Vespers. It is even difficult to lay hands on this book : one would 
have to buy it, but try to borrow it in a parish-you would be 
refll࿈t>·l <\nd now would you believe that in the whole of Russia 
the knowledge of the Acta Martyrum is cxtrrmely widely diffused,­
of course not of the book in toto but of its spirit, at least. Why so ?­
Because there are a great many tellers-men and women-of the 
lives of saints. They relate the stories from the Acta Martyrum 
with great ࿉kill, adding nothing of Lheir own, and they are eagerly 
listened to. In childhood I heard these narratives myself, before I 
even learned to read. Later, 1 used to hear them even in prisons 
among robbers, and they listened to them sighingly. 
These stories are not told from books, hut they are memorized 
orally. To the Russian people there is someth:࿊࿋·· so to speak, re­
pentant and expiatory in these accounts about .he Holy Places. 
Even bad, mean people, forestallers and oppressors, have often ac­
quired a strange and irresistible rlesire to star• on a pilgrimage so 
as to purify themselves through labor and exploit,-to comply with 
a vow made long ago. If they did not go to the East, to Jerusalem, 
they went to Russian Holy Places-to Kiev, to the Solovetzky thau­
maturgists. 
Nekrasov, when he conceived his great Vlas, as a great artist, 
could not even iT'''lgine him otherwise than wearing chains, in re­
pentant roving. This is an historical trait in the life of our people 
which cannot be neglected if only for the reason that it is en­
countered in no other European , •ion. What will come of it is 
difficult to tell, all the more so as literacy and enlightenment are 
coming to our people through the schools, and no doubt new ques­
tions will arise which may cause many changes. 
However, at present, only this trait can solve the whole riddle 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r877 
of the consciousness of last year's movement of our people in sup­
port of the "Slavic brethren"-as they were officially denoted last 
year and as they are almost scoffingly called now. It is true that 
our people know next to nothing about the Slavs. Not only one out 
of a thousand, as Levin says, but perhaps even one out of many 
thousands may have cursorily heard that somewhere there are some 
Serbians, Montenegrins, Bulgarians, our coreligionists. However, al 
our people, or their overwhelming majority, have heard and know 
that there are Orthodox Christians under the Mohammedan yoke ; 
that they suffer and are being oppressed, and that even the holiest 
places-Jerusalem, Athos-belong to dissidents. 
Even twenty or more years ago the people could have heard 
about the tortured Eastern Christians and the enslaved holy places, 
when the late Emperor was starting his war with Turkey, and later 
with Europe, which led to Sebastopol. It was also then, in the be­
ginning of the war, that the word came from above about the holy 
places, a word which the people could have since then remembered. 
Besides, long before our last year's enthusiasm for the Slavs, the 
tortures of the latter had begun. This was discussed and publicized 
in Russia for almost a whole year. I used to hear even in those 
days questions asked by the people : "Is it true that the Turks are 
again rising ?" 
Moreover (but this is a far-fetched consideration) it seems 
to me that times favored the movement of last year. Relatively 
speaking, the liberation of the peasants in Russia took place quite 
a long time ago. Now, these years have elapsed, and what did the 
people perceive in lheir midst ?-Among other things they perceived 
increased drunkenness, reinforced kulaks in increased numbers, 
misery all around them, and often-the bestial image impressed on 
themselves. Perhaps some kind of sorrow began to afflict many a 
heart, repentant sorrow, sorrow of self-condemnation, the quest for 
something better, sacred . . .  Suddenly a voice sounded heralding 
the oppression of Christians ; martyrdom for the Church, for faith ; 
Christians giving their lives for Christ and ascending the cross, 
since, had they consented to renounce the Cross and to embrace 
Islam, they would all have been spared and rewarded.-This, of 
course, was known to the people. Appeals for donations were 
launched. After that the rumor spread about a Russian general 
who had gone4o help the Christians ; then came the volunteers. All 
these things shook the people. Precisely shook them, as I stated 
above, as an appeal to penitence, to preparation for the sacrament. 
He who was unable to go himself brought his pennies, but every­
body, all Russia, saw the volunteers off. 
The old Prince, sojourning at Carlsbad, was unable to under-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Sos 
stand this movement, and he came home at the very height of 
it-with a humorous smile on his lips. But what could the old 
clubman have understood about Russia and the Russians ? Level­
headed Levin could have understood much more than the old Prince, 
but he was led astray by the thought that the people did not know 
history and geography, principally, however, by spite because some 
fellows like the Rogozovs dared to declare war without his per­
mission. 
However, there was no declaration of war, while on the part 
of the people there was general touching repentance, thirst for 
participation in something holy, in Christ's cause, for the support 
of those who are zealous for His Cross. So that the movement was 
at once repentant and historical. 
Please note that when I speak about this historical trait of 
the Russian people, i.e., their zeal for "God's cause," the holy places, 
oppressed Christianity, and, generally, for everything repentant and 
Divine, I have no idea of commending them for this : I am neither 
prais!nl! nor blaming them. I am merely stating a fact which can 
explain much. What is to be done about the fact that we do possess 
such an historical trait ? I don't know what will come of it, but it 
is quite certain that something will. 
In th࿌ life of the people the most important things shape 
themselves in accordance with thelr most momentous and char­
acteristic peculiarities. For example, temporarily, this historical 
trait of our people produced every time, when Russia was at war 
with the Sultan, a consciously national attitude of the people toward 
such a war. So that one shouldn't be surprised at the ardent sym­
pathy of the people with such a war on the me•t: ground that they 
do not know history and geography. What the; 1eed-they know. 
Oh, our people are illiterate, they are ignoramuses-this cannot 
be doubted. Even in a moral respect they cf"uld be taught many 
excellent and most enlightened things concerning this inveterate, 
ancient historical trait of theirs. It could be explained to these 
Russian men that all their rovings and pilgrimages merely point 
to a narrow understanding of their duties and obligations ; that 
there is no need for journeying so far in order to acquire the good ; 
that it would be better if they should forsake drunkenness, pay 
attention to the betterment of their welfare, to the accumulation 
of economic assets ; if they should not beat their wives ; if they 
should give thought to schools, highways, etc.,-in a word, that they 
should help in some way at least to make Russia, their fatherland, 
resemble other "enlightened European states." Finally, it could be 
explained to the pilgrim that his pilgrimages to the holy places are 
of no use to God at all ; chiefly on the grounds that they are of 

8o6 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
no advantage either to himself or his family ; that, on the contrary, 
a pilgrim, departing for a long time, leaving his home and father­
land, does so, strictly speaking, for an egoistic motive, for the sal­
vation of his ·soul, whereas God would be far more pleased if he 
should spend his leisure for some benefit to his neighbor, for in­
stance, if he should spend a little time in his kitchen-garden, look 
after his calves, etc. 
Briefly, it would be possible to say many beautiful things. 
But what is to be done if this historical trait and the quest of the 
good have assumed in our people al171ost,exclusively this particular 
form, i.e., a repentant form in the guise of pilgrimage and sacrifice ? 
-At least, in anticipation of "enlightenment," clever Levin could 
have credited the people with this historical trait of theirs. At least, 
he could have understood that many volunteers, and the people 
who saw them off, were prompted by a good motive, hoping to 
accomplish something good (this must be conceded I )  and, there­
fore, at all events, they were good representatives of the people. 
Of course, they were not "flashing with education," and yet they 
were not lost or reckless men, not drunkards or idlers, but perhaps 
the best men among the people. They acted for Christ's cause, 
while in the innermost soul of a great many of them it was con­
ceived as a purifying and repentant cause. And not one of them 
felt guilty about this before their Czar ! On the contrary, they all 
knew the Czar's, the Liberator's, merciful heart was in full accord 
with his people. Everybody was awaiting with touching emotion 
and hope the expression of the Czar's will, his word, while we, sit­
ing in our corners, were silently rejoicing over the fact that the 
great Russian people had vindicated our great and eternal hope 
in them. 
For this reason how could the comparison with the Pugachiov 
gang, the Commune, etc., in any sense be applicable to the people 
and their noble and humble movement ! -Precisely only a hypo­
chondriac such as Levin, irritated to the point of commotion, could 
proclaim a thing of this sort. This is what touchiness means ! 
4 
LEVIN's CoMMOTION. QuESTION : DoEs DISTANCE ExER­
CISE INFLUENCE UPON HUMANENESS ? CAN ONE AGREE 
WITH ft.IE OPINION OF A CAPTURED TURK CONCERNING 
THE HuMANENEss OF SoME OF OuR LADIES ? WHAT, THEN, 
ARE OuR TEACHERS TEACHING Us ? 
But the commotion extends even farther : Levin is directly 
and intrusively proclaiming that that compassion for the suffering 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
of the Slavs-"the immediate feeling of sympathy for the oppres­
sion of the Slavs does not and cannot exist" ; Sergei lvanovich says : 
" '. . . Here there is no declaration of war but simply a 
manifestation of humane, Christian sentiment. Consanguineous 
brethren artd fellow-believers are being slaughtered. Let us say­
not even brethren, not fellow-believer,.,, but simply-children, women, 
old men. The sentiment is aroused, and Russians run to help put 
an end to these horrors. Imagine that you were walking in the 
street and you saw that drunken people were beating a woman 
or a child. I take it, you wouldn't inquire whether or not war had 
been declared on these men, but you would rush upon them and 
you would protect the assaulted.' 
" 'But I wouldn't kill'-said Levin. 
" 'Yes, you would.' 
" 'I don't know. If I saw this, I should be led by my immediate 
feeling. But I cannot say in advance. And such an immediate senti­
ment for the oppression of the Slavs does not nor cannot exist.' 
" 'Perhaps in you it " does not,. exist. But in others it does 
exist'-said Sergei Ivanovich, discontentedly knitting his brows.­
'Legends of Orthodox people suffering under the yoke of "impious 
Agrarians" are alive in the people. The people heard about the 
suffering of their brethren, and they raised their voice.' 
· ·  'Maybe'-said Levin evasively-'but I don't see it. I am the 
people myself. I don't feel it.' " 
Again we come to : "I am the people myself." Once more I 
repeat : only two hours before Levin received his faith from a 
peasant ;  at least he intimated to Levin how one should believe. 
I am neither praising the peasant nor humbJi!'࿍ Levin. Nor do I 
venture to decide at this time, who of the t. 
believed better, 
whose psychic condition was superior and more aeveloped, etc. But 
you should concede-! repeat-that from this f"lct alone Levin could 
have guessed that there was a substantial difference between him 
and the people. But here he says : "I am the people myself.'' Why 
is he so sure that he himself is the people ? Because he knows how 
to yoke a horse to a cart, and knows that it is good to eat cucumbers 
with honey. Think of such men ! And what self-conceit I What 
haughtiness and :arogance ! 
Still, this is not the main point. Levin asserts that immediate 
sentiment for the oppression of the Slavs does not anc cannot exist. 
He is rebuked : "the people hea: . ഌ about the suftt!ring of their 
brethren, and they raised their vmce. '' But he replies : "Maybe, 
but I don't see it. I am the people myself, and I don't feel it.'' 
Is that-compassion ?-Please note that Levin's dispute with 
Sergei Ivanovich about compassion and the immediate sentiment 

BoB 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1B77 
for the oppression of the Slavs is conducted evasively, as it were, 
with the intent of winding it up with Levin's victory. For instance, 
Sergei Ivanovich exerts his efforts in arguing that were Levin to 
behold drunken people beating a woman, he would rush to protect 
her. ࿎<But I wouldn't kill ! "  retorts Levin . .. Yes, you would kill"­
Sergei Ivanovich insists. And, of course, he speaks nonsense, since 
who, when helping a woman beaten by drunken men, is going to 
kill them ?-The woman may be protected without killing. But the 
main thing is that here we are not dealing with a street fight : the 
simile is incorrect and not homogeneous. They are conversing about 
the Slavs, about tortures, racks and murders to which they are 
being subjected, and Levin knows only too well that he is speaking 
about the Slavs. Therefore, when he says that he doesn't know 
whether he would help ; that he sees nothing ; that he feels noth­
ing, etc., he specifically declares that he feels no compassion for 
the tortures of the Slavs (and not for the suffering of a woman 
beaten by drunken men) and he insists that no immediate senti­
ment for the oppression of the Slavs-and not for the oppression 
of a drunken woman-exists or can exist. Why, he literally ex­
presses himself to this effect. 
Here we have a rather curious psychological fact. The book 
was published two and a half months ago, when it was already 
positively known that all the countless stories about the innumerable 
torments and tortures of the Slavs were absolutely true, and that 
they had been attested to by thousands of witnesses and eye-wit­
nesses of all nations. The things which we have learned in the 
CO\U'Se of these eighteen months about the tortures of the Slavs 
exceed any fantasy of the sickliest and most perverted imagination. 
To begin with, it is known that these massacres are not acci­
dental but systematic, deliberately instigated and encouraged by 
all means. People a:e exterminated by the thousands and tens of 
thousands. The refinements of the tortures are such that nothing 
of the kind has ever been printed or heard of. Live men are flayed 
in the presence of their children ; infants are thrown up and caught 
on bayonets in the sight of their mothers ; women are raped, and 
at the very moment when the woman is being raped, she is stabbed 
to death with a dagger, and what is most important-babies are 
tortured and slain. 
Levin lays that he feels nothing I and haphazardly asserts 
that no immediate sentiment for the oppression of the Slavs exists 
or can exist. But I venture to assure Mr. Levin that it can exist, 
and that I mysell have repeatedly witnessed it. For example, I 
have seen a certain gentleman who does not like to speak about 
his sentiments, but who upon hearing about a two-year-old boy 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
whose eyes had been pierced with a needle, in the presence of his 
sister, and thereafter impaled so that the child did not promptly 
die but continued to scream for a long while,-upon hearing about 
this incident, that gentleman almost became ill ; he could not sleep 
that night, and for two days he felt painfully depressed so that he 
was unable to work. 
In this connection I venture to assure Mr. Levin that this 
gentleman is an honest and unquestionably respectable man, by no 
means a drunkard and not a member of the Pugachiov gang. I 
merely wish to state that an immediate, and even a very strong, 
sentiment about the tortures of the Slavs can exist among all classes 
of society. But Levin insists that it cannot even exist, and that he 
himself feels nothing. To me this is a puzzle. Of course, there are 
simply insensible, coar࿏e and perverted people. Levin, however, it 
would seem, is not a man of this kind ; he is portrayed as a per­
fectly susceptible man. Doesn't mere distance in this case exercise 
a certain influence ? In fact, isn't this psychological peculiarity 
presP.nt in certain characters ?-"I don't see it myself ; the thing is 
transpiling far away ; and I feel nothing." Leaving all jokes aside, 
imagine that on the planet Mars there are men, and that there 
infants' eyes are being pierced. Perhaps we, inhabiting our earth, 
might feel no pity, at least, no great pity ? The same, maybe, is 
also true on earth when distances ::tre very great : "Eh, it's in an­
other hemisphere, not here I "  That is, even though he does not so 
directly express himself, that is what he feels, i.e., he feels nothing. 
In this case, if distance really exercises such an influence upon 
humaneness, a new question arises of its own accord : "At what 
distance does humaneness cease ?" And Levin actually does con­
stitute a great riddle from the sta.r.dpoint of h· · 1aneness : he posi­
tively declares that he does not know whether hl- would kill : 
"If I saw this, I should be led by my immediate sentiment, 
but I can't say in advance." 
This means that he does not know how he would act I And 
yet he is a susceptible man, and as such he is afraid to kill . . . 
the Turk. Let us imagine the following scene : Levin stands still 
with a rifle and bayonet, and two steps from hh a Turk is volup­
tuously getting ready to pierce the eyes of an infant whom he 
holds in his arms. The seven-year-old little sister of the boy screams 
and like an insane person rushes to tear her brother away from the 
Turk. And here stands Levin in dnubt, wavering : 
"I don't know what to do. ഋ feel nothing. I am the people 
myself. No immediate sentiment for the oppression of the Slavs 
ezists or can exist." 
No, seriously speaking, what would he have done after al 

810 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
the things he has told us ? How would it be possible not to rescue 
the child ? Is it conceivable that he would let him be tortured to 
death and not snatch him from the hands of the Turkish villain ? 
"Yes, he should be snatched, but, maybe, it will become neces­
sary to give the Turk a hard push ?" 
"Well, push him I "  
"Hm, push I And what if he refuses to surrender the child and 
draws the sword ? Perhaps it will become necessary to kill the 
Turk ?" 
"Well, kill him ! "  
"No, how is it possible to kill ? No, one shouldn't kill a Turk I 
No, better let him pierce the child's eyes and torture him to death, 
and I'll go to Kitty." 
This is how Levin would act ; this is directly derived from 
his convictions, from everything he utters. He positively says that 
he doesn't know whether he would help a woman or a child if he 
had to kill a Turk. And for the Turks he feels an awful pity. 
"Twenty years ago we should have kept silent," says Sergei 
Ivanovich-"but now we hear the voice of the Russian people who 
are ready to rise as one man, and are ready for self-sacrifice for 
the oppressed brethren : this is a great step and token of strength." 
"But it's not only sacrifice : one has to kill the Turks"­
meekly says Levin. "The people send their donations and are ready 
to sacrifice for their soul, and not for murder." 
In other words : "Here, little girl, take this money, a donation 
for the salvation of our soul. Well, and as for your little brother­
let them pierce- his eyes. You see, one shouldn't kill a Turk . . . .  " 
And further this is what the author himself says about Levin : 
"He was unable to agree that dozens of men, among them 
his brother, had the right, on the basis of what hundreds of fine 
speakers-volunteers arriving from the capital related to them, to 
maintain that they, together with the newspapers expressed the 
will and the thought of the people, such thought as manifests itself 
in vengeance and murder." 
This is unjust : there is no vengeance whatever. Now we are 
at war with these bloodsuckers, and yet we hear about nothing 
but the most humane acts on the part of the Russians. It may be 
boldly asserted that few of the European armies would act with 
such an ew-my as our army is acting now. Only recently the idea 
has been suggested in two or three newspapers that, perhaps, it 
would be expedient, precisely with a view to curtailing the number 
of brutalities, tQ resort to reprisals against Turks arrantly guilty 
of brutalities and tortures. After subjecting prisoners and the 
wounded to unspeakable tortures, such as cutting off noses and 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
8II 
limbs, they kill them. Among them there have appeared specialists 
for exterminating nurslings, real maestros who seize a nursling by 
its two legs and at once rend it in half for the amusement and 
fun of their comrades, the bashi-bazouks. This deceitful and vile 
nation denies the brutalities it has perpetrated. The Sultan's min­
isters assert that there can be no killing of prisoners since "the 
Koran forbids it." Only recently the humane German Emperor 
indignantly rejected the official and deceitful wholesale complaint 
of the Turks about the alleged Russian atrocities and declared that 
he did not believe them. It would seem that one cannot act hu­
manely toward this contemptible nation, and yet we do act hu­
manely. I even venture to express my personal opinion that it would 
be better not to resort to reprisals against Turks proved guilty of 
killing prisoners and the wounded. This would scarcely diminish 
their atrocities. It is said that even now, when they are taken 
prisoners, they look frightened and suspicious, firmly convinced 
that their heads will be promptly chopped off. Better not let the 
magnanimous and humane conduct of the Ru࿐sians be darkened by 
repnsab. Howt •er, the piercing of infants' eyes must not be per­
mitted, and in order to stop this villainy forever, it is necessary 
to liberate effectively the oppressed, disarming the tyrants once and 
for all. Don't worry, when they have been disarmed, they will be 
manuf?--turing and selling morning-gowns and soap-even as our 
Kazan Tartars, whom I have already discussed, but in order to 
snatch the weapons from their hands, this has to be done in battle. 
However, battle is not vengeance. Levin may be tranquil as regards 
the Turk. 
Even last year he might have been tranquil as regards the 
Turk. Doesn't he know the Rt·-·+m, the Ru ian soldier ? Here it 
is being reported that although the soldier ir. .>attle does stab the 
monster-Turk, it has been observed that he has shared his soldier's 
ration with the Turkish captive, fed and ,1itied him. And believe 
me,-the soldier knew everything a bout the Turk ; he knew that 
were he himself to be taken prisoner by that captive Turk, the 
latter would behead him, and together with the heads of other 
executed prisoners he would pile up a crescent and in its center 
he would fashion from other limbs of the body an obscene star. 
The soldier kuows all this, and yet he feeds the captive Turk ex­
hausted by battle : "He is a man, after all, though not a Christian." 
A correspondent of one of the English newspapers, having witnessed 
similar incidents, said : "This is · ,1 army of gentlemen." 
And better than many others Levin might have known that 
this is really an army of gentlemen. When the Bulgarian in some 
towns asked His Highness, the Commander-in-Chief, what they 

812 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
should do with the property of the Turkish refugees, he told them : 
11Collect it, and keep it until their return i harvest the fields, keep 
the crop and take one-third of it as a reward for your labor." These 
are also a gentleman's words, and I repeat-Levin's mind might have 
rested in peace as regards the Turks : where is vengeance here ? 
Where are the reprisals ? Moreover, Levin whose knowledge of Rus­
sian society is so exquisite, might have guessed that the Turks will 
be also saved by our pseudo-Europeanism, and our foolish, artificial 
and narrow sentimentalism so common in our educated society. Has 
Levin heard about our ladies who throw flowers to Turkish war 
prisoners transported in railroad cars and welcome them with ex­
pensive tobacco and bonbons ?-It has been reported that as the 
train pulled off, one of the Turks loudly hawked and energetically 
spat into the very midst of the humane Russian ladies who were 
waving their little handkerchiefs to the departing train. Of course, 
it is difficult to share fully the opinion of that insensible Turk, and 
Levin can comprehend that, on the part of our ladies, coddling 
the Turks was mere hysterical sentimentalism and pseudo-liberal 
Europeanism : "See, how humane we are, how Europeanized, and 
how well we express it ! " 
However, doesn't Levin himself preach and advocate the same 
narrow-mindedness, the same sentimental Europeanism ?-Turks are 
killed in a war, in honest action, without any vengeance upon them, 
and solely because there is no other way of wresting from them 
their dishonorable arms. Thus things happened last year also. If 
arms are not wrested from them-so as to avoid killing them-if we 
walk away, theY. will again forthwith cut off women's breasts and 
pierce infants' eyes. What's to be done ?-Let them pierce the eyes 
so as perchance not to kill a Turk ? But this is a distortion of con­
ceptions, the dullest and coarsest sentimentalism ; this is fanatical 
narrow-mindedness, the fullest perversion of nature. 
Besides, the soldier compelled to kill a Turk sacrifices his own 
life and, on top of that, he endures racks and tortures. Is it for 
mere vengeance, for mere killing, that the Russian people have 
risen ? And when was it that assistance to the massacred, to those 
who are being exterminated by entire regions, to assaulted women 
and children in whose defense there is no one in the whole world 
to intercede.-was considered a callous, ridiculous and almost im­
moral act, a craving for vengeance and blood-thirst ! And what in­
sensibility side by side with sentimentalism ! -In fact, Levin him­
self has a child, a boy ! He loves him ! When this child is bathed 
in a bathtub it is almost a family event I Why doesn't his heart 
bleed when he hears and reads about wholesale massacres, about 
children with crushed heads crawling around their assaulted, mur-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
8I3 
dered mothers with their breasts cut off ? This happened in a Bul­
garian church where two hundred such corpses were found, after 
the town had been plundered. Levin reads all this, and there he 
stands and meditates : 
"Kitty is cheerful ; today she ate with an appetite ; the boy 
was bathed in the tub, and he begins to recognize me : what do I 
care about things that are transpiring in another hemisphere ?-No 
immediate sentiment for the oppression of the Slavs exists or can 
exist-because I feel nothing." 
Is this how Levin brings to a close his epopee ? Is it he whom 
the author seeks to set forth as an example of a truthful, honest 
man ? Men, such as the author of Anna Karenina, are teachers of 
society, our teachers, while we are merely their pupils. What, then, 
do they teach us ? 
SEPTEMBER 
CHAPTER I 
1 
Unlucky and Odd Fellows 
IT IS difficult to conceive unluckier men than the French 
republicans with their French republic. Soon one hundred years 
will have elapsed since, for the first time, this institution came into 
existence. Since then every time (now it is 1 he third time) adroit 
usurpers have conftscated the rt࿑:.!blic for tht'• benefit, no one has 
risen in its serious defense, save some neglig1 ͠ •. e group. Not even 
once has there been strong popular support. Besides, during those 
periods when the republic chanced to exist, only a few people re­
garded it as a final, and not a tra:1sitory thing. Nevertheless, no 
men are more convinced of the country's support than the French 
republicans. 
However, during the first two attempt!= to create a republic 
in France-in the past century and in 1848-the republicans of those 
days may have had certain grounds, especially in the initial phases 
of these attempts, to expect that the country would support them. 
However, it would seem that the present-day republ icans-those very 
republicans who in the near fut .Jre are destined to be liquidated, 
together with their republic, for somebody's benefit-could have en­
tertained no hopes for a steady future, even had the country some 
sympathy for them (very unsteady, to be sure,--since they now 

814 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
exist merely negatively, according to the proverb : in the absence 
of fish even a crawfish is a fish) .  
And yet on the eve of their almost certain downfall they are 
convinced of their complete victory. What unlucky fellows they 
are, and what an ill-starred republic this last and third has been. 
And even though the late Thiers recognized it, yet specifically he 
recognized it as a crawfish in the absence of fish ! 
Let us only recall how this republic came into existence. These 
republicans waited almost twenty years for the "glorious" minute 
of the downfall of the usurper, wlt€m "the country shall call them." 
And what happened ?-Having seized power after Sedan, these odd 
fellows were compelled to load upon their shoulders a horrible war 
which they did not want but which was handed to them by that 
very usurper before he had departed for his charming Castle Wil­
helmshohe-to smoke his cigarettes. And if this crafty usurper, while 
promenading along the walks of the gardens of the German castle, 
felt angry at them because again they had usurped his power, never­
theless, unfailingly, he must have smiled now and then-with that 
spiteful smile-at the thought how he had punished them, throwing 
his guilt upon their weak shoulders. Since, be that as it may, sub­
sequently, France has nevertheless blamed them rather than him­
at least, them more than him-for continuing a hopeless war ; for 
their failure to restore peace immediately after assuming power ; 
for the surrender of two provinces ; for the three billions ; for the 
devastation of the country ; for the incompetent conduct of the 
war ; for their haphazard, disorderly administration lacking all con­
trol. Even up tq this day Gambetta, the former dictator at the time, 
ir. accused of all these things, even though he was innocent of them, 
and, on the contrary, did everything that could have been done 
under the then prevailing dreadful circumstances. 
Briefly, this accusation of the republicans for their incom­
petence and the ruin of the country has persisted, and even still 
persists, seriously and firmly. Much as everybody understands that 
Emperor Napoleon was the prime cause of the calamity, "but why" 
-it is argued-"didn't they manage to repair the situation once they 
assumed the task ? Moreover, they made things inconceivably so 
much worse."-Such is the accusation. Not only that : along with 
this accusation, something contemptuous and comical was cast on 
them at the thought of what a mess they got into in the beginning, 
when they ࿒1zed power. And yet what else could they then have 
done ?-Not to accept the war and to sign an armistice in the very 
beginning, imme_diately after assuming power, and after Sedan, 
would have been altogether impossible : the Germans even then 
would have demanded the cession of territory and an indemnity, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
SIS 
and what would have become of these republicans had they accepted 
an armistice on such terms ? They would have been directly accused 
of pusillanimity, of disgracing the country, of the fact that, "still 
possessing an army," they offered no resistance and ignominiously 
capitulated. This would have been a nice stigma upon their new 
republic I 
And inasmuch as to them t.he republic, its restoration in 
France, was far dearer than the salvation of the country, it con­
stituted everything ;-and so they were compelled to fight, almost 
obviously foreseeing that they would come to a still greater dis­
grace by the time of the termination of the war. Thus, disgrace was 
ahead of them, disgrace was behind them ; this was not only an 
unfortunate, not only a tragic situation, but in some respects even 
a comical one, since it was not in this manner that they had dreamed 
to be enthroned after the tyrant I 
This comicalness was aggravated by the fact that all the same 
they enthroned themselves with a light heart, despite everything. 
Nc.t fh11t they did not grieve about France-oh, among them there 
are excellent men, judging by their feelings, and even genuine 
servants of the fatherland, provided it io; called a republic. Maybe 
there are two or three among them who are ready to place the 
republic ;tself in the background on condition that France be happy 
(although it is doubtful that there be such-to be precise, perhaps 
one or two, and not more) .  
However, the point is that just as soon as they had patched 
up some sort of peace with the Germans and begun to rule the 
country peacefully, at once they conceived the idea that the country 
had irrevocably fallen in love with them, and this-to say the least, 
-this is what was comical. 
Most positively there dwells in every J:t :  ench republican the 
fatal conviction, dooming him, that the word "republican" suffices ; 
that to call the country "a republic" suffices to make it happy­
at once and forever. They always ascribe all the misfortunes of 
the republic to nothing but external unfavorable circumstances, to 
the existence of usurpers,-those wicked men ; never did they give 
thought to the incredible weakness of those :-oots which bind the 
republic with the soil of France, and which during a whole century 
have failed to grow stronger and penetrate deeper. Besides, in the 
course of all these six years it has never occurred to them that 
their comical situation, inheritP-1 by them from ࢔ -1poleon III, still 
persists ; that if the old calamit1 has blown over, a new calamity, 
similar to the old one, is approaching, and that it will unfailingly 
place them in a most comical situation, so comical that they wil 
no longer be able to retain their hold on France-perhaps, in the 
near future. 

816 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
This new comicalness consists of the fact that in this future 
calamity, even as in the old one, their compliance with lofty duty, 
their service to the fatherland, deliberately leads to its detriment j 
further, that this calamity, just like the old one, is absolutely in­
evitable, constituting the same trap in which they were caught in 
1871 ; and that-adding insult to injury-this predicament, much in 
the same way as the old one, was bequeathed to them by that very 
Napoleon III whom they so intensely hate and whose memory they 
so bitterly curse. 
In tact, who in the world is now the most zealous supporter 
of the French republic ? Who is the man favoring most its institu­
tion ?-Unquestionably, Prince Bismarck. So long as the republic 
exists in France, the war of revanche is impossible. Just imagine 
that the republicans might venture to declare war on the Germans I 
-Prince Bismarck understands it. And yet it is clear as daylight 
that the enormous forty-million organism of France cannot per­
petually remain under the disgraceful tutelage of Germany. The 
wounds will heal up ; the debacle will be forgotten ; new forces will 
come into being ; health will be restored ; assets and troops will 
be created and organized. And can a country, which for so long 
a time has been the political leader of the nations, fail to aspire 
anew to its former role, its former position in Europe ?-Perhaps 
this moment is not far off : the surplus of inner energies must in­
evitably impel them to extricate themselves from Bismarck's tutelage 
and to restore their former independence. (At present France can 
still by no means be called independent.) 
1\nd now, ·France in toto, from her first step, has knocked her 
head against her republic. I reiterate : just imagine present-day re­
publicans wishing to act in any way impertinently toward Prince 
Bismarck-to the extent of risking a war with him ! To begin 
with,-who would follow them even if France herself should favor 
war ? Secondly, there comes the inescapable consideration : What if 
the Germans should again defeat them ? This would be the final 
fiasco of the republicans in France, because France would blame 
them for the failure and would expel them forever, forgetting that she 
herself sought a reva,zche and her former leading position . . . .  
However, should the republicans adopt a firm attitude ; should 
they neglect to listen to the new voices and screams ; should they 
fail to decl࿓re war,-this would mean to oppose the aspirations of 
the country, and in this event, again, France would dismiss them 
and would surrender to the first adroit leader who appeared on 
the scene. In a word : Sedan is in the past, and Sedan is ahead 1 
And yet, no doubt, they have not even started to ponder over this, 
notwithstanding the fact that the new outburst of the country, per-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
817 
haps, is very close at hand. Nor did they ever consider the fact 
that, strictly speaking, they are nothing but Prince Bismarck's 
"proteges," and that France, year after year, must more and more 
comprehend this,-precisely as she restores and accumulates her 
energies ; consequently, that she must more and more despise them 
-first, to herself and not very clearly, but subsequently much more 
clearly. and finally aloud, and not merely silently. 
But the republicans do not recognize the comical aspect. They 
are pathetic people. On the contrary, precisely now they feel en­
couraged-after MacMahon, the president of the "republic," has 
driven them away and locked the Chamber till the October election. 
Now they are "the persecuted," and they feel as if they are in 
the aureole. They expect that all France will suddenly start singing 
the Marseillaise and shout : "On assassine nos frȝres !" ("Our 
brethren are being massacred I ")-the notorious cry of all former 
Paris street revolutions, after which the mobs used to erect barri­
cades. Anyway, they look forward to "lawfulness," i.e., that the 
countrv, indignant against Marshal MacMahon, the prospective 
future usurper, will again elect the same republican majority, and 
besides will add new republican deputies, after which the newly 
convened Chamber will utter a stern "veto" to the Marshal, who, 
frightene࿔ with "lawfulness," will hide his tail and retire. 
The}' are immovably convirced of the force of that "lawful­
ness," and not because of the paucity of their mental faculties, but 
because these good fellows are too much party men ; they have 
been chewing the same cud and sitting in one and the same corner 
too long. They have been suffering too long for their beloved re­
public, and, on this ground, they are sure of -:-etaliation. 
It is surprising that also Jll Russia rna·· 
of our newspapers 
believe in their forthcoming triumph and the :.nevitable victory of 
"lawfulness." But in what way is this "lawfulness" guaranteed if 
MacMahon should not deign to submit to it-as he has already 
announced to the country in his strLLnge manifesto ?-By the indig­
nation and wrath of the country ? But the Marshal would promptly 
find numerous supporters in that very country, as this has in­
variably happened in such cases in France. What is to be done 
then ? Erect barricadt!s ? But with the modern rifle and modern 
artillery the former barricades are impossible. Besides, France would 
refuse to erect them even if she should earnestly desire a republic. 
Exhausted and worn out as a rPsult of a century-uld political dis­
organization, she would, in a 1 • •  ost prosaic manner, calculate on 
which side strength lies, and she would submit to it. Strength is 
now in the legions, and the country foreshadows this. Thus, the 
whole question is : For whom are the legions ? 

818 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
2 
A CURIOUS CHARACTER 
In the May-June issue of my Diary I have already given an 
account of the legion, as a new power, which is destined to occupy 
a place of its own in European civilization ; this was long before 
the promulgation of the manifesto of the Marshal-President. And 
now everything has happened as I then anticipated. In this mani­
festo, which surprised everybody, the Marshal, though promising 
to abide by lawfulness, though promising peace, etc.,-nevertheless 
directly stated that should the country disagree with his opinion 
and elect at the forthcoming elections the former republican ma­
jority, he, on his part, would be compelled to disagree with the 
opinion of the country and would not submit to its elections. Such 
a strange act of the Marshal must have some underlying motive. 
He could not have used such language and adopted such a tone 
in addressing the country (France is not a village of some sort l )  
had he not been firmly convinced of his strength and success. 
Therefore, now it is clear that his whole hope is the army, 
of which he is quite sure. In fact, at the time of his summer excur­
sions throughout France, in many towns and provinces the Marshal 
was received rather equivocally, but the army and the fleet every­
where manifested .absolute loyalty and greeted him with sympathetic 
acclamation. Of course, the Marshal's good, so to speak, even inno­
cent, feelings cannot be doubted. Even though he did act in discord 
with the custom by directly stating in advance that he would not 
submit to the lawful opinion of the country should the latter dis­
obey him, nevertheless, this, of course, was due to the fact that he 
sought in his own way, to promote the welfare of his country and 
was sure that he would do so. 
Thus, the moral qualities of the Marshal should not be 
doubted, but, perhaps, some other qualities . . . Indeed, the Mar­
shal, it seems, is one of those characters who cannot help being 
under somebody's tutelage. From this standpoint his character pos­
sesses certain remarkable peculiarities. The question is : for whom 
does he labor at present ? For whom does he so exert himself and 
for whom does he risk so much ? No doubt, he is under absolute 
tutelage, all.4 yet he alone in all Europe is fully convinced even 
today that he is under no tutelage at all, and that he is acting 
independently. Smart people who have got hold of him, probably 
-for the time being-support this conviction of his ; they exert their 
efforts to appear to be mere yes-men, meanwhile leading him irrev­
ocably in any direction they choose. All this becomes possible 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
819 
because they are perfectly familiar with this sort of character and 
his personal ambitions. However, such slick people may be found 
only in one party-true, in the strongest and most enormous Clerical 
party. The other political parties in France cannot boast of adroit­
ness. 
Indeed, here is the question : If the Marshal is under tutelage, 
-under whose tutelage is he ? At present it is well known that 
Bonapartists are awfully disturbed : they have nominated a large 
number of candidates ; the Marshal himself patronizes them ; they 
are sure of their victory at the polls ; they are sure of the army ; 
the Imperial Prince is already on the Continent, and it is even 
rumored that he will go to Paris. However, is it to be believed that 
Marshal MacMahon, the President of the "Republic" so sure of 
himself, is assuming such a load of trouble and risks solely for the 
purpose of enthroning the Imperial Prince ? It seems to me (and, 
again, this is but my personal opinion) that this is not so. Unless, 
perhaps, there are some quite special combinations-for instance, 
that newspaper rumor which was current about one month ago to 
Lhe effect that Lhe Marshal's daughter is supposed to have been 
betrothed to the Imperial Prince, etc. But if no such special secret 
combinations exist ; if, as yet, there are no special agreements and 
contracts, it does seem to me that the Marshal is inclined to make 
the co11ntry happy in his favor rather than in anyone else's, and if 
he gives his support to the Bonapartist candidates, it is because 
nevertheless they are more trustworthy than the rest, and that later 
they would be led in whatever direction he desired. 
God knows what ideas might be conceived by a mind such 
as his. It is not in vain that a certain Bishop in an address of 
welcome to the Marshal has alrearty suggesL .. :i that on his maternal 
side he is descended from Charles the Gret: . 
In a word, several 
years of presidency have planted in his soul certain irritating and 
fantastic impressions. Besides, he is a mi'itary man. 
However, all these deliberations are but meditative attempts 
to explain a mysterious character. At present the truth is that the 
Marshal is in the hands of the Clericals and that they are leading 
him, even though, no doubt, be thinks that it is he who is leading 
them, and that they are in his hands, and not be in theirs. But it 
goes without "aying that they are not in his hands, and it posi­
tively seems that the fate of France at this moment depends on 
them alone. No doubt, the dreadful underground intrigue still con­
tinues. And even though Eurot··· has long been aware of this and 
has known, from the very start, that in the present-day Western 
Eurllpean movement they were playing an important part, never­
theless-so it would seem-they are concPaling, and succeeding in 

820 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
keeping from sight, the magnitude and strength of their role; they 
are maneuvering, and, for the time being, are hiding behind others, 
for instance, the Marshal, the Bonapartists, and so it will continue 
until they reach their goal. 
Strictly speaking, it makes no difference to them who is 
going to succeed-the Marshal or the Imperial Prince. They have 
not, and must not have, any personal sympathies. Theirs is but one 
aim :  that France, as soon as possible, should draw her sword and 
asault Germany. And it was for this aim that they have crushed 
the Republicans incapable of rising in support of the Pope. At 
present, however, they are waiting calmly and adroitly-who's going 
to have more chances ?-Should the Imperial Prince actually give 
them more chance& from the standpoint of the ability to declare 
war, perhaps they would hang on to him and would usher him to 
Paris without further thought about MacMahon. It seems, how­
ever, that, temporarily, they are still clinging to the Marshal. 
By the way, it is said that only recently the Marshal, in the 
course of a conversation, made the following remark aloud : "Ru­
mors are being spread that I intend to destroy republican institu­
tions, but, of course, people forget that, when accepting the presi­
dency of the republic, I gave my word to preserve them." These 
words fully corroborate the conjecture about the Marshal's moral 
innocence, despite all the accusations of the republicans. Thus, as 
an honest man and a soldier, he prizes his word of honor, and, of 
course, he is not going to violate it. But if he preserves the republic 
and at the same time drives away the republicans, this means 
that he intends. to continue the republic without the republicans. 
It seems that such actually is his political program, and that he 
has been assured that it is quite feasible. This program, coupled 
with the motto : "J'y suis et j'y reste" ("I am here to stay") ob­
viously constitutes the whole cycle of his political convictions up 
to the year x88o, when the term of his presidency and, therefore, 
that of his word of honor, expires. 
At that time, however, the dream will begin : "The grateful 
country, seeing that he is quitting the presidency, will offer him a 
new office, say, that of Charles the Great, and then everything will 
again run smoothly." 
It stands to reason that the slick fellows steering him-should 
he really wish to comply with his word of honor and preserve the 
republican ;ustitutions-would forthwith exchange him for a Bona­
parte, if the preserved republic, even though without the repub­
licans, should impede their subsequent plans. It seems that it is for 
this reason that they have swayed him to support the Bonapartist 
candidacies, assuring him that this is to his advantage. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
821 
In any event, he continues to be under such a firm tutelage 
that he can no longer extricate himself from it. In a word, the 
world is confronted with some great and altogether new events ; 
one can foresee the appearance of the legions and a formidable 
Catholic movement. It is reported that the Pope's health "is satis­
factory." But it would be a calamity should the death of the Pope 
coincide with the elections in Franre or should it occur shortly 
thereafter. In this event the Eastern question might at once be 
converted into an all-European one. 
3 
Tms BuT NoT QUITE. REFERENCE TO WHAT I WROTE 
THREE MoNTus Aco 
In the summer May-June issue of my Diary I formulated my 
thought in some detail. However, no one paid attention to the prin­
cipal pa<t of my article, i.e., to the contention that the key to the 
pre··rnt and futuro events in all Europe lies in the Catholic co11spiracy, 
and in the forthcoming, indubitable and formidable Catholic move­
ment coinciding with the death of the Pope-which, apparently, is 
a matter of the very near future-and the election of the new Pope. 
And thus ࿕y article passed unnoticed (in the press). 
Ar 1 t yet now, eV!'n more strPYJgly and more firmly than three 
months ago, I adhere to the same opinion. Since that time so many 
events, corroborating my conjecture, have taken place that I can 
no longer doubt Its correctness. Since those days, newspapers-our 
own and foreign-have begun to allude to this theme, without ven­
turing, however, to formulate the final deducthn. This is what was 
stated in The Moscow Gazette, ih ..LH excellent · · 'itorial article ( The 
Moscow Gazette, No. 235). Among other thing࿖ Lt cites the opinion 
of the English newspaper correspondents : 
"English newspaper correspondents art offering very candid 
explanations. According to their interj)retation, the key to European 
politics is in Germany's hand, and Germany is precisely inclined to 
side, even more firmly than before, with Russia-because of very 
intelligible calculations. First, it was perceivrrl in Berlin that the 
reverses of Russian st,·ategy have •enlivened and encouraged Aus­
tria, which supposedly still nourishes a certain grudge against Prus­
sia. Furthermore, Germany's major enemies-France and Catholi­
cism, both these powers-are extPnding their full s࿗:·npathy to Tur­
key. True, in the beginning of 
.e Eastern complications France 
flirted with Russia somewhat. However, even if, at the time, there 
was some sympathy for us, not only has it grown cold at present, 
but it has decidedly turned toward the TurUsh side. As for militant 

822 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Catholicism, as everybody knows, not only now but from the very 
start, it has decidedly and passionately taken under its protection 
orthodox Turkey as against schismatic Russia. The indecency of 
the ardent Clericals has reached such a point that one of them 
started commenting on the Koran with a degree of tenderness, so 
that even ultramontane Germania deemed it necessary to restrain 
such sallies with the remark that although one has to rejoice over 
the victories of the Turks over the hateful Russians, nevertheless 
it is awkward to express openly sympathy for Islam. 
''Inasmuch as the mot d'ordre of Catholicism remarkably co­
incides with the swing of public opinion in France in favor of the 
Turks ; and since Austria, also a Catholic country, has interests 
conflicting with those of Russia, Berlin naturally fears the pos­
sibility of a Catholic and anti-Prussian league into which eventually 
the ultramontane and separatist interests of Southern Germany and 
'rven England' could be drawn. This is what the English corre­
spondentf are talking about, but the leading role in these intrigues 
unquestionably belongs to England. Thus, as heretofore, we are 
left alone face to face with Turkey." 
All this is splendid. However, all this is still not quite the 
thing, not the real explanatory and last word which, surprisingly, 
no one, as it were, wishes to utter ; which, as yet, no one seems 
to foresee in its proper completeness. Still, this article has raised 
the question of militant Catholicism and its significance from Bis­
marck's standpoint, of its present influence upon France, and finally 
even of a league, i.e., that Berlin "naturally fears the possibility 
of a Catholic lmd anti-Prussian league into which eventually the 
ultramontane and separatist interests of Southern Germany and 
'even England' could be drawn." 
But I spoke about the league, about the conspiracy more than 
two months ago, before anyone had raised this point, as at present ; 
still, I then uttered my concluding word, i.e., that the whole matter 
resides in this conspiracy ; that everything in Europe hinges on 
it, and that the Eastern war itself may, in the very near future, 
be converted into an all-European war solely because of this im­
mense conspiracy of dying Catholicism. 
Even so, it seems that these "correspondents' opinions" in the 
whole admirable article of The Moscow Gazette still refuse to ad­
mit this thought, and instead they even assert that "the leading 
role in these intrigues unquestionably belongs to England," and 
that "as heretofore, we are left alone face to face with Turkey." 
But is this so ? Axe we left alone ? On the contrary, aren't we 
destined, in the very near future, to be left alone not with Turkey 
but with all Europe ? 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
823 
In fact, what then is "militant Catholicism" which is generally 
noticed and acknowledged in the present events ? Whence this 
pugnacity to the point of "passion" with which Catholicism has 
taken under its "protection" orthodox Turkey as against schismatic 
Russia ? Is it possible that it is merely because "Russia is a schis­
matic country" ? At present Catholkism has so many troubles and 
pressing concerns that it has no time to think about all these 
ancient church feuds. And what is most important-whence this 
"Catholic league" which is so feared by Berlin ?-It is precisely 
these things that I dwelt upon more than two months ago, seeking 
to explain them. And it was my inference that this league, which 
now is already recognized by others, is a solid and rigidly organized 
Catholic conspiracy aiming at the renovation of the Roman laic 
rule,-a conspiracy which at the moment is prevalent in all Europe ; 
that it will exercise an enormous influence upon all current events 
in Europe, and that, consequently, the key to all contemporary i1t­
trigues is neither here nor there, not only in England, but unques­
tio,phly in the universal Catholic conspiracy ! 
Militant Catholicism vehemently and "passionately" sides 
with the Turks against us. And even in England, even in Hungary, 
at this moment, then࿙ are no haters of Russia as ardent as these 
militant t:lericals.-Not some prelate, but the Pope himself, loudly 
and with joy, spoke at the Vatica" Conferences about "the victories 
of the Turk<; prophesying to Russia a dreadful future." This dying 
old man, and besides-"the head of Christianity," was not ashamed 
to announce urbi et orbi that every time he hears with joy about 
Russian reverses. This awful hatred becomes quite intelligible if 
it is admitted that at present Catholicism is actually "militating," 
and that, by deed, i.e., with the lwiJrd, it is w·· ing a war in Europe 
against its dreaded and fatal enemies. 
But who in Europe is now the most dreadful enemy of Roman 
Catholicism, i.e., the secular monarchy of the Pope ?-Unquestion­
ably, Prince Bismarck. Rome hers࿘lf was taken away from the 
Pope at the very moment of Germany's and Bismarck's triumph 
when Germany had crushed France, then the principal defendress 
of papacy, thereby forthwith untying the han!'!-; of the Italian King, 
who immediately ocwpied Rome. Ever since, the whole concern 
of Catholicism has been the discovery of Germany's and Prince 
Bismarck's enemy and rival. For his own part, Prince Bismarck 
himself clearly understands thP fact, in all its brr·:tdth-understood 
it long ago-that Roman papa. Catholicism is, in addition, the 
eternal enemy of Protestant Germany, which for so many centuries 
has been protesting against Rome and her idea in all its mani­
festations, and against all its allies, prote1.tors and followers. More-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
over, he understands that Catholicism precisely now, i.e., the most 
momentous hour for united Germany, is the most noxious of all 
elements impeding this unification of hers, i.e., the completion of 
the edifice to the erection of which Prince Bismarck, all his life, 
has devoted so much labor. 
Furthermore, Berlin fears "the possibility" of a Catholic and 
anti-Prussian league, into which eventually the ultramontane and 
separatist interests of Southern Germany could be drawn. Berlin 
also fears, and has long before anticipated, that Catholicism, sooner 
or later, unfailingly will serve as a pretext for the future rise of 
France against Germany, which has humbled, conquered and ruined 
her ; that Roman Catholicism will offer this pretext sooner and 
more quickly than anyone else, and that, consequently, the major 
danger to unified Germany lies precisely in Roman Catholicism, 
and in nothing else. 
And Berlin's foresight has emanated from the natural and 
necessary consideration that, first, at present, papacy has no de­
fender in the whole world other than that same France ; that it 
can solely rely upon her sword, provided it can manage to seiu 
it firmly and hold it in its own hand; secondly, that Roman Catholi­
cism is far from being a crushed enemy, that it is a thousand-year­
old enemy ; that it is an enemy passionately craving for life ; that 
its viability is phenomenal ; that it still possesses many forces, and 
that such an immense historical idea as the secular papal power 
cannot be extinguished in a minute. Briefly, Berlin has become 
cognizant not only of the enemy but also of his strength. In Berlin, 
enemies are not despised before battle. 
However, if Catholicism's desire to live is so strong, and 
if it is necessary to go on living ; and if the sword which can pro­
tect it is in the hands of France alone,-it clearly follows that 
France cannot be permitted to slip out of its hands, particularly 
if the moment should prove opportune. This opportune moment 
arose last spring ; this was the Russian war with the Turks,-the 
Eastern question. Indeed, who is Germany's principal ally ?-Of 
course, Russia. This Rome understands perfectly. This is why the 
Pope was so cheered by Russian "reverses." This means that the 
principal ally of the most dreaded enemy of the papal power has 
been drawn away by the war from his inveterate ally, Germany, 
and thus Germany is now alone. This further signifies that the 
moment, which Catholicism has so long been awaiting, has arrived : 
when, if not now, is the most convenient time for inflaming in· 
veterate hatred and throwing France into a war of revanche against 
Germany? 
Moreover, other seasons fatal to Catholicism are approach· 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
ing, so that it can't lose even a minute : the inevitable death of 
the Pope and the election of a new one are to be expected very 
shortly. And in Rome it is well known that Prince Bismarck is 
going to use all his power, his best endeavors, to deliver the last 
and most horrible blow against the papal authority, exercising his 
utmost influence upon the election of the new Pope so as to convert 
him-if possible with his own consent-from a secular sovereign and 
potentate into a mere Patriarch, and thus, by dividing Catholicism 
into two rival camps, to bring about once and forever its disintegra­
tion and the destruction of its claims and hopes. 
Why, then, not hasten against Bismarck, resorting to all 
means ?-All the more so as the Eastern question comes in handy I 
Oh, at last France is in a position to find allies whom for so long 
a time she has failed to find ! Now a whole coalition can even be 
formed I Let all Europe be stained with blood, but as against this 
the Pope will triumph, and for the Romish confessors of Christ­
this is everything. 
t\nd thus tl,ey have begun to work. First of all, it was im­
perative to make France support them. How was this to be achieved ? 
-Yet they did achieve this. At present a11 European politicians 
and the whole European press agree that the May coup-d'etat in 
France w· 
.. s brought about by the Clericals ; but-I repeat-no one 
seems ttJ ࿚erceive in this fact its fundamental significance. Every­
body seems to think that four months ago the Clericals precipitated 
a coup-d'etat in France only for the purpose of gaining more free­
dom of action, certain advantages, privileges, expansion of their 
rights. And yet it is impossible to believe that the coup-d'etat was 
not engineered for the most radical aims, i ,; . in order to bring 
about (in view of the forthcoming u1ssensions i-
'he Roman Church, 
following the death of the Pope) in the near : uture an inevitable 
war between France and Germany-precisely war ! And you will 
see-regardless of what the outcome may be-they will achieve their 
goal, they will precipitate a war as a result of which-should France 
he victorious-the Pope will, perhaps, regain his secular power. 
They accomplished the task in a most adroit manner, and 
what is most important-they chose a momc࿛t when everything 
seemed to converge toward their success. They had to begin with 
the ousting of the republicans who, under no circumstance, would 
have supported the Pope and risked a war with Germany. And they 
did oust them. In addition, i:. was necessary to ,·,1mpel Marshal 
MacMahon to make an irrepar;.o.>)e-exactly irreparable-error in 
order to set him on an irrevocable course. And he did commit this 
error ; he did oust the republicans, and he did announce to France 
at large that they shall not return. Thus the foundation has been 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
firmly laid, and, for the time being, the Clericals are quiet : they 
know that should France again return a republican majority in 
the Chamber, the Marshal will send it back. 
Gambetta has declared that the Marshal would either have 
to submit to the decision of the country or quit his post. In full 
accord with Gambetta all the republicans have come to the same 
conclusion, forgettmg, however, the Marshal's motto : "l'y suis et 
j'y reste" ("I am here to stay") , and that he will not quit. It is 
clear that the Marshal's whole hope resides in the legions. The 
Clericals, too, intend to take advantage of the legions' devotion 
to the Marshal or to whomsoever they may. If only the coup-d'etat 
could be brought to an end, they would manage to steer events in 
the needed direction. It is most probable that all this will come 
to pass : they will stand at the side of the usurper ; they will guide 
him. And even should they not stand at his side, the thing would 
develop of its own accord since it has been set right : if only the 
coup-d'etat be brought to an end. They know what a colossal im­
pression any political change in France would produce upon Prince 
Bismarck. As early as the year 1875, he sought to declare war on 
France, fearing her steady annual reinforcement. However, every 
coup-d'etat in France would, naturally, greatly disturb him. Espe­
cially at a moment when Germany is left without her natural ally, 
Russia ; when Austria (also an old adversary of Germany) ,  where 
there are so many Catholic elements hostile to Germany, bas sud­
denly become cognizant of her importance, and when England, ever 
since the beginning of the Eastern war, with such irritable impa­
tience, has beeri looking for an ally in Europe ! "What if France" 
-thus they must be arguing in Berlin-"headed by its new govern­
ment, around which the ·Clericals are sneaking, which they are 
guiding and which they own,-what if France should guess that 
if there is to be a war of revanche, she would never strike a more 
opportune moment than the present to begin it, and more formidable 
allies to support her ! And what if the Pope should die at that 
time [which is quite possible] ? What if the Clericals should compel 
the nt>w French government to declare to Prince Bismarck that 
his views on the election of the new Pope are in discord with those 
of France rand this will inevitably happen if the Republicans are 
ousted] ? What if, at the same time, the new French government 
should gueas that were it to succeed [bearing in mind the pos­
sibility of finding powerful allies in Europe] in reconquering at 
least one of the provinces taken away from France in 1871, it would 
consolidate its authority and influence in the country, for at least 
twenty years 1-Nay, in these circumstances, is it possible not to 
be nervous ! " 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
And the most important point is that here there is one ad­
ditional little fact : the German is arrogant and haughty ; he will 
not tolerate disobedience. Up to the present France has been under 
the complete and obedient tutelage of Germany ; she has given Ger­
many a reply to all her inquiries, virtually concerning every one 
of her, France's, moves ; she has Lad to explain and apologize for 
every additional army division, for every battery, and, suddenly, 
this France dares to raise her head ! So that the Clericals may 
boldly presume that Prince Bismarck will virtually take the initia­
tive in starting the war. Didn't he, in fact, seek to start it in 1875 ? 
Not to start war would be equivalent to letting France slip out of 
Germany's hands forever. 
True, in 1875 the situation was different. But should Austria 
side with Germany . . .  In a word, at the recent meeting of the 
Chancellors of Germany and Austria, probably not only the Eastern 
question wa's discussed. And if there be in the world a state in a 
most advantageous external political situation, it is precisely Austria I 
4 
WHAT DoEs AusTRIA AT PRF.SENT THINK ABOUT ? 
It 111ay be argued that there is agitation in Austria ; that one­
half of Austria does not want what its government is after. In 
Hungary manifestations are taking place ; Hungary is eager to give 
support to the Turks against the Russians. Some Anglo-Magyar­
Polish conspiracy has even been discovered. On the other hand, 
although at present the Slavic elements SIJ, ,port the government, 
nevertheless the government of 1\ustria look࿜ 
· n them askance and 
suspiciously, perhaps even more askance tha1; on the Hungarians. 
If so, can it be maintained that, at this minute, Austria is in a 
political situation as advantageous as any European state can pos­
sibly be ? 
Yes, this is so. True, the Catholic work, unquestionably, is 
also on foot in Austria. The Clericals are farsighted. They are not 
ones to fail to understand the present-da} significance of that 
country or to miss an opportunity ! And it stands to reason that 
they are not missing the opportunity to incite in that Catholic and 
"most Christian" land all kinds of disturbances 1mdrr every con­
ceivable pretext, guise and fonr. But here is the point : who knows, 
although in Austria, of course, a is pretended that people are very 
angry about these disturbances, nevertheless, the contrary may be 
true : these disturbances are kept in store for any eventuality in 
anticipation of the fact that they may be useful in the very near 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
future. However, in view of current events, Austria most probably, 
though considering herself in the happiest political situation, has 
not yet decided upon her distant and quite specific policy but still 
keeps looking around and waiting : what will f"udence compel her 
to do ? And even if she has made up her mind about anything, 
it is merely about the immediate policy,-and this only tentatively. 
Generally, she is in a beatific mood ; she takes her time in reaching 
her decisions, knowing that everybody is waiting for her and that 
everybody needs her ; she is taking aim at the prey which she picks 
herself and sensually licks her lips in anticipation of the forthcom­
ing, inevitable blessings. 
At the recent meetings of the Chancellors of the two German 
states, perhaps much of a "tentative" nature has been discussed. 
At least, the Austrian government has publicly announced that noth­
ing in the East shall take place and be settled in violation of Aus­
tria's interests,-which is quite an elaborate idea. Thus Austria, with­
out having even touched the sword, already feels certain that she 
will be given a substantial share in Russian successes, should these 
develop, and perhaps even a still greater share should no such suc­
cesses ensue. And this-merely as a result of her immediate policies I 
And in the future ?-Even at present everybody needs Austria, seeks 
her opinion, her neutrality ; everybody makes promises, perhaps 
bribes her, and this-only because she sits and says : "Hm ! " Indeed, 
that state which is now so fully aware of its value, cannot help rely­
ing upon the chances of its future policy, which still remains un­
known, notwithstanding the cordial meetings of the Chancellors. 
-Of this I am fully convinced. Moreover, I am sure that this policy 
will remain generally unknown till the very last and fatal moment, 
-which would be quite in line with the customs and traditions of 
Austria's inveterate policy. Keenly, oh how keenly, she now watches 
France, awaiting her fate, expecting most interesting new facts.­
And the main point is that Austria is in a most self-complacent 
mood. 
Even so, she also cannot help being agitated : probably, very 
soon she will have to decide upon her future policy,-and irrevocably 
so. Of course, in her situation this is a pleasant but nevertheless 
intense agitation. Indeed, she must understand-and, perhaps, very 
keenly-that with every present-day coup-d'etat in France (so close 
and so pos࿝ble) , even with every new government in France (save, 
again, the republican) ,  the chances of Germany's conflict with 
France are absolutely inevitable,-even if the new rulers of France 
should not desire war, and, on the contrary, should exert every effort 
to maintain peace. Oh, Austria, perhaps, better than anyone, is 
capable of realizing the fact that there are moments in the lives of 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
the nations when no longer will or calculation leads to a certain 
action but fate itself. 
Now, I shall venture to set forth a fantastic dream (and, of 
course, only a dream) .  I shall venture to conjecture what Austria 
thinks, at this crucial and uncertain moment, about that future policy 
of hers, upon which, of course, sht has not yet decided, since still 
not all facts are clear. However, so.nebody is already knocking at 
the door ; this she hears ; somebody wants to come in and is already 
turning the handle of the lock, but the door is not yet open, and 
who's going to come in ?-As yet, no one knows. France is faced 
with a riddle which will be solved there, and meanwhile Austria sits 
and ponders. And how can she fail to ponder ?-If swords are drawn ; 
if Germany and France finally throw themselves upon each other, 
whom will she support ? With whom is she going to side ?-This is 
the most dista11t question, and yet perhaps she will have to answer 
it very soon ! 
1 bus, how can she now help knowing her price ! Because he 
nJ o ·vhn'ie behalf she draws her sword will triumph. No one knows 
what has been said at the meetings of the Chancellors of both Ger­
man Empires, but it is certain that hints have been exchanged 
between them. How could hints have been avoided ?-Perhaps some­
thing m ·.re explicit than mere hints has been said and suggested. 
In a w,_:. d, unquestionably, ma .• y gifts and presents have been 
promised her, so that she is quite sure that if she adheres to her 
alliance with Germany, in return for it she wi!l receive . . .  much. 
And this-as a reward for some sort of neutrality, for the mere 
fact that during some six months she would sit quietly without 
moving in anticipation of a reward for her .࿞'lod behavior-this is 
the most pleasar.t thing ! -Since, i believe, n· 
-:hancellor would be 
able to enlist her active participation against France : Austria will 
make no such mbtake. She is not going to beat France to death. 
On the contrary, at the last fatal moment, she might protect hn 
by means of a diplomatic betrayal, thereby securing for herself an 
additional reward. For one cannot remain quite without France in 
the embrace of such a giant as Germany will become a fter her 
second victory over France. Who knows, the biant might later sud­
denly embract' her ano squeeze her-unawares of course-so strongly 
that she would be crushed like a fly. Besides, that other Eastern 
giant-to ht>r right-might, finally, arise from his o;ecular bed . . . .  
"Good behavior is a go.,·l thing"-Austria, perhaps, silently 
cogitates at present-"but" . .
. In a word, another-true, most 
fantrc;tic-dream must appear in her imagination . . . .  
"The coup d'etat in France may even begin this coming 
autumn, and, perhaps, it will come to a quick end. Should the 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
republic perish, or should it be left in some nominal, absurd form, 
discord with Germany may begin in the winter. The Clericals would 
certainly see to it, all the more so as by that time the Pope will 
unfailingly die, and the election of a new Pope would forthwith 
furnish a pretext for misunderstandings and conflicts. However, 
even should the Pope fail to die, the possibility of misunderstand­
ings and conflicts would still remain in force. And should Germany 
firmly make up her mind, the war would begin next spring. At the 
other end of Europe, the winter campaign against Turkey also seems 
inevitable, so that Germany's ally would still be busy by the spring 
of next year. Thus, should the war of revanche flare up, France 
would at once find two allies-England and Turkey." 
Thus, Germany would be left alone with . . . Italy, i.e., al­
most alone. Oh, of course, Germany is arrogant and mighty. But 
France, too, has managed to recover : she has an army of one million, 
and England wouid be of some help, after all : German maritime 
cities would have to be protected against her fleet, which would 
mean that some troops, artillery, arms and supplies would have to 
be set aside. Anyway, this would weaken Germany to some extent. 
"In a word, France, even without me, has enough chances to wage 
a successful war"-muses Austria-"at least twice as many as in 
1870, since, surely, France will not commit the errors of those days. 
Furthermore, whether or not France be beaten, nevertheless I shall 
be compensated in the East, since there nothing is going to be 
settled in discord with Austria's interests. This has been decided 
upon and signed. However . . . what if, at the most decisive mo­
ment, prudently reserving for myself freedom of decision, I should 
side with France, and should even draw the sword ! "  
Indeed. what would happen then ? 
Austria would at once find herself among three enemies : Italy, 
Germany and Russia. Russia, however, would be terribly busy with 
her own war, and she would not be in a position to attack. Italy, 
at any rate, shouldn't be feared too much. There remains only Ger­
many. But were she even to dispatch troops against Austria, she 
would thereby weaken herself ; still, of course, it wouldn't be a 
large force because she would need all her troops against France. 
In fact, were Austna to risk an alliance with France, France would, 
perhaps1 be the first to assault Germany, even if Germany did not 
wish to 'fight. France, Austria, England and Turkey-against Ger­
many with Italy-this is a dreadful coalition I Success would be 
quite probable. And in the event of success Austria could recover 
everything she had lost at Sadowa, and even much more. Further­
more, in the East she would, under no circumstance, lose her benefits 
and everything that was promised her. But what is more important 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
still-she would gain in influence in Catholic Germany. Should Ger­
many be conquered, not even conquered, but should she emerge 
from the war not quite successful,-Germany's unity would at once 
be shaken. In Southern Catholic Germany, separatism would arise, 
which, besides, the Clericals would foster with all their strength, 
and of which Austria would naturally take advantage . . .  to such 
an extent that then two Germanys two German Empires, would 
come into being-a Catholic and a Protestant. Thereupon, by rein­
forcing herself with the German element, Austria might challenge 
her own "dualism," placing Hungary in her former, ancient and 
respectful relations toward herself, after which, of course, she would 
dispose of her own Slavs,-somehow forever I . . .  
Briefly, there might be innumerable benefits ! Finally, even 
in the event that she should not be victorious, it wouldn't be such 
a calamity, since she wouldn't be able to conquer such a powerful 
coalition completeiy, as in x871, so that, unfailingly she would be 
beaten. Thus peace could be concluded without any too dread­
fu1 ronsequence. "Thus, with whom would it be better to side ? 
What's better ? With whom would it be more advantageous ?"' 
In view of the present events in Europe, Austria, unquestion­
ably, puts such radical questions to herself 
5 
WHo's KNOCKING AT THE DooR ? WHo \VILL ENTER ? 
INESCAPABLE FATE 
When I started this chapter, two facts and communiques were 
still absent ; now, suddenly, they have tillecl the whole European 
press, so that everything whicl. I had wntt--· 
in this chapter as 
conjecture has now been most punctually cor ... borated. My Diary 
will be published next month, on October seventh ; today is only 
September twenty-ninth, and wy "predictiuns," so to speak, upon 
which I had embarked in this chap࿟er, taking chances, as it were, 
will partly prove obsolete and accomplished facts from which I 
copied these "prophecies" of mine. 
However, I venture to remind the readerc of the summer May­
June issue of my Diury. Virtually everything I wrote there con­
cerning the immediate future of Europe has already come true, or 
is beginning to be substantiated at present. Even so, at the time, 
I heard opinions expressed (truP, by laymen) in v·hich my article 
was called an "ecstatic rage," a ... ntastic exaggeration. People were 
simply ridiculing the strength and significance of the Clerical con­
spiracy ; besides, they would admit no conspiracy at all. Only two 
weeks ago I heard a "competent" man i!xpress the opinion that 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
the death of the Pope and the election of a new Pope would pass 
in Europe without leaving any trace. But even today it is already 
known what importance Bismarck is attaching to it and what he 
had said about it in Berlin to Crispi. 
In the May-June issue of my Diary I wrote that ever since the 
time of the Franco-Prussian war Bismarck's genius had grasped the 
fact that the most formidable enemy of the newly unified Germany 
was Roman Catholicism, which, to begin with, would serve as a 
pretext for a war of revanche that would engulf all Europe. This 
was considered absurd, etc. And all this because I wrote these things 
at a time when neither in Russia nor in the European press did 
anyone even think to bother about them, notwithstanding the East­
ern war, which was already thundering in the world and causing 
concern to everybody. At that time it was the general consensus 
that things would be confined to the East. 
Well, perhaps even now no one believes in the inevitability 
of a European war in the very near future. On the contrary, only 
recently serious attention was paid to the opinion of competent 
Englishmen (Northscot's speech) that pacification ma.y be brought 
about by winter. So that, perhaps, I am considering in vain this 
present chapter of mine to be obsolete in advance. Even though 
facts have already come to light ; although their enormous im­
portance is beginning to reveal itself ; although something fatal, 
dreadful and-what is most important-something near is already 
soaring over all Europe,-notwithstanding all this, I am sure, many 
people even now will consider my interpretation of these facts er­
roneous and ridiculous, fantastic and exaggerated, because every­
body is taking the current events for something incomparably less 
significant than they actually are. 
For example, we shall see elections in France, and suddenly 
she might return the former republican majority, as is quite pos­
sible. And I am convinced that people will at once start vociferating 
that everything has come to a happy end ; that the sky has cleared ; 
that no conflicts are in sight ; that MacMahon has confessed his 
guilt ; that the impotent Clericals have disgracefully withdrawn to 
the background, and that peace and "lawfulness" have been restored 
in Europe. All my conjectures, as stated in this chapter, will again 
seem but products of idle imagination. Again it will be said that 
I have corweyed to facts-true, accomplished facts-an erroneous 
meaning, and chiefly a meaning which is nowhere attributed to 
them. 
However, let us once more await the events, and we shall then 
se where the more correct road is. And just as a matter of record, 
I shall attempt in conclusion to indicate the points and landmarks 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
of this road which is already becoming visible to everybody, and 
which, willy-nilly, we shall all have to follow. This I am doing, 
as stated, just as a matter of record-for future verification. In fact 
-this is simply a summary of this chapter. 
1. The road begins at Rome and leads from Rome, from the 
Vatican, where the dying old man, the head of a crowd of Jesuits 
standing by him, has mapped it long ago. When the Eastern prob­
lem arose, the Jesuits realized that the most opportune moment 
had come. Following the road thus traced, they broke into France, 
made there a coup d'etat, and placed her in a position which makes 
her war with Germany in the near future virtually inevitable, even 
if she does not desire it. All this Prince Bismarck has long in ad­
vance understood and foreseen. In my opinion at least, he alone, 
several years prior to the current moment, discerned and sized up 
his principal enemy and the enormous universal importance of that 
last battle for its existence which in the very near future dying 
papal Catholicism will unquestionably fight against the whole world. 
2. At the present moment this fatal struggle is already shaping 
itself, while the idst battle is approaching with terrible speed. France 
has been chosen and designated for the dreadful battle, and the 
battle will take place. It is inevitable, this is certain. However, 
there is a slim chance that it may be postponed-but only for a 
short titue In all events, the battlP is inevitable and not jar distant. 
3· The moment the battle begins it will be converted into an 
all-European battle. The Eastern problem and the Eastern war, 
by force of destiny, will merge with the all-European conflict in 
which Austria's final decision which side she is to lend her sword 
will be one of the most noteworthy episode!' However, the most 
essential and momentous aspect c.i this last a: · 1 fatal struggle will 
consist in that, on the one hand, it will be ihe solution of the 
thousand-year-old question of Roman Catholicism, and on the other 
-that, by the will of Providence, it will be revlaced with regenerated 
Eastern Christianity. In this way our Russian Eastern problem will 
assume the proportions of a universal and ecumenical one fraught 
with extraordinary predestined significance, even though this pre­
destination should come to pass before blind P:•es incapable to the 
last minute of perceiving the obvious and of comprehending the 
meaning of the preordained. Finally--
4· (And let it be called the most conjectural and fantastic 
of all my predictions-! concede this in advance.) I am convinced 
that the war will end in favor ol .he East, in favor of the Eastern 
alliance ; that Russia has nothing to fear should the Eastern war 
merge with the all-European one, and that should the matter thus 
expand-it would be all for the better. 

F'EODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Oh, no doubt, this would be a dreadful affair should so much 
precious human blood be shed I But at least there is consolation 
in the thought that the blood thus shed would unquestionably save 
Europt' from a ten times greater effusion of blood should the matter 
be again postponed and protracted. All the more so as the great 
struggle will unquestionably end quickly. Moreover, so many prob­
lems would be finally solved (the Roman Catholic problem, jointly 
with France's fate, the German, Eastern, Mohammedan problems) ;  
so many matters, altogether insoluble in the former course of events, 
would bt' settled ; the face of Europe would be so changed ; so 
many new and progressive things would ensue in human relation­
ships that perhaps it is not necessary to suffer spiritually and to 
dread too much the last convulsive jerk of old Europe on the eve 
of her indubitable and great regeneration. . . .  
Finally, I shall add one more consideration. Were one to 
make it a rule to judge all universal events of the greatest impor­
tance-even from a most superficial standpoint-by the principle : 
"today as yesterday, tomorrow as today,"-such a rule would be 
in obvious discord with the history of the nations and of mankind. 
And yet it is precisely what so-called realistic and sober common 
sense prescribes, so that virtually everyone who ventures to believe 
that tomorrow, maybe, the matter will appear to everybody in an 
altogether different guise than it seemed yesterday-is ridiculed and 
hissed at. For instance, even today, in the presence of all facts, does 
it not seem to quite a few that the Clerical movement is a most 
insignificant trifle ; that Gambetta will make a speech, and every­
thing will be restored to yesterday's status ; that quite possibly our 
war with Turkey will be ended by winter, and then again, as hitherto, 
stock-exchange speculation and railroad business will begin, the 
ruble rate will rise, we shall be merrily travelling abroad, etc. 
The impossibility of the continuation of the old order of 
things, in Europe, was an obvious truth to all her progressive minds, 
on the eve of the first European revolution which began in France 
at the end of the past century. Even so, who in the whole world, 
even on the eve of the convocation of the States-General, could 
have foreseen and predicted the form which, virtually on the fol­
lowing day, the event would assume, how it would begin . . .  And 
after it had come to pass, who, for instance, could have predicted 
the advent of Napoleon I, who, in substance, was, as it were, the 
predestined executor of the first historical phase of the event which 
began in 1 789 ? 
Moreover; in the times of Napoleon I, perhaps it seemed to 
everybody in Europe that his appearance was positively a sheer 
external accident in no way connected with that universal law by 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
835 
virtue of which the former face of the world was destined, at the 
end of the past century, to assume a new guise. 
And today somebody is knocking at the door ; some new man 
with a new word seeks to open the door and enter . . . .  But who 
is going to enter ?-This is the question. Is it going to be an alto­
gether new man, or again, one resem:•ling all us old dwarfs ? 
CHAPTER II 
1 
A LIE IS SAVED BY A LIE 
ONCE UPON a time Don Quixote, the well-known knight of 
the doleful image, the most magnanimous of all knights on earth, 
the simplest in soul and one of the greatest men in heart, while 
roaming in the company of his faithful armor-bearer Sancho in 
pcrst.;: 0f arlven' :tres, was suddenly struck by a perplexity which 
made him ponder for a long while. 
The point is that oftentimes ancient knights, beginning with 
Amadis de Gaula, whose life-histories survived in the most truthful 
books caH.·d romances of chivalry (for the purchase of which Don 
Quixote did not regret selling a ft..v of the best acres of his small 
estate) ,-not seldom these knights, in the course of their famous 
wanderings, beneficial to the whole world,-would suddenly en­
counter whole armies-at times even one hundred thousand men 
strong-dispatched against them by the evi! spirit, by wicked fairies 
who envied them and obstructed them in evf'-࿠ Qossible way in the 
achievement of their great goal-to be united 
ith their beautiful 
ladies. 
Usually when a knight encountered ࿡uch a monstrous and 
evil army, he drew his sword, invoking for his spiritual aid the 
name of his lady, and thereupon he hewed his way into the very 
midst of his enemies and annihilated them to the last man. 
Apparently this was a simple matter, but suddenly Don 
Quixote started pondering.-Over what ?-It appeared to him im­
possible that r- .,e knight-no matter how strong, and though he 
should keep swinging his sword untiringly twenty-four hours-should 
be able to kill at once, in just one battle, one hundred thousand 
men. Anyhow, even to kill one 'lan time is need࿢d. To kill one 
hundred thousand men much time is required, and regardless of 
how be swung his sword, this could not be accomplished in several 
hours, all at once, by one man. And yet these truthful books told 
that the incident occurred precisely in the course of one battle. 
How, then, could this happen ? 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
"I have solved this riddle, my friend Sancho"-Don Quixote 
finally said. "Inasmuch as all these giants, all these wicked fairies, 
were but the evil spirit, their army, too, possessed the same magic 
and evil character. I believe that these armies were not composed 
of men exactly like us, for example. These men were but an illu­
sion, a creation of magic, and probably their bodies did not re­
semble ours, but were rather akin to the bodies, for instance, of 
mollusks, worms and spiders. Thus, the solid and sharp sword of 
a knight, swung by his mighty hand, striking these bodies, instantly 
passed through them, almost without resistance, as if through the 
air. And if so, he could have actually with one blow passed through 
four or five, even ten, bodies if these stood in a compact group. 
It is intelligible, then, that the matter was greatly accelerated, and 
the knight was actually able to annihilate in several hours whole 
armies of these fairies and other monsters." . . .  
Here the great poet and heart-reader discerned one of the 
deepest and most mysterious traits of the human spirit. Oh, this 
is a great book, not one of those such as are written nowadays. 
Such books are bequeathed to mankind once in several hundred 
years. And you will find such aspects of human nature discerned 
on every page of this book. 
To take but one fact, that this Sancho-the personification of 
common sense, prudence, cunning, the golden mean-chances to be­
come a friend and fellow-traveller of the insanest man on earth ;­
precisely he-, and ne other ! He deceives Don Quixote continually ; 
he cheats him like a child, and at the same time he fully believes 
in his great mind ; he is tenderly fascinated by the greatness of 
his heart ; he als6 gives full credence to the fantastic dreams of 
the valiant Knight, and not once does he doubt that the latter 
finally will conquer the island ! 
How desirable it would be for our youth to become thoroughly 
familiar with these grand works of world literature. I don't know 
what IS being taught in the courses in literature, but acquaintance 
with this the grandest and saddest book conceived by the genius 
of man would unquestionably ennoble the soul of a youth with a 
great thought and would plant in his heart momentous queries, help­
ing to divert his mind from the worship of the eternal stupid idol 
of mediocrity, self-complacent conceit and trivial prudence. This 
saddest of all books man will not forget to take along with him 
to the Lord'࿣ last judgment. He will point to the very deep and 
fatal mystery of man and of mankind revealed in it. He will show 
that the most sublime beauty of man, his loftiest purity, chastity, 
naivete, gentleness; courage, and finally, the greatest are often-alas, 
much too often-reduced to naught, with no benefit to mankind, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
solely because all these the noblest and richest gifts with which 
man is frequently endowed have lacked one and the last gift­
genius in order to administer the wealth of these blessings and all 
their power,-to administer and lead them along a truthful and not 
fantastic and insane path of action-for the benefit of the human 
race I 
Genius, however, is so spari11࿤ly, so rarely allotted to tribes 
and peoples, that the spectacle of the cruel irony of fate which so 
often dooms the labors of the noblest men and most ardent friends 
of mankind to h1sses and ridicule, to stoning, solely because they 
are unable at the fatal moment to discern the true meaning of 
things and to discover their new word,-this spectacle of the vain 
perdition of so many great and very noble forces may lead a friend 
of humanity to despair, no longer rousing him to laughter but stir­
ring him to bitter tears, forever angering his hitherto pure and 
credulous heart with doubt. . . .  
However, I merely meant to point out this most curious trait 
which along with hundreds of other profound observations, Cer­
"an: c:: rliscernerl and revealed in man's heart. The most fantastic 
of all men, who embraced to the point of lunacy the belief in the 
most chimerical dream that can be imagined, suddenly is seized with 
doubt and perplexity which almost shatter his whole faith. And it 
is curio•;.࿥ to note what proved capable of undermining it : not the 
absurdity of his initial aberrat:on ; not the irrationality of the 
existence of knights roaming for the benefit of mankind ; not the 
nonsensicalness of those magic miracles which are recorded in "the 
most truthful books,"-nay, on the contrary-an outward, secondary, 
altogether isolated circumstance. The fantastic man suddenly begins 
to crave for realism I It is not the fact of •i,࢓ appearance of fairy 
armies that baffles him-oh, this cannot be L lbted ! Besides, how 
could these great and splendid knights have r࿦vealed their valor if 
all these trials had not been cast upon them, if there had been no 
envious giants and wicked fairies ?-The ideal of the wandering 
knights is so grand, so lofty and useful, it has so fascinated the 
heart of the noble Don Quixote that to renounce faith in it com­
pletely became an impossibility for him ; it would have been equiva­
lent to the betrayal of the ideal, of duty, oi iove of Dulcinea and 
of mankind. fWhen he did renounce this ideal ; when he recovered 
from his insanity and grew reasonable,-after he had returned from 
his second expedition, in which he was defeated b࿧· the level-headed 
and sensible barber Carasco, t1 P negator and salidst,-he promptly 
passed away, calmly, with a sau smile, comforting weeping Sancho, 
loving the whole world with the full strength of love that dwelt 
in his holy heart, and yet realizing that there was nothing further 
for him to do in this world.) 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Nay, he was perplexed merely with that surest mathematical 
consideration that no matter how the knight might swing his sword, 
and regardless of how mighty he might be, it is impossible to 
defeat an army of one hundred thousand men in the course of 
several hours, or even of one day, killing each one of them, to the 
last man. Even so, this is stated in the truthful books. This means 
that a lie is stated. And if there is one lie,-everything is a lie. 
How, then, is truth to be saved ? Presently he invents for the salva­
tion of truth another fancy, but twice, three times more fantastic, 
cruder, more absurd than the first one ; he conceives hundreds of 
thousand 
of imaginary men 
possessing 
mollusk-bodies 
through 
which the sharp sword of the knight can pass ten times more effec­
tively and quickly than through ordinary human bodies. Thus 
realism is taken care of, truth is saved, and now the first, principal 
fancy may be believed without any further doubts,-and this, again, 
owing to the second far more nonsensical vision, conceived for the 
salvation of the realism of the initial one. 
Ask yourselves : didn't, perhaps, a thing such as this occur in 
your lives ? Say that you took a liking to a certain fancy of yours, 
to an idea, to some inference of yours, a conviction, or some ex­
ternal fact which struck your imagination, finally to a woman who 
bewitched you. You rush after the object of your love with all the 
strength of your soul. True, no matter how you may be blinded, 
how your heart may be tempted, yet if in that object of your 
love there be deceit, illusion, something that you yourselves have 
exaggerated and distorted in it owing to your passion, your initial 
impetus-solely for the purpose of making of it your idol and wor­
shipping it,-of course, secretly you will feel it, doubt will oppress 
you, tease your mind, roam in your soul, preventing you from living 
peacefully with your beloved fancy. 
Now, then, don't you remember, wouldn't you admit, at least 
to yourselves : what would suddenly comfort you ? Haven't you 
conceived a new vision, a new lie, perhaps, of the crudest kind, in 
which you hasten lovingly to believe only because it has solved 
your initial doubt ? 
2 
MoLLUSKs TAKEN FOR HuMAN BEINGS. WHAT Is MoRE 
ADvANTAGEous TO Us : WHEN THE TRUTH IS KNowN 
ABOu'l" ·Us OR WHEN NoNSENSE IS SPOKEN ABouT Us ? 
In our day virtually all Europe is in love with the Turks,­
more or less. Forinerly, say a year ago, even though Europe sought 
to discover in the Turks some sort of great national strength, never-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
theless everybody understood within himself that they did this 
solely because of their hatred of Russia. Indeed, they could not 
help realizing the fact that in Turkey there are no forces, that 
there can be none, inherent in a normal, healthy organism ; more­
over, that perhaps there is no organism left-to such an extent is 
is undermined, contaminated and putrefied, that the Turks are 
but an Asiatic horde, and not a rtgular state. 
At present, however, since Turkey has been at war with 
Russia. little by little, in certain European quarters there has 
arisen a real and serious conviction that that nation is not only 
an organism but one possessing great vigor and qualifications for 
development and future progress. This fancy has captivated many 
a European mind more and more, and finally this conviction has 
even drifted over to Russia : in Russia, too, some people have begun 
to speak of some unexpected national forces which Turkey has 
suddenly revealed. But in Europe this fancy took root as a result 
of hatred of Russia, whereas in our midst it is the result of 
pusillanimity and horrible haste in reaching pessimistic conclusions, 
which were always a characteristic trait of the educated classes 
of our society JUSt as soon as somewhere and in some respect we 
began to have "reverses." 
In Europe the same thing happened as transpired in the de­
fective mind of Don Quixote, only in an inverted sense, although 
the sub࿨tance of the fact is identiral : to save the truth Don Quixote 
invented men with mollusk-bodies ; whereas Europe, in order to 
save her fundamental vision, so comforting to her, concerning the 
negligibleness and impotence of Russia, converted a real mollusk 
into a human organism, bestowing upon it flesh and blood, spiritual 
vigor and health. At present the most educatမ>d European states are 
fervently dic;seminating perfect .1usurdities r ࢒ ')Ut Russia. Even in 
days gone by we were little known in Eur(J;,e, so little that one 
used always to wonder that such enlightened nations took so flimsy 
an interest in the study of that people whom they hated so intensely 
and whom they have always feared. Up to the present, this paucity 
of European knowledge of us, and even a certain impossibility for 
Europe to understand us on many points, in a certain sense, were 
partly advantageous to us. Therefore, now al࿩'l no harm will ensue. 
Let them shout at home about "the disgraceful weakness of 
Russia as a military power," contrary to the testimony of dozens 
of their own correspondents from the firing line, who have expressed 
admiration at the fighting aptitude, chivalrous tenacity and marvel­
ous discipline of the Russian s..,ldier and officer ; let them regard 
the possible mistakes, even grave mistakes, of the Russian staff 
in the beginning of the war not only as irreparable but as organic 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
and customary defects of our army and nation (forgetting how 
often we have defeated them in the field during the last two cen­
turies) ; finally, let their most serious political periodicals herald 
to Europe as an accurate truth the colossal uprising of the people, 
led by nihilists in Petersburg-on the Viborgskaia Storona, and that 
two regiments were dispatched at the instance of the authorities 
by railway from Dinaburg-to save Petersburg,-let them, in their 
blind wrath, say all these things. I repeat, this is even to our 
advantage, since they know not what they are doing. For it goes 
without saying that they would be eager to incite hatred against 
us everywhere abroad as against "dangerous enemies of their civiliza­
tion." They already visualize us in a defeated condition, in dis­
gracefully ridiculous impotence as a military power and a state or­
ganism. But he who is so weak and insignificant,-how can he arouse 
the fear of the coalition ? And yet they feel it necessary to incite 
their society against us. Consequently, what they say is to their 
detriment, and if so they are not causing us harm but bestowing 
a benefit upon us. As for us,-we shall wait for the end. 
But let us only imagine that they might receive the fullest, 
most precise and truthful information concerning the force of the 
spirit, the feeling, the unshakable faith of the Russian people in 
the justice of the great cause in defense of which their Emperor 
has drawn his sword, and in the indubitable triumph-sooner or 
later-of that cause. To imagine that Europe would, finally, com­
prehend that to Russia this is a national war par excellence ,· that 
our people are by no means a dead, inanimate mass, as Europe 
always imagines them to be, but a mighty organism, conscious of 
its strength, united as one man, by heart and will, inseparable from 
their army,-oh, what an alarm would this information rouse all 
over Europe ! And, of course, it would tend more to bring about 
an actual coalition against us than their pet calumnies about our 
impotence and ruin. Nay, better for them to believe in the uprising 
on the Viborgskaia Storona. We should only be encouraged by the 
fact that they believe in it. 
HowE'ver, in Europe all this is intelligible, and one under­
stands why this is transpiring there. But how can people at home 
vacillate, be troubled and even believe in some sort of newly and 
suddenly revealed vital force of the Turkish nation ? How did it 
manifest this force ? By fanaticism ? But fanaticism is carrion and 
not strengtq. This has been preached a hundred times in Russia by 
those very men who now believe in Turkish strength. People speak 
about Turkish victories. Yet the Turks have merely once or twice 
beaten off our attacks, and these are, so to speak, negative and not 
positive victories. We, besieged in Sebastopol, on one occasion re-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
pelled an assault of the French and English inflicting terrible losses 
on them, but in those days Europe did not vociferate about our 
victory. 
The last two months we have been greatly outnumbered by 
the Turks . . . .  Well, have they taken advantage of this ? Why didn't 
they force us across the Balkans ? Why didn't they drive us back 
across the Danube ?-On the contrary, everywhere we have retained 
our main positions, and everywhere we have repelled the Turks. 
On several occasions seven or eight of our battalions have defeated 
twenty of the1rs, as it rt!cently happened on the Czerkovna. Con­
vinced of the strength of the Turks, it is, however, pointed out that 
their rifles and even artillery are superior to ours. Yet people 
refuse to remember that, strictly speaking, we are fighting not only 
against the Turks but also against the European powers ; that many 
Englishmen are serving as office:rs in the Turkish army ; that the 
Turks are armed with European money ; that European diplomacy, 
ever since the beginning of the war, has been opposing us in many 
ways, ho.1ving deprived us of the help of our natural allies and even 
of ct•r real roads of communication to Turkey. Besides, by her hatred 
of us, .Europe has encouraged the fanaticism of the Turks. 
Finally, in Europe a conspiracy of whole organized, armed 
and financed gangs has been discovered ; their object is to attack 
unexpectt>dly the rear of our army. On top of this, recently a Turkish 
loan ha࿪ h·࿫cn cooked up in Europr , to her own great financial detri­
ment. This impossible loan was granted solely because Europe is so 
fond of the fancy that Turkey, far from being a mollusk-state, is 
an organism with flesh and blood just like the European states. 
And this at a time when whole provinces of Turkey were stained 
with floods of blood, when a regular conspiran of the Turkish rulers 
revealed the intent to annihilate Lhe Bulgari< 
·-to the last man ! 
The Turks are fighting us, feeding and su࿬porting their army 
with such requisitions of supplies, horses and cattle as inevitably 
must completely ruin that richest Turkish province. And it is to 
these destroyers and slaughlerers of ;heir own country that the en­
lightened English granted a loan, believing in their economic sol­
vency ! 
But let all this be so over there-in Eဖ.;,ope l There, this is 
somehow intelligible ! Hut how can we regard the Turks as a force ? 
Is the utter destruction of their own country or the complete annihila­
tion of the Christian population of the state-force ? Such force will 
not last them till the end of thF war. The first turn of the war in 
our favor,-and the fantastic ediuce of their military and national 
stren࿭th will instantaneously collapse and vanish like a genuine 
phantom, together with its fanaticism, which will escape like steam 
through an open valve. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Some clever fellows in Russia are cursing-both orally and in 
print-the Slavic problem. "What a fuss you are making about these 
Slavs and these fantasies of their unification I And who cast those 
Slavs upon our neck I What for ?-To doom us to an everlasting dis­
cord with Europe, to her eternal suspiciousness and hatred of us, 
now and in the future ?-Well, let them be damned, those Slavo­
philes I "  and so on, and so forth. 
However, it seems that these clamorous wiseacres are alto­
gether misinformed on the Slavs and the Eastern question, and that 
many of them never took any interest in them-up to the very last 
moment. Therefore, it is impossible to argue with them. Indeed, 
they are not aware of the fact that the Eastern question (including 
the Slavic problem) was invented not at all by the Slavophiles, nor 
by anybody else ; that it arose long ago of its own accord-long 
before the Slavophiles, before us, even before Peter the Great and 
the Russian Empire. It arose at the time of the initial consolida­
tion of the Great Russian race into a unified Russian state, i.e., 
simultaneously with the Moscow Czardom. 
The Eastern question is a fundamental idea of the Moscow 
Czardom, of which Peter the Great took full cognizance, and which, 
when he left Moscow, he transferred to Petersburg. Peter fully 
understood its organic connection with the Russian state and the 
Russian soul. This is why this idea did not only survive in Peters­
burg but it was, as it were, recognized as a Russian mission by all 
the successors of Peter. This is why it can neither be forsaken nor 
modified. 
To abandon the Slavic idea and to leave without solution the 
problem entaning the fate of Eastern Christianity (N. B. which is 
the substance of the Eastern problem)-would be equivalent to 
smashing Russia into pieces, and to inventing in her place some­
thing new, but not Russia at all. This would not even be a revolu­
tion, but simply destruction ; therefore this would even be impos­
sible, since such an entity cannot be destroyed and transformed 
into an altogether different organism. At present perhaps only the 
blindest of our Russian Europeans-and with them, to their shame, 
stock-exchange speculators-do not perceive and do not recognize 
this idea. I call tentatively stock-exchange speculators all those 
present-day Russians who have no other concern in Russia but their 
pocket-books, and who view Russia exclusively from the standpoint 
of the interests of their pockets. Now they are shouting in a chorus 
about commercial depression, the stock-exchange crisis and the de­
cline in rate of exchange of the ruble. 
However; JVere these stock-exchange gamblers so far-sighted 
as to understand anything outside their sphere, they would grasp 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
the fact that should Russia have failed to begin the present war, 
they themselves would be worse off. In order that there be "busi­
ness," even stock-exchange business, it is necessary that the nation 
live in reality, i.e., a genuine live life abiding by its natural mis­
sion, and not as a galvanized corpse in the hands of Jews and stock­
exchange speculators. 
Had we not started the present war-after all the cynical and 
insulting provocations of our enemtes,-had we not come to the 
rescue of the tortured martyrs, we should despise ourselves. But 
self-contempt, moral degradation, and ensuing cynicism impede even 
"business." Nations live by a great sentiment, a great all-unifying 
and all-illuminating thought ; by cohesion of the people, and finally, 
on condition that the people, involuntarily, consider themselves to 
be in accord with their upper men. This generates national vigor. 
This is what nations live by, and not merely by stock-exchange 
speculations and by concern about the rate of the ruble. The 
wealthier a nation is spiritually, the richer it is materially . . .  But, 
say, what obsolete words I am uttering ! 
3 
A SLIGHT HINT AT THE FuTURE INTELLIGENT RussiAN 
M"··"· THE UNQUESTIONABLE FATE oF THE FuTuRE Rus­
SIAN \\ OMAN 
Nowadays there are strange perplexities and odd concerns. 
Positively, there are Russians who are even afraid of Russian suc­
cesses and victories. They are afraid not because they wish evil to 
the Russians ; on the contrary, thPy are sinccʦr!y sorry about every 
Russian reverse ; they are good Russians. Ye· 
hey are also afraid 
of Russian successes and victories "because, you see, after a vic­
torious war self-reliance, self-conceit, cha1·vinism and stagnation 
will develop." 
But the whole mistake of these good men consists in that 
they have always perceived Russian progress in self-bespitting. 
Why, at present, self-reliance is the thing which, perhaps, we need 
most I Aʧ length we need self-respect, and not self-bespitting. Don't 
worry-there w:n be no stagnation. The war will throw light on so 
many things and will make us change so many old things I This 
you would never be able to achieve by self-bespitting and mockery 
which, of late, have been turned ''lto mere pastime. As against this, 
there will also be revealed much which used to be regarded by our 
wise denouncers as a mere trifle, which nevertheless constitutes our 
very essence in every respect. Nay, it is not our custom to indulge 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
in chauvinism and self-intoxication ! When did this take place in 
Russian society ?-Those who claim this are simply ignorant of 
Russian history. l\luch has been said about our self-intoxication 
after Sebastopol ; it was claimed that at that time self-confidence 
had ruined us. However, at no time was educated society less self­
confident-even to the point of decomposition-than at the epoch 
preceding Sebastopol. 
I may remark in passing : among those who wrote about our 
self-intoxication and taunted us with it after Sebastopol, there were 
several new young writers who attracted to themselves a good deal 
of public attention and roused in society much sympathy because 
of their accusations. However, these sincerely well-wishing de­
nouncers were at once joined by so many impudent and disreputable 
fellows ; there ensued so much unbridled sham ; there appeared so 
many men who understood nothing about the substance of the mat­
ter, and yet imagined themselves saviors of Russia,-moreover, 
among them there appeared so many outspoken enemies of Russia 
-that, at length, these men who had, bona fide, joined the cause 
originated by the talented men, finished by harming it. At first, 
however, they did meet with success, solely because the Russians, 
pure in heart, who at that time really craved for regeneration, for 
the new word, failed to discern in them scamps, inept, even venal 
people without any convictions. On the contrary, these naive Rus­
sians believed that the latter were for Russia, for her interests, for 
regeneration, for the people and society. At length, the overwhelm­
ing majority of the Russians became disillusioned and turned their 
backs upon the scamps. And it was after that that stock-exchange 
gamblers and seekers of railroad concessions made their appear­
ance . . .  It seems that at present this mistake will not be repeated 
because, unquestionably, new men, with a new vision and with 
new power will appear. 
These new men will not be afraid of self-respect, but they 
will also not be afraid to follow the old course ; nor will they be 
afraid of the wiseacres. They will be modest, but they will know 
many things, derived from practical experience, of which these wise­
acres of ours have never dreamed. By practical experience they will 
learn to respect the Russian man and the Russian people. This 
knowledge they will unfailingly bring along with them, and in this 
will be their main point d'appui. They will not attribute all our 
misfortun࿮s and ineptitudes exclusively to the characteristics of the 
Russian man and the Russian nature. This, however, has become 
a bureaucratic. device of our wiseacres, since this is comfortable 
and requires no brains. 
They will be the first to attest the fact that the Russian spirit 
and the Russian man are in no way to be blamed for the hundreds 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
of thousands of accusations heaped upon them ; that wherever a 
Russian is given direct access to a job he will do it not worse than 
any other. 
Oh, these new men, despite all their modesty, will, finally, 
understand how often our wiseacres, even the purest in heart who 
wished genuine benefit, have sat on two chairs, seeking to discover· 
the root of the evil. These new mrn, who unfailingly will appear 
after the war, will be joined by many live forces from among the 
people and the Russian youth. Even before the war they made their 
appearance, but then we were unable to discern them. And when 
here we all expected to perceive a spectacle of cynicism and cor­
ruption-over there, they revealed a spectacle of such conscious 
self-denial and sincere sentiment, such faith in that cause for which 
they had gone to give their lives, that we, here, merely kept won­
dering-whence did all this come ? 
Some correspondents of foreign newspapers have accused cer­
tain Russian officers of being ambitious, careerists, of seeking dis­
tinctions, forgetting the principal aim-the love of their fatherland 
and that cause which they undertook to serve. However, if there 
be such Russian officers, these correspondents would do well to 
become acquainted with those young men or with those incon­
spicuous officers-even as far as their ranks are concerned-with 
those modP.st servants of their fatherland and of the just cause for 
which tlwy valiantly died, side by side with their soldiers, with 
absolute self-denial, and not at all for distinctions, not for show or 
career, but only because they had great hearts and were staunch 
Christians, inconspicuous great Russian men, of whom there are 
so many-virtually to the last soldier-in our army. 
Please note that when speaking of the ft::ture new man, I am 
by no means pointing only to ou1 warriors in , 1ticipation of their 
return. Innumerable others will appear,-all thŀ.·se who in the past 
have been craving for the belief in the Russian man, but who were 
unable to reveal themselves in opposition to the generally and mani­
festly prevailing negation and pessin.ism. But now, contemplating 
the faith in his strength which the Russian has revealed over there, 
willy-nilly, they will be encouraged and will believe that here, too, 
there are real Ru'>sian forceႋ: whence, if not from here, did they 
spring up there ? And having braced themselves, they will get to­
gether, and modestly but firmly they will turn to the real task 
without fearing anyone's loud and bombastic words-these old, old 
words ! Yet, our clever little old rnen are still convinced that pre­
cisely they are the newest and tl.c young men, and that they are 
uttering the newest words ! 
However, the principal and most sah,tary regeneration of 
Russian society unquestionably will be allo•.ted to the Russian 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
woman. After the present war, during which the Russian woman 
has revealed herself so loftily, so lucidly, so sacredly, one can no 
longer doubt the lofty destination which awaits her in our midst. 
The secular prejudices will finally fall, and "barbaric" Russia will 
show what place she will allot to the "little mother," "little sister," 
of the Russian soldier, that self-renouncing martyr for the Russian 
man. 
Can we continue to deny this woman, who has so visibly 
revealed her valor, full equality of rights with the male in the fields 
of education, professions, tenure of office, she in whom at present 
we place all our hopes, now, after her exploit, in connection with 
the regeneration and elevation of our society ! This would be shame­
ful and unreasonable, all the more so as at present this would be 
altogether dependent on us, since the Russian woman of her own 
accord has assumed a place to which she is entitled ; of her own 
accord, she strode over those steps which until now had set the limit 
to her rights. She has proved what heights she can ascend, and 
what she is able to achieve. 
However, in speaking so, I have in mind the Russian woman, 
and not those sentimental ladies who treated the Turks to candies. 
Of course, there is nothing bad in being kind to the Turks ; still, 
this is not what those women over there accomplished. Therefore, 
these are only old Russian dames, whereas those are new Russian 
women. Nor do I speak only about those who there are sacrificing 
themselves for God's cause and for the service to humanity. Those 
proved to us by the fact of their appearance that in Russia there 
are many great women's hearts ready for public labors and self­
denial, since, 'again, whence, if not from here, did those spring up 
there ? 
But I should like to say more, in a special article, about the 
Russian woman and her unquestionable immediate lot in our society, 
and therefore I shall return to this theme in the following October 
issue of my Diary. 
OCTOBER 
CHAPTER I 
1 
To Our Readers 
ON ACCOUNT of ill-health which prevents me from pub­
lishing the Diary on strictly determined dates, I have decided to 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
suspend its publication for one or two years. This I am doing with 
much regret because, when last year I embarked on the publication 
of the Diary, I did not expect that I should meet with so much 
sympathy on the part of the readers, which has lasted all the time, 
till this day. I am sincerely grateful for it. I owe my particular 
thanks to all those who have addTP.ssed me by mail : from these 
letters I have learned many new things. And, generally, the two­
year publication of the Diary has taught me much, and in many 
respects reinforced me. But, regretfully, I am positively compelled 
to suspend publication. With the December issue the publication 
will come to an end. I hope that neither I nor the readers will 
forget each other. 
2 
AN OLD ETERNAL MILITARY RuLE 
M11ch has been said and written, both in Europe and Russia, 
about our military mistakes during the present campaign. They 
now CIJntiuue to oe discussed. Of course, the correct and complete 
evaluation of our military actions belongs to the future, i.e., at least, 
it can be made only upon the termination of the war. However, 
even now rerlain facts are revealed with sufficient completeness to 
permit c . ot' to render a more or leso: correct judgment. 
I shall not venture to discuss our military mistakes, since I 
am hardly competent in these matters (although it seems that it 
is the incompetent ones who get most excited in Russia). I merely 
wish to point to a certain contemporary fact (and not an error) 
which, thus far, has been little observed aad rxplained by military 
science, which has hardly been .:· .. :lluated f1 m· the standpoint of 
its contemporary essence. It could have been ࣃo;· .. !ssed merely theo­
retically, but practically it has never been confirmed up to the 
present war. 
This fatal fact, practically un±onfirmed up to the present 
war, was destined, as if on purpose, to reveal itself inevitably, in 
all its strength, and final precision, in the course of the present 
campaign, because this strictly military fact pTecisely conforms to 
the national military character of the Turks, or, more correctly, 
to the principa. distinguishing mark of their military character. 
Moreover, it may even be suggested that were it not for the Turks, 
this fact, perhaps, would not have been explained, at .east in Europe, 
despite the recent wars (even sul. a huge war as the Franco-Pros­
sian campaign). Indeed, this fact had not been explained since it 
did noL have time to reveal itself. 
At present, after the fatal experience of the current war, it 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
will, naturally, become an element of military science and its sig­
nificance will be evaluated. However, the fatality of this to us con­
sisted in the fact that the Russian army, so to speak, stumbled 
against this military fact-not yet explained in a practical sense­
and that we, Russians, were destined to interpret it to our enormous 
detriment, at least, as long as its meaning was not quite clear to 
us. Even so, many people both in Russia and Europe, up to this 
day, are inclined to regard this formidable detriment, sustained by 
us, as a result of this obscure fact, solely as our military mistake, 
whereas here there was something fatal and unavoidable, and not 
an error. Now, for mstance, were the German army in our place, 
it would also have been hurt by this fact, although it might have 
evaluated it quickly and adopted corresponding counter-measures 
faster. 
I merely mean to say that not all of our mistakes of this 
present campaign are in reality mistakes, and that the most im­
portant ones among them would have been committed by any Euro­
pean army in our place. I repeat : we stumbled against an obscure 
military fact, and prior to its elucidation we sustained a loss, which 
cannot be considered an absolute error. But what is this fact ? 
When in the days of my youth, I was studying higher military 
and engineering sciences at the Chief Engineering School and at­
tended a six-year course there at the end of the Thirties and the 
beginning of tl;:te Forties, there was a conviction which vo.as con­
sidered irrevocable,-an engineering axiom. (However, I hasten to 
remark in parentheses : so long ago have I forsaken engineering 
and military pursuits that I do not pretend to be in the least com­
petent in this field. I matriculated in the Chief Engineering School 
and attended a six-year course there at the end of Thirties and in 
the beginning of the Forties. Thereupon, having graduated from 
the School and left it, I served as engineer only one year. I tendered 
my resignation and embarked upon literature. Totleben graduated 
three or four years earlier than I ; I remember Kaufman in the 
officers' classes. I was in the same class with the younger Kaufman 
-in the Conductors' classes. Radetzky, Petrushevsky and Yolshin 
were only one year my seniors. Only three of my classmates have 
deviated from the straight road to choose an unsteady and uncer­
tain path ; namely, I, the writer Grigorovich and the artist Trutov­
sky. In a. word, this was very long ago.) 
Th;t engineering axiom came down to the conviction that no 
fortress is, or can be, impregnable. In other words, no matter how 
skillfully a for.tress may be fortified and defended, in the long run 
it must fall, and thus the military art of the assault of a fortress 
always exceeds the means and art of its defense. Of course, this 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
was merely conceived generally and theoretically :-the essential 
qualities of both engineering arts, that of the attack and of the 
defense of fortresses, were examined as mere abstract propositions. 
Naturally, there is no rule without exceptions, and even in those 
days certain existent fortresses used to be mentioned which were 
supposedly impregnable-for instance, Gibraltar, about which, how­
ever, we had but a hear-say knowleuge. Still, from a scientific stand­
point no fortress should have been conceived as impregnable, and 
the axiom that the art of the assault of a fortress always exceeds 
the means and art of its defense-remained unshaken. 
Of course, it is different in practice. A certain fortress, for 
instance, may acquire the character of an impregnable citadel (with­
out being such) only because, owing to this or that circumstance, 
the enemy's main forces may be held up before it too long and 
exhaust themselves, thus it renders a service greater than that which 
can be expected. Totleben, for example, knew for certain that in 
the long run Sebastopol would be captured, no matter how skill­
fully ht defended her. However, the Allies most certainly did not 
kn:>w. when thev began to besiege Sebastopol, that she would re­
quire so great a strain on their part. On the contrary, probably, 
they supposed that Sebastopol would occupy them for but two 
months or so, and that her siege would be but a passing episode 
in a hugP plan of countless blows which they were ready to deliver 
at Rus:>J:t, apart from the captt.re of Sebastopol. And thus she 
served as an impregnable citadel, even though, at length, she was 
captured. By the protracted, ingenious defense of Totleben-unex­
pected by them-the Allied resources, both military and financial, 
had been so exhausted and shattered that, after the capture of 
Sebastopol, further blows could not even I">,. thought of, and our 
enemies sought peace, at least, not less arde. · y than we ! Would 
they have offered us such peace terms as tht!y did, if they had 
succeeded in capturing Sebastopol in two rPonths ! 
Thus, absolutely impregnable fortresses are not needed : by a 
skillful defense and by the heroic tenacity of the defenders a fortress 
by no means impregnable may break the enemies' forces. Never­
theless, ingenious as the defense of Sebastopol may have been, 
sooner or later-! repeat-she must have faiien because, given a 
certain equalitᆮ· in the strength of both adversaries, the force of 
the assault always exceeds the force of the defense, i.e., again, 
speaking scientifically, and not in a practical sense, because, at 
times, the attackers have actuD11y abandoned the siege of certain 
fortresses-even after a long siege-however, not because these were 
imprrgnable. but because they sought to deliver a blow elsewhere, 
with fewer losses,-if only such a solution presented itself. 

sso 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
3 
THE SAME RULE-ONLY IN A NEW VERSION 
Now, this military fact, this, so to speak, strategic axiom, 
during our present war with the Turks, has been suddenly shaken, 
as it were. By what ?-Not by a permanent fortification, not by the 
impregnable citadel of a threatening fortress, but by a volatile field 
fortification, at most of a temporary character. In days gone by 
field defenses were not even taken into consideration ; these were 
considered field fortifications which merely strengthened the scene 
of the battle. At Borodino we did construct redoubts which served 
their purpose, i.e., fortified the scene ; nevertheless, they were cap­
tured, although with losses to the enemy, but they were captured 
on the day itself of the battle. 
Yet at Plevna something altogether new has occurred. A 
series of ordinary field fortifications, at most of a temporary char­
acter (in days past certainly not important things) has conveyed 
to the site the significance of an impregnable citadel, inconquerable 
with the employment of the traditional weapons, which has required 
on our part double, treble efforts, compared with those anticipated, 
and which, up to the present, has not been captured. Had this been 
a threatening series of fortifications defended only by traditional 
old defense means-could it have withstood the energetic, brilliant 
and unprecedented assault of the Russians ?-Most certainly not : 
it would have served its purpose ; of course, it would have made 
the attack mote difficult ; nevertheless so,ooo Russians, impetuously 
smashing ahead, as they did on the thirtieth of August, of course 
would have captured the redoubts and would have defeated the 
so,ooo army of Osman-Pasha, i.e., in the presence of an equal num­
ber of troops the task would have been achieved and reinforcements 
would not have been required. At present, however, after two un­
successful assaults, it has proved necessary at least to double our 
army, and this is but the first step in the realization of the task. 
What, then, is the matter ?-Of course it is to be accounted 
for by the present-day rifle. The Turk, covering himself with a 
hastily thrown-up bank, is able to fire such a mass of bullets that 
it is not impossible for the assaulting column, before it has even 
reached the breast-works, to be exterminated to the last man. Oh, 
of course, ·it is possible to capture Plevna by resorting to the tradi­
tional method, i.e., to the frontal attack without any fortification 
works, exactly as the redoubts were captured at Borodino. And our 
Russians would have done it ! Perhaps no European army would 
have ventured this, but they would have done it. But here is the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
trouble : experience proved that for this it would have been neces­
sary to sacrifice tens of thousands of Russians so that, having cap­
tured the redoubts by frontal attack, disposing in the beginning 
of an equal number of men as Osman, by the end we should have 
been numerically so weakened that we should have been unable to 
check Osman, who would have lost behind his trenches ten times 
fewer men than we. 
Thus, after two unsuccessful assaults, finally, it proved neces­
sary : first, to double our forces ; secondly, with Totleben's assistance, 
to start engineenng work, i.e., something virtually resembling an 
atack against the strongest permanent fortresses ; third, to begin 
the siege of Plevna, to occupy the roads, to interrupt communica­
tions, to cut off the flow of supplies to the enemy. In a word, a 
group of most ordinary, temporary field defenses have acquired, 
from the standpoint of the enemy, the significance of a first-class 
fortress. And even though Plevna will be captured-for sure-or to 
put it more correctly, even though Osman will be caught when he 
tries to force his way through in order to extricate himself from 
his own trap so ciS to avoid starving to death in it (and once he 
attempts to force his way he will uncover himself, and abandoning 
the defense, he will asume the role of an attacker, and to us-herein 
is the whole trick ! Thus, he would lose at once all advantages 
of the rl::.1dly and invincible fire behind closed defenses) ; even so, 
the resulL IS that Plevna has already served its purpose to the enemy ; 
it has checked the initial victorious march of the Russians, compel­
ling them to double and treble their efforts and losses (of which even 
Europe considered Russia incapable) .  And-who knows-perhaps 
Osman, even without so dreadful an ultimate result to himself, 
hopes to snatch at least half of his army ; • .  _.- n the hands of the 
Russians, and to flee at its head, so as again 
. dig in somewhere, 
throwing up a new Plevna, provided only he is given a chance to 
achieve all this. However, everybody has _he right to hope, and 
Osman is an energetic and proud ma.n. 
It may even be said that if he who defends himself possesses 
entrenching implements and disposes of some twenty thousand sol­
diers-given the modern rifle-by means of a series of ordinary 
former field fortificatil'lns, any number of which can be scattered 
in the course ൈ.r one night in a selected locality, he will increase 
the strength of these twenty thousand men to an army fifty or sixty 
thousand strong so that, if circumstances do not favor manreuvring, 
one does not know how to ham 
.. 
· the situation. 
Thus, this series of light defenses, at times, proves to him who 
defenJs himself even more beneficial than the most threatening and 
impregnable fortress because, when he r࿯treats, he transports it 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
with him to any chosen site, as if it were a mere entrenching im­
plement. At length you will capture it from him by sacrificing 
thousands of soldiers in the course of the assault, but tomorrow 
you encounter in your path another such fortress, provided the 
enemy is given time to escape from you. 
At present there is in Turkey not just one Plevna, but each 
Turkish army, even each detachment, digs in, and on the morrow 
it installs behind the trenches its deadly rifles, saying to the Rus­
sians : "Come up in double numbers, and incur losses ten times 
as great as you anticipated in the beginning of the war." In order 
to match his forces with the assaulted, there remains nothing for 
the attacker but to stop opposite him and dig in too. But this can­
not be done, because he is the attacker ; he came to attack and to 
march forward. He cannot be sitting behind fortifications ; he came 
to storm them. . . .  
People who know will understand that I am speaking merely 
theoretically, that I am dwelling upon attack and defense in gen­
eral, setting aside all other eventualities of war, which change every 
minute the course of events, swaying it hither or thither. I merely 
wish to express the formula that with the modern rifle, assisted by 
field fortifications, every army on the defensive, in any European 
country, has unexpectedly gained a terrible advantage over the at­
tacking army. Now the force of defense exceeds the force of attack, 
and it is unqu࿰stionably more advantageous to him who defends 
himself to conduct a war than to him who is aLLacking. 
Such is the fact which, thus far, has not been fully elucidated 
in strategy, w.hich is even quite unexpected, against which we, the 
Russians, were destined to stumble, which we were destined to 
solve to our great detriment. And this is not at all our mistake, 
but merely a new military fact which suddenly revealed itself and 
became clear. . . . 
4 
THE MosT ENORMous MILITARY MisTAKES SoMETIMES 
MAY NoT BE MISTAKES AT ALL 
Well,-people will say-what kind of a new fact did you dis­
cover here ? Didn't we know before the beginning of the campaign 
what the new rifle was and its deadly effect ? Besides, it is not 
new ; it ࿱as old long ago, so that not only were we in Petersburg 
in a position to calculate but we were in duty bound to calculate 
and prepare ourselves for its deadly action, particularly from be­
hind a closed fortification. But the point is that practice does not 
coincide with theory, and that we actually could not calculate and 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
prepare. Only to civilians this seems easy, to those sitting in their 
drawing-rooms and criticizing our military operations. 
Indeed, I am not denying the mistakes ; I admit that there 
have been, and had to be, mistakes. But I merely do not wish to 
deem this one fact to be our absolute mistake, and I declare that 
up to this war in all its overwhelming effect, it was an obscure and 
even unknown fact. No doubt, it W"uld have been possible to cal­
culate and know in advance that with the modern rifle the defender, 
covering himself with the lightest fortification, might inflict upon 
the attacker twice as much harm as before. To learn and calculate 
is an easy matter requiring no strategic science. But here is what 
was infinitely more difficult to calculate and foresee, i.e., the fact 
that with the present rifle the defender, covering himself with a 
fortification, would inflict not twice, but five times more harm than 
in former times, while in the face of such an energetic defense as 
we have met on the part of the Turks (it was excusable not to have 
taken it into account )-ten times more. Let us admit that that fact 
was known. yet its effect, its dimensions were unknown. No one 
knf'w that, even though the present-day rifle had strengthened the 
attacker, nevertheless it had reinforced the defender infinitely more. 
This excess of the reinforcement was unknown to us, and it was 
precisely this which constitutes the new, unexpected fact against 
which we <;tumbled. 
It w1.s not known, nor could it have been known, because 
nowhere, pnor to this war with the Turks, had it been so fully 
revealed. Bf'lieve me that were the German army in our place, it 
would also have stumbled against this fact and would have sustained 
great losses. I repeat : perhaps the German army would have been 
quicker than we to evaluate its significance f:Jlly and would have 
adopted necf'ssary counter-measw e:s : in some 
tses the German is 
more cautious and circumspect than the Russ .. tn ; as against this, 
the Russian possesses such a self-denying discipline, such absolute 
self-sacrifice, such strength of energy, tenacity and impetuosity that, 
verily, it is difficult to decicie which .:>f the two is superior in mili­
tary matters. Naturally, our competent men, knowing the Russian 
soldier, in the beginning, prior to the experience with the modern 
rifle, even from behind fortifications, could h࿲·;e given the matter 
but cursory thought, and even if the modern rifle were not only 
twice but three times as deadly as the former rifle, they could have 
feared it little. Yet it developed that the modern rifle used from 
behind a fortification was fivt:, :nd even ten times more powerful 
than the former one. This, howl.ver, could have been ascertained 
only by practical experience. . . . And up to the present in this re­
spect there had been no practical experience in European wars. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Indeed, with the appearance of the modern rifle apparently 
many more simpler facts have not been elucidated. For instance, 
only now have we come to life when our troops have received Berdan 
rifles, whereas, in the beginning, the army was equipped with other 
kinds of rifles-slow and short-range ones. This, unquestionably, was 
a mistake. However, the fact to which I am pointing was not a 
mistake : in all its completeness it could not have been anticipated ; 
nor was it possible, prior to practical experience, to make accurate 
calculations. 
The Franco-Prussian war, a war between two so highly edu­
cated nations, which are so equal in regard to inventions and mili­
tary equipment (the French had a better rifle than the Germans, 
and the latter were compelled to accept it, without delay, while the 
war was still in progress)-the Franco-Prussian war which has in­
troduced so tnany novel elements into strategy, almost bringing 
about a revolution with it, had in no way elucidated our fact. And 
yet it could have thrown light upon it. But there occurred special 
circumstancts which prevented this, and the conqueror of France 
up to the present, up to the Turkish war itself, remained ignorant 
of the fact that the Frenchman, defeated by him, possessed a colossal 
weapon with which to check the German onslaught in 187 1 ,  but 
failed to make use of it owing to special circumstances which resulted 
in the fact that the power of this weapon could not even have oc­
curred to the Frenchman. By no means did the Germans conquer 
the French ; they conquered the then prevailing French state of 
affairs-first, of the Napoleonic regime, and later of the republican 
chaos. 
In tht beginning of the war, the French army-whose national 
characteristic is frontal attack at half-sword with the enemy-was 
dreadfully amazed and morally depressed by the fact that instead 
of crossing the Rhine and invading Germany, it was compelled to 
defend its own territory at home. Several battles took place which 
the Germans won. However, the thought that with the use of their 
magnificent chasrepot several more dreadful Plevnas could be 
thrown up at once in order to stem the terrible onslaught of the 
enemy,-that thought did not occur to the Frenchman at all. He 
kept endeavoring to smash ahead, and up to Sedan itself he refused 
to believe that he was conquered. Then came Sedan, and the bulk 
of the regular army-because of considerations which by no means 
were military considerations-was withdrawn from the field. There 
was left the defense of Paris by the madman Trochu. Gambetta 
ftew out of Paris in a balloon, descendit du Ciel (descended from 
heaven) in one- of the provinces-as a certain historian wrote about 
him, proclaimed a dictatorship and began to recruit new armies. 
These little resembled regular troops and were made up of all sorts 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
ass 
of riff-raff, for which, however, Gambetta could not be blamed. At 
the time, they themselves wrote that the majority of their soldiers 
did not know how to load a rifle and to take aim ; why, they 
were not even concerned about such things ; they did not want to 
fight and were anxious to be left in peace. 
Then came wmter, with its co!ri and hunger. How could they 
have guessed that suddenly they could grow three, four times 
stronger than their enemy-by resorting to their chassepots and 
trenching implements ?-Well, did they have these implements ? 
The siege of Paris-which had a political rather than a military 
significance-was also an obstacle. In a word, the French failed to 
make use of the dreadful new military fact, and did not discover 
its effect. In the course of our present Turkish war this fact has 
been ft4lly revealed, and it stands to reason that Germany's politi­
cians and military men have taken cognizance of it with anxiety. 
Indeed, should this fact be dealt with by science, by tactics, 
in every army, perhaps the French will also take advantage of it, 
whe"l Germany again assaults them. And if the French brush aside 
their mihtary prejudices (which is very difficult) ;  if they fully 
embrace the conviction, derived from the Turkish war, that de­
fense with the modern rifle and trench implements is now much 
stronger th:.n attack, which requires a double number of men, the 
followinb may be stated : the Frenrh have an army of one million 
men ; but there is a general military rule that it is far easier for 
the assaulted to concentrate his forces if he is fighting on his own 
territory-even if a country possesses such a disadvantageous mili­
tary borderline as Russia,-whereas the attacker, should he even 
dispose of an army of two million men (whicJ- is never the case) , 
could never invade the assaulted c.J;.::Jtry with :r• ·e than six or seven 
hundred thousand troops. 
Now, imagine that this whole million of defenders should re­
sort to trench implements as energetically anu broadly a!; nowadays 
the Turks do ; imagme a talented gen'!ral and excellent engineers,­
in this event Germany would have to dispatch to France-not just 
a million, but a minimum of a million and a half I Undoubtedly, 
someone in Germany is now thinking about tt•ic:. 
5 
WE MERELY STUMBLED Ac.AillST A FAcT, BUT Tf-t'ERE WAs 
No MISTAKE. Two ARMIES- ࿳'wo OPPOSITES. THE PREs­
ENT STATE OF AFFAIRS 
Precisely the Turks were destined to discover the new fact 
in all its completeness. Other nations, other armies, would long 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
have failed to discover it practically in such completeness. The 
Turks havf' long refrained from attacking Europe, and they are 
specifically used to defense. This is the principal national char­
acteristic of the Turkish army. Behind fortifications the Turk is 
tenacious and energetic, and during this war Europe, as if on pur­
pose, encouraged him, helped him with armaments, engineers, with 
huge sums of money, and finally, by inciting him against us, she 
aroused his fanaticism. Had he even been ignorant of the fact, 
there would have been plenty of people to inform him of it ; but 
it so happened that the fact was in full accord with his national 
spirit. He promptly grasped the meaning of the trenching imple­
ment, coupled with the magazine rifle, and the resulting immense 
preponderance in strength of defense over attack. And as if on 
purpose, the Russians were destined to stumble against this, i.e., 
that army which, in accordance with ancient, secular tradition, has 
adopted as its method of attack-fiery assault, breast to breast, in 
close formation, suddenly converting a thousand men into one being. 
From these two opposites the new axiom has revealed itself 
in all its completeness. I repeat : it was possible to anticipate and 
calculate that the strength of the new rifle behind a covering trench 
exceeds twice, even three times, the effort of the attacker. Relying 
upon the tenacity and unheard-of energy of the Russian soldier, 
we had the right to regard this "twice and three times" with con­
tempt (for a long time we did so regard it) . However, the thing 
proved not twice or three times, but ten times stronger. This could 
not have been anticipated and quickly learned despite even practical 
experience. 
• 
Of course, to civilian strategists all this will sound ridiculous. 
Nor do they recognize the existence of the fact itself : "We should 
have foreseen-that's all. Everybody knows that the Peabody rifle 
emits ten to twelve cartridges per minute. Well, it should have been 
understood that a Turk sitting behind a trench with such a rifle 
will mow down an attacking column to the last man." But, I repeat, 
theoretically, before the experiment, this could not have been fully 
evaluated. 
There are extremely simple things which the most ingenious 
generals have been unable to guess beforehand. A French historian 
bitterly criticizes Napoleon I for the fact that disposing in ISIS 
of an arrr y of I 7o,ooo (only that many) and being fully aware that 
he could not count on recruiting a single additional soldier in France 
-because France was exhausted to that extent as a result of 
twenty years of wars-he nevertheless ventured to attack his enemies, 
i.e., risked a foreign war, instead of a domestic one. This historian 
seks to prove that, even had Napoleon won the battle of Waterloo, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
this would not have saved him from ultimate debacle in that same 
campaign because of the overwhelming numerical preponderance of 
the coalition. Napoleon's whole mistake, according to this historian, 
consisted in that he continued, as hitherto, to consider one French 
soldier worth two German soldiers. Had it been so, he would, of 
course, have made up for the want of the men with whom he pro­
ceeded to fight all Europe. But in . 815, claims the historian, this 
was no longer so : after twenty years the Germans had learned how 
to fight, improving the quality of their soldiers to the point where 
they were fully equal to the French soldiers. 
Thus, even ingenious Napoleon made such a seemingly simple 
mistake : he failed to guess a thing which he should have known 
long ago, and which his critic perceived so clearly. However, it is 
easy to criticize, and it is easy to be a great general sitting on a 
sofa. It is remarkable that Napoleon and we were mistaken in one 
and the same point, i.e., by erroneously attributing an excessive 
significance to certain national peculiarities of our armies. 
In conclusion I shall reiterate, again and again, that every­
t}1;r.g -=࿴:tted here 1-tas but a general, scientific meaning (be it correct 
or incorrect-let everyone judge for himself) . In practice, however, 
the results may greatly vary. For instance, in the beginning of the 
war the Turks did let us cross the Danube and the Balkans ; they 
did surrer Jer their fortresses and cities ; they did flee before our 
advancing troops, without giving .. ny thought to their trench im­
plements and to the effect of their Peabody rifle. It also seems that 
at that timt' they were not yet possessed with fanaticism. Strictly 
speaking, it was only at Plevna that they fully guessed wherein lay 
the trick. Only there did they discover fnr the first time all the 
tactical advantages possessed by the attacked 
It may happen, however, that Plevna w. 
be captured in a 
week, and with it "the whole" Osman, i.e., perhaps he will not suc­
ceed in carrying out a retreat if he attempts ࢑· break-through. Then, 
suddenly, for example, the Turks may reveal the former sinking 
of the spirits ; they will forget Adrianople and Sofia ; they will throw 
down their trench implements, hurriedly fleeing in the face of the 
Russian offensive. In a word, many things may happen. However, 
all this does not at all change the significanct of the new axiom 
in its gen࿵ral st'nse, i.e., that with modern equipment the strength 
of the defense exceeds the force of the attack not as hitherto but 
exceedingly so. 
Let us refer to another ex? .,pie : somewhere .here is a war, 
and a general locks himself up whn his troops in a strong fortress. 
Havin࿶ calculated all data, i.e., the quantity of provisions ; the 
position and strength of the fortifications, engineering science is 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
able (I believe) to ascertain almost precisely how long the fortress 
may resist the siege and thereby render undeniable service to its 
country by tying down around its walls, at the hottest moment of 
the campaign, the two times stronger attacking enemy. Let us sup­
pose the length of time is six or seven months. Unexpectedly the 
general who has locked himself up in that fortress, capitulates-for 
some special reasons of his own-not after seven, but after two 
months. 
Briefly, practice may bring about countless variations. Even 
so-given modern military equipment-the axiom of the excessive­
ness of the preponderance (about which, up to our present war 
with the Turks, no one has ever dreamed) of the strength of the 
defense over the force of the attack retains its force. (Once more 
I emphasize : it was not the preponderance of the strength that 
could not have bet"n anticipated but such excessiveness of it.) 
However, at present, practice is already operating to our ad­
vantage, and we shall commit no such error in the future. At present 
Todleben is over there. What he is doing we do not exactly know ; 
but, perhaps, the ingenious engineer, by some new ingenious dis­
covery, will find a means to shatter the axiom (not only in this 
particular case but in general) ,  to eliminate excessiveness and to 
balance the forces (that of the attack and of the defense) . Europe 
is attentively and eagerly watching his actions, awaiting not merely 
political but also scientific inferences. 
Briefly, our military horizon looks brighter and, once more, 
there is much hope. In Asia a great victory has brought the matter 
to an end. And our Balkan army is numerically strong and mag­
nificent ; its spirit is equal to its great goal. The Russian people-
1 mean the people-as a whole, as one man, desire that the great 
aim of the war in defense of Christianity may be achieved. Mothers 
cannot refrain from shedding tears over their children leaving for 
the battlefields : this is nature. But the conviction of the holiness 
of the cause retains its full force. Fathers and mothers know whither 
they send their children : the war is a popular one. This is being 
denied by some people who do not believe ; they gather contradicting 
facts, but, for instance, such news items as the following appeaʨng 
in the papers in small type remain virtually unnoticed : 
"It is reported to The Odessa Messenger from the station 
Birzula that 28oo convalescent soldiers have been transported 
through that station to the army in the field. They were accom­
panied by six convalescent officers. It is noteworthy that from 
among the wounded not even one wished to take advantage of his 
right to be transferred to the reserve forces. They all hasten to go 
back to the front." (The Moscow Gazette, No. 251.) 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
How do you like this news item ? Indeed, it would sem that 
facts such as these bear witness to the character of the cause I 
After that, how can it be asserted that the war is not a popular war, 
and that the people stand aloof ? But this is not an isolated fact ; 
there is a multitude of such facts. They will all be gathered, they 
will begin to shine, and they will become part of history . . . .  For­
tunately most of these facts han been attested to by numerous 
European eye-witnesses ; no longer can they be changed, counter­
feited and presented in a stock-exchange or Roman Clerical light. 
CHAPTER II 
1 
Hartung's Stטicide and Our Eternal Question: Who Is to 
Be Blamed? 
OF LATF, all Russian newspapers have been-and still are­
discussing General Hartung's suicide in Moscow during the session 
of the Circuit Court, a quarter of an hour after he had heard the 
jurors' verdict which found him guilty. Therefore, I believe that 
all the : ࿷aders of The Diary are already more or less conversant 
with thi࿸ extraordinary and tra6ic incident, and so I don't have 
to explain anything in detail. 
The general purport comes down to this : a man of considerable 
rank and belonging to select society becomes friendly with a former 
tailor, subsequently a money lender, Sanftleben, and not because 
he has to borrow money from him, but, as i r were, as a matter of 
friendship, assuming incidentally, and quite : "ldily, the role of his 
executor. Then, upon Sanftleben's death, ctrtain heinous things 
begin to transpire : the promissory notes l"dger disappears, no one 
knows whither ; in violation of the procedure prescribed by law, 
promissory notes, papers and documents are removed by Hartung 
to his apartment. It develops that Hartung has entered into col­
lusion with one group of the heirs to the detriment of the others 
(even though he may not have suspected this himself) .  Thereui'on 
one of the he;rs rushes into his apartment, and the poor executor 
learns that he is mixed up with bad company. Direct accusations 
are brought forward ;-he is accused of the theft of bills of exchange, 
the bills of exchange ledgers, c • false endorsemenL of the latter, of 
the disappearance of documents, involving a loss of property in the 
sum of over one hundred or even two hundred thousand rubles . . . .  
Then comes the trial. The prosecutor is even glad of it and of the 

86o 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
fact that a general is in the dock, side by side with a plebeian, thus 
giving the Russian Themis an opportunity to proclaim the equality 
of the strong and the notable with the humble and the insignificant 
before the law. 
However, the trial proceeds quite normally (whatever may be 
said about it) and, finally, the jurors pronounce an almost inevitable 
condemnation, the meaning of which is : "guilty-he did embezzle." 
The Court retires to frame the sentence, but General Hartung did 
not choose to wait for it : stepping out-so it is reported-into the 
adjoining room, he seated himself by a table, grasped his poor 
head with both hands, and then, suddenly, a shot sounded : he shot 
himself through the heart with a revolver which he had brought 
along with him and which he had loaded beforehand. On his person a 
note-also written beforehand-was found, in which he "swears by 
Almighty God that in this case he embezzled nothing, and that he 
forgives his enemies." Thus, he died convinced of his innocence 
and his gentlemanliness. 
Now, this death has aroused everybody in Moscow and all 
the newspapers in Russia. It was said that the judges and the 
prosecutor came out of their chambers with pallid faces, and that 
the jurors, too, were abashed. The papers began to vociferate about 
"the obviously unjust verdict." Some of them noted that no longer 
can the Russian courts be accused of lenient and conniving verdicts : 
"Here"-they implied-" is an example : an innocent man perished l "  
Others justly observed that it is impossible not to give credence to 
such :;olemn and last words of a man on earth, and thus, almost 
unquestionably the inference could be drawn that in this case a 
lamentable jutlicial error was committed. Well, much has been said 
and written in the papers. 
It must be admitted that some of the newspaper comments 
were :;trange : some sort of falsity sounded in them,-they may have 
been ardent and sincere, if you please,-but nevertheless,-false. One 
feels sorry for Hartung ; but here it is rather a tragedy (very deep 
tragedy) -the destiny of Russian life, than an error on anyone's part. 
Or to put it better : here everybody is guilty : the habits and cus­
toms of our educated society ; the characters which have developed 
and formed themselves, and finally, the habits and customs of 
our adopted, young and insufficiently Russified courts. 
However, if everybody around is guilty this means that indi­
vidually and singly no one is guilty. Among all the newspaper com­
ment:; I liked most that which appeared in The New Times. It so 
happened that on the eve I conversed with one of our astute jurists 
and connoisseurs of Russian life, and it developed that he and I 
were in full accord. Very shrewdly my interlocutor pointed out the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
861 
tragic character ot this case and its causes. Next day in the Stranger's 
feuilleton I read many things quite akin to those which we had 
discussed on the eve. Therefore, if I say a few words, it wil be 
merely in general and apropos. 
z 
THE RUSSIAN GENTLEMAN. A GENTLEMAN MUST REMAIN . 
A GENTLEMAN TO THE END 
The point is that the old characters have not yet disappeared, 
and, it seems, they will persist for a long while because everything 
requires time and nature prevails everywhere. I am speaking about 
the characters of our educated society. At this juncture I might 
persistently and obstinately add that it would not be good should 
we suddenly !>hift like weather cocks, since the most obnoxious trait 
of our educated characters is precisely their flippancy and meaning­
le:!'nP"S. It reminds one of something lackeyish, of a lackey donning 
his master's clothes. For instance, one of the characteristics of our 
gentlemanlinPss-if once, for some rea!'on, we associate ourselves 
with the rich and the prominent, and particularly, if we manage 
to be aclr.1itted lo their circle-is imposing deportment, the urge to 
estabJi ,•, :mrselves on a grand scrle. 
Please note that at present I am not saying a word personally 
about Hartung ; I do not know his biography at all. I merely mean 
to record several traits of the generally well-known character of our 
educated people to whom, under certain circumstances, exactly the 
same thing might happen which happened to l.eneral Hartung. For 
instance, an insignificant man, u1 low rank, .vithout a penny in 
his pocket, suddenly finds himself in fashim:࿹ble society, or, for 
some reason, begins to be associated with it. Presently the poor 
devil, who has possessed nothmg but the aiJility to worm his way 
into the beau monde, acquires a c .. rriage ; he rents an apartment 
in which he can "live decently"' ; he hires lackeys, buys clothes, 
gloves and so forth. Perhaps he seeks to make a career, to become 
somebody, but more often he simply wants : J  ape : "Well, every­
body lives this way, why shouldn't I ?" There is in him some kind 
of shame whicn cannot be overcome. In a word : honor and decency 
are conceived in a strange manner. 
T believe that parallel to t""is lack of under࿺; .mding of such a 
fundamental thing as the feelinh of self-respect is only the lack of 
under'itanding on the part of virtually the entire educated European 
age of the conct'ption of liberty and of what it consists.-But this 
will bP. discussed later. 

862 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
The second and again almost tragic trait of our educated Rus­
sian is his yielding temper, his readiness to compromise. Oh, there 
are many kulaks and stock-exchange gamblers, repulsive but stead­
fast scoundrels. There are even good steadfast people, but these are 
awfully scarce, whereas in the majority of the decent Russians there 
rather prevails this yieldingness-the urge to concede, to com­
promise. And this is by no means due to good nature or to cowardice ; 
nay, this is some kind of delicacy, or God knows what. 
How often, for example, in a conversation with an opinionated 
man who presses you, insisting that you make your comment, you 
agree with him and change your opinion, or even surrender your 
vote at some meeting, despite the fact that within yourself you are 
not at all inclined to do so. Likewise, the Russian is very much 
influenced by the word "everybody" : "l am like everybody else" ; 
"I am in accord with the general opinion" ; "Let us all proceed, 
hurrah ! "  But there is here another strange thing : the Russian is 
very fond of seducing and tempting himself, of being swayed and 
persuaded. He does not want to do this or that, for instance to 
become Sanftleben's executor ; yet he persuades himself : "Well 
why shouldn't I ?  . . .  " 
In this stratum of educated Russians there are even most 
attractive types, but they are specifically endowed with these un­
fortunate traits of Russian gentlemanliness to which I have just 
alluded. Some of them are almost innocent, virtual Schillers. Their 
ignorance of "business matters" conveys to them something almost 
touching ; but they possess a strong sense of honor : such a man 
will shoot himself, just like Hartung, if, in his judgment, he loses 
his honor. Of these there is a rather large number. Even so, these 
people hardly ever know the sum of their indebtedness. Not that they 
are all spendthrifts ; on the contrary, some of them are admirable 
husbands and fathers ; but money may be as thoughtlessly squan­
dered by a man who lives fast as by an excellent father. Many of 
them begin life with scanty remnants of their former hereditary 
estates, which promptly vanish in their early youth. Then comes 
marriage, then-a rank and a comfortable government position, 
which is so-so ; nevertheless, it yields some income and provides 
a foundation for life, something solid as distinguished from the 
beau-monde vagabondage of earlier days. But debts accumulate 
uninterruptedly ; of course he pays them because he is a gentle­
man, but he pays them by means of incurring new debts. It may 
be positively asserted that many of them when they ponder, at 
times, to themselves, in solitude, over their situation, can say boldly 
and with great dignity : "We have stolen nothing ; nor do we want 
to steal anything." 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Meanwhile, this little thing may happen : on some occasion 
he is capable of borrowing-well, in view of some urgent necessity 
-from his children's nurse, say ten rubles she has saved. After all, 
why not ?-Not seldom the old nurse is a close, intimate associate 
who has lived many years with the family. She is almost a member 
of the family ; she is indulgent ; she is even entrusted with the most 
important keys. The good general, l.࿻r master, has long ago promised 
to provide her, when old age comts, with a lodging in an alms­
house ; but all these business affairs have prevented him from 
taking care of this matter despite the fact that long ago he should 
have put in a word fm her. The nurse, on her own part, is afraid 
to remind him of his promise ; only once a year, maybe, she men­
tions something about the alms-house ; she shivers at the thought 
of annoying such a nervous and always bothered man as her gen­
eral. "They are good ; they will remember"-she thinks at times, 
as she puts her old bone!:\ to rest on her bed. And as for the ten 
rubles, she is even ashamed to remind him of them ; she has her 
own conscience-the good old woman. Suddenly the general dies, 
;n,l thp old wolT'an is left without either lodging or ten rubles. 
All this is, of course, a trifle, an awful bagatelle. But should 
the general be reminded in the world beyond that the nurse was 
never paid her ten rubles, he would blush terribly : "What ten 
rubles ? 'rhis can't be ! Oh, yes, indeerl, four years ago ! M ais com­
ment, ͟ .- •.zmcnt could this happLa ! "  And this debt would weigh 
upon him even more heavily than some ten-thousand-ruble debt 
he left on earth I He would feel awfully ashamed : "Oh, believe me, 
this was unintentional ! Believe me. I didn't even think of it ; I 
just forgot to think ! "  However, only the angels would be listening 
to the poor general (for unfailingly he woulrl : .:- taken to P1C'.radise) 
whereas the nurse on earth would still be depr. ·d of the ten rubles. 
Sometimes the good old woman feels sorry fur him : "Well, God 
be with him ; it is a sin to cast such a thinr upon his memory. He 
was a most precious man, a righteous master." 
One more thing : were this delightful man somehow to return 
to earth and be incarnated in the former general-would he or would 
he not return the ten rubles to the nurse ? 
However, not all of them keep borrowia1g. Here is a friend, 
that very nobiP I van retrovich ; he asks someone to execute in his 
favor a bill of exchange for six thousand rubles. "I will discount 
it"-says he-"at my bank ; I wiH discount it, and :here, my dearest 
friend-take this counter bill ff'· six thousand." \\ hat is there to 
think about? The bills are executt:d. Thereupon he frequently meets 
Ivan Petrovich in the club ; but it stands to reason that both have 
forgotten about these bills of exchange, because both are, so to 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
speak, the very flower of respectable people in our society. Sud­
denly, six months later, the total six thousand falls upon the general's 
shoulders : "You have to pay it, your excellency ! "  Well, it is on 
such occasions that they turn to fellows such as Sanftleben and 
instruments of indebtedness are issued with one hundred per cent 
interest. 
Again, I ask you to believe me that in my narrative I do not 
venture-not even in the least-to accuse the late General Hartung : 
I did not know him at all, and about him personally I have heard 
nothing. I have merely ventured to present a light sketch of the 
character of one of the members of this society. However, were he 
to be placed in an embarrassing position, similar to that of Hartung 
in his relation to Sanftleben, exactly the same thing might happen 
to him which happened to Hartung, including suicide. This is destiny, 
tragedy : up to his last moment General Hartung considered him­
self innocent, and he left a note . . . .  
"Well,"-some people might say-"here is that note ! It is im­
possible that at such a moment a man-even a religious man, as it 
developed-should lie. This means that he embezzled nothing if he 
solemnly declared that he did not do so. Moreover, in this case, 
there could be no compromise, not even with his conscience : no 
matter how shaky and obscure was the man's reason on account 
of all this entanglement, still if he says : 'I did not embezzle,' he can­
not fail to know whether or not he did embezzle. This is strictly a 
human affair. The question is simply this : Did he, or did he not 
steal ? How could he have failed to know if he did steal ?" 
-All this is quite correct, but here there might have been­
and surely was-the following ! He wrote only about himself : "I 
have embezzled nothing, and I did not think of embezzling." Even 
so-others could have embezzled. 
"Absolutely impossible,"-it will be objected. "If he permitted 
other people to embezzle, and knowing this, in his capacity as 
guardian, kept silent, this would mean that he, in collusion with 
others, did embezzle I General Hartung could not fail to understand 
that this made no difference." 
To this I will answer : first, the argument : "If he knew and 
permitted others to embezzle, this means that he, too, embezzled" 
may be contradicted ; secondly, here, unquestionably, there is a dif­
ference. And, third, General Hartung could have written the note 
merely it this literal sense about which we speak, i.e., "Personally 
I did not steal, and did not want to steal anything ; others did it 
against my will. I am guilty only of weakness, but not of em­
bezzlement, because I did not want to steal anything from anybody, 
and I even resisted it. Others did it." . . .  He could have written 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
865 
his fa࿼al words precisely in this sense. However, being honest and 
noble, he would never have conceded that "If I permitted others 
to steal, ergo I stole myself." He was departing to God, and he 
knew that he wanted neither to steal nor permit others to steal, 
but it just so happened that property had been stolen. 
Besides, please observe : undf''" no circumstance could he have 
more clearly explained these words in his note, i.e., "I am guilty of 
indulgence, and not of embezzlement," etc. Indeed, he, a gentleman, 
could not have denounced others, particularly in so solemn a mo­
ment when he "forgave his enemies." 
Finally,-and this is the most plausible explanation-perhaps, 
even to his own heart he could not confess his indulgence, his weak­
ness, good-natured connivance. Perhaps here there was a net of 
circumstances which, to the very last moment, he was unable to 
comprehend, thus he departed to the world beyond. "The bills 
of exchange ledger disappeared." And now level-headed people, 
whom he implicitly trusts, convince him, from the very start, that 
tbi" is a mere trifle, that it disappeared somehow of its own accord, 
becatase no on࿽ needed it anyway. They prove to him by figures, 
mathematically, that the ledger would be detrimental, and in no 
sense useful, to the interests of the heirs themselves. (In fact, this 
very argument was subsequently set forth at the trial by the defense, 
and it :-ePms that it was correct.) 
All the rest could have been shown and explained to Hartung 
in the same sense. For he was not familiar with business matters 
and he could be persuaded by everything they may have told him : 
"Believe us, we, too, are noble people. Just like you, we don't want 
to steal anything from the heirs ; yet Sanftl,.ben left his affairs in 
such a ticklish state that shou࿾d they (the 
· ࿿irs) find out about 
the bills of exchange ledger and other thingက, they might directly 
accuse us of swindling, and, therefore, this should be concealed from 
them." 
Naturally, these "irregularitie:;" of Sanftleben came to light 
not at once but gradually, so that Hartung learned the truth, or, 
to put it more accurately-lost the truth and was drawn into deceit, 
gradually, day by day. Suddenly, one of the l.eirs rushes into Har­
tung's apartment, and virtually shouts that Hartung is a thief. 
This heir walked in triumphantly, with a victorious and wicked 
smile, fully convinced that now he dared to perpetrate any nastiness 
in the General's apartment. It was only then that rhe General fully 
discovered in what a hole he Wi: ခ· Thereupon he became quite dis­
orientated : he began to suggest compromises, settlements, and, of 
course, got himself still more entangled, whereas the accusing side 
avidly seized upon new facts which discredited him in connection 

866 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
with those compromises and settlements. All these became part of 
the case. 
Briefly, Hartung died convinced of his complete innocence. 
Even so, strictly speaking, there was no error . . .  no judicial error. 
This was destiny ; a tragedy occurred : blind force, for some reason, 
chose to punish Hartung alone for the vices which are so common 
in his circle. There are, perhaps, ten thou!>lnd men such as he, but 
Hartung alone perished. This innocent and scrupulously honest man, 
with his tragic denouement, of all these ten thousand people, was 
able to arouse the maximum of sympathy, while his trial got the 
maximum of publicity throughout Russia and came as a warning 
to "the vicious." But it is doubtful if fate, that blind goddess, 
counted on this when she smote him. 
3 
DECEIT Is NECESSARY To TRUTH. DECEIT MuLTIPLIED BY 
DEcEIT PRODUCES TRUTH. Is THIS So ? 
And yet I wish to share with my readers a former impression 
which resurrected itself in my mind, even though it is, perhaps, 
very naive. This is something about our courts in general. A public 
jury trial is regarded throughout the world virtually as an achieved 
perfection. "This is, so to speak, a victory, the loftiest fruit of rea­
son." I believe in this, together with the others, since you might 
be told : "Well, invent something better ! "-and you would be un­
able to do so.· Consequently, one has to agree for this sole reason 
that nothing better can be invented. 
Meanwhile, the prosecutor mounts the stage . . .  I mean the 
platform. Let us suppose that he is an excellent and clever man, 
conscientious, educated, with Christian convictions, one who knows 
Russia and the Russian as only few people in Russia do. Well, this 
highly conscientious man begins directly with the statement that 
he is "even glad that this crime has been committed, because, at 
last, that villain will be punished, that defendant yonder ; because 
if you only knew, gentlemen of the jury, what a rascal he is I "  
That is, he is not going to mention the word "rascal," but this makes 
no difference : in a polite, mild and most humane manner, at length, 
he will make him appear worse than any conceivable rascal. With 
sorrow in his heart, in most delicate terms, he states that the 
defendant's mother was of the same kind ; that, finally, he could 
not fail to steal-because basest debauchery drew him ever so strongly 
into the abyss. He perpetrated everything consciously and in a 
most premeditated manner. Please recall how well the fire in a 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
neighboring street served him at the moment of the commission 
of the crime, because the fire, by causing alarm, diverted the atten­
tion of the house-porters and of everybody in the neighborhood. 
"Oh, of course, I am far from directly accusing him of arson ! But, 
gentlemen of the jury, you must admit that here the strange coin­
cidence of two circumstances inevitably suggests a certain thought. 
. . .  Well, I'll keep silent, mute . . . .  But you will, it stands to 
reason that you will, send away this thief and murderer (because 
he would have unfailingly murdered had he encountered someone 
in the apartment ! )  and, finally,-this incendiary, this arrant, proved 
incendiary,-send him as far as possible, and thereby enable decent 
people to breathe freely, the housewives to leave their apartments 
peacefully, to buy food, and the landlords-not to tremble for their 
property even if it be insured by this or that insurance company. 
However, the main point is that I am dwelling in vain on all these 
things : Look at him ! He sits there and does not dare to look straight 
into the eyes of honest people ! And isn't one glance at him sufficient 
to convince you that he is a thief, a murderer and an incendiary ! 
I so;ട,;;nly regrr' but one thing : that he did not manage to commit 
ten times more such thefts of laundry, to murder ten such house­
wives and to set afire ten such houses, Lecause then the very im­
mensity of the crime would shake our civically sleepy society and 
would, f .1ally, compel it to resort to self-defense and awake from 
its crimiiJdl civic slumber." . . .  
Oh, we know that the prosecutor will speak in a far nobler 
style. Our words are but a caricature f1t for some Sunday comic 
sheet with parodies and couplets.-! admit that. Let us even sup­
pose that this is one of thosf' cases whkh raise grave social and 
civic questions, and what is more important· :"·lt it is fraught with 
psychological motives, and it is known tha, 
·ven in all Europe 
prosecutors are extraordinarily eager about psychology. Well, even 
so, the deduction would be identical, i.e., tht it is to be regretted 
that instead of one poisoning, there had not been ten, thirty, five 
hundred poisonings, because then your hearts would quiver and you 
would arise, as one man, etc. 
But it may be objected that there is nothing in this. True, 
quite a few prosecutors are not orators at all, out, in the first place, 
a prosecutor i 
a functionary who has to act in compliance with 
the duties of his office, and, secondly, prosecutors are always exag­
gerating accusations, and in this there is nothing prejudicial, but 
on the contrary-all this is usef ' Precisely thus !l should be. And 
in opposition to the prosecutor tne defendant has a defense counsel 
who is given the full right to refute the former. Moreover, even in 
all Europe it is permitted to prove-of course, with the utmost 

868 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
politeness-that the prosecutor is stupid, nonsensical, somewhat 
mean, and that "if anyone set two houses on fire in one day on 
the Third Line on Vasilevsky Island, it was precisely this par­
ticular prosecutor because at that very time he attended on the 
Vasilevsky Island a Saint's day party at the house of General 
Mikhailov, a most admirable and noble creature. And that it was 
he who set the house afire there can be no doubt for the sole reason 
(again, psychology I )  that had he not set this house afire, prompted 
by rancor against the landlord merchant Ivan Borodaty, such a 
stupid, nonsensical and trivial accusation of the defendant of arson 
for the purpose of diverting the attention of all the inhabitants in 
that street and committing this imaginary and nonsensical crime 
never would have occurred to him. The prosecutor's own arson pre­
cisely suggested to him the thought of accusing the defendant of it." 
Finally, take into account that the defense lawyer is permitted 
to make gestures, shed tears, gnash his teeth, pull his hair, rap the 
chairs (but not to pretend to hit anyone with them) ,  and finally to 
faint, if he is altogether too noble and cannot endure injustice. 
However, this is not permitted to the prosecutor, no matter how 
noble he may be, because it would seem somewhat strange that a 
functionary in uniform should faint and fall on his back. This is 
never practiced. 
Again, everything I am saying is a caricature, nothing but a 
caricature, and none of these things ever takes place. Everything is 
carried out in a most respectable fashion, I concede (even though 
chairs used to be rapped and lawyers, at times, did faint I ) . But I 
am merely concerned with the essence of the matter since the same 
point may be' reached by the most dignified parlance, as well as 
by the least dignified. 
"What do you mean ?"-I may be asked.-"This is exactly 
what is needed : exactly exaggeration is needed-on both sides I Some­
times the juror is not a very educated man ; besides, he is busy, 
-he has his shop, his business ; sometimes he is absent-minded, and 
sometimes he is simply unable to concentrate. For this reason he 
must be helped to concentrate ; he must be shown all the phases of 
the case, even the most impossible ones, so that he may be abso­
lutely sure that the prosecution has exhausted every possibility that 
can be imagined, and there is nothing more to think about it ; also, 
that the defense has set forth everything conceivable and incon­
ceivable for whitewashing the defendant and making him look 
whiter than snow on a mountain. Then yonder, in that special room 
of theirs, they will know, mechanically so to speak, exactly what 
must spring out, a plus or a minus, so that 11t least their conscience 
may be quite calm. To sum up-it is clear that all this is necessary 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
in order that truth may be arrived at, i.e., vehement attacks and 
vehement defense ; even more-a vehement attack on the part of 
the prosecutor-speaking in the strictest sense-is even more bene­
ficial to the defendant than to the prosecutor, so that, again, noth­
ing better can be invented." 
In a word, the modern court not only constitutes a victory, 
or the loftiest fruit of the mind, b1:t is also a most tricky thing. 
One has to concede this. Besides, it is a public court : the public 
gathers there by the hundreds. And is it possible to suppose that 
they crowd it from mere idleness, for the show of it ?-Of course 
not. But whatever prompts them to attend a trial, it is necessary 
that they should leave the court room with a sublime, strong, edify­
ing and wholesome impression. Meanwhile they sit there and see 
that, essentially, there is some deceit there.-Oh, not in the trial 
itself, not in the meaning of the verdict, but simply in some habits, 
for instance, which we have borrowed with such a felicitous light­
ness fwm Europe, and which have implanted themselves in our 
rer;r"<:Pntatives of both defense and prosecution. 
1 go home, and there I think to myself : I know personally 
Ivan Khristoforovich, the prosecutor ; he is a very clever and kind 
man, and yet, he lied and knew that he was lying. A case which 
should ir·,olve some reprimand or a two-month jail sentence he 
managt•l! ဂo stretch out to twent)' years of exile to the remotest 
regions. Let this be necessary for the clarification of the case, never­
theless he did deliberately lie in a case involving a man's neck. 
How can this be reconciled, especially if he is a talented man, since 
il en reste toujours quelque chose, all the more so, if the defense 
is somewhat weak and is good for nothing but rapping chairs. True, 
here Ivan Khristoforovich's amuur-propre \\ "  
aroused-a purely 
human treat, to be sure-yet is it excusable in ࢐o important a case ? 
Whither did man disappear-the sublime, humane, civilized man ? 
Finally, let truth emerge from all this-mechanically, so to 
speak, in a shrewd manner---but the ဃublic attending the trial, per­
haps, will actually gather for the purpose of witnessing a show, 
for the contemplation of a mechanical and very shrewd device, and, 
listening with dt'light to, say, how ably the tal::1ted defense counsel 
lies against hie: conscience, they are ready to applaud him from 
their seats : "Why, how well the fellow lies I "  But in the bulk of 
the public this generates cynicism and falsity which take root im­
perceptibly. Not truth is cravt'င for but talent ; 1ct it only make 
people merry, let it amuse them 1 fhe humane sentiment grows dull, 
and it cannot be restored by fainting somersaults. Well, and please 
suppose, again, that the liar is actually a man with great talent 1 
I know that OQ my part all this is Lut idle lamentation. But 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
listen : a public jury trial is not a Russian institution ; it was copied 
from foreign patterns. Is it not possible to hope that Russian na­
tionality, the Russian spirit, some day will smooth out the asperi­
ties, will eliminate the falsity of bad habits, and that everything 
will be conducted in full accord with veracity and truth ?-Indeed, 
at present this is impossible : precisely in our day defense and prose­
cution display these bad habits, since the former is looking for 
money, and the latter-for a career. However, in some remote future 
the prosecutor may even be able to plead the cause of the defendant 
instead of accusing him, so that should the defense lawyers argue 
that the minute fraction of the accusation of the defendant which 
the prosecutor still has brought forth against him is inapplicable 
to him -the jurors would simply disbelieve them. 
I even think that such a method would more quickly and more 
expeditiously tend to ascertain the truth than the former mechanical 
method of exaggeration, consisting of inordinateness of prosecution 
and bestiality of defense. Of course, I shall be told that this is 
absolutely impossible, and inasmuch as the same prevails in Europe, 
my method should not be adopted, and that "the more mechanical 
-the better." 
Now, this mechanism, this mechanical method of dragging out 
truth to the surface, perhaps will be replaced in Russia . . . simply 
by truth. Artificial exaggeration will disappear on either side. Every­
thing will be sincere and truthful, and there will be no game at the 
discovery of truth. On the stage there will be no show, no game, 
but a lesson, an exemplification-edification. True, lawyers will be 
paid much lesS'. However, all the Utopias will come to pass only 
when we grow wings and all people are converted into angels. But 
then there will also be no courts. . . 
. 
CHAPTER III 
1 
Roman Clericals in Russia 
RECENTLY, IN an editorial article of The Moscow Gazette 
(No. 262) there appeared the following statement : 
"Two days ago we called attention to some party in the in­
terior of Russia which acts in accord with Russia's enemies and 
which is ready to help the Turks in their struggle against her,-a 
party of Anglo-Magyars which hates every manifestation of our 
national spirit, every act of our government in harmony with it, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
and which places Russian patriotism on a par with nihilism and 
revolution,-a party which feeds the foreign press, hostile to us, 
with most abominable dispatches. No sooner was our article sent 
to press than a telegram from our Petersburg correspondent gave 
the gist of a communique made public in The Messenger of the 
Government revealing new stratagems of this party. At the very 
moment when between Plevna ant! Orchanje our army was scoring 
brilliant successes, in Petersburg the intrigue spread rumors about 
the defeat which those same victorious troops had supposedly suf­
fered-with a view to causing despondency among the public. The 
intrigue is so strenuou଴ly at work that the government has deemed 
it necessary to warn the public against such malicious rumors." 
The very next day The New Times observed in this connec­
tion, though merely in passing, that The Moscow Gazette had 
slightly exaggerated the matter, and that, possibly, The Messenger 
of the Government simply referred to some chit-chat among the 
public which had no such significance. (I am stating the thought 
expreଵsed in The New Times in my own words, from memory.) 
Tt is quitP. possible that The Messenger of the Government 
actually referred to some "chat-chat." Even so, the supposition of 
The Moscow Gazette is well-founded. Only who are these Anglo­
Magyars whom The Moscow Gazette mentions ?-In our border re­
gions aଶd also in the interior we shall find our Roman Clericals. 
We a1 r :to longer in the month of May : today everybody knows 
and writes about the universal Clerical conspiracy ; even our most 
liberal newspapers concede the fact that such a conspiracy exists. 
Indeed, it would have been strange if the Vatican conspiracy should 
have missed our Roman Clericals and should have failed to make 
use of them. Sedition in the rear of the R Lଷ'>ian armies would be 
very useful to the Vatican, espସl.ially, at thi · 
ime. 
Here is another extract-now from The New Times, No. 587. 
In its section, entitled "Among Newspapers and Magazines," it 
quotes the opinion of The Voice expressed apropos of certain articles 
in the English Morning Post and i11 several Polish periodicals pub­
lished abroad. This is the quotation : 
"In the issue of October 22nd of The Morning Post there ap­
peared an article-curious because of its un;:xpectedness-in which 
that Turkophile newହpaper reported parleys which had supposedly 
begun between Russia and Germany in connection with the cession 
of the region adjoining the Vistula up to that river itself. It goes 
without saying that in the opirion of The Morning Post this is the 
result of an agreement by virt .. e of which Germany undertook to 
support 'Russia's acquisitions on the Balkan Peninsula.' The London 
paper further insists that the Poles in the region adjoining the 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Vistula at present no longer contemplate an uprising, 'not wishing 
to fall into a still harsher enslavement,' that is, under Prussian 
domination ; and that should some disturbances occur in 'Russian 
Poland,' these would be merely the result of 'Russo-Prusian in­
trigues.' . . .  It is noteworthy that several days prior to the ap­
pearance of this article in The Morning Post, the Dziennik Polski 
spoke on the same subject, although in a somewhat different tone, 
alleging that the Russian government, when evacuating its troops 
from the Vistula region, disseminated there an appeal to the peasants 
urging them to organize a rural police guard from among their own 
midst for the surveillance of the landowners and the suppression of 
any attempt at rebellion. The Voice, reporting the contents of these 
articles, wondered why the Dziennik Polski and The Morning Post 
had suddenly become so zealous. Why was it necessary for them 
to allude to the nonsensical fable about the Russian appeal to the 
Vistula peasants and the Russo-Prussian agents-provocateurs sup­
posedly seeking to incite 'an artifidal uprising' in Poland ? 
"These unexpected sallies must have some definite object. The 
papers which have published them probably possess information 
which makes them fear an outbreak of disturbances in the Vistula 
region, and they seek to distort in advance the meaning of a move­
ment the consequences of which are, apparently, disturbing to them. 
These tactics are not new. They were resorted to in 1863 by the 
Poles and their Western friends. This reminiscence itself leads one 
to admit that the articles in the Dziennik Polski and in The Morning 
Post are not devoid of significance, and that they have some mys­
terious connection with the earlier rumors in the Magyar press about 
the Poles' sympathy for the Turks, and their clandestine desire to 
complicate Russia's situation by revolutionary agitation on our 
Western border. It is noteworthy that these articles coincide with 
the report about the candidacy of Cardinal Ledohowski for the 
papal throne . . . .  " "We"-says The Voice-"do not belong to those 
who are eager to attach exaggerated importance to all fantastic 
combinations which are seized upon by Russia's ill-wishers in the 
hope of impeding the favorable outcome of the present war. How­
ever, in this particular case the matter seems to us so serious that 
it is impossible to leave it without notice, "meaning the unexpected, 
and apparently wholly uncalled for, appearance of the articles in 
the Dziennik Polski and in The Morning Post." 
Thus, there is also in Russia something resembling the ramifi­
cations of a Clerical conspiracy. The report itself about Ledohowski's 
candidacy is unquestionably derived from a Polish source, since 
only the giddy head of a Polish propagandist abroad can seriously 
believe that the Roman Conclave, permeated with such refined in-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
tellects, could commit the blunder of electing Ledohowski : the new 
Pope would be doing nothing but restoring his fatherland instead 
of restoring the Roman universal power of the Popes. 
However, let us leave this aside, and state that nevertheless 
the ramifications of the Clerical conspiracy in Russia are clearly 
visible. Besides, The New Times adds : 
"The present-day persistent polemics of the Journal de St. 
Petersbourg against the Italian Clerical newspapers seem to indicate 
that there are signs of some agitation in our Western border region." 
Well, by no means only "signs." Thus it is precisely that party 
which, according to The Moscow Gazette, "acts in accord with the 
enemies of Russia . . .  , which hates every manifestation of our 
national spirit, every act of our government in harmony with it, and 
which places Russian patriotism on a par with nihilism and revolu­
tion-a party whch feeds the foreign press with the most abominable 
dispatches hostile to us . . . .  " 
Indeed, it is very possible that European dispatches from 
Russia are the work of this party. This rejoicing over Russian 
reverse!> and thပ.- giddy screams of delight over the alleged informa­
tion that "Russia has proved weak, devoid of financial resources, 
with a demoralized army, with a discontented and repining people, 
with nihilism which has undermined society,"-all these fairy tales 
unmistစ.kably bear the stamp of :t well-known origin. 
Oh, it stands to reason that Russian pens will also be found 
which are ready to write in unison with the Clericals ; however, it 
seems that these dispatches abroad could not have been written 
by Russians : this would have been too mean. Nevertheless, it is 
possible that the Clericals without even ovt-rstraining themselves, 
are guiding Russian pens in Ru:.::i::.. Perhaps, · 'ley are not prompt­
ing them, and they do not enter into direct ·ဆllmmunications with 
them, because these bold liberal pens sometimes belong to most 
honest men who, if they had received a dired offer from a Clerical, 
would propel him down the staircas!". 
However, a Clerical, especially one who has lived long in 
Russia, knows perfectly well that he doesn't even have to call on 
the bold pen, because the bold pen will write everything gratis 
solely because he imagines ( oh, you dear ones ! ) that this is honest 
and liberal. For instance, the bold pen is indignant at the Clericals 
who remain close to MacMahon in France, and he writes threaten­
ing articles against them. But at the same time, not only will he 
fail to notice a Russian Roma . Clerical, but, at times, he will 
start singing in full unison with him. Such fellows exist,-they exist. 
And, maybe, our sly Roman Clericals even wonder at them : "What 
an inclination on their part to fall down this way between two 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
chairs 1 "-they ponder, nodding their heads. "And how disinter­
estedly ! True, they must be liberal to the end. Why, they even 
vociferate that Russia has no right to liberate the Slavs ! Why, a 
hundred thousand rubles would be too low a compensation to them I 
And all this-between two chairs, every minute so ! Why don't they 
get hurt I Or does it heal up very quickly-in their case ? 
" 
2 
A SuMMER ATTEMPT ON THE PART OF OLD PoLAND AT 
RECONCILIATION 
Early in the summer these Clerical agitators attempted to stage 
their demonstration even through Russian periodicals. Wolves dis­
guised themselves in sheep's clothing, and began to talk in a tone 
of would-be ambassadors of the entire Polish "emigration" abroad. 
They began to offer peace : "Accept us I "-they said.-"We also per­
ceive that Slavic brotherhood is unquestionable, and we do not 
wish to stay behind." They spoke with extreme tenderness and set 
forth the following reasons : 
"We have"-they said-"engineers, chemists, technologists, arti­
sans, bookkeepers, agronomists, etc. Of these there are many in 
the emigration. Let them in ! "  
In an article in issue No. 1 72 of The St. Petersburg Gazette 
a resident of "Lithuania asked : "Isn't work available in your midst 
to that stratum which in days past gave a Tengoborski to Russia, 
and a Wolawski-to France ? And in the field of art, which tends 
to make manners less crude and to ennoble character, Brotzki, the 
sculptor and Matejka, the painter, are universally recognized as 
representative of Polish society. Don't you need these men ? And 
what do you say about a whole mass of litterateurs, publicists, in­
dustrialists, manufacturers, and all kinds of workers ? Do you also 
have no need for them ?" ( The New Times, quoted from Kostoma­
rov's article.) 
Mr. Kostomarov, in The New Times, admirably answered all 
these ingratiations. I regret that space does not permit me to print 
excerpts from this excellent article. By clear and precise arguments 
Mr. Kostomarov proved that all this was a mere trap set for us ; 
that they would send to Russia traitors, such as Conrad Wallenrod ; 
that tM Pole, the native of Old Poland, instinctively, blindly, hates 
Russia and the Russians. Mr. Kostomarov admits, however, that 
there are excellent Poles who may even Jive on friendly terms with 
this or that Russian, saving him from some calamity and helping 
him financially. This is, of course, true ; but let this Russian-even 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
after twenty years of friendship-express to that excellent Pole his 
political convictions concerning Poland in the Russan spirit,-that 
Pole would at once become an open or secret enemy of his Russian 
friend-for all his life, to the end-an irreconcilable, boundless enemy. 
This Mr. Kostomarov forgot to add. 
This whole summer attempt at "reconciliation," which had 
its Russian advocates and so mighty an opponent as Mr. Kostoma­
rov, was unquestionably a Clerical reconnaissance from Europe, a 
ramification of the all-European Clerical conspiracy. Oh, these 
Poles, natives of Old Poland, insist that they are in no sense 
Clericals, papists, Romans, and that we should have learned this 
about them long ago. But to imagine that "Old Poland," that Polish 
emigration, does not adhere to the Pope in a Jesuitical spirit, that 
it is far removed from Clerical fantasies-what a funny thought ! 
Aren't they the ones who should adhere to the Vatican,-they who 
are-and always have been-fully cognizant of its strength ?-Nay, 
they will not betray the Vatican, nor will the Vatican betray them. 
The summer sally in connection with reconciliation was per­
fnr.l',.rf at a time when the entire emigration started moving against 
the Russians ; when Polish legions were being recruited ; when the 
aristocrats of the emiJJ;ration went to Constantinople with enormous 
sums of money (of course, not their own ! ) . All this reconciliation 
was noth;;•g but cunning, as Mr. Kostomarov defined it. 
By ,_he way : they are offeri:;g us their scientists, technicians 
and artists, and they say : ''Accept them. Don't you need them ?" 
At this point it may be added that probably they consider us a 
savage people, but they are ignorant of the fact that we possess 
everything they are offering, and that ours is, perhaps, of a higher 
quality. But there is no ground for offense. Tt .... main point is : why 
don't they come ? We did have several Pole 
who revealed their 
talents. and Russia esteemed and respected L.lem, held them In 
high repute, in no way segregating them from the Russians. What 
is the purpose of these stipulations I Come ! -Reconcile yourselves 
and submit, but know that there nevt:t will be an Old Poland. There 
is a New Poland, a Poland liberated by the Czar, a regenerated 
Poland, which unquestionably may expect in the future a lot equal 
with that of any Slavic tribe, when Slavdom i:. liberated and resur­
rected in Europe. However, there never will be an Old Poland, be­
cause she could not live in peace with Russia. It is her ideal to 
occupy Russia's place in the Slavic world. Her motto as applied to 
Russia is : "6te-toi de ld, que je .,•y mette." 
It is noteworthy that the J.-olish advance skirmisher speaks 
only tbout scientists and artists. Well, what about the leaders of 
the emigration, the aristocrats ?-Imagine only that Russia might 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
yield to the flattering words and announce that she wants recon­
ciliation. Then they would haughtily ask us : "What are your terms ?" 
-Because if you suggest that we admit the emigrants to Russia, 
while they do not come here of their own accord,-this means that 
they are awaiting terms. And now imagine that suddenly Russia 
might recognize them as "something," as a belligerent party, and 
might start negotiations ! Presently they would drift into Russia : 
the magnates at once would begin to find fault, demanding high 
positions and distinctions. Thereupon they would start shouting, 
so that all Europe could hear them, that they were deceived ; and 
then they would instigate a Polish rebellion . . . .  Would Russia 
be drawn into such a calamity I Would she make such a mistake I 
Of course, the Poles themselves could not have believed that 
such a crude attempt would deceive Russia. Yet they did count 
upon the pure-in-heart Russian partisans. That this was a Clerical 
scheme, a Clerical move in the direction of Russia-there can be 
no doubt. The question may be asked : What was the object of that 
move ?-Well, don't the Clericals need to reconnoitre the situation, 
to confuse the thoughts, to conceal their real designs, to acquire 
Russian pens, to agitate Russian Poland, etc . . . .  ? Why, who 
can tell what other plans they may have had I 
3 
THE SA࢏LY oF "THE STocK-ExcuANGE GAzETTE." NoT 
BoLD BUT WicKED PENs 
We Wef'e just speaking about "bold pens." But we have pens 
which are not bold but disgusting. They also whistle (and how 
they whistle ! )  in unison with the Polish nightingales, but the Poles 
do not even direct them. All this they do disinterestedly, knowing 
not what they do. Here we have malice pure and simple, betrayed 
hopes and piqued amour-propre. Such is the article in The Stock­
Exchange Gazette (No. 257) about Mr. Jlovaisky. At least, they 
should have learned to write ; instead, they make themselves 
ridiculous. 
It is a matter of common knowledge that our scientist Mr. 
Ilovaisky was arrested and mistreated in Galicia. Passing through 
Galicia on a scientific mission, he applied, by mistake, to a Polish 
priest w\ဇh the request to be shown certain local antiquities. Sub­
sequently he found a Russian priest, but the malicious Polish priest 
promptly denounced him under the pretext that Mr. Ilovaisky was 
a Russian Paaslavist, propagandist and agitator. Very unceremoni­
ously he was arrested, searched, dragged from one prison to another, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
and finally, thanks to the intercession of a local scientist, he was 
deported to the Russian border. 
This affair promptly became known in Russia : The Moscow 
Gazette printed an article concerning it. Our newspapers noted it, 
but without any ardor, merely as a curious incident. The fact that 
a Russian scientist, for no reason ဈ·.!-atsoever, had been maltreated, 
appeared to everybody to be a very Jrdinary event. Mr. Ilovaisky 
himself printed in The Moscow Gazette a few lines in answer to the 
hostile press-meek, apathetic, somniferous lines. As against this, 
our stock-exchange gamblers-who view Russia only from the stand­
point of their own pockets and to whom Russia is of no concern­
rendered her a remarkable service. Here is the article which ap­
peared in The Stock-Exchange Gazette : 
" . . .  What queer thing did Mr. Ilovaisky embark upon in 
Galicia ? What kind of propaganda did he start there ? Is it possible 
that the misfortunes through which Russia is living at present are 
insufficient to chase folly out of the heads of our inveterate Pan­
slavio;ts ? And can it be that after what has been happening now in 
full view of everybody, they still have the impudence to persist in 
their fanaticism and buffoonery with all this Panslavic fiddle-faddle, 
which paves the way for innumerable state calamities and with which 
we all hav": been satiated long ago ? So long as our Panslavists, who 
have gr( w'l dull from indolence, C"'nfined themselves to the export 
of Panslavic church bells, this was nubody's business, and they could 
amuse themselves to their hearts' content. However, when they begin 
to export, together with those bells, their sacristans to ring them for 
church, the matter acquires a different meaning. Who had sum­
moned, who had authorized, l\Ir. Ilovaisky lo erJZage in his Panslavic 
propaganda ? Does he, or does he .-.ct, understaJ· what consequences 
it might entail, particularly now, at this mome:tt ? Gentlemen, you 
are showering invectives against Klapka on the ground that he is 
inciting the l\-Iagyars to help tiuဉ Turks. But what are you doing 
yourselves ? What is Mr. Ilovaisky d.:>ing under the guise of study­
ing Slavic antiquities ? Aren't you satisfied with the evil which your 
fanaticism of last year has brought about ? What new mess are you 
trying to cook up ? We know well that you "re fully capable of 
throwing a stone into water. But you must remember that the stones 
which you throw, at times, have to be pulled out by the efforts of 
a whole nation, at the price of bloody sacrifices and national ex­
haustion. Then stop playing the fool : everything h.:ഊ its season. If 
up to the present you have aroust .. in all reasonable people nothing 
but ridicule, now you can expect only indignation." 
!'hese people speak about indignation ! Listen, how did you 
dare, without knowing about the affair, to write w positively to all 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Russia, to all Europe (since your article in Europe acquired a sig­
nificance of its own),-how dared you to write about Mr. Ilovaisky : 
"who had summoned, who had authorized Mr. Ilovaisky to engage 
in his Panslavic propaganda ?" And thereupon, after the ridiculous 
comparison of Mr. Ilovaisky with Klapka : "but what are you doing 
yourselves ? What is Mr. Ilovaisky doing under the guise of studying 
Slavic antiquities ?" How did you dare to write about this so posi­
tively when you knew positively that it was a lie ? Do you really 
imagine that you will be permitted to betray Russia ? Referring to 
Mr. Ilovaisky, you ask : "Does he, or does he not know ?'' But I 
will ask you, Mr. Publicist : Do you, or do you not, understand 
what you did ?-Since in Austria they will not ask : What kind of 
man wrote this ?-a clever or a stupid man ? educated or uneducated ? 
does he have any idea about Panslavism or does he know noth­
ing ? has he read anything about it ? Indeed, in Austria it will be 
positively said : "So it is true that Russia is sending out agitators. 
If this were not true, how could a big, independent Petersburg daily 
newspaper so positively and so reproachfully have addre;;sed the 
Panslavists, specifically corroborating the fact of the dispatch of 
emissaries for propaganda ? Indeed, the man who wrote it is a 
Russian himself,"-they will say. "In the long run, patriotism would 
have stopped him and prompted him to conceal the crime. But in 
this instance he was unable to conceal the truth because the indig­
nation of a patriot poured out against the Panslavists, who are 
thus actually plotting dreadful calamities for Russia by their reck­
less propaganda and agitation in Austria and the Slavic countries. 
In this situation, we don't have to apologize for the arrest of some 
fellow by the name of Ilovaisky ; on the contrary, we have to make 
more arrests, keep all Russians in Austria under strict police sur­
veillance. We should not send our apologies, but the Russian gov­
ernment must apologize to us for so openly permitting at home the 
work of noxious political societies directed against Austria, and con­
tinuously dispatching large numbers of agitators to incite the Aus­
trian Slavs against their lawful government." 
Unquestionably, this will be said in Austria, and no doubt, 
your article, Mr. Publicist, will be commented on preci;;ely in this 
spirit. Don't you think that this is treason ? Don't you betray Rus­
sia's interests to the Poles and the Austrians ? Don't you give sup­
port toJ.po1itical sedition and don't you serve it ?-For you know 
certainly, fully, precisely that no one has ever dispatched any emis­
saries whatever. How, then, did you dare to write that Mr. Ilovaisky 
went to foster sedition "under the guise of studying Slavic antiqui­
ties"? Is there anyone in Russia who would believe you ? Moreover, 
your statements concerning this affair are as positive as if you knew 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
879 
it quite as well as your five fingers. Who, then, is sowing sedition ? 
Now, let us turn to another point. Having quenched your 
anger, having written an arrant lie, having so flagrantly betrayed 
the Russian interests to the Old Poles, the Austrians and every kind 
of European rabble which unceasingly and perpetually agitates 
against us, do you venture to hope that Russian readers will sym­
pathize with you ? Is it possible that you have so low an opinion 
of them ? 
And what a tone ! What trepidation, what humiliation before 
Austria ! "She may grow angry I "-so to speak. In Gogo) an ataman 
says to the Cossacks : "The favors of a foreign king-not even a 
king, but the favors of a Polish magnate who kicks their faces with 
his yellow boot are dearer to them than any brotherhood." The ataman 
says this about traitors. Is it possible that you wish that the Rus­
sians, too, trembling in animal fear for their interests and money, 
should likewise bow before some yellow boot ? Precisely now, at 
this moment, wouldn't, on the contrary, our best policy toward 
Austria be a policy of highest social and national dignity, and not 
the 
u 1 1 t  you 
a · ..: advocating ?-For the more humiliation-which 
you advocate-we manifest, the more, and in equal measure, we 
should strengthen and reinforce her demands. Besides, why should 
we fear Austria ?-Never would she be in a position to draw her 
sword aᆯ;.J.inst us, even if such were her desire. 
Otl Lhe contrary, precisely now the time has come for a straight­
forward and frank policy so as to avoid sad misunderstandings 
when the war comes to an end. We don't have to give promissory 
notes. In the same way we must look upon England. The English 
should, at least, understand that we have no reason to fear them, 
and that, contrariwise, we are if' a positiC' .. · o  cause them more 
harm than they can cause us. This they mt. , know. Meanwhile 
they have some wrong information about us which is supported 
precisely by such sallies as we see in The S•ock-Exchange Gazette. 
Last summer was it not in Austria that people were made to 
believe that Russta's strength was a mirage which had deceived 
everybody, and that henceforth Russia could no longer be regarded 
as a strong military power ? It was precisely then lhat Austria's 
tone became arrogant. Was it not England's opinion-also in her 
upper circles-1'1at 1 o,ooo English troops landed at Trebizond would 
once and forever settle our whole problem in the East and in the 
Caucasus ?  Certainly, we know them, but they, it appears, do not 
know us. But it is poor servit, •o Russia to betray her interests 
to her enemies, and to picture her in a cowardly and humiliated guise, 
wher•·as thts is not in the least true, and the whole thing is a lie. 

88o 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
NOVEMBER 
CHAPTER I 
1 
What Does the Word "Strutzky"1 Mean? 
IN THE course of the two-year publication of my Diary I 
have used twice or three times the little known word "strutzky," 
and I received from Moscow and the provincial districts several 
inquiries what this word meant. I apologize for not having as yet 
answered this question : all the time I have meant to answer it, 
even though between the lines, in the Diary. Now, bringing its pub­
lication to a close, I shall devote a few lines to this incomprehensible 
Petersburg word, and if I begin the first page of the November issue 
with this trifle it is specifically because when I postpone the sub­
ject to the last page, as I used to do before, because of other topics, 
I never found space for the "strutzkys" and every time I had to 
postpone the explanation to the next issue. 
The word "strutzky" is a plebeian word, one used exclusively 
by the common people, and it seems, only in Petersburg. I believe 
it was also coined in Petersburg. I say : "it seems" because, much 
as I have inquired of "competent" people, I have never been 
able to ascertain whence it came ; what its phonetic origin is ; if 
it is being used anywhere in Russia, except in Petersburg, and 
finally, if it was actually invented there. As for myself, again "it 
seems" to me (I cannot express myself more positively) that this 
is a purely Petersburg word coined by the common people, but by 
whom, when, how long ago-I don't know. On the basis of repeated 
inquiries, and as far as I understand, I may state that its meaning 
is as follows : 
A "strutzky" is a vain, trashy man, a nullity. In most cases, 
perhaps, invariably, he is a drunkard, who dissipates his fortune 
in drinking, a lost fellow. However, it seems that in some cases 
even a man who is not a drunkard may be called a "strutzky." But 
the principal characteristics of this worthless and good-for-nothing 
drunkard, which have earned him a special name and as much as 
the inv:֩tion of a new word, are : first, silliness, absurdity sui 
1The Russian word "strutzky" is untranslatable ;  it is a derogatory, 
slangy word which broadly means "rabble." Sometimes it is used to denote 
the inferior social status of the civilians compared with that of the priv­
ileged military caste, in the sense the German junkers used to say with 
contempt, "Das ganze 'Civil' ist eine niedridge Rasse." ( B. B.) 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
881 
generis, brainlessness, economic worthlessness ;  clamorous nullity. 
On a holiday, in the evening, drunken people are bawling ; one can 
hear them quarrelling. Then there sounds a violent outcry to sum­
mon the police. In the crowd, piled up in a heap, one hears distinctly 
a protesting, appealing, complaining and threatening voice. There 
is much pretended wrath. You approach the crowd, you inquire : 
"What's the matter ?"-In answer ptople laugh, wave their hands, 
and walk away : "Oh, nothing-strutzkys I "  In this connection the 
word "strutzkys" is pronounced with disdain, with contempt-al­
ways with contempt. Should the shouting man even be beaten or 
afronted,-even in this case, it seems, he would get no sympathy 
for the sole reason that he is a "strutzky," i.e., everything in him 
is rubbish : the fact that he is shouting is trash ; that he was beaten 
-is trash-"the most worthless man" that can be imagined. 
I may add that the "strutzkys" are usually shabbily dressed, 
in clothes which are out of season, and they wear torn shoes. Further­
more "it seems" that only those who wear European clothes are 
callrrf "strutzkyc:." However, I would not swear to this, but it 
seems that this is so. 
The second essential characteristic of the dissipated drunkard, 
called a "strutzky," aside from foolishness and worthlessness, is his 
uncertair position in society. I believe that a man who owns money, 
a house, l'roperty of some kind, a',;o one who has even a somewhat 
steady and fixed job, say, that of a factory worker, could not be 
called a "strutzky." However, even if he has some business of his 
own, say, a small shop, or the like, if somehow he conducts his 
afairs unsoundly, without keeping accounts, he may be promoted 
to the rank of a "strutzky." 
Thus, a "strutzky" is a goori-ror-nothing · How, who is unable 
to live on good terms anywhere, to settle dow.:• ; he is a worthless 
and ignorant man ; when drunk, he often acts insolently ; he is loud­
mouthed ; he is frequently affronted, mostly because he likes to feel 
offended ; he is one who calls the poiice, the authorities ; he is the 
one who cries : "help ! help I "  And all these things combined : trash, 
nonsense, triviality, evoking contemptuous laughter : "Eh, that's 
nothing-'strutzky' ! "  
I repeat, it seems to me that this is exclusively a Petersburg 
word. Whether it is used in other parts of Russia, I don't know. 
It is very much in use among the common peoplP. in Petersburg 
where there are a great many mifF-atory elements fr֪.n the provincial 
districts. For this reason it is qutte probable that the term might 
pass nvtr to other provinces, if it hasn't already done so. Maybe 
it will be accepted in literature : I believe that, aside from myself, 
other writers also have employed it. To a litterateur, the attraction 

882 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : I877 
in this word lies in the nuance of contempt with which the people 
specifically use it only of the trashy, empty-headed, vociferating, 
worthless, vile little fellows blustering in their despicable wrath. 
Indeed, also among the educated strata there are many fellows of 
this kind-aren't there ? Not necessarily drunkards and not in torn 
shoes, but therein is the only difference. How can one refrain from 
calling these superior ones-"strutzkys," especially as the word is 
ready-made and is tempting because of the nuance of r.ontempt 
with which the people pronounce it. 
2 
THE HISTORY OF THE VERB "STUSHEVATSIA"1 
By the way, speaking of the origin and employment of new 
words. In our literature there is in general use a word "stushevatsia," 
which, though it was not born yesterday, is of rather recent origin, 
and which has existed not more than three decades : at the time 
of Pushkin it was utterly unknown and was not used by anyone. 
At present, however, it may be found not only among litterateurs, 
belles-lettrists of every kind, from the most humorous to the most 
serious, but also in scientific treatises, dissertations and philosophical 
books. Moreover, it may be encountered in official departmental 
documents, reports, accounts and even in ordinances : it is known 
to everybody ; everybody understands it and uses it. Even so, in 
all Russia there is only one man who knows the precise origin of 
this word, tlte time when it was invented and when it appeared in 
literature. This man is myself, because it was I who, for the first 
time, used this word in literature. For the first time it appeared in 
print on January I, I846, in The Domestic Records, in my novel 
The Double : Adventures of Mr. Goliadkin. 
I began my first novel, Poor Folks, in I844 ; it was finished ; 
it became known to Bielinsky, and was accepted by Nekrasov for 
his almanac Petersburg Collection for the year I845, which was 
published in the latter part of that year. However, in that same 
year, in the summer, after I had made my acquaintance with Bielin­
sky, I started working on my second novel, The Double : Adventures 
of Mr. Goliadkin. Ever since the early autumn of I845, Bielinsky 
had shown a lively interest in this new work of mine. Even before 
he had read it, he spoke about it to Andrei Alexandrovich Kraievsky, 
for whose magazine he was then working, and to whom he also 
introduced me. It was agreed between Kraievsky and myself that I 
1The Russian word "stushevatsia" means to disappear, to vanish, to be 
blotted out, to efface oneself. ( B. B.) 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
should give him my new novel The Double for The Domestic Rec­
Mds: it was to appear in the first months of 1846. 
Most decidedly, I did not succeed with that novel ; however, 
its idea was rather lucid, and I have never expressed in my writ­
ings anything more serious. Still, as far as form was concerned, I 
failed utterly. Fifteen years later, I made considerable improve­
ments in it for the then "Complete ֫ollection" of my works ; how­
ever, also at that time I came again to the conclusion that in this 
work J had not succeeded at all, and were I now to expound and 
expresc; this idea, I should adopt an altogether different form. But 
in 1846, I failed to find it, and was unable to master the novel. 
Even so, I believe, early in December, 1845, Bielinsky per­
suaded me to read at his house at least two or three chapters of that 
novel. For this purpose he even arranged a soiree-a thing he never 
did-to which he invited his intimates. I remember that Ivan Ser­
geevich Turgenev listened to one-half of what I read, praised it 
and left-he was very much in a hurry. The three or four chapters 
which I read greatly pleased Bielinsky (even though they were not 
wo;th it ) .  However, he did not know the end of the novel, and was 
still under the spell of Poor Folks. It was precisely at that reading 
that I employed for the first time the word "stushevatsia," which 
became so popular. The novel was forgotten-this it deserved-but 
the new ·vord was picked up, it was memorized and admitted in 
literatu•r 
The word "stushevatsia"-"to disappear," "to vanish," "to re­
duce one's self," so to speak, "to naught," but to vanish not all of 
a sudden, not by crashing into an abyss with thunder and lightning, 
but, as it were, delicately, fluently, imperceptibly sinking into 
nullity. This resembles a vanishing shade on t1 strip of a llrawing 
washed with Indian ink-from black gradually 
· lighter and lighter 
shades, and finally, to absolute white, "to naught." Probably, in 
The Double I employed this word pointedly in those first three 
chapters which I read at Bielinsky's soiree ; there it referred to a 
sly and annoying little fellow who h1anaged very appropriately to 
vanish from the stage (or something like that-1 forget) .  I say this 
because the new word aroused no perplexity in the listeners. On the 
contrary, it was at once understood and noted. ֬ielinsky interrupted 
me precisely in order tu commend that expression. All others among 
the audience (they all are still alive) likewise praised it. I distinctly 
remember that Ivan Sergeevich Turgenev also made a favorable 
comment on that word. Andrei 1\.lexandrovich K. :devsky, for his 
part, subsequently lauded it ver, warmly. Aside from these men, 
there are other persons who will probably recall that, at the time, 
the new word aroused their interest-at lea!'t a little. However, it 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
took root and penetrated literature not at once but very gradually 
and imperceptibly. 
I remember that in 1854, after I was discharged from prison 
in Siberia, I began to peruse all the literary works which had ap­
peared during the five years of my absence. (I read at one sitting 
and derived an enchanting impression from The Sportsman's Sketches 
-which had barely begun to appear in my young days-and Tur­
genev's early novels. True, then the sun of the steppes shone above 
me ; it was early spring, and with it an altogether new life was 
coming into being-the end of forced labor, liberty ! )  Thus, having 
started reading, I was even surprised to find how frequently I began 
to encounter the word "stushevatsia." Later, in the Sixties, it had 
become an altogether familiar word in literature, while at present, 
I repeat, I even encounter it in official documents published in the 
newspapers, and also in scientific dissertations. And it is used pre­
cisely in that sense in which I employed it for the first time. 
However, if I employed it for the first time in literature, 
nevertheless I did not coin it. This word was invented by my class­
mates in the Chief Engineering School. Maybe I also participated 
in its invent!on-I don't remember. Somehow it invented itself, of 
its own accord, and it came into usage. 
In all six classes of the School we were required to draw plans 
for different fortifications and military architecture. The ability to 
sketch free-hand was strictly insisted upon and required of each 
one of us, so that those who had no predilection for drawing willy­
nilly were compelled to endeavor quand-meme to attain a certain skill 
in this field. Marks received for drawing plans were included in 
the sum totlll of one's marks, and thus affected the average mark. 
One could graduate from the senior officers' class, and enlist in 
the service, as an excellent mathematician, fortifier or engineer, but 
if his drawings were somewhat defective, the mark awarded for 
them, forming part of the sum total, could decrease the mean mark 
to such an edent as to deprive one, at the time of his graduation, 
of very substantial privileges, for example, of the next rank. For 
this reason everybody tried his best to master drawing. 
All plans used to be drawn and shaded with India ink ; among 
other things, we sought to acquire the skill of shading a given 
surface-coloring it-so that the shades gradually passed from darker 
hues to lighter ones, and finally,-to colorless white, to naught. 
Skillful ֭ading conveyed to the drawing a stylish appearance. 
On one occasion, suddenly in the class somebody would ask : 
"Where is So and So ?"-"Eh, he vanished ('stushevatsia') some­
where." Or else, two classmates would be conversing, and one would 
say that he had to start learning his lessons, and then taking his 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
885 
books he would say to his mate : "Now, you just vanish, you must 
'stushevatsia' !" Again, for instance, a student of a higher grade, 
addressing a newly matriculated tyro, would say : "Not long ago I 
was calling you. Whither did you deign to .vanish ? ('stushevatsia')." 
This precisely meant "to withdraw," "to vanish," and the expression 
was derived from shading, from th" passage from the dark hue "to 
naught " I distinctly recall that this word was in usage only in 
our class, and was hardly adopted by the other classes. It seems 
that when our class left the school, the word disappeared with it. 
Some three years later I recalled it and inserted it into my novel. 
I have dealt so seriously and extensively with the history of 
so insignificant a word for the use of a future learned lexicographer, 
some future Dahl, and even if I have bored my readers, the future 
Dahl will thank me. So, Jet this be stated for him alone. However, 
if you please, for the sake of clarity, I shall fully confess : during 
my entire literary career what I liked most in this word was the 
fact that I have succeeded in introducing a new expression into 
R•1ssian speech, and whenever I come across it in print, I always 
tee] vࣁ:ry much pleased. Well, now you will understand why I thought 
it possible to describe such a trifle in a special article. 
CHAPTER II 
1 
Servility or Politeness? 
IT IS known that all educated Russianc: are extremely polite, 
i.e., whenever they deal with E.J&·ope, or if t!·· "I think that Europe 
is looking at them, even though she is not lo· tting at them at all. 
Oh, at home, among ourselves, we'll have it our own way-at home, 
Europranism can be brushed aside. In passing let us refer, say, 
to our family relations, to our att֮tude-in an overwhelming ma­
jority of cases-toward civic matters, honor, duty. Well, who among 
our preachers of "European" ideas seriously believes in them ?­
Of course, only honest men, and, besides, ne-:-essarily kind-hearted 
men, so that they believe in them only because they are kind­
hearten. But ol these do we have many ? 
Strictly speaking, perhaps, there isn't a single European 
amongst us, because we are inc:tpable of being Europeans. In Rus­
sia, progressive intellects, stoct exchange intellects and in every 
way leading intellects merely levy taxes on European ideas. And 
I beheve, so it is everywhere. Naturally, I am not speaking of people 
with great common sense : those do not believe in European ideas, 

886 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
because there is nothing to believe in. In fact, nothing in the world 
was ever as obscure, vague, uncertain and indefinable as that "cycle 
of ideas" which we managed to accumulate in the course of the 
two centuries of our Europeanism ; essentially, it is not a cycle, 
but a chaos of fragments of sentiments, of alien unintelligible ideas, 
inferences, habits, but particularly words, words, words-of course, 
most European and liberal words, but, as far as we are concerned,­
nothing but words. 
To explain all this by mere imitativeness is impossible. Nor 
can this be explained by servility of thought-by Russian ideological 
servility before Europe. In us there is much, even very much, 
servility of thought, but nevertheless the supreme cause of our 
European bondage is not servility but rather our innate Russian 
politene!'s toward Europe. Perhaps it may be observed that this 
is identical with servility. In many cases-it is, but not always. (It 
stands to reason that I am not speaking of the leading rogues whom 
I have mentioned above : these Europeans don't give a rap for Eu­
rope,-never did give a rap. As level-headed fellows, throughout these 
two centuries, they have been fishing in troubled waters.) 
Here is, for instance, what the Englishman Gladstone says 
about the present Russian war with Turkey : 
"Whatever may be said about some other chapters of Russian 
history, by liberating many millions of enslaved peoples from a 
cruel and humiliating yoke, Russia will render mankind one of the 
most brilliant services recorded in history, a service which will 
never be effaced from the grateful memory of the nations." 
Honestly speaking, do you think that a Russian European 
could have pronounced these words ?-Never in his life I He would 
have swallowed his tongue before be would have pronounced them. 
Out of politeness not only toward Europe but toward himself, he 
would blush should he read or hear this in Russian or from a 
Russian. "For goodness sake, how do we dare . . .  to aspire to 
such honors l These are not meant for us ! Our face is much too 
crooked to be venturing to 'liberate mankind' ! And besides, what 
reactionary thoughts : 'Russia liberating the peoples ! '-What an 
unliberal thought ! "  
Such is the sincere opinion of a Russian European of the 
pure type, and he would rather chop off his fingers than write 
somethin& along Gladstone's lines. "Well, perhaps Gladstone can 
afford to compose such things. Besides he does not even understand 
anything about Russia, or he knows how to feather his nest : he 
composes for future plans."-Tbis is what the European thinks. 
And some of those who are kinder and more ardent, on this occasion 
might add to themselves, not without pride : "Well, we Russian 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Europeans are perhaps more liberal than European Europeans ; we 
have gone farther than they. Who among our sober intellects would 
nowadays open his mouth to speak about some sort of liberation 
of the peoples ? What a reactionary way of thinking ! And Gladstone 
says such things without being ashamed I "  
Well, gentlemen what shall we call all this ?-Servility or polite­
ness toward Europe ? 
I still insist that during the t.:uropean period of our history 
politeness has played an enormous role. Indeed, among these Euro­
peans of ours there are so many most honest, courageous people, 
men of honor, even though alien and adopted, perhaps unintelligible 
to the knight himself-since, say what you may to him, it is still 
European gibberish-nevertheless, honor ,-men who personally will 
not permit anyone to tread upon their feet. Thus, how can they be 
directly called servile ? Nay, it is politeness, and not servility, that 
is at the bottom of the trouble,-1 repeat-politeness toward Europe. 
At home we will make up for any loss. 
The ladies who enthusiastically treated the Turks to candies 
.. nri '-ig:us, unr֯..estionably did so also from politeness : "See, how 
charminְly, tenderly, kindly, humanely, Europeanly we are en­
lightened I "  At present these dames have learned better-partly from 
coarse people. However, before they had learned their lesson, say 
the dav rollowing the incident on the train transporting the Turks 
into whtch they were throwing bouquets and candies,-what if an­
other train-load of Turks had arrived, and there had been aboard 
that bashi-bazouk who is said to be a special expert in rending 
nurslings asunder in a trice by seizing them by both legs, and in 
cutting strips out of a mother's back ?-Why. I believe these good 
ladies would have welcomed hi<n with enthu- i -tstic screams, ready 
to give him not only candies but something eve better than candies, 
after which, in their ladies' committee, they would, perhaps, have 
raised the question of endowing a scholars!.ip bearing his name in 
the local high-school. 
Oh, believe me, in Russia politeness may lead to anything, 
and mine is not in the least a fantastic supposition. Looking at 
themselves in a mirror, these ladies, I take it, fell in love with them­
selves : "What humane, what liberal dears we are ! "  And do you 
really think t1.at this fantastic little picture could not come to 
pass ?-That haughty glance which some Europeans now throw at 
our · people and their movement, denying in our wh•>le people every 
kind of thought or movement, · 
•.ve some silly hysterical sallies of 
one fool out of thousands of common people,"-don't you think 
that ::;uch a view-the possibility itself of such a view-justifies the 
delineation of the above fantastic picture ' 

888 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Among us politeness toward Europe is universal. Turkish war 
prisoners demanded white bread, and it was given them. Turkish 
war prisoners refused to work. Prince Meschersky, an eyewitness, 
relates in his Diary from the Caucasus : 
"The prisoners departed from Tiftis. It was intended to trans­
port them by relays of horses, but they revolted and deigned to 
announce that they would not go because they were not used to 
Russian carts. In view of this, postal coaches and carriages equipped 
with springs were provided for their transportation, each vehicle 
driven by six horses. They deigned to express their pleasure with 
this, and in view of the fact that an enormous number of horses 
had to be requisitioned for this purpose, the poor travellers along 
the Military Georgian road will be obliged to wait three days for 
horses. And an officer in the Russian service, accompanying the 
prisoners, is being paid so kopecks per diem for subsistence, and 
he is being seated not in a carriage but in a bus, just as servants 
travel. All this is humaneness I "  (The Moscow Gazette, No. 273.) 
Well, not humaneness but that very politeness in the matter 
of European opinion about us, sensitiveness, susceptibility : "Europe 
is looking at us. Therefore, we have to wear full uniform, and 
pashas have to be provided with carriages." 
In another of its issues (No. 282) The Moscow Gazette further 
reports that in Moscow there was a real outburst of indignation 
when people saw the comfortable accommodations we provided for 
the transportation of the Turkish war prisoners : 
"All captive privates were comfortably placed in third-class 
cars ; officers-in second-class cars, while the pasha occupied a first­
class compartment. Why such accommodations for them ?"-could 
be heard in public.-"Our grenadiers were transported in horse-cars, 
whereas they are provided with special passenger trains." 
"Why speak about grenadiers I "-says a merchant in the 
crowd. "Even wounded soldiers were transported in freight cars, 
and there was no time to lay straw under them. Look at the pasha 
-he's fat as a boar. He should be placed in a freight car-there 
he would lose a bit of his fat ! "  
"Over there, they have been killing our wounded, tendons 
were pulled out of them, they burned them on a slow fire and now 
they are being fondled for that I . . .  " 
"These are not solitary voices"-further observes The Moscow 
Gazette..JI'they are expressive of the general opinion of the people 
that it is painful to behold the comfortable accommodations pro­
vided for the bashi-bazouks and that whole Turkish rabble, robbed 
by their own · pashas, compared with those assigned to our sol­
diers . . . .  
" 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Strictly speaking, in this we find nothing particular : polite­
ness or, so to speak, the uniform of politeness displayed before 
European opinion-that's all. But in Russia this has lasted two 
centuries-it's time we got used to this. 
Speaking of anecdotes, I noted one in The Petersburg Gazette 
quoting a letter of Mr. V. Krestov!-ky which he wrote at the front, 
but I don't know to whom. Nor do I know whence The Petersburg 
Gazette borrowed it. This is the statement : 
"In Mr. Krestovsky's letter a comical incident is cited : Near 
the retinue there appeared an Englishman wearing a cork helmet 
and a civilian overcoat of pea color. It is said that he is a member 
of Parliament. who takes advantage of the recess period for writing 
correspondence 'from the front' for one of the large London papers 
(The Times). Others assert that he is simply an amateur, and still 
others-that he is a friend of Russia. Let all this be so, nevertheless 
it shoulrl be observed that this 'friend of Russia' behaves rather 
eccentrically : for instance, he sits in the presence of the Grand 
D.t1·P when evPrybody, including His Highness, is standing ; at 
dinner, attended by the Grand Duke, he gets up whenever he pleases, 
and today he even suggested to an officer, an acquaintance of his, 
that he might help him to pull on the sleeves of his pea overcoat. 
With a r.>mewhat surprised look the officer glanced at the English­
man, mֱ..Lsuring him from head lO foot, smiled slightly, shrugged 
his shoulderc;, and without protest helped him to put on his over­
coat. Of courֲe, there was nothing else to do. In answer, the English­
man in a slight salute raised his hand to the cork helmet." 
The Petersburg Gazette called this a comical incident. I regret 
to say that I find nothing comical in it ; on • .-:.͞ contrary, it. is very 
vexing, and makes one's blood boil. Beside:-
from childhood, we 
have been accustomed to believe (probably, under the influence of 
romances and French vaudevilles) that everv Englishman is a queer 
fellow and an eccentric. But what is a queer fellow ?-He is not al­
ways a fool or so naive that he cannot guess that not everywhere 
in the world are things run in the same way as somewhere at home, 
in his own corner. On the contrary, Englishmen are a level-headed 
nation with broad views. As navigators-anu besides, enlightened 
ones-they ha''" seen a great many people and customs in all coun­
tries of the world. They are extraordinary and gifted observers. At 
home they discovered humor, denoting it with a ֳ-pedal word, and 
they explained it to mankind. H vv can such a man-besides, a mem­
ber of Parliament-fail to know when he should be standing and 
sitting ? Why, there is no country where etiquette is more rigidly 
observed than in England. For instance, English court etiquette is 
the most elaborate and refined in the world. If that Englishman is 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
a member of Parliament, naturally, he might have learned etiquette 
from the very manner in which the lower House communicates with 
the upper one, and precisely who may sit and who is obliged to 
get up in the other's presence. If, in addition, he belongs to fashion­
able society ; again, nowhere is there such etiquette as at the recep­
tions, dinners and balls of English aristocracy during their London 
season. 
Nay, judging by the way this anecdote has been related, here 
we have something altogether different. Here is English haughtiness, 
not simply haughtiness but an a,ogant challenge. This "friend of 
Russia" cannot be her great friend. He sits there, looks at Russian 
officers and ponders : "Gentlemen, I know you are lion-hearted ; you 
undertake the impossible and carry it out. You have no fear of an 
enemy ; you are heroes ; you are Bayards-each one of you, and the 
sense of honor is fully familiar to you. Indeed, I cannot deny that 
which I see with my own eyes. Nevertheless, I am an Englishman, 
while you are only Russians ; I am a European, and to Europe you 
owe 'politeness.' No matter how lion-hearted you may be, neverthe­
less I am a man of a superior type. And it pleases me very much, 
it pleases me particularly, to study your 'politeness' in relation to 
myself, your innate and irresistible politeness, without which a Rus­
sian cannot look at a foreigner, all the more so, at a foreigner such 
as myself. You think these are but mere trifles. Well, these trifles 
comfort and amuse me. I went to take a trip. I heard that you were 
heroes. I came to take a look at you. But nevertheless I shall go 
home with the conviction that, as a son of Old England (at this 
point his hear·t quivers with pride) I am the superior man on earth, 
while you are but of second rank . . . .  " 
In the above account the last lines are particularly curious : 
"With a somewhat surprised look, the officer glanced at the 
Englishman, measuring him from head to foot, smiled slightly, 
shrugged his shoulders, and without protest helped him to put on 
his overcoat. Of course, there was nothing else to do." 
Why this "of course" ? Why was there nothing else to do ?-On 
the contrary, something quite different, reverse, opposite could have 
been done : it was possible "to glance at the Englishman, measuring 
him from head to foot, smile slightly, shrug his shoulders,"-and 
pass by, without so much as touching the overcoat.-This is what 
could haည been done. Could it not be noticed that the enlightened 
navigator was playing a trick, that the most refined connoisseur of 
etiquette was seizing upon the moment for the satisfaction of his 
petty pride ?-Therein is the whole point. Maybe, at that very 
moment it was impossible to bethink one's self of the situation­
our enlightened "politeness" stood in the way-not toward that 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
member of Parliament wearing some sort of a cork helmet (what's 
this cork helmet ?) but toward Europe, toward the obligation of 
European enlightenment in which we grew up, in which we have 
got stuck to the point of losing our independent personality, and 
from which it will take a long time to extricate ourselves. 
Shipments of cartridges to the Turkish army from England 
and America are colossal. At present it is positively known that at 
Plevna a Turkish soldier, at times, fires soo rounds of ammunition 
per day. Thus to equip the Turkish army the Turks had neither 
facilities nor money. The presence of the English and of their money 
in the current war is undeniable. Their ships are transporting am­
munition and all that is needed. And yet some of our papers are 
vociferating-from "politeness" : "Ah, please, don't say this I Ah, 
let's not raise this question I Let's pretend we don't hear about 
these things I Otherwise the enlightened navigators might grow 
angry, and then . . . " 
Well, then what ? What are you afraid of ?-Much could be 
::dd .. J on the s!:!Jject of "politeness." 
Even if there be some little promissory notes issued by us to 
Europe in the form of different promises made prior to the time 
of our crossing the Barbocz bridge, this, too, must have been done 
from poဋ;teness toward Europe and our admiration of her. 
However, let us temporarily leave the subject of politeness. 
I shall only recall that in the beginning of the chapter, when I 
started speaking of politeness, I added : "this is politeness only 
toward Europe. At home we shall make up for any loss." Taking 
advantage of the occasion, I wish to point out how, at times, we 
manage to make up for the loss, and to take , , ; r  'evanche. 
2 
THE 1\'Iosr SERVILE INCIDENT PosSIBLE 
Do you remember, gentlemen, that last summer, long before 
"Plevna," when we suddenly entered Bulgaria, and appeared be­
yond the Balkans, we were jolted with indie:nation. That is, not 
all of us-this must be stated in the first place-not even fifty per 
cent, but much less. Still there was a considerable number of those 
who grew indignant, and voices were raised -first, the voices of war 
correspondents, and later-voices in our press, espf'.-ially in Peters­
burg. Those were ardent, conv. ··ed voices full of mo!>l virtuous 
indignation. 
The whole incident arose in consequence of the fact that those 
who raised their voices went-as is known by the whole world and 
particularly by us-to save the oppressed, the crushed and exhausted. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
I recall that even prior to the declaration of war I read in one 
of our most serious newspapers, that, in weighing the chances of 
war and the expenditures necessarily connected therewith, of course, 
"it would be necessary, upon entering Bulgaria, to feed not only 
our army but also the starving Bulgarian population." This I read 
myself, and I can state where. 
Now then, with these ideas about the Bulgarians, for whose 
defense we went all the way from the shores of the Finnish gulf 
and all Ruso;ian rivers to shed our blood, unexpectedly we saw 
charming little Bulgarian cottages, surrounded with smiling gardens 
and flowers, cattle, cultivated land yielding almost hundredfold har­
vests, and, on top of that, three Orthodox churches to one mosque 
-this among those oppressed for faith I "How dare they I "-Indig­
nation instantly flared up in the offended hearts of some liberators, 
and the blood of insult. rose to their cheeks. "Besides, we have come 
to save them. Therefore, they should be welcoming us almost on 
their knees. But they are not on their knees ; they look at us askance, 
and it even seems that they are not glad we are here ! And this, 
in a case where we are involved ! True, they welcome us with bread 
and salt, yet they do, they certainly do, look at us askance I "  
And voices began to rise. Look here, gentlemen, what would 
you think : suddenly you receive a false telegram, or one erroneously 
understood by you, to the effect that a man dear to you-a friend, 
or a brother of yours-is sick ; that somewhere far away he has been 
robbed or that he has been run over by a train, or something of 
the sort. You leave all your work and speed to that unfortunate 
brother. And· much to your surprise you discover that nothing of 
the kind has happened : you meet a man who is in better health 
than you. He sits at the table and dines. Vociferously he asks you 
to join him, and he bursts out into laughter over your false alarm, 
over that qui pro quo. Whether or not you are very fond of the man, 
is it possible that you would be angry at him because he has not 
been robbed or run over by a train ? Chiefly-because he has such 
red cheeks, that be so enjoys his dinner and his glass of wine ? 
Certainly not. On the contrary, you should even be glad that he 
is alive and in better health than yourself. Why, being human, you 
might be a little angry-but not because his legs were not cut off 
by the wheels. Indeed, you would not start, straight after dinner, 
writing t.ispatches and anecdotes about him, vilifying his character, 
recording traits unfavorable to him. . 
. . 
Well, in the case of the Bulgarians this has been done. "In 
Russia even a well-to-do peasant has not such good food as this 
oppresSt'ci Bulgarian." And others later inferred that the Russians 
were the cause of all Bulgarian misfortunes : had we not before-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
hand, without knowing the actual facts, threatened the Turks on 
behalf of the oppressed Bulgarian : had we not subsequently come 
to liberate these "robbed" rich fellows, they would be living, even 
up to the present day', in clover. This is still being asserted. 
I am saying this only in the spirit that because of our "polite­
ness" toward Europe and our en1igh౏.ened Europeanism, we manage, 
at times, to make good, in our owP way, at home, where Europe 
no longer sees and observes us and because she can't understand 
Russian. And Bulgaria means "at home." We have come to liberate 
them, which is the same as if we came home-they are ours. He has 
there a garden and an estate,-well, this is the same as if they were 
mine. Of course, I am not goinJZ to take anything away from him, 
because I am an honorable man, and true-also because I have no 
power to do this, nevertheless h౐ should feel and be forever grateful, 
since I have entered his home,-well, this is the same as if I made 
a present to him of everything he possesses-! took it away from 
the Turk, his oppressor, and returned it to him. Indeed, he must 
untiPrstand this. . . . And suddenly it develops that nobody is op­
pressing him ! what a vexing unpleasantness ! Isn't it though ? 
What servility in lieu of enlightencci politeness l Isn't it ? And 
what a funny incident ! -This is one of the most comical "makings 
up" "at P:>me" in compensation for the tightness of the ill-fitting 
uniforn-
r f European politeness in which we are flaunting ourselves 
before Europe. A most servile incident occurred to these ardent 
gentlemen, catching quite a few of them unawares. This is more 
serious than unexpectedly to hold an overcoat for an Englishman. 
Subsequently everything came to light, and the truth revealed 
itself to many of the indignant-even though not to all of them­
up to this day. It developed, in t.•.: first plac · that the Bulgarian 
is in no way guilty because of the fact that h. is industrious and 
that his soil yields hundredfold harvests. Secondly, he can't be 
blamed for "looking askance." To consider only that he has been 
a slave for four centuries, and whet he encounters new masters 
he does not believe them to be his brethren, but, on the contrary, 
believes them to be his new masters. Besides, he is afraid of his 
former masters, and painfully ponders to hir.-':elf : "What if they 
should come back and find out that I have offered bread and salt?" 
-It was becau!>e of these inner questions that he looked askance. 
And he was right, he made a good guess-the poor fellow : after we 
had accomplished our first valiant onrush beyond ͝ :1e Balkans, we 
suddenly withdrew. The Turks at-in came back to them, and what 
they ౑ot from the Turks is a matter of record in world history 1 
These neat little cottages, these savings, garrlens, cattle-all these 
were plundered, reduced to ashes, erased frum the face of the earth. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Not by the scores, not by the hundreds, but by the thousands and 
tens of thousands, Bulgarians were exterminated by fire and sword ; 
their children were rent asunder and died in the throes of torture ; 
dishonored wives and daughters were either beaten after they had 
been raped, or taken into captivity for sale, while the husbands­
those same who welcomed the Russians, as well as those who never 
did welcome them but to whom the Russians might have come 
some day-they all smarted, for the Russians, on the gallows or 
bonfires. The beasts who tortured them nailed them for the night 
by their ears to fences, and in the morning they hanged all of them, 
to the last man, compelling one of them to hang the rest, and when 
he had hanged a score of culprits, in conclusion he had to hang him­
self amid the uproar of the sadistic beasts known as the Turkish 
nation who, subsequently, were so greatly admired by some of our 
most delicate ladies. . 
. 
. 
N. B. Only recently, in the middle of November, reports were 
receivP.d from Pyrgos about the new atrocities of these monsters. 
When, in the course of a spirited skirmish there, the Turks tem­
porarily succeeded in pressing us back so that we had no time to 
remove our wounded soldiers and officers, and that same day when 
in the evening we recaptured the ground, we found our wounded 
robbed, naked, with cut-off noses, ears, lips, carved-out stomachs, 
and finally burned to death on stacks of straw and corn to which 
our wounded, ·then still alive, were transported by the Turks, who 
thereupon set these stacks afire. Reprisals are a cruel thing, all the 
more so as, .essentially, they lead to nothing, as I have already 
stated once in one of the preceding issues of the Diary. However, 
severity in dealing with the superiors of these beasts would not 
be out of place. The announcement could be made-publicly so that 
all Europe should hear it-that in case atrocities are committed, the 
immediate superiors of those Turks who order them, if they be 
captured, will be court-martialled and shot. (The Prussians un­
failingly would have done this because they even dealt exactly in 
the same way with the French for reasons ten times less justifiable 
than in the case of the beasts with whom we are at war.)l 
Such a warning, instead of carriages equipped with springs, 
would teach many of them. At present, however, that same "com­
mander," captured and seing how he is welcomed after his atroci­
ties, really imagines himself infinitely superior to the "infidel Rus­
sian." I assure you that this Turk will never believe in our European 
1 N. B. I believe it would be easy to find out now or later who was the 
Turkish commander who, for instance, was in charge of the attack at 
Pyrgos. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
politeness and in our fear of Europe. Besides, he would not under­
stand this at all, nor would he conceive such a cause. The polite 
fear of Europe is a purely Russian thing and invention, and no one 
will ever comprehend it. And therefore, "if you are thus bowing 
to me"-argues the Turkish commander-"after I have permitted 
only yesterday my soldiers to cut off, maybe, your own brother's 
nose, this means that you feel that you are inferior to me, and that 
I am superior to you. So it should be, by the will of Allah, and 
there is nothing surprising in this I " 
This is what the captive Turkish pasha must be, and unfail­
ingly is, thinking. 
Therefore, when those who grew indignant against the Bul­
garians lived to see the sad denouement wrought upon the latter, 
willy-nilly they understood that Bulgarian life, essentially, is noth­
ing but scenery ; that all those cottages, and gardens, and wives and 
children ; all these young boys and girls in those cottages,-that 
they ::.U, in facL !lelong to the Turk, who grabs them whenever he 
pleases. He grabs them also in times of peace,-he grabs money 
and cattle, wives and little girls, and if nevertheless everything 
continued to remain in a flourishing state, this was only due to 
the fact t',at the Turk did not want to bring utter destruction upon 
so fertile a field, expecting to expioit it also in the future. On the 
contrary, at times, and in certain localities, he permitted full 
blossoming precisely with a view to exploiting it in due time. 
Of course, at present the Turks, having grown furious, are 
completely destroying Bulgaria. They regret that they have not 
done this before. If we capture Plevna and :::: ౒y in our advance, 
the Turks seeing that, perhaps, they may have l ."Jart with Bulgaria 
forever. will destroy everything that can possibly be destroyed-so 
long as there is time. 
There are two remarkable opinions : our sages still keep assert­
ing that, in the absence of Russian intervention, the Bulgarian would 
be living in clover, and that the Russians are the cause of all his 
misfortunes. Now, the Englishman Forbes, the correspondent of 
the newspapt'r Daily News, well-known for his excellent and com­
prehensive disp:1tches from the front, finally, candidly came out 
with his English truth. He sincerely believes that the Turks had 
"the full right" to exterminatt the entire Bulgarian population to 
the north of the Balkans at the ·'le when the Ru:.sian army had 
crossed the Danube. Forbes almost regrets (of course, politically) 
that this did not take place, and infers that the Bulgarians owe a 
debt of eternal gratitude to the Turks for the fact that the latter 
have not slaughtered everyone of them like so many sheep. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Recalling our Russian opinion about "the Bulgarian living in 
clover," and comparing it with the opinion of Forbes, we might as 
well address the Bulgarian with the following admonition. "How 
can you maintain that you are not living in clover seeing that you, 
Bulgarians, have not been slaughtered, head by head, to the last 
man ! "  
But there is one more strange thing : it stands out, and it will 
remain in history. Is it possible that so educated a man as Forbes, 
belonging to so great and enlightened a nation as England, can 
calmly and serenely admit such a right on the part of the Turks ? 
And mind that of course he would not have expressed himself thus 
if, in lieu of the Bulgarians, the French or the Italians had been 
at stake He did thus express himself because these were only Bul­
garians, Slavs. What innate blood contempt for the Slavs, for the 
Slavic race, they all have in Europe I They consider them to be 
mere dogs ! -The possibility and the reasonableness of slaughtering 
everyone of them, to the last man, the entire tribe, including women 
and children, are admitted. 
And mind,-this is very important-this is being said not by 
Lord Beaconsfield : compelled by politics, by "English interests," he 
could have expressed such piratical and bestial convictions. "But 
Forbes is an honest man, not a politician. The duty of complying 
with the interest of England quand-meme and at any cost has not 
been conferrr'd upon him. Such a man ! So honest, talented, truth­
ful, humane-judging by his former dispatches I Here we are dealing 
precisely with some sort of Western European aversion to every­
thing beari౓ the name of Slavdom. These Bulgarians may be 
boiled in boiling water like those bugs' nests in the wooden beds 
of old women I Isn't there some kind of an instinct here, some 
presentiment that all Eastern Slavic tribes, after their liberation, 
will assume some day an enormous role in the new, future human 
race in the place of the old civilization, led astray from the right 
road ? At present Western people can neither consciously conceive 
nor even admit this, just as they cannot conceive bugs' nests as 
something superior which is going to replace them. 
But this is Russia I Obviously, here an altogether new idea 
for everybody's seduction and wrath has been launched-to every­
body's surprise. Here the banner of the future has appeared. And 
inasmuc; as Russia is not a "bugs' nest," as they consider the 
Bulgarians, but a giant and a power which it is impossible not 
to admit ; and because Russia is also a Slavic nation,-how these 
Western fellows must hate Russia in their hearts, instinctively, un­
accountably, rejoicing over every reverse, every calamity of hers I 
Precisely, this is instinct ; we have here a presentiment of the 
future ! . . .  

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
3 
AN ALTOGETHER SPECIAL WORD ABOUT SLAVS WHICH I 
MEANT TO SAy LONG AGO 
Apropos, I shall say a special word about the Slavs and the 
Slavic problem. I meant to say it long ago. Suddenly, everybody 
in Russia has started talking about the possibility of an early peace. 
Let us give freedom to fantasy, and let us suppose that all of a 
sudden the task has been accomplished, that owing to Russia's in­
sistence, and with her blood, the Slavs have already been liberated ; 
moreover, that the Turkish Empire exists no longer, and that the 
Balkan Peninsula is free and lives a new life. 
Of course, it is impossible to foretell in all details what form, 
to begin with, will that Slavic freedom assume, i.e., is it going to 
be a fedf'ration of the liberated small tribes (N. B.-it seems that 
for a long time to come there will be no federation) , or will sepa­
rate small principJ.lities come into existence, in the form of small 
s౔all:.:> w!th sovf': .. igns called from various ruling houses ? It is also 
difficult to conceive whether Serbia's boundaries will be enlarged, 
or whether Austria will prevent it ; what territory Bulgaria will 
occupy ; what will become of Herzegovina and Bosnia ; what the 
relation!' will be between the newly liberated small Slavic nations, 
for instance, the Rumanians or even the Greeks-the Constan­
tinople Greeks and those other Athenian Greeks ; finally, whether 
these rountnes and small lands will be quite independent, or will 
be under the protectorate and supervision of "the concert of Euro­
pean powers," including Russia. (I believe that all thesP. small 
nationc; will unfailingly solicit a 'Furopean Cui•·.· ·rt, be it even with 
Russia, solely as a matter of protection agai1.· 1  the ambitions of 
Russia.)-None of these questions can be decided beforehand, and 
I do not venture to settle them. 
However, even at present it is possible to know certainly two 
things : ( 1 )  that sooner or later all Slavic tribes on the Balkan 
Peninsula will, in the long run, unfailingly free themselves of the 
Turkish yoke, and that they will start a new. free and perhaps 
independent life, and ഉ 2 )  
•
.
.
 Well, this "secondly" which will 
unfailingly CC'ml to pass, I meant to discuss long ago. 
This "secondly" consists of the fact that according to my 
inner, my fullest and now irresistible conviction, R Hssia has never 
had such hatus, enviers, calumni:. •rs and even open enemies as she 
will have in these Slavic tribes-just as soon as Russia has liberated 
them and Europe has consented to recognize their liberation I And 
let people raise no objections, let them not argue with me or shout 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
at me that I am exaggerating, that I am a hater of the Slavs I 
-On the contrary, I like them very mych ; but I am not going 
to defend myself because I know that this will come to pass pre­
cisely in the way I maintain, and not because of the base and 
allegedly ungrateful character of the Slavs, not at all : in this respect 
their character is akin to the character of all others, but precisely 
because such things cannot come to pass otherwise on earth. I shall 
not enlarge on this subject, but I know that by no means should 
we expect gratitude from the Slavs ; we should prepare for this in 
advance. 
I repeat : they will start their new life by soliciting from 
Europe, from England and Germany, for example, a guaranty and 
protectorate of their freedom. And even though Russia also par­
ticipates in the concert of the European powers, nevertheless they 
will act this way for protection against Russia. To begin with, they 
will unfailingly announce to themselves and convince themselves­
tacitly if not aloud-that they owe Russia no gratitude whatever ; 
that, on the contrary, at the time of the conclusion of the peace, 
they barely saved their skins from Russia's ambitions by the in­
tervention of the European concert, and, had Europe not intervened, 
Russia, having taken them away from the Turks, would have 
promptly swallowed them "with a view to expanding her borders 
and creating a great Pan-Slavic Empire in order to make the Slavs 
slaves of the greedy, cunning and barbaric Great Russian race." 
For a long, very long time they will be unable to recognize 
Russia's disinterestedness and the great, holy, unhearౕ-of act of 
raising the banner of the greatest of all ideas by which man lives­
and once these ideas cease to animate him, he grows benumbed, 
crippled, and dies of sores and exhaustion. 
Now, do you think the Slavs have now finally understood this 
present war, a war of the whole Russian people, headed by the 
Czar, and launched against the monsters for the liberation of the 
iJI-starred nations ? However, I shall not speak of the present mo­
ment. Besides, the Slavs still need us : we are liberating them. 
But later, when we have liberated them and they have somehow 
settled,-will they think of this war as a great exploit undertaken 
for thf'ir liberation ?-Decide for yourselves. Why, they will never 
recognize this I On the contrary, they will assert, first as a political 
and later as a scientific truth, that had there been no liberatrix 
Russia c· nring all these one hundred years, they would have managed 
long ago to free themselves from the Turks by their own valor, 
or with the help of Europe, which-again, had there been no Russia 
in existence,-"lot only would have had nothing against their libera­
tion but would have liberated them herself. This crafty doctrine 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
certainly must be entertained by them even at present, and in the 
future they will develop it into a scientific and political axiom. 
Moreover, they will speak of the Turks with even greater respect 
than of Russia. 
Perhaps, during a whole century, or even longer, they will 
unceasingly tremble for their freedon, and fear Russia's ambitions. 
They will ask favors of the European states ; they will calumniate 
Russia, gossip about her and intrigue against her. Oh, I am not 
speaking of individuals : there will be some who will comprehend 
what Russia has meant, means and will always mean to them. 
They will understand the full greatness and sacredness of Russia's 
cause and of the great idea, of the banner, which she will raise 
amidst mankind. In the beginning, however, these men will be in 
such a pitiful minority that they will be ridiculed and subjected to 
hate and even political persecution. 
The liberated Slavs will particularly enjoy announcing and 
heralding to the whole world that they are enlightened nations, 
capable c.f embrౖ౗ing the loftiest European culture, whereas Russia 
is a barbaric country, a grim northern colossus, not even of pure 
Slavic blood, an oppressor and persecutor of European civilization. 
It goes without saying that from the very beginning they will adopt 
a consti•· .. 11.ional form of government ; they will have parliaments, 
responsible ministers, orators and speeches. These will greatly com­
fort and delight them. They will be tickled to death to read tele­
graphic dispatches about themselves in the Paris and London papers, 
heralding to the whole world that, after a protracted parliamentary 
storm, the cabinet bas finally fallen in Bulgaria, and that a cabinet 
has been formed by the liberal mejr.rity ; or tha• >orne Ivan Chiftlik 
of theirs finally bas consented to accept the pv t folio of president 
of the council of ministers. 
Russia must be well prepared to face ·.!le fact that all these 
liberated Slavs will enthusiastically wsh to Europe ; that they will 
be contaminated with the political and social European forms-to 
the point of losing their individuality, and that thus they will have 
to live through a long period of Europeanism before they are able 
to understand at least snmething about their Slavic significance and 
their special Sla . ic mission among mankind. 
Among themselves, these petty countries will be perpetually 
quarrelling, envying each other and intriguing one aౘJinst the other. 
It stands to reason that at a mon. tt of some serious calamity they 
will unfailingly apply to Russia for help. No matter how much they 
may h-.te, gossip and calumniate us in Europe, coquetting with her 
and assuring her of their love, nevertheless they will always instinc­
tively feel-of course at a moment of some calamity, and not before-

goo 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
that Europe is, always was and will always remain, a natural enemy 
of their unity, and, if they do exist on earth, it is, of course, because 
of the fact that there stands a gigantic magnet-Russia-which, 
drawing all of them to herself, thereby preserves their wholeness 
and unity. There will even be moments when they will be able to 
concede-almost consciously-that had there been no Russia, the 
great Eastern center and the great attracting force, their unity 
would have instantly collapsed, been torn to pieces, so that their 
very nationality would have vanished in the European ocean, as a 
few drops of water vanish in a sea. 
For a long while Russia will be left with the anguish and task 
of making peace among them, teaching them, and perhaps, occa­
sionally, even drawing her sword in their defense. Naturally, there 
arises at once the question : wherein, then, is Russia's benefit ? Why 
has Russia been warring on their behalf a whole century, sacrificing 
her blood, her strength, her money ? Was it only for the purpose 
of reaping so much petty hatred and ingratitude ? Oh, it stands to 
reason that Russia will always realize that she is the center of 
Slavic unity ; that if the Slavs are enjoying a free national existence, 
it is because she willed and wishes so ; that it was she who accom­
plished and created all this. However, aside from labors, vexations 
and perpetual concerns, what benefit can be derived by Russia from 
this realization ? 
At present it is difficult to answer this question, and the answer 
may not be clear. 
First, as we all know, Russia will never, must never, think 
of enlarging ber territory at the expense of the Slavs, of annexing 
them politically, of carving Russian provinces out of their lands, 
etc. Even now all Slavs, much like all Europe, suspect Russia of 
such aspirations ; they will suspect them for a century hence. But 
God guard Russia against these aspirations, and the more political 
disinterestedness with regard to the Slavs she manifests, the more 
surely she will subsequently succeed in uniting them around herself 
-one hundred years hence. However, by providing the Slavs, from 
the very beginning, with as much political freedom, by withdrawing 
herself from tutelage and supervision of any kind ; by merely an­
nouncing to them that she will always be ready to draw her sword 
against those who may threaten their freedom and nationality, 
Russia raay thereby rid herself of the dreadful troubles and com­
motions of enforcing this tutelage and her political influence upon 
the Slavs, which, of course is hateful to them and always suspicious 
to Europe. Even so, by manifesting the fullest disinterestedness, 
Russia will thereby conquer and finally attract the Slavs to her­
self: at first they will apply to her in times of calamity, but sub-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
901 
sequently, some day, they will come back to her, and they will all 
press themselves to her, with complete, childish trust. They will 
all return to their native nest. 
Of course, even in our day, among Russians there are many 
learned and poetical conceptions. These Russians expect that the 
new liberated Slavic nations, resur:-ected to a new life, will begin 
by joining themselves to Russia as •o their own mother and their 
liberatrix, and that, unquestionably, in the very near future, they 
will introduce into Russian life many new and unheard-of elements ; 
that they will expand Russia's Slavdom, Russia's soul ; that they 
will even exercise an influence upon the Russian language, litera­
ture, creative faculties ; that they will spiritually enrich Russia and 
will reveal to her new horizons. 
I confrss that all this always has seemed to me nothing but 
learned enthusiasm. The truth is that something along these lines 
will not come to pass before, say, a century, but meanwhile, and, 
maybe, for one hundred years, there will be nothing which Russia 
car horrow from the Slavs, whether from their ideas or their litera­
ture. They are terribly young to be teaching us. On the contrary, 
perhaps throughout that forthcoming century, Russia will have to 
struggle against their narrowness and obstinacy ; against their bad 
habits, thౙir indi.lbitable betrayal of Slavdom in the near future 
for the <;:Jke of the European f"rins of political and social or­
ganization which they will avidly adopt. 
After the settlement of the Slavic question Russia will, ob­
viously, have finally to settle the Eastern problem. It will take a 
long time before present-day Slavs will comprehend what the Eastern 
problem is l It will also take them a long time to understand Slavic 
fellowship in brotherly accord. 1 u explain thi · 
o them incessantly 
by deed and great example will henceforth alw<.ys be Russia's task. 
Again, it may be argued : What is all this for ? Why should Russia 
assume such a task ?-What for ?-ln order to pursue a superior, 
great life ; in order to shine to the wurld with a great, disinterested 
and pure idea ; in order to create, at length, a great and mighty 
organism of a brotherly union of nations ; to create this organism 
not by means of political violence, not by the sword, but by 
persuasion, example, love, disinterestedness,-by light ; to elevate 
those little ones to our level, so that they shall perceive in Russia 
her motherly mission-such is Russia's goal, such, if you please, are 
her benefits. 
If nations fail to live by st.l-'erior disinterested ideas, by the 
lofty aims of serving mankind, and merely serve their own "in­
terests," they must unfailingly perish, grow benumbed, wear them­
selves out, die. And there is no loftier goal than that which Russia 

902 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r877 
will set for herself when she disinterestedly serves the Slavs, demand­
ing no gratitude from them, serving their moral (and not merely 
political) unification into one great whole. Only then will united 
Slavdom utter its new salutary word to mankind . . . .  No loftier 
aims exist on earth. For this reason there can also be nothing more 
"beneficial" to Russia than always to keep these aims before her, 
more and more clarifying them to herself, more and more lifting 
herself spiritually in this eternal, incessant and valiant labor of hers 
on behalf of mankind. 
Let the war end happily, and Russia indubitably will pass into 
a new and superior phase of her existence. 
CHAPTER III 
1 
PtuZce Rumors. "Constantinople Must· Be Ours."-ls This 
Possible? Different Opinions 
AND SUDDENLY everybody has started talking about the 
end of the war-not only in Europe, bun1ִso at home. People have 
begun to debate the probable peace terms. It is gratifying that the 
majority of our political newspapers now evaluate more or less cor­
rectly our labQrs, the blood which Russia has shed and her efforts, 
suggesting peace terms if possible commensurate with her efforts. 
It is particularly pleasing that the majority of those debating this 
topic begin \o recognize Russia's independence in the face of the 
imminent European intervention at the time of the conclusion of 
peace and her right to conclude a separate, independent, peace with­
out appealing to Europe, and, if possible, without even taking great 
heed of her. The lot of the Slavs is also being taken into account. 
The question of indemnity is being considered, and people ardently 
insist upon the surrender of the Turkish iron-clad monitors. Many 
people concede our right to annex Kars and Erzerum. 
However, even now there are people who feel offended by the 
suggestion that we should have the impudence to annex anything 
like Kars. As against this there are, finally, those who even talk 
aUbut Constantinople and that she must be ours. 
These debates and discussions about peace and the peace terms 
will always be renewed after each one of our major military opera­
tions. I merely wish to observe that in ali-or nearly all-these 
present-day deliberations of our periodicals there seems to be not 
exactly an omission but an oversight. I mean-people regard Europe 
as 
. . . Europe, i.e., as she has been, with all sorts of variations, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
throughout this century : the same great powers are taken for 
granted ; the same political equilibrium, and so forth. Meanwhile, 
in our day, Europe is changing from hour to hour ; she is no longer 
what she was six months ago. It is impossible, even three months 
in advance, to be sure what changes may take place and what she 
will look like by next spring. Colossal and fatal contemporary facts, 
which probably will have to be formulated and settled very soon, 
are still not evaluated on that scale on which, essentially, the world 
will have to envisage them. At present even the structure of that 
Europe which may intervene in our affairs at the time of the con­
clusion of peace cannot be ascertained unmistakably. On this ground 
it is a mistake, in my opinion, to discuss the peace terms, basing 
them upon former data, without fully evaluating the fact that all 
these previous conditions have been set in motion, that they are in 
a fluent state, that they slip away, presaging new evaluations. How­
ever, this is something for future discussion. 
At this juncture, inasmuch as the question of Constantinople 
h::.s L ... n raised, :: should like to note in passing a very strange 
and, to me, a rather unexpected opinion on the immediate "destinies 
of Conc;tantinople," which was expressed by a man from whom one 
had the right to expect an altogether different judgment in view 
of the crutemporary events which actually have taken place and 
which un411estionably are likely to happen. 
Nikolai Yakovlevich Danilevsky, who eight years ago wrote 
an admirable- book Russia and Europe, in which there is only one 
obscure and weak chapter concerning the future fate of Constan­
tinople, has recently printed in the newspaper The Russian World 
a series of articles on the same c:nhject. Hiౚ ;: ··al deduction con­
cerning Constantinople is very original. I shat not analyze it in 
detail. 
Following some excellent and sound deE'!>erations to the effect 
that Constantinople-after the Turks have been driven out of her 
-by no means should become a free city-like Cracow, for example, 
in the past-lest she be converted into a nest of filth and intrigue, 
a ha.rem for all conspirators of the world, a prey of the Jews, 
speculators, etc., etc.,-N. Y. Danilevsky asserts that some day 
Constantinople r:.ust become a city belonging to all Eastern peoples. 
According to him, they all will possess her, along with the Russians 
who will own her on an equal basis with the other ':;lavs. 
To me, such a decision see11 
strange. What can be the com­
parison between the Russians and the Slavs ? How can Russia share 
the poc:.session of Constantinople on an equal basis with the Slavs 
if Russia in every respect is unequal to them-to every petty tribe 
separately and to all of them combined? The giant Gulliver, if he 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
had wished, could have assured the Lilliputs that he was their equal 
in every respect. However, this would obviously have been absurd. 
What is the purpose of assuming an absurdity and compelling one­
self to bt>lieve it ? 
Constantinople must be ours, conquered by us, Russians, from 
the Turks, and remain ours forever. She must belong to us alone, 
and possessing her we may, of course, admit into her all Slavs and, 
in addition, anyone whom we please, on the broadest basis. But 
this would not be federal possession of the city along with the Slavs. 
One has merely to consider the fact that a whole century would 
be required before a federal union of the Slavs could be achieved. 
Russia will take possession of Constantinople and the necessary 
metropolitan area, as well as of the Bosphorus and the Strait"> ; there 
she will maintain troops, fortifications and a fleet. And thus it 
should be for a long, long time. 
Oh, people will start vociferating : "So, Russia's service to the 
Slavic caust' was not so disinterested, after all ! "  To this it may 
be easily said that Russia's service to the Slavs is not going to be 
finished now ; that it will continue throughout many centuries ; that 
by Russia alone, by her great central power, the Slavs will manage 
to exist on earth ; that nothing can ever repay her for such a service, 
and that if at present Russia occupies Constantinoplr, it is solely 
because among her aims and in her mission, in addition to the 
Slavic question, there is another problem, her greatest and ultimate 
problem,-speci.fically the Eastern problem which may be settled 
only in Constjintinople. But the federal possession of Constantinople 
by various petty tribes may even kill the Eastern problem, whose 
solution, however, should be persistently sought because it is closely 
tied to the destiny and mission of Russia herself, and it can be 
solved by her alone. 
I am not speaking of the fact that in Constantinople all these 
small nations would quarrel among themselves for power and for 
her possession. The Greeks will set them at variance. The western 
Slavs, too, will be envious of the fact that the eastern Slavs possess 
such a splendid spot of Europe and the terrestrial globe. . . .  In 
a word, Constantinople would serve as a cause of dissension in the 
entire Slavic and Eastern world which would prevent the unity of 
the Slavs and would stop the normal course of their existence. In 
this situ.1tion the salvation would be in Russia's occupying Con­
stantinople alone,-for herself, for her own account. Russia could 
then say to the Eastern peoples that she is taking possession of 
Constantinople "because not one of you has grown up to her, not 
all of you combined, but I, Russia have grown up." She has. 
Precisely now the new phase of Russia's existence begins. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
Constantinople is the center of the Eastern world, while Russia is 
its spiritual center and its head. At present it is necessary and even 
useful for Russia to forget Petersburg for a while-a little at least­
and to visit the East because of the change of her fate and of all 
Europe, a change close at hand, standing "at the door." 
But let us leave for the timP. being the analysis of all the 
inconveniences of a common possessio'l of Constantinople, and even 
the harm which would result therefrom, especially to the Slavs. I 
shall merely say a few words about the fate in this event of the 
Constantinople Greeks and of Orthodoxy. 
The Greeks would look upon the new Slavic element in Con­
stantinople jealously and would hate and fear the Slavs more 
intensely than even the former Mohammedans. The recent con­
troversy between the Bulgarians and the Patriarchal Throne may 
serve as an example of the future. The Orthodox dignitaries in Con­
stantinople might degrade themselves to the level of intrigue, petty 
imprecat\ons, excommunications, irregular sobors, etc., perhaps, 
even. heresy. And all this owing to national causes, national insults 
aud ve;;:aLiuns. ''\v by are the Slavs superior to us ?"-all Greeks in 
accord may ask. "Why is their unconditional right to Constantinople 
recognized even though jointly with us ?" At the same time, please 
observe that Russia's occupying that city, and possessing strength 
and unq1·,·,;tioned authority, would 'llmost eliminate the possibility 
of such questions. Even the Greeks will not envy nor be greatly 
vexed by the fact that she possesses Constantinople precisely be­
cause Russia is so manifest a power and ruler of the destinies of 
the East. 
Russia, possessing Constantinople, woul౛ be guarding the 
freedom of all Slavs and of all Eu."tdrn peopie౜ rithout drawing a 
line between them and the Slavs. During all 
l 1ese centuries the 
Mohammedan rule over all these peoples has been not a unifying 
but an oppressive force ; under that rule they did not even dare 
to move, which means that they have not lived like human beings 
at all. However, with the abolition of the Mohammedan rule, there 
might ensue among these peoples, who would suddenly leap out 
from under the yoke to freedom, awful chaos. l?o that not only a 
duly constituted federation but even ordinary accord among them 
is unquestionably but a dream of the future. Temporarily Russia 
would serve as a unifying force precisely by reason of the fact that 
she would firmly establish herself in Constantinople Russia would 
save them from one another and 
ould guard the freedom of the 
entire East and its future order. 
· 
Finally, Russia alone is capable of raising in the East the 
banner of the new idea and of explaininl!' to the whole Eastern 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
world its new mission. For what is the Eastern question ?-In its 
essence, it is the solution of the destinies of Orthodoxy which are 
merged with Russia's mission. Now, what are these destinies of 
Orthodoxy ?-Roman Catholicism, which has long ago sold Christ 
for earthly rule ; which has compelled mankind to turn away from 
itself, and which was thus the prime cause of Europe's materialism 
and atheism,-that Catholicism has naturally generated socialism. 
For socialism has for its aim the solution of the destinies of man­
kind not in accord with Christ but without God and Christ. It was 
inevitably generated in Europe in a natural way in lieu of the 
deteriorated Christian principle and in the measure of its perversion 
and loss by the Catholic Church itself. 
The lost image of Christ in all the light of its purity is con­
served in Orthodoxy. And it is from the East that the new word 
will be uttered to the world in opposition to future socialism, and 
this word may again save European mankind. Such is the mission 
of the East and this is what the Eastern question means to Russia. 
I know that many people will call this deliberation "religious 
mania," but N. Y. Danilevsky can well understand what I am say­
ing. However, for the fulfillment of such a mission Russia needs 
Constantinople since the latter is the center of the Eastern world. 
Russia, with her people headed by the Czar, is tacitly cognizant of 
the fact that she is the bearer of the idea of Christ ; that the word 
of Orthodoxy transforms itself in her into a great cause which has 
begun with the present war, and that ahead of her there lie centuries 
of self-sacrificing labor, of fostering the brotherhood of the peoples 
and of ardent motherly service to them as to dear children. 
Yes, this is a great Christian cause ; this is the new activity 
of Christianity-preciseiy in this war, because of it, whereas N. Y. 
Danilevsky still does not believe it-obviously because, as yet, he 
deems no one worthy of occupying Constantinople-not even Russia. 
Is it because the Russians have not grown up to her ?-This is dif­
ficult to understand. Of course, it is difficult to establish an accordant 
possession of Constantinople on the basis of equal rights. The author 
of the article admits, however, that for the time being, temporarily, 
Russia alone might possess Constantinople, protecting her rather 
than venturing to possess her, on condition that subsequently the 
city be turned over to the joint possession of the small nations. 
(Why should i\. be thus transferred ?) It seems that N. Y. Danilevsky 
believes that single-handed possession of Constantinople by Russia 
would be tempting. and, so to speak, demoralizing ; that this would 
arouse in her bad imperialistic instincts, etc. But it is time to 
acquire faith in Russia, especially after the exploit of the present 
war. Yes, she has grown up-even to Constantinople. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
And now, unexpectedly, the author hesitates to entrust Con­
stantinople to Russia even for the time being. And imagine how 
he winds up : he infers that for the time being it is necessary to 
prolong Turkey's existence (taking away from her all the Slavs, 
the Balkans, etc.) ; to leave Constantinople temporarily under the 
rule of the Turks ; that for the present this would supposedly be 
the most advantageous solution for Russia, and that therein is the 
Divine fate. But why is it Divine fate ? Why ?-Of course, the author 
supposes that in this new existence of Turkey, Russia would exer­
cise a controlling influence over her (Turkey's) dependence upon 
Russia, so to speak. But what is the purpose of such a masquerade ? 
Please consider : Russia-the sovereign,-and yet, for the time being, 
Turkey should be left intact. I may remark that Europe would be 
even less inclined to give her consent to such a combination than 
to the complete conquest of Turkey because it is better to have 
a definite fait accompli than a still contested and protracted affair, 
threatening new wars in the very near future. 
rhus, in .he last analysis, the author is almost in accord with 
the opinion of Lord Beaconsfield, i.e., that Turkey's existence is 
necessary and that she should not be destroyed. 
"Of Turkey there will remain but a shadow"-says N. Y. 
Danilevsky ; "nevertheless, for the time being this shadow must 
tinge the shores of the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles, since, tem­
porarily, it is impossible to replace her with a live-not only live 
but healthy-organism ! "  
Do you hear ? Russia, as yet, is not a healthy, not even a 
live, organism ; she should not dare to replace in the capital of 
Orthodoxy the Turkish rot ! -To me this is !l•;rprising (again, after 
the exploit of the present war ! ) . I am sure U1at there is something 
here which I do not understand. Doesn't the author simply imply 
that as yet it is impossible to let Russia mto Constantinople (for 
the purpose of sole possession or her subsequent transfer to the 
nations) because Europe will not consent to let her in ? Perhjlps the 
author does not believe that during this present war Russia has 
the power to achieve such a final result. SpPCifically, in one part 
of his article he says that "the occupation of Constantinople by the 
Russians will encounter a most decisive resistance on the part of 
the majority of the European powers." If so, his inference con­
cerning the necessity of leaving the Turks in Constantinople, for 
the time being, becomes more itౝtelligible. Nevertheless, apropos of 
"the resistance of the majority of the European powers" two points 
should be obgerved : ( I )  that, as I have stated above, Europe would, 
perhaps, perceive a more conciliatory solution in our ocupation 
of Constantinople than in the formula suggested by Mr. Danilevsky, 

908 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
i.e., in a Turkey deprived of her individuality, under Russia's com­
plete tutelage, without the Balkans, without the Slavs, with de­
molished fortifications, without a fteet,-in a word, as the author 
expresses himself, a "shadow" of former Turkey. It stands to reason 
that it is not this kind of Turkey that "the majority of the Euro­
pean powers" would be inclined to see, and Europe would not be 
deceived if merely "the shadow of Turkey" were left on earth : 
"All the same, if not today, then tomorrow, you will enter Con­
stantinople"-she would say to the Russians. For this reason the 
final solution would be preferable to her rather than a Turkey in 
the guise of a shadow. ( 2 )  It may also be observed that, perhaps, 
in reality there never has been (and never will be) so advantageous 
a moment for the occup:tion o౞ Constantinople as at present, pre­
cisely in the course of this war, precisely at this moment, or a 
moment very close to it-because of the present political situation 
of Europe herself. 
2 
AGAIN I FOR THE LAST TIME, "PREDICTIONS" 
You keep saying : "the majority of the European powers" 
will not permit it. But now what is "the majority of the European 
powers" ? Can it be defined at this moment ? I repeat what I have 
stated above : from hour to hour Europe is changing from what she 
used to be recently-from what she was only six months ago­
so that one canpot even vouch three months ahead for her further 
immutability. The point is that we are on the eve of the greatest 
and most violent evPnts and revolutions in Europe-and this with­
out exaggeration. At this moment, now in November, that "majority 
of the European powers," which could in any respect issue to us 
their threatening veto at the time of the conclusion of peace, is 
confined to England, and, maybe, also to Austria, although England 
will at any cost drag her into an alliance, hoping even for an alliance 
with France. But we shall not be alone (now this is already obvious). 
In Europe there is Germany, and she is on our side. 
Yes, immense cataclysms are awaiting Europe, perturbations 
which the human mind refuses to believe, conceiving their realiza­
tion as something fantastic. Meanwhile many things, which only 
last summe. were considerPd fantastic, impossible and exaggerated, 
by the end of the year literally came to pass in Europe. For instance, 
the opinion about. the strength of the universal Catholic Conspiracy, 
an opinion which only last summer everybody was inclined to laugh 
at, or at least to ignore,-at present is shared by everybody and 
has been corroborated by facts. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
I am calling attention to this solely in order that readers should 
also believe in our present "predictions" and should not deem them 
fantastic and exaggerated pictures, as probably quite a few people 
considered many of our predictions in May, June, July and August, 
which, however, came true to the letter. 
The only statesman in Europe who, with his ingenious glance, 
penetrates the very bottom of facts, is indisputably Prince Bismarck. 
Long ago he perceived in Roman Catholicism and in the monster 
begotten by it-socialism (Germany is eaten through with socialism ), 
the most dreadful enemy of Germany, of her unity and her future 
regeneration. Bismarck has got to crush Catholicism at the time 
of the election of the new Pope. Oh, he understands that he will 
not completely crush it and that he will merely place it in a certain 
new phase of the struggle. But as far as Catholicism is concerned, 
so long as France is alive, the old phase of the struggle continues 
to persist. So long as France is alive, Catholicism has a strong 
౟wor::t, and thl.e is hope for a European coalition. As for France, 
her fate, in the view of Prince Bismarck, is doomed. To him there 
is but one question. Who is to live-she or Germany ? Should France 
fall,-Catholicism, together with socialism, would enter a new phase. 
And V!"hile European politicians are watching :MacMahon's inter­
minable war with the republicans-wholeheartedly hoping for a 
republican victory, still believing and accepting as a (act that in 
France the republic is a popular government capable of uniting 
her-Prince Bismarck, in the meantime, fully comprehends that 
France has finished her term ; that inwardly that nation has divided 
itself forever, and that it will r.ever have :! irm, all-unifying au­
thoritative government, or a healthy nationat unifying center. And 
even though France's weakness may thus merely tend to encourage 
Germany, nevertheless, Prince Bismarck sees, I repeat, that so long 
as France is alive politically, Roma'l Catholicism continues to live, 
holding in its hand a drawn sword. l\Ioreover, he understands that 
perhaps Catholicism may once more, for a while, serve this decayed 
country as a unifying idea, be it only out,•··udly and politically. 
For it is impossible that France, even headed by the republicans, 
should not, souner or later, draw her sword in defense of the Pope 
and the destinies of Catholicism. 
The republicans themselves would see tl,--tt, should they 
forsake the Pope and Catholk. m, their own existence in France 
would be rendered impossible. True, they might prove incapable 
of following this thought to its logical conclusion, and thus, to the 
last moment, they would remain not only Prince Bismarck's proteges 
(whom, however, to himself, he has condemned to death along with 
all other French parties which have the ambitio'l to reunite France 

910 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
inte one indissoluble whole)-but also Germany's slaves, surrender­
ing to her all France, not only into political bondage but also into 
inner, essential and spiritual serfdom. This they are doing by de­
priving France of the most independent of her political and his­
torical ideas,-by tearing away from her that banner which, during 
so many centuries, she has been holding high in the capacity of the 
representative of the Romanic element in European mankind. 
Those, however, who will drive the inept and useless repub­
licans out of their seats will unfailingly see to it (Bismarck knows 
it) that, for the last time, the Catholic banner is hoisted against 
Germany-a banner which France does not believe in and which 
she almost in toto denies, but which, politically, may serve her as 
a last point of support and unity against the fatal-and also last­
onslaught of Protestant Germany, which has been eternally pro­
testing against the principles inherited from ancient Rome by a 
whole half of European mankind. 
For this reason probably Prince Bismarck has already pre­
destin(>() France's fate. The fate of Poland awaits France, and 
politically she will not live, or else Germany will cease to exist. 
Having achieved this, Bismarck will then compel militant Roman 
Catholicism (which will be waging war till the end of the world) 
to embark upon a new phase of its existence-and struggle for ex­
istence-a phase of underground, reptilian and conspiratory war. And 
he is anticipating Catholicism in this new phase. The sooner this 
comes to pass, the better for him, because he is awaiting the alliance 
of both enemies· of Germany and of mankind, thereby hoping to 
crush them all the more easily-at once. 
3 
IT Is XECESSARY TO SEIZE THE :\loMENT 
Juֵt as soon as France falls politically, the alliance of both 
enemies will be formed. The two enemies have always been or­
ganically tied to France. Almost up to recent times Catholicism has 
been her cementing and integral idea, while socialism was begotten 
in it. 
By deֶ·riving France of her political existence, Prince Bis­
marck hopes to deliver a blow at socialism. Socialism, as a heritage 
of Catholicism, and France are most hateful to a genuine German. 
It is excusable that Germany's representatives believe that it is so 
easy to master socialism by merely destroying France politically­
as its source and beginning. 
However, this is what is most probably going to happen should 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
91 1 
France fall politically : Catholicism will lose its sword, and for the 
first time will appeal to the people whom it has been despising so 
many centuries, ingratiating itself with mundane kings and em­
perors. Now, however, it will appeal to the people, since there is 
nowhere else to go ; specifically, it will appeal to the leaders of 
the most mobile and rebellious element of the people-the socialists. 
Catholicism will tell the people that Christ also preached everything 
the socialists are preaching to them. Once more it will pervert and 
sell them Christ as it has sold Him so many times in the past for 
earthly possessions, defending the rights of the Inquisition which, 
in the name of loving Christ, tortured men for freedom of con­
science,-in the name of Christ to whom only that disciple was 
dear who came to Him of his free accord and not the one who 
had been bought or frightened. 
Catholicism sold Christ when it blessed the Jesuits and sanc­
tioned the righteousness "of every means for Christ's cause." How­
E"vrr, o;ince timP immemorial, it has converted Christ's cause into a 
mere concern for its earthly possessions and its future political 
domination over the whole world. When Catholic mankind turned 
away from the monstrous image in which, at length, Christ had 
been rr•;ealed to them,-after many protests, reformations, etc., at 
the beginning of this century-enJeavors arose to organize life with­
out God, without Christ. Devoid of the instinct of a bee or an ant, 
unmistakably and with utmost precision constructing their hive and 
ant-hill, men sought to create something on the order of an un­
mistakable ant-hill. They rejected the unique formula- of mankind's 
salvation, derived from God and announcecl through revelation to 
man : "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy U," and substituted 
for it practical inferences, such as "Chacun pour soi et Dieu pour 
tous" ("Each one for himself and God for all") , or scientific axioms, 
such as "the struggle ior existence." 
Bereft of the instinct which guides animals and enables them 
to organize their life faultlessly, men haughtily sought to rely upon 
science, forgetting that for such a task as the creation of society, 
science is still, so to speak, in swaddles. Dreams ensued. The future 
tower of Babylon became the ideal but also the dread of humanity. 
But after these dreams there soon appeared other simple doctrines, 
intelligible to everybody, for instance : "to rob the rich, to stain the 
world with blood, after which ·nmehow everything will again be 
settled of its own accord." 
Finally, even these teachers were outstripped : there appeared 
the doctrine of anarchy, after which-if it could be put into effect­
there would again ensue a period of cannibalism, and people would 
be compelled to start all over again as they started some ten thou-

912 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
sand ye:ns ago. Catholicism fully understands all this, and it will 
manage to seduce the leaders of the underground war. It will say 
to them : "You have no center, no order in the conduct of the 
work ; you are a force scattered all over the world, and now, after 
the downfall of FrancE-also an oppressed force. I shall be your 
rallying center, and I shall attract to you all those who still believe 
in me." 
One way or another, the alliance will be formed. Catholicism 
does not. wish to die, whereas social revolution and the new social 
period in Europe are indubitable : two forces, unquestionably, will 
have to come to an understanding, to unite. It stands to reason that 
slaughter, blood, plunder, even cannibalism would be advantageous 
to Catholicism. Precisely then it may hope to catch once more its 
fish in troubled waters, foreseeing the moment when, finally, man­
kind, exhausted by chaos and lawlessness, will fall into its arms. 
Then, once more, it will become in reality the sole and absolute 
"earthly ruler and universal authority," sharing its power with no 
one. Thrreby it will attain its ultimate goal. 
Alas, this picture is not a fantasy. I positively assert that it 
is being foreshadowed in the West by quite a few people. Probably 
it is also being foreseen by the lords of Germany. Still the leaders 
of the German people are mistaken in one respect-in the easiness 
of conquering and crushing these two dreadful and united enemies. 
They arC' relying on the strength of regenerated Germany, on her 
Protestant spirit protesting against the tenets and consequences of 
ancient and mcfdern Rome. But they will not stop the monster. It 
will be checked and vanquished by the reunited East and by the 
new word which it will utter to mankind . . . .  
At all events one thing seems clear to me, that Germany needs 
us even more than we think. And she needs us not for a momentary 
political alliance but forever. The idea of reunited Germany is a 
broad and stately one ; it goes back into the depth of ages. What 
has GP.rmany to divide with us ?-Her object is all Western man­
kind. She has selected for herself the European Western world 
where she seeks to inculcate her principlP.s in lieu of the Roman 
and Romanic tenets, and henceforth to become its leader, leaving 
the East to Russia. Thus, two great peoples are destined to trans­
form the ft>c:e of this world. These are not contrivances of the mind 
or of ambition : the world itself shapes itself thus. There are new 
and strange facts ; they are appearing daily. 
At a time when in Russia it was even considered fantastic to 
speak and dream about Constantinople, in the German press many 
people began to discuss our occupation of her as a most ordinary 
matter. Compared with Germany's former attitude toward us, this 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
is almost strange. It is to be supposed that Russia's friendship with 
Germany is not hypocritical but firm, that, as time goes on, it will 
grow stronger, gradually penetrating the consciousness of both na­
tions. For this reason, for Russia, perhaps there never has been a 
more opportune moment for the final solution of the Eastern ques­
tion than the present one. 
Germany is awaiting the end of our war, perhaps even more 
impatiently than we. Meanwhile, it is actually true that nowadays 
one cannot vouch for what is going to happen even three months 
in advance. Shall we finish the war before the ultimate and fatal 
European disturbances take place ? This is unknown. But whether 
or not we shall be in time to help Germany, at all events she counts 
on us not as on a temporary but an eternal ally. 
As for the current moment,-again, the key to the situation 
is in France and in the election of the Pope. Here one has to expect 
a conflict between France and Germany which is all the more 
cert&m as the1 ͜ are provokers. England will be the one which will 
see to it, after which Austria perhaps will also move. But all these 
things we have discussed only recently. Since that time nothing has 
occurred that contradicts our former opinions. On the contrary they 
have heP.n corroborated. . . . 
In any event, Russia must seize the moment. Is our favorable 
European moment going to last long?-So long as the present great 
leaders of Germany act, it is most probable that this moment is 
guaranteed to us. 
DECEJIBER 
CHAPTER I 
1 
The Final Explanation of a Previous Fact 
CONCLUDING WITH this last December issue the two­
year publication of the Diar)', I deem it necessary once more to 
say a few words concerning a matter which I have discussed in 
extenso. I decided to mention it as early as May, but, owing to 
special considerations, I postp..,ned the discussion of the subject 
precise! y till the last issue. 
This is again in reference to that stepmother Kornilova who, 
prompted by wrath against her husbaud, threw her six-year-old 
stepdaughter out of the window ; the latter, having fallen from 
a five-sagene height, remained alive. As is known, the delinquent 

914 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
woman was tried and convicted. Subsequently the sentence was 
rescinded, and on April 22 of this year, at the second trial, she was 
finally acquitted. (See A Writer's Diary, October, 1876, and April, 
1877.) 
I happened to take a certain part in this case. The president 
of the court, and later also the prosecutor, publicly announced, 
in the courtroom itself, that the first verdict by virtue of which 
Kornilova had been found guilty, was quashed precisely because of 
my suggestion set forth in the Diary that "the act of the criminal 
woman may have been prompted by her pregnant state." I framed 
and developed this idea as a result of extraordinary and strange 
psychic peculiarities which irresistibly, of their own accord, struck 
one's eyes and arrested one's attention during the perusal of the 
details of the perpetrated act. However, all this is known to our 
readers. Perhaps it is also known that, following a most rigid 
investigation, and after most obstinate and persistent arguments of 
the prosecutor, the jurors nevertheless acquitted Kornilova, having 
stayed in the jurors' room not longer than ten minutes, and that 
the public left the courtroom enthusiastically approving the ac­
quittal. 
Even so, at the time, that very day, the thought occurred 
to me that in so important a case involving the highest motives 
of civic and spiritual life, it is very desirable that everything be 
explained in all minutest details so that in society and in the souls 
of the jurors, V¥ho have rendered a verdict of acquittal, there no 
longer remain any doubts, vacillations and regrets that an indu­
bitably criminal woman was left unpunished. Here children are 
involved, the children's lot (often dreadful in Russia, especially 
among the poor class), and the problem of childhood-and yet, the 
murderess of a child is acquitted, the public sympathizes with her ! 
And now-! myself (according to the statement of the court itself) 
contributed to this ! Of course, I acted in accordance with my con­
viction. However, after the verdict had been announced, suddenly 
doubt began to torment me : Didn't the verdict leave a residue of 
discontent, perplexity, distrust of justice, even indignation in so­
ciety ? In our press there was little comment on the acquittal of 
Kornilova-people were occupied with other things : there was a 
presentimer.. of war. 
But in The Northern Messenger, a newspaper which had just 
been started, I rౠad an article full of indignation against the ac­
.quittal, and even anger against me for my participation in this 
.case. The article was written in an undignified tone. Well, I wasn't 
the only one who was subjected to the indignation of The Northern 
Messenger; Leo Tolstc.y was also subjected to wrathful and un-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
dignified scoffing in connection with Anna Karenina. Personally 1 
should not have answered the author, but in that article I perceived 
exactly the thing I was afraid to encounter in a certain portion of 
our society, viz., confused impression, perplexity and indignation 
against the verdict. 
And so I made up my mind to wait eight months in order 
to become, during this period, finally convinced that the verdict 
had exercised no bad inftuence upon the defendant ; that, on the 
contrary, the mercy of the court, like a good seed, fell upon fertile 
soil ; that the defendant was really worthy of compassion and mercy ; 
that the impulses of incomprehensible, almost fantastic rage, in a 
fit of which she had committed her villainy, did not recur and can 
never return to her ; that hers is a kindly and meek soul ; that she 
is not a destroyer and murderess (of which I was convinced through­
out the whole trial), and that the crime of that unfortunate woman 
had to be explained by a special, accidental circumstance, by ill­
ness, by an "affect," precisely by those pathological fits which occur 
rathei uften an.ong pregnant women (of course in conjunction with 
other unfavorable conditions and circumstances) during a certain 
period of pregnancy, and finally,-that the jurors, society and the 
public, which was present in the courtroom and which listened to 
the verJ1ct with ardent sympathv, should no longer doubt the ex­
pediency of such a verdict, and regret their mercy. 
And now after all these eight months, I am in a position to 
communicate and add something in connection with this case, of 
which, however, everybody, maybe, has grown tired. I shall be 
replying as it were to society, i.e., to that pnrtion of it which, ac­
cording to my supposition, ma.y !lave disag· ౡd with the verdict 
rendered, doubted it and grown indignant a:·ainst it,-that is, if 
there has been such a portion of the dissatisfied in our society. And 
inasmuch as among all these dissatisfied l know (not personally, 
however) only that one "Observer" '\"."ho wrote the threatening article 
in The Northern Messenger, I shall give him my answer. Most prob­
ably no arguments of mine will in any way convince him, but per­
haps I shall be understood by my readers. 
The "Observer," when referring in his article to Kornilova's 
case, attributeu to it the highest significance. He pointed out with 
indignation the lot of children, defenseless children, and regretted 
the fact that the defendant had not been sentencf'•l to the severest 
punishment. Thus it was a quౢ .ion of Siberia, of the exile of a 
twenty-year-old woman with her nursling born in prison (who would 
thus have been exiled with her to Siberia) , and of the ruin of a young 
family. 
In these circumstances-it would seem-it would have been 

916 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
necessary, in the first place, to deal with the analyzed facts scru­
pulously, seriously and impartially. And yet (Would you believe it ?) 
this "Observer" does not know the case with which he is dealing ; 
he speaks without thinking ; he invents non-existent circumstances 
and throws them at the former defendant ; obviously he was not 
present in the courtroom ; he did not listen to the pleadings ; he was 
not in court at the time of the announcement of the verdict.-Never­
theless he angrily demands punishment of a human being I 
But here the fate of a human being is involved-of several 
human beings at once ; it is a question of tearing a human life 
asundt'r-pitilessly, with blood. True, the ill-starred woman had al­
ready been acquitted when the "Observer" came out with his article. 
But such attacks influence society, the courts, public opinion ; they 
may have a repercussion in a future case involving a similar de­
fendant ; finally, they offend the acquitted,-well, of course, she be­
longs to the common people, and therefore she is defenseless I 
However, this is the article, i.e., that portion of it which refers 
to Kornilova's case. I am quoting the most essential parts, deleting 
but very little. 
2 
ExcERPT 
"To the jurors it is far more difficult to imagine themselves in the 
condition of a pregnant woman ; even more so-in the condition of 
a six-year-old girl whom that woman has thrown out of a window 
from. tht' fourth floor. One has to be endowed with all that power 
of imagination in which, as is known, Mr. Dostoievsky excels among 
us all, to comprehend fully the condition of a woman and to eluci­
date to one's self the irresistibility of the affects of pregnancy. 
"He actually did penetrate that state ; he went to see a certain 
lady in the penitentiary ; he was impressed with her humility, and 
in several issues of his Diary he came out as her ardent advocate. 
But Mr. Dostoievsky is too susceptible, and besides, 'the pathological 
manifestation of volition' is an outright hobby of the author of 
The Possessed, The Idiot, etc. ; to him it is excusable to feel a 
weakness for them. I look upon the case in a simpler manner, and 
I assert that after such instances of exculpation of the cruel treat­
ment of children-which in Russia, as also in England, is by no 
means infrequenౣ-there remains not even a shadow of deterrent to 
this kind of behavior. How many cases of cruel treatment of chil­
dren are there for each case that is subject to court examination ? 
There are children whose whole lives-morning, noon, and night-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
are nothing but a succession of suffering. These are innocent crea­
tures enduring a lot compared with which the labor of parricides 
in the mines is happiness-with rest, with the absence of eternal, 
unquenchable fear, with full peace of the mind in so far as it is 
not disturbed by the pangs of con!>cience. Out of ten thousand, and 
probably out of a hundred thousand, cases of cruel treatment of 
childrrn, only one reaches the courts-one which for some reason 
attracts more attention. For example, a stepmother perpetually beats 
an unfortunate six-year-old creature, and finally throws it out of 
the fourth-floor window. When she learns that the hated child was 
not killed, she exclaims : 'She is strong ! '  There is neither sudden 
manifE-station of hatred nor repentance after the commission of 
the murder : everything is homogeneous and logical in the mani­
festation of one and the same evil will. And they acquit this woman I 
If in Ӧuch cases of cruelty to children, which are clear to the point 
of obviousness, verdicts of acquittal are returned, what can be 
expe౤ttd in o౥౦1er cases, less clearly defined, more complex ?-Of 
course, acquittal, acquittal and acquittal. As stated, in England, 
among the poorer classes in the cities, cases of cruelty to children 
are not infrequent. But I wish I might be shown one example of 
such a1. acquittal by English jurors. Oh, when there appears before 
our jurors a schismatic who has dropped a disparaging remark 
about a church dome-that's a different matter. In England he would 
not even be arraigned, but in Russia-let him not expect an ac­
quittal. Yet cruelty to a little girl-why, is it worth ruining a young 
woman for this ! Anyhow, she is neverthelP.ss a stepmother, that 
is, almost a mother of the victi:r> ! Anyhow, !":· · feeds her, and beats 
her more and more. But this will not surpri౧౨ a Russian. A friend 
of mine told me that the other day he was being driven by a cab­
man who continually lashed his horse. 11. answer to my friend's 
remark to this effect, the cabman Ӧ<.id : 'Such is its lot ! It must be 
eternally and mercilessly beaten.' 
"Oh, Russia, this has been thy lot throughout the centuries I 
For, maybe, that stepmother had also been bPaten in her childhood. 
And thou takest this into account and sayest : God be with her. 
But thou shollldst not do so. Thou shouldst pity the little ones. 
At present thou art not going to be beaten, and thou shouldst not 
exculpate cruelty to him who is no longer born a 
. .:erf. 
''I may be told : 'You arಊ. 1ttacking the institution of jurors, 
when even without it . .  .' and so forth. I am not attacking the 
institution ; I have no idea of attacking it ; it is a good institution ; 
infinitely better than those courts in which public conscience did 
not participate. But I am conversing with this conscience about 
this or that of its manifestations. . . . 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
" 
But to beat a child for a whole year or so, and there-
upon to throw her out to her almost certain death-this is a different 
matter. 'That same evening, after ten o'clock, the husband of the 
acquitted took her home, and she, in a happy mood, again returned 
to her home.' How touching I But woe to the poor child if it re­
mained in that home which 'the happy one' entered. Woe to it, if 
it should ever chance to come back to its father's home. 
" 'Affect of pregnancy'-well, a new, pitiful word has been 
invented. No matter how strong this affect may have been, never­
theles:-, under its influence, the woman did not rush upon her hus­
band or her neighbors. Her whole affect was reserved exclusively 
for that defenseless girl whom she had been torturing for a whole 
year without any affect. What, then, did the jurors rely upon in 
their acquittal ?-Upon the fact that one psychiatrist admitted 'a 
pathological psychic state' of the defendant at the time of the com­
mission of her crime. Three other psychiatrists merely stated that 
the pathological condition of the pregnant woman might have exer­
cised an influence upon the perpetration of the offense, whereas one 
accoucheur, Professor Florinsky, who is, perhaps, best familiar with 
all symptoms of pregnancy, declared his dissent from such opinions. 
Thus four out of five experts did not admit that in the case at the 
bar the crime was positively committed in a state of 'affect of preg­
nancy,' and subsequent irresponsibility. Yet the jurors acquitted. 
Eh, what an important matter !-The child was not killed, and as 
for the fact that it was beaten, well,-'such is its lot.' " 
3 
DISTORTIONs AND MANIPULATIONs-THIS CosTs Us 
NoTHING 
Such is the excerpt. Such is the accusation-there is also much 
indignation against me. But now I ask "The Observer" : How could 
you so distort the facts in so important an accusation, setting them 
forth in such a deceitful and fictitious light ? When was there beat­
ing, systemdtic beating' by the stepmother ? You state directly and 
precisely : 
"The !itepmother perpetually beats an unfortunate six-year-old 
creature, and finally throws it out from the fourth floor . . .'' 
Then : "But to beat a child for a whole year or so, and there­
upon to throw her out to her almost certain death . . .  
" 
You exclaim-referring to the child : 
"Woe to it, if it should ever chance to come back to its father's 
home." 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
And, finally, you put into the jurors' mouths a bestial phrase : 
"Eh, what an important matter ! -The child was not killed, 
and as for the fact that it was beaten, well,-'such is its lot.' " 
In a word, you misrepresented all the facts, picturing the 
whole case as if the crime, according to you, were committed solely 
because of the stepmother's hatred of the child, whom she had been 
beating a whole year and finished by throwing it out the window. 
You have purposely represented the defendant in the guise of a 
beast,-of an insatiable, wicked stepmother, exclusively in order to 
justify your article and to arouse the indignation of society against 
the merciful verdict of the jurors. And we have the right to infer 
that you have made this substitution solely for the purpose which 
I have just indicated-we are justified in inferring this because you 
could not-you had no right to-fail to ascertain the minutest de­
tails of the case in which you take it upon yourself to render a 
verdict and to demand punishment. 
However. there never has been any beast, that beastly step­
mother hating the child and insatiable in its torture. This was posi­
tively ascertained by the investigation. It is true that, originally, 
an idea was set forth to the effect that the stepmother tortured the 
child arJ out of hatred decided to kill the girl. Subsequently, how­
ever, the prosecution relinquished this idea altogether : it became 
too obvious that the crime had been committed because of motives 
entirely different from the hatred of the child, motives which were 
fully elucidated in the course of the trial and which had nothing 
to do with the child. Besides, at the trial there appeared no wit­
nesses who could testify to the cruelty of . he stepmother-to the 
beatings. There was but one testimony of a s_ ౩le woman who lived 
right there, next to them, in the corridor (Wh(re many people were 
living) that the stepmother used to flog the child very painfully, 
yet even that testimony, as was subsequently shown by the defense, 
proved "a corridor gossip'' and noti1ing more. . . . There was that 
which usually happens in families of this kind, taking into account 
the level of their education and development, namely, that both 
the father and the stepmother used to punish ౪he child for mischief, 
but only at times, i.e., very rarely and not inhumanely, but "pa­
ternally," as they themselves described it. Unfortunately, this pre­
vails in all such Russian families, throughout Russi:t, and this in the 
presence of intense love and car.o for the children, which very often 
is far greater and stronger tha11 in certain educated, wealthy and 
Europeanly enlightened Russian families. This is merely want of 
knowledge, and not cruelty. Kornilova, however, was a good step­
mother ; she cared for the child and was attentive to her. Only once 
was the punishment cruel: one morning, upon awakening, the step-

920 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
mother beat the girl because she did not know how to take care of 
her natural wants at ntght . Here there was no hatred of the child. 
When I remarked to her that one should not be punished for this ; 
that the physical constitution of a child is different from that of 
an adult, and that a six-year-old child is too young to be always 
able to take care of its natural wants, she replied : "But I was told 
that this had to be done in order to break the habit, and that other­
wise the child could not be induced to give it up." It was on that 
occasion that she struck the child with a rope "six times, so hard 
that scars were left." Now, that woman in the corridor, the only 
witness of that one case of cruelty, saw these marks, and it was 
about them that she testified in court. It was also for these scars 
that the husband, when he came home from work, promptly punished 
his wife, i.e., gave her a beating. He is a severe, straightforward, 
honest and above all an inflexible man, although, as you see, partly 
adhering to customs of olden times. He beat his wife rarely and 
not cruelly (so she says herself), solely to uphold the principle of 
the husband's authority. He loved his child (though he punished 
the little girl for mischief oftener than did the stepmother) . But he 
is not a man who would permit anyone, even his wife, to mistreat 
the child. 
Thus the only case of severe punishment (scars) revealed at 
the trial, is conv౫rted by the accuser in his article in The Northern 
Messenger into systematic, bestial, stepmother's year-round beating, 
into stepmother's hatred which, progressively growing in intensity, 
culminated in ller throwing the child out the window, whereas five 
minutes before the commission of her dreadful crime she was not 
thinking about the child. 
Mr. Obeserver, you will start laughing and you will say : "Isn't 
punishment with rods, which leaves scars, a stepmother's beating ?" 
Yes, it is bestial punishment. Quite so. But this case (the singleness 
of which was corroborated at the trial, and at present, in my opinion, 
positively) I repeat, is not systematic, relentless, bestial, stepmother's 
year-round beating. This was but an accident caused by want of 
knowledge of how one should educate, by a false conception of 
how one should teach a child and not at all by hatred, or because 
"such is the child's lot." Thus your description of this woman as 
a wicked stl!pmother, and the personality which was revealed at the 
trial, are radically different. 
Yes, she pushed the child out. This is a dreadful and bestial 
crime ; yet, did .she do this as a cruel stepmother ?-Such is the 
question in answer to your unfounded accusation. Why do you ad­
here to such a ferocious accusation if you know yourself that it 
cannot be proved ; that at the trial it was relinquished, and 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
921 
that there were no witnesses who could testify to it ? Is it possible 
that you were merely after a literary effect I For by asserting that 
the stepmother with this murder brought to a climax year-round 
torture (altogether nonexistent) of the child, eo ipso you are dis­
torting the facts for a reader littlt informed about this case ; you 
are extorting from his soul compassion and mercy which, willy-nilly, 
he must feel, upon reading your article. And yet, had you not pic­
tured to him this stepmother as a torturer of the child, she may 
have, perhaps, won in his heart a slight indulgence as a sick person, 
pathologically shocked, as an irritated pregnant woman, as is clear 
from the fantastic, wild and mysterious details of the event. Is it 
just, for a public man, to act this way ? Is it human ? 
But you even say more. You wrote-and, again, positively and 
precisely-as an observer who had studied the case in all its minutest 
details : 
" 'Affect of pregnancy'-well a new, pitiful word has been in­
vented. No matter how strong this affect might have been, never­
theless, under its influence, the woman did not rush upon her hus­
band or her neighbors. Her whole affect was reserved for that de­
fenselesc; girl whom she had been torturing a whole year without 
any affert. What, then, did the jurors rely upon in their acquittal ?" 
But upon what did you yourself rely, Mr. Observer, when 
concocting such a complete distortion of the case ? "She did not 
rush upon her husband I "  But this was the one thing which had 
been testified to at the trial that in her quarrels with her husband 
(however, only during the last several days} !';he reached that state 
of madness, which prompted ht:r to commit he crime. They were 
quarrelling not at all over the child, and }; terally the child had 
nothing to do with these brawls ; in those days she did not even think 
about it. "Then I did not even need it"-as she put it herself. 
Not for you but for my readers I shall try to trace these two 
characters, those of the husband and wife, involved in the brawls, 
since I understood them even prior to the verdict. They revealed 
themselves to me as a result of most attenti \ e observation. In this 
there can be no great indiscretion, on my part, since much has 
already been revealed in the course of the trial. Besides, strictly 
speaking, I am doing this for their exoneration. 
And so the point is this. Above all, the husband is a steady, 
straightforward, most honest anu kind man (i.e., even magnanimous, 
as he has proved subsequently) , but too puritanical, too naively 
and even too rigorously abiding by a once-and-for-all adopted opinion 
and conviction. Here one has also to take into account a certain 
difference of age between him and his wife, he being much older 
than she, as well as the fact that he is a widower. He works all 

922 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
day, and although he wears "German" clothes and has the appear­
ance, as it were, of an "educated" man, nevertheles he has received 
no special education. I may also remark that in his countenance 
there is an obvious mark of self-respect. Let me add that he is not 
very talkative, not very cheerful or risible. Perhaps his is a some­
what difficult disposition. He married her when she was still very 
young. She is an honest girl, a seamstress by profession, who used 
to earn good money. 
I do not know how they met. She married him of her free will, 
because she loved him. But very soon discord ensued, and although 
for a long time things did not come to a head, nevertheless per­
plexity, alienation, and finally even irritation on both sides grew 
slowly but steadily and undeviatingly. The point is-this may even 
be the whole cause-that despite increasing irritation, they loved 
each other very ardently, and this-to the very end. Love sharpened 
the demands on either side, increased them, adding irritation to 
them. 
And on top of all this-her character. Hers is a rather reserved 
and somewhat proud character. Both among men and women there 
are those who, though nourishing in their hearts most ardent feel­
ings, are nevertheless somehow bashful about revealing them : there 
is little endearment in them, few caressing words ; few embraces 
and little fondling. If, as a result, they be called heartless and in­
sensible, they shut themselves in even tighter. When they are ac­
cused they seldQm seek to explain the matter ; on the contrary, they 
leave this concern to the accuser, as though saying : "Guess your­
self : if you love, you must understand that I am right." And if Êe 
fails to understand and grows more and more irritable, she, too, 
grows more and more angry. 
Now, this husband, from the very beginning, started admonish­
ing, teaching her, reproaching her severely (though not at all cruelly) 
with his former wife, and this was particularly painful to her. How­
ever, things did not go too badly. It always so happened that, in 
answer to his accusations, she would start quarrelling and uttering 
spiteful words, instead of seeking to clear up the misunderstanding 
by some final explanation or indication of its underlying causes. 
At length, such tactics were given up entirely. It came to the point 
where feelil;ʪ;s more morose, disillusionment in lieu of love, grew 
up in her heart (in her heart first, and not in the husband's) . All 
this grew rather unconsciously.-Well, this is difficult toiling life ; 
there is not much time to think about sentiments. He goes to work ; 
she keeps house, cooks, even washes the floors. Along the extended 
corridor in the government building there are small rooms, one for 
each family of married workers employed in that state institution. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
It so happened that, with the husband's permission, she went 
to a Saint's day party, in the family home of that artisan who taught 
her the sewing craft in her childhood and girlhood, and with whom 
both she and her husband continued to be acquainted. This time 
the husband, who had to attend to some work, stayed home. The 
Saint's day party turned out to be a jolly one ; there were many 
invited ; refreshments were served ; people started to dance. The 
feast lasted till morning. Accustomed to a rather dull life at her 
husband's house, in one room, always toiling, the young woman, 
apparently, recalled the days of her girlhood, and enjoytd herself 
at the ball so long that she forgot the hour fixed for her return. 
All in all, she was persuaded to spend the night with the hosts, all 
the more so as it was a long way to her home. The husband, who 
for the first time spent the night without his wife, grew angry,-very 
much so : next day, quitting work, he went after her to her hosts, 
fot.:.d her ther'", and right then and there, in the presence of the 
guests, he punished her. They went home silently, and for two days 
and two nights after that they did not speak to each other and did 
not take their meals together. All this I have learned in fragments, 
while !'1.e, despite my questioning, gave little explanation of her 
psychic ౬tate at the time. "I do uot remember what I was thinking 
about those two days, but I kept pondering. I did not even look at 
her at all [meaning the little stepdaughter] .  I remember everything 
as it happened but I couldn't tell you how I did it." 
Early in the morning of the third day the husband left the 
_house and went to work ; the litt1e girl was "'; ;:1 sleeping. The step­
mother busied herself around the stove. Fina : .', the girl woke up. 
The stepmother automatically, as usual, washed her, put on her 
shoes and dressed her, prepared her coffee . . .  "and I didn't think 
about her at all." The child sat down, drank from her cup, and ate 
her breakfast-"and, all of a sudden, I looked at her." 
4 
SPITEFUL PsYCHOLOGISTS. AccoucHEURs-PsYcHIATRISTS 
Listen, Mr. Observer, you assert-positively and precisely­
that the whole affair occurred without vacillatit·ns, deliberately, 
calmly. You imply that she wa, ౭'eating the child ror a whole year, 
and finally thought the matter over, made up her mind, and threw 
the infant out the window. "There is neither sudden manifestation 
of hatred"-you write with indignation-"nor repentance after the 
commission of the murder : everything is homogeneous and logical 
in the ·manifestation of one and the same evil wil. And they acquit 
this woman I " 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
Such are your own words. But the prosecutor himself withdrew 
the charge of premeditation of the crime. Do you know this, Mr. 
Observer ?-he withdrew it publicly, solemnly, at the most critical 
moment of the trial. And yet the prosecutor had been accusing the 
delinquent woman with cruel perseverance. How, then, Mr. Observer, 
do you assert, after the prosecutor's retreat, that there was no sud­
denness ; that, on the contrary,-everything was homogeneous and 
logical in the manifestation of one and the same evil will ? Homo­
geneous and logical ! -Therefore, deliberate and premeditated. 
Once more, let us briefly recapitulate : she ordered the girl to 
stand up on the window-sill and look out of the window, and when 
the girl did so, she lifted her by her legs and threw her out from 
the height of five and one-half sagenes. Then she shut the window, 
got dressed and went to the police station to denounce herself. Tell 
me, is this really homogeneous, logical, and not fantastic ? And to 
begin with, what was the purpose of feeding the child, if the affair 
had been long before settled in her mind ? Why wait for the child 
to drink her coffee and eat her bread ?-How is it possible (and is 
it natural ?)-not even to look out the window, after she had thrown 
out the girl ? And, if you please, what was the purpose of self-de­
nunciation ? For, allegedly, everything was the result of spite, of 
hatred of the girl "whom she beat all year."-Why, having killed 
that girl, having finally conceived and perpetrated the murder-long 
ago and calmly premeditated-go at once to denounce herself ?-Let 
death be the lot of the hated girl, but why should she ruin her own 
life? Besides, if in addition to hatred of the girl there was another 
motive for killing her,-the desire to take vengeance upon the hus­
band by means of causing death to his child-she could have simply 
told him that the mischievous girl, on her own initiative, climbed 
the window and fell out. All the same, the aim would have been 
achieved ; the father would have been astounded and shaken, while 
at that time no one in the world could have accused her of pre­
meditated murder, even though she might have been suspected of 
it. Where was the evidence ? Even should the girl have remained 
alive, who would have given credence to her lisping ? Contrariwise, 
the murderess would have achieved everything which she set out 
to achieve ; all the more completely, i.e., much more cruelly and 
painfully, she would have avenged herself upon the husband who, 
though suspecting her of the murder, would have suffered even more 
from her impunity, seeing that she could not be brought to justice. 
On the other hand, by punishing herself, by ruining her life in a 
penitentiary, in Siberia, in the galleys, she would thereby be giving 
satisfaction to her husband. 
What was the purpose of all this ? And who in a case such as 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
this dresses himself up to go and ruin himself? Oh, I may be told 
that she simply meant to avenge the child and the husband ; that 
she sought to end her marriage with her husband : "They will send 
me to the galley, and the marriage will be annulled I "-However, 
leaving aside the fact that the annulment of the marriage could have 
been conceived and brought about in a different manner, without 
ruining, at the age of nineteen, all one's life and freedom,-leaving 
this aside, you must concede that a person who deliberately ven­
tures to throw himself into an abyss-heedlessly and unhesitatingly 
-you must concede that in such a human soul there must be at 
that moment a dreadful feeling, dark despair, an irresistible urge 
for perdition, for self-annihilation. This being so, can it be said­
preserving common sense-that "there was neither suddenness nor 
repentance in the soul ! "-If there was no repentance, there was 
gloom, damnation, madness. At least, it cannot be maintained that 
everything was logical and homogeneous, premeditated, without sud­
dt:I.;:o::sc:. 
One has to be himself in a state of "affect" to assert this. Had 
she not gone to denounce herself ; should she have stayed home ; 
should she have lied lo the people and to her husband that the child 
killed b౰rself,-everything actually would have been loJ!;ical and 
homogeneous, without suddenne!>s in the manifestation of the evil 
will. However, immediate self-destruction-not forced but voluntary 
-of course, bears witness, at least, to the dreadfully disturbed psy­
chic state of the murderess. The expression : "How strong she is I "  
was cited by the expert for the defense (and not the prosecution) 
for the purpose of showing to the court thaL !.'•e gloomy, cold, as if 
numb psychic state of the defendant after s౮ . .  had committed her 
crime, was not spiteful, frigid moral insensibility on her part. 
My whole trouble was that, having, a౯ the time, read the first 
sentence of the court, I was struck orecisely by the strangeness and 
fantastical ness of all the details of the case ; and having taking into 
account the fact of the fifth month of her pregnancy at the time 
of the commission of the murder-which was also reported in the 
papers-I was unable, quite involuntarily, not to start reasoning : 
wasn't pregna౱:cy the prompting cause ? i.e., as I then wrote, didn't 
the thing happen this way : "She looked at the child, and spitefully 
thought : 'It would be nice to throw her out the window I ' ?  Yet had 
she not been pregnant, maybe, -he would have spitefully thought 
this, but would not have done it, would not have thrown the child 
out, whereas, being pregnant, she did it" ? Now, this was my whole 
trouble : thus I reasoned at the time and thus I wrote. 
But is it possible that the sentence was rescinded and that 
subsequently the murderess was acquitted as a mere result of these 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
words ? Mr. Observer, you scoff at the experts ! You asert that 
only one of the five held that the delinquent woman was actually in 
a state that was an affect of pregnancy, while three others merely 
maintained that there could have been an influence of pregnancy, 
but did not positively say that such influence was present. From 
this you infer that only one of the experts positively exonerated the 
defendant, while four experts failed to do so. But this argument 
of yours is incorrect : you demand too much from human conscience. 
It suffices to say that three experts, apparently, did not want to 
exonerate the defendant positively, i.e., to take this upon their con­
science, but the facts were so impressive and obvious that these 
scientists nevertheless did waver, and finally were unable to say 
"no" directly and simply, but were compelled to say that "actually 
there might have been a pathological influence at the time of the 
commission of the crime." Well, to the jurors this was equivalent 
to a verdict :  "If they were able to say : 'might have been,' this 
means, perhaps, that it actually was." 
Such a strong doubt on the part of the jurors could not help 
influencing their verdict, and thus it should have been from the 
standpoint of sublime truth. Is it possible to kill a woman with a 
verdict, a woman whose full guilt was obviously doubted by three 
experts, while the fourth, Dukov, an expert specifically in psychic 
diseases, directly and firmly attributed the crime to the then dis­
turbed psychic· state of the delinquent woman ? 
But "The Observer" plJ,rticularly seized upon the fifth expert, 
Mr. Florinsky, who dissented from the opinion of the other four 
experts, implying that he must know more about women's diseases. 
But why must he know more about psychic derangements than the 
expert psychiatrists ? Is it because he is an accoucheur and practices 
not psychiatry but an altogether different thing ?-This, too, is not 
quite logical. 
5 
AN INCIDENT WHICH To MY MIND EXPLAINS MucH 
Now I will relate an incident which, to my mind, may finally 
explain certain things about this case, and which may directly serve 
the purpose for which I embarked upon this article. 
On tile third day after the acquittal of the defendant Kornilova 
(April 22, 1877) , they-husband and wife-came to se me in the 
morning. On thַ eve they both went to a children's home where the 
victimized little girl (the one who was thrown out) had ben placed, 
and next day they were planning to visit her again. By the way, 
the lot of tbe child has been taken care of, and there is no reason 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
for exclaiming : "Woe now to the child ! . . . " etc. When his wife 
was taken to prison, the husband placed the child in that orphan 
asylum because, working all day long, from early morning to late 
in the evening, it was impossible for him to care for her. Upon the 
wife's return, they decided to leave the girl in the home since there 
she is well taken care of. But during the holiday season they fre­
quently took her home. At Christmas time, she stayed with them 
at their home. Despite her work, from early morning till late at 
night ; despite the nursling (who was born in prison) ,  the step­
mother manages now and then to find time to visit the girl at the 
home, to bring her little presents, and so forth. While she was 
still in the penitentiary, when recalling how she had abused the 
child, she frequently dreamed that she might see her, and do some­
thing so as to make the little girl forget the incident. These fan­
tasies were somewhat strange on the part of so reserved and even 
so little trusting a woman as was Kornilova all the time during the 
trial. Still, tht:>e fantasies were to come true. On Christmas, about 
a month ago, not having seen the Kornilovs for about six months, 
I stopped at their apartment, and Kornilova, before anything else, 
told me that the girl "jumps with joy and always embraces her 
whenNf'r she, Kornilova, calls on her at the children's home." And 
when I was leaving them, suddenly she told me : "She will for­
get . . . .  " 
Thus, they came to see me on the third day after her acquittal. 
. . .  But I keep deviating ; I shall deviate once more-just for a 
minute. "The Observer," in his article, huMorously and spitefully 
scoffs at me for my visits tc. Kornilova ir· prison. "He actually 
did penetrate that state" (meaning, the con\౲Ition of pregnancy) ­
says he about me. "He went to see a certain lady in the penitentiary ; 
he was impressed with her humility, anci in several issues of his 
Diary he came out as her ardent advocate." 
To begin with, what is the meaning of the word "lady" ? Why 
this vulgar tone ?-For "The Observer" is fully aware of the fact 
that it is not a dame or a lady, but a sirr.౳le peasant woman, a 
worker from early morning till late at night ; she cooks, washes the 
floors and does some sewing for outside customers, if she can manage 
to snatch a moment of leisure. I visited her in the penitentiary once 
a month, staying with her ten, ill the utmost fiftet'n, minutes, usually 
in a common cell for women ౴waiting trial and having nurslings. 
If I observed this woman with curiosity and sought to comprehend 
her character,- is anything wrong with this,-does it deserve ridicule 
and scoffing ? But let us go back to my story . 
. And so they came to visit me ; they both sat in a concentrated, 
serious mood. Until then I had known the husband but little. And 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
suddenly he said : 11Two days ago, when we returned home"-(this 
was after the acquittal ; thus it must have been after eleven o'clock 
in the evening, and she wakes up at five in the morning)-"at once 
we seated ourselves at the table, I took the Gospel and began to 
read it to her." I confess : when he said this, looking at him I 
thought, "Yes, he couldn't have done otherwise : this is a type, an 
intact type,-this could have been guessed." In a word, he is a 
puritan, a most honest, most serious man, unquestionably kind and 
magnanimous, but one who will yield nothing and surrender none 
of his convictions. This husband looks upon marriage with full 
faith, precisely as upon a sacrament. 
He is one of those husbands who can still be found in Russia, 
and who abiding by the ancient Russian custom and tradition, upon 
returning home from the wedding and retiring to the bedroom with 
his newly wed wife, first of all, throws himself upon his knees before 
a holy image and prays long, asking God that He bless their future 
life. Kornilov acted then in a similar manner : once more accepting 
his wife and renewing his marriage with her, which had been severed 
as a result of the dreadful crime, first of all, he opened the Gospel 
and began reading it to her without being in the least restrained 
in his manly and serious determination by the consideration that 
the woman was almost collapsing from fatigue ; that she was dread­
fully shaken even when she was getting ready for the trial, and that 
on that last fatal day of the trial she had endured so many crushing 
impressions-moral and physical-that it would ha,·e been excusable, 
even to such ·a rigorous puritan as he, to let her rest a bit, and 
collect herself, and that this would have conformed more to the 
aim which he had when he had opened the Gospel. His act seenaed 
to me almost awkward-all too inflexible, because it might have 
failed to produce the desired result. A very guilty soul-especially 
if it vividly realizes its guilt and has already endured much pain­
should not be too obviously and hastily reproached for its guilt, 
lest a reverse effect be produced, especially when it repents anyway. 
In circumstances such as these, the man upon whom the woman 
depends, exalting himself over her in the aureole of a judge, appears 
to her as something merciless, too autocratically breaking into her 
soul, and sternly repulsing her repentance and the good sentiments 
regenerateJ in her : "Not rest, ·not food, nor drink, are needed for 
one such as you. Sit down and listen to how one has to live." 
As they were leaving, I succeeded in remarking in passing that 
he should not be hurrying so and proceeding so inflexibly, and that, 
perhaps, this method would prove more expedient. I spoke briefly 
and plainly. Even so, I thought he might, perhaps, fail to under­
stand me. Unexpectedly, in answer to my remark, he said : "But 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
right then, as soon as we· entered the house, and when we started 
reading, she told me everything, how, during your last visit, you 
taught her to be good, should she be sentenced to Siberia, told her 
how she should live there . . . .  
" 
This is how the thing happc"led. It is true that exactly on the 
eve of the trial, I visited her at the prison. No one, neither I nor 
her defense lawyer, had any firm hopes for her acquittal. Neither 
had she. I found her apparently composed. She was sitting and 
stitching something. Her child was slightly indisposed. Yet she was 
not exactly sad, but, as it were, oppressed. As for myself, I had in 
my mind several gloomy thoughts concerning her. I called on her 
precisely to tell her a few words. We firmly hoped that she might 
be exiled only to a penal settlement. .\nd so a woman scarcely of 
full age, with a nursling, would start for Siberia. Her marriage 
would be annulled. In a strange country, alone, defenseless, still 
rather pretty-looking, and so young-how could she withstand tempta­
t!nn ?-This is what I was thinking. Truly, fate would be pushing 
her mto the arms of debauch.-For I know Siberia : there, there 
are a great many men eager to :>educe : many unmarried men-em­
ployees and speculators-arc jounlt'ying thither from Russia. It is 
easy to lle scdLiced, and the Siberians-plebcians and commoners­
are ah•Piutely merciless toward 1 fallen woman. X o one will stand 
in her way, but a woman whose reputation has once been soiled 
can never restore it : she is doomed to everlasting contempt, re­
proaches, scoffing, and so-till old age, to her very grave. She will 
be specially nicknamed. And the child (a girl ) would be compelled 
to inherit her mother's career : the girl, corn:,g from a family with 
a shady reputation, would be unable to fm 
a decent and honest 
fiance. It would be different, however, if a,; exiled mother lived 
an honest and chaste life in Siberia : a young woman who manages 
to live a chaste life enjoys boundless respect : everybody is ready 
to defend and please her ; everybl>Uy takes off his hat to her. Such 
a woman may be sure to find a husband for her daughter. More­
over, with time, when people begin to know and trust her, she may, 
perhaps, contract a second honest marriagო:- and enter an honest 
family.1 
It was this that I meant to convey to the young woman, 
scarcely of full age. On purpose, I selected preci!'ely that last day 
before the trial because-! 
V-·͚ ͛  saying to mysdi-it would more 
1In Siberia, people rarely are curious about one's past, i.e., for what crime 
one has been exiled. This is equally true of prison inmates and of the 
population in general. Perhaps this is due to the fact that in the course of 
the last three centuries virtually the whole population of Siberia was de­
scendt:d from exiles and it became populated with them. 

930 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
vividly impress itself upon her mind and would more deeply be 
engraved in her soul. 
Having listened to my admonitions as to how she should live 
in Siberia, should she be exiled, she thanked me gloomily and seri­
ously, hardly raising her eyes to me. And now, tired, exhausted, 
shaken with this horrible impression of the long trial, and at home 
having been made to listen to the Gospel, she did not think to her­
self : "At least, he should pity me ! Why doesn't he postpone this 
until tomorrow ? Why doesn't he give me something to eat and 
let me rest I "  Nor was she offended by the fact that she was being 
treated so disdainfully. (N. B. The offense of being treated disdain­
fully may be felt by the most dreadful criminal, fully cognizant of 
his crime, and even by a deeply repentant criminal.) On the con­
trary, she had nothing better to say to her husband than promptly 
to inform him that also in the penitentiary people taught her to 
be good and that she should live in the strange country honestly 
and chastely. Obviously, she did so because she knew that this story 
would please her husband, that it would be in line with his tone 
and would encourage him : "This means"-he would think-"that she 
was really repenting, that she truly made up her mind to live a 
decent life." And he actually did so think, while in answer to my 
advice not to scare her with too hasty severity toward her, he di­
rectly told me, of course, with joy in his heart : "There's no reason 
to fear for her ·and to be cautious, since she herself is glad to be 
honest. . . .  " 
I don't ౵now, but it seems to me that all this is intelligible. 
The readers will understand why I am recording these things. At 
present it may be at least hoped that the great mercy of the court 
did not spoil the delinquent woman more, but that, on the con­
trary, it struck good soil. For even in days past, in prison, as well 
as now she considered and continues to consider herself an in­
dubitable criminal, while she attributes her acquittal exclusively 
to the great mercy of the court. 
She herself does not understand "the affect of pregnancy." 
And verily she is an indubitable criminal ; she was in possession of 
full memory when committing her crime ; she remembers every 
incident, every minute trait of the perpetrated offense, and she only 
does not know and cannot even explain to herself, until this day : 
"How sht! could have done it then and how she could have ven­
tured it !" 
Yes, Mr . .  Observer, the court pardoned an actual criminal, 
despite the now unquestionable and fatal "affect of pregnancy," so 
ridiculed by you, and of which, at present, I am profoundly and 
firmly convinced. And now decide for yourself. Had they annulled 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
931 
the marriage ; had they torn her away from a man whom she un­
questionably loved and loves, and who constitutes to her her whole 
family ; had they banished her to Siberia,-her the solitary, helpless, 
twenty-year-old one, with her nursling-dooming her to debauch 
and infamy (for in Siberia the fall would have unfailingly hap­
pened) ;-tell me, what would have been the sense of ruining and 
corrupting a life which at present, it would seem, has returned to 
truth, in consequence of a severe purge and repentance, with a 
regenerated heart ? Isn't it better to reform, discover and restore a 
human being than simply to chop off his head ? It is easy, abiding 
by the letter of the law, to cut off one's head, but it is always far 
more difficult to examine a case in accordance with truth, humanely 
and paternally. 
Finally, you knew that together with the young, twenty-year­
old mother, i.e., with an inexperienced woman,-in the future un­
hilingly a victim of want and debauch-her baby was to be banished. 
But let me tell you a few special words about babies. 
6 
AM I AN ENEMY oF CHILJIREN ? WHAT DoEs THE WoRD 
"HAPPY 0NE11 MEAN AT TIMES 
Your whole article, Mr. Observer, is a protest "against the 
exculpation of the cruel treatment of children." Of course, the fact 
that you are raising your voice in defense of children is to your 
credit, but your attitude towaul me is too !- ughty. You say : 
One has to be endowed with all that power of imagination 
in which, as is known, Mr. Dostoievsky excels among us all to 
comprehend fully the condition of a woman and to elucidate to 
one's self the irresistibility of thl. affect of pregnancy . . . .  But 
Mr. Dostoievsky is too susceptible, and besides, 'the pathological 
manifestation of volition' is an outright bobby of the author of The 
Possessed, The Idiot, etc. ; to him it is excus:-.ble to feel a weakness 
for them. I look upon the case in a simpler manner, and I assert 
that after such instances of exculpation of the cruel treatment of 
children,-which in Russia, as also in England, is by no means in­
frequent-there remains not cvPn a shadow of deterrent to this kind 
of behavior," and so on, and so .orth. 
In the first place, referring to "my weakness for the patho­
logical manifestations of volition," I will merely tell you that it 
seems that in my novels and stories I did, at times, actually succeed 
in discovering certain people who considered themselves sound, and 
then proved to them that they were unsound. Do you know that 

932 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
a great many people are ill because of their boundless confidence 
in their normalcy, and, eo ipso they are infected with awful self­
conceit, impossible narcissism, which sometimes reaches the level 
of the conviction of one's infallibility ? 
Well, precisely such ones I used to call to the attention of 
my readers and even prove that sturdy fellows are far from being 
as healthy as people think ; that, contrariwise, they are very sick 
and should be placed under medical care. In this I see nothing 
wrong, but "The Observer" is too harsh toward me because his phrase 
about "the exculpation of the cruel treatment of children" is also 
aimed at me. He merely softens it "a little" by saying that "to him 
it is excusable." 
His whole article is written as a direct proof that because of 
my predilection for "the pathological manifestation of volition" 
common sense has been so distorted in me that I am inclined to 
pity the torturer of a child, that beastly stepmother, rather than 
her tortured victim, the weak, miserable little girl,-beaten, insulted 
and, finally, murdered. This, to me, is offensive. 
In contradistinction to my pathological inclination, "The Ob­
server" directly, hastily, and candidly points to himself, setting his 
sound health as an example : "1"-he implies-"look upon the case 
more simply [than Mr. Dostoievsky] ,  and I assert that after such 
instances of exculpation of the cruel treatment of children . . .," 
etc. Thus I am justifying cruel treatment of children-what a dread­
ful accusation ! In this case permit me to defend myself. 
I shall not point to my former thirty years of literary work 
in order to settle the question whether I am a great enemy of chil­
dren and an advocate of their cruel treatment, but I shall merely 
remind the readers of the last two years of my authorship, that is, 
the publication of A Writer's Diary. At the time of the Kronebergs' 
trial, despite my predilection for "the pathological manifestation 
of volition," it so happened that I came out in defense of the child, 
the victim, and not of the torturers. C౶nsequently, Mr. Observer, 
sometimes, I, too, side with common sense. 
At present I even regret, Mr. Observer, that then you did not 
come out in defense of the child ; surely you would have written 
a most ardent article. But somehow I do not recall a single ardent 
article in defense of the child. Consequently, at the time, you did 
not deem it necessary to intercede. Thereupon, recently,-last sum­
mer,-1 happened to raise my voice in defense of the young children 
of the Djunkovskys, who had also been subjected to torture in their 
parents' home. Again, about the Djunkovskys you wrote nothing. 
True, no one has written anything. This is easy to understand : 
everybody was occuJ:>ied with such important political problems I 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
933 
Finally, I could refer not to one but to several instances when, 
in the course of these two years, I have spoken in the Diary about 
children, their upbringing, their sad lot in our families ; about de­
linquent children in our correctional institutions. I even mentioned 
a certain little boy at Christ's Chnstmas tree-of course, a fictitious 
incident-which, however, does nol exactly prove my insensibility 
or my indifference for children. 
Mr. Observer, I will tell you this : when I first read in the 
newspapers about Kornilova's crime, about her inexorable sentence, 
and when, willy-nilly, I was struck by the thought that, perhaps, 
the criminal woman was not as guilty as she appeared to be (please 
note, Mr. Observer, that even then virtually nothing had been men­
tioned in the newspaper accounts of the trial about "the stepmother's 
beating," and even at that time this charge was no longer pressed 
by the prosecution)-having made up my mind to write something 
in favor of Kornilova, I understood only too clearly what I was 
pu·.1·:trking UP""· At present, I candidly admit this to you. I fully 
understood that I was writing an unsympathetic article ; that I was 
raising my voice in defense of the torturer, and against whom ?­
Against a little child. I foresaw that certain people would accuse 
me of i:.sensibility, self-conceit, even of sickliness : "He is defending 
a stepmother, the murderess of " child ! '' I clearly foresaw this in­
flexibility of accusation on the part of some judges-for instance, on 
yours, Mr. Observer- so that, for a while, I hesitated, but in the 
end, I made up my mind : '·If I believe that here is the truth, is it 
worth while to serve deceit for the sakr. of gaining popularity ?"­
this is what I fmally said to myself. BesicL . I was encouraged by 
the faith in my readers : "In the long run, t . y will understand"­
I thought to mysclf-"that it is impossible to accuse me of the de­
sire to exculpate torture of children, and ;f I now raise my voice 
in defense of the murderess, setting forth my suspicion of her patho­
logical and insane state at the time of the commission of her villainy, 
thereby I am not defending the villainy itself, nor am I rejoicing 
over the fact that the child was beaten and killed. On the contrary, 
perhaps, I have the greatest compassion for the child, not less than 
that of any r •her . . . .  " 
Caustically you ridiculed me, 1\lr. Observer, for one sentence 
in my article on the acquittal of the defendant K-•rnilova : 
"That same evening, aft. 
ten o'clock, the .nusband took her 
home, and she, in a happy mood, again returned to her home after 
an :bsence of almost one year, with the impression of an enormous 
lesson derived by her for her whole life and of manifest Divine 
Providence in the whole case, beginning with the miraculous sa/va­
t ion of the child . . ." 

934 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
You se, Mr. Observer, I am ready to make a reservation and 
to apologize to you for the reproach which I have just made for 
my cut-in-half sentence. In fact, I can see now that it is not as clear 
as I had hoped, and that one may be mistaken about its meaning. 
Here, the whole point comes down to my understanding of the word 
uhappy." 
I conceived the defendant's happiness not only in the fact 
that she had been freed but in that 11she returned home with the 
impression of an enormous lesson derived by her for her whole life 
and with a presentiment of Divine Providence guiding her." For 
there is no greater happiness than to become convinced of people's 
mercy and of their love of one another.-This is faith, full faith for 
one's whole life I And what happiness is superior to faith ? Can this 
former criminal woman ever doubt people, people as mankind, as 
a whole, their goodness and sacred character ? For a person on the 
verge of ruin and perdition to enter her own home with such a 
potent impression of a new faith is the greatest conceivable hap­
piness. We know that often noble and lofty people have suffered 
from disbelief in the practical goodness of the great character of 
men, in their kindness, in their ideals, in their Divine origin, and 
died in a state of sad disillusionment. 
Of course, you will smile at me and, perhaps, say that I am 
again indulging my fancy ; that in a person as ignorant and coarse 
as Kornilova, descended from the common people and deprived of 
education, there can be no such disillusionment nor such emotions 
in the soul. This is not true 1 -These ignorant people do not know 
how to express all this in our way, in our tongue ; but quite often 
they feel as deeply as we, the 11educated people," and experience 
these feelings of theirs with the same happiness or with the same 
sorrow and pain as we. 
Much as in ourselves, in them there may be disillusionment 
and mistrust of people. Had Kornilova been exiled to Siberia she 
would have fallen there and perished. Don't you think that in some 
better moment of her life she would feel the whole horror of her 
degradation, and would carry away in her heart-to her very grave 
-exasperation, all the more bitter because to her it would have been 
aimless, since, aside from herself, she could not have blamed any­
one, becalJse, I repeat, she is fully convinced-even to this moment 
-that she is an indubitable criminal, and she merely does not know 
how it all happened to her at the time. At present, however, believ­
ing herself a criminal and considering herself such, but suddenly 
forgiven by men, overwhelmed with benefits and pardoned, how can 
she fail to feel a regeneration to a new life superior to the former ? 
-It was not some single person that pardoned her, but everybody-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
935 
the court, the jurors, which means society as a whole, bestowed 
mercy upon her. After that, how could she have failed to bear in 
her soul a feeling of an immense indebtedness-for her whole life 
-to all those who pitied her, that ;s, to all men on earth ? 
Every great happiness bears within it a certain sorrow because 
it arouses in us superior consciousness. Grief, rarer than great hap­
piness, arouses in us such a lucidity of consciousness. Great, that 
is, sublime happiness lays an obligation on the soul. (I repeat : there 
is no greater happiness than to acquire faith in men's kindness and 
their love of one another.) 
When the woman taken in adultery, condemned to stoning, 
was told : "Go and sin no more," is it possible that she went home 
to sin ? Therefore, also in the case of Kornilova the whole question 
is : On what soil did the seed fall ? This is why it now occurred to 
me to write this article. Mr. Observer, having read your attack 
aeainst me seven months ago, I decided to postpone my answer to 
you so as to amplify my data. Now it seems to me that judging 
by the impressions I have gathered, I can unmistakenly state that 
the seed fell upon good soil, that a human being has been resur­
rected ; t.hat no harm was done to anyone ; that the soul of the 
criminal woman is crushed at once with repentance and with the 
eternally beneficial impression of the boundless mercy of men, and 
that now, after having experienced so much kindness and love, it 
would be difficult for her heart to grow wicked. And I repeat to 
you, Mr. Observer, that she has no idea of excusing herself with 
the unquestionable "affect of pregnancy" whi..:h arouses in you such 
indignation. 
In a word, it seemea to me not withou. point to convey all 
this, not only to you, Mr. Observer, but to my readers, and to all 
those merciful men who have acquitted her. And don't you worry, 
Mr. Observer, about the little girl and do not exclaim : "Woe to 
the child I " At present her fate has been rather well taken care of 
-and "she will forget." There is sound hope for this. 
CHAPTEK II 
The Death of Nekrasov. On What Has Been Said at His 
Grave 
::NEKRASOV IS dead. The last time I saw him before his 
death was one month ago. Then he looked so much like a corpse that 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
it was strange to see that he could speak and move his lips. Yet not 
only did he speak but he preserved full lucidity of the mind. It 
seems that he still did not believe in the proximity of a near death. 
A week before his passing he had a stroke which paralyzed the 
right side of his body, and on the morning of the 28th1 I learned 
that he had passed away on the eve, on the 27th, at eight o'clock 
in the evening. That same day I went to see him. His face, terribly 
macerated and disfigured as a result of suffering, somehow struck 
me most. When leaving, I could hear the psalmist reading over the 
deceased in a distinct but slow voice : "There is no man who has 
not sinned." Having returned home, I was unable to start working. 
I took Nekrasov's three volumes and began to read them, beginning 
with the first page. I sat reading all night till six o'clock in the 
morning, and once more I lived through those thirty years. The 
first four poems, with which the first volume of his works begins, 
appeared in the Petersburg Collection in which my first novel was 
also published. 
Thereupon, as I kept reading-and I read one poem after an­
other-my whole life passed rapidly before me. I recognized and 
recalled those of his poems which I first read in Siberia, when hav­
ing served my four years of imprisonment, and having been dis­
charged from the penitentiary, finally I received permission to lay 
my hands on a book. I also recalled the impression produced on 
me at the time. llriefly, that night I read virtually two-thirds of 
everything Nekrasov wrote, and literally, for the fm•. time, I under­
stood how much Nekrasov, as a poet, had meant in my life ! -Of 
course, as a poet. 
We met rarely, and only once with a wholly unrestrained, 
warm feeling, namely, at the very outset of our acquaintance, in 
1845, at the time of Poor Folk. But this I have already recorded. 
A few moments passed then between us during which, once and 
for all, this mysterious man revealed himself to me in the most 
essential and concealed aspect of his spirit. As I at once guessed 
then, his was a heart wounded in the very early days of his life, 
and it was that wound whicll never did heal that was the inception 
and source of his whole lifelong passionate and suffering poetry. 
With tears he spoke to me about his childhood, about the ugly life 
which opr·•essed him in his parents' home, about his llother ;-and 
the way he spoke of her, that force of emotion with which he recol­
lected her, even then gave rise to the presentiment that if there 
was going to be anything sacred in his life, anything that could 
save him and serve him as a beacon, as a guiding star in the darkest 
1December 28, 18ii· ( B. B.) 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
937 
and most fatal moments of his life,-of course, it would only be the 
earliest infantile recollection about the infantile tears and sobbings, 
together with her, somewhere stealthily, so as not to be seen (as 
he told me) with his martyred mother, who loved him so ardently. 
I believe that no subsequent att .. chment could have exercised so 
potent an influence upon his wili and some obscure irresistible 
urges of his soul, which obsessed him throughout his life, as his 
devotion to his mother. 
And even then one could discern these obscure psychic im­
pulses. After that, very shortly, I recall-we parted : our mutual 
intimacy lasted not longer than several months-thanks to mis­
understandings, external circumstances, and the meddling of good 
people. Thereafter, many years later, when I returned from Siberia, 
even though we disagreed frequently, nevertheless, despite the dif­
ference in our convictions which was then beginning to manifest 
itself, when we met, at times, we said to each other strange things, 
a.; 1 hough actu:1lly somf'thing that had begun in our youth, in 1845, 
persisted in our lives ; as though this refused to be interrupted, and 
could not be, notwithstanding the fact that sometimes we did not 
see each other for years and years. Thus, once upon a time-I believe 
it was ;:• 1863-when handing me a little volume of his poems, he 
pointccl lo one piece, The Unfortz.11ate, and said impressively : "When 
I wrote this, I was thinking about you li.c., about my life in Siberia] . 
This was written about you." And finally, of late, we again began 
to see each other, when my novel Raw Youth was being published 
in his magazine. 
Nekrasov'ٍ funeral was attended by c, •:era! thousand of his 
admirers. There were many students. The ft.:.. ral procession began 
at nine o'clock in the morning, and it was onli at dusk that people 
left the cemetery. At his grave many orations were delivered, but 
only a few litterateurs spoke. Among other things, somebody's beau­
tiful poem was read. Deeply impressed, I made my way to the still 
open grave strewn with flowers and wreaths, and in my weak voice 
I said a few words. I began precisely with the statement that his 
was a heart wounded once for his whole life, .. nd that this bleeding 
wound was tl-P source of his whole poetry-passionate to the point 
of tortured love of everything suffering from violence, from the 
cruelty of unrestrained will-everything that opprPc;sed the Russian 
woman, the child in our Russiബ, families, the conamon man in his 
Jot, which is often so bitter. I aaso expressed my conviction that in 
our noetry Nekrasov was last in the line of those poets who ap­
peared with their "new word." 
In fact-leaving aside the question of the artistic power of 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
his poetry, and its scope-Nekrasov, in truth, was very original and 
he did come with "a new word." For instance, in the past, there 
had been Tutchev, a greater and more artistic poet, and yet he will 
never occupy so conspicuous and memorable a place in our litera­
ture as will unquestionably be assumed by Nekrasov. In this sense, 
among the poets (i.e., who appeared with "a new word") he must 
be placed right next to Pushkin and Lermontov. When I expressed 
this thought aloud, there occurred a little incident : a voice in the 
crowd shouted that Nekrasov was greater than Pushkin and Ler­
montov, and that these two were merely "Byronists." Several voices 
caught it up, shouting : "Yes, greater I "  
However, I did not mean to discuss the relative greatness of 
the three poets. But here is what subsequently developed : Mr. 
Skabichevsky, in The Stock-Exchange Gazette, in his message to 
the young people on Nekrasov's significance, referring to the fact 
that when someone (i.e., I) at the grave of Nekrasov "ventured to 
compare his name with those of Pushkin and Lermontov, all of you 
(i.e., college youth) in unison, in a chorus, shouted : 'he was greater, 
greater than they I ' " I wish to assure Mr. Skabichevsky that he 
has been wrongly informed, and I remember distinctly (I hope I 
am not mistaken) that first there sounded only one voice : "greater, 
greater than they," adding at once that Pushkin and Lermontov were 
"Byronists"-in a supplementary remark which is much more char­
acteristic of and natural to one voice or opinion than to all those 
present shouting at one and the same moment, that is, to a chorus 
composed of. a thousand people. This fact, then, tends to support 
my version of the incident. And it was only after the first outcry 
that several other voices sounded, but only several, and I did not 
hear any thousand-man-strong chorus. This I reiterate, and I hope 
I am not mistaken. 
I insist on this point because to me it would have been painful 
if all our youth had committed such an error. Gratitude to the 
departing great names should dwell in a young heart. No doubt, 
the ironical outcries about Byronists and "greater, greater," did 
not come as a result of the desire to start a literary dispute at the 
grave of the dear deceased-which would have been out of place. 
This was merely an ardent impulse to express as strongly as pos­
sible the sentiment of emotion, gratitude and ecstasy, accumulated 
in one's heart for the great poet who used to move us so deeply 
and who, though in his grave, was still so close to us (whereas those 
great old men. are so far from us I ). 
However, this whole incident, then and there, aroused in me 
the desire to elucidate my idea in the next issue of The Diary and 
to state in detail my views on so remarkable and extraordinary a 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
939 
phenomenon in our life and poetry as Nekrasov, explaining the 
specific significance of this phenomenon, as I understand it. 
2 
PUSHKIN1 LERMONTIJV AND NEKRASOV 
And first of all, one shouldn't use the word "Byronist" as an 
invective. Byronism, though a momentary phenomenon, was a great, 
sacred and necessary one in the life of European mankind and, per­
haps, in that of the entire human race. Byronism appeared at a 
moment of dreadful anguish, disillusionment and almost despair 
among men. Following the ecstatic transports of the new creed in 
the new ideals proclaimed at the end of the last century in France, 
then the most progressive nation of European mankind, the out­
come was very different from what had been expected ; this so 
c!e౷ .. ived the hith of man that there has never perhaps been a 
sadder moment in the history of Western Europe. The new idols­
raised for one moment only-fell not only as a result of external 
(political) causes, but because of their intrinsic bankruptcy-which 
was clearly perceived by the sagacious hearts and the progressive 
minds. The new outcome was n-.t yet in sight ; the new valve was 
not yet revealed, and everybody was suffocating under the weight of a 
former world, which drew and narrowed itself down over mankind 
in a most dreadful manner. The old idols lay shattered. 
It was at this very moment that :t great and mighty genius, 
a passionate poet, appeared. In his meloc!: .. ͙ there sounded man­
kind's anguish of those days, its gloomy dis, tsionment in its mis­
sion and in the ideals which had deceived it. It was a novel, then 
unheard-of, muse of vengeanct' and sorrow malediction and despair. 
The spirit of Byronism, as it were, swept mankind as a whole, and 
everything responded to it. It was precisely as if a valve had been 
opened : at least, amidst the universal and dull groans-mostly un­
conscious-this was a mighty outcry in which all the cries and moans 
of mankind combined and merged in one chord. How could it not 
have been felt in Russia and particularly by so great, ingenious and 
leading a mind as that of Pushkin ?-In those days also, in Russia 
no strong mind, no magnanimous heart could have rvaded Byronism. 
And not only because of con: 1.ssion from afa1 ior Europe and 
European mankind, but because precisely at that time in Russia, 
too, there arose a great many unsolved and tormenting questions, 
a great many old disillusionments . . . .  However the greatness of 
Pushkin, as the leading genius, lay precisely in the fact that he, 
surrounded by men who virtually failed to understand him, so son 

940 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
found a firm path, a great and keenly looked for outcome for us 
Russians, and indicated it. This outcome was-"populism,"1-the 
worship of the Russian people's truth.2 
"Pushkin was a great and extraordinary phenomenon." He 
was "not only a Russian, but the first Russian." For a Russian not 
to understand Pushkin means to be deprived of the right to call 
h౸mself a Russian. Pushkin understood the Russian people and 
grasped their mission so deeply, on such a grand scale, as no one 
had ever done. I am not mentioning the fact that by the universality 
of his genius, by his faculty of responding to all the manifold aspects 
of European mankind and of virtually reincarnating himself in the 
genius of alien peoples and nationalities, he bore witness to the 
humaneness and universality of the Russian spirit, thereby, as it 
were, prognosticating the future mission of Russia's genius in the 
midst of humankind as its all-unifying, all-reconciling and all-re­
generating element. Nor shall I touch upon the fact that Pushkin 
was the first in Russia who, with anguish, in prophetic foresight, 
exclaimed : 
"Shall I behold the free, the liberated people 
And serfdom fallen at the Czar's majestic nod ! "  
I shall speak now merely of Pushkin's love of the Russian people. 
His was an all-embracing love, a love which prior to him no one 
had ever manifested. "Don't love me, but love what's mine"-this is 
what the people will always tell you when they want to be assured 
of your love· of them. 
Every nobleman, especially one who is human and Europeanly 
enlightened, is fully capable of loving the people, that is, pitying 
them for their needs, poverty and suffering. But the people need to 
be loved not for their suffering, but for their own sake. What does 
it mean to love them for their own sake ? "Well, you should love 
what I love ; you should revere what I revere"-this is what it means. 
And it is only thus that the people will respond to you. Otherwise 
they will never recognize you as their own, no matter how much 
you may be sorry for them. Likewise they will always discern 
falsity regardless of any pitiful words you may use to tempt them. 
Pushkin loved the people precisely in this manner, in a way 
requiredt.by the people ; nor did he guess how the people should be 
loved ; he did not prepare himself therefor ; he did not learn how 
to act : suddenly he himself became the people. He bowed to the 
lThe Russian word "narodnost," derived from the word "narod"-"the 
people," is untramlatable. Perhaps the nearest, though far from satisfac­
tory, translation, is "populism." (B. B.) 
liThese are Gogol's words. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
941 
people's truth : he recognized it as his own truth. Despite all the 
vices of the people and many of their terrible habits, he succeeded 
in discerning the great substance of their spirit at a time when al­
most no one even looked upon the people. And he accepted the 
people's substance as an ideal of his own soul. And this-at a time 
when the most humane and Europeanly enlightened lovers of the 
Russian people candidly regretted the fact that our people were so 
mean that they were incapable of lifting themselves to the level of 
the Parisian street mob. Above all, they believed that the Russian 
people were slaves. By slavery they excused the people's degradation. 
Even so, they could not love a slave since, all the same, he was 
repugnant. 
Pushkin was the first to declare that the Russian is not a slave, 
never was one, despite many centuries of slavery. There was serf­
dom but there were no serfs (of course, speaking generally, and not 
about exceptions)-such was Pushkin's thesis. Even from the gait 
ol Lilt: Russia .. peasant he drew the inference that he was not and 
could not be a slave (even though he was in serfdom)-a trait which 
demonstrates in Pushkin a profound and direct love of the people. 
He also recognized in our people (again, taken as a whole, and 
disrer-.trding the usual and inevitable exceptions) the lofty feeling 
of self-respect ; he foresaw that calm dignity with which they would 
accept their liberation from serfdom,-a fact which, for instance, 
long after Pushkin, our most remarkable educated Russian Euro­
peans did not understand, expecting from the people something quite 
different. 
Oh, they loved the peopl"' ::;incerely ,w·.1 ardently, but in their 
own, European way. They vociferated abou, • heir bestial status in 
serfdom. Even so they wholeheartedly believed that our people were 
actually beasts. And suddenly that peop౹..: became free with such 
manly dignity, without the slighte!'t urge to avenge themselves upon 
their former owners : "You mind your business, we will mind ours. 
If you wish-come to us. For whatever good you may bring us, you 
will always be honored by us." 
Yes, to many people our peasant, after his liberation, appeared 
to be a stra:lge enigma. Many people even decided that this in 
him was the result of a want of mental development and dullness, 
an aftermath of former serfdom. And this we bf'hold in our day.­
What, then, must have been t. · feeling in Pushkin's times ? Didn't 
I hear in the days of my youth the opinion expressed by progressive 
and "competent" people that the character of Savelyich, in Push­
kin's The Captain's Daughter, the serf nf the landowners Griniovi, 
who fell to Pugachiov's feet imploring him to spare the life of the 
nobleman's son, and "better to hang him, the old dotard,-for the 

942 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
sake of fear and edification,"-that not' only is this character that 
of a slave, but that is an apotheosis of Russian slavery I 
Pushkin loved the people not only for their suffering. One 
pities sufering, and so commiseration frequently goes parallel with 
contempt. Pushkin loved everything thP- people loved, revering every­
thing they revered. He loved Russian nature, the Russian country­
side, passionately, to the point of emotion. He was not a nobleman 
-merciful and humane-pitying the peasant because of his bitter 
lot. With his heart he incarnated in himself a man belonging to 
the common people, his essence, almost-his image. The deprecia­
tion of Pushkin, as a poet who was devoted to the people rather 
historically and archaically than factually, is erroneous and even 
senseless. In these historical and archaic motives there sounds a 
love, an estimation of the people, which belongs to them eternally, 
always-now and in the future-and not only to some historical 
people who have long ceased to exist. 
Our people love their history principally because they find 
in it intact that same sanctity in which they preserve their creed 
even in our day, despite all their distress and lifelong sufferings. 
Beginning with the stately and immense figure of the chronicler in 
Boris Godunov and winding up with Pugachiov's fellow travellers 
-in Pushkin they all are the people in their most profound mani­
festations ; they are all intelligible to the people as their own es­
sence. And is this all ? The Russian spirit is diffused in all the crea­
tions of Pu౺hkin, the Russian vein pulsates everywhere. In the great, 
inimitable, incomparable songs, supposedly of the Western Slavs, 
which are obviously the product of the great Russian spirit, we 
find the expression of the Russian's conception of his Slavic brethren, 
therein is his whole heart ; therein is revealed the whole philosophy 
of the people which, up to the present, is preserved in their songs, 
legends, traditions, stories,-everything the people love and hold 
sacred : the ideals of their heroes, their czars, national defenders 
and commiserators, the models of courage, humility, love and sac­
rifice. And those delightful jests of Pushkin, for instance, that chit­
chat of the two drunken peasants, or that Tale about the Bear whose 
she bear was killed,-why, this is something amorous, charming 
and touching in his contemplation of the people. 
Had Pushkin lived longer, he would have bequeathed to us 
such treasures for the understanding of the people as would have­
through their influence-unfailingly curtailed the times and seasons 
for the transition to the people's truth, their vigor, the realization 
of their mission by our whole intelligentsia, which still exalts itself 
over the people by its Europeanism. 
Now, it is this worship of the people's truth that I perceive 
(alas, perhaps, I alone among all his admirers) in Nekrasov, in his 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
943 
best creations. I treasure-very much so-the fact that he was "the 
commiserator for the people's sorrow" ; that he spoke so much and 
so passionately about the people's grief. But still dearer to me is 
the fact that in the great, painfnl and ecstatic moments of his life 
-despite all the opposing inftuenct>s and even his own personal con­
victions-he bowed before the people's truth with all his being, a 
fact to which his loftiest creations bear full witness. It is in this 
spirit that I spoke about him, who, after Pushkin and Lermontov, 
came much as the latter two, partly with a new word (for Push­
kin's "word," to us, is still new. And not only new but one which, 
as yet, has not been understood and deciphered, and which is re­
garded as most obsolete rubbish) .  
Before I turn to Nekrasov, I shall say a few words about 
Lermontov in order to justify my contention that he also believed 
in the people's truth. Of course, Lermontov was a Hyronist, but 
hecause of his great and original poetic power he was a peculiar 
Hylulli౻t-sonae kind of sarcastic., capricious, surly Byronist, per­
petually distrusting even his own inspiration, his own Byronism. 
But if he had stopped fussing about the personality of the educated 
Russian tormented by his Europeanism, no doubt 'he would, just 
like J\lo.;hkin, have found the sol•Jtion in the worship of the people's 
truth. In support of this there are strong and precise indications. 
However, in his case. too, death arrested the natural course. 
As a matter of fact, in all his poems he is gloomy, capricious ; 
he wants to speak the truth, but more often than not he lies, and 
he knows it and suffers because he is lying However, the moment 
he touches upon the people, i,._ is serene r · l lucid. He loves the 
Russian soldier, the Cossack, and he reverL , the people. And he 
writes that immortal song about the young merchant Kalashnikov 
who kills for an outrage tht Czar's bodyguard Kiribeevich, and, 
summoned to appear before Czar han the Terrible, he answers him 
that he killed the Czar's servant Kiribeevich "of his own free will 
-not by accident." 
Gentlemen, do you remember "the sla··e Shibanov" ?  He was 
the slave of Prince Kurbsky, a Russian emigrant of the Sixteenth 
Century, whL kept writing protesting and virtually abusive epistles 
to the same Czar Ivan-from abroad, where he found safe refuge. 
Having written one of these letters, he summonecl •lis slave Shibanov 
and ordered him to deliver it L 
Moscow and to hand it personally 
to the Czar. The slave Shibanov acted as he was ordered. In the 
Kn:mlin Square he stopped the Czar, who was leaving the cathedral, 
escorted by his retinue, and handed him the epistle of his master, 
Prince Kurbsky. The Czar lifted his staff with a sharp ferrule, and 
with all his might drove it into Shibanov's foot, and leaning upon 
his staff, h,· ,.;tarted reading the letter. Shibanov, with his pierced 

944 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
foot, did not move. Subsequently, when answering Prince Kurbsky's 
letter, the Czar, among other things, wrote : "Thou shouldst be put 
to shame by thy slave Shibanov." This meant that he, the Czar 
himself, was put to shame by the slave Shibanov. The character of 
this Russian "slave" must have impressed Lermontov's soul. His 
Kalashnikov speaks to the Czar without any reproach about Kiri­
beevich, fully aware of the execution awaiting him ; he tells the 
Czar "the whole genuine truth" that he killed his favorite "of his 
own free will-not by accident." 
I repeat, had Lermontov lived, we should have had a great 
poet who would have acknowledged the people's truth, and maybe 
a genuine "commiserator for the people's sorrow." But this title 
was conferred upon Nekrasov. 
Again, I am not comparing Nekrasov with Pushkin. I am not 
measuring with a yardstick who is taller and who is shorter, since 
here there can be no comparison, nor even a question of comparison. 
By the grandeur and depth of his Russian genius Pushkin up to 
this day shines like a sun over our whole Russian intelligent world 
outlook. He is a great prophet who is still not understood. Com­
pared with him, Nekrasov is but a tiny dot, a small planet which, 
however, emerged from that great sun. And leaving aside all meas­
urements-who is taller or shorter-immortality, fully deserved im­
mortality, belongs to Nekrasov, and I have already explained why : 
for his worship of the people's truth which, in him, was not a result 
of some kincj of imitation, nor even of a fully conscious process­
it was an urge, an irresistible impulse. And in Nekrasov this was 
all the more remarkable as all his life he had been under the in­
fluence of people who, perhaps, very sincerely loved and pitied the 
people but who never acknowledged any truth in them, and who 
always placed European enlightenment far above the truth of the 
people's spirit. Without inquiring into the Russian soul and not 
knowing what it expects and craves for, these men frequently wished 
our people-with all their love for them-that which might have 
been detrimental to them. Was it not they who in the Russian popu­
lar movement of the last two years almost completely failed to 
acknowledge that exaltation of the enthusiasm of the national spirit 
which the people have been revealing for the first time with such 
completeness and so forcefully, thereby proving their sane, mighty 
and steady unity in one and the same great idea and their prescience 
of their future_predestination. And not only do they refuse to recog­
nize the truth of the popular movement, but they virtually consider 
it reaction, something bearing witness to the impassable want of 
consciousness and backwardness of the Russian people, which has 
grown inveterate in the course of centuries. 
Despite his remarkable and extraordinarily keen intellect, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
945 
Nek.rasov, however, lacked serious education ; at least it was limited. 
All his life he was unable to rid himself of certain influences-he 
had no strength to do so. Yet he possessed an original psychic power 
of his own which never left hii'T', a genuine, passionate-and what 
is most important-direct love of the people. With all his soul he 
commiserated with their suffering, perceiving in them not merely 
an image degraded by slavery-a bestial image-but through the 
force of his love he was able to grasp almost unconsciously the 
beauty of the people, their strength and intellect, their suffering 
humility, and partly even to believe in their future predestination. 
Oh, intellectually, Nekrasov could be mistaken in many a thing. 
In an impromptu, recently published for the first time, contem­
plating with alarmed reproach the people liberated from serfdom, 
he found it possible to exclaim : 
". . . But are the people happy ?" 
The grt.at instinct of his heart revealed to him the people's 
sorrow, but if he had been asked : "What should one wish for the 
people ? How can it be done ?"-he might have given a quite er­
roneou౼, perhaps even detrimental answer. And, of course, he could 
not ౽.e blamed : in Russia thrre is still extremely little political 
sense, while Nekrasov, I repeat, was all his life under alien influ­
ences. But with his heart, with his great poetic inspiration, in some 
of his grand poems, irresistibly he merged with the very essence of 
the people. In this sense he was a popular poet. Everyone descending 
from the people, even with a minimum o౾ education, will under­
stand much in Nekrasov, pn .. VI.:led, howev·· 
he is educated. The 
question whether "the Russian people as a whole can understand 
him is obviously a senseless one. What will the "common people" 
understand in his masterpieces : The Kmght for an Hour, Silence, 
Russian Women? Even in his greai. Vlas, which might be intelligible 
to the people (but which in no way would inspire them, since this 
poetry has long been divorced from life itself) they would unfail­
ingly discern two or three false traits. What -;-;ould the people make 
out of one of his mightiest and most appealing poems-On the Volga 'I 
This is Byro11's genuine spirit and tone. 
Nay, as yet, Nekrasov is merely a poet of the Russian in­
telligentsia who spoke with lo"e and passion to the same Russian 
intelligentsia about the people -nd their suffering. I am not speak­
ing of the future : in the future the people will take notice of Nekra­
sov. Then they will understand that once upon a time there lived 
a kind Russian nobleman who shed lamenting tears over their 
popul.ar grief, and who could find nothing better, when running 
away from his wealth and from the sinful temptations of his noble­
man's life, ; 
• his very distressful moments, than to come to the 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
people, and, in his irresistible love of them, cleanse his tormented 
heart, since Nekrasov's love of the people was but an outlet of his 
personal sorrow about himself. 
However, before I explain how I understand this "personal 
sorrow" of our dear deceased poet about himself, I feel that I must 
call attention to one characteristic and peculiar circumstance which 
was recorded in virtually all our newspapers immediately after 
Nekrasov's death-in practically all articles dedicated to him. 
3 
THE PoET AND THE CITIZEN. GENERAL CoMMENTS ON 
NEKRASOV AS A MAN 
All newspapers-just as soon as they began to speak about 
ဌekrasov, about his death and funeral, just as soon as they began 
to define his significance-forthwith added, all of them without ex­
ception, certain coi1siderations regarding a kind of low "practicality" 
in his character, certain defects and even vices, some sort of du­
plicity in the image which he left behind. Some papers merely hinted 
at this, very slightly, in a couple of lines, but the important fact 
is that all the. same they did hint, apparently owing to some neces­
sity which they could not avoid. But in other periodicals, which 
dwelt on Nekrasov in greater detail, the thing appeared even more 
strangely. In fact : without framing any accusations in detail, and, 
as it were, avoiding them out of profound and sincere respect for 
the deceased, nevertheless they set out to exculpate him, so that 
the matter became still more incomprehensible. "Well, what do you 
exculpate him of ?"-involuntarily one would ask oneself : "If you 
know something, there is no reason for hiding it ; but we wish to 
know if he actually needs your apologies." This was the question 
which arose in one's mind. However, they did not want to formulate 
any accusations, but they hastened with their apologies and reserva­
tions, as if seeking to forewarn somebody and mainly, again, as if 
they could not avoid this, even though, maybe, they did not wish 
to embark upon the subject. 
Gr.nerally speaking, this is an extremely peculiar case. Still, 
if thought be given to it, you and everyone else-whoever he may 
be-unquestionably would come to the conclusion that this is a 
perfectly normal case, since, once you start speaking about Nekrasov 
as a poet, it is verily impossible to avoid speaking about him as 
an individual, for the reason that in Nekrasov the poet and citizen 
are so closely combined, so inexplicable one without the other, and 
taken together the}' explain one an')ther so clearly that when you 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
947 
begin to speak about him as a poet, willy-nilly, you turn to the 
citizen. And you feel that you are compelled to do so and that you 
cannot avoid it. 
But what can we say and what specifically do we see ? The 
word "practicality" is uttered, i.e., the ability to take care of one's 
business-that's all. But right away people hasten with their apolo­
gies : "He sufered,"-they say. "Ever since childhood he was op­
pressed by his milieu" ; as a youth-homeless and forsaken..:.he 
endured much grief in Petersburg, and, accordingly, he became 
"practical" (i.e., as if he could not help becoming practical) .  Others 
go still farther, insinuating that without this "practicality" Nekra­
sov, perhaps, would not have accomplished obviously useful things 
for the public benefit, for instance, that he would have been un­
successful with the publication of the magazine, etc. Well, is it 
implied that for good ends bad means should be justified ?-And this 
-speakins of Nekrasov, who, with his poems, made hearts quiver, 
t. . .. king ecst;- .y and emotion for the good and the beautiful ! 
Of course, all this is being said by way of apology. But it 
does seem to me that Nekrasov does not need any such exculpation. 
In apologies of this kind there is always something humiliating, 
dimrr ;og and degrading to the image of him who is being exculpated 
to thಋ.. •evel of triviality. In fact, the moment I start justifying "the 
duplicity and practicality" of a person, thereby I am insisting, as 
it were, that in certain circumstances such a duplicity is natural 
and almost necessary. If so, one has to reconcile oneself completely, 
when he, repenting, beats himself against the slabs of his own church, 
and cries : "I have fallen ! I h:lVe fallen : ·  And this-in verses of 
unfading beauty which he writes down th. 
very night, while on 
the morrow, just as soon as the night is over and tears dry up, he 
embarks again on "practicality" on the .J.lleged ground that it is 
something altogether apart and that it is a necessary thing. Well, 
what then do these groans and cries, expressed in verses, mean ?-Art 
for art's sake-nothing mort", even in its most trivial sense, because 
he lauds these verses himself, he admires them, he is quite pleased 
with them, he publishes them and counts upon them : they will add 
brilliancy tr the periodical ; they will make young hearts beat 
more strongly. 
Nay, if all this is justified without propt r explanation, we 
risk committing a grave erro. 
nd generating perplexity. And then 
in answer to the question : "Whum are you burying ?" we, who 
attrnded his funeral, should be compelled to say : "We are burying 
the most brilliant representative of art for art's sake." And yet 
was this so ? Nay, in truth this was not so : we did bury a "com­
miserator of the people's sorrow," an eternal sufferer for himself, 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
one who was never able to appease himself and who, with disgust 
and self-castigation, rejected cheap reconciliation. 
The matter has to be clarified sincerely and impartialy, and 
whatever is ascertained should be accepted for what it is worth 
regardless of any personality and any further considerations. In 
this case, if possible, the essence of the matter has to be scrutinized 
so as to reconstruct with the utmost precision the personality, the 
character, of the deceased. Our hearts insist on this so that there 
may be left no perplexity whatsoever such as involuntarily smears 
the memory, not seldom leaving an unworthy shadow even on a 
noble image. 
Personally, I have known little of the "practical life" of the 
deceased, and for this reason I am in no position to embark on 
the anecdotal aspect of the matter. But were I even in a position 
to do so, I would refuse it because I should be plunging into what 
I myself consider to be gossip. Because I am (and also formerly 
was) convinced that of everything that has been said about the de­
ceased, at least half-and, maybe, three-quarters-is a pure lie. Lies, 
rubbish and gossip. A man as original and remarkable as N ekrasov 
was bound to have enemies. And the things which were true, which 
did happen, were likely, at times, to be exaggerated. However, even 
taking all this into account, nevertheless there remains a residue. 
What is it ?-Something gloomy, sombre and undeniably painful, 
since what do these groans mean, these cries and tears of his, these 
avowals that he "has fallen," this passionate confession in the 
presence of hfs mother's shadow ?-Again, I am not going to dwell 
upon the factual aspect of the matter ; I believe, however, that the 
esence of that gloomy and painful half of our poet's life was fore­
told by himself, at the dawn of his days, in one of his earliest pieces, 
which, if I am not mistaken, were jotted down prior to his ac­
quaintance with Bielinsky, and only later moulded into the form 
in which they appeared in print. Here are these verses : 
"The evening lights were about to be lighted, 
The wind roared fiercely and the rain fell hard, 
When en route from Poltava I finally sighted 
That capital city-after vexing retard. 
I carried a stick-long and bulky, 
And also a wallet that was empty and torn, 
An old sheepskin coat I wore, and sulky 
I felt,-unhappy and almost forlorn. 
Bereft of money, of name, situation, 
Short of stature and looking so queer . 
. . 
But forty years lapsed-and what transformation­
! have that million, it's mine, it is here." 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
949 
Money-that was Nekrasov's demon ! Well, he did love gold, 
luxury, delights, and was it in order to possess these that he resorted 
to "practicality" ?-No, it was a demon of a different kind-a gloomy 
and most degrading devil. His w;s a demon of haughtiness, of thirst 
for security, of a desire to wall himself off from people, and calmly 
look down on their wrath and threats. I believe that this demon 
entered his heart when he was but a child, a child of fifteen years, 
who found himself on the Petersburg pavement and who had almost 
fled from his father. The timid and proud soul was hurt and stung ; 
it did not wish to look for patrons, to enter into any agreements 
with that alien rabble. Not that distrust of people stole into his heart 
at so young an age,-it was rather a sceptical and too precocious 
(and therefore erroneous) attitude toward them. Let them not be 
so spiteful and horrid as they are reputed to be (he must certainly 
havP thought) ;  nevertheless they all are such weak and cowardly 
trash. Accordingly, they will ruin one even without ill-will the mo­
ment their ir •• erests are at stake. It was then, perhaps, that Nekra­
sov's meditations began and the verse : "I have that million, it's 
mine, it is here" formed itself in his mind-right there, in the street. 
His was a thirst for a gloomy, sullen, segregated security 
with .t view to dependence on no one. I believe I am not mistaken, 
since 1 recall something to this effect on the occasion of my first 
acquaintance with him. At least, so it seemed to me all my life. 
However, his was a foul demon. Was it for this kind of security 
that Nekrasov's soul could have been craving, a soul capable of 
responding to everything sacred, a soul that "'ever lost faith in itself ? 
Is it with this kind of securit౿· that so gii t,.- a soul protects itself ? 
Such people start on their journey barefoo ಀd, with empty hands, 
with serene and lucid hearts. Their security is not in gold. Gold is 
coarseness, violence, despotism ! Gold mu.y seem to constitute se­
curity precisely to that weak and cowardly rabble which Nekrasov 
himself despised. Is it possible that the pictures of violence, and­
later-of sensuality and debauch could live on good terms in the 
heart of a man who was capable himself of appealing to one : "For­
sake everything. Take thy staff and follow me ! "  
"Lead me away to the camp of the perishing 
For the glorious cause of affection and love . 
" 
But the demon overpov. 
· ·ed the man : he stayed on the spot 
and went nowhere. For this he paid with suffering all his life. In 
fad, we know nothing but his verses. But what do we know about 
his inner struggle with his demon, a !"truggle which undoubtedly 
must have been painful and which lasted all his life ?-I am not 
everi speaking about N ekrasov's good deeds : he did not advertise 

950 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
them, and yet, unquestionably, there were good deeds : people al­
ready begin to bear witness to the humaneness and kindliness of 
that "practical" soul. Mr. Souvorin has already made public cer­
tain things. I am sure there will appear many more favorable com­
ments : it cannot be otherwise. 
"Oh,"-I may be told-"you are also exculpating, and even in 
a cheaper manner than we." No, I am offering no apologies : I am 
merely explaining, and I have succeeded in framing the question­
the final and all-explanatory question. 
4 
A WITNESS IN NEKRAsov's FAVOR 
It was already Hamlet who wondered at the tears of the actor 
who, when reciting his part, wept over some Hecuba : "What's 
Hecuba to him ?"-Hamlet asked. Now, this is the direct question : 
Was Nekrasov a similar actor, one who was capable of sincerely 
weeping over himself and that spiritual sanctity of which he had 
been depriving himself, then of pouring out his sorrow (genuine 
sorrow) in verses of unfading beauty, and next morning actually 
consoling himsಁlf with their beauty-with the beauty of the verses 
-and nothing but that ? Moreover : was he capable of perceiving 
this beauty of the verses as a "practical" proposition which was 
likely to bring him profit, money, fame, and to make use of it in 
this spirit ? Or, on the contrary, did not the poet's sorrow pass by 
after writing these verses and was it not assuaged by them ? Did 
the beauty and power, expressed in them, oppress and torment him ? 
And if, being unable to overcome his eternal demon, his passions 
which subdued him all his life, he fell again, did he calmly recon­
cile himself with his degradation ? Didn't his groans and outcries 
grow still stronger in the ಂret and sacred moments of repentance ? 
Didn't they re-echo and grow stronger in his heart every time that 
he convinced himself of the cost of his demon and the high price 
he had paid for those benefits which he had received from that 
demon ? In a word, even if he was able instantly to reconcile him­
self with,.his demon, and even started justifying his "practicality" 
in his conversation with people, was this a lasting reconciliation or 
assuagement, or, on the contrary, did it instantly vanish from the 
heart, leaving as its aftermath a still more burning pain, shame and 
remorse ? Then-if only this question could be settled-what would 
be left to us ?-We should merely have to condemn him for the fact 
that being unable to overcome his temptations, he did not take his 
life as, for instance, that ancient Pechersk martyr who, being also 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
951 
unable to contend with the serpent of passion which tormented 
him, dug himself into the earth up to his waist and died, and if he 
did not succeed in casting out his demon, certainly he did conquer 
him. In this event we ourselves each one of us-should find our­
selves in a humiliating and ridiculous situation should we venture 
to assume the role of judges pronouncing such verdicts. Nevertheless 
a poet who wrote about himself : 
"You do not have to be a poet-
But citizen you've got to be," 
thereby, as it were, recognized the fact that he might be judged by 
people as a "citizen." As individuals we should feel ashamed to 
judge him. Who are we anyhow-each one of us ? We merely do 
not speak about ourselves aloud, concealing our nastiness, with 
which, within ourselves, we are fully reconciled. Perhaps the poet 
lamented such of his deeds as would not make us knit our brows 
bali we comnMted them. For we know about his degradations, about 
his demon, from his own verses, which he, in his repentant sin­
cerity, did not hesitate to publish. This and everything else that has 
been S(lid about him, as a man, about his "practicality," and so 
forth,-•tll these would have di<>d naturally and would have been 
effaced from the memory of men ; all this would have been reduced 
to the level of simple gossip so that he would have needed no 
apology. 
I may observe in passing that so practical a man, who knew 
so well how to take care of his business, irdeed was not practical 
at all in making public his rಃpcatant groa; · and wailings. There­
fore, perhaps, he was not so practical as so.:1e people maintain. 
Nevertheless-! repeat-he has to face the judgment of citizens 
since he himself recognized this tribunal. 'l'hus, if the question pro­
pounded above : Was the poet satis!ied with his own verses in which 
he clothed his tears ; did he come in accord with himself to the 
state of calmnes!i which again enabled him to embark upon "prac­
ticality" with a light heart ? or, on the cont·::.ry, were these recon­
ciliations but momeiltary, so that, perhaps, he despised himself for 
their infamy, suffering all the more and all the more bitterly and 
thus, all his life ?-Should these· questions-! repeat-he settled in the 
latter sense, of course we coul಄ also at once recor.··ile ourselves with 
the "citizen" Nekrasov, since h_ 
.. own sufferings, in our view, would 
have fully cleansed his memory. Naturally, there arises forthwith 
this objection : If you are unable to settle these questions ( for who 
can settle them ?) they should not have Leen raised at all. There is, 
howe,ver, a witness who is in a position to answer them. This witness 
is the people. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
That is, love of the people ! To begin with, why did so "prac­
tical" a man have to be so fascinated with love of the people ? Every­
body attends to his own business : one is occupied with practicality, 
the other-with sorrow for the people. Well, suppose it is merely 
a whim : all right, one can toy with it, and then give it up. But 
Nekrasov kept it up all his life. It may be said that, to him, the 
people were something on the order of "Hecuba," a subject of tears 
clothed in verses, and yielding an income. I am not speaking about 
the fact that it is difficult to counterfeit such sincerity of love as 
sounds in ଺ekrasov's poetry (this may be endlessly debated) ,  but 
I shall merely say that to me it is clear why Nekrasov loved the 
people so much ; why he was so attracted to them in the difficult 
moments of his life ; why he went to them and what he found in 
them. It is because-as I stated above-in Nekrasov love of the 
people was, as it were, an outcome of his own sorrow for himself. 
Once you suppose and admit this, the whole Nekrasov-both as a 
poet and a citizen-wiiJ be intelligible to you. In the service of the 
people with his heart and talent he perceived his self-purification. 
The people were his inner need not only for the sake of poetry. In 
his love of them he found his own exculpation. By his sentiments 
for the people he elevated his own spirit. But still more important 
is the fact that among the people who surrounded him he failed to 
find an object of love, nor did he find it in the fact that these 
people respected and worshipped him. Moreover : he detached him­
self from th«!m and went to the insulted, to the suffering, to the 
naive and humiliated-in those minutes when he was seized with 
disgust with that life to which, at times, he yielded faint-heartedly 
and viciously : he beat himself against the slabs of his own poor 
village church, and he was healed. He would not have chosen such 
a solution llad he not believed in it. In the love of the people he 
felt something steady, a firm and sacred outcome of everything that 
tormented him. He knew of nothing holier, steadier and more truth­
ful which he could worship. Indeed, he could not have perceived 
his whole self-exculpation in mere verses about the people. And 
further, this being the case, he worshipped the people's truth. If, in 
his whole life, he found nothing worthier of love than the people, 
this means that he did recognize both the people's truth and truth 
in the people, and also that truth does exist and is preserved in the 
people. If he did not quite consciously or rationa1Iy recognize this, 
with his heart· he accepted this irresistibly and absolutely. In that 
vicious peasant, whose humiliated and humiliating image tormented 
him so strongly, he thus perceived something genuine and sacred 
which he could not help esteeming, to which he could not help re­
sponding with all his heart. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
953 
It is in this sense that, speaking above of Nek.rasov's literary 
significance, I classed him among those who recognized the people's 
truth. And his eternal quest for that truth, his unceasing striving 
for it, obviously bear witness to the fact-this I repeat-that he was 
attracted to the people by an inner and supreme urge, and that, 
therefore, this craving must indicate that perpetual inner anguish 
which could not be quenched with any crafty arguments of tempta­
tion, with any paradoxes or practical exculpations. If so, he must 
have suffered all his life. . . . In this case, what kind of judges 
are we ?-Even if we be judges, we are not accusers. 
Nekrasov is a Russian historical type,-one of the great ex­
amples of the extent of contradictions and bifurcations in the realm 
of morality and rational convictions which a Russian can reach in 
our sad transitional epoch. But this man stays in our hearts. His 
impulses of love so often were sincere, pure and naive ! His longing 
for the peopJ,. was so lofty that it places him as a poet in a superior 
station. As tor the man, the citizen, by his suffering for them, he 
exculpated himself and he redeemed much if actually there was any­
thing to redeem. . . . 
5 
To THE READER 
The December and last issue of The Diary comes with great 
delay for two reasons : because of DlY ill health throughout the 
month of December, and on account of • :•:- unexpected transition 
to a new printing plant from the former o. 
which ceased to exist. 
In a new and unfamiliar place things wert: inevitably delayed. In 
any event, I assume the responsibility, and I ask my readers for 
indulgence. 
In answer to numerous que1 ies of my subscribers and readers 
whether, at least from time to time, I could publish The Diary in 
the forthcoming year, 1878, without binding myself with monthly 
terms,-! hasten to state that for many rec.:.ons I am unable to do 
so. Perhap!" I shall venture to publish one issue, and once more 
to talk to my readers. Indeed, I have been publishing my periodical 
for myself, as much as for others, because of tlte irresistible urge 
to express my views in so pĆ"r:uliar and charaucristic an epoch as 
ours. Should I publish even .. single issue, I shall make this fact 
known through the newspapers. Nor do I contemplate writing for 
other periodicals. In the latter I could publish only a story or a 
novel. 
. In the course of the forthcoming year of rest from the periodical 
publication I expect, indeed, to engage in belletristic work which 

954 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1877 
imperceptibly and involuntarily moulded itself during the two years 
of the publication of The Diary. But I firmly hope to renew its 
publication one year hence. With all my heart I wish to thank all 
those who have paid me so sincere a tribute. To those who wrote 
me that I am suspending my publication at so hot a time, I may 
remark that one year hence the time may, perhaps, be still hotter 
and more characteristic, and then, once more, we shall serve together 
a good cause. 
I say together, because I actually regard my numerous cor­
respondents as my collaborators. I was greatly helped by their 
communications, comments and advice and by that sincerity with 
which they applied to me. How I regret that, owing to lack of time 
and ill health, I am unable to answer so many of them I Again, I 
ask all those whom I have not yet answered for their kind and good­
hearted indulgence. I feel particularly guilty before those who have 
written me during the last three months. To that person who wrote 
me about "the anguish of those poor boys, and that she does not 
know what to tell them" (the person who wrote this will probably 
recognize herself by these expressions) ,  I am now taking this op­
portunity to tell her that I was wholeheartedly interested in her 
letter. If it were only possible I should have published my reply 
to this letter in · The Diary. I had to abandon this thought only 
because I found it impossible to print her letter in toto. And yet 
it does graphiqtlly bear witness to the ardent and noble mood of 
the majority of our youth, to their sincere desire to serve every good 
cause for the general benefit. I shall say only this to my correspond­
ent : perhaps it is the Russian woman who is destined to save us 
all, our whole society, through the new energy which is regenerated 
in her, through her very noble thirst to serve the cause even to the 
point of sacrifice and heroism. She will put to shame the inactivity 
of the other elements and will captivate them, and will turn those 
who have been led astray on the right path. But enough has been 
said : I am answering my much estemed correspondent here, in The 
Diary, because I suspect that the former address given by her is 
no longer valid. 
I was unable to answer very many of my correspondents for 
the reason that such momentous and live subjects as interest them 
cannot be answered by letters. On such topics-not letters but ar­
ticles, even whoಅe books, must be written. A letter must inevitably 
contain omissions, perplexities. There are themes on which it is 
absolutely impossible to correspond. 
To the person who asked me to state in The Diary that I 
have received her letter about her brother killed in this war, I hasten 
to say that I was sincerely touched and moved by her sorrow for 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
955 
her deceased friend and brother, and also by her delight that he 
had served so beautiful a cause. I am pleased to advise my cor­
respondent that I have met here a young man who had personally 
known the deceased and who c.orroborated everything she wrote 
me about him. 
I heartily shake the hand and thank the correspondent who 
wrote me a long letter (five pages) about the Red Cross, and I 
ask him henceforth to continue corresponding with me. I shall un­
failingly send him the thing he asked for. 
Several correspondents who recently made inquiries point by 
point I shall answer separately, as well as him who asked me : "Who 
is a strutzky ?" (I hope these correspondents will recognize them­
selves by these expressions.) I apologize particularly to my corre­
spondents from Minsk and Vitebsk that I have so delayed my 
answers to them. After taking a rest, if possible I shall answer every­
Lu·.Jy. Thus 1 ಆpeople not complain and wait. 
My address will be the same. I only ask you to give the house 
number and the street, and not to address the mail to the editorial 
office of A Writer's Diary. 
dnce more I thank everybody. I hope for a happy au revoir 
in thഈ near future. This is a glorious but difficult and fatal time. 
How much hangs by a hair at this very minute, and how we shall 
be discussing these things a year hence I 
P. S. The publisher of a new bo0k which has just appeared, 
The Eastern Question : Its p,,,., and Pre· J;·: . A Defense of Russia, 
by Sir T. Sinclair, Baronet, an English l\1. 
; translat(·d from the 
English-asked me to print in this issue ot The Diary an adver­
tisement about this book. However, havhg looked through and fa­
miliarized myself with it, I wish to recommend it personally to the 
readers, instead of inserting a regular advertisement. It is difficult 
to write a more popular, more interesting and sensible book than 
this one. At present we are much in need of such a book, and there 
are few men so well informed on the Eastern question. And yet, 
in our day, ::verybody should be familiar with this question. This 
is needed and necessary. Sinclair is a defender of Russian interests. 
In Europe he has long been known as a politicr1 writer. The com­
pact volume of 350 printed 
"lgcs costs only 1 ruble (postpaid-
1 ruble 20 kopecks). The book i_, sold in all book-stores. 


1 8  8 0 


August 
C H A P T E R 
I 
Explanatory Word Concerning the Address on Pus Itkin 
Printed Below 
!\1Y ALJRESS on Pushkin and his significance, printed be­
low and conဍtituting the substance of the contents of the present 
issue of The Writer's Diary (the only one for the year 188o1) was 
delivered on June 8 of the current year at the solemn exercises 
of T/1 Society of Lovers of Rustian Literature, before a large audi­
ence, and it created a considerable impression. Ivan Sergeevich 
Aksakov, who then said about himself that everybody considers 
him as it were a leader of the Slavophiles, stated from the tribune 
that my addreحs "constituted an event." I recall this here not for 
the purpose of boasting but in order to spy this : If my address 
constitutes an event, it is frorr. ·-··ဎe and o111y ne standpoint, which 
I shall explain later. It is for this purpose t . •  .it I am writing this 
preface. In the address itself I meant to emphasize the following 
four points in my discussion .lf Pushkin's :;ignificance to Russia. 
1. That Pushkin, with his profoundly perspicacious and in­
genious mind and purely Russian heart, was the first to detect and 
record the principat pathological phenomenon of our educated so­
ciety, historically detached from, and pridinr itself on, the people. 
He indicated and graphically set before us our negative type-the 
restlf'ss man, efusing to be reconciled, having no faith in his own 
soil and in the native forces, denying Russia and ultimately him­
self (i.e., his own society, his educated straturr which grew up 
on our native soil) ,  refusing 
co-operate with others and sin­
cerely suffering. Aleko and Onegiu subsequently generated in our 
belh .>-lettres a number of related characters : they were followed by 
the Pechorins, the Tchitchikovs, the Rudins, the Lavretzkys, the 
11£ health permits me, I hope to renew the publication of Tile Writer's 
Diary in the forthcoming year, 1881. 
959 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : x88o 
Bolkonskys (in Leo Tolstoy's War and Peace), and many others 
whose very appearance bears witness to his immense intellect and 
genius, to the truth of the idea originally conceived by Pushkin. To 
him belong the honor and the glory, for having spotted the principal 
sore of the society which came into existence after Peter's great 
reform. It is to his ingenious diagnosis that we owe the knowledge 
of our disease, and he was also the first to comfort us, by giving 
us the great hope that this is not a mortal illness ; that Russian 
society can be cured, reformed and resurrected if it embraces the 
people's truth ; 
2. That he was the first-precisely the first, and there was no 
one prior to him-to discern and give us the artistic types of Russian 
beauty directly emerging from the Russian spirit,-beauty which 
resides in the people's truth, in our soil. This is borne out by the 
character of Tatiana, a purely Russian woman, who managed to 
guard herself against this earthly deceit, as well as by historical 
types, such as those of the Monk and others in Boris Godunov ;  
by genre types, for instance, in The Captain's Daughter, and by 
many other images scattered through his poems, stories and notes, 
even in The History of Pugachiov's Rebellion. The point which must 
be particularly noted is that all these types of Russian positive 
beauty, of the Russian soul, were fully derived from the people : 
it was not in our present civilization ; not in the so-called "Euro­
pean" education (which, it may be noted in passing, we never did 
possess) ; not in the deformities of the outwardly adopted European 
ideas and ferms,-that Pushkin found this beauty but exclusively 
in the people's spirit, and in it alone. Thus-I repeat-having diag­
nosed the disease, he inspired us with a great hope : "Believe in the 
people's spirit ; await salvation from it alone, and you will be saved." 
Having penetrated Pusbkin, it is impossible not to draw such an 
inference. 
J. The third point which I meant to emphasize in speaking of 
the significance of Pushkin, is that peculiar and most characteristic 
trait of his artistic genius, which is to be found nowhere and in 
no one else ; it is the faculty of universal susceptibility, and fullest, 
virtually perfect reincarnation of the genius of alien nations. I stated 
in my address that Europe has brought forth the greatest universal 
artistic geniuses-the Shakespeares, the Cervanteses, the Schillers­
but that in none of them do we perceive that faculty which is re­
vealed in Pushkin. It is not only a question of susceptibility, but 
precisely of amazing completeness of reincarnation. In my evalua­
tion of Pushkin I could not help emphasizing this faculty as the 
most characteristic aspect of his genius, which, among all universal 
artists, belongs only to him, and by which he differs from all of 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
them. But it was not for the depreciation of European geniuses of 
such a magnitude as Shakespeare and Schiller that I said this. Such 
a silly inference from my words could be made only by a fool. The 
universality, the all-comprehensive, the unexplored depth of the 
world types of man belonging t'l the Aryan race conceived by 
Shakespeare I do not doubt in the least. And had Shakespeare 
actually created his Othello as a Venetian Moor, and not as a.n 
Englishman, he would have merely conveyed to him the halo of a 
local national character, but the universal significance of this type 
would have remained identical, since he would have expressed also 
in an Italian that which he sought to express-and with equal potency. 
I repeat : I did not mean to challenge the universal significance 
of the Shakespeares and Schillers when pointing out the most in­
genious faculty of Pushkin to reincarnate in himself the genius of 
alien nations. I merely sought to emphasize in that faculty and in 
its completeness a great and prophetic prognostication to us. 
4. This is altogether a Russian, national faculty which Pushkin 
merc.ly ᅆhares .vith our whole people ; and, as a most perfect artist, 
he is also the most perfect exponent of this faculty, at least in his 
work-in the work of an artist. 
Our people bear in their soul this proclivity for universal sus­
ceptib::lly and all-reconciliation · and on more than one occasion 
they have revealed it during the two centuries since Peter's reform. 
When indicating this faculty of our people, I could not help, at the 
same time, setting forth in this fact our great future consolation, 
and perhaps our greatest hope shining for us in the distance. More 
particularly, I emphasized the fact that ou· longing for Europe, 
even despite all its enthusiasm ആ:!ഇ extremes, · 
its foundation, was 
not only legitimate and reasonable, but also iJOpular, fully coin­
ciding with the aspirations of the popular spirit, and that, in the 
last analysis, it has unquestiCinably a supt:rior aim. Of course in 
my brief address-all too brief-1 waᅇ unable to expound my thought 
in all its completeness, but I believe that at least that which is 
stated in it is clear. 
One should by no means be indignant " t  my statement that 
"our destitute land will, perhaps, at length speak a new word to 
the world." L.:..ewise, it is ridiculous to maintain that before this 
new word is given to the world "we have to develop economically, 
scientifically and civically, and only after that start dreaming about 
•new words' addressed to such f.· feet (would-be) organisms as the 
European peoples." In my address I am precisely stressing the fact 
that 1 do not attempt to compare the Russian people with the 
Western nations in the sphere of their economic or scientific glory. 
I merely say that among all nations the Russian soul, the genius 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
of the Russian people is, perhaps, most apt to embrace the idea of 
the universal fellowship of man, of brotherly love,-that sober point 
of view which forgives that which is hostile ; which distinguishes 
and excuses that which is desperate ; which removes contradictions. 
This is not an economic or any other trait ; this is merely a moral 
characteristic, and who can deny or refute it in the Russian people ? 
Can anyone say that the Russian people are merely an inert mass 
d"oomed to serve economically the advancement and progress of our 
European intelligentsia, priding itself on our people, whereas the 
intelligentsia carries within itself dead inertia from which there is 
nothing to expect or hope ?-Alas, many people maintain this, but 
I ventured to declare something different. 
I repeat that, of course, I was unable to prove comprehensively 
and fully "this fantasy of mine," as I myself called it, but at the 
same time I could not refrain from pointing to it. But to assert that 
our destitute and confused land cannot comprise such lofty aspira­
tions so long as it is not economically and civically equal to the 
West-is sheer nonsense. Essentially, the fundamental spiritual treas­
ures are not dependent upon economic assets. Our destitute and 
unorganized land, aside from its upper stratum, stands as one man. 
All the eighty millions of its population represent such a spiritual 
unity as is, of course, nonexistent-and cannot exist-anywhere in 
Europe. For this reason alone it cannot be said that our land is 
unmanageable, and, strictly speaking, it cannot be maintained that 
it is destitute. On the contrary, in Europe, where so much wealth 
is accumulated, the entire civic foundation of all her nations is 
undermined, and may tomorrow collapse once and for all without 
leaving a trace. In its stead there will ensue something altogether 
new and unheard-of, something in no way resembling former things. 
And no treasures accumulated by Europe will save her from her 
collapse because "wealth, too, will instantly vanish." 
And yet it is precisely that undermined anti con!aminated 
civic order of hers that is being pointed out to our people as an 
ideal to which they should aspire, and only after having attained 
it may they dare to lisp to Europe some word of theirs. But I assert 
that it is possible to embrace and embody a loving and all-unifying 
spirit not only in the face of our present economic destitution, but 
a much worse one, such as we had after Batyi's invasion and the 
devastltion of the Troubled Epoch when Russia was saved exclu-. 
sively by the all-unifying spirit of the people. 
And fi_nally, if it be really necessary in order to have the right 
to love mankind and to be endowed with an all-unifying soul, to 
possess the faculty of not hating alien peoples because they do not 
resemble us ; to refrain from the desire to segregate oneself in one's 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
own nationality from all others so as to acquire everything for that 
nationality, regarding all other nations as a mere lemon which may 
be squeezed ·out (and in Europe there are peoples possessing such 
a spirit ! ) -if indeed, for the realization of all this it be necessary 
to become a rich people and to dr;.g home the European civic order, 
is it possible that we must slavishly .:opy that European order (which 
tomorrow will collapse in Europe) ? Is it possible that in this case 
the Russian organism will not be permitted to develop in a national 
fashion, by means of its own organic strength, that it must neces­
sarily be deprived of its individuality and slavishly ape Europe ? But 
where is the Russian organism to be hidden ? Do these gentlemen 
understand what an organism is ?-And yet they keep talking about 
natural sciences ! "The people will not permit it"-said an inter­
locutor two years ago to a meddlesome Westerner apropos of some­
thing. "Then annihilate the people ! "-calmly and haughtily replied 
the \Vesterner. Nor was he an insignificant "nobody,"-he was one 
c,f thf' represrntatives of our intelligentsia. This is a true story. 
In these four points I have indicated Pushkin's significance to 
us, and my address-! repeat-produced an impression, not by its 
merits (this I emphasize) ,  not by the talent of its delivery (I agree 
with alᅈ my adversaries, and I am not boasting), but by its sincerity 
and, 1 Jaresay, by a certain ir. efutability of the facts I set forth 
despite its brevity and incompleteness. 
However, wherein is "the event," as Ivan Sergeevich Aksakov 
expressed himself ?-Precisely in that the Slavophiles, or the so­
called Russian party (Good Lord, we have a "Russian party" I )  
made an immense and, perhaps, fmal st"! · toward reconciliation 
with the Westerners, since the Slavophiles . dared the legitimacy 
of the Westerners' longing for Europe, even i.he legitimacy of their 
extremest lures and inferencrs, explainin,.,. that legitimacy by our 
purely Russian popular aspiration which coincides with the spirit 
itself of the people. And the Slavophiles justified that enticement 
by historical necessity, historical fate. So that should there some 
time in the future be a balance drawn, in the lᅉst analysis it would 
appear that Westerners have served the Russian land and the as­
pirations of H" spirit just like those genuine Russians who sincerely 
loved their own land and who, perhaps, too jealously guarded it 
against all temptations of "the Russian aliens." 
Finally, it was declared tᅊ 1t all perplexitie!> .md bitter disputes 
between the two parties constituted but one great misunderstanding. 
This, then, could have, perhaps, become an "event," since the Slavo­
philes right then and there, after my address, expressed their full 
accord with its inferences. On my own part I state-1 have also so 
stated in my address-that the merit and honor of this new step 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
(if the sincerest desire of reconciliation constitutes an honor) does 
by no means belong to me alone, but to the whole Slavophile doc­
trine, to the whole spirit and orientation of our "party" ; that this 
was always clear to those who inquired impartially into that doc­
trine ; and that the idea which I expounded has more than once been, 
if not expressed-then indicated by the Slavophiles. I merely man­
aged to strike the opportune moment. 
Now, then, this is my deduction : Should the Westerners accept 
our inference and agree with it, all misunderstandings between both 
parties would, in truth, be obliterated so that "the Westerners and 
Slavophiles would have nothing to quarrel about," as Ivan Sergee­
vich Aksakov put it, "since henceforth everything would be ex­
plained." Of course, it was in this sense that my address was an 
"event." But, alas, the word "event" was uttered in a state of sin­
cere enthusiasm by only one party ; but will it be accepted by the 
other side, or will it remain merely an ideal ?-this is an altogether 
different question. The moment I had left the chair, side by side 
with the Slavophiles who embraced me and shook my hand, West­
erners came to the platform to shake my hand, and not the rank 
and file, but the outstanding representatives of Westernism, par­
ticularly those who were, at the time, playing the leading roles. They 
shook my hand with the same ardent and sincere enthusiasm as the 
Slavophiles ; they called my address "ingenious," several times stress­
ing this word. I am afraid, however, very much afraid, that this 
was said on the spur of the moment of enthusiasm. Oh, I am not 
afraid that tlrey will reject their opinion that my address was in­
genious : I know myself that it was not ingenious, and I wasn't in 
the least seduced by the commendations, so that I shall whole­
heartedly forgive them their disillusionment in my ingeniousness. 
But this is what may happen ; this is what the Westerners may say 
after a little reflection. (Nota bene : I am not speaking about those 
who shook my hand ; I am referring to Westerners in general. This 
I wish to emphasize.) 
"Ah,"-the Westerners will perhaps say (do you hear ?-only 
"perhaps"-nothing more) "finally, after protracted disputes and 
wrangles, you have conceded that our longing for Europe was 
legitimate and normal ; you have admitted that there was truth also 
on our siಇe ; you have lowered your banners. Well, we cordially 
accept your admission, and we hasten to state to you that this 
wasn't so bad on your part : at least, this serves as an indication 
that there is some intelligence in you, which, however, we,-save the 
dullest among us for whom we do not wish to and cannot hold 
ourselves responsible-have never denied in you ; but, you see, there 
arise!> here a new predicament which must be explained as promptly 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
as possible. The point is that your thesis, your inference to the 
effect that in our temptations we supposedly coincided with the 
popular spirit and were mysteriously guided by it,-this thesis re­
mains to us more than dubious, and, therefore, an agreement between 
us again becomes impossible. Kno-.. that we were guided by Europe, 
by her science and by Peter's reform, and not at an by the spirit 
of our people, which we never did encounter or scent on our way. 
On the contrary, we left it behind and hastily ran away from it. 
From the very beginning we have been proceeding independently, 
and not at an guided by a supposedly impelling instinct of the 
Russian people for universal susceptibility and fenowship of man­
kind,-wen, for an the things about which you have spoken so much. 
Since the time has come to speak quite candidly, we say that much 
as heretofore, we perceive in the Russian people merely an inert 
mass from which we have nothing to learn, a mass which impedes 
Russia's progress and which must be remodened and recreated, if 
it k impossible organicany, at least mechanicany, i.e., compening 
them, once and for an, to obey us-for ever and ever. And in order 
to achieve such obedience it is necessary to introduce a civil order 
identical with that prevailing in European countries. Strictly speak­
ing our ;Jeople are destitute and fetid-and thus they always have 
been ; t h.ᅋy can possess neither :ndividuality nor idea. The whole 
history of our people is an absurdity from which you have been 
deducing the devil only knows what, whereas only we viewed it 
soberly. A people such as ours should have no history, while that 
which they possessed under the guise of history should be forgotten 
by them with disgust,-everything in toto. on:_.. our educated society 
should have its history while the people sho. i serve society with 
their labor and energies. 
"Please don't get excited and don't shout : speaking of obedi­
ence we do not intend to enslave our people-of course not I Please 
don't draw such an inference : we are humane, we are Europeans, 
you know this only too wen. On the contrary, we wish to educate 
our people, little by little, in an orderly fashion and to crown our 
edifice by lifting them to our level and by reshaᅌing their nationality 
into a different one which will mould itself of its own accord after 
they have been educated. Their education we will base upon and 
begin with those very things with which we ourselves began, i.e., 
with the negation of their wholᅍ ..,ast and the damncttion which they 
themselves will invoke upon it. 'J. ne moment we have taught a man 
to read and write we shan make him take a sniff of Europe ; we 
shan forthwith tempt him with her, say with the refinement of her 
ways of living, her decorum, clothes, drinks, dances,-in a word we 
shall make him feel ashamed of his former bast shoe and kvass, of 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
his ancient songs ; and even though among them there are several 
most beautiful and musical ones, nevertheless we shall make him 
sing rhymed vaudeville songs regardless how angry you may feel 
about this. Briefly, for the sake of a good goal, in the first place 
we shall press upon the sensitive part of his character-just as we 
used to be pressed to resort to all sorts of means-and then the 
people will be ours. They will grow ashamed of their past and will 
damn it. He who damns his past is ours-such is our formula ! We 
shall fully apply it when we start lifting the people to our level. 
However, should the people prove incapable of education,-'they 
should be eliminated,' since then it would be clear that our people 
are an unworthy, barbaric mass which should be compelled to obey. 
What is to be done ?-Truth resides only in the intelligentsia and 
in Europe. Therefore, even though you may have eighty million 
people (of which, it seems, you are boasting) yet all these millions, 
in the first place, must serve that European truth, because no other 
exists or can exist. The number of millions will not scare us. 
"Such is our usual inference, but now you have it in all its 
nakedness. We adhere to it. Indeed, should we accept your deduc­
tion, we could not join you in your conversations about such strange 
things as, for example, /e Pravoslavie (Orthodoxy) and its alleged 
particular significance. We hope that you will, at least, not demand 
this from us, eᅎpecially now when the last word of Europe and 
European science, in its general synthesis, is atheism, enlightened 
and humane, and we can no longer refrain from following Europe. 
"On this. ground, that part of your address in which you are 
praising us we may, perhaps, accept with certain reservations,-all 
right, we shall grant you this courtesy. As to the other half of "the 
address which relates to you and to all your "principles"-we beg 
your pardon : we cannot accept. : . . " 
Such may be the sad inference. J repeat : I should not dare 
attribute it only to those Westerners who shook my hand, but even 
to many, quite a few of the most enlightened Westerners, Russian 
workers and genuine Russians, who, despite their theories, are re­
spectable and esteemed Russian citizens. As against these, the mass 
of apostates, the mass of your Westerners, the mediocrity, the street 
through which the idea is being dragged, all those plebeians of the 
"orientation" (and they are as numerous as sand grains on the sea 
shore)-they will unfailingly say something on this order-perhaps 
they have already said it. (N. B. For instance, concerning religion, 
one of the periodicals, with its inherent wit, has already stated that 
the aim of the Slavophiles is to rebaptize all Europe into Ortho­
doxy.) 
However, let us set aside gloomy thoughts and let us place 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
hope in the leading representatives of our Europeanism. And should 
they accept at least one half of our inference and of our reliance 
upon them, theirs be honor and glory for this, and we should greet 
them with a delighted heart. Should they accept only one half, i.e., 
should they, at least, admit the iLdependence and individuality of 
the Russian spirit, the legitimacy o!: its being and its humanitarian, 
all-unifying aspiration,-there would be almost nothing to quarrel 
about, at least nothing essential and fundamental. In this case 
my address might actually serve as a basis for a new event. The 
address itself-this I repeat for the last time-was not an event (it 
does not deserve such an appellation) ; the great Pushkin festivities 
were what produced the event of our fellowship-a fellowship of 
all educated and sincere Russians for the sake of the future beau­
tiful aim. 
CHAPTER II 
Pushkin 
(A Sketch) 
D th•ercd on June 8 at a Mati11g of the Society of 
i..;Jcrs of Russian Literat-z.re. 
"PUSHKIN IS an extraordinary, and perhaps a unique, phe­
nomenon of the Russian spirit," said Gogol. For my own part, I will 
add : and a prophetic one. Yes, in his 11ppearance, to all us Rus­
sians, there is something indisputably prop"··':c. Pushkir. appeared 
precisely at the very inception of our true se. ಈonsciousness, which 
was then just coming into being and which origmated in our society 
after a whole century followimಉ Peter's refc>rm ; and his appearance 
greatly helped to illuminate our obscure path with a new guiding 
light. It is in this sense that Pushkin is a prophecy and a revelation. 
I divide the activity of our great poet into three periods. I 
am not speaking now as a literary critic : when referring to Push­
kin's creative work, I merely wish to explain my conception of his 
prophetic sigrificance to us, and my understanding ot this word. 
In passing, I may remark, however, that it seems to me that be­
tween the periods of Pushkin's activity there are ro clearly defined 
lines of demarcation. To my m; ·rJ the inception oi Eugene Onegin, 
for instance, belongs to the flrsL period, while its concluding part 
should be placed in the second period, when Pushkin had already 
found his ideals in his own country, and had fully and affectionately 
absorbed them in his loving and perspicacious soul. It is said that, 
in his. first period, Pushkin imitated the European poets-Parny, 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
Andre Chenier and others-but particularly-Byron. Yes, no doubt, 
the poets of Europe did exercise a strong influence upon the develop­
ment of his genius ; and maintained it throughout his life. Never­
theless, not even his earliest poems were mere imitations, so that 
even in them the extraordinary independence of his genius was re­
vealed. In imitations one never finds such personal suffering and 
such depth of self-consciousness as Pushkin revealed, for instance 
in his Gypsies, a poem which I ascribe entirely to the first period 
of his creative life. I do not speak of the creative potency and im­
petuosity which could not have been expressed so strongly had it 
been merely imitative. 
In the character of Aleko, the hero of the poem Gypsies, there 
is already revealed a strong, deep and purely Russian concept, which 
was subsequently expressed in such harmonious perfection in Eugene 
Onegin, where virtually the same Aleko is shown not in a fantastic 
light but in a palpably real and intelligible guise. In Aleko, Push­
kin had already discerned and ingeniously noted that unhappy wan­
derer in his native land, that traditional Russian suferer detached 
from the people who appeared in our society as a historical necessity. 
And, of course, Pushkin found him not only in Byron. Aleko's is a 
true and unmistakably conceived character, a lasting character long 
since native to our Russian land. These homeless Russian ramblers are 
wandering still, and it seems it will be long before they disappear. 
If, in our day, they no longer visit Gypsy camps with their wild and 
odd mode of living in a quest for their universal ideals and in order 
to seek refuge in the bosom of nature from the confused and in­
congruous life of our Russian educated society-all the same they 
embrace socialism, which did not exist in Aleko's times, and with 
their new creed they journey to another field, eagerly tilling it, be­
lieving, even as Aleko, that through this fantastic labor they will 
attain their goal and happiness not for themselves alone but for all 
men. A Russian sufferer in order to find peace needs precisely uni­
versal happiness : with nothing less than that is he content-of course, 
as long as the proposition is confined to theory. Essentially, it is 
the same Russian who appeared in a different epoch. 
This character, I repeat, came into being among our educated 
society detached from the people's might in the beginning of the 
second rentury after the great reform of Peter. Oh, an overwhelming 
majority of Russian intellectuals served peacefully in the days of 
Pushkin-just as now-as civil servants, in the government or on 
railroads and in banks, or otherwise earned their livelihood, or were 
even engaged in scientific work, in lecturing-in a regular, leisured 
and peaceful fashion, receiving salaries, playing preference,1 with no 
1A game of cards popular in Pushkin's time. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
inclination to take refuge whether in Gypsy camps or in other places 
more suited to our time. At the utmost they play at liberalism "with 
a tinge of European socialism" to which a certain benign Russian 
flavor is conveyed, but, after all, this is merely a matter of time. 
What of the fact that one man h::" not even begun to worry while 
another, encountering a locked door, has already smashed his head 
against it ?-In due time all men will meet the same destiny, unlcᅏs 
they choose the salutary road of humble communion with the people. 
And even if not all men meet this destiny : it suffices if "the chosen," 
one tenth, start worrying ; the great majority will lose peace through 
them. 
Of course, Aleko as yet does not know how to express cor­
rectly his anguish : in him all this is still an abstract mood : yearn­
ing for nature ; complaints against fashionable society ; universal 
aspirations ; laments over truth, somewhere and somehow lost, which 
he can nowhere find. In this there is something akin to Jean-Jacques 
Rousseau. Wherein that truth is, in what form and where it can 
appear ,  and prt:cisely when it was lost, of course, he does not know 
himself, but his is sincere suffering. A fantastic and impatient crea­
ture, he still awaits salvation pre-eminently from external things, 
as needs he must : "Truth," it is implied, "is somewhere without 
him, Sf·JIIP.where in other lands-Furopean, perhaps-with their solid 
historical order, with its settled social and civic mode of life." Nor 
will he ever comprehend that first of all truth is within himself. 
How can he understand this ?-He is an alien in his own country ; 
for a whole century he has been unaccustomed to work ; he is devoid 
of culture ; he has grown up as a damsel in a convent within closed 
walls ; he has fulfilled strange ,.,i\l unaccoun' '>le obligations asso­
ciated with this or that of the fourteen classeᅐ into which Russian 
educated society is divided. He is still nothing but a blade of grass 
torn from its roots and blown about by tne wind. This he feels : 
this makes him suffer-not seldom <;:lite acutely ! What if, perhaps 
belonging to hereditary nobility and possibly owning serfs, taking 
advantage of his noble birth, he, for once, allowed himself to indulge 
in a little whim of taking a fancy to people t:ving "without laws" 
in a Gypsy camp, leading a bear which performs ? Naturally a 
woman, "a wi1J woman," as the poet calls her, more than anyone 
could inspire him with the hope of deliverance from his anguish, 
and so, with light-minded but passionate credulity lte throws him­
self into the arms of Zemphira "Here"-says he-"is my escape ; 
here, perhaps, is my happiness-here, in the bosom of nature, far 
from fashionable society ; here-among men without civilization and 
without laws ! "  
And what is the outcome ?-At his first encounter with the 

970 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
conditions of wild nature he fails to restrain himself, and he stains 
his hands with blood. The poor dreamer proves unequal not only 
to universal harmony but even to those Gypsies who cast him away 
without vengeance, without malice, in na·ive dignity : 
"Depart from us, thou haughty man : 
We're wild, we have no binding laws, 
We neither punish nor torment." 
Of course, all this is fantastic, but "the haughty man" is 
genuine and is cleverly conceived. First he has been conceived in 
Russia by Pushkin ;-and this should be remembered. Quite so : the 
moment something goes against his grain, he is ready to devour his 
adversary to avenge his offenst', or-which is still handier-recalling 
his appurtenance to one of the fourteen classes, he may appeal (this 
did happen) to the chastising and torturing law, provided his per­
sonal wrong be thus avenged. 
Nay, this is an ingenious poem-not an imitation ! Here, indeed, 
we have the Russian answer to the "accursed question" in terms 
of the people's faith and truth : "Humble thyself, proud man ; above 
all, break thy haughtiness ! Humble thyself, idle man, and, first of 
all, labor on thy native land ! "-Such is the solution according to 
the people's truth and wisdom. "Truth is within-not without thee. 
Find thyself within thyself. Not others shouldst thou subdue ; subdue 
thyself ; be master of thyself-and thou shalt perceive truth. Not 
in things, not outside thee nor overseas is this truth, but above all 
in thine own labor for self-betterment. If thou conquerest thyself, 
if thou humblest thyself, then wilt thou be free beyond dreams ; 
thou wilt labor upon a great task ; thou wilt make others free and 
thou wilt find happiness, since thy life will be full, and thou wilt, 
finally, understand thine own people and their sacred truth. Neither 
with the Gypsies nor elsewhere is universal harmony provided if 
thou thyself art unworthy of it-if thou art given to malice and 
pride, if thou demandest life as a gift without even comprehending 
that it has to be paid for." 
This solution of the question is clearly indicated in Pushkin's 
poem. It is expressed still more clearly in Eugene Onegin, a poem 
which is no longer fantastic but tangibly realistic, in which genuine 
Russian' life is incarnated with such creative potency and complete­
ness as have never been witnessed either before or, perhaps, also 
since Pushkin. 
Onegin ·arrives from Petersburg-necessarily from Petersburg : 
it is imperative for the poem, and Pushkin could not miss such an 
important realistic trait in the biography of his hero. Onegin-1 re-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
971 
peat-is the same Aleko, particularly where he later exclaims in 
anguish : 
"Oh, why, like Tula's poor assessor, 
Am I not lying paralyzed ?" 
However, in the beginning of the poem, he is still half a dandy 
and half a man of the world ; as yet, he has not lived long enougb 
to be completely disillusioned in life. Even so, "the noble fiend of 
secret boredom" begins to visit and annoy him. 
It stands to reason that in the remote heart of his motherland 
he is in exile, not at home. He knows not what to undertake, and 
feels as if he were a guest in his own home. Later, when he roams, 
seized with anguish for his own land, in foreign countries and 
among strangers, as an unquestionably clever and sincere man he 
feels even more a stranger to himself. True, he, too, loves his coun­
try, but he does not trust it. Of course, he has heard about its ideals 
b1ᅑt he has no faith in them. He merely believes in an utter impos­
sibility oi any kind of work in his native land, and he looks upon 
the few-now as heretofore-who believe in this possibility with a 
sad smile. He killed Lensky out of mere spleen-which may have 
been an ')Utgrowth of a longing for some universal ideal : this is so 
typica! of us, so plausible. 
Quite different is Tatiana : hers is a strong character, firmly 
standing on her own soil. She is deeper than Onegin, and of course 
wiser than he. With her noble instinct she foresees where and in 
what truth resides, and this is revealed in the finale of the poem. 
Perhaps Pushkin might have done better b"d he called his poem 
by the name Tatiana, and not Onegin, sinct 
he is undeniably its 
protagonist. She is a positive, not a negativt, character ; she is a 
type of real beauty and an apotheosis of Russian womanhood, and 
it is to her that the poet assigned the task of expressing the idea 
of the poem in the famous scene oi her last meeting with Onegin. 
It may even be said that so beautiful and genuine a type of Rus­
sian woman has virtually never reappeared in our literature-save, 
perhaps, for the image of Liza in Turgenev'::. A Gentlefolk's Nest. 
However. the habit of looking down upon people accounts for 
the fact that Onegin altogether failed to understand Tatiana when, 
in a remote place, he met her first, in the humble guise of a pure and 
chaste girl, so abashed by his ;"'resence. He was unable to discern 
perfection in that poor girl, anu perhaps he even took her for a 
"moral embryo." She-an embryo ! And this-after her letter to 
Onegin I If there is a moral embryo in the poem it is, of course, 
Onegin himself-this is undeniable. Nor was he capable in the least 
of comprehending her, for did he know the human soul ?-AU his 

972 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY :  188o 
life he was an abstract man, a restless dreamer. And again he failed 
to appraise her later in Petersburg as a grande dame when, accord­
ing to his own words in his letter to Tatiana, he began "to com­
prehend her full perfection." But these were only words : unrecog­
nized and unappreciated she passed through his life, and therein lay 
the tragedy of their love. Oh, had only Childe Harold, at the time, 
in that country place, at their first meeting, or by some chance 
Lord Byron himself, arriving from England and taking notice of 
her timid, modest charm, pointed it out to him-oh, then Onegin 
would have been at once astonished and struck with admiration ; 
for there is, at times, in these universal sufferers a good deal of 
spiritual servility ! But this did not happen, and this seeker of uni­
versal harmony, having read to her hio; sermon and, after all, having 
honestly dealt with her, started off with his Weltschmerz, and with 
his hands stained with blood spilt in senseless anger, to roam in 
his native land forgetful of Tatiana, full to the brim. with health 
and strength, exclaiming with a curse : 
"Oh, I am young, and full of vigor ! 
On naught but anguish can I figure I "  
This Tatiana understood. In immortal strophes ·of his romance 
the poet shows her visiting the dwelling of that man who was then 
still fascinating and mysterious to her. I need not speak here about 
the artistic perfection and inimitable beauty of these lines. Here she 
is shown in his study. She examines his books, his various posses­
sions. She seeks, through them, to divine his soul-her riddle-and 
finally "that moral embryo," after a wistful pause, with a strange 
smile, foreseeing the solution of the enigma, gently whispers : "Isn't 
he a parody perchance ?" 
Yes, this she had to whisper-she did divine him. Long after­
wards in Petersburg, when they had met once more, she had com­
pletely comprehended his quality. By the way, who was it that said 
that life in the beau monde and at court had a pernicious effect upon 
her soul and that the position of a lady of fashion and the newly 
engendered ideas of fashionable society were partly the cause of 
her refusal of Onegin ? No, this is not so. No, it is the same, the 
former rustic Tanya ! She is not spoiled ; on the contrary, half­
broken, she suffers and feels oppressed by the pomp of Petersburg 
life. She hates her position as a lady of fashion, and he who judges 
her differently utterly fails to understand what Pushkin sought to 
express. Witli firmness she tells Onegin : 
"Pledged to another husband, I 
To him stay loyal, till I die." 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
973 
She says this precisely as a Russian woman ; therein is her apo­
theosis. She expresses the truth of the poem. Oh, I shall not say a 
word about her religious convictions, about her attitude toward the 
sacrament of marriage-upon this I shall not touch. Well, did she 
refuse to follow him, despite havil.ᅒ said to him : "I love you," be­
cause "as a Russian woman"-and uot a Southern or some French 
woman-she is incapablt' of so bold a step, or has no strength tp 
break her chains, to sacrifice the lure of honors, riches and her 
social position, the conventions of virtue ?-Nay, brave is the Rus­
sian woman. She will boldly follow that in which she believes-and 
this she has proved. But "having been pledged to another man," she 
will be "loyal to him unto death." To whom, to what is she faith­
ful ? To what obligations ?-To that old general whom she cannot 
love, since she loves Onegin, and whom she married because "her 
mother wept, adjured, bt'sought her," while in her offended and 
wounded soul there was then only despair, and no hope, no ray of 
lir;bt ?-Yes, she is loyal to that general, her husband, an honest 
man, who loves and respects her and takes pride in her. Even though 
her mother did "beseech" her, it was she, Tatiana, and no one but 
her, who gave her consent, and it was she who swore to be his faith­
ful wift'. Even though she married him in despair, now he is her 
husbanL1, and perfidy on her parᅓ would disgrace and shame him 
and this would be his death. But can one's happiness be founded 
upon another's unhappiness ?-Happiness is not confined to the mere 
delights of love ; it also involves the supreme harmony of the spirit. 
What will assuage the spirit if there is in the past a dishonest, 
merciless, inhuman act ? Dare she run away fr_ r the only rt'aᅔon that 
here might be her happiness ?-nut what kirᅕ 
of happiness would 
it be if it were based upon somebody's unhaᅖpiness ?-Please sup­
pose that yeu yourself are erecting an edifice of human destiny in 
order to bestow upon men aL last tranquillity and peace. And 
imagine, further, that for this end iᅗ is necessary and inevitable to 
torture to death only one human creature, moreover-not even so 
worthy a creature, which to some people may even seem ridiculous 
-not some Shakespeare, but simply an honest : !d man, the husband 
of a young wife whc.:;e love he blindly trusts, without, however, 
knowing her heart at all ; whom he respects ; of whom he is proud­
a husband who is happy with her and who has found his peace. And 
now it is he who must be di!'honored, disgraced J.nd tortured to 
death in order to erect upon the ᅘo.1ffering of this disgraced old man 
your edifice ! In these circumstances would you agree to be tht' 
archilect of such an edifice ?-That's the question. And can you con­
ceive, though for an instant, that men, for whom this edifice was 
erected, would agree to accept from you happiness if it were founded 

974 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
upon the suffering, let us say, of some negligible creature but one 
mercilessly and unjustly tortured to death ; or, if they accepted it, 
that they would forever stay happy ?-Tell me, could Tatiana with 
her lofty soul, with her heart so ennobled by suffering, have answered 
otherwise ?-Nay, a pure Russian heart gives this reply : "Let me 
alone be deprived of happiness ; let my unhappiness be immeas­
'ijrably greater than that of this old man ; finally, let no one ever, 
including the old man, learn about and appreciate my sacrifice, but 
I refuse to be happy by ruining another man ! "-This is tragedy : it 
does transpire, and Tatiana sends away Onegin. 
It may be argued that Onegin is also unhappy ; that by saving 
one man she ruined the other ! -Well, perhaps this is the cardinal 
point in the poem. By the way-the question why Tatiana refused to 
follow Onegin has, at least in our literature, a rather peculiar his­
tory. That is why I deemed it possible to elaborate on it. What is 
most characteristic is that the moral solution of this question has 
for a long time been in doubt. I reason this way : even if Tatiana 
had become free ; even if her old husband had died and she had be­
come a widow-even then she would not have gone away with Onegin. 
One has to comprehend the essence of her character : she knows 
who he is : he, the eternal wanderer ; he meets by chance the woman 
whom he had formerly neglected, in a new, brilliant, unattainable 
setting. Why, perhaps the essence of the matter is in that setting : 
the young girl whom he virtually used to despise, is now worshipped 
by the beau monde-that terrible authority to Onegin, who, despite 
his universal aspirations, throws himself, dazzled, at her feet I "This" 
-he exclaims-" is my ideal ! Here is my salvation ! This is my 
escape from my anguish, I failed to notice it and yet . . .  'So pos­
sible was happiness, so near I ' " 
And even as Aleko in the past turned to Zemphira, Onegin is 
now drawn to Tatiana, seeking all solutions in his new whimsical 
fantasy. And doesn't Tatiana perceive this in him ? Hasn't she ap­
praised him long ago ? She is firmly convinced that, strictly speak­
ing, he merely loves his new fancy, and not her, the hitherto humble 
Tatiana ! She knows that he takes her for something different-not 
for what she actually is ; that it is not she whom he loves ; that he 
is even incapable of loving anyone, despite the fact that he suffers 
so acut_!:ᅙY !-He loves his fantasy. But he himself is but a fantasy I 
Were she to follow him, the very next day be would be disillusioned 
and would regard his infatuation scoffingly. He is devoid of any 
soil ; he is a-blade of grass caught in a gust. 
Tatiana is very different ! -Even in despair, in the agony of her 
lucid recognition of the fact that her life is ruined-she is herself 
solid, unshakeable, something upon which her soul relies. These are 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
975 
the reminiscences of her childhood, of her birthplace, in a rural 
wilderness, where her humble and pure life began, 
"Ay, of that burial-ground so quiet, 
Where my poor nurse reposes now 
Beneath her cross and shadowing bough."1 
Oh, these reminiscences, these pictures of the past, to her are 
now more precious than anything else ; these images-nothing else is 
left to save her soul from ultimate despair. Nor is this a bagatelle ; 
nay, there is much in this, because this is a whole foundation, some­
thing indestructible and solid. Here is the link with the mother­
land, with her own people, with their sanctity. 
And what, by contrast, has he to offer ? Who is he ?-Certainly 
she would not follow him from mere compassion, to gratify him, to 
give him out of boundless loving pity, for a while at least, illusive 
h<1i T!ness, knP-ving certainly in advance that tomorrow he would 
deride it. Nay, there are deep and firm souls which, even though 
from infinite compassion, will not surrender their sanctity by doom­
ing it to dishonor. Nay, Tatiana never could have followed Onegin. 
Tᅚ.us, in Onegin, in that immortal and inimitable poem, Push­
kin, as no one ever before him, revealed himself as a great national 
writer. With one stroke, in a most precise and perspicacious manner, 
he indicated the innermost essence of the upper stratum of our society 
standing above the level of the people. Having traced the type of the 
Russian wanderer of all timr ; having been the first-by reason of 
his ingenious instinct, his historical fate, 1.;. immense ᅛignificance 
to our future ,:estinies-to place side by side . ith this type a char­
acter of positive and unquestioned beauty in the person of a Rus­
sian woman, Pushkin-also first among th ᅜ Russian writers in his 
other creations of the same period-showed us a whole gallery of 
genuinely beautiful Russian characters which he discovered in the 
Russian people. Their principal beauty lies in their incontestable 
and tangible truth, so that it is impossible to deny them, and they 
stand there as though sculptured. 
Once mr -e, I reiterate : I am not speaking as a literary critic, 
and for this reason I shall not dwell in any literary detail upon 
these ingenious creations of our poet. For instance it would be pos­
sible to write a whole book & ·"'Ut the character of the annalist­
monk, revealing the great importance and significance to us of this 
statrly Russian figure unearthed by Pushkin in the Russian soil. 
He revealed and moulded it, forever placing it before us in its in-
1Evg£'ny Ouegiu by A. S. Pushkin. Translated by Oliver· Elton. The 
Pushkih Press. London, 1939. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
disputable, humble and spiritually noble beauty as evidence of that 
potent spirit of Russian national life which is capable of producing 
characters of such incontestable truth. This character has been 
established ; it is here ; it cannot be denied by the assertion that it 
is mere fiction or a fantasy and idealization of the poet. You con­
template it, and you admit : yes, this exists. Therefore, the spirit 
o-f the people that conceived it must exist, and it is great and bound­
less. 
Everywhere in Pushkin there sounds a faith in the Russian 
character, in its spiritual might, and where there is faith there is 
hope, great hope for the Russian : 
"With hope for all the good and glory, 
I look ahead, devoid of fear," 
said the poet him!ielf, referring to another subject ; yet these words 
are directly applicable to his entire national creative work. And 
never was any Russian writer, either prior to Pushkin or since, so 
wholeheartedly and germanely at one with his people as he. It 
stands to reason that we have many writers who are connoisseurs 
of the people ; they write about the people with much talent, point­
edly and lovingly ; and yet, compared with Pushkin, they are verily, 
with one or at most two exceptions, among his latest followers, 
merely "gentlemen" writing about the people. In the most talented 
among them, even in these two exceptions just mentioned, now and 
then, suddenly there appears something haughty, !iomething be­
longing to a different world and mode of living, something of an 
effort to lift the people to these writers' level and thereby to bestow 
happiness on them. In Pushkin, however, there is precisely some­
thing genuinely akin to the people which reaches in him the point 
of almost naive emotionalism. Take his story about The Bear and 
the peasant who killed his "lady bear's mate" ; or recall the verses 
"Kinsman John, when we start drinking," and you will understand 
what I mean. 
All these artistic treasures and gems of creative insight were 
left by our great poet as mere landmarks for future artists and 
workers in the same realm. It may be positively asserted that had 
there ben no Pushkin the men of talent following him would be 
nonexistent. At least they would not have revealed themselves so 
potently and so clearly, despite their great gifts, as they did reveal 
themselves later, in our day. 
Still, the point is not confined to poesy alone, to mere artistic 
creation : had there been no Pushkin, perhaps our faith in our Rus­
sian individuality, in our national strength, and our belief in our 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
977 
future independent mission in the family of the European nations, 
would not have manifested itself with so unyielding a force as it 
did later (although not in everybody but only in very few). This 
exploit of Pushkin becomes particularly clear when what I call the 
third period of his creative work i.; examined. 
As stated, there are no clear-c.ut divisions between these peri­
ods. For instance, certain works of the third period could even have 
appeared at the very beginning of the creative work of our poet, 
since Pushkin was always, so to speak, a complete and homogeneous 
organism bearing within it at once all the beginnings, and not ac­
quiring them from without. External stimuli merely called forth in 
him what lay hidden in the depth of his soul. Even so, that or­
ganism developed, and the stages of its development may actually 
be traced ; in each one of them its intrinsic character may be indi­
cated and the gradual transformation from one period to another 
may be discerned. 
Thus, that group of his works may be placed in the third class 
which pre-eminently reflects universal ideas, poetic images of other 
nations in which their genius is incarnated. Some of these works 
appeared only after Pushkin's death. It is in this period that our 
poet revPals something almost miraculous and unheard-of, something 
never • •r tore recorded in any m: tion. In fact, in European belles­
lettres there were geniuses of immense creative magnitude-Shake­
speare, Cervantes, Schiller. But please point to even one of these 
geniuses who possessed such a universal susceptibility as Pushkin. 
And this faculty, the major faculty of our nationality, Pushkin 
shares with our people, and uy virtue of t l . i ࢎ he is pre-c•ninently 
a national poet. Even the greatest of the Eur 
ᅝan poets were never 
able to embody in themselves with such polency as Pushkin the 
genius of an alien, perhaps neighboring people-their spirit, its 
hidden depth, its longing for its predestination. In deaiing with for­
eign nations it may be said, on t;1e contrary, that the European 
poets reincarnated in them their own nationality, interpreting them 
from their own national point of view. Even in Shakespeare, his 
Italians, for instance, are almost invariabl:;. Englishmen. Pushkin 
alone-among all world poets-possesses the faculty of completely 
reincarnating in himself an alien nationality. Take his Scene from 
Faust, The Covetous Knight, or his ballade Onrr There Lived a 
Poor Young Knight. Read agairt his Don Juan, <.;;.:{ had it not been 
signed by Pushkin you would 
•• evt>r have guessed that it was not 
written by a Spaniard. What deep, fantastic images in the poem 
A /<east DuriPJg the PlaKuc ! But in these fantastic images one dis­
cerns the genius of England : this admirable song about the plague 
sung py the hero of the poem ; and Mary's Song, with those verses 

978 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
"Our children's cheerful voices 
In the noisy school were heard,-" 
these English songs, this anguish of British genius, its lamentations, 
its suffering presentiment of its future. Recall the strange poem : 
"When wandering once amidst a valley wild . . .  
" 
This is almost a literal rendition of the first three pages of a 
strange mystical book, written in prose by an ancient English sec­
tarian-but is it a mere rendition ?-In the sad and ecstatic music 
of these verses there sounds the soul of northern Protestantism, of 
an English sectarian leader, a boundless mystic with his dull, gloomy 
and irresistible aspirations and unrestraint of mystical reverie. When 
reading these queer verses, one feels the spirit of the age of the 
Reformation ; one begins to understand the militant fury of early 
Protestantism, history itself ; and one grasps it not only rationally, 
but as if one were physically present there, as if one had walked 
through an armed camp of sectarians, had sung their hymns with 
them, wept with them in their religious ecstasies and shared their 
creed with them. 
Apropos : compare this religious mysticism with the religious 
strophes from the Koran, or Imitations of the Koran : isn't this a 
Mohammedan ? Isn't this the very spirit of the Koran, its sword, 
the naive stateliness of its creed and its threatening power ? 
And again-here is the ancient world, here are The Egyptian 
Nights ; here are the earthly gods who seated themselves as such 
on the people's backs, gods already despising the genius of the 
people and their aspirations, no longer believing in that genius-gods 
who in fact became segregated gods, who grew mad in their isola­
tion, who in their weariness foresaw death, and who in their agony 
sought diversion in fantastic brutalities, in the voluptuousness of 
creeping things, of a female spider devouring its male. 
Nay, I assert emphatically that never has there been a poet 
with such a universal responsiveness as Pushkin. But it is not only 
a matter of susceptibility but also of its amazing depth-that rein­
carnation in his spirit of the spirit of foreign nations, an almost 
complete, and therefore miraculous, reincarnation. This phenomenon 
has bee, revealed in no other poet in the world. This we find in 
Pushkin alone, and in this sense he is a unique and unheard-of 
phenomenon, and to my mind a prophetic one . . . since it is ex­
actly in this that his national, Russian strength revealed itself most 
-the national character of his poetry, the national spirit in its future 
development and in our future, which is concealed in that which 
is already present-and this has been prophetically revealed by 
Pushkin. For what else is the strength of the Russian national spirit 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
979 
than the aspiration, in its ultimate goal, for universality and all­
embracing humanitarianism ? Having become fully a national poet, 
having come in contact with the people and their vigor, Pushkin 
at once began to foresee their future destiny. In this he was a 
diviner and a prophet. 
In fact, what has Peter's reform meant to us, not only from 
the standpoint of its effect upon the future but even in that whiᅞh 
has already come to pass and stands in full view ? What was the 
meaning of this reform ?-Surely, it was not a mere adoption by us 
of European dress, habits, inventions and science. Let us scrutinize 
the matter, let us examine it attentively. Yes, it is very possible 
that at first Peter conceived the reform in this narrow utilitarian 
sense. Later, however, in the subsequent elaboration of his idea, he 
certainly must have obeyed a certain concealed instinct which im­
pelled him in his work to aspire unquestionably for future, greater 
aims than mere utilitarianism. Likewise, the Russian people ac­
rf1l' "rl the reform not from mere utilitarian motives, but, no doubt, 
because they at once felt an infinitely loftier goal than mere utili­
tarianism. I repeat : they felt it unconsciously, and yet in a direct 
and vital manner. Indeed, at once we began to strive impetuously 
for the .. 1ost vital universal all-humanitarian fellowship. Not inim­
ically , 
•::. it would seem it shoulc have happened) but in a friendly 
manner, with full love, we admitted into our soul the genius of 
foreign nations, without any racial discrimination, instinctively man­
aging-almost from the first step-to eliminate contradictions, to 
excuse and reconcile differences, thereby manifesting our readiness 
and proclivity to enter into an all-embracin'? ᅟmiversal coMmunion 
with all the nationalities of the great Aryan 
·ces. 
Yes, the Russian's destiny is incontestauiy all-European and 
universal. To become a genuine and all-r01md Russian means, per­
haps (and this you should remember) ,  to become brother of all men, 
a universal man, if you please. Oh, all this Slavophilism and this 
Westernism is a great, although historically inevitable, misunder­
standing. To a genuine Russian, Europe and the destiny of the great 
Aryan race are as dear as Russia herself, as Lhe fate of his native 
land, because our destiny is universality acquired not by the sword 
but by the force of brotherhood and our brotherly longing for fel­
lowship of men. If you analyze our history after Peter's reform, 
you will find traces and indkat",ms of this idea, vi this fantasy of 
mine, in the character of our 1a1tercourse with European nations, 
even in our state policies. For what else has Russia been doing; in 
her policies, during these two centuries, than serving Europe much 
more than herself ?  I do not believe that this took place because of 
the mt're want of aptitude on the part of ou; statesmen. 
Oh, thf' peoples of Europe have no idea how dear they are to 

980 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
us I And later-in this I believe-we, well, not we but the future 
Russians, to the last man, will comprehend that to become a gen­
uine Russian means to seek finally to reconcile all European con­
troversies, to show the solution of European anguish in our all­
humanitarian and all-unifying Russian soul, to embrace in it with 
brotherly love all our brethren, and finally, perhaps, to utter the 
ultimate word of great, universal harmony, of the brotherly accord 
of all nations abiding by the law of Christ's Gospel ! 
I know, I know too well, that my words may sound ecstatic, 
exaggerated and fantastic. Be it so : I do not feel sorry for having 
uttered them. This had to be said, especially now, at the moment 
of our triumph, of the celebration of the memory of our great 
genius, who, in his creative work, incarnated precisely this idea. 
Besides, it has been expressed before : I am saying nothing new. 
What is most important-all this may sound conceited : "Is such 
a destiny"-it might be said-" to be bestowed upon our crude land ! 
Are we destined to utter the new word to mankind ?" Well, do I 
.speak of economic renown, of the glory of sword or science ?-I am 
.speaking merely of the brotherhood of men and of the fact that 
the Russian heart is more adapted to universal, all-humanitarian 
brotherly fellowship than any other nation. I perceive this in our 
history, in our gifted men, in the creative genius of Pushkin. Let 
our land be poor, but this destitute land "Christ, in a serf's garb, 
has traversed, to and fro, with blessing." Why shouldn't we em­
brace His ultimate word ? Wasn't He Himself born in a manger ? 
I repeat : at least we are already in a position to point to 
Pushkin, to the universality and all-humanitarianism of his genius. 
For wasn't he capable of embracing in his soul foreign genius as 
his own ? In art, at least, in creative achievement, he has indubitably 
revealed this universality of the Russian spirit, and this in itself is 
a great indication. If my idea is a fantasy-at least it has its sup­
port in Pushkin. Had he lived longer, perhaps he might have revealed 
great and immortal images of the Russian soul which would be 
intelligible to our European brethren ; he might have attracted them 
to us much more than they are attracted at present ; perhaps he 
might have explained to them the whole truth of our aspirations, 
and thus they would comprehend us better than at present and 
might fpresee our destiny ; they would cease to look upon us as 
suspiciously and haughtily as they still do. Had Pushkin lived 
longer, perhaps there would have been among us, too, less strife and 
misunderstamJing. But God willed differently : Pushkin died in the 
full bloom of his creative power, and no doubt he carried with him 
into his grave some great secret. And now we, with him no longer 
among us, are endeavoring to solve it. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
CHAPTER Il l 
Sci:;iny upon an Occasion 
Four lectures on different su!•jects apropos of one lecture read 
to me by Mr. Gradovsky. With an address to Mr. Gradovsky. 
CoNCERNING ONE :\losT IMPORTANT ജlATTER 
I WAS about to wind up my Diary, confming it to my Address 
delivered in Moscow on June 8 and the preface to it that I wrote 
anticipating a row which, in fact, burst out in our press after my 
Addras had appeart>d in The Moscow Gazette. But havinᅠ read 
Y<'llr rriticism. Mr. Gradovsky, I delayed the publication ǔf Tlze 
Diary in order to supplement it with my reply to your attacks. 
Indeed, my presentiments came true : a terrible row did break out. 
I was called "a coward," "a haughty man," "a :\lanilov," "a poet." 
It was :.uggcsted that police be summoned to restrain the public's 
outburᅡls-of course, moral, liber .1.l police. But why not actual police ? 
-In Russia they are not less liberal than those liberals who started 
howling at me. Well, there is little difference between the former 
and the latter ! 
For the time being, however, let us leave this aside. I shall 
turn directly to my reply to your points. T ᅢust confeᅣ;s from the 
very outset that personally I have nothinᅤ 
'1 common with you, 
and there is nothing for me to discuss with you : it is impossible 
for me to agree with you. For this reason I do not in the least intend 
either to convince or to dissuade you. Even in the past, when read­
·ing some of your articles, I used to wonder at the trend of your 
thoughts. Why, then, do I answer you now ?-Solely because I have 
others in mind, i.e., readers, who will settle our controversy. It is 
only for them that I am writing. 
I feel, l foresee, I can even perceive that there are new ele­
ments thirsting for a new word, weary of the obsolete liberal gig­
gling at any word of hope for Russia ; sick and tired of the former 
liberal toothless scepticism-of •ne old corpses which, by oversight, 
have not been buried, and which still regard themselves as the young 
genf'ration-of the antiquated liberal leader and savior of Russia 
whose character has fully revealed itself during the last twenty-five 
years, and who, according to the popular saying, is "a man aim­
lessly- shouting in a marketplace." In a word, I wish to state many 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
a thing, aside from my reply to your remarks, so that in giving my 
answer, I am, as it were, seizing upon an occasion. 
In the first place, you raise the question-and even reproach 
me for not having expressed myself more clearly : Whence did our 
"wanderers," about whom I spoke in my Address, come ? Well, this 
is a long story which one should begin from afar. Besides, no matter 
what I might reply in this connection, you would not agree with 
me because you have your own preconceived and ready solution : 
"Because"-you would say-"they were disgusted at living side by 
side with the Skvoznik-Dmukhanovskys, and also on account of the 
civic sorrow which they felt for the peasants, who, at that time, had 
not yet been liberated." Such an inference would be worthy of the 
contemporary liberal man, who, speaking generally, when it comes 
to Russia, has everything settled and signed with that extraordinary 
ease typical only of a Russian liberal. Nevertheless this is a more 
complicated question than you think-much more complicated­
despite your categorical solution. In due time I shall speak about 
"the Skvozniks" and "the civic sorrow." But first, permit me to 
refer to a most characteristic statement of yours, which you also 
express with a lightness bordering on frivolity, and about which 
I cannot keep silent. You say : 
"In one way or another, for two centuries we have been under 
the influence .of European enlightenment, which strongly affected 
us because of 'the universal susceptibility' of the Russian which 
Mr. Dostoievsky regards as our national trait. There is no way in 
which we can escape this enlightenment ;  nor is there any need for 
this. This is a fact which cannot be helped, for the reason that a 
Russian who desires enlightenment necessarily acquires it from a 
Western European source because of the total absence of Russian 
sources." 
Of course, this is sportively said, but you uttered an important 
word : "enlightenment." I wish to ask you what you mean by it ? 
Western science, useful knowledge, handicrafts, or spiritual enlight­
enment ? The former, i.e., science and trades, in truth, should not 
evade us, and there actually is no reason for us to seek to evade 
them. I am also in full accord with you that these can be acquired 
only from Western European sources, for which Europe deserves 
praise apd our eternal gratitude. But my conception of enlighten­
ment (and I believe that no one can have a different conception) 
coincides with what this word literally implies, i.e., spiritual light 
illuminating the soul, enlightening the heart, guiding the mind and 
indicating to it the road of life. If this be so, I wish to state to 
you that there is no reason for us to borrow such an enlightenment 
from Western European sources because Russian sources are fully 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
available-and not absent. You are surprised ? You see, in disputes 
I like to begin with the very essence of the matter, with the most 
controversial point. 
I assert that our people have long been enlightened, having 
embraced in their hearts Christ an11 His teachings. It may be argued 
that the people do not know the teachings of Christ, and that no 
sermons are preached to them. But this is a vain objection : thᅥy 
know everything, precisely everything that they have to know, al­
though they could not pass an examination in catechism. The people 
acquired their knowledge in churches where, for centuries, they have 
been listening to prayers and hymns which are better than sermons. 
They have been repeating and singing these prayers in forests, flee-. 
ing from their enemies, as far back as the time of Batyi\ invasion ; 
they may have been singing : "0 mighty Lord, be with us !" It may 
have been then that they memorized this hymn because at that time 
nothing but Christ was left to them ; yet in this hymn alone is 
Ci.1. :.:t':; whole t-uth. And what is there in the fact that few sermons 
are preached to the people and that chanters are muttering unintelli­
gibly ?-This is the most colossal accusation against our Church in­
vented by the liberals, coupled with that of the inadequacy of the 
Church- :,Javonic language supposedly incomprehensible to the com­
mon pevple I (And what about tne Old-Believers ?-Oh, God ! )  As 
against this, the priest reads : "God and Lord of my being,., etc. 
-and in this prayer the whole essence of Christianity is contained, 
its entire catechism, and the people know this prayer by heart. 
Likewise they know by heart the life-h:stories of many a saint ; 
they relate them and listen to thPm with p·,. -,;ion. 
However, the principal school of Christi, . :ty from which they 
have graduated is-those centuries of innumeraule and interminable 
sufferings which they have enilured in the r:ourse of their history, 
when, forsaken and oppressed by everybody, toiling for everybody, 
they remained with no one but Christ-the Consoler Whom they 
then embraced forever in their soul, and Who, as a reward for this, 
has saved their soul from despair ! 
However, why am I telling you all this i ls it conceivable that 
I seek to conv''1ce you ?-My words-this goes without saying-will 
sound childish to you, almost indecent. But I repeat-now for the 
third time-1 am not writing for you. Besides, this is an important 
theme : there is still much that ''as to be specially said about it, 
and I shall speak of it so long as I can hold the pen in my hand. 
At prt'sent, however, I shall express my thought only in its essential 
thesis : If our people have long been enlightened by the fact of their 
acceptance of the quintessence of Christ and His teachings, together 
with Him, they have embraced genuine enlightenment. With this fun-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
damental supply of enlightenment, Western sciences will become a 
real blessing to the people. They will not dim the image of Christ 
as in the West, where, however, it was dimmed not by science, as 
liberals maintain, but by the Western Church itself, which distorted 
it by transforming itself into a Roman state, having embodied the 
latter in the form of papacy. Indeed, in the West there is no longer 
Christianity, there is no Church, notwithstanding the fact that there 
still are many Christians who will never disappear. Catholicism, in 
truth, is no longer Christianity ; gradually it is transforming itself 
into idolatry, while Protestantism with gigantic strides is being con­
verted into atheism and into vacillating, fluent, variable (and not 
eternal) ethics. 
Of course, you will at once retort that Christianity and the 
worship of Christ do not at all exhaust the whole cycle of enlight­
enment ; that they are but one aspect ; that, on the contrary, there 
is need of sciences, civic ideas, progress, etc. To this I have nothing 
to say to you-arguing would be unbecoming, since, even though 
you are right to a certain extent, for example, as far as science is 
concerned, nevertheless you will never admit that the Christianity 
of our people must prevail forever, that it must always be the 
principal and vital foundation of their enlightenment ! In my ad­
dress I said that Tatiana, having refused to follow Onegin, acted 
in a Russian fashion, in accordance with the people's truth, whereas 
one of my critics, indignant at the idea that the Russian people 
possess truth of their own, unexpectedly retorted with the question : 
"What abollt incest ?"-Can such critics be answered ? Primarily, 
they feel insulted by the fact that the people can have a truth of 
their own, and therefore be genuinely enlightened. Why, is incest 
prevalent among the people as a whole, and does it exist as truth ? 
Indeed, our people are coarse, but by no means all of them-oh, 
not all of them ; I swear to this as a witness because I have ob­
served them, I know them, I lived with them a number of years, 
sharing my meals and sleeping with them ; I "was personally classed 
with villains" ;  I worked with them performing actual manual 
labor at a time when others were "dipping their hands in blood,"1 
toying with liberalism and giggling at the people, proclaiming in 
their lectures and journalistic feuilletons that there was "an impress 
of the }¥ast" upon the people. 
So, don't tell me that I do not know the people I I know 
them : it was because of them that I again received into my soul 
Christ Who had been revealed to me in my parents' home and 
Whom I was about to lose when, on my own part, I transformed 
myself into a "European liberal." 
INekrasov's verse, from A Knight for an Hour. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
But let us concede that our people are sinful and crude, that 
theirs is still a bestial image : 
"On his mother's back, funning, 
Sonny's takinf: a gay ride, 
While his young wife's running, 
Like a filly alongside-" 
Well, there must have been a reason for this folk song I All Rus­
sian songs are derived from some actuality-have you noticed this ? 
-But be fair just for once, you liberal fellows : try to recall what 
the people have endured in the course of so many centuries. Recall 
who is most to be blamed for their bestial image, and don't con­
demn them ! -Indeed, it is silly to accuse the peasant of the fact 
that his hair wasn't dressed in a French hairdresser's parlor on the 
Grand Morskayia !-And yet virtually such accusations are pro­
pounded when our European liberals hegin to rise against the Rus­
dഢn people ann start denying them ; claiming that they have failed 
to develop their individuality, and that they are devoid of na­
tionality I 
Oh, Lord ! -And in the West, wherever you please, among any 
people- is there less drunkenness and stealing ? Not the same bru­
tality t And besides-embitterm<!nt (which is absent in our people) 
and real, hundred-per-cent ignorance, thorough want of enligᅦlten­
ment, because, at times, it is combined with such lawlessness that 
it is no longer considered a sin, but it is actually treated as truth. 
Even so, let us concede that bestiality and sin are present among 
our people. But one thing is incontestabl? in their mass at least 
(not merely in ideal but in actual reality) t; · people do not accept 
-never will-their sins for truth ! They sin, but sooner or later, 
they always say : I did perpetrate an untruth. Even if he who sinned 
does not say it, somebody else will say it for him, and truth will 
be thus restored. Sin is stench, and stench is dispelled when the sun 
rises. Sin is a transient matter, whereas Christ is eternal. Daily 
the people sin and commit vi1lainies ; yet in their best moments, 
when they turn to Christ, they never err in tl uth. What is important 
is the thing in which the people believe as their truth ; in what 
they conceive and perceive in it ; what they recognize as their loftiest 
aspiration ; what they love ; what they are askin1: from God ; what 
they worshipfully lament. An·1 the people's ideai is-Christ. With 
Christ there comes, of course, ᅧnlightenment, and in their superior, 
critical moments our people always settle national matters-always 
have been settling them-in a Christian spirit. 
You may observe mockingly : "Lamenting and sighing are not 
enough : one has to do things-one has to exist."-Well, gentlemen, 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
Russian enlightened Europeans, have you many righteous men in 
your ranks ? Point to your righteous men whom you seek to sub­
stitute for Christ. But you should remember that among the people 
there are also righteous men. There are positive characters of in­
conceivable beauty and power who have not come within the range 
of your observation. Yes, there are righteous men and sufferers for 
tqe truth-whether or not we happen to see them. It seems to me 
that he who is capable of seeing, of course, will see and understand 
them ; he, however, who perceives nothing but the image of the 
beast will see nothing. The people at least know and believe that 
righteous men exist ; this knowledge fortifies the people, inspiring 
them with the hope that at the eleventh, fatal hour these men will 
save them. And, in fact, how many times the people did save our 
fatherland ! -Only recently the people, though sinking in sin, drunk­
enness and lawlessness, the people, as a whole, were spiritually 
gladdened by the last war for Christ's faith of the Slavs trampled 
upon by the l\lohammedans. The people accepted this war, they 
seized upon it as upon an expiatory sacrifice for their sins and 
lawlessness ; they sent their sons to give their lives for a holy cause, 
and they did not vociferate that the ruble was going down, and 
that the price of meat was going up. They listened avidly to war news, 
they eagerly inquired and read about it, and we all witnessed this. 
I know.: the people's spiritual enthusiasm, and particularly 
the motives behind it are being denied by our liberals ; they scoff 
at this idea. "These rascals"-they imply-"have a constructive idea ; 
they have a- civic sentiment, a political thought ! -Can this be con­
ceded ?" Why is it that our European liberalism so often adopts a 
hostile attitude toward the people ? Why is it that in Europe those 
who call themselves democrats invariably stand in defense of the 
people, or at least rely on them, whereas our democrats are fre­
quently aristocrats, and, in the last analysis, almost always they 
come out in support of everything that tends to suppress the people, 
and they wind up with sheer domineering ? Oh, I am not asserting 
that they are conscious enemies of the people, but the tragedy lies 
in the lack of consciousness. You will be incensed with these queries 
of mine. Be it so. To me all these are axioms, and, of course, I shall 
not cease to explain and expound them as long as I continue to 
write aqd speak. 
Thus, let us finish : science is one thing, but we do not have 
to borrow "enlightenment" from Western-European sources, lest 
we adopt such social formulre as : "Chacun pour soi et Dieu pour 
tous" or "A pres moi le deluge." People will at once start shouting : 
"Don't we have similar sayings ? Don't we have the adage : 'Old 
hospitality is not remembered,' and hundreds of other aphorisms 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
of the same kind ?" -Quite so, the people have different by-words : 
the mind of the people is broad ; so is their humor. Developing con­
sciousness always prompts negation ; yet all these are mere by­
words, and the people do not believe in their moral truth, they joke 
about them and scoff at them ; the people reject them-at least the 
people as a whole. But would you venture to assert that "Chacu" 
pour soi et Dieu pour tous" is a mere adage and not a social for­
mula commonly adopted in the West which everybody serves and 
believes ?-at least all those who rule the people, keep them in check, 
who own the land and the proletarian, who stand on guard over 
"European enlightenment" ?-Why do we have to have such an 
enlightenment ? Let us try to find at home a different kind of en­
lightenment. Science is one proposition and enlightenment another. 
With faith in the people and their strength, we may develop 
some time in the future our Christian enlightenment in its full 
brightness and radiance. It stands to reason that you will tell me 
tbഅ :.11 this iഭ but protracted and idle talk, and not an answer to 
your criticism. Be it so. I consider this an introduction, and a neces­
sary one. Just as you find and note in my Address such points of 
disagreement as, from your own standpoint, are the most important, 
so I, ᅨJr my part, have noted and set forth that point in your 
article which I consider the main point of our disagreement, as it 
serves as an obstacle to reaching an accord with you. However, the 
preface is finished, and let us turn to your criticism, this time with­
out further deviations. 
2 
ALEKO AND DERJIMORDA. ALEKO 's SuFFERING FOR THE 
PEASANT SERF. ANECL JTES 
Criticizing my Address, you write : 
"But Pushkin portraying Aleko and Onegin with their nega­
tion did not show precisely what they 'denv,' and therefore it is 
extremely hazardous to assert that they specifically deny 'the peo­
ple's truth,' 1 t.,e fundamental principles of the Russian world out­
look. This is perceived nowhere." 
Whether or not it is perceived ; whether or 1.ot it is hazardous 
to make the above assertion- ··rill be discussed forthwith. First, 
however, let us deal with your statement about the Dmukhanovskys 
frorn whom Aleko supposedly fled to the Gypsies : 
"But it is true that the world of the roamers of those days"-you 
write-"was one renouncing another world. For the interpretation of 
these characters other characters have to be considered which Push-

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
kin did not portray, although at times he referred to them with burn­
ing indignation. The nature of his talent prevented him from sinking 
into that gloom and treating these owls and bats, filling the basements 
(even more so, perhaps, the upper stories) of the Russian abode 
as 'pearls of creation' :  This was done by Gogol-the great reverse 
side of Pushkin. He told the world why Aleko made his escape to 
the Gypsies ; why Onegin felt bored ; why there came into being 
'superfluous men' immortalized by Turgenev, Korobochka, Sobake­
vich, Skvoznik-Dmukhanovsky, Derjimorda, Tiapkin-Liapkin-this 
is the shadowy side of Aleko, Beltov, Rudin and many others. This 
is the background without which the characters of the latter are 
unintelligible. And Gogel's heroes were Russian-oh, how genuinely 
Russian ! There was no W eltschmerz in Korobochka ; Skvoznik­
Dmukhanovsky managed to perfection to deal with the storekeep­
ers ; Sobakevich knew his peasants from A to Z, and they clearly 
saw him through. Of course Aleko and the Rudins neither saw nor 
comprehended all this ; they simply fled wherever they could : Aleko 
to the Gypsies, Rudin to Paris to give his life for an altogether 
alien cause." 
You see, they simply fled. Oh, the journalistic ease of the 
solution ! How simply everything transpires in your opinion ; how 
ready and predetermined ! -Verily, yours are ready-made words. 
By the way, why did you start dwelling upon the subject that 
Gogo] 's heroes were Russians-"oh, how genuinely Russian ! "-This 
is quite irrelevant to our controversy. Besides, who does not know 
that they were Russians ? Aleko and Onegin, too, were Russians ; 
you and I are Russians. Likewise Rudin was a Russian, a full­
fledged Russian, who ran away to Paris to give his life for a cause 
which, according to you, was quite alien to him. He was a Russian 
in the strictest sense precisely for the reason that the cause for 
which he died in Paris was by no means so alien to him as it would 
have been to an Englishman or a German, since a European, uni­
versal, all-humanitarian cause has long ceased to be alien to a 
Russian. This is Rudin's distinguishing mark. Strictly speaking, 
Rudin's tragedy lay in the fact that he found no labor to perform 
on his own soil, and died in a foreign land, but not as foreign as 
you maintain. 
This is, however, the point : despite the fact that all these 
Skvozniks and Sobakevichs were Russians, nevertheless they were 
corrupted Russians, detached from their soil ; although they were 
familiar with ·one aspect of the people's mode of living, still they 
knew nothing about its other aspect ; they did not even suspect its 
existence-this is the whole point. They did not even suspect the 
existence of the people's soul, the things for which the people were 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
thirsting and praying, because they profoundly despised the people. 
They denied in the people any soul, save for the purpose of the census. 
You claim that "Sobakevich knew his peasants from A to Z." This 
is impossible : he perceived in his Proshka nothing but a labor unit 
which he could sell to Tchitchikov. You say that Skvoznik-Dmu­
khanovsky managed to perfection to deal with the merchants. For 
goodness' sake ! Read the bailiff's monologue to those store-keepers 
in the fifth act : in this manner one speaks, perhaps, to dogs, but 
not to human beings. Does this mean to deal with the Russian "to 
perfection" ? Is it possible that you are praising him ?-Why, he 
had really better have smacked them on their faces or pulled them 
by their hair ! 
In my childhood I saw once on a highway a state courier in 
uniform with flaps, wearing a three-cornered hat with a feather 
sticking in it, brutally with his fist beating the driver un his nape, 
while the latter madly whipped the steaming troika racing at full 
.spec•l Of cou. ᅩe this courier was Russian by birth, but one so 
blinded, so alienated from the people that he did not know how 
to deal with a Russian otherwise than with his heavy fist in lieu 
of conversing with him in any mannrr whatsoever. And yet he 
spent 'lil his life in the company of postboys and Russian com­
moners of every kind. However, the flaps of his uniform, his feath­
ered hat, his polished Petersburg boots, to him were spiritually 
dearer not only than the Russian peasant, but perhaps than Russia 
in toto, which he crossed from one end to the other, in which, 
probably, he found nothing remarkable or worthy of note other than 
his own fist or the kick of his _;:)·-·lished bout The whole oi Russia 
represented itself to him merely in the guise .Jf his superiors, out­
side of whom virtually nothing was worthy of existence. How could 
such a fellow understand the people's esst.1ce and tht>ir soul ! Al­
though a Russian, he was a "Eur"pean'' Russian, only one who 
had embarked upon his Europeanism not with education but with 
debauchery, just in the same way as many others did. Yes, sir, 
this debauchery on many occasions was helil in Russia to be the 
surest means of convᅪrting Russians into Europeans. Indeed, the 
son of that sta.Le-messenger might have become a professor, i.e., a 
patented European. 
And so, don't speak about their understandir.ᅫ·. of the people's 
essence. We had to have Pushk ., the Khomiakovs, the Samarins, 
the Aksakovs before we could begin to speak about the people's 
essenᅬe. (Although prior to them this subject used to be discussed 
but in a somewhat pseudo-classical and histrionic fashion.) And 
when they began to speak about "the people's truth," everybody 
looked· upon them as epileptics and idiots whose ideal was "eating 

990 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
radishes and writing denouncements." At first their appearance and 
opinions surprised everybody to such an extent that liberals began 
to wonder : aren't these men about to start denouncing them ?-It 
is up to you to decide whether or not our contemporary liberals 
have much advanced from that silly view on Slavophiles. 
But let us turn to business. You state that Aleko fled to the 
Gypsies from Derjimorda. Let us concede that this is true. But 
the worst thing is that you, Mr. Gradovsky, with full conviction 
admit Aleko's right to such surliness. You imply : "He could not 
have failed to flee to the Gypsies because Derjimorda was too re­
pulsive." But I assert that in a certain sense Aleko and Onegin were 
also Derjimordas, and perhaps even worse than these, with that 
difference only that I am not accusing them in the least, fully 
realizing the tragedy of their fate, whereas you are lauding them 
for their escape. "Such great"-you seem to imply-"such interest­
ing men were unable to live on good terms with such monsters." 
You are awfully mistaken. You infer that Aleko and Onegin did 
not in the least alienate themselves from their native soil and did 
not deny the people's truth. Moreover, you seem to say : "they 
were by no means haughty ! "-This is what you maintain. Well, in 
this case haughtiness is a logical and unavoidable consequence of 
their abstraction and their detachment from their own soil. Indeed, 
you cannot deny the fact that they did not know their soil, that 
they grew and were brought up as if in a convent. They acquired 
their knowledge of Russia in Petersburg, through bureaucratic chan­
nels, and their relations with the people were those of a master 
with his serf. Let us even admit that at times they lived in the 
country, in proximity to the peasant. My state messenger, all life 
long, rubbed shoulders with postilions, and admitted that they were 
worthy of nothing but his fist. Aleko and Onegin behaved in Russia 
haughtily and impatiently like all men who live in a small group 
segregated from the people, fully provided for, i.e., supported by 
the peasant's labor and depending on European education, which 
they also received gratuitously. The very fact that our educated 
classes, as a result of historical preparation, virtually throughout 
our whole national existence have been converted into lazy crea­
tures, explains their abstraction and alienation from their native 
soil. Thᅭ perished not because of Derjimorda as such but because 
they were unable to explain to themselves the phenomenon of Der­
jimorda and its origin. For this they were too proud. But having 
failed to find tbe meaning of Derjimorda, they deemed it impossible 
to toil on their native soil, regarding those who believed in such 
a possibility as blockheads or as Derjimordas themselves. 
These roamers exalted themselves not only over the Derji-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
991 
mordas but over Russia as a whole, because Russia, in their last anal­
ysis, was populated only with serfs and Derjimordas, whereas if there 
were nobler elements there, they were composed of Alekos and 
Onegins, and of no one but them. This line of reasoning inevitably 
leads to haughtiness : dwelling in a state of segregation they natu­
rally began to wonder at their own nobility and superiority over 
the vile Derjimordas whom they were unable to comprehend. Hjld 
they not been uppish they would have perceived that they were 
Derjimordas themselves, and having comprehended this they might 
have found a way to reconciliation. With regard to the people there 
was on their part a feeling not merely of haughtiness but of aver­
sion, and this was the general rule. 
You will not believe all this. On the contrary, while admitting 
that in the Alekos and Onegins certain traits are truly unbecoming, 
you haughtily start reproaching me for the narrowness of my view 
that '·it is hardly reasonable to cure the symptoms leaving the root 
(,f 1 h,. disease :ntact." You assert that when I say : "Humble thy­
self, haᅮghty man," I am thereby accusing Aleko of his personal 
qualities, overlooking the root of the matter, "as if the essence of 
it resides in the individual qualities of those exalting themselves 
and ref using to humble themselves.'' "The question has not been 
deciderr·-you say-"over what did these wanderers exalt them­
selves. Equally, another question remains unanswered : Before what 
should they humble themselves ?"-On your part, all this is very 
presumptuous. It is apparent that I clearly inferred that "the roam­
ers" were a product of the hi'ltorical course of development of our 
society. This means that I am not placi .. ࢍ: the full blame upon 
them personally and upon their personal qt . 'ities. You have this 
in my Address which was written and pubhshed. Why, then, do 
you distort my views ? Quoting my tirade · "Humble thyself," you 
write : 
"In these words ::\lr. Dostoievsky has expressed 'the holy of 
holies' of his convictions, that which at once constitutes both the 
strength and weakness of the author of The Brothers Karamazov. 
These words comprise a great religious ideal, a potent sermon of 
personal mor;,!ity, but they contain no inkling of social ideals." 
And after these words you begin at once to criticize the idea 
"of personal betterment in the spirit of Christian lnve." I shall turn 
in a minute to your opinion t 
"self-betterment," but first I will 
unfold for you your underlying idea, which it seems you seek to 
conceal : You grew angry at me not only because I accused "the 
wanderer," but because I do not perceive in him an ideal of moral 
perfection, a sound, healthy Russian which he can and must be 1 
When you admit that in Aleko and Onegin there are "unbecoming 

992 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1 88o 
traits" you are merely dodging the issue. According to your inner 
conviction, which for some reason you do not wish to reveal com­
pletely, "the wanderers" are normal and beautiful, beautiful in the 
fact itself that they have fled from the Derjimordas. Your indigna­
tion is at once aroused the moment one ventures to perceive in them 
the slightest defect. You state specifically : "It would be nonsensical 
tq maintain that they perished because of their uppishness and their 
refusal to be humbled before the people's truth." Finally you are 
ardently arguing, and insisting, that they were the ones who liber­
ated the peasants. You state : 
"I will say more : If there was any thought conserved in the 
souls of the best of 'those wanderers of the first part of our cen­
tury,' it was precisely the thought about the people, while their 
most burning hatred was directed against serfdom which oppressed 
the people. Even though they loved the people and hated serfdom 
in their own, if you please 'European,' way, nevertheless, who but 
they prepared our society for the abolition of serfdom ?-They, too, 
have served their 'native soil' as best they could-originally as 
preachers of liberation and later as peace mediators of the first 
period." 
Therein is the point that "the wanderers" hated serfdom "in 
their own European way." The point is in the fact that they hated 
serfdom not f-or the sake of the Russian peasant who worked for 
them and fed them, and whom they, among others, oppressed. If 
civic sorrow was so painful to them that they had to flee to the 
Gypsies or to the barricades in Paris-who prevented them from 
simply liberating their peasants with land, and in this way from 
removing that civic sorrow, at least from their personal responsi­
bility? But we heard little about such liberations, whereas there was 
quite a bit of civic howling. The implication is that "the milieu 
ruined their souls ; and, besides, why should one be deprived of his 
capital ?" Well, why shouldn't they have been deprived of their cap­
ital if their sorrow for the peasants was so intense that they had 
to run away to the barricades ?-Therein is the point that in that 
"little spot called Paris" money was needed, even though one took 
part in the fight on the barricades, so that serfs had to send their 
poll-tax anyway. Why, these gentlemen acted even in a simpler 
manner they pledged, sold or exchanged (what's the difference ! )  
their peasants, and having thus raised money, they went to Paris 
and financed there the publication of French radical newspapers and 
magazines for the salvation of mankind, and not just of the Russian 
peasant. 
You assure us that sorrow for the peasant serf devoured all 
of them. Not really for the peasant serf, but abstract sorrow about 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
993 
slavery prevailing in mankind. "This shouldn't be ! This is unen­
lightened. Let's have Libcrte, Egalite ct FratcmiU !" :\s for the 
Russian peasant in particular, sorrow for him, maybe, did not tor­
ment these great hearts at all. I know and have memorized many 
sayings of the most "enlightenell" men of the good old times. 
"Slavery"-they used to say, in their intimate talks among them­
selves-"is unquestionably a great evil. But taking everything int-o 
account, are our people-a people ? Are they akin to the Paris peo­
ple of 1 793 ?  Why, they are used to slavery ; their faces, their forms, 
are the expression of slavery. Or take the rod, for instance. Gen­
erally speaking, of course, it is an awful abomination. But, really, 
the Russian still needs it : the good little peasant has to be flogged ; 
he would start agonizing should he not be flogged. Such is our na­
tion ! "-In days gone by I used to hear such conversations, and 
I swear, opinions of this kind used to be expressed even by quite 
enlightened men. This is sober truth. Perhaps Onegin did not flog 
hiഄ iwᆗ.;sc-serv::..Jts, although I woulrl not swear to this. But Aleko, 
I am sure, now and then flogged his serfs-and not because of the 
cruelty of his heart but almost from compassion, for a good enrl : 
"Why, he needs it ; he can't live without being flogged a little. He 
comes ' ,  his own accord and begs : · :\laster, do please flog me, make 
a man of me ! I'm completely spoiled ! '  Well, what's to be done 
with such a nature, I ask you : so one has to satisfy him and ad­
minister a little flogging ! "  
I repeat, their feeling for the peasant often bordered on 
squeamishness. And to think of the number nf contemptuous anec­
dotes about the Russian peasrPᅯ which c;r, l.ated among them­
despicable, obscene anecdotes about his slavb, · soul, his "idQiatry," 
his priest, his woman. And all these were told with a light heart 
sometimes by people whose (•Wn family ᅰ:fe reminded one of a 
brothel. Of course, this was not always due to something evil ; at 
times this resulted from a too enthusiastic susceptibility to the 
latest European ideas a la Lucrezia Floriani, for instance, inter­
preted and embraced with Russian impetuosity. They were Russians 
in everything ! 
Oh, the Russian lamenting roamers, at times, were great 
rogues, Mr. Gradovsky. Now, these very anecdotes about the Rus­
sian peasant and the contemptuous attitude to\\ -ud him almost 
always alleviated in their heartᅱ he sharpness of their civic sorrow 
caused by serfdom, thus conveying to it an abstract universal char­
actel with which one can live on very good terms, spiritually feed­
ing oneself· on the contemplation of one's TJloral beauty and on the 
largesse of civic thought, while feeding the body-and feeding it 
well-with the poll-tax levied from those same peasants ! One doesn't 

994 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
have to go far : only recently an old timer told an anecdote in a 
magazine about outstanding Russian liberals of those days, and 
universal minds, meeting a Russian peasant woman. Those were 
arrant, so to speak, patented wanderers who became known as such 
in history. You see, once upon a time, in the summer of 1 845, there 
gathered a great multitude of guests in a gorgeous suburban l\los­
cow villa where, according to the same oldtimer •·colossal dinner 
parties" used to be given : among the guests there were many most 
humane professors, most renowned lovers and connoisseurs of the 
fine arts and of some other things, most famous democrats, sub­
sequently noted politicians of universal importance, critics, writers, 
and intellectually most charming ladies. Presently the whole com­
pany, after a champagne dinner with fish-pies and bird-milk1 (there 
must have been a reason for calling these dinners •·colossal" ! ) , went 
for a stroll into the fields. In a remote part of a corn-field they 
encountered a woman reaper. We all know what harvest time is : 
peasants-men and women-get up at four o'clock in the morning, 
and they go to gather the crops, toiling till late at night. Reaping, 
having to stoop down for twelve hours, is hard work ; the sun burns 
mercilessly. When a woman reaper works in a corn-field, one can't 
even see her. Well, it was there, amidst the corn, that our dis­
tinguished company came across the woman reaper, and, imagine 
-she "in a primitive costume" (with only a shirt on her ! ) . How 
dreadful ! Universal humane sentiment is aroused at once, and an 
insulted voice sounds : "Am·ong all women it is only the Russian 
woman who" is ashamed of nobody ! "  And, of course, the inference 
is readily drawn : "Only the Russian woman is of a kind before 
whom nobody is ashamed of anything." (Does it mean that one 
shouldn't be ashamed of anything ?)-There ensued a dispute : some 
came out in defense of the peasant woman. But what kind of de­
fenders were they, and· with what arguments did they have to con­
tend ? . . .  
Such were the opinions and contentions which prevailed among 
a crowd of roaming landowners, drunk with champagne and feast­
ing on oysters-and on whose money ? Well, on money earned by 
that very woman reaper ! Why, it was for you, universal wanderers, 
that she toiled ; it was through her labor that you got satiated. Be­
cause, ႊmidst the corn, where nobody sees her, tormented by the 
sun and sweat, she took off her linen skirt, with nothing but a shirt 
on her-because of this you called her shameless, and your delicate 
sense of shame was insulted ? "The most shameless among all 
women ! "  Eh, you chaste fellows I What about your Parisian "diver­
sions" I What about your sportiveness in that "little spot called 
lAn ironic Russian !;)hrase, connoting a very choice meal. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
995 
Paris" ! And that neat little cancan at the Bal-ᅲIabille, which made 
Russian fellows thaw from the very account of it ! And that charm­
ing little song : 
"Ma commere, auand je dance, 
Comment va mon cotillon ?" 
with a graceful lifting of the petticoat and jerking of the posterio.rs 
-does all this incense our chaste Russian fellows ?-On the contrary, 
it captivates them. "We beg your pardon-they stage it so grace­
fully-that little cancan, those sportive little jerks-indeed, this is 
a most elegant article de Paris, sui generis, whereas here, what is 
there ?-A peasant woman, a Russian peasant woman, a log, a block ! "  
Nay, here we have not merely a deep belief in the nastiness 
of our peasant and our people : here the sentiment has grown to 
the point of personal squeamishness toward the pea.;ant, oh, of 
course, involuntary, almost unconscious, not even noticed on their 
pa. ࢌ-
I confess, Mr. Gradovsky, that I utterly disagree with your 
cardinal thesis : "Who but they prepared our society for the aboli­
tion of serfdom ?"-Perhaps, by means of abstract chit-chat with 
an effl,._ ion of civic sorrow according to all the rule!'i ! -Well, of 
course, tnis was added to the sum total, and may have served the 
cause. However, the liberation of the peasants was fostered, and 
those working for their liberation were helped, by men of the type 
of Samarin, for example, and not by your roamers. Mr. Gradovsky, 
there appeared a multitude of men of Samarin's pattern-which does 
not in the least resemble that of the wanr.ᅳ:-,.rs-who offered their 
services to the great work of those days. But, . • course, there is not 
a word about them in your article. As for the roamers, they evi­
dently very soon grew tired C'f it, and, ag"l.in, they began to pout 
squeamishly. They would not have been roamers had they acted 
differently. Having receiveJ their redemption payments, they began 
to sell their lands and forests for extermination and deforestation 
to merchants and kulaks, they expatriated themselves, inaugurat­
ing absenteeism. . 
. 
. 
It stand · to reason that you, Mr. Professor, will not agree 
with my opinion. But what can I do ?-Under no circumstance can 
I consent to recognize the character of this Russia·; superior liberal 
man-so dear to your heart-as l,e ideal of a genume, normal Rus­
sian, which supposedly he actually Wds, is and must be in the future. 
During the last decades nothing very constructive has been accom­
plished by these men on their native soil. This is a more correct 
statement than your dithyramb glorifying these gentlemen of days 
gone by. 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
3 
Two HALVES 
Now I am turning to your views on "individual self-better­
ment in the spirit of Christian love" and on its alleged utter in­
s.ufficiency in comparison with "social ideals," and, principally-with 
"social institutions." You begin with the statement that this is the 
cardinal point of our disagreement. You write : 
"Now we come to the most important point of our disagree­
ment with Mr. Dostoievsky. Insisting on humility before the people's 
truth, before the ideals of the people, he accepts this 'truth' and 
these ideals as something ready-made, immutable and eternal. We 
venture to tell him-no ! The social ideals of our people are still 
in the process of formation, development. The people have to labor 
much upon self-betterment in order to be worthy of being called 
a great people." 
Partly, in the beginning of my article, in its first subdivision, 
I have already answered you on the question of "truth" and the 
ideals of the people. This truth and these ideals you positively con­
sider insufficient for the development of Russia's social ideals. Re­
ligion-you imply-is one proposition, while the social cause is a 
different one. With your scientific knife, you are cutting a live, 
homogeneous organism into two separate halves, and you assert that 
they must be altogether independent one from the other. Let us 
scrutinize tlre matter more closely, let us analyze each half sepa­
rately, and perhaps we shall arrive at something. First, let us deal 
with the half pertaining to "self-betterment in the spirit of Chris­
tian love." You state : 
"Mr. Dostoievsky urges that we start working upon ourselves 
and. that we humble ourselves. Of course, individual self-betterment 
in the spirit of Christian love is the major premise of any activity, 
whether great or small. But from this it does not follow that men 
personally perfect in a Christian sense necessarily form a perfect 
society. Let us cite an example. 
"The Apostle Paul instructed slaves and their masters con­
cerning their mutual relations. Both the former and the latter may 
have obfWed, and usually did obey, the Apostle's words ; individually 
they were good Christians ; nevertheless, slavery thereby was not 
made sacred, and it continued to be an immoral institution. Equally, 
Mr. Dostoievsky, like every one of us, used to know admirable 
Christian landowners and peasants. Serfdom, however, continued to 
be an abomination in God's judgment, and the Russian Czar-Lib­
erator came forward as a champion not only of personal, individual 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
997 
morality but also of social morality, of which in olden times there 
were no adequate conceptions, notwithstanding the fact that there 
were, perhaps, more 'good men' than at present. 
"Individual and social morality do not constitute one and the 
same thing. From this it follows that no social improvement can 
be achieved only through the betterment of the personal qualities 
of men constituting a society. I shall again cite an example. Let 
us suppose that beginning with the year x8oo a number of preach­
ers of Christian love and humility had started to improve the mo­
rality of the Korobochkas and Sobakevichs. Could it be presumed 
that they would have succeeded in abolishing serfdom, that this 
'phenomenon' could have been eliminated without the utterance 
of the Imperial word ? On the contrary, Korobochka would have 
begun to argue that she was a true Christian woman and a genuine 
'mother' of her peasants, and she would have clung to this con­
viction despite all the arguments of the preacher . . . .  
''ᅴlen's Letterment in a social sense cannot be accomplished 
by mere work 'upon oneself.' One may work upon self-improvement 
and subdue one's passions in a wilderness and on a desert island. 
But as social heings men develop and improve in working beside 
each other, one for the other and one with the other. This is why 
social progress is so greatly dependent upon social institutions which 
mould in man if not Christian, then civic virtues." 
See how much I have quoted from you ! All this is awfully 
haughty and ''individual self-Letterment in the spirit of Christian 
love" certainly has got "a black eye" : in civic matters-you imply 
-it is virtually good for nothi11g. Verily, 
.,. 'U understand Chris­
tianity in a most curious way I Presuming :nat Koroboch)ta and 
Sobakevich might have become true, perfect Christians (you speak 
yourself about perfection)-could they be i,tduced to renounce serf­
dom ? This is the crafty question wl>ich you propound, and which-it 
goes without saying-you answer : "No, it is impossible to induce 
Korobochka, even though she be a perfect Christian." 
This I shaH answer directly : Had KnTobochka become, or 
could she have become, a true, perfect Christian, there would have 
been no serfdom on her estate, so that there would be nothing to 
bother about, notwithstanding the fact that all deeds and bills of 
sales would still be kept in :her trunk. Another th;ng : Korobochka 
has been a Christian all alonᆚ:;. she was born a Christian. Thus, 
when you speak about the new preachers of Christianity, you mean 
Christianity, though identical in substance with the former one, yet 
intensified, perfect, so to speak, one thu.t has attained its ideal. 
Well, if so, what slaves, what masters can there be ?-One has to 
have at least a bit of understanding of Christianity ! And what 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
difference would it have made to Korobochka, a perfect Christian, 
whether her peasants were serfs or freemen ?-She would have been 
their mother, a real mother, who would have promptly dismissed 
the former "mistress." This would have come to pass of its own 
accord. The former mistress and the former slave would have van­
ished like mist in the rays of sun, and altogether new human beings 
would have come into existence, and quite new, hitherto unheard-of 
relations would have ensued between them. Besides, an unheard-of 
condition would arise : everywhere there would appear perfect Chris­
tians, of whom formerly there had been so few that they were 
almost imperceptible. 
Mr. Gradovsky, you have set forth yourself this fantastic 
supposition, and having embarked upon such phantasms, you have 
to take the consequences. I assure you that in this event Koro­
bochka's peasants themselves would not have left her, for the simple 
reason that everybody sees where he can be better off. Where would 
he be better off ?-in your institutions ?-or in the home of his loving 
landowning mother ?-Also, I venture to assure you that if slavery 
prevailed in the days of the Apostle Paul, this was precisely be­
cause the churches which originated then were not yet perfect, as 
we perceive from the Epistles of the Apostle himself. However, those 
members of the congregations who, individually, attained perfection, 
no longer owned or could have had slaves, because these became 
brethren, and a brother, a true brother, cannot have a brother as 
his slave. But, according to you, the preaching of Christianity was 
impotent. At "least you maintain that slavery was not made sacred 
as a result of the Apostle's preaching. And yet many other men of 
science, especially European historians, have reproached Christi­
a.'lity for having allegedly sanctified slavery. This means a lack of 
understanding of the essence of the matter. Just imagine that Mary 
of Egypt owned peasant serfs and refused to liberate them ! What 
an absurdity ! -In Christianity, in genuine Christianity, there are 
and always will be masters and servants, but a serf is inconceiv­
able. I am speaking of true and perfect Christianity. But servants 
are not slaves. The disciple Timothy served Paul when they jour­
neyed together. Yet read Paul's Epistles to Timothy : does he write 
to a slave, or even a servant ?-Precisely he is his "own son in 
faith," his "dearly beloved son" ! -Such will be the relations be­
tween masters and their servants when both the former and the 
latter become perfect Christians ! There will be servants and mas­
ters, but masters will no longer be masters nor will servants be slaves. 
Please imagine that in a future society there will be a Kepler, 
a Kant, a Shakespeare : they are engaged in a great work for all 
men, and everybody realizes this and reveres them. Shakespeare 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
999 
has no time to interrupt his work in order to clean h1s room and 
remove the garbage. And, believe me, some other citizen, of his own 
volition, will come to serve him, and will remove Shakespeare's 
garbage. Well, would this humiliate him ? Would this make him 
a slave ?-Certainly not. He kno\\ .; that Shakespeare is infinitely 
more useful than he. "Honor and glory to thee ! "-he will say to 
Shakespeare-"! am glad to serve thee : at least in a slight way I 
shall thereby serve the common cause, because I shall save thy 
time for thy great work. But I am not a slave. By the fact itself 
that I am admitting that thou, Shakespeare, art superior to myself 
in genius, that I came to serve thee, I have proved that from the 
standpoint of human moral dignity, I am in no sense inferior to 
thee, and, as man, am equal to thee." Why, then he would not even 
have to say all these things, for the sole reason that then no such 
questions would arise ; they would be simply inconceivable, for, 
verily, all men would be new men, Christ's children, while the former 
ht-a t in man would be vanquished. 
Of course, you will say that this is again a fantasy. Yet I 
was not the first to embark upon fastasies.-You were the one : you 
started picturing Kurobochka as a perfect Christian with "serf 
children'" whom she refuses to liberate. This is more paradoxical 
than my fantasy. 
Clever people will start laughing and will say : "What's the 
use, then, to advocate self-betterment in the spirit of Christian love, 
if true Christianity does not exist on earth, or there is so little of 
it that it is well-nigh impercPptible, sinre otherwise (according to 
my own words) everything woulri be instat.ᅵ! · ·  settled and slavery 
of every kind would be abolished : the Korobt: . kas would be trans­
formed into lucid spirits and there would be nothing left · but to 
start singing a hymn to God ?" Yes, of cc•trse, gentlemen-scoffers, 
there are still very few true Christians (although there are some) . 
But how do you know how many of them are needed to preserve 
the Christian ideal among the people-and with it the people's great 
hope ? Apply this to civic conceptions : how many true citizens are 
needed to preserve civic virtue in society ? This question, too, you 
cannot answer In this respect there is a political economy of its 
own, of an altogether different kind, unknown to us, unknown even 
to you, Mr. Gradovsky. 
Again, it might be said : I · there are so few confessors of the 
great idea, what use is there in tt ?--And how do you know to what 
benef1t, in the last analysis, it will lead ? Apparently, thus far, the 
only thing that was needed was that the great idea should not expire. 
The situation is different at present when something new is arising 
in the ·world, and when one has to be prepared. Besides, it is not 

1000 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
a matter of benefit but of truth. For if I believe that truth is here, 
precisely in what I believe, what do I care if even the whole world 
should refuse to believe in my truth, should ridicule me and should 
choose a different road ?-Therein is the strength of a great moral idea 
that it cements men into a most solid union ; that it is not measured 
in terms of benefit but makes men aspire to the future, to eternal 
a.Ǒms and absolute gladness. How will you unite men for the attain­
ment of your civic aims if there is no foundation in the form of an 
initial great moral idea ? But all moral ideas are identical : they are 
all based upon the principle of absolute individual self-betterment 
in the future, in an ideal which comprises all aspirations, all long­
ings, and, consequently, all our civic ideals emanate therefrom. Just 
try to cement men into a civic society with the sole aim of "saving 
their skins" 1 -You will derive nothing but the moral formula : 
"Chacun pour soi et DitĿu pour tous." With such a formula no civic 
institution can live long, Mr. Gradovsky. 
But I will go further : I intend to surprise you. Please be ad­
vised, learned Professor, that there are no social, civic ideals, as 
such, not originally tied to moral ideals, and existing independently 
in the form of a separate half, chipped off from the whole with 
your scientific knife, ideals which can be borrowed from without 
and successfully transplanted into any new spot in the form of a 
separate "institution." There are no such ideals, they never have 
existed, never can exist ! 
Besides, what is a social ideal ? How is one to understand this 
term ?-Of cdurse, its essence resides in the attempt of men to find 
a formula of social organization, faultless, if possible, and satisfying 
everybody. Isn't this so ? But men do not know such a formula. 
Men have been looking for it during six thousand years of their 
historical existence, and they have failed to find it. The ant knows 
its ant-hill formula ; the bee the formula of its beehive (even though 
they do not know them in a human way ; they know them in their 
own way, and this is all they need) .  Man however, does not know 
his formula. 
If so, whence can the ideal of civic organization in human 
society be derived ?-Trace it historically and you will forthwith 
perceive whence it is derived. You will see that it is solely the 
product ,f moral self-betterment of individual entities ; it has its 
inception there. Thus it has been from time immemorial, and thus 
it always will be. In the origin of every people, of every nation­
ality, the moral idea invariably preceded the origination of the 
nationality itself, since the former created the latter. The moral 
idea always emanated from mystical ideas, from the conviction that 
man is eternal, that he is not a mere earthly animal, but that he 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
IOOI 
is tied to other worlds and eternity. Invariably and everywhere 
these beliefs assumed the form of religion, the form of a confession 
of the new idea. And just as soon as a new religion came into being, 
a new civic nationality came into P.Xistence. Look at the Hebrews 
and the Mohammedans : Jewish nationality came into being after 
the Mosaic law, even its beginning can be traced to the law of 
Abraham, while the Mohammedan nationalities arose only aftᅶ 
the Koran. 
To preserve the acquired spiritual treasure, men are forthwith 
attracted to each other, and only then do they zealously and anx­
iously, "working beside each other, one for the other, one with the 
other" (as you eloquently put it) begin to investigate how they 
should organize so as to preserve the treasure without losing any 
part of it ; how to find such a civic formula of common existence 
as would help them to promote throughout the world the acquired 
moral treasure in its full glory. 
:\r.d plea:. .. observe that just as soon as after centuries ·and 
ages-here there is also a law of its own, unknown to us-the spir­
itual ideal of this or that nationality begins to loosen and weaken, 
the nationality begins to degenerate, together with its civic con­
stitutior., and the civic ideals which had moulded themselves within 
it become extinct. The civic forms of a people assume the character 
in which their religion is expressed. Therefore the civic ideals are 
always directly and organically tied to the moral ideals, and-what 
is most important-the former indisputably are derived only from 
the latter. Civic ideals never appear of their own accord because 
when they do appear they have :ts their 0111!' 1bject the consum­
mation of the moral aspirations of the given nat .. nality, in tlie form 
and in so far as these moral aspirations have moulded themselves 
in that nationality. 
On this ground "self-hettermel"t. in a religious sense" in the 
life of the peoples is the foundation of everything, since 'self-better­
ment is the confession of tlze acquired religion, whereas "the civic 
ideals," devoid of this longing for self-bettermPnt, never do appear, 
and never can come into being. 
You mighl retort, perhaps, that you said yourself that "individ­
ual self-betterment is the beginning of everything," and that you 
have not used your knife to divide anything. But therein is the 
point that you did cut a live orᅷ. tism into two halves . . Individual 
self-betterment is not only "the beginning of everything," but also 
its co11tinuation and outcome. It-and it alone-embraces, creates 
and preserves the national organism. It is fo:- the sake of self-better­
ment that the civic formula of a nation exists, since it came into 
being only for its preservation as an initially acquired treasure. 

1002 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
When, however, a nationality loses the urge of individual self-better­
ment in the spirit which procreated it, gradually, all "civic insti­
tutions" begin to disappear because there is nothing more to preserve. 
Therefore it is altogether impossible to maintain what you have 
framed in the following sentence : 
"This is why social progress is so greatly dependent upon 
social institutions which mould in man, if not Christian, then civic 
virtues." 
"If not Christian, then civic virtues" ! Doesn't one see here 
the scientific knife dividing the indivisible, cutting a homogeneous 
live organism into two separate dead halves-the moral and civic ? 
You may say that "social institutions" and the dignity of "citizen" 
may comprise a very great moral idea ; that "the civic idea" in ripe 
and developed nations alway:,"; replaces the initial religious idea which 
degenerates into the former and which it legitimately inherits. Quite 
so, this is being maintained by many people, but thus far we have 
never seen this fantasy realized. When in a nation the moral or 
religious idea wears itself out, there always comes the panicky, 
cowardly urge to unite for the sole purpose of "saving the skins" : 
then no other aims of civic unity exist. At present, for instance, the 
French bourgeoisie sticks together only for the purpose of "saving 
its skin" from the fourth estate which tries to break into its door. 
But "the saving of skins" is the most impotent and lowest of all 
ideas uniting mankind. This is the beginning of the end. People 
pretend to stick together, but at the same time they are on a sharp 
look-out for the first moment of danger, ready to disperse. And 
what, in this case, can an "institution," as such, save ? If there be 
brethren, there will be brotherhood. But if there are no brethren 
no "institution" will ever produce brotherhood. What is the sense 
of establishing an "institution" and inscribing on it : Libcrtc, EgaliU, 
Fraternite I Nothing will be achieved by an "institution," so that 
it will become necessary, quite inevitably, to add to these three 
"constituent" words, three new ones : "ou la mort," "fraternite ou 
la mort," and brethren will start chopping off the heads of their 
brethren in order to achieve brotherhood through "the civic insti­
tution." 
This is merely an example, but a good one. You, Mr. Gradov­
sky, jusᅸ like Aleko, seek salvation in things and external phenom­
ena : "Let there be in Russia fools and rogues, no one but they'' 
(according to certain views this is so) ; it is sufficient, however, to 
transplant from Europe into Russia some "institution," and, in your 
opinion, everything will be saved. The mechanical transplantation 
to Russia of European forms (which tomorrow will collapse there) , 
alien and not suited to our people, is, as we know, the most mo-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1003 
mentous notion of Russian Europeanism. By the way, Mr. Gradov­
sky, when condemning our want of order, shaming Russia for it, 
and pointing out Europe to her, you state the following : 
"Meanwhile at home we are even unable to cope with such 
discords and contradictions as ha\ '- been settled long ago in Eu­
rope . . .  
" 
You mean Europe has settled them ? Who could have told you 
this ?-Why, Europe is on the eve of a general and dreadful col: 
lapse. The ant-hill which has been long in the process of construc­
tion without the Church and Christ {since the Church, having 
dimmed its ideal, long ago and everywhere reincarnated itself in 
the state) ,  with a moral principle shaken loose from its foundation, 
with everything general and absolute lost-this ant-hill, I say, is 
utterly undermined. The fourth estate is coming, it knocks at the 
door, and breaks into it, and if it is not opened to it, it will break 
the door. The fourth estate cares nothing for the former ideals ; 
it rl"iects every existing law. It will make no compromises, no con­
cessions ; buttresses will not save the edifice. Concessions only pro­
voke, but the fourth estate wants everything. There will come to 
pass something wholly unsuspected. All these parliamentarisms, all 
civic theories professed at present, all accumulated riches, banks, 
sciences, .rެws-all these will instan._ly perish without leaving a trace 
-save the Jews, who even then will find their way out, so that this 
work will even be to their advantage. All this is "near, at the door." 
-You laugh ? Blessed be those who laugh. God grant you time to 
live longer ; you will see it yourself. Then you will be surprised. 
You will tell me with sarcasm : "What is ym 
.. r love of Europe if 
you are making such prophecies tv her I "-Do 
rejoice ?-I r.nerely 
foresee that the balance has been struck. The ޭual settlement, the 
payment due, may occur much sooner than the most vivid fantasy 
can conceive. The symptoms are dreadful. 'fhe long-standing ab­
normal political status of the Euro}k:an countries may serve as a 
beginning of everything. How can this status be normal, if abnor­
mality is laid in its very foundation and has been accumulating 
during centuries ? One small part of mankind c.umot own the rest 
of mankind as slaves. Yet it was for this sole purpose that, up to 
the present, all civic institutions (long not Christian) of Europe, 
now altogether pagan, have been inaugurated. This abnormality, 
and these "insoluble" political qupc:tions (however gc:ޮerally known) 
unfailingly must lead to a colos5aL, final, partitioning, political war 
in which everybody will be involved, and which will break out in 
the course of the current century, and, perhaps, even in the coming 
decade. 
WJ?at do you think : Will society over there endure at present 

1004 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
a long political war ?-The manufacturer is cowardly and easily 
scared ; likewise the Jew. Factories and banks will all close down 
should the war drag out even slightly or should it threaten to be 
prolonged, and millions of hungry mouths, outcast proletarians, will 
be thrown into the streets. Perhaps you are relying on the prudence 
of the politicians, and on the fact that they will not start a war ? 
But when was it possible to rely on such a prudence ? Perhaps you 
are relying on legislative bodies, that they will refuse to make appro­
priations for the war, anticipating its consequences. But when did 
these chambers over there ever anticipate consequences and refuse 
to appropriate funds to a more or less persistent leader ?-And now 
the proletarian is in the street. Do you think that, as heretofore, 
he will patiently wait, dying of starvation ?-After political social­
ism ? After the International ? After social conventions and the Paris 
Commune ?-Nay, at present it is not going to be the way it used 
to be : the proletarians will rush upon Europe, and the entire old 
order will collapse forever. The waves will break only against our 
shores, and then it will be arrantly revealed to everybody to what 
an extent our national organism differs from the European. Then 
you too, gentlemen doctrinarians, will come to your senses, and 
will begin to seek at home those "people's tenets" which now you 
are merely ridiculing. 
But no\Y, gentlemen, you are pointing to Europe and suggest­
ing that those very institutions which will collapse tomorrow as an 
outworn absurdity be transplanted to Russia, institutions in which 
many wise men in Europe have long ceased to believe, which hold 
out and exist there by mere inertia. 
And who, except an abstract doctrinarian, could take the com­
edy of bourgeois unity, which we are witnessing in Europe, for 
a normal formula of human fellowship on earth ? "They" -you say 
-"have solved their problems long ago ! "  -And this-after twenty 
constitutions and scarcely less than ten revolutions ! -Oh, only then, 
perhaps, liberated for a moment from Europe, we ourselves, without 
European tutelage, shall dwell upon our social ideals, necessarily 
derived from Christ and individual self-betterment, Mr. Gradovsky. 
You will ask : What social and civic ideals of our own can we 
have outside of those of European origin ?-Well, our social and 
civic idޯals are better, more solid and even-oh, ho"ibile dictu /­
more liberal than your European ideals I Yes, they are more liberal 
because they emanate directly from our people's organism, and they 
are not a slavishly impersonal transplantation from the West. Of 
course, here I cannot enlarge upon the subject because my article 
has grown too long anyway. 
By the way, please recall : what was the ancient Christian 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1005 
Church ? What did it strive to be ?-It came into existence imedi­
ately after Christ. It was formed by a handful of men, and forth­
with, almost in the very first days after Christ, it began to seek 
after its "civic formula," fully baserl upon the moral hope of quench­
ing its spirit in accordance with the principles of individual self­
betterment. Christian communes-churches-arose, following wltich 
a new, hitherto unheard-of nation began to form itself-all-brotherlJ', 
all-humanitarian in the form of an Oecumenical Church. But it was 
subjected to persecution ; its ideal was moulded underground, while 
on the earth's surface a huge erlifice, an enormous ant-hill, was being 
erected-the ancient Roman Empire, which was also, as it were, an 
ideal and a solution of the moral aspirations of the ancient world : 
there arose the demigod ; the Empire itself embodied the religious 
idea providing an outlet to all moral aspirations of the ancient 
world. The ant-hill, however, did not come to pass, having been 
undermined by the Church. A collision of two diametrically opposed 
ide..t¼ ᅺ;ccurrerl . the man-god encountered the God-man, Apollo of 
Belvedere encountered Christ. A compromise took place : the Empire 
embraced Christianity, while the Church accepted the Roman 
law and the Roman state. A small part of the Church !dired into 
the wilderness and continued there its original work : Christian 
communes again came into existence, and later monasteries. But 
these were merely tests, which continue even to our day. As we 
know, the remaining overwhelming portion of the Church subse­
quently split into two parts. In the Western part the state, at length, 
subdued the Church altogether. Papacy arose-a continuation of the 
ancient Roman Empire in a ncᅹ incarnatior. In the Eastern half, 
however, the state was conquered and destn > ed by the s'kord of 
Mohammed, and there remained only Christ detached from the 
state. That state which embraced and aga.n raised Christ has en­
dured such dreadful secular sufferings from its enemies, the Tartars, 
want of order, serfdom, Europe and Europeanism-is still endur, 
ing so much suffering-that actually no real social formula in the 
spirit of love and Christian self-improvement has yet been elab­
orated in it. But it is not for you, Mr. Gradovsky, to reproach that 
state for this fact. Temporarily our people are only Christ-bearers 
and they place their entire hope in Him alone. They called th'em­
selves "Krestianin,"1 i.e., "Christian" ; and this is 110t only a matter 
of words ; this comprises the id· J. of their whole future. You, Mr. 
Gradovsky, are mercilessly reproaching Russia for her want of 
order. But who has prevented her from establishing order during 
these last two centuries, and, particularly, during the last forty 
1 The. Russian word "Krestianin" means prasant ; the Russian word 
"Christianin" means Christian. 

1006 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
years ?-Well, Russian Europeans, akin to yourself, Mr. Gradovsky, 
who have never ceased to exist during the last two centuries, and 
who, in our day, are pressing us ever so hard. Who is hostile to 
Russia's organic and independent development based upon its na­
tional principles ? Who scoffingly refused even to admit or notice 
the existence of these tenets ? Who sought to remodel our people, 
fantastically "raising them to the level of the reformers," or simply 
to convert them into so many liberal European creatures, just like 
the reformers themselves, from time to time snatching from the 
people's masses this or that man, perverting him into a European 
even though with mere flaps on his uniform ?-In stating this, I do 
not mean to say that the European is perverted. I merely mean to 
say that to remodel a Russian into a European is oftentimes equiva­
lent to actual perversion. And yet of this alone consists the whole 
ideal of the program of their work : precisely-tearing away one man 
after another from the masses-how absurd I They seek to tear 
away all the eighty millions of our people and to remodel them. 
Do you really believe that the whole mass of the Russian people 
will consent t9 such an impersonality as these Russian European 
gentlemen ? 
4 
HuMBLE THYSELF-TO ONE ; ExALT THYSELF-TO THE 
OTHER. A TEMPEST IN A TEA-POT 
. 
Thus far, I have been merely wrangling with you, Mr. Gradov­
sky, but now I want to accuse you of a deliberate distortion of my 
thought, of the principal point of my Address. You write : 
•iThere sticks in them (i.e., in our people) too much untruth, 
residues of secular serfdom, for them to be entitled to demand that 
we should worship them and, in addition, for them to attempt to 
turn all Europe to the right road, as Mr. Dostoievsky predicts. 
"Strange thing I A man who condemns haughtiness in indi­
vidual wanderers, urges a whole people, in whom he perceives some 
kind of a universal apostle, to take pride in themselves. To these 
he says : 'Humble Yourselves ! '  to those-'Exalt Yourselves I ' " 
And further : 
"And now, without having evolved a proper nationality, all 
of a sudden we are to dream about a universal role I Isn't this too 
early ? Mr. ްostoievsky is proud of the fact that during two cen­
turies we have been serving Europe. We confess that this 'service' 
does not rouse in us a joyous feeling. Can the time of the Congress 
of Vienna and, generally, the epoch of Congresses be a subject of 
our 'pride' ?  The time when, serving Metternich, we were suppress-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1007 
ing the national movement in Italy and Germany, and were· even 
looking askance at the Greeks-our coreligionists ? And what hatred 
we contracted in Europe precisely for this 'service' 1 "  
First, I shall dwell upon the latter trifling, almost innocent 
misquotation : When I said that "during the last two centuries we 
have been serving Europe, perhap!>, more than ourselves,"-did I 
commend the way we served ?-I merely meant to note the fact o! 
the service, which is correct. However, the fact of the service and 
the way we served are two altogether different propositions. We 
may have committed a number of political blunders-the Europeans, 
too, are committing many an error, almost daily-but I was not 
commending our mistakes : I merely noted the fact of our service 
(almost always disinterested) .  Don't you understand that these are 
two different matters ? "Mr. Dostoievsky is proud of the fact that 
we served Europe"-you say. I said this without any pride : I merely 
pointed to a trait of our national spirit, a very significant trait. 
Thuo to discovpr a beautiful, healthy trait in a national spirit 
necessarily means to exalt oneself ? 
And why are you talking about Metternich and the Con­
gresses ?-It is you who venture to teach me I Even as a student I 
spoke ah.1ut our service rendered to Metternich, using stronger 
language, and precisely for these words about our faulty service to 
Metternich (of course, among other words) thirty years ago, I paid 
my respective penalty. Why did you make this distortion ?-Well, 
in order to demonstrate : "See what a liberal I am I And that poet, 
that enthusiastic admirer of the people, do you hear what reaction­
ary stuff he is babbling, priding himself abo..:.: <.ur service to Met­
ternich I "-Amour pro pre, Mr. Gradovsky I 
However, this is, of course, but a trifte. ޱ."et the following is 
not a bagatelle. 
Thus, when I say to the people : "Lift up your spirit I "  it 
means that I am telling them : "Exalt yourselves I " ;  that I am urging 
them to be haughty ; that I am teaching them uppishness ?-Suppose, 
Mr. Gradovsky, you tell your own children : "Children, lift up your 
spirit I Be noble ! "-does this really mean that you are teaching 
them to exalt themselves, or that teaching them, you are exalting 
yourself ?-And what did I say ?-I spoke about the hope that "at 
length, they will be brethren of all men," with an f mphasis on the 
words "at length." Is the seren, ޲ope that some oay brotherhood 
will be achieved by our suffering mankind, and that perhaps we 
shall be permitted to become brethren of all men-is this hope equiv­
alent to pride, to an appeal to haughtiness ? Why, in the latter part 
of my Address I stated explicitly : "Do I speak of economic renown, 
of the glory of sword and science ?-I am merely speaking about 

1oo8 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188o 
broth'erhood of men, and of the fact that the Russian heart is more 
adapted to universal all-humanitarian brotherly fellowship than any 
other nation . . . .  
" Such are my words. And is this an appeal to 
pride ? Immediately after the said words in my Address I added : 
"Let our land be poor but this destitute land Christ, in a serf's garb, 
has traversed to and fro with blessings. Why shouldn't we embrace 
his wltimate word ?" Now, does this Christ's word signify an appeal 
to haughtiness, and is the hope that we may embrace this word 
-uppishness ? 
You state indignantly that "it is too early to demand that 
we be worshipped." But where is there such a demand-for goodness' 
sake 1 This desire of universal service, the desire to become servants 
and brethren ; to serv޳ them with our love-does this mean to demand 
universal worship ? If there be such a demand, the sacred, disinter­
ested desire of universal service at once becomes an absurdity ! No 
one bows to a servant, and a brother does not expect genuflection 
on the part of his brother. 
Imagine, Mr. Gradovsky, that you have performed some good 
deed, or that you are about to perform it. Now, on your way, you 
begin to ponder fondly : "How glad the poor devil will be to receive 
the unexpected help which I shall give him I How his spirit will be 
braced ! -Why, he will be resurrected I He will tell about his joy to 
his family, to his children ! He will cry with them." Pondering about 
these things, you will naturally be moved yourself, you may even 
start shedding tears ( is it possible that this never happened to 
you ? ) ,  and ·suddenly a prudent voice begins to whisper into your 
ear : "You are exalting yourself, imagining all this ! You are shed­
ding tears from haughtiness ! "-For goodness' sake ! The hope itself 
that we Russians m:ly mean something to mankind, and that at 
length we shall be worthy of rendering brotherly service to it-this 
hope itself aroused delight and evoked tears of enthu޴aism among 
the thousands of listeners. I am not bragging, and it is not from 
haughtiness that I am recalling this : I am merely recording the 
solemnity of the moment. Serene hope was given that we, too, may 
mean sornethmg to mankind ; that we may become merely brethren 
to other men, and now this one ardent hint united everybody into 
one thought, into one sentiment. Strangers embraced each other, 
swearin޵: that henceforth they would try to be better. Two old men 
carne up to me and told me : "We've been enemies for twenty years ; 
we've been harming one another, and now, under the influence of 
your words, we have made peace." 
One of the newspapers hastened to observe that this enthusiasm 
meant nothing ; that this was simply a momentary mood accom­
panied by "the kissing of hands" ; that the orators ascended the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1009 
. 
platform in vain, and that in vain did they speak and finish their 
addresses. uNo matter what they said, there would have been the 
same enthusiasm, for such happened to be the goodhearted mood 
in Moscow at the time I "  Had that ;ournalist gone there and spoken 
something on his own behalf, woulci people have rushed to him as 
they did to me ? Why was it that three days earlier addresses were 
delivered and the speakers were given great ovations, but the thing 
which took place after my address occurred there to no one before ? 
This was a unique moment in the Pushkin celebration, and it did 
not repeat itself. 
Honestly, I am saying this with no idea of bragging ; yet the 
moment was too solemn and I cannot keep silent on it. Its solemnity 
consisted of the fact that new elements clearly and graphically 
revealed themselves in society-men thirsting for a worthy adven­
ture, for a comforting idea, for the promise of a cause. This means 
th;:.t society is no longer satisfied with our mere liberal giggling at 
.Kussia, that the doctrine of Russia's eternal impotence has grown 
repulsive I Only one hope, one hint, kindled in the hearts a holy 
thirst for an all-humanitarian cause, for a universal brotherly serv­
ice and adventure. Was it haughtiness that kindled those hearts 
and madt' people cry ? Did I urge • hem to be uppish ! Ah, you I . 
. 
. 
You see, Mr. Gradovsky, the seriousness of that moment sud­
denly frightened many people in our liberal tea-pot, all the more 
so as it came so unexpectedly. "What I Thus far, we have been so 
pleasantly and so usefully giggling and spitting upon everything, 
and now suddenly . . .  Why, this is a rebr.!lion I Let's call the 
police 1 "  Several frightened geDLicmen jumpt· 
up : "Well, what's 
going to happen to us now ? We have also been writing . .  :.Where 
are they going to stick us now ? The thing has got to be effaced, as 
quickly as possible, so that no trace 
be lett I We have to explain 
promptly to all Russia that this was merely a complacent mood in 
hospitable Moscow, a charming little moment after a series of din­
ners-nothing more I And as for the rebellion, let the police quell it ! "  
And they set to work : I am a coward ; ! am a poet ; I am 
insignificant ; the significance of my address is naught-in a word, 
people acted imprudently on the spur of the moment. The public, 
however, might not have believed all these things. So the matter 
had to be handled skillfully ; it had to be tacklf : coolheadedly : 
something could even be praise(;_ in my Address: "Well, there is 
nevertheless a certain flux of ideas," and thereupon, little by little, 
everything should be spat upon and effaced to the satisfaction of 
everybody. 
In brief, they acted not so skillfully. There appeared a gap ; 
it had to be filled as promptly as possible. And so forthwith there 

IOIO 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r88o 
came forth a weighty, experienced critic combining the irresponsi­
bility of his attacks with comme il faut appearance. You are this 
critic, Mr. Gradovsky : you wrote your article, people have read it, 
and everything has calmed down. You have served a common and 
admirable cause ; at least your views were reprinted everywhere : 
"The speech of the poet does not stand the test of acid criticism. 
Poets are poets, but level-headed men always stand on guard, ready 
at any moment to pour a bucket of cold water on the dreamer." 
In the concluding part of your article you ask me to forgive 
you those expressions which I may consider sharp. In concluding 
my article, I am not asking your forgiveness, Mr. Gradovsky, for 
the sharp expressions if there be such ; I was answering not Mr. 
Gradovsky personally, but Mr. Gradovsky the publicist. Personally 
I have no reason whatsoever not to respect you. If, however, I do 
not respect your opinions and cling to this, how could I mollify 
things by asking your forgiveness ?-But it was painful to see that 
a very serious and significant moment in the life of our society 
was represented in a distorted manner and was erroneously inter­
preted. It was painful to see that the idea which I am serving is 
being dragged through the streets. It was you who dragged it. 
I know that on every side I shall be told that it was not worth 
while and it was ridiculous to write such a long article in answer 
to your article, which is short compared with mine. I repeat, how­
ever, that your article served merely as a pretext : I meant to express 
certain things in general. Beginning with next year I am planning 
to resume the publication of A Writers Diary. So let this present 
issue serve as my profession de foi for the future ; let it be, so to 
speak, _a "test" issue. 
Perhaps it may also be said that this answer of mine annuls 
the whole meaning of my Address delivered at Moscow, in which 
I appealed to both Russian parties to unite and to bring about a 
reconciliation, recognizing the legitimacy of either party. Not at 
all : the meaning of my Address has not been annulled ; on the con­
trary, it has been reinforced, since in my answer to you I specifically 
state that both parties, in their mutual alienation, in their hostility 
one to the other, are placing themselves and their work in an ab­
normal situation, whereas united and in accord with each other, 
they Ihlght rise and save everything, set in motion boundless forceS 
and lead Russia to a new, sound, grand, as yet unheard-of life I 

1
8
 8 1  


January 
CHAPTER I 
1 
Finances. A Citizen Insulted in the Person of 'fhersites. 
Crowning from Below an.d the Musicians. 
'fhe Chatter,Mill and Chatterboxes 
GOOD LORD I Is it possible that after three years of silence 
I shall come out in my resumed Diary with an economic artic1e ? 
Am I an economist or a financier ? Never was I either. Even despite 
the modern trend, I am not infected with economism. And yet, fol­
lowing the common mood, I am coming out with an economic article. 
That the trend is towards economics there c'ln be no shadow of 
doubt. Nowadays all are econo1aists. Every ;· 'W magazinE: seeks 
to be recognized as an economic periodical &Dll mtroduces · jtself in 
this spirit. Why, how can one fail to be an economist ? Who can 
aford not to be one in the face of the drop uf the rate of exchange 
of the ruble and the deficit ? This all-round economic trend has 
become particularly noticeable in Russia in the last years, after our 
Turkish campaign. Of course, also in days gone by we used to 
discuss finances back and forth, but during and lifter the war every­
body rushed headlong into finances. And this was only natural : the 
ruble dropped, war loans, etc. But aside from the ruble exchange, 
there was in this case an element of revenge which continues in our 
day, revenge for the war : "We"-such is the implir޶tion-"told you, 
we predicted I " Most busily eng, 0ed in economism are those who 
in 1876 and 1877 maintained that money was better than mag­
nanimity ; that the Eastern question was nothing but mischief and 
fiction ; that not only was there no national enthusiasm, not only 
was the war unpopular and not national, but that, strictly speak­
ing, there were no people, and that instead there was an inert, dumb 
1013 

IOI4 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : I88I 
and Iitute mass organized for taxation purposes and the maintenance 
of the intelligentsia, a mass which, even though it contributes pen­
nies to the church, does so because the priest and the authorities 
have issued respective orders. All Russian Thersites-and of these 
there are many among the intelligentsia-were then awfully offended 
in their best sentiments. In the person of Thersites the citizen was 
insulted. So they began to take vengeance by blaming finances. 
Little by little they were joined by non-Thersites and even former 
"heroes." Everybody began to pout-true, some people not too seri­
ously. It must be admitted that the disadvantageous peace, the 
Berlin Conference, contributed to this condition.1 
Here I merely wish to state that at present everybody is 
writing about the ruble and the deficit : partly, in this there is a 
gregarious element : everybody is writing, everybody is alarmed­
why shouldn't I be alarmed?-People may think that I am a poor 
citizen, that I am not interested. However, here and there one finds 
genuine civic anxiety, pain, painful doubts concerning the future. 
This I do not wish to conceal. Nevertheless, even genuine civic anxi­
ety is almost invariably linked to the theme : Why is it that at 
home everything is so different from things in Europe? "In Europe 
the thaler is everywhere quoted favorably, whereas our ruble stands 
low. Why are we not Europe? Why are things at home different 
from those in Europe ?-It's because our edifice is not crowned 1 "  
And so everybody started vociferating about "crowning the 
edifice," forgetting that as yet no edifice has been erected, so that 
there is actually' nothing to crown ; that in lieu of an edifice we have 
but several white waistcoats who imagine that they constitute the 
edifice, and that, if the crowning is to be started at all, it should 
be begun from below-from the peasant's overcoat and the bast-shoe, 
and not from the white vest. At this point it is necessary to make 
a reservation : of course, at first glance, crowning from below seems 
an absurdity, at least, in an architectural sense, and stands in con­
fiict with everything that has existed and does exist in Europe in 
this respect. However, inasmuch as in Russia everything is peculiar, 
diferent from what we se in Europe, and, at times, altogether 
topsy-turvy-so important a matter as the crowning of the edifice 
may be effected in a maner contrary to that in Europe-to the 
great surprlc.e and indignation of our Russian European minds. For, 
to Europe's surprise, our lower stratum, our peasant's overcoat and 
lN. B. By the way, speaking about the Berlin Conference : in those days 
in a remote provincial district, on a by-road, a peasant woman, the hostess 
of a small inu, unexpectedly asked me : "Dear sir, tel me, how did they 
decide upon our case abroad ? Any news about this ?" I wondered at the 
womaD. However, this, i.e., the question of popular enthusiasm, I shall 
disau later. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
101 5 
bast-shoe, is actually an edifice of its kind-not only the fo\Jnda­
tion, but precisely the edifice itself-though not completed, yet solid 
and firm, erected in the course of centuries, in fact, foreseeing the 
whole genuine, though not fully developed, idea of the future archi­
tecturally completed edifice. 
Well, if the whole truth is to be told, these outcries of our 
Europeans about the crowning, as stated, bear rather a gregarious 
and mechanically-appeasing than a truly civic, morally civic, char޷ 
acter. And the reason why everybody has jumped at this new con­
solation is that all these external, precisely mechanically-appeasing 
devices are always easy, agreeable and extremely handy. "What we 
need is the European formula-and everything will be saved. It has 
to be applied, taken out of a ready-made chest, and forthwith 
Russia will become Europe, and the ruble-a thaler." The thing 
which is particularly pleasant in these mechanical consolations is 
the fact that one doesn't have to think at all-still less suffer or be 
ocr!11Pxed. I am speaking about the herd-and I am not referring 
to righteous men. These may be found everywhere, even among 
European Russians, and I esteem them. But you must concede that 
in Russia, in most cases, all this transpires dancingly, as it were : 
What's the use of thinking and cracking one's brains l One may 
contract J. headache ! Nay, take .,omething ready-made from some­
body else, and forthwith you will have music, an accordant con­
certo-
If seated in a row 
Our skill we'll surely show. 
Well, what if as musicians you are good for 
. 
· thing, and tbis, gen­
tlemen, is true of the overwhelming majority vf you. What if noth­
ing but a chatterbox-mill comes out of the white vests l What if 
the colossal majority of the white vests shouldn't be admitted at 
all to the crowned edifice (at least in the first instance) if ever it 
should happen to be crowned I That is, they could and should be 
let in because, after all, they are Russians-many of them good 
fellows-on condition that they should con::.l:nt, jointly with the 
country at lar޸e, to give their advice humbly in some great common 
cause. But the trouble is that they would refuse to give their advice 
jointly with their country ; they would start ex;1lting themselves 
over it. Up to our day, for t޹'l whole centuries, they have kept 
aloof-and all of a sudden they would unite with the people ! -This 
is not vaudeville ; this requires history and culture, but we neither 
have culture nor ever had it. 
Look at the excitement of a European Russian-at times a 
most jnnocent and amiable one-scrutinize the absurd, venomous 

1016 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : x88x 
and ciminal excitement, with foam at his mouth, and reaching the 
point of calumny, with which he wrangles about his cherished ideas, 
precisely those which are pre-eminently in discord with the people's 
world outlook, their holiest hopes and most sacred beliefs ! Why, 
such a gentleman, such an idler, before he could unite with his 
native land, which smells of the peasant's coat and the bast-shoe, 
would have to give up some of his most revered European books 
and convictions. But this he would not do because he is, malgre lui, 
squeamish toward the people and haughty toward Russia. "We"­
they would say-"are the only ones who are capable of giving advice, 
whereas the rest (i.e., the country at large) for the time being should 
be content with the fact that we are educating them, and thereby 
gradually raising them to our level and 'teaching the people their 
rights and duties.' " (It is they who plan to teach the people their 
rights, and especially their duties ! -What wags ! )  
"Russian society"-they will further say-"cannot stay in the 
county jail side by side with the ragged people wearing their na­
tional bast-shoes.'' Setting out in such a mood, it is possible-even 
inevitable-to revert to serfdom, to the enslavement of the peasant's 
coat and the bast-shoe, not in the form of the former bondage, but 
by means of enlightened tutelage with its political consequences : 
•• And again we shall enchain the people I " 
Well, naturally, they will wind up by instituting the chatter­
box mill for themselves alone. But so instituted, at first, they will 
not recognize and understand one another.-This will unfailingly 
happen. Roaming in the dark they would bump each other's heads. 
Don't feel offended, gentlemen : this has happened to societies, not 
even like ours-which for two centuries has been detached from any 
kind ofwork and which is devoid of any original culture-when the 
occasion arose to give advice for the first time ; this has happened 
.among the most enlightened nations. However, because they had to 
their credit a secular culture and since they always relied, more or 
less, on the people, they promptly recovered and embarked upon 
a firm road, of course not without some preliminary bumps on their 
foreheads. 
And you, our Europeans-what will you be relying upon ? How 
.are you going to reach an accord ?-Is it only by means of seating 
yourselves, iide by side, in a row ? And what . .a breed of chatter­
boxes we have in our midst i -As if they were really getting ready 
for action I At times, one of those progressive and didactic fellows 
sits down and srarts talking : there is neither end nor beginning, 
everything is muddled up and twisted into a ball. He keeps talk­
ing for an hour and a half, and he talks so sweetly, so smoothly, 
.as if a bird were singing ! And you ask yourself : Well, is he a 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
ror7 
clever fellow ? What is he anyway ?-And you can't make up your 
mind. Every word, taken separately, seems to be intelligible and 
clear, but you can make nothing out of the whole. You fail to 
understand whether henceforth eggs are going to hatch the hen, or, 
as heretofore, the hen is going to hatch the eggs : one can only se 
that an eloquent hen hatches, in lieu of eggs, perfect rot. At length, 
one's eyes begin to bulge and fog sets in in one's head. This is .a 
newly born type ; it has not yet been reflected in our belles-lettres. 
Many a thing relating to contemporary current events has not yet 
been touched upon in literature ; many a thing has been overlooked 
and is badly lagging. Mostly literature keeps toying with characters 
of the Forties, at the best, of the Fifties. Perhaps literature has 
embarked upon the historical novel because it has lost the sense 
and meaning of the current moment. 
2 
CAN WE DEMAND FOR RussiA EuROPEAN FINANCES ? 
"Well, what about finances ? Where is that financial article of 
yours ?''-I may be asked. But, again, what kind of an economist 
or financ1er am I ?  I do not even dare to write about finances. Why, 
then, did 1 venture and why am I about to write such an article ? 
-for the simple reason that, starting to write on finances, I shall 
deviate to something altogether different, and thus it will not be 
a financial but some wholly different article This encourages me. 
Nor am I even worthy of dwe!Fng upon f111:· 'cial matters since I 
know that I am viewing our finances by no 1. :t·ans from the Euro­
pean standpoint ; moreover, I do not believe that it can oe made 
applicable to us-for the specific reason ,:1at we are in no way 
Europe, that, compared with her, evPrything is so peculiar in Russia 
that we seem to be dwelling on the moon. 
In Europe, for instance, the slavish, feudal relations between 
the lower and upper castes for centuries were in the process of liqui­
dation until, finally, a revolution broke out. In a word, everything 
happened historically and in a cultured fashion. In Russia, however, 
serfdom, with all it;, consequences, collapsed instantaneously, and, 
thank God, without even the slightest revolutirn .. One wonders : 
Whence should there have come 
concussion, I mean a great capital 
concussion ? True : everything that falls suddenly falls dangerously, 
with a great concussion. I shall, of course, not regret that it fell 
suddenly. On the contrary, it is excellent that this abominable his­
torical sin of ours was at once abrogated by the great word of the 
Liberator. Nevertheless the law of natdre cannot be evaded, and 

1018 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1881 
there was a great concussion. Would that it had been only great ! 
But why so enormous ? Naturally everything has to abide by the 
laws of history, and no doubt there are many people who now clearly 
perceive why everything happened as it did. 
Without enlarging upon this subject (it is a colossal theme 
with which, perhaps, a historian of the next century will be able 
to cope) ,  without adding a word, I shall merely point to certain 
particulars which strike one's attention and cause confusion. 
Take, for instance, this : serfdom collapsed ; it stood in the 
way of everything ; it even impeded the progress of agriculture. It 
might have seemed that at last the time had come for the peasant 
to blossom out and grow rich.-Nothing of the kind happened : in 
agrtculture the peasant sank to the minimum of what the land is 
capable of yielding. And the main trouble is that one does not know 
whether there be such a force (and of what it specifically consists) 
as would prompt the peasant to venture to raise himself above that 
minimum which the land yields to him and to ask it for a maximum. 
Wiseacres may say : This is a vain question which is under­
stood by everybody. But I am firmly convinced that this question 
is far from having been settled, and that it is of a vastly more far­
reaching significance than people suppose. Furthermore, consider 
this : former noble landownership has deteriorated to a pitiful level. 
At the same time, apparently, we are witnessing the degeneration 
of the whole former landowning class into something different, into 
an educated cla႟s, since into what else can it degenerate ?-Well, it 
would seem, what could be better ? The people need the intelli­
gentsia as their leaders ; the people themselves crave for the in­
telligenႠsia and seek them. Unfortunately, this, too, as yet is an 
ideal, which looks like a delightful heron soaring through the skies. 
In reality it is far from this. Will the caste, the former landowners, 
endeavor to become the educated people ?-This is the question and, 
you know, the major, most cardinal question with which we art 
faced at present, one upon which perhaps our whole future depends I 
Even so, this question is far from being settled, and it cannot even 
be conceived how it is going to be solved. Will not the caste take 
an uppish attitude and become again an authoritative power, of 
course not in the former sense of servitude but by endeavoring, for 
instance, in lieu of uniting with the people, taking advantage of its 
education, to create a new domineering discordant force and to place 
itself above the people as an intellectual aristocracy and establish 
a tutelage over them ? Will this caste henceforth and forever sin­
cerely recognize the people as its brother by blood and spirit ?  Will 
it respect the things our people revere? Will it agree to love, even 
more than itself, that for which the people feel affection ?-Without 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1019 
this the intelligentsia will never merge with our people, because 
what they respect and love is a matter of their firm conviction, and 
they will never yield or renounce it, regardless of any intelligentsia, 
much as they may thirst for the latter. 
All this is of vital importance and yet altogether unsettled. 
And generally everything in Russia is replete with questions. And 
the main thing is that all this requires time, history, culture, gen.:. 
erations, whereas we have to solve this in one moment. Therein is 
our main difference from Europe-that in Rt:ssia much happens not 
as a result of historical and cultural process, but somehow suddenly, 
by an altogether unexpected decree of government authority. It 
stands to reason that no one is to be blamed for everything that 
happens ; in a way this is also an historical process. Even so, you 
must concede that Europe has never had and known such a history. 
How then can one demand that we be Europe, and in addition­
with her financial system ?-For example, I believe as in an eco­
nomic axiom that land is possessed not by railroad men, not by 
industrialists, not by millionaires, not by banks, not by Jews, but 
in the first instance-only by agriculturists ; that he who cultivates 
the land leads everything, and that agriculturi5ts actually constitute 
the state, its kernel and its core. But is this so in Russia Ⴁ Aren't 
things inside out at this moment ? Where is our kernel ? In whom ? 
Don't the railroad man and the Jew own our economic assets ? We 
are constructing railroads. But it is a fact that they are being built 
as nowhere else : Europe has been covering herself with her rail­
road net virtually during a whole half centuႢ, notwithstanding her 
wealth. Yet we have built the last fifteen or si · , Ⴃen thousand versts 
of our railways in the course of ten years-am• this in the · Jace of 
our poverty, and at such an economically disturbed time as the 
period which immediately followed the abolition of serfdom I And, 
of course, the railroads attracted aH capitႤl at a time when agri­
culture needed it most. The railroads were built at the expense of 
the destruction of agriculture. 
Again, have we solved the problem of inႥ:vidual private land­
ownership ? Will it survive side by side with peasant landownership ? 
Will it be based upon a sound and solid labor force-and not upon 
the proletariat and the pot-house ?-And yet without a sound solu­
tion of this problem what sober rflnsequences can L-. expected ? We 
need sober solutions. Lacking theb .. Wf' shall never have tranquillity, 
whereas tranquillity is the source of all great power. How, then, 
can we demand a European budget and orderly finances ?-It is not 
a case of why we have no European economy and sound finance, 
but-hoႦ we manage to survive.-We have survived through the 
solid, unifying force of the whole people. 

1020 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1881 
We have little tranquillity, especially spiritual peace, i.e., the 
main thing, since without spiritual peace no peace is possible. This 
is particularly neglected, and only temporary, material smoothness 
is sought. There is no peace of mind, and this is true of all strata ; 
there is no calmness in our convictions, in our opinions, in our nerves, 
in our appetites. Work and the recognition of the fact that through 
work alone one will be saved-are altogether absent. There is no 
sense of duty. And whence should it be derived ?-No right culture 
has existed for a century and a half-perhaps no culture whatsoever. 
"Why should I work if through my culture I have been brought to 
the point where I deny everything around me ? And if there are 
blockheads who hope to save the edifice by some European contriv­
ances-! deny the blockheads, and I believe in the principle : the 
worse-the better, and this is my whole philosophy." 
I assure you that nowadays many people say this-at least to 
themselves-and some of them-even aloud. And yet the fellow who 
utters such aphorisms is made of bones and of flesh. "The worse 
-the better"-says he ; but this applies only to others, to everybody, 
whereas as far as he is concerned he believes in the motto : "Let 
me have the best." This is how he conceives his philosophy. He has 
a wolf's appetite. A man of the size of a bear, he has woman's nerves, 
deranged and spoiled. He is cruel and sensual ; he can endure noth­
ing : "Why should I take the trouble to endure this ?" With no 
more restaurant dinners and cocottes-what's the use of living ?­
And he drives a bullet through his brain. It is all right if he only 
shoots himself : what if he defrauds another man, abiding by all 
legal formalities ? Time does not wait-poverty is spreading every­
where. Merchants are complaining everywhere that no one buys 
anything. Factories are curtailing production. Go into a store and 
ask : "How is business?"-They tell you : "In days past for the 
holiday a fellow bought at least half a dozen shirts ; but nowadays 
they all buy just one shirt at a time." Take even fashionable res­
taurants, since this is the last place where poverty puts in an ap­
pearance. "No"-they will tell you-"there is no more lavish spend­
ing as in days gone by ; they all sit tight ; at best a fellow comes 
and orders a regular dinner"-and this is the former fop and dandy. 
Redemption monies are spent. At present there remain only forests 
which are 'king hewn down ; but after these have been done with, 
there will be nothing left. When travelling on a railroad, please ob­
serve fire-wood at the stations : in days past they used to cut logs, 
whereas at preseht one often sees some kind of thin sticks instead 
of fire-wood ; not trees but bushes, so to speak, striplings, or under­
growth, are being cut. Of course, to you this observation may seem 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1021 
trifling in the face of all other colossal problems of our timeႧ But 
our financiers absolutely ignore the question of our forests ; they 
don't want to know anything about them, as if on principle. And 
yet deforestation, if one gives thought to it, will most harmfully 
affect our finances. Despite this, there seems to be a general tacit 
agreement to skip over the surface of the timber problem as long 
as the catastrophe has not yet come. It will come suddenly becaust;. 
everybody is satisfied with the fact that the market price of timber 
is adequate, people refuse to take heed of the fact that the price is 
artificial, due to intense selling on the part of those who are cutting 
down forests, bushes included, because they have spent all their 
money. There will come a moment when there will be nothing more 
to cut and nothing to sell. But let us leave this for further discus­
sion. I began to speak about general poverty and its opposite-in­
crease in appetite. 
In passing, I merely wish to note that there have appeared an 
<;.Wft.! lot of Cr t-lain Kopeikins, in countless varieties, beginning 
with real ones and including those belonging to fashionable and 
perfumed sets. They all grind their teeth at the treasury and at 
public funds. Of course they will soon turn, if not into highway 
robbers like the real Captain Kopeikin, at least into industrial pick­
pockets-some in legalized guise, while others will not even bother 
to protect themselves with legal formalities. Some of these fellows 
may even proudly declare : "I am such because I deny everything, 
and I am fostering negation." Indeed, aren't Kopeikins liberals? 
They fully comprehend that liberalism is in vogue, and that it may 
be used to one's advantage. Who h;ts not seen Li.•·m ?-a cosmopolitan 
liberal, a cheap atheist, exalting himself over C: ; people by his edu­
cation, is worth a kopeck. He is the most trivial of all vulgar-mani­
festations of our pseudo-liberalism. Even ࢋJ, he is endowed with 
unquenchable appetite, and for this reason he is dangerous. It is 
men of this type who are the first to embrace the idea of all sorts 
of transplantations from without for mechanical cures ; they gather 
in groups and form a crowd, which is often led by most honest men, 
who, strictly speaking, should not be blamed for this fact : "Let 
there be any change whatsoever, so long as it entails no work," 
says liberal Kopeikin.-"A change, whatever it be, will be to my 
advantage, since surely, at first at least, I shall m;mage to derive 
some profit for myself." From tlt;s standpoint he is dangerous, al­
though he is only a Kopeik.in. But let us leave Kopeikin. All that 
I have said is but a tiny fraction of the subject of the absence of 
tranquillity at home. I can se for myself that my introduction is 
much too long. So let me turn directly to finances I 

1022 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 188I 
3 
LET Us FoRGET CuRRENT THINGS IN ORDER TO RENDER 
THE RooTs HEALTHY. BECAUSE oF INABILITY I EMBARK 
UPON SoMETHING SPIRITUAL 
Such is my nature that I shall begin with the end, and not 
JYith the beginning, and straightway I shall set forth my idea. 
I have never been able to write in a measured fashion, gradually 
reaching the conclusion, formulating it only after having prelim­
inarily explained it in detail and, if possible, proved it. I had no 
patience ; my temper stood in the way, and thereby, of course, I 
harmed myself, because some inferences formulated directly with­
out preparation and preliminary proof, at times, are apt to cause 
surprise and confusion, or even make people laugh. And I know in 
advance that my inferences are precisely such as may make the 
reader laugh if he has not been prepared beforehand. My idea, my 
formula, is as follows : "In order to establish a sound financial sys­
stem in a state which has experienced a violent commotion, do not 
ponder too much over current needs no matter how pressing, but 
think only about rendering the roots healthy-and this will produce 
sound finances." 
Of course people will start laughing : "Everybody knows this 
much"-they will say. "There is nothing new in your formula. Who 
is ignorant of the fact that roots should not be famished ; that if 
the roots dry up there can be no fruit, etc. ?" However, let me ex­
plain my thought ; as yet I have not fully expounded it, and-alas 
-my trouble is that were I ever to write a whole book in an en­
deavor to develop my idea-even then (I foresee) I should fail to 
explaiu it in a way which would make it intelligible in its entirety. 
This is due to the fact that there is a certain predetermination in 
this idea. 
You see, it stands to reason that everybody knows that roots 
must be kept healthy. What Minister of Finance did not take care 
of them, especially the present one ? The tax on salt has already 
ben abolished. Other extraordinary, capital reforms are pending, 
reforms actually afecting the "roots." Besides, also in former times, 
ten years ago, different measures were applied for rendering the 
roots healfl.y. Audits were instituted ; committees were appointed 
for the study of the economic status of the Russian peasant, his 
industrial pursuits, his courts of justice, his institutions of self­
government, his -diseases, customs, habits, and so on, and so forth. 
Committees formed subcommittees for the collection of statistical 
data, and everything progressed rather smoothly, in the best ad­
ministl ative sense. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1023 
However, I started speaking about altogether different mat­
ters. In my opinion, not only subcommittees but even such cardinal 
reforms as the abolition of the salt tax and the forthcoming great 
reform of the tax system, are mere palliatives, external things which 
do not begin with the roots. This is what I want to emphasize. 
We shall begin with roots when we forget-if not completely, half­
forget at least-the current things, the headline news, the crying· 
needs of our budget, our foreign indebtedness, the deficit, the ruble, 
even bankruptcy, which, however, we shall never have, despite all 
the malevolent prophecif's of our foreign friends. In a word, when 
we forget all current things and turn our exclusive attention to 
the treatment of the roots, only then shall we reap an abundant 
and healthy crop. At that time we may revert to current things, 
or, more correctly-to new current things, because one may expect 
that during this intermission the things of the past (i.e., the con­
temporary, our present-day current things) will change and trans­
form thcmselvel> so radically that we shall not recognize them. 
And yet, of course, I understand that what I have just said 
may sound fantastic ; that it is impossiblf' not to think about the 
ruble, about payments on loans, bankruptcy, the army ; that these 
expenditures must be met in the first instance. But I assure you 
that I understand this. I must confess that I set forth my idea 
squarely, extending my desiderata almost to the point of an im­
possible ideal. I thought that by starting out with an absurdity I 
might be better understood. And I said, "If only we could force 
ourselves to half-forget current things and di·•ert our attf'ntion to 
something wholly different, to Ⴈhat depth : ,  o which, honestly 
speaking, thus far, we have never looked becau -t: we soughf to find 
it on the surface." But I am ready to mitigate my formula, and in 
lieu of it I propose : let us not half-forget the current things-I 
renounce the half-but let us forget only one twentieth of them, 
on condition (on the binding condition) ,  however, that, having be­
gun with one twentieth of oblivion of the current things, we add 
each subsequent year another one twentieth, :t•Ⴉaining in this way, 
say, three quarters of the oblivion. In this matter it is not the 
fraction that is important but the principle which one adopts and 
by which one undeviatingly abides. 
Well, we are faced with the same question · What shall we 
do with the present ?-We can't d1 .:ard it as something nonexistent !  
But I do not propose to discard it. I know myself that the existent 
cannot be made nonexistent. And yet, gentlemen, sometimes it 
can be. For should we annually diminish by only one twentieth 
our paႪhologically anxious attention to current t¥i?gs, turning it 
in the same ratio to something else, the proposition would not 

1024 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r881 
appear so fantastic. On the contrary, it would seem plausible ; all 
the more so, I repeat, as there is no need to worry about the 
present annually neglected one twentieth, for the simple reason 
that it will not be lost or eliminated, but will naturally transform 
itself into something different ;  something much better ; it will sub­
mit to the new principle and will become part of its spirit. 
.. 
It may be said that I am speaking in riddles. But this is not 
so. By way of an example I shall first say a few prefatory words 
on the subject of how one may begin the transition from the current 
things to the "treatment of the roots." 
For instance, what if Petersburg, by some miracle, should 
suddenly agree to diminish her haughty attitude toward Russia ! ­
Indeed, this would be the first glorious and sound step towards "the 
treatment of the roots" ! Look at Petersburg. She has gone so far 
as to believe that she is all Russia, and this belief grows increas­
ingly from generation to generation. In this spirit Petersburg fol­
lows, as it were, the example of Paris, despite the fact that she 
does not resemble Paris at all ! Paris formed herself historically, 
of her own accord, so as to absorb France, the whole significance 
of her political and social life, her whole purport. Take Paris away 
from France, and what will remain of France ?-Nothing but a 
geographical definition. Now, some of us imagine, even as in Paris, 
that Petersburg- has absorbed all Russia. But Petersburg is by no 
means Russia. To the overwhelming majority of the Russian people 
the significance of Petersburg is confined to the fact that the Czar 
resides there. liowever, from generation to generation, our Peters­
burg intelligentsia have comprehended Russia less and less, because, 
having ·closeted themselves in their Finnish marsh, they have been 
changing their view of Russia more and more, so that, finally, she 
has narrowed down to the microscopical dimensions of some Karls­
ruhe. But peep out of Petersburg and you will behold an ocean of 
Russian land, an immense bottomless sea. Even so, a son of Peters­
burg parents calmly denies the sea of the Russian people and takes 
it for something inert and unconscious, spiritually negligible and 
extremely backward. "Russia is massive"-says he-"but stupid. 
She is only good for maintaining us so that we may educate her 
and teach her the meaning of state order." 
The future sons of our fatherland are moulded in Petersburg 
in the process of dancing and polishing inlaid floors, whereas "the 
servile rats," as Ivan Alexandrovich Khlestakov used to call them, 
are studying their fatherland in chanceries ; naturally, they manage 
to learn something, but not Russia-something altogether different, 
at times, very strange. And this "something different and strange" 
they obtrude upon R ussia. Meanwhile the sea of the people lives 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
rozs 
in its own peculiar manner with every new generation spiritually 
more and more segregating itself from Petersburg. And don't tell 
me that, though the pulse of the people's life beats mightily, theirs 
is an unconscious existence, as is still believed not only by Peters­
burg residents but even by some ,,f the few Russians who under­
stand Russia. Oh, if only you knew how incorrect this is ; how 
much consciousness has accumulated in the Russian people even 
during the present reign ! Yes, consciousness is steadily growing, 
and so much has been grasped and rationalized by the people that 
Petersburg gentlemen would not believe it. This is perceived by 
those who know how to see ; this can be foreseen ; it merely does 
not manifest itself in its totality ; yet it can even be clearly ob­
served locally, in remote corners, in peasants' abodes. And how 
can it be revealed in its totality ? How can it be revealed in an 
ocean ? But when some day consciousness manifests itself, or only 
begins to reveal itself, how dumbfoundeci will the educated Peters­
bu:-r Ⴋf'ntleman he ! True, for a long time he will deny it ; he will 
refuse to believe his five senses ! For a long time the European 
homunculus will refuse to surrender,-some of them will die with­
out surrendering. 
In order to avoid great future misunderstandings, how de­
sirable it would be-l repeat-th..:.t Petersburg, at least her best 
representatives, should tone down a bit their haughty attitude to­
ward Russia I 1\.f ore understanding, more humility before the great 
Russian land, before the ocean of Russia-this is what we need. 
And what a sure first step this would be toward "the treatment 
of the roots I " . . . 
"If you please"-! may be interrupted 
'as yet all . this is 
nothing but obsolete worn-out Slavophile rubbi::.h ; there is Mthing 
real in it-it is something on the spiritual orrler. What is this 'treat­
ment of the roots' ?-Thus far you haven't explained this. What 
are these roots ? What do you mean by them ?" 
You're right, gentlemen, quite right.-Let's begin with the 
"roots." 
4 
THE FIRST RooT. INSTEAD OF A FIRM FINANCIAL ToNE I 
AM LAPSING INTO OLD WoRDs. THE OcEAN. TǺIRST FOR 
TRUTH AND THE NECESSITY "'F TRANQUILLITY .. o UsEFUL 
TO FINANCE 
The first root, the most esential root, which must by all means 
be rendered healthy is, no doubt, the Russian people, that ocean 
about which I have just :'poken. I am referring here to our common 

1026 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1881 
people, the plebeian and the peasant, the source of taxation, the 
callous laborers' hands,-to the ocean. Oh, don't I know what our 
government has done-is incessantly doing-for them during the 
present reign, beginning with their liberation from serfdom ? Yes, 
the government takes care of their needs, of their education, of 
their medical treatment ; at times, it even forgives them their 
arrears,-in a word, it does and cares much,-and who does not know 
this ? Yet I intend to speak about a different thing : I mean spiritual 
health of this great root which is the basis of everything. Yes, the 
people are spiritually sick-not mortally : the core of their soul is 
healthy. Nevertheless it is a painful disease. What is it called ?­
This is difficult to define in one word. It might be described as 
"unquenched thirst for truth." The people are continually seeking 
truth, an outlet to it, and they do not find it. 
I wish I could confine myself to the financial aspect of this 
malady, but I shall have to add a few obsolete words. Ever since 
the liberation from serfdom, there has arisen in the people an urge, 
a thirst, for something new, something that was not an aftermath 
of the past ; a thirst for the whole truth, for complete civic resur­
rection to a new life following their great liberation. There ensued 
an urge for a new word ; new sentiments began to boil, and there 
arose a profound belief in a new order. After the initial period of 
the first mediatqrs, suddenly there came to pass something different 
from what the people had expected. There arose an order in which 
the people would have been glad to believe but which they under­
stood little. In fact, they could not understand it at all ; they were 
losing themselves, and, therefore, were unable to believe in that 
order. There came something external, as it were alien to them, 
something not their own. There is no point in ruminating on a 
subject- which has been thrashed out long ago : others will tell the 
story better. Read it, for instance, in the magazine Rus. Then reck­
less drunkenness began to spread, as if a drunken sea overflowed 
Russia. And even though it is still raging, the people have not lost 
their longing for the new truth, for the whole truth, notwithstanding 
the fact that they continue to abuse liquor. Perhaps at no time 
have the people been more susceptible to certain influences and ten­
dencies, more defenseless against them than at present. Take, for 
instance, Stundism, and observe its popularity among the masses. 
What doeႬ it signify ?-Quest after truth and anxiety for it. Pre­
cisely,-anxiety. The people, in our day, are morally "disturbed." I 
am convinced that if, thus far, nihilistic propaganda has failed to 
find its way to the people, this has been exclusively due to the in­
competence, stupidity and unpreparedness of the propagandists, who 
did not even know how to approach the people. However, with the 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1027 
slightest skill they would have penetrated the people just as 
Stundism has. Oh, one must guard the people. "The time will come 
to pass when ye shall be told : Here is Christ, or yonder. Do not 
believe it." At present something similar is transpiring, and not 
only among the people, but, perhap޺, also among our upper strata. 
Aren't the people disturbed by various unusual rumors about the 
new partition of the land, about new "gold charters" ? Recently, 
in churches, announcements were made to the effect that people 
should not believe these rumors ; that nothing is going to happen. 
But, would you believe it ? precisely after these announcements, in 
different localities, belief grew stronger that something would 
"transpire" : "They would not be reading in vain : if they start 
reading, this means that something will 'transpire.' " This is how 
people began to talk immediately after the announcements had 
been read,-at least, here and there. I know of one instance : peasants 
WPrP negotiating' with a neighboring landowner for the purchase of 
his land ; the parties agreed upon the price, but after that announce­
ment the peasants would not go through with the deal : "We'll get 
that land without paying for it.'' They smile and wait. 
I am merely referring to rumors, to the eagerness to listen 
to them, indicating the state of moral disturbance of the people. 
And this is the most important point : the people are left alone, 
dependent solely upon their own strength ; spiritually they are sup­
ported by no one. There is the zemstvo, but they are "bosses." 
There are courts, but these, too, are "bosses.'' .Finally, there is the 
peasants' commune, the peasants' village aso;\ mbly ; however, these 
seem to exhibit a tendency of turning into sc •ething akin to "the 
authorities.'' Newspapers are full of descriptivns of the manner in 
which the people elect their deputies in the presence of "the authori­
ties," of some government official, and what comes of it. There are 
thousands of these anecdotes, and I shall not recapitulate them. A 
simpleton starts looking around, and unexpectedly draws the con­
clusion that only the kulak or the peasants' blood-sucker manages 
to prosper ; everything seems to serve only him : "Well, then, I 
shall also try to become a kulak ! "-And this he becomes. Another 
more timid fellow turns into a thorough drunkard. not because he 
is overcome by poverty but because he is disgustPd with lawless­
ness. What is to be done ?-Thi!' is predestination. 
The people were given an administration ; officers were ap­
pointed,-well, it would seem that this ought to have settled mat­
ters. And yet, for some reason, the contrary happened. It has been 
reckoned that at present there are some twenty government officials 
specially appointed for the people, standing above the people pro­
tecting and guarding them. Everybody is the poor man's boss any-

1028 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1881 
way, and yet here we have no additional group of special ap­
pointees I This makes the people's freedom of movement equal to 
that of a fly caught in a plate full of molasses. Not only from a 
moral but also from a fmancial point of view such a "freedom of 
movement" is harmful. And the main thing is that the people are 
alone, without any advisers. They have only God and the Czar ; 
tliese two forces, these two great hopes are the people's only sup­
port ; while all other counselors pass them by without any effect. 
For example, the whole progressive intelligentsia passes the people 
by because even though there are many level-headed men among our 
intelligentsia, only a few of them have any understanding of the 
people. In Russia there is nothing but negation and incessant com­
plaints : "Why isn't society 'vivified' ? Why can't it be 'vivified' by 
some means ? What's the riddle ?"-Society cannot be animated be­
cause you do not rely upon the people ; spiritually, the people are 
not with you, and they are alien to you. You are constituting, as it 
were, an upper stratum above the people enveloping Russia ; and, 
according to your own statements and writings, it was for you that 
the Reformer left the people in servitude in order that, by serving 
you with their labor, they might enable you to acquire European 
enlightenment. During these two centuries you have , become en­
lightened, but the people have alienated themselves from you, and 
you have segregated yourselves from them. "But aren't we"-you 
will say-"sorrowing for the people ? Don't we keep writing about 
the people ? Don't we appeal to them ?"-Quite so. You are doing 
all this. But, for some reason, the Russian people are convinced 
that you sorrow not for them but for some other people who do 
not res¢mble the Russian people, whom you actually despise. This 
disdainful attitude toward the people, in some of us, is quite un­
conscious, so to speak, altogether involuntary. This is an after­
growth of serfdom. It took its inception at the time when civically 
the people were put to death for tl1e sake of our European enlighten­
ment. This aftergrowth unquestionably persists in us till this day 
when the people have been resurrected. And do you know that it 
is no longer possible for us to unite with the people unlesS' some 
miracle happens in Russia ? Here I shall repeat my own words 
which I uttered long ago : The overwhelming mass of the Russian 
people is vrthodox ; it lives by the idea of Orthodoxy in all its 
completeness despite the fact that rationally and scientifically they 
do not compreႭnd this idea. Essentially, save for this "idea" there 
dwells no other in our people ; everything is derived from it,-at 
least this is what the people want wholeheartedly and with deep 
conviction. They want precisely everything tlley possess and every­
thing that is given them, to emanate exclusively- from this idea. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1029 
This is true in spite of the fact that many things happening afnong 
the people nonsensically are derived not from this idea but from 
fetid, foul, criminal, barbaric sources. But even the criminal and 
the barbarian, although they sin, nevertheless, in the loftiest mo­
ments of their lives, they pray God ޻hat their sins and abominations 
may come to an end, and that everything may he again derived 
from their beloved "idea." 
I know that our educated men ridicule me : they refuse everi 
to recognize "this idea" in the people, pointing to their sins and 
abominations ( for which these men themselves are responsible, hav­
ing oppressed the people for two centuries) ; they also emphao;ize 
the people's prejudices, their alleged indifference to religion, while 
some of them imagine that the Russian people are simply atheists. 
Their great error consists of the fact that they refuse to recognize 
the existence of the Church as an element in the life of the people. 
I am not speaking of church buildings, or the clergy. I am now 
rdet.;ug to our Russian "socialism,"1 the ultimate aim of which 
is the establishment of an a!Cumenical Church on earth in so far as 
the earth is capable of embracing it. I am speaking of the unquench­
able, inherent thirst in the Russian people for great, universal, 
brother!)" fellow5hip in the name of Christ. And even if this fellow­
ship, as yet, does not exist, and it that church has not completely 
materialized,-not in prayers only but in reality-nevertheless the 
instinct for it and the unquenchable, oftentimes unconscious, thirst 
for it, indubitably dwell in the hearts of the millions of our people. 
Not in communism, not in mechankal forms is the socialism 
of the Russian people expressec' · they belkv·.- that they s::Iall be 
finally saved tlzrougll the universal commun. •l in the name of 
Christ. This is our Russian socialism ! It is the presence· in the 
Russian people of this sublime unifying "(.::mrch ., idea that you, 
our European gentlemen, are ridicnling. There ;ue many other 
"ideas" in the people which you will never embrace and which you, 
in your European world outlook, conceive as outright Tartar ideas. 
At this time I shall not even mention these other ideas, although 
they are extremely important ; their truth you do not comprehend 
at all. 
Here I am merely speaking about this focal idea of our 
people-about their hope for the future recumenical Church which, 
by Divine Providence, moulds i. ·If in their hearts. At this junc­
ture the following formula may be set forth : He who fails to com­
prehend in our people their Orthodoxy and its ultimate aims never 
I Strange as it may seem, I am using this tc: m, descriptive of something 
diametri.cally opposed to everything the Church represents, for the purpose 
of elucidating my thought. 

1030 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1881 
can understand the people themselves. Moreover, he is incapable 
of loving the people (even though the hearts of many of our Euro­
peans are pure and longing for justice and love). They will love 
them only in the guise that they conceive and desire. Inasmuch, 
however, as the people will never become such as our wiseacres 
would like to see them, and will always remain such as they are, 
an unavoidable and dangerous conflict may be anticipated in the 
future. Indeed, the formula, framed above, has also a reverse sig­
nificance, i.e. : Never will the people take such a European Russian 
for their own. "First, learn to love my sanctity ; begin to revere 
that which I revere,-then you will be, even as I, my brother, 
irrespective of the fact that you dress differently, that you are a 
gentleman, a boss, and that, at times, you don't know how to ex­
press yourself decently in Russian."-This is what the people will 
tell you, since the people are clever and there is liberality in them. 
At times, they will even esteem and take a liking to a good man, 
though he does not believe in their sanctity ; they will listen to 
him, if he is level-headed, will thank him for his advice and will 
take advantage of it. The Russian people can live on good terms 
with anyone, because they have seen many a sight, they have noticed 
and memorized many a thing in the course of their long and dif­
ficult life of the last two centuries. However, you do not even con­
cede the fact that the people have noticed and memorized many 
a thing, and that, consequently, they are cognizant of them ; and 
that, on this ground, they are not merely an inert mass and a 
source of taxation, as you have defined them. Even so, to live on 
good and even loving terms with a man is one thing, and to recog­
nize him as one's own is an altogether different proposition. With­
out such a recognition, however, there can be no fellowship. 
I merely wish to state that the forces alienating us from the 
people are very great ; that the people are left to themselves, in 
their great segregation, and that, save for the Czar, in whom they 
inviolably believe, they expect support from no one and from no­
where. They would be glad to perceive such a support but it is 
difficult to discern it. And yet, what a mighty, creative, blissful 
and new-wholly new-force would arise in Russia should a com­
munion of our educated classes with the people come to pass 1 I 
mean-spirႮtual communion. 0, gentlemen Ministers of Finance, 
then you would be computing your annual budgets quite differently 
from those which you are now drawing I Rivers of milk would be 
flowing in our Czardom, and all your ideals would be attained at 
once I "Well, how is this to be done ? Is it possible that our Euro­
pean enlightenment is to be blamed for this ?"-Oh, not at all en­
lightenment. To tell the truth, as yet there is none ;. nevertheless 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
IOJI 
segregation persists, as i t  were, in the name of European enlighten­
ment which we don't have. But genuine enlightenment is not to be 
blamed for this condition. I even reason this way : had we genuine 
enlightenment there would have J.een among us no segregation, 
since the people, too, crave enlightePment. But having acquired our 
enlightenment, we flew away from the people to the moon, and we 
lost our road to them. How, then, can we, such detached individuals, 
assume the task of making the people healthy ? What can be done 
in order that the people's spirit, languishing and everywhere dis­
turbed, should be braced and pacif1ed ? Capital itself, its mobility, 
requires moral tranquillity, bereft of which it either hides or re­
mains unproductive. What is to be done in order that the spirit 
of the people may be assuaged by truth, by perceiving the truth ?­
There is even truth at present, but it is necessary that the people 
should believe in it. How is one to inculcate in their souls the con­
vic-tion that truth exists in our Russian land, and that its banner 
soars high ? What is to be done, fur example, to make the people 
believe in their courts, in their representation, and to make them 
feel that these are flesh of their flesh and bone of their bone ?-I 
am not J!"Oing into details. How can I ?  If one were to start ex­
plaining and describing everythinli, I believe "that even the world 
itself could not contain the books that should be written." 
However, if only truth could be guaranteed to the people in 
the future so that they should firmly believe that it will unfailingly 
come ; if the fly should extricate itself-at least a bit-out of the 
plate of molasses,-even then an unaccountat-!y great thinrz would 
come to pass. I state directly : tࢊ1e whole trc·· 'Jle is the result of 
the old alienation of our educated class from the lower stratum, 
from our people. How is one to restore peace between the· upper 
stratum and the grand ocean ? How is one to pacify the ocean so 
as to avoid a great commotion ? 
s 
LET THEM SPEAK FIRST. FoR THE TIME BEING LET Us 
STAND AsmE IN ORDER TO LEARN SENSE AND REASON 
For this there is a magic W'lrd : "Show faith." Y'es, our people 
can be trusted, they are worthy oJf confidence. Summon the gray 
peasants' coats, and ask them about their needs, and they will tell 
you the truth, and, perhaps, for the first time, we shall hear the 
real truth. And there should be no elaborate preparations : the 
people .could be questioned locally, in counties, in peasants' huts, 
since even if scattered locally they would say exactly the same thing 

1032 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1881 
whib they would say if they were assembled in one place, because 
their spirit is one. Scattered or brought together they are one, since 
their spirit is one. Each locality would merely add its local pecu­
liarity, but in toto everything would be in accord and one. It should 
only be observed that, for the time being, precisely the peasant, 
the genuine peasant, should be given a chance to express himself. 
True, alongside the peasant you will find the kulak and the blood­
sucker ; but they, too, are peasants, and in so great a cause they 
will not betray their land and will utter a true word.-Such is, in­
deed, our national peculiarity. 
How is this to be achieved ?-Well, men in power are in a 
better position to decide this question. I merely believe that the 
matter would require no special formulae. Our people are not 
particular about forms, especially, ready-made, foreign forms, which 
they do not need at all, because they have different things on their 
minds ; they never were, never will be, interested in forms because 
on this matter they have their own, quite peculiar opinions. In­
deed, in this case a people such as ours can be fully trusted. For 
who has not seen them beside, near and with the Czar ? They are 
true, loyal children of the Czar, and he is their father. Is the 
saying that "the Czar is their father" a mere phrase, an empty 
sound in Russia ? He who so believes understands nothing about 
Russia I Nay, this is a profound and most original idea,-a live 
and mighty organism of the people merging with their Czar. This 
idea is a force which has been moulding itself in the course of 
centuries, especially the last two centuries, which were so dreadful 
to the people, but which we so ardently eulogize for European en­
lightemnent, forgetting the fact that this enlightenment was bought 
two centuries ago at the expense of serfdom and a Calvary of the 
Russian people serving us. The people waited for their liberator, 
and he came. Why, then, shouldn't they be his own, true children ? 
The Czar to the people is not an extrinsic force such as that of some 
conqueror (as were, for instance, the dynasties of the former Kings 
of France) ,  but a national, all-unifying force, which the people 
themselves desired, which they nurtured in their hearts, which they 
came to love, for which they suffered because from it alone they 
hoped for their exodus from Egypt. To the people, the Czar is the 
incarnatidh of themselves, their whole ideology, their hopes and 
beliefs. 
So recently these hopes have been completely realized. Would 
the people renounce their further hopes ? Wouldn't the latter, on 
the contrary, be strengthened and reinforced, since after the peasants' 
reform the Czar became the people's father not merely in hope but 
in reality. This attituႯe of the people toward the Czar is the genuine, 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
IOJJ 
adamant foundation of every reform in Russia. If you wish, there 
is in Russia no creative, protective and leading force other than 
this live organic bond of the people with their Czar, from which 
everything is derived. For instance, who would even have ventured 
to dream about the peasants' reform without knowing and believ­
ing in advance that the Czar was a father to the people, and that 
precisely this faith of the people in the Czar as their father would 
save and protect everything and stave off the calamity ? Alas, in.: 
competent is that reformer-economist who shuns the genuine and 
living national forces because of some prejudice or foreign belief. 
Why, we are not with the people, we do not understand them for 
the one reason that, even though we know and comprehend their 
attitude toward the Czar, yet we are unable to embrace in all its 
completeness the cardinal and essential element in our destinies, 
i.e., that this attitude of the Russian people toward their Czar is 
the most peculiar trait which distinguishes our people from all 
C'ther peoples of Europe and of the whole world ; that in Russia this 
is not merely a temporary, transitory phenomenon, not a mere 
symptom of national infancy or the people's growth, as some wise­
acre may think, but a secular, perpetual fact which will never-at 
least, not for a very long time-change. 
How, then, is it possible to maintain that our people are not 
different from all other nations, and that they do not bear within 
themselves an idea of their own ? Is it not, on Lhe contrary, clear 
that the Russian people bear within themselves the organic embryo 
of an idea which differs from any idea in the world ? And this idea 
comprises in Russia so mighty a force that i': will naturally exercise 
an influence upon our whole future his tor· 
Inasmuch, however, 
as this idea is quite peculiar and is encount޼red nowhere eise, our 
history cannot resemble the history of other European nations ; even 
less can it be a slavish copy of the latter. 
This is what our wise fello\\ s fail to comprehend, they who 
believe that everything in Russia will transform itself into a Europe, 
devoid of any individuality, and who hate individuality. This may 
result in a calamity. And the fact that in R!lssia all fundamentals 
are different from anything in Europe may be demonstrated by the 
following example : Civil liberty may be established in Russia on 
an integral scale, more complete than anywhere in the world, whether 
in Europe or even in North \merica, and pre( isely on the same 
adamant foundation. It will b .. based not upon a written sheet of 
paper, but upon the children's affection of the people for the Czar, 
as their father, since children may be permitted many a thing 
which is inconceivable in the case of contractual nations ; they may 
be entrusted with much that has nowhere been encountered, since 

1034 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1881 
children will not betray their father, and, being children, they will 
lovingly accept from him any correction of their errors. 
How, then, can confidence be denied to such a people ?-Let 
them speak about their needs, let them tell the whole truth about 
them. But, I repeat, first, let them speak alone, while we, "the 
people's intelligentsia," for the time being, humbly stand aside and 
look at them, listening to what they have to say. Oh, it is not on 
some political grounds that I am suggesting that our intelligentsia 
be temporarily set aside. Do not attribute to me these motives. I 
am suggesting this, if you will pardon me, for purely pedagogical 
motives. Yes, let us stand aside and listen to the people ; let us 
find out how clearly and intelligently they will express their truth 
without our assistance, precisely a matter genuinely their own, 
how they will hit the target, without offending us, should we be 
involved in the discussion. Let us stand there and let us learn the 
people's humility, their business-like reasoning, the concreteness of 
their mind. 
You may retort : "You said yourself that the people are apt to 
listen to nonsensical rumors.-What kind of wisdom, then, can we 
expect from them ?"-Quite so. But rumor is one thing, and fellow­
ship in a common cause is an altogether different proposition. 
Wholeness will ensue, which, in turn, will exercise an influence upon 
itself and will produce reason. Indeed, it will be a school for us 
all, a most beneficial school. Perceiving in the people such a serious, 
business-like approach to their problems, we shall be surprised. 
And, of course, some of us will not believe our eyes. Of these, 
however, there will be very few, since all those who are genuinely 
sincere, who really thirst for truth and principally for common bene­
fit,-those will all support the wise utterances of the people. But 
all those who are insincere will forthwith reveal themselves and 
their content. Should there remain sincere men who even then fail 
to believe in the people, such old-believers and doctrinaires of the 
Forties and Fifties, such old incorrigible childrႰ" will merely be 
ridiculous and harmless. Aside from these, all others will clear their 
eyes and cleanse their understanding. 
This might be an event of major importance from the stand­
point of its consequences, since . . .  it is in this form that the 
beginninႱ, the first step in the direction of a merger of our whole 
educated · class, so uppish toward the people, with the latter would 
start. I am speaking merely about a spiritual merger. This is all we 
need, and thi!i will greatly help everything, will regenerate every­
thing and provide us with a new idea. I believe that our serene and 
fresh youth will be the first to surrender their hearts to the people 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
IOJS 
and will understand the people for the first time. The reason l am 
placing so much hope in our youth is that they also suffer from 
"the quest after truth" and agonize for it ; therefore they, more 
than anyone, are akin to the people, and they will at once under­
stand that the people are seeking the truth. And having closely 
familiarized themselves with the soul of the people, they will re­
linquish the radical nonsense which was about to captivate so many. 
of them who imagined that they had found the truth in the extreme 
European doctrines. 
Oh, I believe that I am not dreaming, and that I am not 
exaggerating those beneficial consequences which could be derived 
from so good a cause. Haughtiness would vanish and respect for 
the native land would arise. An altogether new idea would enter 
our souls, illuminating in them everything that, thus far, has re­
mained in the dark ; its light would expose deceit and banish it. 
Who knows ?-This might be the beginning of a reform the sig­
nihcancc of wLch would even surpass that of the peasants' reform : 
here there would also be a "liberation"-a liberation of our minds 
and hearts from European serfdom sui generis in which, during 
two centuries, we have been dwelling, just in the same way as the 
peasant has recently been our slave. If only this second reform 
could begin and be realized, it would merely be the consequence 
of the first great reform of the beginning of the present reign. At 
that time the two-century-old wall which separated the people from 
the intelligentsia fell materially, and now this wall would fall 
spiritually. And what can be loftier and more profitable to Russia 
than this spiritual merger of tbc social cL., • s ?  Kinsfolks for the 
first time would come to learn their kin. The. - .  who, till now, used 
to be ashamed of our people as a barbaric people impeding progress, 
would become ashamed of their former shႛ.me ; they would humble 
themselves before many a thing and would begin to esteem many 
a thing which they formerly did not respect but despised. And when 
the people have given their reply, when they have given a full ac­
count of themselves, and their humble word has been uttered, 
ask then our intelligentsia their opinion on what the people have 
said, and yo1.o will at once see the results. Then the word of the 
intelligentsia will also be productive, since, after all, they are edu­
cated people and theirs should be the last word. Even so, the ex­
ample of the people who have 
· tered their word first, at all events 
would guard us against many an error, much foolishness we were 
abo1.1t to speak before the people had spoken. And then you would 
see that our intelligentsia would say nothing contradictory to the 
people, merely expressing their truth in scientific language and 

IOJ6 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1881 
developing it to the full breadth of their education, since science, 
or its fundamentals, is in the possession of the intelligentsia, and 
the people are in bad need of science. Moreover, even if there be 
someone who disagrees with the basic tenets of the people, he will 
not dare to oppose the national spirit,-and this is rather important. 
It is very possible that spiritual tranquillity would begin 
precisely with this step. There would arise common, undivided hope, 
and our aims would reveal themselves to us clearly. This is all the 
more desirable as our educated men do not know at all, or know 
indistinctly, what our future national and state aims are. This is 
our weak point, especially at this moment. And this confusion, this 
ignorance, is unquestionably the source of great anxiety and want 
of order. This is true not only of the present but also of the in­
finitely more bitter future. All this could be elucidated, or at least 
might serve as an indication how things should be interpreted and 
envisaged. 
Well, enough has been said on this subject. I have expressed 
myself as best I could. Even though not everything may be under­
stood-if I have proved unable to make myself understood, I accept 
the blame for this-nevertheless, that which will be comprehended 
should be accepted in a peaceful, inoffensive spirit. I merely wish 
that it may be impartially understood ; that above all I am for the 
people ; that I believe as in a sanctity in their soul, in their great 
forces, which no one among us knows in their full compass and 
grandeur. Primarily, I believe in the people's salutary destiny, in 
their conservative and creative spirit. And my only desire is that 
this should be perceived by everybody. The moment this is per­
ceived everything else will begin to be understood. 
Why should ali this be a dream ?-I am not speaking of the 
immensity of the task, but only of the peasant, his own, initial 
affairs, affecting him alone. Doesn't he have such special problems, 
pertaining to him alone, as should become known, so to speak, as 
a matter of taking initiative or by way of an introduction to any 
even very grand reform ? Great benefits would be derived from 
such a knowledge : we should have facts ; we should learn the truth 
about many a thing ; precious material would be gathered which 
would ႜuard many of us against fantastic hopes, distortions in the 
European fashion, and exaggerations.. Most important of ali-I re­
peat-we shall find the proper tone and spirit, that very spirit 
which alone may generate future things on an even greater scale. 
This task will bear a national and profoundly conservative impress. 
No one, not even the most fantastic minds, will be able to avoid 
in the future the consequences of this impress ; even these fantastic 
minds will be tempred and will voluntarily accept it. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
CHAPTER II 
1 
A Witty Bureaucrat. His Opinion on Our Liberals and 
Europeans 
1037 
BUT HAVING finished this first chapter, I shall interrupt 
my article on finance, since I feel that what I write is very bor­
ing. But I am interrupting it only for the time being. I should like 
to dwell upon other "roots" and other elements which in my judg­
ment could be made healthy. I am suspending my article abo for 
the reason that I should be unable to squeeze it in toto into the 
thirty-two pages of Tlze Diary, so that willy-nilly, I should have to 
postpone it till the subsequent issues. 
"There's no point in this. Not necessary to continue it in the 
subsequent issues"-squeamish voices will interrupt me. (I anticipate 
these voices.)-"This has no bearing on finances ; it's just . . .  mis­
chief. All this is not realistic lalthough I don't see why ?] ; all this 
has a ""lystical flavor, with no bearing upon concrete and current 
things ႝ Give us a novel in you; subsequent issues ! "  
Strange voices 1 -I am specifically insisting on the necessity 
of turning away from many a concrete and current thing in order 
that we may create a different reality much more concrete than 
our present one upon which we have embarked and in which we 
are sticking-if you will pardon me-also I:lre that fly in the mo­
lasses.-Therein is my whole Idea, i.e., tl: 
we should t.urn our 
heads and eyes in an altogether different direction. Such is my 
thought. 
Those in power could start the thing, and from this stand­
point by fancies become not at ali as fantastic as they may seem, 
because should the authorities take the initiative, much could be 
accomplished at once. Some of our principles would be radically 
changed ; flies would be extricated from Lഃ.e molasses and freed. 
This idea appears to be unpopular : we have long been used to 
immobility, while it feels so sweet to be sitting in molasses. 
True, I am again deviating, and I may he curtly reminded 
that, having written so muct-
I have failed, ti1us far, to explain 
what are the current and pr႞sent things I am referring to, and 
what kind of future I prefer. This is precisely what I intend to 
explain in the future issues of my Diary. However, in winding up 
the present discussion, I shall say a few words about a meeting 
which I had with a rather witty bureaucrat who told me a curious 

1038 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1881 
thinႍ precisely dealing with certain principles pertaining to the 
changes in our present-day "current" affairs. 
In a certain society the conversation turned to finances and 
economy, but specifically in the spirit of frugality in saving our 
financial resources, and expending them in such a way as to prevent 
the loss of a single kopeck or that it should be spent for no fan­
tastic appropriations. At present we speak almost incessantly about 
this kind of economy, and the government, on its own part, is 
preoccupied with the same problem. We have established control, 
and year after year we have been curtailing our staffs. Of late, 
people even started speaking about the curtailment of the army. 
In newspapers a specific figure has even been suggested, namely, 
that our standing army be reduced by so,ooo men, while in other 
quarters it was proposed to reduce it by one half, and it was claimed 
that this would entail no harmful consequences. This might have 
been excellent, but the following consideration involuntarily comes 
to one's mind : to begin with we might reduce the army by so,ooo 
men ; even so, money thus saved would slip through our fingers­
hither and thither-of course for state needs, but such as are not 
worthy of so radical a sacrifice as this. We shall never be able to 
restore these so,ooo men, or, at any rate, this could be done only 
with a great effort, because, having once made the reduction, it 
would be difficult to restore it, whereas we greatly need an army, 
especially just now, when everybody is ready to retaliate against us. 
It would be dangerous to embark upon this road but only at present, 
with current things as they are. Were we to adopt rigid, gloomy 
economy, in the spirit and resolution of Peter should he have made 
up his mind to economize, only then could we be sure that this 
precious money would be expended on a genuinely worthy cause. 
But are we capable of this in the face of the "crying" needs of thP 
current moment with which we have bound ourselves ? 
I may remark that should we do this-start economizing-this 
would be one of the first turning steps from the fantastic past of 
the current things toward the new, realistic and relevant tasks. For 
example we have often reduced the personnel of government em­
ployees, but the result is that their staffs sem to be increasing. Are 
we capable of a curtailment which would reduce their number from 
forty to four ? That four functionaries can oftentimes accomplish 
what forty were engaged in there can be no shadow of doubt, es­
pecially should the paper office routine be curtailed and the present 
bureaucratic methods radically reformed.-Such was the subject 
which was brought up in the conversation of our company. It was 
observed that this, to say the least, would require a thorough reor­
ganization. Others retorted that we had much more radical reforms 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1039 
than this one. Still others maintained that the salaries of those four 
employees who had replaced the forty, could even be trebled, and 
that they would work willingly, without repining ; and, further, that 
should their salaries be trebled, their subsistence would amount to 
that of twelve present employees, which would reduce the present 
appropriation by three quarters. 
At this juncture I was interrupted by my bureaucrat. First, I 
wish to remark that much to my surprise he did not object to the 
possibility of replacing forty functionaries with four, thus implying 
that business could be conducted by those remaining four. But he 
did object to something else, namely, to the principle itself ; to the 
erroneousness and criminality of the principle. I am recording here 
his objections, not verbatim, but in my version. I am recording them 
because, I repeat, to me, they sounded strange, in a certain sense, 
and comprised an almost piquant idea. Of course, he did not deign 
tn answer me in detail since in a matter such as this I am not a 
specialist, and ·'understand little"-which I hasten to admit.-The 
principle, however, he hoped, I should be able to understand. 
"The reduction of the number of government employt'es from 
forty to four"--thus he started sternly and with conviction-"not 
only b not useful but is essentially harmful, despite the fact that 
state expenditures would actually be considerably curtailed. Not 
only is the reduction from forty to four harmful, but even from 
forty to thirty-eight for the following reason : thereby you would 
be challenging the fundamental principle itself, because for almost 
two hundred years, ever since Peter, we have constituted in the state 
everything. Strictly speaking, ".V ͘ are the 
r .  ·te, while f'IJCrything 
else is merely an appendix. At least, such "' 1s the situatibn until 
recently, till the liberation of the peasants. All former elective offices, 
those of the nobility, for instance, were au.:omatically imbued with 
our spirit, so to speak. Perceiving this, we were not disturbed in 
the least, since the principle laid down two centuries ago was in 
no sense violated. True, after the peasants' reform a new tendency 
began to manifest itself : self-government cႎrne into existence, the 
zemstvo, and the like . . . .  It is now clear that these new institu­
tions at once IJegan to assume our guise, our soul and body ; they, 
too, began to reincarnate themselvP.s. And this happened by no 
means under our pressure (this is an erroneot''' idea) but auto­
matically, since it is difficult l 
rid oneself of secular habits ; nor 
is it at all necessary, if you please, especially in so great and funda­
mental a national task. You may not believe me, but if you are 
capable of rationalizing this, of course yr.u will understand me. For 
what . are we ?-Even to this day we are everything, we continue to 
be everythinJ!;,-and, again, without any effort on our part, without 

1040 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1881 
exerting ourselves in the least, precisely automatically, in the natural 
course of events. People have long been shouting that ours is a 
bureaucratic, not a live but dead, paper proposition, and that Rus­
sia has outlived it. Maybe she has outlived it, but, as yet, we alone 
are holding, building and preserving her lest she fall apart. For 
that which you call burealfcratic carrion, i.e., we ourselves, as an 
institution, and our whole work,-all these, to use a simile, con­
stitute the skeleton in a living organism. Scatter the skeleton, the 
bones, and the live body will perish. Granting that the work is 
being performed in a dead manner, yet it develops in accordance 
with a system, with a great principle. This is what I want to tell 
you. Let the work be done in a bureaucratic fashion, even badly 
and incompletely, nevertheless it is being performed somehow, and 
what is most important-everything stands erect without falling 
apart, and the fact that it does not fall is the main thing. I agree 
with you, and perhaps I am ready to concede that as a matter of 
fact we are not everything : we are clever enough to understand 
that we do not constitute everything in Russia, especially, in our 
day. All right, conceding the fact that we are not everything,-we 
are something, i.e., something real, actually existent, though partly 
incorporeal. Now, what have you with which to replace us so that 
we could safely withdraw ; what kind of 'something' have you 
which would replace us so that nothing would fall ?-All your self­
governments and zemstvos are nothing but beautiful herons soaring 
in the skies, who have never, as yet, alighted on earth. Therefore, 
they are zeros, even though beautiful zeros, whereas we may not 
be beautiful, we may be boring, but we are something, and by no 
means zeros. 
"You all keep blaming us for the heron : Why hasn't he 
alighted to this very day ? You claim that we are to be blamed 
for this and for the alleged fact that we seek to transform the 
beautiful heron into our guise, endowing him with our spirit. Of 
course, on our part it would have been very laudable had this ac­
tually been entirely our fault, since this would have proved that 
we are backing a secular, fundamental and noble principle, and 
seeking to transform a useless zero into a useful something. But 
believe me, of this we are in no way guilty, or, at least, too little 
guilty : the beautiful heron himself is in a state of hesitation ; he 
knows not what he should ultimately become : whether he should 
assume our guise or become really independent. He vacillates ; he 
does not trust himself ; he is almost lost. I assure you that he 
would have come to us by his own free will without any pressure 
on our part. Thus, it appears that we are, so to speak, a natural 
magnet to which e\·erything is still being drawn-and will be drawn 
for a long time. 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
I04I 
"Again, you seem to be sceptical, you laugh. But I am•will­
ing to bet. Just try to unfold the wings of your beautiful wee 
birdie ; give him a free choice I Send your zemstvo a formal, stern 
decree, bearing a file number : 'Henceforth thou shalt be inde­
pendent, and not a bureaucratic heron,' and, believe me, all these 
herons, of their own volition, wouႏd try to come to us and would 
wind up by becoming genuine bureaucrats imbibing our spirit and 
assuming our guise ; they would copy us in everything. Even the 
elected peasant would knock at our door ; this would greatly flatter 
him. Not in vain have tastes moulded themselves for two centuries. 
"And yet, you wish that we, that is, something steady, stand­
ing on its feet, would exchange ourselves for this riddle, this charade, 
this beautiful heron of yours I Nay, better let us hold the titmouse 
in our hands. Better let us cope with the task in our own way. 
We shall improve, clean ourselves ; why, we may introduce some­
thing new, so to speak, more progressive, conforming more to the 
sp;.it of the "ge. Perhaps we may even become more virtuous. 
But we will not exchange our present, the real something for a 
ghost, for a suddenly dreamed of dream, since there is none and 
nothing to replace us. This is correct. We resist annihilation, so 
to SJ>f>'•K, by inertia. This inertia in us is precious, because, in 
truth, iu our day, everything i!> held together by it alone. There­
fore, to be reduced to thirty-eight from forty-not to speak of the 
reduction from forty to four-is a most harmful and even immoral 
proposition. You will gain pennies, but you will destroy a principle. 
Just try to cut out or change your formula, if conscience would 
permit you to venture such a thing : why, :!•; • would be a betrayal 
of our whole Russian Europeanism and 
•
.
 'ightenment,-.do you 
know this ? This would be a negation of the fact that we are a 
state, that we are Europeans. This would ႐e treason to Peter ! And 
do you know that your liberals (well, ours too) who in the news­
papers are so ardently supporting the zemstvo against bureaucracy, 
strictly speaking are contradicting themselves. Why, the zemstvo, 
all these novelties, this 'popularism'-they are, indeed, those very 
'popular principles or their inception,' about which 'The Russian 
Party' (you nay have heard that it has been thus nicknamed in 
Berlin) so hated by our Europeans, is so loudly vociferating, which 
are so furiously denied by our Russian liberalism ·;nd Europeanism ; 
which they so bitterly ridicu' 
the very existeuce of which they 
refuse to admit I Liberalism is very much afraid of these principles r 
Wb..Lt if they should ever be realized ! -In a sense this certainly 
would be a surprise I 
"This means that, strictly speaking, all your Europeans are 
with · us, and we are with them, and this they should have under-

1042 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r88I 
stood long ago and dutifully memorized. If you please, not only 
are we supporting the same things as they, but we and they are 
one and the same thing I Our guise and our spirit reside in them, 
in your Europeans. This is actually so I Here is what I am going 
to add : Europe-! mean Russian Europe, or Europe in Russia­
this is we, we alone. We are the incarnation of the whole formula 
of Russian Europeanism ; it resides in toto in us. We alone are also 
its interpreters. And I can't see why they shouldn't be receiving 
duly established decorations for their Europeanism if we are merg­
ing with them so innocently I They would wear them with pleasure, 
and they might even thereby be attracted to us. But we don't know 
how to do these things. And they keep scolding,-verily, kinsfolk 
fail to recognize their own kin I 
"To wind up the discussion about your zemstvos and all these 
innovations, I shall tell you once and for all : No, sir I This is a 
long and not a short story. This requires a preliminary culture, its 
own, perhaps, two-hundred-year-long history. Be it only a century- or 
half-century-long history, since ours is an age of telegraphy and 
railroads, which accelerate and facilitate all communications. Even 
if it is only fifty years, nevertheless it is not forthwith. 'Forthwith 
and right away' are abominable Russian words. Right away noth· 
ing can come to pass, save men akin to us. And thus it will be for 
a long time." 
At this point my bureaucrat, with proud deportment, ceased 
speaking. Apd would you believe it, I did not argue with him, since 
there was "something" in his words, some kind of a sad truth, 
something actually existent. Of course, inwardly, in my soul I did 
not agree with him. And the tone with which these departing men 
speak I . . . Even so, there was "something" in his words . . . .  
2 
AN OLD KRYLov FABLE ABouT A CERTAIN PIG 
And to finish with all this-once and for all, I shall quote a 
short and very pretty little fable by Krylov which is probably for­
gotten by everybody, since what has our busy and tossing age to 
do with Krylov ? This little fable i11voluntarily came to my mind 
when I was ;lbout to start writing my article on finances and the 
task of rendering our roots healthy. It has an admirable moral, 
but on a different theme, on the subject of other roots. However, 
this makes no difference,-it is applicable to our situation. This is 
the fable : 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
"A Pig beneath an ancient oak 
Upon the acorns gorged and stuffed aU day, 
Then in the shadow snoring Jay. 
At last, with heavy eyes, the Swine awoke, 
Got up, and with his snout the roots began to poke. 
'Dost thou not see ? This hurts the tree I '  
A Raven from the oak called out reproachfu11y. 
'If thou lay'st bare the roots, thou'lt make the tree decay.' 
Says Pig : 'Well, let it l As for me, 
That doesn't disturb me anyway I 
It's not much qse that I can see, 
And if it went for good, I'd never fret for that : 
It's acorns that I want ; it's they that make me fat I '  
'Ungrateful, thou I '  the Oak replied in tone severe, 
'If thou shouldst raise thy snout and look up here, 
Then thou wouldst see 
That all these acorns grow on me.' "1 
1043 
Isn't this a good fable ? And are we wiJiing to resemble this portrait ? 
3 
GEox-TEPE. WHAT IS AsiA TO Us ? 
Geok-Tepe is captured. The Turkomans are defeated, and al­
though they are not yet quite pacified, our victory is indubitable. 
Society and the press are jubilant. But wa::. :· long ago th:.t society, 
and partly a] so the press, took a most inc : Zerent attitude toward 
this affair ?-Particularly after the failure of General Lom::rkin and 
in the beginning of the preparations for f1e second offensive. "Why 
should we go there ? What is Asia to us ?-So much money has been 
expended, whereas we have a famine, diphtheria, we have no schools, 
etc." Yes, such opinions were expressed ; we heard them. Not every­
body shared them-far from it. Even so, one has to admit that, 
of late, many people began to adopt a hostile attitude toward our 
aggressive policy in Asia. True, the lack of information concerning 
the expedition undertaken was a contributing factor to this mood. 
Only quite recently news began to slip into Rus!'iia from the foreign 
press, whereas Skobelev's tek ႑rams were printed throughout Rus­
sia when the undertaking was practically all over. Nevertheless, 
one can hardly maintain that our society has a clear conception of 
our mission in Asia,-what specifically she means to us now and 
1From The Fables of Krylov, translated by Sir Bernard Pares, published 
by Jonathan Cape Limited, London, 1926. 

1044 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1881 
in the future. Generally speaking, our whole Russian Asia, includ­
ing Siberia, still exists to Russia merely in the form of some kind 
of an appendix in which European Russia has no desire to take 
any interest. "We are Europe,"-it is implied.-"What is our busi­
ness in Asia ! " There even sounded very harsh voices : "Oh, this 
Russian Asia of ours ! We are even unable to establish order and 
settle properly in Europe, and here we have to meddle with Asia I 
Why, Asia is quite superfluous to us I How can we get rid of her ! "  
Even in our day such opinions are expressed by our wiseacres,-of 
course, out of their great wisdom. 
Skobelev's victory resounded all over Asia to her remotest 
corners : "Another fierce and proud orthodox people bowed before 
the White Czar I " And let this rumor echo and re-echo. Let the con­
viction of the invincibility of the White Czar and of his sword 
grow and spread among the millions of those peoples,-to the very 
borders of India and in India herself. After General Lomakin's 
failure throughout Asia there must have spread doubt as to the 
invincibility of our sword, and Russian prestige was unquestionably 
jeopardized. This is why we cannot stop on this road. The peoples 
may have their khans and emirs ; in their imagination England, 
whose strength they admire, may stand as a menace, but the name 
of the White Czar must soar above those of the khans and emirs, 
above the name of the Caliph himself. Such is the conviction that 
must prevail in Asia ! And, from year to year, it does spread there. 
And we nee.d it because it prepares them for the future. 
What for ? What future ? What is the need of the future seizure 
of Asia ? What's our business there ? 
This is necessary because Russia is not only in Europe but 
also in Asia ; because the Russian is not only a European but also 
an Asiatic. l\loreover, Asia, perhaps, holds out greater promises to 
us than Europe. In our future destinies Asia is, perhaps, our main 
outlet ! 
I anticipate the indignation with which this reactionary sug­
gestion of mine will be read. To me, however, it is an axiom. Yes, 
if there is one of the major roots which has to be rendered healthy, 
it is precisely our opinion of Asia. We must banish the slavish fear 
that Europe will call us Asiatic barbarians, and that it will be said 
that we· are more Asiatics than Europeans. This fear that Europe 
might regard us as Asiatics has been haunting us for almost two 
centuries. It has particularly increased during the present nine­
teenth century, reaching almost the point of panic, something on 
the order of the trepidation which the "enigmatic" words "metal" 
and "fiend'' cause among the Moscow merchants' wives. This 
erroneous fright of ours, this mistaken view of ourselves solely as 

THE DIARY OF :\ WRITER 
1045 
Europeans, and not Asiatics-which we have never ceased t() be­
this shame and this faulty opinion have cost us a good deal in the 
course of the last two centuries, and the price we have had to pay 
has consisted of the loss of our spiritual independence, of our un­
successful policies in Europe, and finally of money-God only knows 
how much money-which we spent in order to prove to Europe that 
we were Europeans and not Asiatics. 
However, Peter's shock which pushed us into Europe, at first 
necessary and salutary, proved too strong, and for this we cannot 
be fully blamed. And was there a limit to our efforts to make Europe 
recognize us as hers, as Europeans, solely as Europeans, and not 
Tartars I Continually and incessantly we have annoyed Europe, 
meddling with her affairs and petty business. !'\ow, we scared her 
with our strength, dispatching our armies "to save the kings," now 
we bowed before Europe-which we shouldn't have done-assuring 
her that we were created solely for the purpose of serving her and 
m .. l.:ing her h:>i)py. In 1812, having driven Napoleon out of Russia, 
we did not make peace with him, as certain perspicacious Russians 
advised us to do, but moved into Europe as a solid wall in order 
to make her happy and to liberate her from her aggressor. Of 
courSP, this was a lustrous picture : IJn the one hand was the despot 
and the aggressor, while on t႒1e other-the peacemaker and the 
resurrector. Still, in those days our political fortune consisted not 
in the picture, but in the fact that that aggressor had been placed, 
for the first time during his whole career, in a position where he 
would have made peace with us,-a sincere, lasting peace, maybe, 
forever. On condition that we should npt ႓inder him in Europe, 
he would have given us the East, so that 01. present Eastern prob­
lem-the menace and calamity of our prese!lt and of our: future­
would have been settled long ago. The aJYgressor later said it him­
self, and surely he did not lie, since he could have done nothing 
better than to be our ally on condition that the East should be 
ours, and the West-his. Then he certainly would have mastered 
the European nations, whereas the latter, including England, were 
then still too weak to stop us in the East. s .. bsequently, Napoleon, 
or his dynac•y after his death, would, perhaps, have fallen, but the 
East nevertheless would have been ours. (Then we should have had 
access to the sea, and we could have met England on the seas.) 
But we gave all this up for 
little show. Wh<> .. was the result ?­
All these nations we liberatetl, before they had even dispatched 
N႔tpoleon, began to look on us with most obvious malevolence and 
the bitterest suspicion. At the Congresses at once they all united 
against us, as a solid wall, grabbing everything for themselves. And 
not ·only did they leave nothing to us, but they exacted from us 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1881 
certa[n obligations-true, these were voluntary obligations-which, 
however, subsequently proved to be very costly ones. 
Later, despite this lesson,-what did we do throughout the 
subsequent years of our century, up to this very day ? Didn't we 
contribute to the consolidation of the German states ? Didn't we 
strengthen them to such an extent that today they are, perhaps, 
stronger than we ?-Indeed, it is no exaggeration to say that we 
have contributed to their growth and strength. Didn't we, in answer 
to their appeals, go to quell their strifes ? Didn't we protect their 
rear when calamities threatened them ? And now, contrariwise, 
didn't they threaten our rear when we were faced with a calamity, 
or didn't they threaten to appear in our rear, when we were menaced 
with other dangers ? It came to the point where everybody in Europe, 
f'very tribe and every nation, held in their bosom a stone stored 
against us long ago, merely waiting for the first conflict. This is 
what we have gained in Europe by serving her.-Nothing but her 
hatred ! We have played the part of Repetilov, who, racing after 
fortune, "In dowry got but naught, in service-no advancement." 
But why this hatred against us ? Why can't they all, once and 
for all, start trusting us and become convinced of our harmlessness ? 
Why can't they believe that we are their friends and good servants, 
and that our whole European mission is to serve Europe and her 
welfare ? ( For is it not so ? Haven't we been acting so throughout 
this century ? Have we done or achieved anything for ourselves ?­
Everything was spent on Europe I )  Nay, they cannot place trust 
in us. The main reason is that they are altogether unable to recog­
nize us as theirs. 
Under no circumstance will they believe that we can in 
truth, on an equal basis with them, participate in the future destinies 
of their civilization. They consider us alien to their civilization ; 
they regard us as strangers and impostors. They take us for thieves 
who stole from them their enlightenment and who disguised them­
selves in their garbs. Turks and Semites are spiritually closer to 
them than we, Aryans. All this has a very important reason : we 
carry to mankind an altogether different idea than they-that's the 
reason. And this, despite the fact that our "Russian Europeans" 
exert their efforts to assure Europe that we have no idea whatso­
ever, and that we can have none in the future ; that Russia is in­
capable of possessing an idea of her own, being capable of mere 
imitation ; that we shall always imitate, and that we are not Asiatics, 
not barbarians, but just as they-Europeans. 
Europe, however, for once, at least, did not believe our Rus­
sian Europeans. On the contrary, in this matter her inferences coin­
cide with those of '>ur Slavophiles, although she knows them not,-

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1047 
at best she might have merely heard something about them: The 
coincidence is precisely that Europe believes, much as the Slavo­
philes believe, that we have an "idea" of our own,-a peculiar, not 
a European idea ; that Rusia can have, is capable of possessing, 
an idea. Of course, as yet, Europt knows nothing about the essence 
of our idea, since did she know it she would forthwith be pacified 
and even gladdened. But some day she will unfailingly come tD 
know this idea, precisely when the critical moment in her destiny 
arrives. At present, however, she does not believe : admitting the 
fact that we possess an idea, she is afraid of it. Finally, she is quite 
disgusted with us, even though, at times, she is polite to us. For 
instance, they readily admit that Russian science can already point 
to several remarkable workers ; that it has to its credit several good 
works which have even rendered service to European science. But 
under no circumstance will Europe now believe that not only 
scientific workers (even though very talented) may be born in 
Russia, but n.en of genius, leaders of mankind, such as a Bacon 
Kant or Aristotle. This they will never believe, since they do not 
believe in our civilization, while, as yet, they do not know our 
future idea. In truth, they are right : we shall have no Bacon, no 
Newt..Jll. no Aristotle so long as we fail to stand on our own road 
and be spiritually independent. 'fhe same is true of all other things, 
-of art and industry : Europe is ready to praise us, to stroke our 
heads, but she does not recognize us as hers, she despises us, whether 
secretly or openly ; she considers us as an inferior race. At times, 
she feels aversion to us, especially when we fling ourselves on her 
neck with brotherly embraces. 
However, it is difficult to turn away 
rom "the window to 
Europe" ; here is predestination. Meanwhile Asia may be, fn truth, 
our future outlet I I reiterate this exclai.Iation. And if we could 
only take cognizance of this idel' even though partially, what a 
root would be rendered whole I Asia, our Asiatic Russia,-why, this 
is also our sick root, which has to be not only refreshed but resur­
rected and transformed I A principle, a new orinciple, a new vision 
of the matter-this is what we need. 
4 
QUESTIO!I., AND ANSWERS 
"What for ? What for ?"-irritated voices will sound.-"Our 
Asiatic affairs even now continually require from us troops and un­
prod႕ctive expenditures. And what is Asia's industry ? What is her 
merchandise ? Where shall we find there consumers of our goods ? 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : 1881 
And you suggest, no one knows why, that we should forever tum 
away from Europe I "  
"Not forever," I continue to insist,-"for the time being, and 
not altogether : hard as we may try we shall never completely tear 
ourselves away from Europe. We should not abandon Europe com­
pletely. Nor is this necessary. She is a 'land of holy miracles' ; this 
was uttered by a most ardent Slavophile. Europe, even as Russia, 
is our mother, our second mother. We have taken much from her ; 
we shall again take, and we shall not wish to be ungrateful to her. 
Last year, at the Pushkin festivities in Moscow, I said a few words 
about the future great mission of the Russian people in Europe (in 
which I believe), and much mud was thrown at me, I was scolded, 
by everybody,-even by those who had then embraced me,-as though 
1 had perpetrated an abomination, a nasty deed, having then ut­
tered my word. 
"However, perhaps, my word will not be forgotten. But enough 
has been said about this. Even so, we have the right to take care 
of our re-education and of our exodus from Egypt, since we our­
selves created out of Europe something on the order of our spiritual 
Egypt." 
"Wait,"-1 shall be interrupted-"in what way will Asia con­
tribute to our independence ? There, we'll fall asleep in an Asiatic 
fashion, but we shall not become independent ! "  
"You see,"-1 continue-"when we turn to Asia, with our new 
vision of her, in Russia there may occur something akin to what 
happened in Europe when America was discovered. Since, in truth, 
to us Asia is like the then undiscovered America. With our aspiration 
for Asia, our spirit and forces will be regenerated. The moment we 
become independent, we shall find what to do, whereas during the 
two centuries with Europe we lost the habit of any work ; we be­
came chatterers and idlers." 
"Well, how are you going to arouse us for the Asiatic venture, 
if we are idlers ? Who's going to be aroused first even if it were 
proved, as by two times two, that our happiness lies there ?" 
"In Europe we were hangers-on and slaves, whereas we shall 
go to Asia as masters. In Europe we were Asiatics, whereas in Asia 
we, to႖ are Europeans. Our civilizing mission in Asia will bribe 
our spirit and drive us thither. It is only necessary that the move­
ment should start. Build only two railroads : begin with the one to 
Siberia, and · then-to Central Asia,-and at once you will see the 
consequences." 
"Indeed, yours is a modest desire I "-people will tell me laugh­
ingly.-"Where are the funds? And what shall we get in return ?­
Nothing but a los to us I" 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
1049 
"First, had we in the last twenty-five years set aside- only 
three million rubles annually (and three million rubles, at times, 
simply slip through our fingers),-by now we should have built sev­
enty-five million rubles' worth of Asiatic roads, i.e., over one thousand 
versts, no matter how you reckun. Then you speak about losses. 
Oh, if instead of us Englishmen or Americans inhabited Russia, 
they would show you what losses mean I They would certainly dis­
cover our America ! Do you know that in Asia there are lands which 
are less explored than the interior of Africa ? And do we know what 
riches are concealed in the bosom of these boundless lands ? Oh, 
they would get at everything-metals and minerals, innumerable 
coal fields ; they would find and discover everything-and they would 
know how to use these materials. They would summon science to 
their aid ; they would compel the earth to yield fifty grains to one, 
-that same earth about which we here still think that it is nothing 
but a steppe naked as our palm. Corn would attract people ; pro­
c.h.:ction, indo., try, would come into existence. Don't you worry : 
consumers would be found, and the road to them would be dis­
covered ; they would be found in the depths of Asia, where millions 
of them are slumbering now ; to reach them new roads would be 
constructed I " 
"Well, here you are eulo!;izing science, and at the same time 
you urge us to renounce science and enlightenment ;  you are sug­
gesting that we become Asiatics I "  
"There, we shall need science al the more"-I exclaim-"since 
what are we in science now ?-Half-educated men and dilettanti. 
But there we shall become workers : nece႗႘i႙y itself wiH compel us 
to it the moment the independent, enter: ising spirit a,rises. In 
science, too, we shall become masters and not hangers-on, as we 
now are all too often. But the main tJ-.ing is that our civilizing 
mission in Asia will be understood and learned by us from the very 
first steps,-this cannot be doubted. It will lift our spirit ; it will 
convey to us dignity and self-consciousness, which at present we 
either lack altogether or possess in a trifling degree. Our longing 
for Asia, should it ever arise among us, would, in addition, serve 
as an outlet to many a restless mind, to those seized with anguish, 
to the lazy, to those who have grown tired of doing nothing. Give 
an efflux to water, and mustiness and stench will disappear. Once 
they are drawn into work, t),C'y will not feel I.Jored ; they will all 
be regenerated. Even the inept fellow with a piqued, aching amour­
propre, would find there an outlet for himself, since it often happens 
that an incapable man in one place is resurrected almost as a 
genius in another place. This is also often observed in European 
colonies. And don't you worry : Russia will not be depopulated : the 

FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : I88I 
thing will start gradually. At first, only a few men will go, but 
after a while news from them will be received which will attract 
others. Even so, to the Russian Sea this will be imperceptible. Ex­
tricate the fly from the molasses ; even straighten its wings as much 
as possible. Still, only a negligible percentage of the population will 
drift thither, so that the migration will remain unnoticed. Over 
there, however, it will be quite noticeable ! Wherever a 'Uruss' 
settles in Asia, the land will forthwith become Russian land. A 
new Russia will arise which in due time will regenerate and 
resurrect the old one and will show the latter the road which 
she has to follow. This, however, requires a new principle and a 
turn. These would necessitate the least destruction and commotion. 
Let it be only slightly fathomed (but fathomed) that Asia is our 
future outlet, that our riches are there, that there is our ocean ; 
that when in Europe, because of the overcrowded condition alone, 
inevitable and humiliating communism is established, communism 
which Europe herself will loathe ; when whole throngs will crowd 
around one hearth, and gradually individual economies will be 
ruined, while families will forsake their homes and will start living 
in collective communes ; when children ( three quarters of them 
foundlings) will be brought up in foundling institutions,-then we 
shall still have wide expanses, meadows and forests, and our chil­
dren will grow up in their parents' homes, not in stone barracks­
amidst gardens and sowed fields, beholding above them clear, blue 
skies. 
"Yes, "Asia holds out to us many a promise, many an oppor­
tunity, the full scale of which we here cannot clearly conceive. Not 
only gold lies concealed in the earth. But we do need a new prin­
ciple which, in turn, will provide us with moneys required for the 
work. Speaking truthfully why should we maintain, over there, in 
Europe, especially at this time, so many embassies with their costly 
gloss and lustre, with their refined wit and dinners, with their 
brilliant but expensive staffs ? What are all these Gambettas and 
Popes to us, precisely now, even though Bismarck may be oppress­
ing them ? Would it not be better, for example, temporarily, to don 
a beggar's garb, to sit down by the roadside, placing a cap before 
us and to start collecting pennies. Let Europe think : 'la Russie se 
recueil/;:'. Meanwhile, at home, we should be getting ready and 
organizing things. People might say : 'Why should we be humbling 
ourselves ?'-Well, we shall not humiliate ourselves in the least ! 
When I mentioned the cap, I was speaking allegorically. Not only 
shall we not humble ourselves, but at once we shall elevate our­
selves. This is what is going to happen. Europe is sly and clever : 
she will at once gues, and, believe me, she will forthwith begin 

THE DIARY OF A WRITER 
IOSI 
to respect us. It stands to reason that, at first, our indeperrdence 
will puz?.le her, but to a certain extent it will please her. Perceiving 
that we have embarked upon 'gloomy economy' ;  that we have de­
cided to abide by the proverb 'they who cannot as they will, must 
will as they may' ; that we have become frugal ; that we are saving 
and valuing our ruble ; that we arc not making it of paper,-Europe 
will forthwith begin to value our ruble in her own markets. Why, 
if Europe sees that we are not afraid of deficits and bankruptcies, 
but that we go straight to our goal, she will come to us herself 
offering money ; and she will offer it to us as serious, business-like 
people who have learned business and who know how to conduct it." 
"Wait,"-1 hear a voice-"you said something about Gambetta. 
But we are in no position to brush everything aside. Take, to begin 
with, the Eastern question : it remains pending. How are we going 
to evade it ?" 
"On the Eastern question at this time I would say : At this 
ffi.ll!ule, in oႚ.i political spheres there is, perhaps, not even one 
political mind which would consider it common sense that Con­
stantinople must be ours (save in some remote, enigmatic future). 
If so, what is there to wait for ?-At this minute the essence of the 
EastPm problem comes down to an alliance of Germany with Aus­
tria, plus the Austrian seizures m Turkey which are encouraged by 
Prince Bismarck. We can and, of course, will protest only in some 
extreme cases. However, so long as these two nations are united, 
what can we do without incurring very grave risks ? Please observe 
that the Allies are waiting only until, at length, we should grow 
angry. However, as heretoforf', we may ;:o·1e the Slavi: nations, 
encourage them at times, even extend our . ,elp to them .. Besides, 
they will not perish within a short time. And the term · is likely 
to expire very soon. Let it sufice to s: y that we shall make it 
appear that we do not intend to meddle with European affairs, as 
heretofore ; bereft of us, they will quarrel among themselves all 
the sooner. Indeed, Austria will never believe that Germany fell 
in love with her solely because of her beautiful eyes. Austria knows 
only too well that in the long run Germany must incorporate the 
Austrian Gt ,·mans into the German union. But for no price will 
Austria cede her Germans-not even if Constantinople were offered 
her for them-so highly she values them. The . efore pretexts for 
discords are present there. A· ·i, on top of that, Germany ig faced 
with the same insoluble French problem which, to her, has now 
b(...:ome an eternal problem. Besides, Germany's unification itself 
appears to be incomplete and is apt to be undermined. It also ap­
pears that European socialism not only is not dead but continues 
to constitute a very grave menace. 

1052 
FEODOR DOSTOIEVSKY : r88r 
·"In a word, let us only wait and refrain from meddling,-even 
if we are invited to meddle. Just as soon as their discord comes 
to a crash, 'political equilibrium' will crack, and then the Eastern 
question will at once be solved. We should only have to choose the 
opportune moment, even as at the time of the Franco-Prussian 
slaughter, and we should suddenly declare, as we then declared 
concerning the Black Sea : 'We do not wish to recognize any Aus­
trian seizures in Turkey I '-and all seizures will instantly vanish, 
perhaps, together with Austria herself. In this way we shall catch 
up with everything which ostensibly, for the time being, we let 
slip." 
"What about . England ? You overlook England. When she 
observes our Asiatic aspirations, she will instantly grow alarmed." 
11Paraphrasing the proverb, I retort : 'If one fears England 
one should sit at home and move nowhere.' Besides, nothing new is 
going to alarm her since she is also alarmed with the same old 
thing at present. On the contrary, now we are holding her in con­
fusion and ignorance concerning the future, and she is expecting 
from us the worst things. When, however, she comes to understand 
the true character of al our moves in Asia, perhaps some of her 
apprehensions will be toned down . . . .  Well, I concede : she will 
not tone them down ; she is too far from this frame of mind. Still, 
I repeat : 'If one fears England, one should sit at home and move 
nowhere I ' Therefore, let me exclaim once more : 'Long live the 
Geok-Tepe victory I Long live Skobelev and his good soldiers I '  
Eternal memory to those valiant knights who 'were eliminated from 
the rolls.' We shall record them on our rolls.n 

Notes 
and 
Index to the Diary 


N.otes 
[ A ] 
Aksa.kov, A. (Alexander) N., 1832-
1903, author of several interesting 
articles on the theory of spiritism. 
His house in St. Petersburg was the 
meeting place where, in the Seven­
ties, a number of spiritualistic seances 
were held. 
Aksakov, Ivan Sergeevich 
(1823-
11!86), son of Sergei Timofeevich 
Aksakov and urother of Konstantin 
A.ksa.kov, an outstanding publicist, an 
ardent patriot, one of the most in­
fluential Slavophiles, and a leading 
mem"urи of the Moscow Slavic CoM­
mittee (1876-1878), whose views on 
the Eastern question, on Russia's role 
in the destinies of Slavdom and on 
the Russo-Turkish war of 1877-1878, 
agreed with those of Dostoievsky. 
Aksakov, Konstantin SergŲevich 
(1817-186o), one of the most tal­
ented Slavophiles, brother of Ivan 
Sergeevich Aksa.kov. In the Fifties K. 
S. Aksa.kov expounded his views in a 
Moscow weekly The Rumor (Molvti) . 
Aksa.kov, Sergei Timofeevich ( 1 791-
1859), famou:; Russian diarist, father 
of Konstantin Aksak.ov and Ivan 
Aksak.ov. His prose rivals that of 
PU!ihkin, Lermontov (q.v.), 
· nd 
TurgŲnev (q.v.) . Speaking of his 
writings, Maurice Baring says : "One 
is spell-bound by the charm, the dig­
nitй, the good nature, the gentle, easy 
accent of the speaker, who was a 
gentleman by character as well as 
by lineage, one of God's as well as 
one of Russia's nobility." Aksakov's 
principal works, masterpieces rather, 
are Family Chronicle {1856) , The 
Years of Childhood of Bagrov the 
Grandson 
(1858) and 
Tales and 
Recollections of a Sportsman (1BSs). 
Alexei 
Mikhailovich 
{ 1645-1676), 
Czar, the second Czar of the Ro­
manov dynasty, the father of Peter 
the Great {1699-1725). 
Amadis de Gaula, or Amadis of Gaul, 
the hero of a famous · cycle of ro­
mances of chivalry ; these legends 
form the so-called "Amadis cycle," 
which is affiliated with the Arthurian 
cycle and the Knights of the Round 
Table. These romances were widely 
read in Western Europe in the XVIth 
and XVl ' ':! Centuries. 
Anton - The Poor WretCh - once a 
popula. novel by Apoll6n Alexandr6-
vich Grigor6vich (q.v.) . 
Apraksin shopkeepers, in St. Peters­
burg, renutedly the most backward, 
ignorant and vulgar group of the 
lower middle class. 
Artel-in pre-!'" oviet Russia, an asso­
ciation or partnership of independent 
laborers for collective work and the 
execution of some specific job at 
their joint expense and with recip­
rocal bond. The artŲl, as a legal en­
tity, owned the tools and implements 
IOSS 

NOTES 
requirt:d for the performance of the 
contracted work. Its profits were 
equally divided among the members 
of the artel. 
Avsenko, Vasily Grigorievich (1842-
1913), mediocre novelist. He made 
h;s debut with the novel The Storm 
( I 86 5) . His best known belletristic 
work is The Milky Way ( 1875-
1876). He was a regular contributor 
to Katkov's The Russian Messenger 
(q.v.). 
[ B ] 
Bathory (or Bathuri), Stephen, King 
of Poland and Lithuania (1576-1586), 
an able strategist ; during the reign 
of Czar Ivan Vasilievich, the Ter­
rible (q.v.) he recaptured from the 
Russians a number of cities along 
the Russian-Lithuanian border, in­
cluding Polotzk and Velikie Luki ; 
he besieged Pskov but was unable 
to capture it. In 1582, a ten-year 
truce between Bathory and the Rus­
sian Czar was signed; under the terms 
of that treaty Russia lost Polotzk 
and the Baltic coast. 
Batyi, the Tartar Khan, at the head 
of a JOO,oo Mongol army invaded 
Russia 
in 
1 237· 
Discord reigned 
among the Russian dukes, and the 
Tartars defeated them one by one 
despite their heroic resistance. In 
1240 Batyi captured Kiev, thus com­
pleting bis conquest of Russia, which 
lay devastated and helpless. This was 
the beginning. of the Mongol yoke 
which lasted for almost two and a 
half centuries, til 148o. 
Beltov, the hero of Hertzen's novel 
Who Is to Blame? typifying one of 
the progressive but "superfluous" 
men of the Forties who have lost all 
connection with their native soil. 
Turgenev's RUdin is another speci­
men of the same pattern. 
The Berlin Conference of 1878 under 
the presidency of the German Chan­
cellor Prince Bismarck was convened 
as a result of the Russo-Turkish war 
and Russia's victory over Turkey, 
which terminated in the treaty of 
San Stefano (February 19, 1878), 
by virtue of which Turkey recog­
nized the independence of Serbia, 
Montenegro and Rumania, and agreed 
to form an autonomous Bulgarian 
dukedom. Under the terms of that 
treaty, Russia received Bessarabia, a 
strip of land in Asia Minor (in Ar­
menia) with the port of Batum and 
the fortress Kars, 
while 
Turkey 
undertook to pay Russia an indem­
nity of JOO,oo,oo rubles. England 
and Austria at once started intri­
guing against Russia, insisting that the 
San Stefano treaty be revised. To 
this Russia reluctantly agreed, and, 
under the terms of the Berlin Con­
ference, Bulgaria was divided into 
two parts-the Bulgarian dukedom, 
subordinate to Turkey, and Eastern 
Rumelia, which, though subordinate 
to the Sultan, was Inade autonomous 
and placed under the supervision of 
a Christian Governor-General. Bosnia 
and Herzegovina were placed under 
Austrian rule. 
Betzky, Ivan Ivanovich (1704-1795), 
noted Russian statesman, educator 
and humanitarian during the reign of 
Catherine the Great. He was the nat-

NOTES 
1057 
Bobor)rkin Piotr Dmitrievich t I836-
1921), noted .Russian novelist ; his 
best known works are : China-Toum 
( I 88z) and Vasily Ti6rkin ( 1892). 
ural son of Prince I. U. Troubetzkoy. 
On the initiative of Betzky model 
Foundling Institutions were founded 
in Moscow (1 763) and in St. Peters­
burg ( I  767). He was one of Cath­
erine's principal collaborators in the 
field of public education 
Bielinsky, Vissari on Grigorievich 
( I 8Io-I848), famous Russian critic 
of humble origin . A convinced 
Westerner, Bielinsky neverthelt>ss 
"guessed" the universality and at the 
same time the national character of 
Pushkin's genius. He acclaimed Gogol 
in I 835 and enthusiastically greeted 
both the poetay and the prose of 
Urmontov. His lengthy critique Lit­
erary Reveries: An Elegy in Prose 
( I834) is a masterful review of Rus­
sian );u•rature from its beginnings in 
the XVIIIth Century to the early 
Thirties of the XIXth Century. Dur­
ing the period from 1843 to 1846 he 
wrote eleven essays on Pushkin. His 
was a brilliant pen, inspiring if not 
always convincing. Because of t!1..: 
lack of systematic education, his 
philosophical conceptions were con­
tradictory and confusing. Eveu so, 
his captivating sincerity, genuine en­
thusiasm and passion for truth make 
him an outstanding figure in the his­
tory of Russian literary thought. 
Bielinsky was a realist, but his real­
ism was colored with Hegelian ideal­
ism. He exercised an immense influ­
ence upon his contemporaries; his 
fiery but always didactic and part. .n 
articles contributed much toward the 
emancipation of Russian public opin­
ion, thus paving the way for the en­
actment of the great reforms in the 
Sixties. 
Bolk6nsky, Prince, one of the lead­
ing characters in Count Leo TolstoY's 
( I828-I9IO) epic novel War and 
Peace ( 1868), the Russian Iliad. 
Bolshaia Morskaia-one of the most 
fashionable streets in St. Petersburg. 
Boris Godunov ( 18z5) by Pushkin, 
a tragedy which he dedicated to N. 
M. Karamzin, and in which, accord­
ing to his own admission, he fol­
lowed Shakespeare's pattern "in his 
free and broad treatment of the char­
acters, in the extraordinary moulding 
of the types, and in his simplicity." 
Boris Godun6v is an unsurpassed 
piece of Russian drama which in­
spired M. P. Muss6rgsky ( I 8J9-
I88I) to compose his ingenious opera 
bearing the same title (1872-I874) . 
Botkin, 
. rgei Petril\'ICh ( I 8J2-
I889). fan;uus Russian clinician, pro­
fessor at the Military Medkal Acad­
emy in St. Petersburg. 
Bulgarin, Faddci Venediktovich 
( 1789-I859), of Polish descent, edi­
tor of tാn magazine The Northern 
Bee and an alleged agent of the Rus­
sian secret police, author of the once 
popular lvtin Vijigin; ardent antago­
nist of Pushkiк who immortalized his 
name by several mordant and witty 
epigrams. 
Burenin, Viktor Petrovich 
( I84I­
I886), noted Russian critic in The 
New Times and playwright. His pen 

NOTES 
was full of wit and sometimes full 
of venom. 
[ c ] 
The Captain's Daughter - Pushkin's 
major work in prose (1833-1836) .  
Cassation Departments, Criminal and 
Civil, of the Ruling Senate, in the 
system of the Russian reformed 
courts (November 20, 1864) were 
the courts of last appeal. 
Cathedral Folks ( 1872) one of the 
best novels of N. S. Leskov (q. v.). 
There is an excellent English transla­
tion of this work made by Isabel 
Hapgood. 
Catherine the Great, Czarina ( 1 762-
1 796), was not only familiar with 
the works of the French encyclope­
dists but corresponded with some of 
them, viz., with Voltaire ( 1694-
1 778), Diderot 
( 1 713-1 784) 
and 
Dalembert (1713-1 783). It was under 
their influence that the Empress 
wrote her famous Nakdz (Instruc­
tion) to the Committee of deputies 
elected by the people to frame a new 
Code of Laws ( 1 767). 
The Caucasian Captive (182o-1821), 
an early romantic poem by Pushkin ; 
it was written at the time when 
Pushkin was still under the influence 
of Byron. 
Cherniaiev, Mikhail Grig6rievich 
( 1828-1898), Russian soldier; 
he 
participated in the Crimean war 
( 1854-1855), in the expedition against 
Tashkent (in Central Asia), which 
he captured on June 15, 1865. In 
1875, having resigneJ from Russian 
military service, he proceeded to 
Serbia. In 1876 he assumed com­
mand over the Serbian army. In 1882 
he was appointed Governor-General 
of Turkestan, and in 1884 he was 
made a member of the War Council. 
Cherniaiev was an ardent Slavophile. 
Chernyshevsky, Nikolai Gavrilovich 
(1828-188g), noted Russian radical 
critic, economist of the Marxian ori­
entation, revolutionist, author of the 
novel What Is to be Done? ( 1 862) 
and editor of the radical monthly 
Contemporary 
(Sovremennik). 
In 
1855-1856, he wrote his valuable 
Essays on the Gagol Period of Rus­
sian Literature. Despite the didactic 
and utilitarian tendencies of his criti­
cism, he recognized the genius of 
Pushkin. Karl Marx called Cherny­
shevsky "der grosse Russiche Gelehrte 
und Kritiker" ("the great Russian 
scientist and critic"). For his revolu­
tionary activities he was arrested, 
tried and sentenced to seven years' 
hard labor and twenty years' exile. 
However, in 1883, he was permittPri 
to take up residence in Astrakhan, 
on the Caspian Sea, and thereafter 
in his native town Saratov. 
Childhood, Boyhood and Youth, 
Count Leo TolstoY's autobiographical 
:story, was written in 1852-1856. 
Communal landownership among the 
peasants in pre-revolutionary Russia 
meant common ownership of the 
arable land and meadows by all the 
peasants of a given village. The com­
mune, or obshchina, composed of all 
such peasants, assigned the particular 
tracts of land for cultivation to the 

NOTES 
1059 
individual landlords who were tenants 
of the land the title to which was 
[ D ] 
vested in the commune. At the same 
Dahl, Vladimir lvanovich 
( 1801-
time the commune as an entity was 
responsible for the payment of taxes 
whether in the form of monetary 
levies or prestations in kind. The 
individual landlords of the commune 
had no right to dispose of, or to 
acquire title to, the land parcels as­
signed to them without the consent 
of the peasants' assembly. or mir, 
which was the executive organ of the 
obshchina. The land occupied by the 
houses of the peasants, the houses 
themselves and other household 
ΈtruGu;cs (barr .. , stables, etc.), as 
well as the land used for the kitchen 
garden, were the exclusive property 
of the individual landlords. Every 
year. r .  once every three years. or 
from time to time, as nt"ed arose, the 
mir revised the status of the arable 
land within its jurisdiction, and at 
such times redistribution (peredcl) 
of the arable areas took placr ; in 
this way periodical adjustments ir_ 
the utilization of the communal land 
were effected. In Russian economic 
literature the question of the ,ib­
sluhina, its advantages and disadvan­
tages, its legal nature, its social 
effects and its influence upon agricul­
tural techniques, was one of the 
most controversial. The Slavophiles 
were staunch SLipporters of this form 
of peasant landownership, whereas 
the Westerners, on the whole, were 
strongly in favor of its total abL 
tion. 
Crime a1ul Punishment, one of the 
best known novels by Dostoievsky 
( 1866) 0 
18 i 2 I ,  famous Russian lexicographer 
who single-handed accomplished the 
:,tupendous task of compiling The 
b1terpretative Dictionary of the Liv­
ing Great Russia11 La11guage (coniΉ 
pleted in 1859), which still remains 
the main source for the study of the 
immensely rich, lexically complex and 
colorful Russian language. To the 
compilation of the Dictio1uuy Dahl 
devoted forty-seven years. He also 
collected some 3 7 .ooo Russian prov­
erbs and Ίayings. This compilation 
is also still unsurpassed. Dahl is the 
author (under the penname "The 
Coss.u:k Lugansky") of many novels, 
tales and short stories, of which the 
btst known are : M idsl1ipman Pot­
:clriiev, Tl1e Convict ( l'arnak ) ,  New 
Pictures 
of R11ssia11 
Life, Sailors' 
Lt'imre Hours, and The Tale about 
/Itt' Jew a11d the Gypsy. Dahl was a 
friend of Pitshkin, and he was present 
at the ' ... .' moments cf the poet, 
mortally w . 1ded in a duel, (Pttshkin 
died at 2 :45 P.M., January .:!9. 183i.) 
Danilevsky. Nikolai Yakovlevich 
(r8n-1895), Russian publicist, phi­
losopher and naturalist ; theoretician 
of the Slavophile doctrine, the author 
of a historico-philosophical treatise 
R11ssia and E11rope ( I  87 1 )  ; noted 
anti-Darwinian. His treatise Darwi11-
ism appeared ir 1885. 
Davydov, Denis Vasilievich ( 1 784-
I 839), a noted poet, horseman and 
partisan in the war against Napoleon 
in 18 1 2 .  In 1836, Pushkin sent him 
a copy of The History of the P11ga-

Io60 
NOTES 
chiov•Rebellion with an autograph in 
which there are these lines : 
A rider of the tame Pegasus 
I wore of the antique Parnassus 
The long outmoded poet's suit. 
But even in this hard pursuit 
Thou, wonder rider,-told in brief­
Thou wast my dad and honored chief. 
(Boris Brasol's version) 
Of course, Davydov never was Push­
kin's "honored chief" in the realm 
of poetry, but his verses replete with 
hilarity and sincere humor were-and 
still are-very much in vogue. Count 
Leo Tolstoy, in his War and Peace 
( I  868) , portrayed Da v:Ydov in the 
character of Vasily Denisov. 
Decembrists - participan ts in the 
revolutionary uprising which took 
place in St. Petersburg, on December 
14, 1825, following the death of Em­
peror Alexander I on November 19, 
1825, and the abdication of his elder 
brother Koristantin Pavlovich, who 
was then residing in Warsaw. Briefly, 
the story of the Decembrist revolt 
is as follows: On January 14, 1822, 
Grand Duke Konstantin in a letter 
addressed to Emperor Alexander I 
advised the latter of his desire to 
renounce the Throne. On February 
2, 1822, Alexander I, in writing, ac­
ceded to his brother's determination 
to cede his sovereign rights, and on 
August 16, 1823, the Emperor issued 
a manifesto to this effect, naming his 
brother Grand Duke Nikolai Pavlo­
vich, next in the order of succession, 
heir to the Imperial Throne. This 
manifesto, however, was not promul­
gated; instead, four copies of it, in 
sealed envelopes, were delivered for 
safekeeping to the Moscow Cathe­
dral of the Assumption, the Imperial 
(State ) Council, the Ruling Senate 
and the Holy Synod, with the proviso 
that, immediately after the Emperor's 
passing, the seals should be broken 
and this act should be duly promul­
gated by the Senate. When the news 
of Alexander's death in Taganrog on 
the Awv Sea (South Russia) was 
received in St. Petersburg, and be­
fore the manifesto of August 16, 
1823 had been promulgated, Grand 
Duke Nikolai Pavlovich, who had no 
knowledge of its contents, took an 
oath of allegiance to his brother Kon­
stantin, and his example was followed 
by the regiments of the Imperial 
Guard. Meanwhile Grand Duke Kon­
stantin officially confirmed his de­
termination not to ascend the throne, 
following which Grand Duke Nikolai 
gave his consent to ascend the 
throne. Taking advantage of the 
confusion which arose in conse­
quence of these events, a group 
of Russian officers of the Guard, 
most of whom were masons, refused 
to take the oath of allegiance to 
Emperor Nicholas I and swayed the 
men of their regiments to follow their 
example. The political aims of the 
revolutionists were divided : some of 
them sought to establish a constitu­
tional monarchy; while others advo­
cated a republican form of govern­
ment. On the other hand, the mu­
tinous soldiers had no political pro­
gram whatsoever and merely obeyed 
the orders of their superiors. On De­
cember 14, 1825, the armed rebels 
assembled at the Senate Square. The 
Emperor ordered the loyal contin­
gents of the Imperial Guard to line 

NOTES 
1061 
up in front of the Winter Palace ; 
gradually they encircled the insur­
gents. Count Mikhail A n d re e v i c h  
Miloni.dovich, the Governor-General 
of St. Petersburg (the hero of 181 2) 
sought to persuade them to disband ; 
the soldiers were ready to return to 
their barracks but a pistol shot from 
the ranks of the rebels killed the 
Count on the spot. Not before ar­
tillery went into action did the mob 
disperse and was order restored. A 
committee to investigate the Decem­
brist movement was appointed by the 
Emperor. One hundred and twenty­
,,n · mpn were arrested and tried. Five 
men were sentenced to death, while 
the rest were exiled to Siberia. 
Derjavin, Gavriil Romanovich. See 
God. 
Derjimorda - a police "peace guar­
dian" in Dmukhan6vsky's "enlight­
ened" administration. "You just tell 
Derjimorda he should keep his fists 
under control ; as a matter of routinP 
he deals blows to both innocent and 
guilty." (Revizor, Act I, s.) 
Dmukhan6vsky, the corrupt bailiff, a 
character in Gogol's Revizor. 
Dobroliubov, Nikolai Aleundrovich 
( 1836-186r ), noted Russian radical 
critic, a nihiliȼt .  Among his "zsthet­
ical" slogans we read : "Not the ex­
ecution but the purpose-this is what 
is important in art," or "the mrPit 
of literary productions is determin .. J 
by what and how they propagandize," 
etc. His best known critical essays 
are : The Dark Kingdom ( 1859) , an 
evalmtion of Ostrovsky's Thunder­
storm, What ;. Obl6movschina ( 1859) 
on Goncharov's Oblumov (q.v.) , and 
When Will the Real Day Come? 
(r86o) - an interpretation of Tur­
gcnev's 
(q.\'.J 
novel On the Eve. 
Dobrolil1hov died of consumption at 
the age of twenty-five. 
The Domestic Records ( Otechestven­
nia Zapiski) , a monthly founded in 
St. Petersburg in 1820 by P. P. Svin­
jin. In the Forties 
the magazine, 
which became the mouthpiece of the 
liberal Westerners, with Bielinsky (q. 
v.) as the most eloquent exponent 
of their philosophy, fur many years 
exercised a potent influence upon the 
educated strata. Urmontov's (q.v.) 
youthful poems and lyrical pieces 
posthumously appeared in The Do­
mestic Records. In the Seventies the 
magazine was jointly edited by M. 
E. 
Saltykuv 
("Schedrin") 
(q.v.) 
and N. A. Nekrasov (q.v.) .  During 
that decade on the pages of that 
periodical there appeared many noted 
literary w. rks, such as P. D. Boborj­
kin's 
(q. 
novel Solid 
Vir tues 
( 1870) , V . .:i. Garshin's (1ti5S-1888) 
story Four Days (1877), · Dostoiev­
sky's novel The Rau: Youth (1875), 
a number of comedies by A. N. 
Ostr6vsky (q.v. ) .  etc. It was also in 
the Seventies that N. K. Mikhailov­
sky (184: :904), who in some quar­
ters was regarded as the theoretician 
of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, 
came out with a flood of radical ar­
ticles, essays, f,·Jilletons, etc., which 
strongly appealed to the underdevel­
oped minds of the college youths, 
but which, on the whole, conformed 
to tȽe provisions of the Saltykov 
"By-laws of the Skin Removers," 
viz., "without neglecting a single con-

1062 
NOTES 
temporary question one should de­
liberate upon every one of them in 
a manner which would lead to noth­
ing." Darwin was M i khailovsky's 
principal target. In 1884, by order 
of the government, the publication of 
'(he Dornestic Records was stopped. 
Draper, John William ( 181 1-1882), 
noted American physicist, physiolo­
gist and chemist of English birth 
(born at St. Helens, near Liverpool) 
the author of a once widely read bok 
History of the Intellectual Develop­
ment of Europe (1862) ,  which has 
been translated into many languages. 
This treatise exercised a marked in­
fluence upon the European intelli­
gentsia of the Sixties and Seventies. 
Draper wrote many valuable papers 
on radiant energy and an admirable 
Textbook of Chemistry (1846). 
[ E ]  
The Epocll, • a short-lived magazine 
founded by M. M. D os toievsky 
(182o-186.0, F. M. Dostoievsky's 
brother, in the year of his death. 
The magazine ended its existence in 
February, 1865. 
Evenings on the Farm near Diktinka 
(183 1-18J2) by N. V. Gogol. In 
these stories full of hilarity and hu­
mor Gogol ingeniously depicted the 
life in his native romantic Little 
Russia. ,.Dikanka is a village in the 
province of Poltava. 
. [ F ] 
Fathers and Sons, one of Turg΋nev's 
best known novels. Among the char­
acters in that novel Bazarov is an 
immortal prototype of the Russian 
nihilists. 
Feast during the Plague (1830)-a 
miniature tragedy by Pushkin. 
Fct, Afanasi Afanasi cvich (182o-
1892), natural son of Shenshin, a 
wealthy landowner in the province 
of Ori61, one of the gods of the Rus­
sian Parnassus. In his delicate, lace­
like, melodious pieces Russian lyrical 
poetry reached its summit. The rad­
ical critics of the Fifties and Sixties, 
according to whose motto "Boots 
arc more i mportant than Shake­
speare," bitterly denounced Fet's 
poetry, "where music and moonlight 
and feeling-are one." They hated his 
resthetic leanings ; they would not 
forgive him such pieces as this verb­
less lyrical gem : 
Murmurs. Breezes. Trills and singing 
Of the nightingale. 
Silver touches. Gentle swinging 
O'er the drowsy vale. 
Lights and shadows. Strange sensa-
tions. 
Visions full of grace, 
And the magic of mutations 
In that lovely face. 
Clouds in purple. Amber blushes 
'Cross the misty lawn. 
Tears and kisses. Sudden flushes, 
And the dawn! The dawn! 
(Boris Brasol's version) 
Fet was also a noted translator; 
among his best known versions are : 
Goethe's Faust and Hermann und 
Dorothea, Schopenhauer's The World 
as Will and Idea ( 1819) and Four­
fold Root of the Principle of Suf­
ficient Reason ( 1813) and Horace's 

NOTES 
I06J 
Odes, Satires and Eˏstles ( 1856-
1883). 
[ G ] 
Gavroche, in Victor's Hugo's novel 
Les M iserables ( 186 2), typifying the 
Parisian gamin de rue. 
Geok Tepe-a former fortress of the 
Turkomans in Central Asia. In De­
cember, 188o, General Sk6belev at 
the head of 6,ooo Russian troops at­
tacked the fortress and carried it by 
storm although the defenders num­
bered ࢉs.ooo. 
God-one of the oest known odes by 
Gavriil Romanovich Derjavin ( 1743-
18I6), which has been translated 
into virtu:J.IIy every language, includ­
ing tl".l· Japanese. Derjavin was of 
Tartar descent. A poet of genuine 
but unruly talent, he wa!. undeniably 
the most gifted and colorful repre­
sentative of Russian literature of the 
XVIIIth Century. He became a 
sworn bard of Empress Catherine II 
( 1 762-1 796) and of her brilliant age. 
Pushkin in his Eugene Onegin (Chap­
ter VIII), referring to his own Muse, 
made the following allusion : 
The world upon her smiled a greeting, 
I soared upon my first success, 
And old Derjavin, now retreating 
Graveward, 
n marked us-stayed to 
bless. 
(Oliver Elton's version) 
Derjavin was a member of the Rus­
sian Imperial Academy, and during 
the reign of Emperor Alexander I 
( 1 801-1825) for a brief period was 
MiniSter of Justice. 
Gogol, Nicholas V. (March 2o, "l8og­
February 21, I852) : Nicholas V. G6gol 
was born in the province of Poltava, 
Little Russia, of noble parentage. In 
I 82 I, he matriculated in the Nejin High 
School. In 1825, Gogol's father died. 
In 1828, Gogo) graduated at the High 
School and undertook his first jour'Ό 
ney to St. Petersburg. In 1 831, he 
started teaching in a woman's college 
in St. Petersburg ; there, he estab­
lished close contacts with the leading 
Russian literary circles. During that 
year he published the First Part of 
Evrnings on the Farm 11ear Dikanka. 
The Second Part of the same Col­
lrction appeared in 1832. In 1834, 
Gogo) was appointed Assistant Pro­
fessor of World History at the St. 
Petersburg Imperial University. Dur­
ir.g that same year he completed his 
two comedies, The Revizor and The 
Wedding. In 1835, he started writing 
Dead Souls. On April 19, 1836, The 
Revizor was given for the first time 
on the Imperial dramatic stage at 
St. Petf''-΍ ·rg. On January 29, 1 837, 
Pltshkin (· 
·.) died, an event which 
proved the greatest misfimune in 
Gogol's life. From I837 to 1839, 
Gogo) spent most of his time in 
Rome. In I 84o, he completed two 
comedies : The Litigation and The 
Servants' Room. During the same 
year, he hnished a romantic novel, 
Taras B11lba, and also The Cloak, 
one of his best short stories. In 1842, 
the First Part .,f Dead Souls was 
printed. In 1845, Gogo) burned the 
manuscript of the Second Part of 
Dead Souls. In 1846, the Selected 
Portions from the Correspondence 
with Friends were printed in St. 
Petersburg. Early in 1 848, Gogo) 

NOTES 
unde•!ook a pilgrimage to the Holy 
Land, and on May 16 of the same 
year he returned to Russia. On Feb­
ruary 1 1, 18 52, he again burned an­
other version of the Second Part of 
Dead Souls, together with most of his 
other manuscripts. Gogo! died in 
Moscow. 
Goncharov. See Oblomov. 
Gostiny Dvor, in St. Petersburg, a 
huge block occupied by a large num­
ber of stores, facing on one side the 
Nűvsky Prospect next to the Muni­
cipal Building (Duma). 
Gradovsky, Alexander Dmitrievich 
( 1841-1889), professor of govern­
ment law at the Imperial St. Peters­
burg University. His treatises Prin­
ciples of Russian Government Law 
( 1875) and G-overnment Law of the 
Principal European States (1886) in 
many respects may still be considered 
classics. Grai:tovsky was a convinced 
Westerner. 
Granovsky, Timofei Nikolaievich 
( 1813-1855), noted Russian historian, 
a sworn liberal, a humanist of the 
finest pattern, and a convinced West­
erner; professor of universal history 
at the Moscow University. He was 
an outstanding orator, and his public 
lec tures (1843-1846) marked an 
epoch in the history of the Russian 
progreslive intelligentsia. 
GriboiMov. See Woe from Wit. 
Grigoriev, Apollon Alexandrovich 
(1822-1864), after Bielinsky (q.v.) 
the most distinguished Russian critic, 
expoJ?ent· of "organic" criticism which 
maintains that every zsthetical phe­
nomenon is an organic product of the 
whole historical process. He gave a 
masterful critical evaluation of Push­
kin, Gogo! and Ostrovsky (q.v.). In 
1859 he expounded the basic tenets 
of his organic critique in a series of 
articles dealing with Turgűnev's (q. 
v.) Gentlefolks' Nest (The Russian 
Word, 1859. Nos. 4, 5, 6, and 8). 
Grigorovich, D m i tri Vasilievich 
(1822-1899), a noted Russian novel­
ist. His novels The Village (1847) 
and Anton-The Poor Wretch (1847), 
in which peasant life is depicted with 
false sentimental ism , on political 
rather than on literary grounds, were 
enthusiastically acclaimed by Bielin­
sky (q.v.) .  His other novels The By­
Roads and The Fishermen (1852) 
suffer from the same defect. How­
ever, his Literary Reminiscences are 
a mine of information on the history 
of both Russian literature and the 
Russian theatre. 
Grushnitzky, in A Hero of Our Days, 
by Urmontov, is a vain young man, 
a braggart, and something of a coward. 
Guű, N. N. ( 1831-1894), noted Rus­
sian painter. He is best known for 
his pictures Peter I and Alem, What 
Is Truth? and Pwhkin in Mikhtilov­
skoie (Pushkin's estate in the prov­
ince of Pskov). 
The Gypsies (1824), a poem by 
Pushkin; it belongs to the Byronic 
period of his creative work. Dos­
toievsky dwells on it in some detail 
in his Pushkin speech. 

NOTES 
to6s 
[ H ] 
A Hero of OUt' Days (183CJ-1840) 
by Urmontov is a masterpiece of 
Russian prose. 
Hertzen, Alexander lv.inovich, pen 
name Iskander (1812-I87o), well­
known Russian publicist and political 
emigrant, sometimes called the "Rus­
sian Voltaire." While attending the 
Moscow University, he joined a "cir­
cle" of which Bielinsky (q.v.) and 
N. P. Ogariov (1813-1877), later a 
noted poet, were the moving spirits; 
their gospel at the time was socialism. 
Hert.ren was e:uled to the city of 
Viatka in Northern Russian, but he 
was soon permitted to settle in either 
capital. In 1847, he voluntarily left 
Russia after having written several 
novels, including The Legend and 
Who Is to Blame? In Western Eu­
rope he embraced extreme revolu­
tionary doctrines. However, he be­
came disillusioned in the revolution 
of 1 848, and proclaimed that "ili.: 
West is decaying" and also that 
"Europe is not asleep-she is dying." 
In July, 1857, he began to publish 
in London a revolutionary periodical, 
The Bell (Kolokol), which gained 
extraordinary popularity all over Rus­
sia. Emperor Alexander II was among 
its regular readers. In 1863, the 
Polish landed aristocracy, inspired by 
the Polish emigrants and the French 
radicalв, organized a rebellion against 
the Russian rule. Hertzen, in his Bt .• , 
came out in support of the Polish 
uprising. This was the end of his 
popularity in Russia. He was the 
autho.r of two remarkable books, 
From the Other Shore (1847-1859), 
which is a series of letters expound­
ing the socialistic doctrine, and the 
fascinating Memories and Thoughts 
(1852-1855). 
[ I ] 
"I have experienced this feeling myг 
self when . . . I unintentionally en· 
dorsed for publication a news item 
which should not have been printed 
without the express permission of the 
Minister of the Imperial Court." 
(Page 213.) Dostoievsky refers to an 
article in The Citizen, of which he 
was then editor ( 1873), entitled 
Kirghiz Deputies in St. Petersburg. 
In that article the words of Em­
peror Alexander II addressed to Sul­
tan Mahomet, the spokesman of the 
Kirghiz delegation, were quoted. Dos­
toievsky was tried and sentenced to 
two days in a house of detention and 
twenty-five rubles' fine. 
"I have seen a five-year-old boy . . .  " 
(Page 2'д \ Dostoievsky recalled the 
words of . 
little son Hdia who in 
December, !875, was take·n ill with 
scarlet fever. 
"I will tell you a little anecdote . . .  " 
(Page 235.) Dostoievsky refers to a 
conversation which actually took 
place bet\\o..en him and his six-year­
old daughter Lilia. 
"If seated in a row-Our skill we'll 
surely show." ·rhese two lines are 
from the fable A Quartet by Ivan 
Andreevich Krylov (1 768-1844), one 
of the world's greatest fabulists, 
whosl' fame is equal to that of tEsop 
(560 B.c.) and La Fontaine (1621-
1695) ; characterizing Krylov's genius, 

1066 
NOTES 
the eminent English critic Maurice 
Baring said that he "has the talis­
man which defies criticism, bafBes 
analysis, and defeats time : namely, 
chann." Krylov was assistant to the 
Librarian of the Imperial Public Li­
ǐrary in St. Petersburg. 
Ilovaisky, Dmitri lvanovich (1832-
I920), Russian historian; the author 
of many textbooks on history for 
high schools. Author of The History 
of the Riaztin Dukedom (1859) and 
Inquiry into the Beginnings of Russia 
(1876). 
Ilya Murometz. See Murometz, Ilya. 
Ivan Ill ( 1462-1505), Grand Duke 
of Moscow. In 148o, his refusal to 
pay the customary contribution to 
the Tartar khans marked the end of 
the Mongol domination over Russia 
(124o-I48o). In 1472, Ivan III mar­
ried the Greek Empress Sophie Paleo­
log. In consequence of this event 
closer ties were established between 
the two Orthodox countries-Russia 
and Greece. 
Ivan Vasilievich, Czar, the Terrible 
(153o-1584). He was only three 
years old when his father Czar Vasily 
III died ( I  533). Because of Ivan's 
minority, his mother Czarina Elеna 
assumed the regency. She died in 
1538, whereupon the administration 
of the state fell into the hands of the 
Boyard ' Duina (Council). Countless 
intrigues ensued, many villainies were 
perpetrated by the rival boyard par­
ties; oppression and persecution be­
came general ; the people suffered 
injustice of every kind. The young 
Czarbich, an extrao:-dinarily gifted, 
well-educated and observing boy, 
could not help viewing these abuses 
with deep concern. In 1547, he as­
cended the Moscow Throne, and the 
first years of his reign were marked 
by a series of wise and just adminis­
trative acts designed to alleviate the 
lot of the common people and to 
curb widespread injustice. In 1550 an 
important Code of Laws (Sutlebnik) 
was enacted; it introduced the prin­
ciple of self-government. On the ini­
tiative of the Czar the first print­
ing office was established in Moscow 
(1563). In 1552, the Russian anny 
headed by the Czar captured Kazan, 
the stronghold and capital of the 
Tartar Kazan Czardom, and in 1556, 
the Tartar capital, Astrakhan, on the 
Caspian Sea was annexed lo the Rus­
sian state. These two victories put 
an end to Mongol aspirations as far 
as Russia was concerned. The Czar 
became a great hero in the opinion 
of the people, especially because it 
was also during his reign that Siberia 
became part of Lhe Russian Czardom 
( 1584). However, the last years of 
his reign were obscured with cruel 
persecution and wholesale executions 
of the boyards, whom he suspected­
not without reason-,.of disloyalty. 
[ ] ] 
Juk6vsky, Vasily Andreevich (1 783-
I852), famous Russian romantic 
poet; brilliant translator of Johann · 
Uhland ( 1 787-I862) ,  Schiller (1759-
I8o5) and Goethe ( 1 749-1 83 2 ) .  
Among his best original poems the 
following should be mentioned: Svet­
ldna (18u), The Bard in the Camp 
of Russian Warriors (1812), The 

NOTES 
Bard m the Kremlin ( I8I4). Tile 
Sleepi11g C:arev11a ( I  83 I ). Pttshkin 
thus characterized Juki>Vsky's poetry : 
His verses' captivating fascination 
Through centuries will stand the jeal­
. ous test : 
Youth, hearing them, will s1gh for 
fame's elation. 
And silent Grief in them will fmd its 
rest, 
And mirthful Joy, will pause in medi­
tation. 
(Brasol'!> version ) 
Emperor Nicholas I (I82S-I8SS J ap­
J-IOillt•·•l Jukbvsk: 
tutor to his eldest 
son Grand Duke Alexander. the fu­
ture 
Czar-Liberator, 
Alexander 
II 
( I8ss-I88I J .  
[ K ] 
Kaidanov, Ivan K u zm i c h  ( q82-
I 843) ,  Russian historian, prof e5sor 
of history at the Imperial Lyceum. 
Karamzin, N i k o l a i  M i k h a i l o v i c n  
( 1 766-I 826), famous Russian his­
torian, the author of Tl1e History of 
tile Russian State ( I8I6-1824). This 
monumental work ( I  I volumes) be­
came possible of achievement due 
to the fact that Emperor Alexander 
I had granted him a liberal subsidy 
out of his owr funds. tSee Imperial 
Ukaz of October 3 I, I 803.) Karam­
zin's History proved a great success 
and is considered a classic. Accordi··Ⱦ 
to Pushkin, Karamzin "revealed '"' 
the Russians their own history." Ka­
ramzin was also the author of senti­
mental stories Poor Liza ( I  ;92) and 
Natalia, the Bayard's Daughter 
( 1 792 ) .  His Letters of a Russian 
Traveller ( 1 79 I )  reveal "a fresh, hu­
man observation and a tender feel­
ing for men and 
nature'' 
(Laurie 
\1agnus. A Dictionary of ErˎropeaPI 
f.iterature, p. 26;. London. 192 7 ) .  
Katkl>v. St>r Moscow Gazeflt' . 
Kaz:in, Capture of. See Ivan Vasi­
lievich. 
Khlestak!JV, lv:in Alexandrovich. t he 
"hero" 
of 
Gugol's 
play, 
Revizor, 
is a petty young member of the ad­
ministrative flock serving in one of 
the countless St. Petersburg chan­
ceries. 
As 
the curtain 
rises 
(Act 
IIJ we sec him stranded in a third­
rate hotel in Dmukhan«'>Vsky's town. 
The 4uecr behavior of Khlestakuv : 
the mysterious purpose that brought 
him to a town which no one would 
have reason to visit anyway, and 
more convincing still, the fact that 
he is stubbornly declining to settle 
for his room and board,-all these 
combined ·tre irrefutablP proof, to 
the provm. 
࢈ officialdom, that Khles­
taklnr is nȿ· other than the much­
dreaded government inspector in dis­
bruise whose forthcotr.ing arrival has 
:.Cen 
revealed 
in a private letter 
intercepted by the local postmaster. 
Once arrived at this conclusion, the 
city fathe: 
hasten to pay Khles­
tak6v formal vi5its. He quickly sizes 
up the situation and cleverly begins 
to insinuate that he is the inspector 
after all. Arnone: .he ensuing "comedy 
uf errors" Khlestakuv, the immortal 
liar, with an air of virginal innocence, 
confesse5 to his duped visitors that 
he is ɀnort of funds, and they cheer­
fully leave with him their little cash 
souvenir5 in the hope that their of-

1068 
NOTES 
ficial sins will be overlooked. Dmu­
khanovsky invites Khlestakoff to stay 
as a guest at his house, where the 
young impostor promptly tries to 
make Jove, first to Miss Dmukhanov­
sky, and then to her virtuous mother. 
The latter, though quite pleased with 
his attentions, modestly reminds him : 
"But may I remark that, in a way, 
I am . . .  married," to which K.hles­
takoff unhesitatingly remarks : "That's 
nothing. For love there's no distinc­
tion . . . .  " At last, however, he pro­
poses to the sweet miss. Of course, 
this "honor" is gladly accepted by 
proud papa and mama Dmukhanov­
sky. At this juncture Khlestakoff 
departs from the Godforsaken town 
-ostensibly to pay a flying visit to 
his "rich uncle." He promises to be 
back in a day or two, and then the 
wedding is going to be celebrated. 
No sooner has Khlestakoff departed 
than his fraud is revealed by post­
master Shжkin. He intercepts a let­
ter which the "revisor" mails to a 
friend in St. Petersburg. In this 
epistle, candidly and with biting sar­
casm, he recounts his provincial ad­
venture. As the curtain is about to 
fall the arrival of the real revisor is 
announced-much to the horror of 
Dmukhanovsky and his enlightened 
colleagues. 
K.homiakov, Alek.sei Stepanovich 
( 1804-:t:86o), noted Russian historian, 
the author of Notes on World His­
tory (1838 ff. Completed by the end 
of the Forties) ; theologian; critic ; 
one of the foremost Slavophiles. 
Kifa Mokievich, a queer fellow, a 
character in Gogol's (q.v.) novel 
Deatl Souls. Speaking of him A. 
V. Drujinin, a noted Russian critic 
( 1824-1864) remarked : "Our deep 
thinker Bouikovidov, at times, re­
minded one of Kifa Mokievich. Now 
and then such thoughts and infer­
ences invaded his brain that there 
was nothing the listener could do 
but throw up his arms and start 
howling in a most unbecoming voice." 
(New Notes of a Journalist.) Gogo) 
himself said : "Kif a Mokievich is a 
chap of stubborn disposition." 
Kifa Mokievschina is a state or dis­
position akin to the character and 
proclivities of Kifa Mokievich (q.v.). 
Koltzilv, Aleksei Vasilievich (18з 
1842), noted Russian poet of humble 
descent. His father, a Voronej com­
moner, traded in cattle, timber and 
grain. Koltz6v's Songs, of which the 
first eighteen were published in 1835 
by N. V. Stankevich (1809-184o), a 
young Russian amateur philosopher, 
are dedicated to the life and labors 
of the common people - peasants, 
wagoners, tradesmen. The steppe was 
his element. Koltz6v was an ardent 
admirer of Pushkin and a friend of 
Bielinsky. One of Koltzov's best 
poems The Forest (1837) was dedi­
cated to the. memory of Pushkin. 
Kopeikin, Captain, in Gogol's Deatl 
Souls a legendary brigand, a half-pay, 
officer who, although he had lost one 
arm and one leg, had placed himself 
at the head of a band of robbers in 
the forests of the Ryazan province. 
The story of Captain Kopeikin told 
by the Postmaster, forms part of 
Chapter X, Part I, of Gogol's novel. 

NOTES 
1069 
Korobochka, in Gogol's Dead Souls-
of nonsense and travesties : "One 
an ignorant woman, a landowner from 
cannot embrace the unembraceable" ; 
whom Tchitchikov (q.v.) purchases 
"When thou throwest pebbles into 
a few "dead souls." 
the water look at the circles on its 
Kostomarov, Nikolai lvanovich 
( 1 8 1 7- 1 8 8 5 ) , noted Russi an his­
torian; professor of Russian history 
at the Universities of Kiev and St. 
Petersburg. 
Kovalevsky, Egor Petrovich ( 18oq-
1 868J , noted Russian traveller and 
belles-lettrist. 
Kraievsky, Andrei Alexandrovich 
( llHo- ;88g), et:itor of The Voice 
(q.v.), and The Domestic Records 
(q.v.). 
Kresto,·oky, Vsevolod Vladimirovich 
( 184o-1 895), Russian novelist, au­
thor of a once popular novel The 
Petersburg Dens (1863). 
Krylov, Ivan Andreevich. See "If 
seated in a row." 
Kuindji, Arkhip Ivanovich (1842-
1910), brilliant Russian painter. 
a 
maestro of "lyrical" landscape, in 
which the moon and sun lighl effects 
are treated with ingenious insight. 
Kuzma Prutkov is a nom de plume 
which was adopted by three poets : 
Count Alexei Konstantinovich Tol­
stoy ( 181 7-1875), Alexei Mikhailo­
vich Jemchujnikov ( 1821-1908), ۱tnd 
his brother Vladimir Mikhailovi .. n 
Jemchujnikov ( 1 83o-1884). Kuzma 
Prutkov is a self-satisfied ass-much 
like Henri Monnier's (1805-1877) 
famous Prudhomme, who utters with 
an air of profound wisdom all sorts 
۰urface produced thereby, otherwise 
thy occupation will be useless" ;  "De­
prive a man of society, and he wiU 
remain in solitude," etc.) . Some of 
these "aphorisms" are full of irre­
sistible humor, and even in our day 
enjoy real popularity. Of course, the 
poets attached no significance to 
these burlesque productions, which 
appeared from time to time in the 
monthly magazine The Contemporary 
in the section called "Literary Hotch­
potch." 
[ L ] 
"Lame coopers who continue to con­
struct the moon on Gorokhovaia 
Street." This is an allusion to Gogol's 
(q.v.) story Memoirs of a Lunatic. 
The "hero" of the story is P6prischin, 
a petty ltcvernment functionary who 
imagines : • t he is Ferdmand VII, 
King of . ·pain. Under . the date 
"February the Thirtieth" he records 
among other things the following : 
"But the moon is usually constructed 
in Hamburg, and it is very poorly 
constructed. I wonder why England 
fails to tak; notice of this. The moon 
is constructed by a lame cooper, and 
one can see that the fool has no 
conception of what the moon is." 
Gorokhovaia ࢇ' ' t"et was one of the 
principal thoroughfares in St. Peters­
burg. Dostoievsky's reference to this 
street is incorrect. In Gogol's story 
Gori•khovaia Street is mentioned in 
connection with a barber who, ac­
cording to P6prischin, in company 

NOTES 
with a midwife, seeks to spread Mo­
hammedanism all over the world. 
Lavretzky, the hero of Turgenev's 
(q.v.) novel Gentlefolk's Nest. 
Ledochowsk i ,  Count Mieczislaw 
( i822-1902), Polish Jesuit, a favorite 
of Pope Pius IX. In 1875, he was 
appointed Cardinal. In 1874, he was 
sentenced by a German court to two 
years' imprisonment for anti-German 
propaganda. In 1876, he proceeded to 
Rome, where he became the leader 
of the anti-German party. In 1885, 
he was appointed to the important 
office of Segretario dei Brevi. 
Urmontov. See "The Tale" about 
K altishnikov. 
Leskov, Nikolai Semionovich (1831-
1895) , noted Russian novelist, the 
author of Cathedral Folks ( 1872) , 
The Enchanted Pilgrim, The Flea, 
The Devil's' Dolls, The Ensealed 
Angel (1873), etc. His style is rich 
and colorful with outstanding lexical 
qualities which were acknowledged by 
Dahl (q.v.), the famous Russian 
lelricographer. Leskov's best stories 
and novels deal with the delineation 
of the customs and mode of living 
of the clergy, schismatics and Old­
Believers. 
The Liberator-Emperor: Alexander 
II (185$-1881). He is called "the 
Liberator" because by the stroke of 
his pen he liberated 2 2 ,00,00 Rus­
sian peasants (see Manifesto) . De­
spite a series of far-reaching liberal 
reforms, the revolutionists, who, in 
1879, organized under the name "Wil 
of the People" (NarJdnaia Volia), 
with headquarters in London, made 
a series of daring attempts upon the 
life of the Czar, and on March 
1 ,  
1881, he was killed by a bomb in 
St. Petersburg. 
Liebig, Baron Justus von ( 1803-
18 7 2), noted German chemist. 
Liprandi, Ivan I vanovich (1 79o-
188o), Major-General, Russian his­
torian. He helped to uncover the 
revolutionary activities of Petrashev­
sky (q.v.). 
Liteinaia Street, later Liteini Pros­
pect-one of the principal streets in 
St. Petersburg. 
Lithuanian Castle, an obsolete peni­
tentiary in St. Petersburg. It was de­
molished during the early days of 
the 1917 revolution. 
Lomonosov, Mikha i l  Vasilievich 
(ql l-1765), famous Russian gram­
marian, chemist, physicist and poet. 
B ruckner, the noted German his­
torian of Russian literature, in his 
Geschichte der Russischen Literatur, 
p. 81, thus defined Lomon•"•sov's 
scientific status : "metallurgist, geolo­
gist, chemist, electrician, astronomer, 
politico-economist, statistician, geog­
rapher, historian, philologist, critic, 
poet." Lomonosov was the son of a 
well-to-do peasant in the province of 
Archangel, who was engaged in fishery 
in the White Sea. At the age of nine­
teen, Mikhail Lomonosov left his 
parents' house and proceeded on foot 
to Moscow (some 8oo miles) in order 
to educate himself. There he matricu­
lated in the Slavic-Greek-Latin Acad­
emy; subsequently the government 

NOTES 
sent him to Freiburg, Germany, for 
the study of mining. Upon his return 
to Russia, he began to distinguish 
himself by his scientific discoveries 
in the fields of chemistry, physics 
and metallurgy; his thermology ante­
dated by several decades the work 
of the Western European physicists, 
and in chemistry he was the pre­
cursor of Lavoisier ( 1 743-1 794). J. 
]. Shouv.ilov, one of the most en­
lightened and influential statesmen 
during the reign of Empress Elizaveta 
Petrovna (I 741-1 76I ), the daughter 
of Peter the Great, gave full encour­
age .... n' 
to Lo·· .onosov, who soon 
became the leading spirit in the work 
of the Imperial Academy of Sciences. 
In 1 755, he completed his Russian 
Gram"' v, which laid the foundation 
of the l<.ussian literary and livin۲t. 
language as distinguished from the 
ancient Church- Slavonic tongue. 
Lomonosov was elected honorary 
member of the Academie Franc;aise, 
the Stockholm and Bologna Academil's 
of Science. The all-embracing genius 
of Lomonosov makes him one of the 
most impressive figures in the his­
tory of modern science. A compre­
hensive record of Lomonosov's work 
and achievements appears in The 
Russian Biographical Dictionary, vol. 
X. pp. 593-628. 
[ M ] 
Magnitzky, M ikhail Leontiev; ࢆ, 
( 1 778-1855) one of the most hideous 
-court intriguers during the reign of 
Emperor Alexander I ( 18oi-I825), a 
dose friend and collaborator of M. M. 
Speransky (1772-I839) ,  an avowed 
liberal and rn.tson, the author of the 
Institution of Ministries ( 1802) and 
of the State (Imperial) Council. At 
the same time Magnitzky posed as a 
devoted admirer of the ultra-conserva­
•ive General Count A. A. Arakcheev 
( 1 769-1834). On March 1 7, 1812, 
Speransky and Magnitzky were arۯ 
rested on charges of conspiracy to 
undermine the monarchy and of con­
ducting secret negotiations with Na­
poleon, who was just then busily pre­
paring his invasion of Russia. Both 
men were exiled. However, in 1816, 
not only were they permitted to re­
turn to the capital but Speransky was 
appointed Governor of the Penza 
province and Magnitzky - Vice-Gov­
ernor of the Voronej province. Sub­
sequently he was placed in charge 
of the Kazan district of public edu­
cation. 
Makovsky, Vladimir Eg6rovich 
(1846-1920), a noted Russian genre 
painter. Among his best canvases arc 
The Fail, .... ?j a Bank, The Optimist 
and the Pe. 
wist and The Comforter. 
Manifes•o of February 19, ·1861. Em­
peror Alexander II ( I 855-188I ) is­
sued the famous Manifesto liberating 
22,000,000 Russian peasants with 
land. This historical document ended 
with the words ; "Cross thyself, Or­
thodo:r: people, and invoke with us 
God's blessing upou thy free labor, 
the pledge of th:· domestic happiness 
and public weltare." Serfdom was 
thus peacefully abolished, and the 
peasants became owners of 3 18,257,-
527 acres of arable land. This great 
refom1 was carried out on the initia­
tive of the Czar himself. In this dif­
ficult work he was assisted by a group 

1072 
NOTES 
' 
of enlightened and patriotic meu, 
among whom Urij Samarin, N. A. 
Miliutin, Prince V. A. Cherkassky, 
Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolaievich 
and ]. I. Rostovtzev deserve particu­
lar mention. 
Manilov, in Gogol's Dead Souls, a 
character typifying an idle, incurable 
dreamer. 
Marko-Vovchok, pen name of Maria 
Alexandrovna Markovich (I8J4-
I907), a mediocre woman novelist 
of liberal views; she wrote both in 
Russian and in the Little Russian, 
or Ukranian, dialect. Turgenev trans­
lated into Russian her Ukranian 
PofJUI.ar Stories (1859). 
Matejko, Jan Alojzyn (I8J8-189J), 
famous Polish historical and portrait 
painter. 
The Memoirs of a Lunatic by Gogol 
-a fantastic diary of a lunatic ; it is 
included in Gogol's Arabesques 
(I8JS). 
Mendeleev, Dmitri lvanovich ( 1834-
1 907), famous Russian chemist, crea­
tor of the Periodic Table. 
Meschersky, Prince Vladimir Petro­
vich ( I8J9-1914), editor of the con­
servative weekly magazine The Citi­
zen (Grajdanin), which was founded 
in St. Petersburg in 1872. Dostoiev­
sky and several prominent Russian 
novelists, as well as the outstanding 
poets of the Seventies and Eighties, 
including Count Ale:.:is Tolstoy, A. 
N. Maikov, F. ] . Tutchev and A. 
N. Apoukhtin, were regular contribu­
tors to The Citizen. Meschersky's 
novel One of Our Bismarcks, depict­
ing the Russian beau monde, deserves 
mention. Meschersky is also the au­
thor of My Reminiscences, 1897-
1912 (3 volumes). 
The Messenger of Europe-an influ­
ential liberal monthly magazine, 
founded by N. M. Karamzin (q.v.) 
in 1802. In 1830, the periodical was 
discontinued. Its publication was re­
sumed in 1866. Gonchar6v's (q.v.) 
novel The Abyss was printed in The 
Messenger of Europe. 
"Metal" and "fiend," literally "Metal 
and Sulphur" ("metal i jupel"). 
(Page 1044.) The word jupel in 
Russian means "burning sulphur"; in 
an allegoric sense it means a scare­
crow, a monster bugbear or some­
thing of this kind. Some ignorant 
Moscow merchant wives in Ostrov­
sky's (q.v.) comedies were afraid of 
the word "metal"; others would be 
scared by the word "jupel." Thus 
one of these "heroines" says : "Truly, 
I am so very timid. . . . Whenever 
I hear the word 'jupel' pronounced, 
my hands and feet begin to tremble." 
(Difficult Days, II, 2.) 
Mikhailovsky, N. K. See The Do­
mestic Records. 
Mir. See Communal landownership. 
Molchalin, one of the characters in 
Griboiedov's comedy Woe from Wit 
(q.v.). Molchlilin is the incarnation 
of triviality, subservience, "modera­
tion and punctuality," a "yes-man" 
in a most despicable sense. 
The Moscow Gazelle, a conservative 

NOTES 
1073 
daily, subsidized by the government. 
In 1851 Mikhail Nikiforovich Kat­
kov ( 181S-1887), one of Russia's 
most brilliant publicists, was made 
editor of that newspaper. In 1855, 
he founded the influential monthly 
magazine The Russian Messenger 
(Russki Vestnik) . Katkov started his 
literary career as a liberal Anglophile 
but subsequently became one of the 
pillars of Russian Toryism. His phil­
osophical conceptions were largely 
derived from Friedrich Schelling 
(1 775-1854). 
Murometz, Ilya (from the town Mu­
rol"l of the Nijni-Novgorod province), 
most beloved legt:ndary hero of the 
epoch of St. Vladimir, Grand Duke 
of Kiev ( 9 80- 1 0 1 5 )  under whom 
Russia embraced Christianity ( 988) . 
In Russian folk-lore Ilya Murometz 
symbolizes not only gallantry and ele­
mental "earth" force but equally the 
common Christian Russian people .  
His many exploits are directed against 
the pagan nomadic tribes, which were 
a real menace to the safety of the 
then young Russian state. 
[ N ] 
Nechaiev case.-In 1869, Sergei Gen­
nadievich Nechaiev, the son of a but­
ler and a former school teacher, organ­
ized in Moscow a secret society under 
the name "People's Revenge" for the 
purpose of forcibly overthrowing the 
government and assassinating Em­
peror Alexander II (1855-1881) . .i.&l 
one of his leaflets, Nechliiev pro­
claimed that he would subject the 
Czar "to a cruel, solemn execution 
in the presence of the liberated pie-
• 
beians and on the ruins of the state." 
Nechaiev was 
an anarchist of the 
Bakunin school (M. A. Bakunin 
-
1814-1876) ; his cherished aim was 
!n precipitate, first in Russia and 
thPreafter in Europe, political and 
social chaos. He demanded from h!ۮ 
associates blind obedience, and every 
member of the group was obligated 
to spy upon the others. The activities 
of this organization came to an ab­
rupt end, owing to the fact that on 
November 21, 1869, in Moscow, the 
body of a certain Ivanov, a student 
of the local Agricultural Academy, 
was discovered in a lonely spot. It 
was soon found out that the murder 
had been committed by Alexis Kuz­
netzov with the assistance of other 
accomplices. Kuznetzov made a full 
confession and stated that he had 
murdered Ivanov at the instigation 
of Nechaiev who !.Uspected Ivanov 
of disloyalty to the organization. Kuz­
nelzbv was tried by a jury, convicted 
and sentenced to ten years of hard 
labor. Ner .. .iiev managed to escape 
abroad. Dn· oievsky ingeniously de­
picted this l •. se in his prophetic novel 
The Possessed (1871) .  
:-Jekrlisov, Nikolai Alekseevich (1821-
1877). The poem Vla.s was written 
in 1854. In his tendentious poetry he 
expressed 
• lte senliments of a "re­
penting nobleman." His magnum 
opus is the long poem Who Lives 
Well in Russia ( 1873). Among the 
other best remrmbered poems the 
following may be cited : The Song to 
Eriomushka (1858), The Hawkers 
(186 I ) ,  Fro.d-The Red Nose ( 1863), 
The Bear Hunt (1867) and The Rus­
sian Women ( 1 871-1872) ,  dedicated 

1074 
NOTES 
to Princess Troubetzkaya and Prin­
cess Volkonskaya, who voluntarily 
followed their husbands, convicted of 
participating in the Decembrist re­
volt (q.v.) into exile. 
N evsky Prospect -the principal street 
in St. Petersburg. 
Tlze New Times, an influential Rus­
sian daily, with Slavophile and na­
tionalistic leanings. In 1876 A. S. 
Suvorin became its editor. 
Nikon, Patriarch of Russia ( 1605-
1681), son of a peasant. At twelve 
he fled from his home and as a lay­
brother entered the Saint Makary 
Monastery on the Volga. Subse­
quently his relatives succeeded in 
persuading him to leave the monas­
tery and to return to civilian life. 
He married and became a village 
priest. He had children, but they 
died. Thereupon he persuaded his 
wife to take tht! veil and at the same 
time he entered the Ezersky Monas­
tery near t.he river Onega, where he 
soon became prior. In connection 
with some needs of his friars he pro­
ceeded to Moscow, and there he was 
introduced to Czar Alexei Mikhailo­
vich (q.v.) . Nikon's religious zeal, 
keen mind, great learning and ex­
emplary life produced a strong im­
pression upon the Czar, and a close 
friendship developed between the two 
men. Owirw to the Czar's influence 
Nikon was appointed Metropolitan 
of Novgorod. Following the death of 
Patriarch Joseph; Nikon was elected 
Patriarch of Russia (July 25, 1652), 
and the title of "Great Sovereign" 
was conferred upon him. His inftu-
ence upon the affairs of state 
became so strong that he virtualy 
became co-ruler with the Czar, and 
when, in 1654, during the Russo­
Polish war, the Czar left Moscow to 
join the army, the administration of 
the state was entrusted to Nikon. 
Gradually Nikon grew arrogant and 
haughty, especially in his daily rela­
tions with the boyards. Upon the 
Czar's return to Moscow ( 1657), 
friction developed between him and 
the Patriarch which finally led to an 
open break. In 1658, Nikon renounced 
the title of Patriarch and retired to 
the Resurrection Monastery near Mos­
cow. There he lived eight years in 
voluntary exile ; but in 1666, the All­
Russian Sobor unanimously con­
demned Nikon, officially deprived 
him of the title of Patriarch and 
exiled him to a remote monastery on 
the White Sea. There he remained 
fifteen years, and only in 1681, he 
received permission to return to Mos­
cow. On his way to the capital he 
died. Nikon 's patriarchate was marked 
with the beginning of the great schism 
in the Russian Orthodox church as 
a result of the revision and correc­
tion of the old prayer books. 
The Nose-a fantastic story by Gogo) 
which is included in his Arabesques 
( 1835). 
[ 0 ] 
Oblomov, the famous novel (1858) 
by I van Alexandrovich Goncharov 
( 181 2-1891) is one of the finest 
specimens of Russian realistic fiction. 
Not only is Oblomov himself, the 
"hero" of the story, the incarnation 
of mental apathy, lack of initiative, 

NOTES 
1075 
repugnance against action of any 
kind, but he embodies the funda­
mental traits of a typically Russian 
disease which was widespread among 
the upper classes in the Thirties, 
Forties and Fifties, and which be­
came known as Obl6movschjna or 
OblOmovjsm - pathological laziness, 
despite natural kindness and intel­
lectual acumen. This was the direct 
outgrowth of serfdom, where the 
master had at his disposal "three 
hundred Zak.hars" (Zakhar - Oblo­
mov's manservant, or better-"man 
nurse") to comply with his slightest 
whim. Goncharov, one of the out­
::.ta11Jing Russian novelists, was also 
the author of An Ordjnary Story 
( 1847), The Abyss (1868), Frigate 
PaJlas ( 1 856) and Million Torments 
( 1871), a brilliant critical evaluation 
of Griboyedov's immortal corned} 
Woe from Wjt {q.v.). 
Obshchina.Sec Communal landowner­
ship. 
{Eil-de-ba:uf in architecture-a circu­
lar or oval window generally used in 
the XVIIth and XVIIlth Centuries. 
Old-Believers, Russian dissenters, 
who bitterly opposed the Church re­
form undertaken by Patriarch Nikon 
( 16 5 3-16 57) . Among other measures, 
the Patriarch decreed that the sign 
of the cross be performed with three 
fingers joined together, symbolizing 
the Holy Trinity, and not with t · 
,, 
fingers, as hitherto, which was re­
garded as an indication of the dual 
nature of Christ-the divine and the 
human. In 1654, a Church Sobor, or 
Conference, convened by the Patri-
arch, adopted a resolution by virtue 
of which it was decided to carry out 
an extensive revision of the prayer 
boks, which, in fact, were replete 
with all sorts of errors ; these were 
Jue to the negligence of the copyists 
as well as to the conflicting teats 
from which copies were executed. On 
the other hand, the Patriarch pro­
hibited the use and worship of "Latin" 
icons, i.e., those painted by Western 
artists. These and similar decrees 
caused much resentment on the part 
of those Orthodox Russians who ad­
hered to the old church traditions. 
The persecution of the Old-Believers 
was brought to an end by the Im­
perial manifesto of April 17, 1905, 
which granted the Russian people ab­
solute freedom of worship and re­
ligion. In particular, the Old-Believers 
received permission to erect their 
churches, while the Old-Believers' 
priests were exel!lpted from serving 
in the armed forces of Russia. 
Ostrovsk۩·. \lexander Nikolaievich 
{ 1 823- 18b· 
the forem9st Russian 
dramatist. 1'or over half a century 
the Ru·۪ian repertoire was wholly 
dependent upon his comedies and 
dramas, among which the following 
are the more popular; The Poor 
Fiancee { 1 !152). Poverty Is No Crime 
{1854), 1"/le Thunder-storm ( 1 859) , 
The Forest ( 1 8 7 1 ) ,  Wolves and Sheep 
( 187 5 )  and Guilty Witho11t Guilt 
( 1884 ) .  All the۫ · are genre plays de­
picting the customs and ways of liv­
ing of the Russian middle class, par­
ticularly those of the provincial and 
Moscow mrrchants. In 1879, Ostrov­
sky wrote his delightful and justly 
famous S110w Maidel! (Sneg1iroclzka\ 

NOTES 
( 1873)-"a Spring fairy tale in four 
acts and a prologue," to which N. A. 
Rimsky-Korsakov (1844-1908) com­
posed his immortal opera bearing the 
same name (188o-I881). Ostrovsky 
firmly established the realistic tradi­
tion in Russian drama. 
[ p ] 
Pechorin, the principal character in 
Lermontov's A Hero of Our Days, is 
one of those "superfluous men" whose 
prototype was portrayed by Pushkin 
in his Eugene Onegin ( 1823-I83 1 ) .  
See Dostoievsky's analysis of this 
type in his famous Pushkin speech 
(Diary, 1 88o) . 
Peredel. See Communal landowner­
ship. 
Perov, V. G. (1834-1882), a noted 
Russian painter. His is one of the 
best portraits of Dostoievsky. Perov's 
art is didactic, 'fith a satirical flavor. 
His pictures The Fowler ( 187o) , The 
Fisherman ( 1871) and The Hunters 
are masterpieces of Russian genre 
painting. 
Petrashevsky, M ikhail Vasilievich 
(1819-I867). a Russian government 
official in the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs. In the Forties his house in 
St. Petersburg became a center for 
Friday evening discussions of political 
subjects. Most of the young men of 
the Petrash۬vsky circle (Petrashevtzi) 
were idealists naively believing in the 
blessings of the socialistic dogma, 
followers of Franۭois Fourier's ( I  7 7 2-
I 83 7 )  doctrine, as expounded in his 
work Theorie de l'Ut1ite Universelle 
( 1822) and of Claude Henri de 
Saint-Simon ( 1 76o-I825), a fore­
runner of revolutionary socialists of 
subsequent patterns. The Petrashevtzi 
were planning to equip a clandestine 
printing office. On April 24, 1849, 
Petrashevsky's house was raided by 
the police, and twenty-one members 
of his group were arrested and con­
demned to be shot. Among these was 
Dostoievsky. At the last moment 
their sentences were commuted to 
various terms of imprisonment and 
exile. 
"Petropavlooka" is a colloquial name 
for the fortress of Sts. Peter and 
Paul in St. Petersburg on the Neva, 
which was built by order of Peter 
the Great following the foundation 
of the new capital on May 16, 1 703. 
"Piccola Bestia." The tarantula in­
cident recorded on Page 427 ff. oc­
curred in Florence, in 1869. 
Pisemsky, Aleksei Feofilaktovich 
( 182o-I881), noted Russian novelist 
of the realistic school. A man of 
unquestionable talent, Pisemsky gave 
m his works The Muff (18so), A 
Thousand Souls ( 1858), The Agitated 
Sea (1863), The Bourgeois ( 1877) 
and The Masons ( 188o) a vivid pic­
ture of Russian life in the Forties 
and during the transition period pre­
ceding and immediately following the 
liberation of the Russian peasants. 
Radical critics vehemently attacked 
him for The Agitated Sea in which 
he portrayed (Part IV of the novel) 
Russian nihilists residing abroad and 
the disintegration of rural life in 
Russia as a result of the peasants' 
reform. His Bitter Fate (186o) is a 

NOTES 
1077 
powerful realistic drama, a worthy 
precursor of Count Leo Tolstoy's 
T/,e Power of Darkness (1886). 
Pogi>din, Mikhail Petrovich ( 1 8oo-
1875), son of a peasant. Noted pub­
licist and historian ; appointed pro­
fessor of Russian history at the Im­
perial Moscow University. In 11l4 1 ,  
he founded in Moscow a conservative 
monthly magazine, M oskvitid71i71. with 
a marked Slavophile tendency ; this 
magazine was continued till 1855. 
Pogbdin's principal works are : On 
the Origin of Russia ( 1824) ; His­
torico-Critical Sketclies ( 1846) and 
4,.r;,,.,, Rrssia prior to tile M onː:ol 
Yoke (1872) . 
Polish insurrection ( 1 86J- 1 8 64 ) .  
France, Austria and England sent 
threatening notes to the Russian gov­
ernment demanding all sorts of con­
cessions to the Poles. These demands 
were emphatically rejected. Poland 
was then divided into ten provinces 
which became an integral part of 
the Russian Empire. 
Polonsky, Yakov Petrovich (182o-
1898) , one of Russia's greatest lyric 
poets. The metrical and lexical quali­
ties of his verses are superb. Tur­
genev (q.v.) and Gogo) praised 
highly his noble poetic talent with 
its humanistic leanings and romantic 
moods. In his Caucasian poems he 
painted magnificent pictures of the 
majestic scenery. Grasslwpper - T' • 
Musician (1863) is among his be΂t 
poems. 
Poprischin - the "titular counsellor 
P6prischin" in G6gol's Memoirs of a 
Lunatic, who imagines himselt Fer­
dinand VII, King of Spain. 
Pot ugin, one of the characters in 
Turgen e v ' s  (q.v.) novel S m o k e  
( I 86i). He is a sworn Westerner. 
Powder Plant-some six miles from 
St. Petersburg. 
Prutkov. See Kuzma Prutki>v. 
Pugachiov ( Pugache v ) , Emelian 
lvanovich ( 1 743?-1 775), a Don Cos­
sack and impostor, who, having as­
΃umed the title of Emperor Peter Ill 
( 1 761-1 762) ,  organized in I 7i3 a 
rebellion against the government of 
Catherine II ( 1 762-1 796) and the 
landowners. The ranks of the rebels 
were recruited from among peasants, 
Don and Yaitzk Cossacks, ex-convicts, 
fugitives from justice, the Kalmucks 
and Kirghizes. The revolt, which first 
broke out in the province of Oren­
burg, promptly spread south, north 
and west along the Volga and Ural 
rivers, as "- •'11 as toward tJ,e Caspian 
Sea. Wherr 
r the rebels. succeeded 
in capturin1; a town or . "fortress," 
they subiected the landowners, gov­
ernment officials and loyal officers and 
!>oldiers to wholesale extermination. 
Pugachiov's bands captured a number 
of important cities (Ufa, Samara, 
Saratov, f .:.,za, Kazan, etc.). Only 
in September, 1 774, the government 
troops succeeded in capturing Puga­
chiov, who, under the personal super­
vision of Field :, ::.rshal Suvnrov ( q. 
\'. ) was brought to Moscow in chains. 
On January 1 o, 1 i 7 5, Pugachiov and 
his associates were executed in Mos­
cow. After that the revolt was soon 
liquidated and the devastated towns, 

NOTES 
hamlet's and estates gradually restored. 
Pttshkin depicted the Pugachi6v re­
bellion in his novel The Captain's 
Daughter, and he also wrote Tl1e His­
tory of Pugachiov's Rebellion. 
Pugachiov's Rebellion, The History 
oj (I833), by Pttshkin. By order of 
Emperor Nicholas I ( I82S-I8Ss), 
Pttshkin was given access to the 
secret archives and reports of the 
civil and military authorities concern­
ing Pugachiov and the spread of the 
revolt organized and headed by him. 
In addition to the official material, 
Pttshkin examined a large number of 
private letters dating back to the 
Seventies of the XVIIIth Century, 
unofficial records of the revolt, etc. 
To make the publication of The His­
tory possible, the Emperor granted 
Pushkin a loan of 2o,ooo rubles ($Io,­
ooo) .  See Pushkin's Diary, under 
March 6, I 834. 
Pttshkin, Alexander S. (May 26, 1 799-
january 29, I837), was born in Mos­
cow. In October, I8I I, he entered the 
Imperial Lyceum at Czarskoye Sel6, 
then the summer residence of Em­
peror Alexander I. Pttshkin's first 
poems, light and imitative, date back 
to the early part of I8I2. In 1817, 
he graduated at the Lyceum and pro­
ceeded to St. Petersburg, where he 
joined the literary association, "Ar­
zamas," of which Karamzin (q.v.) , 
and Jouk6vpky (q.v.) ,  the former 
a noted historian, the latter a gifted 
romantic poet, were the leading mem­
bers. During this early J)eriod, Push­
kin wrote a iong series of lyrical 
pieces, love stanzas, elegies and idylls 
which, though fully expressive of his 
youthful sentiments, revealed remark­
able poetic power. In I 820. he wrote 
his first long poem, Rusld11 a11d Lud­
mila. Early in that year, in conse­
quence of his mischievous epigrams, 
having invoked upon himself the dis­
pleasure of the Government, Pushkin 
was ordered to leave St. Petersburg 
for Ekaterinoslav on a government 
mission. There he fell ill, and he 
received permission to proceed for a 
cure to the Caucasus. It was while 
there that he began studying Byron. 
Having spent several months in the 
Caucasus, he proceeded to the Crimea, 
and thence to Kishinev in Bessarabia. 
Impressed by the Southern scenery. 
and under the influence of Byron. 
Pushkin wrote three poems : 
Tl1e 
Caucasian Captive (I82I), The Bakll­
chissarai Fountain ( I823) and Tl1e 
Gypsies ( I  8 24 ). In I 824, Push kin 
left Kishinev for Odessa, where , 
again, he got himself into trouble. 
Accused of bad behavior and of hav­
ing uttered atheistic opinions, he was 
ordered to leave for Mikhailovskoie, 
his own estate in the Province of 
Pskov. Pttshkin remained in this exile 
approximately two years ; he lived 
there all alone with no one but Arina 
Rodi6novna, his old peasant nurse, 
to brighten his seclusion. The en­
forced sojourn in M ikhailovskoie 
proved beneficial to the poet's men­
tal growth. There he conce ived 
and c o m  p I e  t e d  his tragedy Boris 
Godunov ( 182 5 J ,  which was written 
under the marked influence of Shake­
speare. During the same period he 
wrote the major part of Eugene One­
gin, his magnum opus. In September, 
I826, Pushkin received permission to 
leave Mikhailovskoie, and he pro-

NOTES 
1079 
ceeded to Moscow, where he was 
given an audience by Emperor 
Nicholas I. The two subsequent years 
Pushkin spent partly in Moscow and 
partly in St. Petersburg. In I828, 
he completed Poltava, a long poem 
dedicated to the memory of Peter 
the Great and the well known battle 
of Poltava ( 1 709), where the Rus­
sians defeated the invading army of 
Charles XII, King of Sweden. In 
I829, Pushkin proposed to Natalie 
Goncharova, a recognized beauty of 
the early Thirties, and on February 
I8, I83 I, he married her in Moscow. 
In the autumn of I83o, he spent 
severJ.I weeks in Baldino, another 
estate of his, in the Province of 
Nijni-Novgorod. There, within the 
brief period of four or five weeks, 
he wrote four miniature tragedies : 
The Miser Knight; The Feast Dur­
ing the Plague; Don Juan; and M o­
zart and Salieri. Each one of these 
tragedies is an unsurpassed master­
piece. In addition, he conceived and 
completed The Little House in Kˌ• · 
lomna, a long poem in octaves. Be­
ginning with the same year, Pushkin 
turned his attention to prose. In I833, 
he completed his last big poetic work 
Tile Bronze Horseman-perhaps the 
most remarkable of his major poems 
-again portraying Peter the Great. 
The best of his works in prose are 
The Bielkin Tales (I83o), Doubrov­
sky ( I833) ,  The Queen of Spades 
( I833), History of Pougach16v's 
Rebellion (I833) and The Captai,, 
Daughter ( I  836). Insulted by the 
attentions which Baron Haeckern­
Dantes, a young Guard officer, was 
paying to Natalie Pushkin, the poet, 
on January 27, 1837, fought a duel 
with his rival, and was fatally wounded 
by him. Pi1shkin died in St. Peters­
burg on January 29, I837· 
PYJ>in, Alexander Nikolaievich ( I833-
• 904), noted Russian historian, pub­
licist and historian of literature. J;n 
I898, he was elected to the Imperial 
Academy of Sciences. His principal 
works arc : Russian Masonry in the 
XV/1/th and First Quarter of the 
X/Xth Century (in book form first 
published in I9I6), History of Rus­
sian Literature, 4 volumes ( I  898-
I899), History of Russian Ethnog­
raphy, 4 volumes (I89o-I892) ,  Bie­
linsky: His Life and Co"espondence 
( I876) . Editor of the literary works 
of Empress Catherine II. 
[ Q ] 
The Queen of Spades, a novel by 
Pushkin (I833) to which P. I. Tchai­
kovsky (I84o-I893) wrote his opera 
bearing the same title. 
[ R ] 
Rastrelli, H ;.rtolomeo Francesco 
(I 70o-I 77I ), famous Italian-Russian 
architect. He came to Russia from 
Haly at the age of sixteen and settled 
in St. Petersburg. The following are 
his best known buildings : the Winter 
Palace in S •. Petersburg (I 732-1736), 
the Great Palace at Czarskoe Selo 
( 1750) , the Smolni Monastery in St. 
Petersburg (174R) , the St. Andrew 
Cathedral in Ki.:.·,· ( 1 747-1 767), the 
palace of Count Stroganov in St. 
Petersburg, and the palace in Peter­
hof. 
A Raw Youth, a novel by Dostoiev­
sky ( I875). 

1 080 
NOTES 
Rectilinear : Dostoievsky uses this 
word in the sense of a single-track 
mind devoid of flexibility. 
Redemption sums, or redemption 
payments, or redemption loans, were 
payments which were made by the 
Russian Government to the land­
owners for their land allotted to the 
liberated peasants (February 19, 
1861) . These payments were sup­
posed to have been repaid by the 
peasants to the Treasury in annual 
installments over a period of forty­
nine years. However, a considerable 
portion of this indebtedness even­
tually was cancelled, and the peasants 
became owners of the lands tilled by 
them, acquiring full title thereto. Re­
demption payments. or loans, were 
made in the form of interest-bearing 
securities guaranteed by the State. 
In this connection it may be of in­
terest to note that on February 19, 
x86x, i.e., two Y.ears before the aboli­
tion of slavery in the United States, 
over 2o,ooo,ooo Russian peasants 
were liberated from bondage by Em­
peror AleXander II. The Imperial 
manifesto liberating the peasants was 
accompanied by an act granting them 
roughly JI8,257,527 acres of land 
suitable for tilling. On the average 
every one of the 8,450,78:z peasant 
farms contained 37.18 acres. By Jan­
uary 1, 1917, that is, prior to the 
revolution, the peasants in European 
Russia owried about so per cent of 
the entire available acreage. 
Redstock, Lord Grenville, an Oxford 
graduate. He served in the British 
Army, reaching the rank of Colonel. 
Ever since his Oxford days he was 
interested in miSSionary work. He 
came to St. Petersburg in the Seven­
ties of the XIXth Century as a self­
appointed missionary. He preached 
the doctrine that faith - and faith 
alone-in Jesus Christ is necessary 
for the salvation of the soul. Good 
deeds, according to him, serve merely 
as an obstacle to salvation. The 
Church, as an ecclesiastical institu­
tion, must be abolished ; sacraments 
are worthless and sin is of no conse­
quence so long as faith prevails. For 
a while Lord Redstock's doctrine was 
in vogue among the fashionable sets 
of St. Petersburg society. Among the 
most ardent disciples of Lord Red­
stock was Colonel Vasily AJexan­
drovich Pashkov, a man of great 
wealth. For the propagation of the 
tenets of Redstockism he established 
in 1876 in St. Petersburg a Society 
for the Encouragement of Religious 
and Ethical Reading. He was the 
founder of a spiritual sect known as 
PdshkovschiruJ. 
The Reformer-Dostoievsky refers to 
Peter the Great. 
Repetilov, in Griboyedov"s comedy 
Woe from Wit (q.v.), is a tireless 
causeur and a pathological liar. 
Repin, Ilya Efinovich (1844-1918), 
famous Russian painter of Cossack 
descent. His Haulers, John the Ter­
rible and His Son John, and espe­
cially The Cossacks' Reply to Sultan 
M achmond IV are universally ad­
mired. In 1894, he was appointed 
professor of historical painting at the 
Imperial Academy of Arts in St. 
Petersburg. 

NOTES 
1081 
RUdin (1856), one of Turgenev's (q. 
v.) best-known novels. Rudin's place 
is in the long gallery of the so-called 
"superfluous men" portrayed in Rus­
sian belles-lettres. 
"A R u s s i  a n  Lady, Countess K." 
(Page 375.) Countess Kushelev-Bez­
borOdko. 
The Russian Messenger, founded by 
Katkov, was one of the most influen­
tial and widely read monthly maga­
zines. Among its contributors were 
the Slavophiles S. T., K. S. and I 
S. Aksakov (q.v.) ; the Westerners 
I. S. Turgenev (q.v.), A. N. PYJ>in 
(q.v.J and Boris Chicherin ; the 
gifted poet Y. P. Polonsky (q.v.) ,  
the famous novelist Goncharov (q. 
v.) and many ott.er noted authors. 
Tl1e Russian Wome11 (1871-1872), 
one of the best-known poems by N. 
A. Nekrasov (q.v.). 
[ s ] 
Saltykov, M ikhail Evgr afovich 
( 1826-1889) (pen name-Schedrin) ,  
of noble descent, Russia's outstand­
ing satirist ; he was nicknamed by the 
rightists "the Russian Vice-Robes­
pierre," as an allusion to the fact 
that this radical thinker held the 
office of vice-governor of the province 
of Riazan (I8S8) and later of the 
province of Tver ( I86o). In I862, 
he resigned temporarily from govern­
ment service. and became editor 
· f 
the radical monthly Contemporary 
(Sovremennik) in place of Chemy­
shevsky (q.v.), who had been ar­
rested for revolutionary activities. 
Shortly thereafter, however, he was 
appointed president of the _, Penza 
Court of Exchequer. At the age of 
forty-four, he tendered his resigna­
tion, and from that time on he gave 
all his time to literary pursuits. It 
is noteworthy that Saltykov's satire 
mercilessly and mordantly chasti5;t;d 
not only the Russian bureaucracy 
but likewise the loose-mouthed liber­
alism of the Sixties and Seventies, 
the bushy-haired nihilists and the 
radical intelligentsia. His ironical al­
lusions to Chernyshevsky's no vel 
What Is to Be Done? caused great 
indignation in the leftist camp. His 
best-known works are : Prov;ncial 
Sketches (1856-I857), Pompadours 
and Pompadouresses ( I 8 6 3- I 8 7 3 )  , 
Well-Intentioned Speeches (1872-
1876), Messrs. Golovlyovi (I872-
1876), In the Rralm of Moderation 
a11d Acwracy ( I874-I877), Tales 
( !88o-r88S) and Bygone Days in 
Posl1ellvnie ( 1887-I 889). 
Samarin, Ury Fiodorovich ( 18I9-
I876), O!"" ,..,f the outstanding Slavo­
philes and 
;ncipal supPQI"ters of the 
liberation oi the Russian peasants. 
Samarin was also a noted theologian. 
"Save the Kings."-On February 4. 
I 799, Emperor Paul I ( I 796-18o1) 
sent for Fieldmarshal Survorov, who 
was then hvmg in exile on his estate, 
and ordered him to proceed to Italy 
to check the victorious offensive of 
the French revc•!utionary armies in 
Lombardy. On tnat occasion Paul 
bestowed upon the old Fieldmarshal 
the Grand Cross of the Order of Saint 
John of Jerusalem. Suvorov knelt be­
fore the Emperor and exclaimed : 
"God save the Sovereign !" to which 

1082 
NOTES 
Paul said: "It is for you to save the 
Sovereigns ! " 
Schedrin. See Saltykov. 
Sebastopol Stories {I8SS) by Count 
Leo Tolstoy (I8z8-I9IO) are a rec­
onl of his personal observations and 
experiences during the siege of Se­
bastopol ( I8S4-I8Ss). As a Russian 
anny officer Tolstoy took part in the 
heroic defense of that fortress. 
Senkovsky' Osip I vanovich ( I  8oo­
I8S8) {pen name "Baron Brambeus"), 
editor of the St. Petersburg magazine 
Library for Reading; professor of 
Oriental languages (Persian, Arabian, 
Tartar) ; translator of the novels : 
The Bedouin, The Knight of the 
Cream-Coloured Steed ( from the 
Serbian language) ; The Village Belle 
(fro01 the Tartar) ,  etc. 
Sennaia-a square and a slum pre­
cinct in St. Petersburg. 
Sergij of Radohej, Saint ( IJI4?­
IJ92), of noble descent, founder of 
the famous Holy Trinity Monastery 
near Moscow, of which, in IJS4, he 
became prior. This monastery ac­
quired an important significance in 
Russian history, especially during the 
Troubled Epoch (q.v.) in Russia's 
struggle against the impostors and 
the Poles. Saint Sergij was not only 
an exemplary Christian confessor of 
faith, but likewise a man of great 
political wistiom and executive abil­
ity. He became a close friend of 
·the Moscow Metropolitan Saint 
Alexis, who, on many occasions, en­
trusted to sergjj the difficult mission 
of bringing about peace between the 
contending dukes of the various Rus-
sian provinces. In I 38o, the Moscow 
Grand Duke Dmitri jo&nnovich pro­
ceeded to the Holy Trinity Monas­
tery in order to consult Saint Sergij 
on the question whether Russia 
should openly challenge the Tartar 
rule. Saint 5ergij bestowed his bless­
ing upon the Grand Duke and fore­
told his victory in the field. On Sep­
tember 8, IJ8o, the Grand Duke de­
feated Khan Mamai in the Kulikov 
battle on the Don. This brilliant vic­
tory exercised a profound political 
and moral influence upon the destinies 
of the Russian state : ( 1) it raised 
in the minds of the people the pres­
tige of Moscow as the rallying center 
of the strugle against the Tartars ; 
(2) it proved to the nation the fal­
sity of the legend of the Tartars' 
invincibility, and (3) it created in 
the minds of the people the convic­
tion that the Moscow Grand Duke 
was the logical defender of the Rus­
sian state as a whole and ipso facto 
the political symbol of its unity (the 
idea of the Czar). 
Skabichevsky, Alexander Mikhailovich 
(I8J8-I9IO), mediocre radical critic, 
author of The History of Russian 
Censorship (I89o), The History of 
Russian Literature, etc. 
Skobelev, Mikhail D m i trievich 
(I843-I882), Russian general . In 
I 868 he was sent to Turkestan and 
with a brief interval remained in 
Central Asia till I877. In 1874, be 
distinguished himself in the expedi­
tion to Khiva. For extraordinary 
bravery he was promoted to the 
rank of major-general and appointed 
Governor of Fergana. He took an 

NOTES 
active and prominent part in the 
Russo-Turkish war of 1S77-1S7S; 
more particularly he distinguished 
himself during the siege and capture 
of Plevna. On September 3, 1S77, he 
captured the Turkish 
͗ t ronghold 
Lovtcha. In january, ISiS, he crossed 
the Balkans in a severe snowstorm, 
defeating the Turks at Senova near 
Shipka. Because he always wore a 
white uniform and rode a white horse, 
he was called "the White General." 
Skobclev was an ardent Panslavist. 
On july 7, 1SS2, he died of a heart 
attack in Moscow. 
"k v •:!nik-Dmukhanovsky, Antbn An­
tonovich, a hard, utterly dishonest 
bailiff who in touching union with 
a score of equally unscrupulous state 
functionaries, autocratically rules over 
a small and God-forsaken Russian 
provincial town in N. V. Gugol's 
(ISog-1852) five-act comedy The 
Revizor ( 1S34), which made his name 
immortal. (See Khlestakov.) 
Sobakevich-in Gogol's Dead Souls­
a vulgar, gluttonous, massive land­
owner ("not finely tailored but solidly 
seamed") who sells his "dead souls" 
to Tchitchikov. 
Solianoi Gorodok-in St. Petersburg, 
an agricultural museum and lecture 
hall. 
Solovetzky Monastery on an island 
in the White Sea. It was founded by 
Saint Savvaty and the monk Hermc 
in 1436. Under the Soviet regime 
this famous monastery serves as a 
huge concentration camp, in which 
tens of thousands of prisoners are 
subjected to slave labor. 
"Some eighteen months ago 
•
.
.
.
 
" 
(Page 54i-) The jurist mentioned by 
Dostoievsky was the famous Rusian 
criminalist, Anatoly Fiooorovich Koni 
i 1844- ? J ,  member of the Imperial 
Academy of Sciences, and one of 
Russia's outstanding orators. 
So"gs of the Western Slavs (1833) 
by Pushkin. Their origin and literary 
significance is explained by Dos­
toievsky. 
Spasi'Jvich, V. D. ( IS2Q-I9o6), of 
Polish descent, brilliant Russian jurist 
criminalist, advocate and I i t  era ry 
critic. His essays P1ishkin and Mick­
icwic: before the M ormment to Peter 
the Great, Urmo"tov's Byro "isn1 
( I88i J .  Sclziller's Friendship with 
Goethe ( 1894) and Prishkin in Mod­
em Polish Literature and Criticism 
( 189 1 )  arc important contributions 
to the critical evaluation of the re­
spective poets. In 1863, he published 
a Teztbook of Criminal Law, which 
even in on day retains a certain 
interest. 
The Sportsman's Sketch'es ( 1 847-
185 1  )-a collection of short stories 
hy Turgenev. 
Stundism (from the German word 
Stunde - hour) , a religious sect 
which was lounded in Germany in 
the latter part of the XVIIth Cen­
tury by jacob Spener (died in qos). 
Early in the Seve :1ties of the XIXth 
Century a Germo1n pastor by the 
r.ame of Donnenkempfer started 
preaching Stundism among the Little 
Russian peasants in the Kharkov 
province. Stundists reject the dogmas 
of the Russian Orthodox Church, 

NOTES 
sacraments, priesthood, etc., as well 
as civil authority of every kind. They 
confine themselves to the reading of 
the Scriptures and the singing of 
hymns. In several Southern provinces 
of Russia Stundist propaganda met 
wۦth considerable success. Among the 
most noted Russian followers of 
Stundism Ivan Riaboshapka, Gerasim 
Balaban and the brothers Tzibulsky 
may be mentioned. Stundism was in­
terdicted and prosecuted in Russia 
until 1905 when by virtue of an 
Imperial Manifesto full religious free­
dom was proclaimed. 
Susanin, Ivan, a Russian national 
hero, who early in 1613 saved the 
life of the newly elected sixteen-year­
old Czar Mikhail Fi6dorovich Roma­
noff. Polish armed bands which then 
invaded Russia were determined to 
assassinate the young Czar, who was 
residing at the time on one of his 
estates near Kostroma on the Volga. 
The Poles lost their way in the virgin 
woods in that district. They ordered 
a peasant, by the name Susanin, to 
guide them· to the Czar's residence. 
Susanin at once sent a secret mes­
senger to warn the Czar of the im­
pending peril, and meanwhile prom­
ised the Poles to show them the way 
to the Czar's palace. Acting as their 
guide, he deliberately led them astray 
into impassable forests. When, at 
length, the Poles found out that they 
had been do_uble-crossed by Susanin, 
they killed him. Nevertheless the 
Czar was saved, and on March 14, 
1613, he ascended the Russian throne. 
This episode inspired M. I. Glinka 
( 1804-1857 ), the famous R ussian 
composer, to compose his classic 
opera A Life for the CZIT, the per­
formance of which was prohibited 
by the Soviet government. However, 
in 1942, because of the war, its per­
formance was renewed for a while 
under the name Ivan Susanin. At 
present it is again ostracized from 
the Russian operatic repertoire. 
Suvorin, Alexei Sergeevich ( 1834-
191 2), noted publicist, critic, play­
wright and conservative editor of 
the influential St. Petersburg daily 
The New Times. His best known 
dramatic piece is Tatiana Repina 
(1889). Suvorin was the owner of 
the Little Theatre in St. Petersburg. 
Suvorov, Prince Alexander Vasilievich 
(1 73o-I8oo), Russian fieldmarshal, 
undeniably the most brilliant Rus­
sian strategist and soldier. Among his 
principal victories the following may 
be mentioned : ( 1) the defeat of the 
Lithuanian Hetman Count Oginski 
near Stolovice, September 12, 1 771 ; 
(2) the defeat of the Turks at Tur­
tukai May 10, 1 773 ; (3) the defeat 
of the Turks near Kirburn, October 
1, 1787 ; (4) the defeat of the Turks 
at Rimnik, September 11, 1 789 ; (5) 
the siege and storming of the Turk­
ish fortress Izmail, December 1 1 ,  
1790; (6) capture of Warsaw, No­
vember 4-ˍ. 1 794 ; ( 7) the defeat of 
the French army at Trebbia in Italy, 
June 7-8, 1799 ; ( 8) the defeat of 
the French army under General J ou­
bert at Novi, August 4, 1 799 ; (9) 
the storming of the Devil's Bridge 
and the defeat of the French army 
in Switzerland, September 14, 1 799. 
Suvorov has often been compared 
with Napoleon. However, Survorov, 

NOTES 
1085 
during his long military career, never 
suffered a defeat. 
[ T ] 
"The Tale" about Kaltishnikov, as 
Dostoievsky erroneously calls it, is 
an ingenious epic poem by Mikhail 
Urievich Urmontov ( I  8 I 4- I  84 I ) ,  
after Pushkin the greatest Russian 
poet, known as the Russian Byron. 
The correct title of the poem is The 
Song about Czar Ivan Vasilevich, the 
Young Body-Guard and the Bold 
Merchant Kaltishnikov (I837). LCr­
IJir)ntov wrote this ingenious Song 
when he had barely reached the age 
of twenty-three. His two greatest 
poems are Mtziri (a Circassian con­
vent novice) and The Demo11 ( I829-
I839) . Both are dedicated to the 
Caucasus. His shorter lyrical pieces : 
The Angel, The Nymph, Borodino, 
Three Palm-Trees, The Prophet, Tile 
Twig of Palestine, The Gifts of 
Terek, The Dispute, First of la11uary, 
The Death of a Poet (dedicated • .., 
the death of Pushkin) ; The Poet and 
The Dagger are among the most 
precious gems in world poetry. Puۧh­
kin and Byron were the two forma­
tive influences in the development of 
his poetic genius. Like Pushkin, Ur­
montov was killed in a duel. 
The Tale about the She-Bear (1830) 
by Pushkin is an unfinished piece; 
it is a popular story of a she-bear 
who on a lovely spring morning, 
dawn, was killed by a peasant with 
a hunting-pole; of the boundless grief 
of her husband, the dark-brown bear 
and tbe forest animals (the wolf, the 
be;lver, the fox, the squirrel, the 
hedgehog, the hare, etc.) who express 
to him their sympathy because of 
the irreparable loss he has suffered. 
Tatarinova, Ekaterina Fili ppovna 
l l 783-IBS6), was the daughter of 
Ekaterina Fibdorovna Booxhoevden, 
nee Laroness von Maltiz ; the latter 
was a nurse of Grand Duchess Mary, 
the eldeۨt daughter of Grand Duke 
Alexander (later Emperor Alexander 
I, 
J Soi-1 825 ) ,  who died in infancy 
(18oo l .  The nurse was given an 
apartment in the Mikhailovsky Castle 
in St. Petersburg (Emperor Paul's I 
palace) .  After the assassination of 
Paul (March I I, 18o I ) Ekaterina 
Fiildorovna was permitted to retain 
her rooms in the Castle. Her daughter 
Ekaterina Filippovna married Ivan 
Mikhailovich Tatarinov, an officer in 
the 3rd Infantry regiment of the 
Imperial Guard who was gravely 
wounded in the battle of Borodino 
(August 26, IBI2). After his death, 
Tatarinova. in IBI 5, came to live 
with her If'· ·her, and from that time 
on she bei ,J to devote herself to 
the practices of pietism. In I8I7, 
she de<..ared herself a prophetess. 
Her apartment in the Mikhailovsky 
Castle became a meeting place of 
castrates, convulsionists, mystics and 
all sorts of sectarians. Prince A. N. 
Golitzin, the then Minister of Eccle­
siastic Affairs, took an interest in 
her, and it was through his influence 
that Alexander I accorded her an 
interview. However, in 182I, she was 
ordered to vacate her apartment, and 
all official support of her activities 
came to an end. 
Tatiana, the heroine of Pushkin's 

1086 
NOTES 
magmtm opus Eugene Onegin ( x823-
183 1 ) .  A brilliant evaluation of her 
character was given by Dostoi̛vsky 
in his famous Pushkin address in 
Moscow on June 8, x88o, the full 
text of which appears in Writer's 
Diary for that year. 
Tchitchikov - the "hero" of Gogol's 
famous novel Dead Souls (1842), 
which is his magnum opus. Tchi­
tchikov has often been compared with 
Khlestakov (q.v.), although, in more 
than one respect, they are antipodes : 
Khlestak6v is slim and light as down, 
outspoken and eloquent ; Tchitchikov 
is ponderous and fat as a Thanks­
giving turkey, taciturn and reserved 
-a convinced positivist ; Khlestak6v 
is a tireless cattSeur, and his world 
outlook is that of a loose-minded 
whig; Tchitchikov is a steadfast 
builder, a narrow-minded Tory, a 
slow thinker of the fundamentalist 
breed. Even so. Tchitchikov is but 
the prolongation of Khlestak6v, both 
having one common root, one under­
lying cause of their coexistence, which 
is elemental mediocrity. Khlestak6v 
survives in history as an immortal 
impos tor, Tchitchikov as an un­
rivalled schemer and money-getter. 
"The suicide was a young girl . . .  " 
(Page 469.) Dostoievsky refers to the 
eldest daughter of A. I. Hertzeo (q. 
v.) Elizabeth, who committed suicide 
by taking lilQison in November, 1875· 
Theodosius Pechersky, Russian Saint, 
was born in Kur.sk in the first half 
of the Xlth Century. At the age of 
twelve he left his parents' home and 
proceeded to Kiev, where not long 
before that Saint Antony bad founded 
the famous Kiev-Pechersky Monas­
tery ( 1051). When Antony retired 
from the Monastery to live in soli­
tary seclusion, Theodosius was made 
prior. He in troduced among the 
monks rigid discipline and himself 
strictly adhered to the principle of 
asceticism. He was the author of 
two ecclesiastical instructions to the 
people, ten instructions to the Kiev­
Pechersk friars and two epistles to 
the Kiev Grand Duke Iziashi.v ( 1054). 
Thersites, in Homer's Iliad, the ugli­
est, most scurrilous officer in the 
Greek army which besieged Troy. 
He always reviled Achilles ,  who 
finally slew him. Hence, an impudent 
railer at powers that be. 
Thon, Konstantin Andreevich ( 1 794-
188x), noted Russian architect. He 
executed the plans and sketches for 
the famous church of Christ the 
Savior in Moscow (1835), which was 
demolished by the Soviet government 
in 1931, as well as of the Big Palace 
in the Moscow Kremlin ( 1837). 
Tiapkin-Liapkin in Gogol's Revizor, 
the judge, one of the city's important 
stars in the constellation of the cor­
rupt city officials. He, l ike the 
other officials, leaves a little "cash 
souvenir" with K.hlestakov, the imag­
inary "revizor." 
Tikhoo Zadonsky (1724-1 783), Rus­
sian Saint, of humble descent. He 
spent his childhood and youth in 
abject misery. He attended the N6v­
gorod Seminary in which he later 
became instructor. From 1 763 to 
1 767 he was the nding bishop in 
the Vor6nej diocese. From that year 

NOTES 
1087 
until his death he lived in retirement 
in the Zad6nsky Monastery devoting 
all his time to prayer, charity and 
the practice of Christian virtues. 
He wrote several remarkable boks, 
among which On True Christianity, 
Christian Instruction and The Rules 
o I Monastic Life deserve particular 
mention. 
T6dleben, or T6tleben, Count Eduard 
Ivanovich 
(1818-1884), brilliant 
Russian military engineer; he con­
structed the fortifications of Sebas­
topol (1854), and in 1877, the siege 
of the Turkish stronghold Plevna 
· . •  as ǂ .. nclurted under his supervision. 
Plevna was captured by the Russians 
on November 28, 1877. 
Tortzov, Lubim, one of the prin­
cipal characters in Ostrovsky's (q.v.) 
comedy Poverty Is No Crime ; he is 
a declasse, a drunkard, but a kind­
hearted man with noble impulses. 
The Troubled Epoch in Russia ( 1 598-
J 613) . Following the death of Czar 
FiOdor Ioannovich ( 1584-1598), the 
son of Czar Ivan the Terrible (q. 
v.) the Zemsky Sobor elected Boris 
Godunov (q.v.), a favorite of Czar 
Ivan, and the late Czar Fiodor's 
brother-in-law, to the throne of Rus­
sia. But it was persistently rumored 
that Godun6v had been instrumental 
in the assassination, in May, 1591, 
of the young Czarevich Dmitry, 
Ivan's youngest son and Czar Fi6doa 
only brother. Besides, Godun6v was 
of humble Tartar descent, and there­
fore quite unpopular among the an­
cient Russian bayard families. Go­
dun6v was an enlightened ruler, and 
his early legislation proves t΄at he 
was an able statesman. However, 
suspicious of bayard intrigues, he be­
gan to persecute the nobles and thus 
,, roused among them great indigna­
tivn. In 1601 Russia began to suffer 
from a dreadful famine which was 
followed by an equally devastating 
plague. Popular discontent grew to a 
high pitch. Hunger-stricken peasants 
and all sorts of rebellious clements 
began to plunder the boyards' estates. 
Highway robberies spread all over 
Russia. In the presence of these 
political and social conditions, it was 
comparativelv easy for an impostor 
to challenge the authority of Boris 
Godunov. Such an impostor appeared 
in the person of a young man (exact 
date of birth is unknown ) Grig6ry 
Otrepiev who is supposed to have 
been the son of a government official. 
In the latter part of the XVIth Cen­
tury he settled in Moscow, where he 
took religious orders, and shortly 
thereaf΅er he began to spread the 
rumor thaΆ ••c was Czarevk· Dmitry, 
miraculous!_. ·aved from. the hands 
of Godun6v's assassins. R-ealizing the 
danger of such propaganda, the Czar 
ordered Otrepiev to be seized. But 
he managed to escape, fled across 
the Lithuanian border and proceeded 
to Poland, where he enlisted in the 
service of a Polish magnate Wisz­
newezki. He convinced the latter as 
well as the Sandomir Wa}'wode Mnis­
zek that he waf the son of Czar 
Ivan the Terribic. Having embraced 
Roman Catholicism, Otrepiev, with 
the aid of the Jesuits, succeeded in 
securinf!' formal recognition by King 
Sigismund of Poland of his status 
as lawful pretender to the Russian 

1088 
NOTES 
throne. Some I soc- Polish adventur­
ers joined his ranks. He crossed the 
Russian border and the Cossacks and 
robbers' bands gave him active sup­
port. In April, J6os, Godunov died, 
and in June of the S3me year, Dmitry 
the Impostor triumphantly entered 
Moscow at the head of his rebel 
army. He ascended the Throne, but 
his avowed pro-Polish sympathies 
and the fact that he had married 
Marina Mniszek, a Roman Catholic, 
caused widespread discontent. Taking 
advantage of this situation, Prince 
Vastli Shuisky organized an uprising 
in Moscow, during which Dmitry 
was assassinated by the mob. From 
that time on, one impostor after an­
other contested the Russian Throne. 
The Poles invaded Russia and cap­
tured Moscow. For six years, anarchy 
reigned throughout Russia. However, 
at the eleventh hour the spirit of 
patriotism prompted the Russians to 
rally around Prince Dmitry Mikhai­
lovich Pojarsky, who had formed 
a volunteer army. In August, 1612, 
Pojarsky dc;feated the Polish Hetman 
Hodkiewicz · and liberated Moscow. 
In October of the same year, the 
remnants of the Poles, who were be­
sieged in the Moscow Kremlin, were 
compelled to surrender, following 
which, on February 21, r613, Mikhail 
Fiodorovich Romanov was unan­
imously elected Czar of Russia. This 
put an end to anarchy. A monument 
to Prince iojarsky and the Nijni­
Novgorod merchant Kozma Minin, 
who by his ardent patriotism helped 
to finance the volunteer army, was 
erected in the Moscow Kremlin. 
Turgenev, Ivan Sergeevich ( I8I8-
r 883), one of the most famous Rus­
sian novelists and a noted dramatist. 
His works The Sportsman's Sketches 
( I 847-I851 ) ,  Rtidin ( 1 856), Gentle­
folks' Nest ( 1859), On the Eve 
( 1 86o), Fathers and Sons ( 1862) ,  
Smoke ( 186 7 )  and his shorter stories 
The First Love, Asya ( 1858), The 
Torrents of Spring ( 1 87 1 ) ,  The Song 
of Triumphant Love ( 1881 ) ,  Hamlet 
of the Schigrov County, Poems ifl 
Prose ( 1882 ) ,  have won for Turgenev 
universal fame. His works have been 
translated into all European lan­
guages. Maurice Baring has justly 
called Turgenev "the prose Virgil of 
Russian literature" ;  the brilliant 
French art critic Hippolyte Taine 
( 182J-1893) considered Tu rgene v 
one of the greatest artists since­
Sophocles. Gustave Flaubert ( 1821-
1880) and George Sand were among 
his enthusiastic admirers. In fact, his 
prose is matchless; it flows like the 
gentle murmurs of a tide ; its ele­
gance, rhythmical properties and 
crystal purity are inimitable. Tur­
genev was a convinced Westerner, a 
humanist in the best sense, and a 
liberal. In spite of this, time and 
again he was attacked by the Rus­
sian radical critics. Among his dra­
matic works The Provincial Lady and 
A Month in the Country are genuine 
masterpieces. 
Tutchev, FiOdor lvanovic ( 1 803-
187 3), one of Russia's foremost lyr­
ical poets-the four lines addressed 
to Russia, quoted on Page 425, are 
taken from a short poem of his. The 
first sixteen of his poems were pub­
lished in 1836 by Pushkin in The 
Contemporary, which be then edited. 

NOTES 
[ u ] 
Uri Milosldvsky;-a once popular his­
torical novel (I829) by Mikhail 
I v.inovich Zagoskin ( 1 7  8 9- I 8 s 2 ) . 
His other novels R6sla1•lev or The 
Russians in 1Brz ( I83I), Askold's 
Tomb ( I833) ,  The Tempter (I838), 
etc., replete with melodramatic ef­
fects, have met with but little success 
and are now forgotten. 
[ v ]  
VasUy Shibdnov, a poem by Count 
Alexei Tolstoy (18I7-I875) , a bril­
liant Russian poet, playwright, the 
authoۥ ilf the famous historical 
trilogy : The Death of lvdn the Ter­
rible ( I866) , Cztv Fi6dor /odnnovich 
(I868) and Czar Boris ( I 87o) ; 
novelist, the author of The Silver 
Prince ( I  86 I), in which he gave a 
vivid picture of the epoch of Czar 
I van the Terrible. 
Viardot, Louis ( I  8oo-I 883 ) ,  co­
founder with George Sand (I804-
I876) of the Revue Independante 
( I  84 I ) ,  husband of the famous 
French operatic mezzo-soprano 
{I821-I9IO) for whom I. S. Tur­
genev (q.v.) felt an ardent affection. 
Viborgskaia Storona - a borough in 
St. Petersburg. 
VIas. See Nekrisov. 
The Voice ( G6los), a liberal daily 
founded in St. Petersburg in rSC 
. 
by A. N. Kraihsky (q.v.). 
[ w ]  
"Whether 'tis beast that roars in 
gloomy. woods" is the first line in 
Pushkin's poem •Echo (I83I), an 
adaptation from Thomas Moore's 
( q8o-I852) Echoes with its first 
stanza: 
How sweet the answer Echo mAes 
To Music at night, 
When, roused by lute or horn, she 
wakes, 
And far away o'er lawns and lakes 
Goes answering light ! 
"The window to Europe." In the 
Introduction to Pushkin's great poem 
The Bronze Horseman (I833), Peter 
the Great is pictured standing on the 
desolate bank of the Neva and 
meditating about founding St. Peters­
burg, the new capital of Russia, on 
the shores of that river flowing into 
the Finnish Gulf. Says Peter: 
Hence 'gainst the Swede we are to 
labor, 
Here shall a mighty city rise 
To the distress of our proud neigh­
bor; 
By nature ""· are destined here 
To cut 
a 
'11011 through to Eu-
rope . 
(Boris Brasol's version) 
Woe from Wit {I824)-the immortal 
four-act comedy by Alesander Sergee­
vich Griboi̛dov (I 795-I829) with its 
ingenious epigraph : 
Thus naughty Fate has ruled forever: 
That fools for happiness be fit, 
But they who har,TJen to be clever 
Should always suffer woe from wit. 
(Boris Brasol's version) 
Tchatzky is the hero of the play. 
Eloquently, with idealistic zeal, he 
denounces the antiquated Moscow 

IOC}O 
NOTES 
beau monde of b:s days. His is a 
progressive world outlook. At the 
same time he ridicules foolish apish­
ness of Western customs and he bids : 
Oh, let's adopt from those Chinese 
Their prudent nescience of strangers. 
Bielinsky (q.v.) belittled the literary 
significance of Woe from Wit. Push­
kin, however, in his letter to A. A. 
Bestujev (January, 1825), predicted 
that 
Griboiedov's 
ingenious 
verses 
would become an integral part of 
the living Russian language. Griboie­
dov was Russia's special envoy in 
Persia. Some Armenians persecuted 
by the Shah appealed to Griboiedov 
for protection. He sent a sharp note 
to the Persian government, but on 
January 30, 
I 829, at Teheran, the 
fanatical infuriated Persian mob 
broke 
into 
the 
Russian 
embassy. 
Griboiedov, with his sword in hand, 
met the rioters in the vestibule and 
gallantly defendtd himself until, over­
powered, he fell and was assassinated. 
His mutilated body was brought to 
Tiflis and
. 
buried on Saint David's 
mountain. 
[ y ] 
Vat. In the pre-revolutionary Russian 
alphabet, "yat" stood for a "soft 
sound" of "e." The difference is closely 
represented by the sound of yea in 
the name Yeats compared with the 
sound ye in the English word yet. 
In the Russian alphabet there are 
letters 
for 
the 
familiar European 
vowel sounds A, E, I, 0, U, and 
also letters representing what in Rus­
sian are called the "soft sounds" of 
those vowels and in English are most 
closely represented by prefixing the 
consonant Y to the respective vowel 
sounds. In the new spelling intro­
duced by the Soviet decree of De­
cember 23, 1917, the letter "yat" 
was altogether eliminated. As a result 
many linguistic nuances and finesses 
can no longer be expressed. 
[ z ] 
Zamoskvorechie, a borough in Mos­
cow on the right bank of the Moscow 
river, residence of the old-fashioned 
Moscow merchants. 

INDEX TO THE DIARY 
[ A ] 
Acta Martyrum, 204, 8o!l 
Ajax, 7H 
Ak.sakov, A. N., 302, 1105, 504 
Aksakov, Ivan Sergeevich, 959. 963, 
964, g8g 
Ak.sakov, Konstantin, 202, 2 1 0  
Aksakov, Sergei Timofeevich, 270, 
285 
Alcibiades, 
166 
Aldini, George Sand, 348 
Alexander I, 665 
Alexei Mikhailovich, Czar, 67 1  
Allonso XII, King o f  Spain, 261 
AliuJ•d Frolovna, 284 
Amateurs of Nightingales Singing, 
Makovsky, 77 
Andrei Alexandrovich. See Kraiev­
sky 
A nna Karenina, Tolstoy, 278, 610, 
755· 777-779. 785-785. 8 13, 915 
Annenkov, Ivan Alexandrovich, 190 
Anton-The Poor Wretch, Grigoro­
vich, 290 
Arago, 
Dominique 
Franúois 
Jean 
( 178•855) , French physicist, 148 
Arina Rodionovna, 400 
Aristotle, 1047 
Arminius, 730 
Avseenko, Vasily Grigorovich, 273-
293 
Anakum, Archpriest, 401 
[ B ] 
Bacon, Francis, 1047 
Baldwin I, Prince of Edessa, 8o2 
Balzac, Honorȓ de, 346 
Bathory, King Stephen, 358 
Batyi, Khan, g62, g83 
Bazaine, Marshall Achille FranȔi<. 
7!J3 
B eaconsfield, Benjamin D israe l i ,  
Lord, 45o-432. 456, 6o7, 640, 6g6, 
8g6, 907 
The Bear, Pushkin, 976 
Bereziȕ. I. N., 1g6 
Betzky, Ivan Ivanovich, 3!1 1 
Hibina, Ouliana, 224 
Hielinsk.y, 
ViIJrion 
Grigorie,·ich, 
4--9· 1411. 2 16, 246, 344· 346, !.15!1· 
!156-!157· 5116-588, 643. 78o, 118;. 
948 
Bismarc k, 137· 2.!)4. 258, 6oo, 7 '9· 
7!12-7!J4. 7!18-74"· 74!1 ·  8 !6-817, 
822--827, 8!12--8!1!1· 909-910, •oso-
1 05• 
Black Earth and 11.1 Future. Vasil· 
chikov, 272 
Blanc, Louis, 148 
Boboryk.in, Piotr Dmitrievida, 307 
Boneketberg, Pastor, 62 
Book uf Ptedictiom, The, Lkhten· 
berger, 69!1 
Boris Godunov, Pushkin, 942. g6o 
Botkin, Sergei PetrO\·ich, 1 !I !I 
Bronnikov, 83 
Brotherly Help, 202 
B1others Karamazov, The, Dostoie\·-
sky, 99' 
Hulkle, Henry Thomas, 746 
Bulgarin, Faddei Venediktovich, 345 
Burenin, Viktor Petrovich, 71 1 
Byron, ·ം· 327, 34!1· 4o6, 945· g68, 
972 
[ c ] 
Cabet, :Etie •• ne, 8 
Caesar unto Caesar, Titian, 84 
Capt am J Daughtt!1 , The, Pushkin, 
75· 94 1, g6o 
Carlos, Don, 259. 26o, 261 
Cathedral Folks, Leskov, 59· 8.!) 
Catherine the Great, Czarina, 289 
Caucasian 
raptive, 
The, Pushkin, 
597 
Cawe, The, 3o8, 309 
Cavour, 457· 7 18, 719 
Cervantes, g6o, 977 
Chambord, Con o : t, 16o, 741 
Charles the Great 
(Charlemagne) , 
819, Sao 
Chechotkin, 337 
Chenier, Andre, 968 
Cherni.aiev, General Mikhail Grigo­
rievich, 366, 421, 416-417, 4!19· 
473-478, sg8. 6o, 750, 795· 7gB 

INDEX TO THE DIARY 
Chernyshevsky, Nikolai Gavrilovich, 
2g-go 
Childhood, Boyhood, Youth, Tol­
stoy, s88-59 1 , 610 
Clire, Mme., gos-go7 
Conductor and a Tarantula, The, 
Prutkov, 428 
Considerant, Victor Prosper, 148 
Conversation between Mr. A. and 
Mr. B., A, Bielinsky, 4 
Corneille, 299 
Correspondence with Friends, Gogo), 
277· 70g 
Covetous Knight, The, Pushkin, 977 
Crime and Punishment, Dostoiev­
sky, 22 
Crispi, .Francesco, 8g2 
Crocodile, The, Dostoievsky, 23, 27, 
go 
Crookes, Sir William, 195 
[ D ] 
Dahl, Vladimir lvanovich, 885 
Daily News, London, 895 
Danilevsky, N i k o l a i  Yakovlevich, 
gog, go6, 907 
Danilov, Foma, 569-57g 
Darwin, 1 50, g 1 6, 6o4 
Davydov, Denys Vasilievich, 344 
Dead Souls, Gpgol, 276-277, 585-
586 
Decembrists, g, 190, 409 
De Comb, 22 1-222, 227 
Diary, Prince Meschersky, 888 
Dickens, 75, 82-Sg, 343. !J46, g5o, 
4!JO, 431 
Disraeli. See Beaconsfield 
Diversion, 1go 
Djunkovsky, Major Alexander Afa­
nasievich, 762-77 1 
Djunkovsky, Ekaterina, '165-766 
Djunkovsky, Ekaterina Pe t ro v n a ,  
76g-77 • 
Djunkovsky, Nikolai, 763-771 
Djunkovsky, Olga, 763-771 
Djunkovskfs, 761-771 
Dmitry Donskoi, 88 
Dobell, Sydney, 264-265 
Dobroliubov, N i"k o l a i  Alexandro-
vich, 246 
Domestic Records, The, 57, 16o, 272, 
go8, 581-585 
Domestic Review, The, 85 
Don juan, Pushkin, 977 
Don Quixote, Cervantes, 
74• 260, 
8gs-8g8 
Don't Live as Thou Wilt, Ostrov­
sky, 42 
Dostoievsky, Mikhail Mikhailovich. 
1 96, 11o8-go9 
Double: Adventures of Mr. Goliad­
kin, The, Dostoievsky, 881-88g 
Draper, John William, 746 
Drinking to the Last Drop Will 
Yield No Good Crop, Kishensky, 
107-1 1 8  
Dubarry, Marie .Jeanne Becu, Com-
tesse, 4 1  
Dukov, 691 
Dumas, Alexandre, fils, 4 14-4 15 
Dumas, Alexandre, phe, 1go 
Dziennik Polski, 871 
[ E ] 
Eastern Question: Its Past and Pres­
ent: A Defense of Russia, The, 
Sinclair, 955 
Egyptian Nights, The, Pushkin, 978 
Elizabeth, Queen of England, 694 
Ems and Her Mineral Springs, 
Hirschhorn, 404 
Ensealed Angel, The, Leskov, 57 
Epoch, The, 27, 29, 196, goB 
Eugene Onegin, Pushkin, g67-g68, 
970, 975 
Eugt!nie Grandet, Balzac, g46 
Evenings on a Farm, Gogol, 1 79 
[ F ] 
Fadeev, General, 275 
Family Chronicle, Aksakov, 185 
Fathers and Sons, Turgenev, 16o 
Faust, Goethe, 1 9, 495 
Feast during the Plague, A, Push-
kin, 785, 977 
Fet, Afanasi Afanasievich, 28 
Feuerbach, Ludwig Andreas, 8 
First Step, The, g14 
Floriani, Lucrezia, 993 
Florinsky, Dr., 6g 1 ,  918, 926 
Forbes, Archibald, 8g5-896 
Fourier, Franúois Charles Marie, 8 
Frederick the Great, 713 
From the Other Shore, Hertzen, 4 

INDEX TO THE DIARY 
1093 
[ G ] 
Gagarin, Prince, !j l l ,  357 
Gambetta, 8 14, 8a6, 834· 854-a55, 
105Q-105 1  
Gazin, ao6 
Gentlefolks' Nest, Turgcnev, 203, 
ago, g7 1 
Georgi the Black, Pushkin, 597 
Gladstone, 886-887 
God, Derjavin, 28 
Goethe, 1 37· 1 58, 196, 3 1 1 ,  500 
Gogo!, Nikolai 
V., 74-'75· Sa, 94· 
1 0 1 ,  a go, 2 1 5, 176-277, 279. 401 , 
583. 585-586, 70!1, 706, 784, 879· 
940, g67. 988 
Goldstein, 63g-64o 
Golubev, 1 88 
G o n c h a ro v ,  Ivan Alexandrovich, 
276, 58!1 
Lorhunov, actor, 28 
Gouzla, La, Merimee, 596 
Gradovsky, Alexander Dmitrievich, 
g8 a-ao10 
Granovsky, 
Timofei 
Nikolaievich, 
!179-!187, 408, 445· 7 • • 
Griboiedov, Alexander Sergeevich, 
177, 468 
Grigoriev, Apollon Alexandrovich, 
356 
Grigorovich, Dmitri Vasilievirh. g8, 
ug, 584-585, 848 
Gue, N. N., 84 
Guizot, 2g2 
Gypsies, The, Pushkin, 597• 968 
[ H ] 
Hamlet, Shakespeare, 654, 950 
Harmonies Poetiques et Religieuses, 
Lamartine, 2 1 7  
Hartung, General, 8sg-a66 
Hero of Our Days, A, Lermontov, 
l g8  
Hertzen, Alexander Ivanovich, 4· 5· 
7· 1 35· 153 
Hindenberg, Dr., 655--659 
Hirschhorn, 404 
History of Pugachiov's Rebellion, 
The, Pushkin, 960 
History of the Girondists, A, Lamar­
tine, 2 1 7  
History of the Revolution, Thiers, 
/144 
Hoffmann, Ernst•Theodor Wilhelm, 
55 1 
Homer, 166 
Hood, Thomas, 7g 
Horace, Corneille, 299 
Hugo, Victor, 491 
Hunter's Sketches, A, Turgenev, 75 
Hunters at a Halting Place, Perov, 
78 
. 
Hymn of the Pythagoreans, Bron­
nikov, 83 
[ I ] 
Idiot, The, Dostoievsky, 9 16, 931 
Ilovaisky, 
Dmitri 
Ivanovich, 876-
878 
llya-Murometz, 476 
Imitations of the Koran, Pushkin, 
978 
Ivan III, Grand Duke o[ Moscow, 
!j64 
Ivan 
Vasilievith, 
Czar, 
The Ter­
rible, 282, 358, 44 1 ,  94!1· 944 
Ivanov, 142, 149 
[ J ] 
Janin, Jules, 1 29 
jeanne, George Sand, 348 
.Jcsing. Miss, 222 
Joan of Arc, 348 
journal d, St. Petersbou:-g, 873 
Jukovsky, ·, 
sily Andrecvich, 343 
J ulian the 
· _.>Ostate, 256 · 
[ K ] 
Kaidanov, Ivan Kuzmich, 723 
Kaidashka, 714 
Kairova, !j l ll-323, 33g 
Kama-Volga Gazette, 153 
Kant, 104·1 
K a r a m z i  n ,  Nikolai Mikhailovich, 
1 52, 580, 72!1 
Kastorsky, Pr. P., 85, 87-99 
Kaufman, GeneȖaJ Constantine Pe-
trovich, 848 
Kelsiev, 1 53 
Kepler, Johann, gg8 
Khomiakov, A le k s e i  Stepanovich, 
7 l l , g89 
Khmvatovich, 6oo 
Khvostov, Count, stgo 
Kirilova, 531 

IOC)4 
INDEX TO THE DIARY 
Kisbinsky, 107-1oe 
Klapka, Georg, 877-878 
Kmght for an Hour, The, Nekra-
sov, 945 
Koltzov, Aleksei Vasilievich, 179 
Kornilov, 918 
Komilova, Ekaterina Proko6evna, 
459-465, 517-5,4· 6go-6gl, 91!­
'9!5 
Kostomarov, Nikolai Ivanovich, 874· · 
875 
Kovalevsky, Egor Petrovich, 11 
Kraievsky, Andrei Alexandrovich, 
I SO, 88t-88' 
Krestovsky, Vsevolod Vladimirovich, 
88g 
Kroneberg, 2 10, 11 1-117, 150, 155, 
254, 156, 1,7, 766, 9'1 
Krylov, Ivan Andreevich, 67, 1041-
1043 
Kuindji, Akhip lvanovich, 76 
Kurbsky, Prince, 945-94 
Kuzma Prutkov, 418 
[ L J 
Lamartine, Alphonse, 47 
Lansberg, Dr., 117, 119 
Last Days of a Man Condemned to 
Death, The, J/ictor Hugo, 491 
Last Songs, Nekrasov, 584 
Ledochowski, Cardinal, 871-875 
Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre Auguste, 
!145 
Lennontov, Mikhail Yurievich, 179. 
317, sgo. sss. 700, 958-gs9. 945-
944 
Leroux, Pierre, 8, !145 
Leskov, Nikolai Semionovich, 57-6o 
Letters from a Dead-House, Dos-
toievsky, 207 
Library for Reading, 545 
Lichtenberger, Johann, 6g5-6g7 
Liebig, Baron Justus von, 1 57. 76o 
Light, 55!1• 591 
Lipareva, 356 
Liprandi, Ivan lvanovich, !145 
Lomakin, Genera_), 1045-1044 
Lomonosov, Mikhail Vasilievich, 784 
Lord's Supper, The, GuǠ. 84 
Lubimov, 764 
Lustig, 6g1 
Luther, 564, 568, 750 
[ M ] 
MacMahon, Marshal, 198, 101 , 711, 
75!1· 759· 74 1-74!1· 746. 8 1 7-810, 
1115, 1116, 8.!11, 873 
Magnitzk.y, Mikhai·l Leontievich, !145 
Makovsky, Vladimir Egorovich, 77• 
79· 86 
Marei, 205, 2o8, 209 
Marinovich, 6o 
Marko-Vovchok 
(Maria Alexan-
drovna Markovich) , 1 19 
Marquise, La, George Sand, 548 
Mary's Song, Pushkin, 977 
Masquerade, Lennontov, 517, 700 
Matejko, Jan Alojzyn, 874 
Memoires d'un Maitre d'A.rmes, Les, 
Dumas ǡre, 190 
Memoirs of a Lunatic, The, Gogol, 
28, 101 
Mendeleev, Dmitri lvanovich, 195, 
:JOI, !J05-!Jo8 
MerimǢe. Prosper, 5g6 
Meschcrsky, Prince Vladimir Petro­
vich, I ,  I, 888 
Messenger of Europe, The, 175, 444• 
446. 458, 466. 584, 641, 645 
Messenger of the Government, The, 
87 1 
Metternich, 544, 58 1 ,  587. 6os. 6o7. 
719, 1~1007 
Milan, Prince of Serbia, 558, 797-
798 
Milley Way, The, A\'seenko, 278 
Mill, J. S., 1 50 
Mirabeau, 544 
.Mohammed, 1005 
Moltke, Helmuth Carl Bernhard, 
Baron von, 6oo 
Morning Post, 87 1-871 
Moscow Gazette, The, 1, 2, 570, 
479. 544, 6o1, 654. su, su, s5s, 
870, 871 , 87!1· 877. 888, g8 1 
Moscow State, The, Oblonsky, 67 1 
Muraviev-Apostol, Matvei lvano­
vich, 190 
[ N J 
Napoleon I, 1 1 1 ,  165, 196, 546, 457, 
6gs. 7•4· 741. Bs4. 8s6-8s7. 1045 
Napoleon III, 457· 5g6, 751-753• 
7'!17· 814-816 
Narration, The, Avvakum, 401 

INDEX TO THE DIARY 
1095 
Nazimov, 190 
Nechaiev, Sergei Gennadievich, 141-
145· 146-147· 149· 151 
Nedolin, 85, 88-g5. gg. 100 
Nekrasov, Nikolai Alekseevich, 57· 
8o, J6o, 584-588, 616, 8os. 88a, 
955-955· g84 
New Testament, 9 
New Times, The, 171, 505, 5o8, 509· 
556, 475· 641. 645· 765-']66. 86o, 
s71 ,  sn. 874 
Newton, Sir Isaac, 1047 
Nicolas, Prince of Montenegro, 558, 
797 
Nikitin, Dr., 461 
Nikon, Patriarch, 57 
Northern Bee, 545 
Northern Messenger, The, 914, 915, 
gao 
No•e. The, Gogol, 15 
:r. ovostlov. 5g8 
[ 0 ] 
Oblomov, Goncharov, 105, 176 
Oblomov's Dream, Goncharov, 176 
Obolensky, Ivan, 671 
Odessa Messenger, The, 858 
Olcott, Bronson, 195 
Old Curiosity Shop, The, Dickens, 
81 
Oliver Twist, Dickens, 81 
On the Volga, Nekrasov, 945 
O nce There Lived a Poor Young 
Knight, Pushkin, 977 
Onegin. See Eugene Onegin 
Osman-Pasha, 85o, 851, 857 
Ostrovsk.y, Alexander Nikolaievich, 
41, 74· lO!j, 179· 176, •n. 179· 5Bll 
Ousachkova, 764 
Outin, !j16-550 
Ovsiannikov, 485 
[ p ] 
Parnv. :tvariste Ǥsire de Fo11tes, 
Vicomte de, 967 
Paul, Apostle, 996, gg8 
Pere Goriot, Balzac, 546 
Perova, 16o 
Persov, V. G., 78 
Peter the Great, Czar, 88, 199. 181, 
a8g, !114· !16o, 561, !16!1. 564, 467. 
574. 785, s4a. 96o. 965. g67. 968. 
979· 1045 
Petersburg Collec4ion, 881, 9!1•6 
Petersburg Gazette, The, 165, 197. 
475· 8119 
• 
Petersburg Hurdy-Gurdy Men, Gri­
gorovich, 5B4 
Pt•trashevsky, Mikhail Vasilievich, 
147· 197· !jl l, 848 
Petrashevtzi, 149, 151 
Petrova, 11!16-557 
Pickwick Papers, Dickens, 81 
Pirogov, Lieutenant, 141 
Pisareva, !1116-11!18, 541 
Pisemsky, Aleksei Feofilaktovich, 175 
Pius IX, 7!15· 7119 
Pogodin, Mikhail Petrovich, 4 
Polonsky, Yak.ov Petrovich, 1g6 
Poor Folks, Dostoievsky, 581-588, 
9!16 
Possesst'd, 
The, Dostoievsk.y, 141, 
146. 149· 1179· 916, 9!11 
Present Times, 6o 
Prognasticationes, Lichtenberger, 
6g11 
Proudhon, 8, 148 
Psalm Readers, Makovsk.y, 79 
Pugachiov, Emelian I vanovich, 8o 1, 
8o6, 8og, 941, 941 
Pushk.in, Alexander S., 68, 75• g8, 
184, 1g8, 103, 146, 1711• 191, 380, 
!199· 101, 4!17· 465, 583, 589, 595-
597· 784, 785, 911ǣ4· 95g-g65. 
967-971, o75-g8o, g88-g89. 1oog, 
1048 
Pypin, Alexw ier Nikolaievich, 101 
[ Q ] 
Qtleen of Spades, The, Pushkin, 75 
[ R ] 
Rabeau, 544-345 
Rachinsky. !jo6 
Radetzky, .Josef, 848 
Radivoy, 595 
Raphael, 556, 654 
Rastrelli, Bartolc>n-l"o Francesco, 111 
Raw Youth, A, Dostoievsky, 16o, 166, 
9!17 
. 
RecreatiOn, 5!17 
Redstock, Lord Grenville, 167-16g 
Renan, 7 
Repin, llya Efimovich, 81, 81, 654 
Revizor, The, Gogol, 586 

INDEX TO mE DIARY 
Rodic Baron, 19+-195 
Rossi, 654 
Rothschild, James, 650 
Rousseau, 166, aa9, ago, sao, 6os, 
96g 
Rudin, Turgenev, 75 
Runners, Schapov, so8 
Rw, 1016 
Rwsia and Europe, Danilevsky, 90!1 
R ussian Encyclopedic Dictionary, 
The, ed. I. N. Berezin, 196 
Russian Invalid, The, 56g 
Russian Messenger, The, 11, 57• as. 
•1s. •75· .,a, 610, 755. na. 7as 
Russian 
Women, The, Nek.rasov, 
945 
Russian World, The, as. a6, 100, 
14!1-146, •54· •97· 90!1 
[ s ] 
St. Petersburg Gazette, The, a74 
Samarin, Ury Feodorovich, 171-175• 
g89. 995 
Sand, George, 8, 541-550, 568, 551 
Sanftleben, 859, 861, a65 
Scene from Faust, A, Pushkin, 977 
Scene in Valaam, A, Kuindji, 76 
Schapov, Afa.nasij Prokofievich, 
soS-su, !14 1 
Schedrin, 57, 640 
Schiller, 161, s • • ·  !14!1· sa•, 715, g6o, 
961, 977 
Schumacher, Danila, 4aa 
Scott, Sir Walter, 54!1 
Sebastiani, Marshal, a6s 
Sebastopol 
Stories, 
The, Tolstoy, 
179 
Senkovsky, Osip Ivanovich, 545, 547 
Serge (Sergij) , 105 
Sergeeva, 764 
Sexton, The, A Story Told among 
Friends, Nedolin, aS-go 
Shakespear, 166, !145• 468, 556, 6as. 
960, 961, 97!1• 977• gg8 
Shibanov, Vaaily, 94!1 
Shishova, 764-767 
Shot, The, Puahkin, 1g8 
Silence, Nek.rasov, 945 
Sinclair, Sir T., 955 
Skabichevalty, Alexander Mikhailǥ 
vich, 57• 95a 
Slr.etches by a Churchman, as 
Skobelev, General Mikhail Dmitrie­
vich, 104lJ-1044, 1051 
Song 
about 
the Battle at Great 
Zenitz.a, The, Pushk.in, 595-597 
SonÏs of the Western Slavs, Puah­
km, 595-597, 941 
Spasovich, V. D., 1o6, 1 1 1, u8-t!jl, 
1!16 
Sportsman's 
Slr.etches, 
The, Tur­
genev, 176, aa4 
Stoclr. Exchange Gazette, The, 475• 
a76-877· a79· 9!1a 
Stoclr. Exchange News, !1 •!1 
Stranger's, a61 
Strauss, a, 150, •5• 
Susanin, Ivan, 105 
Suvorin, Alexei Sergeevich, 46, .aa, 
950 
Suvorov, Prince Alexander Vasilie­
vich, 474 
Svistunov, 190 
[ T ] 
Tale about Kalashnilr.ov, The, Ler­
montov, 1 79 
Tale about the She-Bear, Pusbkin, 
941 
Tatarinova, Ekaterina Filippovna, 
569 
Tengobonki, a74 
Ten of Spades, The, 7a 
Thackeray, 116, 465, 466 
Theodosius Pechenky, 105 
Thien, 544 
Thon, Konstantin Andreevich, uo 
Thoughts on Art, Philosophy and 
Religion, Dobell, 164 
Three Portraits, Turgenev, 74 
Tikhon Zadonsky, 105 
Time, 196, soS-510 
Times, The, London, aa9 
Titian, a4 
Titova, Agrafena, 114-116 
To the Younger Generation, anon., 
l!j 
Tolstoy, Count Leo, 17a, 409, 5a5, 
sss. sa9, 61o, 75!1· 914, g6o 
Totleben, Count Eduard Ivanovich, 
a48-849 
Trochu, Louis-Jules, a54 
Trutovsky, a4a 

INDEX TO THE DIARY 
1097 
[ u 1 
Unfortunate, The, Nekrasov, 957 
Unmarried Conceptions of a Mar­
ried Monk, Kastonky, 91 
Uri Miloslauslr:y, lagoskin, 18 
Usltolt, George SanG, 546, 548 
[ v 1 
Vasilchik.ov, Prince, 171 
Vaailiev, Grigory, 1S4 
J'crily Shibanov, Alexei Tolstoy, 
943-944 
Velikanov, 511, 515 
Velibnova, Alexandra, 517-550 
'Ventre de Paris, Le, Zola, 415 
Viardot, Louis, 74, 401 
'Vie de ]bw, R.enan, 7 
'Virgin Soil, The, Turgenev, 5S5, 595 
'VIas, Nekrasov, 51-55· 616, 8os 
• 
'Voice, The, 1, 17,euS, 150, 16o, 1S1, 
11 1, ass. 159. a6g, 576, 459. 491· 
497. S71, S71 
. 
Voltaire, 44. 166, sSo, 6os 
[ w 1 
Wagner, Nikolai Petrovich, 504-
505, 55!1· 591 
' . 
Wallenrod, Conrad, 874 
War and Peace, Tolstoy, 610, 6go, 
75!1 
Watkin, Sir Edward, 161 
Wedding, The, Gogol, 94· 176, 177 
We're No Strangers-We'll Settle It, 
Ostrovsk.y, 74 
What to Do, Chemyshevsky, 19 
Woe from Wit, Griboyedov, 177, 
468 
Wolowski, S74 
Yaroslav, 88 
Yolshin, 848 
lola, 415 
[ y ]  
[ z ]  
Zotov, Vladimir, 197 

