
A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR 
Stories 
FYO D O R D O S T OY E V S K Y 


CO N T E N T S 
White Nights 
1 
A Disgraceful Affair 
77 
The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
153 
About the Author 
Credits 
Cover 
Copyright 
About the Publisher 


WHITE NIGHTS 
A S e nt im e n t a l L o ve Stor y 
( Fr o m t h e M e m o ir s of a D r e a m e r ) 
TRANSLATED BY DAVID MAGARSHACK 


And was it his destined part 
Only one moment in his life 
To be close to your heart? . . . 
—Ivan Turgenev 


First Night 
It was a lovely night, one of those nights, dear reader, which can 
only happen when you are young. The sky was so bright and 
starry that when you looked at it the first question that came 
into your mind was whether it was really possible that all sorts 
of bad-tempered and unstable people could live under such a 
glorious sky. It is a question, dear reader, that would occur only 
to a young man, but may the good Lord put it into your head as 
often as possible! . . . The mention of bad-tempered and unstable 
people reminds me that during the whole of this day my behav-
iour has been above reproach. When I woke up in the morning 
I felt strangely depressed, a feeling I could not shake off for the 
better part of the day. All of a sudden it seemed to me as though 
I, the solitary one, had been forsaken by the whole world, and 

6  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
that the whole world would have nothing to do with me. You 
may ask who “the whole world” is. For, I am afraid, I have not 
been lucky in acquiring a single acquaintance in Petersburg 
during the eight years I have been living there. But what do I 
want acquaintances for? I know the whole of Petersburg with-
out them, and that, indeed, was the reason why it seemed to me 
that the whole world had forsaken me when the whole town 
suddenly arose and left for the country. I was terrified to be left 
alone, and for three days I wandered about the town plunged 
into gloom and absolutely at a loss to understand what was the 
matter with me. Neither on Nevsky Avenue, nor in the park, 
nor on the embankment did I meet the old familiar faces that I 
used to meet in the same place and at the same time all through 
the year. It is true I am a complete stranger to these  people, but 
they are not strangers to me. I know them rather intimately, 
in fact; I have made a very thorough study of their faces; I am 
happy when they are happy, and I am sad when they are over-
cast with care. Why, there is an old gentleman I see every day 
on the Fontanka Embankment with whom I have practically 
struck up a friendship. He looks so thoughtful and dignified, 
and he always mutters under his breath, waving his left hand 
and holding a big knotty walking-stick with a gold top in his 
right. I have, I believe, attracted his attention, and I should not 
be surprised if he took a most friendly interest in me. In fact, I 
am sure that if he did not meet me at a certain hour on the Fon-
tanka Embankment he would be terribly upset. That is why we 
sometimes almost bow to one another, especially when we are 
both in a good humour. Recently we had not seen each other 
for two days, and on the third day, when we met, we were just 
about to raise our hats in salute, but fortunately we recollected 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  7  
ourselves in time and, dropping our hands, passed one an-
other in complete understanding and amity. The houses, too, 
are familiar to me. When I walk along the street, each of them 
seems to run before me, gazing at me out of all its windows, 
and practically saying to me, “Good morning, sir! How are you? 
I’m very well, thank you. They’re going to add another storey 
to me in May”; or, “How do you do, sir? I’m going to be repaired 
tomorrow”; or, “Dear me, I nearly got burnt down, and, good-
ness, how I was scared!” and so on and so on. Some of them are 
great favourites of mine, while others are my good friends. One 
of them is thinking of undergoing a cure with an architect this 
summer. I shall certainly make a point of coming to see it every 
day to make sure that its cure does not prove fatal (which God 
forbid!). And I shall never forget the incident with a pretty little 
house of a pale pink hue. It was such a dear little house; it al-
ways welcomed me with such a friendly smile, and it looked on 
its clumsy neighbours with such an air of condescension, that 
my heart leapt with joy every time I passed it. But when I hap-
pened to walk along the street only a week ago and looked up at 
my friend, I was welcomed with a most plaintive cry, “They are 
going to paint me yellow!” Fiends! Savages! They spared noth-
ing, neither cornices, nor columns, and my poor friend turned 
as yellow as a canary. I nearly had an attack of jaundice myself, 
and even to this day I have not been able to screw up my cour-
age to go and see my mutilated friend, painted in the national 
colour of the Celestial Empire! 
So now you see, dear reader, how it is that I know the whole 
of Petersburg. 
I have already said that until I realised what was the trouble 
with me, I had been very worried and upset for three whole 

8  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
days. In the street I felt out of sorts (this one had gone, that one 
had gone, and where on earth had the other one got to?), and at 
home I was not my old self, either. For two evenings I had been 
racking my brains trying hard to discover what was wrong with 
my room. What was it made me so peevish when I stayed there? 
And, greatly perplexed, I began examining my grimy green walls 
and the ceiling covered with cobwebs which Matryona was such 
a genius at cultivating. I went over my furniture and looked at 
each chair in turn, wondering whether the trouble lay there (for 
it upsets me to see even one chair not in its usual place); I looked 
at the window—but all to no purpose: it did not make me feel 
a bit better! I even went so far as to call in Matryona and rebuke 
her in a fatherly sort of way about the cobwebs and her untidi-
ness in general. But she just gave me a surprised look and stalked 
out of the room without saying a word, so that the cobwebs still 
remain cheerfully in their old places. It was only this morning 
that at last I discovered the real cause of my unhappiness. Oh, so 
they are all running away from me to the country, are they? I’m 
afraid I must apologise for the use of this rather homely word, 
but I’m not in the mood now for the more exquisite refinements 
of style, for everybody in Petersburg has either left or is about to 
leave for the country; for every worthy gentleman of a solidly-
prosperous and dignified position who hails a cab in the street is 
at once transformed in my mind into a worthy parent of a fam-
ily who, after his usual office duties, immediately leaves town 
and, unencumbered by luggage, hastens to the bosom of his 
family—to the country; for every passer-by now wears quite a 
different look, a look which almost seems to say to every person 
he meets, “As a matter of fact, sir, I’m here by sheer chance, just 
passing through, you understand, and in a few hours I shall be on 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  9  
the way to the country.” If a window is thrown open and a most 
ravishing young girl, who at a moment ago had been drumming 
on it with her lovely white fingers, pokes out her pretty head and 
calls to the man selling pots of plants in the street, I immediately 
jump to the conclusion that the flowers are bought not for the 
purpose of enjoying the spring and the flowers in a stuffy old 
flat in town, for very soon everybody will anyway be leaving for 
the country and will take even the flowers with them. Why, I’ve 
got so far in my new discovery (quite a unique discovery, you 
must admit) that I can tell at once, just by looking at a man, 
in what sort of a cottage he lives in the country. The residents 
of the Stone and Apothecary Islands can be recognised by their 
studied exquisiteness of manners, their smart summer clothes, 
and their wonderful carriages in which they come to town. The 
inhabitants of Pargolov and places beyond “inspire” your con-
fidence at the first glance by their solidly prosperous position 
and their general air of sobriety and common sense; while the 
householder of Krestovsky Island is distinguished by his imper-
turbably cheerful look. Whether I happen to come across a long 
procession of carters, each walking leisurely, reins in hand, be-
side his cart, laden with whole mountains of furniture of every 
description—tables, chairs, Turkish and non-Turkish divans, 
and other household chattels—and, moreover, often presided 
over by a frail-looking cook who, perched on the very top of the 
cart, guards the property of her master as though it were the 
apple of her eye; or whether I look at the barges, heavily laden 
with all sorts of domestic junk, sailing on the Neva or the Fon-
tanka, as far as the Black River or the Islands—both carts and 
barges multiply tenfold, nay, a hundredfold in my eyes. It really 
seems as though everything had arisen and set off on a journey 

10  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
as though everything were moving off in caravan after caravan 
into the country; it seems as though the whole of Petersburg 
were about to turn into a desert, and it is hardly surprising that 
in the end I am overwhelmed with shame, humiliation, and sad-
ness. For I have no possible excuse for going to the country; nei-
ther have I any country cottage I can go to. I am willing to leave 
with every cart or every gentleman of respectable appearance 
who hails a cab; but no one, absolutely no one, invites me to go 
with him, as though they had all forgotten me, as though I were 
no more than a stranger to them! 
I walked for hours and hours, and, as usual, had for some 
time been completely oblivious of my surroundings, when I 
suddenly found myself near the toll-gate. I felt cheerful at once, 
and, stepping beyond the bar, walked along the road between 
fields of corn and meadows of lush grass, unconscious of any fa-
tigue, and feeling with every breath I drew that a heavy weight 
was being lifted from my heart. All the travellers I met looked 
so genially at me that it seemed that in another moment they 
would most assuredly bow to me. All of them seemed to be 
happy about something, and every one of them without excep-
tion smoked a cigar. And I, too, was happy as never before in my 
life. As though I had suddenly found myself in Italy—so strong 
was the impact of nature upon me, a semi-invalid townsman 
who had all but been stifled within the walls of the city. 
There is something indescribably moving in the way nature 
in Petersburg, suddenly with the coming of spring, reveals her-
self in all her might and glory, in all the splendour with which 
heaven has endowed her, in the way she blossoms out, dresses 
up, decks herself out with flowers. . . . She reminds me some-
how rather forcibly of that girl, ailing and faded, upon whom 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  11  
you sometimes look with pity or with a certain compassion-
ate affection, or whom you simply do not notice at all, but who 
in the twinkling of an eye and only for one fleeting moment 
becomes by some magic freak of chance indescribably fair and 
beautiful; and, stunned and fascinated, you ask yourself what 
power it was that made those sad and wistful eyes blaze forth 
with such a fire? What caused the rush of blood to her pale 
and hollow cheeks? What brought passion to that sweet face? 
Why did her bosom heave so wildly? What was it that so instan-
taneously suffused the face of the poor girl with life, vigour, 
and beauty? What forced it to light up with so brilliant a smile? 
What animated it with so warm, so infectious a laugh? You look 
round; you wonder who it could have been; you begin to sus-
pect the truth. But the brief moment passes, and tomorrow 
perhaps you will again encounter the same wistful and forlorn 
gaze, the same wan face, the same resignation and diffi  dence 
in her movements, and, yes, even remorse, even traces of some 
benumbing vexation and despondency for that brief outburst 
of passion. And you feel sorry that the beauty, so momentarily 
evoked, should have faded so quickly and so irrevocably, that 
she should have burst upon your sight so deceptively and to so 
little purpose—that she should not have given you time even 
to fall in love with her. . . . 
But all the same my night was much better than the day! 
This is how it happened: 
I came back to town very late, and, as I was approaching the 
street where I lived, it struck ten. My way lay along a canal em-
bankment where not a single living soul could be seen at that 
hour. It is true, I live in a very remote part of the town. I was 
walking along and singing, for when I am happy I always hum 

12  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
some tune to myself like every happy man who has neither 
friends nor good acquaintances, and who has no one to share 
his joy with in a moment of happiness. Suddenly I became in-
volved in a most unexpected adventure. 
A little distance away, leaning against the railing of the 
canal, a woman was standing with her elbows on the rail; 
she seemed to be engrossed in looking at the muddy water of 
the canal. She wore a most enchanting yellow hat and a very 
charming black cloak. “She’s young,” I thought, “and I’m sure 
she is dark.” She did not seem to hear my footsteps, for she did 
not stir when I walked past her with bated breath and a thump-
ing heart. “Funny!” I thought, “she must be thinking about  
something very important.” Suddenly I stopped dead, rooted 
to the spot. The sound of suppressed weeping reached me. No, 
I was not mistaken. The girl was crying, for a minute later I dis-
tinctly heard her sobbing again. Good gracious! My heart con-
tracted with pity. And timid though I am with women, this was 
too good a chance to be missed! . . . I retraced my steps, walked 
up to her, and in another moment would have certainly said 
“Madam!” if I had not known that that exclamation had been 
made a thousand times before in all Russian novels of high life. 
It was that alone that stopped me. But while I was searching for 
the right word with which to address the girl, she had recov-
ered her composure, recollected herself, lowered her eyes, and 
darted past me along the embankment. I immediately set off in 
pursuit of her, but she must have guessed my intention, for she 
left the embankment and, crossing the road, walked along the 
pavement. I did not dare to cross the road. My heart was flutter-
ing like the heart of a captured bird. But quite an unexpected 
incident came to my assistance. 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  13  
A gentleman in evening dress suddenly appeared a few 
yards away from the girl on the other side of the street. He 
had reached the age of discretion, but there was no discretion 
in his unsteady gait. He was walking along, swaying from side 
to side, and leaning cautiously against a wall. The girl, on the 
other hand, walked as straight as an arrow, quickly and appre-
hensively, as girls usually walk at night when they do not want 
any man to offer to accompany them home. And the reeling 
gentleman would most certainly not have caught up with her, 
if my good luck had not prompted him to resort to a stratagem. 
Without uttering a word, he suddenly set off in pursuit of the 
girl at an amazing speed. She was running away from him as 
fast as her legs would carry her, but the staggering gentleman 
was getting nearer and nearer, and then caught up with her. 
The girl uttered a shriek and—I have to thank my good genius 
for the excellent knobbly walking-stick which, as it happened, I 
was at the time clutching in my right hand. In less than no time 
I found myself on the other side of the street, and in less than 
no time the unwelcome gentleman took in the situation, took 
into account the undeniable fact of my superior weapons, grew 
quiet, dropped behind, and it was only when we were far away 
that he bethought himself of protesting against my action in 
rather forceful terms. But his words hardly reached us. 
“Give me your arm,” I said to the girl, “and he won’t dare to 
molest you any more.” 
She silently gave me her arm, which was still trembling with 
excitement and terror. Oh, unwelcome stranger! How I blessed 
you at that moment! I stole a glance at her—I was right! She 
was a most charming girl and dark, too. On her black eyelashes 
there still glistened the tears of her recent fright or her recent 

14  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
unhappiness—I did not know which. But there was already 
a gleam of a smile on her lips. She, too, stole a glance at me, 
blushed a little, and dropped her eyes. 
“Well, you see, you shouldn’t have driven me away before, 
should you? If I’d been here, nothing would have happened.” 
“But I didn’t know you. I thought that you too . . .” 
“But what makes you think you know me now?” 
“Well, I know you a little. Now why, for instance, are you 
trembling?” 
“So you’ve guessed at once the sort of man I am,” I replied, 
overjoyed that the girl was so intelligent (this is never a fault in 
a beautiful girl). “Yes, you’ve guessed at once the sort of man 
I am. It’s quite true, I’m afraid, I’m awfully shy with women, 
and I don’t want to deny that I’m a little excited now, no less 
than you were a moment ago when that fellow scared you. Yes, 
I seem to be scared now. It’s as though it were all happening to 
me in a dream, except that even in a dream I did not expect ever 
to be talking to any woman.” 
“How do you mean? Not really?” 
“Yes, really. You see, if my arm is trembling now, it’s because 
it has never before been clasped by such a pretty little hand as 
yours. I’ve entirely lost the habit of talking to women. I mean, 
I never really was in the habit of talking to them. You see, I’m 
such a lonely creature. Come to think of it, I don’t believe I 
know how to talk to women. Even now I haven’t the faintest 
idea whether I’ve said anything to you that I shouldn’t. Please 
tell me frankly if I ever do. I promise you I shan’t take offence.” 
“No, I don’t think you’ve said anything you shouldn’t. And 
if you really want me to be frank with you, I don’t mind telling 
you that women rather like shy men like you. And if you want 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  15  
me to speak more frankly, I like it too, and I promise not to send 
you away till we reach my home.” 
“I’m afraid,” I began, breathless with excitement, “you’ll 
make me lose my shyness at once, and then goodbye to all my 
schemes!” 
“Devices? What schemes, and what for? I must say that isn’t 
nice at all.” 
“I beg your pardon. I’m awfully sorry. It was a slip of the 
tongue. But how can you expect me at this moment not to 
wish. . . .” 
“To make a good impression, you mean?” 
“Well, yes. And do, for goodness’ sake, be fair. Just think— 
who am I? At twenty-six—yes, I’m twenty-six— I’ve never re-
ally known anyone. So how can you expect me to speak well, 
cleverly, and to the point? You, too, I think, would prefer us to 
be straightforward and honest with each other, wouldn’t you? I 
just can’t be silent when my heart is moved to speak. Well, any-
way . . . I know you’ll hardly believe me, but I’ve never spoken to 
any woman, never! Never known one, either! I only dream that 
some day I shall meet someone at last. Oh, if only you knew 
how many times I’ve fallen in love like that!” 
“But how? Who with?” 
“With no one, of course. Just with my ideal, with the woman 
I see in my dreams. I make up all sorts of romantic love stories 
in my dreams. Oh, you don’t know the sort of man I am! It’s 
true I have known two or three women—you can’t help that, 
can you?—but what sort of women were they? They were all so 
mercenary that . . . But let me tell you something really funny, 
let me tell you how several times I longed to talk to a society 
lady in the street, I mean, talk to her when she was alone, and 

16  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
without any formality. Very humbly, of course, very respect-
fully, very passionately. Tell her how horribly depressed I am 
by my lonely life; ask her not to send me away; explain to her 
that I have no other way of knowing what a woman is like; sug-
gest to her that it is really her duty as a woman not to reject the 
humble entreaty of an unhappy man like me; finally, explain 
to her that all I want of her is that she should say a few friendly 
words to me, say them with sympathy and understanding, that 
she should not send me away at once, that she should believe 
my protestations, that she should listen to what I had to tell 
her, laugh at me by all means, if she wanted to, but also hold out 
some hope to me, just say two words to me, and then we need 
not see each other again! But you’re laughing. . . . Well, as a mat-
ter of fact, I only said that to make you laugh. . . .” 
“Don’t be cross with me. I’m laughing because you are your 
own enemy, and if you had tried you would, I’m sure, have per-
haps succeeded, even though it all happened in the street. The 
simpler, the better. Not one kind-hearted woman, provided, of 
course, she was not a fool, or angry at something at the time, 
would have the heart to send you away without saying the two 
words you were so humbly asking for. But I may be wrong. She 
would most likely have taken you for a madman. I’m afraid 
I was judging by myself. I know very well, I assure you, how 
people live in the world!” 
“Thank you,” I cried, “thank you a thousand times! you 
don’t know how much I appreciate what you’ve just done 
for me!” 
“All right, all right! Only tell me how did you guess I’m one 
of those women with whom . . . well, whom you thought wor-
thy . . . of your attention and friendship. I mean, not a mer-

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  17  
cenary one, as you call it. What made you decide to come up 
to me?” 
“What made me do that? Why, you were alone, and that fel-
low was much too insolent. It all happened at night, too, and 
you must admit it was my duty. . . .” 
“No, no! I mean before. On the other side of the street. You 
wanted to come up to me, didn’t you?” 
“On the other side of the street? Well, I really don’t know what 
to say. I’m afraid I . . . You see, I was so happy today. I was walk-
ing along and singing. I had spent the day in the country. I don’t 
remember ever having experienced such happy moments before. 
You were . . . However, I may have been mistaken. Please, forgive 
me, if I remind you of it, but I thought you were crying, and I—I 
couldn’t bear to hear it—I felt miserable about it. But, goodness, 
had I no right to feel anxious about you? Was it wrong of me to feel 
a brotherly compassion for you? I’m sorry, I said compassion . . . 
Well, what I meant was that I couldn’t possibly have off ended you 
because I had an impulse to go up to you, could I?” 
“Don’t say anything more, please,” said the girl pressing my 
hand and lowering her head. “I’m to blame for having started 
talking about it. But I’m glad I was not mistaken in you. Well, 
I’m home now. I live in that lane, only two steps from here. 
Goodbye and thank you.” 
“But shall we never see each other again? Surely, surely, you 
can’t mean it. Surely, this can’t be our last meeting?” 
“Well, you see,” the girl said, laughing, “at first you only 
asked for two words, and now. . . . However, I don’t think I’d 
better make any promises. Perhaps we’ll meet again.” 
“I’ll be here tomorrow,” I said. “Oh, I’m sorry, I seem to be 
already making demands. . . .” 

18  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
“Yes, you are rather impatient, aren’t you? You’re almost 
making demands. . . .” 
“Listen to me, please, listen to me!” I interrupted. “You won’t 
mind if I say something to you again, something of the same 
kind, will you? It’s this: I can’t help coming here tomorrow. I am 
a dreamer. I know so little of real life that I just can’t help re-
living such moments as these in my dreams, for such moments 
are something I have very rarely experienced. I am going to dream 
about you the whole night, the whole week, the whole year. I’ll 
most certainly come here tomorrow. Yes, here, at this place and 
at this hour. And I shall be happy to remember what happened 
to me today. Already this place is dear to me. I’ve two or three 
places like this in Petersburg. Once I even wept because I remem-
bered something, just as you—I mean, I don’t know of course, 
but perhaps you too were crying ten minutes ago because of some 
memory. I’m awfully sorry, I seem to have forgotten myself again. 
Perhaps you were particularly happy here once. . . .” 
“Very well,” said the girl, “I think I will come here tomor-
row, also at ten o’clock. And I can see that I can’t possibly forbid 
you to come, can I? You see, I have to be here. Please don’t imag-
ine that I am making an appointment with you. I hope you’ll 
believe me when I say that I have got to be here on some busi-
ness of my own. Oh, very well, I’ll be frank with you: I shan’t 
mind at all if you come here too. To begin with, something 
unpleasant may happen again as it did today, but never mind 
that . . . I mean, I’d really like to see you again to—to say two 
words to you. But, mind, don’t think ill of me now, will you? 
Don’t imagine I’m making appointments with men so easily. I 
wouldn’t have made it with you, if. . . . But let that be my secret. 
Only first you must promise. . . .” 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  19  
“I promise anything you like!” I cried, delighted. “Only say 
it. Tell me anything beforehand. I agree to everything. I’ll do 
anything you like. I can answer for myself. I’ll be obedient, re-
spectful. . . . You know me, don’t you?” 
“Well, it’s because I know you that I’m asking you to come 
tomorrow,” said the girl, laughing. “I know you awfully well. 
But, mind, if you come it’s on condition that, first (only you will 
do what I ask you, won’t you?—You see, I’m speaking frankly to 
you), don’t fall in love with me. That’s impossible, I assure you. 
I’m quite ready to be your friend. I am, indeed. But you mustn’t 
fall in love with me. So please, don’t.” 
“I swear to you . . .” I cried, seizing her hand. 
“No, no. I don’t want any solemn promises. I know you’re 
quite capable of flaring up like gunpowder. Don’t be angry with 
me for speaking to you like this. If you knew. . . . You see, I 
haven’t got anyone, either, to whom to say a word, or whom to 
ask for advice. Of course, it’s silly to expect advice from people 
one meets in the street, but you are different. I feel I know you so 
well that I couldn’t have known you better if we’d been friends 
for twenty years. You won’t fail me, will you?” 
“You can depend on me! The only thing is I don’t know how 
I shall be able to survive for the next twenty-four hours.” 
“Have a good sleep. Good night, and remember I’ve already 
confi ded in you. But, as you expressed it so well a few minutes 
ago, one hasn’t really to account for every feeling, even for 
brotherly sympathy, has one? You put it so nicely that I felt at 
once that you’re the sort of person I could confide in.” 
“For goodness’ sake, tell me what it is. Please do.” 
“No, I think you’d better wait till tomorrow. Let it remain 
a secret for the time being. So much the better for you: at least 

20  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
from a distance it will seem more like a romance. Perhaps I’ll 
tell you tomorrow, perhaps I won’t. I’d like to have a good talk 
to you first, get to know you better. . . .” 
“All right, I’ll tell you all about myself tomorrow. But, good 
Lord, the whole thing is just like a miracle! Where am I? Tell 
me, aren’t you glad you weren’t angry with me, as some other 
women might well have been? Only two minutes, and you’ve 
made me happy for ever. Yes, happy. Who knows, perhaps 
you’ve reconciled me with myself, resolved all my doubts. Per-
haps there are moments when I . . . But I’ll tell you all about it 
tomorrow. You shall know everything, everything. . . .” 
“All right, I agree. I think you’d better start first.” 
“Very well.” 
“Goodbye!” 
“Goodbye!” 
And we parted. I walked about all night. I couldn’t bring 
myself to go home. I was so happy! Till tomorrow! 
Second Night 
“Well, so you have survived, haven’t you?” she said to me, laugh-
ing and pressing both my hands. 
“I’ve been here for the last two hours. You don’t know what 
I’ve been through today!” 
“I know, I know—but to business. Do you know why I’ve 
come? Not to talk a lot of nonsense as we did yesterday. You 
see, we must be more sensible in future. I thought about it a lot 
yesterday.” 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  21  
“But how? How are we to be more sensible? Not that I have 
anything against it. But, really, I don’t believe anything more 
sensible has ever happened to me than what’s happening to me 
at this moment.” 
“Oh? Well, first of all, please don’t squeeze my hands like 
that. Secondly, let me tell you I’ve given a lot of thought to you 
today.” 
“Have you? Well, and what decision have you come to?” 
“What decision? Why, that we ought to start all over again. 
For today I’ve come to the conclusion that I don’t know you at 
all, that I’ve behaved like a child, like a silly girl, and of course 
in the end I blamed my own good heart for everything. I mean, 
I finished up, as everybody always does when they start exam-
ining their own motives, by passing a vote of thanks to myself. 
And so, to correct my mistake, I’ve made up my mind to fi nd 
out all about you to the last detail. But as there’s no one I can 
ask about you, you’ll have to tell me everything yourself. Ev-
erything, absolutely everything! To begin with, what sort of 
man are you? Come on, start, please! Tell me the story of your 
life.” 
“The story of my life?” I cried, thoroughly alarmed. “But 
who told you there was such a story? I’m afraid there isn’t any.” 
“But how did you manage to live, if there is no story?” she 
interrupted me, laughing. 
“Without any stories whatsoever! I have lived, as they say, 
entirely independently. I mean by myself. Do you know what it 
means to live by oneself?” 
“How do you mean by yourself? Do you never see anyone 
at all?” 

22  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
“Why, no. I see all sorts of  people, but I’m alone all the 
same.” 
“Don’t you ever talk to anyone?” 
“Strictly speaking, never.” 
“But who are you? Please explain. But wait: I think I can 
guess. You’ve probably got a grandmother like me. She’s blind, 
my granny is, and she never lets me go out anywhere, so that 
I’ve almost forgotten how to talk to  people. And when I be-
haved badly about two years ago and she saw that there was no 
holding me, she called me in and pinned my dress to hers— 
and since then we’ve sat pinned to one another like that for 
days and days. She knits a stocking, blind though she is, and 
I have to sit beside her sewing or reading a book to her. It’s a 
funny sort of situation to be in—pinned to a person for two 
years or more.” 
“Good gracious, what bad luck! No, I haven’t got such a 
grandmother.” 
“If you haven’t, why do you sit at home all the time?” 
“Look here, do you want to know who I am?” 
“Yes, of course!” 
“In the strict meaning of the word?” 
“Yes, in the strictest meaning of the word!” 
“Very well, I’m a character.” 
“A character? What kind of a character?” the girl cried, laugh-
ing merrily, as though she had not laughed for a whole year. “I 
must say, you’re certainly great fun! Look, here’s a seat. Let’s sit 
down. No one ever comes this way, so no one will overhear us. 
Well, start your story, please! For you’ll never convince me that 
you haven’t got one. You’re just trying to conceal it. Now, first 
of all, what is a character?” 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  23  
“A character? Well, it’s an original, a queer chap,” I said, and, 
infected by her childish laughter, I burst out laughing myself. 
“It’s a kind of freak. Listen, do you know what a dreamer is?” 
“A dreamer? Of course I know. I’m a dreamer myself! Some-
times when I’m sitting by Granny I get all sorts of queer ideas 
into my head. I mean, once you start dreaming, you let your 
imagination run away with you, so that in the end I even marry 
a prince of royal blood! I don’t know, it’s very nice sometimes— 
dreaming, I mean. But, on the whole, perhaps it isn’t. Especially 
if you have lots of other things to think of,” the girl added, this 
time rather seriously. 
“Fine! Once you’re married to an emperor, you will, I think, 
understand me perfectly. Well, listen—but don’t you think I 
ought to know your name before starting on the story of my 
life?” 
“At last! It took you a long time to think of it, didn’t it?” 
“Good lord! I never thought of it. You see, I was so happy 
anyway.” 
“My name’s Nastenka.” 
“Nastenka! Is that all?” 
“Yes, that’s all. Isn’t it enough for you, you insatiable 
person?” 
“Not enough? Why, not at all. It’s more than I expected, 
much more than I expected, Nastenka, my dear, dear girl, if I 
may call you by your pet name, if from the very first you—you 
become Nastenka to me!” 
“I’m glad you’re satisfied at last! Well?” 
“Well, Nastenka, just listen what an absurd story it all is.” 
I sat down beside her, assumed a pedantically serious pose, 
and began as though reading from a book: 

24  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
“There are, if you don’t happen to know it already, Nastenka, 
some very strange places in Petersburg. It is not the same sun 
which shines upon all the other  people of the city that looks in 
there, but quite a different sun, a new sun, one specially ordered 
for those places, and the light it sheds on everything is also a dif-
ferent, peculiar sort of light. In those places, dear Nastenka, the 
people also seem to live quite a different life, unlike that which 
surges all round us, a life which could only be imagined to ex-
ist in some faraway foreign country beyond the seven seas, and 
not at all in our country and in these much too serious times. 
Well, it is that life which is a mixture of something purely fan-
tastic, something fervently ideal, and, at the same time (alas, 
Nastenka!), something frightfully prosaic and ordinary, not to 
say incredibly vulgar.” 
“My goodness, what an awful introduction! What shall I be 
hearing next, I wonder?” 
“What you will be hearing next, Nastenka (I don’t think I 
shall ever get tired of calling you Nastenka), is that these places 
are inhabited by strange  people—by dreamers. A dreamer—if 
you must know its exact definition—is not a man, but a sort 
of creature of the neuter gender. He settles mostly in some in-
accessible place, as though anxious to hide in it even from the 
light of day; and once he gets inside his room, he’ll stick to it 
like a snail, or, at all events, he is in this respect very like that 
amusing animal which is an animal and a house both at one 
and the same time and bears the name of tortoise. Why, do you 
think, is he so fond of his four walls, invariably painted green, 
grimy, dismal and reeking unpardonably of tobacco smoke? 
Why does this funny fellow, when one of his new friends comes 
to visit him (he usually ends up by losing all his friends one by 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  25  
one), why does this absurd person meet him with such an em-
barrassed look? Why is he so put out of countenance? Why is he 
thrown into such confusion, as though he had just committed 
some terrible crime within his four walls? As though he had 
been forging paper money? Or writing some atrocious poetry 
to be sent to a journal with an anonymous letter, in which he 
will explain that, the poet having recently died, he, his friend, 
deems it his sacred duty to publish his verses? Can you tell me, 
Nastenka, why the conversation between the two friends never 
really gets going? Why doesn’t laughter or some witty remark es-
cape the lips of the perplexed caller, who had so inopportunely 
dropped out of the blue, and who at other times is so fond of 
laughter and all sorts of quips and cranks? And conversations 
about the fair sex. And other cheerful subjects. And why does 
the visitor, who is most probably a recent acquaintance and on 
his first visit—for in this case there will never be a second, and 
his visitor will never call again—why, I say, does this visitor feel 
so embarrassed himself? Why, in spite of his wit (if, that is, he 
has any), is he so tongue-tied as he looks at the disconcerted 
face of his host, who is, in turn, utterly at a loss and bewildered 
after his herculean eff orts to smooth things over, and fumbles 
desperately for a subject to enliven the conversation, to con-
vince his host that he, too, is a man of the world, that he too can 
talk of the fair sex? The host does everything in fact to please 
the poor man, who seems to have come to the wrong place and 
called on him by mistake, by at least showing how anxious he 
is to entertain him. And why does the visitor, having most con-
veniently remembered a most urgent business appointment 
which never existed, all of a sudden grab his hat and take his 
leave, snatching away his hand from the clammy grasp of his 

26  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
host, who, in a vain attempt to recover what is irretrievably lost, 
is doing his best to show how sorry he is? Why does his friend 
burst out laughing the moment he finds himself on the other 
side of the door? Why does he vow never to call on this queer 
fellow again, excellent fellow though he undoubtedly is? Why 
at the same time can’t he resist the temptation of indulging in 
the amusing, if rather far-fetched, fancy of comparing the face 
of his friend during his visit with the expression of an unhappy 
kitten, roughly handled, frightened, and subjected to all sorts 
of indignities, by children who had treacherously captured and 
humiliated it? A kitten that hides itself away from its tormen-
tors under a chair, in the dark, where, left in peace at last, it 
cannot help bristling up, spitting, and washing its insulted face 
with both paws for a whole hour, and long afterwards looking 
coldly at life and nature and even the bits saved up for it from 
the master’s table by a sympathetic housekeeper?” 
“Now, look,” interrupted Nastenka, who had listened to me 
all the time in amazement, opening her eyes and pretty mouth, 
“look, I haven’t the faintest idea why it all happened and why 
you should ask me such absurd questions. All I know is that 
all these adventures have most certainly happened to you, and 
exactly as you told me.” 
“Indubitably,” I replied, keeping a very straight face. 
“Well,” said Nastenka, “if it’s indubitably, then please go on, 
for I’m dying to hear how it will all end.” 
“You want to know, Nastenka, what our hero did in his 
room, or rather what I did in my room, since the hero of this 
story is none other than my own humble self? You want to 
know why I was so alarmed and upset for a whole day by the 
unexpected visit of a friend? You want to know why I was in 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  27  
such a flurry of excitement, why I blushed to the roots of my 
hair, when the door of my room opened? Why I was not able 
to entertain my visitor, and why I perished so ignominiously, 
crushed by the weight of my own hospitality?” 
“Yes, yes, of course I do,” answered Nastenka. “That’s the 
whole point. And, please, I do appreciate the beautiful way in 
which you’re telling your story, but don’t you think perhaps 
you ought to tell it a little less beautifully? You see, you talk as 
if you were reading from a book.” 
“Nastenka,” I said in a very grave and solemn voice, scarcely 
able to keep myself from laughing, “dear Nastenka, I know I’m 
telling my story very beautifully, but I’m afraid I can’t tell it 
any other way. For at this moment, Nastenka, at this moment, 
I am like the spirit of King Solomon when, after being impris-
oned for a thousand years in a jar under seven seals, all the 
seven seals have at last been removed. At this moment, dear 
Nastenka, when we’ve met again after so long a separation— 
for I’ve known you for ages, dear Nastenka, for I’ve been look-
ing for someone for ages and that’s a sure sign that it was you 
I was looking for and, moreover, that it was ordained that we 
two should meet now—just at this very moment, Nastenka, 
a thousand floodgates have opened up in my head and I must 
overflow in a cataract of words, or I shall burst. So I beg you to 
listen to me like a good and obedient girl and not to interrupt 
me, Nastenka, or I shan’t say another word.” 
“No, no, no! Please go on. You mustn’t stop. I shan’t say an-
other word, I promise.” 
“Well, to continue. There is, Nastenka, my dear, dear friend, 
one hour in my day which I love exceedingly. It is the hour when 
practically all business, office hours and duties are at an end, and 

28  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
everyone is hurrying home to dinner, to lie down, to have a rest, 
and as they walk along they think of other pleasant ways of 
spending the evening, the night, and the rest of their leisure 
time. At that hour our hero—for I must ask your permission, 
Nastenka, to tell my story in the third person, for one feels aw-
fully ashamed to tell it in the first—and so at that hour our 
hero, who has not been wasting his time, either, is walking along 
with the others. But a strange expression of pleasure plays on his 
pale and slightly crumpled-looking face. It is not with indiff er-
ence that he looks at the sunset which is slowly fading on the 
cold Petersburg sky. When I say he looks, I’m telling a lie: he does 
not look at it, but is contemplating it without, as it were, being 
aware of it himself, as though he were tired or preoccupied at 
the same time with some other more interesting subject, being 
able to spare only a passing and almost unintentional glance at 
what is taking place around him. He is glad to have finished till 
next day with all tiresome business. He is happy as a schoolboy 
who has been let out of the classroom and is free to devote all his 
time to his favourite games and forbidden pastimes. Take a good 
look at him, Nastenka: you will at once perceive that his feeling 
of joy has had a pleasant effect on his weak nerves and his mor-
bidly excited imagination. Look! he is thinking of something. Of 
dinner perhaps? Or how he’s going to spend the evening? what is 
he looking at like that? At the gentleman of the solidly prosper-
ous exterior who is bowing so picturesquely to the lady who 
drives past in a splendid carriage drawn by a pair of mettlesome 
horses? No, Nastenka, what do all those trivial things matter to 
him now? He is rich beyond compare with his own individual life; 
he has become rich in the twinkling of an eye, as it were, and it 
was not for nothing that the farewell ray of the setting sun 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  29  
flashed so gaily across his vision and called forth a whole swarm 
of impressions from his glowing heart. Now he hardly notices 
the road on which at any other time every trivial detail would 
have attracted his attention. Now ‘the Goddess of Fancy’ (if you 
have read your Zhukovsky, dear Nastenka) has already spun the 
golden warp with her wanton hand and is at this very moment 
weaving patterns of a wondrous, fantastic life before his mind’s 
eye—and, who knows, maybe has transported him with her 
wanton hand to the seventh crystalline sphere from the excel-
lent granite pavement on which he is now wending his way 
home. Try stopping him now, ask him suddenly where he is 
standing now, through what streets he has been walking, and it 
is certain he will not be able to remember anything, neither 
where he has been, nor where he is standing now, and, fl ushing 
with vexation, he will most certainly tell some lie to save ap-
pearances. That is why he starts violently, almost crying out, 
and looks round in horror when a dear old lady stops him in the 
middle of the pavement and politely asks him the way. Frown-
ing with vexation, he walks on, scarcely aware of the passers-by 
who smile as they look at him and turn round to follow him 
with their eyes. He does not notice the little girl who, after tim-
idly making way for him, bursts out laughing as she gazes at his 
broad, contemplative smile and wild gesticulations. And still 
the same fancy in her frolicsome flight catches up the old lady, 
the passers-by, the laughing little girl, and the bargees who have 
settled down to their evening meal on the barges which dam up 
the Fontanka (our hero, let us suppose, is walking along the 
Fontanka Embankment at that moment), and playfully weaves 
everybody and everything into her canvas, like a fly in a spider’s 
web. And so, with fresh food for his fancy to feed on, the queer 

30  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
fellow at last comes home to his comfortable little den and sits 
down to his dinner. It is long after he has finished his meal, 
however, when, after clearing the table, Matryona, the pre-
occupied and everlastingly melancholy old woman who waits 
on him, gives him his pipe, that he recovers from his reverie and 
is shocked to find that he has had his dinner, although he has no 
recollection whatever how it has all happened. It has grown 
dark in the little room; he feels empty and forlorn; his castle in 
the air comes crumbling noiselessly around him, without a 
sound, and it vanishes like a dream, without leaving a trace be-
hind, and he cannot remember himself what he was dreaming 
of. But a vague sensation faintly stirs his blood and a perturba-
tion such as he has known many times before agitates his breast. 
A new longing temptingly tickles and excites his fancy, and im-
perceptibly conjures up a whole swarm of fresh phantoms. Si-
lence reigns in the little room; solitude and a feeling of indolence 
enfold his imagination in a sweet embrace; it catches fire, burn-
ing gently at first, simmering like the water in the coffee-pot of 
old Matryona, who is moving placidly about her kitchen, mak-
ing her execrable coffee. Very soon it begins flaring up fitfully, 
and the book, picked up aimlessly and at random, drops out of 
the hand of my dreamer, before he has reached the third page. 
His imagination is once more ready for action, excited, and in a 
flash a new world, a new fascinating life, once more opens up 
enchanting vistas before him. A new dream—new happiness! A 
new dose of subtle, voluptuous poison! Oh, what is there in our 
humdrum existence to interest him? To his corrupted mind, 
our life, Nastenka, yours and mine, is so dull, so slow, so insipid! 
To his mind we are all so dissatisfied with our fate, so tired of 
our life! And, to be sure, Nastenka, how cold, gloomy, and, as it 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  31  
were, out of humour everything about us is at the first glance! 
‘Poor things!’ my dreamer thinks. And it is not surprising that 
he should think so! Look at those magical phantoms which so 
enchantingly, so capriciously, so vastly, and so boundlessly, are 
conjured up before his mind’s eye in so magical and thrilling a 
picture, a picture in which, needless to say, he himself, our  
dreamer, in his own precious person, occupies the most promi-
nent place! Look what an amazing sea of adventures, what a 
never-ending paradise of ecstatic dreams! You will perhaps ask 
me what is he dreaming of? But why ask? He is dreaming of 
everything—of the mission of the poet, first unrecognised, 
then crowned with laurels, of St. Bartholomew’s Night, of Diana 
Vernon, the heroine of ‘Rob Roy’, of what a heroic role he would 
have played at the taking of Kazan by Ivan Vassilyevich, of Wal-
ter Scott’s other heroines—Clara Mowbray and Effi  e Deans, of 
the Council of the Prelates and Huss before them, of the rising 
of the dead in ‘Robert the Devil’ (remember the music? It smells 
of the churchyard!), of the Battle of Berezina, of the poetry read-
ing at Countess Vorontsova-Dashkova’s, of Danton, of Cleopa-
tra i suoi amanti, of Pushkin’s ‘Little House in Kolomna’, of his own 
little home and a sweet creature beside him, who is listening to 
him, with her pretty mouth and eyes open, as you are listening 
to me now, my dear little angel. . . . No, Nastenka, what can he, 
voluptuous sluggard that he is, what can he find so attractive in 
the life which you and I desire so much? He thinks it a poor, 
miserable sort of life, and little does he know that some day per-
haps the unhappy hour will strike for him too, when he will 
gladly give up all his fantastical years for one day of that miser-
able life, and give them up not in exchange for joy or happiness, 
but without caring what befalls him in that hour of affl  iction, 

32  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
remorse, and unconstrained grief. But so long as that perilous 
time is not yet—he desires nothing, for he is above all desire, for 
he is sated, for he is the artist of his own life, which he re-creates 
in himself to suit whatever new fancy he pleases. And how eas-
ily, how naturally, is this imaginary, fantastic world created! As 
though it were not a dream at all! Indeed, he is sometimes ready 
to believe that all this life is not a vision conjured up by his over-
wrought mind, not a mirage, nor a figment of the imagination, 
but something real, something that actually exists! Why, Nas-
tenka, why, tell me, does one feel so out of breath at such mo-
ments? Why—through what magic? through what strange 
whim?—is the pulse quickened, do tears gush out of the eyes of 
the dreamer? Why do his pale, moist cheeks burn? Why is all his 
being filled with such indescribable delight? Why is it that long, 
sleepless nights pass, as though they were an infinitesimal frac-
tion of time, in unending joy and happiness? And why, when 
the rising sun casts a rosy gleam through the window and fi lls 
the gloomy room with its uncertain, fantastic light, as it so often 
does in Petersburg, does our dreamer, worn out and exhausted, 
fling himself on the bed and fall asleep, faint with the raptures 
of his morbidly overwrought spirit, and with such a weary, lan-
guorously sweet ache in his heart? No, Nastenka, you can’t help 
deceiving yourself, you can’t help persuading yourself that his 
soul is stirred by some true, some genuine passion, you can’t 
help believing that there is something alive and palpable in his 
vain and empty dreams! And what a delusion it all is! Now, for 
instance, love pierces his heart with all its boundless rapture, 
with all its pains and agonies. Only look at him and you will be 
convinced. Can you, looking at him, Nastenka, believe that he 
really never knew her whom he loved so dearly in his frenzied 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  33  
dream? Can it be that he has only seen her in ravishing visions, 
and that his passion has been nothing but an illusion? Can it be 
that they have never really spent so many years of their lives 
together, hand in hand, alone, just the two of them renouncing 
the rest of the world, and each of them entirely preoccupied 
with their own world, their own life? Surely it is she who at the 
hour of their parting, late at night, lies grieving and sobbing on 
his bosom, unmindful of the raging storm beneath the relent-
less sky, unmindful of the wind that snatches and carries away 
the tears from her dark eyelashes! Surely all this is not a dream— 
this garden, gloomy, deserted, run wild, with its paths over-
grown with weeds, dark and secluded, where they used to walk 
so often together, where they used to hope, grieve, love, love 
each other so well, so tenderly and so well! And this queer an-
cestral mansion, where she has spent so many years in solitude 
and sadness with her morose old husband, always silent and ill-
tempered, who frightened them, who were as timid as children, 
and who in their fear and anguish hid their love from each 
other. What misery they suffered, what pangs of terror! How in-
nocent, how pure their love was, and (I need hardly tell you, 
Nastenka) how malicious  people were! And why, of course, he 
meets her afterwards, far from his native shores, beneath the 
scorching southern sky of an alien land, in the wonderful Eter-
nal City, amid the dazzling splendours of a ball, to the thunder 
of music, in a palazzo (yes, most certainly in a palazzo fl ooded with 
light, on the balcony wreathed in myrtle and roses, where, rec-
ognising him, she hastily removes her mask, and whispering, 
‘I’m free!’ breaks into sobs and flings herself trembling in his 
arms. And with a cry of rapture, clinging to each other, they at 
once forget their unhappiness, their parting, all their sufferings, 

34  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
the dismal house, the old man, the gloomy garden in their far-
away country, and the seat on which, with a last passionate kiss, 
she tore herself away from his arms, numbed with anguish and 
despair. . . . Oh, you must agree, Nastenka, that anyone would 
start, feel embarrassed, and blush like a schoolboy who has just 
stuffed in his pocket an apple stolen from a neighbour’s garden, 
if some stalwart, lanky fellow, a fellow fond of a joke and merry 
company, opened your door and shouted, ‘Hullo, old chap, I’ve 
just come from Pavlovsk!’ Good Lord! The old count is dying, 
ineffable bliss is close at hand—and here  people come from  
Pavlovsk!” 
Having finished my pathetic speech, I lapsed into no less pa-
thetic a silence. I remember I wished terribly that I could, some-
how, in spite of myself, burst out laughing, for I was already 
feeling that a wicked little devil was stirring within me, that 
my throat was beginning to tighten, my chin to twitch, and my 
eyes to fill with tears. I expected Nastenka, who listened to me 
with wide-open, intelligent eyes, to break into her childish and 
irresistibly gay laughter. I was already regretting that I had gone 
too far, that I had been wasting my time in telling her what had 
been accumulating for so long a time in my heart, and about 
which I could speak as though I had it all written down— 
because I had long ago passed judgment on myself, and could 
not resist the temptation to read it out loud, though I admit I 
never expected to be understood. But to my surprise she said 
nothing, and, after a pause, pressed my hand gently and asked 
with timid sympathy: 
“Surely you haven’t lived like that all your life, have you?” 
“Yes, Nastenka, all my life,” I replied, “all my life, and I’m 
afraid I shall go on like that to the very end.” 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  35  
“No, you mustn’t do that,” she said, “that must not be, for if 
it were so, I too might spend all my life beside my granny. Don’t 
you think it’s just too awful to live like that?” 
“I know, Nastenka, I know,” I cried, unable to restrain my 
feelings any longer. “More than ever do I realise now that I’ve 
been wasting the best years of my life. I know that, and the re-
alisation of it is all the more painful to me now that God has 
sent me you, my good angel, to tell me that and to prove it to 
me. Sitting beside you and talking to you now, I feel terrified to 
think of the future, for in my future I can discern nothing but 
more loneliness, more of this stale and unprofitable life. And 
what is there left for me to dream of now that I’ve been so happy 
beside you in real life and not in a dream? Oh, bless you, bless 
you a thousand times, my dear, for not having turned away 
from me at first, for making it possible for me to say that for at 
least two evenings in my life I have really lived!” 
“Oh, no, no,” Nastenka cried, and tears glistened in her eyes, 
“it can’t go on like that! We shan’t part like that! What are two 
evenings in a man’s life?” 
“Oh, Nastenka, Nastenka, do you realise that you’ve recon-
ciled me to myself for a long, long time? Do you know that 
I shall never again think so ill of myself as I have sometimes 
done in the past? Do you know that I shall never again accuse 
myself of committing a crime and a sin in the way I live, for 
such a life is a crime and a sin? And for goodness’ sake don’t 
imagine I’ve exaggerated anything. Please, don’t imagine that, 
Nastenka, for there are moments when I’m plunged into such 
gloom, such a black gloom! Because at such moments I’m al-
most ready to believe that I shall never be able to start living in 
earnest; because the thought has already occurred to me often 

36  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
that I have lost all touch with life, all understanding of what is 
real and actual; because, finally, I have cursed myself; because 
already after my fantastic nights I have moments of returning 
sanity, moments which fill me with horror and dismay! You 
see, I can’t help being aware of the crowd being whirled with a 
roaring noise in the vortex of life, I can’t help hearing and see-
ing  people living real lives. I realise that their life is not made 
to order, that their life will not vanish like a dream, like a vi-
sion; that their life is eternally renewing itself, that it is eter-
nally young, that not one hour of it is like another! No! Timid 
fancy is dreary and monotonous to the point of drabness. It is 
the slave of every shadow, of every idea. The slave of the first 
cloud that of a sudden drifts across the sun and reduces every 
Petersburg heart, which values the sun so highly, to a state of 
morbid melancholy—and what is the use of fancy when one is 
plunged into melancholy! You feel that this inexhaustible fancy 
grows weary at last and exhausts itself from the never-ending 
strain. For, after all, you do grow up, you do outgrow your 
ideals, which turn to dust and ashes, which are shattered into 
fragments; and if you have no other life, you just have to build 
one up out of these fragments. And meanwhile your soul is 
all the time craving and longing for something else. And in 
vain does the dreamer rummage about in his old dreams, rak-
ing them over as though they were a heap of cinders, looking 
in these cinders for some spark, however tiny, to fan it into a 
flame so as to warm his chilled blood by it and revive in it all 
that he held so dear before, all that touched his heart, that 
made his blood course through his veins, that drew tears from 
his eyes, and that so splendidly deceived him! Do you realise, 
Nastenka, how far things have gone with me? Do you know 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  37  
that I’m forced now to celebrate the anniversary of my own 
sensations, the anniversary of that which was once so dear to 
me, but which never really existed? For I keep this anniversary 
in memory of those empty, foolish dreams! I keep it because 
even those foolish dreams are no longer there, because I have 
nothing left with which to replace them, for even dreams, Nas-
tenka, have to be replaced by something! Do you know that I 
love to call to mind and revisit at certain dates the places where 
in my own fashion I was once so happy? I love to build up my 
present in harmony with my irrevocably lost past; and I often 
wander about like a shadow, aimlessly and without purpose, 
sad and dejected, through the alleys and streets of Petersburg. 
What memories they conjure up! For instance, I remember that 
exactly a year ago, at exactly this hour, on this very pavement, I 
wandered about cheerlessly and alone just as I did today. And I 
can’t help remembering that at the time, too, my dreams were 
sad and dreary, and though I did not feel better then I somehow 
can’t help feeling that it was better, that life was more peace-
ful, that at least I was not then obsessed by the black thoughts 
that haunt me now, that I did not suffer from these gloomy 
and miserable qualms of conscience which now give me no 
rest either by day or by night. And you ask yourself—where 
are your dreams? And you shake your head and murmur: how 
quickly time flies! And you ask yourself again—what have you 
done with your time, where have you buried the best years of 
your life? Have you lived or not? Look, you say to yourself, look 
how everything in the world is growing cold. Some more years 
will pass, and they will be followed by cheerless solitude, and 
then will come tottering old age, with its crutch, and after it 
despair and desolation. Your fantastic world will fade away, 

38  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
your dreams will wilt and die, scattering like yellow leaves  
from the trees. Oh, Nastenka, what can be more heartbreak-
ing than to be left alone, all alone, and not have anything to 
regret even—nothing, absolutely nothing, because all you’ve 
lost was nothing, nothing but a silly round zero, nothing but 
an empty dream!” 
“Don’t,” said Nastenka, wiping a tear which rolled down her 
cheek, “please don’t! You’ll make me cry if you go on like that. 
All that is finished! From now on we shall be together. We’ll 
never part, whatever happens to me now. You know, I’m quite 
an ordinary girl, I’m not well educated, though Granny did 
engage a teacher for me, but I do understand you, for I went 
through all that you’ve described when Granny pinned me to 
her dress. Of course, I could never have described it as well as 
you,” she added diffi  dently, for she was still feeling a sort of re-
spect for my pathetic speech and my high-flown style, “because 
I’m not educated; but I’m very glad you’ve told me everything 
about yourself. Now I know you properly. And—do you know 
what? I’d like to tell you the story of my life too, all of it, with-
out concealing anything, and after that you must give me some 
good advice. You’re so clever, and I’d like to ask your advice. Do 
you promise to give it me?” 
“Oh, Nastenka,” I replied, “though I’ve never given any 
advice to anyone before, and though I’m certainly not clever 
enough to give good advice, I can see now that if we always lived 
like this, it would be very clever of us, and we should give each 
other a lot of good advice! Well, my sweet Nastenka, what sort 
of advice do you want? I’m now so gay, happy, bold, and clever 
that I’m sure I shan’t have any difficulty in giving you the best 
advice in the world!” 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  39  
“No, no,” Nastenka interrupted, laughing, “it isn’t only good 
advice that I want. I also want warm, brotherly advice, just as 
though you’d been fond of me for ages!” 
“Agreed, Nastenka, agreed!” I cried with enthusiasm. “And 
if I’d been fond of you for twenty years, I couldn’t have been 
fonder of you than I am now!” 
“Your hand!” said Nastenka. 
“Here it is!” I replied, giving her my hand. 
“Very well, let’s begin my story!” 
Nastenka’s Story 
“Half my story you know already, I mean, you know that I have 
an old grandmother.” 
“If the other half is as short as this one——” I interrupted, 
laughing. 
“Be quiet and listen. First of all you must promise not to in-
terrupt me, or I shall get confused. Well, please listen quietly. 
“I have an old grandmother. I’ve lived with her ever since I 
was a little girl, for my mother and father are dead. I suppose 
my grandmother must have been rich once, for she likes to 
talk of the good old days. It was she who taught me French and 
afterwards engaged a teacher for me. When I was fifteen (I’m 
seventeen now) my lessons stopped. It was at that time that I 
misbehaved rather badly. I shan’t tell you what I did. It’s suf-
fi cient to say that my offence was not very great. Only Granny 
called me in one morning and saying that she couldn’t look 
after me properly because she was blind, she took a safety-pin 
and pinned my dress to hers. She told me that if I didn’t mend 

40  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
my ways, we should remain pinned to each other for the rest 
of our lives. In short, at first, I found it quite impossible to get 
away from her: my work, my reading, and my lessons had all 
to be done beside my grandmother. I did try to trick her once 
by persuading Fyokla to sit in my place. Fyokla is our maid. She 
is very deaf. Well, so Fyokla took my place. Granny happened 
to fall asleep in her arm-chair at the time, and I ran off to see 
a friend of mine who lives close by. But, I’m afraid, it all ended 
most disastrously. Granny woke up while I was out and asked 
for something, thinking that I was still sitting quietly in my 
place. Fyokla saw of course that Granny wanted something, but 
could not tell what it was. She wondered and wondered what to 
do and in the end undid the pin and ran out of the room. . . .” 
Here Nastenka stopped and began laughing. I, too, burst out 
laughing with her, which made her stop at once. 
“Look, you mustn’t laugh at Granny. I’m laughing because 
it was so funny. . . . Well, anyway, I’m afraid it can’t be helped. 
Granny is like that, but I do love the poor old dear a little for all 
that. Well, I did catch it properly that time. I was at once told to 
sit down in my old place, and after that I couldn’t make a move 
without her noticing it. 
“Oh, I forgot to tell you that we live in our own house, I 
mean, of course, in Granny’s house. It’s a little wooden house, 
with only three windows, and it’s as old as Granny herself.  
It has an attic, and one day a new lodger came to live in the 
attic. . . .” 
“There was an old lodger then?” I remarked, by the way. 
“Yes, of course, there was an old lodger,” replied Nastenka, 
“and let me tell you, he knew how to hold his tongue better 
than you. As a matter of fact, he hardly ever used it at all. He 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  41  
was a very dried up old man, dumb, blind and lame, so that in 
the end he just could not go on living and died. Well, of course, 
we had to get a new lodger, for we can’t live without one: the 
rent we get from our attic together with Granny’s pension is 
almost all the income we have. Our new lodger, as it happened, 
was a young man, a stranger who had some business in Peters-
burg. As he did not haggle over the rent, Granny let the attic to 
him, and then asked me, ‘Tell me, Nastenka, what is our lodger 
like—is he young or old?’ I didn’t want to tell her a lie, so I said, 
‘He isn’t very young, Granny, but he isn’t very old, either.’ 
“ ‘Is he good-looking?’ Granny asked. 
“Again I didn’t want to tell her a lie. ‘He isn’t bad-looking, 
Granny,’ I said. Well, so Granny said, ‘Oh dear, that’s bad, that’s 
very bad! I tell you this because I don’t want you to make a fool 
of yourself over him. Oh, what terrible times we’re living in! 
A poor lodger and he would be good-looking too! Not like the 
old days!’ 
“Granny would have liked everything to be like the old days! 
She was younger in the old days, the sun was much warmer in 
the old days, the milk didn’t turn so quickly in the old days— 
everything was so much better in the old days! Well, I just sat 
there and said nothing, but all the time I was thinking, Why 
is Granny warning me? Why did she ask whether our lodger 
was young and good-looking? Well, anyway, the thought only 
crossed my mind, and soon I was counting my stitches again (I 
was knitting a stocking at the time), and forgot all about it. 
“Well, one morning our lodger came down to remind us 
that we had promised to paper his room for him. One thing 
led to another, for Granny likes talking to  people and then she 
told me to go to her bedroom and fetch her accounts. I jumped 

42  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
up, blushed all over—I don’t know why—and forgot that I was 
pinned to Granny. I never thought of undoing the pin quietly, 
so that our lodger shouldn’t notice, but dashed off so quickly 
that I pulled Granny’s armchair after me. When I saw that our 
lodger knew all about me now, I got red in the face, stopped dead 
as though rooted to the floor, and suddenly burst into tears. I 
felt so ashamed and miserable at that moment that I wished I 
was dead! Granny shouted at me, ‘What are you standing there 
like that for?’ But that made me cry worse than ever. When our 
lodger saw that I was ashamed on account of him, he took his 
leave and went away at once! 
“Ever since that morning I’ve nearly fainted very time I’ve 
heard a noise in the passage. It must be the lodger, I’d think, 
and I’d undo the pin very quietly just in case it was he. But 
it never was our lodger. He never came. After a fortnight our 
lodger sent word with Fyokla that he had a lot of French books, 
and that they were all good books which he knew we would 
enjoy reading, and that he would be glad to know whether 
Granny would like me to choose a book to read to her because 
he was sure she must be bored. Granny accepted our lodger’s 
kind offer gratefully, but she kept asking me whether the books 
were good books, for if the books were bad, she wouldn’t let me 
read them because she didn’t want me to get wrong ideas into 
my head.” 
“ ‘What wrong ideas, Granny? What’s wrong with those 
books?’ 
“ ‘Oh,’ she said, ‘it’s all about how young men seduce decent 
girls, and how on the excuse that they want to marry them, 
they elope with them and then leave them to their own fate, and 
how the poor creatures all come to a bad end. I’ve read a great 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  43  
many such books,’ said Granny, ‘and everything is described so 
beautifully in them that I used to keep awake all night, reading 
them on the quiet. So mind you don’t read them, Nastenka,’ 
she said. ‘What books has he sent?’ 
“ ‘They’re all novels by Walter Scott, Granny.’ 
“ ‘Walter Scott’s novels? Are you certain, Nastenka, there 
isn’t some trickery there? Make sure, dear, he hasn’t put a love 
letter in one of them.’ 
“ ‘No, Granny,’ I said, ‘there’s no love letter.’ 
“ ‘Oh, dear,’ said Granny, ‘look in the binding, there’s a good 
girl. Sometimes they stuff it in the binding, the scoundrels.’ 
“ ‘No, Granny, there’s nothing in the binding.’ 
“ ‘Well, that’s all right then!’ 
“So we started reading Walter Scott, and in a month or so 
we had read through almost half of his novels. Then he sent us 
some more books. He sent us Pushkin. And in the end I didn’t 
know what to do if I had no book to read and I gave up dream-
ing of marrying a prince of royal blood. 
“So it went on till one day I happened to meet our lodger on 
the stairs. Granny had sent me to fetch something. He stopped. I 
blushed and he blushed. However, he laughed, said good morn-
ing to me, asked me how Granny was, and then said, ‘Well, have 
you read the books?’ I said, ‘Yes, we have.’ ‘Which did you like 
best?’ I said, ‘I liked Ivanhoe and Pushkin best of all.’ That was all 
that happened that time. 
“A week later I again happened to meet him on the stairs. 
That time Granny had not sent me for anything, but I had gone 
up to fetch something myself. It was past two in the afternoon, 
when our lodger usually came home. ‘Good afternoon,’ he said. 
‘Good afternoon,’ I said. 

44  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
“ ‘Don’t you feel awfully bored sitting with your Granny all 
day?’ he said. 
“The moment he asked me that, I blushed—I don’t know 
why. I felt awfully ashamed, and hurt, too, because I suppose 
it was clear that even strangers were beginning to wonder how 
I could sit all day long pinned to my Granny. I wanted to go 
away without answering, but I just couldn’t summon enough 
strength to do that. 
“ ‘Look here,’ he said, ‘you’re a nice girl, and I hope you don’t 
mind my telling you that I’m more anxious even than your 
Granny that you should be happy. Have you no girl friends at 
all whom you’d like to visit?’ 
“I told him I hadn’t any. I had only one, Mashenka, but she 
had gone away to Pskov. 
“ ‘Would you like to go to the theatre with me?’ he asked. 
“ ‘To the theatre? But what about Granny?’ 
“ ‘Couldn’t you come without her knowing anything about it?’ 
“ ‘No, sir,’ I said. ‘I don’t want to deceive my Granny. 
Goodbye.’ 
“ ‘Goodbye,’ he said, and went upstairs without another 
word. 
“After dinner, however, he came down to see us. He sat 
down and had a long talk with Granny. He asked her whether 
she ever went out, whether she had any friends, and then sud-
denly he said, ‘I’ve taken a box for the opera for this evening. 
They’re giving The Barber of Seville. Some friends of mine wanted 
to come, but they couldn’t manage it, and now the tickets are 
left on my hands.’ 
“ ‘The Barber of Seville!’ cried my Granny. ‘Why, is it the same 
barber they used to act in the old days?’ 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  45  
“ ‘Yes,’ he replied, ‘it’s the same barber,’ and he glanced 
at me. 
“Of course I understood everything. I blushed and my heart 
began thumping in anticipation. 
“ ‘Oh,’ said Granny, ‘I know all about him! I used to play Ro-
sina myself in the old days at private theatricals.’ 
“ ‘Would you like to go today?’ said the lodger. ‘My ticket 
will be wasted if nobody comes.’ 
“ ‘Yes, I suppose we could go,’ said Granny. ‘Why shouldn’t 
we? My Nastenka has never been to a theatre before.’ 
“My goodness, wasn’t I glad! We started getting ready at 
once, put on our best clothes, and went off. Granny couldn’t 
see anything, of course, because she is blind, but she wanted to 
hear the music, and, besides, she’s really very kind-hearted, the 
old dear. She wanted me to go and enjoy myself, for we would 
never have gone by ourselves. Well, I won’t tell you what my im-
pression of The Barber of Seville was. I’ll merely mention that our 
lodger looked at me so nicely the whole evening, and he spoke 
so nicely to me that I guessed at once that he had only meant to 
try me out in the afternoon, to see whether I would have gone 
with him alone. Oh, I was so happy! I went to bed feeling so 
proud, so gay, and my heart was beating so fast that I felt a little 
feverish and raved all night about The Barber of Seville. 
“I thought he’d come and see us more and more often af-
ter that, but it turned out quite differently. He almost stopped 
coming altogether. He’d come down once a month, perhaps, 
and even then only to invite us to the theatre. We went twice to 
the theatre with him. Only I wasn’t a bit happy about it. I could 
see that he was simply sorry for me because I was treated so 
abominably by my grandmother and that otherwise he wasn’t 

46  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
interested in me at all. So it went on till I couldn’t bear it any 
longer: I couldn’t sit still for a minute, I couldn’t read anything, 
I couldn’t work. Sometimes I’d burst out laughing and do some-
thing just to annoy Granny, and sometimes I’d just burst into 
tears. In the end I got terribly thin and was nearly ill. The opera 
season was over, and our lodger stopped coming down to see 
us altogether, and when we did meet—always on the stairs, of 
course—he’d just bow to me silently, and look very serious as 
though he did not want to talk to me, and he’d be out on the 
front steps while I’d still be standing halfway up the stairs, red 
as a cherry, for every time I met him all my blood rushed to 
my head. 
“Well, I’ve almost finished. Just a year ago, in May, our lodger 
came down to our drawing-room and told Granny that he had 
finished his business in Petersburg and was leaving for Mos-
cow where he would have to stay a whole year. When I heard 
that I went pale and sank back in my chair as though in a faint. 
Granny did not notice anything, and he, having told us that he 
was giving up his room, took his leave and went away. 
“What was I to do? I thought and thought, worried and wor-
ried, and at last I made up my mind. As he was leaving tomor-
row, I decided to make an end to it all after Granny had gone 
to bed. I tied up all my clothes in a bundle and, more dead than 
alive, went upstairs with my bundle to see our lodger. I suppose 
it must have taken me a whole hour to walk up the stairs to 
the attic. When I opened the door of his room, he cried out as 
he looked at me. He thought I was a ghost. He quickly fetched 
a glass of water for me, for I could hardly stand on my feet. My 
heart was beating very fast, my head ached terribly, and I felt all 
in a daze. When I recovered a little, I just put my bundle on his 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  47  
bed, sat down beside it, buried my face in my hands, and burst 
into a flood of tears. He seemed to have understood everything 
at once, and he stood before me looking so pale and gazing at 
me so sadly that my heart nearly broke. 
“ ‘Listen, Nastenka,’ he said, ‘I can’t do anything now. I’m a 
poor man. I haven’t got anything at present, not even a decent 
job. How would we live, if I were to marry you?’ 
“We talked for a long time, and in the end I worked myself 
up into a real frenzy and told him that I couldn’t go on living 
with my grandmother any more, that I’d run away from her, 
that I didn’t want to be fastened by a pin all my life, and that, 
if he liked, I’d go to Moscow with him because I couldn’t live 
without him. Shame, love, pride seemed to speak in me all at 
once, and I fell on the bed almost in convulsions. I was so afraid 
that he might refuse to take me! 
“He sat in silence for a few minutes, then he got up, went to 
me, and took me by the hand. 
“ ‘Listen to me, darling Nastenka,’ he began, also speaking 
through his tears, ‘I promise you solemnly that if at any time I 
am in a position to marry, you are the only girl in the world I 
would marry. I assure you that now you are the only one who 
could make me happy. Now, listen. I’m leaving for Moscow and 
I shall be away exactly one year. I hope to settle my affairs by 
that time. When I come back, and if you still love me, I swear to 
you that we shall be married. I can’t possibly marry you now. It 
is out of the question. And I have no right to make any prom-
ises to you. But I repeat that if I can’t marry you after one year, 
I shall certainly marry you sometime. Provided of course you 
still want to marry me and don’t prefer someone else, for I can-
not and I dare not bind you by any sort of promise.’ 

48  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
“That was what he told me, and the next day he left. We 
agreed not to say anything about it to Granny. He insisted on 
that. Well, that’s almost the end of my story. A year has now 
passed, exactly one year. He is in Petersburg now, he’s been here 
three days, and—and——” 
“And what?” I cried, impatient to hear the end. 
“And he hasn’t turned up so far,” said Nastenka, making a 
great effort to keep calm. “I haven’t heard a word from him.” 
Here she stopped, paused a little, lowered her pretty head, 
and, burying her face in her hands, suddenly burst out sobbing 
so bitterly that my heart bled to hear it. 
I had never expected such an ending. 
“Nastenka,” I began timidly, in an imploring voice, “for 
goodness sake, Nastenka, don’t cry! How can you tell? Perhaps 
he hasn’t arrived yet. . . .” 
“He has, he has!” Nastenka exclaimed. “I know he’s here. We 
made an arrangement the night before he left. After our talk 
we went for a walk here on the embankment. It was ten o’clock. 
We sat on this seat. I was no longer crying then. I felt so happy 
listening to him! He said that immediately on his return he 
would come to see us, and if I still wanted to marry him, we’d 
tell Granny everything. Well, he’s back now, I know he is, but he 
hasn’t come, he hasn’t come!” 
And once more she burst into tears. 
“Good heavens, isn’t there anything we can do?” I cried, 
jumping up from the seat in utter despair. “Tell me, Nastenka, 
couldn’t I go and see him?” 
“You think you could?” she said, raising her head. 
“No, of course not,” I replied, checking myself. “But, look 
here, why not write him a letter?” 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  49  
“No, no, that’s impossible!” she replied firmly, but lowering 
her head and not looking at me. 
“Why is it impossible? What’s wrong with it?” I went on  
pleading with her, the idea having rather appealed to me. “It 
all depends what sort of a letter it is, Nastenka. There are letters 
and letters, and—oh, Nastenka, believe me it’s true. Trust me, 
Nastenka, please! I wouldn’t give you bad advice. It can all be 
arranged. It was you who took the first step, wasn’t it? Well, why 
not now——?” 
“No; it’s quite impossible! It would look as if I was thrusting 
myself on him. . . .” 
“But, darling Nastenka,” I interrupted her, and I couldn’t 
help smiling, “believe me, you’re wrong, quite wrong. You’re 
absolutely justified in writing to him, for he made a promise 
to you. Besides, I can see from what you’ve told me that he is 
a nice man, that he has behaved decently,” I went on, carried 
away by the logic of my own reasoning and my own convic-
tions. “For what did he do? He bound himself by a promise. He 
said that he wouldn’t marry anyone but you, if, that is, he ever 
married at all. But he left you free to decide whether or not you 
want to marry him, to refuse him at any moment. This being 
so, there’s no reason on earth why you shouldn’t make the first 
move. You’re entitled to do so, and you have an advantage over 
him, if, for instance, you should choose to release him from his 
promise. . . .” 
“Look, how would you have written——?” 
“What?” 
“Such a letter.” 
“Well, I’d have started, ‘Dear Sir. . . .’ ” 
“Must it begin with ‘Dear Sir?’ ” 

50  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
“Of course! I mean, not necessarily. . . . You could. . . .” 
“Never mind. How would you go on?” 
“ ‘Dear Sir, you will pardon me for . . .’ No, I don’t think you 
should apologise for writing to him. The circumstances them-
selves fully justify your letter. Write simply: ‘I am writing to 
you. Forgive me for my impatience, but all the year I have lived 
in such happy anticipation of your return that it is hardly sur-
prising that I cannot bear the suspense even one day longer. 
Now that you are back, I cannot help wondering whether you 
have not after all changed your mind. If that is so, then my let-
ter will tell you that I quite understand and that I am not blam-
ing you for anything. I do not blame you that I have no power 
over your heart: such seems to be my fate. You are an honour-
able man. I know you will not be angry with me or smile at my 
impatience. Remember that it is a poor girl who is writing to 
you, that she is all alone in the world, that she has no one to tell 
her what to do or give her any advice, and that she herself never 
did know how to control her heart. But forgive me that doubt 
should have stolen even for one moment into my heart. I know 
that even in your thoughts you are quite incapable of hurting 
her who loved you so much and who still loves you.’ ” 
“Yes, yes, that’s exactly what I was thinking!” Nastenka 
cried, her eyes beaming with joy. “Oh, you’ve put an end to all 
my doubts. I’m sure God must have sent you to me. Thank you, 
thank you!” 
“What are you thanking me for? Because God has sent me to 
you?” I replied, gazing delighted at her sweet, happy face. 
“Yes, for that too.” 
“Oh, Nastenka, aren’t we sometimes grateful to people only 
because they live with us? Well, I’m grateful to you for having 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  51  
met you. I’m grateful to you because I shall remember you all 
my life!” 
“All right, all right! Now listen to me carefully: I arranged 
with him that he’d let me know as soon as he came back by 
leaving a letter for me at the house of some  people I know— 
they are very nice, simple  people who know nothing about the 
whole thing; and that if he couldn’t write me a letter because 
one can’t say all one wants in a letter, he’d come here, where 
we had arranged to meet, at exactly ten o’clock on the very first 
day of his arrival. Now, I know he has arrived, but for two days 
he hasn’t turned up, nor have I had a letter from him. I can’t 
possibly get away from Granny in the morning. So please take 
my letter tomorrow to the kind people I told you of, and they’ll 
see that it reaches him. And if there is a reply, you could bring it 
yourself tomorrow evening at ten o’clock.” 
“But the letter! What about the letter? You must write the 
letter first, which means that I couldn’t take it before the day 
after tomorrow.” 
“The letter . . . ?” said Nastenka, looking a little confused. 
“Oh, the letter! . . . Well——” 
But she didn’t finish. At first she turned her pretty face away 
from me, then she blushed like a rose, and then all of a sudden I 
felt that the letter which she must have written long before was 
in my hand. It was in a sealed envelope. A strangely familiar, 
sweet, lovely memory flashed through my mind. 
“Ro-o-si-i-na-a!” I began. 
“Rosina!” both of us burst out singing. I almost embraced 
her with delight, and she blushed as only she could blush and 
laughed through the tears which trembled on her dark eye-
lashes like pearls. 

52  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
“Well, that’s enough,” she said, speaking rapidly. “Goodbye 
now. Here’s the letter and here’s the address where you have to 
take it. Goodbye! Till tomorrow!” 
She pressed both my hands warmly, nodded her head, and 
darted away down her side-street. I remained standing in the 
same place for a long time, following her with my eyes. 
“Till tomorrow! Till tomorrow!” fl ashed through my mind 
as she disappeared from sight. 
Third Night 
It was a sad and dismal day today, rainy, without a ray of hope, just 
like the long days of my old age which I know will be as sad and 
dismal. Strange thoughts are crowding into my head, my heart 
is full of gloomy forebodings, questions too vague to be grasped 
clearly fill my mind, and somehow I’ve neither the power nor the 
will to resolve them. No, I shall never be able to solve it all! 
We are not going to meet today. Last night, when we said 
goodbye, the sky was beginning to be overcast, and a mist was 
rising. I observed that the weather did not look too promising 
for tomorrow, but she made no answer. She did not wish to say 
anything to cloud her own happy expectations. For her this day 
is bright and full of sunshine, and not one cloud will obscure 
her happiness. 
“If it rains,” she said, “we shan’t meet! I shan’t come!” 
I thought she would not pay any attention to the rain today, 
but she never came. 
Yesterday we had met for the third time. It was our third 
white night. . . .

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  53  
But how beautiful  people are when they are gay and happy! 
How brimful of love their hearts are! It is as though they wanted 
to pour their hearts into the heart of another human being, as 
though they wanted the whole world to be gay and laugh with 
them. And how infectious that gaiety is! There was so much joy 
in her words yesterday, so much goodness in her heart towards 
me. How sweet she was to me, how hard she tried to be nice to 
me, how she comforted and soothed my heart! Oh, how sweet 
a woman can be to you when she is happy! And I? Why, I was 
completely taken in. I thought she— 
But how on earth could I have thought it? How could I have 
been so blind, when everything had already been taken by an-
other, when nothing belonged to me? Why, even that tender-
ness of hers, that anxiety, that love—yes, that love for me was 
nothing more than the outward manifestation of her happiness 
at the thought of her meeting with someone else, her desire to 
force her happiness upon me too. When he did not turn up, 
when we waited in vain, she frowned, she lost heart, she was 
filled with alarm. All her movements, all her words, seemed to 
have lost their liveliness, their playfulness, their gaiety. And the 
strange thing was that she seemed doubly anxious to please me, 
as though out of an instinctive desire to lavish upon me what 
she so dearly desired for herself, but what she feared would 
never be hers. My Nastenka was so nervous and in such an ago-
nising dread that at last she seemed to have realised that I loved 
her and took pity upon my unhappy love. It is always so: when 
we are unhappy we feel more strongly the unhappiness of oth-
ers; our feeling is not shattered, but becomes concentrated. . . . 
I came to her with a full heart; I could scarcely wait for our 
meeting. I had no presentiment of how I would be feeling now. 

54  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
I little dreamt that it would all end quite differently. She was 
beaming with happiness. She was expecting an answer to her 
letter. The answer was he himself. He was bound to come; he 
had to come running in answer to her call. She arrived a whole 
hour before me. At first she kept on laughing at everything; ev-
ery word of mine provoked a peal of laughter from her. I began 
talking, but lapsed into silence. 
“Do you know why I’m so happy?” she said. “Do you know 
why I’m so glad when I look at you? Do you know why I love 
you so today?” 
“Well?” I asked, and my heart trembled. 
“I love you so, because you haven’t fallen in love with me. 
Another man in your place would, I’m sure, have begun to pes-
ter me, to worry me. He would have been sighing, he would 
have looked so pathetic, but you’re so sweet!” 
Here she clasped my hand with such force that I almost cried 
out. She laughed. 
“Oh, what a good friend you are!” she began a minute later, 
speaking very seriously. “You’re a real godsend to me. What 
would I have done if you’d not been with me now? How unself-
ish you are! How truly you love me! When I am married, we 
shall be such good friends. You’ll be more than a brother to me. 
I shall love you almost as I love him! . . .” 
Somehow I couldn’t help feeling terribly sad at that mo-
ment. However, something resembling laughter stirred in my 
soul. 
“Your nerves are on edge,” I said. “You’re afraid. You don’t 
think he’ll come.” 
“Goodness, what nonsense you talk!” she said. “If I hadn’t 
been so happy, I do believe I’d have burst out crying to hear 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  55  
you express such doubts, to hear you reproaching me like that. 
You’ve given me an idea, though. And I admit you’ve given 
me a lot to think about, but I shall think about it later. I don’t 
mind telling you frankly that you’re quite right. Yes, I’m not 
quite myself tonight. I’m in awful suspense, and every little 
thing jars on me, excites me, but please don’t let us discuss my 
feelings! . . .” 
At that moment we heard footsteps, and a man loomed out of 
the darkness. He was coming in our direction. She almost cried 
out. I released her hand and made a movement as though I were 
beginning to back away. But we were both wrong: it was not he. 
“What are you so afraid of? Why did you let go of my hand?” 
she said, giving me her hand again. “What does it matter? 
We’ll meet him together. I want him to see how we love one 
another.” 
“How we love one another?” I cried. 
“Oh, Nastenka, Nastenka,” I thought, “how much you’ve 
said in that word! Such love, Nastenka, at certain moments 
makes one’s heart ache and plunges one’s spirit into gloom. 
Your hand is cold, but mine burns like fire. How blind you are, 
Nastenka! How unbearable a happy person sometimes is! But 
I’m afraid I could not be angry with you, Nastenka!” 
At last my heart overflowed. 
“Do you know, Nastenka,” I cried, “do you know what I’ve 
gone through all day?” 
“Why? What is it? Tell me quickly! Why haven’t you said any-
thing about it before?” 
“Well, fi rst of all, Nastenka, after I had carried out all your 
commissions, taken the letter, seen your good friends, I—I 
went home and—and went to bed.” 

56  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
“Is that all?” she interrupted, laughing. 
“Yes, almost all,” I replied, making an effort to keep calm, 
for I already felt foolish tears starting to my eyes. “I woke an 
hour before we were due to meet. But I don’t seem to have re-
ally slept at all. I don’t know how to describe the curious sensa-
tion I had. I seemed to be on my way here. I was going to tell you 
everything. I had an odd feeling as though time had suddenly 
stopped, as though one feeling, one sensation, would from that 
moment go on and on for all eternity, as though my whole life 
had come to a standstill. . . . When I woke up it seemed to me 
that some snatch of a tune I had known for a long time, I had 
heard somewhere before but had forgotten, a melody of great 
sweetness, was coming back to me now. It seemed to me that it 
had been trying to emerge from my soul all my life, and only 
now——” 
“Goodness,” Nastenka interrupted, “what’s all this about? I 
don’t understand a word of it.” 
“Oh, Nastenka, I wanted somehow to convey that strange 
sensation to you,” I began in a plaintive voice, in which there 
still lurked some hope, though I’m afraid a very faint one. 
“Don’t, please don’t!” she said, and in a trice she guessed 
everything, the little rogue. 
She became on a sudden somehow extraordinarily talkative, 
gay, playful. She took my arm, laughed, insisted that I should 
laugh too, and every halting word I uttered evoked a long loud 
peal of laughter from her. I was beginning to feel angry; she 
suddenly began flirting. 
“Listen,” she said, “I’m really beginning to be a little annoyed 
with you for not being in love with me. What am I to think of 
you after that? But, sir, if you insist on being so strong-minded, 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  57  
you should at least show your appreciation of me for being such 
a simple girl. I tell you everything, absolutely everything. Any 
silly old thing that comes into my head.” 
“Listen, I think it’s striking eleven!” I said, as the clock from 
some distant city tower began slowly to strike the hour. 
She stopped suddenly, left off laughing, and began to 
count. 
“Yes,” she said at last in a hesitating, unsteady voice, “its 
eleven.” 
I regretted at once that I had frightened her. It was brutal 
of me to make her count the strokes. I cursed myself for my 
uncontrolled fit of malice. I felt sorry for her, and I did not 
know how to atone for my inexcusable behaviour. I did my 
best to comfort her. I tried hard to think of some excuse for 
his failure to come. I argued. I reasoned with her. It was the 
easiest thing in the world to deceive her at that moment! In-
deed, who would not be glad of any word of comfort at such a 
moment? Who would not be overjoyed at the faintest glimmer 
of an excuse? 
“The whole thing’s absurd!” I began, feeling more and more 
carried away by my own enthusiasm and full of admiration for 
the extraordinary clarity of my own arguments. “He couldn’t 
possibly have come today. You’ve got me so muddled and con-
fused, Nastenka, that I’ve lost count of the time. Why, don’t you 
see? He’s scarcely had time to receive your letter. Now, suppose 
that for some reason he can’t come today. Suppose he’s going 
to write to you. Well, in that case you couldn’t possibly get his 
letter till tomorrow. I’ll go and fetch it for you early tomorrow 
morning and let you know at once. Don’t you see? A thousand 
things may have happened: he may have been out when your 

58  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
letter arrived, and for all we know he may not have read it even 
yet. Anything may have happened.” 
“Yes, yes!” said Nastenka. “I never thought of that. Of course 
anything may have happened,” she went on in a most acquies-
cent voice, but in which, like some jarring note, another faintly 
perceptible thought was hidden away. “Yes, please do that. Go 
there as soon as possible tomorrow morning, and if you get any-
thing let me know at once. You know where I live, don’t you?” 
And she began repeating her address to me. 
Then she became suddenly so sweet, so shy with me. She 
seemed to listen attentively to what I was saying to her; but 
when I asked her some question, she made no reply, grew con-
fused, and turned her head away. I peered into her eyes. Why, of 
course! She was crying. 
“How can you? How can you? Oh, what a child you are! What 
childishness! There, there, stop crying please!” 
She tried to smile, to compose herself, but her chin was still 
trembling, and her bosom still rising and falling. 
“I’m thinking of you,” she said to me after a minute’s silence. 
“You’re so good that I’d have to have a heart of stone not to feel 
it. Do you know what has just occurred to me? I was compar-
ing the two of you in my mind. Why isn’t he you? Why isn’t 
he like you? He’s not as good as you, though I love him more 
than you.” 
I said nothing in reply. She seemed to be waiting for me to 
say something. 
“Of course it’s probably quite true that I don’t know him 
very well. No, I don’t understand him very well. You see, I 
seemed always a little afraid of him. He was always so serious, 
and I couldn’t help thinking proud as well. I realise of course 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  59  
that he merely looked like that. I know there’s more tenderness 
in his heart than in mine. I can’t forget the way he looked at me 
when—you remember?—I came to him with my bundle. But 
all the same I seem to look up to him a little too much, and that 
doesn’t seem as if we were quite equals, does it?” 
“No, Nastenka, no,” I replied. “It does not mean that you 
are not equals. It merely means that you love him more than 
anything in the world, far more than yourself even.” 
“Yes, I suppose that is so,” said Nastenka. “But do you know 
what I think? Only I’m not speaking of him now, but just in 
general. I’ve been thinking for a long time, why aren’t we all 
just like brothers to one another. Why does even the best of us 
seem to hide something from other  people and keep something 
back from them? Why don’t we say straight out what’s in our 
hearts, if we know that our words will not be spoken in vain? 
As it is, everyone seems to look as though he were much harder 
than he really is. It is as though we were all afraid our feelings 
would be hurt if we revealed them too soon.” 
“Oh, Nastenka, you’re quite right, but there are many rea-
sons for that,” I interrupted, for I knew that I myself was sup-
pressing my feelings at that moment more than ever before. 
“No, no!” she replied with great feeling. “You, for instance, 
are not like that. I really don’t know how to tell you what I feel. 
But it seems to me, for instance—I mean I can’t help feeling that 
you—that just at this moment you’re making some sacrifice  
for me,” she added shyly, with a quick glance at me. “Please for-
give me for telling you that. You know I am such a simple girl. 
I haven’t had much experience of the world and I really don’t 
know sometimes how to express myself,” she added in a voice 
that trembled from some hidden emotion, trying to smile at the 

60  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
same time. “But I just wanted to tell you that I’m grateful, that 
I’m aware of it too. . . . Oh, may God grant you happiness for 
that! I feel that what you told me about your dreamer is not true, 
I mean it has nothing to do with you. You are recovering, you’re 
quite different from the man you described yourself to be. If you 
ever fall in love, may you be happy with her. I don’t need to wish 
her anything, for she’ll be happy with you. I know because I’m a 
woman myself, so you must believe me when I tell you so.” 
She fell silent and pressed my hand warmly. I was too moved 
to say anything. A few minutes passed. 
“Yes, it seems he won’t come tonight,” she said at last, raising 
her head. “It’s late.” 
“He’ll come tomorrow,” I said in a very firm, confident 
voice. 
“Yes,” she added, looking cheerful again, “I realise myself 
now that he couldn’t possibly come till tomorrow. Well, good-
bye! Till tomorrow! I may not come, if it rains. But the day after 
tomorrow I shall come whatever happens. You’ll be here for 
certain, won’t you? I want to see you. I’ll tell you everything.” 
And later, when we said goodbye to each other, she gave me 
her hand and said, looking serenely at me— 
“Now we shall always be together, shan’t we?” 
Oh, Nastenka, Nastenka, if only you knew how terribly 
lonely I am now! 
When the clock struck nine, I could remain in my room no 
longer. I dressed and went out in spite of the bad weather. I was 
there. I sat on our seat. I went to her street, but I felt ashamed 
and went back when I was only a few yards from her house 
without even looking at her windows. What a day! Damp and 
dreary. If it had been fine, I should have walked about all night. 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  61  
But—till tomorrow, till tomorrow! Tomorrow she’ll tell me 
everything. 
There was no letter for her today, though. However, there’s 
nothing surprising in that. They must be together by now. . . . 
Fourth Night 
Good Lord, how strangely the whole thing has ended! What a 
frightful ending! 
I arrived at nine o’clock. She was already there. I noticed her 
a long way off. She was standing, leaning with her elbows on 
the railing of the embankment, just as she had been standing 
the first time I saw her, and she did not hear me when I came 
up to her. 
“Nastenka!” I called her, restraining my agitation with 
diffi  culty. 
She turned round to me quickly. 
“Well?” she said. “Well? Tell me quickly!” 
I looked at her utterly bewildered. 
“Well, where’s the letter? Haven’t you brought the letter?” 
she repeated, gripping the railing with her hand. 
“No, I haven’t got any letter,” I said at last. “Hasn’t he 
come?” 
She turned terribly pale and stared at me for a long time 
without moving. I had shattered her last hope. 
“Well, it doesn’t matter,” she said at last in a strangled voice. 
“If he leaves me like that, then perhaps it’s best to forget him!” 
She dropped her eyes, then tried to look at me, but couldn’t 
do it. For a few more minutes she tried to pull herself together, 

62  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
then she turned away from me suddenly, leaned on the railing 
with her elbows, and burst into tears. 
“Come, come,” I began, but as I looked at her I hadn’t the 
heart to go on. And, besides, what could I have said to her? 
“Don’t try to comfort me,” she said, weeping. “Don’t tell me 
he’ll come—that he hasn’t deserted me so cruelly and so inhu-
manly as he has. Why? Why did he do it? Surely there was noth-
ing in my letter, in that unhappy letter of mine, was there?” 
Here her voice was broken by sobs. My heart bled as I looked 
at her. 
“Oh, how horribly cruel it is!” she began again. “And not a 
line, not a line! If he’d just written to say that he didn’t want me, 
that he rejected me, but not to write a single line in three days! 
How easy it is for him to slight and insult a poor defenceless 
girl whose only fault is that she loves him! Oh, what I’ve been 
through these three days! Lord, when I think that it was I who 
went to him the first time, when I think how I humiliated my-
self before him, how I cried, how I implored him for a little love! 
And after that! . . . But, look here,” she said, turning to me, and 
her black eyes flashed, “there’s something wrong! There must 
be something wrong! It’s not natural! Either you are mistaken 
or I am. Perhaps he didn’t get my letter. Perhaps he still doesn’t 
know anything. Tell me, for heaven’s sake, explain it to me—I 
can’t understand it—how could he have behaved so atrociously 
to me. Not one word! Why, people show more pity to the low-
est creature on earth! Perhaps he has heard something, perhaps 
someone has told him something about me,” she cried, turning 
to me for an answer: “What do you think?” 
“Listen, Nastenka, I’ll go and see him tomorrow on your 
behalf.” 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  63  
“Well?” 
“I’ll try and find out from him what the position is. I’ll tell 
him everything.” 
“Well? Well?” 
“You write a letter. Don’t refuse, Nastenka, don’t refuse! 
I’ll make him respect your action. He’ll learn everything, and 
if—” 
“No, my friend, no,” she interrupted. “Enough! Not another 
word, not another word from me, not a line—I’ve had enough! 
I don’t know him any more, I don’t love him any more, I’ll f-f-
forget him.” 
She did not finish. 
“Calm yourself, calm yourself, my dear! Sit here, Nastenka,” 
I said, making her sit down on the seat. 
“But I am calm. I tell you this is nothing. It’s only tears— 
they’ll soon dry. You don’t really think I’m going to do away 
with myself, drown myself, do you?” 
My heart was full: I tried to speak, but I couldn’t 
“Listen,” she said, taking my hand, “you wouldn’t have be-
haved like this, would you? You wouldn’t have abandoned a girl 
who had come to you of her own free will, you wouldn’t have 
made a cruel mockery of her weak foolish heart, would you? 
You would have taken care of her. You would have reminded 
yourself that she had nobody in the whole world, that she was 
so inexperienced, that she could not prevent herself from fall-
ing in love with you, that she couldn’t help it, that it wasn’t her 
fault—no, it wasn’t her fault!—that she had not done anything 
wrong. Oh, dear God, dear God. . . .” 
“Nastenka,” I cried, unable to restrain myself any longer, 
“this is more than I can endure! It’s sheer torture to me! You 

64  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
wound me to the heart, Nastenka! I can’t be silent! I must speak! 
I must tell you of all the anguish in my heart!” 
Saying this, I raised myself from the seat. She took my hand 
and looked at me in surprise. 
“What’s the matter?” she said at last. 
“Listen to me, Nastenka,” I said firmly, “listen to me, please! 
What I’m going to say to you now is all nonsense. It is foolish. 
It cannot be. I know it will never happen, but I cannot remain 
silent. In the name of all that you’re suffering now, I beseech 
you beforehand to forgive me!” 
“Well, what is it? What is it?” she demanded, and she stopped 
crying and looked intently at me, a strange gleam of curiosity 
in her startled eyes. “What is the matter with you?” 
“It’s out of the question, I know, but—I love you, Nastenka! 
That is what’s the matter with me. Now you know everything!” 
I said, with a despairing wave of my hand. “Now you can judge 
for yourself whether you ought to go on talking to me as you 
did just now, and—what is perhaps even more important— 
whether you ought to listen to what I’m going to say to you.” 
“Well, what about it?” Nastenka interrupted. “Of course I 
knew long ago that you loved me, only I always thought that— 
well, that you loved me in the ordinary way, I mean that you 
were just fond of me. Oh dear, oh dear! . . .” 
“At first it was in the ordinary way, Nastenka, but now— 
now I’m in the same position as you were when you went to 
him with your bundle that night. I’m in a worse position Nas-
tenka, because he wasn’t in love with anyone at the time, and 
you—you are.” 
“Goodness, what are you saying to me! I really can’t under-
stand you. But, look, what has made you—I mean, why did 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  65  
you—and so suddenly too! Oh dear, I’m talking such nonsense! 
But you——” 
And Nastenka got completely confused. Her cheeks were 
flushed. She dropped her eyes. 
“What’s to be done, Nastenka? What can I do about it? It’s 
entirely my fault, of course. I’ve taken an unfair advantage of— 
But no—no, Nastenka, it isn’t my fault. I know it isn’t. I feel it 
isn’t because my heart tells me I’m right, because I could never 
do anything to hurt you, because I could do nothing that you 
would ever take offence at. I was your friend? Well, I still am 
your friend. I have not been unfaithful to anyone. You see, I’m 
crying, Nastenka. But never mind. What if tears do run down 
my cheeks? Let them. They don’t hurt anyone. They’ll soon 
dry, Nastenka.” 
“But sit down, do sit down, please,” she said, making me sit 
down on the seat. “Oh dear, oh dear!” 
“No, Nastenka, I shan’t sit down. I can’t stay here any longer. 
You’ll never see me again. I’ll say what I have to say and go away. 
I only want to say that you’d never have found out that I loved 
you. I’d never have told my secret to a living soul. I’d never have 
tormented you with my egoism at such a moment. Never! But 
I could not bear to be silent now. It was you who began talking 
about it. It’s your fault, not mine. You just can’t drive me away 
from you.” 
“But I’m not—I’m not driving you away from me!” Nas-
tenka said, doing her best, poor child, not to show how embar-
rassed she was. 
“You are not driving me away? No—but I meant to run away 
from you myself. And I will go away. I will. Only first let me tell 
you everything, for, you see, when you were talking to me here, 

66  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
I couldn’t sit still; when you cried here, when you tormented 
yourself because—well, because (I’d better say it, Nastenka)— 
because you were jilted, because your love was slighted and dis-
regarded, I felt that in my heart there was so much love for you, 
Nastenka, so much love! And I so bitterly resented not being 
able to do anything to help you with my love that—that my 
heart was bursting and I—I couldn’t be silent any longer, Nas-
tenka. I had to speak!” 
“Yes, yes, tell me everything, do speak to me like that!” said 
Nastenka with a gesture that touched me deeply. “It may seem 
strange to you that I should be speaking to you like this, but— 
do say what you have to say! I will tell you afterwards. I’ll tell 
you everything!” 
“You are sorry for me, Nastenka. You’re just sorry for me, 
my dear, dear friend! Well, what’s done is done. No use cry-
ing over spilt milk, is it? Well, so you know everything now. 
At any rate, that’s something to start with. All right. Every-
thing’s fine now. Only, please, listen. When you were sitting 
here, when you were crying, I thought to myself (Oh, do let 
me tell you what I was thinking!), I thought that (I know of 
course how utterly impossible it is, Nastenka)—I thought that 
you—that you somehow—I mean quite apart from anything 
else—that you no longer cared for him. If that is so, then—I 
already thought of that yesterday, Nastenka, and the day be-
fore yesterday—then I would—I most certainly would have 
done my best to make you care for me. You said yourself, 
Nastenka—you did say it several times, didn’t you?—that you 
almost loved me. Well, what more is there to tell you? That’s 
really all I wanted to say. All that remains to be said is what 
would happen if you fell in love with me—that’s all—nothing 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  67  
more! Now listen to me, my friend—for you are my friend, 
aren’t you?—I am of course an ordinary sort of fellow, poor 
and insignificant, but that doesn’t matter (I’m afraid I don’t 
seem to be putting it very well, Nastenka, because I’m so con-
fused), what matters is that I’d love you so well, so well, Nas-
tenka, that even if you still loved him and went on loving the 
man I don’t know, my love would never be a burden to you. 
All you’d feel, all you’d be conscious of every minute, is that 
a very grateful heart was beating at your side, Nastenka, an 
ardent heart which for your sake—Oh, Nastenka, Nastenka, 
what have you done to me?” 
“Don’t cry, I don’t want you to cry,” said Nastenka, rising 
quickly from the seat. “Come along, get up, come with me. 
Don’t cry, don’t cry,” she said, drying my tears with her hand-
kerchief. “There, come along now. Perhaps I’ll tell you some-
thing. Well, if he has really given me up, if he has forgotten me, 
then though I still love him (and I don’t want to deceive you)— 
But, listen, answer me! If, for instance, I were to fall in love 
with you—I mean, if only I—Oh, my friend, my friend, when I 
think, when I only think how I must have offended you when I 
laughed at your love, when I praised you for not falling in love 
with me! Oh dear, why didn’t I foresee it? Why didn’t I foresee it? 
How could I have been so stupid? But never mind, I’ve made up 
my mind now. I’m going to tell you everything.” 
“Look here, Nastenka, do you know what? I’ll go away. 
Yes, I’ll go away! I can see that I’m simply tormenting you. 
Now you’re sorry you’ve been making fun of me, and I hate to 
think—yes, I simply hate to think that in addition to your own 
sorrow—Of course, it’s all my fault, Nastenka, it’s all my fault, 
but—goodbye!” 

68  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
“Stop! Listen to me first, please. You can wait, can’t you?” 
“Wait? What should I wait for? What do you mean?” 
“You see, I love him, but that will pass. It must pass. It’s quite 
impossible for it not to pass. As a matter of fact, it’s already pass-
ing. I can feel it. Who knows, maybe it’ll be over today, for I hate 
him! Yes, I hate him because he has slighted me, while you were 
weeping with me. I hate him because you haven’t let me down 
as he has, because you love me, while he has never really loved 
me, because—well, because I love you too. Yes, I love you! I love 
you as you love me. I’ve told you so before, haven’t I? You heard 
me say it yourself. I love you because you’re better than he is, 
because you’re more honourable than he is, because he—” 
She stopped crying at last, dried her eyes, and we continued 
our walk. I wanted to say something, but she kept asking me to 
wait. We were silent. At last she plucked up courage and began 
to speak. 
“Look,” she said, in a weak and trembling voice, in which, 
however, there was a strange note which pierced my heart and 
filled it with a sweet sensation of joy, “don’t think I’m so fickle, 
so inconstant. Don’t think that I can forget him so easily and 
so quickly, that I can be untrue to him. I have loved him for a 
whole year, and I swear I have never, never for a moment, been 
untrue to him even in thought. He has thought little of that, 
he has scorned me—well, I don’t mind that. But he has also 
hurt my feelings and wrung my heart. I don’t love him because 
I can only love what is generous, what is understanding, what 
is honourable, for I’m like that myself, and he’s not worthy of 
me. Well, let’s forget about him. I’d rather he behaved to me 
like that now than that I was disappointed later in my expec-
tations and found out the sort of man he really was. Anyway, 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  69  
it’s all over now. And, besides, my dear friend,” she went on, 
pressing my hand, “who knows, perhaps my love for him was 
nothing but self-deception, nothing but imagination. Perhaps it 
started just as a joke, just as a bit of silly nonsense because I was 
constantly under Granny’s supervision. Perhaps I ought to love 
another man and not him, quite a different man, a man who’d 
have pity on me, and—and—anyway,” Nastenka broke off, 
overcome with emotion, “don’t let’s speak of it. Don’t let’s speak 
of it. I only wanted to tell you—I wanted to tell you that even 
if I do love him (no, did love him), even if in spite of this you 
still say—or rather feel that your love is so great that it could 
in time replace my love for him in my heart—if you really and 
truly have pity on me, if you won’t leave me alone to my fate, 
without consolation, without hope, if you promise to love me 
always as you love me now, then I swear that my gratitude— 
that my love will in time be worthy of your love. Will you take 
my hand now?” 
“Nastenka,” I cried, my voice broken with sobs, “Nastenka! 
Oh, Nastenka!” 
“All right, all right!” she said, making a great effort to speak 
calmly. “All right! That’s enough! Now everything’s been said, 
hasn’t it? Hasn’t it? Well, you are happy now, aren’t you? And I 
too am happy. So don’t let’s talk about it any more. Just wait 
a little—have patience—spare me! Talk of something else, for 
God’s sake!” 
“Yes, Nastenka, yes! Of course don’t let’s talk about it. Now 
I’m happy. Well, Nastenka, do let’s talk of something else. Come 
on, let’s. I don’t mind.” 
But we did not know what to talk about. We laughed, we 
cried, we said a thousand things without caring whether they 

70  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
made sense or not. One moment we walked along the pave-
ment, and the next we suddenly turned back and crossed the 
road, then we stopped and crossed over to the embankment 
again. We were like children. . . . 
“I’m living alone, now, Nastenka,” I began, “but tomor-
row——You know, of course, Nastenka, that I’m poor, don’t you? 
I’ve only got twelve hundred roubles, but that doesn’t matter.” 
“Of course not, and Granny has her pension, so that she 
won’t be a burden to us. We’ll have to take Granny, of course.” 
“Of 
course 
we’ll 
take 
Granny! 
Only—there’s 
Matryona——” 
“Goodness, I never thought of that! And we’ve got Fyokla!” 
“Matryona is a good soul, only she has one fault: she has no 
imagination, Nastenka, none whatever! But I don’t suppose that 
matters!” 
“It makes no difference. They can live together. You’ll move 
to our house tomorrow, won’t you?” 
“How do you mean? To your house? Oh, very well, I don’t 
mind.” 
“I mean, you’ll take our attic. I told you we have an attic, 
didn’t I? It’s empty now. We had a woman lodger, an old gentle-
woman, but she’s left, and I know Granny would like to let it to 
a young man. I said to her, ‘Why a young man, Granny?’ But she 
said, ‘Why not? I’m old and I like young  people about. You don’t 
think I’m trying to get a husband for you, do you?’ Well, I saw at 
once of course that that was what she had in mind.” 
“Good Lord, Nastenka!” 
And we both laughed. 
“Oh, well, never mind. But where do you live? I’ve 
forgotten.” 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  71  
I told her I lived near a certain bridge in Barannikov’s 
house. 
“It’s a very big house, isn’t it?” 
“Yes, it’s a very big house.” 
“Oh, yes, I know it. It’s a nice house, but I still think you 
ought to move out of it and come and live with us as soon as 
possible.” 
“I’ll do so tomorrow, Nastenka, tomorrow. I’m afraid I’m a 
little behindhand with my rent, but that doesn’t matter. I shall 
be getting my salary soon and—” 
“And you know I could be giving lessons. Yes, why not? I’ll 
learn everything myself first and then give lessons.” 
“That’s an excellent idea, Nastenka, an excellent idea! And 
I’ll be getting a bonus soon. . . .” 
“So tomorrow you’ll be my lodger. . . .” 
“Yes, and we’ll go to The Barber of Seville, for I believe they’re 
going to put it on again soon.” 
“Oh yes, I’d love to,” said Nastenka, laughing. “Perhaps not 
The Barber, though. We’d better see something else.” 
“Oh, all right, something else then. I don’t mind. I suppose 
something else would be better. You see, I didn’t think—” 
Talking like this, we walked along in a sort of a daze, in a 
mist, as though we did not know ourselves what was happen-
ing to us. One moment we would stop and go on talking in 
one place for a long time, and the next we would be walking 
again till we would find ourselves goodness knows where— 
and more laughter, more tears. Then Nastenka would sud-
denly decide that she ought to be going back home, and I 
would not dare to detain her, but would insist on accompany-
ing her to her house. We would start on our way back, and in 

72  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
about a quarter of an hour would find ourselves on the em-
bankment by our seat. Then she would sigh, and tears would 
come into her eyes again, and I would be plunged into despair 
and a chilly premonition of disaster would steal into my heart. 
But she would at once press my hand and drag me off again to 
walk, talk, chatter. . . . 
“It’s time—time I went home now,” Nastenka said at last. “I 
think it must be awfully late. We’ve been behaving like children 
long enough!” 
“Yes, of course, Nastenka. Only I don’t suppose I shall be 
able to sleep now. No, I won’t go home.” 
“I don’t think I shall sleep, either. Only see me home, will 
you?” 
“Of course, I’ll see you home. . . .” 
“On your word of honour? Because, you see, I must get back 
home some time, mustn’t I?” 
“On my word of honour!” I replied, laughing. 
“All right, let’s go.” 
“Let’s go. Look at the sky, Nastenka, look! It’ll be a lovely 
day tomorrow! What a blue sky! What a moon! Look, a yellow 
cloud is drifting over it. Look! Look! No, it has passed by. Look, 
Nastenka, look!” 
But Nastenka did not look. She stood speechless, motion-
less. A minute later she clung somewhat timidly close to me. 
Her hand trembled in mine. I looked at her. She clung to me 
more closely. 
At that moment a young man passed by us. He suddenly 
stopped, looked at us intently for a moment, and then again 
took a few steps towards us. My heart missed a beat. 
“Nastenka,” I said in an undertone, “who is it Nastenka?” 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  73  
“It’s him!” she replied in a whisper, clinging to me still more 
closely, still more tremulously. 
I could hardly stand up. 
“Nastenka! Nastenka! It’s you!” we heard a voice behind us, 
and at the same time the young man took a few steps towards 
us. 
Lord, how she cried out! How she started! How she tore 
herself out of my hands and rushed to meet him! I stood and 
looked at them, utterly crushed. But no sooner had she given 
him her hand, no sooner had she thrown herself into his arms, 
than she suddenly turned to me again, and was at my side in 
a flash, faster than lightning, faster than the wind, and before 
I could recover from my surprise, flung her arms round my 
neck and kissed me ardently. Then, without uttering a word, 
she rushed back to him again, clasped his hands, and drew him 
after her. 
I stood a long time, watching them walking away. At last 
both of them vanished from my sight. 
Morning 
My nights came to an end with a morning. The weather was 
dreadful. It was pouring, and the rain kept beating dismally 
against my windowpanes. It was dark in the room; it was dull 
and dreary outside. My head ached. I felt giddy. I was beginning 
to feel feverish. 
“A letter for you, sir,” said Matryona, bending over me. 
“Came by the city post, it did, sir. The postman brought it.” 
“A letter? Who from?” I cried, jumping up from my chair. 

74  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
“I don’t know, sir, I’m sure. I suppose whoever sent it must 
have signed his name.” 
I broke the seal: the letter was from her! 
“Oh, forgive me, forgive me!” Nastenka wrote to me. “I beg 
you on my knees to forgive me! I deceived you and myself. It 
was all a dream, a delusion. I nearly died today thinking of you. 
Please, please forgive me! 
“Don’t blame me, for I haven’t changed a bit towards you. I 
said I would love you, and I do love you now, I more than love 
you. Oh, if only I could love both of you at once! Oh, if only you 
were he!” 
“Oh, if only he were you!” it flashed through my mind. 
“Those were your own words, Nastenka!” 
“God knows what I would do for you now. I know how sad 
and unhappy you must be. I’ve treated you abominably, but 
when one loves, you know, an injury is soon forgotten. And 
you do love me! 
“Thank you, yes! thank you for that love. For it remains 
imprinted in my memory like a sweet dream one remembers 
a long time after awakening. I shall never forget the moment 
when you opened your heart to me like a real friend, when 
you accepted the gift of my broken heart to take care of it, 
to cherish it, to heal it. If you forgive me, I promise you that 
the memory of you will always remain with me, that I shall 
be everlastingly grateful to you, and that my feeling of grati-
tude will never be erased from my heart. I shall treasure this 
memory, I’ll be true to it. I shall never be unfaithful to it, I 
shall never be unfaithful to my heart. It is too constant for 
that. It returned so quickly yesterday to him to whom it has 
always belonged. 

WHITE  NIGHTS  //  75  
“We shall meet. You will come and see us. You will not leave 
us, will you? You’ll always be my friend, my brother. And when 
you see me, you’ll give me your hand, won’t you? You will give 
it to me because you’ve forgiven me. You have, haven’t you? You 
love me as before, don’t you? 
“Oh, yes, do love me! Don’t ever forsake me, because I love 
you so at this moment, because I am worthy of your love, be-
cause I promise to deserve it—oh, my dear, dear friend! Next 
week I’m to be married to him. He has come back as much in 
love with me as ever. He has never forgotten me. You will not 
be angry with me because I have written about him, will you? 
I would like to come and see you with him. You will like him, 
won’t you? 
“Forgive me, remember and love your Nastenka.” 
I read this letter over and over again. There were tears in my 
eyes. At last it dropped out of my hands, and I buried my face. 
“Look, love, look!” Matryona called me. 
“What is it, Matryona?” 
“Why, I’ve swept all the cobwebs off the ceiling. Looks so 
lovely and clean, you could be wed, love, and have your wed-
ding party here. You might just as well do it now as wait till it 
gets dirty again!” 
I looked at Matryona. She was still hale and hearty, quite a 
young-looking old woman, in fact. But I don’t know why all of a 
sudden she looked old and decrepit to me, with a wrinkled face 
and lustreless eyes. I don’t know why, but all of a sudden my 
room, too, seemed to have grown as old as Matryona. The walls 
and floors looked discoloured, everything was dark and grimy, 

76  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
and the cobwebs were thicker than ever. I don’t know why, 
but when I looked out of the window the house opposite, too, 
looked dilapidated and dingy, the plaster on its columns peel-
ing and crumbling, its cornices blackened and full of cracks, 
and its bright brown walls disfigured by large white and yellow 
patches. Either the sun, appearing suddenly from behind the 
dark rain-clouds, had hidden itself so quickly that everything 
had grown dark before my eyes again, or perhaps the whole 
sombre and melancholy perspective of my future flashed before 
my mind’s eye at that moment, and I saw myself just as I was 
now fifteen years hence, only grown older, in the same room, 
living the same sort of solitary life, with the same Matryona, 
who had not grown a bit wiser in all those years. 
But that I should feel any resentment against you, Nastenka! 
That I should cast a dark shadow over your bright, serene hap-
piness! That I should chill and darken your heart with bitter 
reproaches, wound it with secret remorse, cause it to beat anx-
iously at the moment of bliss! That I should crush a single one 
of those delicate blooms which you will wear in your dark hair 
when you walk up the aisle to the altar with him! Oh no— 
never, never! May your sky be always clear, may your dear smile 
be always bright and happy, and may you be for ever blessed for 
that moment of bliss and happiness which you gave to another 
lonely and grateful heart! 
Good Lord, only a moment of bliss? Isn’t such a moment suf-
ficient for the whole of a man’s life? 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR 
TRANSLATED BY NORA GOTTLIEB 


Our beloved motherland was experiencing a renaissance; her brave sons, 
fi red with impulses at once touching and naïve, were seeking with an un-
controllable yearning for new destinies and hopes. It was at this time that 
the following disgraceful affair took place. 


One clear and frosty winter’s night—incidentally, it was al-
ready past eleven o’clock—three highly reputable personages 
were sitting in a comfortable, even luxuriously furnished room 
in a certain fine two-storied house on the Petersburg Side. They 
were engaged in a measured and lofty discussion on a most cu-
rious topic. All three were worthies of the rank of General in 
the Civil Service. They sat around a small table, each in a fine, 
soft arm-chair, in the course of their conversation now and 
again sipping champagne with quiet enjoyment. The bottle was 
ready at hand on the little table, in a silver wine-cooler. The fact 
was that the host, Privy Councillor Stepan Nikiforovitch Niki-
forov, an old bachelor of about sixty-five, was simultaneously 
celebrating a house-warming in his newly acquired house and 
incidentally his birthday as well, which just happened to fall 
on the very same day, and which he had never celebrated up 

82  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
to now. The celebration was nothing very much; as we have al-
ready seen, there were only two guests, both former colleagues 
and subordinates of Mr. Nikiforov’s, namely: one, Actual State 
Councillor Semyon Ivanovitch Shipulenko; and the other, 
also Actual State Councillor, Ivan Ilyitch Pralinski. They had 
come to take tea around nine o’clock and had afterwards tack-
led some wine, and they knew that they would have to leave 
promptly at half past eleven. Their host had all his life had a 
liking for regular habits. Let me say two words about him: he 
had begun his career as an impecunious petty Government of-
ficial, gently spinning it out for forty-five years, knowing too 
well how far he could hope to rise. He could not bear to snatch 
at the stars above (although he already wore two of them on his 
tunic) and in particular he disliked expressing his own personal 
views on any matter whatever. He was honest, too; or rather, 
he had never had occasion to be particularly dishonest; an 
egoist, he was single; he was no fool, but disliked parading his 
intellect. He could not stand disorder and enthusiasm, which 
he considered a sort of moral untidiness, and by the end of his 
life he was submerged in a kind of sweet, indolent comfort and 
well-ordered solitariness. Although he himself had sometimes 
visited his superiors, even as a young man he had been unable 
to endure receiving guests, and lately, when he was not playing 
Grand Patience, he had contented himself with the company 
of his dining-room clock. Drowsing in an arm-chair, he would 
listen placidly for whole evenings to it ticking on the mantel-
piece beneath its glass case. In appearance he was very respect-
able; clean-shaven, he looked younger than his years; he was 
well preserved, showed signs of living for a long while yet, and 
conformed to the highest standards of gentlemanly behaviour. 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  83 
The position he held was comfortable enough: he sat on a Board 
and signed something or other. 
In brief, he was considered a most worthy person. 
He had only one passion, or better, one ardent desire: that 
was to possess his own house, and in particular a house built in 
the style of a gentleman’s residence, not a tenement for letting 
at a profit. At last this wish had been realized. He had looked 
round and bought a house on the Petersburg Side; true, it was 
rather far out, but it was an elegant residence, and, moreover, it 
had a garden. The new owner maintained it was even better for 
being farther out; he did not like entertaining at home, and for 
visiting anyone or driving to the office, he had a fine chocolate-
coloured two-seater carriage, a coachman called Mikhei and 
a pair of small but strong, handsome horses. All this was the 
fruit of forty years’ painstaking economy, and his heart rejoiced 
in it. 
Hence, when he had bought the house and moved in, Ste-
pan Nikiforovitch was overcome by such contentment that in 
the serenity of his heart he actually invited guests on his birth-
day, which formerly he had carefully kept from even his closest 
friends. 
He had, however, an ulterior motive in inviting one of his  
guests. He himself occupied the upper floor of his house, while 
the ground floor, which was set out in exactly the same way, 
required a tenant. And so Stepan Nikiforovitch looked to Se-
myon Ivanovitch Shipulenko, and in the course of the evening 
had twice steered the conversation towards this objective. But 
Semyon Ivanovitch was non-committal. Here was a man who 

84  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
had also made his way painstakingly and over a long period; 
he had black hair and whiskers and a jaundiced countenance. 
Married, a surly stay-at-home, he tyrannized his household; he 
performed his duties with self-confidence, and he, too, was well 
aware of his capabilities and, better still, of what he would never 
achieve; he was sitting pretty in a comfortable job, and sitting 
tight. He looked on the new order of things not entirely with-
out rancour, yet was not unduly concerned. He was very sure of 
himself and it was not without malicious scorn that he listened 
to the ramblings of Ivan Ilyitch Pralinski on topics of the day. As 
a matter of fact, they had all had a little too much to drink, so 
that even Stepan Nikiforovitch condescended to launch forth 
in a slight argument with Mr. Pralinski on the subject of the 
new reforms. But a few words must be mentioned about His 
Excellency Mr. Pralinski, particularly as he is, in fact, the chief 
hero of our story. 
Only four months had passed since State Councillor Ivan Ily-
itch Pralinski had begun to be addressed as “Your Excellency”; 
in fact he was a newly created General. And he was still young 
in years, about forty-three, certainly not more and looked, 
and liked to look, younger. He was a handsome man, tall, 
and clothes-conscious; he had the proper knack of wearing a 
distinguished order round his neck. From childhood he had 
learned to adopt some habits of the fashionable world, and, as 
a bachelor, he dreamed of a rich bride, even a bride from high 
society. There were many other things he dreamed of, though 
he was far from stupid. At times he was a great talker, and 
even liked to adopt the airs of a parliamentarian. He was of 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  85 
good family, the pampered son of a General, and at a tender 
age was clothed in velvet and fine linen; he had been educated 
in an aristocratic establishment, and although he had gained 
little learning therein he had succeeded in offi  ce and managed 
to rise to the rank of General. His superiors regarded him as 
a gifted person and had great hopes for him. Stepan Nikifo-
rovitch, under whom he had begun and continued his offi  ce 
career almost up to the time when he rose to the rank of a 
General, had never considered him very businesslike and had 
no hope whatsoever for him. But it pleased him that he was of 
good family, had private means—that is, he owned a large and 
profitable house, with its own caretaker—was related to folk 
of good standing and, above all, had a certain air of distinc-
tion about him. Stepan Nikiforovitch secretly reproached him 
for his excess of imagination and frivolity. Ivan Ilyitch himself 
sometimes felt that he was too vain and even over-sensitive. It 
was a queer thing: at times he had attacks of morbid conscience 
and even a slight feeling of remorse. With bitterness and secret 
heartache he admitted to himself that he did not really fly as 
high as he liked to think. At these moments he felt dejected, 
especially when his attack of piles was at its worst, and called 
his life “une existence manquée”, lost faith (privately, of course) even 
in his debating abilities, referring to himself as an empty talker 
and a phrasemonger. Although all this was certainly much to 
his credit, it did not in the least impede his spirits from rising 
half an hour later, when he would more obstinately and more 
presumptuously than ever reassure and convince himself that 
he still had time to prove his worth and would not only reach 
a high rank but would moreover become a great statesman, 
long to be remembered in Russia. At times he even visualized 

86  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
monuments raised in his honour. From all this one can gather 
that Ivan Ilyitch aimed high, though he concealed, with cer-
tain misgivings, the vague dreams and hopes that lay beneath 
the surface. In short, he was a kind man and even a poet at 
heart. In recent years he had more frequently been overcome 
by painful moments of disillusionment; he had become in 
fact especially irritable and suspicious, ready to consider any 
contradiction an insult. However, the regeneration of Russia 
suddenly raised great hopes in him. Attainment of the rank of 
General only confirmed them. He blossomed forth and held 
up his head once more. He suddenly began to speak eloquently 
and profusely: he spoke on the most topical subjects, which he 
felt very strongly about and which he had absorbed with un-
expected rapidity. He sought out occasions to speak; he went 
about town and in many places succeeded in becoming known 
as a desperate liberal, which flattered him greatly. 
On the evening in question, having consumed about four 
glasses of champagne, he was particularly talkative. He wanted 
to make a total convert of Stepan Nikiforovitch, whom he had 
not seen for a long time and whom he had until now always 
respected and even obeyed. For some reason he regarded him 
as a reactionary and attacked him with unusual ardour. Stepan 
Nikiforovitch hardly bothered to object, although the subject 
interested him, but merely listened slyly. Ivan Ilyitch became 
agitated and in the heat of an imaginary dispute had recourse 
to the glass more often than he should. Whereupon Stepan 
Nikiforovitch took up the bottle and at once refi lled the glass; 
this, for no reason at all, began to offend Ivan Ilyitch; more es-

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  87 
pecially as Semyon Ivanovitch Shipulenko, whom he partic-
uarly despised and feared for his cynicism and spitefulness, sat 
beside him in crafty silence, smiling more often than was nec-
essary. “They appear to me taking me for a puppy!” the thought 
flashed through Ivan Ilyitch’s mind. 
“No, sir it’s time, it was time long ago,” he continued hotly. 
“We have talked too long and it is my opinion that the chief 
thing is to be humane, to be considerate towards one’s inferiors, 
bearing in mind that they too are human beings. Idealism will 
save all, will be the universal panacea. . . .” 
“He-he-he!” chuckled Semyon Ivanovitch from his corner. 
“But why are you reproaching us?” finally objected Stepan 
Nikiforovitch with an amiable smile. “I must confess, Ivan Ily-
itch, I have not yet been able to grasp what you are so kindly 
explaining to us. You are extolling idealism. That means love 
of mankind, doesn’t it?” 
“Yes, perhaps, granted, call it love of mankind. I . . .” 
“Permit me, sir! As far as I can judge, that is not the whole 
point. There was always a need for love of mankind; the Re-
form Act does not stop at that. Various problems have arisen 
relating to the peasantry, the law, agriculture, the payment of 
compensation, morals and . . . there is no end to these prob-
lems, and all in all, united, they could cause, so to speak, great 
upheavals. That was what we feared, not merely some sort of 
idealism . . .” 
“Yes, sir, the matter is rather more involved,” remarked Se-
myon Ivanovitch. 
“I understand very well, sir, and permit me to remark, Se-
myon Ivanovitch, that I am in no way ready to lag behind you 
in comprehending the depths of the problem,” remarked Ivan 

88  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
Ilyitch caustically, “but, nevertheless, I’ll venture to remark to 
you, Stepan Nikoforovitch as well, that you too have not under-
stood me at all. . . .” 
“Indeed, I have not.” 
“Yes, I expressly continue to uphold and I attempt to spread 
the idea that idealism, consideration, particularly towards 
one’s inferiors, from official to clerk, clerk to house-servant, 
house-servant to peasant—idealism, I say, could serve as the 
keystone to the impending reforms and, on the whole, to the 
regeneration of every facet of life. Why? This is why: take the 
following syllogism: I am humane, consequently I am loved. 
They love me, then presumably they trust me. They put their 
trust in me, consequently they believe in me, therefore love 
me . . . that is, no, I mean to say, if they believe, they will also 
believe in reform, they will understand, so to speak, the very 
heart of the matter. They will, so to speak, morally embrace 
one another, and will settle everything fundamentally in a 
friendly spirit. What are you giggling about, Semyon Ivano-
vitch? Don’t you follow?” 
Stepan Nikiforovitch raised his brows in silence; he was 
astonished. 
“It seems to me I’ve had a drop too much,” remarked Se-
myon Ivanovitch maliciously, “and therefore I am a little slow 
on the uptake. A kind of mental blackout, sir.” 
Ivan Ilyitch winced. 
“We shan’t live up to it,” Stepan Nikiforovitch suddenly pro-
nounced on brief reflection. 
“What’s that? We shan’t live up to it?” asked Ivan Ilyitch, sur-
prised at this sudden and abrupt remark coming from Stepan 
Nikiforovitch. 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  89 
“Just that: we shan’t live up to it.” Stepan Nikiforovitch evi-
dently did not want to enlarge on his remark. 
“Are you referring to ‘new wine in old bottles’?” retorted 
Ivan Ilyitch, not without irony. “Oh no, sir, I am sure I can 
vouch for myself.” 
At that moment the clock struck half past eleven. 
“Here we sit like birds in a desert,” said Semyon Ivanovitch, 
preparing to rise. But Ivan Ilyitch forestalled him, immediately 
getting up and taking his sable hat from the mantelpiece. He 
looked hurt. 
“What about it, Semyon Ivanovitch, will you think it over?” 
said Stepan Nikiforovitch, seeing his guests off. 
“About the flat? I’ll think it over. Yes, I’ll think it over.” 
“And let me have your decision quickly?” 
“Still talking business?” remarked Mr. Pralinski ingratiat-
ingly, playing with his hat. It seemed to him as though he was 
being left out. 
Stepan Nikiforovitch raised his eyebrows and remained 
silent, as a sign that he was not detaining his guests. Semyon 
Ivanovitch hurriedly took his leave. 
“Ah . . . well . . . have it your own way! If you don’t under-
stand common courtesy,” decided Mr. Pralinski, and with a 
particularly conscious air of independence he held out his hand 
to Stepan Nikiforovitch. 
In the hall Ivan Ilyitch wrapped himself in his light and ex-
pensive fur coat, trying not to notice Semyon Ivanovitch’s well-
worn raccoon and they both began to descend the stairs. 
“It seems our old man is offended,” said Ivan Ilyitch to the 
silent Semyon Ivanovitch. 
“Not in the least,” answered the other calmly and coldly. 

90  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
“Serf mentality!” thought Ivan Ilyitch. 
When they had stepped down from the porch, Semyon  
Ivanovitch’s sledge was brought up, with its plain grey nag. 
“What the devil! What has Trifon done with my carriage?” 
cried Ivan Ilyitch, not seeing it. 
He glanced hither and thither, but there was no carriage in 
sight. Stepan Nikiforovitch’s servant had no idea of its where-
abouts. They inquired of Varlam, Semyon Ivanovitch’s coach-
man and were told Trifon had been around the whole time, the 
carriage as well, but now they were gone. 
“Disgraceful!” put in Mr. Shipulenko. “Would you like a 
lift?” 
“What wretches these  people are!” cried Mr. Pralinski in a 
rage. “He asked me, the scoundrel, to let him off for a wedding 
somewhere here on the Petersburg Side, some sort of relative 
was to be married, the devil take her. I strictly forbade him to 
abandon his post. And now I’ll bet he has gone there.” 
“That’s actually what he has done,” remarked Varlam. “He 
went there, but promised to be back in a jiffy; that is, to be back 
just in time.” 
“So that’s it! I somehow felt this would happen. You wait; 
he’ll catch it.” 
“You’d better have him thrashed twice at the police station; 
that will make him carry out your orders better,” said Semyon 
Ivanovitch, drawing the fur cover of the sledge over himself. 
“Please don’t worry, Semyon Ivanovitch.” 
“So you don’t want a lift home?” 
“No, merci. A pleasant journey.” 
Semyon Ivanovitch drove away, while Ivan Ilyitch, feeling 
intensely irritated, set off walking along the wooden causeway. 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  91 
——————————— 
“I’ll show you now, you rogue! I’ll walk home on purpose, just 
to make you realize, just to frighten you! You’ll return and 
find out that the master has had to go off on foot . . . good-for-
nothing!” 
Never before had Ivan Ilyitch sworn so at anyone, but he was 
in an excessive rage, and on top of this his head was humming. 
He was unaccustomed to drink, which is why some five or six 
glasses of champagne quickly affected him. However, the night 
was enchanting. It was frosty but unusually silent and still. The 
sky was clear and full of stars. The full moon shed her pale sil-
very light over the earth. It was so lovely that having gone about 
fifty paces Ivan Ilyitch almost forgot his misfortune. He began 
feeling particularly contented.  People in a state of intoxication 
are prone, in any case, to quick changes of mood. He even began 
to like the unsightly little wooden houses of the empty street. 
“It’s a good thing, after all, that I’ve had to walk,” he 
thought. “It’s a lesson to Trifon and a pleasure for me. I really 
ought to take walks more often. It won’t do me any harm. I 
shall find a cab at once on the Bolshoi Prospect. What a lovely 
night! What odd little houses these are! Probably small folk 
live here—petty officials . . . shopkeepers maybe. . . . That 
queer Stepan Nikiforovitch! What reactionaries they all are! 
Wet blankets. Wet blankets, that’s precisely what they are, c’est 
le mot. . . . He is a clever man, though: he has this bon sens, a 
sober, practical understanding of things. But in spite of this 
they are real old men! They lack the—what could one call it? 
Well, they lack something. . . . We shan’t live up to it! What 
did he mean by that? He even became thoughtful when he 

92  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
said it. . . . Incidentally, he never understood me at all. And 
how could he fail to understand? It was more diffi  cult not to 
understand than to understand. The main thing is that I am 
convinced, convinced in my innermost heart. Idealism—love 
for mankind! To restore man to himself. . . . To restore him 
his self-respect and then—with such material in hand, set 
to work. It seems clear enough! Yes, sir. Just permit me this, 
Your Excellency; take the following syllogism: we meet, for 
instance, a petty clerk, a poor, downtrodden clerk. Well . . . 
and who are you? The answer is: a clerk. Very well, a clerk; 
more: what kind of clerk? The answer is: such and such a clerk, 
he says. Are you working? Yes, I am working! Do you want to 
be happy? I do. What do you need to make you happy? This 
and that. Why? Because . . . And here you have a man who 
understands me at once, the man is mine, caught, so to speak, 
in my nets, and I can do anything I like with him. That is, for 
his own good. Disgraceful man, that Semyon Ivanovitch! and 
what a nasty mug he has. To have Trifon whipped at the po-
lice station—he said that deliberately. No, you’re wrong, whip 
him yourself; I am not in favour of whipping, I’ll put Trifon 
in his place with words, with a rebuke, that will make him 
realize. As for using the whip, h’m . . . that question is as yet 
unsolved, h’m. . . . Shall I look in at Emerance’s? Ugh! The devil 
take these damned pavements!” he cried out as he tripped up 
on something. “And this is the capital. This is supposed to be 
civilization! You might break your leg. H’m. . . . I cannot stand 
that Semyon Ivanovitch, a most unpleasant mug. He was snig-
gering at me when I talked about ‘moral embrace’. Well, and 
if they embrace, what’s that got to do with you? Don’t worry, 
I won’t embrace you; rather embrace a peasant. . . . If I come 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  93 
across a peasant, well, I’ll talk to him. However, I was drunk 
and perhaps did not express myself quite clearly. Even now, 
perhaps, I’m not expressing myself properly. . . . H’m. . . . I’ll 
never get drunk again. In the evening you talk freely and next 
day you regret it. I am not swaying on my feet, am I? Ah well, 
they are all scoundrels, just the same!” 
So, at random, Ivan Ilyitch, conducted an incoherent discussion 
with himself as he continued to walk along the pavement. The 
fresh air was having its effect on him and had, you might say, 
sobered him. Five minutes later he would have calmed down 
and felt sleepy. But suddenly, within a  couple of paces of the 
Bolshoi Prospect, he thought he heard the sound of music. He 
looked round. On the other side of the street, in a very ram-
shackle wooden house, one-storied but long, a party seemed to 
be in full swing; the fiddles hooted, the double-bass creaked and 
the flute sang shrilly to the tempo of a gay quadrille. A crowd 
had gathered below the windows, mostly of women in quilted 
coats and shawls over their heads; they were trying their best to 
see between the chinks of the shutters what was going on. Ap-
parently all was gaiety within. The thump of the dancers’ feet 
could be heard across the street. Ivan Ilyitch noticed a police-
man near by and approached him. 
“Whose house is it, old fellow?” he asked, throwing open his 
expensive fur-lined coat a little, just enough to let the police-
man see the important decoration he was wearing. 
“It is Pseldonymov’s; he is a clerk, a registrar,” answered the 
policeman, straightening himself as he caught a glimpse of the 
medal. 

94  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
“Pseldonymov’s! I never! What about him! Is he getting 
married?” 
“He is, Your Honour, to the daughter of a Titular Council-
lor. Mlekopitayev, Titular Councillor he is . . . the one who used 
to work in the City Council. This house goes with the bride.” 
“So that is now Pseldonymov’s and not Mlekopitayev’s 
house?” 
“It is Pseldonymov’s, Your Honour. It used to be Mlekopi-
tayev’s before, but now it is Pseldonymov’s.” 
“H’m. I am asking you this, my good man, because I am his 
chief. I am the General in charge of the very offi  ce in which 
Pseldonymov works.” 
“Quite so, Your Excellency,” said the policeman, finally 
drawing himself up to his full height, while Ivan Ilyitch ap-
peared to grow pensive. He stood there, thinking. . . . 
Yes, indeed, Pseldonymov was in his department, even in his 
own offi  ce; he did remember that. He was a very junior offi  cial 
with a salary of some ten roubles a month. As Mr. Pralinski had 
only very recently taken over his department, he did not re-
member all his underlings too well, but Pseldonymov he did 
remember, just because of his name. It had immediately caught 
his eye, so that he had been curious enough to look more  
closely at the owner of so strange a name. He now remembered 
a very young man with a long hooked nose and colourless bris-
tly hair; he was anaemic and underfed, and wore an impossible 
uniform and impossible, even indecent, nether garments. He 
remembered that at the time the thought had crossed his mind: 
ought he not to give the poor devil a bonus of ten roubles for 
the New Year to rig himself out? But because the poor fellow 
wore an over-hypocritical expression on his face and because 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  95 
his appearance was extremely unattractive, even to the point of 
repulsion, the kind thought had somehow evaporated, so that 
in the end Pseldonymov had remained without bonus. He was 
all the more surprised when, a week earlier, this same Pseld-
onymov had approached him with the request to get married. 
Ivan Ilyitch remembered that at the time he had been too busy 
to take the matter up properly, so that the question of the mar-
riage was decided casually and hurriedly. Nevertheless, he dis-
tinctly remembered that his bride was bringing Pseldonymov a 
wooden house and a clear four hundred roubles; this fact had 
astonished him at the time; he remembered he had even made 
a pun about the combination of the surnames Pseldonymov 
and Mlekopitayev. All this he clearly recalled. 
As he remembered he became more and more lost in reflec-
tion. It is well known that a whole train of thought can pass 
through one’s mind in a flash in the form of some kind of feel-
ing, without being translated into human language, let alone 
into writing. However, we shall try to convey all the feelings of 
our hero and bring before the reader at least something of their 
substance, so to speak, everything that was most essential and 
most plausible in them. Because many of our feelings, put into 
ordinary words, would appear quite implausible, would they 
not? That is why they are never revealed, but remain locked up 
within us. Of course, Ivan Ilyitch’s feelings and thoughts were a 
little incoherent. But then you know the reason for this. 
“Now, why,” passed through his mind, “is it that we all indulge 
in talk, but when it comes to action nothing comes of it but a 
mockery? For instance, take that self-same Pseldonymov: he 

96  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
came back from the wedding ceremony a short while ago, all 
excited, full of hope, ready to taste joy . . . this is one of the 
most blissful days of his life. Now he is fussing around with 
his guests, giving a party—a modest, meagre party, but all the 
same a happy and genuine one. . . . What would happen if he 
realized that at this very moment I—I—his most exalted di-
rector, am standing by his house and listening to his music? 
Indeed, what would he do? But really! what would he do, if 
I suddenly took it into my head to go in? H’m . . . naturally, 
he would at first take fright, struck dumb with confusion. I 
should disturb him, spoil everything, perhaps . . . yes, this 
would happen, if any other General intruded, but not with 
me. . . . That’s the point, with any other, but assuredly not 
with me. . . .
“Yes, Stepan Nikiforovitch! You refused to understand me a 
short while ago, but here you have a living example. Yes, sir. We 
are all shouting about humanitarianism, but are incapable of 
herosim, of a heroic act. 
“What heroism? Why, this! Just consider: despite the way all 
members of society feel about each other, here I myself shall 
turn up at one o’clock in the morning at the wedding of my 
underling, a registrar, earning ten roubles a month; but this is 
madness, this would create havoc, wouldn’t it turn things up-
side down, the last day of Pompeii, utter chaos? Nobody would 
understand it. Stepan Nikiforovitch wouldn’t understand it to 
his dying day. Didn’t he say: we shan’t live up to it? But that re-
fers to you old men, paralyzed and stagnating, whereas I shall! 
I’ll transform the last day of Pompeii into the sweetest day for 
my clerk, and an eccentric act into a normal, patriarchal, lofty 
and moral gesture. How? Like this. Kindly listen: 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  97 
“Well . . . let’s suppose that I go in: they are astonished, break 
off dancing, draw back, overawed. Yes, but it is here that I re-
veal my quality: I march straight up to the frightened Pseldony-
mov and say with the most affectionate smile, in the simplest 
words: ‘It’s like this,’ I say. I have been visiting His Excellency 
Stepan Nikiforovitch. I expect you know him, a neighbour of 
yours. . . .” And then, in a slightly comic tone, I recount the 
incident with Trifon. From Trifon I pass on to the fact that I had 
to walk. . . . Well, then—that I heard music, asked of the police-
man what the noise was and learned that you, my friend, had 
just got married. I’ll go to my underling’s house, think I; I’ll 
see how my clerks enjoy themselves and how they get married. 
I don’t suppose you’d show me the door, would you? Turn me 
out! What an expression in the mouth of one’s underling. What 
the devil—turn me out indeed; I think he would more likely 
lose his head, rush to settle me in an arm-chair, tremble with 
delight, at first quite distracted. 
“Now what could be simpler, more gracious than such an 
action? Why did I go in? That is another question. That is, so to 
speak, the moral aspect of the matter. That is the core of the 
matter. 
“H’m . . . oh dear me, what was I thinking about? Oh yes. 
“And naturally they will put me next to the most impor-
tant guest, some sort of Titular Councillor or relative, a retired 
staff-captain with a red nose . . . how well Gogol described these 
characters! And, of course, I am introduced to the bride. I com-
pliment her, I encourage the guests. I ask them to be at their 
ease, to go on enjoying themselves, continue dancing; I play 
the wit, I laugh—in short, I am amiable and charming. After 
all, I always am amiable and charming when I am pleased with 

98  \\  FYODOR  DOSTOYEVSK Y  
myself. . . . H’m . . . the truth is, I’m still, it seems, not exactly 
drunk, but somewhat . . . 
“ . . . Of course, being a gentleman I shall treat them as 
equals and on no account demand any special attention. . . . 
But from the moral point of view . . . this is another matter: 
they will understand and appreciate me properly . . . my ac-
tion will revive in them a sense of their own dignity. . . . Well, 
I stay there, for half an hour . . . maybe even a whole hour. It is 
obvious that I leave just before supper. They will start bustling, 
start baking and roasting, they will bow low before me, but I 
shall just drink to the health of the newly-weds and decline 
to take supper. I shall say: ‘I have some business to attend to’, 
and as soon as I say the word ‘business’ everyone’s face will 
assume a respectful and serious expression. In this way I shall 
tactfully remind them that between myself and them there is 
a difference. . . . Like heaven and earth. Not that I mean to sug-
gest that, but one has got to . . . even from the moral point of 
view it is necessary, whatever one may say. Incidentally, I shall 
promptly smile, perhaps even laugh a little, then everyone will 
feel reassured. . . . I may joke once more with the bride, h’m. 
. . . I can even do this: I can hint that I’ll return again exactly in 
nine months in the capacity of godfather. Ha-ha! She is sure to 
give birth by that time. After all, these people breed like rab-
bits. Well, they’ll all break into laughter, the bride will blush; I 
shall kiss her forehead with genuine affection, I may even give 
her my blessing and . . . tomorrow in the offi  ce everyone will 
know of my exploit. Tomorrow I shall be stern once more, ex-
acting, even obdurate, but at the same time they will all know 
who I really am. They will know my soul, they will know my 
innermost self: ‘As a chief he is strict, but as a man—he is a 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  99 
perfect angel!’ That is how I shall win them over; I shall catch 
them by some small action which you will never imagine. 
They are sure to be won over; I am their father, they my chil-
dren. . . . Come now, Your Excellency Stepan Nikiforovitch, go 
thou and do likewise. . . . 
“Do you realize, do you understand that Pseldonymov will 
tell his children about how the General himself feasted and 
even drank at his wedding? And these children will tell their 
children, and they in their turn their grandchildren, as their 
most treasured recollection, how the high dignitary, the states-
man (I shall be all this by then) had done them the honour, 
and so on, and so on. I shall raise the spirits of the downtrod-
den. I shall restore him to himself. . . . To think that he gets 
ten roubles salary a month! . . . If I were to repeat this, or some-
thing of the kind, five or ten times, I should achieve universal 
popularity. My action will be imprinted upon all hearts, and 
the devil only knows what may be the outcome of all this, of all 
this popularity, I mean . . .” 
It is in this or a similar manner that Ivan Ilyitch talked the ques-
tion over with himself. (Well, my friends, what can a man not 
say to himself, especially when he is in a somewhat odd state?) 
It took perhaps one minute for all these arguments to flash 
through his mind, and undoubtedly he would have contented 
himself with these reveries, and imagining Stepan Nikiforo-
vitch brought to shame, would have quietly set off for home and 
retired to bed. And that would have been a good thing, too. But 
the trouble was that that particular moment was no ordinary 
one. As if on purpose at that same moment the self-satisfied 

100  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
faces of Stepan Nikiforovitch and Semyon Ivanovitch formed 
in his imagination. 
“We shan’t live up to it,” Stepan Nikiforovitch had repeated 
with an artful glance. 
“Ha-ha-ha!” chimed in Semyon Ivanovitch with his nastiest 
smile. 
“Just let’s see, whether we shan’t live up to it,” said Ivan  
Ilyitch so resolutely that his face actually flushed. He walked 
off the wooden pavement and directed his steps firmly across 
the road towards the house of his subordinate, the registrar 
Pseldonymov. 
He was being led astray by his evil star. Passing briskly through 
the open gate, he kicked away contemptuously the long-haired 
mongrel which had long lost its voice and which, more from a 
sense of duty than ferocity, threw itself at his feet with a hoarse 
bark. He went along the path raised above the ground leading 
to the little covered porch which jutted out into the courtyard 
and, climbing three very rickety wooden steps, found himself 
in a tiny passage. Although a tallow candle end or some sort of 
nightlight was burning somewhere in the corner, Ivan Ilyitch 
was not saved from stepping with his left foot, clad in a galosh, 
into a dish of brawn which had been put out to set. Ivan Ilyitch 
bent down and, glancing round with curiosity, saw that there 
were two other similar dishes with aspic, as well as two moulds 
evidently full of blancmange. The squashed brawn rather dis-
concerted him and for one fleeting moment he considered the 
idea of slipping away immediately. But he decided this would 
be unworthy of him. Maintaining that nobody had seen him 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  101 
and that he would surely not be suspected, he hastily wiped his 
galosh to eradicate all traces, felt for the padded door, opened it, 
and found himself in a very small hall. One half of the hall was 
literally choked with various coats, fur jackets, cloaks, hoods, 
scarves and galoshes. In the other half the musicians had spread 
out: two violins, a flute and a double-bass, four men in all who, 
doubtless, had been picked up off the streets. They sat at a small 
plain wooden table and by the light of one tallow candle were 
scraping away with all their might at the last figure of the qua-
drille. Through the open door to the adjoining room the danc-
ers could be seen in a haze of dust, tobacco smoke and kitchen 
vapours. An atmosphere of frantic merriment enveloped the 
whole company. Bursts of laughter, shouts and piercing shrieks 
were heard from the ladies. The men stamped like a squadron 
of horse. The commands of the Master of Ceremonies could 
be heard above the uproar, his collar unbuttoned and coat-tails 
flying. “Gentlemen, forward, chain de dames, balance!” and so on. 
Ivan Ilyitch, in a state of some excitement, flung off his fur coat 
and his galoshes and, with his sable hat in his hand, entered the 
room. By now he had given up reasoning. 
For the first instant no one noticed him; they were all busy 
finishing the dance. Ivan Ilyitch stood as if stunned and could 
not make out a thing in this hotchpotch of ladies’ dresses, 
men with cigarettes between their lips, which flitted by . . . one 
lady’s pale-blue scarf floated by, catching his nose. She was fol-
lowed by a medical student, his hair all dishevelled as if swept 
by a whirlwind, who rushing by him in frenzied rapture gave 
him a hard push. An officer of some regiment, who was as 
tall as a barge-pole, also flashed past him. Someone who flew 
past, stamping with the rest, cried out in an unnaturally shrill 

102  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
voice: ‘Eh-eh-ekh Pseldonymushka!” Beneath Ivan Ilyitch’s 
feet the floor felt sticky: they had evidently waxed it. There 
must have been about thirty guests in the room, which was 
quite sizeable. 
However, in another minute the quadrille was over, and al-
most immediately everything happened exactly as Ivan Ilyitch 
had imagined as he stood dreaming on the wooden pavement. 
The guests and dancers had not time to regain their breath 
and wipe their faces when a murmur ran through the room, 
an extraordinary whisper. All eyes, all faces turned quickly 
in the direction of the guest who had just entered. Then fol-
lowed a general shuffling back as everyone gently retreated. 
They tugged at the clothes of those who had not noticed the 
visitor to attract their attention; these now looked round and 
immediately fell back with the rest. Ivan Ilyitch still stood in 
the doorway without advancing, while between him and the 
guests the gap, strewn with countless sweet-papers, tickets and 
cigarette ends, widened. Suddenly a young man stepped timo-
rously forward; he wore the uniform of a civil servant and had 
bristly, light-coloured hair and a hooked nose. He stepped for-
ward all hunched up, and looked at the guest in exactly the 
same way as a dog looks at his master when summoned to re-
ceive a beating. 
“How do you do, Pseldonymov? Recognize me?” said Ivan 
Ilyitch, and instantly felt that he had said it extremely awk-
wardly; he also felt that at that moment he was perhaps com-
mitting the most dreadful piece of stupidity. 
“Your E-e-excellency!” muttered Pseldonymov. 
“Well, now! I have dropped in quite by chance, my friend; 
dropped in on my way home, as you have probably guessed.” 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  103 
But Pseldonymov obviously had guessed nothing. He stood 
there, his eyes wide open, terribly perplexed. 
“I suppose you won’t turn me out . . . Glad or not glad, we 
have to welcome our guests . . .” continued Ivan Ilyitch, continu-
ing to feel embarrassed to the point of weakness. He wanted to 
smile but no longer could; he felt that to tell his humorous story 
about Stepan Nikiforovitch and Trifon was becoming progres-
sively less and less possible. Yet Pseldonymov, as if purposely, 
would not emerge from his stupor, and continued foolishly 
gazing at him. Ivan Ilyitch winced, he felt that it wanted only a 
moment more for the whole situation to become grotesque. 
“Perhaps I have disturbed you . . . I’ll be going!” he muttered, 
and a certain nerve began to twitch in the right corner of his 
mouth. But Pseldonymov had recovered. 
“Your Excellency, for goodness’ sake . . . an honour . . .” he 
mumbled, bowing hastily. “Do us the honour of being seated 
. . .” and recovering still more he pointed with both hands to 
the sofa, from which the table had been pushed back to make 
room for the dancing. 
Ivan Ilyitch felt easier in his mind and sank down on the 
sofa; immediately someone rushed forward to move the table 
towards it. He cast a glance round and noticed that he alone 
was seated, while all the others, even the ladies, were stand-
ing. This was a bad omen. But the moment had not yet come 
to reassure and encourage them. The guests were still backing 
away and before him Pseldonymov alone stood, hunched up, 
still comprehending nothing and no flicker of a smile on his 
face. It was an unpleasant situation; in fact, our hero at that 
moment experienced so much anguish that this invasion à la 
Haroun al Raschid, in accordance with his principles of behav-

104  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
iour towards inferiors, might really have been regarded as a 
heroic deed. 
But suddenly another small bowing figure appeared beside 
Pseldonymov. To his unspeakable pleasure, not to say relief, Ivan 
Ilyitch at once recognized the chief clerk of his department, 
Akim Petrovitch Zubikov. He was not, of course, acquainted 
with him personally, but knew of him as a capable offi  cial and a 
man of few words. He rose immediately and held out his hand, 
his whole hand, not merely two fingers. Akim Petrovitch re-
ceived it in the palms of both his with the greatest reverence. 
The General had triumphed; the situation was saved. 
And, in fact, Pseldonymov had now become, so to speak, not 
the second but the third person. He could now tell the story di-
rectly to the head clerk, in an hour of necessity driven to accept 
him as a friend, even as a crony. While all Pseldonymov could 
do was to merely remain silent, trembling with awe. Conse-
quently, the rules of propriety were observed. But it was essen-
tial to tell the story; Ivan Ilyitch felt this; he saw that all the 
guests expected something, that all the members of the house-
hold, crowded in the two doorways, were almost scrambling 
over each other to get a look and hear him speak. However, it 
was aggravating that the chief clerk, out of sheer stupidity, still 
would not sit down. 
“What about you?” said Ivan Ilyitch, awkwardly pointing to 
the place on the sofa by his side. 
“If you please, sir . . . I am fine here, sir. . . .” And Akim Petro-
vitch quickly sat down on a chair which was swiftly off ered to 
him by Pseldonymov, who still persisted in standing. 
“Just imagine . . .” began Ivan Ilyitch, addressing Akim 
Petrovitch only, at first a little shakily but then in a voice tinged 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  105 
with familiarity. He even drawled slightly, stressing each word, 
emphasizing syllables, mispronouncing letters; in short, he was 
conscious of his affectation, but was no longer able to regain 
control of himself: some external force directed him. At that 
moment he was painfully becoming aware of a great many 
things. 
“Just think, I have come straight from Stepan Nikiforo-
vitch—you may perhaps have heard of him, the Privy Council-
lor—the one—you know . . . on that commission . . .” 
Akim Petrovitch respectfully bent his whole body forward, 
conveying that he could hardly not know of him. 
“He is now your neighbour,” continued Ivan Ilyitch, for a 
moment turning to Pseldonymov in order to be correct and 
polished; but he soon looked away as he saw at once by Pseld-
onymov’s eyes that he was quite indifferent to what he heard. 
“The old man, as you know, has dreamed all his life of buy-
ing a house. . . . Well, he has bought one. A most attractive 
house. Yes . . . and it also happened to be his birthday. He has 
never celebrated it before. You know, he even used to conceal 
the date from us, ignored it out of meanness.” He chuckled. 
“And now he is so delighted with his new house that he invited 
me and Semyon Ivanovitch. Do you know him—Shipulenko?” 
Akim Petrovitch bowed again. He bowed eagerly. Ivan Ilyitch 
felt a little more relieved. Otherwise it had already occurred to 
him that the head clerk might perhaps guess that he was at that 
moment a necessary prop for His Excellency. That would be the 
worst that could happen. 
“Well, the three of us sat down together; he treated us to 
champagne; we talked about business, one thing and another . . . 
about various subjects . . . we even had an argument . . . ha-ha!” 

106  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
Akim Petrovitch raised his eyebrows respectfully. 
“But that’s not the point. At last I took my leave of him— 
he’s an old man of regular habits, goes to bed early in his old 
age, you know. I left the house. My coachman, Trifon, was no-
where to be seen. I got worried and made inquiries: ‘What has 
Trifon done with my carriage?’ It transpired that, in the hope 
that I should be late, he’d gone off  to the wedding of his sister 
. . . God knows who, somewhere here on the Petersburg Side, 
and, as it happens, had taken the carriage with him!” 
Once again, for courtesy’s sake, the General glanced at 
Pseldonymov. The latter bowed immediately, but not at all in 
the way one would bow to a General. “He’s unsympathetic and 
hard,” flashed through Ivan Ilyitch’s mind. 
“You don’t say!” said Akim Petrovitch in great astonish-
ment, and a low murmur of surprise ran through the assem-
bled company. 
“You can imagine my position . . .” Ivan Ilyitch glanced 
round the room. “There was nothing left for me to do but to 
begin walking. I thought that if I reached the Bolshoi Prospect I 
should be sure to find some Vanka or other. Ha! ha! ha!” 
“Ha! ha! ha!” echoed Akim Petrovich respectfully. Once 
more a murmur, this time of amusement, ran through the as-
sembly. At that moment the glass of one of the lamps hanging 
on the wall splintered and broke. Someone rushed forward to 
deal with it. Pseldonymov gave a start and stared sternly at the 
lamp, but the General paid no attention whatsoever to it, and 
once again all was calm. 
“There I was, walking along—the night was so lovely, so 
still. Suddenly I heard music, the stamping of feet, the sound 
of dancing. I inquired of the policeman what was going on. I 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  107 
was told it was Pseldonymov’s wedding. Well, my friend, you are 
throwing a party on a grand scale, aren’t you? Ha! ha!” he said 
suddenly, addressing Pseldonymov again. 
“Ha! ha! ha! Yes, sir . . .” echoed Akim Petrovitch; the guests 
stirred, but the most absurd part of it was that, even now, though 
he bowed again, Pseldonymov still did not smile. He looked as 
though he was made of wood. “He must be a fool,” thought Ivan 
Ilyitch. “Why, the old ass should smile and everything would go 
off smoothly.” His heart throbbed with impatience. 
“I’ll drop in on my subordinate, I thought. After all, he  
won’t kick me out . . . welcome or unwelcome, guests must be 
received. Forgive me, my friend, if I have inconvenienced you in 
any way. I shall leave. . . . I only dropped in for a moment.” 
But by this time the assembled company was gradually be-
coming restless. Akim Petrovitch assumed a sweet expression: 
“As if Your Excellency could possibly disturb us!” The guests 
stirred and at last began to show signs of being at their ease. 
Nearly all the ladies were now seated, which was a good and 
positive sign. The boldest of them were fanning themselves 
with their handkerchiefs. One lady, in a worn velvet dress, said 
something in a deliberately loud voice. The officer to whom she 
had addressed herself wanted to reply in a loud voice too, but as 
no one else was speaking loudly thought better of it 
The men, mostly Government clerks with one or two stu-
dents among them, exchanged glances, as if encouraging one 
another to relax, began coughing and actually moving a step or 
two in either direction. As a matter of fact, no one was particu-
larly embarrassed; it was simply that they were awkward and 
regarded the man who had barged in on them and interrupted 
their merrymaking with something verging on hostility. The 

108  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
officer, ashamed of his feebleness, gradually began to sidle up 
to the table. 
“Look, my friend, may I ask your name and patronymic?” 
Ivan Ilyitch inquired of Pseldonymov. 
“Porfiry Petrov, Your Excellency,” he answered, staring 
ahead as if he were on parade. 
“Introduce me, Porfiry Petrov, to your young wife. . . . Take 
me to her. . . . I . . .” 
And he made as if to rise. But Pseldonymov threw himself as 
fast as he could towards the drawing-room. As it happened, the 
bride was already standing at the door, but hearing her name 
mentioned she quickly hid herself. In a second Pseldonymov 
was leading her in by the hand. Everyone stepped aside, mak-
ing way for them. Ivan Ilyitch rose solemnly and turned to her 
with his most amiable smile. 
“I am very very pleased to meet you,” he said with a slight 
bow, in the manner of a grand seigneur, “especially on such a 
day. . . .” 
He gave a significant smile. The ladies became pleasantly 
agitated. 
“Charmée,” said the lady in the velvet dress, under her 
breath. 
The bride was worthy of Pseldonymov. She was a slim young 
lady of barely seventeen, with a very tiny pale face, and sharp 
little nose. Her small, swivelling eyes did not in the least suggest 
shyness, but, on the contrary, stared fi xedly and indeed a shade 
maliciously. Clearly Pseldonymov had chosen her for her beauty. 
She wore a white muslin dress over a pink slip. Her neck was 
scraggy, her body like that of a pullet, with protruding bones. She 
found simply nothing to say in reply to the General’s greeting. 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  109 
“That’s a sugar plum, you have there,” he continued in a 
low voice, as if addressing Pseldonymov alone, but purposely in 
such a way that the bride would hear him also. But again Pseld-
onymov had absolutely nothing to say, and this time he did not 
even make as if to bow. By his eyes it seemed to Ivan Ilyitch 
almost as though there were something cold and secret hidden 
within him, even something sly, peculiar and sinister. Yet at all 
costs he must provoke an emotional response from him. That, 
after all, was why he was here. 
“Not a bad pair,” he thought. “However . . .” and he turned 
again to the bride, who had seated herself on the sofa beside 
him. But he only got “no” or “yes” in answer to the one or two 
questions he addressed to her, and to tell the truth he could 
hardly even make these words out. 
“If only she were slightly less embarrassed,” he went on to 
reflect, “then I could start joking. As it is, I am in a hopeless fix.” 
Akim Petrovitch also remained silent, as if on purpose; it was 
unpardonable, even though it was out of stupidity. 
“Ladies and gentlemen, are you sure I have not interrupted 
your fun?” he was saying to the whole party. He even felt the 
palms of his hands sweating. 
“No, sir . . . don’t worry about that, Your Excellency, we shall 
begin again in a minute; just now . . . we are taking a breather, 
sir . . .” answered the officer. The bride gave the officer a look of 
appreciation; he was still young and wore the uniform of some 
obscure regiment. Pseldonymov had remained standing on the 
same spot, his head inclined slightly forward, his hooked nose 
seeming to jut out farther than ever. He listened, with the look 
of a footman holding his master’s coat, waiting for the end of 
the letter’s leave-taking. Ivan Ilyitch thought up this compari-

110  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
son himself; he felt bewildered and awkward, dreadfully awk-
ward, as if the ground were giving way under his feet, as though 
he had entered some place of no return, as if he were in the 
dark. 
All at once the guests made way for a short, stocky, middle-
aged woman; she was dressed simply—though smartened up— 
with a large shawl round her shoulders, pinned at the throat, 
and a cap, which she was obviously unaccustomed to wearing. 
In her hands she held a small round tray on which stood an 
untouched, uncorked bottle of champagne and two glasses— 
no more and no less. The bottle was evidently intended for only 
two of the guests. 
The elderly woman approached the General. 
“Accept us for what we are, Your Excellency,” she said, bow-
ing, “and since you have deigned to honour my son’s wedding 
with your presence, out of the goodness of your heart drink a 
toast to the young  couple. Don’t offend us by refusing.” 
Ivan Ilyitch clutched at her as if at salvation. She was by 
no means an old woman, not more than forty-five or -six. 
But she had such a kind, rosy face, an open, round Russian 
face—she smiled so good-naturedly, bowed so simply, that 
Ivan Ilyitch was almost comforted and was again filled with 
hope. 
“So you, you are the . . . mother of your son,” he said, rising 
from the sofa. 
“My mother, Your Excellency,” mumbled Pseldonymov, 
stretching his long neck and again thrusting his nose forward. 
“Ah, very pleased . . . very pleased to meet you.” 
“Your Excellency won’t refuse . . .” 
“Not at all. I’d be delighted.” 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  111 
The tray was placed on the table. Pseldonymov jumped for-
ward to pour out the wine, and, still standing, Ivan Ilyitch took 
a glass. 
“I am particularly glad of this opportunity to be able—” he 
began—”to be able . . . to witness this . . . In short, as your chief, I 
wish you, madam,” he turned to the bride, “and you, my friend 
Porfiry—I wish you all prosperity and lifelong happiness.” 
With feeling, he emptied his glass; it was the seventh that 
evening. Pseldonymov looked on seriously, even gloomily. The 
General began to detest him with all his might. 
“And this blockhead here” (he glanced at the offi  cer) “is still 
hanging around her. Couldn’t he give a cheer? Then things  
would go like a house on fire. . . .” 
“And you too, Akim Petrovitch, drink a glass and congrat-
ulate them,” added the elderly woman, turning to the head 
clerk. “You are his chief, he is your subordinate. Look after my 
son’s interests, my dear; I ask you as his mother. And don’t for-
get us in times to come, love, Akim Petrovitch, kind man that 
you are.” 
“What excellent people these old Russian women are!” 
thought Ivan Ilyitch. “She has put new life into us all. I’ve al-
ways loved the common people. . . .” 
Just then another tray was brought to the table. It was car-
ried by a maidservant in a rustling new cotton dress and crino-
line. The tray was so large that she could hardly hold it in her 
two hands. On it stood any number of small dishes with apples, 
bonbons, glacé fruits, jellied sweets, walnuts and many other 
things. Until then the tray had been standing in the drawing-
room as refreshments for all the guests in particular for the la-
dies. But now it was brought in for the General alone. 

112  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
“Don’t refuse our refreshments, Your Excellency; what’s 
ours is yours,” said the elderly woman, bowing. 
“Indeed, no, it’s a pleasure,” said Ivan Ilyitch; and he gladly 
took a walnut and cracked it between his fingers. After all, had 
he not decided to be as agreeable as possible. 
Meanwhile, the bride burst into giggles. 
“What’s the joke?” asked Ivan Ilyitch, smiling, pleased to see 
any sign of animation. 
“It is just Ivan Kostenkinytch who is making me laugh,” she 
answered, lowering her eyes. 
The General noticed a fair-haired, rather good-looking 
young man, hiding himself on a chair behind the sofa, whis-
pering something to Mrs. Pseldonymov. The young man half 
rose; he was evidently very young and shy. 
“I was telling her about the ‘Book of Dreams’, a book which 
interprets dreams, Your Excellency,” he murmured almost 
apologetically. 
“What sort of Book of Dreams?” asked Ivan Ilyitch  
indulgently. 
“It’s a new Book of Dreams, sir, quite a reputable one! I told 
her, sir, that if one dreamt of Mr. Panayev, that meant spilling 
coffee on one’s shirt-front, sir.” 
“There’s Innocence for you!” thought Ivan Ilyitch, with 
a feeling of irritation. Though the young man blushed as he 
spoke, he was nevertheless very pleased with himself for telling 
this story about Mr. Panayev. 
“Yes, yes, I have heard of it,” responded His Excellency. 
“No, but there’s an even better one,” put in another voice 
quite close to Ivan Ilyitch. “A new encyclopaedia is being pub-

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  113 
lished, Mr. Krayevski is to write for it, they say, and Alferaki will 
be a contributor too . . . and there will be scurrilous pieces . . .” 
This was said by a young man who, far from being timid, 
was rather bold in manner. He wore a white waistcoat and 
gloves and held a hat in his hands. He did not dance and, since 
he was on the staff of the satirical magazine The Firebrand, he be-
haved with an air of superiority that he lent to the company 
in which he found that he was by chance an honoured guest. 
He and Pseldonymov were on intimate terms with each other, 
having a year previously lived together in some obscure quartier. 
However, he did not say no to a glass of vodka and had already 
retired repeatedly for that purpose to a secluded back room 
which everyone was acquainted with. The General took a vio-
lent dislike to him. 
“And what is so funny, sir,” joyfully put in the fair-hatred 
young man who had told the story of the shirt-front, and 
whom the journalist in the white waistcoat consequently re-
garded with hate, “what is so funny, Your Excellency, is that 
the speaker assumed that Mr. Krayevski does not know how to 
spell and thinks that ‘scurrilous’ is written with an ‘a’.” 
But the poor young man hardly had time to finish. He could 
see by the General’s eyes that he had long been acquainted with 
this fact and that, as a result, he felt embarrassed. The young 
man felt abashed; he rapidly managed to make himself incon-
spicuous and remained dejected for the rest of the evening. 
However, the bold journalist on The Firebrand approached nearer, 
as though he intended to sit down somewhere in the vicinity of 
the General. This kind of familiarity seemed to Ivan Ilyitch a 
little presumptuous. 

114  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
“Come, Porfiry, tell me—” began the General, for some-
thing to say, “I have always wanted to ask you personally—why 
are you called Pseldonymov and not Pseudonymov? Surely you 
ought to be called Pseudonymov?” 
“I can give no precise reason, Your Excellency,” answered 
Pseldonymov. 
“Perhaps it was his father, sir, when he entered the service; 
there may have been some mistake in the papers, and he has 
remained Pseldonymov,” suggested Akim Petrovitch. “It can 
happen.” 
“Un-doubt-ed-ly,” took up the General eagerly, “un-doubt-
ed-ly, you can judge for yourself—Pseudonymov has its origin 
in the literary word ‘pseudonym’, but Pseldonymov doesn’t 
mean anything.” 
“Out of ignorance, sir,” added Akim Petrovitch. 
“How do you mean, out of ignorance?” 
“Sometimes the common people change the letters out of 
ignorance, sir, and pronounce them in their own way. For ex-
ample, they say ‘nevalid’ when they should say ‘invalid’, sir.” 
“Oh, yes, ‘nevalid’ . . . Ha! ha! ha! . . .” 
“They also say ‘mumber,’ Your Excellency,” blurted out 
the tall officer, who had long been itching to say something 
himself. 
“What do you mean by ‘mumber’?” 
“ ‘Mumber’ instead of ‘number’, Your Excellency.” 
“Oh, yes, quite, ‘mumber’ instead of ‘number’ . . . Oh, yes, 
yes . . . ha! ha! ha!” 
Ivan Ilyitch felt also obliged to give a little laugh for the of-
fi cer’s sake. 
The officer adjusted his tie. 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  115 
“And they also say ‘bast’,” broke in the contributor to The 
Firebrand. But His Excellency tried not to listen to him. After all, 
he was not obliged to laugh for everybody’s sake. 
“ ‘Bast’ instead of ‘past’,” badgered the journalist with obvi-
ous annoyance. 
Ivan Ilyitch looked at him severely. 
“What are you bothering him for?” whispered Pseldonymov 
to the journalist. 
“What do you mean? I am just making conversation. Can’t 
a man even talk?” he was on the point of continuing the argu-
ment in a whisper, but instead he held his tongue and left the 
room with concealed anger. 
He went straight to the back room, which had been made 
attractive to the gentlemen by a small table covered with a 
Yaroslav tablecloth on which were two sorts of vodka, herrings, 
small pieces of bread with caviar, and a bottle of extremely 
strong Russian sherry, which had been placed there for their 
benefit at the beginning of the evening. Still fuming, he had 
just finished pouring himself a glass of vodka when the medical 
student with the dishevelled hair suddenly rushed in. He was 
the chief dancer and can-can expert at Pseldonymov’s ball. In 
hasty greed he attacked the decanter. 
“They are going to begin directly,” he muttered quickly in a 
dictatorial manner. “Come and have a look. I shall give them a 
solo performance standing on my head, and after supper I shall 
risk a can-can. It will be quite the thing for a wedding. A kind of 
friendly hint to Pseldonymov . . . she’s a poppet that Cleopatra 
Semyonovna; you can risk anything you like with her.” 
“He’s a reactionary,” answered the journalist gloomily, emp-
tying his glass. 

116  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
“Who is a reactionary?” 
“That individual who was treated to jellied sweets. He’s a 
reactionary, I tell you.” 
“Go on with you,” muttered the student, and hearing the 
ritornella of the quadrille, rushed out of the room. 
Left alone, the journalist poured himself another glass to 
support his courage and independence, drained it and helped 
himself to the savouries; never has His Excellency State Coun-
cillor Ivan Ilyitch had a more bitter enemy or a more implacable 
avenger than the slighted contributor to The Firebrand, especially 
after two glasses of vodka. Alas! Ivan Ilyitch was totally unsus-
pecting. Furthermore, he was oblivious of another very impor-
tant fact, which was to affect the attitude of the guests towards 
His Excellency. The fact was that though he, for his part, had 
given a proper and even detailed explanation of his presence at 
the wedding of a subordinate, this explanation had not really 
satisfied anybody and the guests continued to feel ill at ease. 
But suddenly, as if by magic, everything changed; they seemed 
reassured and ready to enjoy themselves, laugh, scream and 
dance, just as if the unexpected guest were not present in the 
room. The reason for this was that suddenly, by some mysteri-
ous means, a whispered rumour spread the news that the guest 
seemed “just a little bit . . . too merry on account of . . .” And 
although on the surface this rumour seemed dreadful slander, 
it became more and more evident that it was true and explained 
everything. The company relaxed. And it was at that very mo-
ment that the quadrille, the last before supper to which the 
medical student had hurried back, began. 
Ivan Ilyitch was just on the point of addressing the bride 
again, trying this time to overcome her shyness with a joke, 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  117 
when the tall officer ran up and with a flourish sank down on 
one knee before her. She immediately jumped up from the sofa 
and flitted off with him to take her place in the quadrille. The 
officer did not even apologize, nor did she glance at the General 
on leaving him; it seemed as if she were glad to be rid of him. 
“After all, she really was justified in doing that,” thought 
Ivan Ilyitch; “they haven’t learnt good manners. H’m! You, my 
friend, Porfiry, don’t stand on ceremony,” he said, addressing 
Pseldonymov. “You may have business to attend to . . . some ar-
rangements . . . or something. . . . Please don’t mind me . . .” 
“Is he standing guard over me, or something?” he added to 
himself. 
He found Pseldonymov unbearable, with his long neck and 
his stare fixed in his direction. In short, all this was not as it 
should be, not at all as it should be, but Ivan Ilyitch was still far 
from admitting this to himself. 
The quadrille began. 
“May I, Your Excellency . . . ?” asked Akim Petrovitch re-
spectfully, holding the bottle in his hands, poised to fill His Ex-
cellency’s glass. 
“I . . . I really don’t know whether . . .” 
But Akim Petrovitch, his face beaming with reverence, 
had already poured out the champagne. Filling one glass, he 
poured another for himself, furtively, stealthily, awkwardly 
grimacing, with one difference, that his own glass was about a 
finger’s breadth less full, which seemed somehow more respect-
ful. Seated beside his immediate superior, he felt like a woman 
in labour. What, in fact, was he to talk about? He felt in duty 

118  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
bound to entertain His Excellency, since he had the honour of 
his company. The champagne provided a way out of the situa-
tion, and besides, His Excellency welcomed the champagne— 
not for its own sake, for it was warm and quite horrible, but for 
the mere fact that it was being offered to him. 
“The old fellow wants a drink himself,” thought Ivan Ily-
itch, “and doesn’t dare to drink without me. I don’t want to pre-
vent him. And it would be odd for the bottle to stand neglected 
between us.” 
He took a gulp—at least it looked better than just sitting 
there like that. 
“I am here, you see,” he began, pausing and emphasizing 
each word, “you might say I just happen to be present, and, 
of course, some  people might think it . . . so to speak . . . im-
proper . . . for me to be present at such a gathering. . . .” 
Akim Petrovitch remained silent and listened attentively 
with timid curiosity. 
“But I hope you will understand why I am here. . . . After all, 
it’s not just to drink wine that I’ve come, is it? . . . Ha! ha! ha!” 
Akim Petrovitch wanted to laugh like His Excellency, but 
somehow broke off and once more failed to make a comforting 
response. 
“I am here . . . as you might say, to sanction . . . to demon-
strate, that is to say—the moral, that is to say, aim . . .” continued 
Ivan Ilyitch, getting annoyed with Akim Petrovitch for being so 
slow on the uptake; suddenly he fell silent too. He noticed that 
poor Akim Petrovitch was actually lowering his eyes in guilt. 
The General hastened, in some confusion, to take another gulp 
from his glass, while Akim Petrovitch, as if his whole salvation 
depended on it, seized the bottle and refilled the glass. “You cer-

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  119 
tainly are dumb,” thought Ivan Ilyitch, looking sternly at poor 
Akim Petrovitch. The latter, sensing the General’s glance upon 
him, finally decided to remain silent and not to raise his eyes. 
Thus they remained seated opposite each other for about two 
minutes—two rather painful minutes for Akim Petrovitch. 
Just one or two words about Akim Petrovitch. Timid as a 
rabbit, he was of the old school, brought up to accept subservi-
ence while at the same time being a kind and worthy man. He 
was a native of Petersburg, that is to say, his father and grand-
father were born and bred in Petersburg and had worked there 
and never once been out of the town. Men like Akim Petro-
vitch belong to quite a peculiar class of Russian  people. They 
know nothing about Russia, which really doesn’t worry them. 
All their interests are centred in Petersburg, and particularly, 
in their place of employment. All their attention is directed to 
games of chance at kopeck points, to their place of work and 
their monthly salary. They do not know a single Russian cus-
tom nor a single Russian song except Lutchinushka, and this only 
thanks to the barrel organs. Incidentally, there exist two infal-
lible signs by which one can immediately tell a true Russian 
from a Petersburg Russian: the first is that Petersburg Russians, 
without exception, never say “The Petersburg Journal”, but always 
“The Academic Journal”. The second and equally important sign is 
that they never say “breakfast”, but always “Frühstück”, with a 
special emphasis on the “Früh”. By these well-established and 
distinctive signs one can recognize them anywhere. In brief, 
they represent a submissive type which has definitely emerged 
during the last thirty years. But Akim Petrovitch was no fool. 
Had the General asked him something within his sphere, he 
would have made an appropriate answer and kept up the con-

120  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
versation; but it would have been improper for a subordinate to 
reply to questions such as these, though Akim Petrovitch was 
dying to know something more definite about the immediate 
intentions of His Excellency. . . . 
And meanwhile Ivan Ilyitch was sinking deeper and deeper 
into thought, into a state where his ideas revolved in a circle. 
Absent-mindedly, he took constant tiny sips at his glass. Eagerly 
Akim Petrovitch immediately replenished it. Both sat in silence. 
Ivan Ilyitch began to watch the dancing, and before long it held 
his attention. All at once, a certain occurrence rather surprised 
him. 
The dances were indeed gay. Here they really danced out of 
the simplicity of their hearts, for the fun of it, letting them-
selves go. There were very few good dancers; but many awk-
ward ones thumped so vigorously that one could have taken 
them for good dancers. The individual who distinguished him-
self above all was the officer; he particularly liked the part of 
the dance where he performed on his own, a kind of solo. He 
was amazingly supple; poised as straight as a ramrod, he would 
suddenly bend to one side, to such an extent that he seemed 
bound to topple over; but with the next step he suddenly bent 
to the opposite side, at the same acute angle to the floor. He 
maintained a solemn expression and danced in the conviction 
that everyone was admiring him. Another dancer fell asleep 
beside his partner during the second figure of the dance, having 
drunk too much beforehand, so that his partner had to dance 
alone. A young registrar, dancing energetically with the lady in 
the blue scarf, played the same trick in every figure, in fact, in 
all the five quadrilles danced that evening: that is, he fell a little 
behind his partner, seized the end of her scarf and, as he crossed 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  121 
over to his vis-à-vis, managed quickly to press a few dozen kisses 
to it. His lady floated before him, appearing quite oblivious to 
what was going on. The medical student actually did dance a 
solo on his head and provoked frenzied raptures, stamps of ap-
proval and screams of delight. In a word, the lack of inhibition 
was remarkable. 
Ivan Ilyitch, who was also under the influence of the wine, 
at first began by smiling, but little by little a kind of bitter doubt 
began to seep into his soul: of course he very much approved 
of the easy manners and freedom; it is this that he has wanted, 
even in his heart willing this freedom when they had all hung 
back, but already it was getting out of control. For example, the 
lady in the well-worn blue velvet dress which looked as though 
it had been bought not second- but fourth-hand, had pinned it 
up so high during the sixth figure of the quadrille that it looked 
as if she wore trousers. This was that same Cleopatra Semyo-
novna, with whom one could risk anything, according to the 
expression used by her partner, the medical student. As for the 
medical student, no words could describe him: he was a wizard, 
a regular Fokine. How had it all happened? At one time they 
were diffident, and now they were rapidly becoming free and 
easy. Unimportant as this transition seemed, it was somehow 
strange and threatening; just as if they had completely forgot-
ten the existence of Ivan Ilyitch. Naturally, he was the first to 
burst out laughing and even risked clapping. Akim Petrovitch 
politely giggled in chorus with him, with obvious pleasure and 
no suspicion that His Excellency was already beginning to nur-
ture yet another viper in his bosom. 
“You dance famously, young man,” Ivan Ilyitch felt obliged to 
say to the student, who passed by at the end of the quadrille. 

122  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
The student turned sharply to him, made some sort of gri-
mace and rudely drawing up his face close to His Excellency’s 
crowed like a cock at the top of his voice. This was altogether 
too much. Ivan Ilyitch rose from the table. In spite of this, a 
volley of uncontrollable laughter burst out, for the cock-crow 
sounded amazingly real, and the grimace was quite unexpected. 
Ivan Ilyitch was still standing perplexed, when suddenly Pseld-
onymov himself appeared and, bowing, invited him to supper. 
His mother followed. 
“Your Excellency, sir,” she said, bowing, “do us the hon-
our—don’t scorn our poverty . . .” 
“I . . . I—really don’t know . . .” began Ivan Ilyitch. “I did not 
come for this. . . . I was just thinking of going.” 
In fact, he was already holding his fur hat in his hands. 
Moreover, at this very instant, he promised himself he would 
go immediately, at all costs, and not stay for anything—but . . . 
he stayed. 
A minute later he led the procession to the supper table. 
Pseldonymov and his mother walked before him, clearing the 
way. They seated him in the place of honour and again an un-
opened bottle of champagne appeared before him. To begin 
with there was herring and vodka. He stretched out his hand, 
filled himself a huge wineglass of vodka and drained it. He 
never had before touched vodka. He felt as if he were rolling 
downhill, flying, flying so that he must hold on, cling to some-
thing, but this was no longer possible. 
Really, his position was becoming more and more of an anom-
aly. Moreover, it seemed as though Fate was mocking at him. 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  123 
God knows what had happened to him in less than an hour. 
On entering he had, so to speak, stretched out his arms to em-
brace the whole of mankind and all his subordinates; and here 
scarcely an hour had gone by and he was painfully realizing 
only too clearly that he hated Pseldonymov and cursed him, 
his wife and his wedding. As if that were not enough, he could 
see from Pseldonymov’s face, by his eyes alone, that the latter 
hated him too; he was staring at him almost saying: “Damn 
you. What the hell have you tagged on to me for?” He had long 
ago read all this in Pseldonymov’s eyes. 
Of course, even now, Ivan Ilyitch, as he sat down at table, 
would sooner have had his hand cut off than admit frankly, even 
to himself let alone out loud, that all this was in fact so. That 
moment had not yet come; he still retained some moral equi-
librium, though something was steadily gnawing at his heart. 
He felt his heart crying out for freedom, space to breathe and 
quietude. After all, Ivan Ilyitch was too good a man, really! 
Did he not know full well that he ought to have left long 
ago; not merely left, but more, saved himself; that all this had 
suddenly turned out very different from what he had expected, 
from the way he had imagined things when he was walking 
along the raised wooden pavement earlier. 
What did I come here for? Did I come here to eat and drink? 
he asked himself as he helped himself to some herrings. He 
even felt certain misgivings. He felt a momentary sense of 
irony at his own actions; he began to ask himself why he had 
entered. But how could he leave? Simply to leave without see-
ing it through was impossible. What will people say? They’ll say 
I frequent the wrong places. Indeed, that’s what it’ll look like 
if I don’t see things through to the end. What will they say to-

124  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
morrow, for instance (since the news is sure to spread)? What 
will Stepan Nikiforovitch and Semyon Ivanovitch say, what will 
they say at the office, at Shembel’s, at Shubin’s? No, I must leave 
in such a way that they will all understand why I came; I must 
reveal my moral aim. . . . Yet that sublime moment declined 
to present itself. “They don’t even respect me,” he continued. 
“What are they laughing about? They are so free and easy, as if 
they lack any kind of feeling. . . . Yes, I have long suspected the 
whole younger generation of lacking sensitivity. I must stay, at 
all costs! . . . They have been dancing, but now at table they will 
all be gathered together. . . . I shall talk about current affairs, 
reforms, the greatness of Russia . . . I may yet succeed in inter-
esting them. Yes! Perhaps nothing is yet lost. . . . Perhaps this 
is how it always happens in real life. If only I knew how to set 
about winning them over. What sort of approach shall I make? 
I feel completely lost. . . . And what do they want, what are they 
asking for? I can see they are sniggering over there. Good Lord, 
surely not about me! But what is it I want? Why am I here, why 
don’t I go away, what do I hope to accomplish? . . . He thought 
all this, and a kind of shame, a kind of deep, unbearable shame, 
rent his heart. 
From then on, events took their own course. 
Two minutes after he had sat down at table, he was struck 
by a terrible realization. He suddenly felt horribly drunk, not as 
he had been before, but totally, absolutely drunk. The cause of 
it was the glass of vodka which he had drained immediately af-
ter the champagne and which had taken effect at once. He felt, 
sensed with his whole being, that he was completely helpless. 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  125 
Of course, he appeared to be far more confident, but his con-
sciousness did not forsake him and cried out: “It is wrong, very 
wrong, and also utterly revolting.” Of course, the rambling, 
drunken thoughts could not concentrate on any one point; 
at once, almost tangibly, two opposing selves appeared within 
him. In the one self was confidence, the desire to gain a victory, 
surmount all obstacles, and the desperate conviction that he 
could reach his goal. The other made itself felt by anguish, by a 
kind of bleeding of the heart. “What will they say? How will all 
this end? What will happen tomorrow—Tomorrow . . . ?” 
Earlier in the evening he had had a vague feeling that he 
had enemies among the guests. “That was because I was drunk 
when I came in,” he thought, in agonizing doubt. To his in-
creasing horror he now became convinced, through unmistak-
able signs, that some of those at table really were his enemies 
and that this could no longer be doubted. 
“And why? What is it all for?” he mused. 
At this table all the guests were seated, thirty of them; 
among them some had finally passed out. The others con-
ducted themselves with a somewhat negligent, flaunting in-
dependence, shouting at the tops of their voices, prematurely 
proposing toasts, shooting bread pellets at the ladies. One very 
ill-favoured individual in a dirty frock-coat fell off  his chair as 
soon as he had seated himself at table and remained on the 
floor right to the end of the supper. Another was determined to 
climb on the table to propose a toast, and it was only the offi  cer 
who restrained his ill-timed enthusiasm by seizing him by his 
coat-tails. The supper was quite commonplace, although a chef 
had been engaged, the serf of some general or other. There was 
brawn, tongue with potatoes, meat rissoles with green peas, 

126  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
and finally, blancmange for dessert. There was beer, vodka and 
sherry to drink. The bottle of champagne stood before the Gen-
eral alone, which obliged him to help himself and also Akim 
Petrovitch, who at supper did not dare to act on his own initia-
tive. The other guests were meant to drink the toasts in bitters, 
or whatever they could get hold of. The table itself was made 
up of a number of smaller ones and included even a card ta-
ble. They were covered with several tablecloths, among them a 
coloured Yaroslav one. Men and women were seated alternately 
at table. Pseldonymov’s mother would not sit down; she bustled 
about and attended to the guests. And now a spiteful-looking 
female appeared who had not been there before; she wore a 
russet silk dress and the highest possible cap and had her face 
bandaged up as though she had toothache. This was the bride’s 
mother, who had finally consented to come in to supper from 
the back room. Until then she had not left her room because of 
her irreconcilable hostility towards Pseldonymov’s mother; but 
of this we shall speak later. The lady gave a malicious, almost 
scornful look at the General and evidently did not want to be 
introduced to him. Ivan Ilyitch was highly suspicious of her. 
But others were suspect besides, and instilled unwitting appre-
hension and uneasiness. It seemed almost as though they were 
involved in some conspiracy together directed against Ivan  
Ilyitch. At least, that is how it seemed to him, and as supper 
progressed he became more and more convinced of this. For ex-
ample, there was an evil-looking gentleman with a small beard, 
some kind of self-styled artist; he actually looked several times 
at Ivan Ilyitch and then turned to whisper in the ear of his 
neighbour. Another, a student, admittedly completely drunk, 
judging by certain signs, was nevertheless suspect. There was 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  127 
little hope for the medical student either; even the offi  cer was 
not entirely to be relied on. But it was the journalist from The 
Firebrand who was generating a peculiar and obvious hatred: he 
had a manner of lounging in his chair, with an extremely proud 
and arrogant air, sniffing with such self-assurance. And though 
the other guests paid no attention to the journalist (who had 
merely written four lines of verse for The Firebrand, which made 
him a liberal) and evidently positively disliked him, still when 
a small bread pellet suddenly fell beside Ivan Ilyitch, obviously 
intended for him, he was ready to swear that the culprit was 
none other than the contributor to The Firebrand. 
Naturally, all this affected him for the worse. 
He made yet another particularly unpleasant observation. 
Ivan Ilyitch was quite convinced that he was beginning to pro-
nounce his words with difficulty and indistinctly; he wanted 
to say a great deal, but his tongue would not move; also his 
memory would suddenly have lapses and, worse still, he would 
suddenly burst out laughing for no reason at all. This condi-
tion soon passed after Ivan Ilyitch had helped himself to a glass 
of champagne without wanting it particularly, but suddenly 
gulping it down without further thought. As a result, he almost 
burst into tears. He felt he was succumbing to a most peculiar 
sentimentality. He began to love everyone again, even Pseldon-
ymov, even the contributor to The Firebrand. He suddenly wanted 
to embrace them all, to forget everything and make peace with 
them. More, he wanted quite freely to tell them everything, 
everything, everything; that is, what a good and admirable fel-
low he was, what splendid abilities he possessed, what service 
he would be to his country, how well he could amuse the ladies, 
and, above all, how progressive he was, in what an idealistic 

128  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
manner he was prepared to condescend to all, even to the very 
lowest; and finally, to conclude, he would frankly describe all 
the motives that had induced him, an uninvited guest, to turn 
up at Pseldonymov’s, drink two bottles of his champagne and 
give him the pleasure of his company. 
“The truth above all, sacred truth and frankness; I’ll win 
them with frankness. They will believe me, I can see it so 
clearly; they look at me with positive hostility, but when I reveal 
everything I’ll win them over, there’s no doubt of it. They will fill 
up their glasses and drink my health. The officer, I am sure, will 
break his glass on his spur. They may even shout ‘Hurrah!’ Even 
if they should decide to toss me up in the Hussar manner, I would 
not resist that either; it might even be a good thing. I shall kiss 
the bride on the forehead; she is a sweet thing. Akim Petrovitch 
also is a very nice man. Pseldonymov, of course, will improve 
in time. He lacks the polish of the beau monde. . . . And though 
the whole of this new generation lacks that certain sensitivity, 
yet I shall tell them about Russia’s standing among the Great 
Powers. I will also mention the peasant question, yes, and . . . 
they will all love me and I’ll emerge crowned in glory. . . .” 
These fantasies, naturally, were very pleasant; the only un-
pleasant thing amidst all these rosy hopes was that Ivan Ilyitch 
suddenly discovered in himself one more unexpected talent, 
that is, for spitting. At any rate, spittle began suddenly to spurt 
from his lips, quite involuntarily. He noticed it first of all on 
Akim Petrovitch, whose cheek he had bespattered and who, out 
of respect, sat there without daring to wipe it off. Ivan Ilyitch 
took a napkin and suddenly wiped it off himself. Yet at once this 
action seemed to him so absurd, so remote from all reason, that 
he fell silent and began to wonder. Akim Petrovitch, though he 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  129 
had had some drink, sat there just as if he had been scalded. 
Ivan Ilyitch now realized that he had been talking to him for 
almost a quarter of an hour on a most interesting subject, but 
Akim Petrovitch, as he listened to him, appeared not only em-
barrassed but even afraid of something. Also Pseldonymov, who 
was sitting one chair away from him, craned his long neck, and 
with his head on one side, seemed to be listening with a most 
unpleasant expression in his face. It was as if he was keeping an 
eye on him. . . . Glancing around at the guests he noticed that 
many were looking straight at him and roaring with laughter. 
But strangest of all, this did not embarrass him in the least; on 
the contrary, he sipped at his glass once more and began to talk 
so that everyone could hear. 
“As I have just said to Akim Petrovitch,” he began as loudly 
as possible, “ladies and gentlemen, Russia . . . particularly Rus-
sia . . . in one word, you understand what I want to s-say . . . 
Russia is experiencing, it is my deepest conviction, a mood of 
idealism . . .” 
“Idealism!” echoed from the other end of the table. 
“Hu-hu!” 
“Tu-tu!” 
Ivan Ilyitch was cut short. Pseldonymov rose from his chair 
and began to look round. Who was it who was shouting? Akim 
Petrovitch surreptitiously shook his head, as if reproving the 
guests. Ivan Ilyitch saw this clearly, but suffered in silence. 
“Idealism,” he continued stubbornly—”not long ago . . . just 
so . . . not long ago I said to Stepan Nikiforovitch . . . yes . . . 
that—that the rebirth, so to speak, of things . . .” 
“Your Excellency!” somebody cried out from the other end 
of the table. 

130  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
“Sir?” answered Ivan Ilyitch, interrupted, trying to make 
out who was addressing him. 
“Nothing at all, Your Excellency, I got carried away. Con-
tinue! Co-on-tin-ue!” the same voice was heard again. 
Ivan Ilyitch winced. 
“The rebirth, so to speak, of these very things . . .” 
“Your Excellency,” shouted the same voice. 
“What do you want?” 
“How do you do!” 
This time Ivan Ilyitch could stand it no longer. He broke 
off his speech and turned to the offender. He was still quite a 
young student, completely drunk, who looked exceedingly 
suspect. For a long time he had been shouting, and even broken 
a glass and two plates, asserting that this was the done thing at 
weddings. At the moment when Ivan Ilyitch turned to him, the 
officer had set about dealing severely with the rowdy. 
“What’s wrong; what are you yelling for? You should be sent 
out, that would be best.” 
“It’s not about you, Your Excellency, not about you. Carry 
on!” cried the tipsy student, sprawling in his chair. “Carry on, 
I am listening and I am very pleased by you. It is praiseworthy, 
most praiseworthy.” 
“A drunken schoolboy!” Pseldonymov suggested in a 
whisper. 
“I see he is drunk, but . . .” 
“I have just told a funny story, Your Excellency,” began the 
officer, “about a lieutenant of our regiment who talked to his 
superiors in just the same way; and the young man here is imi-
tating him. He added to every word his superior said his own 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  131 
‘Praiseworthy’ . . . For this he got discharged from the service 
ten years ago.” 
“What—what-t lieutenant was it?” 
“One in our regiment, Your Excellency. He was mad about 
praising. At first he was cautioned, then later he was put under 
arrest. . . . His chief reproved him in a fatherly manner; but he 
only said ‘praiseworthy’. It was strange, a fi ne sort of fellow he 
was—over six foot tall. They thought of having him tried, but 
then realized that he was insane.” 
“So he’s a schoolboy. Well, one need not be too strict about 
schoolboy tricks. For my part, I am ready to forgive . . .” 
“There was a medical examination, Your Excellency.” 
“How? Did they dissect him?” 
“Good gracious, no; he was quite alive, sir.” 
A loud and almost universal burst of laughter came from 
the guests, who had at first tried to behave in a respectable 
manner. Ivan Ilyitch was embarrassed. 
“Gentlemen, gentlemen,” he cried, for the first time with 
hardly a stutter; “I am quite capable of grasping that one can-
not dissect a living man. . . . I assumed that owing to his being 
insane he was no longer alive . . . that is to say, he was dead. . . . 
I mean to say . . . that you do not love me . . . whereas I love all 
of you; yes, I love Por . . . Porfiry. . . . I am lowering myself by 
speaking like this. . . .” 
At that moment a huge gob of spittle flew out of Ivan Ily-
itch’s mouth and landed on the tablecloth with a splash, on a 
most conspicuous spot. Pseldonymov rushed to wipe it off with 
a napkin. This last misfortune finally crushed him. 
“Gentlemen, this is just too much!” he cried out in despair. 

132  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
“The man is tight, Your Excellency,” Porfiry was on the  
point of putting in. 
“Porfiry! I see that you . . . all . . . yes! I am saying that I hope 
. . . yes, I invite you all to say in what way I have lowered my-
self?” Ivan Ilyitch was on the verge of tears. 
“Your Excellency, for goodness’ sake, sir!” 
“Porfiry, I appeal to you . . . Tell me, if I came . . . yes, yes, to 
the wedding, I had a purpose. I set out to raise your moral stan-
dards. . . . I wanted you to feel . . . I am appealing to you all: have 
I lowered myself very much in your eyes or have I not?” 
Silence persisted. That was just it—dead silence, and after 
such a direct question, too! “Well, what would it cost them to 
say something at least?” flashed through His Excellency’s mind. 
But the guests merely exhanged glances. Akim Petrovitch sat 
there more dead than alive, while Pseldonymov, struck dumb 
with fear, repeated the terrible question that had long before 
presented itself to him, under his breath: “And what will be the 
consequence of all this tomorrow?” 
All of a sudden the contributor to The Firebrand, now com-
pletely drunk, who until then had been sitting in sullen silence, 
turned to Ivan Ilyitch and with flashing eyes began to answer 
on behalf of the whole company: 
“Yes, sir!” he shouted in a thundering voice, “yes, sir, 
you have lowered yourself, yes, you are a reactionary . . . 
re-actionary!” 
“Young man, come to your senses! Who d’you think you’re 
talking to?” cried Ivan Ilyitch furiously, jumping up again from 
his chair. 
“You; and furthermore, I am not ‘young man’ . . . you have 
come here to show off and to play for popularity.” 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  133 
“Pseldonymov, what is this?” cried out Ivan Ilyitch. 
However, Pseldonymov had jumped up in such terror that 
he was rooted to the ground and was completely at a loss. The 
guests seated at the table had been struck dumb too. The artist 
and the student were applauding and shouting “Hear, hear!” 
The journalist continued to shout with unrestrained fury: 
“Yes, you came here to boast of your ideals. You have dis-
rupted everyone’s enjoyment. You have been drinking cham-
pagne and never considered that it was too expensive for a 
Government clerk on a salary of ten roubles a month. And I 
suspect that you are one of those chiefs who have a taste for the 
young wives of their employees. Not only that, but I am thor-
oughly convinced that you uphold the payment of compensa-
tion. . . . Yes, yes, yes!” 
“Pseldonymov! Pseldonymov!” cried Ivan Ilyitch, stretching 
his arms towards him. He felt that each word of the journalist 
was a fresh dagger in his heart. 
“At once, Your Excellency, please, don’t worry,” Pseldony-
mov cried hysterically, running up to the journalist, seizing 
him by the collar and dragging him away from the table. No 
one would have expected such a display of physical strength 
from the feeble Pseldonymov. But the journalist was very 
drunk, while Pseldonymov was completely sober. He punched 
him several times in the back and pushed him out of the door. 
“You are all scoundrels,” shouted the journalist. “I’ll show 
you up in The Firebrand tomorrow. . . .” 
Everyone rose. 
“Your Excellency, Your Excellency,” cried Pseldonymov, his 
mother and several of the guests, crowding round the General, 
“Your Excellency, calm yourself.” 

134  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
“No, no,” cried the General, “I am destroyed. . . . I came 
. . . I wanted, so to speak, to give my blessing. . . . And this, for 
this . . .” 
He sank on to a chair as if he were fainting, put both hands 
on the table and dropped his head on to them, straight into a 
plate of blancmange. No need to describe the general horror. 
After a minute he got up, evidently wanting to go away, stag-
gered, tripped over the leg of a chair, fell on the floor with full 
force and began to snore. . . .
This kind of thing happens to  people not accustomed to 
drink when by chance they do get drunk. Down to the last 
detail, up to the last moment they retain consciousness and 
then suddenly they black out completely. Ivan Ilyitch lay un-
conscious on the floor. Pseldonymov seized himself by the hair 
and stood rooted to the ground. The guests were breaking up 
hurriedly, each commenting on the occurrence in his own way. 
It was already nearly three o’clock in the morning. 
What complicated matters was that to Pseldonymov the affair 
was far worse than one could imagine, taking into account even 
the unpleasantness of the present situation. While Ivan Ilyitch 
is lying on the floor with Pseldonymov standing beside him 
tearing his hair in despair, let us digress to put in a few words of 
explanation about Porfiry Petrovitch Pseldonymov himself. 
It was not more than a month before his wedding that he 
was on the verge of total and irrevocable disaster. He came from 
the provinces, where his father had held some post or other and 
had died while he was awaiting trial for some offence. When, 
five months before his wedding, Pseldonymov, who in Peters-

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  135 
burg had been facing disaster for a whole year, obtained his ap-
pointment at ten roubles salary, he felt restored in body and 
soul, but he was soon humbled once again by circumstances. Of 
the Pseldonymov family there remained only two  people in the 
whole world, himself and his mother, who had left her native 
place in the provinces after her husband’s death. Mother and 
son lived in cold and hunger. There were days when Pseldony-
mov himself went with a mug to the Fontanka to get a drink 
of water. Having obtained a job, he and his mother managed to 
settle somewhere in a tenement. She set about washing linen for 
other  people, while in four months he scraped together enough 
money to acquire a pair of boots and an old coat. And what mis-
ery he had to undergo in his office: his superiors would come up 
to him, asking when he had last had a bath. Rumour had it that 
whole nests of bugs had settled under the collar of his uniform. 
But Pseldonymov had a strong character. In appearance he was 
gentle and quiet; his education had been very sketchy, he was 
hardly ever heard to talk. I simply don’t know whether he ever 
thought, ever made plans, evolved systems, ever indulged in 
day-dreaming at all. But instead of this he had developed an 
instinctive, determined unconscious resolve to work his way 
out of his unfortunate circumstances. He was as tenacious as 
an ant; if you destroy an ants’ nest, they start building it again; 
destroy it a second time and they will start once more, and so 
on, without respite. He was an orderly and domesticated crea-
ture. It was written all over his face that he would make his way, 
build his nest and perhaps even put something by for a rainy 
day. His mother was the only person in the whole wide world 
who loved him, and she loved him passionately. She was strong, 
indefatigable, a hard-working woman, and at the same time, 

136  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
kind. They would have continued to live in their tenement for 
five or six years perhaps, until things had changed, had they not 
come across the retired Titular Councillor Mlekopitayev. The 
latter was a former treasurer in a Government office of their na-
tive district, who had since established himself and settled with 
his family in Petersburg. He knew Pseldonymov, and had been 
in some way indebted to his father. He had not much money 
put by, of course, but he had some; how much, in fact, nobody 
knew, neither his wife, his eldest daughter, nor his relations. 
He had two daughters, and as he was pig-headed, a drunkard, 
a petty tyrant and, to crown it all, an invalid, he suddenly took 
it into his head to marry off one of his daughters to Pseldony-
mov. “I know him,” he said, “his father was a good man, and the 
son will be a good man too.” Whatever Mlekopitayev wanted 
to do, he did; and once he said a thing was to happen, it did 
happen. He was a singularly pig-headed man. He spent most 
of the time sitting in an arm-chair, as he had lost the use of his 
legs through some kind of illness, which, however, did not pre-
vent him from drinking vodka. He spent whole days drinking 
and abusing  people. He was a vicious man, and sure to be tor-
menting someone all the time. For this purpose be kept several 
distant relatives in the house; his sister, a sick and cantanker-
ous woman, two of his wife’s sisters, both bad-tempered and 
with long tongues; as well as his old aunt, who had managed to 
break a rib. Besides them, he kept another sponger, a Russified 
German woman, because of her talent for telling stories out of 
the Arabian Nights. His only pleasure was to nag these unfortu-
nate hangers-on, to swear at them every minute, like a trooper, 
though none of them, not even his wife, who had been born 
with a chronic toothache, ever dared utter a word. He caused 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  137 
them to quarrel among themselves, invented and provoked 
gossip and dissensions, and then broke out into laughter, de-
lighted to see them on the verge of coming to blows. He was 
very glad when his eldest daughter, who had lived in poverty 
for ten years with her officer husband, finally, when she was 
widowed, came to live in his house with her three small, sickly 
children. He could not bear her children, but because the num-
ber of victims on whom he could make his daily experiments 
increased with their arrival, the old man was very pleased. This 
whole crew of spiteful women and sick children were squeezed, 
together with their torturer, into a wooden house on the Pe-
tersburg Side. They never had enough food, because the old 
man was miserly and only gave money by kopecks, though he 
never grudged it for his vodka; they never had enough sleep be-
cause the old man suffered from insomnia and demanded to 
be amused. In short—all of them lived in misery and cursed 
their fate. It was at that time that Mlekopitayev noticed Pseld-
onymov. He was impressed by his long nose and his submissive 
manner. His sickly, plain youngest daughter was then just sev-
enteen. Though she had been to a German school at one time, 
she had never learned much more than the alphabet. After that 
she continued to grow up, consumptive and anaemic, under 
the blows of her crippled and drunken father, in a turmoil of 
domestic gossip, spying and slander. She had no friends, and she 
was devoid of common sense. For a long time she had longed to 
get married. In the company of strangers she was silent but at 
home with her mother and the spongers she was spiteful, and 
sharp as a gimlet. She particularly liked to slap and pinch her 
sister’s children, telling on them for taking sugar and bread, 
which caused eternal and ceaseless rows between her and her 

138  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
elder sister. The old man himself offered her hand to Pseldony-
mov. Poverty-stricken though the latter was, he still asked for a 
little time to reflect. He and his mother considered the proposal 
for quite a while. However, the house was to be transferred in 
the bride’s name, and though it was wooden, one-storied and 
drab, all the same it was worth something. On top of that the 
old man was giving four hundred roubles—it was not so easy 
to save so much. “Do you know why I am taking a man into 
the house?” yelled the drunken tyrant. “First because all of you 
are women and I’m sick and tired of women. I want him to be 
under my thumb too, because I am his benefactor. Secondly, 
I’m taking him in because it’s against your will and you are furi-
ous. I’ll do it to spite you, see! What I say, I do. And you, Porfiry, 
thrash her when she’s your wife; ever since she was born she has 
nurtured seven devils within her. Drive them all out. I’ll have 
a stick ready.” 
Pseldonymov kept quiet, but he had already made up his 
mind. He and his mother were already taken into the house 
before the wedding; they were washed, clothed, shod and given 
money for the wedding. The old man was favouring them, per-
haps simply because the whole family bore them malice. He 
even took a liking to Pseldonymov’s mother, so that he con-
trolled himself and did not nag her. Incidentally, while there 
was yet a week to go before the wedding, he made Pseldonymov 
himself dance the Kazatchek for him. That will do, I wanted to 
see that you’re not forgetting your place,” be said at the end of 
the dance. As for wedding expenses, he gave the bare amount 
of money needed and then invited all his relatives and acquain-
tances. On Pseldonymov’s side the only people asked were the 
contributor to The Firebrand and Akim Petrovitch, the guest of 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  139 
honour. Pseldonymov knew very well that his bride loathed 
him and would far rather have married an officer. But he bore 
it all, in accordance with the arrangements he and his mother 
had made. Throughout the day of the wedding, and the whole 
evening, the old man swore horribly as he sat drinking. Because 
of the wedding, the whole family had taken refuge in the back 
rooms and were so crowded together they were almost suff o-
cating. The front rooms were intended for dancing and supper. 
At last, when, at eleven o’clock, the old man fell asleep, dead 
drunk, the bride’s mother, who had been snarling at Pseldony-
mov’s mother on that day more than ever, decided to change her 
tune and turn up at the party. The appearance of Ivan Ilyitch 
had upset everything. Mrs. Mlekopitayev was disconcerted; she 
was offended and began to scold them for not having warned 
her beforehand that the General himself was invited. She was 
assured that he had come of his own accord, uninvited, but she 
was so stupid that she would not believe this. 
When champagne was required, all Pseldonymov’s mother 
could find was just one rouble. Pseldonymov himself had not a 
kopeck. They were compelled to humble themselves before the 
angry Mrs. Mlekopitayev and beg money first for one bottle of 
champagne, then for another. They pointed out future busi-
ness connections, the career to come, they did their utmost to 
persuade her. At last she consented to part with her money, but 
in return she nagged at Pseldonymov with such bitterness that 
he kept running into the chamber and throwing himself on the 
bridal couch, intended for heavenly delights, silently tearing his 
hair and trembling all over with impotent rage. Ivan Ilyitch had 
no idea of the price of the two bottles of champagne he had 
drunk that evening. How great was the terror of Pseldonymov, 

140  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
his anguish and even despair, when the business of Ivan Ilyitch 
took such an unexpected turn: he could anticipate the worries, 
the piercing shrieks and tears from the capricious bride, which 
would perhaps continue throughout the whole night, with re-
proaches from the bride’s stupid relations. As it was, his head 
was already aching and he felt dazed. And here was Ivan Ilyitch 
requiring assistance; at three o’clock in the morning a doctor 
had to be found and a carriage to take him home; it had to be a 
carriage, since it would be impossible to dispatch such a person-
age, in such a state, to his home in a simple cab or sledge. But 
where was he to find the money even so much as for a carriage? 
Mrs. Mlekopitayev, enraged that the General had not spo-
ken two words to her and had not even looked at her during the 
whole of supper, declared that she had not a kopeck. Perhaps 
she really had not got a kopeck to her name. But where was he 
to get the money? What was he to do? Yes, he had good reason 
to tear his hair. 
Meanwhile, Ivan Ilyitch was carried to a little leather sofa 
that stood there ready in the dining-room. While the tables 
were cleared and sorted out, Pseldonymov rushed hither and 
thither to raise some money; he even tried to borrow from the 
servants, but he found that nobody had any. He dared to trouble 
Akim Petrovitch, who had stayed longer than the others. But 
kind as he was, at the sound of the word “money” he became 
so bewildered and indeed frightened that he talked a lot of sur-
prising nonsense: “At any other time, I would with pleasure . . .” 
he mumbled, “but now . . . really you must excuse me . . .” And 
picking up his hat, he quickly fled from the house. 
Only the kind-hearted young man who had told the story 
about the Book of Dreams gave some help, but even this was 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  141 
not of much avail. He also had stayed longer than the others, 
sympathetically participating in Pseldonymov’s misfortune. 
At this Pseldonymov, his mother and the young man decided, 
after consultation, not to send for the doctor, but rather for a 
carriage to take the sick man home; and for the present, un-
til the carriage arrived, to administer some home remedies to 
him, such as moistening the temples and applying ice-packs, 
and so on. All this was done by Pseldonymov’s mother. The 
young man flew off to look for a carriage. As by that time of 
night there were no more cabs to be had on the Petersburg Side, 
he set off, quite a distance, for the coachmen’s yard, and roused 
the coachmen. They began bargaining, declaring that at such 
an hour even five roubles would be too little for a carriage. They 
agreed, however, on three. But when the young man arrived in 
the carriage at Pseldonymov’s at nearly four o’clock, there had 
already been a change of plan. It turned out that Ivan Ilyitch, 
who was still unconscious, had become so ill, had groaned and 
tosssed about so much, that it had become quite impossible to 
move him and take him home in such a state. 
“What will come of all this?” said Pseldonymov, dejectedly. A 
new question rose; if the sick man were to be left in the house, 
then where was he to be carried and deposited? There were only 
two beds in the whole house; one, a huge double bed in which 
old Mlekopitayev and his wife slept, the other, also a double bed, 
of imitation walnut and newly acquired for the young  couple. 
All the other inhabitants of the house slept on the floor, side 
by side, mostly on feather beds which were already partly worn 
and smelt—in brief, completely unsuitable, and there were in 
any case none to spare. Where was the sick man to be put? A 
feather bed might yet be found—in extreme need it could be 

142  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
pulled out from beneath someone —but where to put it? The 
upshot was that the bed must be made up in the drawing-room, 
the point farthest away from the bulk of the family and with 
its own exit. But what was the bed to be made up on? Simply 
on chairs? Everyone knows that only boys who are home from 
school for the weekend are made to sleep on chairs; for someone 
of Ivan Ilyitch’s standing this would be most disrespectful. What 
would he say tomorrow at finding himself lying on a  couple of 
chairs? Pseldonymov would not even hear of it. There was only 
one thing left to do: to carry him to the bridal couch. This bridal 
couch, as we have already said, had been set up in a little room 
leading from the dining-room. On the double bed was a newly 
bought, as yet unused mattress, clean bed linen, four pillows, in 
pink-coloured calico slips, under flounced muslin covers. The 
eiderdown was of pink satin, quilted in patterns. From a gilt ring 
above the bed fell muslin curtains. In a word, everything was as 
it should be, and the guests, who had nearly all visited the bed-
room, had admired the fineries. The bride, though she could not 
bear Pseldonymov, had several times during the evening come 
into the room, quite secretly, to have a good look. Imagine her 
indignation, her fury, when she heard that they wanted to put 
the sick man, who was ill with cholera or something, on her 
bridal couch. The bride’s mother began to take her part, cursed, 
and vowed she would complain the next day to her husband, 
but Pseldonymov held his own and insisted: Ivan Ilyitch was 
transferred to the double bed, and a bed was made up on chairs 
for the young  couple in the drawing-room. The bride snivelled 
and wanted to pinch someone, but she dared not disobey; she 
knew well that Papa had a stick and that next day he would be 
sure to require a detailed report of what occurred. 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  143 
To console her the pink quilt and the pillows in muslin cov-
ers were brought into the drawing-room. At that very moment 
the young man arrived with the carriage; when he heard that 
the carriage was no longer needed he had a terrible shock. He 
would have to pay for it himself, and he had never even pos-
sessed a twenty-kopeck piece. Pseldonymov announced that he 
was completely penniless. They tried to reason with the coach-
man, but he began to kick up a row to the extent of knock-
ing at the shutters. How all this ended, I don’t quite know. I 
believe the young man was driven in the carriage to Peski, on 
the fourth Rozhdestvenskaya Street, where he hoped to rouse a 
certain student who was passing the night with some acquain-
tances, to try to see whether he had any money. By the time the 
young couple were left to themselves and shut in the drawing-
room it was five o’clock in the morning. 
Pseldonymov’s mother stayed all night by the bedside of the 
sufferer. She lay down on the floor on a small carpet and cov-
ered herself up with a shaggy fur coat, but she could not sleep 
as she constantly had to get up. Ivan Ilyitch had a terrible bout 
of sickness. Pseldonymov’s mother, a brave and kind-hearted 
woman, herself undressed him, took off all his clothes, nursed 
him as if he were her own son, and throughout the night she 
fetched and carried between the bedroom and the corridor. 
However, the misfortunes of that night were far from being 
at an end. 
Ten minutes had hardly elapsed since the young  couple had 
been shut away alone in the drawing-room, when a heart-
rending cry rang out. There was nothing reassuring about that 

144  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
cry—it was a cry of the most sinister kind. Immediately fol-
lowing it a noise could be heard, a crash as if chairs were fall-
ing, and all at once a whole crowd of screaming and frightened 
women at every stage of undress rushed into the still, dark-
ened room. These women were the bride’s mother, her elder 
sister, who had abandoned her sick children for the time be-
ing, and three of her aunts—even the one with the broken rib 
had dragged herself along. The cook was there too; even the 
sponger, the German woman with the talent for telling stories, 
had come along. It was the latter’s feather bed, the best in the 
house and her own and sole property, that had been forcibly 
removed from under her for the use of the young  couple. All 
these shrewd respectable women had already, a quarter of an 
hour earlier, been stealing on tiptoe from the kitchen, through 
the corridor, and had been eavesdropping in the hall, con-
sumed by the most inexplicable curiosity. Meanwhile, some-
body hastily lit a candle and an unexpected sight was revealed. 
The chairs, unable to withstand the weight of two  people and 
the broad feather bed which they supported on either side, had 
given way and the mattress had fallen between them to the 
floor. The bride was trembling with rage; this time she was 
wounded to her very heart. Pseldonymov, morally crushed, 
stood there like a criminal caught in the act. He did not even 
try to justify himself. Exclamations and shrieks were heard on 
all sides; hearing the noise, Pseldonymov’s mother also came 
running up, but this time the bride’s mother got the upper 
hand entirely. First she blamed Pseldonymov, for the most part 
unjustly saying: “What sort of a husband are you, my dear sir, in 
view of this? What use are you, my dear sir, after this disgrace?” 
and so on, and, finally, taking her daughter by the hand, led 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  145 
her away from her husband to her own room, taking it upon 
herself to account for this tomorrow when her fierce husband 
would demand an explanation. All the others departed with 
her, sighing and shaking their heads. His mother alone stayed 
with Pseldonymov and tried to comfort him. But he immedi-
ately drove her away. 
He was in no condition to be comforted. He reached the sofa 
and sat down in a spirit of gloomy reflection; there he sat, bare-
footed, dressed only in his underwear. His mind was confused. 
Now and again he glanced in a mechanical fashion round the 
room where only recently there had been such wild dancing 
and where cigarette smoke still hung in the air. Cigarette-ends 
and sweet-papers were still scattered on the stained and dirty 
floor. The wreck of the bridal bed and the overturned chairs 
bore witness to the transitory nature of the best and truest 
earthly hopes and dreams. He remained like this for almost an 
hour. Depressing thoughts came into his head: what awaited 
him at the office? He realized that at all costs he would have 
to change his place of work; it would be impossible to stay on 
where he was after what had happened last night. Into his mind, 
too, came Mlekopitayev, who would probably on the morrow 
force him to dance the Kazatchek once more to test his docility. 
He realized that although Mlekopitayev had given fifty roubles 
towards the wedding expenses—which had all been spent to 
the last kopeck—he had not thought to let them have the four 
hundred roubles promised as dowry, nor even made further 
mention of them. Even the house had not been offi  cially trans-
ferred to his name. His thoughts also turned to his wife, who 
had left him at the most critical moment of his life; he thought 
of the tall officer who had gone down on one knee before her. 

146  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
This he had already contrived to notice; he thought of the 
seven devils which possessed his wife, according to the personal 
testimony of her father, and of the stick ready to drive them 
out. . . . Of course, he felt he was capable of enduring much, 
but Fate had in the outcome allowed such surprises to assail 
him that it was finally understandable that he should doubt 
his own strength. Thus Pseldonymov grieved. Meanwhile the 
candle-end was burning low. Its flickering light, falling straight 
on to Pseldonymov’s profile, reflected it on the wall in a huge 
image, with outstretched neck, a hooked nose and two tufts of 
hair sticking up over his forehead and at the back of his head. 
At last, when the first breath of morning freshness came, he 
got up, shivering and his feelings numbed, reached the feather 
bed which was lying between the chairs, and, without putting 
anything right, without blowing out the candle-end, without 
even slipping a pillow under his head, he crawled into the bed, 
overcome by that leaden, death-like sleep which is experienced 
perhaps by those who are condemned to public execution on 
the morrow. 
On the other hand, what could compare with the ago-
nizing night which Ivan Ilyitch Pralinski spent on the bridal 
couch of the unfortunate Pseldonymov? For a long time head-
ache, vomiting and other most unpleasant attacks gave him 
not a moment’s peace. This was infernal torment. His occa-
sional flashes of awareness lit up such an abyss of terror, such 
grim and horrible images, that it would have been better for 
him to have remained unconscious. However, everything was 
still confused in his head. For instance, he recognized Pseld-
onymov’s mother—he heard her gentle remonstrances: “Try 
to bear it, my pet, try to bear it, dearie, it’ll be all right, you’ll 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  147 
see.” He recognized her but could not logically account for her 
presence. Horrible visions came to him: most often he saw Se-
myon Ivanovitch; but looking more closely he observed that 
it was not Semyon Ivanovitch at all, but Pseldonymov’s nose. 
Before him flitted by the self-styled artist and the offi  cer, the 
old woman with her face bound up. He was preoccupied most 
of all with the gilt ring hanging above his head, from which 
hung the muslin curtains. He made it out quite clearly in the 
dim light of the candle-end which illuminated the room, and 
all the time he was pondering; what was it made for? He asked 
the elderly woman about it several times, but evidently he 
said something other than what he intended, for she seemed 
not to understand him, however much he tried to explain. At 
last, as morning came near, the attacks ceased and he fell into 
a sound, dreamless sleep. He slept for the best part of an hour 
and when he awoke he was almost fully conscious; he felt he 
had an unbearable headache and the nastiest possible taste in 
his mouth and on his tongue which appeared to be made of 
woollen cloth. He raised himself on the bed, looked round, 
and reflected. The pale light of the breaking day penetrated 
through the chinks of the shutters in a narrow line, trem-
bling on the wall. It was almost seven o’clock in the morning. 
But when Ivan Ilyitch suddenly realized and remembered all 
that had happened to him from the beginning of the previous 
evening; when he remembered all the mishaps at supper, his 
exploit that misfired, his speech at table; when suddenly, with 
terrifying vividness, the possible consequences of all this pre-
sented themselves to him, what people would now think and 
say about him; when he looked round and, finally, saw to what 
a sad and disordered state he had reduced the peaceful bridal 

148  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
couch of his subordinate—oh, then, such deadly shame, such 
torment filled his heart that he cried out, covered his face 
with his hands and, in despair, threw himself on to the pillow. 
A minute later he jumped out of bed and saw that his clothes 
were lying on the chair, neatly folded and already cleaned; he 
seized them and quickly began to struggle into them, looking 
around as if in dreadful fear of something. Here too, on the 
other chair, lay his fur coat, his fur hat with his yellow gloves. 
He was on the point of slipping quietly away. But suddenly 
the door opened and Pseldonymov’s mother entered, carry-
ing an earthenware basin and a jug. Over her shoulder hung a 
towel. She put the basin down and without further argument 
declared that he most certainly needed a wash. 
“Come, come! My dear sir, you must wash, you can’t go 
without washing. . . .” 
In that instant Ivan Ilyitch realized that if there were a single 
person in the whole world before whom he need not be ashamed 
and whom he need not fear, it was this same elderly woman. 
He did wash. And long afterwards, in painful moments of his 
life, he remembered, along with other regrettable occasions, all 
the circumstances of this awakening: this earthenware basin 
and china jug filled with cold water in which bits of ice were 
still floating, the oval cake of soap with some kind of embossed 
lettering on it, wrapped in pink paper, which must have cost 
fifteen kopecks, bought evidently for the newly-weds and used 
by Ivan Ilyitch; and he remembered the elderly woman with 
the linen towel over her left shoulder. The cold water refreshed 
him; he rubbed himself dry and, without saying a word, with-
out even thanking his nurse, he seized his fur hat, threw his 
fur coat, which Pseldonymov’s mother handed to him, over his 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  149 
shoulder, and ran through the corridor, through the kitchen, 
where the cat was already mewing and the cook raising herself 
from her bed to look at him with avid curiosity, out into the 
street and flung himself into a passing cab. The morning was 
frosty, a chilly yellowish mist still blanketed the houses and 
everything else. Ivan Ilyitch turned up his collar. He felt that 
everybody was looking at him, that everybody knew him, that 
everybody would know . . . 
For eight days he did not leave the house, nor did he appear at the 
office. He was ill, painfully ill, but more in his mind than his body. 
In those eight days he endured complete purgatory and, surely, 
they would be credited to him in the next world. There were mo-
ments when he thought of taking monastic vows. Truly, he had 
such moments; his imagination even began to play actively along 
those lines. He dreamed of quiet singing in cloisters, an open cof-
fin, life in a solitary cell, woods and caves; but as soon as he came 
to himself he confessed that it was all terrible nonsense and exag-
geration, and was ashamed of it. Then came pangs of mental an-
guish about his wasted life. Then shame once more filled his heart, 
overwhelmed it in an instant, and turned a knife in the wound. 
He shuddered as he recalled certain images. What would they say 
about him, what would they think about him when he entered the 
office, what whisperings would pursue him for a whole year, for ten 
years, for his whole life? The story of this disgraceful affair would be 
told to future generations. Sometimes he became so faint-hearted 
that he was ready to drive at once to Semyon Ivanovitch and ask 
him for forgiveness and for his friendship. He did not even try to 
justify himself, he blamed himself completely: he could find no 
excuse for himself and was ashamed of his inability to do so. 

150  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
He also contemplated resigning his post immediately and 
dedicating himself, without fuss, in solitude, to the happiness 
of mankind. In any case, it was undoubtedly necessary to relin-
quish all his acquaintances and even to go so far as to eradicate 
all memory of himself. But then it occurred to him that this, 
too, was nonsense, and that with increased strictness towards 
his subordinates the whole thing could still be put right. This 
gave him hope and courage. Finally, after eight whole days of 
doubt and torment, he felt that he could no longer bear the un-
certainty, and one fine morning he decided to set off for the 
offi  ce. 
Previously, while he was still sitting at home in distress, he 
had pictured to himself a thousand times how he would enter 
his office. He was completely convinced that he was sure to hear 
ambiguous whisperings, that he would see suspicious faces, 
reap most malicious smiles. Imagine his surprise when, in fact, 
nothing of the kind happened. He was received respectfully; ev-
eryone bowed to him; all were serious; all were busy. When he 
reached his private room, joy filled his heart. 
He at once and most conscientiously took up his work, lis-
tened to several reports and explanations, issued decisions. He 
felt that never till now had he reasoned and made decisions so 
well, with such judgment, so competently, as on that morn-
ing. He saw that they were pleased with him, respected him, 
esteemed him. The most sensitive susceptibility would have felt 
nothing. Everything went off splendidly. 
At last Akim Petrovitch himself appeared with some pa-
pers. At sight of him Ivan Ilyitch felt as if something had struck 
him right to the heart, but only for a moment. He gave him his 
attention, talked in a measured manner, showed how things 

A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR  //  151 
should be done and cleared up certain points. He noticed only 
that he avoided glancing for long at Akim Petrovitch, or, rather, 
that Akim Petrovitch was afraid to look at him. But then Akim 
Petrovitch had finished, and began to collect his papers. 
“There is just one request,” he began, as impassively as possi-
ble. “Official Pseldonymov asks to be transferred to the Depart-
ment of——. His Excellency Semyon Ivanovitch Shipulenko 
has promised him a position. Pseldonymov asks for your kind 
co-operation, Your Excellency.” 
“I see, he wishes to be transferred,” said Ivan Ilyitch, feeling 
that a great weight had been taken off his mind. He glanced at 
Akim Petrovitch, and in that instant their eyes met 
“Well now, I, for my part . . . I will use . . .” replied Ivan Ily-
itch, “I am prepared . . .” 
It was plain to see that Akim Petrovitch wanted to slip away 
as quickly as possible. But suddenly Ivan Ilyitch, in a burst of 
magnanimity, decided to get the thing off his chest once and for 
all. He had evidently had another inspiration. 
“Tell him,” he began, directing a piercing and meaningful 
glance towards Akim Petrovitch. “Convey to Pseldonymov that 
I bear him no ill will. . . . Yes, I bear none. . . . That, on the 
contrary, I am quite prepared to forget the past, to forget every-
thing, everything. . . .” 
But suddenly, Ivan Ilyitch stopped short, amazed at the 
strange behaviour of Akim Petrovitch, when, for no reason 
whatever, he changed all of a sudden from a sensible person 
into a most awful fool. Instead of listening, and letting Ivan Ily-
itch finish, he blushed very foolishly, bowing rather hurriedly 
and awkwardly, bobbing, at the same time receding towards the 
door. His whole appearance revealed the desire to sink through 

152  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
the floor, or, rather, to reach his desk as quickly as possible. Ivan 
Ilyitch, left alone, rose from his chair in confusion. He looked 
into the mirror and did not see his own face. 
“No! discipline, discipline and again discipline,” he whis-
pered almost unconsciously, and suddenly his face burned. He 
felt more shame, more heaviness at heart, than he had experi-
enced during even the most unbearable moments of his eight 
days of illness. 
“I have failed to live up to my ideals!” he said to himself, and 
sank into his chair—helpless. 

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
A Fantastic Story 
TRANSLATED BY DAVID MAGARSHACK 


I 
I am a ridiculous man. They call me a madman now. That  
would be a distinct rise in my social position were it not that 
they still regard me as being as ridiculous as ever. But that does 
not make me angry any more. They are all dear to me now even 
while they laugh at me—yes, even then they are for some rea-
son particularly dear to me. I shouldn’t have minded laughing 
with them—not at myself, of course, but because I love them— 
had I not felt so sad as I looked at them. I feel sad because they 
do not know the truth, whereas I know it. Oh, how hard it is to 
be the only man to know the truth! But they won’t understand 
that. No, they will not understand. 
And yet in the past I used to be terribly distressed at ap-
pearing to be ridiculous. No, not appearing to be, but be-

156  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
ing. I’ve always cut a ridiculous figure. I suppose I must have 
known it from the day I was born. At any rate, I’ve known 
for certain that I was ridiculous ever since I was seven years 
old. Afterwards I went to school, then to the university, and— 
well—the more I learned, the more conscious did I become of 
the fact that I was ridiculous. So that for me my years of hard 
work at the university seem in the end to have existed for the 
sole purpose of demonstrating and proving to me, the more 
deeply engrossed I became in my studies, that I was an utterly 
absurd person. And as during my studies, so all my life. Ev-
ery year the same consciousness that I was ridiculous in every 
way strengthened and intensified in my mind. They always 
laughed at me. But not one of them knew or suspected that 
if there were one man on earth who knew better than any-
one else that he was ridiculous, that man was I. And this—I 
mean, the fact that they did not know it—was the bitterest 
pill for me to swallow. But there I was myself at fault. I was 
always so proud that I never wanted to confess it to anyone. 
No, I wouldn’t do that for anything in the world. As the years 
passed, this pride increased in me so that I do believe that if 
ever I had by chance confessed it to any one I should have 
blown my brains out the same evening. Oh, how I suffered in 
the days of my youth from the thought that I might not my-
self resist the impulse to confess it to my schoolfellows. But 
ever since I became a man I grew for some unknown reason 
a little more composed in my mind, though I was more and 
more conscious of that awful characteristic of mine. Yes, most 
decidedly for some unknown reason, for to this day I have not 
been able to fi nd out why that was so. Perhaps it was because 
I was becoming terribly disheartened owing to one circum-

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
157 
stance which was beyond my power to control, namely, the 
conviction which was gaining upon me that nothing in the 
whole world made any difference. I had long felt it dawning upon 
me, but I was fully convinced of it only last year, and that, too, 
all of a sudden, as it were. I suddenly felt that it made no dif-
ference to me whether the world existed or whether nothing 
existed anywhere at all. I began to be acutely conscious that 
nothing existed in my own lifetime. At first I couldn’t help feeling that 
at any rate in the past many things had existed; but later on I 
came to the conclusion that there had not been anything even 
in the past, but that for some reason it had merely seemed to 
have been. Little by little I became convinced that there would 
be nothing in the future, either. It was then that I suddenly 
ceased to be angry with people and almost stopped noticing 
them. This indeed disclosed itself in the smallest trifles. For 
instance, I would knock against  people while walking in the 
street. And not because I was lost in thought—I had nothing 
to think about—I had stopped thinking about anything at 
that time: it made no difference to me. Not that I had found 
an answer to all the questions. Oh, I had not settled a single 
question, and there were thousands of them! But it made no dif-
ference to me, and all the questions disappeared. 
And, well, it was only after that that I learnt the truth. I 
learnt the truth last November, on the third of November, to 
be precise, and every moment since then has been imprinted 
indelibly on my mind. It happened on a dismal evening, as dis-
mal an evening as could be imagined. I was returning home at 
about eleven o’clock and I remember thinking all the time that 
there could not be a more dismal evening. Even the weather 
was foul. It had been pouring all day, and the rain too was the 

158  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
coldest and most dismal rain that ever was, a sort of menac-
ing rain—I remember that—a rain with a distinct animosity 
towards  people. But about eleven o’clock it had stopped sud-
denly, and a horrible dampness descended upon everything, 
and it became much damper and colder than when it had been 
raining. And a sort of steam was rising from everything, from 
every cobble in the street, and from every side-street if you 
peered closely into it from the street as far as the eye could 
reach. I could not help feeling that if the gaslight had been ex-
tinguished everywhere, everything would have seemed much 
more cheerful, and that the gaslight oppressed the heart so 
much just because it shed a light upon it all. I had had scarcely 
any dinner that day. I had been spending the whole evening 
with an engineer who had two more friends visiting him. I 
never opened my mouth, and I expect I must have got on their 
nerves. They were discussing some highly controversial sub-
ject, and suddenly got very excited over it. But it really did 
not make any difference to them. I could see that. I knew that 
their excitement was not genuine. So I suddenly blurted it out. 
“My dear fellows,” I said, “you don’t really care a damn about 
it, do you?” They were not in the least offended, but they all 
burst out laughing at me. That was because I had said it with-
out meaning to rebuke them, but simply because it made no 
difference to me. Well, they realised that it made no difference 
to me, and they felt happy. 
When I was thinking about the gaslight in the streets, I 
looked up at the sky. The sky was awfully dark, but I could 
clearly distinguish the torn wisps of cloud and between them 
fathomless dark patches. All of a sudden I became aware of a 
little star in one of those patches and I began looking at it in-

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
159 
tently. That was because the little star gave me an idea: I made 
up my mind to kill myself that night. I had made up my mind 
to kill myself already two months before and, poor as I am, 
I bought myself an excellent revolver and loaded it the same 
day. But two months had elapsed and it was still lying in the 
drawer. I was so utterly indifferent to everything that I was 
anxious to wait for the moment when I would not be so indif-
ferent and then kill myself. Why—I don’t know. And so every 
night during these two months I thought of shooting myself 
as I was going home. I was only waiting for the right moment. 
And now the little star gave me an idea, and I made up my 
mind then and there that it should most certainly be that night. 
But why the little star gave me the idea—I don’t know. 
And just as I was looking at the sky, this little girl suddenly 
grasped me by the elbow. The street was already deserted and 
there was scarcely a soul to be seen. In the distance a cabman 
was fast asleep on his box. The girl was about eight years old. 
She had a kerchief on her head, and she wore only an old, 
shabby little dress. She was soaked to the skin, but what stuck 
in my memory was her little torn wet boots. I still remem-
ber them. They caught my eye especially. She suddenly began 
tugging at my elbow and calling me. She was not crying, but 
saying something in a loud, jerky sort of voice, something 
that did not make sense, for she was trembling all over and 
her teeth were chattering from cold. She seemed to be terri-
fied of something and she was crying desperately, “Mummy! 
Mummy!” I turned round to look at her, but did not utter 
a word and went on walking. But she ran after me and kept 
tugging at my clothes, and there was a sound in her voice 
which in very frightened children signifies despair. I know  

160  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
that sound. Though her words sounded as if they were chok-
ing her, I realised that her mother must be dying somewhere 
very near, or that something similar was happening to her, 
and that she had run out to call someone, to find someone 
who would help her mother. But I did not go with her; on the 
contrary, something made me drive her away. At first I told 
her to go and find a policeman. But she suddenly clasped her 
hands and, whimpering and gasping for breath, kept running 
at my side and would not leave me. It was then that I stamped 
my foot and shouted at her. She just cried, “Sir! Sir! . . .” and 
then she left me suddenly and rushed headlong across the 
road: another man appeared there and she evidently rushed 
from me to him. 
I climbed to the fifth floor. I live apart from my landlord. 
We all have separate rooms as in an hotel. My room is very 
small and poor. My window is a semicircular skylight. I have 
a sofa covered with American cloth, a table with books on it, 
two chairs and a comfortable armchair, a very old armchair 
indeed, but low-seated and with a high back serving as a head-
rest. I sat down in the armchair, lighted the candle, and began 
thinking. Next door in the other room behind the partition, 
the usual bedlam was going on. It had been going on since the 
day before yesterday. A retired army captain lived there, and 
he had visitors—six merry gentlemen who drank vodka and 
played faro with an old pack of cards. Last night they had a 
fight and I know that two of them were for a long time pulling 
each other about by the hair. The landlady wanted to com-
plain, but she is dreadfully afraid of the captain. We had only 
one more lodger in our rooms, a thin little lady, the wife of 

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
161 
an army officer, on a visit to Petersburg with her three little 
children who had all been taken ill since their arrival at our 
house. She and her children were simply terrified of the cap-
tain and they lay shivering and crossing themselves all night 
long, and the youngest child had a sort of nervous attack from 
fright. This captain (I know that for a fact) sometimes stops 
people on Nevsky Avenue and asks them for a few coppers, 
telling them he is very poor. He can’t get a job in the Civil Ser-
vice, but the strange thing is (and that’s why I am telling you 
this) that the captain had never once during the month he had 
been living with us made me feel in the least irritated. From 
the very first, of course, I would not have anything to do with 
him, and he himself was bored with me the very first time we 
met. But however big a noise they raised behind their partition 
and however many of them there were in the captain’s room, 
it makes no difference to me. I sit up all night and, I assure 
you, I don’t hear them at all—so completely do I forget about 
them. You see, I stay awake all night till daybreak, and that 
has been going on for a whole year now. I sit up all night in 
the armchair at the table—doing nothing. I read books only 
in the daytime. At night I sit like that without even thinking 
about anything in particular: some thoughts wander in and 
out of my mind, and I let them come and go as they please. In 
the night the candle burns out completely. 
I sat down at the table, took the gun out of the drawer, and 
put it down in front of me. I remember asking myself as I put 
it down, “Is it to be then?” and I replied with complete cer-
tainty, “It is!” That is to say, I was going to shoot myself. I knew 
I should shoot myself that night for certain. What I did not 

162  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
know was how much longer I should go on sitting at the table 
till I shot myself. And I should of course have shot myself, had 
it not been for the little girl. 
II 
You see, though nothing made any difference to me, I could 
feel pain, for instance, couldn’t I? If anyone had struck me, I 
should have felt pain. The same was true so far as my moral 
perceptions were concerned. If anything happened to arouse 
my pity, I should have felt pity, just as I used to do at the time 
when things did make a difference to me. So I had felt pity that 
night: I should most decidedly have helped a child. Why then 
did I not help the little girl? Because of a thought that had oc-
curred to me at the time: when she was pulling at me and call-
ing me, a question suddenly arose in my mind and I could not 
settle it. It was an idle question, but it made me angry. What 
made me angry was the conclusion I drew from the reflection 
that if I had really decided to do away with myself that night, 
everything in the world should have been more indifferent to 
me than ever. Why then should I have suddenly felt that I was 
not indifferent and be sorry for the little girl? I remember that 
I was very sorry for her, so much so that I felt a strange pang 
which was quite incomprehensible in my position. I’m afraid 
I am unable better to convey that fleeting sensation of mine, 
but it persisted with me at home when I was sitting at the table, 
and I was very much irritated. I had not been so irritated for a 
long time past. One train of thought followed another. It was 
clear to me that so long as I was still a human being and not a 

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
163 
meaningless cipher, and till I became a cipher, I was alive, and 
consequently able to suffer, be angry, and feel shame at my ac-
tions. Very well. But if, on the other hand, I were going to kill 
myself in, say, two hours, what did that little girl matter to me 
and what did I care for shame or anything else in the world? I 
was going to turn into a cipher, into an absolute cipher. And 
surely the realisation that I should soon cease to exist altogether, 
and hence everything would cease to exist, ought to have had 
some slight effect on my feeling of pity for the little girl or on 
my feeling of shame after so mean an action. Why after all did 
I stamp and shout so fiercely at the little girl? I did it because 
I thought that not only did I feel no pity, but that it wouldn’t 
matter now if I were guilty of the most inhuman baseness, 
since in another two hours everything would become extinct. 
Do you believe me when I tell you that that was the only rea-
son why I shouted like that? I am almost convinced of it now. 
It seemed clear to me that life and the world in some way or 
other depended on me now. It might almost be said that the 
world seemed to be created for me alone. If I were to shoot 
myself, the world would cease to exist—for me at any rate. 
To say nothing of the possibility that nothing would in fact 
exist for anyone after me and the whole world would dissolve 
as soon as my consciousness became extinct, would disappear 
in a twinkling like a phantom, like some integral part of my 
consciousness, and vanish without leaving a trace behind, for 
all this world and all these  people exist perhaps only in my 
consciousness. 
I remember that as I sat and meditated, I began to exam-
ine all these questions which thronged in my mind one after 
another from quite a different angle, and thought of some-

164  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
thing quite new. For instance, the strange notion occurred 
to me that if I had lived before on the moon or on Mars and 
had committed there the most shameful and dishonourable 
action that can be imagined, and had been so disgraced and 
dishonoured there as can be imagined and experienced only 
occasionally in a dream, a nightmare, and if, finding myself 
afterwards on earth, I had retained the memory of what I had 
done on the other planet, and moreover knew that I should 
never in any circumstances go back there—if that were to 
have happened, should I or should I not have felt, as I looked 
from the earth upon the moon, that it made no difference to me? 
Should I or should I not have felt ashamed of that action? The 
questions were idle and useless, for the gun was already lying 
before me and there was not a shadow of doubt in my mind 
that it was going to take place for certain, but they excited and 
maddened me. It seemed to me that I could not die now with-
out having settled something first. The little girl, in fact, had 
saved me, for by these questions I put off my own execution. 
Meanwhile things had grown more quiet in the captain’s 
room: they had finished their card game and were getting 
ready to turn in for the night, and now were only grumbling 
and swearing at each other in a halfhearted sort of way. It was 
at that moment that I suddenly fell asleep in my armchair at 
the table, a thing that had never happened to me before. 
I fell asleep without being aware of it at all. Dreams, as we 
all know, are very curious things: certain incidents in them 
are presented with quite uncanny vividness, each detail ex-
ecuted with the finishing touch of a jeweller, while others you 
leap across as though entirely unaware of, for instance, space 
and time. Dreams seem to be induced not by reason but by 

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
165 
desire, not by the head but by the heart, and yet what clever 
tricks my reason has sometimes played on me in dreams! And 
furthermore what incomprehensible things happen to it in a 
dream. My brother, for instance, died five years ago. I some-
times dream about him: he takes a keen interest in my af-
fairs, we are both very interested, and yet I know very well all 
through my dream that my brother is dead and buried. How is 
it that I am not surprised that, though dead, he is here beside 
me, doing his best to help me? Why does my reason accept all 
this without the slightest hesitation? But enough. Let me tell 
you about my dream. Yes, I dreamed that dream that night. 
My dream of the third of November. They are making fun of 
me now by saying that it was only a dream. But what does it 
matter whether it was a dream or not, so long as that dream 
revealed the Truth to me? For once you have recognised the 
truth and seen it, you know it is the one and only truth and 
that there can be no other, whether you are asleep or awake. 
But never mind. Let it be a dream, but remember that I had 
intended to cut short by suicide the life that means so much 
to us, and that my dream—my dream—oh, it revealed to me 
a new, grand, regenerated, strong life! 
Listen. 
III 
I have said that I fell asleep imperceptibly and even while I 
seemed to be revolving the same thoughts again in my mind. 
Suddenly I dreamed that I picked up the gun and, sitting in 
my armchair, pointed it straight at my heart—at my heart, 

166  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
and not at my head. For I had firmly resolved to shoot my-
self through the head, through the right temple, to be precise. 
Having aimed the gun at my breast I paused for a second or 
two, and suddenly my candle, the table and the wall began 
moving and swaying before me. I fired quickly. 
In a dream you sometimes fall from a great height, or you 
are being murdered or beaten, but you never feel any pain un-
less you really manage somehow or other to hurt yourself in 
bed, when you feel pain and almost always wake up from it. 
So it was in my dream: I did not feel any pain, but it seemed as 
though with my shot everything within me was shaken and 
everything was suddenly extinguished, and a terrible dark-
ness descended all around me. I seemed to have become blind 
and dumb. I was lying on something hard, stretched out full 
length on my back. I saw nothing and could not make the 
slightest movement. All round me  people were walking and 
shouting. The captain was yelling in his deep bass voice, the 
landlady was screaming and—suddenly another hiatus, and I 
was being carried in a closed coffin. I could feel the coffi  n sway-
ing and I was thinking about it, and for the first time the idea 
flashed through my mind that I was dead, dead as a doornail, 
that I knew it, that there was not the least doubt about it, that 
I could neither see nor move, and yet I could feel and reason. 
But I was soon reconciled to that and, as usually happens in 
dreams, I accepted the facts without questioning them. 
And now I was buried in the earth. They all went away, 
and I was left alone, entirely alone. I did not move. Whenever 
before I imagined how I should be buried in a grave, there 
was only one sensation I actually associated with the grave, 
namely, that of damp and cold. And so it was now. I felt that I 

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
167 
was very cold, especially in the tips of my toes, but I felt noth-
ing else. 
I lay in my grave and, strange to say, I did not expect any-
thing, accepting the idea that a dead man had nothing to ex-
pect as an incontestable fact. But it was damp. I don’t know 
how long a time passed, whether an hour, or several days, or 
many days. But suddenly a drop of water, which had seeped 
through the lid of the coffi  n, fell on my closed left eye. It was 
followed by another drop a minute later, then after another 
minute by another drop, and so on. One drop every minute. 
All at once deep indignation blazed up in my heart, and I sud-
denly felt a twinge of physical pain in it. “That’s my wound,” 
I thought. “It’s the shot I fired. There’s a bullet there. . . .” And 
drop after drop still kept falling every minute on my closed 
eyelid. And suddenly I called (not with my voice, for I was mo-
tionless, but with the whole of my being) upon Him who was 
responsible for all that was happening to me: 
“Whoever Thou art, and if anything more rational exists 
than what is happening here, let it, I pray Thee, come to pass 
here too. But if Thou art revenging Thyself for my senseless 
act of self-destruction by the infamy and absurdity of life after 
death, then know that no torture that may be inflicted upon 
me can ever equal the contempt which I shall go on feeling in 
silence, though my martyrdom last for aeons upon aeons!” 
I made this appeal and was silent. The dead silence went on 
for almost a minute, and one more drop fell on my closed eye-
lid, but I knew, I knew and believed infinitely and unshakably 
that everything would without a doubt change immediately. 
And then my grave was opened. I don’t know, that is, whether 
it was opened or dug open, but I was seized by some dark and 

168  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
unknown being and we found ourselves in space. I suddenly 
regained my sight. It was a pitch-black night. Never, never had 
there been such darkness! We were flying through space at a 
terrific speed and we had already left the earth behind us. I 
did not question the being who was carrying me. I was proud 
and waited. I was telling myself that I was not afraid, and I was 
filled with admiration at the thought that I was not afraid. I 
cannot remember how long we were flying, nor can I give you 
an idea of the time; it all happened as it always does happen 
in dreams when you leap over space and time and the laws 
of nature and reason, and only pause at the points which are 
especially dear to your heart. All I remember is that I suddenly 
beheld a little star in the darkness. 
“Is that Sirius?” I asked, feeling suddenly unable to restrain 
myself, for I had made up my mind not to ask any questions. 
“No,” answered the being who was carrying me, “that is 
the same star you saw between the clouds when you were 
coming home.” 
I knew that its face bore some resemblance to a human 
face. It is a strange fact but I did not like that being, and I even 
felt an intense aversion for it. I had expected complete non-
existence and that was why I had shot myself through the 
heart. And yet there I was in the hands of a being, not hu-
man of course, but which was, which existed. “So there is life 
beyond the grave!” I thought with the curious irrelevance of 
a dream, but at heart I remained essentially unchanged. “If I 
must be again,” I thought, “and live again at someone’s unal-
terable behest, I won’t be defeated and humiliated!” 
“You know I’m afraid of you and that’s why you despise me,” 
I said suddenly to my companion, unable to refrain from the 

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
169 
humiliating remark with its implied admission, and feeling my 
own humiliation in my heart like the sharp prick of a needle. 
He did not answer me, but I suddenly felt that I was not de-
spised, that no one was laughing at me, that no one was even 
pitying me, and that our journey had a purpose, an unknown 
and mysterious purpose that concerned only me. Fear was 
steadily growing in my heart. Something was communicated 
to me from my silent companion—mutely but agonisingly— 
and it seemed to permeate my whole being. We were speeding 
through dark and unknown regions of space. I had long since 
lost sight of the constellations familiar to me. I knew that there 
were stars in the heavenly spaces whose light took thousands 
of millions of years to reach the earth. Possibly we were already 
flying through those spaces. I expected something in the ter-
rible anguish that wrung my heart. And suddenly a strangely 
familiar and incredibly nostalgic feeling shook me to the very 
core: I suddenly caught sight of our sun! I knew that it could 
not possibly be our sun that gave birth to our earth, and that 
we were millions of miles away from our sun, but for some un-
known reason I recognised with every fibre of my being that 
it was precisely the same sun as ours, its exact copy and twin. 
A sweet, nostalgic feeling filled my heart with rapture: the old 
familiar power of the same light which had given me life stirred 
an echo in my heart and revived it, and I felt the same life stir-
ring within me for the first time since I had been in the grave. 
“But if it is the sun, if it’s exactly the same sun as ours,” I 
cried, “then where is the earth?” 
And my companion pointed to a little star twinkling in 
the darkness with an emerald light. We were making straight 
for it. 

170  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
“But are such repetitions possible in the universe? Can that 
be nature’s law? And if that is an earth there, is it the same 
earth as ours? Just the same poor, unhappy, but dear, dear 
earth, and beloved for ever and ever? Arousing like our earth 
the same poignant love for herself even in the most ungrateful 
of her children?” I kept crying, deeply moved by an uncontrol-
lable, rapturous love for the dear old earth I had left behind. 
The face of the poor little girl I had treated so badly flashed 
through my mind. 
“You shall see it all,” answered my companion, and a 
strange sadness sounded in his voice. 
But we were rapidly approaching the planet. It was grow-
ing before my eyes. I could already distinguish the ocean, the 
outlines of Europe, and suddenly a strange feeling of some 
great and sacred jealousy blazed up in my heart. 
“How is such a repetition possible and why? I love, I can only 
love the earth I’ve left behind, stained with my blood when, 
ungrateful wretch that I am, I extinguished my life by shoot-
ing myself through the heart. But never, never have I ceased to 
love that earth, and even on the night I parted from it I loved it 
perhaps more poignantly than ever. Is there suff ering on this 
new earth? On our earth we can truly love only with suffering 
and through suffering! We know not how to love otherwise. 
We know no other love. I want suffering in order to love. I 
want and thirst this very minute to kiss, with tears streaming 
down my cheeks, the one and only earth I have left behind. I 
don’t want, I won’t accept life on any other! . . .” 
But my companion had already left me. Suddenly, and 
without as it were being aware of it myself, I stood on this other 
earth in the bright light of a sunny day, fair and beautiful as 

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
171 
paradise. I believe I was standing on one of the islands which 
on our earth form the Greek archipelago, or somewhere on 
the coast of the mainland close to this archipelago. Oh, every-
thing was just as it is with us, except that everything seemed 
to be bathed in the radiance of some public festival and of  
some great and holy triumph attained at last. The gentle em-
erald sea softly lapped the shore and kissed it with manifest, 
visible, almost conscious love. Tall, beautiful trees stood in all 
the glory of their green luxuriant foliage, and their innumer-
able leaves (I am sure of that) welcomed me with their soft, 
tender rustle, and seemed to utter sweet words of love. The 
lush grass blazed with bright and fragrant fl owers. Birds were 
flying in flocks through the air and, without being afraid of 
me, alighted on my shoulders and hands and joyfully beat 
against me with their sweet fluttering wings. And at last I saw 
and came to know the people of this blessed earth. They came 
to me themselves. They surrounded me. They kissed me.  
Children of the sun, children of their sun—oh, how beauti-
ful they were! Never on our earth had I beheld such beauty in 
man. Only perhaps in our children during the very first years 
of their life could one have found a remote, though faint, re-
flection of this beauty. The eyes of these happy  people shone 
with a bright lustre. Their faces were radiant with understand-
ing and a serenity of mind that had reached its greatest fulfil-
ment. Those faces were joyous; in the words and voices of these 
people there was a child-like gladness. Oh, at the first glance 
at their faces I at once understood all, all! It was an earth un-
stained by the Fall, inhabited by  people who had not sinned 
and who lived in the same paradise as that in which, according 
to the legends of mankind, our first parents lived before they 

172  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
sinned, with the only difference that all the earth here was ev-
erywhere the same paradise. These  people, laughing happily, 
thronged round me and overwhelmed me with their caresses; 
they took me home with them, and each of them was anxious 
to set my mind at peace. Oh, they asked me no questions, but 
seemed to know everything already (that was the impression I 
got), and they longed to remove every trace of suffering from 
my face as soon as possible. 
IV 
Well, you see, again let me repeat: All right, let us assume it 
was only a dream! But the sensation of the love of those in-
nocent and beautiful  people has remained with me for ever, 
and I can feel that their love is even now flowing out to me 
from over there. I have seen them myself. I have known them 
thoroughly and been convinced. I loved them and I suffered 
for them afterwards. Oh, I knew at once even all the time that 
there were many things about them I should never be able to 
understand. To me, a modern Russian progressive and a despi-
cable citizen of Petersburg, it seemed inexplicable that, know-
ing so much, they knew nothing of our science, for instance. 
But I soon realised that their knowledge was derived from, 
and fostered by emotions other than those to which we were 
accustomed on earth, and that their aspirations, too, were  
quite different. They desired nothing. They were at peace with 
themselves. They did not strive to gain knowledge of life as we 
strive to understand it because their lives were full. But their 
knowledge was higher and deeper than the knowledge we de-

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
173 
rive from our science; for our science seeks to explain what 
life is and strives to understand it in order to teach others how 
to live, while they knew how to live without science. I under-
stood that, but I couldn’t understand their knowledge. They 
pointed out their trees to me, and I could not understand the 
intense love with which they looked on them; it was as though 
they were talking with beings like themselves. And, you know, 
I don’t think I am exaggerating in saying that they talked with 
them! Yes, they had discovered their language, and I am sure 
the trees understood them. They looked upon all nature like 
that—the animals which lived peaceably with them and did 
not attack them, but loved them, conquered by their love 
for them. They pointed out the stars to me and talked to me 
about them in a way that I could not understand, but I am 
certain that in some curious way they communed with the 
stars in the heavens, not only in thought, but in some actual, 
living way. Oh, these  people were not concerned whether I 
understood them or not; they loved me without it. But I too 
knew that they would never be able to understand me, and 
for that reason I hardly ever spoke to them about our earth. I 
merely kissed the earth on which they lived in their presence, 
and worshipped them without any words. And they saw that 
and let me worship them without being ashamed that I was 
worshipping them, for they themselves loved much. They did 
not suffer for me when, weeping, I sometimes kissed their feet, 
for in their hearts they were joyfully aware of the strong affec-
tion with which they would return my love. At times I asked 
myself in amazement how they had managed never to offend 
a person like me and not once arouse in a person like me a 
feeling of jealousy and envy. Many times I asked myself how 

174  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
I—a braggart and a liar—could refrain from telling them all 
I knew of science and philosophy, of which of course they had 
no idea? How it had never occurred to me to impress them 
with my store of learning, or impart my learning to them out 
of the love I bore them? 
They were playful and high-spirited like children. They 
wandered about their beautiful woods and groves, they sang 
their beautiful songs, they lived on simple food—the fruits 
of their trees, the honey from their woods, and the milk of 
the animals that loved them. To obtain their food and clothes, 
they did not work very hard or long. They knew love and they 
begot children, but I never noticed in them those outbursts 
of cruel sensuality which overtake almost everybody on our 
earth, whether man or woman, and are the only source of 
almost every sin of our human race. They rejoiced in their 
new-born children as new sharers in their bliss. There were no 
quarrels or jealousy among them, and they did not even know 
what the words meant. Their children were the children of 
them all, for they were all one family. There was scarcely any 
illness among them, though there was death; but their old 
people died peacefully, as though falling asleep, surrounded 
by the  people who took leave of them, blessing them and smil-
ing at them, and themselves receiving with bright smiles the 
farewell wishes of their friends. I never saw grief or tears on 
those occasions. What I did see was love that seemed to reach 
the point of rapture, but it was a gentle, self-suffi  cient, and 
contemplative rapture. There was reason to believe that they 
communicated with the departed after death, and that their 
earthly union was not cut short by death. They found it al-
most impossible to understand me when I questioned them 

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
175 
about life eternal, but apparently they were so convinced of 
it in their minds that for them it was no question at all. They 
had no places of worship, but they had a certain awareness of a 
constant, uninterrupted, and living union with the Universe 
at large. They had no specific religions, but instead they had 
a certain knowledge that when their earthly joy had reached 
the limits imposed upon it by nature, they—both the living 
and the dead—would reach a state of still closer communion 
with the Universe at large. They looked forward to that mo-
ment with joy, but without haste and without pining for it, 
as though already possessing it in the vague stirrings of their 
hearts, which they communicated to each other. 
In the evening, before going to sleep, they were fond of  
gathering together and singing in melodious and harmoni-
ous choirs. In their songs they expressed all the sensations the 
parting day had given them. They praised it and bade it fare-
well. They praised nature, the earth, the sea, and the woods. 
They were also fond of composing songs about one another, 
and they praised each other like children. Their songs were 
very simple, but they sprang straight from the heart and they 
touched the heart. And not only in their songs alone, but they 
seemed to spend all their lives in perpetual praise of one an-
other. It seemed to be a universal and all-embracing love for 
each other. Some of their songs were solemn and ecstatic, and 
I was scarcely able to understand them at all. While under-
standing the words, I could never entirely fathom their mean-
ing. It remained somehow beyond the grasp of my reason, and 
yet it sank unconsciously deeper and deeper into my heart. I 
often told them that I had had a presentiment of it years ago 
and that all that joy and glory had been perceived by me while 

176  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
I was still on our earth as a nostalgic yearning, bordering at 
times on unendurably poignant sorrow; that I had had a pre-
sentiment of them all and of their glory in the dreams of my 
heart and in the reveries of my soul; that often on our earth I 
could not look at the setting sun without tears. . . . That there 
always was a sharp pang of anguish in my hatred of the men 
of our earth; why could I not hate them without loving them 
too? why could I not forgive them? And in my love for them, 
too, there was a sharp pang of anguish: why could I not love 
them without hating them? They listened to me, and I could 
tell that they did not know what I was talking about. But I 
was not sorry to have spoken to them of it, for I knew that 
they appreciated how much and how anxiously I yearned for 
those I had forsaken. Oh yes, when they looked at me with 
their dear eyes full of love, when I realised that in their pres-
ence my heart, too, became as innocent and truthful as theirs, 
I did not regret my inability to understand them, either. The 
sensation of the fullness of life left me breathless, and I wor-
shipped them in silence. 
Oh, everyone laughs in my face now and everyone assures 
me that I could not possibly have seen and felt anything so 
definite, but was merely conscious of a sensation that arose 
in my own feverish heart, and that I invented all those de-
tails myself when I woke up. And when I told them that they 
were probably right, good Lord, what mirth that admission of 
mine caused and how they laughed at me! Why, of course, I 
was overpowered by the mere sensation of that dream and it 
alone survived in my sorely wounded heart. But none the less 
the real shapes and forms of my dream, that is, those I actually 
saw at the very time of my dream, were fi lled with such har-

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
177 
mony and were so enchanting and beautiful, and so intensely 
true, that on awakening I was indeed unable to clothe them in 
our feeble words so that they were bound as it were to become 
blurred in my mind; so is it any wonder that perhaps uncon-
sciously I was myself afterwards driven to make up the details 
which I could not help distorting, particularly in view of my 
passionate desire to convey some of them at least as quickly as 
I could. But that does not mean that I have no right to believe 
that it all did happen. As a matter of fact, it was quite possibly 
a thousand times better, brighter, and more joyful than I de-
scribe it. What if it was only a dream? All that couldn’t possibly 
not have been. And do you know, I think I’ll tell you a secret: 
perhaps it was no dream at all! For what happened afterwards 
was so awful, so horribly true, that it couldn’t possibly have 
been a mere coinage of my brain seen in a dream. Granted 
that my heart was responsible for my dream, but could my 
heart alone have been responsible for the awful truth of what 
happened to me afterwards? Surely my paltry heart and my 
vacillating and trivial mind could not have risen to such a rev-
elation of truth! Oh, judge for yourselves: I have been conceal-
ing it all the time, but now I will tell you the whole truth. The 
fact is, I—corrupted them all! 
V 
Yes, yes, it ended in my corrupting them all! How it could 
have happened I do not know, but I remember it clearly. The 
dream encompassed thousands of years and left in me only a 
vague sensation of the whole. I only know that the cause of 

178  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
the Fall was I. Like a horrible trichina, like the germ of the 
plague infecting whole kingdoms, so did I infect with myself 
all that happy earth that knew no sin before me. They learnt 
to lie, and they grew to appreciate the beauty of a lie. Oh, per-
haps, it all began innocently, with a jest, with a desire to show 
off, with amorous play, and perhaps indeed only with a germ, 
but this germ made its way into their hearts and they liked 
it. The voluptuousness was soon born, voluptuousness begot 
jealousy, and jealousy—cruelty. . . . Oh, I don’t know, I can’t 
remember, but soon, very soon the fi rst blood was shed; they 
were shocked and horrified, and they began to separate and 
to shun one another. They formed alliances, but it was one 
against another. Recriminations began, reproaches. They 
came to know shame, and they made shame into a virtue. The 
conception of honour was born, and every alliance raised its 
own standard. They began torturing animals, and the ani-
mals ran away from them into the forests and became their 
enemies. A struggle began for separation, for isolation, for per-
sonality, for mine and thine. They began talking in different 
languages. They came to know sorrow, and they loved sorrow. 
They thirsted for suffering, and they said that Truth could 
only be attained through suffering. It was then that science 
made its appearance among them. When they became wicked, 
they began talking of brotherhood and humanity and under-
stood the meaning of those ideas. When they became guilty 
of crimes, they invented justice, and drew up whole codes of 
law, and to ensure the carrying out of their laws they erected 
a guillotine. They only vaguely remembered what they had 
lost, and they would not believe that they ever were happy and 
innocent. They even laughed at the possibility of their former 

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
179 
happiness and called it a dream. They could not even imagine 
it in any definite shape or form, but the strange and wonderful 
thing was that though they had lost faith in their former state 
of happiness and called it a fairy-tale, they longed so much 
to be happy and innocent once more that, like children, they 
succumbed to the desire of their hearts, glorified this desire, 
built temples, and began offering up prayers to their own idea, 
their own “desire,” and at the same time firmly believed that 
it could not be realised and brought about, though they still 
worshipped it and adored it with tears. And yet if they could 
have in one way or another returned to the state of happy in-
nocence they had lost, and if someone had shown it to them 
again and had asked them whether they desired to go back to 
it, they would certainly have refused. The answer they gave 
me was, “What if we are dishonest, cruel, and unjust? We know 
it and we are sorry for it, and we torment ourselves for it, and 
inflict pain upon ourselves, and punish ourselves more per-
haps than the merciful Judge who will judge us and whose 
name we do not know. But we have science and with its aid we 
shall again discover truth, though we shall accept it only when 
we perceive it with our reason. Knowledge is higher than feel-
ing, and the consciousness of life is higher than life. Science 
will give us wisdom. Wisdom will reveal to us the laws. And 
the knowledge of the laws of happiness is higher than happi-
ness.” That is what they said to me, and having uttered those 
words, each of them began to love himself better than anyone 
else, and indeed they could not do otherwise. Every one of 
them became so jealous of his own personality that he strove 
with might and main to belittle and humble it in others; and 
therein he saw the whole purpose of his life. Slavery made its 

180  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
appearance, even voluntary slavery: the weak eagerly submit-
ted themselves to the will of the strong on condition that the 
strong helped them to oppress those who were weaker than 
themselves. Saints made their appearance, saints who came to 
these people with tears and told them of their pride, of their 
loss of proportion and harmony, of their loss of shame. They 
were laughed to scorn and stoned to death. Their sacred blood 
was spilt on the threshold of the temples. But then men arose 
who began to wonder how they could all be united again, so 
that everybody should, without ceasing to love himself best of 
all, not interfere with everybody else and so that all of them 
should live together in a society which would at least seem 
to be founded on mutual understanding. Whole wars were  
fought over this idea. All the combatants at one and the same 
time firmly believed that science, wisdom, and the instinct of 
self-preservation would in the end force mankind to unite into 
a harmonious and intelligent society, and therefore, to hasten 
matters, the “very wise” did their best to exterminate as rap-
idly as possible the “not so wise” who did not understand their 
idea, so as to prevent them from interfering with its triumph. 
But the instinct of self-preservation began to weaken rapidly. 
Proud and voluptuous men appeared who frankly demanded 
all or nothing. In order to obtain everything they did not hesi-
tate to resort to violence, and if it failed—to suicide. Religions 
were founded to propagate the cult of non-existence and self-
destruction for the sake of the everlasting peace in nothing-
ness. At last these  people grew weary of their senseless labours 
and suffering appeared on their faces, and these  people pro-
claimed that suffering was beauty, for in suffering alone was 
there thought. They glorified suffering in their songs. I walked 

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
181 
among them, wringing my hands and weeping over them, but 
I loved them perhaps more than before when there was no 
sign of suffering in their faces and when they were innocent 
and—oh, so beautiful! I loved the earth they had polluted 
even more than when it had been a paradise, and only because 
sorrow had made its appearance on it. Alas, I always loved 
sorrow and affliction, but only for myself, only for myself; for 
them I wept now, for I pitied them. I stretched out my hands 
to them, accusing, cursing, and despising myself. I told them 
that I alone was responsible for it all—I alone; that it was I 
who had brought them corruption, contamination, and lies! I 
implored them to crucify me, and I taught them how to make 
the cross. I could not kill myself; I had not the courage to do it; 
but I longed to receive martyrdom at their hands. I thirsted for 
martyrdom, I yearned for my blood to be shed to the last drop 
in torment and suffering. But they only laughed at me, and 
in the end they began looking upon me as a madman. They 
justified me. They said that they had got what they themselves 
wanted and that what was now could not have been other-
wise. At last they told me that I was becoming dangerous to 
them and that they would lock me up in a lunatic asylum if 
I did not hold my peace. Then sorrow entered my soul with 
such force that my heart was wrung and I felt as though I were 
dying, and then—well, then I awoke. 
It was morning, that is, the sun had not risen yet, but it was 
about six o’clock. When I came to, I found myself in the same 
armchair, my candle had burnt out, in the captain’s room they 
were asleep, and silence, so rare in our house, reigned around. 
The first thing I did was to jump up in great amazement. Noth-
ing like this had ever happened to me before, not even so far 

182  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
as the most trivial details were concerned. Never, for instance, 
had I fallen asleep like this in my armchair. Then, suddenly, as 
I was standing and coming to myself, I caught sight of my gun 
lying there ready and loaded. But I pushed it away from me at 
once! Oh, how I longed for life, life! I lifted up my hands and 
called upon eternal Truth—no, not called upon it, but wept. 
Rapture, infinite and boundless rapture intoxicated me. Yes, 
life and—preaching! I made up my mind to preach from that 
very moment and, of course, to go on preaching all my life. I 
am going to preach, I want to preach. What? Why, truth. For I 
have beheld truth, I have beheld it with mine own eyes, I have 
beheld it in all its glory! 
And since then I have been preaching. Moreover, I love all 
who laugh at me more than all the rest. Why that is so, I don’t 
know and I cannot explain, but let it be so. They say that even 
now I often get muddled and confused and that if I am getting 
muddled and confused now, what will be later on? It is per-
fectly true. I do get muddled and confused and it is quite possi-
ble that I shall be getting worse later. And, of course, I shall get 
muddled several times before I find out how to preach, that is, 
what words to use and what deeds to perform, for that is all 
very difficult! All this is even now as clear to me as daylight, 
but, pray, tell me who does not get muddled and confused? 
And yet all follow the same path, at least all strive to achieve 
the same thing, from the philosopher to the lowest criminal, 
only by different roads. It is an old truth, but this is what is 
new: I cannot even get very much muddled and confused. 
For I have beheld the Truth. I have beheld it and I know that 
people can be happy and beautiful without losing their ability 
to live on earth. I will not and I cannot believe that evil is the 

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 
// 
183 
normal condition among men. And yet they all laugh at this 
faith of mine. But how can I help believing it? I have beheld 
it—the Truth—it is not as though I had invented it with my 
mind: I have beheld it, I have beheld it, and the living image of it 
has filled my soul for ever. I have beheld it in all its glory and 
I cannot believe that it cannot exist among men. So how can 
I grow muddled and confused? I shall of course lose my way 
and I’m afraid that now and again I may speak with words that 
are not my own, but not for long: the living image of what I 
beheld will always be with me and it will always correct me 
and lead me back on to the right path. Oh, I’m in fine fettle, 
and I am of good cheer. I will go on and on for a thousand 
years, if need be. Do you know, at first I did not mean to tell 
you that I corrupted them, but that was a mistake—there you 
have my first mistake! But Truth whispered to me that I was 
lying, and so preserved me and set me on the right path. But I’m 
afraid I do not know how to establish a heaven on earth, for I 
do not know how to put it into words. After my dream I lost 
the knack of putting things into words. At least, onto the most 
necessary and most important words. But never mind, I shall 
go on and I shall keep on talking, for I have indeed beheld it 
with my own eyes, though I cannot describe what I saw. It is 
this the scoffers do not understand. “He had a dream,” they 
say, “a vision, a hallucination!” Oh dear, is this all they have to 
say? Do they really think that is very clever? And how proud 
they are! A dream! What is a dream? And what about our life? 
Is that not a dream too? I will say more: even—yes, even if this 
never comes to pass, even if there never is a heaven on earth 
(that, at any rate, I can see very well!), even then I shall go on 
preaching. And really how simple it all is: in one day, in one hour, 

184  \\  FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY 
everything could be arranged at once! The main thing is to 
love your neighbour as yourself—that is the main thing, and 
that is everything, for nothing else matters. Once you do that, 
you will discover at once how everything can be arranged. 
And yet it is an old truth, a truth that has been told over and 
over again, but in spite of that it finds no place among men! 
“The consciousness of life is higher than life, the knowledge of 
happiness is higher than happiness”—that is what we have to 
fight against! And I shall, I shall fight against it! If only we all 
wanted it, everything could be arranged immediately. 
And—I did find that little girl. . . . And I shall go on! I shall 
go on! 

About the Author  
A TOWERING literary giant, Fyodor 
Dostoyevsky was—and remains—unparal-
leled in his understanding of the darkness 
that resides in the farthest corners of the 
human soul. Although his shorter works 
have been overshadowed by his astonish-
ing novels—Crime and Punishment and 
The Brothers Karamazov, to name but 
two—his stories and novellas deserve a 
place among the great literary inventions 
of the modern era, offering insight into 
the themes and ideas that drive his longer 
fiction. Included in this volume are some 
of Dostoyevsky’s most troubling, moving, 
and poignant short works. 
WWW.FIFTYTWOSTORIES.COM 
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive 
information on your favorite HarperCollins author. 

Credits 
Designed by Justin Dodd 
Cover design by Adam Johnson 
Cover photograph by Hulton Archive/Getty Images 

Copyright 
The translations of “White Nights” and “The Dream of a 
Ridiculous Man” by David Magarshack are reprinted by his 
permission. The translation of “A Disgraceful Affair” by Nora 
Gottlieb is reprinted by permission of The Merlin Press, Ltd., 
London. 
A DISGRACEFUL AFFAIR. Copyright © 2009 by HarperCollins 
Publishers. All rights reserved under International and Pan-
American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required 
fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable 
right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part 
of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, 
decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any 
information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any 
means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or 
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of 
HarperCollins e-books. 
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader March 2009 
ISBN 978-0-06-192560-3 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

Australia 
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia 
Canada 
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 
New Zealand 
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited 
Auckland, New Zealand 
United Kingdom 
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 
77-85 Fulham Palace Road 
London, W6 8JB, UK 
United States 
HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 
10 East 53rd Street 
About the Publisher 
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd. 
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au 
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900 
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca 
P.O. Box 1 
New York, NY 10022 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com 
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk

