
"No scholar has made ·.u.:h ex, 
haustive and reve:-Jing use of 
all the evidence of t h c note, 
books in an attempt to clarify 
Dostoevsky's art and thought,'' 
wrote Ernest J. Simmons in 'The 
New Yor. 'Times when the first 
of the notebooks appeared, 
edited by Edward Wasiolek. 
Now a fourth volume in this 
much,acclaimed series is avail, 
able to Dostoevsky readers and 
scholars. With the help of the 
notes to A Raw Youth, we are 
able to follow the slow and pain, 
ful process by which Dostoev, 
sky comes to terms with the 
political and moral atmosphere 
of his age. 
In some respects A Raw Youth 
is a failure. This novel on dis-­
order in society is doomed by 
the very nature of the author's 
talent. Dostoevsky can give us 
magnificent portrayals of indi, 
vidual disorder, but uncon vine, 
ing pictures of general disorder. 
Thus, although his desire to 
write about social chaos is re, 
alized, his novel is less successful 
than the great novels he pro, 
duced before and after A Raw 
Youth. 'The N.oteboo.s for "A 
Raw Youth'' are a record of 
what Dostoevsky could and 
could not accomplish. 
Mr. Wasiolek in his introduc, 
tion comments, "Some of the 
compositional disorder of the 
novel came about, I am con, 
vinced, because tPCJ'\ was no 

great character to impose order 
by his will and personality.'' 
The notebooks are the history 
of the transformation of V ersie 
lov from a patchwork of motifs 
to potentially one of Dostoeve 
sky's great characters. Had he 
permitted Versilov to take come 
mand of the novel as V ersilov 
tries to do throughout the 
notes, Dostoevsky might have 
achieved the greatness that A 
Raw Youth promised. 
That promise is fulfilled in Dose 
toevsky's next novel, 'The 
Brothers Karamazov, in which 
he allows magnetic individuals 
to emerge and dominate their 
environment. Thus, the strugf 
gles in these notebooks are as 
much a preparation for 'The 
Brothers Karamazov as they are 
for A Raw Youth. 
EDWARD WASIOLEK spent a 
year in the Soviet Union studye 
ing the notebooks for Crime 
and Punishment, 'The Idiot, 'The 
Brothers Karamazov, 'The Pos- 
sessed and A Raw Youth. Edue 
cated at Rutgers, Harvard, The 
Sorbonne, and The University 
of Bordeaux, he is now profese 
sor of Russian and comparative 
literature at The University of 
Chicago and was recently ape 
pointed to the Avalon Profese 
sorship there. 
VICTOR TERRAS is currently 
professor of Slavic Languages at 
The University of Wisconsin. 

The Notebooks for A Raw Youth 

A pencil drawing of Dostoevsky by I. A. Sharleman, made in 1921 

The Notebooks for 
A Raw Youth 
Fyodor Dostoevsky 
Edited and with an Introduction by Edward Wasiolek 
Translated by Victor Terras 
The University of Chicago Press 
CHICAGO & LONDON 

Standard Book Number: 226-15965-5 
Library of Congress Catalog Number: 75-84588 
The translation is based upon the Russian edition of 
F. M. Dostoevsky at Work on His Novel "A Raw Youth," 
edited by A. S. Dolinin (Moscow, 1965) , vol. 77 of Litera­
turnoe Nasledltvo, edited by I. I. Anisimov et al. 
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637 
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London 
© 1969 by The University of Chicago. Al rights reserved 
Published 1969. Printed in the United States of America 

Contents 
List of Illustrations 
Vl 
Introduction 
. 
. 
. 
1 
I Initial Sketches toward the Novel: February-July, 1874 
21 
II The First Period of Work on the Plot: August-Septem-
ber, 1874 
. 
. 
64 
III Second Period of Work on the Plot: September 8-Novem-
ber, 1874 
. 
166 
IV Notes to the First Part of the Novel 
256 
V Notes to the Second Part of the Novel 
334 
VI Notes to the Third Part of the Novel 
4 3 8 
Index 
. 
555 

Illustrations 
A Pencil Drawing of Dostoevsky 
frontispiece 
Masthead for the Newspaper Voice of February 17, 1874 
63 
Newspaper Clipping Concerning Trial of Counterfeiters 
63 
A Proclamation of the Dolgushintsy 
121 
File on Police Surveillance of Dostoevsky 
254 
Notice of Abolishment of Police Surveillance of Dostoevsky 
255 
Facsimile of Notebook Page 
333 
Facsimile of Notebook Page 
436 
Facsimile of Notebook Page 
437 

Introduction 
I 
There are admirers of Dostoevsky who look upon Crime and Punish­
ment as Dostoevsky's greatest novel, and just as many who would 
choose The Idiot or The Possessed, and many more who would 
choose The Brothers Karamazov. Each of the four great novels can 
in its own way support the burden of greatness. But A Raw Youth 
cannot. Perhaps it shines less because it lies in the midst of such 
brilliance, but it still shines dully, and no amount of explanation or 
justification will make it shine more. For Dostoevsky A Raw Youth 
is a failure. 
And yet there was no reason for A Raw Youth to be a failure. 
Dostoevsky was at the height of his creative powers, and The 
Brothers Karamazov was to follow it as definitive sign that A Raw 
Youth did not signal a general decline of talent. The conditions for 
work were never better. Dostoevsky was back in his native Russia 
after four years of pining, and from 1 87 1  on he was once again in 
touch with the contemporary and living life he missed in writing 
The Idiot and much of The Possessed. His financial affairs-though 
far from happy-were better than they had ever been, thanks to 
the ingenuity and tireless efforts of his efficient wife. His home life, 
too, was peaceful and happy. He was more sure of what he wanted 
to write about than he had been when he wrote The Idiot and The 
Possessed. There is none of the agonizing search for a subject that 
we have in the notebooks for The Idiot and none of the conflict of 
wanting to write one thing and finding himself writing something 
else that we find in the notebooks for The Possessed. He knew from 
the very beginning that he was going to write a novel about disorder 
in contemporary society and the search of the younger generation for 
order. He was less haunted, too, at this time by ghosts from the past, 
less intolerant of "socialists," "nihilists," and "liberals." It is true 
I 

2 Dostoevsky Listens to the Other Side 
that these were the years when he was working for the reactionary 
newspaper The Citizen, and the years when, immediately before and 
after the writing of A Raw Youth ( 1 8i5), he was writing articles on 
frankly chauvinistic and reactionary themes. But it is also true that 
he chafed at his cooperation with the unsavory publisher Meshcher­
sky, jeopardized the status of the journal more than once with 
government censors because of his liberal views, and severed his 
relationship with the journal because he was unable to live with the 
reactionary demands of its publisher. 
Dostoevsky was beginning to listen to the other side, in a way he 
had done only reluctantly before this. He had always shown an im­
patience in his created works with the "other case," and only a tough 
artistic integrity had held in check a propagandistic impulse in his 
character. He was a little too eager to establish Sonia's influence and 
Raskolnikov's conversion in Crime and Punishment; his expression 
of nihilist vulgarity is too enthusiastically put forth in "the Burdovsky 
episode in The Idiot, and his portrayal of the socialists and liberal 
elements in The Possessed is gleefully destructive. Such literary 
executions and easy caricatures as we find in The Possessed are lack­
ing in A Raw Youth, and the explanation seems to be that Dostoevsky 
was feeling something of that spirit of reconciliation that he was to 
express so eloquently in his Pushkin speech in 1 880. 
Dostoevsky had gone out of his way to break his association with 
Katkov and the conservative The Russian Messenger, where he had 
published his great novels, in order to place A Raw Youth in the 
liberal journal The Fatherland Notes under the editorship of 
Nekrasov. The overture to publish his next novel there had come 
from the journal itself, and Dostoevsky took more than six months 
before he gave his final answer; yet the fact that he agreed to place 
his new novel there can be explained only by some change in his 
mental and emotional horizon. It was not a change in political orien­
tation as Soviet critics sometimes hopefully explain. Rather, it was a 
new eagerness to listen to the new Russia, which fascinated and 
troubled him. The long years of self-exile abroad had convinced him 
that he had become out of touch with new realities, and it was toward 

The Dolgushintsys 
3 
these new realities that he tried to turn. He was as convinced as ever 
that socialism, nihilism, and liberalism were wrong, but he seemed 
readier than ever to believe that they were sincere. 
His new temper led him to Nekrasov's journal and also to the 
Dolgushintsy conspiracy. The Dolgushintsy, who are represented 
under the name of Dergachev in the novel, constituted a conspirato­
rial group that called upon the people, and especially the peasants, to 
overthrow the landowners and the Tsar with the view of distributing 
the land to the people, replacing the permanent army with a militia, 
abolishing the passport, and instituting a popularly elected govern­
ment. Dostoevsky followed very closely the trial of the Dolgushintsy 
in July of 1 874, and a trace of his interest is retained in the Dergachev 
subplot in the novel. Although the Dergachev subplot figures im­
portantly in the notes, it leads nowhere in the novel. Dostoevsky 
treats the radical group more gently than he would have earlier, but 
the subversive group finds no place in his interest and it finds no 
place in the structure of the novel. A broader and more lasting effect 
of his desire to keep in touch with liberal currents lay in his attempt 
to describe a society that was obsessed by money and self-gain and 
devoid of living beliefs-and against this background to dramatize 
the search for ideals on the part of the Youth. His intention to do 
this is voiced in letters and notes; yet no general picture of social 
disorder emerges in the novel. Something deeper in talent and view 
militated against what intention decreed. 
Dostoevsky had always placed a great stress on contemporary events 
and went to great pains to ferret out his chronicles of social horrors. 
They may have had less effect upon his work than is commonly 
thought. The contemporary events he painstakingly collected from 
newspapers and courtrooms often languished in the notebooks and 
letters, that is, in intention. When he used them in the works them­
selves, they were either so reconceived as to have lost any specific 
correspondence to the life situation from which they had been col­
lected, or they refused to live in his works, as did the Dolgushintsy­
Dergachev subplot, and appeared as artistic blemishes. There is 
finally very little of the Olga Umetskaia case left in the actions and 

4 Dostoevsky's Great Characters 
situation of Nastasya Filiplovna, although there is a great deal of her 
in the notebooks. Soviet, and occasionally American scholars, have 
been fond of showing us how much of A Raw Youth has been based 
on factual events. They are right: the Tambovo-Kozlovsky forgery 
lies at the base of the Stebelkov blackmail of Prince Sergei, the 
Dolgushintsy conspiracy at the base of the Dergachev subplot, and a 
newspaper campaign against gambling at the base of the Youth's 
gambling sprees. Hertsen may be a prototype for Versilov; and the 
names of public figures, both domestic and foreign, play either spoken 
or unspoken roles in the novel. Yet it is remarkable how little of con­
temporary life makes it from the notebooks to the novel. The note· 
books are dotted with references to public figures, ministers, en­
gineers, newspaper articles, political events, crimes, and campaigns, 
the vast majority of which never leave the world of the notebooks for 
the fictive world of the novel. 
I don't believe Dostoevsky himself realized how often his novels 
rejected his attempts to import the facts of life into them. The im­
pulses of his creativity were not to be found in his researching into 
and chronicling of the events and horrors of the time, which he was 
so proud to cite as proofs of his realism. At best these were corrobo­
rating instances of what he had already imagined and created. His 
creative world is an intense subjectivity, as indeed its individual 
characters are. Dostoevsky's great personalities do not have "proto­
types" in the world, nor do his great situations have casual analogues 
in the real world. They are very special cases, or in Dostoevsky's 
words "typical exceptions", and they do not live as any conceivable 
prototypes would live in the real world. They are intensely one kind 
of thing, and by a special kind of magnetism they attract to themselves 
only situations, people, and events of a similar kind and by a special 
antimagnetism repel everything else. Dostoevsky's great novels are 
built on his great characters, and his great characters almost always 
remind us of self-enclosed worlds with magnetic cores of their own. 
The Possessed is largely composed of worlds that the intense subjec­
tivity of Peter, Kirilov, Shatov, and Stavrogin bring into being. 
Dostoevsky's great characters are not created by situations either in or 
outside the novel, but they themselves create situations and draw to 

Versilov 5 
them-as Peter does consummately-others who are like them in 
some essential sense. 
When Dostoevsky attempts to give us a "social panorama," as he 
tried to do in the middle chapters of The Idiot, the novel loses much 
of its intensity and disperses into minor "subjectivities" and con­
fusion. Characters crowd the stage, situations multiply, and no special 
magnetism welds the characters and situations into any kind of unity. 
Dostoevsky's attempt, or at least his desire, to give us a picture of 
disorder in society in A Raw Youth, was doomed to failure by the very 
nature of his talent. He can give us magnificent portrayals of in­
dividual disorder, but unconvincing pictures of general disorder. 
Lacking the magnetism of the great characters, A Raw Youth dis­
perses into plottings, confusions, melodrama, contrivances, and repe­
titions. Some of the compositional disorder of the novel came about, I 
am convinced, because there was no great character to impose order 
by his will and personality. The triangle of Nastasya Fillipovna, and 
M yshkin, and Rogozhin is powerful enough to command the most 
dispersed elements into relevance, and Peter and Stavrogin are pow­
erful enough to draw into obedience the satellite worlds of the other 
important characters. But A Raw Youth has no such center. Versilov 
is almost such a center, and might have become one, but Dostoevsky 
fought against Versilov's domination of the novel. He wanted to write 
a novel about general social disorder and about a young man's suffer­
ings and successes in such a world. He was unfortunately able to do 
largely what he set out to do. 
Versilov alone raises the novel above confusion and melodrama, 
and to the level of tragedy and intensity that is embodied in Stavro­
gin, Kirilov, Raskolnikov, and Myshkin. Dostoevsky told himself 
again and again in the notes that Versilov was not the hero, and that 
the Youth was the hero. But despite his words, Versilov dominates the 
novel in his person and the intensity of his character. Alfred Kazin 
was right when he said "Versilov is the true 'hero' of A Raw Youth," 
and that "those who hate him cannot free themselves from him; those 
who love him cannot reach him." 
Everyone feels his effect, but no one knows who he is. He is 
mystery to everyone, but everyone needs him. His son needs him, 

G 
Versilov as the Center of the Novel 
suffers for him, feels his humiliations, and lives for his love, or per­
haps only for the sign of his love. Versilov expects love from every­
one, but gives love to no one; expects the service of everyone, but 
serves no one. They all wait on him and he waits on no one. He is 
quiet, self-contained, confident, sure of his effect on others and of 
their response to him. He is like a medieval lord who commands 
fealty without asking for it. He has no position, no money, and no 
title, but by some inner force exercises an irresistible power over 
those about him. One of the tasks for the critic of the novel is to 
discern what the source of that effect is and how Dostoevsky was able 
to communicate the effect. 
The effect seems unlikely, since Versilov has been built of old 
characters, remnants and snatches of motifs used before. He is, in his 
sponging and his disregard of his son, something like Stepan Trofimo­
vich Verkhovensky in his Gallicisms, his forgetting of moral obliga­
tions, his European "uprootedness." He is a serious Stepan Trofimo­
vich. He is a Shatov in his messianic belief in the superiority of the 
Russian over other European nationalities, as he is a Shatov in his 
inability to believe in God. He is an Ivan Karamazov in his adoration 
of European culture, and an Underground Man in his pervasive 
nihilism. He is Stavrogin in the dark and mysterious past, the slap in 
the face he suffers, his inconsequent actions, and most of all, of course, 
the Stavrogin of the suppressed chapters of the red beetle, the raped 
girl, and the dream of the golden age. He has elements of the Under­
ground Man, Raskolnikov, Stavrogin, Stepan Trofimovich, Dmitri 
Karamazov, and surely Ivan Karamazov. Somewhere during the proc­
ess of writing A Raw Youth Dostoevsky found who Versilov was, and 
the notes are the history of his transformation from a patchwork of 
motifs to one of Dostoevsky's great characters. Had he permitted 
Versilov to take command of the novel, as Versilov tries to do 
throughout the notes, Dostoevsky might have achieved the greatness 
that A Raw Youth promised but never realized. The notes are largely 
a record of the development and refinement of Versilov's character, 
not a record of the development of the Youth, Dostoevsky's state­
ments notwithstanding. Versilov dominates the notes and he should 
have dominated the novel. 

The Early and the Late Versilov 
7 
II 
The Versilov we have in the final version and the Versilov we meet 
in the early notes are very far apart. The Versilov of the early notes 
is cruel, passionate, predatory, bored, and indifferent to the sufferings 
of others. He seduces a young girl and laughs at her when she hangs 
herself, and in one version seduces a stepdaughter and plots with her 
to poison the wife and mother. He is ruthless in action and in opin­
ion. He says, "Why should I do good? Why should I love anybody?" 
and, "Why shouldn't I live to take care of my own arse, what else 
is there to do? Worry about the common good, make your contribu­
tion to the happiness of future generations? To hell with them, what 
the devil do I care? Let them tell me something more serious to sup­
port such notion." He is a Predatory Type and it is by this name 
that we know him in the early notes. 
The Versilov of the late notes and of the final version seduces no 
girls, and he voices no sentiments of cynical nihilism. On the contrary, 
he does good deeds; he takes care of the seduced girl of Prince Sergei, 
then takes care of the orphaned offspring, and he magnanimously 
gives up an inheritance that is legally his, though not morally his. In 
opinion, he is a cultured and refined humanist who loves civilization, 
adores its culture, and is sentimentally attached to the passing of 
Christianity. He conveys the impression of tolerance, wisdom, cul­
ture, and refinement. He seems to be remote from the coarseness of 
action and the cynicism of opinion of the Predatory Type, but the 
history of change which is traced in these notes shows us that the 
Predatory Type continues to live in the cultured humanist. 
Between the early notes and the late notes there is a progressive and 
gradual shift in the portraiture of Versilov from "acts" to "ideas." 
Philosophical premises take the place of rapacious acts and nihilistic 
thought. The actor becomes the talker, and the cynic the philosopher .. 
In the final version we are not sure about Versilov. Many of his ideas 
would be championed by Dostoevsky himself, and many of his acts, 
despite his aloofness, are admirable or at least morally ambiguous. 
But whatever he is in appearance and conscious intention, Katerina 

8 
Versilov's Idea 
Nikolaevna destroys. lly her intention to marry Bioring, she turns 
Versilov into a humble penitent and then raving madman. From 
olympic calm and philosophical vision Versilov falls into rage, plot, 
collusion with Lambert, and finally to near-murder. 
Katerina Nikolaevna causes Versilov's downfall in the novel, but 
she does more in the notes. She explains it. Versilov's fall indicates 
that there is something wrong with his calm, his "idea," and with his 
views of life. But the "something wrong" is left ambiguous in the 
novel. The notes tell us what is wrong and why he is wrong. And 
what is wrong has to do with what is wrong with his idea. \Ve are 
never quite told what Versilov's idea is in the novel, although we 
assume that the idea has animated his wanderings and his opinions 
on Europe, Russia, and the destiny of man. The notes tell us what the 
idea Is: 
I conceived, at that time, my original idea: seek to perfect your­
self, try to break your own resistance as your conscience and your 
faith will tell you, to the best of your ability, and, once having con­
quered youtself, you may perhaps also find the ultimate idea, your 
own solution "what to do?" and "what to preach?" I passionately 
clung to this idea. You were all laughing at my chains. Why? I was 
actually wearing them, but you didn't know what was going on in my 
soul. Yes, it may be that, finally, I did persuade myself that mine was 
the right way, but then you appeared before me, and I suddenly 
realized that without you I am nothing, and my idea unrealizable. 
These are Versilov's own words and his own analysis of his idea. Late 
in the novel Dostoevsky gives us a starker, more explicit, and less 
flattering analysis of the idea: 
1) Versilov is convinced of the loss and of the stupidity of every 
ideal , as well as of the curse of stagnation on that has hit the whole 
moral world. 
2) For a while he forced himself to believe in Christ. 
3) But his whole faith went to pieces. There remained only a 
moral feeling of duty as s1:1dt telling him to strive for self perfection 
and good <deeds> under any circumstances (i.e., regardless of any 
loss of faith, or any kind of moral despair) , owing to his own con-

Katerina Nikolaevna 
9 
scious will, a certain uncompromising despair). "Though my ideal 
may be lost and I may not know good from evil, still, I shall follow my 
conscience and, gropingly, seek to perfect myself-and I shall get 
somewhere." Having lost his faith he decides instead of succumbing 
to despair, to start straight from himself, and he believes that he will 
get somewhere, and that something will be revealed to him along the 
way (the chains). 
Versilov and Dostoevsky tell us what the idea 1s, and Katerina 
Nikolaevna tells us what is wrong with the idea: 
She to H im: \Vhen falling in love with me, you were falling in love 
with no one but yourself and, besides, you <.:ertainly couldn't have 
forgiven me that con fession which you made before me, for you saw 
it as a humiliation. You vain man, you couldn't even stand that. How 
then was I going to help laughing at you? 
And with a vigor she does not manifest in the novel, she continues: 
She: ("Lack of all form") I have seen your pride, which consists of 
the idea that, inasmuch as I have learned about your thoughts and 
you have exposed your soul before me (you have deigned to open it 
to me, I should therefore value this very highly. 1 have seen this in 
every movement of yours, and I've made a point of <.:easing to value it. 
quite on the mntrary, I've been often laugh ing at it. This alone is 
utterly disgraceful. 
Katerina Nikolaevna saw only "the falsity of the idealist, the stilted­
ness, the affectation" in the idea, and in the man "I have seen your 
moral disorder." 
Katerina Nikolaevna tells us that Versilov is a product of moral 
disorder and that his idea is the product of affectation, pride, artifi­
ciality. But she does not tell us why this is so. We receive judgment 
and not explanation from her. The intent of the idea seems admir­
able: by denial, discipline, and the conquering of the self, Versilov 
would find his faith. Versilov has lost his faith, but not his desire for 
faith, and he attempts to create with his will what his spirit has lost. 

10 
Versilov's "Sincerity" 
But for Dostoevsky the effort of will is the work of pride. 'Vhat looks 
like self-sacrifice and self-command are really self-indulgence and self­
satisfaction. Versilov's idea is the ultimate refinement of the self­
contained mind which seeks to make God and salvation the products 
of the will, an effort which is caricatured in Stepan Trofimovich 
Verkhovensky's explanation of his belief in God as a "Being who is 
conscious of Himself in me only." 
Something of the ambiguity of Versilov's character and actions in 
the final version are cleared up when we realize, as the notes tell us 
explicitly, that he does not believe in God, that his faith is a subtle 
effort to make himself creator as well as believer of the faith, that the 
delicate scaffolding of culture, refinement, and civilization is vanity 
and self-love. More than one critic has been swept away with the 
"sincere" sentiments of Versilov's love of humanity, his nostalgia for 
Christianity, and the beatific vision of the golden age. The scaffold­
ing collapses so suddenly and so fully when he is touched by Katerina 
Nikolaevna's rejection, because it was built of vanity and pride. In 
the notes-much more so than in the novel-Versilov vacillates from 
adoration to revilement of Katerina Nikolaevna. She is either the 
worst of women or the best of women, and, of course, vanity would 
dictate one or the other. If she loves Versilov, she must be the best of 
women; and if she rejects him she must be the worst of women. 'Ve 
can understand, too, why he turns in the notes to Lidiia after he is re­
jected by Katerina Nikolaevna. Shame, anger, and humiliation turn 
him to her; he must reassert his control over another human being, 
albeit a half-wit and a cripple. As in many other instances in the novel 
this fact is deliberately obscured and mixed with what seem to be 
good motives. In the novel he "magnanimously" offers marriage to 
the seduced and abandoned Lidiia, and after her death "magnani­
mously" takes care of Prince Sergei's bastard offspring. 
And yet it is perhaps too simple to see only vanity and pride be­
neath the culture and civilized exterior. The relationship is more 
complex and more subtle. Versilov's vanity is modified by suffering 
and some sincere desire to give substance to the appearance of nobil­
ity and wisdom. The notes make clear that he did not believe in God, 
that he loved only himself, and that his faith was a faith created to 

Versilov's Moral Superiority 
I I  
honor him. They show us-as Katerina N ikolaevna says i n  a half­
dozen ways-a false Versilov, and the false Versilov remains in the 
novel, but this is not the same thing as a "hypocritical" Versilov. 
Versilov is false and vain despite himself. He would like to believe, 
to be magnanimous, to love sincerely. He is not a hypocrite when he 
tells Arkady that he has come to love only his mother. But he cannot 
be any of these things, because he does not believe in God, and as 
Dostoevsky showed so many times before and shows here once again, 
when one ceases to believe in God, one can believe in oneself alone, 
and when one believes only in oneself, self-interest will corrupt the 
best of intentions. 
It is this special and ambiguous moral nature of sincere intentions 
and necessary self-interest that contributes both to the ambiguity 
we feel about Versilov's moral nature and to the moral force and 
charm he commands over the other characters. We like what he says, 
and we often like what he does. We like particularly, I think, the self­
containment and indifference on his part to what moves others. It has 
the sign of a man who has come to terms with himself and with cir­
cumstances about him. It is the sign of someone who has found in 
himself what everyone else seems to be looking for. This is a society 
obsessed by money: Prince Sergei has bartered his honor for it, 
Katerina Nikolaevna has promised to dishonor her father for it, 
Arkady has conceived of a program of life in acquiring it, but Versilov 
magnimously and almost disdainfully "gives up" what others are 
ready to ravage for. There is a touch of moral superiority in the ges­
ture. Versilov seems beyond the grubby pursuits, passions, and words 
of the frantic world that surrounds him. He seems, in short, to be 
beyond the turbulence that touches everyone else. Yet in both novel 
and notes he is touched coarsely and suddenly by his passion for 
Katerina Nikolaevna. This is so because the moral superiority, the 
calm, the indifference, and the sense of a world under his command 
are such only in appearance. Dostoevsky is telling us that culture, wis­
dom, refinement, and the acquirements of the best of Russia and the 
best of Europe are no armor against the ravages of the self. They can 
refine the predatory character, but they cannot dispel it. This is the 
tragedy of Versilov, for the Predatory Type of the early notes con-

1 2  Point of View 
tinues to live in the ambiguous and moral predatoriness of the Versi­
lov of the final version. 
III 
Throughout a significant portion of the notes Dostoevsky carries on 
a dialogue with himself about the relative advantages of the first- or 
third-person point of view. Both have their advantages and their dis­
advantages. He tells us the following in one of his deliberations: 
"Think over the possibility of a first-person narrative. Many advan­
tages; much freshness, the figure of the Youth would emerge more 
typical, nicer. I'll be able to cope better with the character, with the 
personality, with the essence of that personality." On the other hand 
he realizes that in giving the point of view to the Youth he will not 
be able to express certain important thoughts and feelings of others: 
"NoTE. The Youth, due to his tender age, has no access to the events, 
facts which comprise the plot of the novel. And so he makes his own 
conjectures and masters them by himself. \Vhich circumstance is 
reflected in the whole manner of his narrative (to give the reader 
some surprises)." 
Dostoevsky's dialogue with himself about the mode of narration 
goes on for a good part of these notes, but throughout the dialogue 
and long before he cries out "In the first person, in the first person, 
in the first person" the reader is convinced that Dostoevsky has com­
mitted himself to first-person narration almost from the very begin­
ning, at least from that point in the notes when he asserts forcefully 
that the Youth and not "He" will be the hero of the novel. Dostoev­
sky needed first-person narration as a device by which he hoped to 
invite sympathy and love of the reader for the Youth. If we are 
forced to share with Arkady his confusions, enthusiasms, fumblings, 
angers, loves, and hates, we might be won over to the beauty of his 
soul. 
I am not sure that Dostoevsky gained this for the Youth. The Youth 
is too much a "recorder" of what happens and too little the sufferer 
and undergoer. So much happens, so quickly and so implausibly, 
that we lose some sense of the seriousness of what is going on. More 

Moral Ambiguity of Versilov 
13 
than once A Raw Youth borders on comedy, as indeed melodrama, 
through the multiplication of implausibilities, always borders on 
comedy. If we felt that the Youth were suffering, the first-person 
narration might intensify the suffering and our love, but instead the 
narration simply magnifies the confusions and the implausibilities. 
Dostoevsky made a mistake, I think, in giving the point of view to 
Arkady, and he might have done better in opting for the solution 
he came to in Crime and Punishment, where he toyed with the same 
alternative narrative modes. As there, he might have centered his 
narrative on the Youth while keeping the control of the narrative 
away from the Youth. 
There is, however, one advantage Dostoevsky derived from giving 
the point of view to the Youth: the ambiguity and mystery of Versi­
lov's character is compounded by the confusions and emotional turbu­
lence of the Youth. In the notes Versilov is analyzed directly and the 
effect is very much different from the effect in the novel. The para­
doxical, enigmatic, and mysterious Versilov in the novel is partly the 
creation of the Youth's feverish and distorting thoughts and emotions. 
In the notes Versilov is unrefracted; he is presented directly and his 
motives are analyzed directly. 
It seems quite clear from the notes, and it should be noted here, 
that Dostoevsky very deliberately marshaled his technical equipment 
to increase the moral ambiguity and the mystery of Versilov. The 
notes make it quite clear that he knew that Versilov was in a very 
real sense "false" and very much the predatory type he started with, 
though softened by culture, suffering, and good intention. But 
Dostoevsky deliberately manipulates mystery and ambiguity for 
technical reasons. I bring this up only because it is often asserted to­
day that the conjunction of technique and matter does not occur so 
deliberately and mechanically. Technique, when it is not an end in 
itself, is usually put forth as "heuristic," that is, as the means by which 
an author finds his ideas. It may very well happen that way in some 
works, but seldom in Dostoevsky's creative world, and never in the 
notebooks for A Raw Youth. 
Whereas Versilov undergoes a progressive and important change in 
the course of the notes, the Youth changes very little and is in essen-

14 Sexual Rivalry 
tial respects no different in the notes from the way he is presented in 
the novel. He is at the end what Dostoevsky made him at the begin­
ning, a fact that might testify to the firmness of intention and the 
imperviousness of the Youth and Dostoevsky to creative change. 
There is perhaps one exception: the Youth's libidinous desires for 
Katerina Nikolaevna (the Princess) are expressed openly and fre­
quently in the notes, and even coarsely, but they are veiled and frag­
mentary in the novel, appearing only in hint and dream. Both father 
and son know, in the notes, that they are engaged in sexual rivalry, 
but neither knows it in the final version. Long before Freud, Dostoev­
sky knew and expressed the concept that the love of the Youth veiled 
its hostilities, and that both the love and hostility had something 
of sexual origin. But the sexual rivalry went the way of the frequent 
obscene words in the notes, and hardly a hint of either is to be found 
in the final version. If there are those who deny the influence of 
society on art, the notebooks for A Raw Youth offer testimony to that 
influence. 
The object of that sexual rivalry, and in the novel the object of 
Arkady's and Versilov's sublimated passions should have been a great 
character. She is, after all, the provoker of passion and destruction. 
Versilov's "salvation" is ruined by her smile. Yet she hardly seems 
adequate, in her desire for peace and social security, to the passions 
and disturbances she provokes. The notes tell us something of the 
changes in the character of Katerina Nikolaevna, but very little about 
why she is not more complex and more adequate to the tasks that 
Versilov and the novel impose on her. 
In the early notes she, like Versilov himself, is passionate, cruel, and 
even depraved: in some of the versions, for instance, she seduces the 
Youth. Dostoevsky had, in his early design, the intention of making 
her something of a double to Versilov: "\Vhat is going on between 
Him and the Princess is not passion, but a duel of pride. Yes, the 
Princess is that kind of person herself." In the final version Katerina 
Nikolaevna resists the obeisance Versilov exacts from nearly everyone 
else; she refuses to be touched, and she recoils from his complications. 
But she recoils not from principle or force of character, but from the 
desire to lead a simple and peaceful life. She is mystery without sub-

Profusion of Characters 
15 
stance, a provoker of passions without passion. Versilov's predatory 
qualities are softened to subtleties, but her predatory traits are 
softened to innocuousness. She seems at the end like a very ordinary 
woman of society, who wants in almost a vulgar way the security of 
position and money. 
IV 
Horst-Jurgen Gerigk has written two hundred pages of analysis and 
charts describing the refinements of structure in A Raw Youth, but 
the book will convince only those who want to be convinced. There 
is plotting and contriving in A Raw Youth, but very little structure, 
if by that we mean the marshaling of all the elements of the novel 
for a unified effect. Dostoevsky himself was aware that he could 
wander, and in one passage of the notes he affirmed his intention of 
not wandering again: 
1st rule Avoid the mistake, made in The Idiot and in The Possessed, 
of describing 
(many of the) 
secondary events in a fragmentary, 
insinuated, romance-like manner, and dragging them out over a 
lengthy extension <of the novel>, both in the narrated action as well 
as in individual scenes, yet without giving any explanations at all, 
just guesses and hints, instead of explaining the truth directly. Being 
mere secondary episodes, they weren't worth such concentrated at­
tention on the part of the reader, rather on the contrary, they actually 
tended to obscure, rather than to clarify, the principle objective, pre­
cisely because the reader, diverted to a side road, could very well lose 
the main road and get all confused in his attention. 
Dostoevsky was not able to do what he wanted, but as disappointed 
readers we cannot help speculating on what the novel could have be­
come if he had been able to stem the profusion of secondary charac­
ters and situation and if he had found his way to social disorder by 
way of great and intensely personal embodiments of order and dis­
order. 
What would the novel have been if Dostoevsky had given up the 
idea of drawing for us a general picture of social disorder and had 

16 
The Youth Loves and Hates 
pruned away the Dergachev episodes, the Stebelkovs and the counter­
feiting, many of the inanities of the old Prince, and some of the 
inanities of the young Prince? Suppose, too, he had done away with 
the tiresome documents, the eavesdropping, the coincidences, and the 
melodramatic contrivances. Suppose he had written on what he tells 
us in the notes the novel is all about: "All in all, the whole novel is a 
poem of the Youth's love for Him." Suppose he had written about 
the son's love for a father with all its bruising complexity and its de­
feats and its minor but precious triumphs, and had permitted both 
the Youth and Versilov to take command of the novel. Dostoevsky 
would have had his picture of social disorder without disordering his 
novel. There was disorder and complexity enough, of the truest kind, 
in the scattered notes we have of the love the youth bore for his 
father and both bore for the Princess. 
The Youth loves and hates the Princess (Katerina Nikolaevna), 
because he loves and hates his father. He feels shame and mortifica­
tion because his father is lusting after the Princess, and greater shame 
and mortification because he himself is lusting after her, and the 
greatest shame because he is his father's rival, while loving him. 
Arkady needs his father and realizes that his father needs him, and he 
rushes to the defense of Versilov against the "depraved" woman even 
to the point of casting away his ideas so as to protect his father by 
vilifying her. The notes give us the embryo of one of Dostoevsky's 
great triangles, a situation of mortifying and ambiguous love. Most 
of it is not present in the novel, and if present, it is so veiled by pru­
dence and so confused by the endless plotting and so fixed in con­
trivance and implausibility as to lose the serious and even tragic 
character that much of it has in the remarks in the notebooks. 
One is amazed that The Idiot could have arisen from notes of such 
uncertain intention, and that Stavrogin could have come from notes 
of a garrulous and romantic Prince, or that Kirilov could have 
grown to such proportions from the brief references to him in the 
notes of The Possessed. But far more is promised in the notes for A 
Raw Youth than is realized in the novel. The promise is fulfilled in 
Dostoevsky's next novel, The Brothers Karamazov, where he was to 
write of the love-hate of father and sons. There he was to give the 

The Underground Type 
17 
love Arkady bore for his father to Alyosha, the passion he felt to 
Dmitri; and he was to give Versilov's predatory qualities to Fyodor, 
and his intellectual predatoriness to Ivan. Smerdyakov was to be the 
shadow of them all. The notebooks that follow are as much a prepa­
ration for The Brothers Karamazov as they are for A Raw Youth. 
v 
One cannot leave a discussion of the notebooks for A Raw Youth 
without calling attention to some remarkable pages in the last section 
of the notes in which Dostoevsky contrasts his work with that of 
Tolstoy and defends and defines his "Underground" type. There are 
enough references to Tolstoy, explicit and implicit, in the notes to 
indicate that Dostoevsky was thinking of his great Russian fellow 
writer while he was writing A Raw Youth. Dostoevsky probably had 
Tolstoy's youthful narrator from Childhood in mind when he was 
creating Arkady, and the example of Tolstoy's "normal" family was 
uppermost in his thoughts as a contrast to his "accidental" family. 
Dostoevsky had more humility than Tolstoy when assessing his talent 
and place in Russian letters, but there is something like irritated 
pride and a sense of being unappreciated in these pages in the sixth 
section of these notes, where he defends his conception of the under­
ground type against his critics and against the normal type as created 
by Goncharov and Tolstoy. He says: "Tolstoy, Goncharov, thought 
that they were describing the life of the majority;-in my opinion, 
what they were describing were the lives of some exceptions. Quite 
to the contrary, their life is the life of some exceptions, while mine is 
the life of the general rule. Future generations will find that out, as 
they will be more objective, and the truth will be on my side. In this 
I believe." Dostoevsky was right about this, of course, but he was 
even more right and remarkably acute in his definition of the 
underground type: "I have been the only one to bring out the trag­
edy of the underground, which consists of suffering, self-laceration, 
an awareness of a better <life> coupled with the impossibility of 
attaining it, and, most important of all, a strong conviction on the 
part of these unfortunate people that everybody else is like them and 

18 
Tolstoy 
that it is, therefore, not worth while to improve oneself. \Vhat can 
sustain those who do try to improve themselves? A reward, faith? 
Nobody is offering any reward, and in whom could one have faith? 
Another step from this position and you have extreme depravity, 
crime (murder). A mystery." 
Tolstoy's psychology strikes him as unreal and naive. He says in 
self-justification and bitter satisfaction: "Bolkonsky reforms as he sees 
Anatole's leg being cut off, and we've all been shedding tears over it, 
but a genuine underground man wouldn't have reformed. " Dostoev­
sky was always more generous than Tolstoy in his estimation of 
others, but his bitterness in these notes may have stemmed from a 
consciousness of how far A Raw Youth was from the quality of Tol­
stoy's work. Yet the shadow of the great works he had written before 
A Raw Youth and that of his greatest work The Brothers Karamazov 
was present in these notebooks, and it is perhaps both pride and 
disappointment that feed the feeling that his great counterpart had 
been too much appreciated and he too little. History has redressed 
the balance and confirmed what he believed when he said that he was 
\vriting about the majority in what seemed to his contemporaries to 
be the life of exceptions. ·what better characterization do we have 
of the "raw youths" of today than "the tragedy of the underground 
which consists of suffering, self-laceration, an awareness of a better 
<life> coupled with the impossibility of attaining it . . .  "? 
VI 
This edition is a translation of F. M. Dostoevsky at Work on His 
Novel "A Raw Youth/' edited by A. S. Dolinin (Moscow, 1965), 
volume 77 of Literaturnoe Nasledstvo. The Russian edition has been 
followed in all substantial respects, and I am indebted to Dolinin's 
careful and extensive references in the appendix. The notes have 
been divided into six sections, as in the Russian edition, and I have 
added a short introduction to each section. 
These editorial devices have been used in the preparation of the 
manuscript: crossed-out words are crossed out in the text; notes 
'vritten in the margins, between and above lines and in different ink, 

The Russian Edition 
19 
are enclosed in square brackets; insertions by the editor and trans­
lator are enclosed in angle brackets; and incomplete words or sen­
tences are followed by three spaced dots in angle brackets. Italics, 
capitalizations, parentheses, and unspaced dots are Dostoevsky's. 
Names have been spelled out in full, and obvious oversights such as 
the failure to supply end parentheses have been rectified. Dates with 
a slanted line between the two sets of numbers, as "June 1 8/30," 
refer to the twelve-day difference in time between the nineteenth­
century Russian calendar and the Western calendar. Punctuation has 
been altered to conform to English convention. Every effort has been 
made to retain significant departures from nonnal usage. 
As editor I have supervised the translation and preparation of the 
manuscript, compiled the sequentially numbered footnotes, and 
written the introduction and the six chapter introductions. Victor 
Terras has done the translation (his notes are indicated by asterisks) 
and compiled the index. 
EDWARD W ASIOLEK 


I 
Initial Sketches toward the Novel 
February-July, 1874 
This is the first part of the notes, and in many respects the sketchiest. 
As is familiar in many of the notebooks, Dostoevsky is in search of 
a unifying idea. The germs of situations, plots, and characters appear 
in profusion. The earliest notes are occupied with a novel about 
children, duplicating with slight variation the notes to "The Life 
of a Great Sinner" and anticipating the early notes to The Brothers 
Karamazov. The children are waifs, shift for themselves, and con­
stitute some kind of social unit. But the notes quickly give ground 
to a consideration of a school teacher by the name of Fyodor Fyodoro­
vich, who loves children, believes in communism, and is something 
of an idealist. He looks back in certain traits to Prince M yshkin and 
forward to Alyosha of The Brothers Karamazov. He is once called 
"idiot," as are Prince Myshkin in The Idiot and Alyosha in the notes 
to The Brothers Karamazov. 
Fyodor Fyodorovich gives ground quickly to two other characters, 
a younger and an older brother, the prototypes for the "Youth" 
Arkady and for Versilov of the final version. The older brother, 
called throughout "the Predatory Type" or simply "He," is a cynical, 
skeptical, and morally indifferent cultured landowner. He is cruel, 
predatory, egotistical, bored, indifferent to the sufferings of others, 
enigmatic, and atheistical. But he is something of a double char­
acter, and Dostoevsky speaks of his "bright side." In some of the notes 
he is courageous and heroic and does good deeds in secret. 
The portrait lacks cohesion and is a pastiche of old, new, and 
future traits of many Dostoevsky characters. Something of Stavrogin, 
the Underground man, Stepan Trofimovich Verkhovensky, Dmitri 
Karamazov, as well as of Versilov, characterize his actions. Like Stav­
rogin of the suppressed chapter of The Possessed the Predatory Type 
seduces a young girl, who hangs herself while he laughs at her; like 
21 

22 
The Children 
Stavrogin, too, he is "seeking a burden"; like the Underground Man 
he has dreams of the adoration his presence will arouse in others; 
like Svidrigaylov and I ppolit he does good deeds in secret; and like 
Peter Verkhovensky he considers everyone to be a scoundrel and 
implies that there are only stupid and clever scoundrels. His bore­
dom, cleverness, and moral exhaustion, as well as such specific actions 
as preaching Christianity and breaking the icons, look forward to 
Versilov. 
The Youth arises from the plot about the children that Dostoevsky 
starts with, then becomes "His" younger brother, and finally his son. 
As in the novel the Youth's feelings about the Predatory Type are 
ambivalent: he admires "Him" and looks to him for guidance, but 
he also hates and is disenchanted with "Him." Despite the fact that 
midway through these notes Dostoevsky announces in capital letters 
that "The boy and not he is the Hero," the characterization of the 
boy is less full than that of his older brother. The boy is na"ive, impul­
sive, sexually hungry, and something of an idealist about women. He 
is already possessed by his idea to become a Rothschild, and he tim­
idly tells the Predatory Type about the idea. The Predatory Type 
criticizes and then ironically approves of the idea. 
Katerina Nikolaevna Akhmakova is faintly present as the Princess, 
who is the niece of the old Prince and has an affair with the Predatory 
Type. Many of Katerina Nikolaevna's traits are present in the por­
trait of "His" wife, who is compassionate but somewhat predatory. 
She is totally devoted to the Predatory Type, but cannot forgive him 
his anarchical convictions. Whereas in the later notes and the final 
version the Princess is a source of calm and solace for Versilov in her 
patient suffering, she is crushed, here, by the Predatory Type's dis­
order, and she herself becomes disturbed and almost loses her mind. 
Liza is already present, but Dostoevsky questions whether she is 
needed. She is seduced by the Predatory Type and kills herself. Lam­
bert appears in substantially the way he will later: cruel, self-seeking, 
and morally heartless. We are told: "Lambert says that his greatest 
pleasure, when he is rich, will be to feed dogs with bread and meat, 
while the children of the poor are starving to death. And when they 

The Predatory Type 23 
are without firewood, he is going to buy a whole wood-yard, put all 
the wood in one pile, and burn it all up for nothing, in the frost, 
without giving a single log to the poor. 'Let them call me names, it 
will only make me get a better charge out of it.' " Lambert is already 
sketchily at work in using a promissory note against the Princess, 
and as in the final version both the Youth and the Predatory Type 
are involved in his plot. 
Something of the main idea of the final version is apparent in the 
old Prince's characterization of the Predatory Type as someone who 
suffers from inner chaos. "And this inner chaos finds expression in 
external disorders, i.e., his quitting the service, garrulity, restless­
ness, his odd behavior with his wife; in a word, disorder, as if he were 
trying to dissuade himself, increased preaching of Christianity (the 
relics)." This quotation points already to the important structural 
characteristic of the final version, in which Versilov's "Christianity" 
is an attempt to impose order upon himself, that is, an attempt to find 
faith rather than an example of acting from faith. Dostoevsky is clear 
about the Predatory Type's lack of faith, although this is made some­
what ambiguous in the portraiture of the later Versilov. Dostoevsky 
says: "NoTE. This is the image of an ATHEIST. This is the main idea 
of the drama (that is, the main essence of His character)." The Preda­
tory Type's doubleness is a psychological lack of cohesion and pro­
ceeds from the conflict of inner need and outer behavior. 
Tolstoy must have been on Dostoevsky's mind in writing these 
notes, for there are several rather forthright analogies between what 
is said in these notes and what is said by several of Tolstoy's char­
acters. Like Prince Andrey in War and Peace, the Predatory Type 
says that he is opposed to any increase in the level of education 
because "any increase in the level of education is at the same time 
an increase in the level of suffering.'' And in an argument against 
the existence of God, the old Prince says, as does Daddy Eroshka in 
The Cossacks in fairly similar words, "Simply the grass grows every­
where, as it always has grown, and that's all there is to it.'' 
One should point out, finally, Dostoevsky's frankness on sexual 
matters in these early notes, and his reticence in the novel. In the 

24 Children 
notes Lambert's plan is scurrilously frank in the payment he expects 
to derive from the Princess for the letter; the Youth has a session 
with a whore; and the Predatory Type seduces his stepdaughter, 
which in the novel, by the process of displacement, becomes the 
seduction of Liza by the young Prince Sergei. 
A schoolteacher, a novel (description of the effect which the read­
ing of Gogol's works, <and especially> Taras Bul'ba, has on him). 
Enemies, the village clerk (a correspondence leads to their approval). 
A Christian Hamlet.1 
A tale about a humble Russian peasant, Ivan l\Iatveevich 
Prokhodimov. 
An apocryphal gospel2 (N.B. Temptation by the Devil,3 a clay bird 
before those poor in spirit. Socialists and nationalists in Jerusalem. 
\Vomen. Children.)4 
Children. A mother who has remarried.6 A group of orphans. Step­
brothers and step-sisters. A fighter for justice. \Vorn out, the mother 
dies. The children protest. Run away? They go out into the street. 
The fighter is alone. \Vanderings, etc. 
A fantastic poem-in-the-form-of-a-novel: society of the future, com-
1 Probably a first reference to the future Versilov. Versilov will have an over­
developed sense of analysis, which paralyzes his capacity for action. This corre­
sponds to Turgenev's depiction of Hamlet in Gam let i Don Kikhot (1860), a work 
that had broad influence during these years. It is possible, too, that the school 
teacher mentioned in the first lines was to be contrasted with Versilov, along 
lines of Turgenev's contrasting of Hamlet, the thinker, with Don Quixote, the 
believer. 
2 The "Apocryphal Gospel" consisted of early Christian legends uncertified by 
the church. They were widely disseminated during the early years of Chris­
tianity. 
3 The theme of the temptation by the devil will figure importantly in "The 
Legend of the Grand Inquisitor" and is apparently on Dostoevsky's mind at this 
early date. A short time later, in January, 1876, in The Diary of a Writer, 
Dostoevsky will address himself to the question of what is meant by one of the 
devil's temptations, "turning stones into bread." 
4 See Part III, "The Life of the Great Sinner," of The .Votebook for "The 
Possessed" (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968), pp. 52-68, for an ex­
tended sketch of children and their fortunes. 
5 Possibly a first reference to the Youth's mother, Sofia Andreevna, who leaves 
her husband, l\lakar Dolguruky, to live with Versilov. 

Fyodor Petrovich 25 
mune,6 uprising in Paris, victory, 200 million heads/ terrible sores, 
depravity, extermination of the arts, of libraries, a child tortured to 
death. Quarrels, lawlessness. Death. 
A man who shot himself,8 and a devil somewhat like Faust. Can be 
combined with the poem-in-the-form-of-a-novel, etc. 
A NOVEL ABOUT CHILDREN, SOLELY ABOUT CHILDREN, AND ABOUT A 
BOY-HERO (N .B. They save a suffering child, stratagems, etc.). 
They find an abandoned child. 
Fyodor Petrovich (a man who loves children, and the nurse). 
Fyodor Petrovich, addressing the children upon completion of 
their commissions, says: "Gentlemen, I have taken care of your busi­
ness and hasten to render an account to you." Or: "Gentlemen, I 
have finished reading such-and-such book," and suddenly he tells 
them about Schiller or about politics, etc. (N .B. He is himself a 
grown-up child, only imbued with a very strong, and vivid, and long­
suffering feeling of love for children). 
Man, in his higher specimens and in his higher manifestations, 
does nothing simply: he does not even shoot himself simply, but 
religiously. 
Moskovskie vedomosti, February 26, 1874, <the item> from 
Bakhmut, about the wife as a trace-horse.9 
One man wanted to give the other 100,000, but does not know how 
to offer it to him. 
The Parsons (a sketch). "Meat croquettes,* the devil take it," the 
Little Priest and the Student, etc. 
• Koklety, apparently a jargon variant of kotlety, "cutlets, croquettes." 
6 Reference to the revolutionary government established in Paris from May 
1 8  to May 27, 1 871. In Part III, Chapter 7:2, Versilov refers to the burning of 
the Tuileries, a reference to the burning of the Tuileries palace during the last 
battles between the forces of the Commune and loyal government forces. The 
"Communards" were blamed for the fire and Dostoevsky-in his frequent 
reference to this event in his works-accepts this version, and uses the fire as a 
symbol of the disorder and destruction that ensues from liberalism and radicalism. 
7 In Part II, Chapter 7, of The Possessed the lame man and Peter Verkhovensky 
discuss the advisability of cutting off 100,000 heads. 
8 This is probably the first reference to Kraft, who shoots himself because he 
can't stand the idea of Russia's being a second-rate nation. 
9 This refers to an item about a peasant wife who ran away to her mother be­
cause her husband beat her. Her mother would not take her in, and she then went 
to a girl friend. Her husband found her there, and with the help of two friends 
tied her to the shaft and dragged her along by horses; they would stop from 
time to time to drink at inns and then resume beating and torturing her. 

26 
The Predatory T)'pe 
The children plot to establish their own children's empire. The 
children argue about having a republic or a monarchy. The children 
establish contact with juvenile criminals locked up in prison. Juve­
nile arsonists and train wreckers. The children make a believer out 
of the Devil. Juvenile profligates and atheists. Lambert. Andrieux. 
Children who kill their father (Moskovskie vedomosti. ֆo. 89, April 
12).10 
A government clerk, his wedding, a-child left at his door: he starts 
an orphanage, accepts charitable contributions, quits the government 
service. 
Also, another government clerk (on the back), himself a child, etc. 
A moment. A rapid encounter of the young man (the ideal of 
struggle) with a former friend of his who has made up his mind to 
shoot himself. A day with him. The other man shoots himself. 
A magician. At Dussot's, or in Maly Iaroslavets. Turning heads, 
etc. (The boy who is a liar tells about it and says: "I saw it myself.") 
The predatory type (analysis of Prince Danilo by Avseenko).U Why 
is that fool, Prince Danilo, deserving of my attention? Confrontation, 
by Avseenko, of a man who is simply ambitious and who would have 
absolutely returned to Petersburg for the celebration, and Prince 
Danilo who, quite to the contrary, failed to return, due to his un­
bridled nature; for he is passionate, he marries Milusha, and wants 
to be free in his passion. And yet, later, he whimpers: "\Vhy didn't I 
go back?" N .B. That's because he is, what's most important, a fool. 
A truly predatory man would have married Milusha by all means, 
and then he would have returned. It would have been immoral, but 
a full-fledged predator might have actually felt remorse and would 
yet have persevered in his sins and passions. 
They do not comprehend the predatory type. 
N .B. N .B. Bear in mind the real predatory type in my novel for of 
1 875. 
This will be This will be already a genuine heroic type, above the 
to This refers to an item about the murder of a father by his children in a 
small town near Vienna. Three children aged 8-10 decide to murder their father 
because their mother has run away and they miss her. They do the murder with 
two chisels. It is possible that this item is an adumbration of the father-murder 
in The Brothers Karamazov. 
n Refers to the review by the critic V. G. Avseenko of the historical novel of 
Evgeny Salias, Pugachev's Followers, published in The Russian Messenger in 
April, 1 874. 

Breadth of Character 27 
public and its everyday life,* and for this very reason will please it 
without fail. (Whereas Prince Danilo, for example, has nothing to 
please the public with.) 
The predatory type (of 1 875). 
Passion and immense breadth of character. The meanest coarseness 
along with the most refined generosity. And meanwhile, the very 
strength of this character lies in the fact that he can easily support 
this infinite breadth, so much so that, finally, he is looking in vain for 
a burden heavy enough for him. Both channing and repulsive (the 
little red beetle,12 Stavrogin). 
N.B. THINK ABOUT THIS TYPE. May 4, 1 874 [A new month has just 
begun] 
Himself He bears a slap in the face, takes vengeance in secret, dis­
graces the other man, receives powerful impressions.13 
PUNCTUALITY-c'est la politesse des rois.14 "Come on, you are not 
a king." 
When the Predatory Type meets the Princess, he sacrifices his posi­
tion with the Prince and is rude to her, which makes her like him. 
Once he thought of joining the Skoptsy15 (money). 
A puny little Polish lawyer, Zeromski, is busy all the time. The 
portrait (he transfers the power of attorney to the lawyer of the other 
party). 
The foundations of-society are cracking under the pressure of the 
revolution brought about by the reforms. The sea has become 
troubled. The borderlines of good and evil have disappeared and 
become obliterated. N. V. D--ko and Zeromski. You can't make an 
honest living these days. Characters of the milieu, of the trend. 
• Zhivaia zhizn', literally, "living life." Could also mean "true life." 
12 This phrase will be repeated often in the notes, and is an image apparently 
of the bite of repentance. Stavrogin in the "suppressed" chapter of The Possessed 
looks at a little red spider on a geranium leaf while :\Iatryosha hangs herself, and 
he sees the same spider when he awakens from his dream about the "golden age." 
13 A repeated gesture in these notes, as well as in the notebooks for The 
Idiot and The Possessed. In The Possessed Shatov hits Stavrogin in the face, and 
Stavrogin publicly "bears" the pain as a test of his will. In A Raw Youth Prince 
Sergei gives Versilov a public slap and Versilov does not call him out. This is 
the "cause" of Versilov's exclusion from society. 
14 French: "It is the politeness of kings." 
15 The "Skoptsy" were a religious sect that arose in the 1 770's. A separation 
from the "Khlysty," their main belief consisted in the doctrine that the only 
way to salvation was through battle with the flesh and through emasculation. 

28 A Double Type 
Vecherom means only "in the evening," while t•echor means "last 
night." 
"Meanwhile, it seems that you counted on livi11g off my lawsuit for 
a while." Or: '"Lived off him for a while." 
(Staraia Russa.] The young man (N .B. the great sinner), after a 
series of progressive falls, all of a sudden reaches the greatest heights 
of spirit, willpower, enlightenment, and consciousness. (Do not ex­
plain it to the reader, simply all of a sudden. What it amounts to is 
that all the elements of a moral regeneration were already given in 
his character which, for that very reason, did not succumb to e\il 
naively, but rather from conscious evil thoughts, etc.) 
You could see him, at our place, like the new moon: he'd show up 
and immediately disappear again. • 
(£:\IS] Think about the predatory type. As much consciousness as 
possible in the e\il he does. "I know that it is evil. and I feel remorse, 
but I still do it right along with my noblest transports." Might do it 
this way: tU'o lines of actiotJ at one and the same time; in one of these 
(with one group of people) he is a great righteous man who, ''ith all 
his heart, lives to the exaltation of his spirit and surveys his activities 
with the most joyful and tender emotions. In his other activities, he 
is a terrible criminal, a liar and a profligate (with other people). But 
when alone with himself, he views both kinds of activities with arro­
gance and despondency, postpones a decision, is ready to give up. He 
is carried away by passion. Here, a passion which he cannot and does 
not want to resist. There, an ideal which purifies him, a heanwaml­
ing exploit, and an activity which giws rise to the most tender emo­
tions. Both of these sides, as well as the people involved in them, meet 
toward the end of the novel. He is angry with his great gift of sur­
,i,ing amidst unbelief, baseness, and vanity. 
!?! A task. Combine the novel Children with This one . . More 
natural. 
This Predatory Type is a great skeptic. The people around him 
have some social ideas at which he sneers. He unmercifully demol­
ishes the ideals of others (a young boy) and derives pleasure from it. 
A trait. He is very kind and polite with everybod}·. in spite of his 
crimes. He does e\il calmly and even good-naturedly, as he casts a 
friendly and benevolent glance at a person whom he has mined and 
• The Russian phrase is untranslatable, since m(siats, ""moon,"" is masculine, 
which allows a zeugma of ''he" and "the new moon." 

"A pres M oi le Deluge" 29 
who has perished through him: "My friend, why did you have to 
come my way? I needed to satisfy my whim, and I am not going to 
sacrifice even my slightest whim for your sake." 
N.B. But then, sometimes, he would sacrifice everything to some­
body else's small whim. 
His is a firm conviction (though not a theory): "There is no other 
life, I am on earth for a brief moment only, so why stand upon 
ceremony? However, inasmuch as certain conditions of community 
life have been established by society as a sort of contract, do your 
cheating in secret, violate your contract in secret, and if this might 
disturb the harmony of, or introduce a dissonance into, the society 
of the future, as for this, what do I care if the earth will open and 
swallow it up, not only in the future but this very moment and me 
along with the rest of them, apres moi le deluge. A parallel: just as 
our indifference to the exhaustion of our soil and to the destruction 
of our forests. (But not because of any theory about there being no 
future life, does all this happen. And he laughs himself at the idea 
that his character might be such as a result of any theory. But he is 
wrong there: not because of any theory, but because of a feeling of 
that theory, for he is an atheist not only by conviction, but with his 
whole being.) He even has this tendency of thought: "We have here 
a beautiful vision and impression. So let's stifle them as quickly as 
possible: all of this will exist only for a moment, and in that case it 
would be better for that thing of beauty not to have existed in the 
first place." 
N .B. A woman becomes passionately enamored of him. (A young 
man of 20 falls in love with her.) Either she, or the other woman, his 
wife, has children. His feud with the children (he seduces one little 
girl who betrays the gang of children and her mother; the mother 
dies). The mother is jealous of the child, her own little girl. But right 
in the middle of a fit of jealousy, the mother, while trying to get some 
answers from her by force torturiRg her, also covers her with kisses. 
But the girl remains haughtily and warily cold toward her. The 
mother makes a lot of fuss, whimpering: "Why don't you love me?" 
The mothe£ The little girl is sick, and delirious. Her mother standing 
over her. The mother dies. The little girl almost goes out of her mind 
from remorse. She reproaches him .w+4 (he has grown cool toward 
her and laughs). Strange and fantastic reproaches, though they are 
brief. The little girls hangs herself. Her mother, before her death, 
falls in love with the Prince. 
N.B. The mother's social background is a good one, higher than 

30 Embryo of a Plan 
His. N .B. Something like Countess V-a Dashkova marrying a doc­
tor. That's why she meets the Prince, having connections with those 
social circles. 
He abandons the child, ျ the little girl hangs herself. The little 
Beetle. Irresistibility of remorse and impossibility to live after "the 
little beetle." And this along with an ability to do evil consciously. 
He is done in at once and quite irretrievably by a subconscious, vital• 
impression of pity, and he perishes, like a fly. 
Embryo of a plan. A wife with stepchildren, a righteous woman, a 
victim of his diabolic schemes, who has sacrificed everything for his 
sake and who ruins Prince G<olitsy>n for his sake as well (story of 
the latter's death), who has surrendered her heart and soul to her 
tormentor. He tortures her diabolically, solely for the pleasure he 
derives from her torments. 
A band of children and their plot. The traitress is a little girl, the 
daughter of his wife, his stepdaughter. The child's precocious love. 
After her mother's death she hangs herself (that's where "the little 
beetle" enters the picture). 
The mother and her little daughter are jealous of each other. (The 
band of children has a counselor and leader in Fyodor Fyodorovich, 
an idiot.) 
This is His dark side. The bright one lies in his love for a young 
girl, or somebody else's wife. (It is precisely her jealousy of the other 
woman that kills his wife, the mother of <his> stepdaughter.) There, 
with the other woman, in that other environment, he is affectionate, 
generous, and heroic. 
!?! N.B. He secretly does good deeds and pays visits to the needy. 
The band of children ("the empire") finds out about it. Here, a boy 
who, like him, is a hero reveals himself to him. The boy is fascinated 
by Him, admires Him, abandons the gang and joins Him, becoming 
an admirer of His. His relationship with the gang. But still another 
heroic boy, the leader of the gang, their Emperor ("an empire or a 
republic?"-arguments), refuses to yield to Him and intensifies their 
feud. He had always been a rival and enemy of the renegade boy, 
though secretly his friend. When the other boy changes sides, he 
suffers, suffers to the point of suicide. 
N .B. He does not feel too sorry for his stepdaughter after she has 
• Zhiznennyi, which I have translated literally; perhaps Dostoevsky means 
"animal," or "living." 

The Poet and the Artist 3 1  
hanged herself; much more so (and in spite of himself) he is overcome 
by pity for his deceased wife. (N .B. N .B. The boy slaps his face.) He 
marries, or is going to marry, the girl who admires him (the righteous 
one). And here, suddenly, "the little beetle." The children's republic 
disintegrates by itself. 
Note. This is the image of an ATHEIST. This is the main idea of the 
drama (that is, the main essence of His character). 
But absolutely introduce* several real, everyday characters (such 
as the Governor in The Possessed)16 so as to create a more vivid 
picture. 
His social position: a former landowner living off redemptiOn pay­
ments (but this is doubtful, think it over). 
IN ORDER TO WRITE A NOVEL, ONE MUST ACQUIRE, FIRST OF ALL, ONE 
OR SEVERAL STRONG IMPRESSIONS ACTUALLY EXPERIENCED BY THE 
AUTHOR's HEART. THIS IS THE POET's JOB. <FROM> THIS IMPRESSION 
THERE ARE DEVELOPED A THEME, A PLAN, A HARMONIOUS WHOLE. THIS 
IS ALREADY THE ARTIST's JOB, ALTHOUGH ARTIST AND POET HELP EACH 
OTHER IN ONE THING AS WELL AS THE OTHER, IN BOTH INSTANCES. 
N.B . . He is an idle person (a former landowner, redemption money, 
abroad), and his enemies (and both wives) charge that he is an idle 
person. And suddenly by accident some area of activity opens itself 
to him (invent something); and he turns out to be a man who gets 
everything done in outstanding fashion, while those who had been 
accusing him and had sneered at him accomplish nothing. 
Fyodor Fyodorovich, like Baranov; at the office of some Bashmakov 
and knows his business exceedingly well. 
The govemeat offlcial Fyodor Fyodorovich is getting married. 
(An abandoned child.) The wedding does not come off. Supporting 
a wife. Children. This is a subconscious passion for children. He 
offers an explanation to his wife, with whom things have gone awry, 
as if from a book (altogether, he talks as from a book, establishes rela­
tions with her, and she gets to like him awfully much). 
!?! Perhaps, this wife of Fyodor Fyodorovich's is precisely that 
other man's wife with whom His righteous feat is accomplished. 
Or perhaps, her sister. 
" "Absolutely" is underlined three times. 
16 This is possibly a reaction to N. K.l\Iikhaylovsky's review of The Possessed 
in which he singles out the governor Lembke as a particularly well·made charac­
ter. The review is in The Fatherland Notes, vol. II (1873). 

32 Fyodor Fyodorovich 
Fyodor Fyodorovich has given his estate to another brother17 
(couldn't He be actually his brother?). In that case, he does love his 
brother and is unfailingly affectionate toward him; yet, when the 
situation demands it he tells him outright that he is a villain, but 
does so without despising him in the least, but simply stating it as 
a fact, and continues to be affectionate. An active personage, but in 
the main part only in connection with the children. 
There are some ideas in which he believes unfailingly and blindly. 
Some social ideas, among others. He does not, however, believe in 
commumsm. 
Regarding narodnost' :• "The precise reason why I am perfectly 
narodnyi• • is that I am perfectly Russian. However, it is all the same 
to me." And to be sure, he cares very little whether he is narodnyi or 
not. But what is strange: the people, whenever they come in contact 
with him (N .B. present an instance of such an encounter in the novel) 
absolutely and directly recognize him as one of them. 
(The children curse classicism. A plot against Katkov.18 But Fyodor 
Fyodorovich demolishes their arguments, and they remain admirers 
of Katkov.) 
N .B. Fyodor Fyodorovich marries neither for passion nor for love, 
but according to certain family arrangements. The bride is terribly 
cold toward him (before the marriage is broken because of the aban­
doned child). Fyodor Fyodorovich is from a good family (declining 
families). 
N.B. Should one introduce the fool in the railway carriage? (God's 
fool) (also in the bath-house-the leg) and the young man? (The 
young man could be His rival.) It is he who is the lover of another 
man's wife (a righteous feat), and the other man's wife is the former 
bride of Fyodor Fyodorovich. 
• Untranslatable: derived from narod, "the people, the Russian people, or 
nation"; it could be translated by "nationalism" or "populism," but neither is 
adequate. 
• •  Adjective to namd. 
11 In the final version Versilov does something of this kind when he refuses to 
accept the estate he has won from Prince Sokolsky. 
IS ;'\likhail Katkov was the editor of The Russian Messenger, where most of 
Dostoevsky's novels were published. He was an extreme conservative. The refer­
ence to classicism concerns the edict of July 31, 1871, of the ministry of education, 
in which it is declared that only students who finish a classical course of studies in 
a Gymnasium may enroll at a university. Katkov championed this view eagerly 
and vigorously. 

A conversation with Fyodor Fyodorovich: 
He Is a Child 33 
She (annoyed): "\\Tell, let me tell you one thing, you are pleased 
with yourself." 
Fyodor Fyodorovich: "I agree that this is a very bad shortcoming 
of mine." (N .B. Though he had never thought of having this short­
coming before.) 
She: "For another thing, it certainly isn't easy to catch you with 
your guard down." 
Fyodor Fyodorovich (somewhat taken aback): "Were you really 
trying to catch me? And I was thinking that you were speaking 
simply." 
She. She feels drawn to Fyodor Fyodorovich, talks to him, finds 
him very much to her liking, but deep inside she says to herself di­
rectly: "No, he is impossible!" (That is, as a husband, as a male.) 
N.B. Fyodor Fyodorovich's (apparent) arrogance and calmness were 
actually the cause of her hatred for him and set the stage after for 
the break between them after the incident with the abandoned child. 
She (and many other people) consider Fyodor Fyodorovich to be 
a child understanding nothing about life and people, and suddenly, 
when the time has come (but quite unintentionally and without 
having given any thought to setting the stage for it), Fyodor Fyodoro­
vich explains to her the entire psychology of her soul, to a depth 
which frightens her, yet does it calmly and almost coolly. "But if you 
have penetrated so deep into people and if you know all these things 
about them, how can you remain so cool and calm?" she exclaims. 
"But I am really neither cool nor calm," he replies, but coolly and 
calmly as if he had not understood her remark. 
The solution of the riddle lies in the fact "that he is a man with an 
idea fixa} and such people are all calm, even when headed to their 
own execution. 
He is # forty years old} and Fyodor Fyodorovich, His younger 
brother (or even better, his stepbrother) is twenty-seven. 
A stepbrother. (Give this some thought.) 
He experiences an unexpected (and, what is most important, unex­
pected for him) fit of jealousy for his much abused wife, to whom he 
has been unfaithful himself. He tries to laugh it off, taking it for a fit 
of vanity, yet this passion weighs on him. (A Dream. Gol<itsyn>)19-
19 The first husband of the Predatory Type's wife. A prototype of Makar 
Dolgoruky. 

34 Preacher of Christianity 
a duel, the thought of his murder under her eyes, and "what is she 
going to say?" Her love for fti.m (G<o>li<tsyn>. His passionate love 
for her. The crime. 
He is from an obscure family, the son of some kind of government 
clerk, but his education has made him a superior and a well-known 
man. Perhaps he is ashamed of his obscure lineage, and suffers from 
it. (N .B. His brother says about him, or to him: "Admit that you are 
ashamed of not being an aristocrat.") 
N.B. A candidate for a post in the judiciary. (Couldn't he be the 
oldest brother in an impoverished family, a righteous man and a 
stay-at-home?) Before his marriage, he had his face slapped (story and 
setting), which is why she married him in the first place, but later 
she keeps reproaching him for that very thing. (lA her when "my 
Prince," etc.) The whole vileness of his fall is combined in him with 
all the sensations of an exalted mind. "The whole vileness of my 
fall is with me" (secret vices). A young boy working for the Count is 
his brother. (Perhaps, a sermon on Christ and God, whereas he is an 
atheist.) He chops up some icons. 
The children's empire. 
(No need of a noble exploit a part, as a separate episode.) 
N .B. Straighten out and focus (realize) this character more strongly. 
Make him more attractive. (A depraved man. Depravity.) 
N .B.! ! ! He is tired and indifferent, and suddenly (often) he has 
a quick impulse to do something (and, for the most part, something 
depraved and frightful), often enough something noble (but he 
would invariably drag it down into the mud and eventually wind up 
doing something depraved, secret, and frightful). 
He is a preacher of the Christian religion, and this is why the 
Princess left her high society and followed him. And then WR@R sh@ 
is ayiRg he smashes an icon (before or after her death, better before). 
"I am a depraved man, I am an atheist." 
tH=- \Vhat is most important, he is always sometimes loftily sincere, 
which is why he fascinates people. 
It is He who is the head manager of the Count's affairs, who has a 
liaison with his wife,* he has also written for his brother and made 
him his assistant (also in the office). It is he who is the central figure 
in the incident involving Lambert. 
• The Russian phrase is ambiguous, just as is my translation. 

Socialist and a Fanatic 35 
N .B. (N .B. His marriage to the widowed Princess has somewhat 
improved his financial condition. But the Princess has only a small 
fortune of her own.) 
A PROBLEM: SHOULD ONE GET THE CHILDREN MIXED UP IN THIS? 
Fyodor Fyodorovich has a wir;ming lottery ticket, but he does not 
consider it his own, since he bought it from a certain government 
clerk. His fiancee and her family are clamoring against his intention 
to return the ticket. He says nothing and returns the ticket, which 
becomes known on his wedding day. But the bride still thinks that 
he has returned only a part and does not learn that everything has 
been returned until after the ceremony. And here, suddenly, the 
abandoned child. Everybody leaves. 
N .B. The thing is that the friend to whom he returned the win­
nings from that ticket did not give him a penny. Fyodor Fyodorovich 
(as usual) finds this neither good nor bad, and accepts it as a fact. 
"\Vhy, in today's society no phenomena other than of this kind, nor 
people other than of this type, can be expected to exist." 
Nothing can disturb him, not even blatant justifications brought 
forth in favor of the matricides, much to the satisfaction of the elder 
brother: "May everything come tumbling down!" And Fyodor Fyo­
dorovich views him with strange curiosity and answers: "Yes, you 
are so right, may everything come tumbling down, the sooner the 
better." He has said it in the sense that everything should go to the 
devil, while Fyodor Fyodorovich meant that the new society should 
come as soon as possible. 
Fyodor Fyodorovich i် a socialist and a fanatic, but somehow cold 
and calculating, whereas the older brother is a skeptic and believes 
in nothing. Fyodor Fyodorovich is all faith, while He is all despair. 
Regarding Christ, Fyodor Fyodorovich states that much about him 
was rational, that he was a democrat, that he had firm convictions, 
and that some of his articles of truth were correct. But not all. 
The elder brother (He), in the presence of his wife and his younger 
brother, proves to Fyodor Fyodorovich that Christ had founded soci­
ety on freedom, and that there could be no other freedom, ex.cept but 
in Christ FyodoF FyodoFovick is }3Ht oHt. And that he, the communist 
Fyodor Fyodorovich, is founding his on slavery and idiocy. Fyodor 
Fyodorovich is put out as far as his arguments are concerned, but not 
in his feelings. "All right then, so let us accept Christ's system," he 
says, "only let's straighten out a few things about it." "Why, in that 
case nothing will be left of Christ," says his brother. "I have to admit 

36 Doctrines of Comm unism 
that, I am not going to argue," says Fyodor Fyodorovich, for "these 
are only words," and all this is irrelevant to the real thing. And he 
quits the debate, remaining calm. 
But suddenly he is struck by one thing: the abandoned child. And 
he spontaneously becomes a lover of children and a Christian. He is 
told that, in the new society, children will have no fathers, for there 
will be no family ("family, that's as good as private property"). He 
says that, probably, it won't be that way,-i£ this be natural. • "How is 
it possible not to love children?" "You see, their fathers and mothers 
have deserted them, but then, don't I love them? There will always 
be people like myself." "Oh yes! And they will be a thousand times 
better than ourselves, for everything will be love and concord! All 
will be fathers and mothers, and then we won't need to have natural 
fathers, which, by the way, is almost tantamount to monopoly." 
Inflames the children with the doctrines of communism. 
"Thou art not far from the kingdom of God," somebody tells 
him.20 "You have gotten Christianity mixed up with communism." 
Even now there are many who prepare this incompatible mixture. 
But in the meantime, blood and incendiarism (the treasures of the 
Tuileries). 
But blood and incendiarism do not disturb Fyodor Fyodorovich. 
And there are going to be better treasures, a thousand times superior. 
"Of course, it might be a good thing to save from the coming con­
flagration a few of the very greatest items (the Sistine Madonna, the 
Venus of Milos), for the sake of their past glory and in the spirit of 
conciliation. But unfortunately this is impossible; it is precisely 
these things that must be the first to go. I presume that those who 
will be burning them will do so with their hearts bleeding." 
"Quite the contrary, quite the contrary," they shout back. "A 
right to be dishonorable, much rather than tears. They are happy 
with it. For these people are all nothing but the vile average. They 
are the ones who even bum things without an idea. It is only we who 
understand the essence of the idea, of the brains which direct these 
vile hands." 
"\Veil, there you see it, you have said it yourself, that it is the 
average, and that's where you are right. \Vhich means that it couldn't 
be different at all, and so what are you complaining about?" 
• Unclear phrase. 
20 Mark 12 : 34. 

He Is an Atheist 37 
"And you remain calm!" He exclaims. "It isn't a matter of com­
plaining or rebelling, it means to let it be damned. If the world is 
moving in this direction, with this vile business taking over and 
replacing the bright cause, I'd rather see everything come tumbling 
down: I am not accepting this kind of a world," He says. 
His whole misfortune lies in the fact that He is an atheist and does 
not believe in resurrection, whereas Fyodor Fyodorovich believes in 
the message of communism. 
Later, Fyodor Fyodorovich discusses the subject of children with 
his future wife: "Come on, you don't resemble a book at all. Look 
how you have become all living emotion, all a single sensation," his 
wife tells him. "But prior to that, you were no more than a book. 
What would a woman mean to you?" 
"Oh, if you only knew how much a woman could mean to me!" 
"Really? have you ever loved a woman? do you love one now?!" 
"Yes" (when he says this, it comes quite unexpected to the reader). 
"\Vhom then?" 
["I love you/' etc.] 
"Oh, you don't know how I have been loving you."* 
"Really?" 
"And I still love you, I love you even more than I did then." 
(The stage is set for a graceful relationship between husband and 
wife. Yet they don't get together: "He is impossible.") (In her pres­
ence, he draws milk from the wet-nurse's breasts and drinks it. Yellow 
diapers.) This wife of Fyodor Fyodorovich's is in touch with (Him), 
but it isn't a liaison. His wife is jealous. His liaison with the Count's 
wife. (An old gentleman, the portrait.) 
And so, one brother is an atheist. Despair. The other is a thorough­
going fanatic. The third represents the new generation, a living force, 
new people. He was able to withstand Lambert. (And the children, 
as the youngest generation.) 
Most important. The idea of disintegration is present everywhere, 
for everything is falling apart, and there are no remaining ties not 
only in the Russian family, but even simply between people m 
general. Even children are apart. 
[Disintegration is the principal visible idea of the novel.] 
"The tower of Babel," he says. "Here we are, for example, a Rus-
" The gender of the Russian phrase suggests that it is "He" who says these 
words. 

38 Belinsky 
sian family. 8e sa}'S 'Ve speak different languages and cannot under­
stand each other. Society is chemically disintegrating." 
"But not the people." 
"The people, too." 
"But families do exist, and there's an awesome multitude of them." 
"This awesome multitude is a sorry phantom," he replies, "it is 
all nothing but average, run-of-the-mill, people without ideas. It's we 
who really matter. 'Ve are the people who have ideas, and everybody 
is going to follow us. Belinsky was all by himself when he hit upon 
his idea of change, after his article on "The Anniversary of Boro­
dino,"21 and look what happened: everybody followed him. His idea 
prevailed everywhere. Even the run-of-the-mill keep babbling it, 
without understanding him. It is going to be the same thing now, all 
these families and all this narodnost''*' will disintegrate, not even a 
bare outline will be left of them." 
"You are so right saying, 'without understanding.' " 
"Yet doing it his way, like everyone else.'' 
"Isn't it you who said that they are only too happy to have been 
given the right to be dishonorable?" 
"This means nothing at all: they are happy to have acquired the 
right to be dishonorable, others are happy about something else. It's 
the others who will prevail.'' 
Fyodor Fyodorovich is in favor of a classical education, and defends 
this view when asked by the children, though he admits that he is 
at a loss for an answer. He asserts that the classical corresponds more 
to our goals, and wonders why the liberals have rejected it. 
Fyodor Fyodorovich hesitated for a long time how to explain it to 
the children, [told them] that he wasn't ready to answer the question; 
finally, he did some research and prepared an answer. 
Though the office is located in the Count's house, he has some asso­
ciates in the business: a certain Count Poletika, two Yids, and a 
Russian capitalist (railroad). 
[3d part] An image of the Earth covered with snow in 100,000 
years. The stupidity of creation. "'Vhat is most stupid of all is that 
you will be given proof that it isn't stupid at all, but merely a fact, 
• See n. (•), p. 32, above. 
21 A work by V. Zhukovskii, "Borodinskaia godovshchina," published in The 
Fatherland Notes in 1 839 and reviewed by Belinsky in the same year. Belinsky 
gives an extended definition and explanation of the meaning of narodnost' in 
this article, and it is to this concept that Dostoevsky refers. 

Secret Debauchery 
39 
whereas I certainly know, for some reason or other, that it is stupid 
(that deserted, cold globes be whirling through space). Gambling in 
Monaco is incomparably higher than anything else in existence." 
"What do you care about it?" 
"Well, it's a snaR'l@ nothing." 
The old Prince says: 
"Listen--oh, my dear, what does it matter to you, let them whirl 
through space (the globes, that is)." 
The story about the slap in the face; bearing the slap in the face. 
His wife is greatly afraid that there may be a duel. His wife congratu­
lates him on his strength of mind, yet he knows that she despises 
him. (He had earned the slap in the face earlier, at the time when he 
was torturing his wife.) 
She is aware of his secret debauchery (she follows him one night, 
and exposes him). 
Her love grows more and more, until she meets the Prince. She is 
30, she had her first child (a girl) when she was 1 7. 
Prince (G<olitsyn> is £4 24 years old. 
He speaks about St. Theodosius.22 
A trait. He is terribly inquisitive, and likes to hear gossip: "What 
have you got coming up there?" He is too proud to ask himself and 
waits until somebody would report it to him. 
Frequently, he is overwhelmed by remorse, and in tears, on which 
occasions he simple-heartedly prostrates himself before her, telling 
her everything. "I'll torture you to death," he tells his wife, "but 
when you die, I won't be able to stand you . . .  
" 
. 
He poisons her. Or she is simply hit by a fever aRd R@ driY@S a Rail 
iRto R@F. For she cannot herself endure the strain resulting from her 
relationship with the Prince, and he regrets not having strangled her. 
He is a coward, but in this case he is willing to run the danger. 
"I haven't got any money, Madam." 
Queteuse.23 "I am no philanthropist, Madam." 
"I have no love for the poor, Madam." 
"I am no philanthropist, Madam." 
"I have money, Madam, and I hope to spend it without the help of 
other people." 
22 A monk in Kiev who died in 1 074 and who was renowned for his spiritual 
feats. In the February, 1876, issue of The Diary of a WTileT Dostoevsky speaks of 
him with admiration, as the embodiment of the ideas of the people. 
23 French: "alms collector." 

40 In Case God Does Xot Exist 
?N.B. He has money, and hopes to spend it without the help of 
other people. 
? START THE :"OVEL: He still is Her conversation with <her> 
brother, the Count. The Count is a General. He is a superior man, 
and clever, "I like him very much, but he is stupid, and I dislike him 
a good deal." He still resigns his commission. She defends him with 
ardor. But at home she attacks him for having resigned his commis­
sion. [about his family) ["You have changed your social circle. Prin­
cess Mimi <?> He is admitted immediately."] She is also ridiculous, 
and sickly. They talk about the lawsuit. Her lawsuit about an inheri­
tance. "All our hopes rest here," he says; the money belongs to the 
children. 
A young boy, brother, informs her that he is given to debauchery 
at night. She chases him out, refusing to believe it. An older boy is 
being rude to her. Liza. Preparations for the wedding of Fyodor 
Fyodorovich's middle brother. The younger <brother> goes out and 
meets Lambert, tells him about his family. 
"Is there a Devil?" the third brother asks the eldest brother. Mean­
while, rebellion of the children. 
The stage is being set for the incident with the slap in the face. 
Prince G<olitsyn> (in the matter of the inheritance). 
[3d part) "I can't help agreeing with this (i.e., that this is all the 
same and that it is nobody's fault), but iR that case, two shopkeepers 
playiRg checkers, having a rational mind, I can't help acknowledging 
that this is frightfully stupid, no matter how innocent it might be, 
and a game of checkers, played by two shopkeepers, contains infinitely 
more wisdom and makes infinitely more sense that all of being and 
the universe." 
"This is to say that you don't believe in God after all, or are you 
just talking that way?" 
"I am sayiRg this am coming to this conclusion in case God does 
not exist." 
"And in case he does?" 
"In that case: eternity exists for me, too, and then, immediately, 
everything takes on a colossal and a grandiose aspect, and infinite 
dimensions, worthy of man and of being. Everything becomes ra­
tional and makes sense." 
\Visdom stifles the human mind, yet man is in constant search of it. 
Being must be absolute and in any case superior to the human 
mind. 
The teaching that the human mind is the limiting boundary of 

He Is Terribly jealous 
4 1  
the universe is as stupid as the most stupid thing you might think of, 
and therefore infinitely more stupid than a game of checkers played 
by two shopkeepers. 
July 6. 
Shouldn't it begin with Him being mainly a preacher of the Chris­
tian religion: set it up accordingly. (Secretly, an atheist.) A young 
boy, <his?> brother. 
Her conversation with <his?> brother, the General (who is ill). 
"Before, He was a clever, and even a useful man . . .  He wants to 
turn himself into a saint, and that his relics would perform miracles; 
a joke! After all, this is the kind of idea one feels strange discuss­
ing even hypothetically. A man of the world, used to wear the same 
clothes we do, well, and the rest, and there, suddenly, his relics . . .  
Une supposition! I am not saying a thing, naturally, this is all sacred. 
But there, suddenly, his relics. It actually seems somehow improper, 
for a man of the world, to have his relics perform miracles later." 
He} to her: "Let us part, I am going to torture you to death, I 
am a hard man. Your children annoy me. They look at me as if I 
were a dragon." A quarrel with the oldest boy. "Either he or 1." They 
are separated. 
(Fasting.) The little girl comes to tell him that he is a villain. He 
moves to an apartment. Crapule/4 suddenly, after the fasting. • The 
younger brother. 
N. B. HE IS TERRIBLY JEALOUS. 
"Suddenly, I hold a position in society, and suddenly, tomorrow 
my relics perform a miracle. This is altogether unbecoming. If it were 
to happen to me somehow, or if somebody would offer me heavenly 
powers by any chance, I would decline, I wouldn't want it. Une 
supposition . . .  for, perhaps there is really such a thing as relics, and 
perhaps they do indeed make miraculous appearances of some sort, 
and the whole thing isn't such a prejuge at all, you never can tell, and 
finally, nobody knows a thing about all this. C'est de l'inconnu."25 
The predatory type} as if it weren't enough that he is seeking for a 
burden, as if it weren't enough that he is seeking a faith, is actually 
seeking the despair of utter unbelief} and cynicism, so as to come to 
rest at least there. "Otherwise, I believe in nothing at all, and at the 
• Pasty, plural of post ("fast"). 
24 French : "scoundrel." 
25 French: "it's unknown." 

42 It Is Base to Love Life 
same time, I believe in the great idea ("the great idea" is his own 
private technical term; settle this point with the reader). "\Vhat then, 
is the essence of this great idea of mine? .fi. What's both ridiculous 
and absurd about it is that it has not been formulated. The moment 
I have formulated it to any extent, I'm the first to find it ridiculous 
myself. No, it manifests itself as an emotion, as an impression. You 
live, going your way, and suddenly you say: 'this is good'-that's 
precisely what is not good." 
N.B. Though He says himself that he is an ignoramus and knows 
very little, it is necessary to let the reader know that, as a matter of 
fact, he knows a good deal. He has a synthesis, a whole archive of ex­
perience, he has feelings in which he firmly believes. (N .B. It is feel­
ings that were his undoing: he couldn't stand "the little beetle.") 
He tells his wife: "I am going to torture you to death, nor do I 
feel sorry for you, as long as you are with me; but after you'll have 
died, I know for sure that I'm going to kill myself by self-condemna­
tion." 
"If at least I were a weak-willed nonentity," he says, "and could 
!>uffer with that consciousness, from the lofty heights and the low envy 
of that consciousness! But now I do know that I am infinitely strong; 
'strong with what?' you may think. \Vell, with that immediate 
strength of vitality and adaptability, with those (good) feelings, ex­
actly, which right now make me say: 'this is good.' These are of course 
good feelings, but . . .  you understand that there is a but. This is to 
say that I love life." 
"It is a base thing, for a man like myself, to love life. Could it be 
really true that the Earth exists only for men like myself? Most 
probably this is true. (\Vhereas saints are either stoned by other 
people, or burn themselves to death.)" 
"Nothing can destroy me, and what is the vilest thing of all, 
nothing can perturb me either. I am continuously without shame. I 
am capable of feeling two contrary feelings at the same time. \Vhich 
is dishonorable, and actually against my own will. But imagine, I 
even don't know whether this is good or bad." 
"I am dishonorable almost to the limit, and what's even more im­
portant, I'm glad that I am. I am sh <ameless) My name is shame­
less,''• and nothing else." 
• The Russian word sramnik is a noun. 

"The Little Beetle" 43 
A big N .B. (for the plan). "Whereas the Krafts hang themselves. 
To be sure, the Krafts are stupid, whereas we are clever." 
"I very nearly was glad that, for as long as about 1 5  years now, 
every intelligent element in our country has, as a consequence of 
Russia's requirements, embraced realism and taken to specialization, 
and in this particular sense, I swear that I am actually opposed to any 
kind of reform school reform, to any increase in the level of educa­
tion. In our dear fatherland, things have quite naturally worked out 
the way that any increase in the level of education is at the same time 
an increase in the level of suffering." 
"So really, it is even better if they do specialize; to increase the 
level of education means to increase the level of suffering." 
The young boy, <his> brother (the one who is with Lambert, and 
everything), slaps <his?> elder brother's face. After this has hap­
pened, he runs away from his family. Later, he makes friends with 
<his?> elder brother, with reserve, but irrepressibly. He does not 
want to show him any respect-and listens to him with terrible 
curiosity. He listens to him, finding him somewhat entertaining. In 
the end He is done in by "the little beetle," while the younger 
brother is resurrected to a superior exploit. Get both of them mixed 
up in the same intrigue (with the Princess). The Y<oung> Man 
paralyzes* his crimes. 
For a while, He associates with Lambert. 
He asserts that he is a product of Russia, and typical of her people 
as they all are at the given moment. He supports the idea that they are 
all such (scoundrels) as he is, provided only that they are clever. They 
don't know if this is to be a joke, or not. (N .B. He does not mean it 
as a joke.) And when they tell him: "So everybody is such a scoun­
drel?" he answers: "It isn't only that we are scoundrels, we are, be­
sides, the only bearers of a higher idea." 
"Yes, but as skeptics, without suffering," his wife, or somebody, 
tells him. "'Vhat you need is suffering."-¥6-t- "'Ve have not reached 
the maturity of suffering, for only a heart that has not been cor­
rupted is worthy of suffering." 
"I am praying for suffering." 
Suffering ("the little beetle"), once it has made its appearance, is 
crushing him, like a cockroach. 
"What is he up to? 'Vas he simply chatting with me? As if he had 
• Perhaps Dostoevsky means "neutralizes." 

44 L1za Hangs Herself 
no one else to chat with. I noticed that there was something wrong, 
yet at the same time, there was so much strained and spent suffering 
about every one of his escapades, no matter how contrived <?>, that 
I simply couldn't leave him or remain indifferent to him. On the 
contrary, I was becoming more attached to him every day." 
"And besides, I always suspected that, perhaps, He was merely talk­
ing that way, driven either by spite or by his suffering, but that 
secretly, with himself, He was actually the fanatical adherent of some 
higher idea, so that in effect he continued to appear before my eyes 
covered with an aura of mystery." 
Liza hangs herself because she -says- has broken with her mother, 
and says: "I have hurt my mother." She hangs herself at a time when 
her mother is with the Prince. He is glad that she has hanged herself, 
and feels nothing. A colossal impression upon her mother. She sud­
denly recovers from her infatuation with the Prince, and dies of a 
broken heart. He has two deaths on his conscience. However, "the 
little beetle" that tortures him to death is not the one that reminds 
him of his wife, but the one which reminds him of Liza (the little 
beetle of disorder). On the last day, flight of the child (the boy, Liza's 
brother). 
N.B. N.B. N.B. Scenes and excitement in the family on account 
of the dismissal of a housemaid. A picture of everyday life. 
!N.B.! He feels no passion for the Princess, but simply vexation, 
intrigue, spite, and hurt vanity. That's where he makes up his mind 
to ruin the Princess. 
[For the plan.] He simply is the Princess's lover without loving her. 
He is looking for money. The younger brother proves to her that he 
wants to rob her. The Princess breaks with him and throws him out. 
She has never belonged to him. That's the time when He gets in­
volved with Lambert. 
"If for no other reason, I am a typical Russian nobleman," he says, 
"because I am dishonorable to a very high degree. During the past 20 
years, dishonor and the right to be dishonorable have become the 
highest quality of the Russian soul." 
"No, it really seems that I am a genius," he says, "yes, indeed. Any 
other, average person would have been finished a long time ago, but 
I have that accursed gift of vitality. No, I am not going to shoot my­
self." 
The boy (<his> brother), instead of him, begins to pursue the 
course of righteousness. 
A story, a story is what is needed! An entertaining plan. 

Revenge suffered by the Princess. 
The Boy Is the Hero 45 
The scene with the housemaid (his sordid cohabitation <with her> 
is exposed). He falsely accuses the housemaid of theft. The boy is 
terribly indignant about this and reproaches him. He then takes his 
brother in hand, going even further in his unbelief than the latter. 
On the contrary, in his belief in crime < . . .  >. 
Secretly, he does good deeds, but after "the little beetle" he be­
comes indifferent and abandons the recipients of his beneficence. 
He does not esteem his wife as his spouse, though, in his words, it 
isn't exactly that he wouldn't recognize marriage, but he is simply 
indifferent. But the moment it is he who is affected he goes into a fit 
(when she goes to the Prince). 
After having had his face slapped he is surprised that he feels no 
anger. He chuckles to himself and says, for everyone to hear, that 
probably the reason why he isn't angry is that he actually deserved 
to be slapped. 
"I AM BORED/' he says. 
"But aren't you an intrigant, a petty gossip," the boy tells him, 
"how is it that you are bored?" 
"I do not know, I am an intrigant and a petty gossip, but I am 
still bored." 
July 23/ l l .  
The BOY, and not HE is the HERO. 
The story of the boy, how he arrives, whom he happens to meet, 
under whose care he is put. He falls into the habit of seeing the pro­
fessor; he dreams of the university; also, the idea to get rich. 
He, on the other hand, is only an accessory, but what an accessory! ! 
THE YouTH* 
The boy has failed an examination in the classics. They had ac­
tually written him that there was a job waiting for him in Petersburg, 
ostensibly he was to replace his older brother, who had gotten married 
and who was therefore lost to the family. Furthermore, they are ac­
tually stepbrothers, and those relatives are his aunts, and close rela· 
tions, while being virtually unrelated to the other brother. So the boy 
drops a hint to the effect that he feels they brought him in so they'd 
have somebody to take care of the aunts. He is told, by the family, that 
• Podrostok, "youth" or "adolescent," which is also the title of the novel. 

46 Rothschild 
as of now it is he who is being taken care of, and, in a word, they cut 
him down in every possible way. He arrives having already conceived 
the idea of becoming a Rothschild. 
The "despot" brother (i.e., He) whom he had taken for a pompous 
despot impresses him with his cynical simplicity; for instance, he 
frankly tells him himself that He is uneducated, etc. He corrupts him. 
Infinite vanity. 
The boy becomes friends with Liza. He foresees [sic] all His rela­
tions with Liza and breaks with Him, since he despises Him. Makes 
a direct turn <back> to the right way. He won't forgive him Liza. 
The young man arrives smarting from an insult, thirsting for 
revenge. Colossal vanity, a plan <to become> a Rothschild (his 
secret). Organize the theme: Liza isn't needed. 
DECIDE? His wife's age. Is there a need for the Prince and jealousy, 
or isn't there? Liza alone, or Children and their flight after their 
mother's funeral? 
The old Prince, the Princess's husband (who has made a will and 
is being cheated). An old chatterbox. Used to be a dandy and with 
the horse guards. (A capitalist.) Now he likes to come up with an 
occasional bon mot, and will point out to an unsuspecting party, with 
childish (however, quite innocent, cheerful) vanity, that he has done 
just that, come up with a bon mot. To make up for it, those who 
want to win his favor make a point of taking notice of his bans mots, 
and to them he is awfully grateful, and willing to do anything for 
them. 
[February] Both good nature and egoism. Fits of stinginess. The 
strange view (the only serious trait in him) that now, in our age, 
honors, nobility (all in the sense of rank) mean nothing, so that 
money is the best thing of all. He states this idea with sadness. He has 
also preserved some noble traits. He does not suspect his wife, for 
reason of his indolence (or egoism, wishing to avert an unpleasant 
denouement), which he states openly and for which he really gets it 
from the Princess, who has a most severe influence on him. A strange 
trait: he actually boasts of this severe influence, he likes to let every­
body know that he is being ruled with a rod of iron, so as to appear 
to be such a gay blade and rake, such a naughty boy who would take 
to carousing the moment she'd look the other way. 
It is he who speaks of the "relics." 
It is a remarkable fact that 10 to 20 years ago he was a more serious 
person and actually performed meritoriously in an important govern­
ment appointment. A man with taste. He dearly loves a scabrous 

The Prince and God 47 
anecdote and is bored when nobody will turn the conversation that 
way. They arranged for· him to see Mile Andrieux, but he returned 
embarrassed, he didn't like it at all: not the right thing, unaesthetic. 
He is greatly interested in the new woman. So they arrange for a visit 
with a new woman. He is even more embarrassed. He is getting ready 
to die and <tells them> what they should bury him in, and he seri­
ously expects to him to die, and blague. (He has had a vision.) He 
makes a break for <Mile> Andrieux, in spite of the fact that he is 
prepared to die, and suddenly dies. He is a capitalist, and a share­
holder in a number of companies. 
Once, the Prince began to talk like a nihilist, and promptly made 
a fool of himself. Deny everything (he is a Senator, or a member of 
the State Council). 
As for the Princess, he married her 10 years ago (he is 62), out of 
vanity, so that people would say: "Look what an attractive young 
wife he has got." This he tells her himself, trying to appear frivolous. 
He makes fun of human nature and points out, in himself as 
well as in others, various psychological traits that are comical or 
trivial: "You can't cover those with any uniform," he says. A good 
deal of wit, here. 
The Prince has been listening to various atheists for a long time 
and has become an atheist himself: "And so, there just isn't anything 
of that kind (i.e., God)," he says. "I must admit that I always sus­
pected it to be so," he says. And he immediately proceeds to ramble 
along, arguing that this (i.e., God) would actually be indecorous. 
"I don't know how to express it, but, in my opinion, it is actually 
trivial. As if somebody were always ready to give me a spanking-une 
idee. I am a General, and there . . .  'he's realized the vanity of earthly 
existence.' All right, he's a general, let him be a general, yet we are 
still wetting our pants,"" still being the same naughty little boys." 
"And finally, if it is really as you say, then prove it to me, so I can 
see it, or as they say, have a sensation of it. All right if He (God) 
exists in person (and not in the form of an effusion of spirit or some­
thing, for I must admit, that is even more difficult to understand), 
then what does he wear? How tall is he? Don't be angry, my dear, 
naturally, I have a right to ask this question, for if he is God, a per­
sonal God, i.e., a person, then how tall is he, et enfin) where does he 
• Sikaem, a nursery word the basic meaning of which is "to squirt"; another 
slang meaning is "to drink (vodka)." 

48 He II' as the Bay's Enemy 
live? This is an important question, where does he live, a most im­
portant question. I am not talking of His having a passport or any­
thing of the kind, of course. As for a rational spirit, that's nonsense as 
far as I can see. This is nothing but clouding the issue the idea. \Veil, 
and still, un domicile, that adds authority to the idea of order and, 
so-to-speak, decorum. An effusion? \Veil, what could that be, some 
kind of water or what? Yet in my opinion, there hasn't ever been 
any effusion at all, but simply the grass grows everywhere, as it has 
always grown, and that's all there is to it. I always suspected it to be 
that way, I always did." 
The old Prince is critical of Him all the time and, behind his back, 
likes to crack jokes at his expense, but to his face he is for some reason 
afraid of him. The other man is confident that he can turn him 
around in any direction of his own choice. So he turns him against 
the Princess. 
They are maried tt> two sisters. 
He says to his wife: "I never loved her (i.e., the Princess). It was 
only vanity on my part, only envy, perhaps." 
"But why were you tempted by Liza?" 
"Liza was my enemy from the very beginning, I needed her sub­
mission. It flattered me." 
The boy (Liza's brother) was sick, a kind of God's fool. He loved 
Liza. He was the boy's enemy. \Vhile his wife was still alive he would 
really rip his mouth apart. • \Vhen everybody was dead, he wanted 
to make friends with the boy. He goes with him. The boy runs away. 
The boy (the youth) passionately dreams of how he will save a lot 
of money, but he does not tell anybody; in his dreams he shines shoes, 
etc. 
N.B. Important. Not a word about Lambert until he appears on 
the scene (everything in the narrative). 
About the ideas which interest the Youth (except Rothschild). 
Also, everything at the proper time, for instance, the image of the 
Earth all covered with ice. Here, suddenly, his remarks, showing that 
he has already been thinking, experienced certain emotions, and felt 
excited about things. 
(Women, the desire for a woman which agitates him), his scene 
with Mile Andrieux, and later, how he had a whore. 
• Razryval rot, obviously a slang expression; I did not find it in the dictionaries 
and had to guess its meaning. 

The Princess Insults Him 49 
He arrives in town and locates Vitia, who brings him together with 
a high school boy. Together, they plan to run away to America. About 
God, with Vitia: "There's one more thing which I forgot to tell you," 
etc. 
His first night at the house, after his return from Vitia's place. The 
chambermaid. His daydreams about himself (about Rothschild). He 
counts his money before going to bed. 
Next morning he is at the office (with the old Prince). There, a 
conversation between the old Prince and His wife, also about "relics." 
The boy bursts out laughing. He gets to talk with the Prince. 
At home, he runs into a scene involving the chambermaid. A 
scene about the children. He quarrels with <his> brother (with 
Him). He tells him that he was brought there to take care of his aunts. 
He picks up a letter at the office and learns the secret of the 
Princess. 
Slaps His face. 
The boy gets to know Him more closely on account of the slap in 
the face (inimically, at first). His wife makes scenes to Him, on 
account of <her> jealousy. His last tryst with the Princess. <He> 
learns the whole truth. The Princess has insulted him by failing to 
take notice of him. He vows vengeance. 
The little Prince appears on the scene. м 
Lambert appears on the scene. 
?N .B. Perhaps there is no need at all to have Liza. She is 24 at the 
time, and she is with the Prince. 
?N.B. She is 2€i and has two children, 8 and 7. 
Perhaps he has made a will, and he scares her by letting her know 
that the will is as good as worthless (5 percent and on the security of 
the estates), and thatfl.e. the Prince is not going to make out a new one, 
especially if he will show the old Prince those love notes. 
? The young Prince, of whom he is jealous (the old man's nephew 
and legal heir), never had anything to do with the Princess (some­
thing strange did happen, deceiving Him), but suddenly his wife 
falls in love with the Prince. Then, he becomes jealous of his wife 
and, together with Lambert, plans to ruin the Princess. 
?N .B. Couldn't Liza be her stepdaughter? Liza's strange friendship 
with her. Liza wouldn't allow her to marry Him. From the very be­
ginning she is his outspoken enemy. She stands up for her little 
brother (stepbrother) at the house, creating a turmoil. She incites 
<her> stepmother against Him ( 1 3  years <old>). And suddenly -hf. 
love for him. The stepmother is thHnderstrHck. Liza's death. He 

50 The Old Pri11ce 
seduces her. Liza (in her innocence) thinks that she has reached the 
utter limit of vileness (she marries him). She hangs herself. <His> 
wife (<her> stepmother) is thunderstruck. 
N.B. The old Prince laughs at His cuckoldry. He proves to the 
old Prince, while in a fit of temper, that he, too, is a cuckold, and that 
it is, again, the Prince who is responsible for it. \Vith this in mind, 
he launches the <love> note picked up by the Youth. 
It is also Lambert who works out a plan according to which 
she'd have to give 20,000 plus herself, for that note.* The Youth 
saves her. 
The Stepmother's love for the little Prince borders on insanity. 
EVERYTHING CAN BE FIXED BY 1\IAKIN'G IT SO THAT HE and the old 
Prince are N'OT married to two natural sisters. On the contrary, the 
Stepmother (His wife) is a distant [(or even a close)] relative (a niece) 
of the old Prince's. The old Prince incessantly criticizes his late 
brother, the freethinker, who is the father of the Princess, his niece, 
i.e., His wife. He died a Collegiate Registrar, in poverty and while 
awaiting criminal trial. And always an enemy of the Princess's, but 
she used to play with the little Prince in their childhood. And there­
fore, when she** (i.e., the Stepmother) hears about the little Prince, 
she remembers this and tells her husband and the Prince the delicate 
story of how she and the Prince were engaged when they were chil­
dren (a love between two children, with the little Prince a year young­
er than herself). On this occasion she recalls and tells them one 
anecdote after another about the terrible character of the little Prince 
(even when he was still a child), who had fascinated her with his utter 
fearlessness. Inasmuch as she keeps reminiscing and talking <about 
him> for several days in a row, and with her cheeks burning, He has 
the impression that there may be something behind it. 
N.B. Later, after having been "engaged" as children, they had 
not met at all until the very eve of her wedding to the late General. 
The little Prince had just received his <first> commission and 
offered to elope with her. She tells Him this with an air of profound 
mystery which actually surprises Him. "And I had seen him for all of 
one hour, though we were still calling each other by our first names," 
she says. Now the little Prince has returned from his exile (for a duel) 
• Chtob ona dala i dala 20,000; in Russian dat' ("to give") is routinely double 
entendre. 
• • Underlined twice. 

A Female Don juan 
5 1  
and taken to carousing about Petersburg. The 'Vife (the Stepmother) 
suddenly goes to see him, particularly since she has heard that he is 
the Princess's lover. 
She (the 'Vife, the Stepmother) is all aroused when she hears that 
the little Prince is supposed to be the Princess's lover. 'Vhereas the 
little Prince is perhaps indeed the lover of both women (both the 
Princess, and the Stepmother). 
Two infuriated women. 
The young Prince is a most open-hearted and delightfully charm­
ing person (overcome this difficulty). 
The Stepmother seems to be out of her mind. She tells Him out­
right that she was infatuated with Him in a morbid way, but that 
she never loved him. That she had taken a similar fancy to her late 
husband, the General. She is amorous, like Don Juan, but a female 
Don Juan. She is all compassion : she loved the General, who had 
squandered her dowry, out of compassion, for his defenselessness, she 
also <loves> Him out of compassion. She also loves the little Prince 
like a mother. "But only now have I learned what bliss is!" she ex­
claims. "Now I live only for myself, I myself am cruel!" This state­
ment, that she is "cruel," shows of course that she is all compassion, 
just as before. The death of Liza, of whom she had been jealous, 
leaves her thunderstruck. "She died," etc., etc. 
A TYPE which should be given more finish along with <that of> 
the LITTLE PRINCE. 
WHAT IS MOST IMPORTANT. Before her death (of moral disorder and 
exhaustion) she says: "How terrible all this is, suddenly! 'Vhat a dis­
order, suddenly! No, I am no predatory woman. Rather, I have been 
a poor victim all my life. How hard it is to weather this storm." She 
cannot stand Liza. Him either. 
Had He been the type of a superior and righteous man, she would 
have obeyed him and been an exemplary wife. 
"All my life, it seems, I'v been looking for somebody whom I 
could obey," she says. But he disturbed her soul and crushed her 
peace of mind with HIS anarchic spirit. He disturbed her. He trans­
mitted his own disturbed condition to her. This is why she suffered 
together with him. She took care of Him like a nurse, she would for­
give Him everything, every admission of His <guilt>, every villainy. 
But she would not forgive Him his anarchic convictions. Seeing what 
an influence he had on her, He arrogantly increased his influence, 
and her confusion. Toward the end she seemed to be going out of 
her mind. He finally reached the point where he would regularly 

52 A Larger Role for the Yo!ilh 
make full <drunken> confessions to her. That's where she threw 
herself on the Prince. 
It is she who says as she lies dying, with a wistful smile, that she 
had been looking all her life for somebody she could have obeyed. 
N .B. J\Ioral admonition. N .B. 
Create (creer) an extraordinarily novel and graceful type of woman 
and wife. 
!? ϲ.B. ္lore than to anything else in this novel, pay attention to 
the element of confession, to his erotic influence on her through 
disturbing her mind and frightening her soul. A cat playing with its 
victim. But then, how very angry does He get when somebody takes 
her away from him (the little Prince). When this happens he im­
mediately gives up his affair with the Princess, and the whole busi­
ness, forgetting about it and quitting having any feelings about this 
business, for he realizes that he needs his wife} whom somebody is 
trying to take away from him. A sign that he had nothing going with 
the Princess. 
A LARGER ROLE FOR THE YOUTH. 
He himself explains this whole THEORY (i.e., his influence on his 
wife) while the affair is taking its course and expounds the whole 
idea of the novel to the reader, w8at 8is seRsatioRs are and how this 
idea actually has to do with Him. And let this rule be valid for the 
entire novel, so that the characters would themselves explain <their 
actions> and SO that IT WOULD BE :'-lORE READILY U:'I:DERSTOOD. 
THE LITTLE BEETLE-not Liza, but she, his wife. He recalls her 
wretched clothes and predatory type. He She was crushed by com­
passion. Tenderness for the persecuted child. He ran away. The boy 
with the birdie. 
"How could you have gotten together with Him then?" the old 
Prince asks her (the Stepmother). N .B. At this point her story is to be 
told. 
"I thought that I was [such] a great man, but <it turns out that> 
I'm such a small one," (the Stepmother) says of Him. 
July 24/ 1 2. 
TRY THE CHILDRE:'I: TO:O.IORROW, NOTHI;'I:G BUT THE CHILDRE:'I:. 
Make it so that the Youth, toward the end, inadvertently reveals 
his main idea (about Rothschild) to Him. This happens at a time 
when he is himself beginning to lose faith in his idea. Yet he ex­
pounds it to Him with intense ardor and irritated presumption. The 
other man listens to him very carefully, is apparently impressed, and 

You JVill Never Become a Rothschild 53 
asks: "How much money have you saved so far?" And he ironically 
approves of the idea. (N.B. The Youth explains, for instance, how 
one can make money through stock transactions. Get the details from 
Anna Grigorievna. The idea of buying stock apparently fascinates 
him and renews his faith in his idea about Rothschild.) 
But the Youth sees clearly that He is making fun of him, and does 
not want to tell him what he thinks.* And therefore he is pestering 
Him (with adolescent awkwardness, rashness, and angularity) to 
point out a better ideal to him: how <else> could he become a free 
man? The other man does not give him an answer and finally says: 
"\\Thy should I care about all of you? (His wife has just left him) I am 
living for my own sake, I don't care if you all go to hell. [Let each 
live his own life."] And, among other things, he reminds the Youth of 
a recent episode involving his aunt, a squeamish old spinster, whc 
had managed to make the Youth (in the generosity of his heart) beg 
her forgiveness, pay court to her, a spiteful, dried-up squeamish and 
demanding sort, and spend some money in the process. "\\lith im­
pulses such as this," He ironically tells the Youth, "you will never 
become a Rothschild; much rather, you'll become a good-natured 
milksop of a government clerk." But the Youth replies to him that 
this has been the last time and that he has even made an entry in his 
diary saying that this is the last time, and that from now on he is 
going to be businesslike and cruel. "You will see, you'll hear soon 
enough," the Youth tells Him, hinting at Lambert. And it is this 
promise, made on a dare and out of pride, which is in part responsible 
for the fact that he agrees with Lambert's plan to rape her, and to 
take from her a promissory note for 30,000 and 10,000 in cash. 
?N .B. The Youth, incidentally, makes friends with the children 
who want to murder and rob their father, or he sees those children 
immediately after they have killed their father, at the house where he 
has got his flat, and is strongly impressed by this scene, yet he still 
joins Lambert. \\That is most important to the Youth is also the fact 
that the Princess has "insulted him," the way he sees things. Getting 
ready to rape her, he is still confused and embarrassed, which he 
communicates to Lambert, who can't even understand him. The 
Youth does not know until the very last hour, that He is involved in 
• The Russian phrase is just as ambiguous as this translation; either the Youth 
or He could be the subject. 

54 He Flatters the Youth 
this affair along with Lambert. It is Lambert himself who lets him 
know about it at the very last moment. 'Vhich causes an outburst of 
indignation on his part. 
'Vhat matters most to the Youth is to be free, and he is willing 
to achieve his goal of becoming a Rothschild even by way of commit­
ting crimes. "And do good deeds once you have achieved it," says He. 
The Youth blushes, and it is at this point that he pesters him with 
his question: "what is freedom?" 
And what is :'\lOST remarkable here is the fact that at this point the 
Youth's cycle of ideas about Rothschild, so silly yet so passionate, 
suddenly acquires a broad new dimension for Him, and that He sees, 
with astonishment, the tremendous depth of this idea; much that is 
based on actual experience, something one could have hardly ex­
pected from him; emotions and thoughts which were already his 
own•, and acquired from life itself, something quite unexpected at 
his age. He lets him know about all this. 
HERE a huge nota bene: that He systematically, out of spiteful 
irony and satanic destructiveness, and under the guise of his usual 
querulousness, skillfully flatters and admires'*"" the Youth, in order 
to turn his head, throw him off course, and sneer at his downfall 
caused by <his> pride. All of this He tells either the Youth, or his 
wife, who warns the Youth to be more cautious with Him. On this 
occasion, the Youth tells Her that he is wondering how she can love 
such a base character as Him. That's where she tells him this: "He 
has really subjugated us both, hasn't he?" At any rate, the reader 
should be made aware of His plan of action, i.e., corruption of the 
Youth out of malice. 
Once, the Youth angrily says to him: "You simply haven't accom­
plished anything and this is why you're envious of everybody." He 
says the same thing to his wife. He makes Him very angry by saying 
this, particularly since it is unfair to Him. 
From the very beginning, Liza is hostile to the Youth, she makes 
fun of him, and toward the end she almost hates him. Yet before she 
hangs herself, she leaves a letter for him in which she chooses him 
to wR.ofB to reveal to be the sole executor of her last will. In her 
letter she begs him (without giving the slightest reason why she has 
chosen him alone, and no one else) to defend her before her mother, 
• Underlined twice. 
• • Underlined three times. 

Lambert 55 
to implore her to forgive her, and to reveal her sin to her (she says 
in her letter that she surrendered herself to Him, that "she got 
married to him," but he proves quite clearly that Liza, being a child, 
had no understanding as yet of the meaning of the word to surrender, 
and had thought that she had surrendered ever)'thing, i.e., her vir­
ginity). She leaves him one of her dresses as a keepsake, the one in 
which he saw her for the last time, but asks to be buried in the dress 
which she was wearing when she hanged herself. Finally, she solemnly 
asks <him> to forget her altogether. This letter leaves a strong im­
pression on the Youth, but what is particularly remarkable is the fact 
that he is not at all surprised that Liza addressed herself to him. And 
still, the fact that she did address herself to him is one of the stronger 
reasons for his moral turnabout. "It must be that I am capable of 
doing something good, if she chose me to be the executor of her last 
will," he thinks. 
Lambert, among other things, tells him the story of how he was 
being detained in the provinces and how he had Viktoriia, having 
scared her with his threats to tell her mother. The Kirghiz coachman. 
He tells this story without the slightest embarrassment, but on the 
contrary, is actually boasting of this despicable action. Make it clear 
to the reader that this successful precedent with Viktoriia may have 
perhaps caused him to believe that he could do the same thing with 
the Princess. It is amazing that Lambert failed to tell the Youth that 
he would be asking the princess for that very special favor.* But it 
turns out that he did tell Him. He does not believe that they will 
succeed in obtaining that other favor, and actually advises against 
trying for it. He does, however, agree with the scheme, figuring that, 
"well, the devil knows, perhaps she will after all." But he does believe 
that they will get that promissory note. Incidentally, it is neither the 
promissory note nor that other favor which are important to Him, 
but rather, it is the scandal which he is sure will come out of it, due 
to the imprudence of the two youths, while He himself would, in 
any case, stay out of it. 
After everything is over,** when the Princess has already made 
peace with the Youth, and the latter says to her, full of remorse: 
• Prosit' u kniagini i klubnichki, literally, "ask the Princess for some straw­
berries, too," where klubnichki has an obscene connotation similar to that of 
"cherry" in English slang. 
• • Underlined three times. 

56 Preacher of Christianity 
"\Vhere is there an honest man, show me an honest man" (this is 
when Lambert is lying there, unconscious), the Princess tells him, 
pointing at him: "Here yon have an honest man." 
\Vith Liza, the Youth has several scenes even before that, a whole 
long story. Create one. Liza, like a princess in a fairy tale, sets him 
various tasks. He fulfills them. Liza only laughs at him. The Youth 
vows eternal vengeance. The Youth On one occasion they have a 
fight (absolutely), and have to be parted. The Youth is deeply humili­
ated, but refuses to beg Liza's forgiveness. Liza sees to it that this 
scuffle, instead of being seen as a mere joke, is turned into a hyper­
bolically serious and scandalous incident, derogatory to the Youth. 
In Liza's suicide note to him there is not a single word addressed 
to him personally; for an explanation: why was it he whom she 
selected, why did she turn to him, and why did she always respect 
him, and love him?• 
{couldn't there have been an English atheist in Moscow, 
no who converted the Youth to atheism? 
shouldn't the entire biography be written in his childhood? 
In the beginning of the novel, He must absolutely be a preacher of 
Christianity. Relics. \Vhich is what elicits the Youth's indignation 
more than anything else. The Youth hears the old Prince's opinion 
regarding relics and laughs heartily, thus earning the old Prince's 
benevolent attention, as the latter is flattered that his witticism has 
produced such an effect (even if it be only upon a mere youth!). The 
same episode also seems to bring the Youth closer to the old Prince, 
since prior to it the Youth had already been thinking of leaving the 
office, and not without kicking up a big row. But now his pride is 
vanquished quickly, and he and the old Prince seem to become 
friends through this incident, so much so that the old Prince actually 
takes lessons in nihilism from the Youth. And altogether, this will be 
the beginning of a series of comical scenes, characteristic of the rela­
tionship between the Youth and the old Prince. 
Yet toward the end He must absolutely chop up some icons (this 
takes place at the time of the final catastrophe), and do it when He 
sees that his slavishly devoted wife is awfully attracted by the young 
Prince, but still before she definitely breaks with her husband and 
runs away to the young Prince. 
• Unclear and somewhat ungrammatical phrase. 

Proving His Faith 57 
N .Bene. What is important here is that He, in preaching Chris­
tianity with all his might, as well as freedom (in Christ, as opposed to 
the social theory of crime) and a future life, makes it quite plain that 
the life of a man, and of mankind, is quite unthinkable without 
Christ (Orthodox) and Christianity, because life is not worth living 
otherwise (i.e., for a moment, shopkeepers and checkers, icy rocks for 
planets, etc.). So that when he chops up those icons, it turns out that 
he never did believe anything of what he had been saying, having 
always been at heart, and even as long as he had been alive, an in­
veterate atheist, which was also the cause of his torments. 
"Now I can understand his sufferings," says the Youth. "Really, 
he can't have been faking when he was preaching Christ so zealously; 
on the contrary, he must have been extremely sincere about it. He 
was trying to convince himself that he believed. He was trying to 
prove to himself that there could be faith, he was struggling with the 
monster of his doubts, trying to strangle it, but the monster finally 
realiz.ed devoured him." 
[February] Conversations with the boy, for instance, about crime 
and th:e6fetieally his theories, or about the workingman's struggle 
with the bulldog. "Here I am, Sir!" Even in Europe they (the bour­
geoisie) want to stop this fourth estate by force. \Ve have already seen 
the prelude. You (i.e., the young people) must get ready, for you are 
going to be participants, the time is near, and precisely when things 
look so solid (armies a million strong, explosive shells). All this 
power, built up to defend civilization, will fall upon civilization and 
will swallow it. The Youth is listening to such talk with a sinking 
heart. (Also, about classical education.) 
The Youth is of amorous disposition, a scene with various young 
ladies, he lost his virginity to a whore, and sheds tears about his lost 
innocence. 
A similar scene with Mme Andrieux. Lambert tells him, "Fuck 
her," and .fie- leaves the two of them alone, but something strange 
happens. Mme Andrieux starts by making love to him in a superficial 
way, but then she bursts into tears about her hard lot and about the 
insults she has suffered. The Youth has a good cry together with her 
and leaves, having done nothing. [February (In the 4th part.)] 
Conversation about the hunchback baron and about the island in 
the Baltic Sea. 
Important nota bene. At the beginning of the novel He has already 
quit the service and abandoned his career as a man of affairs. He quit 
when he received the inheritance. Even the old Prince blames him: 

58 Inner Chaos 
"He could have been a man of affairs, had he only wanted." "And 
altogether," says the old Prince, "I see him as some kind of a poet; 
up to now he has been restraining himself, but now his true nature 
has come to the surface and He has revealed his true self." 
It was exactly as the old Prince had said. It was exactly at the point 
where the novel begins that His inner chaos and conflict with himself 
(unbelief, etc.) had grown altogether ripe. The claims of his con­
science had grown more persistent, etc. And this inner chaos finds 
expression in external disorders, i.e., his quitting the service, gar­
rulity, restlessness, his odd behavior with his wife; in a word, dis­
order, and as if he were trying to dissuade himself, increased preach­
ing of Christianity (the relics). 
Let the reader know about this at the very beginning of the novel, 
explaining to him that <He,> a man of orderly habits, of modera­
tion, and of action is, to everybody's surprise, beginning to go off 
his head, which poses a problem to his friends and family, though 
his aunts actually find it charming and are delighted with his new 
direction. But all the others are saying: "\\Thy, he even used to be a 
progressive." 
July l8j30. 
An idea. Shouldn't one let Him embrace Pietism, absolutely and 
totally, with fanaticism, so that he has fully convinced himself, made 
himself believe in it, that he is preaching it (trembling for his faith, 
i.e., seeking to protect it), doing great deeds, thwarting the plans of 
other people, and all of a sudden chops up some icons (only not 
immediately after his wife has left him). 
The old Prince calls him the bishop, but listens to him, and is 
afraid of him. He takes charge of all <his> affairs, gets his wife mixed 
up <in this>, < . . .  > etc. 
The pedagogue, on children: "You know, here we are, bringing 
them up, but what a pity it is, really, that they will grow up to be 
schemers and boors, whereas right now they are so simple-hearted 
and so charming. They are scheming and lying even now; and they 
are fighting with each other, but all this is so simple-hearted." 
"\Ve are infinitely more evil than they are," he runs to the janitor. 
"I am humanizing them, and they are humanizing me. There are 
things which I'd have never understood without them." 
[February] He says about Lambert, having heard everything from 
his younger brother: "That is good." 
"\\That is so good about Lambert?" 
"An integral idea." Apparently, he did not care to finish <his 

Railroads and Russia 59 
thought> and fell to thinking in an absentminded way. The young 
man did not want to be inquisitive either, and also got lost in his 
thoughts. The young man says: "I would also like to represent an 
integral idea, but I wouldn't like to be Lambert." 
?! AN IDEA. Shouldn't they have a sister who, having been the 
purest of maidens, suddenly becomes a whore. 
Make up some French phrases for Mme Andrieux (like Guizot). 
"Eh, may the devil take them!" 
"A fine wish." 
"By the way, I'm ready to join them." 
"I cannot understand the httffiftH: character of Satan, yet every man 
has some of it. I could understand the irony, the arrogance, and the 
dejection of a conscious spirit, if there be existence, but no God. But 
Satan knows God; how then, can he deny Him?" 
The ideals of (Satan-peace in nothingness, in eternal death. 
both sides l God-FeS+ peace in eternal life. 
"Look for the man with the deepest gaze and approach <him> 
boldly, for it is he." 
\Vrite my "bibliography." 
\Ve have withstood the Tartar invasion, then two centuries of 
slavery. Now we must withstand freedom. \Vill we succeed, or will we 
stumble? 
[Here.] Perhaps railroads have done Russia more bad than good. 
And anyway, everything has been going that way with us, ever since 
Peter the Great, always at one gulp and unnaturally. Our present 
time is the [time] reign of the golden mean, of semi-enlightenment, 
ignorance, laziness, inefficiency, of claims for satisfaction of one's 
demands without contributing anything oneself, etc. 
Three blackguards of shopkeepers are beating up an honest woman 
on a boulevard (perhaps Lambert is telling this story). The police 
are egging them on. (Lambert the fool answers, when asked by Per­
chatkin the fool: "\Vhy are the police egging them on?"-"Because 
they are afraid that, if they won't allow it, somebody might take to 
things political, and so, with this in mind, they are actually egging 
them on.") Perchatkin says: "Aha!" 
A tirade about the clergy who are doing nothing. 
Elpidiforova (Aleksandrova). A cosmopolitan. The story of how 
she broke her jaw. 
The bath-house. An Apollinian leg. "\Vhy should you take a wife? 
You could become a kept man." 
Lambert says that his greatest pleasure, when he is rich, will be to 

60 A Predatory Type 
feed dogs with bread and meat, while the children of the poor are 
starving to death. And when they are without firewood, he is going 
to buy a whole wood-yard, put all the wood in one pile, and burn it 
all up for nothing, in the frost, without giving a single log to the poor. 
"Let them call me names, it will only make me get a better charge 
out of it."• (N.B. His phantasies are all of this type.) 
A phantasy about an island in the Gulf of Botnia, and the prison 
there, etc. 
<Absolute> bei11g certainly must be reality, and in any case it must 
transcend human reason, so that man will be searching all his life. 
And this is not enough; [it is absolutely necessary] and everything that 
he never find it: that's more decent. There's a philosopher for you. 
[Come on . . .  quite ordinary] Come on, it's not the philosopher's 
fault. This is something <quite ordinary?> 
Regarding the order in which the various creatures appeared -tfte­
'Book of Genesis. \Vho taught them when there was no science? (An 
Egyptian papyrus.) 
He thinks to himself: "And still, I am an ignorant dolt, even 
though I am a clever man." 
His explanation: the temptation of Christ, 40 days in the desert. 
(A chapter.) 
"\Veil, after all, it isn't so one feels insulted by what just anybody 
may say." 
A GENUINELY PREDATORY TYPE (see p. 3 of the plans). 
Description how he is looking for some money. (Baseness and 
breadth of character.) He is admitting it to himself and is surprised 
at himself. He does call himself a predatory type. (See to it that all 
is explained to the reader.) He is searching for a load to carry, he is 
searching for faith; but the "little beetle" crushes him. 
He talks about those 40 days in the desert, but what is most impor­
tant, he does not believe. He puts this question to himself: "\Vel!, 
what if I did believe? Surely, after everything I've said, I would have 
left for the desert right away." 
Finally, he breaks down and chops up those icons. 
The man who hanged himself. • • 
[A man with hopes.] [with Kraft] 
• 
U menia ot etogo stoiat' budet luchshe, literal/)', "mine will stand up 
better for it" (obscene). 
• • Udavivshiisia, literally, "suicide by hanging." 

Abusing the Soil 61 
"The deforestation of Russia is taking its course, her soil is being 
exhausted, transformed into a steppe, and prepared for a takeover by 
the Kalmucks. \Vho is doing it? The merchants who buy up the land, 
and the ancient nobility, the landowners, who formerly would have 
fought for the land, until the abolition of serfage. Let a new, young 
landowner with some hopes come and plant a tree, why, everybody 
will laugh at him: "Do you really think you'll live to see it grow up?" 
On the other side, well-meaning people are talking about what's 
going to happen a thousand years hence. The idea of raising children, 
the idea of patriotism, the idea of integrity, of a future ideal-all of 
these ideas no longer exist; they have been broken up, undermined, 
sneered at, justified by the lawlessness which has come after the aboli­
tion of serfage.* They have destroyed the nobility, yet they demand 
a renaissance and a regeneration from it, they want it to act as the 
guardian of Russia, as the bearer of some higher idea, they address 
their manifestoes on the education <of the Russian people> to it.26 
But a man who is abusing his soil, thinking '\Vhat do I care what 
happens after me,' has lost his spirituality and his higher idea. It 
may be that he has altogether ceased to exist." 
"\Veil, what about your idea of Russia, and your despair at her 
being second-rate? Doesn't that look I ,000 years ahead?" 
"This, this is the most topical question of all. A basic fact. The 
truth H- that, if out of 100,000, there is just one bearer of the higher 
idea, everything is saved. But is there even one for every 100,000? 
That's the question." 
Answer: "He exists, he is sitting right before me and talking." 
[Vitia.] He bends down and whispers into his ear: "He is lying." 
The boy's bans mots: "I don't want to be Schiller."} 
"Why not?" 
with Lambert. 
"Because it is too vile." 
How he studies nihilism and other things, learning what is good 
and what is evil, etc. 
"I don't want to love [act] gratis, like Christ," He says. 
"Are you looking for a reward?" asks the [Youth] boy. 
"Yes, a reward. What did you think?" 
• The last part of the sentence is unclear in the original, too. 
26 A reference to the Tsar's public letter of December 25, 1873, addressed to 
the nobility and appealing to it to act as a guardian of the education of the 
people. 

62 Everyman's Dream of HafJpiness 
"\Vhat kind of a reward?" 
"That's precisely the point: I don't know. That's the point, I 
want something really special. That everybody should love me. Imag­
ine me walking down the street: 'This is he,' people whisper. Let me 
do something: 'This is he, our benefactor.' They applaud me, a com­
mune, a monument even while I'm still living. A maiden, dreaming 
of her beloved, would be thinking of me. By the way, they'd all have 
to be in love with me, etc. The Czar will learn about me, and make 
me a Czar too." (Brazen, ironic, comical presentation of Everyman's 
dream of happiness.) 
The Youth smiles and says: "No, perhaps you don't need a reward, 
and you are making fun of me." The other man replies, laughing: 
"How do you know, perhaps I need it very much, and precisely 
in that form." 
After three days he couldn't stand it anymore; if it were in that 
form, it would bore him to death. 
"You'll get bored without fail : you are no MacMahon."27 
"\Vhat three days, I couldn't stand it for three hours!" 
"A university student," who shouts obscenities at women at night 
(reportage in Russkii mir, around July 10, 1874).28 
27 A marshal of France (1808-93). He distinguished himself in the Crimean 
war and was governor general of Algeria from 1 864 to 1 870. He suffered a crush­
ing defeat in the war of 1870 and later became president of the republic from 
1873 to 1 879. Dostoevsky satirized him in The Citizen, September 1 7, 1873. 
28 Printed actually in The Russian World (Russkii mir), July 12, 1874. It is an 
account of how a writer, accompanying a lady, is molested by a drunk, who turns 
out to be a university student. The narrator appeals for help from a policeman, 
but the policeman shakes the hand of the drunken student and permits him 
to continue abusing women in the street. 

63 
&a&IH &aHO& Mtņ .UI I S 
Masthead for the newspaper Voice of February 17, 1874. Dostoevsky read about the 
trial concerning counterfeit shares for the Tambovsko-Kozlovsky railways. Dostoev­
sky drew upon the facts of this affair for his narration of Stebelkov's manipulations 
and Prince Sergey's unwitting participation. 
CY AE6HAR XPOHMKA. 
lt .. Xutt .. • .,. .. Jrla I ae,M'Lort 
U• 
ldl n•••• ....... ._. . .. tnoa A.,.n. 
I.&CI,l A I I I  C A I I T I I T I P IP r r C I U O  1 1rr•a .. 
ro erA•, 
• •  1-•r lt'J I I I I J D.  cŅ ' " " c " • • "  
I P ICI. I II I "  I .& C i l A f l .l l l, 1 '-... t i i P A .I I, 
(n,. .. -. •). 
CN.\лIID IOUOIIU 1. 
)1\ t I I I 0 I ..  
IOIU&.f-., 
'1ft n lp&UCIM o6.ecn& Tt.l6oJCIO·IOUOte:IOi 
a.riuol .-opora lpil&u" CJAf61WI CdAOIIH.U. 
no oco6o 
.... ., ... JlAa•"· apuen n co6o10 ,ut 
a&JUa :noro o6•ea•, 
• 
&Otopeu ... apocu• 
Cltl· 
a&n., lkTO.I.i.l Od Ul lin. 
Oo 
aepHIJ IU· 
1 
.. at$i11 leJioU 6euo 1pllTW 
n OIOI .. ITIUINJ 
.._,, 1 II&SOAI•Xu n. apaunia 'I UIM 1p11.1.11 
u-. aa aaCToa•i.t, rln 6o.aw, no aou•c• 6p· 
ruttpa CA\JaZa •• aкn lO roro aopo•o, uo 
c .. -. 011' ae •on. un rnepuruuaro ou·ha.­
.,o .11 aoJnca. 
ua 
ain. 
Ooroa" ·йuoauo 
&uo CJle6loatJ cdJoeafiJD ucraun. tel auo-
, 
Jll!lii!C.I J ltfO UJ&ill, n IO.II'IKTU 259 IITJln, 
lptl Ul'ltlil IOTOf*l" Clt I&CtGa .. UI OU M.IOCio, 
'ITO 01\ IO.U,\.11-IIIIIj Ul 6o.a'Le TO'IIIIfU p&lpi.llt· 
IIU atapoea 6w.aw apn u•e1111 Jtcaeprv, 10ropwe, 
.,. t•ITeUIOI Y p1X110tpili111 OTIJIUU 1\t IJlel· 
CT&Utlllll.l1o III,IU1. 6on•JIO IICCJ DOlpo6IOCtel 
IIO.UirL 
Ha 101pon apor.ypopa, 
Jlte•11on. o6-.1cauІ 
.ro an.fi ra•ISoeu.o-AOUOteKol autuol 1opor1 
61UO IIIJiltiO 35,960 •TJinoj IOFAI o6t!&PJ•ItOC•, 
no ec n touo.lfiUit 
•••i•, 
1paue11ie o6-.ecr11 
o6panuoc• n XOllr&lcno• .. 
•• • •••cTepcno +•· 
UICOI\t Jl II.UOIIOTI.IO p&lpi•eaie 0 Jl•bi 
II· 
Єill cnp&ro o(!paaa aJUli.an 
aoaaro o6puu a 
" 1acro.a•te 1pe111 au,IJI 
o6•tct• "',. 
ltd 
o61Mnltl. 
n po r. y p o p  ... Aa,ia, llptACHI.&UIId ...... ., 
lpGlllli lie OCTIUIJif IIIIUIKOrO C:OMlfUil n. l'Otl  .. 
UO 01t IIICTOI.il? 
' 
Jt e u 11 o a... 
Hanpwo 11e 6•uo auuoro co-
-.HЅKic 
noTOMJ • to " .. ., .. ,.. r..,. _ __ ,. 
.. 
A clipping from Voice concerning the trial of those arraigned for counterfeiting 
railway shares. The text of the clipping is about the discovery and determination of 
the counterfeit shares and the subsequent is5ue of new shares. 

II 
The First Period of Work on the Plot 
August-September, 1874 
The plot of the boys and the abstract idealism of Fyodor Pyotrovich 
are missing from these notes, as they will be throughout the notes. 
Dostoevsky has settled on the Youth and the Predatory Type, now 
son and father, as the focus and center of the novel; and the char­
acterization of each and the relations between them dominate these 
notes. As in the novel the Youth is ambivalent in his attitudes toward 
his father. He loves and hates him, and seeks and does not find the 
guide to life that he looks for. He does not know how to judge his 
father, and the reader, too, is ambivalent and unsure of how to judge 
him. The father-now called occasionally Brusilov-is less myste­
rious, more talkative, and more revealing in these notes, but the 
revelations bring complexities and not illuminations. He is in love 
with the Princess, but intent upon wreaking revenge upon her; and 
in love with his wife, to whom he looks for purity and salvation, but 
he drives her out of her mind by his affair with Liza, the step­
daughter. He is cynical and impassioned, an intriguer and a recluse, 
charming and cold and spiteful. 
Versilov preaches Christianity so eloquently that the Princess al­
most takes the veil under his influence, but he attempts to seduce her 
and provokes her hate and disgust. 'Vhether his preaching of Chris­
tianity comes from mocking contempt or a searching heart is a 
question that the Youth-and even Dostoevsky-agonizes over. The 
Youth asks himself, "Is he religious, or is He an atheist?" And Dos­
toevsky says of the Youth's quandary: "In connection with this, his 
passionate sermons on Christianity (and this is MOST IMPORTANT) are 
particularly characteristic, so that the Youth can never, in the course 
of the entire novel, make sure if he is saying these things in earnest, 
64 

The Youth Hates and Loves His Father 65 
or not." Near the end of the section, the following dialogue takes 
place between the Youth and Versilov: 
"But what about Christianity?" 
He: "Why, I really never believed in it." 
"So, you were playing a role?" 
He: " How could I have played a role? I believed because I was 
afraid that I didn't. And now I've realized that I really didn't believe 
in anything at all. Only now have I discovered that everything is dis­
order, that everything is cursed." 
But this dialogue is not the last word on the matter. 
Dostoevsky experiments with many dialogues between the Youth 
and the father and many monologues in which Versilov's enigmatic 
views are put forth. The Youth hates and loves his father, and Versi­
lov looks on the Youth with amusement, indifference, and occasion­
ally with tolerant interest. There is something static and immovable 
about these conversations, as if Dostoevsky were seeking some lever 
to move them. They are often repetitious, and they return again and 
again to a few insistent motifs. In many respects these motifs are not 
different from those we find in the final version. The Youth is seeking 
an ideal, some guide to life, but his thoughts and his actions are 
contradictory, na'ive, and even vile. Versilov is and is not a worthy 
guide, and both substance and void are concealed behind his myste­
rious words and actions. 
Dostoevsky is not sure what Versilov is supposed to stand for. In 
some of the notes he is tormented by a great idea, despite his 
weaknesses: 
BuT WHAT IS MOST IMPORTANT, retain throughout the entire nar­
rative a tone of His unchallenged superiority over the Youth and 
everybody else, all His comical traits and all His weaknesses not­
withstanding: let the reader feel all along that, at the end of the 
novel, He is tormented by a great idea. And motivate the reality of 
His suffering. 

66 A nticipating Ivan Karamazov 
But Dostoevsky also says of him: "Simply: an amoral man, a man who 
has failed to develop a moral principle. A purely Russian, .universal 
type." And Versilov says of himself: "But so long as I still have my 
two rubles, I want to live all by myself and do nothing." And­
anticipating Ivan Karamazov-"Why should I do good? Why should 
I love anybody?" Even more emphatically: "\Vhy shouldn't I live 
to take care of my own arse, what else is there to do? \Vorry about the 
common good, make your contribution to the happiness of future 
generations? To hell with them, what the devil do I care? Let them 
tell me something more serious to support such notions!" 
Dostoevsky seems more sure of what the Youth is to stand for, and 
it does not differ greatly from what he embodies in the novel: 
Finale. And altogether, this is an epic poem about how the Youth 
made his debut in the world. This is the story of his searchings, 
hopes, disappointments, corruption, rebirth, education-the story of 
a most attractive, of a very nice person. And it is life itself that teaches 
him, yet l.t is he, the Youth, who learns his lesson, for some other 
person might not have learned it. 
Dostoevsky is sure that the main idea concerns the Youth: 
THE :-.tAl:" IDEA. Though the Youth arrives with a ready idea in 
his mind, the whole idea of the novel is that he is searching for a 
guideline to direct his actions, for good and evil; he is thirsting for 
something that is lacking in our society, is intuitively searching for 
it, and this is what the novel is all about. 
But the essence of the novel also concerns Versilov: 
The essence of the novel is this: His untidy love for Liza and the 
sufferings from it. His love and admiration for His wife, and their 
mutually inflicted suffering. Yet they are hiding the secret from each 
other. His love-hatred for the Princess. 
The situation that Dostoevsky returns to again and again is the 
plot of revenge upon the Princess. As in the novel the Youth and 

The Youth Hates Him 67 
the father, as well as Lambert and Liza, participate in the plot. The 
Youth conceives of the plot to humiliate her and in some of the notes 
plans to exploit her sexually. The device to humiliate here is a secret 
letter that the Youth comes across in various ways. There is talk of 
two letters: one in which the Princess declares her love for the young 
Prince, and more insistently a letter in which she recommends that 
the old Prince (here her husband) be incarcerated in an insane 
asylum. 
Sexual complications appear clearly and insistently in these notes 
but are muted in the novel itself. Both father and son seek sexual 
revenge upon the Princess and both have affairs with Liza, who is, 
apparently, stepdaughter and stepsister to them. Dostoevsky says: 
"Liza has enthralled the Youth, making him fall madly in love with 
her. He is aware of it, and is jealous (but he does not believe Liza 
altogether). In the meantime, Liza is complaining to the Youth that 
He is trying to seduce her (this, after she has already slept with Him). 
The Youth begins to hate Him." And: "On one occasion Liza enticed 
the Youth and surrendered herself to him he actually sensing before­
hand the Youth's horror after the act. She laughs at his horror." 
Throughout the section Dostoevsky vacillates between narrating 
the novel from the "Youth's point of view," that is, in the "I" form, 
and from the third-person point of view, closely centered on the 
youth. In dozens of comments he weighs the advantages and disad­
vantages of both modes of narration. The narration from the Youth's 
point of view will express well the searching, naive quality of the 
Youth; it will endear the reader to him and will even permit "Him" 
to appear in a more mysterious light. Dostoevsky details the advan­
tages for himself: 
Think over the possibility of a fu·st-[Jerson 11arrative. Many advan­
tages; much freshness, the figure of the Youth would emerge more 
typical. Nicer, I'll be able to cope hetter with the character, with the 
personality, with the essence of that personality. 
But Dostoevsky fears some of the limitations of this mode of narra­
tion: the reader may become bored and it may not be possible to 

68 Point of View 
narrate convincingly everything that must be said from the youth's 
point of view. He worries about whether certain intimate thoughts 
and experiences of Versilov will be known by the Youth: 
!'\on:. The Youth, due to his tender age, has no access to the events, 
the facts <which form> the plot of the novel. And so he makes his 
own conjectures and masters them hy_himself. \\'hich circumstance is 
reflected i n  the whole manner of his narrative (to give the reader 
some surprises). 
The "I" point of view will be used in the final version, with ques­
tionable results. Versilov's enigmatic character will be retained with 
magnificent results. The sexual rivalry over the Princess will be 
muted into insignificance and the sexual rivalry over Liza will dis­
appear entirely. In the private world of his notes Dostoevsky could 
play with what modern psychology has come to consider as one of the 
elements of the struggle of the generations, but in the public world of 
Russian convention, the struggle had to take place on an ideal plane. 
August 1 .  
An idea.• Couldn't He be a contemporary father, and the Youth 
His son? (Think it over.) 
At first sight, one might think that He is merely a vile creature 
and a sackful of shit (which is what he likes to pretend to be). Regard­
ing his duties as a father, he says: "Leave me alone." He preaches 
Christianity in a mocking way (but it turns out that this mockery 
is full of bitterness). But later it turns out that He is very serious, 
and that he suffers from his unbelief and the sensation of vitality 
which accompanies it and which he considers base (hence depravity 
and cynicism). 
He has suffered an insult and there has been a severe rupture 
between him and the Prince and Princess, with whom he is still at 
odds at the beginning of the novel. 
As EARLY AS IN THE MIDDLE OF THE NOVEL HE RETURNS THE ESTATE, 
J;\; A WAY THAT MAKES IT CO:\fE UNEXPECTED, AND AGAINST ALL EXPEC­
TATIO:-.IS CO:\IING FR0:\1 Hl:\1. 
• Underlined twice. 

He Has Come to Rebel 69 
If He is a father) in that case the Youth is summoned <by the 
family> (already after his decision to return the estate), but only 
after he has quit Moscow University of his own accord. His wife 
(the Princess-Stepmother) is very glad that he is returning what is 
actually her own estate. 
The estate is returned in the middle) strangely, inadvertently, and 
against everybody's expectations. The Youth is not being told about 
it. He is staying with his aunts who are resentful of His marriage. 
Also, these aunts had been bringing up and supporting the Youth 
even before, since he does not remember his mother. The Youth 
learns about the return of the estate by himself, and what is most 
important, from <overhearing> conversations between the old 
Prince and his Stepmother. As for his aunts, they do not consider it 
necessary to discuss serious subjects with him. 
But he has come to rebel. 
Later, when he asks his father and stepmother what they are going 
to live on, he receives practically no answer: "\Veil, somehow we'll 
manage." 
The family to whom the money was returned. Etc. 
The old Prince is wondering why He quit his position with him. 
He, on the other hand, explains a parte that to remain with the old 
Prince would have meant for him to pander to the liaison and plans 
of the young Princess and the young Prince (Gol<itsyn>). But this 
is a lie, and He is simply in love with and jealous of the Princess, and 
in his desperation actually ventured to proposition her most auda­
ciously, thr့atening to tell the old Prince. She had shown him the 
door. He is out to get even with the Princess, and finds Lambert most 
welcome. 
His wife is jealous of him. But when she gets involved with Golit­
syn, he gets rid of the Princess and makes furious attempts to get his 
wife back (in a word, his biography is full of base actions). He never 
gave up any of his passions. 
N.B. Meeting between father and son, the latter having arrived 
from Moscow to join his family, after he failed an examination in the 
classics. The father laughs boisterously, calls his son a "darkie,"* 
sneers at classicism, teaches him some scandalous things, etc. The son 
despises his father. 
• Chumka) "blackie, darkie," not necessarily literal, since it might be an allu­
sion to his son's classical studies; the classics were often associated with obscur­
antism. 

70 
Chops Up Some Icons 
An idea (something quite different). At a time when everybody 
is holding Him in contempt for His meekness (including even his 
wife), He comes up with an exploit (an act of martial heroism, almost) 
and puts up with a slap in the face. But his exploit is divulged. Think 
up something. 
There is a rumor that He will perform a miracle, lots of people, 
some of them from far away, are coming to see it.1 
On the three temptations by the Devil. 
[?February,? 3d part.] More intelligibly. His main desire is to 
explain to people that vice is not repugnant at all. He hates those 
Genevan ideas2 (i.e., love of man, i.e., virtue without Christ) and 
refuses to recognize that there is anything natural about virtue. The 
Youth is taken abးck, but his aunts tell him that this is an argument 
e contrario and that it must be taken in the opposite sense, that he 
merely wants to carry <the argument> ad almtrda. But the Youth 
has a hunch that he is saying it quite naturally and that there is 
nothing absurd about it. (He meddles in the Princess's affairs out of 
fanaticism.) 
He is talking about Ungern-Shternberg and suddenly chops up 
some icons. After the icons, he wants to shoot himself, but there his 
wife's affair with the Prince comes up. Death of his wife. His suicide. 
The Youth takes over his place on Earth. 
The Youth says: "I want to be kind simply because I like it." 
The Youth has this word to say about Him en lieu of a funeral 
oration: "He was too conscientious." 
[February, 3d part.] "If I were a government official or a bour­
geois," He says, ''I'd wish for order, peace, so that (l) I myself, and 
(2) (for humanitarian reasons) other people as well might live as 
1 This incident may be an anticipation of the scene in which father Zossima 
talks to the peasant women: Part I, Chapter 4, of The Brothers Karamazov. It 
may also be an anticipation of the miracle expected at his death. This is one of 
frequent references to themes and details that Dostoevsky will use in The 
Brothers Karamazov. 
2 Dostoevsky had in mind Rousseau's ideas and the fund of egotism that he 
saw in the doctrine of natural virtue. :.\fore immediately, however, he probably 
had in mind French utopian socialism, which incorporated much of Rousseau's 
belief in the natural "goodness" of man anJ the corruption of his institutions, and 
especially Russian utopian socialism, which Dostoevsky had direct contact with 
and against which-after a period of ambivalent attraction in the fortieׂ he 
fought a lifelong battle. Perhaps, also, Dostoevsky had in mind the revolutionary 
ideas he heard at "The International Peace Congress," which was held in Geneva 
in 1867. 

A Religious A theist 7 1  
comfortably as possible (and with atheism, too!). Moreover, I would 
be supporting law and order myst:lf. But inasmuch as I am an honest 
and conscientious man, I sincerely favor (under the conditions of 
atheism) crime and destruction, nor have I any use for those Genevan 
ideas." But he could not overcome crime, and his conscience killed 
him. 
Staraia Russa1 August 4 
The Youth believes that money will make him a conqueror, allow­
ing him to face the future proudly and without fear, like a perennial 
conquerer ... But He scares him with a description of the petroleum of 
the future.* 
In Him, who is a predatory type, there lives a passionate and inde­
fatigable drive to enjoy life, real life1 but from the whole breadth 
of life he would like to pick not too spectacular a lot (such as Napo­
leon's). "You're too much in the limelight, you must play a role too 
often, create an image of yourself and pose. Every man to his taste, for 
myself I prefer freedom. And in particular, I like secrecy. TR.e role 
The lot of Ungern-Shternberg-3 is better than that of Napoleon." 
Like Rousseau, who derived pleasure from revealing his innermost 
secrets, so He, too, would derive a perverse pleasure* *  from baring 
his innermost secrets before the Youth, actually corrupting him by 
his frank revelations. He enjoys the Youth's puzzlement and aston­
ishment. Yet he is passionately religious, even though he is suffering 
from that sore of atheism and eventually is consumed by it, when he 
chops up those icons. 
He is consumed by fire, consumed by fire. 
THE YOUTH is astonished and asks himself: "Is he religious, or is 
He an atheist?" 
When the Youth challenges Him, asking how He could be a re­
ligious man and reconcile Christ with secret debauchery, he says: 
"Well, so what if I am base and repulsive; the truth is the truth even 
without me." 
[February, 3d part.] "No, it cannot without you1 if you only be-
• Unclear phrase. 
• •  Sladostrastnoe naslazhdenie, literally, "voluptuous enjoyment," but slados­
trastnyi tends to be negative in Russian, so that "perverse" seems in order. 
3 He was a pioneer in railway building in the south of Russia. His methods 
were the occasion of political polemics in the sixties, and articles on this subject 
appeared in journals that Dostoevsky edited (Vremia .  April, 1 863, and Epoch, 
1 864). 

72 
Movirzg a H11ge Rock 
lieve. That's right, it cannot without youJ-that's the way you must 
reason. You must quit everything and become an ascetic." 
"I shall certainly do this, I certainly will. This is what I'm thirsting 
for, this is what I need, for right now I'm only playing with the Devil, 
though he is not going to get me." 
And here then, a lecture on willpower and how to strengthen it, 
and on the freedom of a hermit (but not for pride, but for Christ). 
It is He himself who tells the Youth about baring one's imzermost 
secrets. • His wife, too, knows everything, he had been baring his 
secrets to her, before he did so to the Youth. 
llut in the end he is consumed by <his own> fire, and chops up 
those icons, commits a crime, not being able to endure "the little red 
beetle." 
200,000, and he returned it (Shchelkov), and he is vexed by the 
fact that he has done a good deed. 
\Vhen he has destroyed those icons: "There is no good and no evil, 
I want to live thinking of my own arse only." And "the little beetle" 
tortures him to death. 
He explains himself what a predatory type and a flabby type are.'*"*' 
A Russian type, an artistic strain about his desire to express him­
self, total ignorance, an interest in a great idea, a story about the 
plain young Russian who got the better of a German engineer, as 
he dumped the <huge> rock by Pavlovsk Barracks into a hole he had 
dug, how he was talking to the then Governor General, Prince Suvo­
rov, and how he told him the anecdote about the crow who had lived 
in this world for three years, when the Prince had shown too little 
understanding for the overwhelming simplicity of certain ideas. Oh, 
without a doubt, Suvorov found it so very funny and later told the 
anecdote to the Czar. So they got to question the man why he wasn't 
in the government service: "\Veil, Sir, I have a small capital." So he 
was given a post-and then he really got going ... what a career he 
made! Yet he was just knocking about the world until he came to 
Petersburg and came across that rock.4 
Christ was on trial in England. 
[Perhaps for the story <which I promised> to Kozlov. February.] 
• The Russian word zagalivanie) "laying oneself bare," is used by Dostoevsky 
rather as a "technical term," meaning "baring one's innermost secrets." 
••  Babii tip, from baba, "(old) woman," thus "effeminate," "weak," "flabby." 
4 This anecdote appears in the final version in Part II, Chapter 1 :2. 

To Become a Rothschild 73 
Opposed to this type, there is another insupportable type, a real 
nemesis to those artistic ones, a type of people who are just as 
uneducated and ill-informed as the "artistic ones," but make up for 
it by being extraordinarily exact. 'Vhat does he care for the poetic 
aspect of the story, in fact he won't even notice it, that bear of a 
Sobakevich, he won't become emotional about it, the scoundrel, no 
he won't; but he won't let you get away with any nonsense either and 
will surely take you up on some detail: "where, when, and in what 
year, and, come on, there wasn't any Suvorov around at that time, and 
besides, that couldn't have been Aleksandr Ivanovich, it must have 
been Pavel Ignatievich, but he wasn't even in the service that year, 
but was rather managing some salt-mines," etc. 
He is not a general manager of the Prince's affairs, but had been 
something of that sort before; but then, like Shchelkov, he wins a 
fortune (unfairly) and lives the life of a man of means, gets married­
and suddenly he returns everything, including a secret document per­
taining to this affair. Could be that Fyodor Fyodorovich insisted that 
he do that and forced him to take this step. 
Though the Youth meets Vitia occasionally and visited all of his 
old friends upon his arrival, he thinks very little of their projects 
(America, anonymous letters), having his own idea) and is told by 
the others that he has changed, and betrayed his former convictions. 
But the Youth reveals his secret (to become a Rothschild) to none of 
them. 'Vhich immediately makes the reader see him in an aura of 
mystery and enigma (he keeps counting his money, frequents the 
money-changers, the flea-market, looks for ways to increase his capital, 
asks questions, sniffs around, skimps). 
Stepson and stepfather. An artistic nature. A charming character 
(he refuses the inheritance). To bare one's innermost secrets. He fas­
cinates him (literally so). It turns out that he is involved in some 
frightfully base actions, very nearly a plot, against the Princess (think 
up something). The young man turns away from him and leaves him 
(secret debauchery). He chops up some icons (it turns out that every­
thing about him is serious). For his wife. "The little beetle" (his 
wife). Those Genevan ideas were his ruin. The Youth turns honest. 
[Nota bene.] In the meantime, the Youth's friends get caught. Episode 
with the aunt. (N .B. This is a poetic treatment of early youth.) He 
talks with his stepfather about how much of an education he might 
need, and how to conduct himself. He is angry with himself for 
having opened his heart to his father. ;'\feanwhile the action rolls on 
all by itself, as the plot of the novel runs its course. The Youth him-

74 A Natural Father 
self, having found the letter, thinks up a scheme how to put the 
Princess into a tight spot, and explains his idea to Lambert who has 
recently arrived. He- He is scared by the way in which Lambert 
accepts this idea. About how he got together with <Mme> Andrieux. 
About Liza. And all along, about the fascination which He exerts 
upon him. In a word, don't leave the Youth for a single moment, the 
fragrance of early youth, a poem. 
Better if he is his natural FATHER. 
Liza must absolutely be (a stepdaughter), the General's children. 
The poor sick boy. He left after his mother's death. (Or killed him­
self. The little birdie.) His stepfather persecuted him in a morbid 
way. 
Later, in the end, when his wife has died, Liza hangs herself, and 
the boy runs away: He makes a confession to his son, saying that he 
cannot stand the icons; he tells him everything, how he used to bare 
his innermost secrets (terrible simple-heartedness, Valikhanov,5 fasci­
nation), how he used to torture his wife, <their> child, Liza-he 
shoots himself. 
The boy, for a moment, is in a tight spot together with Lambert. 
But he is rescued by the Princess, and finds his father already in a state 
of desperation (he has been an aggressive atheist all the time; •  the 
depth of his suffering now becomes evident). 
Nota bene. Gooo! August 7 j8. 
(N.B. On the absence of ideas in society, and on the lack of family 
ties, His theory, etc.) 
He is just as fascinatingly simple-hearted with his wife, when they 
are having their quarrels, and the Youth tries to reconcile them. 
BUT WHAT IS MOST IMPORTANT, retain throughout the entire narra­
tive a tone of His unchallenged superiority over the Youth and 
everybody else, all His comical traits and all His weaknesses notwith­
standing; let the reader feel all along that, at the end of the novel, 
• A teist so svistom vse vremia, literally, "an atheist with a whistle all the time." 
5 Dostoevsky became acquainted with him in Omsk. He was attracted to his 
good-hearted simplicity, and referred very positively to him on more than one 
occasion in his letters. On December 14, 1 856, Dostoevsky wrote to Valikhanov: 
"I never felt such an attraction to anyone, including my brother, such as I feel 
to you" (Letters, I, 200-202). And on October 31, 1859, he wrote the following 
to Baron Vrangel: "Valikhanov is a dear and most remarkable man. I like him 
very much and I'm very interested in him" (Letters, I, 279). 

Russia Is a Second-Rate Nation 
75 
He is tormented by a great idea. And motivate the reality of His 
suffering.* 
Thus, for instance, he is an atheist, yet suddenly he is explaining 
the sermon of the mount to the Youth, though it comes to no decision. 
Or, the advent of communism. ("\Vhat will save the world?­
Beauty." But always with a sneer.) Perhaps, he is chopping up those 
icons, while saying, "I want to live thinking of my own rear-end 
only," and as for having returned the estate, he says: "c'etait <umi> 
betise."6 
"Will Russia stand her ground? (against communism)," asks the 
Youth. He cursorily points out some signs showing that Russia has 
her own idea, but ia time concludes with a sneer: "I am not educated 
nor an expert, who am I to decide it?" 
N.B. To motivate the fact that he shoots himself, an example-on 
account of the idea that Russia is a second-rate nation and merely 
serves as raw material. 
We haven't got a single idea in Russia that might guide us. Exam· 
pie: the role of the nobility, the principle has been lost, an abstract 
idea high up in the air, on the tip of a needle, it just won't stay up 
there. 
FoR EXAMPLE. The scene with the chambermaid at the house, 
almost on the very first day after the arrival of the Youth. The sick 
child tells <him?> a bout the chambermaid.* *  Hatred, they force the 
child to admit that he had been lying, etc. 
Therefore the Youth, having a father, starts to save money and 
begins to dream about <becoming a> Rothschild, the reason for it 
being that He (his father) has been treating him more than casually 
for a long time, which the young man has also recognized a long time 
ago (facts). 
"I cannot understand the idea of being useful to society," He 
explains. "To what end? \Vhy? One must believe in and love that 
desire to be useful, and I neither love it nor believe in it. \Vhat is 
society to me? I can't stand that trite idea.* * *  I may yet find myself 
• Unclear sentence, not quite grammatical. 
• •  Might also be: "The sick child tells on the chambermaid." 
• • •  Kazennyi, "trite," "banal," has a connotation of something imposed by the 
government. 
6 French: "It was nonsense." 

76 Comfort aud a Great Idea 
something to do, but not in order to be useful, but merely for the 
salary, if I really were in great need of the money. But so long as I 
still have my two rubles, I want to live all by myself and do nothing. 
At least this gives one the satisfaction of doing nothing at all, so that 
one can say with a clear conscience that one isn't involved in any­
thing." 
He is deeply impressed by the Youth's idea to start saving money 
(though he laughs at him). "This is a most profound idea and a most 
profound inclination," He says. "A most remarkable trait of yours." 
N.ll. Think over the plot (Lambert, Andrieux, the Princess et al.) 
<to make it> BElTER, deeper, BROADER A:\'D MORE SERIOUS. About 
the Princess, etc. 
N.B. There must absolutely be a rupture between him and the 
Princess, so that he would be burning with vengeance. \Vhich circum­
stance greatly surprises the Youth later on, when he learns about it, 
namely that He, being such a skeptic and recluse, is also an intrigant 
-aHd a passionate one at that...* and that, with all his charm, he is so 
cold and spiteful. 
For instance, He makes the Youth tell him, right off the bat, that 
he has had some dealings with the Princess and traps him into 
admitting that he is enthralled by her. The Youth is frantic, while 
He suddenly turns malicious, cold, and superciliously casual. 
He tells the Youth: "Assuming I'll be aware of all the inventions 
of the exact sciences and, through them, get a multitude of things 
to increase my comfort, <like> now I am sitting on thick cloth, and 
then everybody will be sitting on velvet, and what of it?** The ques­
tion still remains: what shall we be doing then? \Vith all that comfort 
and velvet 
what to dot what will we actually be living for, what goal 
will we have? Mankind will be thirsting for a great idea."; 
"I agree that to feed humanity, and to distribute food among it, is 
at the given moment a great idea also, for it implies a goal. But it is a 
secondary and a subordinate idea, for the moment man is fed, he is 
certainly going to ask: 'What am I living for?' " 
• Or "is also a passionate intrigant." 
• • The whole sentence is slightly ungrammatical. 
; This refers to one of Dostoevsky's many formulations about the fact that 
comfort alone will not satisfy man. This is fairly close to what the Underground 
Man says in his argument against the crystal palace, and what Lebedev has to 
say in The Idiot. The Grand Inquisitor, however, argues the opposite point in 
The Brothers Karamazov. 

A Tyrant and Despot 77 
"So that all of these secondary goals, which mankind sets itself, 
appear to be mere diversions from the great main idea: 'Here, my 
good little child, keep yourself occupied and relax, don't give any 
thought to the great idea.' And believe me, the moment there will be 
enough food for everybody, people will immediately think up some 
other, also secondary, idea, to keep them busy for the time being and 
to divert their attention from the great idea. Mankind has been doing 
this as long as it has existed." 
(To the Youth:) "There you are, saving money and wanting to 
become a Rothschild. Don't tell me this is for velvet, for tasty dinners, 
or is it? On the contrary, it is for pride. You'd rather eat dry bread, 
than pie, just to attain your goal.'' 
"And your goal is not material wealth, but power.'' 
An IDEA: "FATHERS and CHILDREN"-CHILDREN and FATHERS. For 
the son who wants to become Rothschild is essentially an idealist, 
i.e., a new phenomenon, an unexpected consequence of nihilism.8 
With regard to the Youth, He displays a condescending air of 
mockery throughout: he would invariably conclude (as if he had had 
an afterthought) even the most pathetic exchanges with a gibe and 
a negation (but condescendingly, casually, as if in passing, lazily, with­
out warmth and without effort). 
A tyrant and a despot at all times. Likes to parade his egoism. Even 
in his worst moments of petty baseness and weakness of character, as 
when he is ripping apart the mouth of the <little> boy. Even then 
the Youth cannot get a grip on Him, for in the very last resort he 
would catch himself and expose his own shame <for everyone> 
to see.9 
In connection with this, his passionate sermons on Christianity 
(and this is MOST IMPORTANT) are particularly characteristic, so that 
the Youth can never, in the course of the entire novel, make sure if he 
is saying these things in earnest, or not. Until the very moment when 
he chops up those icons; he makes an effort to start laughing imme-
B Idealism is a trait that Dostoevsky studiously avoided attributing to nihilists, 
but near the end of his life he was tempted by the idea that Russian atheists and 
liberals were really "believers" who had gone astray. He voiced this sentiment in 
his Pushkin speech of 1880. It is possible that Dostoevsky's restraint in his criti­
cism of them in his later years contributed to the seriousness with which he deals 
with a version of the "atheist as believer" in the figure of the Grand Inquisitor. 
9 This reminds one of Lebedev's frequent parading of his shame in The Idiot. 

78 
The Youth's Daydreams 
diately after he has done it, but it is a wry smile. The Youth realizes 
that this is very serious. 
PLOT! PLOT! 
AnsoLUTELY. From the very beginning, every independent effort of 
the Youth to make a penny must be included in the novel: the flea­
market, auctions, sale, purchase, successes and failures, i.e., profit and 
loss. In the end result, <let him> absolutely make a profit, to his 
great satisfaction. Daydreams about shining shoes, etc. Daydreams 
about inventions. But the Youth finally decides that he despises 
inventions. ·what gives him most comfort about his system of gaining 
wealth is that it requires absolutely no talent. Precisely the fact that 
one doesn't need genius, wisdom, education, and in the end one is 
still a big man, a king to each and everybody, and one can get even 
with all those who had at one time insulted one (list them, starting 
with the Moscow professor, and down to his aunts, the Princess, the 
Prince, and that officer who shoved him in the street). Get even, or 
do <them> an infinite amount of good. "\Vhen I'm that far, I'll do as 
I please; what matters <now> is to attain freedom and independent 
power." His system is this: saving, willpower, character, seclusion, 
and secrecy. The idea of joining a company does not appeal to him. 
He is fascinated by his being so alone, poor, ragged, and wretched. 
"Nobody wants to pay attention to me, they walk by haughtily, and 
whenever they do address me, it is invariably with condescension or 
even with contempt that they do. Oh, if they only knew that I am al­
ready a power, that given a little more time, I shall suddenly make my 
appearance, that I could do it even right now." 
He counts his years, figuring when exactly .he will have a capital 
of so-and-so-much, and by what year, approximately, he will have 
become a Rothschild. He knows some anecdotes, like the one about 
Rothschild making millions by having learned, a few hours before 
everyone else, that the Due de Berry had been assassinated,10 etc. 
N.B. He is fascinated by <the report about> a beggar who had 
200,000 hidden in the lining of his coat. I am satisfied with this 
knowledge.* (N.B. Pick up some anecdotes.) 
• A quotation from Pushkin's "Covetous Knight." 
10 Due de Berry was the second son of Charles X, pretender to the French 
throne. He was assassinated in 1820, but Dostoevsky was wrong about Roth­
schild's profiting from his knowledge of this fact. Rather, Rothschild learned of 
Napoleon's defeat at \Vaterloo early and profited from this fact. 

Socialism 79 
He actually likes the idea of being uneducated; however, he 
changes his mind regarding this idea and decides to acquire knowl­
edge and learning, so he could astound everybody when the time 
would come for him to make his appearance.11 
He asks questions about socialism: he is particularly impressed 
by the abolition of private property, his very first conversation with 
Vitia has to do with this. Vitia isn't able to explain anything to him, 
and so he introduces him to somebody like DolgushinP a group of 
people who carry on discussions about "normal man" (they are later 
arrested). He does not agree with socialism: it is against nature. 
But He gives answers to many of his questions. When He demon­
strates the unnaturalness of socialism to the Youth, the latter is so 
delighted he must laugh. Seeing this, He immediately confuses him 
again by pointing out the grandeur of the idea of socialism. For a 
while, the Youth is actually carried away. 
WHAT IS MOST IMPORTANT. The Youth's whole idea about saving 
money is also a great and a poetic idea in his daydreams. 
In order to avoid making the novel too abstract, it might be 
necessary to introduce a few visiting Zemstvo workers. His anecdote 
about how he was, at one time, working very hard for his Zemstvo 
and how an allotment of 10 rubles was made, and how, when every­
body had voiced his agreement, only three got up.* (Inquire with 
Father Ivan.)13 
(August 12) AN IMPORTANT SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM. Write in 
the first person. Start with the Word: /. 
"Confession of a great sinner, for himself." 
"I am nineteen years old [nineteen going on twenty], and I am 
already a great sinner. After the catastrophe which has hit me, I want 
• The story is not clear in the original either. 
11 This is a variation of a common idea in Dostoevsky's works. The Under­
ground Man tells how while at school he tried to intimidate his schoolmates 
with his learning. He also has fantasies about impressing Zverkov and company 
with his superior knowledge. In the notes for The Idiot this is a frequent refrain. 
12 He is called Dergachev in the novel. The "Dolgushintsy" were a conspira­
torial group which called for revolt against the Tsar, extermination of the 
bourgeois, division of the land among workers, substitution of a militia for the 
army, the building of schools, and the abolition of the passport. Their slogan 
was "life according to nature and truth" and their aim was equality and brother­
hood. 
13 Reference to Ivan Rumiantsev, priest in Staraia Russa. Dostoevsky became 
friends with him and rented an apartment from him. His relations with Dos­
toevsky are narrated in A. G. Dostoevsky's Vospominaniia. 

80 More Concisely 
to put it all down. For myself, later, many years hence (for I shall 
have a long life), I shall understand all these facts much better, but 
this manuscript will even then help me to know myself better," etc. 
Start direct! y and concisely: how and why he decided to get rich ; 
and when that idea was conceived. \Vhile taking an examination 
with a professor. (Anecdote.) And only later, that he has a father in 
Petersburg, and who his father is, and how he went there. ?N .13. He 
left without saying good-bye to Lambert. (In the railway carriage, a 
fool-30,000). 
(N .B. Or, that story about how Lambert went there later, and 
though he didn't witness anything personally, he still tells the story 
as if he had been there, having warned the reader that it is based on 
hearsay and on facts gathered by him.) These advertisements are very 
naive: "I am now presenting my story according to facts which I 
have gathered, even though I wasn't there myself." 
"I am writing this without paying attention to style," or: "Natu­
rally, I am writing this without paying any attention to style, but just 
for myself," or something of that sort. This is in the middle. The 
confession is extraordinarily concise (learn from Pushkin). A lot of 
things that remain unsaid. His own peculiar manner: for instance, 
he is on his way to join his father, but the facts concerning the latter 
are given only after he has already arrived, and his father's biography 
even later. 
MORE CONCISELY, AS CONCISELY AS POSSIBLE. The story how he had 
a fight with Liza-more naively. "I could have omitted this trivial 
detail, but I am putting it down for myself." 
On chambermaids, on women's derrieres. Frou-Frou, derrieres 
and trains arouse his indignation. Trains which raise a lot of dust 
make him particularly angry, and how he used to get even, either by 
using bad language, or by quickly crossing over to the other side. 
About how, on the night before his departure, he and the univer­
sity student were walking up and down the boulevards saying ob­
scenities to respectable women (more concisely).14 Here, a very slight 
and insignificant recollection about Lambert. 
AGAIN, A soLUTION. The fool is in a railway carriage together with 
Him, when he is on his way, but Lambert arrives later, telling him 
about the fool as if it had been an encounter which he, Lambert, 
handled in his own way<and already> in Petersburg. 
14 See note 28 of Part I. 

Kraft 81 
?About this: "Is there a Devil?" He shoots himself and summons 
the Devil.15 
About a duel he fought. 
About Kraft who shot himself because Russia is <so> worthless 
(theory of the worthlessness of Russia). He used to know Kraft only 
superficially, and Kraft appears (before the reader and before him) 
only after the catastrophe, i.e., after his suicide. 
A lot of interlinked and characteristic events, even though they 
may be episodic and do not pertain directly to the novel, create a 
strong impression on him at the time of their occurrence-for re­
alism, vividness, and plausibility. 
But then, plot, plot!, which should be developed awfully con­
cisely, consistently, and unpredictably. 
In the end of the novel (of the confession), the idea is that he is 
thunderstruck, crushed, <yet> plucks up his spirit, gets his mind set, 
and prepares to start a new and different life. A hymn to every blade 
of grass and to the Sun (the concluding lines). And he quits accumu­
lating wealth. 
And so, the type of a youth emerges all by itself (also, through the 
awkwardness of the narrative, and in the fact that "life is so beauti­
ful," and in his extraordinarily serious character. A high artistic 
quality must help out. But just as in The Tales of Belkin16 it is Belkin 
himself who matters the most, so here, too, it is the primary objective 
to delineate the <character of the> Youth.) 
The character of his father, before whom he stands in awe all 
along, also stands out better <this way>, for the Youth's supersti­
tiously cowed attitude toward Him makes him appear in a more 
fantastic and, one might say, in a Bengal illumination. Yet the idea 
of the novel (and the plot) motivate the fact that the Youth is concen­
trating so much on his father. 
About women and about <Mme> Andrieux. A few exceedingly 
frivolous, yet bright, cheerful (the joy of having begun one's life), 
and childlike deviations on the part of the Youth, compared to the 
seriousness of the main events. 
???Only one QUESTION-regarding His torments upon the death of 
15 This is possibly an anticipation of Ivan's dilemma in The Brothers 
Karamazov. 
16 A collection of five short stories by Pushkin written in 1830 and published 
anonymously the following year. 

82 
Thoughts on Technique 
his wife, the flight of <his> child, etc. And, what is most important, 
about "the little beetle." \Vould a narrative from a third party be 
natural here? However, the father might tell this to the Youth him­
self, shortly before his suicide. 
A happy day spent together on the eve of His suicide. 
MosT IMPORTANT. There prevails, in the narrative of the Youth, in 
many instances a most cheerful and even joyous tone, which would 
then quickly change into a severe or into a suffering tone in the 
following chapter, in accordance with the event described. 
The problem of ARTISTIC QUALITY. 
Full title of the novel: 
THE YOUTH. CoNFESSION oF A GREAT SINNER, 
\VRITTEN FOR Hil\ISELF. 
NoTE. The Youth, owing to his tender age, has no access to the 
events, the facts <which constitute> the plot of the novel. And so he 
makes his own conjectures and masters them by himself. 'Vhich cir­
cumstance is reflected in the whole manner of his narrative (to give 
the reader some surprises). 
[For the story <I promised> Kozlov. February.] 
!A CHARACTER : (a type). A dreamer who dreams that he is riding 
in a railway carriage, talking, and with all the ladies thanking him. 
Or, hovv he would act if his wife were unfaithful to him. Invariably 
it turns out, after terrible cruelties, that he is forgiving everybody, 
and that everybody is happy. A Field Marshal, Ungern-Shternberg17 
(describe in great detail). 
Perhaps it is, again, He himself. 
N.B. MosT IMPORTANT. This character ought to be introduced only 
as something that is organically connected with the novel. 
[February, 4th part.] Note: about how it is the Youth himself 
who is the first to think up an idea how to ruin the Princess-the 
basest, the meanest <idea>, but audacious and bold, and he becomes 
fascinated by it. Here you have a plot. So that the Youth was almost 
the cause of a terrible misfortune. 
The psychology behind this: it is precisely the monstrosity, the 
fearful audacity and enormity of the scheme which exerts an irresist­
ible fascination on the Youth, something like arson on children. He 
is quivering is quiv@ring with nervousness and can no longer abandon 
his project which is now irrevocable. He no longer has any willpower, 
17 See note 3 of this section. 

Lambert 83 
the only thing in his mind is to set the fne as soon as possible, to get 
it done with. He is not deterred by the moral hurt to his dignity, nor 
by the prospect of committing a lo:,v-down action. 
He has visions of Ungern-Shternberg. 
What is particularly strange from a psychological point of view is 
the fact that when his FATHER accepts this idea, the Youth all too 
clearly sees his father's baseness, and turns his heart away from him 
on account of his baseness. 
"Isn't it strange that I was condemning my father, with repulsion, 
for the very same low-down action I was about to commit myself?" 
In the meantime, He actually does listen, vilely, to what the Youth 
has to say; though, without saying a word himself, being afraid to 
compromise himself; he manages to change the subject with a cheap 
sneer and some clowning; and later, he bypasses the Youth and behind 
his back allies himself with Lambert in this matter. 
As for Lambert, he immediately appalls repels and appalls the 
Youth with the insufferable coarseness and frivolity of his version of 
the idea. 
(N.B. The new generation is involved here. Lambert and the 
Youth, in contrast to Him, who is infinitely better educated, has so 
much more understanding, and is so much more sophisticated than 
they are.) 
Also, the psychology of material fascination, of a crime against a 
young soul-through audacity. A nd in everything, the absence and 
loss of a general idea during the present reign, as a consequence of 
the reforms. Everything apart. 
["I am a cosmopolitan."] [Of reconciliation and happiness, uni­
versal man, youthfulness of the heart, Don Juan.] 
His father tells him about Liza himself, in the beginning, immedi­
ately after her death (he comes to see the Youth), and later, after "the 
little beetle." On this occasion he amazes the Youth with his amazing 
frankness and his almost incredible sincerity. N.B. The Youth had 
thought that He was much more severe and harder. 
Besides: The Youth realizes that he means a lot more to his father 
than he had wanted, that there isn't and never was any haughtiness 
about Him, but on the contrary, some kind of strange, easygoing 
familiarity and urge to communicate, yet one that is not founded on 
any strong feeling, or, perhaps, not on any feeling at all. (Predatory 
type.) 
Absolutely pay attention to the question what He was doing before 
(i.e., all his life, His biography), i.e., whether he was in the govern-

84 He Is Cold and Spiteful 
ment service, or was a landowner, whether he was an active man or a 
do-nothing. 
\Vork it out accurately and definitively. 
A biographic sketch. A landowner and son of a landowner, but 
not a grandson. Studied at Russian and German universities. Married 
very young (the facts about his first wife are lost). Served in the Army 
during the Crimean campaign, but not very long, and never saw 
action. Resigned his commission. District Commissioner <in the 
administration of the agrarian reform>* of the first call-up, resigned. 
Traveled aimlessly abroad. Married a widow, a Princess. They sud­
denly made an inheritance (the Princess did). The company of the 
<old> Prince. Stockholder and society figure. Return the inheri­
tance. Takes the money, 200,000, and returns it. The Princess is the 
Prince's < . . .  > The end. (N.B. He always acted in a sensible and busi­
nesslike way, in a word, he was showing certain abilities.) 
SAVING <money>-MERELY A POETIC IDEA. 
HE IS DRI;\;KING CHAMPAGNE a la H ERZEN. Remembers Herzen, used 
to know Belinsky. 
The Youth is amazed how He, with all his charm, is so cold and 
spiteful (Liza, the Princess his wife, the sick boy, etc.) (he is guilty of 
a lie-the chambermaid, which he subsequently admits to his son 
in a most ingenuous manner). The basic traits of a predatory type. 
He admits to his stepson that he is capable of any low-down action. 
He used to tell the Youth about "the secrets of his married life," 
<and> that he wasn't admitting any aesthetic principle. And yet, in 
spite of all this degradation and his weaknesses, he u:-.:QUESTIONABLY 
retains his authority over his son. Sometimes he is terribly reserved 
and unsociable. (For there is a secret. He is his own secret.) 
Characterization of the student who is telling obscenities on the 
boulevard. How this student got involved with a lackey, drinking 
vodka <with him>. (No, he has no goal.) 
Railway station, they've arrived, an idea-how much, he will find, 
is going on there, yet, in all probability, nobody has any real business 
go mg. 
QuESTIO:-.:. Absolutely to be solved. \Vas he fanatically religious and 
was he actually preaching the Gospel when the Youth arrived (as the 
old Prince and the aunts were claiming)? If so, the Youth is hostile, 
and ready to have a fight with him, when they first meet. 
• I\1irovoi posrednik, an office Leo Tolstoy held for a while. 

The Main Idea 85 
The Youth arrives on the very day when the aunts (two months 
after they had buried the head of the family) were about to leave; 
they sit down, have a good cry, and decide to stay at the flat (the 
Andreevs). 
August 15. 
Best of all, make it so that he did his preaching before taking this 
fancy (even though his wife \'.rould be saying, while conversing with 
the old Prince: "This is not it," or "There's something wrong here") , 
and that's the stage at which the Youth meets him. And there, right 
in the middle of his sermonizing, and with extraordinary sincerity 
(or after having continued his preaching for some time), he becomes 
frivolous, and depraved, and spiteful, and broadminded, yet always 
clever and witty. The Youth is amazed, and reproaches him for his 
debauchery (develop this). 
Perhaps the Youth gives up on him, thinking that "there's a smart 
man for you, and an artist" (this is before the icons). DEVELOP THIS. 
\Vhen the Youth arrives in town, it is a full two weeks since the 
lawsuit has been definitively won. The late Andreev had handed Him 
a note, according to which the 200,000 thus won were not His. 
It is also at the moment of the Youth's arrival that the fate of the 
money is decided. The old Prince is indignant, the Princess thunder­
struck. But the Youth learHs learns only later, from strangers} and 
after he has already beeme iHtimate become intimate with his 
father, that the money has been handed over. 
Couldn't it have been the family of the young Prince that was car­
rying on the lawsuit about those 200,000? 
THE MAIN IDEA. Though the Youth arrives with a ready idea in his 
mind, the whole idea of the novel is that he is searching for a guide­
line to direct his actions, for good and evil ; he is thirsting for some­
thing that is lacking in our society, is intuitively searching for it, and 
this is what the novel is all about. 
Apparently, he sometimes feels sorry for him and wants to lead him 
away from evil, and actually points out to him what is good and what 
is evil. (In connection with the plot against the Princess, after He 
has himself approved it; on the following day.) This is why he by­
passes the Youth and allies himself with Lambert. 
?The Youth has found a note written by the Princess, but what 
kind of a note? (determine that) (that's where you have the plot). 
An idea. Lila is aH adHlt, IS years old, aHd secretly iH loYe with 
Him. La hail'le RBI'IS l' 8fl'l€JltT. It is sRe wRo giYes tRe YoutH tRe idea 
to eHsHare the Princes. uRe is also in on tRe plot, along with Lambert. 

86 The Youth Loves the Princess 
She is jealous of the PriRces became of Him. Tliere is no stepmother, 
everything takes place iR the aunts' house. 
Theme. I'\N is considered to be the greatest scoundrel ; all the 
evidence is against him. He is held in such contempt that everyone 
whom he loves renminces him, his wife leaves him for another man; 
he cannot prove his innocence, nor does he want to compromise a 
certain person. His son, the new generation, children. It turns out 
that he is innocent. The Youth. Only one of the children had blind 
faith in him. Here, intrigues on the part of Liza may play a role. 
Or: Liza and Lambert. Liza incites Lambert to blackmail the 
Princess, joining into a conspiracy with him. Also, she tortures her 
mother, making her jealous of Him inad .. •erteRtly. He realizes all too 
well what is going on, and that Liza is in love with him. His char­
acter; besides, the Youth.* 
There is an accidental yet inevitable showdown between Him and 
Liza, he has had her. Liza wants to get rid of her stepmother. (The 
Stepmother and the Prince. The Stepmother's death. Liza hangs her­
self. The Youth goes his own way. Lambert and the document re­
ceived from Andreev. The Youth is in love with the Princess. Fasci­
nated by Liza. He is not in love with the Princess, but is terribly, with 
all his heart and soul, interested in her opinion. Vanity, amorousness, 
and hurt pride to the point of madness. Moreover, <he feels> in­
sulted. Playing the insulted lover. Everything turns out to have been 
nothing, when his wife betrays him. It turns out that who was really 
dear to him was his wife. It is she who is also "the little beetle." 
There's your plot. It contains the net in which the Youth is imme­
diately caught. The characters are the same. 
The tone of the whole. All the time, he is preoccupied with his 
higher idea (disintegration), his loss of a goal, and his own chemical 
decomposition. And therefore, as long as the affair was still in prog­
ress, he treated everything with condescension. lhtt wl'leH His de­
bauchery wouldn't let him take the affair into his own hands, as he 
should have. In the end, when he has done in his wife, and all has 
come to an end, "the little beetle" comes into its own and defeai:s 
everything. 
He has feelings. "I should have rebuffed Liza from the outset, I 
should quit torturing my wife, turn honest, work hard, do my duty." 
But the main question is: to whom? United to nature, to the preda­
tory type, to a call to disorder and adventure. 
• Unclear phrase. 

The Old Generation 87 
N .B. The whole question is: is this a true character and has it taken 
a firm shape in the author's mind? All of his former qualities: mys­
tery, seriousness, frivolity, no effort whatsoever to improve himself, 
motivated by a rejection of principles, and a charming simple-heart­
edness which delights Liza, and his wife, and the Youth, and the 
Princess. 
There are some attempts: he returned those 200,000, etc. llut all 
this means nothing, and even makes him angry, since it suggests that 
he still believes in something after all. His preaching of religion is 
there> even fanatically so, once he warms up to it, yet casually, jerkily: 
"Don't interfere, I have business to do." Whenever he gets willy-nilly 
carried away by his own preaching he gets angry with himself, which 
fact is noticed by the Youth (who lets the reader know about it). 
"A MEMBER OF THE OLD GENERATION . I AM ONE OF THE MEN OF THE 
OLD GENERATION, and as for the new, I do not see any; and what I 
do see is nothing serious," He says, treating everything with super­
cilious condescension. 
He also sees the new in the men of the new generation, i.e., their 
lack of principle} their rejection of duty, or simply their ignorance 
of duty without an actual rejection of it, and as a result of this, no 
fear of crime, egoism. 
The belief in one idea only, a thirst for material pleasures, <and> 
on the other hand, abstract materialism idealism (the Dolgushins). 
[February, 3d part.] "These are the fruits of the bankruptcy of the 
old generation," He says. "We have transmitted nothing to the new 
generation that might have served their edification or guidance, not 
a single finn or important idea. And yet, all our lives we have suffered 
from our thirst for great ideas." 
Weli- "\Vell, what could I have transmitted?" He says, "I am myself 
a beggar. All my life I have been believing that I am a rich man and 
that 'I shall not want'; and there, in my approaching old age, I must 
beg my bread, there is nothing in me, nor was there ever." 
·when he had had Liza: "I had her whom I hate most," He said. 
When he had had Liza, they parted as enemies, not telling each 
other, though (traces left by the crime). 
They embrac<.d, and they parted, and suddenly she ran up to him, 
in a fit of rage: "Look out, I shall kill you." 
[February, 3d part.] He says: "In reality, we were the nihilists, we, 
the eternal seekers for a higher idea." 
"Whereas now, we have either HReaHcatea Elullaras indifferent 
dullards, or monks; the former mean business and often shoot them-

88 
The Youth Does Not Know Him 
selves, the latter are communists, such as Dolgushin, and their 
followers." 
"There is a third category-(thoroughgoing] scoundrels, but this 
always category is the same always and everywhere." 
He is always much, much too frank with his son, the Youth. It is 
not only the immeasurable charm of his simple-heartedness which 
wouldn't let one despise Him too much* for his frivolity. It is just 
that, in the course of the novel, the Youth will begin to lose his respect 
for Him, on account of that simple-heartedness, and it is then that 
something unexpected, mysterious, new will immediately appear 
about Him, something the Youth had never even suspected about 
him. Toward the end the Youth is quite firmly convinced that he 
knows Him only from a single, almost a superficial and minor side, 
and that there exists a great multitude of unknown and secret facts 
about Him, facts which He (so the Youth suspects) is never going to 
reveal to him. So that, toward the end, the Youth is taking great pains 
to penetrate and to get to know this character, and does so because he 
is fascinated by Him and because he loves Him. 
(February, 3d part.] 'Vhat also amazes the Youth, in the course of 
the novel, is the fact that all His sincerity and all his simple-hearted­
ness somehow do not seem to come from the heart, that they are not 
based upon a strong feeling of friendship or a ofte6. warm need to 
confide in somebody. On the contrary, they do appear heartless (the 
predatory type). Except for religion! (and this terribly stuns the 
Youth). He sometimes discusses religion with inspiration, even 
though later he won't forgive it to himself. (The Youth makes all 
these observations in his confession to the 1·eadn, and equally notes 
the preceding point-about the impenetrable mystery of his 
character.) 
The Youth is asking himself a thousand times: "What is it that 
entertains Him, that interests Him? Could it really be ruling the roost 
with <a bunch of> women, or idle chatter a Ia Herzen to a bottle of 
champagne, etc.?" He is asking himself this question, and there, sud­
denly, He gives away 200,000, etc., and once again the Youth does not 
know where he stands. 
In the very end, the Youth is quite confused by the fact that He, 
though suffering very much and ready to shoot himself, has no par­
ticular regrets about anything, not his wife, nor the Princess, nor 
• Underlined three times. 

A Russian Universal Type 89 
Liza, though perhaps some about the boy. And yet his sufferings are 
intense and he dies in severe torments. But he very nearly went mad 
from the pain he suffered on account of "the little beetle" (i.e., the 
boy). Yet he won't recognize even this pain as HIS VERY owN essence, 
or as that OF HIS VERY owN suffering. (Irregularity, not knowing what 
to believe in, "What is the sense of all this?") 
At this point, Kraft shoots himself. They receive his suicide note. 
He becomes very much interested in the motive of Kraft's suicide. 
"Kraft was devoured by an idea in which he happened to believe, 
whereas+ I suffer the same fate having lost every single idea which I 
could have believed in," He says. 
And thus, the Youth and the young generation are victorious.* The 
concluding idea is formulated by the Youth in the end of the novel, 
thusly: "Only he can be saved who already in his youth manages to 
work out for himself that strong moral sensation (feeling) which is 
called a conviction. The formula of a conviction can change in the 
course of one's life, but the moral sensation of this feeling ought to 
remain unchanged all one's life. He who possesses it will survive." 
(He may have said this to the Youth before His suicide.) 
Here is what he says about his suffering on account of the boy: 
"Could it be that I have found the essence of the emotion, that imme­
diate sensation of pain, which I have been pursuing all my life?" 
Simply: an amoral man, a man who has failed to develop a moral 
principle. A purely Russian, universal type. 
If this is a purely Russian and a universal type, why doesn't every­
one suffer and kill himself? 
Answer: because the spirit of analysis and conscientiousness is not 
developed in every person, as it is in Him. 
"Because the fools [the brutes] are many, and the wise [men] few," 
He says. "The wise men [brutes] depart, and the fools [men] are left." 
"I might have left my life untouched* * ,  to the very end, I would 
have found myself some duty to follow, deceptiofl I would have found 
a way to deceive myself, all but for this boy ("the little beetle")." 
"\Vhy is it that I feel sorry for nothing, except this one boy? Why 
is it that my entire self-judgment is formulated in connection with 
this one boy?" 
• Underlined twice. 
• • I a b i ostavil zhizn' is ambiguous, since ostavit' means both "to leave," "to 
depart," as well as "to retain." Specifically, ostavit' zhizn' can also mean "to die 
(voluntarily).'" 

90 Liza's Liaison with Him 
"Wfl.y- What made me marry my wife? Because I feel terribly sorry 
for her. Yet it is I who am torturing her. And besides, I have made 
her my nurse. Really, isn't she my nurse now?" 
?IMPORTA:'I:T QUESTIO:-:. Should it be that the Stepmother falls in 
love with the Prince? Shouldn't one get rid of the Prince altogether? 
???! Shouldn't one confine oneself to letting the Stepmother learn 
about Liza's liaison with Him, which causes her to l1reah down. 
And shouldn't one let Liza fall in love with the Prince and adver­
tise her liaison with him? "I am a predatory type," says Liza, "when I 
go, I go all the way." And so she gets even with the family in a big 
way, and makes fun of Him spectacularly and in public. So He gets 
mad and calls out the Prince on account of Liza. 
ဵdies in the arms of <her> Stepmother, but strangely. 
??? Liza Couldn't it be that Liza already has a liaison going with 
Him when the Youth appears on the scene? However, He reveals it 
to the Youth ࠧ in the middle of the novel. But when he makes this 
revelation, he does not know as yet whether Liza loves Him, or 
whether she continues to hate him (for she keeps smearing Him 
before <her> mother just as before, carries on her intrigues against 
him, and makes fun of him). 
But He is captivated by Liza and tells the Youth that he is begin­
ning to fall in love with her precisely because she continues to hate 
him, even though she has slept with him. 
He has been begging Liza for more and more love trysts. Those 
trysts are characteristic; every time <they make love> with hatred. 
Finally, witnessing her allempt to poison her mother, He is terribly 
shaken. 
Absolutely this way. Liza won't sleep with him at any of these 
trysts, but rather teases him, driving him to a frenzy.18 
He is amazed at her intellectual depravity in spite of her imwcence. 
"\Vhat a predatory type you are," she says. 
"Let's poison <her> and run away." 
"Where to?" She is willing to follow him anywhere. 
"Doesn't matter." 
"I'll fall out of love with you." 
18 This theme is to be found in The Gambler, which is based in part on 
Paulina Suslova's sexual teasing of Dostoevsky. Paulina Suslova left a record of 
her relations with Dostoevsky in a diary which was published in 1928 under the 
title Moi gody blizosti s Dostoevskim, ed. A. S. Dolinin. 

Liza 
91 
"I don't care, just leave me in the gutter."* 
And suddenly, at the very moment when <her> mother has 
learned the whole truth, Liza surrenders herself to the Prince. Fanati­
cally, so it seems, yet she does not love the Prince (to be sure, she did 
get carried away, and so she made up a story about "her Prince"; the 
Prince, to be sure, takes advantage of her, but in a most casual way). 
She surrenders herself to the Prince to make Him insanely jealous. 
(Not so: as far as Liza is concerned, it is simply a game. "Though 
<he> isn't worth a penny, I'll still get <him> ." She wants to torment 
<Him.>) -
MosT IMPORTANT. Liza sees through His character: i.e., disintegra­
tion and no integrity, yet she is in love (His simple-heartedness has 
enthralled her). Instinctively and unaccountably she wants to make 
Him jealous. As for the Princess, she wants to ruin her entirely be­
cause she is jealous of Him. Then, when everything fails, she hangs 
herself in a latrine. 
(The moment when They were alone the mother wasn't there. 
"The little beetle.") 
The mother couldn't stand it, broke down, went out of her mind, 
and died. 
Then the boy (that's the way!) 
Liza with Lambert, lying in wait, and with the Princess. The 
Youth is captivated by Liza. Yet he saves the Princess. 
MOST IMPORTANT. N.B. THE YOUTH TELLS THE STORY IN THE FIRST 
PERSON: I, I. 
So then, the Youth does meet Him right in the middle of a stormy 
affair with Liza, but without passion on His part. On the contrary, 
everything is but fiction and fancy. 
He calls out the Prince to a duel on account of Liza. 
The problem is solved! August 20, just after midnight. 
N .B. It is Liza who found out about the chambermaid. 
August 26. 
[3d part. February.] [Another novel.] 
He sees in Liza another case of disorder, i.e., a person who has lost 
her goal who, in spite of the presence in her of the most powerful 
passions, is apparently rushing about aimlessly in a general chaos. 
"She does not love me," He says, "she is doing it just so, though 
it may not be worth a penny, just to have it her own way ... A game 
• Literally, "at the crossroads." 

92 
The Role of the Youth 
born of desperation (if one were to translate it into conscious terms, 
it would be a game born of desperation, even though there is no 
such consciousness in her)." 
An adventure of the Youth's, theft of a bracelet. The boy is loyal. 
The Youth is in possession of an important secret. The temptation. 
He chops up those icons when, after the first time (of possessing 
her), Liza drives him to a frenzy by her refusal and mockery. He is 
madly in love with her. He walks along with the Youth: "All this is 
nonsense, all this morality, shopkeepers and games of chess." He fights 
a duel with the Prince. And when it is all over, he realizes that HE 
NEVER LOVED LIZA at all and that there really was nothing! At this 
point, self-judgment and suffering. 
An idea. The Youth, then, projects all of His frenzy upon himself, 
and comes up with Lambert. (\Vhich means that he is not in love with 
the Princess, though Liza is jealous of her.) He is NOT in love, but he 
still joins Lam bert. 
N.B. The role of the Youth? N.B. 
An idea. The role of the Youth. 
Liza has enthralled the Youth, making him fall madly in love with 
her. He is aware of it, and is jealous (but he does not believe Liza 
altogether) . In the meantime, Liza is complaining to the Youth that 
He is trying to seduce her (this, after she has already slept with Him). 
The Youth begins to hate Him. But not for long, for he can't hate 
him, because he adores Him so much. Finally, each confides his 
secrets to the other. 
The Youth ardently thirsts for the good and does not know what 
to think of his father, whereas Liza is a demon. (She slanders (?) him 
to those who have been arrested, telling them that it was he who 
betrayed them.) 
Liza is only teasing Him with the Youth. She assures the Youth 
that He is in love with the Princess. He swears that this isn't so, and 
thinks up a plan how to bring .fieF. the Princess to her knees. Liza 
encourages him, with much enthusiasm, to proceed with this plan. 
The idea of the novel. The predatory type is a female, Liza, and 
not He. Liza appears simple, very frank, as if bornee, somewhat crazy. 
And suddenly she displays, in her mocking remarks, a terrible depth 
of thought and of development. She convinces Him that he has cor­
rupted her with his own disorder. She adores <her> mother quite 
sincerely. She writes proves to Him that he is not worth being loved. 
She has a great weakness for the Youth. 
Liza and the Youth are traveling from Moscow to Petersburg by 

The Youth and Lambert 93 
railway together. She is telling him about Him (she knew him even 
before and fell in love with Him before her mother's wedding). The 
Youth tells her about his plan of getting rich. 
Liza had been visiting in Moscow and accidentally meets the 
Youth. 
He is afraid of Lambert's plot against the Princess; however, the 
idea to bring the Princess to her knees does tempt His craven spirit 
also. He does not, however, know that Liza is the principal leader of 
the plot. Since it is the Youth who first thought of this plan against 
the Princess, He believes that the Youth and Lambert are acting all 
by themselves. Later on, as we already know, He gets so carried away 
by this idea that he seeks out Lambert, while bypassing the Youth. 
Had He known that Liza was involved in the scheme, He would not 
have participated in it, but would have rather counteracted it and, 
very definitely, he would have gotten cold feet. But Liza has learned 
(from the Youth and from Lambert) that indirectly He, too, has 
joined the plot, and she is laughing in her sleeve spitefully: for she 
realizes that He has joined the plot driven by jealous and haughty 
vengefulness against the Princess, which would mean that he is still 
interested* in the Princess, that he is trying to take his vengeance on 
her, and that he consequently <still> loves the Princess. (N.B. Even 
before, and what is worse, in the presence of the Youth and her 
mother, Liza had been teasing him by telling Him to his face that the 
Princess had shown Him the door, on which occasion the Stepmother 
had taken His side, and heatedly so; and, as a result, Liza and <her> 
mother were at odds for some time.) Neither He nor the Youth are 
aware of the full extent of Lambert's (and really, Liza's) villainous 
schemes against the Princess. 
[February, 3d part.] Otherwise, even He the Youth would have de­
sisted, while He would have gotten cold feet. Yet the psychology lies 
in the fact that even the Youth, and certainly He, both have a fore­
boding of Lambert's terrible role and that, in spite of this, both rather 
relish the idea, whereas if it were a matter not of foreboding hut of 
direct knowledge, they surely would have protested against it. (:"-.B. 
This is a valuable psychological observation and a new bit of informa­
tion concerning human nature.) This also explains why He and Liza, 
who in a certain sense are enemies, get together and participate in 
the same scheme, whereas if He had known that Liza is taking part in 
• Underlined twice. 

94 Passio11 a11d Breadth 
it, nothing in the world could have made Him join forces with her. 
Liza is laughing to herself and is annoyed by the thought that, to 
come right down to it, she is once again making a fool out of Him, 
while He is caught in a mess not even of his own making,• being 
unable to withstand his petty idea of haughty vengeance. Yet, and I 
repeat, He, too, causes Liza great suffering in that, though she is 
gloating on account of having made a fool out of Him, the whole 
thing is yet another proof of the fact that He is [interested] in the 
Princess, that he has been interested in her, and that he will remain 
interested in her. (N .B. In the novel, express all of these considera­
tions in words, so the reader will be more clearly aware of them.) 
The predatory type, passion and breadth of character, the vilest 
crudity, along with the most refined generosity. He comes to see the 
Youth, sometimes being delighted with Liza, then sad again, skeptical 
and spiteful, then again desperate. One notices a streak of petty boast­
ing of <His> successes with Liza (and with women in general), this 
in front of the Youth. He awakens in him an enthusiasm for a great 
idea and a thirst for education. The Youth witnesses how he helps a 
certain poor family. Right along with passionate faith, derisive skep­
ticism (this is before he breaks those icons) . He tells the Youth out­
right: "If I had no faith, how could I go on living?" And he goes on 
to explain all that has been said before about those two shopkeepers. 
N.B. The main questions. The difficulty of the beginning of a 
novel. The Youth's actions at the flea-market, in the family, at Dol­
gushin's, at Vitia's, etc. \Vrite it in the first person, or in the third 
person. • • The role of the aunts. 
It is a quality of the aunts (the Andreevs) that they actually brought 
ffiH:t up the Youth since he was a small child, and he finds out, to his 
surprise when he arrives in Petersburg that He had never contributed 
anything toward his upbringing, but that Andreev had been paying 
for it all along. On account of this latter circumstance, the Youth does 
not want to see Him; but the aunts shout: "Come on now, come on, 
he will give you a job." From this, the Youth draws the conclusion 
that he was sent for to take care of the aunts, which is quite a surprise, 
and starts counting his money. 
The fact that they simply sent for him by sending him the money 
• Popalsia kak kur vo shchi, literally, "got caught like a cock in some cabbage 
soup," the point being that cocks are not used in cabbage soup. 
• • Literally, "from the author." 

In the Railway Carriage 
95 
to Moscow, the aunts say, is to be explained by his being only 19 
years old: no sense in being fussy about that, nothing worth mention­
ing even. They scold him for having traveled second class, rather 
than third. (Explain that through Liza?) 
The Youth (in either case, whether he is the first-person narrator, 
or tells this to Liza) expresses this idea: take that Petersburg man 
traveling from the capital to that village of Moscow, and yet he'll 
be immediately taken aback by something there; and by the same 
token, a man who travels from .Moscow to Petersburg will immedi­
ately run into some people who are a lot more clever than he is. 
In the railway carriage, Liza and the fool. He tells Liza about 
Lambert. She is more reticent, yet she tells him about <his> father, 
etc. 
In case the Youth is not the first-person narrator (I), do it in such 
a manner that the narrative would cling to the Youth, as its hero, 
and never let go of him through the entire beginning of the novel, 
so that, for instance, the Princess, and He, and the situation of the 
aunts, and the Dolgushins, and everything, is all described only 
insofar as it gradually involves the Youth (it goes without saying that 
this pertains to the initial stages only) . This might produce excellent 
results. 
Important question: does he or doesn't he tell Liza, in the railway 
carriage, about his plan to get rich? (He definitely does, but under a 
seal of deep secrecy.) 
?N.B. \Vithout knowing it himself, the Youth acts as Liza's spy at 
the Princess's. 
In the railway carriage, the Youth only gradually becomes ac­
quainted with Liza, giving her his name, and she hers to him. How­
ever, having learned his name, though she is surprised (for she has 
heard a little about His son, in passing), she first subjects him to a 
thorough examination and finds out everything that the Youth could 
possibly know, and only then, at Malaia Vishera, tells him that they 
are from the same family, which comes as a terrible surprise to the 
Youth, though he is delighted; but for all his delight, he does, how­
ever, realize that this young lady is nobody's fool and has a strong 
character. At the same time, he is very indignant with himself for 
having told her about his idea. 'Vhereas she starts making fun of his 
idea, after <the train has stopped at> Liuban', and laughs at him 
very loud and in a shameless fashion. He is furious. \ Vhen they are 
approaching Petersburg she suddenly makes up with him, swearing 
solemnly that she will never tell anybody about his idea. The Youth 

96 
Treatment of Liza 
melts once again. In this way, Liza has succeeded in subjecting him to 
a thorough interrogation and has felt him out very substantially. 
And yet the Youth, even though he did melt, is still full of bitter 
misgivings regarding Liza's perfidy, as well as, more than anything 
else, <regrets> his own blundering. But Liza fully sets his mind at 
rest even on that score, saying: "I was spying you out on purpose, 
yes, I did stoop to that. But it was only because I am so unhappy and 
so defenseless. I need a protector, a helper, and I have been looking 
for one for a long time. You are pure, truthful, and clever. Oh, very 
soon I'll be coming to you begging you to protect me. I'll tell you 
later about my grief, and about my needs, we haven't time now; and 
even if we had time, I wouldn't tell you now, on the contrary, I want 
you to survey everything with your own eyes, impartially, for if I were 
to tell you, you would, generous as you are, see it willy-nilly through 
my eyes, which would be too bad, because, who knows, I may be 
wrong myself. But you, a new man, will be a judge of my position, 
you will decide my fate and tell me everything." 
Having arrived in Petersburg, she continues to TeFRaiR sileRt 
remain silent, nor does she visit him. A week goes by, another week; 
on the contrary, she even starts making fun of him <again>. This 
leaves the Youth confused, and hurt in his pride; but his pride won't 
allow him to mention anything to her. 
For the first few days he is still in love with Liza, but later he 
thinks of her with contempt, treating her as if she wer.e a vaudeville 
"soubrette." It is only later that Liza, suddenly, again casts her spell 
over him, leaving him confused, telling him about the young Prince, 
telling him that she is in love with him, that she is jealous of the 
Princess, setting the Youth against the Princess, etc. 
In general, treat Liza lightly throughout the narrative (in accord­
ance with the Youth's attitude toward her) aRd oRl)' later, though she 
ought to be presented to the reader as an invariably mysterious char­
acter. And only later, in the course of the novel (and again in accord­
ance with the Youth's attitude), portray Liza as a giantess, a Satan<ic 
woman>, who crushes the Youth. And then, her tragic death and her 
affair with the young Prince will crush the reader also. It was a 
genuine infatuation that made her run away to the Prince's, and this 
is the tragedy about it. Liza's end must be solemn and terrible, like 
the ringing of a bell. 
A thirst for truth and simplicity in Him discovered what was false, 
immediately asked for an ideal, and accused Him, i.e., the first 
comer. She did not want to wait. 

The Theft of Diamonds 97 
In the railway carriage, she took her seat in the following way: on 
one bench, Liza and the seminarian, and across from them, the fool 
and the Youth. Liza was frequently interrupting the Youth at the 
most pathetic junctures (for instance, right after he had revealed his 
idea to her), and immediately says, without giving him an answer: 
"Let's not listen to them (i.e., to the fool)." 
The Youth is stunned by such heartlessness every time: he develops 
the notion that this is always the rule in high society. Having finished 
listening to him, Liza immediately addresses the Youth and starts 
discussing his idea with so much apparent interest that all his doubts 
are immediately dispelled. 
And yet he says to himself: "A high society serpent." At this point, 
explain his attitude toward women, disdain, frou-frou, trains, and 
chastity. 
On the occasion of -eR-e- one of Liza's slights he reasons thus: ''I'll 
never marry, down with women, let me be alone with my idea," etc. 
(N .B. However, toward the end, develop this idea from a comic and 
childish thing into something that would strike the reader as both 
powerful and poetic. Everything gradually.) 
?N .B. The seminarian on that trip: no sooner has he walked away 
from the fool having been accused of the theft of l 0 roubles when 
he stumbles across that incident with the lady. ;\1" .B. N .B. Shouldn't 
these personages later reappear in the novel? 
[February, third part] N.B. The theft of some diamonds. He was, 
if not accused outright, so certainly under a strong suspicion at the 
Prince's house. The Prince hurriedly hushed up the affair; the Prin­
cess blushed. Later, they found the diamonds under tံe PriREe old 
Prince.* There wasn't much of an apology extended to the Youth, 
which offends him greatly 'for he is already in love with the Princess); 
and so the Youth, having been so unfairly accused, retreats into his 
shell and forms terrible plans about becoming a gloomy money­
grubber. But when he finds it impossible to save, he wants to become 
a thief. He prays. On the next day, he saves a pair of earrings after 
they have been recovered. He is surprised at how quickly this whole 
mood of his has passed. 
Set fire to everything. A night in the streets, the dark image of Our 
Lady of the Miracle. 
Though Liza is telling him (later, when she is frank with him) that 
she is in love with the Prince, she still makes him (i.e., the Youth) 
• Sic. 

98 Liza Loves Him 
fall in love with her by pretending that she is attracted by him also. 
This is still before He admits his relationship with Liza to the 
Youth. The Youth even admits to Him (upon His questioning) that 
he loves Liza, and He frowns. The Youth is trying to talk Liza into 
loving Him, and into being more just and more affectionate toward 
Him. 
It affects him so much more strongly when he learns from Him 
that Liza loves Him. 
The Youth is very much impressed by and sympathetically at­
tracted to the Stepmother (especially when she stands up for the 
child). And altogether, the Stepmother's beauty presents itself pri­
marily through the Youth's impressions of her. 
The action in Petersburg starts with a quarrel between the Youth 
and the aunts [on the very first day.] during the first few days of his 
stay there; he announces to them that he has been sent for to take 
care of them, they cut him down, and He reconciles them. He very 
nearly asks the Youth, during the latter's quarrel with the aunts, to 
move in with him. The Youth does move, and is stunned at His 
house by the Stepmother, and the relationship with Liza, and the 
chambermaid, and the sick boy, and the argument about Christianity. 
After <the incident with> the boy, he winds up quarreling with 
Him, and leaving Him. It is during the same days that he enters the 
employ of the old Prince, and frequents the flea-market, and meets 
Vitia, and runs into Kraft. He feels that he needs to have his own flat, 
a place of his own. A discussion of this topic. He tells this to the 
communists. 
The old Prince actually does have three grown-up daughters and 
a ward. 
Explain the fool and the widow Mrs. Perchatkin (develop) . 
¥et- Returning home one night on one of his first days, the Youth 
-wal*& has some melancholy thoughts: Petersburg, its influence, pov­
erty, looking for a flat, the flea-market, the Dolgushins, thirst of 
Christ (that same night, an argument about Christianity). And in 
general, more poetry in his impressions. 
That very same night, the boy with his mouth ripped open. 
And altogether, there will be plenty to keep the Youth busy before 
<the arrival of> Lambert. More poetically. 
Evil passions, depravity, cynicism, His example (when he learns 
about Liza) have their effect upon the Youth, and, from pride and 
spite (as well as from a taste for destruction*), and also due to the fact 
• Literally, "'conflagration." 

The Prince Insults the Youth 99 
that his nerves are in disorder. As a result of this general confusion, 
he comes up with the plot against the Princess. 
N .B. And altogether, express the whole warmth and humanity of 
the novel in the person of the Youth, all those affectionate spots (Ivan 
Petrovich Belkin); make the reader love him. Then the Stepmother, 
He. 
It ends with the Youth asking: "Where is justice in life?" (which 
is what he is looking for throughout the entire novel). And on the 
last page, after he has buried Him, paid a visit to Dolgushin, etc., 
this melancholy and solemn thought: "I am embarking upon my 
life." A hymn to being a just man. "I know, I have found out what is 
good and what is evil," he says. 
Work out this last page. Make it more meaningful and more poetic. 
N.B. Do NOT FORGET. About how the young Prince "insults" the 
Youth, how he decides to take vengeance on him, how he goes to see 
him, how the young Prince receives him most elegantly, reconciling 
and delighting him. Passionate love for the young Prince. But soon, 
a disappointment: all these predatory high society types, dead-wood. 
And it turns out that He alone remains as having a warm and sooth­
ing heart for the Youth (but still, there remains a problem up to the 
point where (He) begins to suffer; here, the Youth is all melting with 
compassion for Him.) 
And altogether, a thirst for <more> heart, compassion, for a 
great idea (He gives it to him, but there is always some doubt). So 
that on one occasion, tort1:1ring being tormented by the aridity of life, 
he is tempted by one of the squeamish aunts, but what he gets out of 
it is nothing but compassion for her, and this conviction: if you really 
go to the root of a person's life, or soul, you will find depth even in a 
person whom you detest (the aunt). 
Having quarreled with Him R.e rented (in the beginning, when he 
is renting a flat and does not know Him yet), he talks the sick child 
into joining him. But the child begs to be sent home; here He looks 
him up and acts in a conciliatory way. 
And altogether, the whole novel through the person of the Youth 
who is seeking the truth of life (Gil Blas and Don Quijote), could be 
most attractive.19 
19 Alain Rene Lesage (1668-1747) is the author of Gil Bias de Santilane 
(1714-35). Dostoevsky probably refers to this novel because he sees a relation­
ship between the way the hero of Lesage's novel hunts for truth through various 
strata of society and the way the youth searches for truth in an unbelieving world. 
In intention at least Dostoevsky wanted to make the Youth a good-hearted idealist 
(like Cervantes' hero). 

I 00 An Epic Poem 
Don't forget the last lines of the novel: "Now I know; I have 
found what I was looking for, what is good and what is evil; I shall 
never stray again." 
Finale. And altogether, this is an epic 'poem about how the Youth 
made his debut in the "·orld. This is the story of his searchings, hopes, 
disappointments, corruption, rebirth, education-the story of a most 
attractive, of a very nice person. And it is life itself that teaches him, 
yet it is he, the Youth, who learns his lesson, for some other person 
might not have learned it. 
A propos N.B. Do not forget about how He gradually develops a 
respect for the Youth, marveling at his heart, his sweet sympathy, 
and the depth of his ideas, in spite of so little of an education. On one 
occasion- he actually expresses all this to the Youth. And altogether, 
arrange things so that the reader would understand that He is, 
throughout the novel, observing the Youth with the greatest atten­
tion, which fact presents Him in a most attractive light, and as having 
great depth of soul, as well. 
Do NOT FORGET. At Dolgushin's, too, he was very nearly taken for 
a spy, but it turned out that it was somebody else. And yet the Youth 
felt offended by such a suspicion, and with his soul receiving hurts 
from every side, he did not know where to turn. (Torments.) 
N.B. Once he went to see Nadezhda Prokofievna,20 having remem­
bered her for her sympathetic glance. He spent the evening sitting 
with her. She was keeping busy, left <the room>: "Never, never 
shall I renounce this bright idea." So much power, and all so one­
sidedly concentrated! Yet the Youth leaves deeply touched. 
By no means forget THE MOST IMPORTANT. Do not forget the 
Youth's friendship with the poor boy: he has not forgotten him even 
after he had lured him away from Him. He is taking an interest in 
him throughout the novel. Secret meetings with the boy, but without 
any big words (7 or 8 years old, create the character of the boy). Liza, 
on the contrary, has no sympathy whatsoever for her brother, is ac­
tually hostile to him. But when the Youth is arrested in connection 
with the Dolgushin affair, the boy runs away. Ѓ The Youth is 
terribly stunned. 
And again, in the course of the novel (and more and more often 
20 The sister of Apollinaria Suslova. Dostoevsky knew and liked the sister 
very much. On April 19, 1865, he wrote to her: "I value you very highly; you 
are one of the rare beings that I have met in life, and I do not want to lose your 
affection. I value very highly your view of me and your memory of me." 

The Title 
101 
toward the end), leave the Youth and devote si11gle chapters to other 
characters, conducting the narrative in the author's name. It is in 
this way that the episode of the boy's suicide and the birdie will be 
unveiled. In these single chapters presented by the author (i.e., leav­
ing the Youth <out of sight>) , the author will always inform the 
reader beforehand, for instance, in this fashion: "But in order to 
explain the meaning of this, and to show what had happened и 
(i.e., in the preceding chapter, to the Youth), let us. find out what 
happened to so-and-so or there-and-there, or let us step into a small, 
country type cottage on the Petersburg side," etc., etc. 
!N .B! SHOULDë'T THE TITLE BE (THE BEGIììIëG OF A CAREER), 
a novel, etc. 
Another title: DISORDER (August 26). 
Another title: A DETAILED STORY. 
Or: 0:-:E DETAILED STORY. 
In the railway carriage, when the Youth has been de,·eloping his 
theory of accumulation of wealth and Liza cuts him short in order 
to listen to the fool, the Youth frowns and gives a lot of thought to 
frou-frou and to the wickedness of women in general. But when Liza 
suddenly turns back to him and continues the discussion about the 
accumulation of wealth at the very point he had left off, and does so 
with the greatest sympathy, the adverse impression received by the 
Youth is dissipated in a jiffy, and he suddenly begins to tell her about 
his own coarseness, ignorance, and impatience: "'Vhy, really, ho"· 
petty of me; of course, it is all on account of my crudeness, but also 
because I do not know life; so different people have different habits, 
and so what? really, cutting short a com·ersation and turning to some­
one else, why, this is only a habit, isn't it?" etc. And in the same breath 
he admits that he hates women, as well as frou-frou, and so on. 
A bsolutely. He first loses his innocence in a vile house, and with 
a very vile woman. Impressions. That creature. His pity, etc. Here is 
another occasion to show his com passionate and kindly character. 
'Vhen He starts chopping up those icons, the sick boy is at first 
stunned by fear, but then suddenly he falls headlong on the sofa and 
starts sobbing i11audibly. 
He says, on the eve of his suicide: "But whoso shall offend one of 
these little ones, shall not be forgiven, neither in this world, neither 
in the world to come."• 
• Seems to be a contamination o f  :\Iatt. 18: 6 and :\Iatt. 12: 32. I t  does, how­
ever, render the meaning of :\Iatt. 18: 6 correctly. 

1 02 
Vasin 
King Louis XVII, a shoemaker,21 they decide at Dolgushin's that 
they are right, reading Victor Hugo.22 But someone by the name of 
з who has remained silent until then (a young man of 24, and a 
rabid socialist) (later, at the trial, it turns out that he has been the 
ringleader and the guiltiest of all) gets up and suggests that he moral 
question rests with the fact that it won't matter if even all of France 
were to perish, and that millions of people won't matter either, etc. 
Dolgushin and the rest won't agree with him. This young man im­
presses the Youth as the most beautiful <soul of them all> and when 
he is in a sad mood, and looking for sympathy, he pays him a visit. 
(Description of the visit.) Later, he drops in on him again, but N finds 
his presence trying and tells the Youth frankly, kindly, yet firmly: 
"You have grown fond of me, you are looking for sympathy, but I 
have no time and, inasmuch as you are not one of us, let us part," etc. 
N.B. (All the personages, images, portraits.) 
Kraft is one of them, but he refuses to "join the people"• with 
them; he drily and abruptly states a part of his theory, and later shoots 
himself. 
Liza owes nobody a thing, everybody owes her. (I refuse to live 
other than in uninterrupted happiness.) A predatory type. 
Vasin (an ideal nihilist) is a paragon of reason and logic (as well 
as heart) amidst stubborn folly. The Youth arranges for a meeting 
between him and his father. 
Vasin says: "Although the revolution will serve no useful purpose 
in this country, it is still necessar)', in view of the fact that there is 
nothing else to do, to engage in revolutionary activity. There is no 
immediate advantage, except perhaps the fact that the idea is thus 
being kept alive, examples are being established, and [a continuity of] 
experience sustained for the benefit of future revolutionaries. This 
is in itself enough reason not to abandon the idea. Nothing will 
happen at once; unfortunately, I am apparently the only one of our 
group who recognizes this notion, for everybody else seems to believe 
that, once a society has been formed, it ought to achieve all of its 
objectives immediately; and they actually believe this to be true, so 
• ldti v narod, the term applied to the activities of the Russian populists 
among the Russian people. 
21 The second son of Louis XVI. He was arrested with his father, but after­
wards was released, separated from his mother, and sent to be apprenticed to a 
shoemaker. He was later reimprisoned and died in 1795. 
22 Reference to Victor Hugo's novel Quatre-Vingt-Treize (1874). 

A n  Ant Heap 
103 
much so that if they did not have their faith, they wouldn't have ever 
started this thing, even though there are some fine people among 
them. I haven't got faith, but I am still <with those who are> starting 
it. I believe in the future. And anyway, what else is there to do, 
except the revolution; really, what else is there?" 
The Youth: "It seems to me that one can simply be a citizen, mean­
ing well. For example, teach, work with the health department, en­
gage in scientific work, etc.-all of which serves the common good, 
little bit by little bit, just as in an ant heap, and eventually there will 
be a whole large heap." 
Vasin: "This is absolutely impossible, I am sorry to say. You see, 
imagine that we have an extraordinarily large machine, made of steel, 
cast iron, lumber, etc. Now imagine that all the parts of this machine, 
instead of being connected by strong joints, screws, etc., as should be 
the case considering how heavy and complex it is, are kept together 
by some sort of paste or string, that is, for no more than a second or 
so: a gust of wind, and everything will fall apart. As for myself, I 
would be very glad to accept any kind of a job with that machine, 
working on any one of its particular parts, but if I am absolutely sure 
that the whole thing will fall apart in no time, tell me, will I really 
care to take the job, and where will I find the enthusiasm for it? 
Except, perhaps, if I work for the money. But that would be like 
that District Commissioner* about whom I read in the papers and 
who was saying openly and himself to show off before the people of 
his district, and quite loudly too: 'I am holding on to the job because 
I need the salary, however, I am not going to do anything at all while 
I am on the job.' I approve of this Commissioner from every possible 
point of view. Low-down, but right. No, I'd rather work to help the 
machine fall apart faster. Well, and then we'll start our own, and that 
will be a strong one." (N .B. However, Vasin does not talk much.) 
He does not counter Vasin's arguments. 
"I did not respond to Vasin," writes the Youth, "but I liked the 
way he was talking to me, not in the least arrogantly, he, such a 
learned man, talking to such a young and insignificant person as 
myself, and what more, not knowing either me or my ideas at all, and 
being convinced of only one thing-that I wouldn't inform on him." 
N .B. Among the members of the young generation, do not forget 
that young man, a wealthy landowner, who apprenticed himself as a 
• See n. (•), p. 84, above. 

104 Liz.a and the Youth 
laborer at a German-owned factory, an engineering plant. (Persist­
ence.) Grazhdanin <"The Citizen">, August 19, A--r (Poretsky's) 
letters. He is present at one of the meetings at Dolgushin's house. In 
part <he resembles> Speshnev.23 
"Gentlemen, I suggest that you turn your attention to technology 
and do something in the technical field." 
"Serve the machine?" 
"No, gentlemen, but if only the technical field got a good start all 
over Russia, there already would be an upheaval (a revolution), and 
one that would be immeasurably stronger and more successful than 
all of your appeals to the people." 
In the railway carriage, the Youth initially says that his father is 
private secretary to a minister, "allow me not to identify who in 
particular" (the Princess is the wife of a minister) . 
The tone of a little fop (Pasha).24 Childhood and adolescence. The 
poet of petty self-love.25 Liza brushes literature aside. But Liza's 
charm causes the Youth to change his tone quickly, and he changes 
into the simple-hearted, high-minded, and funny child that he is. 
Later, when they learn each other's names (after Liza has found out 
from him everything she wanted), the Youth is awfully embarrassed 
about having told these lies and having promoted the old Prince to 
the rank of a minister. 
Liza, on the other hand, enhances his sufferings by insisting, most 
na'ively (i.e., purposely), specifically, and lengthily, that the old Prince 
is very far from being a minister, and, as if this weren't enough, that 
he is in a bad mess right now, and practically under the guardianship 
(of his family, with whom the Princess is carrying on litigation). And 
altogether, she establishes the actual insignificance of the <old> 
Prince, which is also quite useful for the reader to know. 
The Youth, in the meantime, is trying to wiggle loose, is very much 
23 Nikolai Aleksandrovich Speshnev (1821-82), a revolutionary, atheist, and 
member of the Petrashevsky Circle, in which Dostoevsky participated in the late 
1840's. He was condemned to ten years of prison. 
24 Dostoevsky's stepson, Pavel Aleksandrovich Isaev. Dostoevsky writes to him 
a number of times in his letters, usually lecturing him about leading a more 
disciplined life. Pasha was something of a dandy and amounted to very little. 
25 These early works by Tolstoy (Childhood and Boyhood) are narrated from 
the "I" point of view, as are Rousseau's Les Confessions and Lesage's Gil Bias. 
All four had some influence on Dostoevsky's considerations and his adoption of 
the first-person narration. 

Rothschild 105 
ashamed, and finally just barely manages to induce Liza to let go of 
the minister; he is glad that Liza, at least, has not noticed that he told 
his lie to show off before her and in this particular instance in an 
extremely petty and ridiculous way. 
But when they reach Liuban' and quarrel, Liza tells him to his 
face that he told her a lie, just to show off. "Secretary to a minister! 
No, sir, it is you who is 'a poet of petty self·love,' and not Count Tol­
stoi" (yet, the bird-cherry tree) . 
N.B. Important. Judging from part one, it is quite impossible to 
recognize in Liza the person she becomes toward the end. But it is 
absolutely necessary to convey the notion of the predatory, animal 
<strain in her>, and a foreboding of something very deep. 
When the Youth has told Liza (in the railway carriage) about his 
idea to become a Rothschild, he suddenly becomes sad: "\Vhy aren't 
you saying anything? Why won't you at least laugh at my stupidity in 
telling you about it?" he says. "I didn't know how to express myself, 
and I can see that what I've just said must look stupid to you, very 
plain and childish. But my feeling for it is quite different, a lot more 
clever." 
Liza Eloes Hot say a word. Tkis aaaoys kiiH evea IHore. "'A'ky area't 
yoa sayiag aaytR.iagi'" 
"I.e., I was feeliag" "You say" 
"Do you really feel that it is more clever?" 
"Listen, you are awfully clever," says the Youth. 
"Really, I've noticed, all you have to do is express yourself, and you 
suddenly realize the absurdity <of what you have just said>." 
"A thought once expressed is a lie."26 
N .B. Liza lets him talk away till he is sick of it all the way till <he 
gets to the subject of> Baron Ungern-Shternberg. 
August 26. 
An idea. 
He, a young wife, love, jealousy, disorder, he is being unfaithful 
himself, he tortures his wife, betrays <her?>, Liza, the boy, the Youth, 
the young Prince, etc. 
Or: the husband betrays his wife* and attends their meetings. 
[February-3 and 4] Regarding the meeting of Vasin, Him, and the 
Youth. They discuss suicide. The Youth asks this question: "What is 
it that makes practically every one of them (or at least very many of 
• Prodaet zhenu, literally, "sells his wife." 
26 A quotation from Tiutchev's poem "Silentium." 

106 Suicides 
them) write confessiom during their very last moments (N .B. so that, 
if all of them had the means to do it, perhaps all of them would be 
writing confessions). Self-love, petty vanity. In fact, there are some 
suicides which are caused entirely by vanity. (Unbelief?) (The ab­
sence of a universal, guiding idea, which might atfect <people of> 
all levels of education and all stages of development, for instance, 
that cook who hanged herself having lost 5 ron bles belonging to 
her mistress.) And this universal trait belongs to our age only, for 
it certainly cannot be said that even before the promulgation <of 
the emancipation> suicides were as numerous, and of the same type, 
as today. The contrary is true. It is precisely in our day that they 
have increased, and this is specifically a trait of our age. A link has 
been lost, a guideline, a certain something that was holding up 
everything." 
"Well then, tell me, what is it that got lost? Do you really think it 
is the serf's dependence on his master?" 
"No, not only that." 
"What then?" 
"There has been a loss of order in general." 
"You mean to say that now we have disorder, in a general way?" 
"Precisely. I am not praising whatever has gotten lost. It was a bad 
order, but good or bad, at least it was some order. \Vhereas now, it's 
good, but we have disorder." 
"Rather, you want to say, it's bad, and we have disorder." 
"Have it your way, I'm not arguing." 
People destroy themselves for many different reasons, they also 
write confessions for multiple reasons, and thm:tgh it is possible not 
from vanity alone. Yet one can also find some common traits, for 
instance, the fact that, at a moment like this, everyone has an urge 
to write. Golas:• a man who cut his throat with a knife, in a tavern 
<wrote>: "The image of dear K. is always before my eyes." 'Veil, in 
this case, we can hardly speak of vanity, and besides, who is going to 
cut his throat with a blunt knife, just from vanity? And yet, there is 
again a common trait: right there, in his suicide note (in spite of dear 
K. whose image, quite surely, was giving him no rest, in case he did 
cut his throat because of her), there is this comment: "My head is 
surprisingly empty; I would have thought that, at such a moment, 
some special thoughts would come to one." I don't know whether 
• The Voice, a contemporary Russian newspaper. 

Garibaldi 107 
this remark was clever or stupid, but what matters is the fact that 
they are all looking for something, that they are all asking a certain 
question, to which they are not -getting any answer, that they are 
interested in something which has nothing to do with their personal 
interests. Something universal and eternal, even in spite of the image 
of dear K. which, without any doubt, could have dispelled any uni­
versal idea as well as any urge for a deeper realization of oneself, 
and transformed the action into an absolutely personal affair. 
Garibaldi's21 Notes. "Gentlemen," he says to the governments and 
monarchs <of Europe>, "you are the creators of the Internationale 
and of the revolution, for you are opposed to the truth and to the 
brotherhood of men." Garibaldi's economic system boils down to 
the following: "How shall we avoid this danger? Nothing is easier 
than that: those who are now consumingီ the share of fifty people 
will consume no more than if there were only twenty-five of them." 
A man of such convictions has it easy in this world of ours. You 
can establish as many economic rules of this kind as you want, but 
how are you going to fulfill them? This latter question never enters 
the minds of people like Garibaldi. So simple-mindedly do they 
believe in such absolute nonsense that one is surprised at seeing them 
with this much influence. 
"By virtue of their pure and great character. • By virtue of having 
served as the heralds of a great idea." 
Thus, when relinquishing <his position>, Garibaldi, as against all 
other revolutionaries, had not made a fortune and rejected the mil­
lions [hundreds of th::msands, 600,000] offered him by the Italian 
government! And yet you'd have to agree that this brave general 
and honest man is no great mind. • • 
An accident. 
"By vifttte ef this He was the defender of a great idea all his life." 
"You see, sir; these people find it easy to keep their faith, and that's 
why theirs is an easy life." 
"And what about their great deeds?" 
"Great deeds come easily to those who have such simple minds." 
• Or "Purely by virtue of their great character." 
• •  Mysliiu ne oret literally, "is no eagle, as far as his mind is concerned." 
27 Giuseppe Garibaldi (1 807-82) led a series of efforts to unify Italy in the 
1 850's and 1 860's. He became something of a symbol for democratic elements 
throughout Europe. 

108 No Universal Good 
Note. :'\.B. The Youth's conversations with Him, in the beginning, 
sometimes proceed as follows: 
"And what do you think of Garibaldi?" 
"And what do you think of women in general?" 
"And what do you think of future life?" etc. 
I.e., all kinds of disconnected questions, asked quickly and sud­
denly (similarly also with Vitia at their first meeting). It appears as if 
the Youth is hurrying his questions so as not to forget to ask them, 
questions to which he must have given a lot of thought before, and 
which interest him very much. 
Ice-covered rocks. 
The Youth: "Perhaps there is intelligent life on the planets." 
He: "Science denies it." 
The Youth: "Perhaps there is something even higher than intelli-
gent life?" 
He: "Science doubly denies it." 
""What use is it then to do good?" 
"Just so as to get along <with other people> for such a short time?" 
"Yes, if such be the law of nature, if you are doing it because you 
cannot help doing it." 
He: "Is it really true that I couldn't have kept those 200,000?" 
The Youth: "No, you could not." 
He: "But somebody else could have, what do you think?" 
The Youth: "Yes, somebody else could have." 
He: ""Which means that there is no such thing as universal good. 
A man holds sacred whatever he does." 
The Youth: "ّo, universal good is the thing. Toward the end of 
its life, mankind will finally realize that everybody must keep re­
turning 200,000, and that this is to his better advantage, and thus 
general well-being will become a fact." 
He: "Yes, for two weeks! No, better let me indulge in my fancy 
during those two weeks, and tell me, what will be so wrong about 
my doing so?" 
The railway carriage and Liza. 
At first he just looks and blushes, puffy, he was innocent m the 
literal sense of that word. 
About the boulevard. ("You find that women are unfair? Frou-frou 
is unfair.") 
His own idea, he was daydreaming and suffering: there were 
minutes <when he> suffered a lot. ုNewspaper, all nonsense, 
one must stick to the golden mean. 

Illegitimate Son 
109 
"Let's listen to the fool." 
And the Youth thought: ("This is characteristic o£ high society.") 
"Who is your father?" (He started lying: "A minister.") 
"Finds out that Lila You have such a good heart." (He beams with 
joy, indulges in confidences.) 
She starts making caustic remarks. (He falls asleep for a while, 
wakes up red-faced.) She taunts him mercilessly. At first, not about 
his family name. 
"I was sent for to take care of my aunts. I decided not to go to the 
university on principle. I don't want to feel obligated to my father." 
They make up <when the train pulls out> after the last stop. 
She tells him that she is going to need him. She finds out his family 
name. 
"But I didn't tell her about my idea." 
-Btt Liza didn't tell him either who she was, or did she? So that he 
is stunned when he meets <her> at his father's. 
The moment he hits the whirl of the big city,* he abandons his 
idea. 
N.B. Keep reiterating that he has got an idea. 
In the railway carriage: That he is an illegitimate son. "I am proud 
of it." She does not say a word. "You are a young girl, it wouldn't 
be polite to explain this to you." (The girl laughs.) 
N .B. When he suddenly blushes and starts pouting: "I am begging 
no one to talk to me." 
The fool at first makes the Youth indignant, and he stands up <for 
him?>, but then suddenly he bursts into loud laughter. 
And still he says to her: "I have my own idea." Both the night 
before (she remains silent), and in the morning. In the morning, Liza 
takes up the subject and starts discussing his idea. Venomous taunts. 
Quarrel. Liza: "You look puffy." He wanted to strike her. Suddenly 
he confesses his shame, i.e., that he wanted to strike her. He con­
cludes: "You are a mocker; generosity and a sense of justice have 
moved me to make this admission. Go ahead and laugh. I despise your 
laughter." At this point, Liza <says these things> about his heart and 
about his mind. They have gotten up and, already on their way out, 
he says to himself: "Still, she cannot despise me, for I didn't tell her 
about my idea." 
• Literally, "he steps on the pavement." 

1 10 
The Christian Religion 
\Vhile leaving the railway carriage, he is sad, "I have abased 
myself." 
Mistrustful, gloomy. To seclude himself. An argument with a cab­
man (he flings a twenty-kopek piece to the ground, but picks it up). 
"No, to seclude myself, 'puffy.' " Daydreams about how clever he is, 
alone. "This pufi)' man man was a misanthrope." Liza. A hussar. 
"Cut <them> down with my sabre." The outlook of cutting <some­
body> down with his sabre already consoles him. 
Author's comment. One acts that way when one is 15, but this one 
is 19, sitting in a corner all by himself, and thinking. 
N .B. Absolutely, right in the middle of a caricature-like discourse, 
a few very clever remarks on the part of the Youth. Liza, when she is 
making up with him at Kolpino, deftly uses these phrases to prove 
that she respects his wit. The Youth is delighted. 
At the aunts'. "You fool, I am your godmother; if you don't care 
to be affectionate, you could be polite, at least." 
N.B. The aunt: "You could be helping us now. You haven't got a 
heart." 
"So you are my godmother aboHt tl=tis is that so?" 
"Christian religion is meaningless." 
"Good Lord, how do you mean, 'meaningless?' " 
"Just so, meaningless.'' 
"Come on, Marfa Petrovna, you can see that he is a nihilist.'' 
"I respect Christ as a <historical> figure and generally as a person, 
but I don't believe in all the rest, because it is stupid.''28 
"My father is a hypocrite and a hanger-on." 
"Oh you whelp, you.'' (N.B. What made me so angry was the fact 
that I had made up my mind to maintain a proud silence, but the 
moment I was touched to the quick, I couldn't restrain myself and 
told everything.) 
\Vhen I returned home that night: "Auntie, I was joking when I 
said that I don't believe in Christ. I do. You may, of course, consider 
my admission despicable; however, I am saying this not to ingratiate 
myself to you, or to do you a favor, but simply because I did wrong, 
and lied, and my conscience tells me that, shameful as it may be, I 
have to admit it." 
28 A vanauon of the belief of many liberal Russian intellectuals. The 
Petrashevtsy were bitterly anti-religious and looked upon Christ as a historical 
figure and person. 

About Christ 
I l l  
"\Veil, never mind," says the aunt. "You know, he (Christ) is like 
that. Right now he is glad about you, and if he were here, he'd call 
you and give you a kiss. If a man has blasphemy in his heart,* why, 
that's different; Christ does not forgive that." 
"That I know. I can understand that this is indeed so. The spirit 
is the spirit of glory and of freedom, things which man (at least man 
of the European type) will never again abandon, as well as of a har­
mony which extends to the whole of society, and which will create a 
rational society, founded on rational principles." 
"You talk very subtly; but that doesn't matter. That's one way to 
do it." 
A pillow was in his way, he placed the package with the documents 
under <it?>. 
A letter: to her grace, the Princess, under the icons. 
About Christ: "\Vhen I blurted that out." 
If in the first person, tR:e sceRe use this form for the passage about 
Brusilov: 
I was crying, crying, crying, crying. I had been all alone for 5 
years. Really, I didn't want to <do it?> at all, yet irrepressibly.** 
I told him about Souchard (all in answer to his questions). He is 
feeling sincere pity. Embraces Him, as his father. About the island, 
high school, the tattle-tale, he always kept apart. <His> theory­
didn't want to tell about it. Explained it. He leaves, skeptically 
impressed. The Yotth I was left alone. I had a strange feeling. I was 
embracing my father. I had finally found <him?>. That's how it is. 
I loved <him?>. Oh, for nothing in the world did I want to talk 
<about it>. But the idea-had lost some of its lustre. I crossed myself. 
Even in the 2d part, a tingle of revulsion. He loves and doesn't 
love his father. "It started somehow strangely," he casually tells him 
about family life in general (all a lot like frou-frou). 
After the discourse on the spirit <of Christianity>, he gets up at 
night to kiss her hand. But his aunt is asleep. Nightcap, drooping lip 
(Leo Tolstoi). 
Frou-frou throughout the novel, including part two. 
"But that would be too smart on her part. Al this is R:appeRiRg. 
Moves which are too smart usually fail. Exceedingly subtle and deli­
cate affairs always require that a touch of stupidity be added to their 
execution; otherwise they would fail." 
• Literally, "in his spirit." 
• • Incomplete phrase and unclear. 

I 12 Why Should I Do Good 
"People do not like ူ things that are clever beyond any doubt, 
and remain cool to them. Smart guys who are a little on the stupid 
side are more to people's liking. The more stupid, the closer. So that 
the smart guys who are on the stupid side are perhaps, in effect, 
smarter than those undoubtedly smart guys." 
In a third-class railway carriage. A soldier's head in the window. 
April. ·why didn't he take a third-class seat, but a second-class one? 
At the tieket 6Eflee "I felt it would be mean to hide, and so I took 
< . . .  > (at the ticket office, encounter with Liza). 
He and his wife. "We get together and shame (upbraid) each 
other." 
He, cursorily and suddenly, takes the Youth aback by such frequent 
statements: 
"\Vhy should I do good? Why should I love anybody?"29 
"Really, one loves just so, not for any particular reason." 
"Really, this is stupid. What sort of a system is this? 100,000 years 
of love, and then everything turns into an <ice-covered> rock. So 
much for human society in general. And as far as I am concerned, it is 
much closer than that." 
"And still, you love." 
"And still, this is stupid." 
"All right, believe then." 
"I do believe, I do believe with all my heart, I do believe precisely 
because it is impossible not to believe." 
So then, it is almost unnatural to have so little control over oneself 
as He does, to be so subservient to one's passions as He is, and to work 
so little on oneself <as is true in His case>. Everybody says that he 
used to be a man of action, that he used to have goals which he 
actually pursued. And suddenly he is preaching Christianity! But if 
it is to be Christianity, where then are his feats? He's got a goal, he's 
got love. \Vhy doesn't he do anything for it?" 
"\Vhat an ardent, what a vigorous character," thinks the Youth (as 
he observes some of His strivings), "and what a flabby old \'loman he 
is at other times!" 
\Vhen I saw Him at Souchard's, when he came to see me there, He 
appeared exceptionally beautiful and brilliant to me. ·when I met 
him in Petersburg, he looked entirely different (balding and gone to 
seed). 
29 This is the question that Ivan Karamazov will pose in the meeting in Father 
Zossima's cell, at least hypothetically. 

The Youth's Idea 
1 1 3 
He comes to see the Youth and starts accusing himself: "I am a 
conglomerate of petty vanities," etc. 
Once, He does not visit the Youth for a long time, after a dishon­
orable action. The Youth runs into him: "\Vhy don't you ever come 
to see me?" 
"\Vhy, I was afraid of you, I really was. This is all so dishonorable 
that I thought that you were going to scold me a good deal, so I 
wouldn't even dare to face you." 
All this fascinates the Youth, and yet) though he is admitting his 
own dishonor) he never expresses remorse: on the contrary, he is 
skeptical. However, it appears that he suffers. But what? The Youth 
is preoccupied with these questions. 
\Vhen the Youth has already found out about His liaison with Liza, 
He comes to see him being terribly worried about what he should buy 
her (the Stepmother) for her name-day. 
In a fit of passion He says to the Youth about Liza: "J am going to 
hang her with my own hands." 
In the railway carriage. "No, I have seen the Vestal (the statue), she 
is covered from head to foot, that's more decent (there is the Bourbon 
museum, Naples)-simply a statue." 
The Youth)s own idea [His own idea.]. "I have power, and I am 
calm. I know that I want to eat well, and I can, whenever I want. 
\Vell, enough of that. I would eat a piece of bread and ham, and I'd 
be satisfied with the knowledge. High rank, the title of a Baron, 
women. I do not want to torture anybody, nor am I going to. But I 
know that if I wanted to have somebody tortured I could do it. 
Enough of that. I aေ poorly dressed. A learned man, a Galileo, 
whereas I am an ignoramus. But I know that I am stronger. And 
enough. Actually, I find it rather agreeable that I am so ignorant, and 
that's why I didn't go to the university and was a poor student in my 
last year <in high school>." 
"\Von't it be boring to accumulate wealth?" 
"No." 
"Yes. Patience, constant calculating, perpetual waiting, a full life, 
very good" (says He). "How did you come up with this idea?" (he 
gives the Youth a long, strange look). 
Le ris tenta le rat. Le rat tala le ris.30 
30 French: "The bait tempted the rat. The rat touched the meat (bait)." 

1 14 
The Youth irz School 
He says to Liza, during their first tryst: "I do not understand you." 
"\Vhy then did you come here, if you don't? I have ဲ come to 
tell you that I hate you. You are torturing my mother. You love the 
Princess." 
N.B. He tells all this to his stepson. His scene with her is not 
described. 
"Poison her? Come on, I won't exchange her for 1 ,000 the likes of 
you." 
"Then I shall poison myself." 
"Then poison yourself." 
Just sitting there. Not saying a word. 
Liza: "I want you• to embrace and to kiss me right away." 
The Youth to Him: "\Vhy, it is quite impossible that she (Liza) 
should have a passion for you. You are an old man." And He feels as 
if something stabbed him. 
NoTE (if in the third person). The finale of the novel. Everybody 
is dead. The Youth is left all by himself. Melancholy. Three days, just 
sitting around. He leaves his flat in the evening. The idea of acquiring 
wealth is fading away. The sun is setting above the ϲeva. "I want to 
live." He prays Every blade of grass prays. The Youth's prayer: "Save 
me, oh Lord, and I thank you that I want to live. And what will be, 
will be." 
The young generation, entering life. 
N .B. After Souchard,31 as well as at Souchard's, the Youth initially 
made an effort to study very hard (he read Karamzin), but precisely 
with the idea of withdrawing <into himself> arzd gathering strength. 
And so it went on, starting from his first years at high school, even 
though he was being considered a dull boy who was getting where 
he did by his assiduousness only. "Let them," he thought, "it's just 
my looks that hurt me. I am liked by no one, [His own idea.] but later, 
in Paris, I will <make up for it>." Daydreams of a fourth grade high 
school student, how he <will> later <write> a dissertation and prove 
that his teacher didn't know a thing. He then goes to Paris, publishes 
in Paris, everybody takes him for a scholar. He is invited to come to 
Russia. I am not coming. I'll crush all those professors and academi­
cians; I'll tell them that they are fools. And, having told them off, 
I'll stay there, rejecting all offers. I'll withdraw from the world. 
• She is using the intimate form ty ('thou"). 
31 Nikolay I. Souchard, Dostoevsky's childhood French teacher. 

The Youth and Power 1 15 
They'll get even angrier and will start trying to prove that I am but 
an insignificant pygmy. They'll prove it. I'll wait on purpose for a 
long time, so that even the public will get to believe them, and so 
that I'll be completely forgotten and it will be considered disgraceful 
to have a high opinion of me. Then suddenly, after three or four 
years of silence, I <bring out> another book, in Paris and in French, 
with a preface saying that it is impossible to have it published in 
Russian. And again, Europe will raise a howl. And again they will 
be crushed. And so all my life. I'll make a point of never discussing 
any learned things, just trivialities, with learned Russians. (N .B. In 
his daydreams he always considered himself to be a great man.)32 
(For Christ's sake, repent, miracles, coming from Kharkov, Eile­
kon, * the academy.) 
Ungern-Shternberg.33 (Two heads come down.) 
Ruler of a deserted island. Since he was in the fifth grade of high 
school, the idea about <becoming a> Rothschild began to occupy 
him. "Shouldn't I become a mean character? Let them detest me, as 
long as I am powerful." Though he continued to be an excellent stu­
dent, it was only due to the force of habit. But in the last grade he 
quit being a good student, on account of his idea of the triumph of 
the golden mean. 
He tells him, in the middle of his confession: "I see that you always 
placed yourself first and foremost. [His own idea.] And this (unedu­
cated) golden mean is nothing but that same pride. It is an excellent 
practical idea. To spend all one's life nursing one's pride and vanity. 
That is a tremendous job, and one can lead a full life with it and 
spend a pleasant life. And be not such a bad person on top of it." 
He) inveighing against Souchard: "Tell me, what were you day­
dreaming about, in that corner of yours, my boy? (and I wasn't even 
aware of it)." 
"This is what I was dreaming about," the Youth began, with his 
eyes flashing ... -i.e., under no circumstances did he want to tell about 
it, but as his mood changed, he revealed everything. 
And when he had left, he became sad) not because he had told 
about the island, but because he had betrayed his idea <to him>. It 
• I am not familiar with this obviously foreign name. Therefore, I just trans­
litera ted it. 
32 These daydreams remind one of the Underground !\Ian's daydreams of glory, 
as well as those of Ippolit in The Idiot. 
33 See note 3 of this section. 

1 16 Nihilists 
was only the idea that was shaken. As for his confession, he wasn't 
ashamed of it in his thoughts. Nor was the idea shaken because He 
had failed to approve of it. On the contrary, He had listened to it 
very seriously and had said something mysterious. But it was shaken 
because he had told somebody else about it. "I did not explain it too 
well," he thought as he was falling asleep. Later, he became very much 
excited and confused on account of <some> social ideas. 
"Come on, what could I pass on to the young generation?" He says. 
"I am a beggar myself. All my life I believed that I was a rich man 
who would never come to grief, and there, on the threshold of my 
old age, I find myself a beggar. There is nothing in me; Rot that tl'lere 
ever was it won't matter that there isn't, that I could bear. \Vhat's 
so sad [\Vhat really hurts] is that there never was." 
He says: "\Vho were the nihilists? Essentially we- we were, we, the 
perennial seekers of a higher idea. \Vhat you've got now are either 
indifferent dullards or monks. The former (they are the "men of 
action") are the ones who, incidentally, happen to shoot themselves 
not infrequently, all their businesslike attitude notwithstanding. As 
for the monks, they are socialists, believers to the point of madness, 
and they never shoot themselves." 
"Come on, you don't say that nihilists never shoot themselves?" 
"Only those who have become nihilists by mistake. Nihilism with­
out socialism is a mere repulsive nihilistics, * and certainly not nihi­
lism. That's a good name for it: 'nihilistics.' \Vhat you have got there 
is stupidity, or swindling, or being glad to have the right to be dishon­
orable, but certainly not nihilism. But most often it is being glad to 
have the right to be dishonorable. Genuine nihilism, true and pure, 
is based on socialism. Here, everybody is a monk. A veritable mon­
astery, boundless, mad faith. That's why they reject everything else 
tl'le whole world, <just> because it is against socialism, <just> be­
cause they are believers. Everything that isn't of their faith is rejected. 
And what is against their faith? This whole world of ours. And so this 
world of ours is being rejected." 
The Youth: "Are there any other categories, or are there just these 
two?" 
"There is a third category, thoroughgoing scoundrels of various 
kinds, but these are the same at any time and any place, so there isn't 
any use to talk about them." 
• Nigiliatina, with a pejorative suffix difficult to duplicate in English. 

No Moral ldeas 
1 17 
Liza: "I have been blaming the first come-r for not being the ideal 
<man>, but who are you in my life, but <such> first comer?" 
I would call him a youth, if he hadn't passed 1 9. In fact, does one 
grow after 1 9?* If not physically, so at least morally. 
Not a grain of truth. 
About the drunken student. All this, he tells ဳ to Liza. 
This Geschichte.** 
In our society things are quite confused. 
"A genuine nihilist cannot, must not, dare not become reconciled 
to any part of the existing <order>. Under no condition should he 
dare to make deals <with it>. And he knows only too well that any 
such deal is decidedly out of the question." 
"Absolutely no moral ideas exist today," (He says) "suddenly, there 
isn't a single one left; and above all, it looks as if there hadn't ever 
been any." 
"Well, and before?" 
"I don't know anything about what was before. I only know that I 
looked around me and found nothing. Idealism." 
"Were you already 40 years old when you looked around?" 
"Le temps n'y fait rien.34 However, let it be 40." 
He has "an insatiable appetite for life." 
"He also talks in a taciturn way (Vasin)." 
"How is that, 'he talks in a taciturn way'? What sort of an expres­
sion is that?" 
"Well, there are people who even talk as if they weren't saying a 
word. It is a good expression." 
The Youth: "Now, that I know that I won't ever become a serious 
person, I have decided," etc. 
To write in so much detail-that means that my whole life will 
have as many volumes as a code of laws. 
He is explaining poetry to the Youth-"sweet lemonade." " 'Songs 
of the Western Slavs'-that is, sweet lemonade." 
Nervous behavior. 
According to a remark by Ivan lvanovich Dmitriev, Derzhavin had 
two <participants> in Pugachev's rebellion hanged solely out of 
poetic curiosity. 
• Russian podrostok, "youth," is derived from podrasti, "to grow up. " 
• • Geshikhta, the Russian form of the German word meaning "story." 
34 French: "Time has nothing to do with it." 

1 18 Feeding Hungry .'\fankind 
·when Vasin left Him and the Youth, He tells the Youth: "He 
didn't say a word all the time, and the two of us did all the talking, 
making fools of ourselves." (Petty vanity. But here the Youth adds a 
note in the novel, saying that "to remain silent is good, beautiful, and 
safe," and how nice it would be to take advantage of this <maxim>.) 
The Youth: "You are a stern judge of yourself." 
He: "I have no use for this remark. Let me tell you that I shall 
never allow anybody to judge me. But so long as I still have a couple 
of rubles, I want to live in seclusion and do nothing. At least this 
gives me the satisfaction that I am not involved in anything; I have 
a clear conscience, since I am not participating in anything, not doing 
any damage, making no mischief, not dirtying myself along with 
them." 
"Wagons that are hauling grain to mankind.3:; This is a lofty idea, 
yet a secondary one, and one that is great at a given moment only. For 
I know that, the moment I shall have changed stones into bread and 
feed mankind, man will immediately ask: 'All right then, I have 
satisfied my hunger; what shall we do now?' " 
"Mankind has always acted that way: it would thirst for a great 
idea, yet couldn't stand the thought of it and, the moment it arose, 
men would invariably sneer at it and spit upon it, trying to see it as 
something below them. Just so they wouldn't have to give any 
thought to the great idea, (I presume that, even if you do not under­
stand what I mean by 'that great idea,' you at least have a presenti­
ment of it) they invariably come up with, always have come up with 
some secondary idea, to divert their attention, just so they wouldn't 
have to think of the great idea." 
"Father, this sounds vague. What do you call 'a great idea'?" 
He: "I don't know what. I know that it is [always] the thing from 
which real life* springs, immediate, and not cerebral, manufactured, 
fahricatea fabricated life." 
The Youth: "What is real life?" 
He: "Real life ought to be something terribly simple, something 
one meets every day, something that strikes the eye, something that 
• Zhivaia zhizn', literally, "living life." 
35 Compare this phrase with the words of Lebedev in The Idiot: "Vile as I am, 
I do not believe in the carts bring bread to humanity. For the carts bringing 
bread to humanity, without a moral basis to the act, may quite cold-bloodedly 
exclude a considerable part of mankind from the enjoyment of what is brought, 
which has already occurred" (Part III, Chapter 4). 

A Russian Atheist 
1 19 
is so simple we just don't want to believe that it could be that simple, 
and pass by without even noticing it, not to speak of recognizing it." 
"The consequence of nihilism 'vill be idealism," says the Youth. 
"Not true," He retorts, "on the contrary, the most salutary and the 
most sobering positivism, for nihilism is itself, perhaps, practically 
the last stage of idealism." 
He: "I never judge anybody, and this is why I never make any de­
finitive conclusions either" (answering the Youth's reproof), "this is 
because I do not want to judge anybody." 
The Youth: "Why so?" 
He: "Because I wouldn't dare." 
The Youth: "But why so?" 
He: "I don't know why, but this is what my conscience tells me. A 
certain wise person (the Princess) [my wife] says: because I do not 
know how to suffer. In order to become a judge, she says, it is neces­
sary to acquire the right to judge through suffering. This sounds [a 
little grandiloquent,] but perhaps it is the truth." 
"A Russian atheist, if only he has brains and a heart, is always 
inclined to show some affection for God, because he is a kind person 
and immeasurably pleased to be an atheist. Atheism is for him a 
source of pleasure, and not of suffering." 
The Youth: "You always talk in an awfully, awfully abstract way." 
He: "Don't you pick on me." 
The railway station-they've arrived. "Why, it could be that 
nobody around here has anything to do, and that this is true of 
everybody." 
He: "Before, a long time before, I used to think: 'The moment 
they emancipate the peasants they (the liberals) will immediately 
become terribly unhappy [here]. What will they have to talk about 
then?' But I was wrong. They recovered quickly: they immediately 
began to write again-and they still are shouting and writing about 
it-that the peasants must be emancipated." 
The Youth: "Come on now, show me where." 
He: "I assuFe )'Ou At least they haven't come up with anything 
new. 
" 
The Youth calls him "daddy," sometimes "father," and on one oc­
casion they keep calling each other "father" and "sonny"* all evening, 
• Batiushka, which I have translated as "daddy," is both respectful and affec­
tionate; synok ("sonny") is also very affectionate, but more formal and dignified 
than "sonny." 

120 New Title: "Disorder" 
and emphatically so. But on the very next morning He is already 
frowning and no longer says "sonny," and another day later he asks 
the Youth to never again repeat this foolishness. 
Being guided by a single idea. 
"He has gorged himself with nihilistics, he has stuffed himself with 
nihilistics." 
"Who are they to negate things? \Vith them, even the negation of 
religion has been converted into a religion. Idealists These people 
are perpetually prayerful. Of course, I am not talking of the scoun­
drels and fools. There are an awful lot of scoundrels and schemers 
among them, though even more fools. Nihilistics. That's Lambert." 
"Isn't that also a moral idea?" 
"God knows. Let's change the subject." 
"Thoroughgoing scoundrels." 
A conversation at the nihilists' (he is delighted): "Quae medica­
menta non sanant/'36 etc., and then set fire to all the cities \·ilages and 
villages all over the land, make that the beginning. "That's how I 
understand it." (It is the spy who says this; some others argue with 
him.) 
The two late Rothschilds, and how much of a fortune they left, etc. 
(The Youth, making money, his idea.) 
New. 
According to the new plan of August 26. 
Title of the novel: "Disorder." 
The whole idea of the novel is to demonstrate that we have now 
general disorder, disorder everywhere and wherever you go, in soci­
ety, in business, in guiding ideas (of which, [for that very reason,] 
there aren't any), in <our> convictions (which ,[for the same reason,] 
we don't have), in the disintegration of the family unit. 
"If there are any passionate convictions, they are all destructive 
(socialism). There aren't any moral ideas; suddenly not a single one is 
left, and above all," He t8e YoutH says, "one has the impression that 
there never were any." 
"Well, after all, you, for instance, are a religious man." 
36 Latin: "\Vhat medicine does not cure." In the final version, someone cries 
out the following when the Raw Youth enters the Dergachev apartment: Quae 
medicamenla non sanant-ferrum sanat, quae ferrum non sanat-ignis sanat!" 
("What medicine does not cure, iron will cure; what iron does not cure, fire will 
cure.") (Part I, Chapter 3:3.) Quotation from Hippocrates. The quotation is used 
by Dostoevsky as a call for revolution. 

Liza and Moral Disorder 
121 
 
0 MY'lEHHK'B HHKOJA'I> 
H ItA K'b 
.D;OJ&EH'b 
•nTh 
'IUOHK,. 
no 
iJA KOIIY 
fiPABJUi 
H 
fiPHPOAY. 
81> Huan •YAUMII Hno.1u, • •To4w n npo.l\ a1.1t 
I CIIIMIOCB 
trO 
Ul, 
R.liTe 1\ 11p0.l- I roaopiTI gJ 
apal.lJ· 
rtmopne RlpG.lJ, K&n 011'1. Kl.n. I IUOI ... 
Own. unol •uo11,.n, 11 nn 
ero 1,1paie ueoall&l, 
liO.l'h II UITOUIU IIJUII, TMp1111U I 61111 .ll ka&· 
IITeTII, ltln 0111 r.ro 1'1.· 1\ .. ftl IIOII.U " IIIITUII I WTUI. 
[P"at.UXITt HIPO.lJ Btll 1p11.1,J .lO IOe.t'hllrt C.IOU, I Ullo 
.. •uoa•h .. .lOAXello liiTio 110 UHOIJ nplpO,lW. 
no 3&KIIIJ np11p0.lll ''" ...... pauu. CIOTplte ,., 
O.lln AUOI'h'lo pO.liiTCI n Jt.lori. I Kpl&'n, I .lpJrtJ 1\ 
urpe6"oA TpUil... Bet PO.lЂTt.l ruwe, act po,uTt.l TiD· 
Ill lit laAUIII I U1611,1M ;  Ill OJ.II1o IOHpOX.ltlllltl U ro·  
IOpiiTh, Hll 'IITITI., HN DICIT1o Ill } ...... I act HI DOlPII 
J.Pl .. lit. .lpJra7Penyn. .IIIU O.liiiUOH: 1tn .UIIUa. 
&OTtpwll 6w.11o'"tu n ua aepmu, l .lpJrero, ltTOpwl dtu" 
11M ,, ""'" 
C1ae11o. 
li:en c.o6a101 .,..,, 1 &n•ie. •• 
lltl IUUI II 6on•ie, I .1111.111 IUIIX'Io II do.llollllo 1\n. 
TJn auon npuo lll.lel'lo, Rea.lJ .lll.lJolll .lO.IKIO Ѐ 
6o.au1e p&NICTII •t•lo ll&.lJ eo6aua 1 11'\111. 
Ht 
pan\ en1o Ёu• 6-t.lllll 
" 6orntt, pa•t ecn an• 
fi.liiUt II 6onTUt; UK'Io U llt&,lJ .la.lloll, &ITOpwt .. 
pta1u J.PJflo .lP'J'1 10ryn 6un lltJ.III 1 6oraftlt. l\· 
This is one of the proclamations composed by the conspiratorial group, the Dol­
gushintsy, who are referred to in the notes. The title reads: "A bout the Martyrdom 
of Nikolay and how man should live according to the law of truth and nature." 
The text concerns itself with the fact that all men are born equal and consequently 
should be equal in society. 
"All I need is to lose that, too." 
[February, 3d part.] "You, for instance," he says to the Youth, 
"have chosen the idea of <becoming a> Rothschild. This idea is 
another bit of evidence concerning our moral disorders. You want to 
withdraw into your own burrow and shun everybody, and you are 
taking action to make this possible." 
Liza is an example of complete moral disorder; she refuses to live 
without happiness. 

122 
The Princess Hates Him 
The Dolgushins are another instance of moral disorder. 
"Let them be wrong," says the Youth, "yet their convictions imply 
honor and duty, and consequently there can be no talk of disorder 
in this instance." 
"Convictions implying honor and duty, and aimed at universal 
destruction; that's some fine order for you; however, I don't want to 
argue with you," He says. 
The Youth is convinced, up to about the middle of the novel, that 
He has married her for her money. And there, suddenly, he returns 
200,000. 
<His> Stepmother is very young, 24 years old. Toward the end, 
absolutely the young Prince. He takes his vengeance. "For every­
thing." 
Liza makes the Youth believe that He is selling his wife to the 
young Prince, (or that the Stepmother is being supported by the old 
Prince). 
The Stepmother suspects that He has a liaison with Liza and, 
having discovered that this is indeed so, she surrenders herself to the 
Prince, but not for revenge, but from despondency: "I am a predatory 
type myself." 
The Stepmother dies insane aRd eml>nces. Even before, when she 
had surrendered herself to the young Prince, she embraces Him and 
says: "What will become of you?" 
He says to the Youth: "Live to the moment. I do not believe in a 
future life; consequently, there is no need to engage in moralizing." 
"Is that why you keep immoralizing?"'*' says the Youth. 
"No, not just because of that; I am generally a scoundrel, but that's 
all right that way" (this is already after the icons). 
Toward the end: ("Faith in duty, and convictions-that is 
happiness.") 
The Princess hates Him, in addition to other reasons, because she 
suspects that He is ready to sell his wife to the old Prince. (The Step­
mother is a relative of the old Prince's.) (Perhaps this is slander on 
the part of Liza, but perhaps it is true.) 
?He married a girl who was being supported by the Prince (i.e., the 
Stepmother was said to be supported <by the old Prince>, until she 
inherited 200,000 herself). 
• :1\'ravstvennichat' ("engage in moralizing") and beznravstvennichaete "you 
keep immoralizing" are neologisms formed ad hoc and difficult to translate. 

Appetite For Life 
123 
A will in favor of the Stepmother. 
He is scheming, among other things, <to show> that the Princess is 
in possession of a forged will.* (The plot!) 
The Youth realizes immediately that the Stepmother cannot be 
sold (for reason of her exalted character), but it is true that she and 
the old Prince are friends, since they are distant relatives. She respects 
the old Prince as the benefactor of her family (Al. Alekseevich). How­
ever, as far as He is concerned, it is still true that He has received a 
good deal of money from the Prince to cover his own expenses (pocket 
money, and some secret <expenditures>). And suddenly the Youth 
learns that this man, who had married a girl for her money, has 
returned 200,000, and even without making any fuss about it. 
His is "an insatiable appetite for life." 
A tormentor of his wife.+-
[February, 3d part.] "Is this also a part of your appetite?" (i.e., tor­
turing his wife) asks the Youth. 
"Certainly," He replies. 
The Princess is convinced that the Youth belongs to His gang in 
the affair of the will. (Think it all over.) 
(N.B. Shorten the railway journey.) 
Liza says: "If I had lived in the 1 6th century, I would have been 
a poisoner." 
"I like disorder," (Liza suddenly says). 
He is in love (with the Princess, after a fashion). 
"You are an old goat, that's what you are."* *  
[February, 3d part.] "Why shouldn't I be one, why shouldn't I live 
to take care of my own arse, what else is there to do? Worry about the 
common good, make your contribution to the happiness of future 
generations? To hell with them, what the devil do I care? Let them 
tell me something more serious to support such notions!" 
"Well, this is a moral feeling, a striving to do one's duty, a thirst 
for harmony." 
He comes back with the shopkeepers. "No, my friend, it couldn't 
be that things rest upon a sense of duty and of harmony; it must be 
something natural. pFessо:ue A natural pressure, like that which makes 
a tree produce fruit, or a bird build a nest and hatch its eggs. The 
pressure of nature." 
• The Russian sentence is not quite grammatical and is unclear. 
.. Vy myshinyi zherebchik, literally, "you are a grey stallion,"whcre zherebchik 
is literally, "a little stallion." Disparaging and slightly obscene. 

124 Essence of the Novel 
"All right, let it be that way." 
"Oh no, nobody ever consulted me about this arrangement of 
things, so why should I submit to it, if, perhaps, I mustn't?" 
"But if you have no will, if you can't help submitting?" 
"Well, didn't I say perhaps.' But for the time being, I don't know, 
and I am going to try it out." 
"Why, this is atheism!" 
He: "I was just making fun." 
Vasin was not saying anything, stood up silently, and left. 
N.B. This conversation took place at Vasin's flat. Vasin had come 
to see him having learned that he had returned 200,000. However, 
only He and the Youth did any talking, while Vasin was listening all 
the time. So that later He is embarrassed and angry that He talked so 
much. 
He actually had lived with Liza. In the end, <her> Mother found 
out about it. Liza alternately enthralls Him during their trysts, and 
tortures him the rest of the time. Liza once made an attempt to en­
thrall the young Prince, but he rejected her. An insult. After her 
stepmother goes mad and dies, Liza hangs herself. 
The essence of the Novel is this: His untidy love for Liza and the 
sufferings from it. His love and admiration for His wife, and their 
mutually inflicted sufferings. Yet they are hiding the secret from each 
other. His love-hatred for the Princess. 
On one occasion Liza enticed the Youth and surrendered herself to 
him, He- actually sensing beforehand the Youth's horror after the act. 
She laughs at his horror. 
Vasin suddenly tells Him: "You were compromised in connection 
with such-and-such-affair," he says. 
"No, I was not." 
"You participated in such-and-such." 
"The proof is in the fact that I am here, talking to you." 
"However, you were compromised," Vasin remarked in his taciturn 
way. 
"To make money is dishonorable," He tells him. "\Veil, you buy 
cheaper, you sell at a higher price-you've cheated twice." 
The Youth gets to think. 
"There must be a line," he says. "Nobody would have given this 
soldier more, this is a market." 
"You think a little, and you'll see that there is no line." 
Conversation with Him, but already a long time after he has re­
vealed the secret about Rothschild, and somehow by accident. As a 

Vasin 
125 
result of this conversation, the Youth begins to waver, but there is a 
moment when he would rather be a crook, but with money. 
"If I renounce this idea," the Youth thinks, "what is there left for 
me to do? There is nothing for me to do then: it is very stupid to live 
that way. Unless one decides to enjoy life the way my father does.* 
I do not believe in socialism. If <one believes> in religion, one ought 
to go all the way and become a monk. What shall one believe?" 
And very soon after this conversation, He suddenly bursts out 
laughing: 
"Has this really discouraged you so much? The devil take it, 
haven't you ever come to think of this yourself? 'Vhy, you knew all 
along what you were up to and, as it appears to me, you are no simple­
ton: you keep asking questions, and looking for the answers." 
"I have been thinking of that even before," the Youth said 
gloomily. 
[February, 3d part.] "But before, until somebody else told you the 
same thing, you didn't believe in what had occurred to you? That 
makes sense, that's what always happens to people. However, I cer­
tainly did not say this to dissuade you from your idea. Frankly, your 
idea is a good one, and is worth as much as any other idea. Keeping 
busy in life <leads to?> the destruction of ideas." 
The Youth frequently regrets* *  that he is never going to be a 
senous person. 
?N .B. Vasin's father, who has sold his wife, goes to see .fim. Him 
because he thinks that He, too, has sold his wife. 
Though Vasin is a senior member of the secret society, all the other 
members disagree with him on many points, and some are his enemies 
and actually look at him with suspicion. 
The Youth must witness, in the course of the novel, a number of 
exceedingly craven acts on His part. He must be coming to see the 
Youth all excited, to tell him that nobody in His family respects him, 
that they refuse to consider Him the head of the family, etc. 
When the Stepmother has surrendered herself to the young Prince, 
the young Prince suggests that He sell <him> his wife. 
A NEW TRAIT: He absolutely must be jealous of his wife even before 
<her affair with> the young Prince. He (the father) is mistrustful. He 
• V klubniku pustit'sia, literally, "to go into plucking strawberries." See 
n. (•), p. 55, above. 
• • Plachet, literally, "cries." 

126 Liza and the Princess 
keeps looking under beds,37 <lies awake> at night listening. Liza 
takes notice of all this and subsequently exposes it. In the beginning 
the Youth suspects nothing, he just sees that something is wrong in 
the house. One day they're like turtle doves, the next day there is a 
hysterical scene, and suddenly He takes the Youth aback by informing 
him that his wife is having an affair with so-and-so. The Youth refuses 
to believe it, but He insists that it is true, and the Youth is almost 
made to believe it. 
The affair ends with Him put to shame. Contempt, Liza's jeers on 
account of this affair, • yet it had been Liza herself who, to some 
extent, had been egging him on. All this happens before the Youth 
learns about His liaison with Liza, or about His love for the Princess, 
about which he is also told by Liza. 
N .B. The Stepmother, on the other hand, is jealous of a chamber­
maid; then again of certain other trivial involvements, but most of 
all of the Princess. Liza is also trying to fan this jealousy of hers for 
the Princess. Being aware of it all, He is furious. The torments in­
flicted on his wife Altogether the Youth are organized. "He needs a 
nurse," etc. 
Altogether, the Youth is amazed at the contrast between His defini­
tive, severe, and exaltedly fascinating convictions (or reversed convic­
tions) and the surprisingly unfinished state of his character in real 
life. He is easily swayed, he is a slave of his impressions. 
"What have you found in Him?" the Youth asks Liza indignantly. 
"He has debauched me, and must belong to me," Liza replies, 
"because I can't stand him, and because I despise him." (That He has 
debauched her is a lie.) 
N .B. Liza absolutely suggests to Him that he must poison his wife, 
threatening that she is going to tell..fte.F <her> mother everything. But 
she finds out by herself. The Stepmother finally guesses what is going 
on, mainly as a result of some amazing scenes between Liza and Him. 
These scenes are arranged as follows. In the beginning, the <Step> 
mother was scolding on acoHnt of them was angry with Liza for 
being so insolent to Him. Then later, she got curious and began to 
take a closer look at what was going on. Finally, his cowardly be­
havior before Liza, a number of careless actions on Liza's part, and 
• Or: "Liza's contempt and jeers on account of this affair." 
37 Dostoevsky's father was supposed to have looked under his daughters' beds 
in search of suitors. 

Liza and the Young Prince 127 
several slips on his, made her suspicious. When she first became sus­
picious, she initially experienced a jealous animal curiosity, later a 
boundless sadness, and an exaltation of her own character. She made 
an attempt to get something out of the Youth, as she came to see him 
and cried (a scene, more gracefully). Finally, in a violent scene, Liza 
tells her everything herself. A scene. 
Then, the Stepmother all of a sudden surrenders herself to the 
Prince. Liza accuses her vehemently. "You were a saint. Why did you 
deprive me of yourself?" Liza's fury she hangs herself. The Step­
mother's madness. Liza hangs herself. 
"You can't love me, having noticed so many funny traits about 
me," He says to Liza. 
Two IDEAS. Definitively. 
Liza never submitted to Him, but she is carrying on a love affair 
with Him, and goes on rendezvous' with Him. She tortures Him by 
leaving him uncertain. Does she love Him, or does she hate Him? 
She offers to poison her <Step>mother. "You are mad," He says. 
Perhaps Liza herself does not know whether she loves or hates Him. 
Leave it that way, don't ever clarify it. 
In a mad fit of passion, Liza surrenders herself to the young Prince 
(earlier, she has been inciting His jealousy of her mother and the 
young Prince). She causes Him terrible suffering by her admission: 
"Why, I have been his mistress for a long time," i.e., the young 
Prince's (she is lying). He goes into a mad freRZ)' as a restlt of this, 
ehops up some ieons, a d1:1el. 
The Stepmother, having found out about it from Liza, dies, having 
lost her mind. Liza suddenly becomes utterly devoted to her dying 
Stepmother. She abandons the young Prince, as they part enemies 
(she sneers at him, drives him to a frenzy, spits on him as he is grov­
eling at her feet). And when her Stepmother dies, she hangs herself. 
N.B. NoT NECESSARY THAT THE STEPMOTHER SUBMIT TO THE YOUNG 
PRINCE. 
It is not necessary that Liza submit to Him even once. Love with­
out it. 
Or thus: Lia. in order to driYe him to a frenzy, Sl:lHenders herself 
to the Prince. He chops 1:1p some icons and leaves the house to chal 
leHge the PFiHee t6 a duel. TheH the Stepmother, feariHg <that> 
the challenge <might be acepted>, rushes to see the ''Olmg Prince 
begging him not to accept the challenge. "You have promised to be 
my frieRd," she says. "Save l-Iim, save Liza. Save me from these dis 
orders, from this teror. I alw:ays HSed to love you a little, ever since 

128 First-person S arrative 
we were children. Please, give me back my peace of mind" (at this 
point, dr@ams of the past, of aR ideal). She di@s in a fev@rish stat@, in a 
frenz·· 
;.: .It o that, though the tepHwther did rush to se the Prince, 
netloing at all ever happened between them. [Think over the pro and 
contra. A task] 
The death of his wife brings Him bac:k to his senses, he is stunned, 
there is no duel. After his wife's death, hatred for Liza, she hangs 
herself on the day of <her Stepmother's> funeral. 
But what does this domestic• disorder mean, and what is its role 
as far as the whole poem is concerned? 
The idea is that, theoretically, He has worked out a rule according 
to which nothing on earth has any value. Yet in practice He is fully 
devoted to <life on> earth. He is ashamed to live, yet in fact he has 
great vitality. 
He who denies everything and is desperate about not having any­
thing to cling to is at the same time attached to everything. 
Think over the possibility of a first-person narrative. Many advan­
tages; much freshness, the figure of the Youth would emerge more 
typical. Nicer. I'll be able to cope better with the character, with the 
personality, with the essence of that personality. It is all written while 
he is under arrest, for the second time, in connection with the Lam­
bert affair and the murder of Perchatkin. 
It will be easier to describe as something typical the passion of 
arson} i.e., the passion to set fires (comparing the plot against the 
Princess with incendiarism). His and Liza's characters will take shape 
in a more typical fashion, and more gradually. 
A task. 
Finally, descriptions could proceed more rapidly and more con­
cisely. Instances of naivete. Make the reader develop a liking for the 
Youth. They'll get to like him, and then they'll read the novel to the 
end. If the Youth as a character should turn out a failure, the whole 
novel will. 
August 27. 
Give it a good deal of thought. Color. ·will I succeed in giving 
life to this character? If I write the novel in the first person} this will 
• Or: "family," "familial." 

Plot against the Princess 
129 
undoubtedly give it more unity, and less of that what Strakhov38 has 
been criticizing me for, i.e., too large a number of characters and 
subjects.30 But what about the style and the tone of the Youth<'s 
narrative>? This style and tone may help the reader in anticipating 
the denouement. 
The plot against the Princess (details). 
About a year and a half prior to the beginning of the novel He 
married the widow of a General, who is a former ward and a very 
distant relative of the old Prince. She was then 24 years old. But 
before that, He had for some time made a strong impression upon 
the Princess (the Princess, a young society lady, 26 years old, is the old 
Prince's second or third wife). The Princess has a rather somber and 
most impressionable character, though not without an occasional, ex­
ceedingly bright flash of light. A society lady's presumption, insuffer­
able arrogance, the stubbornness and punctiliousness of an English­
woman (the wife of <Lord> Byron),40 petty vanity-this is her high 
society aspect. On the other hand, she shows flashes of true generosity, 
flashes of genuine philanthropy, mystic inclinations (which is how He 
gained influence on her, i.e., through religwn, preaching) and, of late, 
an inclination toward socialism (perhaps it could be arranged so that 
Vasin might have some influence on her). As for His influence of a 
year and a half earlier, it undoubtedly existed, and even not without 
an element of budding love. It was the Princess who had declared 
herself, a fact she is forever ashamed of, and most painfully so. There 
also had been a rendezvous, at some sort of a dive, something like a 
tavern, where they had suddenly quarrelled. The principal reason for 
their quarrel at the tavern may have been his crude seminarian" 
blundering in selecting the place of their rendezvous, as well as the 
obviousness, bordering on coarse and comical blatancy, with which he 
had made his preparations for a certain triumph. 
• Untranslatable: Russian seminarians were notorious for semiliteracy, crudity, 
and clumsy manners, coupled with "intellectual" presumption. 
38 Nikolay Nikolaevich Strakhov (1828-96), critic and philosopher, conservative 
in view. He cultivated the friendship of both Tolstoy and Dostoevsky and was 
biographer and critic of both. Dostoevsky took very seriously his criticism of 
The Idiot. 
39 Translation of the word "siuzhet." This word in Dostoevsky's time meant 
"theme" as a structural element. 
40 Dostoevsky was perhaps familiar with Macaulay's biography of Byron in 
which the domestic crisis of Lord Byron's life is treated. 

1 30 
The Princess 
Absolutely include in the Youth's narrative a description of this 
rendezvous and its setting, with details a la L<eo> T<olstoi>. (N.B. 
In his narrative, it might come out even more concise, more naked, 
leaving more things unsaid.) 
Silver and gold. 
They parted as enemies, and yet His sudden marriage to the Step­
mother terribly angers the Princess. 'Vithout spreading any slander­
ous rumors, she was sincerely convinced that He had married a 
woman kept by the old Prince, and that his function was that of a 
paid, dummy husband. He feels very much insulted by this, and 
greatly resents being so affronted by the Princess, but most of all 
<he suffers from> the memory of the rendezvous. The Princess is a 
seeker of the serious; a puritan, with sudden flashes of extraordinary 
femininity, gracefulness, and joie de vivre. 
Of late, i.e., immediately after Him, the young Prince, too, has 
had some influence on her. There is really some love here; however, 
it is a kind of motherly adoration, so that she even forgives him his 
betrayals, for instance, en haul lieu41 (there is only one betrayal which 
she does not forgive him-it is his affection, a pure one as it turns 
out, for the Stepmother). Actually she had quarreled with Him, a 
year and a half earlier, because He had started to preach to her about 
her being an adulteress, even if she was only mentally unfaithful to 
her husband; whereas she had, on that occasion, freely confessed to 
him her motherly affection for the young Prince. 
Then, a strange game had developed. Up to that point she had 
been sincerely impressed by His preaching, but now she suddenly 
noticed that there was hidden, behind his sermon to her: "Do not 
commit adultery," His own jealousy toward the young Prince, and a 
desire to lure her over to himself, i.e., "commit adultery not with him, 
but with me." This is where she exposed Him (at a point where she 
was already beginning to love Him, yet with her inner self seeking 
convulsively to escape from this love, which seemed repulsive to her), 
and this was also the theme of their rendezvous at the wretched tavern 
so inappropriately selected by him. 
During that year and a half of separation He had to bear a good 
deal of scorn and contemptuous opinions from her, but it was pre­
cisely this very fact that elicited in Him some sort of inexplicable 
passion and desire for the Princess, a love of pride, Ia haine dan.s 
41 French: "In high places." 

The Princess and Her Father 1 3 1  
l'amour,42 etc. As for real love, perhaps there actually wasn't any. But 
He always assumed that there might be a little bit of that same haine 
dans l' amour in the Princess, too, and was still dreaming of regaining 
her heart. However, of late He was almost forced to abandon such 
hope, on account of her terribly contemptuous attitude toward Him. 
This is already after the novel has started, and it will be necessary 
to invent such a scene (perhaps the theft of those diamonds). On 
which occasion He intercedes for tl=te boy <his> son. It's the Princess 
who has made the Prince believe that He is preaching l'evangile, and 
about those relics. And it is Vasin who converts the old Prince to 
atheism. 
Furthermore, about two years earlier the old Prince had had an 
attack of softening of the brain (Lamansky).43 That's when he lost 
his positions. It was at that time that the Princess, in her efforts to 
intervene in favor of the young Prince, her husband's <legal> heir, 
wrote a letter to Andreev telling him that the old Prince had made a 
will leaving his entire capital to the Stepmother (a fiction, but where 
did it originate?). 
N .B. She also told Him about it, not knowing yet of his impending 
marriage to that very same Stepmother, and so she was quite stunned 
when she suddenly heard (already after their rendezvous at the tav­
ern) that He was going to marry that kept woman. 
N .B. In the course of the novel, the Princess is stunned by the fact 
that He returns 200,000; also, He proves to the Princess that there is 
nothing in the will about leaving anything to the Stepmother; so 
that there takes place (already in the novel) an attempt at a reconcilia­
tion between the Princess and Him; however, it ends in another quar­
rel and contempt. 
And so, when the old Prince was suffering from softening of the 
brain, the Princess wrote a letter to Andreev concerning how the 
old Prince might be declared insane and the will which he had just 
then made, invalid (she trusted Andreev as she would herself). Also, 
a letter to Andreev about the young Prince (in reply to old Andreev's 
suspicion that she was in love with the young Prince) <somehow> 
turned up, and this letter, too, could, if necessary, compromise her. 
42 French: "Hate in love." 
43 Porfiry lvanovich Lamansky (1824-75), a government official with whom 
Dostoevsky was slightly acquainted, and who committed suicide from a deranged 
mind. Dostoevsky wrote to his wife on February 6, 1 875: "Imagine Porfiry 
Lamansky died from a dagger struck in his heart!" 

1 32 
The Youth and the Princess 
Still in Andreev's lifetime the Princess had once, all of a sudden, 
asked him to return those letters to her, and he had replied that he 
had destroyed them (burned them) immediately. Which was not true. 
After Andreev's death, the Princess, fearing an intrigue on His 
part, i.e., a denunciation to the Prince, a denunciation on His part, 
with the aim of having her excluded from the will (for h@ i5 youAg), 
goes to see one of the aunts with whom she had been on friendly 
terms before, begging her to let her have those letters, but the aunt 
says that she hasn't found anything of the kind. 
This scene: the Youth was asleep behind a screen, and the aunt 
didn't know it. The Youth woke up and involuntarily, as well as 
voluntarily, listened in to her confession about the letters, conclud­
ing, though not quite clearly, that the Princess was afraid of those 
letters. At this point he got up, stepped out from behind the screen, 
much to the Princess's embarrassment. Then he realized that, from 
there on, the Princess was going to be afraid of him. (N .B. He hates 
the Princess, i.e., he loves her passionately, which he has confessed to 
the reader beforehand.) But she gets to be even more contemptuous 
and rude toward him; at this point the insult <which the Youth suf­
fers at the hands> of the young Prince, and the scene with the theft 
of the diamonds. 
During a night of despair, when the Youth is aimlessly walking 
around the city, the thought of the letters suddenly occurs to him. [Or 
simply, he accidentally finds a package of Andreev's correspondence.] 
He recalls that there is a package of letters at the flat. (N .B. He has 
already learned from Him that these letters have great importance.) 
And there, without any previous intention or plan to take vengeance 
<on her>, he starts looking for these letters and finds them. 
Having found them, he has an idea which begins to torment him. 
(N .B. Perhaps he is no longer working for the Prince by that time.) 
From some conversations with Him, very cleverly conducted by the 
Youth, he sees that the Princess is quite vulnerable to pressure. At 
first he isn't after the money, nor does he want to have the Princess, 
but simply wants to triumph, to show them, to be a success (at first 
he had been daydreaming of shooting somebody). 
(Fantasy about Ungern-Shternberg.)44 This fantasy is related by a 
dreamer, a most kindly person (couldn't he be Vasin's brother?). Now, 
as is generally the case with adolescent passion for incendiarism, he is 
44 See note 3 of this section. 

The Letter 
1 33 
seized by a feeling of his own power. He does not tell Him that he 
has found those letters. 
Finally, he reveals to Him a plan, still remote and vague, how to 
violate her.* He consults with Him. The other man is amazed, then 
falls to thinking, and is stunned. He says nothing. Apparently he 
doesn't want to say what he is thinking, or give advice. But the idea 
obviously appeals to Him. 
·what is most characteristic about it all is the fact that the Youth, 
when telling Him about those letters, gives him nothing really defi­
nite, i.e., that he has actually discovered that correspondence, but 
merely makes a supposition to the effect that if one could find these 
letters, such-and-such might be done. 
·when the Youth is discussing that [fantastic] letter to the Princess, 
meant to lure her to an appointment, He gives him this bit of advice: 
the letter of invitation ought to contain one or two characteristic 
expressions quoted from her correspondence with Andreev-"I bet 
you that'll scare her." "If I had those letters in my hands, I'd know 
what expressions precisely," He says, but the Youth remains silent. 
(N .B. The Youth deeply despises Him for the very thing he had him­
self wanted to do.) 
He comes to see him several days later, looking positively alarmed, 
in order to talk him out of it, and indirectly advises him not to go 
through with it, i.e., he says that any such idea, if there actually were 
a person who had such an idea, would amount to a low-down trick. 
On the occasion of this visit He inadvertently reveals his thoughts 
to the Youth by asking one careless question, which he doesn't notice 
himself, something like: "\Vell, what about that business with the 
letters?" etc. \Vhich suggests to the Youth that he has taken it all 
seriously, that he is awaiting the effect <of the plot>, that he wishes 
it to materialize, but by someone else's hands, and that, morally, he is 
seeking to detach himself even in the eyes of the Youth. 
But at this time the Youth is overcome by a feeling of disappoint­
ment. He views the idea with the letters with hatred; quarrels and 
exchanges angry words with Him. 
But the thing gives Him no rest. He tells Liza about the letters, 
though in a roundabout way. Liza has some caustic comments on the 
baseness of His thinking, as well as regarding the fact that he, appar­
ently, is still interested in the Princess, as a result of which He aban-
• Plan nasiliia, literally, "a plan of violence." 

1 34 He and the Letter 
dons the idea altogether and becomes even more spiteful than before. 
But then Liza, having won this victory, proceeds to use her charms on 
the Youth and finds out about the letters from him. The Youth is 
stunned by the fact that Liza knows <about the letters>, and since no 
one except He could have told her, he now for the first time begins to 
suspect that they are in liaison. Friendship, and almost love, between 
the Youth and Liza (<initially> Liza is putting him on, but later she 
is very nearly carried away by love herself, for hers is such a nature 
that a planned game of love, once it has taken possession of her, will 
rapidly turn into real love, even though it will last only as long as 
the game). It is Liza who concocts the whole scheme. She incites the 
Youth, arranging for him to be insulted by the Princess again, etc. 
They are working on it, but He meets her on the occasion of re­
turning those 200,000 (through Vasin, maybe). The Princess makes 
an attempt conc€rning th€ l€tt€rs to determine whether the letters 
might be in His hands, while He, seeing this, and becoming con­
vinced (falsely) that the Princess had sent for him and was trying to 
effect a reconciliation merely in order to find out about those letters, 
makes a rude insinuation to this effect. She turns pale and asks Him 
to leave. He feels insulted, even though he had behaved in a dignified 
way. He immediately goes to see the Youth and now asks him directly 
whether or not he has found those letters. (But no more than that, 
without making any mention of the chance <that he might now be 
willing to go along> with his plan.) The Youth answers that he hasn't, 
but tells Liza that He has been asking him. This gives Liza another 
occasion to make fun of Him: how He is being abused by the Princess, 
how she has once more shown him the door, etc. But what is most im­
portant, He is stunned by the fact that the Youth has told Liza (for 
who else could have?), and deduces from it that there actually must be 
a letter. Nevertheless, having discovered that Liza is involved in the 
affair, He again seeks to dissuade the Youth, and in a (tumultuous) 
scene swears that he will warn the Princess. 
At this point Lambert suddenly <enters the scene>. Liza now joins 
Lambert and tries to talk the Youth into abandoning <his scheme>. 
But Lambert is being careless and lets the Youth know about it (thus 
betraying Liza), for he needs some material help from the Youth. 
But having learned from the Youth that He has perhaps already 
informed the Princess <. . .> (N .B. \Vhen He threatened to inform 
the Princess, the Youth failed to pass this phrase on to Liza, wishiRg 
since he was himself struggling with his noble<r> feelings, which he 
did not expect Liza to have. But then Lambert again made him 

The First Person 
1 35 
change his mind.) Lambert comes to see him, asks some direct ques­
tions, and even tells him what to do. (He was ill at the time-from 
<the incident with> the Princess, from Liza's surrender to the little 
Prince, from the flight of his own wife, etc.) Having analyzed Lam­
bert and realized that this thing is really going to be a scandal (the 
violation), He agrees <to join in> and says that he has not warned 
<the Princess>. His struggle with himself: should he warn her or not? 
All of which He later adHlits tells the Youth in his confession. 
But the Youth relates this to the reader even before the confession. 
At this point, a scene with the Princess, the Youth gives Lambert a 
surprise. Lambert gets up and leaves. 
They lure her to the aunt's flat. They know for sure that she doesn't 
know the aunt's hand. The aunts had left on a pilgrimage. Liza is 
hiding there, etc. 
A note, A ugust 31. 
The Youth writes that, in explaining his facts he must inevitably 
make mistakes, and this is why, if ever possible, only the bare facts 
will be given. 
N.B. August 3 1 .  A factual presentation in the first person, by the 
Youth, will undoubtedly reduce the length of the novel, if I succeed. 
A ugust 31. 
A bsolutely. Draw attention to the extraordinary amount of dis­
harmony and nervous tension in His family, including the Step­
mother and Liza: to perpetual grumbling, suffering, and pain which, 
as far as He is concerned, soHletiHles almost invariably end right 
there. Tragic as things may have looked, they come to an abrupt end 
in forgiveness and reconciliation, as he cheerfully forgets everything. 
But they never end that way for the Stepmother, who always forgives 
everything but in whose heart the pain keeps lingering and growing. 
(Liza is there, too.) 'When he feels the pain growing within, he some­
times awakens the Stepmother at night. Explain her eventual re­
bellion and flight to the Prince as a result of her derangement: "I am 
myself a predatory type." 
The psychology lies in the fact that she is stunned by Liza's action. 
She may have suspected for a long time that Liza was living with 
Him; but though she was suspecting it, she always refused to believe 
it. On the contrary, some terrible things were happening to her: self­
accusations, self-derision. On one occasion she actually makes an at­
tempt to confess the "baseness" of her suspicions to Him and to Liza, 
and she tells <them> of her dream (which she had really dreamt) 
about Liza's liaison with Him. But in the end she cannot stand <the 

1 36 
Violating the Princess 
thought of> that dream; she bursts into tears and begs Liza's and His 
forgiveness on her knees (the Youth is a witness of that scene). 
But then, having learned that Liza has been seeing the Prince, and 
when He and Liza give themselves away in her presence (the icons), 
she is so thunderstruck that she goes out of her mind. 
\Vhen she leaves <her husband> for the Prince she is already mad, 
and moreover, in so doing she is following Liza's example. The Prince 
shows Liza the door. This is where He makes an effort to challenge the 
Prince to a duel, but not on account of Liza, but on account of the 
Stepmother. The Stepmother dies having been unable to stand these 
disorders. 
August 31. 
ExcEEDINGLY IMPORTANT. The first idea of violating the Princess 
belongs to the Youth, not to Lambert. As for Lambert, he only wants 
30,000 (and actually thinks of killing her). In this "idea" there lies 
"the terrible crime of the Youth." 
N.B. "I would have never dared to even open my mouth to say 
such a thing to the Princess," writes the Youth. "I vvould have started, 
and then my voice would have failed me. I was imagining it a thou­
sand times, as I was roaming the streets of the city. And yet I decided 
that I would absolutely bring off the rendezvous. And that's why I 
was trying not to think of how badly I would be scared, and if I was 
imagining anything at all, I was imagining only the moments of 
triumph which were to follow. I was seeking to reassure myself by 
thinking how base they were." 
August 3 1 .  
Think over part one, i.e., already the details of details. 
TASK. That the reader have, toward the end of part one, a presenti­
ment of the importance of the ending (of the idea) and of a further 
development of the idea of the novel. A plot. Conclude part one at 
the most interesting spot. 
Another most important note. The Youth must write (the whole 
novel) in the same unexpected :md original fashion as <the episode 
about> frou-frou. 
September I. 
A doubt resolved. 
There is nothing pathetic or sympathetic about the novel. 
"'What do you like yourself?" 
The novel is going to be a failure and will turn out artificial and 
forced if it doesn't have the following: the character of the Youth, 
tortured, overwrought, suffering, and gloomy, with flashes of light 

Brusilov 
1 37 
and of joy, who has retreated into his somber idea and who, in his 
clashes with the outside world, sees the problems, the tasks, the 
horror <of life>. So that only then can one see how the Youth could 
have come up with such a somber idea. 
1st, the childhood of the Youth (absolutely), in a number of frag­
ments throughout the novel, cursorily, how they used to beat him at 
the boarding school. For instance, when he defends the sick child. 
His long-suffering late mother, his first friendship, Lambert, etc.-all 
cursorily. 
Sufferings of the Youth at the boarding school, absolutely in a 
cursory manner, and how they nicknamed him the barn-owl. Not only 
cursorily, but even as if he didn't want to tell about it. A good many 
things that remain unsaid, but this will make it all the clearer to the 
reader. On one occasion he tells Lambert about his sufferings at the 
boarding school (and at high school)-only 6 lines. On another occa­
sion he recalls Brusilov. Later, about how the idea of alienation was 
conceived by him early, to be precise, when he was dreaming of be­
coming king of an island known to no one, near the Pole, or in the 
middle of a lake in Central Africa. 
Couldn't he be Brusilov? 
He is Brusilov, which he mentions only once in his notes (Lambert 
is the son of Souchard; that's where they became friends). He never 
told Him about it, never complained, <being> proud. 
"At times I thought that I might take my revenge on Souchard, 
even burn his house; I was giving it a good deal of thought, but 
couldn't make up my mind. Neither could I make up my mind to 
run away. (I am a coward.)" 
His character is gloomy, hypochondriac, nervous, suspicious. But 
<occasionally> a ray of light <would break> through the clouds. 
Youth. And, finally, the great idea wins out. But he has terrible pride, 
so that he does not complain to anybody. The tone of his notes is 
somber and na'ive. Sometimes naively ironic, but sincerely so. A seeker 
and a wanderer. His father was then a Brusilov, a grand seigneur (of 
the middle bracket). Il faut le rosser.45 
He is also the one who dreams about Ungern-Shternberg.46 
"I must admit that I am a terrible dreamer and a coward; I am 
admitting this before myself. If I had to admit it before other people, 
45 French: "You have to beat him." 
46 See note 3 of this section. 

138 
The Youth and the Boy 
I'd rather die. I could never imagine myself in my thoughts as any­
thing but the head man, as a hero. I could never accept a secondary 
role. And therefore, when it comes to making a fortune, it must ab­
solutely be a million." 
He is from a very good family and not a government official, nor a 
lawyer, but a wanderer all his life, who has spent two average fortunes 
in his lifetime. Never managed to make a career. To be sure, he did 
manage to start a law practice. 
See the biography. Combine with the inheritances and with 
Brusilov. 
His aunt removed him from Souchard's <boarding school> and 
placed him in a high school (cursorily). In high school, they used to 
beat him up. Tattle-tale. Barn-owl. Lambert. Souchard has died, and 
Lambert only has his mother. 
The Youth is both petty and profound; he knows a lot, and is 
nai've; and gloomy. Overwrought. But resurrection and light in the 
end. And do not explain why light and resurrection. 
The Youth has his own flat. A doorman in a government building. 
An unctuous fellow. (It is this doorman who takes the kidnaped boy 
over to His place.) The boy was with the doorman's sick daughter. 
The boy was later begging to be taken to that girl, and the Youth 
used to take him there. Death of the little girl, who insists that the 
boy say good-bye to her. The Youth relates in detail and with severe 
seriousness how he arranged for that last meeting between the two 
children. This is how He and the doorman became acquainted. 
The doorman is an unctuous fellow, not too talkative. The Youth 
respects and loves him and only with him alone is he completely sin­
cere. The doorman has a frequent visitor, a certain lieutenant who 
keeps begging people for 20 kopeks aRd he oRce. This lieutenant 
tells the story about the laborer that boat in England, about that 
rock, etc. The doorman has a wife, a woman of easy virtue. After 
the death of their daughter, he burns her to death on her kitchen 
stove. 
After the boy has run <away> for the last time, he is on his way to 
drown himself and drops in on the doorman, thinking that he might 
find the Youth there. He finds nothing at the doorman's flat. The 
Youth collects the boy's <tales of his> wanderings.* 
• The whole paragraph is quite awkward in the original. 

The Youth in School 
1 39 
The Youth NEVER* was in prison, and was only superficially con­
nected with the Lambert affair. 
The Youth. Notes. In the railway carriage. "It appears to me that 
what I was saying to her was pretty stupid. It is a strange thing; I still 
don't know how to talk to women, whereas I can say clever things 
when talking to men. But in a woman's presence I always get mad 
at something right in the very beginning, and then I go on to talk 
a lot of nonsense. This must be corrected. But this is of course what 
was causing my hatred for <all> women. And altogether, I am 
terribly vain. I am vain and give myself away in trivial things, but I 
know how to keep <my> great idea a secret." 
When I met this character for the first time .J:,.i.a.. (Liza)-that was 
a long time ago, almost six months now. 
Make sure to insert the phrase " [to be sure,] I have read a lot." 
The Youth HAS GRADUATED FROM HIGH SCHOOL, but he does not 
want to go to the university, because Andreev who had been support­
ing him had died and he did not want to be supported by Him, while 
the aunts had written him to Moscow that they could not send him 
any money. Secondly, he failed to enroll in the university (even 
gladly so) because he wanted to tackle his idea as soon as possible. 
The Youth was among the best students through all the grades of 
high school, except the last, where he barely passed his examinations. 
(Purposely. The golden mean.) But he did pass. 
He won't talk to the Stepmother for three days at a time, while 
having the intention not to talk to her for 1 0  days (he comes running 
to the Youth, telling him everything). Or else, he would wake her up 
in the middle of night to lecture to her (while she is sick). 
(N .B. The Stepmother is so intelligent that she can understand 
this psychology perfectly well.) 
September 1 .  
PLAN OF THE FIRST CHAPTERS. 
N.B.! Be aware of the main point in each chapter and stick to it. 
Leaving things unsaid. 
The railway carriage, Liza, arrival in Petersburg, etc. 
Reception at the aunts'. He goes to see Him, but He isn't in, 
<only> the Stepmother and Liza. 
Goes to see Vitia, Vasin, goes back to see Him in the evening, 
embarrassed because it is so late. A comical situation because of its 
" Underlined three times. 

140 Returns the 200,000 
being so late, and because of how it is settled (the Youth does some 
pouting). 
He returns home to the aunts. The [etten. Staying for the night. 
The aunts give him a tongue-lashing. He decides to rent himself a 
flat. 
On the next morning, a flat. The flea-market. 1\Iahe money. 
He (the day before): "Come and have dinner with us." He comes­
they are quaneling, no dinner. "Let's go to a tavern." 
At the tavern, they become acquainted. He is showing off. 
Returning home. The chambermaid has already been fired. Liza. 
On the child. The Youth leaves for his own Hat witA a strange feeling. 
The Prince and the Princess (riddles everywhere). He listens in on 
the conversation about those relics and makes friends with the Prince. 
Insults on the Princess's part lie is }'Otmg. 
Again at Dolgushin's. They talk<ed> about the young Prince. 
He stays for the night at the aunts'. The Princess's visit. He comes 
out from behind the screen. 
At His place. The scene with the child. He rents a flat. He takes 
the child with him. The child is taken back. 
He is convinced that He married her for her money and that his 
wife is being supported by the old Prince. "What business is this of 
mine?" 
He gets together with Him and terribly would like to reproaches 
him for letting the Stepmother be supported by the old Prince. His 
aunt chases him out of her house for that. 
At this point he learns that He has returned 200,000. (N.B. This 
happens early.) 
Feeling insulted and sad, having quarreled with Him and insulted 
the Stepmother, he <sulks> in his corner. 
About Soucliard, about liis da)·dreams. Statement of his idea. He 
comes to see him. He Liza cotnes to see hitB, who had insulted Him, 
tells Him everything: about Souchard, about Brusilov, and about his 
idea. A fascinating evening. At this point he asks Him about Vasin. 
On that fascinating evening, he asks Him about Vasin, for the 
theories of those people, while they haven't shaken his own idea, still 
are causing him some anxiety and doubt. 
'Vhat is most important, on that fascinating evening the Youth is 
impressed by the fact that He is not treating him with condescension, 
that He won't brush off his questions with biting remarks, but 
answers them all, even his question& about petroleum, etc. 
(N.B. A task. But how to coordinate "a boy <who feels> insulted" 

The Youth's Idea 
1 4 1  
with "a fascinating evening"? Answer. By letting Him ask the boy's 
forgiveness, so that the latter cautiously embraces Him, by then let­
ting Him confess all his weaknesses to the Youth and, finally, by 
letting the Youth make him promise, upon leaving, to take good care 
of the boy.) 
1\feeting with the fool at the Princess's (still in part one). The Fool 
used to visit the Youth. The Youth tells Him about the Fool. They 
both laugh. They see the Fool. 
2d part. 
Development of His boy. The Dolgushins. Vasin. He almost 
abandons his idea. He quits respecting Him, but is still interested in 
Him. \Vith Liza. \Vomen are whores. The Princess. The diamonds. 
Rejected. 200,000. At this point, Lambert. A meeting. For the first 
time, the idea of revenge occurs to him. He puts his own idea aside 
for the time being. 
N.B. Only in the beginning does he ardently adhere to his own 
idea; later he puts it off, being busy with other things. It comes back 
to him during <the incident with> the diamonds. He is cheated at 
an auction. A popular scene. However, though he has abandoned the 
practical pursuit of his idea, he continues to defend it theoretically, 
before Vasin and everyone else. 
The unctuous doorman teaches the Youth to disdain wealth and 
great intellect, pointing out the happiness and freedom offered by the 
possession of a firm will. "Pray!" (A great character.) And yet he, who 
possesses willpower, burns his own wife to death on her kitchen stove. 
1ft tke 2d part (I st part. The Youth confesses his idea, and later is 
sad that he has told it; conclude it with some characteristic items 
from his biography. High school. The desert island, etc. <He has 
had> the idea for three years.) 
In the first part, absolutely include also some highly spectacular 
action. Rude behavior at the Prince's. Insults at the hands of the 
Princess. The young Prince (give a beating.) Vasin. He steals a child. 
Tells his father that he is married to a kept woman. Reconciliation. 
He reveals his plan of getting rich. His sadness about having re­
vealed an idea which he had been keeping himself for three years. 
He leaves having said nothing. Conclude with his biography. 
[ Andreev' s letter.] 
In the 2d part, the Princess. Meetings with Him. His family life. 
Liza's rude behavior. He disenchants him regarding Rothschild, also 
Vasin. But the Princess detests him, a real clash with the young 
Prince. The diamonds. He says something impertinent about her 

142 First or Third Person 
depravity-something frightfully rude. He is shown the door. Nights. 
Revenge. "Let me become an enemy of humanity." 
[The boy is in his care all along.] 
An unctuous soldier. The diamonds are found on the following 
morning. But he has behaved so rudely that he leaves. (N.B. He 
was threatening the Princess about his knowledge of Andreev's letter. 
He had learned about this letter from Him.) (N.B. Suddenly he finds 
out about His liaison with Liza. Liza tells about the letter while they 
are at his place. The beginnings of a plot. A rupture. He withdraws 
from everybody. Wanderings. ''I'll shoot myself." Lambert.) 
[Meeting with the little girl. Death of the little girl.] 
September 2. 
Two questions. If told in the third person, will it be interesting? 
If the Youth tells the story (in the first person), that alone will make it 
interesting. And more original. Also, it shows the character better. 
In the first, or in the third person? (in the first persou is better even 
as far as Brusilov is concerned, more original). 
N.B. The arrangement of the narrative would be more original 
with the Youth telling the story. Jumping from one detail to the 
other. Such arrangement is revealing of his own character, but as for 
the chapter arrangement < . . .  > 
In the first person it would be so much more original, and show 
more love; also, it would require more artistic skill, and would be 
terribly bold, and shorter, easier to arrange; moreover, it would 
make the character of the Youth as the main figure of the novel so 
much clearer, and the meaning of the idea as the cause upon which 
the novel hinges more obvious. But won't this originality bore the 
reader? \Vill the reader be able to stand this first person through 35 
quires? And what is most important, can the basic ideas of this novel 
be fully and naturally expressed by a twenty-year-old writer? 
N.B.? TAe YmltA is writiRg four years after tAe e•t'eRt, wAicA ex 
plaiRS Row Ae Aas maRagea to compreheRa Him, His iaeas, etc. 
The Youth brings Vasin together with his friend Shveitsarov, • 
and what do you know, Shveitsarov is in complete accord with his 
doctrine, except one point, "that everything should be broken to 
pieces": "It will go to pieces all by itself." "Either he didn't under-
• This name is derived from shveitsar, "doonnan," which connects this char· 
acter with the nameless doorman of a few pages back. 

The Youth's Feelings for Him 
143 
stand a word of what I said, or he understands more than I do," Vasin 
remarked to the Youth. "At any rate, he has got some sort of an idea 
of his own. These are the most dangerous people." (?) [Idee] 
[Idea] The young Prince, instead of responding to His challenge, 
offers to buy His wife from him. 
If in the first person, it will become necessary to go less into the 
development of various ideas which the Youth could not naturally 
transmit in the form in which they were uttered, and to let him trans­
mit only the heart of the matter. 
A narrative in the first person is more original by virtue of the 
fact that the Youth may very well keep skipping, in ultra-naive 
fashion, <from the main line of the narrative> to all kinds of 
anecdotes and details, proper to his development and immaturity, 
but ဴ impossible for an author conducting his narrative in regu­
lar fashion. 
The Youth's feelings for Him can be more direct, and expressed 
more clearly and more simply (and more unexpectedly), if the narra­
tive is conducted in the first person; for instance, suddenly and un­
expectedly: "I was grieving bitterly about His being so frivolous," 
and later: "This is where I realized that he was being consumed by 
some idea '\'t'hich and that he wasn't so frivolous at all, but what pre­
cisely was it?" 
And in the end: "Disorder of the soul as a result of unbelief" (as a 
result of atheism). "Strange words! I would not have understood 
them, or would have considered them meaningless, hadn't I seen in 
Him a living example." 
The Youth to himself, in the end: "I simply believe in life, I want 
to live with all my might. But what ought one to do as one lives?­
that's the problem. That's something I don't know. Could it be no 
more than making a living? That's not enough. Simply love every­
body, and inasmuch as I don't know how to do that, but want to, to 
spend one's whole life learning how to love, and then-well, I don't 
know what then, I am still too young." 
"And first of all, I think, I'll go to the university . . .  
" 
He- If in the third person, draw <your characters> in a detached 
way, as if concealing your sympathy, restraining yourself, with as 
much originality as ever possible both in the tone of the narrative as 
well as in the arrangement of the order of the scenes and subjects to 
be described. 
(N .B. It was the Stepmother who placed him with the old Prince. 

144 The Youth Steals the Letter 
The latter had long been asking to have a young secretary.) The Old 
Prince had actually told the Stepmother: "Why won't you find a 
young secretary for me?" 
He told the Youth that the Prince was in his second childhood. 
In tke fiFSt part In any case, pay attention to His character in the 
first part. (Insofar as He is not as yet expressing himself either through 
Christianity, or through any intrigues.) 
One ought to plant something dazzling and mysterious about Him 
in the first part. 
A valuable note. This is already in the hrst part, when He fails to 
visit the Youth for fear "that he might give Him a scolding" (a trait 
which touches the Youth by its simple-heartedness). 
Also in the first part, the Youth tells Him that He is an old man 
and that He was more dazzling before, when he saw Him the last time. 
"You were still walking with a limp." U f8:ut le r 
"Yes, my dear, I still loved you." 
"You said to Souchard: "Il faut le rosser."41 
The Youth steals the letter from Andreev's package. The Princess 
had said to the aunt: "My entire fate depends on that letter. He is 
going to show it to my husband, who will deprive me of everything. 
He is capable of doing it. (Can't you find it somewhere? Couldn't it be 
among some slips of papers?)." Here, about being a kept <woman?>. 
The aunt takes her part. The Princess tells the aunt outright that 
she had suggested that the Prince be placed in an insane asylum. Her 
husband would never forgive that. The Youth recalls having seen a 
package behind the icons. He tells Him about it. He explains to Him 
what it is the Princess is afraid of, and He is terribly interested in the 
whole thing. 
"Are you really in love with her?" 
However, the Youth does not tell Him that he has got the letter. 
A;-.; IDEA. Couldn't it be Vasin to whom he tells the story of his 
childhood (when the child has fallen asleep)? "I shall never tell my 
father?" But he does not tell Vasin about his idea. But he does tell 
his father about it. And when He has left, the idea has lost some of its 
lustre. But to make up for that: "/ told <him> nothing about 
Brusilov." 
The character will turn out more genuine. And only toward the 
end of the novel He tells him: "Vasin told me everything, everything 
47 French: "You have to beat him." 

Vasin 
145 
(about Brusilov), on the very next day, asking me to save you from 
getting into trouble. This is how I've been saving you" (i.e., He has 
himself led him on to commit a crime). 
He tells Vasin <his story> in this form: first, about Brusilov, with 
restrained irony, but everything. And then, how he used to withdraw 
into himself, how he used to daydream (here one might let the Youth 
devote a separate chapter to his daydreaming, but let him address it to 
the reader, rather than to Vasin). He tells Vasin only about Brusilov. 
Vasin is feeling him out: withdrawn, wouldn't he make a good social­
ist and conspirator? 
"Too bad you haven't met any people. Nor have you read any good 
books. Nor developed a good idea." 
"I've got an idea." 
"Which is?" 
''I'll tell you later. Only it isn't any of yours." 
"Well, it is time to go to bed," says Vasin (white nights). 
When He comes to see the Youth (this is when, for several days, 
He is very tender to him), He suddenly says: "I know, Vasin has told 
me about you." 
He flushes: "I didn't want to tell him. I don't want to beg for any­
body's pity. Why, and you weren't such an old man either." And he 
suddenly bursts into tears. 
An idea: "Vasin has told me about <your> idea, and about all of 
your ideas. Don't you worry, you've been trying to withdraw from 
people. I understand, I am not laughing." He confides his idea <to 
Him>. 
When he has left, he feels sorry that he has told him about his idea. 
"\Vhy did Vasin tell him about me? At least it wasn't /. But I did 
start crying. That's bad. But what was bothering me most of all was 
the fact that I had told him about my idea. Eh, too bad I did tell him." 
And later, in the 2d part, many times about the idea (raising it to 
the level of a poetic idea in the reader's mind). 
Then, Lambert. Finale. The idea has lost its lustre. 
But as far as He is concerned, he tells him, prior to the confession 
and to <the meeting with> Vasin, only about: "Il faut le rosser."48 
"This was a kindly, a most kindly Frenchman." 
"Yes, kindly." 
"You seem to disagree." 
48 French: "You have to beat him." 

146 Disorder 
"Not at all." 
"That's why I placed you with him, because he was a kind man." 
In the first person, the Youth €aft says: "I am of course incapable 
of stating all these ideas as they were expressed." And later: Even in 
a first person narrative he can write as if he were writing in the third 
person, describing scenes that occurred before his arrival, and scenes 
which he did not himself witness. For instance, in this fashion: "'Vhat 
had happened was this: Vasin went to see Dolgushin and told him." 
Or, "once, the Princess entered her husband's <study>, saying," etc. 
If the novel is to be told in the first person, the whole poem lies in 
this: how I fell, and how I was saved. 
I have called it: Disorder. This is His word. He used this word 
more often than any other. 
If the novel is to be told in the third person, something everybody 
is sick and tired of; and the narrative devices, too, are available in 
literature; besides, it will be more difficult to make the Youth look 
original, i.e., to explain why he has been selected. 
AsouT THE LETTER, there absolutely ought to be some casual men· 
tion of it in part one. 
It could be done so that he has already stolen the letter and doesn't 
feel in the least guilty about it; only much later his conscience begins 
to bother him. 
[668] But there should absolutely be something about the letter in 
part one. 
BASIC and MOST IMPORTANT. When He learns that Vasin has told 
<his father> about Souchard, He feels hurt. • "I couldn't have 
thought of any pain that could have stung me harder. I had been 
left with only one thing: the pride of knowing that I had suffered. 
But I don't say a word, nor am I reproaching Him, and suddenly 
everything is gone. I EFiecl I began to cry (from being deeply moved, 
but also from anger. Father). Then I got mad and in a fit of temper 
told him about my idea. When he had left, I was feeling sad. There's 
your father, yet . . .  and angrily-and I dropped off to a heavy sleep. 
An evil spirit was already hovering above me." 
N .B. "I was in a somber and excited mood, and how could I do 
• The Youth seems to be the subject of this sentence even though "He" is 
capitalized. 

The Youth's Plan 
147 
these foolish things-the old Prince's visit at <Mme.> Andrieux's."• 
This helps to draw the character of the Youth. Also how he went with 
that wench. 
BuT THE TO:-.:E• •  [Here] of the narrative shows that all this happened 
a year ago, i.e., he is now, a year later, in a way still a youth, yet he 
looks down upon the youth of a year ago. 
N .B. He can make this remark himself (write it down), in his notes. 
He-after having revealed <to the Youth> that Vasin has told 
Him: 
"My friend, I am ready to ask your forgiveness 1,000 times, but 
what will come of that? You are such a ... " (Yet it was He who had 
been looking for me.) 
He: "At any rate, you can be sure that now ... 
" 
My eyes went flashing: "I want nothing ... to hell with Vasin, I had 
this one thing left." And I began to cry, and cried, and cried. 
"I have yet to meet a man whom I didn't hurt in some way!" 
"I want to become a Rothschild." 
He: "\Veil, so what? or perliaps )'OI:lr plaH That isn't at all new, or 
perhaps it is your method that makes your plan <a novelty>." 
The Youth: "No, there isn't anything special about my methods 
either." 
He: "\Veil, and then, having grown rich, you will live in luxury 
and-be happy?" 
[February] "Not at all, I'll be wearing sackcloth. (\Vomen.) I'll 
never touch a woman." 
N.B. Very true psychologically that after having cried, and cried 
he begins to explain his plan for spite, and is being soffl:beF abrupt, 
frowning, insolent. But when He leaves, they embrace and both begin 
to cry. 
\Vhat is most important, He begins to cry walking down the back 
staircase. 
I fell asleep with mixed feelings. But on the very next day, toward 
nightfall, my mixed feelings turned into being angry with myself 
about having cried; also about having told him about my idea, and 
angry with Vasin. And if there had been any chance at all for me to 
go away somewhere, away from them all, and as fast as possible, to 
• Ungrammatical and unclear. 
•• Underlined twice. 

148 Religious and Depraved 
leave Petersburg in a hurry, I would have left for some faraway place 
and would have stayed there all by myself, without them, forever. But 
already there was something (attracting i.e., the Princess) attracting 
me. 
And then the next chapter immediately in the following fashion: 
"How curious that I was ashamed about having cried, but not 
ashamed about having, already then, committed a villainy (the 
letter)." 
Also in the first part, <present> Him in a most impressive and 
mysterious fashion. 
1\fost important: Between the scenes with the child, He comes to 
see the Youth merely to let him know that He has learned everything 
from Vasin. Between those two times, during a period of several days, 
he <once> met Htfi. the Youth, looking angry and frowning, and 
said in passing: "You are seeking solitude." 
The Youth was struck by the fact that these were Vasin's words. 
And suddenly it becomes clear that Vasin has told Him everything. 
But the reason why He comes to see him is that He wants to tell him 
about Liza, about the family; the Youth asks to be spared <these 
details>, and that's when He lets him know that Vasin has told him. 
(Ideas.) (Plans.) 
ABSOLUTELY. N.B.? After this has happened, the Youth immedi­
ately writes Him a letter saying that he wishes to have nothing to do 
with him. Absoh:tely put ti:tis iR, but not after ti:te meetiRgs wi:teR He 
asks: "§eekiRg solitude, ei:t?" On the very next day after he had told 
him about his idea. And all the next day he is worrying: "Why did I 
tell him about my idea?" 
He is a most depraved man who has factually had Liza. 
He is terribly religious, which he shows most specifically in one 
chapter. (N.B. The Youth hears <Him?> read <the passage> about 
<Christ's> temptation by the Devil. It leaves him stunned. He goes 
to see Him to have a talk about Christianity. 
(A passionate chapter.) 
Finale. "The main point is that I haven't held a single conviction 
in all my life. Not just the fact that I haven't had any convictions; 
this in itself isn't so bad, but rather the fact that I have become con­
vinced that I could never have had any, and what is even worse: that 
I can never have any <in the future> either. There's an idea for you. 
It is hard to bear." 
Already, in the first part, the Princess insults him. "Oh, how I 
hated her. I felt like jumping up and striking her. But since no one 

First Person 
149 
will ever see these notes, I am putting down the fact that at that very 
moment a strange sensation passed through my heart: I would like 
to have jumped up and started kissing the spot where she had been 
sitting. I wouldn't have told this even to my confessor... \Vell, let me 
then put down everything: that's what I did." 
Septem her 4. 
THE MANUSCRIPT IS FOUND AT A HOSPITAL, AFTER THE WRITER's 
DEATH. 
If it is in the first person, a most original (the more original and 
uncontrolled, the better) conciseness, as well as the whole w A vw ARD­
NESS OF THE NOTES will be preserved. 
If in the first person: "I have now outgrown all these things, and 
so I must not be ashamed (but there are some memories of which I 
am very much ashamed)." 
The notes <are written> a year later, at a hospital. 
"I'll recover and start a new life." 
Vasin and Dolgushin have been arrested. He has lost stature in his 
eyes, and when Lambert tackles the idea head-on, yet on an enormous 
scale, the Youth: "Eh, come what may!" "Disorder has overtaken me." 
And what is most important, he triumphs over the Princess. 
At the end of part one. "I cried and cried, but He left. ·why did I 
tell Him? In all my life I wasn't going to tell Him, and be proud. I 
had been dreaming about how I was going to be proud." 
[See 668] "Now, a year later, when I have perhaps become an 
entirely different person, even now the thought that I have revealed 
to my father that proud anguish of mine (about Brusilov) keeps lacer­
ating me and aeiaea decidedly fills me with shame. Shame about not 
having been able to hold back. Could it be that this shame is lingering 
to this day because I feel, even now, that I might perhaps not be able 
to restrain myself either in this <kind of a situation>, or in any other, 
weak-willed youth that I am? No, a good deal of hard work still lies 
ahead for me, if I want to become a man of willpower and fortitude." 
"Now, when I may perhaps decide to abandon my idea, I still feel 
sorry that I revealed it on that occasion. I almost stooped to where I 
was seeking praise <from Him>, although I was of course seeking 
only advice, just seeking to make a check of myself. I did not, how­
ever, tell Vasin about it, but rather Him, even though I trusted Vasin 
more at the time iR spite of wRieH: He. To be sure, He, too, was then 
beginning to impress me greatly. But the most curious thing for me 
now is the fact that I was then fretting about my weakness, consider­
ing it a low-down action, while having actually committed a truly 

150 Christianity 
despicable action (the letter), yet never giving it a single remorseful 
thought." 
"\Vhen He listened to my idea, there was no derision or condescen­
sion in his attitude. But still, He isn't my brother. There was a feeling 
that He, too, had his idea, which He would never express, but to 
which He was so devoted that he would consider everything that is 
transitory, including my confession, the trivia as well as the tragedies 
of life, to be secondary while holding it* to be the most important. 
Yet at the same time, wasn't He plunging into this life, even to the 
point that one couldn't help calling him a petty man, and a gossip?" 
He, in a conversation with Vasin: "There are, however, some 
inexplicable things ... " And at this point, <Christ's> temptation by 
the Devil from the Gospels. This is already in a conversation with 
Vasin which takes place in the presence of the Youth, who can't help 
thinking to himself: "He won't talk to me that way, but he will with 
Vasin, because he is more clever than I am." 
[For part two.] Vasin responds with silence. The Youth notices, 
furthermore, that though He does produce some evidence to prove 
the supernatural origin of Christianity, he does so in passing, not in 
any great haste, or excessive zeal, to propagate <his idea>, but merely 
in the course of conversation: "Take it into consideration, or leave it; 
personally, I really don't care what you do." I.e., He always acts that 
way, though in this particular case he got somewhat carried away, and 
later felt hurt aboi.1t it: "There, the two of us were jabbering away, 
while he kept silent all the time." 
1: "\Vhy do they keep silent? Because they're dull or because they 
are very clever?" 
He: "It's because they have nothing to talk about. They know 
everything and have every decision made for many thousands of years 
ahead. \Vhat's the use of talking, if this is so?" 
The Youth is so pleased that he laughs when He has thus put down 
socialism. But He comes back to see him and again says: "The great 
idea is at hand, <it is> at the door." 
"And still, He <is saying it> just so," the Youth remarks. But since 
he is interested in the matter himself and, besides, is anxious to find 
out definitively what His convictions really are, the Youth keeps pes­
tering Him with questions about Christianity. He responds with the 
<two> shopkeepers. But still in the same, unhurried way, cursorily 
• Translator's italics. 

Science and Socialism 
1 5 1  
and abruptly, as if He were going to say: "'Vhy won't you leave me 
alone!" "He does not, of course, have any passion for propaganda," 
the Youth observes in his notes, "but He himself is of course being 
burnt out and tormented by these ideas." 
By the way: The Youth, too, puts down these observations in his 
notes as if it were in passing; for example, he mentions this not imme­
diately after the chapter about the <two> shopkeepers (which he 
breaks off without making any conclusions), but somewhere else, two 
or three chapters later. 
He, about Belinsky49 .... "And most of all, self-adoration. Most of 
all, the fact that science had not even started in our country then." 
He comes to see the Youth one day and talks about the French and 
about the coming of socialism. "It is at hand; it is at the door. You 
must all be ready for it." 
The icons. 'Vhen the Youth enters the room for the first time, he 
notices a magnificent icon-case. He assumes that it is the Stepmother's. 
Learns that it is His. It was this particular icon-case that got chopped 
up later. 
Absolutely include something about a poor family, or something of 
that order, which He is secretly helping, being angry with himself for 
having done it. 
After all this heartbreak He suddenly disappears in the finale. The 
Youth learns that he has gone to a monastery. A month later hangs 
himself in the monastery. 
He brings 25,000 to the Youth. He won't take the money. Or does 
he return it later? THI:-.:K ABOUT IT. Or (He) gives it to the aunt sus­
pecting that the Youth might, conceivably, "accomplish" the stu­
pidity of refusing it. 
September 6. 
Definitively: in the first person. 
SO:\IETHING VERY IMPORTANT. Never in the whole course of the 
novel does the Youth totally relinquish his idea about Rothschild. 
49 Vissarion G. Belinsky (181 1-48), the most important Russian critic in the 
nineteenth century. He was largely responsible for the reputations of Dostoe\'sky, 
Gogo!, Lermonto\', the later Pushkin, Turgene,·, and others. He was an immense 
presence in Russian criticism and literature, and his influence may be compared 
to that of Dr. Johnson in English literature and Sainte-Beu,·e in French litera­
ture. In his later years Dostoe\'sky nurtured bitter feeling toward Belinsky and 
wrote disparagingly of him. He held him responsible for ha,·ing led him on 
wrong paths during Dostoe\'sky's early years. 

1 52 
Vasin's Idea 
This idea fixa is his solution of everythiug, of all problems and diffi­
culties. It is based upon his feeling of pride, which has taken shape in 
<his> idea of withdrawal <from society>. [He says that to the 
Youth.] 
[February, 3d and 4th part.] 
Arrange the whole novel so that this idea would be of outstanding 
importance in the novel. Outstanding precisely for the reason that 
it never leaves the Youth, having a firm grip on him: shall he perish 
or shan't he? This is why he suffers so much from his doubts in the 
course of the novel, first on account of Vasin's arguments, then again 
on account of His <arguments>. And this is why, occasionally, the 
Youth will suddenly forsake the most curious events which he is in 
the process of relating and in which he is himself very much inter­
ested, and will begin, most emphatically, (though, apparently, for no 
good reason at all) to state his doubts: 
"If I cheated that soldier, buying from him and selling to someone 
else, as He is telling me-why, this is a paradox, for doesn't the whole 
world live and cheat that way? But then, is the whole world an au­
thority <for me>? It suffices that I have become aware of the fact 
that I have cheated. That means that one must abandon everything, 
walk around clothed in rags, keep working without even asking for 
higher pay. Surely so, for one must be true to an idea which one has 
conceived. But if this is so, why doesn't He go to a monastery or 
accomplish feats, once he believes in Christianity? Why are all social­
ists such skinflints (here, give some examples)?" 
Ne- He, to the Youth: "Probably according to the principle that 
now, in our present society, no different life is possible, for it is society 
that is at fault. But when society is rebuilt, we shall all be living 
differently." 
"So then, I am not guilty of a dishonorable deed; it is society that 
is guilty. This is why Vasin plans to destroy it. Vasin, incidentally, is 
sacrificing everything to his idea; why, he could be sitting around 
idly, too, saying that 'it is all the fault of society.' No, apparently that 
is no excuse. And, incidentally, is it dishonorable, and is there indeed 
something dishonorable about my idea?" 
And later: "I asked Him (as late as in the finale, at a time when 
He was in a depressed state), and received the answer that it won't 
pay to be honorable for a time, in view of <the fact that all planets 
eventually become> ice-covered rocks. How terribly does the thought 
of those ice-covered rocks torment Him!" 
V/hat do you ca£e fo£ those mcl;s the Youth 

How to Live 
1 53 
VERY NECESSARY. The Youth communicates His idea about the 
ice-covered rocks to the old Prince. The latter replies: "Mon cher, I 
have always thought so, c'est une idee. But why does he fuf:get- worry 
about it? Let them fly through space, let them fly. I won't be around, 
and none of us will. Should we really worry about what's going to 
happen in tens of thousands of years, while dinner is just being 
served? Why, our dinner may get cold!" The Youth quotes these 
words to Him, and He laughs a lot, and says: "This old arsehole has 
naturally solved all the problems, but the thing is that not everybody 
has an appetite for dinner under these circumstances." Yet it is funn}' 
ti:tat I can't solve them, i.e., ti:tat I am aot wiliag to live uader tR@S@ 
conditions. 
He tells the Youth in the finale, in a depressed mood, that his idea 
of withdrawal <from society> is inferior for its pride, full forgiveness, 
renunciation of vengeance.* Besides <the idea of becoming a> 
Rothschild contains a rather contemptible element of petty concern 
with one's own material security. 
The Youth, to Him: "Does it really pay to be honest, or even 
proud? And what about those ice-covered rocks? Isn't it better to live 
thinking about one's own arse only?" 
"And what do you do with your heart?" He says. 
"You're right, I've overlooked that! We are really in a fix, aren't 
we?" 
And once he is alone, the Youth says: "I want to live, but how? Is 
it worth it to be honest? \Viii my idea really prevent me from doing 
good? Is it really harmful to other people?. Of course, society is at 
fault, but. .. I still don't know if I am going to accept those 25,000." 
He is walking along, and <then,> the embankment, the setting 
sun, ecstasy. 
"If you are saying that it isn't worth while to love mankind for a 
short moment (ice-covered rocks), you have no real love of mankind." 
"I have been told that before. I have heard that. Only, you see, a 
natural inclination to love mankind and any other great idea is of 
course an unchallenged fact, much as such natural functions as sneez­
ing, shitting, eating; yet, in view of the fateful inevitability of the 
prospect of ice-covered rocks, such love of mankind resembles a con-
• Not quite clear in the original. The Russian text does not allow a translation 
" . . .  inferior . . .  to full forgiveness, renunciation of vengeance." 

154 
The Youth's Idea 
dition of bondage and gives me no satisfaction. So that, perhaps, I 
may decide in favor of rebellion rather than love." 
"I deny everything," He says, "and I am desperate about not having 
anything to cling to, yet at the same time I am <so> attached to every­
thing. 'Ashamed to be alive, yet in fact full of vitality.' " 
"You are lying: a fresh young girl smells of apples" (somebody tells 
the Youth). 
Frou-frou, he used to spit on it, or avoid it. Stooped to such petti­
ness. Anger at <such> injustice. 
In the railway carriage. Liza. "I quit talking with Liza. I sat down 
and fell to thinking about my idea." 
Or: "I used to run up and down the boulevard with that student, 
because I considered all this to be infinitely inferior to my idea, and 
consequently, something irrelevant, something that didn't really seem 
to pertain to me. Here I want to note that this daydreaming about my 
idea had, already for a long time, caused me to be somehow distrait 
and just barely in touch with the world, as if it were in passing only. 
I was actually addressing myself to many things with a strange con­
descension; even to many things that should have, on the contrary, 
deserved my full attention, being in effect of the most immediate 
concern to me." 
"My idea, or my plan, made me take a train and change my 
whole life without a bit of excitement. As I was approaching Peters­
burg I was thinking rather about how I would begin to apply my 
idea, than about how I was going to meet them all, and what I was 
going to tell them. ࠣtraRge The moment I found myself in the streets 
of Petersburg the question how I would meet them became first and 
foremost in my mind. I am mentioning this fact because it was so 
strange and because my meeting with them and, most important, 
with Him was the beginning of a new life for me, and the object 
of my fantasies during my entire life even since my earliest child­
hood.'' 
"Oh, how I had fancied what I would say to my father at our first 
meeting! I had been daydreaming about that even while I was still 
in the first grade of high school. But I said nothing and was very 
pleased with. it <with myself> that I had behaved so proudly." (N .B. 
This ought to come in definitely still in part one.) At the end of part 
one, possibly about the idea, about Souchard and Brusilov. 
In the railway carriage. "I am yielding and petty in trivia, but 
when it comes to essentials I never give in. I remember very well what 
I was thinking to myself as I was looking at Liza (with the train ap-

The Youth a11 d  Liza 
1 55 
proaching Petersburg): 'And yet I haven't told you about my idea.' 
I was awfully pleased with that thought, so much so that all my rather 
petty anger at -bfit. that young girl, which I had been feeling, sud­
denly evaporated. Later on I became convinced that my anger hadn't 
been so petty after all, and <that> I had been right. Anger at what? 
At her sitting there? Both at the fact that she was a lady and that she 
looked so unapproachable; in a word, I was rebelling against tyranny 
and injustice. For, if you take a broad enough view of it, that's what it 
amounts to."' 
"This is Pavel Fyodorovich Fyodorov. He has graduated from high 
school, but has decided against going to the university" (this is how 
He introduces the Youth to the Stepmother). 
"My friend, I am ready to support you. But you have rejected my 
help." 
"But haven't my aunts been supporting me?" 
"Come to think of it, it's true, right from the time you were at 
Souchard's. That Souchard, he was a kind man, wasn't he?" 
"The further I went in explaining my idea to Him, the more it 
seemed to me that I was betraying something, betraying my idea, and 
the further I was getting in developing it, the more I was losing my 
faith in it. \Vhen he had left, I returned sad, almost jaded." 
He tells the Youth, in his own uncontrolled confessions: "Oh, in 
those moments, how I wish to catch a serious fever, or just any fever: 
I'd be lying there, and they'd be pacing the room at my bedside, 
suffering the pangs of a guilty conscience, trembling and moaning 
with fear and remorse, crushed and punished. But the Lord isn't 
sending me either any serious fever, or even the merest febris catar­
halis} since I am healthy as a bull!" 
In the railway carriage: 
l-and suddenly I blurted out, I don't myself know why: "You 
had recognized me, of course." 
Liza: "Since I am not talking to you and don't even want to look at 
you, you naturally had to get the clever idea that I had recognized 
you." 
A bag has been stolen. (The fool.) Everybody is looking around. 
Liza sits down. Lizt sits claHR A small bag, it has been stolen. 
To Liza: "Pardon me, it seems that I put it <somewhere>. There it 
is! How did it get here?" 
Liza: "If you're saying that you put it there." 
"Yes, but how did it get behind you?" 
""Why, if you're saying that you put it there." 

156 Socialism and Christianity 
"Could be, but... it is behind you." 
"I sat down not noticing it... It is so small." 
"Not noticing it? That's strange." 
"You are a fool." It made no impression, but he gave me a look. 
The Fool: "Ahem ... How can that be ... Ahem. There were some 
silver things in there, but they're still there. Look: this is silver." 
"Look, you have been told once." 
Liza: "Let him." 
"I didn't mean to. I was just saying that to lose things ... you must 
agree ... th_ere's some silver here ... and I could think." He stopped. He 
was talking not only as if he had been dissuaded but also a little as 
if he were convinced that she had actually stolen <the bag>. 
September 6. N.B. 
N.B. Tomorrow think it over on the train, and gather your notes. • 
"\Vhy, and the phrases, too, were conventional, heard from someone 
else." 
He: "That means, chacun chez soi, chacun pour soi,50 and whatever 
will come of it, will be." 
[February, 3d part.] Socialism consists of kesiRg aestro)·ea leaving 
the confines of Christian civilization, which implies its destruction, 
and creating one's own, based on a denial of <the existence of> the 
kingdom of heaven, and limiting oneself to mere earthly <concerns>. 
An outright Antichrist. 
The Youth is familiar with some poets, writers; he has read some 
books, though in haphazard fashion. None of his schoolmates ever 
took an interest in these things. He knows physics very well. He is 
very good at mathematics. [lOlXJ 
On the boulevard, with Liza, obscenities. "This was a swinish 
trick" (comments the author). 
In the first part there isn't any preaching of Christianity; yet, only 
the Youth accuses Him to his face that He is a Jesuit. \Vhereupon He 
asks the Youth: "Who told you that I preach?" 
"I heard that still in Moscow." 
But it would be good to bring out some brief, yet weighty flashes 
of a forced Christianity. 
"Petersburg. \Vhat good is Petersburg to me?" Contempt for 
Petersburg. (This is when he is leaving the station.) 
• Unclear in the original. Perhaps: "On the next day, think over what had 
happened on the train . . .  
" 
50 French: "Everyone at home, everyone for himself." 

A Scene about the Child 
157 
"I heard that still in Moscow," <says the Youth> but He asks some 
more questions, and there remains no doubt that it was the Princess 
who told him. He is visibly impressed by this circumstance, so much 
so that the Stepmother is all flushed and it looks as if there is going 
to be a scene. Liza immediately injects some more poison, as she 
remarks aeout the Princes mentions some (very accurate) facts, drily 
and concisely, concerning what the Princess is saying about him right 
now, what she used to say before, what she plans to say in the future, 
and what further steps she is probably going to take. A terrible 
quarrel. The boy. Reminding <Him> of the chambermaid (who was 
chased from the house the day before, or two days ago). A scandal. 
Liza to them purposely addresses the Youth, telling him <about that 
incident>, thus making the Stepmother relate <her version of the 
story>, too. The Youth, somberly and abruptly, asks not to be made 
a party <to this argument>. Suddenly, a scene with the child. The 
Youth is in a frenzy (mouth is ripped open). A terrible quarrel, in 
the course of which the Youth tells Him everything. 'Vhen he is 
about to leave-in a dark corner, the weeping boy. He immediately 
talks him into leaving with him. Only when they are out in the street 
together, the question: "Where am I going to put him? It won't go 
with the aunts, it's impossible with Vitia. 'Vith Vasin?" He goes 
looking for Vasin, though he doesn't have his exact address, leading 
the boy by his hand. Vasin is willing to take him. 
He took him over to Vasin's solely because he had taken a liking 
for him, for he had never exchanged a word with him yet, but had 
just heard him talk at the Dolgushins. An adventurous night, they 
try to cheer up the boy who suddenly, <though> noiselessly, as if 
he were afraid to show himself ungrateful, starts to cry for his mother. 
They promise him that tomorow they'll bring back his mother, and 
that his mother will actually be living at their place. He spends the 
night at Vasin's. He returns to the aunts only in the morning. 
They charge into him. (They have heard about the kidnaping. He 
throws himself on his aunt's neck and kisses her.) He rents his own 
flat. He lets the mother know; she is at Vasin's. He takes the boy 
over to his own flat, as the boy begs him hysterically not to leave him, 
but the boy's mother insists that he should stay with the aunts. The 
boy is with the aunts. He begs the boy to forgive him. It is through 
this incident, too, that He hears about Vasin. (N.B. At Vasin's, that 
night, they talk about fundamental questions, but Vasin is reluctant 
to talk-etc.) 
He, to the Youth: "It al happeRed oR accouRt of the PriRcess. 

158 
The Youth Is Crushed 
·why did you briAg it up?" Ami Me tells him what the PriAces is 
afraid of, also askiAg the Youth what it is the PriAces is saying about 
HiH'l. The Youth reacts ·.vitA 8aughty iroAy. Dee13 contetBf3t. He 
coolly takes his leave. About the "ke13t •.voman." (The Youth is al 
ready in love witR tke Princes.] 
IH the H'l:orning there is a big coH'l:H'l:otion at tke aunts': He has 
returned the 200,000. The Youth is thunderstruck: only the day 
before he had charged Him with letting himself be supported. The 
Youth rushes over to Vasin's; the latter listens to his story with great 
interest, but in the end asks him not to visit him anymore. 
The Youth, in a scene of reconciliation. Champagne. About the 
Princess. He is complaining about his wife, makes some equivocal 
statements about Liza, speaks convulsively of his own character (but 
without remorse). 
Then, the scene wit8 tlie Youtk's confession Liza in a frenzy, await­
ing Him. An ecstatic exchange of words. The Youth is stunned: 
""What kind of a relationship is this?" 
He won't come. The Youth goes to see him. He tells him: "I was 
afraid to come. I thought you'd be angry with me." A meeting at the 
Youth's flat. The Youth's confession, Souchard. The idea. "But what 
is my father really like?" 
In the 2d part, too, it is further developed "what his father might 
be like"; Liza's liaison. The Youth is a confidant of the whole affair. 
Liza violates him· (after her own fashion), la haine l'amourH <sic> 
toward the Princess, diamonds, a quarrel, the found letter, etc. 
N.B.! Tke YoutH Most important (psychologically). The Youth, 
besides being crushed by the <fact that He has returned those> 
200,000, is also crushed by the thought that he has stolen the letter. 
That's why both <his> hysterics and his confession: as <He> leaves as 
he says good-bye to Him, he feels, for a moment, like showing Him 
the letter, but he holds himself back. ["Won't go? Too early for the 
letter?"] When he is left alone, he has mixed feelings <about it all>. 
"I had expressed my idea poorly. Did I really love Him? But on the 
other hand, I hadn't told Him about the letter. Amazing: I suddenly 
felt satisfied that I hadn't told Him about the letter (i.e., 'you see how 
I can be firm and keep a secret-that means I'll be able to handle my 
idea, too'). But what about Him?" 
"Tkere's notliing diskonorable about H'l:}' kolding oH to tke letter. 
51 French: "Hate, love." 

Inner Disorder 
159 
So I do kaYe a fatker. "Gut do I lo,·e Him? How touckiRgly did H@ 
say tke otker da'' tkat 'you'd be aRgry with me.' " 
Last idea: tke boy. ORe great idea 
saves aRd recovers tke wR:ol@ 
mood, recoRciles everytkiRg, ke falls to tkiRkiRg about the boy. H@ 
falls fast asleep. 
HE FWBS THE LETER AFTER THE <iRcideRt witk tke:> Bh'tMOP<BS. 
September 7. 
Passionate love for Liza, when the Youth arrives it is already there. 
That's how it goes. Having married, after long <years of> wander-
ing (legend has it that He was just about to enter a monastery when 
He suddenly got married) < . . .  > Having married, He actually did 
preach Christianity, but was somber, moody, capricious, both cheer­
ful and hypochondriac, both petty and generous, both great idea and 
cynicism.* All this from inner dissatisfaction with his own convic­
tions, secret atheism which remains hidden even to himself, doubts 
concerning the truth of Christianity, etc., i.e., from inner disorder. 
[N .B. He is one of those noble natures who, if they believe in an idea, 
devote themselves to it body and soul, but who perish if they have 
nothing to believe in. (N .B. He himself says this to the Youth.)] 
In his family life He is now capricious, with everybody acting as 
his nurse, then again (very rarely) patient as an angel. At times He 
hates his stepchildren, then again He loves them passionately. Liza has 
grown to hate Him. 
"I've come to love Him out of hatred," she says, "I've come to love 
Him so I could destroy Him" (this is her innermost passionate de­
sire). At the same time, she is herself a predatory character and pur­
sues her passion with a savage vehemence. She really does have a 
passion for Him, but not in order to make Him happy, but in order 
to destroy Him; she looks at Him like a crocodile wanting to swallow 
its prey alive. 
It is remarkable that she is telling Him all this right to his face, 
without trying to conceal it at all. This is precisely what intoxicates 
Him, this is what drives Him mad; he madly falls in love with her 
and desires her terribly. It is in such a state that the Youth finds Him 
when he arrives. Their love affair has already begun, and there have 
been several meetings. But Liza refuses to submit to him. "I am 
walking around like a man who has been bitten by a rabid dog," He 
says to the Youth. 
• Ungrammatical. 

160 Liza Is jealous of Him 
It is remarkable that, during the last five years of his life, He had 
seemingly turned from a highly frivolous (though always deeply 
thinking) man into a quietly and calmly religious one. A quiet love 
made Him marry that "beautiful angel of God," the Stepmother. 
"I grew restless," He says, because I felt, in the presence of that 
angel (my wife), the whole extent of my own moral inadequacy, as 
well as that of my convictions and, what is most important, <the 
shortcomings> in my cultivation of my inner self. \Vhat hit me 
harder than anything else was the fact that instead of actually begin­
ning to perfect myself, I had suddenly begun to yield to an irrepres­
sible urge to view everything with haughty condescension. From so 
much inner dissatisfaction and disorder, I became capricious: '\Vhat 
I need is a good thrashing, and not such perfection <of all virtues> 
as is seen in this woman.' I even got to be jealous (and of the young 
Prince, of all people, on account of what she had been telling me 
about him), and at times I was beginning to hate my stepchildren." It 
is at this point that Liza turned her attention to Him. "/ felt the devil 
in you," she used to say later. 
N .B. All of this He tells Liza in a passionate, troubled, and tragic 
manner, during their meetings. 
It was precisely this anxiety, caused by his failure of self-perfection 
and by his realization that He was essentially a predatory type, that 
was pursuing Him. And the secret idea: "Why strive for self-perfec­
tion?" (predatory type). This is precisely what Liza sensed, i.e., <that 
he, too, was a> predatory type. 
Liza starts being violently and irrepressibly jealous of Him, on 
account of the Princess, for example. (It is a remarkable fact that she 
is not jealous of her mother.) "You love only yourself," she tells Him, 
"and so there really isn't any reason to be jealous."* And yet she is 
terribly jealous of the Princess, and the longer the affair lasts, the 
more jealous. 
In the meantime, His relationship with the Princess, in reality, 
amounts to the following. He had given a warm and ardent answer 
to the Princess when she, having the greatest respect for Him, had 
opened her soul to Him and laid bare before Him the whole horror 
of her condition as the wife of the old Prince. This woman is a pas-
• Literally, "and so there really is no one on whose account one ought to be 
jealous of you." 

He Tries to Seduce the Princess 
161 
sionately ideal <is tic> person, thirsting and searching for what is true 
and good (later she even listens to what the nihilists have to say). 
Yet in this capacity of <being> the Princess's spiritual guide and 
confidant, which continues for a whole year, and through preaching 
Christianity to her, <He gets her> to where she almost decides to take 
the veil. (N .B. The old Prince says: "He has conditioned her for the 
monastery; she has been asking me for a divorce, so that, imagine that, 
I would have had to become a monk, too, to keep her company. 
Imagine only what a fine monk I'd make. Though, on second thought, 
I might make a good monk, and, you know what, I like this costume 
of theirs.") (And altogether, this whole year which he spent with the 
Princess must be included as a separate episode)} with this relation­
ship going on, and He her spiritual guide and saint, the predatory 
type is suddenly awakened in Him, and He begins to seduce her. She 
sees through it and ignominiously chases Him out, moved by the 
indignation of outraged innocence. 
N .B. However It is precisely this indignation of outraged inno­
cence, without any admixture of Christian forbearance (as seen, for 
instance, in the Stepmother), this boundless pride of <triumphant> 
virtue, that cuts Him to the quick even then. 
He denies her charges, but she contemptuously refuses to answer 
him. Then He confesses <his guilt>, writing her a passionate letter; 
but she contemptuously returns the letter. 
And so, from then on, two feelings remain forever present in his 
soul. 
I) Terrible pangs of conscience on account of having wanted to 
corrupt <her> innocence. "This was my worst and dirtiest action 
ever." From then on, he is lacerated by the thought of the un­
governability and lack of discipline in his character in the face of any 
sort of convictions. He gets married solely because he hopes that he 
will succeed, under this angel's wings, in restraining his nature 
through a pure life and in bending it to the good <in Him>. 
2) A very high respect for the Princess, her opinions, and <yet> 
with a hidden hatred for such exceedingly lofty nobility of spirit. 
It is clear that He does not love her anymore; however, under Liza's 
influence there is awakened in Him a seed, concealed so far, of hatred 
for the Princess, her purity and her virtue. 
"Eh, spit on everything, break up everything," just as He breaks 
the icons. 
This was a concealed hatred, but He obviously still wanted to 
meet her, and returned those 200,000 for the Princess's sake} so she 

1 62 
Frenzy of the Finale 
would change her mind about Him. But having been bitten by that 
rabid dog, He suddenly develops (as He now consciously realizes) a 
hatred for the Princess's perfect purity. It is Liza's "inner disorder," 
a desire to see everybody as being just as impure as Himself, <His> 
skepticism, etc. (here, psychology) that make Him become an in­
voluntary, impersonal participant in Lambert's and Liza's plot, for 
He knows that Liza is involved (though he once makes an attempt to 
divert the Youth <from going along with them>). 
ِfeanwhile Liza is giving Him more and more trouble and has 
brought Him to the point where he thinks of escaping <with her> 
and of poisoning <His wife>. He rejects it. But he does chop up those 
icons, and his wife guesses what is going on. His wife flees to join the 
young Prince. Her death, and Liza says that it is all His fault. She 
hangs herself. (She cannot stand <her> mother's death and His loath­
ing, or the vileness of her own conduct.) But what is most interesting 
is that she says that it is all His fault. "You corrupted me." 
In the frenzy of the finale He says to the Youth: "You know, this 
kind of dullness is really attractive erotically. 'A foolish woman is 
good also,' says Iaichnitsa. * Admitted, this isn't quite the same thing, 
but still there are times when the most depraved creature seems more 
attractive than any angel. And the more so if she is dim-witted and 
unfair. I am depraved to the bones." 
"But what about Christianity?" 
He: "Why, I really never believed in it." 
"So you were playing a role?" 
He: "How could I have played a role? I believed because I was 
afraid that I didn't. And now I've realized that I really didn't believe 
in anything at all. Only now have I discovered that everything is 
disorder, that everything is cursed." 
Ergo. His character cannot be that of a frivolous, playful, effemi­
nate, jovial fellow, or "an old goat."** 
He is passionate, morose, a skeptic, restrained, and it is rarely that 
his heart would reveal itself impetuously. He cannot be proud of 
his erotic triumphs over women, <including> Liza, or frivolously 
and playfully tell the Youth about it. 
•Literally, "Ȋlr. Scrambledeggs," a character in Gogol's play "The Marriage." 
• • See n. (••), p. 1 23, above. Dostoevsky uses zherebchik, "young stallion," in 
the first instance and zherebenok, "colt," here. 

The Letter 163 
MosT IMPORTANT. All the time, He has been bitten by that rabid 
dog. 
Now, it turns out, we're facing the question of form! 
September 7. 
N.B. As regards His preaching of Christianity; the Youth meets 
Him when <everything> has been decided: abrupt, skeptical, brush­
ing <him> off; but so much stranger is the one chapter (only) con­
taining a passionate confession. 
The letter written by the Princess from the country, in which she 
was suggesting that the Prince be placed in an insane asylum, was 
inspired by Him (as He was seeking to corrupt her). "I began to 
corrupt her consciously and step by step." Yet later on, after He had 
quarreled with the Princess, He was mean enough to threaten her 
with that very letter. Eventually He wrote her a letter in which He 
confessed everything. Including that He was trying to corrupt her. 
This letter in pan Contempt on her pan. Yet he inquires with 
Andreev about that letter. Andreev, sman man, won't give it to Him. 
But after Andreev has died, He makes further inquiries (for He is 
already itching to have his revenge. But it is the Youth who finds it.) 
N.B. ·we are facing, then, the question of form: 
How will the Youth describe, in the first person, those psychological 
explanations involving Liza and the antecedents of His relationship 
with the Princess, even if it be in quoting His words? 
But then again, if it is going to be the third person, won't this make 
the Youth a secondary figure, and Him the main character? 
If it is going to be the third person, the role of the Youth dis­
appears entirely. 
Liza used to visit the Youth from the very beginning (feeling that 
she could use him, and having explained the whole thing to him 
briefly). 
The Youth despises Him. After various peripeties He explains to 
the Youth what had really happened, also describing their meetings: 
"I was sitting there, she was sitting there, with downcast eyes. 'You 
have corrupted me.' " N.B. tke aHflt And later He drops in on the 
Youth to tell him even about the poison. 
Moreover: the Aunt admits to the Youth that the Princess has been 
His mistress. Also, that she has got the letter (the aunt, that is; the 
Youth then steals it from her). Liza also asserts that He has been living 
with the Princess. But she chased <Him> out. Thereupon, He 
dissuades him from believing this. That's the kind of form it is going 
to be in. 

164 He JVants to Get Even 
As far as the Princess is concerned, He confesses to the Youth that 
he has only feelings of the deepest respect and reverence for her, but 
that He has quit loving her a long time ago. (And there, suddenly, 
the Youth learns that He <has allied himself> with Lambert.) It's 
the same thing as when He is being so very sincere and keeps dropping 
in on the Youth, making a display of His simple-heartedness: His 
need of having a confidant, and showing His Jove for the Youth, all 
of which doesn't fail to move the Youth. However, the Youth notices 
that even while He is trying to be on such familiar terms with him 
He is still maintaining His independence (an air of mystery), mean­
ing that he, the Youth, does not satisfy Him. 
By the way, He started dropping in on the Youth only when He be­
gan seeing some advantage in so doing. Until then, He had been keep­
ing much more aloof from him. 
(N .B. He absolutely wanted to get even with the Princess, in the 
literal sense of that word. A predatory type.) 
He has an irrepressible desire to find out about the Princess. In the 
beginning, Liza practically convinces the Youth that He has sent for 
him only to have him do some finding out about the Princess (sic, and 
most important). 
And later: He starts dropping in on the Youth when He finds out 
that Liza has been seeing the Youth. As a result the Youth finds him­
self right in the middle of a developing intrigue. 
In the beginning He wouldn't tell him everything, but later He 
was feeling an irrepressible urge to express himself. 
"How then, are you going to act?" the Youth says to Him (about 
Liza). "I don't know," says He, and the Youth is appalled. 
"You come to see me only because you need me," says the Youth. 
N .B. Most important. The Youth never admits to Him that he is 
in Jove with the Princess, and is angry at His bilious and derisory 
insinuations. He even breaks off relations with him. 
But His ultimate confession to the Youth comes in the finale. 
So then, it is the first person after all. 
Always follow this last plan of September 7. 
"I have no convictions or rules, and I almost became your un­
doing," He says to the Youth in the finale. "Your idea-remain true 
to your idea, or are you wavering?" 
"I have left 25,000 with your aunt, to get you going in life." 
The Youth may have been in possession of His posthumous 
memoirs and may be quoting from same directly. 
His memoirs. "Now, when everything is over (a year later), I have 

His Confession 
165 
His notebook. It seems to me that this was written down after every­
thing had happened (i.e., in the Finale). It presents in no way a whole, 
but only scenes-with Liza, for example-and cursory notes of His, 
all quite disconnected. But this particular meeting (with Liza, the 
one about which he writes in his confession, is described in its en­
tirety, and this is how it was)." 
"But what is so very sincere about this?" 

I I I  
Second Period of Work on the Plot 
September 8-November, 1 874 
Late in this section of notes Dostoevsky reminds himself of the 
following: 
1st rule. Avoid the mistake, made in The Idiot and in The 
Possessed, of describing (many of the) secondary events in a fragmen­
tary, insinuated, romance-like manner, and dragging them out over a 
lengthy extension <of the novel>, both in the narrated action as well 
as in individual scenes, yet without giving any explanations at all, 
just guesses and hints, instead of explaining the truth directly. Being 
mere secondary episodes, they weren't worth such concentrated at­
tention on the part of the reader; rather on the contrary, they actually 
tended to obscure, rather than to clarify, the principal objective, pre· 
cisely because the reader, diverted to a side road, could very well lose 
the main road and get all confused in his attention. 
Yet, whatever the difficulties in The Idiot and The Possessed, they do 
not compare with the proliferation of diverting detail in The Raw 
Youth. Dostoevsky's imagination always teemed with more life than 
his organizational ability could encompass, but in The Idiot and 
The Possessed great characters and great passions, like magnets, were 
able to give order to a world that always seems to be on the verge of 
dispersing in chaos. There is not enough of great character or great 
passion to force chaos into order in The Raw Youth; yet when the 
notes are placed beside the novel one has some idea of how much 
order Dostoevsky was able finally to impose and how great his accom­
plishment was. 
The rummaging for situations, details, and lines of development 
in these notes seems ceaseless and often seemingly profitless. The 
notes do not move forward as much as they move in a circle. Every· 
166 

Persistent Themes 
167 
thing seems possible, nothing seems settled, and every tentative solu­
tion seems to give birth to three other possibilities. In the novel the 
Youth has the letter and he doesn't know whether he will use it or how 
he will use it. In these notes Dostoevsky is not even sure of who has 
the letter: the Youth has it most frequently, but sometimes Lambert 
has it, and sometimes no one has it. Lambert thinks of extorting 
money from the Princess; the Youth thinks up the idea; and in other 
notes Versilov thinks of it. Sometimes Versilov is part of the plot to 
humiliate the Princess, and sometimes he is the dissuader. The plot 
is put into action and consummated in some of the notes, and some­
times it is not. \Vhen it is effected, the Youth saves the Princess or he 
doesn't save her. In some of the notes he kills Lambert, and in one 
note he kills his father. The Princess is engaged to the young Prince, 
is married to him, or has no relations at all with him. There is doubt­
lessly something instructive in Dostoevsky's willingness-even his in­
sistence-on entertaining every variant of a situation, but it is difficult 
to imagine what. Life seems to move in every direction and to include 
every complication for Dostoevsky, and it is only the agony of dead­
lines that forces him to choose. 
Still, some things are fixed and some situations are immovable. 
Above all the Youth's character seems to be fixed. Here, as in the 
earlier notes, the Youth continues to be naive, good-hearted; tempted 
by disorder and thirsting for order; loving and hating the Princess and 
his father; talking of ideals and imagining debaucheries: "Besides, 
they both hated the Princess. The Youth got to hate her even more 
when he realized that He, in spite of his ostensible hatred, was more 
in love with her than ever. And suddenly he the Youth feels that he 
is himself in love; he spits with disgust. Chastity, and the hideous 
thought that he is his father's rival." Above all, Dostoevsky clings 
relentlessly to the belief that the Youth is the center of the novel: 
"The Youth is <the> hero in every respect. He is both with the old 
Prince (a duel), and with his father, and at his own flat with the 
government clerk, and with Vasin about his idea. The latter hands 
him his papers. He is also aware of Liza's romance. He also loves the 
little child, is close to his mother, greatly impressed by Makar Ivanov. 
N.B. It might be that Lambert, in particular, fascinates him." 

168 Characterization of Versilov 
For many readers of these notes, as has been the case for many 
readers of the novel, Versilov will be the hero of the novel, dominat­
ing the Youth and all about him and dominating the dramatic in­
terest. The portraiture of Versilov (called variously "He," Brusilov, 
and Versilov here) is in some respects similar to that of the early notes 
and in other respects very different. Versilov continues to preach 
Christianity; he loves and hates the Princess, breaks the icon, returns 
a large sum of money, and teaches the Youth while mocking him. 
At one point in the notes, Dostoevsky says to himself, with something 
of amazement and something of weariness 
•. "HE ONCE !\tORE?" and 
proceeds to give us a long analysis of Versilov: 
A landowner, a despot, a strong intellect, critical enough not to be· 
come either a Slavophile or a Westernizer. He becomes a profound 
egoist. An egoist rrom despotism. He is, though, a despot to the bone; 
a true despot must place himself so highly that he actually treats 
people unctuously, without anger, for to him they are mice, moles. 
They must be given help and encouragement. The fact that every­
body is in love with Him he must accept as something necessary. And 
this is why he cannot understand how the Princess is not in love with 
him. He refuses to believe that he is in love, and is embarrassed when 
he must finally prove it to himself, and he gets to think. He thinks 
that he wants only to save the Princess. Everything is solved by his 
passion. This passion er:sA.es, his admission that he is capable of 
sinking to the level of passion, leaves him completely crushed. A 
despot to the bone. He admits himself that he is an atheist-ruins the 
Youth, is running the risk of ruining him, changes his mind and 
comes to tal k  him out of going along with the plot. 
The characterization is negative and bitter, but not as negative and 
bitter as in the earlier sections. He no longer has an affair with a 
young girl who hangs herself, nor with his stepdaughter, nor does he 
consider poisoning the mother. He is still the Predatory Type, but the 
predatoriness is becoming more subtle. In small steps Dostoevsky 
seems to be moving toward the enigmatic, cultured, and weary aristo­
crat, who is too withdrawn from life to commit the atrocities of the 
early pages. Dostoevsky burdens him more and more with "ideas," 
often of a predatory nature. He is as self-interested as in the earlier 

Changes in Versilov's Character 169 
notes, where he had said, "Why shouldn't I live to take care of my 
own arse, what else is there to do?" But here he says, in an argument 
against socialism reminiscent of the Underground Man's argument 
against socialism: 
My God, what a miscalculation on your part: when did man ever 
do what was to his advantage? On the contrary, hasn't man always 
done what he liked to do, rather than what was to his advantage, and 
not infrequently knowing full well that it was to his disadvantage? 
For man has an innate tendency to consider as advantageous to him­
self} in almost any calculation that he may undertake, that which 
pleases him, and nothing else. 
His self-interest is becoming abstract, as it will be in the final ver­
sion. Philosophical premise and principle are beginning to take the 
place of naked will, but for Dostoevsky an idea hides but does not re­
place an act of will. Indeed, Dostoevsky has begun to do what is so 
much in evidence in the final version and what contributes so much 
to the mystery and enigmatic evil of Versilov: to give him "good" 
ideas and even-from Dostoevsky's own point of view--correct and 
precious ideas. Dostoevsky would agree with his argument against 
socialism quoted above, and he would most certainly agree with these 
words of Versilov: 
If only Christ would not die in the hearts of the Russian people, 
then, even though there were night til- around us, it would still be 
possible to strive for that bright dot <of light> with everything one 
has got. That is, it would be a joy to be alive, provided the idea does 
not die. You see, if the idea itself should die, and the European idea 
become accepted, an idea of mechanical and not of inner equality, 
everything would be lost. 
It may seem strange for Dostoevsky to give to Versilov some of his 
precious ideas, but here-at least in germ-and in the final version, 
Dostoevsky shows us how "truths" can become "errors" in the words 
of Versilov. Versilov often has the right ideas, but always the wrong 
movement of his heart, or no movement at all. He is laden with the 

170 Point of View 
best, which has somehow become the worst. Versilov cannot teach 
and he cannot love, because he cannot believe. For Dostoevsky it is 
an article of faith that when a man ceases to believe in God he be­
lieves in no one else and indeed finally not even in himself. Dostoevsky 
has begun to understand his character and the following quotation is 
astonishingly close to the kind of assessment that one can make of 
the final Versilov: 
Besides catholic narrow-mindedness, despotism, and intolerance, 
besides contempt for one's own land, there is also present <in his 
character> such a thing as a stubborn, almost enthusiastic pursuit of 
an idea, of a world view, etc. Besides extreme and diabolic pride ("no 
one can be my judge") there also are present extraordinary, harsh de­
mands directed at <him>self, "though under the condition that I be 
responsible to no one." A most elegant, polished exterior: an apparent 
ingenuousness, an affability, an apparent tolerance, an absence of any 
purely personal ambition. And yet all this is only the result of a 
haughty view of the world, an incredibly exalted position which He 
has arbitrarily assumed opposite the whole world. 
One of the values of these notes, surely, is the harsher and more direct 
light Dostoevsky throws on Versilov. Once Dostoevsky has seen him­
and he takes a long time seeing him-he dims the light, until in the 
final version it takes strong seeing to discern the despot and the rapa­
cious ego through the mist of elegance, refinement, culture, and 
"right" ideas. 
The problem of Versilov's progressive alienation from active 
cruelty and toward "rootless" cruelty comes from how we see him, 
and Dostoevsky spends in this section as in others many pages think­
ing about the implications of narration from the Youth's point of 
view. He has finally decided to give the narration to the Youth, but 
he busies himself justifying his decision. In one excited note he 
cries out: "In the first person} in the first person} in the first person." 
But when he thinks about "why," his arguments seem more intent on 
shoring up the Youth as the central character than in seeing the 
advantages it will give him in expressing the character of Versilov. He 
is quite right that in giving the Youth the point of view he will drama-

The Youth's Point of View 
171 
tize the naive, questioning, sifting, misunderstanding, fumbling and 
questing spirit of the Youth. 
Dostoevsky believed that in centering the story in the consciousness 
of someone other than the Youth he would be taking something away 
from the picture of the Youth. He did not want a picture of the 
Youth; he wanted the Youth picturing. He was equally intent on 
tempering the immediacy by the remove of time. He wanted the 
Youth's assessment of the events after the events had taken place, and 
he experiments in this section with having the Youth narrate the 
events one year after they have taken place, five years, and even eight 
years. Five years, he tells us, will not do: 
Can't make it 5 years. The reader will be left with the crude, 
rather comical idea that "there's that young adolescent now grown 
up, and perhaps holding a Master's degree, and a jurist, describing 
with great condescension (the devil only knows why) how foolish he 
used to be before," etc. And thus the whole naivete of the narrative is 
destroyed. And therefore, better let it be a year. In the tone of the 
narrative, the whole impact of a recent shock would still be apparent, 
and a good many things would still remain unclear, yet at the same 
time there would be this first line: "A year, what a tremendous inter­
val of time!" 
Dostoevsky knows, too, that by giving the point of v1ew to the 
Youth he will gain some advantage in the portraiture of Versilov. At 
least in section two of the notes he makes reference to this. But in 
this implication is firm in his mind, there is very little reference to it 
in these notes. Giving the point of view to the Youth has an impor­
tant effect on the dimensions and obscurity of Versilov's character. 
Versilov is one person in the notes and in essential respects someone 
very different in the novel itself. As we have seen, Dostoevsky moves 
in his conception of Versilov toward a more subtle evil by changing 
"acts" to "ideas." In the notes Versilov is often analyzed flatly and 
the effect is sharp and clear. The enigmatic, paradoxical, and myste­
rious Versilov of the novel is largely the creation of the Youth's igno­
rance, naivete, and obfuscating emotions. In the novel we see Versilov 
reflected in the passionate and distorting mind of the son. Even 

172 Scriptural Quotations 
when Versilov emerges into sunlight and tells us himself what he 
believes in, we have been prepared, by the many Versilovs that have 
succeeded themselves in Arkady's mind-to look on this as another 
Versilov. 
Makar Ivanov. 
STI:'\KI:'\G LIZAVETA. 
The aunts are not his aunts, but distant relatives o£ His. 
A lawyer is a hired conscience. 
God has already forgiven him, he's dead. 
They interpret <the scriptures?> allegorically and in a derivative 
way (metaphorically. N .B.), in a spiritual sense. And thus dumbfound 
ignorant people. ·worrying about one thing only, how to get any kind 
of an interpretation out of it, even if it be a silly one, so long as it is 
their own. 
Enoch is natural law, Elias is written law, and John is the law of 
grace (the doctrine of the Bespopovtsy). * 
Comfort in my sorrows which have afflicted me gravely. 
Holy inviolate relics, a great fragrance. 
He will save me by willing what He himself knows well.** 
This arrow has pierced my heart. 
Being most ignorant myself, how can I teach another, knowing 
nothing myself. 
0 bitter delusion! 0 great madness! 
Receive me, oh Lord, as you once received Paul, accursed that I 
am, like (some) wicked sinner. 
And <I> used to have as many as four thousand books of my own. 
P. 30. 
(In sweet scriptural style.] The soul inside me is one only; if I lose 
it, I cannot find another one. Also, if I shall spend my time without 
profit to my soul, I shall not be able to return that time. 
Be zealous in your service o£ the Holy Church, and if the time 
should come and you be called, die for it, as you would die for Christ. 
("Yet they are only servants, and not gods, and thus servile, and 
curious."] 
• Literally, "the priestless ones," name of a sect. 
• • This and the following sentence are apparently a scripture quotations. 

Stinking Lizaveta 
173 
"Occupy till I come." (Luke 19: 1 3) 
And many elders bearing God <in their hearts>. 
They read and discuss, yet they all remain in bewilderment, nor 
can they solve <the mystery>. 
For though I have studied it according to the scriptures, the Holy 
Scriptures are an unplumbed depth. 
Queen of Heavens! For what great authority does she have with 
her son Jesus Christ, our Lord! 
And hardened worse than a stone. 
Another would be satisfied to have his own. 
Do not tempt me, your aren't my enemy yet (the Devil). 
There was sincere love between them, and as if their two bodies 
had only one soul. 
Stinking Lizaveta. "Do not send me, the stinking one, to your 
bright paradise, but send me into utter darkness, so that even there, 
in fire and in pain, I could raise my voice to Thee: 'Holy, holy art 
Thou, and I have no other love.' " 
"My dear Lizavetushka, my Lizanka, calm down." 
"Stretch out your little hand, once every year, [at least once every 
thousand years, for I love you and I shall kiss you."] 
" 'Shut up, Lizaveta you fool, I know that you love me, shut up.' 
And I to him: 'I'm not going to shut up, I want to keep raising my 
voice until even the devils will believe in you.' " 
" 'Keep quiet, you happy-go-lucky one!' " (Before her Holy Com­
munion: "I am not begging to be in eternal pain." "Keep quiet, you 
happy-go-lucky one!" And she took fright, and partook of the sacra­
ments, and went on to die.) 
And so we went to do some work for our Lord. 
And he is talking such nonsense that it's not worth listening to. 
And as for the books, he had picked out nothing but the prettiest 
flowers, and even those at his own discretion. 
They don't know themselves where they are going. 
For a mystery such as transcends all human reason has been re-
vealed (to her, to him, to us). 
Nor did he want to commit himself to marriage. (To take a wife.)* 
Delivered us to be trampled upon by all men. 
\Ve want no part of alien (wickedness). 
But to live without God is sheer torture. 
• The expression in the original is typically biblical. 

174 
Get to Know Christ 
Save us from the machinations of the Devil. 
Because of envy. 
And he got to love our Lord Jesus Christ so much that he didn't 
want to leave him in his thoughts even for a little while. 
And he obtained the gift of clairvoyance. 
Everyone is lost, it is only that everyone is boasting of his own 
ruination, never even thinking of reverting to the Truth. 
And observing his youth with apprehension. 
\Vhatever sanctifies us we curse, without being aware of this our­
selves. Do what you have to do step by step, without flinging yourself 
forward, or rushing ahead. 
For they are not gods, but men like ourselves, and apprehensive 
of us.• 
May the Lord not leave unrewarded my sorrows and my (your) 
pilgrimage (we are praying for that, that is). 
He (i.e., a contemporary member of the upper classes) is like the 
prodigal son, having squandered his patrimony. (They did in fact 
receive two ten-kopek pieces, but had to pay a hundred rubles of 
their own [money] for it.) Let him return [(to the people),] and a 
fatted calf will be killed for him. 
Laymen are tied down by their families, and by worldly concerns. 
And without ever getting satisfaction, they are gathering (perish­
able) wealth. 
And they are living in obedience and having completely cast off 
their own will (and so much firmer they are <in their faith>). 
And found peace from worldly concerns for his feelings. 
[Get to know Christ, <and you shall know> that you have not 
accomplished anything.] See p. 253. 
So that the world become the most beautiful and happy abode, 
replete with every kind of joy. 
And to leave all this behind is no small cross, nor is it a light grief. 
He would give his life for his wife, and almost everybody would 
be willing to suffer and die for his children's sake. 
For a wife to be left behind, alone like a homeless swallow, after 
the loss of her husband (it is hard, that is). 
For he owes them this debt by nature (i.e., he must love them). 
Into a quiet and mute refuge. 
• Podobostrastnye, literally, "servile," "obsequious"; however, the speaker here 
tends to use book words in meanings that are a little off the target. 

A n  Exhausted Soul 1 75 
He was tossing about and suffering anguish, like a fish pulled out 
of the water. 
I say this is an impious thought. 
Don't you give up (don't break off) your enterprise on account of 
any kind of faint-heartedness. 
They are all so intemperate, each of them is out to surprise the 
whole world. 
How he could surprise the world. 
But you are standing before him shifting from one foot to the other, 
refusing to stand still, rushing about( as if he were worth it). 
Crone, jade, <scare> crow.* 
And he also said that one should not smoke tobacco, which point 
he sought to impress upon <his audience> at length, with sorrowful 
mien and with many a sigh. 
All you [he] care about is to have a good laugh at your own joke. 
A military force. ** 
As they say around our place: take some nice yellow sand, strew 
it on some nice little rocks (cover some nice little rocks with it), and 
when the yellow sand begins to sprout from those rocks, your dreams 
will come true. 
He would get drunk, of his own free will, and then cry: "Oh 
mother dear, why did you ever bear me, sorry drunkard that I am? 
Rather, you should have crushed the life out of me at birth, than let 
me into this world (the way I am)." (He is coming from the tavern 
stark naked, yet reciting his lamentations.) (He is coming from the 
tavern, naked as his mother bore him.) They made up such a song, 
there is such a song. 
And he forfeited* * *  some of his own capital. 
Yet you are more 'xhausted (exhausted) than he. An exhausted soul. 
Exhausted people.* * * *  
Drinking u p  and eating u p  his soldier's pay. 
Where will a poor soldier go, a soldier must take orders, that's what 
a soldier is for. 
And now I am going to tell you that there is a little child. 
Stinking Lizaveta. "Do not forgive me, Christ, let me be the only 
• Karga·zagumennaia, vorona, literally, "Crone behind-the-barn, crow." 
• • The expression in the original is typically biblical. 
• • •Istomchivyi, a dialect word, from istoma, "weariness." 
• • • •  Reshilsia. This particular meaning is dialectal. 

I i6 A theists and Suicide 
one whom you won't forgive, but let me go down to Hell. They'll be 
burning me, and I'll be praising you, I'll be loving you. I can't live 
without suffering. Let me suffer some; give me the gift of suffering." 
Lizaveta, don't thou tempt you tempt me with words, or with pies, 
or I'll burn your town, so I may again suffer. 
It is envy, envy that kills a man altogether; envy is followed by 
death. 
Even God's angels are imperfect; only our Lord Jesus Christ is per­
fect and free of sin; that's why the angels serve him. 
And you will come to your grave in your old age, like an ear of 
corn to the sheaf, all in their own time. 
It has been said: "The words of a desperate man are blown away by 
the wind." 
"\Ve have all only come yesterday, and we haven't had time to find 
out anything yet. 
It has been said: "The hope of a hypocrite shall perish, and his 
safety is that of a spider's house."• 
+ Man has been deprived even of his right to complain, for he 
actually cannot even point a finger at whomever he is complaining 
against, man being surrounded by mystery. What will it help me if I 
shall complain? For as I will be complaining, I shall know that I 
speak as a man who lacks any sense and that my tongue is turning 
in vain, because I really know nothing, and so haven't the power to 
point my finger at anyone. 
So then, is it possible at all for an atheist to remain calm and not 
kill himself? Only he can live who believes that God is always right 
(and that it couldn't be any different), even though it might appear 
to him all the time that in justice rules the world. Take it for a 
temptation, and believe. 
And you shall become immersed in such filth "that your own 
clothes will begin to loathe you," that's what it says. • • 
Liza: "At least you might help her (mother), why are you just sit­
ting around there?" 
"Right away, my dear, forgive me." Makar got up, staggered, and 
fell down (his feet were swollen). 
"It's my feet are swollen," he smiled, as if he were guilty. "E-eh!" 
• I have translated literally: dom pauka is "a spider's house"; "a spider's web" 
is pautina, of course. 
• •  Inexact quote from Job 9: 31. 

Makar 177 
Liza was embarrassed. And later she stepped up to Makar. 
"0 that ye would altogether hold your peace! and it should be your 
wisdom." (Job 1 3:5) 
"Your remembrances are like mounds of clay." (Ibid., 1 2)* 
"The first thing for you is your ambition: 'What do you know, 
what is it you could know?' is your very first question." 
An intemperate and corrupt man, "drinking lawlessness, like 
water." 
But in your hearts, thoughts are hovering about. 
Your fame will be scattered, like the wind, and your happiness will 
pass, like a cloud. (There he is, fortunate and redoubtable, high in 
rank, covered with decorations, but he will die-and where will he 
be? Who will remember him?) 
The remembrance of an undistinguished man is less than fifty 
years. 
And they die (blissfully and quietly), full of days.* *  
Impenetrable fog. Impenetrable grief. 
Full of the sweetness of learning. 
Makar: "Get to know Christ and preach him, and provide an ex­
ample by your deeds, and nothing will shake you. And thus you will 
serve even the whole world." 
"True," says Versilov, "Europe is expecting Christ from us. They 
gave us science, and we shall give them Christ (this is Russia's whole 
mission)." 
Makar: "I used to be hard and cruel. I would impose burdens and 
demand service."· The story of the hermit and the child. " '\Vhy, 
these are cherubs!' I didn't believe it: why was the hermit doing my 
pleasure? (I fell to my knees before him. Departed in anger. 'I knew 
that you would come.')" 
"Stinking Lizaveta, why are you struggling so hard, poor sinner?" 
"Because I do not want to be saved, my dear; I want to go to hell, 
darling, right to where the devils are . . .  
" 
"Why is it you don't want to be saved, you madwoman?" 
"Because I want to suffer the torments of hell, that's why . . .  " 
"But I'll be shouting 'Holy-Holy' all the time, so all those devils 
will get tired of it. They will be burning me, and tearing off my skin, 
and I'll still keep shouting: 'Holy-Holy.' " 
• Quoted incompletely in the text. 
• • Quote from Gen. 35: 29. 

178 Makar's Cozmsel 
"Christ, in my sleep: 'Shut up, stupid . . .  what are you doing, 
Lizanka?' This is exactly how he called me: 'Lizanka.' " 
She was about to give up the ghost: "I am guilty more than anyone 
else, I am guilty of my disorders." 
This happened in the town of Afimevsk. I spent a long time there 
on account of having fallen ill . . .  
"A boy with a canary drowned himself. But why are you telling 
these stories? 'Why are you gloating? It's all disorder, and you are 
still speaking of order: you are speaking up against yourself." 
"I am not gloating, my dear, yet one must accept everything with a 
trembling heart. You see something that is good-so you are full of 
joy; you see evil-and you begin to weep in your soul. One as well 
as the other is good and profitable for your soul. The Creator is 
great in one as well as in the other. And how do you know his ways 
so well?" 
"Be firm, man, don't let anything disturb you." 
" . . .  That things are changing for the worse. [Though] this may be 
true, and has been so prophesied for those last days, do not believe it 
in the least, but act as if <things> were going just fine. Preach Christ 
by your words, and even more so by your deeds. Be firm, man, and 
calm, do not let anything trouble you. And your life shall be to the 
glory of God." 
"Most of all, serve by your own works. There is nothing stronger 
than the example of your own works; and don't let it trouble you 
that you have not completed everything, or that you have done but 
little, for it will all contribute to the general good order of things." 
"Will it really?" 
"Why won't it? How does a man live but by good examples?" 
Makar: "Sanctify yourself, and you will serve everybody: by being 
a light to the world." 
["Why, <I> have been speaking of the godless all the time. What 
godless people are they, really? That's asking too much of them. And 
besides.''] 
The hour destined to <end> my life is come.* 
"Do not rejoice over another man's grief. (Do not injure the 
Church of God.)" 
[Every] "Man cannot exist without bowing before something. 
Without it, no man could stand himself, ိ no man could, and not 
• Apparently a variation on John 17: l .  

Christ and Hunger 
179 
just simply so, but he has been created that way. Let him reject God, 
and he will bow before an idol made of silver [stone], or of gold, or 
one that is in his mind. That's the kind of godless people they all 
[these all] are! They are idolaters, that's what they are, and not god­
less. [And all who are living in this world."] 
"So there is no such thing as godless people?" 
"There must be, my dear, there must be, but I've never met any." 
"His soul is like a wild forest, and there is no peace in it. All his 
life. Such is his lot. There are people who are given this." ж 
"So it is given?" 
"Yes; beauty-in-God (i.e., a feeling for beauty-in-God)."* 
"And so, as far as I have been able to notice, all people lead dull 
lives everywhere." 
"If all people would be like Christ, could there be any hunger?" 
"And all this kind of people, they're all untidy, all of them." 
Stinking Lizaveta: "Forgive all of hell, and take all the sinners up 
to you, and leave me there alone to suffer. And <he> will leave me 
there alone (for love). Isn't that enough bliss for you? Satan will 
give in." 
"I am not afraid of Satan." 
"All right, Lizanka, go and suffer all you want." 
There was a man, "I am not asking (<him to repay his?> debt), 
because he loves, and a man won't know what makes him insist on 
his own opinion." ** 
And <I> have heard that one siHHer ancient saint said: "The 
nearer we come to God in our love, the more sinful we feel." And 
believe me, my friend, that the reverse of this [undoubtedly] must 
consequently [must properly] be true also: the further we are from 
God with our hearts and with our minds, the more righteous we con­
sider ourselves to be. 
"\Vhosoever does not want to work, may he not eat either," has 
been said before (Nil Sorsky). 
Lizaveta: "I am not eating either; I'm not eating." 
"Forgive me, as the son of God, king of all ages." 
About Lambert's character. 
Makar Ivanovich has some touching recollections about Versilov's 
• Blagolepie, a Church Slavonic word, literally means "good beauty," i.e., a 
beauty or an order agreeable to God . 
.. Quite unclear and apparently ungrammatical in the original. 

180 A New Story 
childhood, about how he used to teach mamma how to walk, how he 
would carry her into the forest. 
Stinking Lizaveta. "Shut up, you strange woman, you." 
They also put her in an insane asylum once. Her relative, a mer-
chant, gave her a beating-and she kissed his foot. 
She lies on prickly straw. 
"Lizanka, my Lizanka, there is none fouler than you." 
And they sure beat her a lot, the poor dear. 
She would be sitting there, pricking her shirt with some straw, 
then suddenly she would have a fit and start screaming. 
"Here then, the temperature of my head went down a bit" (he 
became sober). • 
September 8. 
Special plan. 
[to remember] The Youth is from Moscow. He sees the whole 
family: mother, elder brother prior to <illegible>, Olia, and the 
small boy. They are all illegitimate, and <his> father, at 50, married 
a young relation of the old Prince's. Scenes with the child at the old 
Prince's, the aunts, etc. A showdown with <his> father, the dia­
monds. It is He who makes inquiries about the Princess. He got 
married in a provincial town, but when he met the Princess again 
he was once more seized by passion and vindictiveness. Olia surren­
ders herself to the young Prince. The Princess fears Him: the docu­
ment. His wife, having learned of His passion for the Princess, leaves 
Him. The Youth and Lambert, and the plot against the Princess. The 
Youth goes to see his father and puts him to shame. He affects his 
reconciliation with <His> wife. The young Prince marries Liza. The 
Youth abandons his idea. The Youth who is running errands for his 
father and acts as a spy at the Princess's falls in love with her. 
A l"'EW STORY. 
Makar Ivanov [an old-time house serf] is dead. Howe·i'er He lived a 
pious life. After February 19 < 1861 >  he spent his time collecting 
funds to build churches. He had come back to Petersburg to die and 
died at the family residence. The family <consists> of his wife, 37 
years old (N .B. She was a beauty all along, until 8 years ago, when she 
rapidly sudden! y got all doubled up from the birth of her last child, 
a small and sick! y boy); Olia, I 7 years old; and the eight-year-old, 
• Literally, "Here then, those degrees went out of my head a bit." 

Versilov's Plot 
1 8 1  
sickly boy. They are all His children, Makar Ivanov being ostensibly 
the husband. 
The Youth had been brought up by the aunts. Later he was at­
tending high school, <then> quit; his own idea. 
The old Prince is altogether under His influence and fears Him. 
He is a gentleman from a good family, who has squandered his 
fortune (Brusilov). 
The Youth knows his story and travels to Petersburg with hidden 
anger in his heart-to get even <with Him> with the aid of his idea. 
He has some poor female relatives (Ͽ the so-called aunts of the 
Youth). They have lost Andreev. They respect Him very much (they 
are doing some sewing <for a living>, and are not being supported 
by Him). Tender, yet cautious and, so it appears, for some reason 
timid relations with Makar Ivanov's family. 
The PriRces The General's wife-<rather,> the widow of a 
General, and the Prince's daughter, 26 years old. 
The young Prince (not a relative), 28 years old (Golitsyn). 
About half a year earlier, He apparently had a strange influence 
on that cold idealist tl:te J!riRces, the General's <widow>. N.B. The 
old Prince might marry. 
Having recognized His intention to marry her, she chases Him out 
with ignominy. 
He suddenly lets the family join him, coming from Luga (a little 
later, Makar Ivanov shows up quite unexpectedly and dies). The 
Youth meets with <His> despotic rule over the family, <witnesses 
how He> rips open the <little boy's> mouth, etc. But the family 
trembles <before Him> all the time. Only the Youth rebels and 
takes his little brother away. 
He had been patient, but now he no longer could, and suddenly 
went into a rage hearing that the General's widow was going to marry 
the Prince. 
Meanwhile he returns those 200,000. 
[He finds out that the Princess has been visiting the family.] 
The Youth gets to hate the Princess, is insulted by the young 
Prince. The diamonds. 
The Princess fears the document. The Youth has found the docu­
ment. He seRds l:ter tl:te docHFReRt. 
[He chops up those icons.] 
Tl:te last reRdeZ?lOHS. At arst He tl:treateRs l:ter, dacHFReRt iR haRd; 
tReR he tears 1:1}3 the dscHFReRt; tkeR wants ts ra13e her. The Ysuth 
saves botl:t HiFR aRd tl:te J!riRcess. MeaRwl:tile Liza surreRders herself 

182 
The Old Prince and the Document 
to the )"Olmg PriRce. She drowRs herself. He is desperate, ,,·hile the 
GeReral's widow hreaks with the PriRce. The little bo)· can't endure 
Liza's death and drmms hitRself. He ·.tants to !Harry Makar's widow, 
but she refuses. (N.lt It is reffiarl<ahle that 'Makar's wife had been 
His friend and advisor.) álakar's widow suddenl)· dies. (The Youth is 
anested.) The little hoy sta)·s with WitH and drowns hitHsel£. (To 
Liza.) He hangs hiR1self in a ffionastery. 
Note. 'Vork out the episode of the rape. This is how it happens: 
after the return of those 200,000, etc., the Princess is cool <toward 
Him>. Thereupon He threatens her with the letter, for that letter 
has been found. The Princess responds by <seeing to it> that the 
old Prince dismisses Him. Marriage to the young Prince. He is furi­
ous at such a show of contempt and (psychology) asks Makar's widow 
to marry him. She refuses (she used to be his advisor). On that day, 
He chops up those icons. In the meantime Liza's romance takes its 
course, without anyone being aware of it. The young Prince doesn't 
know who she is? Desperate as a result of his comic situation, He 
allies himself with Lambert. The Youth saves Him. 
He is crushed by his own baseness. At this point Olia's romance 
comes to light. (The Youth is arrested.) His mother dies of a broken 
heart. The Princess breaks off her wedding. He is left alone with the 
little boy, broken-hearted. The boy drowns himself. 
He reasons this way: "She is afraid that the old Prince might dis­
inherit her, for she herself is penniless. Then, the young Prince will 
abandon her." Besides, she is sure that the document has been 
destroyed. She is sure of that mostly because He has told the old 
Prince about the document and about the lunatic asylum. But the 
old Prince asked to see the document and when He replied that <the 
document> had been lost at Andreev's, he showed Him the door. It 
is after having committed this low-down act that He proposes to his 
wife. (N. B. He is suddenly convinced that the Princess is passionately, 
madly in love with the young Prince. At last His eyes are opened. 
Up to that time He had had a theory according to which it had been 
a mere case of La lzaine dans l'amour.1 The Youth, in spite of the fact 
that he is his mother's son, is very much under His influence, i.e., they 
have become that close friends. At times he finds Him repulsive, then 
again he is attracted to Him.) After this, He chops up those icons. 
(Liza's romance, without anyone being aware of it.) 
1 French: "Hate in love." 

They Both Hate the Princess 
1 83 
Lambert finds out about the existence of the document from the 
Youth and tells Him about it. He reasons like this ... (and wants to 
take vengeance on her by violence and scandal just before her wed­
ding). Then the Youth sees how far things are gone, and he saves the 
Princess. But he does it on an impulse, for he was himself in on the 
plot, though with trepidation. [Though in love himself, he would 
spit with disgust, a misogynist.] The thing is that <while> he hated 
the Princess, had suffered insults from the young Prince, he still loved 
even though he despised Him and looked down <on Him>, for he 
forgave <Him> (after the scene with Souchard). * 
Besides, they both hated the Princess. The Youth got to hate her 
even more when he realized that He, in spite of his ostensible hatred, 
was more in love with her than ever. And suddenly.fte.the Youth feels 
that he is himself in love; he spits with disgust. Chastity [and the 
hideous thought that he is his father's rival.] 
"\Vhen the Youth finds the letter, he experiences a sensation <as if 
he were an> Ungern-Shternberg.2 He now wants to put the screws on 
her, then to send her the letter; then again, considering this to be base 
(for he senses that he is yielding to his love for her), to give the letter 
to Him. But it is too late for that, for he is frightened by the news that 
He has already reported the matter to the old Prince, and was shown 
the door <by the latter>. 
[The old Prince] He later tried to convince the Youth that, had she 
only been shown the document, she'd have been licking their boots. 
Incidentally, He also told the Youth that He wouldn't have married 
her in any case, aside from the fact that it was impossible now. 
(N.B. Having learned about Liza's romance, he tells her about it. 
He gets mocking remarks in return, and the date for the wedding is 
set.) Then He suggests to Lambert, having learned from him that the 
letter does exist, that he make a copy of its content and mail it from 
the aunt's, thus joining the plot. (Rape her on the eve of her wedding 
day.) 
Lambert tries to tempt the Youth with an offer of 30,000 and 
"fuck." The Youth is excited both by the thought of revenge, and 
by <his> love <for her>. But having learned the whole extent of 
the scheme, and also (from Lambert) that He had asked Lambert not 
to tell him, the Youth, that He is involved in the plot, he becomes 
• Ungrammatical and unclear in the original. 
2 See note three of part II. 

1 84 Lambert and the Docume11t 
scared, realizes how base it is. And yet he is drawn to it, like <an 
arsonist is drawn> to set fire to a village. He wanted to see with his 
own eyes the vileness of the Princess, the vileness of the aristocracy. 
But he saves the Princess, for she conducts herself splendidly. (N .B. 
Here the crime and the cynicism of the Youth and, incidentally, 
also his thirst for power. The document being a temptation to apply 
his power. As for the 30 thousand, he wanted to let Lambert keep 
them, and without a moment's hesitation. As for fucking her, the 
thought never entered his mind, not even for a moment, nor would 
he let Lambert do it.) HoweveF The Princess fell ill after that; but, 
having learned about Liza's death from the Youth, seeing the young 
Prince's despair, and realizing that he would be forcing himself to 
marry her, she proudly broke off their engagement. 
[N .B. Olia's romance absolutely must take place after Lambert's 
plot. 
Lambert is terribly frank, the peculiar and unusual ingenuousness 
of a crook, who doesn't even suspect that there might be some honest 
people, too.] 
Characters. 
The old Prince. A year and a half earlier he had been suffering 
from softening of the brain. He has gotten well again, but has not 
fully recovered. He feels terribly insulted whenever someone suspects 
that he is in a state of imbecility. This is why he would have cursed 
his daughter if he had learned that she was going to place him in an 
insane asylum. He has lost his official positions. He has invested his 
capital in some business transactions (which gave the Princess reason 
to say that He is stealing <from her father>). 
Then there is He, an old-fashioned type of gentleman. The pre­
cious traits of skepticism, generosity, unbelief, [idle] atheism, laziness, 
liberalism, despotism. Above all, passion, a predatory type. But pas­
sion <which has taken?> refuge in Christianity ("It's his third year 
of preaching the Gospel," says the old Prince). N.B. (The old Prince 
has become terribly witty precisely since the time when he was suf­
fering from softening of the brain.) Hidden atheism and despotism 
in the family. Almost the same as in the earlier novel. This is how 
the Youth finds it when he arrives on the scene. 
Olia is an angelic type. The intimidated ones. She got frightened 
when the young Prince proposed to her. But she felt terribly flattered 
and was very happy. She turned him down, drowned herself. ["One 
could get married, <but> he won't love me. Surely, he would never 

JVho Is the Hero? 
1 85 
give me a word of reproach, and <yet> he would regret it all his 
life."] 
The mother. A Russian type (a· tremendous character). They are 
both downtrodden, and humble, and firm, like saints. 
Makar Ivanov. (A Russian type.) He wonders. 
The Youth as before. 
Dolgushin et al. Vasin-very cursorily. 
He'll need his own flat, I suppose. 
However, his own idea is just too persistent. 
Only this problem: who is the hero? The Youth or He? 
The young Prince Golitsyn, charming, also 24 years old. 
N.B. More strongly about his own idea-and more strongly on 
Christianity as preached by Him. 
Olia is a frightened <soul>, because He had frightened her in her 
childhood, which is also why He <later> surrounded her with care. 
He hired a Swiss governess for her. They used to travel abroad. 
Venice, cathedrals. Cathedrals scared her. 
A legend. In Luga there is living an old lady, a relative of the old 
Prince's; not wealthy, but independent. It is under her patronage 
that Makar's family was living <in Luga> in seclusion. In Luga, the 
young Prince also met Olia. (But he didn't find out whose daughter 
she was.) Meeting her in Petersburg he asks her directly: "So you are 
here?" (N .B. The young Prince is poor himself, but is having success 
in Petersburg.) They become acquainted. For a long time he has pity 
on her, and finally she becomes pregnant. 
He hRaS eHt aeeHt tkat l'lregRaRC)' (ey ckalleRgiRg tke yeHRg 
PriRce te a aHel, fer He l'larticHlar reaseR, jHst beiRg R'l:aa aeeHt the 
PriRcess; tke challeFtge is riaicHleus, <iR •liew ef> the aitfereRce iR 
years; B)' this tiR'le the FriRce already kRew (threugh the auRts) all 
tke secrets ef Makar's faR'lily; the FriRce refuses te figkt a aHel aHa 
adR'I:its te Him that he is gHilty before His daHghter). 
Thereupon He is fired by a decision to force the young Prince to 
marry Olia. OR acouRt of this, his first rul'lture with tke ola FriRce. 
But He has aceR'lt'lliskea kis eRa: tke CeReral's wiamv is R'l:ortally 
RHrt. gyt He is not doiRg it for her sake. He is doing it for his 
daughter's sake. It is l'lrecisely at this t'lOiRt tkat Makar sheHs Ht'l aHa 
-tlies: Olia meets the young Prince. She asks him about the Princess: 
"Do you love her?"* The young Prince cannot possibly marry her, but 
• Olia is using the obsequious plural, literally, "Do you love them?" 

186 0/ia and the You11g Prince 
he does feel awfully sorry for her. Olia drowns herself (after having 
seen the Princess and set her mind at rest). The Princess breaks with 
the young Prince. The young Prince himself breaks off his engage­
ment with the Princess. The mother dies of a broken heart. The 
Youth is arrested, but soon released. The little boy drowns himself. 
Fussing around with father, etc. • 
Makar still in the beginning. After Makar<'s death> offers to 
marry her. On the same day-[MRkRr still i1'1 the heginning He chops 
up those icons. It was at this time that Lambert's plot materialized. 
The Princess is ill. But He challenges the young Prince in a fit of 
fury. The young Prince, dumbfounded, tells Him about Olia. It is 
at this point that He finds out about Olia, not any earlier. 
The young Prince had stolen some icons, was tried and then par­
doned. Later he rose in the service thanks to the efforts of a young 
General. 
He has squandered his own 70 souls. 
Bon jour, papa le grand.3 
He has been at Souchard's only as an adult. 
During their first meeting the Youth asks the young Prince about 
Souchard. The young Prince doesn't understand and forgets about 
it. Sincerely. Traveling by train. Tells his story to <his> aunt. "I 
hate!"] 
That's how it was: Olia used to go with the young Prince until 
she found out that he was engaged to the General's widow. Then she 
broke off their relationship, without anger: ["Maybe you couldn't 
help it at all."] She used to go to Kazan Cathedral. <Then> she began 
staying at home, afraid to make a move, to see the Prince. Meanwhile 
the young Prince was pleading, fretting, visiting the aunts' place, 
writing letters. Having found out whose daughter she was, he refuses 
to accept His challenge, issued in a fit of madness (a long time prior 
to the scene with Lambert). The Youth arrives just at the time when 
Liza has become pregnant. Scene between him and the young Prince. 
The young Prince is actually making up to him. A strange impression. 
On her own part, the General's widow is miserable and jealous, as 
she sees the change in the young Prince, who is displaying alternate fits 
of love and an almost timid aloofness. The Princess finds out about 
Liza from the young Prince himself. After the scene with Lambert, 
• Impossible to determine whether the subject is masculine or feminine. 
J French: "Good day, great papa." 

Plan of Part One 187 
rupture with the young Prince, while He learns that Liza is pregnant. 
He wants to kill the young Prince. But Liza drowns herself, etc. In 
the meantime, Makar. His proposal to <Makar's> wife. He chops up 
the icons. [The mother had known for a long time that Liza was 
pregnant.] 
Form, form! (plain narrative a Ia Pushkin). 
N.B. Makar. 
Makar shocks everybody by his appearance: the Youth, the family, 
but especially Him. He has a nervous breakdown and suddenly offers 
to marry <Makar's> wife. Thereafter, he chops up those icons. 
N.B. The Fool is staying at the same place where the Youth has 
rented a flat. 
N .B. N .B. First make an outline of <the Youth's> own idea, as well 
as of the characters <of the novel>; then work out the plan of the 
entire novel, event after event. 
September 9. 
TENTATIVE PLAN OF PART ONE ALONE. 
In the railway carriage. The aunt and the Youth. N.B. The Youth 
had met his aunt casually before, and they run into each other at the 
railway ticket office. If Lambert, then the Fool is right there, too. [The 
aunt talks to the Fool, mentioning that she knows the Princess.] In 
the railway carriage the Youth and his aunt discuss and argue about 
Christ, about frou-frou, about "I am proud <that I am an illegitimate 
son?>," about his running around with a student of the university. 
[He surprises the aunt by his familiarity with the old Prince, about 
the General's widow, except that it is all distorted. Somber, but his 
age (he is 20) shows.] [He feels very sorry that he was so outspoken 
with the aunt.] 
His own idea. About who Brusilov is, the soldier in the railway 
carriage, April 25. Doubts, about <his> mother. "Your mother, she 
has seen you, hasn't she?" 
They arrive at the aunts' place. "I don't want to <stay> with my 
mother," while she is right there. Scenes. 
Should he or shouldn't he be introduced to Him? 
But he goes away to see Vitia, <or> to the market, <or> to 
Dolgushin's. Vasin. [At Vitia's he must absolutely <say something> 
about Lambert. Lambert worries him.] 
He comes home at 8 o'clock. [He won't pay proper attention to the 
Youth.] A scene. He is being rude. The ripping of <the little boy's> 
mouth. [He chases him out of the house.] He is leaving of his own 
accord. The little boy, frightened, has already run out into the street. 

1 88 
Vasin 
He takes him over to Vasin's place. [Even glad to do it, wanting to 
take his re,·enge. "?\o, I had only one feeling, that of compassion! JJ!e 
/Joth wanted to nw away."] 
At Vasin's. He tells Vasin e\·erything, whole confession, but not 
about his idea. (The little boy has fallen asleep, as he keeps asking 
for Olia.) The Youth falls asleep also. Vasin sends word to his family. 
His mother comes. 
The Youth goes out to rent himself a flat. [Vasin asks him not to 
come anymore.] He goes to the aunts' place. In a dark room. Over­
hears a ဪonversation in spite of himself. (The General's widow has 
come to see the aunt.) Letters. The aunt is perturbed by the fact that 
he has heard what was said. He asks the aunt to tell Him to please stay 
away from him, and that he won't need that job either. He goes to see 
his mother to pay a visit to the child. Liza. Now they will forgive 
everything. 
[After <Vasin's> request not to come to his place anymore he goes 
to the aunts' place where he starts a letter to his father asking that 
they sever all connections. Enter the Princess. He eavesdrops in spite 
of himself. The letters.] 
He returns home (an incident with a wench, something that hap­
pens in the street). At home, he finds Him waiting, engaged in a 
conversation with his landlord. A showdown. He charms him. Be­
sides, the Youth is considerably shaken and exhausted. About Vasin 
(about socialism). He learns that Vasin has told <Him> the story of 
his <the Youth's> childhood. Ardently <expounds> his idea. Ce 
n'est pas si bete.4 
They had promised to visit the General's widow. Captivated by 
her. He doesn't l<now )'et tl:lat !:lis father is a villain. He leaves, pensive 
and crushed. 
The Youth vlfites a letter in the morning, goes to se falls asleep 
cursing himself for having told him about his idea. 
[He curses and tears up. < . . .  > A villainy. The curse. He goes 
home. Alone. His own idea. En route, the incident with the wench. 
He is shaken.] 
First Part 
All of this had a very strong effect on the Youth (He is talkative). 
But prior to this conversation, coming home one day, he found Him 
4 French: "This isn't so foolish." 

The Youth and the Prince 
1 89 
with a government clerk <talking> about that <huge> rock," and 
was surprised at such triviality. 
He has mixed feelings. But he wakes up and proceeds to the 
Prince's house. 
Second Part 
On the next day I went to see the Prince, the Prince and the 
General's widow. But jeune Jwmme)G toward the end of the conver­
sation (about how the old Prince ought to get married) < . . .  > The 
young Prince insults him ("I could not restrain myself, went up to 
him: '\Veren't you a friend of Lambert's?' "). The Princess whispered 
something about him to the old Prince and left, chuckling. The 
Youth returns in order to quit everything and leave. He meets Liza 
in the street. A brief meeting. [A ray of sunshine. For the first time, he 
recognizes the real Liza. N.B. Compose a scene.] The General's 
widow, stepping out of her carriage. A strange sensation. He swears 
revenge. 
He returns home, knowing that He is going to question him regard­
ing the General's 'vidow. But He does not. [He announces that he is 
not going to <work for> the old Prince. At this point, <the scene> 
at the Liar's flat. The Youth is surprised that He, such a somber 
person, diverts himself with such trivialities. Spending time on baga­
telles. He challenges Him fiercely on account of this.] The Youth is 
irritated by the idea of Christianity, so, exactly at this point, a sermon 
on Christianity and about his own idea. About Vasin, about social­
ism. The future, about Vasin and about his own idea. He hasn't seen 
his mother. Full of sorrow. ["Let's go, and the devil may care!" In his 
fall, he has visions of Liza.J A scene at his flat, involving the landlord 
and landlady. 
On the third day he wants to challenge him to a duel. An insolent 
refusal. The diamonds. She accuses <him>. He leaves. \Vas about to 
give himself up for lost. Got home late. He finds the young Prince 
already waiting to tell him that the incident with the diamonds has 
been taken care of, and that he has already received a challenge from 
Him. He had asked the <Youth> to come to see Him. He is at home. 
("You don't know!" i.e., about Liza.) He blushes. He doesn't want to 
5 The anecdote about how a huge rock is disposed of by digging a hole beside 
it is narrated by the Youth's landlord in Part II, Chapter I ,  of the final version. 
6 French: "Young man." 

190 Absolutely in the First Person 
give any answer, is somber and irritated. He says that he has seen the 
old Prince and has settled the business with the diamonds. 
l\fakar arrives. The whole story of Makar. His death. (The Youth 
is terribly impressed.) After Makar's death He comes with a new con­
fession, with tenderness, imprecations, about the Princess, about pas­
sion, about the letters (at Andreev's). [The idea about Andreev's let­
ter,] the letter. Meanwhile the old Prince is very much upset. An inci­
dent with the landlord-death of the small child. The Youth's agony 
at seeing that the letter has this effect on him. He realizes that he is in 
love; he kisses the Princess's tracks. 
A meeting with Vasin. Vasin about Him. They get together and 
have a talk. 
His mother comes: "\Vhy aren't you coming to see your brother, he 
is calling for you." His mother is very sad. 
Lila sHdden:ly comes to see the Y otlth aRd asks him if it is tn:te that 
he loves the Prinn:ss. 
The young Prince says that Liza doesn't want to marry him. She 
wants to break with him. 
N.B. The Youth is aware of Liza's romance a long time before He 
is. He does not tell Him. At first he was going to tear the young Prince 
to pieces, but the latter bends him to his will. He grows more somber, 
finds that the whole thing is base. 
The Youth had learned the facts about his father, about the Gen­
eral's widow, and about the old Prince from Lambert who at one time 
had been drinking together with the old the young Prince. 
Absolutely in the first person, it is more naive and more charming, 
though it would lack any moral. 
A story. 
September 10! 
The aunt tells the Youth about the death of his mother after he is 
released from arrest. Absolutely make it so the Youth is not present 
at his mother's death. 
Or make it so his mother dies in his presence. 
He is arrested, and returning four days later, on the day of the 
funeral, he discovers that the little boy has disappeared. They find the 
boy. The aunt suggests that he use those 25,000 to buy a place in the 
country and take both of them there. The Youth would like to get an 
education. A yea£ late£ the little boy makes friends with the Idiot. 
They spend their time together. Leave the city and go to the country! 
N.B. He, as well as Vasin, brings up the subject of <the Youth's> 

Point of View 
191 
continuing his education many times throughout the novel. They 
decide that he will get his education. 
He has mixed feelings about things. "I don't want to see anybody." 
The aunt, He, and the little boy. "I did, however, pass the examina­
tion." A ray of sunshine. "Oh my dear, you have such a long life 
ahead of you!" (the aunt says). 
If in the first person} then, provided it is close <to the event> (3 
months), the manuscript must bear the traces of a certain lack of pur­
pose. <But> if the Youth has already overcome this period, the result­
ing conscious purpose of his narrative will cause it to lose its naivete. 
In the first person it would be more na'ive, incomparably more 
original, and, in its deviations from a smooth and systematic narra­
tive, even more delightful. 
The young Prince as he appears in the Youth's judgment and all 
the scenes with Liza will come out more original from the Youth's 
pen. In the first person} in the first person} in the fi1·st person! 
But if the third person were used, it would be extremely difficult 
to give the reader a sound reason why the Youth should be the hero, 
and to justify such <choice>. 
Start without any kind of introduction-more original that way, 
and only in some other place, later, in the following chapters: All 
this happened a year ago, of course I am a different person now, etc. 
[Also in the first chapter: tR:e reader One might think that what 
I'm writing is all nonsense, but it is really very serious and, what is 
most important, I'm writing nothing that isn't necessary, everything 
is quite important-even that Fool, for the time will come when he 
will begin to play a role.] 
But in the finale: A detailed description of how he was saving the 
child,* with all the horrors of it, and later, how he is dying, without 
the slightest hint regarding the meaning of life, etc. 
[In the first person} it's definite now. No matter what happens. But 
he is writing it a year after <the event>. Keep this in mind in every 
line.] 
"We are living in seclusion"-two aunts. To see the mother's 
grave. "I think that your aunt is right, suggesting that you enroll in 
the university." 25,000. 
• Spasal rebenka. The Russian form is ambiguous, since it could mean "saved" 
or "was trying to save." 

192 
The Yo11th's Idea 
A ray. Everything casually and significantly. "But now I shall stop, 
for I have [other things to do. 1\1 y idea.] [September 1 2  I drm·e to 
<the Cathedral of> the Savior.] Or should I rather not take those 
25,000? In that case, I'll join the civil service." 
The Youth makes his way into real life from a sea of idealism (his 
own idea). He is suddenly surrounded by all the different elements 
of our society at once. 
His own idea failed to stand the test and at once began to waver. 
Hence his depressed state. [An idea. Convey this mood to the reader 
more clearly.] But being the gloomy misanthrope he is, he won't con­
cede defeat, but keeps viewing the world with arrogance. He accuses 
everybody and decides to go against every law. (N .B. When Makar is 
dying, he sheds tears and kisses his hand; and in a scene with his 
mother and Liza, he accuses them of servility.) 
Now he is really in a whirl. Scene with the Princess. Somber scene 
involving Lambert's leg. His arrest. The scenes after his arrest are 
already in a different mood. 
The novel contains all the elements <of our society>. Civilized 
and desperate, idle and skeptical, of the higher intelligentsia-that's 
He. 
Ancient Holy Russia-Makar's family. 
\Vhat is holy, good about new Russia-the aunts. 
A <great> family gone to seed-the young Prince (a skeptic, etc.) 
High societyါthe funny and the abstractly ideal type. 
The young generation-the Youth, all instinct, knows nothing. 
Vasin-hopelessly ideal. 
Lambert-flesh, matter, horror-etc. 
"I can see that my idea has not been realized; however, the idea 
still stands. Having made this statement I conclude by saying that I 
won't write anymore for at least five years. I shall devote this time to 
my studies. And then, after five years, I may reread what I have 
written <and> check myself. In 5 years the status of my idea will 
become more definite also." 
Perhaps [unnecessary]. 
DEFr;.:rTIVELY. Better without even the slightest comments or reser­
vations, just say that it happened a year ago. 
N .B. In the finale. "I wanted to say that <we> shouldn't take any 
money from the Prince, but said nothing. <My> aunt only gave me 
a look." 
About frou-frou. I was in that kind of a mood theu. 
DEFr;.:rnvE. 

Lambert Learns the Secret of the Letter 1 93 
All the elements of our society were present, and it appeared to me 
that we were like mummers, refusing to understand each other; yet 
we speak the same language, we belong to the same country and even 
to the same family. (N.B. That's it. And the transition to the next 
chapter. Finish it abruptly. \Vrite more abruptly all along.) 
DISORDER. 
In the first person, in the first person-September 1 2. 
The Youth is amazed at the baseness <of the world> and curses 
the whole world. He is himself in agony about his idea concerning the 
letters. Vasin and the landlord. The Youth is thinking of suicide. 
Kraft shoots himself (while Vasin comes suddenly to return the 
papers). Everybody has been arrested. Lambert talks him into it. The 
letter. His father reports to the old Prince about the letter. He <the 
father> is shown the door. He proposes to <Makar's> wife, chops up 
some icons. The next day he tells the Youth that, if he only had the 
document, she'd be licking his boots. He wants to get even with her. 
"I would have never married her." [Lambert's story left out. Death 
of the old Prince left out.] He doesn't say himself that he is out to get 
ာven with her, but the Youth can see it. The Youth about his father: 
"Quite decidedly, he had become attached to me." The Youth is 
terribly excited. His landlord has burned his wife. Lambert and 
Andrieux. The old Prince to Andrieux. [They both start crying. A 
disgusting, nerve-wracking scene. Nothing comes of it. Lambert says 
that nothing will come of this idiot.] The Y6ttth "\Vhat is this whole 
world good for?" exclaims the Youth. The Youth reveals the secret 
of the letter to Lambert. Liza. Some kind of desperate scene [between 
him, his mother, and Liza.J The mother: "Bear it." The Youth : "Eh, 
to hell with it all!" Power, start a conflagration, he suddenly learns 
that He is in on the plot with Lambert. The scene of the violation, 
kills Lambert, the Princess. The Princess has already learned about 
Liza's romance. The Youth finds out about it. Back home, Liza 
drowns herself. She leaves a letter. (N.B. The Youth hears the story 
of Liza's romance either from the Prince, through the latter's inci­
dental remarks, or <from> Liza: "Farewell, my darling.") Liza's 
body recovered from the water. He, <her> mother. The Youth is 
arrested. 
The YButh is ttHeeF anest fBF a sfiBrt tiffle BRly, a weelt BF so; upoR 
his Fetttf'H he fiRes l:tis fflBtfier 6yiRg. Returning from prison. +fte­
auRt tells Riffl. He goes tA.ere. TA.e little eoy. The little boy has 
disappeared. The Youth rushes to find him. He is found (to Liza). He 
brings the boy. He, the aunts, and the boy. "Live for their sake. Forget 

194 Lambert's Plot 
about my own idea." Three months later the boy laughs, embraces 
Him. He is an idiot. Cries. 
[25,000, get an education. The Princess has gone abroad and has 
taken the old Prince with her. The young Prince is living somewhere 
in the country.] 
N.B. A propos the novel. The Youth is <the> hero in every 
respect. He is with the old Prince, and with the young Prince (a duel), 
and with his father, and at his own flat with the government clerk, 
and with Vasin about his idea. • The latter hands him his papers. 
He is also aware of Liza's romance. He also loves the little child, is 
close to his mother, is greatly impressed by Makar Ivanov. N.B. It 
might be that Lambert, in particular, fascinates him. 
"To hell with everything. Leave everything and run." He cannot 
see any sense in Him, though He is dear to him, and so he argues with 
Him all the time. Also, the meekness at home doesn't make sense to 
him. Neither can he understand the meaning of his budding love for 
the Princess. Even his own idea seems senseless and shaky, which 
makes him feel terribly giddy. And Vasin, too, seems senseless. And 
Liza's romance is terrifying. And what good is justice? ,\,REi l=te wouiEl 
like Ġa 
He is terribly impressed by Makar Ivanov. He would like both to 
see an aristocrat humiliated and, tempted by Lambert, to get all that 
money. But he loves his little brother to the point where it hurts. 
THE YOUTH GROWS MORE AND MORE UNSOCIABLE AND SO:\lBER. 
A areaFRer, tl=te [tl=tought of suiciae. Especially after [Makar and 
the icons.] 
YouRg The Youth was turning somber and taciturn. [It might go 
even without Lambert.] 
Lambert (without the Fool). "You ask for 30,000 and a fuck." He 
is thinking about the idea of fucking <her>. And altogether, he is 
thinking of the entire scene of <her> humiliation; he has an urge 
to start a conflagration-to get even <with them> for everything; as 
for those 30 thousand, he haughtily dreams of leaving them to Lam­
bert. An urge to set a fire. He** penetrates the conspiracy at the very 
last moment. Perhaps, only Lambert and he, without Him, though 
He knows about everything. 
[Incidentally, the Fool is needed. Lambert kills him.] 
• Ungrammatical in the original. 
• • Apparently "He" is meant. 

Adjustment zn the Plan 
195 
[Think, but the l st part is good.] 
SheulaR't it ee <writteR> iR the fiF5t pef56H? 
The tone is such. For instance, the story of His relationship with 
the Princess ... They parted as enemies and this is the state of affairs 
when the Youth arrives on the scene, etc.; etc. a la Pouchkine-the 
story of each character being a secondary one, with only the Youth 
being dealt with primarily, i.e., the poem is devoted to him. He is 
the hero. 
All this had a terrifying and a somber effect on him. It led him all 
the way to falling in love 'vith the Princess (without his father being 
aware of it) and to crime. Idea. I.e., the Youth despised them all for 
their guilt, and became guilty himself. He is saved from having to 
stand trial. 
Perhaps the little boy didn't drown <after all>. The Youth finds 
him. He drags him from the water. He stays with the little boy and 
with his deranged father. 
"For the time being I shall be working to support these two; there's 
a job for me. I'll be a bourgeois." 
The young Prince himself breaks off <his engagement> with the 
Princess. He has 200,000 which He has conceded to him. The Prin­
cess has a passion for the young Prince. He says: "A widow, an old 
woman, madness." 
September 1 3. 
Adjustment in the plan (complication of the sujet). He has sum­
moned <his> family to have a moral (refuge), i.e., the devil only 
knows why. I.e., precisely because of his excited state and his strained 
psychic condition. Rejected the year before by that proud idealist, the 
Princess, merely because of her suspicion that He does not love her 
for her own sake, disinterestedly, but rather intends to better his 
financial position through this marriage, He marries the Prince's step­
daughter, an orphan. [(N.B. Upon the old Prince's own suggestion.)] 
The General's widow is afraid of a will, but succeeds in making the 
Prince reserve for her another huge dowry (the first had been dis­
sipated by her late husband, the General). 
[She fears the letter for the reason that the document concerning 
those 200,000 had been found at Andreev's, so why not also the letter?] 
She is engaged to the young Prince. He denounces <the marriage> 
of a 26-year-old "old woman" to a 27-year-old <man>; furthermore, 
he, i.e., the young Prince, is not serving anywhere, etc. [Passion, he 
had been charged with <the desecration? of> some icons.] 
Nevertheless, he returns those 200,000 (in the beginning of the 

196 Lambert and Forgery 
novel. The report of this event exceedingly impresses the Youth, who 
has just arrived from Moscow.) However, the return of those 200,000 
makes no impression whatsoever on the Princess, except sneers. [The 
Princess is laughing at his having returned the 200,000, and she lets 
the aunt and stepdaughter her father the Prince know how she feels. 
The latter is amused by it. The Youth communicates this conversa­
tion to Him.] He is bitter about it. 
Simultaneously, the Princess lets the old Prince and his step­
daughter know about the existence of 1\Jakar's family. He the)' are 
asuming that it is the Princes who has heen tattling knows that it is 
the Princess who has been tattling. \Vhich makes him even madder. 
He challenges the young Prince to a duel, but the latter won't accept 
the challenge (after the return of those 200,000). The challenge brings 
Him and the Youth closer together, on account of the fact that he had 
offered 50,000. * 
Makar dies. The young Prince loves Liza, but isn't, God knows 
why, attracted by Liza. The Princess finds out about this. She forgives 
the young suspect Prince. But she keeps suspecting Him [and (in a fit 
of passion) accuses Him of wanting to make the Prince marry Liza, 
and of buying the Prince <for> 200,000,] whereas He doesn't even 
know about Liza at this point. [This is why her hatred against him has 
grown.] [She demands that the young Prince return those 200,000. 
He does not want to.] 
Suddenly Lambert appears on the scene. He has documents to 
prove that the Prince has committed forgery. [He wants] to suggest 
that either the Prince or the Princess buy them from him. He <the 
father> gets together with Lambert and buys the document. He sends 
it over to the Princess. rendezYous uhe On account of the Princess, 
His rupture with the old Prince and his stepdaughter. He offers to 
marry <Makar's> wife and chops up those icons. He goes to see the 
old Prince and denounces her to him, saying that she wanted to have 
him declared insane (thus casting prudence to the winds). He is shown 
the door. The letter is found. \Vith the Youth. Shows it to Lambert. 
He wants to wheedle it out of him. The scene with the violation, etc. 
He is indirectly involved in the plot. 
The Princess insults Liza. 
[Makar Ivanov. The diamonds. The Youth finds out about Liza.] 
[From Lambert or from the Princess. She tells him about Him-that 
• Not quite clear in the original. 

Lambert and the Princess 
197 
He wanted to s€1 to buy the Prince for Liza.] [N.B. A showdown 
between the Youth and the Princess, during which she treats him 
casually, insulting him. Revenge At first he is charmed, but then he 
finds reason to feel insulted] and joins the conspiracy. The Princess 
has obtained all the information for the Youth and subsequently 
<says> to him: "'Vhat is it you were going to say?" 
Meanwhile Lambert has arrived in town. He has taken 5,000 rubles 
from the Princess for a compromising document. He tells Lambert 
that he is a fool, that even the young Prince himself now has a fortune 
of nearly 200,000, and that he could have gotten 1 0,000 from the 
young Prince and the Princess for this kind of document. But Lam­
bert hadn't known that the young Prince owned 200,000 (on this 
occasion, he expresses his surprise that He has returned those 200,000) 
and tells him that he had negotiated the deal with the Princess who, 
upon having bought the document, had begged him not to tell the 
young Prince about the document. But as for herself, she felt that 
these were trifles. "She wants to reproach the young Prince for it, she 
wants to nag him with this document, and hold him firmly in her 
hands besides," says He. (N .B. 'Vhen the Youth asks the Prince, "Are 
you acquainted with one Lambert?" the Prince gets angry, but later 
tries to make up to him, though in a condescending manner, just 
barely receiving him at his house. Then, the theft of the diamonds, 
etc..) 
He tells Lambert outright that he is a fool-why didn't he give 
that document to Him? And states, in this connection: "If I only 
had that letter!" 
[The old Prince, [ϱIme] Andrieux. A pathetic scene.] 
The Youth tells Lambert that he has got the letter. The Youth 
Lambert communicates this information to Him. But the Youth 
won't let him have the note, even though Lambert offers him money; 
but he is willing to go along with the plan according to which Lam­
bert would rape her, take 50,000 from her, "and later you can fuck 
her, too." 
He keeps aloof. He would like to have his revenge. (It is right at 
this point that the Princess has just insulted Liza and the young 
Prince has deserted her, even though he had done some crying before 
the Princess.) He finds out that Liza is dishonored. The day before 
her wedding. Lambert is about to rape her, but the Youth won't let 
him. Then Lambert, seeing that his scheme has failed, decides -FAe­
FFI:eRtaril)' to kill the Fool and to make his escape as fast as possible. 
The young Prince would have prefered has a premonition that 

198 
Asks Lambert to Rape Her 
life with the General's widow is going to be hell. Meanwhile Liza 
drowns herself. \Vedding of the Princess and the young Prince. He 
is put to shame, and stunned. <Makar's> wife dies. He suffers very 
much from the fact that the little boy is afraid of him. The Youth 
has no end of trouble with both of them. Lambert with his leg. The 
Youth is arrested. He shows up again 5 days later. The boy has run 
away. 
Couldn't He have sent the compromising document to the young 
Prince, but without being rewarded, etc.? Lambert tells the Youth 
outright that He is in on the plot, but has told Lambert not to tell 
him. \Vhen Lambert learns that He has turned over the document 
<to the young Prince> he tears into Him, but He Ealms him dowR 
having learned from Lambert that the letter does exist, <He> ex­
plains the whole importance of the letter <to Lambert>, insisting, 
also, on going through with the rape. • Lambert openly tells every­
thing to the Youth, much to the latter's amazement; he is disturbed 
by the fact that He is asking <Lambert> to rape her, but it also 
inflames him. The proud Princess. 
After Liza's death the Youth is so depressed that he does not want 
to take revenge on the Prince. [He is reproaching himself for having 
forgotten about Liza.] 
It is even worse with Him. He is even more crushed. After Liza's 
death he accuses everybody; the whole family is gathered; the heart­
breaking scene of Mother's death. On the day of the funeral the little 
boy keeps asking for Liza. He <his father> is trying to talk to the 
boy, but he is afraid of Him, and won't let go of the Youth; but the 
Youth is arrested, and the little boy runs away to drown himself (to 
join Liza). They find him. 
The whole question about the marriage amounted to this: \Vould 
the Prince give (the Princess) another dowry? The old Prince was 
trying to stand firm (to show his authority, while being afraid of 
everybody, as He explains to the Youth), but on the day He de­
nounces <her> he gives her 300,000 and chases Him out of his house. 
"I do not love her," He says to the Youth, '"all I want is that she 
admit that I am an honest man, that's all." 
"And a great man?" 
"What do you mean?" 
"An honest and a great man," the Youth repeats. 
• Ungrammatical and not quite clear in the original. 

Meeting with the Princess 
199 
"Mon cher, vos saicasmes < . . .  >"7 (They quarrel, but later He still 
comes back to see-fl.i.m the Youth.) 
In the beginning he says this about the Princess: "I am very glad 
that she is so smitten with the little Prince. Both sfie aRd fie God is 
punishing them both, [and him even more so, for] she will at least be 
holding her own" (however, in reality he isn't glad at all, but on the 
contrary, opposes <this match> with everything he's got). Toward 
the end. 
Absolutely, a scene showing a rendezvous between Him [and] the 
Princess, a meeting He has extorted from her. [The scene featuring 
insincere emotions <on His part> and his insincere position after the 
return of the forged promissory note is unmercifully exposed by the 
Princess. However, He does return the document.] It all ends in sar­
casms and sneers. (This scene takes place in the Youth's presence, 
perhaps purposely so). "\Vhat do you want from me?" says the Prin­
cess, "I agree that you are a great man." 
After this scene He offers to marry <Makar's> wife, then chops up 
those icons, and tells the Prince that the Princess had wanted to place 
him in an insane asylum. 
Though the old Prince does not make much fuss when told that 
Makar's family is at his place ("I always suspected that there was 
something of that kind going on at his place"), and actually wants to 
meet the family, but when he denounces the Princess, He shows Him 
the door and refuses his stepdaughter permission to marry Him.* 
Though she had already turned him down earlier. 
Having learned from Lambert that the letter exists, He- he asks to 
have it, in order to show it to the old Prince, but Lambert says that 
<this way> they wouldn't get any money, and so it is decided that +I: 
is tfie ffiORey she should be asked for some money, and raped. 
Lambert wants to ask for 100,000. He suggests 25, then decides that 
she may, perhaps, give 50,000-and rape her.* *  In a word, He is 
blinded and lost himself, but is counting on Lambert, <and> figures 
that, at any rate, there is going to be a scandal. 
He suspects (even before Lambert) that the Youth has got the docu­
ment and makes an attempt to wheedle it out of him. But he simply 
tells Him that he hasn't found a thing. 
• The translation duplicates the anacoluthon found in the original. 
•• Ungrammatical in the original. 
7 French: "My dear, your sarcasms." 

200 
The Letter and the Rape 
The Prince's stepdaughter is a passive creature. • 
\Vith all these scenes, notes, and violating going on, He knows 
nothing about Liza's romance. \\rhen he finally finds out, he is 
crushed. 
During their meeting, the Princess makes some strange mocking 
insinuations regarding Liza. But seeing that He 8tes net knew yet. .. 
s!:te TNHains silent This is where he hears about Liza<'s affair> for 
the first time. 
A challeRge te the Prince, ·,·,·he refuses te accept it, disgrace. (There 
had been an earlier challenge.] He rushes home, makes a scene to 
Liza, offers to marry <:\lakar's> wife, so as to break all ties, and rise 
abO\·e <the Princess>. (The proposal is made in front of everybody; 
on the next day, the icons.) [ࠥ.B. The proposal to <:\fakar's> wife 
is completely unprovoked.] He goes to see the old Prince, who shows 
him the door. He is acting as if he were mad. The letter and the rape. 
\Vhen he returns home after the scene of the rape Liza has drowned 
herself. 
Question: When does the Youth find out about those 200,000? 
OR the traiR, frem tl:te aHRt. ARd wReR tl:te aunts From his mother, 
when she comes to pick up the little boy, and from Vasin. The Youth 
is surprised that Vasin knows about it. 
\Vith private explanations in the chapters <written> by the Youth. 
For instance, "He did not know about Liza at the time. The Prince 
was told about Liza by . . .  How could I know that the first hint that 
the letter existed would have such a painful effect upon him? But I 
was purposely teasing him with my hint... and only a hint, no more." 
Later, the Youth makes a point of revealing nothing about the letter, 
as He sinks lower and lower in his opinion. "I was going to do the 
very same thing, yet I wouldn't allow Him to do it, and was condemn­
ing Him with loathing." 
Important note. Since the whole thing has happened four years 
earlier, all these digressions and explanations on the part of the Youth 
are actually indispensable. HOWEVER, WATCH OUT THAT THE NARRA­
TIVE DOESN'T LOSE ITS NAIVETE. 
PLAN. September 14. 
ဦAll this happened [over] 4 years ago. [Over] 4 years. What a 
terribly long time. [Everybody was calling me "a youth" then.] How­
ever, in order not to write anything that isn't necessary, I find it to 
• Podushka, literally, "a pillow." 

The Princess and the Old Prince 201 
-make- appropriate to make a short introduction. As I am describing 
the first steps [of my career] in Petersburg, I don't want to make this 
a Code of Law. 
I am the illegitimate son of a gentleman. From Makar, and who 
Makar is. I saw my father once. At the aunts'. The family. [I'll tell 
about him later.] Mother, in passing. In Luga. I am at Souchard's, 
later in high school, a German. I was absorbed in my idea. But there 
will be many pages about me later on. 
Who is my father? <Went through> several fortunes, of a good 
family, worked as a District Commissioner (his biography in a few 
lines). Well educated. Religiousness. DuriHg A year prior to the be­
ginning of my notes, <affair> with the Princess. Daughter of the old 
Prince. About the old Prince, bon mot. Ideally cold, how they got 
together, and how they parted. The Princess openly said that <He 
was> after her fortune, thus cruelly insulting him. He could never 
forget the insult. Enemies. [The letter and Andreev.] 
He had the urge to see her acknowledge that he was a great man. 
Cruel sarcasms. She drove him to that state of frenzy in which I found 
him when I arrived. 
The old Prince was afraid of both. Drive both of them mad. 
[The inheritance.] [A claimant (the young Prince, to the inher­
itance).] 
About how the family moved from Luga. The father. Did he want 
to retire from all the noise <of the world>, and to the bosom <of 
mother Russia>? He had always respected Mother, though it is hard 
to imagine how it could have been otherwise. I bega:H te He continued 
to run the Prince's affairs. I have no idea who was the first to think of 
the Stepdaughter. A passive creature* out of finishing school. The 
Prince makes it his concern. Father, in order to show that he wasn't 
thinking of her anymore. Alas! He thought to the end that it was only 
la haine dans l'amour.8 At least that's what I think. 
Meanwhile, there's that claimant, the young Prince, in Petersburg. 
Father finds out that he is her protege. About her several unfortunate 
proteges; at first she almost married a wretch of a Frenchman; <later> 
her General <husband> who gambled away her dowry ( 150,000), 
then later her own father became a protege of hers, for he was suffer­
ing from the pangs of conscience, finally the young Prince and family. 
• Ibid. 
8 French: "Hate in love." 

202 
The Prince H1res the Youth 
'Vho the young Prince is. His trial. Acquitted. "Where do you put 
him?" Howe,·er, I think that there was some passion in it also, for 
he had chann. Casually, [with a crook,] Lambert. [The Princess has 
spread the rumor that by marrying that passive creature <the Prince's 
stepdaughter> he is in effect becoming a kept man.] That's when 
Father is driven to a frenzy. \Vhat, then, did he do? 
The document <left> after Andreev's death. Returns 200,000. I 
wasn't yet aware of the return of those 200,000 when I first met my 
father, etc. [The return of this money had a great effect. But the 
Princess got a scare on account of <the other> document.] 
But as for my having been called <to Petersburg>, the fact was 
that I had done poorly during my last year in high school (my own 
idea). I was stuck with that idea. Failed to pass my examination. My 
father called me. I do not know if he wanted to return < . . .  >, break 
with everything, start a new life. He was sickly then, many sensations, 
<in a> daze, and disorder. 
But this is how it came out: The Princess, having learned that the 
matter involving "that passive creature" had been decided (the Prince 
was under the thumb of both of them, and would try to play one 
against the other, but would, in special cases, also seek the support 
of one against the other. He liked to show off his independence, 
which is why he came up with the passive creature without asking for 
anyone's advice, i.e., without having asked the Princess). She then 
told him about Makar's family, and the Prince found it amusing: 
"Cher, you have a son, but where is he?" 
"He has failed his examination [every time]. He writes me that he 
wants to earn his living." 
"You see, I can use a young man; he could learn some manners." 
"He is a nihilist." (It ought to be mentioned that I was not a 
nihilist at all, just had my own ideas.) 
"So much the better." 
And for three full days he was nursing this idea, pestering people 
with it. Then he almost forgot it. The Princess was showing her 
disdain by silence. My father chose to play it defiantly: 
"As your secretary? But he would be nothing but a spy!" 
They were expecting the Prince from Moscow. My father was 
furious. But playing it defiantly. I think that he was expecting me 
with some anxiety, to see for himself what kind of an impression I 
would make. But the Prince was insisting <that I come immedi­
ately>. And so I went. [The night before,<the episode> with the 
university student.] 

Point of View in Time 203 
And so, 5 years ago exactly, I came to the Moscow railway ticket 
office, etc. 
[And later, explanations concerning how this all came about, how 
he himself became involved, and Liza, and Christianity, Vasin, <my> 
idea, and 200,000. Makar Ivanov.] 
The end of the novel: He and the infant. A ray. 'Ve find <?> a 
cheap flat, then I enroll in the university. [It turns out we have some 
money, father had some. The aHRt sa}·s: I took 29,000.] 
And so the decision to write in the first person has come all by itself. 
September 14. 
The old Prince has left the Youth 10,000. 'Vhereas the fact that 
the young Prince had made an attempt to return 50,000 to Him, in 
the beginning of the novel, had caused Him to challenge the Prince 
to a duel. 
The Youth is summoned on account of Liza. * At this point, a meet­
ing, and showdown, with the young Prince. 
Insert this in the first part: Arrival of "that passive creature" and 
a fleeting glance at Liza, when he enters the aunt's flat one evening 
in order to write Him a letter. This is also when he overhears the 
General's widow in spite of himself. He is struggling hard with him­
self, whether he should come out or not, finally comes out, and like a 
fool, too ("spy!"). Then he goes home to his own flat. (No need of the 
wench here. The wench will come up in part two, during his wander­
ings after the incident with the diamonds.) 
September 1 8. 
Can't make it 5 years. The reader will be left with the crude, rather 
comical idea that "there's that young adolescent now grown up, and 
perhaps holding a ࠪlaster's degree, and a jurist, describing with great 
condescension (the devil only knows why) how foolish he used to be 
before," etc. And thus the whole na'ivete of the narrative is destroyed. 
And therefore, better let it be a year. In the tone of the narrative, the 
whole impact of a recent shock would still be apparent, and a good 
many things would still remain unclear, yet at the same time there 
would be this first line: "A year, what a tremendous interval of time!" 
Toward the end of his notes--"our means," etc. And suddenly, these 
final lines: "If ever. these lines should happen to get into the Princess's 
hands, let her see how unmercifully ဧ I have drawn her character, 
etc. However, nobody will read them, of course: I am going to seal 
• ׀light also mean: "The Youth's challenge on account of Liza." 

204 
The Passive Creature 
them and look through them in about five years." (N .B. He is still 
undecided about the university, his own idea is still weighing on 
him.) And there is one last and very important note: "Alas, my idea 
has diverted me from my feelings for Liza, for my mother; it has not 
allowed me to make <my life> meaningful, and still doesn't," etc. 
N.B. For myself. The introduction must be written cleverly. If it 
is a success, everything will be. 
The young Prince used to live in Luga, having been exiled* to 
that town. He has come to Moscow for two weeks only, to visit with 
his family. And suddenly he receives a cable from the Princess, in­
forming him that the document has been found. 
He, to the Youth regarding the Princess: "A woman is capable of 
any cruelty, any Jesuitism." The Youth fully agrees with this state­
ment. 
Suddenly, a letter from "that passive creature" to Him, in the 2d 
part, completely unmotivated. 
September 1 9. 
The young Prince finds out about the existence of her letter to 
Andreev, a letter which would cause the old Prince to disinherit her. 
'Vithout a moment's thought he gets a hold on "that passive creature" 
(who will be given some money). It is at this point that the Princess 
pounces upon the document. 
He would have liked even to return her the letter as a noble 
gesture. 
The young Prince, to Him after the challenge: "'Vhy won't you 
yield 'that passive creature' to me? Of course I could get by even with­
out you, but you do have some influence on the old Prince." He 
shows the young Prince the door, but when the old Prince has chased 
Him out, it immediately develops that the young Prince will marry 
"that passive creature." (Lambert has convinced the young Prince of 
the existence of that document.) 
He had been trying to get the document in order to give it to her, 
but was vacillating himself. 'Vhereas the Youth and Lambert would 
not surrender the document. "All right then, so fuck <her>," He 
thinks. 
The Princess, having received the document, takes it straight to the 
old Prince, and he leaves his whole fortune to her." At the same time, 
• ׁot to be taken literally; the meaning seems to be "having been drummed 
out from his regiment and forced to leave the capital." 

The Young Prince and Liza 205 
he does not allow "that passive creature" to marry the young Prince. 
As a consequence the latter takes to carousing with Lambert. Loses 
200,000 to Nekrasov; he and Lambert together kill the Fool. The 
young Prince to Liza: "Liza, give those 25,000 back to me," and she 
immediately lets him have the money. 
The young Prince is 26 years old. Earlier (4 years ago) the young 
Prince had stolen some diamonds; He was a juror <at his trial?>. 
Now he's gotten to be very proud, wants to restore the <honor of his> 
family. Treats Him haughtily on account of those 50,000. Used to 
have Liza in Petersburg, whenever he wanted. Somehow the Princess 
finds out about it. She demands that he break with her. He gives 
I 0,000. The Youth demands an explanation. (The affair with the 
diamonds is solved by the young Prince purposely in favor of the 
Youth.) He explains <the whole thing> in a condescending manner. 
The Youth expresses his idea of getting rich before his mother and 
Liza. In a frenzy, he is drawn into a mad whirl. Liza always feared 
the Prince and loved him with a strange love. Finally, he personally 
sends Liza on her way. After Liza has left, almost glad, she is suddenly 
seized by a fit of melancholy. (Even the Princess had found it beyond 
her powers to insult her.) The Youth is amazed at such base humble­
ness. She means to go and watch the wedding. Drowns herself. It iဨ 
at this point that He learns everything, whereas the Youth had 
known about it earlier. 
The young Prince tries to arrange a match between Liza and some 
young man. Not knowing what is going on, He approves of it. Liza 
comes to see him and explains everything. The liberal young man 
feels a little hurt. He admits the liberal young man in the very 
beginning, not knowing that he has been sent by the young Prince. 
So he is an early acquaintance. Work on this character. 
Liza: "I shall enter a convent." 
In the beginning Liza is willing to listen to his proposal, but then 
she suddenly turns him down. This is the cause of her (last) meeting 
with the Prince. 
The young man is quite persistently trying to make friends with 
the Youth. Finally, he gains recognition as a suitor, but when Liza's 
heart begins to ache she turns him down. 
·wandering around (with her fiance) she drops in on the young 
Prince. "Let's go to Luga, let's live far away from here ... " (a touching 
exchange). Then she collects herself: "Oh God, what am I talking 
about!"-and leaves. Her fiance feels insulted: "You might have 
spared my feelings, Lizaveta Makarovna." 

206 The Incident with the Diamonds 
"Oh, I don't know ... Well, good-bye." 
At home: "Oh, it is hard." Mother: "Does it hurt, Liza?" Liza: "It 
hurts, mamma." "Bear it." 
September 20. 
Final version. 
He knew about the Prince and Liza and when the Youth arrived, 
the young mall was, with everybody's consent, expected to make a 
visit. On the first day the Youth was not aware of that, but just before 
the scene where <He> rips open <the little boy's> mouth he ran 
into the young man. The latter leaves, and then the scene where 
<He> rips open <the little boy's> mouth. 10,000 had been allotted to 
the young man in the form of a promissory note cosigned by the old 
Prince. [He is terribly upset about the old Prince's apparent inten­
tion to act as a benefactor of His family.] 
He was furious that the Princess had a part in this business, but 
preferred to shrug his shoulders, considering the disposition of his 
family. Besides, he was finding it to his own advantage to marry off 
Liza. "That passive creature" also used to come and visit. All of which 
He later explains to the Youth. However, He does not like the fact 
that she and the young man are, obviously, creatures of hers. 
However, the Youth finds out about that only much later, from the 
young Prince himself, and ·already at the time of the <incident with 
the> diamonds and after His sudden and unmotivated challenge to 
the young Prince. This is why his challenge, also, seems merely ridicu­
lous and troublesome to the Prince. After the <incident with the> 
diamonds the young Prince explains the matter to the Youth and, 
most important, His and Liza's view of it. "Eh, what the devil!" 
thinks the Youth, and this is the first time that tRe esence of the 
FR:atter cynicism finds a way into his heart. Yet He is still trying to 
save him, is sincere with him, and fascinates him. At this point, 
Makar Ivanov. Here the Youth inadvertently gets together with Liza 
[and his mother] and tells them about his idea, upbraiding and con­
demning them for their meekness, even though Makar Ivanov has 
left a strong impression on him. As for his father, he speaks of him 
with contempt, suggesting to them that they should leave Him. 
After this, a FReeting between HiFR and tRe Princess at whicH tRe 
YoHth is present. arcastic stateFRents about Liza. The Youth is so 
confused he wants to stay away from them all. But there's the letter. 
He again mentions the letter to him after that meeting-again, since 
he had mentioned it before. The Youth disgustedly insults Him. He-

Liza Drowns Herself 207 
Yet the letter is beginning to preoccupy the Youth, and worries him 
greatly. He is roaming the streets at night! 
Offers his hand to <Makar's> ,vife. Chops up those icons. A noc­
turnal encounter with him. Again about the letter. The Youth shows 
Him the door and cals him a scoundrel heaps ridicule on him. [He 
remains silent (that night).] Encounter with Lambert. Quick influ­
ence. The latter surprises the Youth by telling him that he has 
passed on to Him a forged promissory note of the <young> Prince's. 
[Admission of the existence of those letters, but to whom?] 
Furthermore, the Youth is present at a meeting between Him and 
the Princess on the occasion when He hands over the document to 
her. The Princess heaps sarcasms on Him. She also insults both Liza 
and the Youth. Both leave. He is in a frenzy. So is Lambert. But 
Lambert mentions the letter. His advice, etc. On the following day 
He reveals everything to the old Prince, in a fit of impotent fury. The 
Prince shows Him the door. 
The Youth is convinced that He won't be present at the meeting 
on account of the letter, but there He suddenly emerges, having 
killed Lambert;* the Youth runs away, to his own home. As for the 
Princess, she had come to the meeting because He had made the 
young Prince believe that the Princess would not be getting much. 
In the meantime Liza's romance had taken its course and she 
drowas herself. Liza turns down her suitor. On the following day the 
Princess sees the Youth. 
Lambert recovers. 
He suffers a moral breakdown. 
Liza drowns herself. She had been insulted by the Princess the day 
before. 
He has a moral breakdown, etc. 
I.e., cynicism and all almost to the very end. He both loves and 
corrupts the Youth. The Youth is beginning to shun society; at one 
time he is consumed by an urge to break with society altogether, 
after having humiliated the Princess to his heart's content, <but> 
he cannot make himself go through with it. 
The young man mentions several times, both to the Youth and to 
Liza, that He is to all appearances about to become a member of a 
not quite respectab1e [clean] family. [Meetings with the Princess.] 
• Though this is the literal translation, it may well be that "emerges and kills 
Lambert" is what is really meant. 

208 Spirit of the Yo11th 
The Princess won't marry the young Prince. "That passive crea· 
ture." 
"'Vho needs the good; the good is of no use to anybody," He cor­
rupts the Youth after <the scene with> the icons. 
He was greatly pained by falsities and failures: i.e., having handed 
over that 200,000 promissory note, his false position within the fam­
ily, the refusal of <Makar's> wife to marry him, the icons, the release 
of the document. (Meetings with the Princess.] <Also,> the challenge 
to a duel, as well as his last, mad sally when He lets the old Prince 
know that the letter exists. 
"Where then, is that letter?" 
"This letter has been purloined by this person" (i.e., the Youth). 
But the Youth denies it. (Though Lambert had already admitted 
it.) N.B. The young Prince needs a personality. Liza has a personality. 
The young Prince is also a sickly person, but charming; he would 
like to rise above his present condition. The Youth sees that he, too, 
has got his own idea and, while hating him, loves him. 
"I am a coward," says the Prince to him. The Prince is challenged 
to a duel. At the duel <he retains his composure> with difficulty. The 
Princess is stunned. 
About Dolgushin. 
The Fool. 
' 
Andrieux. 
All Questions The old Prince. 
The Fool and the Youth are sharing a flat. 
The Liar-,Vindbag is their landlord. 
The Youth, in spite of his gloomy airs and tragic moods, is still an 
adolescent: he loves, he laughs with the old Prince, and later he 
sympathizes with Liza. 
The old Prince suddenly decides to pay a visit to the Youth. Vasin. 
l\'.B. A table. l\'.B.! 
THE SPIRIT OF THE YOUTH. Vacillation. He seeks a solution from 
Vasin. Vasin causes him to waver, but his thought does not coincide 
with his idea [(he cannot comprehend man without property).] He 
becomes a devotee of his father's (morally) and is tormented by the 
fact that He is not a good man. Incomprehensible episodes with 
Makar and his family. The mood he is in prevents him from seeing 
Liza. Pride, and insults from the Princess and the young Prince. 
Rivalry with the young Prince. They are arrested. He is quite stunned 
and withdraws into himself. 'Vants to kill himself. "No, it is better 

The Old Prince 209 
to live by being base. [People aren't worth a Vasin. How about Christ? 
'Vhen I become powerful, I'll be .doing good."] The power of that 
letter. Ungern-Shternberg.9 The icons, and <His> whole weakness. 
Liza's grief, and the family's. Lambert. Fascinates him. The passion 
to start a conflagration. He comes to his senses. Destruction, is seized 
along with Lambert, who has told on <Him>. The Princess, who has 
not married the young Prince, intervenes on <his> behalf. He is 
released. His little brother and He. He is saved by a strong feeling, 
and by his aunt. 
He is writing his notes in order to send them abroad, to the Prin­
cess, who suddenly starts giving him encouragement. (Think this 
through. About the Princess.) 
His own idea. Get an education, but his own idea. His own idea 
still stands. 
The old Prince: ["If I should marry,] of course I wouldn't have 
any children." 
His daughter: "Quite the contrary, yo1:1 will it's you precisely who 
is going to have children, if you get married." 
The old Prince: "Tiens} c'est un bon mot.10 ARd malicio1:1s And 
inasmuch as there is very little wit around these days and wit is in 
fact shunned, I forgive you your [malicious] bon mot from the bottom 
of my heart, in spite of the biting remark directed against me, which 
it contained. I was -5e¥eH- two months premature, we were twins and 
the two of us would have fit on one plate. My brother died when he 
was two weeks old, while I've been living for better than fifty years 
now, and -e¥eH- going strong, so it seems." 
He was living a reverent life (Makar Ivanov).* 
"They are all downtrodden and meek, yet firm as saints." 
Ѿ Idle atheism all over. 
Olia} frightened: "I love you too," and she put her hand on his 
elbow. 
Frightened by Him. 
Later, the Swiss governess. Two years (N .B. He hired the governess 
because He had frightened her.) Makar. He was living a reverent 
life. Sanctified by his bonds (that's why he stayed at the Hat). Praying 
' 
• Zhil pochtitel'no, literally, "he was living respectfully, he was living rever­
ently," a solecism from the viewpoint of the literary idiom. 
9 See note 3 of Part II. 
IO French: "Say, that's a clever word." 

210 The Youth and the A unt 
for the atonement of their sins. Knows everybody by his first name. 
He would give <alms> all over to help people."' 
Mother to Olia : "Bear it!" 
In the railway carriage the aunt: "I am proud to be a bastard." 
The aunt: "Forget the color. You don't have to be proud, nor do 
you have to feel humiliated." 
In the railway carriage: "Eat a bite." The fact that she was a 
relative had its effect, but he was gloomy and even embarrassed, the 
more so the closer they were getting to Petersburg. 
They are there: "Should I go and see Him, or shouldn't I? Better 
if he'll come to see me." He tells <the cabman> to take him to His 
place. 
In the railway carriage. The aunt has fallen asleep. The Youth 
recalls his childhood, his mother and the new hospital; at Andreev's, 
his stern aunt who was also kind, and now he puts a pillow under her 
head ... [In the first person.] 
"\Vhat are you doing, dear?" She's asleep, a good face, good 
wrinkles. 
"Auntie, I'm just giving you a pillow." 
"Thank you, Vasia, thank you." 
"Auntie, it isn't that I don't respect your Christ" (I couldn't help 
saying that,) "I respect him very much as a historical figure." 
"\Veil, all right. But watch out, you can't <speak in this way> 
against the <Holy> Ghost."* *  
"So why won't you let me sleep." 
About Lambert, firm (they've thought up a plan). <His> mother 
comes < . . .  > 
He asks his aunt at dawn: "Is that so?" By the time they get to 
Liuban' he is overcome by mixed emotions. 
[April, head, soldier.] Of course, if I were to write down all of 
these anecdotes I'd get a whole Code of Law. 
I am not going to make any more such comments. 
In the railway carriage he says to the aunt, after some silence: "I 
saw my father the last time when <he said> 'il faut le rosser.' "11 
"So don't be angry." I was really going to say that to my aunt, but 
I didn't (when all of a sudden she began to talk to me peaceably and 
kindly). "So what, it's a good name," said my aunt. 
• Unclear in the original. 
•• Allusion to Matt. 12: 31-32. 
11 French: "You have to beat him." 

The Youth's Daydreams 2 1 1  
"Makar Ivan<ov>, why has he got that resounding name Dol­
goruky? I don't know it, nor do I want to know it." "I understand 
that you used to like Russian history." 
The fact that she was a relative did have an effect. 
Father: "Il faut le rosser."12 
At Vasin's. After telling <him> about his dreams. 
"It is already three years since I have given this any thought at all." 
"I understand, you must have thought up some plan of your own." 
He was gettiRg ready to be a fYti:He citii!@R 
"YoY IRow wH.at, yoy're telliRg me tH.is, too, jYst to make fYR of 
-me:!-! 
"ls tH.at wH.at yoH tH.iRk YoM are beiRg most suspicioYs <I> ·.vitH. 
p@opl€. How€V€T1 €V€R if you f€€1 that I am makiRg fYR of yoY, 
beli€v€ m€, it im't so.'' 
The Youth, who during his last few years in high school had been 
rooming with a German, a teacher, gloomily and in alienation from 
the soil. "They have their own life, in which I did not participate on 
purpose; I really was glad, for I had my own idea. [And the more you 
become alienated, the better." This he says to the young Prince's 
valet.] 
Finale of the novel: "That's nothing," says the aunt (i.e., about 
everything that has happened), "let this be a lesson to you. Why, you 
still have a long life ahead of you." 
But that's exactly how things turned out. Makar Dolgoruky, letters, 
"tall and upright."13 
[I was born.] In the railway carriage. In my daydreams about how 
I was going to deal with people, I would always do the clever thing, 
whereas in practice it would always come out stupid, for I would 
invariably give myself away while talking, and was always too much 
in a hurry. Perhaps I am exactly the same even now, and altogether 
this self-control is a very bad thing; in fact, sometimes it deserves 
unqualified contempt. 
Makar Ivanov tells about vespers and vigils, take it from Parthenios. 
He. The Youth to a lackey. "We haven't got a nobility, and perhaps 
we never had one." 
"Perhaps you actually couldn't have acted otherwise," says Olia to 
the young Prince when she learns that he is engaged to the Princess. 
12 Ibid. 
13 Quotation from Nekrasov's "VIas." 

212 Notes for Myself 
A valuable observation of the Youth's in the middle of the novel, 
after his landlord has fried his wife: "I could not write about all 
these things [many things] at all. They are all so secondary! But I was 
so very much excited by all this!" 
(J:-.; THE FIRST PERSO:-;", OR :-;"OT?) 
They say He cried terribly on his wife's grave. Yet he calls it "a 
mausoleum" when talking to the Youth. 
The Youth forgives everybody. "My idea." 
He is attending the university. "You know what," says his aunt, 
"they need medical help, and so they need you. And it's also a good 
thing to get an education. \Vhy won't you stay in Petersburg? And, 
my dear, 'ဩhat a long life you've still got ahead of you!" 
Though I am no "youth," for I was already 19 at the time, I am 
calling <this novel> "The Youth" because I was being called by 
that name by quite a few people then (last year). I am writing this 
manuscript as notes for myself. Here, in this godforsaken place, I 
have nothing else to do. [It goes without saying that I am writing this 
after a year's lapse so that I have really outgrown my childhood.] 
(Exiled by administrative decree.) [I'll be writing down e,·erything, 
i.e., only what is relevant. If I should slip up here and there, it won't 
matter, for I am no litterateur.] 
Beginning of the novel. 
\Ve were buying our tickets at the ticket office. Ήly aunt insulted me 
by not paying any attention to me. I for my part was displeased with 
myself in a vague way. \Vith students on a boulevard. Later, after 
Ͼmy conversations with my aunt on the train, I got to thinking 
about frou-frou, trying to find an excuse for myself in my conscience. 
Life is great, own idea. 
[The aunt. He is not very rich. 
20 thousand-yes, 20,000. 
The Youth : "If I leave, it means that I have a reason why I'm not 
going to obey you ; we are ࠪfakar Ivanov's children." 
"\Ve are nothing but the children of ࠨfakar Ivanov."] 
Then, having taken a seat, about the lost bag and about his aunt, 
etc. 
\Vithout the first person, a good many subtle and naive remarks 
will get lost. 
1st aunt: "You'll complete your education, and then you'll see what 
you'll do." 
2d aunt, a silent (character): "And there you'll see what you'll do." 
In the railway carriage, his aunt: "You'd be better off continuing 
your education (at the university)." 

Daydreams 2 1 3  
The Youth : "I wasn't studying on purpose." 
N.B. If the narrative is to be in _the third person, there might be 
some explanation of the Youth's condition and state of mind, such 
as: "Indeed, a daydreaming idealist, he was suddenly caught in a whirl 
of all the different elements of Russian society" (all the elements). 
If in the third person, then only the Youth should be presented in 
a primary role; everyone else in secondary roles. 
N .B. The aunt is pestering him throughout the novel about "con­
tinuing his education." 
And, regarding what has happened: "That's nothing, it is good for 
seasoning" (in the finale). 
Everything has a limit, even our All-Russian stupidity which, 
[however,] is nevertheless in a way boundless [on <his> own part.] 
hrPORTAl'£T N .B. 'Vhile discussing Ungern-Shternberg,14 at Vasin's, 
the Youth suddenly interrupts himself: "I don't remember how I 
got to explain this to Vasin, or what exactly I was explaining to him, 
but it is a fact that this used to happen to me during all of those three 
years; in fact, it is happening to me even now. My daydreams had 
taken such a hold on me that I could no longer live without my 
daydream; as a matter of fact, I can't understand how people can 
survive without daydreaming. I suppose that all people do some day­
dreaming. And whoever thinks that daydreaming interferes with busi­
ness just doesn't know business. 'Vhen I was only I I  years old I used 
to jump up and smite the Tartars. I never took vengeance on Sou­
chard in my daydreams, but I did become Ungern-Shternberg.15 Later, 
a learned academician, an unrecognized professor. 'Vhen I had 
finished (I had told Vasin all about my daydreams without being 
ashamed), he said to me: 'I notice two things-withdrawal and 
always being first, never being second.' " 
The very same thing, but mockingly and skeptically, in a somber 
sort of way, more genteel. His character. 
The Youth: "\Vhy didn't you at least use your influence to dispel 
some of Mother's prejudices? I, of course, am not saying a word, for 
I do not pretend I can raise a person from the dead. But there must 
have been a time when she was alive." 
He: "My friend, she never was. You won't believe it... Here-I 
even don't know what I should say. Here, there was from the very 
beginning, humility, meekness, gentleness, and at the same time, firm-
14 See note 3 of Part II. 
15 Ibid. 

2H 
Versilov all£1 Makar 
ness, power, real power, [my friend.] For I have seen how she has been 
nurtured by that power. [To he sure, it isn't worth much.] <But> 
there where it comes to-I won't say convictions, for there can't be any 
talk of true convictions in this case-those things that are considered 
sacred [by those people,] there she is simply ready to stand any tor­
ture <in their defense>. [Consequently, what could I have done, if a 
tormentor couldn't have accomplished a thing?] Decide for yourself 
if I look like a tormentor. [I preferred to remain silent, and did the 
right thing.] I have always been humane and liberal, and she has been 
trembling before me all her life, yet at the same time she has positively 
refused to succumb to any form of culture. How she has managed to 
do that, I just don't know. She just won't say a word. J,Vhat's tHost im 
portant She doesn't say a word all the time, [that's what is most im­
portant,] and then, [perhaps, when really pressed for an answer;]­
well I R'lust adR'lit, you'll see for yourself that there's no sense in even 
talking about it! Besides, <her> rejoinders will be of an entirely 
unexpected nature. You are smiling at my saying that I am humane 
and liberal, for you are thinking of Makar. God is my witness that 
the whole thing was conducted in a most humane and liberal manner. 
I summoned Ίlakar, even before having sinned <with his wife> and 
put it to him squarely, offering a compensation of 3,000. He said 
nothing. Here I offered, in case he wasn't satisfied with these condi­
tions, to let him state his own wishes without any fear, and to give him 
his freedom, together with hers, and they could go anywhere they 
wanted. And keep the money, too. \Ve were all such enthusiasts in 
those days, and in such a mood, all burning with zeal to do some good, 
to serve our country, great ideas, "everything that was lofty and 
beautiful," as they used to say in those days. I'm telling you, I had 
just finished reading "Anton Goremyka" and "Polinka Saks"16 when 
I arrived at my country estate. Have you read these books?" 
"I don't remember." 
"You should have. I admit that I was actually crying when I was 
16 D. V. Grigorovich's Anton Goremyka appeared in 1847 and had a great 
influence on the attitudes of Russian liberals toward the lot of the Russian 
peasant. A. V. Druzhinin's Polinka Saks, published in 1847, concerned the 
"woman question" and treated it in a sentimental manner. The novel shows the 
inllucnce of George Sand. When the wife of Polinka Saks tells her husband that 
she is in love with another man, he gives her his blessing. This work undoubtedly 
influenced Dostoevsky in The Possessed, when Virginsky gives his blessing to his 
wife when she falls in love with Captain Lebiadkin. 

Makar Takes the Money 215 
saying these things, for I was afraid I might lose her, I loved her so 
much-elle etait tres belleY Makar just waved his hand and left. .J. 
to him [Altogether, it is worst of all when these people say nothing. 
He is a somber character.] And I had little hope that he would cooper­
ate. Now." 
"And you hadn't sinned yet?" 
"That is, you see, man ami/8 there hadn't been any sin between us, 
but there was love; that is, my friend, this is all relative; in a word, 
there was love." [the appearance of a gardener.] 
'iH:i4 Did he take the money?"-"He left his wife with me and on 
the third day, a week later and without too many words, or rather, 
almost without any words at all,* [asking only that she be given her 
freedom,] just waved his hand. And he himself became a traveling 
man. [went traveling]. And so, <your> mamma and I did the same 
. . .  we, too, went traveling.* *  As ·for the money, it is, maybe, really a 
strange story. He took I ,000 rubles in cash and gave it all to a monas­
tery; 2,000 on a promissory note. Nine years ago he collected the 
money from me practically through the courts, because I didn't have 
any at the time . . .  I don't know about this money; perhaps he gave 
it to the monastery also, and perhaps he is carrying it on his person, 
though he is walking around in rags and in bast shoes, wandering all 
over the country and collecting money to build churches. [A very 
strange character.] 
"An did she love you?" 
"Man cher,19 I've spent all my life trying to find out, but in vain. 
ဤIf she did indeed, then in an exceedingly hushed manner. I only 
know that she loves me now-and perhaps she is the only one who 
does in the whole wide world. I don't know what for, that is, perhaps 
precisely because I am not worthy of her love. [However, if this were 
so,] she is only following the example of all women." 
[With this elegant quip he closed the discussion.] 
"Also, she somehow secretly respects Makar Ivanovich. They write 
each other about every other year, and most reverently. Sending each 
• Untranslatable: the Russian bez dal'nikh s/ov means, literally, "without long 
words," but has the meaning "without further ado." 
• • The Russian verb stranstvovat', used here, has a connotation of "pilgrim· 
age." 
17 French: "She was very beautiful." 
18 French: "My friend." 
19 French: "My dear." 

2 1G Equality without Free Will 
other their respects. He has been around once or twice-[but I wasn't 
there at the time.] 
At their ""* meeting at night at the flat, when his father comes to 
see him, and as he is already saying good-bye: "l\ly dear, I am vilely 
sentimental, but this is because I'm ill." 
N .B. Most important. Emphasize His preaching of Christianity 
and make it clear that It is actually serious with Him. 
The old Prince to the Youth: "l\ly friend, you will allow me to 
call you by your first name, won't you?"* 
"Oh, you're so welcome." 
"Fits of youth or what, but even though I shouldn't have been in a 
mood for such things, I used to be naughty with the Prince, told him 
about the stones, took him over to <Mme> Andrieux." 
He: "If there is consciousness, there is also <free> will." 
The Youth: "That's not one and the same thing." 
He: "On the contrary, it is literally one and the same thing ... " 
"He is unfamiliar with the progress of science," Vasin says later. 
The Youth stands up for Him with great ardor: "Oh yes, He is 
familiar." 
"I am surprised not by the fact that you are preaching (that there 
is no such thing as an individual will), but rather by the cheerful way 
in which you people are preaching it. If this is so, what are you going 
to do with freedom, equality, brotherhood? What kind of freedom 
can you have, if there is no such thing as individual will, what kind of 
equality without free [will], what kind of brotherhood without 
either?" 
N .B. It is apparent that He is under compulsion. He has torn him­
self loose from all his grief to talk about these things, even if it be 
only to spite somebody. Yet by so doing He shows that all these ques­
tions have been disturbing and tormenting him, that He is interested 
in more than just his own self, and that nihil humanum mi alienum 
puto.20 
In the railway carriage: "I admit that I was traveling (to Petersburg, 
the Youth) with hidden anger in my heart." 
Liza says: "If I hadn't taken that a:wney money (promissory note) 
• In the original, he is asking for the Youth's permission to say ty ("thou"), to 
him (tutoyer). 
20 Latin : "I do not consider anything human foreign to me." From Terence's 
"Heau ton ti morou menos," Act I, Scene I, line 77. 

He Makes Up to the Youth 217 
then, it would have been all the same as if I were reproaching them 
wit!:t it a great deal." 
And when she drowned herself, she had those 10,000 sent to the 
Prince. Or didn't give it any thought at all. 
When about to drown herself, she was wandering around aimlessly: 
she was also at the Youth's. 
The young Prince wants to marry her off to a respectable young 
man. She is bitter about it. 
The Liar is telling about the French in 1 8 1 2, a peasant woman 
has a goat, "Ah, cossack!"* 
"I didn't like her (the Princess) at all; I couldn't understand why 
I had started that... game." 
Vasin to the Youth: "There you are, I have noticed that you like 
general topics (i.e., generalizations). Imagine then, a machine which," 
etc. (see earlier <note>). 
"You little fool, you-you aren't going to make any money," says 
Makar Ivanov. "You aren't an enterprising man," says Makar Ivanov 
[Makar]. 
In the railway carriage, the Youth strikes up a conversation with a 
lackey. A young man later says to him: "You started a conversation 
with a lackey." 
In the railway carriage. After Christ and the Holy Ghost. "I knew 
that you are a good boy." Toward morning: "Mad again." 
He to him, in part one, in his confession : "Your idea is very good; 
there is much that is frightening about it. Yet..." 
He makes up <with the Youth>, and then: "If you want to, you 
can quit your job with the old Prince, but do as you please," as a 
result of which the young man decided to take the job with the Prince. 
And later, when saying good-bye: "'Veil, forgive me," and tears; then 
I cried, and cried. 
"Why is it you love me so much," says He. "My dear friend, my 
situation was so very difficult, but now I'm going to have a new 
friend." 
LAST LITTLE PAGE. 
In his biography, a statement on wealth. About Vasin's opinion, 
and the entire development of his own idea, absolutely from the very 
beginning. 
I, during an exchange with Him: "I want to be rich. I know in 
• Untranslatable pun: koza "goat"; kozak "cossack." 

:!18 Impossible to Love People 
what way shares were being underwritten only recently. I know how 
Rothschild made 50 million in connection with the assassination of 
the Due de Berry.21 I wasn't studying for I was seeking mediocrity." 
\Vrite in the right order, more briefly, a Ia Pushkin. 
In the railway carriage: "You are <talking> to a lackey." 
The Youth: "I am a democrat." (I was lying. I had a passionate 
hatred for democracy.) 
Vasin tells the Youth about the immorality of the ultimate goal of 
his own idea} gratification of animal drives, etc. 
SPb. vedomosti} No. 263. • 
"No, no, in my case it isn't gratification of animal drives," writes 
the Youth. 
"He couldn't possibly marry (the Prince, that is, couldn't) that 
Dolgoruky girl," they are saying about the Prince (during a drinking 
bout) in the Youth's presence. 
"How come? \Vhy couldn't he marry that Dolgoruky girl?" Some 
people put up an argument. . .  
"That document (about those 300,000) has no legal meaning what­
ever." 
"Oh yes, it does, but not enough so, and the Princes S. could of 
course do nothing at all, even if they had it in their hands; yet, hold­
ing that document in my hands, I was morally convinced that they 
were in the right. . .  " 
He, about the Princess: "That woman worries me. Once she is in 
my way, she must follow me. u Nobody stands in my way unpunished." 
[February, 3rd and 4th part.] ["That woman has made me hate her. 
Previously, I merely loved no one, now she (i.e., the Princess) has 
made me hate her."] 
He about Christ: "It is impossible to love people the way they are. 
And yet one must love them, for this is what we are ordered to do (by 
Christianity). And therefore, do good to them, in spite of your feel­
ings, and in particular, holding your nose and, almost always, keeping 
your eyes closed, and suffer the evil which they do to you, without 
getting angry at them. Of course, it is your duty to be stern with them. 
If you feel that yours is the vocation of a pastor, you must be stern. 
People are base, they like to love and to adore from fear. So they 
• St. Petersburg News} No. 263. 
• • The statement is just as illogical in the original. 
21 See note l 0 of Part II. 

Versilov and Religion 219 
will adore you, too. Do not give way to their adulation, do not prove 
to be petty, but continue to despise people even when they are good, 
for most often it is precisely then and there that they are wicked, too. 
Without any doubt, Christ could not have loved them; he suffered 
them, he forgave them; but of course he also despised them. At 
least, I, for my part, cannot comprehend his personality otherwise. 
Love for mankind must be understood as love for a perfected man­
kind, one that exists so far only as an ideal, and God only knows if it 
will ever become reality."22 
Once, a tirade about Christ, an enthusiastic one; but He is taking 
Christ so seriously that he is even afraid to talk about him. 
Only twice in the course of the novel does He speak about religion: 
once about the rocks, and another time about temptation by the 
Devil. The first time, unwillingly and skeptically, while it is He him­
self who comes to see the Youth and tells him about temptation 
by the Devil, in a separate chapter. 
The Youth: "How is it that you, a Christian, have praised my own 
idea for the hatred which it contains, thus encouraging me to per­
severe in my hatred?" 
He: "My friend, you shall learn about my goals later. I am only 
praising you for having had the strength, in that jelly-like age of ours, 
to develop a powerful feeling, and besides, to nurture that feeling, to 
develop it, and to stick to it." 
[I: "Is this what you call a feeling?"] 
"I am glad to have met a man who is deeper than all this dust, 
<all these> rats and mice. 'To persevere in hatred,' you say; but, my 
dear, you don't know yet that a good deal of love is hidden in your 
hatred (just as some people's love is nothing but hidden hatred). You 
are now in a certain phase of your development; wait a little, you'll 
enter a different phase, and you'll see things more clearly. I don't 
want to stop you solely on the basis of the principle: 'Live and work 
yourself.' But you will not perish, you will find your way, and that's 
enough. In the meantime, your idea is keeping you occupied; life 
won't be too boring with it. And, at any rate, I'm not your nursemaid: 
live as you please, do as you want." 
22 In the "Pro and Contra" section of The Brothers Karamazov han Kara­
mazov argues against the possibility of loving one's fellowmen as Christ had 
commanded in terms similar to those used here. Ivan tells Alyosha: "In my 
opinion Christ's love for humanity is by its nature an impossible miracle on 
earth." Part II, Chapter 5:4_ 

220 He Hates ll'omen 
A LAST, VALUABLE OIISERVATIO:\'. 
Prior to the plot, He suddenly drops in on the Youth and says to 
him: "1£ you've got the letter, hand it over directly, without any 
schemes, try to raise yourself above these mice." 
My own idea got me all confused; I quit reading in an orderly and 
sensible fashion. 
After their first conversation they (He and the Princess) parted 
hating each other. I don't know who hated whom, but this passionate 
thought persevered in my father's mind: that she was continuing to 
love Him, even adore Him, and that it had all been only a game, 
coquetry, La haine dans l'amour.23 Incidentally, there will be a lot 
more said about this later. 
He is a misogynist, he hates women. "\Vomen? One must be as 
polite with them as possible, and show one's affection to them as best 
one can, and that's all." 
Regarding his passionate longing for a meeting with Him, he won't 
admit it in his notes about his childhood, but <admits it> to Him, 
during a showdown, with tears. 
The Youth: "\Vould you pronounce yourself infallible?" 
He: "Your crude joke has a certain meaning of which you aren't 
even aware. Let me tell you that I don't fear infallibility, nor would 
I be ashamed to apply it to myself. I have sinned only in the eyes of 
my own conscience, and this stays with me and inside me. But as for 
the fact that the opinion of you people, or of society, I am ready to 
claim infallibility in many a point, even in everything, though really 
only on the grounds that none of you will know how to even accuse 
me. \Vhat do you people know of good and of evil? I'll convince any 
one of you tomorrow, that it is most virtuous, indeed, to become a 
Rothschild, and that, conversely, it is a great sin to turn the other 
cheek, and you are all going to believe me." 
As he is having that showdown with his father in the final scene 
of the first part, he almost tearfully declares that he loves him. In 
<his> convulsive manner, he inadvertently reveals that he has been 
dreaming of this meeting day after day, and then, angry about having 
let out this secret, starts rapping his father's hand. 
"Come on, beat me up, beat me up!" says He. 
MosT I:\IPORTAl'\T. The Youth is particularly surprised by the fact 
that He is sometimes furious at the Princess for some sally of hers, 
but would, on some other occasion, be almost delighted about practi-
23 French: "Hate in love." 

The Youth Becomes Depraved 221 
cally the same words, calling them "the insolence of the enamored." 
Sometimes he would start by being delighted and end up being mad, 
or vice versa. His theory about submission to women. 
October 2. 
MosT IMPORTANT. 
I) The Youth notices, however (gradually, in the course of the 
entire novel), that his father-in spite of the fact that there has been 
a reconciliation between them, and even though He has himself told 
the Youth that He is more clever and better than all the others-still 
does not treat him on equal terms with His own children, but that He, 
on the contrary, sacrifices him and all of Makar's <children> (Liza) 
to His own. Hurt pride (noticed by his father with a smile), and 
cynicism. 
2) Abandoning his duties as a human being, the Youth, in his 
bitterness and confusion, not only becomes a cynic, but actually 
preaches to himself, in connection with each adventure of his, that 
depravity, even baseness, even banality, even cowardice, are all to the 
good, and really better for his own idea. Not enough: "A thief is an 
improvident person." This is true of pickpockets only, whereas the 
big thieves en joy the support of all society, and are never caught. 
"The golden mean" is best of all. I.e., regarding his own idea, though 
he still likes the role of the lonely avenger, he is also getting reconciled 
to all kinds of degradation. And .fil:. because of this he forgets about 
Makar's family, about Liza, and about the child. His cynicism has 
taken him to the point from which he can see only one aspect of Liza's 
story, i.e., contempt for the concepts, beliefs, and views of their en­
vironment. (N.B. Though Makar Ivanov leaves him stunned and 
has, apparently, left a strange impression on him, the corrupting in­
fluence of his environment gains the upper hand.) When the preda­
tory designs on the Princess are about to be realized, he seems to be 
making a forced effort to rid himself of all positive impressions, 
though there were those impressions left by his rare (yet remarkable) 
meetings with Liza, like rays of light, as well as with the child 
(whom he suddenly gives some candy, right before the plot). To be 
sure, even when surrounded by the full stench <of corruption>, 
when he was about to shoot himself, he would get to thinking of his 
responsibilities toward Liza, for example. But: "\Vhat can I do 
about it?" he thought, reassuring himself with this perfectly rational 
question. But after the morning with the Princess he suddenly has a 
longing for home: Liza, the little boy! This is why he is so thunder­
struck by Liza's death ... [Here) 
N .B. Vasin is arrested toward the middle of the novel, during the 

222 
On University Education 
period of the diamonds, and though he is stunned he says: "It serves 
him right!" But then, later . . .  
After <the incident with> the diamonds he is roaming the streets 
of the city: ''I'm responsible for my own humiliation," and there, at 
night, he meets a fallen woman. 
The last. The Princess must absolutely marry the young Prince; 
she must be passionately, terribly in love with him. 
N .B. How can the combination involving the young Prince's mar­
riage proposal be coordinated with the lawful daughter?* Answer: 
By various phases of love. She loved the Prince, but her pride made 
her leave him. He iR his frivolous way, was h€r slav@ did love her, yet 
was also afraid of her. But now, after her return, she again attracts 
him (besides, the young Prince is positively convinced that she is 
having a liaison with Him). <His> daughter immediately sees 
through this. He could not well reject lRltially the combination in­
volving marriage. The Princess is a little ashamed even to admit 
to herself that she loves the Prince. 
On a university education. 
He: "You don't mean our specialist-professors who are merely 
becoming stultified from their specialties?" 
"Must a professor be an educated person? In Russia, we don't even 
ask this question; as long as he is a specialist." 
He. On environment. Moskovshie vedomosti, 74, :\I a. 244, Octo­
ber I .** 
Editorial. Opinion of that fool A. K--rov, to the effect that there 
are no good and no evil people, only environment. 
"Lady teacher prepares children for educational institutions, and 
gives lessons in arithmetic." 
He went to see her and wanted to give her a hundred nthles. He 
gave her the money and she hangs herself, or something of this sort. 
An episode. Might also attach Perchatkin to him. ["Oh, I am not 
blaming her at all," He says.] 
He is vain Russian average man, uprooted from everything, and 
possessed by the idea that He is an undiscovered genius, and not at 
all average. Christ would save Him owing to the fact that He always 
imagined iR his futur@ Catholicism Him <Christ> as his support. 
But He turns out to be an atheist. 
• Unclear in the original. 
• • iU oscow .\' ews. 

I Imagined I Believed 223 
After having chopped up those icons He comes to see the Youth: 
"For 8 whole years I imagined that I was a believer," He says. 
"How did you suddenly lose your faith?" 
"My friend, I always suspected that I wasn't believing in anything." 
llut at }east RSW I caR liYe tHiRkiRg sf RSthiRg but H-I)' SWR afS@. 
"So from now on you'll be living to your own a<rse>." 
"No, my friend, but according to my ideal of nobility, which I 
have myself set up aRd RothiRg is goiRg to stop RUJ. 
"Who then is forcing you?" 
"I am forcing myself." 
VALUABLE OBSERVATION. When leaving Makar's family, He would 
sometimes make the sign of the cross over the little boy; if he were 
asleep, He'd let him sleep; but after having made the sign of the cross, 
He would never ask him to kiss Him, either His face or His hand­
with distaste (and irritation)-not wanting to violate the child's 
feelings, since it (He sees that) continues to be afraid of Him, the 
longer, the more. 
N .13. Unsolved question: How can the Youth, suspecting finally, 
after the proposal, that He is in love with the Princess, join a plot to 
dishonor her? 
N .B. When the Princess learns that it is the Youth who has brought 
the document concerning those 300,000 (he bragged about it to the 
old Prince), she makes an attempt to make up to him: hasn't he also 
got her letter to Andreev? She is trying to charm him. He refuses. 
October 5. 
?SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM. CHANGE OF PLAN. 
All the time, step by step, and the longer he thinks of it the more 
so, the Youth becomes convinced that He is a victim, persecuted by a 
Messalina. At tHe tiHl@ sf His aFrival. Even before his arrival, the old 
Prince had severed his intimate relations with Him on account of a 
slanderous statement to the effect that his daughter was a whore who 
would serve the first comer. He is assuring the Youth with ardor that 
He is being persecuted and a sufferer. Since <his marriage> to "that 
passive creature" had been planned before this rupture and His ejec­
tion from the old Prince's house, the old Prince, seeing that "the 
passive creature" wants to marry Him anyway, does not veto the 
marriage, in spite of the rupture. Besides, the rupture is a rather 
delicate one. Moreover, the Prince does not want to relinquish his 
idea of a marriage between the young Prince and his lawful daughter 
(the Prince's ward) either. 
But when He obtains I 00,000 for the old Prince, in the form of 

22·1 
The Yo11th aiUl the Yo1111g Pri11ce 
his daughter's dowry, the old Prince heartily approves of it, but still 
fails to go along. He makes an effort to reconcile Him with the Prin­
cess, but she disdainfully rejects his overtures. In a word, by the time 
of the Youth's arrival, the Princess has gained the upper hand with 
the old Prince, while the father is in disfavor. 
Having gotten together with the Youth, the young Prince tells him 
(in a friendly way) that the Princess is in love with him, that she is 
after him again, and that he is afraid of that, particularly since she 
has a liaison going with Him. And that she is having liaisons with God 
knows whom. \Vhen the Youth asks him; With whom} then? the young 
Prince can't give him an answer. There are many facts which make 
the Youth believe that this thought has been suggested to the young 
Prince by Him, and that he has been and still is under His influence. 
Meanwhile the young Prince speaks admiringly of His wisdom and 
justice} and also shows some fear of Him. In his opinion, He can't 
have told a lie. The Youth is surprised by such frankness and in turn 
tells the Prince that there isn't any liaison, but that she is a ࠢlessalina 
who wanted to seduce his father. 
In the meantime, return of the 300,000. Reconciliation between 
the old Prince and Him. [The Princess suddenly insults Liza.J Liza's 
romance is revealed (for the first time. for everybody; nobody knew 
about it). Meanwhile the Youth has already informed his father that 
the Princess is after the young Prince again. His challenge to the lat­
ter, immediately withdrawn. The young Prince learns through the 
Youth that the Princess has no dowry. Also, that there is this letter. 
In a first-person narrative, the Youth has this to say, in one chapter: 
"He didn't like to discuss Christianity and, as I noticed, avoided 
such discussions in a strange manner. Perhaps He wanted to let me 
experience these things myself. However, when I kept insisting, I 
remember especially those days following so-and-so and so-and-so, he 
would sometimes let himself be persuaded to talk about this subject. 
ဥ I recall that we discussed these matters twice or so (once in 
connection with Vasin, the other time upon my persistent question­
ing), and here is, more or less, what I have retained in my memory 
from these discussions: 
"Here, about the rocks. On the eternity and relativity of virtue. On 
<being a> man for two weeks, on virtue for two weeks (the rocks). • 
• The allusion is apparently to the notion, repeatedly mentioned before, of 
the Earth's becoming "an ice-co\'ered piece of rock" like other planets. 

Lambert's Plotting 225 
On the relationship between socialism and Christianity; about the 
fact that socialism is trying to conceal, by putting forward a series 
of Genevan ideas, that its ideal is, in spite of everything, nothing else 
but material prosperity; on environment, etc. (Moskovskie vedo­
mosti, * No. 245, from \Vies baden), etc." 
He expresses sympathy with Kraft: "Only, that's a strange idea, 
for did he really assume that things are better in Europe? However, 
he may be right in his own way: there really is something about 
Russia that can make you shoot yourself." 
N.B. ABsOLUTELY. In the course of the novel the Youth is wonder­
ing: "How could this tolerant man, so firm and possessing such a 
high ideal of generosity (N.B. His indulgence toward those who had 
insulted him, the lady school teacher, etc.), rip open the child's 
mouth?" And so he learns from His own mouth that the child had 
not been simply irritating Him, but rather, that he child was one of 
those who refused to worship Him, "and never will worship me," 
(He adds). This is why a temporary fit of frenzy followed. He also 
hates the Princess because she refuses to worship Him. His passion 
<for her> was ignited by <her> contrariousness. 
·without Lambert. Everything that happened to Lambert hap­
pened to the Father. But what could replace Lambert? (N.B. In 
Lambert's presence, but without him. And, at the very last moment, 
he goes to <his> father). 
N.B. Couldn't it be so that the Youth does not give the letter to 
Lambert and shows him the door? Then, Lambert again seeks the 
company of the young Prince, giving him money and encouraging 
him to take <money> from her. He lets the young Prince know that 
they've got that letter and that the old Prince won't be giving <her> 
any money. The Princess quarrels with the young Prince and chases 
him out of her house. Here, the Youth plans his scheme all by him­
self, letting his father know about it on the eve <of its execution>. 
Meanwhile the young Prince has robbed Perchatkin. The plot. Liza. 
The young Prince shoots himself-suicide note, sympathy. Before 
his death, the young Prince is with Liza again. Liza shoots herself, 
having learned of his death. 
During a drinking party, the Princess tries to go after the Youth, 
hoping "Maybe he's got the letter." The Youth is rude to her, refuses, 
• Moscow News. 

226 
The Princess 
but falls in love with her. The diamonds, and that feeling of Ungern­
Shternbergian24 intoxication, "so I can really do you (the Princess) in, 
if I want." He begins to suspect that the Youth might be in love with 
the Princess, makes fun of him, torturing him as well as Himself. 
Messalina makes a hint regarding the letter. He fmds out that the 
Youth has been seeing the Princess. The Youth does not realize that 
He is jealous, and confides everything to Him, except the letter. 
"Is it true that you haven't had her? Listen, there is a certain 
letter! \Vhoever has that letter could fuck her if he wanted." The 
Youth is excited-was it intentional on his part, or was it uninten­
tional; does he know, or doesn't He, that the letter is <in the Youth's 
hands>? úwddeRly ti:te PriRcess iRswlts Liрa. 
Liza insulted by the Princess for the second time. As a result of 
this, the "lawful daughter" pretends to have heard only just now that 
the young Prince had anything to do with Liza. Impossible, though 
they be Dolgorukys, but mainly because the insult inflicted upon 
Liza by the Princess confirms that the Princess loves the Prince, and 
that he loves her. "I don't want to." [October 14?] 
Yet <she> surprises <her> father with this question: "Does He 
intend to propose to the Princess?" In that case, she is offering to 
marry the old Prince ... Won't give away those 100,000. WH-e& 
Suddenly refHsal a letter from "that passive creature," under the pre­
text that He loves the Princess. Lambert makes his first appearance. 
Infuriated by the passion attributed to Him, He demands a show­
down with the Princess (she accedes, under the pressure of His 
threats). He makes her a present of the young Prince's documents, 
sarcastically remarking that it was for her love of Him, but demands 
that she dare not seduce the Youth and debauche him, like a Messa­
lina (that's what He is calling her, a Messalina). [February, for part 
four.] She slaps His face. The old Prince summons Him: He affirms 
that she had been trying to seduce the Youth, in order to wheedle 
that letter out of him. The Prince is stunned by <the news about> 
the letter, calls in the Youth, who refuses to say that such a letter 
exists. [Here] The Prince calls him a scoundrel. "The passive crea­
ture" refuses <to marry him>. A formal proposal to the Princess. 
Everybody is screaming: "He is out of his mind!" Chopping up 
those icons, proposal < . . .  > 
[He says to the Youth: "I really got it for you, you scoundrel, but 
24 See note 3 of Part II. 

Versilov and Lam bert 227 
you did right] in not giving up the letter." The Youth is furious 
about His complaining to the Prince that she was corrupting him 
(the Youth). He meekly admits tha,t he was carried away by His anger 
and contempt for her, and, "My boy, if you do have that document, 
be generous and hand it over." Such magnanimous confession leaves 
the Youth perfectly convinced that He does not love her, [and is 
suffering an injustice, and a giant among people.] But the Youth 
is sneered at by her, and by everybody, including the young Prince 
and the old Prince (try it without Lambert). 
At this point, Lambert. Dishonor her. Both agree. The Youth is 
convinced of his father's absolute hatred for her. On the very eve of 
the attempt, when he is wavering, Lambert suddenly stuns him with 
the admission that He knows about the plot also and is approving of 
it. ["He has just proposed to the Princess."] Upon his repeated ques­
tions Lambert does, however, retract what he has just said about Him. 
He agrees that he hasn't understood him right, but still leaves a 
lingering suspicion in the Youth's mind. The Youth is convinced that 
he hates her. (N.B. He never did admit to his father that he was in 
love; on the contrary, he was always angry that everybody was teasing 
him about his being in love. He knows himself that he is in love, but 
is trying to persuade himself that he hates her on account of being in 
love with her.) [But Lambert, who does not believe the Youth, calls 
on his father. The latter jumps out <from his hiding place> at the 
moment when the Youth kills Lambert.] 
N .B. Most important. THe Rrst time He a emits His f3aSsioR for tHe 
Priaces is wHeR He Has alreaay seat Her tHe leter. We comes to see 
Him aaa coafeses. We says sarcasticaly: "AU rigHt tHea, rape Her." 
gHt He is askiflg for Helf3. He SHOWS Hf3 aRe goes mas. 
The Youth never admits, not even to himself, that he is in love 
with the Princess, not even when he has found himself kissing her 
tracks ("How can they be so depraved! so materialistic!"). He begins 
to hate her for having kissed her tracks. He comes to see his father, 
telling him that he hates her. Don't want to rape her. "I am afraid to 
rape her!" 
October 6. 
Besides catholic narrow-mindedness, despotism, and intolerance, 
besides contempt for one's own land, there is also present <in his 
character> such thing as a stubborn, almost enthusiastic pursuit of 
an idea, of a world view, etc. Besides extreme and diabolic pride 
("no one can be my judge") there also are present extraordinary, 
harsh demands directed at <him>self, "though under the condition 

228 
"/ Hate Her" 
that I be responsible to no one." A most elegant, polished exterior: 
an apparent ingenuousness, affability, an apparent tolerance, an ab­
sence of any purely personal ambition. And yet all this is only the 
result of a haughty view of the world, an incredibly exalted position 
which He has arbitrarily assumed opposite the whole world. The 
essence of which is, for example, this: "No one can insult me, for 
they are all mice <compared to me>. I am guilty, and they've found 
me guilty, so let them, and may God give them wisdom, at least for 
a time, for they are so paltry, so very paltry!" [February, for pan four.] 
"I hate her, yet I am afraid to rape her," says the Youth as he 
comes to see his father for the last time, and asks him to join the 
conspiracy. 
"Do it, do it," says the Father. 
"How?" 
"A young man of your age can hardly avoid getting soiled by some 
woman. So it really does not matter whether it be her, or some 
streetwalker. But you will see that she will be worse than a street­
walker. You will see tears, and vileness, and deceit. Use her, and 
throw her pay to her, get even with all of them, son of a whore, 
Dolgoruky." 
The Youth remains silent. 
"I knew that you hated her," he says. 
"\Vhat about you?" 
"I hate her more than you do!" 
"Listen: simply give it to her, give it to her generously-give it to 
her without any words, if you can. This will be best of all, and fairest 
of all. Then, turn your back to her, without asking for a remunera­
tion." 
""Would you care to be present?" 
["Are you truly ready to hand it over just like that?" "I am and I 
was actually expecting such advice from you. You hate her so much 
you surely would have simply handed it to her, crushing her with 
your magnanimity."] 
"You want me to talk to her?" 
"No, stay in the next room." 
"\Vhat for? So I could hear your beautiful speech to her?" 
"I am telling you, I fear that I might fail; I am afraid of raping 
her." 
''I'll go." There is hatred written on his face. 
(And that's how they decide to act.) (N .B. "I have already sent a 
letter.") 

Lambert's Idea 229 
The young Prince has been behaving badly; he is no longer ad­
mitted to society. The Princess has chased him out of her house; he 
did make a move to win the hand of "that passive creature," but the 
old Prince, learning of his dishonest action (theft) [a duel] , also 
shows him the door. Then the Prince and Lambert kill and rob 
Perchatkin. N.B. Lambert is hoping all the time that the young 
Prince is going to get a lot of money, and has been giving him money 
himself. Lambert was hoping that he might get money from the 
Princess, from the old Prince, from "that passive creature." Lambert 
is thinking that the young Prince failed to get any money from the 
Princess because, as a result of that letter, she hadn't got and was never 
going to have any money. And that's why he keeps pestering the 
Youth: Isn't there a letter somewhere, for she would give a lot for 
that letter (because the old Prince is furious at Him, and tactfully, in 
view of the fact that he is getting married himself, has promised to 
provide her with another dowry). Then, in his opinion, the young 
Prince and the Princess would make up again and pay him. He has 
made the young Prince give him a promissory note, which the young 
Prince promises to honor as soon as he gets 20,000, if only he gets that 
letter from the Youth. But Lambert has another idea: "I'll make the 
little Prince pay up on the promissory note, as soon as they make up," 
he thinks, "but I can still shake her down for 20,000 with that letter." 
And this is why he is furiously trying to talk the Youth into becoming 
his partner in the deal, "We'll split the money, and you can fuck her, 
too." And, strangely enough, though the Youth does not capitulate 
before Lambert, the latter's passion-laden words-"Let's shake her 
down, revenge; let's fuck her; it's all a moment's work; one must 
take advantage"-in spite of their crudeness, have an intoxicating 
effect on him. "Or don't they?" he asks himself. Finally he decides to 
go it alone. (While Lambert and the Prince, together, kill Perchat­
kin.) But at the last moment, two hours or so before the act, he goes 
to see Him, inviting him <to join the plot>. 
As He is rushing about the room, like a beast, the half-dead 
Princess in his arms, He suddenly and with all his might, after having 
dropped her on a bed, strikes her face (after kisses) with his fist (he 
had bared her leg). This is where the Youth kills him. 
In the plan for part one. 
As the Youth is entering the Brusilov residence, a lady school 
teacher forces her way in, carrying a letter (and 100 rubles). "Tell 
this scoundrel," etc. The Youth takes it upon himself to convey <the 
letter and the money>. He returns <the letter and the money> with 

230 Bismarck 
some rude and caustic remarks. "That passi\·e creature." Rips open 
<the little boy's> mouth. The school teacher hangs herself. Her 
H'leth@r. The next day the Youth pays a visit to the school teacher. He 
is there, too. But the Youth does not exchange a single word wih Him, 
while they are at the dead school teacher's. <Her> mother exonerates 
Him. The Youth leaves embarrassed Then, his father comes to see 
him at his new flat. Among other things, he also mentions the school 
teacher, but in a quiet, delicate way. (N.B. \Vhen the Youth comes 
<to the aunts' place> to write a letter (and also to pick up his be­
longings), he makes mention of Andreev's letter which he might hand 
over to Him; which he does when they become reconciled). 
N .B. Important. The aunt, who is the godmother and a very dis­
tant relative of the young Prince's, is a V@T)' cle5@ closer relative of 
the old Prince's. She is living in Luga, is poor, and the Prince had 
stayed at her house for some time, while in exile; furthermore, 
Makar's family was also under her wing. 
It was this aunt who had a lawsuit with Him, for 300,000. Having 
won the 300,000 He promises to return 100,000. But th@ family the 
old Prince, to show his tact, since he has suddenly decided to get re­
married, promises to take care of the dowry himself. Then, He will 
give away 100,000 with his daughter, and he deposits <that amount>. 
"However, you are not visiting me too often, are you?" says the 
Youth to Him. 
"I haven't time, my friend; I just haven't the time, forgive me; 
please, don't feel hurt." 
He, about Bismarck: "It is bad when a man, or a cause, are easy 
to understand: it's the first sign that they are worthless. He has united 
<Germany> mechanically, with iron and sword, while disuniting it 
morally, as he is sowing the seeds of future religious hatred. Isn't he 
counting on atheism?" 
Nothing durable was ever created by iron and sword. 
Prince Bismarck is one of those men who are quickly understood 
by their environment (there are such poets, public figures, publicists). 
Theirs is an ephemeral and a foolish fame. [To the lackey, on the 
train.] 
The old Prince: "Imagine, He is jealous of Bismarck's fame; nor 
will he recognize that he is a great man." 
He, about the Princess: "She is modest." 
"If she's modest, how can she be a l\fessalina?" 
"You can't understand it." 
A letter by the Youth, from Moscow to Petersburg, addressed to 

The Andreevs 231 
a certain unknown "dear Sir," and asking to be left alone; but his 
aunt appears on the scene and turns everything the other way. 
·when I let this German know that I didn't intend to enroll in the 
university, this (Russian) German made a slight effort to make me 
change my mind, presenting to me the advantages <of a university 
education>, but I cut him short quickly (my own idea). Then, he 
let me know that he had informed my family in Petersburg that, in 
his opinion, everything would of course go the way I wanted it, for 
though I was still a minor, I already had certain rights (acquired 
by graduating from high school) and nobody would, of course, force 
me, except that I would have to bear the unpleasant consequences my­
self. Let me note that it was the German who was in touch with my 
"relatives." I never wrote a single letter. Those "relatives" were the 
Andreevs. But I knew that Andreev had died in Petersburg two 
months earlier, and that his wife, two of my aunts, and his two 
unmarried daughters were then in Petersburg. Somehow, my Ger­
man, through all this time, had shrunk from discussing my relatives 
with me. But I never wrote them a line, nor did I ever talk about 
them, though I knew a lot about them. Here's exactly what I knew 
at the time. This is essential in the presentation of my arrival in 
Petersburg. I knew it from some German women, from servants. 
First, about my fatlier. My father ... all the information-with 
the old Prince. (N .B. ·what a romantic effect every bit of news about 
my father had on me!) And here, Father, the old Prince, the Princess 
... , etc. 
[<My> father's marriage, for <?> the German. 
I: "I couldn't care less."] 
Most of all, I was worried about the news of my father's marriage, 
and about Makar's family then staying with him in Petersburg. Then, 
the aunt shows up. They've found a job for me in Petersburg. I don't 
have to leave right away. I had a talk with the German-<my job 
will be> to entertain the old Prince. Then, frou-frou. The university 
student, and the trip. N.B. Toward the end <of the year> I was in 
the seventh grade. The story of the little Prince, then a quick en­
counter with Lambert. 
Something remarkable. Or thus: the day before I was going to leave 
for Moscow,* the German, his wife, and I sat down together in the 
evening, and here is what I learned. Then, a package of Andreev's 
• An obvious slip of the pen; should be "Petersburg." 

232 Realism and Atheism 
letters. The German: "I have decided to let you have them." Or else, 
the German dies and his wife lets me have them. The letter <to> the 
Youth 
(October 9.) 
"A man of undoubted intellect, but not a very clever man."• 
"Listen, Prince, where do you get these things?" 
"1\lon cher, je sais tout, mais je ne sais rien de bon."25 
The Prince was happy that I was admiring his wit. But I swear that 
I had been sincere, not just flattering him. On the contrary, I'd been 
rather laughing at him, being quite sure that he said it without think­
ing, just by accident. Then the Prince immediately came up with 
another bon mot, but that second one didn't come off. 
]e sais tout, mais je ne sais rien de bon (Faust).26 
I know everything, but I know nothing right (I have learned every­
thing, but I haven't learned anything right). 
[February.] It is the same anxiety which entices a soul thirsting 
for faith and carries it off to the heavens, tHe saFRe that also induces 
the realist to reject faith. Realism and atheism present a tranquillity 
which is deceptive (for never does atheism capture an indifferent 
soul). A soul which is trying to calm itself through complete negation 
may thirst, more than any other, for complete affirmation (for the 
positive), for complete faith. 
But there is "average man," who is glad to have acquired the right 
to be dishonorable. Our youth doesn't even suspect his existence, or 
that it is mixing with this dirty mass. 
People know nothing about socialism in this country, yet socialist 
ideas are present everywhere. 
\Ve have become Europeans under the absolute condition of losing 
our self-respect. 
[February.] Many things will age before they mature, but society 
does contain <some> undeniable evil. This is true. 
[\VoRN To RAGs.] He: "Your mother is the exact contrary to certain 
Petersburg newspapers in which, 'what's new is bound to be 
good.' " 
"To repent would mean, in my case, to immediately attack some-
• The bon mot is more effective in Russian, since urn ("intellect") and umnyi 
("clever") are derived from the same root. 
25 French: "ֿIy dear, I know everything, but I don't know anything good." 

Everybody Is a Lackey 233 
body with some accusation." (N .B. He: "\Veil, so much we know: to 
repent means, in our country, to immediately attack somebody with 
some accusation.") Comparison of nihilism to the appearance of the 
poet Benediktov (He).27 The old Prince on Versilov's action: "How 
it cheers one's heart to rejoice at somebody's noble deed!" 
Versilov: "The idea of a nobility and of 'better people.' " 
V ersilov: "The nobles freed the people, while the government offi­
cials merely stole their idea." 
Versilov: "If we only had enough of that Russian spirit, i.e., of the 
spirit of Christ, and all this chronological determinism of evil, which 
you have in Europe, would be unthinkable in Russia (factory-owners, 
the people <?>), no one would want to abuse his lesser brethren, for 
life's happiness, life's joy would be found in something else, i.e., not 
in gold, but in self-denial.'' 
"Could such a country be for real?" 
"If not so, at least its ideal and the striving for it are always possible. 
If only Christ would not die in the hearts of the Russian people, then, 
even though there were night iH-1-around us, it would still be possible 
to strive for that bright dot <of light> with everything one has got. 
That is, it would be a joy to be alive, provided the idea does not die. 
You see, if the idea itself should die, and the European idea become 
accepted, <an idea> of mechanical, and not of inner equality, every­
thing would be lost.'' 
Versilov: "\Ve Russians haven't got any honorable memories, and 
those which we used to have we have lovingly dishonored and 
rejected.'' 
Versilov: "I am not assuming or allowing that there might be any 
freely thinking or freely acting people in Russia: everybody is a 
lackey, you hear, a lackey, not a slave. Russian boldness, if it should 
show up anywhere, is nothing but a lackey's insolence, and invariably 
accompanied by a cowardly concern for oneself: '\Vatch your step, 
<careful with> what you're doing.' " 
"Those nihilasters have grown old; they've lost their teeth.'''*' 
• Nigiliashki, derived from nigilist ("nihilist") with a Russian suffix which 
suggests contempt. 
27 V. G. Benediktov's first book of poetry was enthusiastically received in 1835 
and was praised by Pushkin, Dostoevsky, and Turgenev, among others. Belinsky 
alone criticized his poetry as empty music and composed of a series of common­
places. Time quickly showed that Belinsky was right. When his third collection 
of poetry was published in 1 842, the reading public ignored him. 
26 Ibid. 

234 Socialists 
Versilov: "Russia is just about getting ready to start living." 
"And these preparations will take her a thousand years?" 
"A big ship takes more time to get clear. It will take less time to 
build a Neva river boat of 4 <horse> powers than the frigate Mi11i11." 
Makar is glad to hear these words. 
Political discussions (about China). 
"Not only don't we have well-informed people, we don't even have 
any honest people. There is almost no such thing in Russia as an 
honest man." 
Our clergy has given us, for the most part, atheists and nihilists 
(dreamers, as a result of not knowing the world, and practicing 
discrimination, as a result of their forming a separate estate). In their 
academies they continue to represent a separate estate; one really 
ought to break it up and make it a part of our universities. 
They haven't been participating in our general progress, but 
have for those past 20 years reacted to every reform with nothing but 
contemptuous sneers and sullen sniffs. 
"My friend, these are all very painful questions, and I am making 
every effort to avoid them." 
To the socialists: "You are hoping to lure people with promises of 
their own advantage, with rational calculations of their own advan­
tage, and you think that in view of their own "indubitable" advantage 
they will all join you (so thought Chernyshevsky and Dobroliubov:28 
'Let me talk to the people through the window for a quarter of an 
hour, and they'll follow us.') i\fy God, what a miscalculation on your 
part: when did man ever do what was to his advantage? On the con­
trary, hasn't man always done what he liked to do, rather than what 
was to his advantage, and not infrequently knowing full well that it 
was to his disadvantage? For man has an innate tendency to consider 
28 Nikolay Gavrilovich Chernyshevsky (1828-89) was one of the most influential 
critics and political activists in the nineteenth century. His most important 
critical work is Esteticheskie otnosheniia iskusstva k deistvitel'nosti (1855) 
(Aesthetic Relations of Art to Reality). His novel Chto de/at' (What is to Be 
Done1) (1862-63) inspired generations of young Russians to revolutionary zeal. 
Dostoevsky satirized this novel, as well as some of Chernyshevsky"s views of man 
expressed in various essays, in Notes from the Underground. Nikolay Alexandro· 
vich Dobrolyubov (1836-61) was an idealogical and political contemporary and 
a follower of Chernyshevsky. \Vith Chernyshevsky and Pisarev he forms the triad 
of important and influential radical critics. His most important article is Chto 
tahoe Oblomovshchina (What is Oblomovism1) (1 859). 

Versilov's Effect on the Youth 235 
as advantageous to himself, in almost any calculation that he may 
undertake, that which pleases him, and nothing else. You have for­
gotten that."29 
"It isn't your special privilege to be lovers of mankind. On the con­
trary, quite often you are nothing but petty egoists, thirsting for fame. 
Socialism means hatred." 
Versilov: "<The image of> this planet with a God is contiguous 
with totality and immortality (the family is being destroyed, and with 
it one's forebears, and the individual. Only mankind remains; and so, 
<life> is limited to earthly existence, whereas if <we believe in> 
resurrection, there is reunion, and revelation)." 
The Youth: "It was with this kind of passion-laden words (abrupt, 
disconnected, yet poetic) that he was stirring my imagination and 
irresistibly attracting me (I am mentioning these items just to show 
what kind of phantasies were dwelling in this man's soul)." 
Christianity and socialism. Anger and struggle (forward!). Advan­
tage instead of any moral principle. They've gotten their hatred 
mixed up with love of mankind. The burning down of the Tuileries. 
Personal responsibility, and there is no such thing as crime (i.e., indi­
viduality). They'll surely win. In the end, Christ will be victorious. 
"Lord, have mercy, give me some money." 
"Lord, have mercy on all men who have no one who will pray for 
them." 
"Lord, make a move." 
Lambert is urging the little Prince to collect the 30,000 which He 
had spent and failed to pay him, and also the 100,000 which the 
<Prince's> daughter is absolutely refusing to surrender. 
The Youth makes up his mind to go through with his scheme all 
by himself, but learns, on the eve <of its execution>, that He, after 
all that has happened, has proposed to the Princess. The Youth is 
stunned by this bit of news: "So He is in love!" He goes to see Him, 
and never before has he heard more insults hurled at "that Messalina" 
than on this occasion, when He has <just> proposed marriage to her. 
"I proposed to her out of contempt for her." 
He is cited before a Justice of the Peace in connection with his 
having given 100 rubles to that governess. 
A lawsuit on account of the money he has paid short. 
29 The Underground Man makes similar points in his argument against the 
Crystal Palace. 

236 His Father's Rival 
The Youth has just arrived, <and> He hastens to ask him ques­
tions: "Did the young Prince have a good trip?" 
October 14. 
The Princess is the old Prince's daughter. The Youth 1s m love 
<with her>, though he won't believe that he is in love, and thinks 
that he hates <her>. However, he i11sti11ctively hides his feelings for 
the Princess from Him and everybody else, as he fears to be shamed 
for it. How great then, are his embarrassment and his anger when He 
takes the liberty to tell the Princess that she is corrupting the Youth 
by making him fall in love with her, so that he has completely lost 
his head! The main thing is really that the Youth has been trying, 
throughout the course of the novel, to conceal his feelings from Him: 
suspecting, in spite of himself, that He may be in love, even though 
he has been believing Him when he was saying that He has had noth­
ing but hatred for her in a long time. His feeli11g of tact has prevented 
him from becoming his father's rival. He is seized by cynicism, a 
loathing for Him, and even more so, for the Princess. He finally gets 
to believe that He hates her. It is He himsel£ who suggests that he 
rape her. Yet he is working on his scheme all by himself, and in deep 
secrecy. And then, suddenly, practically the night before, he learns 
(from Lambert) that He has proposed to her. [The Youth] goes to 
see Him. 
"How then, could you say that you didn't love her?" 
He replies: "l\fy life isn't worth a thing. I can save her."* 
"But if she hates you?" 
"No, she adores me, though I do not love her." 
"But she won't admit it." 
"Perhaps she'll be wise enough to admit it." 
The result is that the Youth is struggling with himself and, finally, 
an hour before <the act> invites Him over. 
October 14. 
Absolutely stick to these two rules, throughout the course of the 
novel. 
1st rule. Avoid the mistake, made in Tlze Idiot and in The Pos­
sessed, of describing (many of the) secondary events in a fragmentary, 
insinuated, romance-like manner, and dragging them out over a 
lengthy extension <of the novel>, both in the narrated action as well 
as in individual scenes, yet without giving any explanations at all, 
• Or: "I can save it." Since zhizn' ("life") is a feminine noun in Russian the 
phrase is ambiguous. 

Avoid Secondary Details 237 
just guesses and hints, instead of explaining the tmth directly. Being 
mere secondary episodes, they weren't worth such concentrated atten­
tion on the part of the reader; on ·the contrary, they actually tended 
to obscure, rather than to clarify, the principal objective, precisely 
because the reader, diverted to a side road, could very well lose the 
main road and get all confused in his attention. 
Try to avoid secondary details and seek to assign an insignificant 
place to those <that you do introduce>; present them much more 
briefly, concentrating the action exclusively around the hero. 
The 2d rule lies in the fact that the Youth is the hero of the novel. 
Everything else is secondary, even He is secondary. The poem is about 
the Youth and his idea, or better, about the Youth, solely as the 
bearer and inventor of his idea. 
The Youth sets out from Moscow, all im bued with his idea, and 
loyal to it. He is armed with his idea as he is riding out to battle, and 
he knows it. He already has sacrificed a few things to his idea: to be 
precise, three years of alienation, <a good deal of hard work> to 
strengthen his character, saving money and declining a chance to get 
a higher education, explicitly on account of his idea. In Petersburg, 
his idea suffers some damage and is shaken by a number of things, to 
be precise: 
l) Meeting people, and the fact that he cannot restrain himself but 
reveals his idea to other people: being ashamed of it. 
2) His faith is shaken by socialism: he wants to retain his idea and 
yet remain a noble human being. 
3) His condescending attitude toward the idea: He does approve 
of it, yet the Youth has the feeling that His idea is higher, more 
proud and noble tRaR 8is owR than his own. \Vhat then is His idea? 
The Youth is trying to guess it through the entire course of the novel. 
4) His clash with life, voluptuousness, ambition, uncongenial com­
pany, the young Prince. Cynicism as well as other avenues to bril­
liance make their appearance. Everything collapses as a result of 
insults, which return him to his idea-no longer theoretically, but 
as a genuinely embittered man who is out to take his revenge. Cyni­
cism and daring, Lambert, the young Prince. The plot, money. It is 
during this period that he has an attitude of contemjJt for Him, hav­
ing lost his respect and his love for Him, and a desire to get even with 
Him for what He has meant to him in his life, so decisively and for 
such a long time. At the same time, a lack of respect for his family. So 
much more is he <then> affected by his meeting with Liza, the 
child, etc. 

238 
Vasin 
5) His relationship with the Princess, ambition, passion, and the 
plot. In the very end, it becomes clear what He is. [N.B. However, 
he decides to join the plot certainly not on account of his idea, but 
because of his passion <for the Princess>.] 
6) Makar Ivanov, and those others. A shattering impact which 
does not, however, destroy his idea. 
3d mle: the young PriHce. 
October 15. 
After Souchard, conclude it quickly. [Mother, a meeting.] He 
withdraws into himself; later, in high school, daydreaming, about his 
father, about meeting him, his idea, his social position; it actually had 
an influence upon his decision not to enroll in the university. But do 
not say that this is so, later, at Vasin's. Then, living with the German, 
and facts about his father. Andreev's letters, ''I've deciphered them, 
I've learned a few things from these letters;" so he travels <to Peters­
burg> armed <with these letters>. The aunt shows up: "<You are 
going> to Petersburg, <where you have a job> with the Prince." The 
trip, etc. An auction, 10 rubles. 
["The German said that 'you like to economize.' " 
"\Vhy won't you say, 'a tightwad'?"] 
["\Vhy are you doing it?" 
I, with a guffaw: "I want to become a Rothschild," etc.] 
It is He who tells Vasin about the Youth's very ow11 idea, and Vasin 
unexpectedly comes to see him (right before being arrested) and has 
a talk with him. He causes the Youth to waver. Question to the 
Youth: "So he is concerned about me?" And, again because of his 
pride, he is not too fond of the notion that Vasin knows about <his 
idea>. But Vasin is arrested. The Youth is stunned. 
[October 14.] N.B. Absolutely. Carousing with the young Prince, in 
good company (hussars), to which the Youth is admitted (he can see, 
though, that he doesn't belong there). Later, the young Prince's duel. 
The Prince shows himself a coward at the duel. The Princess sum­
mons the Youth and asks him questions about it. The Youth turns 
away-but after <some affairs with> women, <Mme> Andrieux, the 
old Prince, playing a hoax on the Fool, etc. He* suddenly withdraws 
into himself, cynicism, a mad rage at the Princess, "take revenge on 
them all," the letter, which irritates him, quarrels with his father, of 
• "He" is capitalized in the Russian text. 

The Youth Becomes Corrupted 239 
whom he demands an awful lot, and Lambert. ("Alas! The mood I 
was in didn't let me see Liza." Their romance, separately.) 
The day after the attempt <on her honor> the Princess says: "He 
is honest, noble, bHt all this alfected, bookish, artificial aHd <a seHse 
of> hoHo£ (as iH al of OHT society), I kHew it. He was always capable 
of believing that I would get frightened by that letter. I always, 
always felt that this might happen. He lacks a great idea." 
In his introduction to the Princess: "If I were to explain my idea 
to you, I would never succeed, nor bring my undertaking to an end, 
but here is my story. Though it may not have been written for you, it 
will be completely frank: I thought that some day you might want to 
read it." 
·with every line. 
\Vhy did I think, not in the least expecting this letter from you?* 
< . . .  > 
Here, I want to severely < . . .  > 
I am not even rereading it, yet I am sending it to you. 
Though He has incited everyone else to go ahead with their plot, 
He is still wavering and alFHost waRted to would like to make a noble 
gesture and send the letter. It is with this idea in mind that he takes 
the final step of trying to filch the letter from them. But they won't let 
him. He comes to see the Youth and, in allegorical language, advises 
against going through with it ("father's noble feelings flared up for 
the last time"). But the Youth takes it for a ruse to get the letter from 
him. Then, He waves his hand and, with a guffaw, decides <to go 
along with them>. 
"I didn't love her (the Princess) at all. I don't know what game I've 
been playing." 
N.B. Carousing with the young Prince. \Vomen. The Youth feels 
that H.e is beiHg acepted he isn't on equal terms with them, but 
already he is beginning to be corrupted, already he is getting fond of 
sweet luxury (Petersburg is having a physical effect on him). \Vomen. 
He t£ies it iH the st£eets He is arrested in a secret gambling house, 
<since> some money <has disappeared> from the table. The little 
Prince betrays the Youth, when he is under suspicion of having 
stolen the money. He leaves, night, a wench, he throws himself at the 
Prince in a mad rage. "I have straightened out that business," saysࠩ 
• Unclear in the original. 

2i0 
The Challenge 
Youth the young Prince to the Youth. "The money has been found." 
But he has already withdrawn into himself; he is full of hatred. 
To Liza, to his mother, to them, about his idea; they understand 
nothing. Dolgushin is arrested. Liza's farewell with the Prince takes 
place in the Youth's presence. <Her> fiance reproaches <her>. Liza 
thanks him. He apologizes. That same night, at home, the scene be­
tween Liza and her mother: "Bear it!" The ne?a flay she turns aewR 
the young IBaR. Here, He and the Youth are also present. As they 
leave, the Youth says to Him: "Scoundrel!" Yes, that's where <he 
calls Him?> a scoundrel. \Vhereupon they meet again as co-conspira­
tors. And then, later that night, the Youth is with his mother. Liza is 
not at home. Suddenly his mother throws up her hands: "Oh! I feel 
sick!" She runs out to look for Liza and comes across the people who 
are bringing her <body>. It is the fiance who brings her. Immedi­
ately following, this description: the mother, back home, dying. He, 
just barely suppressing his sobs; the little boy, crying for Liza and not 
letting the Youth go away. Lambert with his <injured> leg. Arrest. 
Write more briefly. (Imitate Pushkin.) 
The young Prince's proposed marriage to the Princess is far from 
being official. Nothing has been said in public, and the Princess is 
free. But throughout the novel there are many instances when 
rumors of an official announcement of the marriage are afloat, and on 
each of these occasions He gets terribly excited. \Vhen the Prince 
arrives together with the Youth, this is already enough cause for him 
to get excited. Here, the challenge after <the return of those> 
200,000 also takes place. He wonders why the old Prince has become 
involved in the young Prince's promissory note to Liza, etc., on this 
subject. 
[Most important.] N .B. After his arrival, the Prince is seeking to 
meet Liza, which is why Liza is all smiles (even though she has a 
suitor). They actually have a rendezvous. The young Prince suggests 
that the Youth be present, so he can see how innocent this all is. And 
so the Youth is there. This is in part two. 
In part one. 
The Youth tells Him that, though he hasn't seen Him since his 
childhood, he has <always> loved Him, 'I don't know <why>' and 
that he has been always daydreaming about how he was going 
to tell and show Him all in a general showdown, after which he 
would be either rejected or forgiven, and that now he was having a 
hard time, really, realizing that He was no longer quite the fine fellow 

Makar lvanovich 241 
and dandy, no longer quite so ideally handsome, as He had been 
when he had visited <his son> at Souchard's. 
What is absolutely necessary is· a conversation between the old 
Prince and the Youth about Liza, a conversation which makes certain 
things considerably clearer to the Youth (i.e., to the reader), specifi­
cally, why the old Prince has been helping to provide Liza with a 
dowry ("cher enfant, en fin c' est juste" ).30 
It is Makar Ivanov who says "Bear it!" when Liza's mother tells 
him about it. 
When, in the scene of the conspiracy, the Youth has killed Lambert, 
he says to the Princess: "Do you really think that I would have been 
afraid to take advantage of you? No, solely in order to show you that 
I am not afraid of you and how much I despise everything, beginning 
with you and down to the penalty that is awaiting me, I am telling 
you this: go, leave, out!" Whereupon the Princess steps closer, opens 
the door, sees his father who has been hiding there and says, with a 
smile: ''I'm not in the least surprised." 
"Go, we are all guilty." 
Makar lvanovich on Peter the Great. 
N.B. Makar Ivanov is preaching continence, fasting, pursued with 
methodical rigor (monasticism), i.e., the exact contrary of the Youth's 
<own> idea. He overwhelms him with his Christian ways. But he is 
too busy with other things at the time. Versilov also discusses 
Christianity. 
There is a certain solidity (of intellect, of knowledge, of erudition) 
about him. 
"He is neither this nor that..."* 
"He is like a babe: whatever he sees he wants to grab." 
"Breathing down my neck." 
"Unexpectedly." 
"Failed to get a hold on her (his) throat." 
"As yet, he couldn't bring himself to do it; he hadn't the heart (to 
kill <him> with his knife)." 
"So as to subject himself to such eternal torments." ** 
• For the next several pages we seem to be dealing mostly with Makar lvano­
vich Dolgoruky's stories and words of wisdom. The language is "substandard," 
which cannot always be rendered in the translation. 
• • In the original the phrase contains distorted forms of literary phraseology. 
so French: "Dear child, at last it's just." 

212 Epigrams 
"I have lived reverently." 
"Little kids will give you small trouble, once they're ready to reap, 
they'll knock ol' dad off his feet." * 
"She helped herself <?> to an egg (a mouse stole it)." 
"Our trouble (our grief)." 
"Ah, he is in such a bad shape (the sick man), it's just his soul is 
barely [still] hanging on; he ought to have died a long time ago." 
"Live off you for a while." 
"One does not take offense at everybody." 
"He is like the new moon at this place: he'll just barely show him­
self, and be gone again." 
This is one of those many Russian writers who-al- don't know why 
they are writing. 
"A soldier is a muzhik turned rotten." 
ucare ucare over "Render him an example, scare him a bit. Set a 
good example through him." [for him] 
"He used to order even other people's <children> to be flogged in 
this fashion." 
"You are a youth."** 
Makar Ivanov: (Peter the Great.) "So you go ahead and get an edu­
cation,-al+ and don't waste any time. Get to know everything, so that 
when you run into some FHischievoHs person godless or mischievous 
person, you can tel hiFH answer him so that he can't smother you 
with his words. And so that he can't confuse your immature mind." 
"I have a backache as bad as if some dogs were chewing it." 
"You're a fussy one; you never think ahead." 
"It's not for you, fool that you are, to get rich."**• 
"You ought to be flogged, though you may have risen to officer's 
rank; yet somebody ought to take off your pants and punish 7'6*' for 
an example." ("Makar lvanovich! I am taking a generous view of 
your words, and so I am willing to forgive you.") 
"And so he is sitting in that tavern, stark naked." 
"He is going to give you a lot of trouble (he'll put you into a lot 
of trouble)."**** 
• Free translation of a doggerel "epigram." The Russian edition has Detki 
malen'kie, tak i vedki malen'kie, where vedki is apparently a misprint for bedki. 
• • This sentence and preceding two paragraphs contain distorted forms of 
literary phraseology in the original. 
• • • Literally, "to make a kopek." 
• ••  • This paragraph and preceding five paragraphs contain distorted forms of 
literary phraseology in the original. 

Don't Lose Your Measure 243 
"But all this is to no avail, there'll be just so many more rumors 
afloat." 
"You'll put it (i.e., a good word of advice) to good use also, if there's 
anything at all in your soul you can get a solid grip on." 
"He's grown up, but still has no sense." 
"Look what our degrees are doing" (i.e., how cold it is). 
"A man-turned-dog, turned-animal." 
"A lawyer is a hired conscience." 
"Here, they'll find out everything, down to the last little thing." 
"<He> was waiting for him, like a raven for blood." 
"Listen, my friend, couldn't အ quit this thing?" (in the sense: 
quit a bad thing one has started). 
"In no time he extracted me by the collar, tearing my collar" ("ex­
tracted" in the sense: seized and pushed away).* 
"They immediately tore off our hands, mine and his" (i.e., stopped 
them from doing what they were about to do). 
"You've lost your measure. Don't ever lose your measure. A man 
who has lost his measure is in trouble. Such a man is lost." 
"So you were thinking." 
"You made bold to him." 
"You are a captive of your mind, instead of being its master." 
"You were thinking! What good is it you were thinking, if you 
didn't think it through to the end!" 
"What do you think you're worth once you have broken your 
oath?" (i.e., violated).** 
"You haven't handed out enough lickings (i.e., beatings). Gave him 
a good licking (a good beating)." 
"Crying bitter tears. Taking out what little he owns (what little is 
his own)." 
"EyerywR.ere the little man is shedding tears, shedding tears day 
and night, shedding tears all over, <for> he's got no bread, he's got 
no shoes and no clothes to wear, while the big man is eating and 
drinking more than his fill. And that's how it is going to be all over 
the world, right till the advent of Christ, always growing and multi­
plying." 
"And they beat her up that time, so badly she almost died." 
• Ibid. 
•• In the original the phrase contains distorted forms of literary phraseology. 

244 Righteous Even in Sodom 
"\Vhat does she say? I love her. \Vhat, me not love her? I love her 
day and night-that's how much I love her.:· 
"Straighten out a warped kopek piece." 
"\Vhy, you ought to shape up first, and give some shape to all you're 
doing. Give it an effort; as is, you're all spread out, nor do you see 
what your job really is; [nor do you really have a job in front of you] 
you don't know what you want, and you're no longer aware of your­
self (or you've quit being aware of yourself)." 
"In the first place, work (on yourself), [for yourself] and just by 
doing that you'll also work for other people; and start a great feat 
with<in> yourself, and if God won't forsake you, you'll end up 
working on a great cause. Each and every one should work on himself, 
and no one else-no state, and no rule, and no law. You can remain 
a righteous man even in Sodom, if only you will never cease viewing 
yourself, and judging yourself with your mental gaze [eye]. Never 
abandon yourself-this is the first rule. But what about you: not 
only are you out of hand, but you won't give in to a word either" 
(i.e., he does not even want to listen when somebody is talking about 
him). 
''I'll make you see the stars." 
"He blew into her ear" (whispered into her ear, gave her an earful, 
taught her). 
"A daily day." 
"Though money may not be God, it is half a god." 
"A soldier is a muzhik turned rotten." 
"As was said by you to be your pleasure." 
"It is not for you, little fool that you are, to get rich. You're a fussy 
one, and business likes a cool man." 
"Remember throne-and-fatherland."* 
"One must also remember throne-and-fatherland" (ex abrupto). 
Stinking Lizaveta. 
["How Lizaveta, a beggar-woman and a servant <of the Lord>, 
was elevated-and she had a dream: on the day of judgment Christ 
calls her, 'there hasn't been anyone more wretched, more evil-smelling 
than you-so if you'll forgive, I will.' And Lizaveta says: 'They burnt 
me, and they whipped me-l did not complain, as if I never felt it, 
nor did I take notice of the insults I was suffering; but now as the 
time has come where all the guilty are judged, here's what I say: no, 
• This paragraph and preceding two paragraphs contain distorted forms of 
literary phraseology in the original. 

Persecutions in Childhood 245 
I am not forgiving them, many times a sinner that I am <myself>,' 
and they all perished. And the merchants heard about it, and gave her 
cotton material, and kvass to dririk, and plied her with pies, offered 
her as much as five rubles in cash-Lizaveta wouldn't take it. Then 
they gave her a beating and chased her away. She rolled off the stairs, 
and screamed, screamed for a long time, cursing them."] 
Drunken men out in the streets. Nobody wants to work. A high 
school student killed himself finding studying too hard. A flabby, vile 
generation. No sense of duty or responsibility. 
The aunt, in the railway carriage: "You are acting as if somebody 
had insulted you, my dear." 
" ... Here I realized that I was taking a conventional line." 
In the provincial town, intimate-polite-common place-familiar dis­
cussions, in a tone considered best as well as proper: 
"Listen, doctor, you've really told us some tall stories in connection 
with this affair." 
The doctor: "Not at all, and to begin with, I'd ask you to address 
me in a more polite tone." 
"1..." etc. (N.B. Yet they don't continue their discussion any more 
politely, but continue in exactly the same tone.) 
In the railway carriage: "I promised myself to never tell Father, 
or anyone else, about the persecutions I suffered at Souchard's in my 
childhood-they aren't worth it." 
October 1 5. 
Or leave it as before, without shortening the part about his day­
dreaming, and then at Vasin's about Ungern-Shternberg31 as well as, 
in passing, about his own idea-in a mysterious form. 
October 23. 
"Seeing myself at the height of such power (as a Rothschild), I 
decidedly fell in love with myself." 
October 26. 
It isn't that I was a coward, but I was imagining that I was a flunky; 
well, and if I was a flunky, then I had to be a coward as well, and a 
thief (I did steal), and so I was taking pleasure in wallowing in this 
stinking filth. At the same time, another world, the world of books, 
Walter Scott, daydreaming. Light up (a dream). (N.B. Besides, think 
up another daydream for this spot.) Think up some noble action. And 
so, he feels the torture of the noble deed which he has done. 
31 See note 3 of Part II. 

246 His Idea 
A visit by his mother. • The aunt, moving to the German's place. 
Both <of his> lives continue and develop further. A description of 
his daydreams, and what exactly he dreams. (N .B. \Vithout fail, his 
father in each of these dreams.) Then, reality, a description of the 
German, life with him, high school, yet an arid, wretched life. 
Finally, he has shut himself up in a well·ordered way of life, as in a 
shell (every single item has its own proper place. A terribly small life, 
and the smaller, the better). Once, he is torn away from this life by 
Lambert. After <the episode with> Lambert he withdraws into him­
self completely. News about his father. He is eagerly gathering them. 
His heart is palpitating every time he gets such a bit of news. The first 
signs of sex. Kuznetsky Bridge. A ray <of light>. Suddenly, his own 
idea. It takes him three years to get his idea organized. Through with 
high school, a quick change, a letter to Petersburg (he wasn't even 
told to whom the German had written the letter). The German dies. 
The package. Information about his relatives. The aunt. Frou-frou 
and an encounter. \Vith the aunt. The trip. 
In the meantime, he had some miserable teachers in high school 
(examples). "Amazing how little I cared." Examples, anecdotes. It 
might have seemed that he was all engrossed in that life (a high school 
student's), yet this wasn't true at all, on the contrary, he was just 
going through the motions. 
The German used to talk about the boat that went to England, the 
trial of Christ, etc. 
(Cope with this material.] Daydreams. The prophet. <The cap> 
that makes you jnvisible. An arrow into Napoleon's eye. A merry tale 
about a head cut off. How he told it very well. I am telling it at the 
Countess's. The rout near Moscow, and Ungern-Shternberg.32 I am 
describing it step by step, how it all started and how it kept going. 
N .B. He, to the Youth, at their first showdown: "If you think that 
I am doing the wrong thing in marrying this woman, tell me-I'll 
break the engagement; there is still time. To be sure, she .is almost 
officially my fiancee, but there is still time. I have also told your 
mother what I am telling you now." 
"And your children?" 
"No, I haven't told them: I do not intend to ask them." 
In the first person. 
His life during his childhood is to be distributed between the 
• Or: "to his mother." The Russian sentence is ambiguous. 
32 Ibid. 

Analysis of Versilov 247 
various parts of the novel thusly: In the railway carriage-Chatsky; 
also on the train, about the Prince's lawsuit. At Vasin's, his mother's 
visit, daydreams, etc. About Lambert, while he is drinking with the 
Prince. (A word or so can be be dropped earlier.) But it is the Prince 
himself who tells him about Lambert. 
In the railway carriage. "I would ask him about Lambert." "Do 
you know Mr. Lambert?" The drinking bout should have this scene­
he is trying to kiss <him?>, and <he?> grabs <him?> by the hair. 
"Drive me to the Princess's, too. She is a rotten one." 
October 27. 
[February.] He is thrown out of a sled while it is traveling at full 
speed, and he bears it. Gambling. "I want this man to leave, either he 
or I will leave." Stolen money. After he has been led out <of the 
gambling place> he returns and says that it was the Prince who stole 
the money. 
N.B. <The Youth's> story at Vasin's is interrupted either by epi­
sodes with the child, or at night, by the episode with the girl who 
has hanged herself, and who should be living in the same house. 
"I didn't have enough character to stand a little suffering, but I 
could have withstood great suffering; I knew that I could." 
Before his departure he talks to N. A., who says to the Youth: "Do 
you know that there's a wedding coming up between the Prince and 
your sister?" 
"I know even more, there's also my father's wedding." 
HE ONCE MORE? 
A landowner, a despot, strong intellect, critical enough not to 
become either a Slavophile or a \Vesternizer. He becomes a profound 
egoist. An egoist from despotism. He is, though, a despot to the bone; 
a true despot must place himself so highly that he actually treats 
people unctuously, without anger, for to him they are mice, moles. 
They must be given help and encouragement. The fact that every­
body is in love with Him he must accept as something necessary. 
And this is why he cannot understand how the Princess is not in love 
with him. He refuses to believe that he is in love, and is embarrassed 
when he must finally prove it to himself, and he gets to thinking. He 
thinks that he only wants to save the Princess. Everything is solved by 
his passion. This passion crHshes, his admission that he is capable of 
sinking to the level of passion leaves him completely crushed. A 
despot to the bone. He admits himself that he is an atheist-ruins the 
Youth, is running the risk of ruining him, changes his mind and 
comes to talk him out of going along with the plot. 
N.B. He views Vasin with extreme condescension (i.e., benignly 

248 Egotistical Suffering 
to the point of unctuousness). N.B. The only person he is not treating 
benignly is the sickly little boy. 
"He is really something to look at, so perfect the type of a despot," 
says Vasin. 
Suffering in his egoistic way, He can stand the death of his wife and 
Liza's suicide. Then he takes the boy away himself and leaves him 
out in the street. Later, when the Youth returns he begins to scream 
that he has abandoned the child. [Ran away from him.] 
Or: The child ran away by himself. Even though he had been 
taking care of it, entertaining it, and playing with it (the aunt wasn't 
around), but the child ran away from him, which delivered the final 
crushing blow to his pride. 
October 28. 
\Vhen the old Prince had shown Him the door for having de­
nounced his daughter (regarding that letter in which she was taking 
steps to have him declared insane), He went home and wrote a letter 
to the old Prince, in which He said that he had slandered the Prin­
cess under the influence of his own passion for her, etc. ("\Vhat if 
this is the truth?" He says to the Youth, but mockingly.) 
His lectures to the Youth concerning depraved creatures, the de­
pravity which reigns in society (in connection with the Princess). He 
is taking advantage of the Youth's fanatic hatred of the aristocracy, 
and thus excites him (to play the game). The Youth blindly believes 
Him to the last moment. His game consists of making the Youth fall 
in love with Him, subject him to His will, take complete possession 
of him, all with the idea of later abandoning him. 
The question regarding his mother He presents to the Youth in 
such a manner that the latter believes that He actually had no chance 
to act in any other way. 
The Youth is outraged by the fact that He pays no attention to 
Liza's fate. Also, he is having a slight suspicion that He may be too 
egoistic even with him. But at the last moment when He comes to 
see the Youth asking him to quit the plot, He is noble and shows him 
how to give up <his plan> proudly. It is on this occasion, too, that 
He gives <the Youth> an exalted judgment of <the latter's idea to 
become a> Rothschild. He invites him to become an ascetic. • The 
Youth begs Him to come along with him as he hands over the letter. 
• na verigi, literally, "to <wear> chains <worn by ascetics as an act of pen­
ance.>" 

People Are Average 249 
The Youth to the aunt, in the railway carriage: Information about 
the story of his father's life, about the old Prince, etc. 
"You are quite wrong there," says the aunt. 
The Youth likes the way his aunt isn't at all embarrassed by what 
had happened the day before, but rather adjusts skillfully to every­
thing. 
He, to the student: "You are mediocrity itself, you are going to 
graduate and become the most respectable citizen; even now, as you 
were shouting obscenities <at that woman>, you were entirely lack­
ing in any kind of idea of your own. You don't even understand what 
I am saying." 
"The devil take you, you're a swine, you're the one who forced 
himself on me." 
"And you are what kind of
--
"And you, you-so much for you, I know." 
October 29. 
A bsolutely. The Youth also reveals his idea to Vasin. 
But when Versilov comes to see him at his flat in order to ask his 
forgiveness, he tells the Youth that now he ought to be in a mood 
hostile to the whole world, for he had just revealed his own idea to a 
stranger for the first time in his life, and so he actually ought to hate 
Vasin. The Youth is amazed at His knowledge of people. 
"I beg you to never discuss this matter with me." 
"Naturally, and I also ascribe your letter asking to be left alone to 
this very mood of yours." 
[Versilov adds: "I am not enticing you with any kind of bourgeois 
virtue to replace <your> ideals, nor am I saying that happiness is 
superior to heroism, because, my dear, heroism is superior to any kind 
of happiness, and I am respecting you for having conceived an idea."] 
Versilov tells him a few other things. Touchard is kinder <than 
you might think>, and there are only few villains <in this world>. 
People are a lot kinder and more "average" than you might think. 
You thought that you had found a villain in me, but here now, we've 
had a heart-to-heart talk and you can see that I am no villain at all, 
but just <an average person>, and you are angry and even ashamed, 
seeing that the world is turning out to be different from what you 
thought it to be like. [Either he or I? You're a fool, she is going to 
trade you in for him.] 
"Right now you'd like very much to set fire to something, smash 
something to pieces, rise above all of Russia, sweep past like a thun­
derstorm leaving everybody behind, and then, having thus manifested 

250 
Writers 
yourself, disappear in a desert, or in the United States of America, 
where you'll make another meteoric appearance." 
A bsolutely. After the Youth had been beaten up (when he was 
with the young Prince), he did think of fleeing to America. 
"A soldier is a muzhik gone rotten." 
"That republican chicken, Michelet;33 hebephrenia in his old age." 
[Here] The husband says to his wife who has been away from home: 
"Don't you know where you have been?" 
(To our liberals:) "You are romantics, you are dreamers, you are 
minor poets." 
To strong and undisputed recognition of certain writers as being 
important or even great is in part evidence of the shallowness of these 
writers, of the fact that they are well within the range of the golden 
mean. Turgenev. 
About Sherstobitov (Putilin).3t Looks stern, has got canaries sing-
ing at his house, plays the guitar himself. Owns a brick house. 
They've expressed their affection for God. 
N .B. (A marvellous artist. About Turgenev.) 
"So that I have decided to conclude the debut of my life" (from a 
letter left by a nihilist girl who had shot herself). 
"Cocklets." • 
Don Basilio, chain smokes. Boundless impudence. 
"Note that this gentleman is giving himself very portly airs." 
"Kind of strange." 
The word "abroad" (write it as one noun throughout). • • 
He is like the new moon (etc.). 
Live off you for a while. 
It isn't so everybody (every man) can insult one. 
Man, ဢ in his higher exemplars and his higher manifestations, 
does nothing simply; and so he won't shoot himself simply either, but 
religiously (even though he be an atheist). But the run-of-the-mill 
• Koklety, apparently a colloquial allomorph of Kotlety, "cutlets." 
• • Russian zagranitsa is really za granitsei, "across the border." 
33 Jules l\lichelet (1798-1874). Dostoevsky does not refer to him in any of his 
works nor in any of his letters; yet it seems clear that he was familiar with 
l\lichelet's works, especially with his arguments with Hensen. Dostoevsky prob­
ably knew his Pologne et Russie (1852) and his La Pologne martyre (1863). 
Hensen's famous article "The Russian People and Socialism" was addressed 
to l\lichelet. Dostoevsky is probably thinking in this note of his sentimental and 
rather trite sketches L'Amour (1 858) and La Femme (1860). 
34 The first note of a story that l\lakar Dolgoruky narrates in Part III, Chapter 
3:4 of the final version. 

Laughter at Feelings 251 
and the ordinary [people,] they are the ones who even shoot them­
selves in a banal way and without being fully aware of what they're 
doing, simply ဣand stupidly. Simple and simpler, but more stupid, 
too. 
This turmoil. 
Markus, telling how the merchants on that boat gave word to 
England in three days.35 
About how they reenacted Christ's trial in England and decided 
that he was guilty. 
About the vision of that Swedish King. 
(N.B. They tell the old Prince about the boat, and he laughs, then 
himself tells about Christ's trial in England.) 
N.B. "I'd like to have a nice chat; in our country, people always 
find lofty subjects entertaining. Yet I would also like to communi­
cate it to you to make my audience happy, and moreover, to be myself 
worthy of all that is beautiful and sublime."* 
The hole under the rock (see plan). 
And postpones his decision, waving his hand <in a gesture of 
resignation>. 
Whatever he could not understand or value he would sneer at 
insolently, in particular if he'd -6@- notice that it might be of im­
portance to high-minded people. 
With our entire progressive movement of the past 1 7-18 years 
we have proved, more than anything else, that we are terribly 
uneducated. 
They were laughing at my better feelings, in those rare moments 
when I was really entirely sincere. Well, I am glad that I cannot for­
get this; at least they have rid me of the misfortune to love them. 
"You, a future Rothschild," (He says to the Youth). "Of course you 
are an idealist-and there you have a [new] and unexpected con­
sequence of positivism and nihilistics."* *  
Having chopped u p  the icons: 
"Haven't I believed in all this [all my life,]" He said suddenly, 
pointing at the fragments, as he was leaving the room together with 
the Youth. 
• Purposely awkward in the original . 
.. Nigiliatina, formed from nigilizm ("nihilism") with the pejorative suffix 
·iatina. 
as Fyodor Antonovich Markus was a steward in the hospital where Dostoevsky's 
father worked as a surgeon. He lived above the Dostoevskys and visited them 
often. 

252 A Reactionary 
"That is, [all your life] you have not believed in all this," said the 
Youth. 
"All right, I haven't believed in it all my life," he repeated, hesitat 
iRg for a moR'lent breaking off the conversation (with that intonation 
of his, so well known to the Youth, with which He habitually inter­
rupted <their> conversations). 
God sends us misfortune. Misfortunes are useful, too, and how! 
\Vithout misfortunes there wouldn't be any happiness. Without mis­
fortunes, life wouldn't be worth living. 
N .B. The tale of St. Paul's conversion, on the road, after the 
murder of <St.> Stephen. About the temptation in the desert. About 
the essence of asceticism in monasteries. The freedom of Christ even 
in communism, the freedom of Christ even in < 17>93. All these 
tales both delight and puzzle the Youth. 
He shook the dust off his feet at Dolgushin's, and kissed the 
threshold. 
[Here] Any time your wife is getting too affectionate with you, 
assume that she is about to take a lover. 
[The lackey in the railway carriage] We fools (i.e., husbands) can 
be always deceived, and how simply and easily at that." 
"The reforms launched during the present reign have caused any 
common idea as well as any common bond to disappear. Previously, 
there was at least something; now there is nothing at all. Everything 
has fallen apart. The order that existed before was foul and wretched, 
but it was order. \Vhat we've got now is complete disorder in every­
thing." This is one of His cynical phrases. "'WR)' is tRis? asks tR@ 
YeHtR. 
"Why is this?" the Youth asks Him. 
"The devil only knows, must be because of the reforms. As far as 
I am concerned, it may all go to hell." 
The Youth: "You know what, father, you are a terrible reac-
tionary." 
He: \V@ll, I "I don't give a damn, really." 
About how the notion of good and evil has become lost. 
He: "For goodness's sake, here's what it says, right there, a District 
Commissioner stated outright: 'I'll take the money, but I won't 
serve,' and there's that other one who'd simply have the peasants 
Hogged if they bothered him with any official business. (Golas, • early 
• The Voice. 

The Ten Commandments 253 
August.) Well then, how can we in Petersburg decide if it's good or 
bad?" 
The Youth: "Of course it's a low-down <attitude>." 
He: "Hardly. These people will be screaming and writing that it is 
a low-down <action>, but secretly they'll be glad, for it can only 
mean that the reforms aren't working, that they aren't taking root, so 
that things are getting closer to a complete collapse, and thus, to the 
advent of a new social order. If these people were put in the place of 
those District Commissioners, they'd certainly act exactly as those did. 
And so, we really don't know what's good and what's bad." 
"These are paradoxes, father." 
"Hardly so. For these things have been bothering me all my life." 
"I think that all this will happen most simply. People will just 
refuse to pay their debts in order to get a new deal through universal 
and solidaristic bankruptcy. I've only presented a tiny part of the 
whole situation, but isn't this tiny part connected with all the rest, 
and, so-to-speak, with indissoluble ties?" 
"What then, are we to do?" 
"What to do? Be honest. In a word, read the ten commandments." 
"But this is old, and besides, what am I going to accomplish all by 
myself?" 
"Look, all these questions notwithstanding, do follow the ten 
commandments, and you'll be a great man. [If you're going to do it 
in a serious way, then once you are engaged in some serious business, 
you'll naturally quit asking questions. I have postponed."] 
"Unknown to all." 
"There is no secret that won't be revealed <some day>." 
"You're laughing <at me>?" 
That's right, sometimes it would seem to me that he was definitely 
laughing <at me>, and it made me sad, -9tft sad, for all my life. On 
the other hand, it still made me think. 
[The 10 commandments and, in addition to that, love somebody 
or something, and you will be <a great man>, and best of all, become 
a specialist in some field. 
I postponed telling him about my idea. It wasn't the proper time. 
I saw this ... Besides, it wasn't the proper time for me either. God 
knows what kind of a time it was-a time of both exaltation and 
disgrace.] 

-- -
........ J)JJl 
HOBroPOACKAro rеtiEPHATOPA 
.
•
 /.c.. 
. 
/('R;'д _.,,_ -.. • • • 
• .. , 
Ͻ ............ 
""-
`7"'"' .!J--u. ' 
File on suroeillance of Dostoevsky in Staraia Russia. The dossier is dated January 
8, 1876, and covers the period from May 27, 1872, to September 30, 1872. 
254 

·· -
Notice of abolishment of police surveillance of Dostoevsky. The notice is from the 
St. Petersburg head to the governor of Novgorod and is dated january 5, 1876. 
Dostoevsky was under police surveillance from the time of his release from prison 
to this date. 
255 

IV 
Notes to the First Part of the Novel 
These notes for the first part of the novel have something of a 
miscellaneous character, because Dostoevsky ranges over many of the 
subjects and situations of the first part of the novel, often without 
transition and often in very abbreviated form. In effect, the writer 
seems to be grouping elements in summary fashion, and checking out 
what has been decided and what still needs to be decided. What 
Dostoevsky still finds unsatisfactory is signaled by his return again 
and again to the same situations and by his analysis at length of cer­
tain scenes and character portraits. From these notes one can see that 
Dostoevsky is still very much at work attempting to fathom the 
relations of the Youth to his father, still very much intrigued and 
challenged by the character of Versilov, vacillating and unsure about 
the Princess (now called occasionally Akhmakova) character, and in 
a quandary about how to present the relations between the Princess 
and Prince Sokolsky. 
As before, the Youth's attitude toward his father is one of hate and 
love, but a hate that is itself a form of love. Dostoevsky says, perhaps 
more directly and more extremely than before: "And all in all, the 
whole novel is a poem of the Youth's love for Him." And the Youth 
himself says, "I was feeling that I could not live without Him, I was 
full of spite, I was acting like a woman in love." The relations be­
tween the two, as well as those of both to the Princess, are still being 
experimented with. In one version the Youth attempts to kill the 
Princess with a revolver, and it is Versilov who wrestles the revolver 
from him and shoots her. In one version Versilov "unmercifully 
lures him into debauchery and moral degradation" in order to get 
the document from him. 
256 

Effect of Analysis on Versilov 257 
Such actions are, of course, at odds with the Versilov who moves 
with sublety and mystery and achieves his effects without direct 
pressures. Much of the fascination of Versilov in the novel comes 
from the force he exerts on others without exerting force, and it is 
something of a surprise to find Dostoevsky still picturing Versilov in 
some of these notes as coaxing, luring, conniving, antagonizing, and 
demonstrating. In the novel Versilov is something of a still point in a 
vortex of action: he "permits" things to happen and they often hap­
pen in a way that seems to accord with his intention. Near the end of 
this section of notes Dostoevsky gives us a long analysis of Versilov's 
character that is fairly close to the core of Versilov's character as 
portrayed in the novel. Yet the effect of the analysis is quite different 
from the effect we receive in the novel: 
In spite of his self-adulation, he is restless, since he is often dissatisfied 
with himself. He wants the feats of a superior man ;  He wants chains 
and sacrifices, but his attitude of considering people no better than 
mice as well as his pride justify Him to His own conscience every 
time. It is impossible to love people. The idea that he may be in love 
with the Princess is humiliating to Him [and eventually leads to his 
ruin.] ... Furthermore, he cannot exist withou t a circle of admirers, 
starting with poor Sofia. He likes to be adored even in the most petty 
ways and would be unhappy in a trivial way even if a Tatiana Pav­
lovna turned away from Him; yet it would never make him lose 
heart. 
The tone of the analysis is too sharp, too critical, and even debasing. 
Versilov comes out something of a moral scoundrel in such an anal­
ysis, and one may legitimately wonder why he is worshipped by all 
about him, and why the Youth should seek his love so forcefully. It is 
possible that this consideration leads Dostoevsky to say the following: 
N.B.! In order to elevate the tone of the Youth's worrying and suffer­
ing as he is following His every move with deep emotion, tortured by 
His very person , it is absolutely necessary to also raise to a more tragic 
level the very tone of the events and accusations weighing upon Him 
on the part of society. Many legends and Catholicism are being 

258 
Versilov Is Morally Corrupt 
charged to H i m ;  /Jut it is necessary: to also elevate the person of the 
Princess. Make her proud and fantastic, too. 
The pride and self-love that Versilov represents must not prevent, 
artistically, a belief on the part of the reader in the love and attach­
ment that he provokes. The task is delicate and Dostoevsky seems to 
sense the difficulty, but he will not resolve it in this sections of the 
notes. Versilov is, in the final analysis morally corrupt; yet he must be, 
as he is in the novel, someone who commands admiration, respect, and 
fanatical devotion. He is corrupt, but he must be able to seduce those 
about him into believing in the sincerity of his "sufferings," in the 
seriousness of his goals, and in the importance of his gestures. Perhaps 
more important, he must seduce the reader into believing in these 
things. 
At this point in the elaboration of Versilov's character, Dostoevsky 
sees the solution to the expression of corruption and admiration in 
making more tragic Versilov's exclusion from society. In the novel 
itself the reasons for Versilov's exclusion from society are shrouded 
in rumor and mystery, and we are given scanty facts and vague specu­
lations. But a good part of these notes, perhaps the major part, are 
devoted to variations of those events at Ems that led to Versilov's 
complicated relations with the Princess, the slap in the face that 
Versilov endures from Prince Sokolsky, and his consequent exclusion 
from society. At least for a while Dostoevsky evidently contemplated 
giving these events a much larger part than they have in the final 
version. The events, as in the novel, concern Prince Sokolsky's father­
ing of a child by Lidiia, the stepdaughter of Katerina Nikolaevna 
Akhmakova; Versilov's love affair and proposal to Lidiia; Lidiia's 
death under ambiguous circumstances. But the relations between 
Prince Sokolsky and the Princess in these notes are substantially 
different, for in some of the versions there has been a passionate love 
affair between the two. It is this love affair that provides the motives 
for Versilov to attempt in various ways to discredit the Prince in 
the Princess's eyes and the. Prince in Lidiia's eyes. 
In the novel the passionate love affair between the Princess and the 
Prince is reduced to a flirtation, and Versilov's intrigues against 

Katerina N ikolaevna 259 
Lidiia, the Prince, and the Princess are either eliminated or clothed 
in rumor and mystery. Despite Dostoevsky's intention in these 
notes to elevate the tone of the circumstances of Versilov's exclusion 
from society, he succeeds only in placing more emphasis on Versilov's 
intriguing and ruthless character. For in all the versions of the 
romantic complication Versilov fathers complications and crises by 
revelations and plots, the whole point of which seems to be to break 
up the love affair between the Prince and the Princess and, it seems, 
Lidiia's attachment to the Prince. Dostoevsky understood quite 
rightly that Versilov needed a stature and a tone that he did not have 
as a predatory type to explain the silent obeisance of those about him, 
and to explain also the furious tenderness of his son's love. But he 
was wrong in believing that an elaboration of the circumstances of 
Ems would do this. 
In the notes up to now Dostoevsky's portraiture of the Princess has 
taken a course similar to Versilov's development. She has been pic­
tured largely as passionate and in many respects cruel, and in these 
notes she is spoken of as "a depraved woman-of-the-woTld." She in­
sults the Youth, plays with him, in some versions seduces him; in­
deed she abuses the Youth in ways that are similar to those that the 
father uses. Her portrait has far less body and less coherence than 
Versilov's, but Dostoevsky seems to have had in mind-to judge from 
these notes-the idea of creating a woman who in many respects was 
to be Versilov's female counterpart. In the following note he ex­
presses this directly: "\Vhat is going on between Him and the Prin­
cess is not passion, but a duel of pride. Yes, the Princess is that kind 
of person herself." 
The subtilizing of Versilov's predatory nature in the course of 
these notes results in a character of chilling and ambiguous evil, and 
a certain charm, sincerity, and suffering raise him almost to the 
tragic tone which Dostoevsky speaks of here as necessary to his 
character. \Vhereas the final portrait of Versilov is a monumental 
achievement, Dostoevsky will not be as successful in his portrait of 
Katerina N ikolaevna Akhmakova. The same concealment and am­
biguity will result in a woman of society who strikes us as inadequate 
to the passions she provokes. She is in many respects an empty and 

260 
The Rothschild Motive 
shallow woman, and yet these notes make it clear that Dostoevsky in­
tended to make her as complex, mysterious, and tragic as he was 
making Versilov. In the last interview with Versilov she conveys the 
impression of a passionless, frightened woman looking for peace and 
security of the most mundane sort. 
One must note finally that "the Rothschild motive," which floats 
idly in the final version, with little connection to other events, re­
ceives in these notes substantial elaboration. In one paragraph of 
notes the Youth describes in some detail his program of privation and 
hermit-like existence and the happiness they have brought him. Im­
mediately following the description of the program, he asks himself 
the following: "This was my poem on independence. \Vhy then, that 
Akhmakov woman, why the document, why did I want to save 
Versilov from his enemies-by doing all this, I was only betraying my 
idea." In this quotation the Youth provides us with a motive for con­
necting the Rothschild theme and the Youth's relations with Versilov. 
It is love of a particularly brusing and mixed variety that deflects the 
Youth from the pride, isolation and superiority that he is tempted 
to practice; but it is love, too, that deflects Versilov from his superior 
self-sufficiency. Both father and son are challenged by love and love 
is a contradiction to the ideas of both. \Vhereas Versilov reacts with 
rage and frustration against love, the Youth reacts with agony and 
pain and finally with acceptance. 
October 29, 1 874. 
After <the scene> at Mother's <involving> "either he or 1/' he 
throws 100 rubles to the young girl, stamps his foot, and leaves, be­
cause: he had felt that he was in the right, and had felt serious and 
exalted, while it came out stupid and humiliating. 
[Either at Vasin's or at Dolgushin's.] 
"Under socialism, I lose my property; in a commune I must be 
together with everyone else, but I don't want to be with everyone 
else." 
"Let's forget it, Vasin, let's forget it." 
"Let's forget it..." 
Program (in the first person) [Ii" A SPECIAL STYLE} AND MORE 

Plot Summary 261 
BRIEFLY.] Touchard <?>, Chatsky,l Drouchard <?> has a lackey 
motHer. Lambert and the young Prince, books, daydreams. သ 
cHard's deatH. He cried and cried: Mother. At N. S., high school, in 
the beginning like everyone else, daydreams Lambert, gets involved 
in Touchard's prose. Everything was so mean, I was considered a 
traitor, and I withdrew, and I was having friends. Daydreams, books, 
garden, ray <of light>, life, daydreaming devoured everything. Day­
dreams: robbers, a general, a prophet, a scientist who publishes his 
works in Paris, bow and arrow, Ungern-Shternberg.2 I am not talking 
about religion. I am not talking about women, frou-frou. Two 
ladies. Said it outright. OR the boulevard, with tlie st1:1deRt... Later, 
he once met <a> girl, withdrew into himself even more. For a while, 
the lady whom he had seen step out of her carriage was exciting his 
imagination. They'll all be mine: leader of a band of robbers, etc. 
"But how am I going to get my revenge?" Daydreams about him, 
news about him. Communicating with Mother, a letter. Suddenly, his 
own idea, it wholly captures him-he'd even be a scoundrel. He quits 
studying. The money he got for his name-day gift. An encounter with 
his brother, 25 rubles. <Time> goes by without a word. The last two 
years without a word from his mother, who had been taken abroad, 
then to Luga. Rumors about 300,000. Later, about the marriage of 
the young Prince. The young Prince's story. He knows about his 
preaching Catholicism. In <illegible> Andreev's death. They send 
him a letter. 23. He travels there to find out about the job. He returns, 
his aunt has been there in the meantime, orders to come to Peters­
burg. He decides to go. Andreev's package. On the train-<meeting> 
with the young Prince. They arrive, <the Youth> in a most wretched 
mood as a result of his first clash with reality. He decides to break with 
everybody, to leave everybody, even to go to America. He meets his 
mother, brief and forceful <scene>. "Either he or I." He leaves, etc. 
(At this point, the university student.] 
Versilov: "I've brought 100 rubles, why did I do it? I never give 
anybody a thing." 
The Prutkov woman. "Mother, why won't you come closer?" 
"Oh, I'm afraid I might do something wrong." (N.B. "Forgive me, 
Sir, if I'm guilty before you.") 
1 Chatsky is one of the protagonists of Gribocdov's play Gore ot uma (Woe 
from Wit) (1822-25). 
2 See note 3 of Part II. 

2G2 
His A ttitude toward I Vomen 
He, to Him (in the presence of their family): "Because you are a 
scamp and a scoundrel!" 
Marriage to "that passive creature." "'Vhat's the cause of it?" the 
Youth initially exclaims at N.S.'s, later when he is on the train with 
the Prutkov woman, and finally, at his mother's. During a showdown 
with the Youth, He says: "If you want me to, I'll break <the engage­
ment>. But the cause of it will still remain unclarified.'' 
He goes to Moscow to see N. S. and inquire if that letter might not 
be there. But N. S. won't tell him. Yet he told the Youth. 
brPORTA:"T. Before leaving Moscow. About the fact that Versilov is 
an extraordinary man. Even when he was only 16, when he got those 
letters from his mother, and 15 rubles. 
In connection with the statement of his own idea (general), a tirade 
on indefatigability. 
A letter to her, a preface, "an illegitimate son in the highest de­
gree." ''I'm in the service, I've got my salary." 
"It just so happened that my General had given me a surprise on 
that very day." Three stories by Lambert-the picture and the stu­
dent, his own idea. 
Relics, Catholicism, about his salary and his official duties, about 
the fact that he has never had a woman. His attitude toward women, 
frou-frou, "I hate them, they stir up a lot of dust.'' 
"You are idpliziRg your fath€r, you are dissatisf'ied with sotRethiRg. 
I'm glad that you are talking to me so seriously, as If I were a friend. 
ORe Hntst be FRore serious (I am wary of the Princess.) Entrefilet.3 He 
was a madman. One must be more serious. "I notice that you are 
amusing yourself and -as-H- as if you were reproaching yourself for 
something. You idolize your father, you are dissatisfied with some­
thing." One FRust "Why did you show my father the door? I am not 
staying with you, <I have> my own idea.'' 
[Or "your father" (with tact)] He has broken with everybody, has 
withdrawn <into> Catholicism tlie Princes + Suddenly the Versilov 
woman and "the passive creature" come to see us. [I got up.] [Arrival 
of the Prince.] Salary, Tatiana, about <my> job-I got it. At that 
moment, the Princess, Dolgoruky, a lorgnette. I heard it. 
[Get some witticisms for the General.] 
"Forgive me, my dearest General, it may be that I have to quit 
your service." I said this quite inadvertently because I had seen that 
3 French: "Newspaper item." 

Motives of the First Part 263 
Princess (and it is \dth this day that I am beginning my notes). But 
this is how it was. Finished, I must break <with him>. :\Iy weakness 
for this man was quite inexcusable. I thought of writing a letter, 
otherwise it wouldn't have worked out, <but would have been 
turned> into a joke, or into irony. I am much more serious than I am 
<sic>. 
An auction. To Vitia-about Kraft. Dolgushin, Vasin, sister, quae 
medicamenta14 conversations, arguments, Lambert. Somebody asks: 
"Prince Dolgoruky?"-taking my measure. ဟot my idea, Vasin-a 
machine, Kraft-Russia, to Kraft. (The latter asks me very urgently 
to come and see him right away.) Opinion about my father-about 
Russia. Three lives. Kraft on the Princess's little stepdaughter. The 
Youth asks the question himself. [Kraft answers politely and readily, 
yet as if it were costing him an effort.] [He tells him how he attended 
that auction.] 
Back home, at home before father is back, "I said that you had 
given 1 1 7 rubles. Forgive me."* (A tender, and the best, scene with 
his mother, with his sister about Vasin.) He is terribly rude. He comes 
home, "we've won <the lawsuit>," money, Tatiana Pavlovna, he is 
rude about yesterday's announcement, today <he is rude?> to the 
Princess, a Catholic (he was dreaming). "You've been chased out 
everywhere, I don't want that job. I bought and resold something 
at an auction.n 
Clothes to the tailor. About Touchard. Two lives. "I hate," he 
has stirred my pity. ''I'd give them a whipping." 
ևIotives of the 1st part. 
Vitia says that Vasin knows <the Youth's> sister. Everybody is 
telling the Youth that he is somber and secretive. The old Prince used 
to say it, also Vitia, the people at Dolgushin's, and He. He says: "It 
looks as if he had something important in mind, two lives, and be­
sides, something else: I've got it, he'd like to become a Rothschild." 
"All right, so I'll be a Rothschild." I stamped my foot and went up­
stairs. "He finds that all these words, and steps, are much too petty, 
relatively speaking, and is actually ashamed of it." The Youth thinks: 
"It annoys me that everything around here is so lacking in serious­
ness, <all> this blague/j and humor. I'd better \\Tite Him a letter. 
• The gender of the verb suggests that this is a woman speaking. 
4 Latin: "What medicine . . .  " See note 36 of Part II. 
5 French: "Joke." 

264 
The Eavesdropping Scene 
Otherwise, if I do it orally, He'll turn it all around, so it will come 
out as nothing serious." 
"You've got your own idea. I'm sure of that, it has something to 
do with buying and selling." "I know, he wants to become a Roth­
schild." I got up and left. I decided to leave, so I sat down to write 
Him a letter. Suddenly He entered my room. A discussion. Rebellion, 
"I don't want to, I want to leave. I would like you to be more serious, 
I have nothing to hide before you." "1\1 on enfaut, your mother," dis­
cussion about Makar Ivanov. "You are still laughing."•-"You are 
more clever than I thought" (here, he'll add something) (on flattery) 
-about Rothschild, in passing, then He left. I was left with the 
thought that it was my last night there. This is what I was thinking: 
"I have a serious idea, and I don't want to sacrifice anything to any­
one." And at this point, to the reader: "This is what that letter had 
to say" (I reread it). "But I must say that this letter had been bother­
ing me for three hours already. I got to thinking, 'Really, they'll take 
over that property, not knowing that. . .' Eh, to hell with it.'' 
Next morning: Things look a bit different, not "to hell with it"; I 
went to see the Prince so He wouldn't think that I had really deserted 
him. But I left early and went to see a lawyer. At the Prince's­
politeness, to Vasin, who wasn't home-next door, "I've delivered it" 
behind the partition: "I've delivered it." I went to Tatiana Pavlovna's 
place. There, the eavesdropping scene. "You rogue!"-"I couldn't 
come out.'' "Le petit espion."6 I left. "Surely she is referring to the 
letter Kraft was mentioning. To hell with all their intrigues. I'll send 
it over to her right tomorrow, and as for myself, I'll withdraw into 
my shell, where I have spent three years of solitude." 
[Finish it more spectacularly.] 
Returning home I ran into that roomer. She had brought a letter 
and 50 rubles. Threw them to me. She was ashamed to do it in front 
of the family. On account of this, an argument: "It is your fault." 
[Recently, the old Prince had been talking about little girls.] A 
ဠAn abandoned infant. Argument. "You're a rich man." "Take 
one half, and the other half, 40 rubles, for the child. To the orphan­
age." "You are absolutely right: here is a letter for you. Of course, 
you are a rich man, and I am going home as my conscience bids 
me. \Vhat do I care? I am sorry that I have to leave Mother. I'll be 
• Or: "You are laughing all the time." 
o French: "The little spy." 

Summary of Action 265 
seeing you, mamma, but it is either you or I, we are the children of 
Makar Ivanov, so why are you here?" Tatiana Pavlovna jumped up: 
"Yes, I am a swine." 
I went to Vasin's. "Yesterday Kraft shot himself." Vasin's story 
about the young girl and the 50 rubles. Told him everything. Asking 
to stay the night. Telling him all kinds of things, about my day­
dreams, really got going, and still more, and more. "I can see that 
you have pride, and your own idea." "Don't ask what idea." ¥etr 
kRow, VasiR, but then. screams, she has haRged herself t.Rat <girl> 
of ours A tirade about how everything serious came out unserious, 
about character. " 'I am serious about big things and unserious 
about little things.' (Been dreaming for a long time, that's why such 
a character)." Vasin has a few words to say about my sister. The pack­
age. Vasin's prediction that I wouldn't want to run away from <all 
those> Counts and Princes. "You'll want to take your revenge." 
In the morning, screams, she has hanged herself, Father is dumb­
founded, not a word to the Youth. Meets TatiaRa Encounter with 
<my> sister. "Come and apologize." I've coHte "I was on my way. I 
am going to make up with everybody, but I'll get my stuff.'' Returned 
the money. I was sitting at the PriHce's General's when the Prince 
came in; "imagine, c' est si noble,"1 the young Prince. I came home. 
Tatiana Pavlovna: "Why, why? You're a righteous man.'' A scene, a 
confession, I had decided to break <with them>, that's why I am 
saying this. Statement of my idea. About ti=le PriRces I cried, and 
cried. [About the Princess as the misfortune of -HtY- His life]. That's 
an idea! And there I am, tied up with them again. There will be a 
day when I'll be able to prove it-they don't need it, excitement, 
Kraft, and this death. Ahead, ahead, there is still a lot of time ahead. 
I am lacking stability. 
[?Told <Him?> about the scene at Tatiana Pavlovna's, <as I was 
listening> behind the door.] 
Motives of the 1st part. 
Kraft: "Stay around a bit, you are perhaps the last person I'll ever 
see. 
" 
With the Prince, about nakedness, and later, after tke eoulevarcl 
about the foul language used by the punks and by the officers he has 
been with. "This is true! (I) You are my only friend, my dear boy, 
my son!" 
7 French: "It's so noble." 

266 
Order of Events 
During the confession upstairs: "The Prince fears nothing so much 
as to be considered insane. Kraft also used to say that this is why he 
liked his bons mots so much." 
The Prince to him: "You know what, I started in the Guards, and 
I am now, by appointment of the Czar, a Full Privy Councilor." 
"A propos: you are probably going to have children (mais c' est 
charmant)8." 
"You know literature." "I know nothing." 
"I can see many strange things about your childhood, you were so 
lonely. Yes, there are those unhappy children! You aren't angry with 
me for my calling you by your first name?"* 
Initially I had planned to be rude with them, but later < . . .  > I 
was ashamed to ask for money. "Now we're in trouble! \Ve are no 
longer going to have those discussions." 
Order: At first, at the Prince's, about his father, the relics and, after 
a long conversation: an entrefilet9 about his being deranged. And 
then, after a lot more talking, take the money. Entrefilel1 "Tatiana 
Pavlovna has gotten me this job." 
It is necessary <to insert>, as soon as he is leaving with Vasin, or 
so: "\Vhy not the university?"-"Nineteen years old, I have my own 
idea." And at night, with his father, again: "You quit the university 
even though your tuition was being paid, Andreev." 
"You have been living off all those people, and still they all adore 
you. <Like> a Japanese deity." 
The old Prince: "I raised the question in my club: \Vhy is it that 
a soldier is a muzhik gone rotten?" 
\Vith the old Prince. About the lawsuit-"they are going to win 
it." "Is it true that He is in love with your daughter?" "Yes, he has 
been having influence on women," and later: "She is my brother's 
stepdaughter, and take note of this phenomenon: she loves Versilov." 
N .B. She has somehow got involved with Versilov. 
At the old Prince's. About the Princess. "\Vhy did she quarrel 
<with Him>?" "Here, mon cher/0 something happened here-there 
was love ... " 
I (with my eyes flashing): "But I know for certain that nothing of 
• Literally: " . . .  for my saying thou to you?" 
s French: "But this is charming." 
o French: "Newspaper item." 
1o French: "1\Iy dear." 

The Youth and the Princess 267 
the kind ever happened, and that she has been the cause of all his 
suffering!" 
"How do you know?" 
"And so, my dear, I beg you to leave this. [There are certain limits, 
don't take it as if I were lecturing to you, but don't get angry with 
an old man.] You are on his side. I have noticed that he fascinates you. 
Yes, yes, he fascinates me also, I'll admit that," etc. 
["I noticed this trait about the Prince, that he liked <to talk> 
about girls."] 
General. 
In the 1st part the Youth is stunned by and interested m the 
Princess (and show it in the 1st part), and it isn't an accident either, 
but rather, he was so inclined even in Moscow, in a preparatory way} 
as it were. Besides, WOl\IAN. This feeling for her as a woman is to be 
expressed in an unnatural and excessive hastiness with which he turns 
hostile toward her from the very first step. Further along in the novel, 
let him insult her, which insult he takes for an insult to himself, 
during a drinking bout, still during his happy period; <then,> pre­
cisely when he is about to break with his father, let him clash with 
the Princess (and the Princess, also, on account of the letter). She has 
lost her shawl, he takes it, kissing her tracks, he wins 800 rubles, brings 
home the gold, lies down-passion. He wakes up in the middle of the 
night, furious at himself, and on the very next day finds a pretext to 
insult the Princess stupidly and rudely. (In a letter?)* He even has 
a clash with his father on account of that. Later, during those un­
happy days of his carousing, it is already the Princess who insults him 
-terribly, boundlessly, crushingly. Dreams of revenge (Lambert), 
arson, dreams in different forms, endless dreams that last for several 
days (N .B. he thus remains true to his principal character trait, that 
of a dreamer), finally, even to kill her in the end, with <his> revolver. 
(N.B. The revolver is taken away from him on the spot by Him, who 
then fires at her also, when their plot is carried out.) (N.B. N.B. About 
shooting a woman who keeps being recalcitrant, Suvorin's feuilleton, 
November 3, No. 303). 
Motives of part one. 
The Youth, at his father's: "I know that the old Prince may, in one 
of his foolish moods, decide to get married, and that everybody is 
afraid of that, which is why they are carrying on these intrigues." 
• Or: "Through that letter?" 

268 Kraft 
The Youth: "I admit, I was scared and sitting there, cowering. It 
didn't seem so terrible to me. I've got my own idea-l just want to be 
left alone. Society-! want to quit society, I want to use everything 
and quit. I'll be paying enough, and that's it. [Gentlemen, it takes a 
long time to present a serious idea. I do not see the slightest reason 
why I should do anything for others.]" 
! Most valuable. The suicide's mother, telling about Versilov's 
visit, says "She said that she took it because Versilov didn't smile even 
once and was terribly serious, even cool." And later, Versilov to the 
Youth: "It seems to me that I was laughing and looked frivolous, 
which later affected and irritated her." 
Even more valuable. At the old Prince's. "\Vhen the Princess ap­
peared I grew pale and wanted to leave without a word of explana­
tion. Later, leaving the auction, I saw a lady and recalled the impres­
sion left on me by the Princess. And later that night, at Kraft's, again 
about the Princess, and then, while going home: "The devil take you 
all! <Back> into <my> shell!" 
The old Prince owns a huge male cat. "My friend, j'aime le bon 
dieu"11 (and he begins to cry). This is already on the next day, or 
after the news of the Princess's arrival. 
The old Prince liked to arrange matches for young girls; all his 
life he had been marrying them off. 
N .B. Make it so that Kraft, as he is talking to the Youth, would look 
like a man preparing for suicide. 
He said: "This is semi-idea, half-education, half-life, half-health, 
half-knowledge." 
Vasin says that he has read Kraft's manuscript. 
The Youth to the old Prince: "But why is he living with our 
family? Our name is Dolgoruky." 
The Prince asks about his sister. 
MosT IMPORTANT GENERAL NOTE. 
This whole thing is a story about why I got rid of my idea. Because 
I got carried away by the idea, by a passionate duty to rehabilitate 
Him, being in possession of the document. This, toward the end of 
part one. (As for the feeling, see that torn sheet). And this is why, in 
the first part, he is desperate, and in tears, wanting to break off every­
thing. To be sure, he is defending Him with his eyes flashing, but 
Kraft is pressing him hard with facts, and he returns home as if he 
were intoxicated. 
11 French: "I love the good lord." 

Motives of Part One 269 
Quarrels, but he is blaming himself for those quarrels. To Vasin: 
"\Vhat bothers me most is this: Couldn't it be that I am myself 
guilty, while accusing others?" 
· 
Cynicism and mockery cause the Youth to feel aversion and antag­
onism, especially in connection with His account of Makar Ivanov. 
He breaks <with his father>, but the news of how He has acted 
in connection with the inheritance, and all the rest, win him back and 
attract him again <to his father>, then the confession. 
The final words of part one: "\Vhy, after He had left, after 'and I 
cried, and cried,' did I have this thought: 'Are we completely recon­
ciled? \Vasn't he acting a role?' and, secondly, 'Probably it was just 
regret on my part, regret about having revealed my idea to him.' And 
then, these words: 'Rehabilitate Him through the document.' These 
words: 'The whole story is nothing but an account of how,' " etc. 
Motives of part one. 
The Youth is at Dolgushin's. "And then, I pay enough to society 
မin the form of money and taxes for seeing to it that I won't be 
robbed, or beaten up, or killed, though I want you to note this: 
Society is taking money from me for this, and a lot of money, too, yet 
it doesn't guarantee my [absolute] safety at all; it just protects me as 
best it can. But inasmuch as there is no other order which would 
allow me to live in safety, nor can there be, I am in favor of the 
seciety state, i.e., of society, but this is all the state can expect of me, 
and not that I go running around embracing everybody, feeling 
neighborly love and being consumed by tears of tender emotion. ;\ o, 
just leave me alone; it's enough I'm paying my money. [You've been 
talking of the mankind of the future; what good is it to me?] [and 
probably stupidity] I had said this nervously and angrily, [but I] I 
had been silent for three years already, after having come up with 
this thought, and I had never expressed it to anybody before, which 
is why I uttered it so angrily, expecting to be contradicted and fearing 
to be refuted by my audience.'' 
Through the entire novel, develop the notion that the Youth, 
though emotionally involved in all of these events, isn't seriously af­
fected by them, but just temporarily, just so. He keeps repeating that 
after every event which leaves him with another failure, or deeply 
entangled. Even in his preface he says: "Let me note that I came to 
Petersburg a year ago (this is the time at which I begin my notes) 
while already in possession of my own idea; and that, even if I did 
take part in the life into which I had been [suddenly] thrown aRe al 
tegetRe£ after having emerged from my shell, in which I had been liv-

270 Passionate Excitement of Love 
ing practically since my childhood, and if I was an active participant 
in all of the events which I am describing in these notes, I was never 
serious about it and \\·as doing it 'just so.' I was considering myself a 
temporary newcomer who due to certain circumstances could not 
immediately sever his connections entirely, or escape [from them] 
altogether. The idea was in my mind, and I was awaiting the time 
when I could turn everything over to someone else, and leave. This 
impression, which continually accompanied every step of mine dur­
ing all of last year, was in all probability the cause of many of my 
imprudent actions; it was certainly the cause of the nasty things, and 
most likely of the stupidities which I committed in the course of that 
one year. However, even though I am willing to admit that this was 
indeed so, I do not feel obliged to either answer or repent it before 
anyone save myself." 
Then, after part one, he is His devoted slave (the feeling on that 
torn sheet). 
He challenges the young Prince to a duel, but, having learned 
about His challenge and the Prince's refusal to meet it, forgives 
the young Prince (he and the young Prince have become friends by 
accident). 
Then, "that passive creature": the Youth flushes, but He says to 
him: "If you don't want me to, I shan't marry her.'' As a result of 
which the Youth actually encourages Him. 
Then, throughout the novel, the passionate excitement of love. He 
follows His every step, His meeting with her, etc., demands an expla­
nation, is infinitely sad because He, though boundlessly sincere, still 
seems to be lying and making fun of him.* 
Profound, pure sadness and despair. This feeling is actually one of 
the reasons why he becomes involved in the game. Each noble, <or> 
apparently <noble>, step on the part of his father enraptures him, 
and he is singing his praises to everybody (Ήfakar Ivanov, the intro­
ductory episode. The Youth is embarrassed by the fact that his father 
apparently does not understand him at all).** 
Then, after a hellish night, the terrible thought that his father may 
not have been helping him and that he may have actually turned 
his back on him. [Roaming the streets that night, an encounter with 
• Ungrammatical in the original. 
• •  Ambiguous in the original: "him" could be either the Youth or :\fakar 
Ivanov or the episode. 

Raise Tone to a Tragic Level 27 1 
a whore.] Liza. Then, a desire to take revenge and to break <with 
him>. Satanic despair at the realization that his father is corrupting 
him, that he has apparently gotten wind of the document, and is 
pushing him into committing a crime. 
The crime. Arson, but he can't stand it and in utter despair goes to 
see his father. And suddenly, the latter: "Forgive, return <the letter> 
proudly." "You are saving me!" the Youth shouts. 
[Lofty and electrifying words about socialism, about Christ, and 
immediately thereafter, about the fact that these are only ideals, and 
that one ought to despise people. "And I'm starting right with my 
own person."] Denouement. 
Liza's death. He and her mother are at his side) as he has gone out of 
his mind. "I am thinking about my idea *lea." 
The last chapter presents the theory of the entire idea. 
Motives of the 1st part. 
The old Prince tells the Youth this about Him: "He is after little 
girls all the time, unfledged young girls.* There's one instance I 
know about him, in which ... " 
N.B! In order to elevate the tone of the Youth's worrying and 
suffering as he is following His every move with deep emotion, tor­
tured by His very person, it is absolutely necessary to also raise to a 
more tragic level the very tone of the events and accusations weighing 
upon Him on the part of society. Many legends and Catholicism are 
being charged to Him; but it is necessm·y: to also elevate the person 
of the Princess. Make her proud and fantastic, too.* *  The legend, of 
which the Youth is already aware, is that He has done something base, 
-H=em- as a result of which society has renounced Him, so that he has 
been forced to live in seclusion. Another segment of society (Tatiana 
Pavlovna) is for Him. 
There was the following legend: Abroad, there were living the 
Princess and her late husband, a washed-up General who had gam­
bled away her fortune and was feeling guilty before his wife on 
account of that. He <Versilov>, too, was then living abroad, being a 
friend of the family and having an extraordinary influence on the 
General. He was trying to insinuate to the General that the Princess 
had become involved with the young Prince, who was there also, but 
• I am translating devochka once with "little girl," and once with "young girl," 
since it could mean both and is ambiguous here. 
• •  The whole paragraph is quite awkward in the originaL 

2i2 
The Stepdaughter 
that it was not, however, a serious affair and that, much rather, they 
had some secret between them. But what is most important, He had 
an extraordinary influence on the General's 1 6-year old daughter, 
the Princess's stepdaughter. The legend has it that this stepdaughter 
apparently fell in love with Him. Then, the Princess, being opposed 
<to this match>, raised a fuss over it, trying to prevent this marriage 
by strongly advising both the General and her stepdaughter against 
it. Then, He made the stepdaughter believe (and what he said to her 
also reached the General's ears) that the Princess was a i\lessalina, 
that she was in love with Him, and that the Prince was merely a 
dummy who, little fool that he was, would take her coquetry for 
actual encouragement. The stepdaughter became very excited, 
wanted to drown herself, got jealous, charging that, on the contrary, 
He was in love with the Princess, and that the whole thing was merely 
a clash between two strong characters, la hairze dans l'amour/2 where­
upon she fell ill and died of a brain fever. 
[Now, i\laria lvanovna had told the Youth quite a different story, 
i.e., that the Princess actually had been in love with him and that she 
was taking her revenge on him for having been scorned.] 
The General, unhappy and ill, who had adored the stepdaughter, 
couldn't bear her loss, nor his wife's infidelity (in which he did not 
believe)*, fled, and also died. [A motive for part one.] Whereupon He 
started to embroil the Princess with her father and with the Prince. 
This whole story became public knowledge and besides, suddenly, the 
Prince slapped His face (abroad). He did not challenge him to a duel. 
Everybody turned his back on Him. His affairs went into a decline, 
etc., etc. 
\Vhen the Youth arrived he, too, had heard this legend; it is also 
explained to him by Kraft, by the old Prince, by Tatiana Pavlovna, 
and by [the young Prince] (all in part one). 
And suddenly dies. Fifty rubles. Thereafter, later, "that passive 
creature," etc. All this is having a continuous effect on the Youth; 
however, the Princess, too, has a shattering impact upon his curiosity. 
Already when en route from i\loscow he had been thinking of her, 
thinking of her for a long time. However, she becomes an enemy of 
his in the course of the novel. It is also against her that the Youth 
directs his ultimate scheme, thus realizing his ultimate revenge on 
society. 
• Ambiguous in the original. Could also mean: "whom he did not believe." 
12 French: "Hate in love." 

Of Fundamental Importance 273 
This is why the search for the Princess's letter to Andreev, i.e., pos­
session of this letter, has such a shattering impact on the Youth. 
Having left <the family room:> at the end of part one, and gone 
upstairs} just before his father comes to his room and prior to his 
confession, the Youth reads the letter: "\Veil, well, we shall see!" He 
is deeply shaken by the content of the letter, for he sees that the 
Princess is in his hands and that he is .J:H.s. <her> master. In the mean­
time, he had already decided to quit everything and withdraw into 
his shell. He had actually been thinking of giving the letter to Him, 
and so to put an end to it all; but there He comes in, the confession be­
gins, and when He has left (having told the Youth about the Princess), 
the Youth is overcome by mixed emotions: he has revealed his idea; he 
has revealed the secret of his love for Him; he has postponed his 
withdrawal into his shell and, "still, I didn't give Him that letter! 
Can it be that I'm involved with them already?" He falls asleep with 
mixed emotions. 
[He read it at Vasin's on the next day, as he was waiting, and over­
heard <a conversation> behind the wall.] 
[D. February.] After Makar Ivanov's death, the Youth says: 
" ... I 
haven't as yet organized my thoughts and, regarding many things, I 
am still at a loss for a set opinion. I have left many facts pending; 
right now I'll just put them down and remember them, and only later 
on I may, perhaps, learn to judge them. Yet the death of this man, my 
nominal father, left a very strong impression on me, which I shall in 
all sincerity admit." 
OF FUNDAMENTAL IMPORTANCE. Versilov has returned the money­
this has a terrific impact on the Youth, and he decides: "Never, under 
no circumstances, shall I take advantage of the document against the 
Princess. THAT WOULD BE BASE!" Also, Makar Ivanov's influence stops 
him. 
This was right at the height of his gambling spree. A sadness that 
he was gambling, and a desire to win his money back. He didn't even 
go to the funeral. A momentary winning streak. Get to know Versilov 
through this document. But there is one temptation-to simply re­
turn it to the Princess, without telling Versilov, and thus set her mind 
at rest. 
However, the Princess goes on to insult him, Liza. Night-a temp­
tation to take revenge! Take an honest revenge and then withdraw 
into his shell. But Versilov corrupts him by pointing out to him that 
these people aren't deserving of any such good deeds ("\Vhy then, are 
you doing them?"), and then Lambert turns up. 

274 The Letter 
VERSILOV TO THE YOUTH: "I am the same as )'OU, I am the image of 
you." (Except for his generosity, for it is only pride and a senseless 
desire to be first.) 
THE PR!;\;CE, ABOUT TO :\lARRY THE VERSlLOV \\'0:\IA:-;-, intends to 
make an allotment for his daughter. And this then, would be the 
fateful moment at which the document would have to be presented. 
November 2. 
The Youth is hiding the old Prince at his flat, after he has fled 
there, crazed with fear: "Alan cher, she wants to have me declared 
insane; she wants to have me certified." This develops into a scandal, 
new relations with the Princess for the Youth, and A cHA:-;-GE 1:-;- THE 
PLOT OF THE NOVEL. 
:\Iotives of part one. 
The father's official record. 
During the confession, and if possible even earlier, Versilov is 
surprised that the Youth is so excited about the Princess and speaks of 
her with such hyperbolic ardor. 
Again, this problem-how to account for the possession of the 
Princess's letter in part one? 
Couldn't it be accounted for in the following way: The letter isn't 
even mentioned in part one, and Kraft hands over only a document 
pertaining to the lawsuit and some other worthless papers. However, 
he does mention that such a letter of hers exists, that she is looking 
for it and actually went to Moscow on account of it. 
"So she did go to Moscow?" the Youth asks eagerly, etc. 
Then, in his confession, he tells his father about the letter. After 
the confession, the Youth says these final words: "I had that letter, 
sewn into my jacket. I got it from N. S." 
To his sister Liza, on the first night: "You were mentioned three 
times today: by the old Prince, by the Princess, and by Vasin." -a-R4-
tR@ Priac€ 
The Youth to Kraft, before leaving: on humaneness, wittily. 
"I would only like to love one person, no matter whom, and 
enough." "\Vhy, you do love!" -Hiflt.I didn't follow it up. Kraft didn't 
finish his phrase, politeness. \Vith Kraft, on nobility. A booklet 
of <?>.• 
\Vhen he learns from the old Prince that He has returned the 
• St. Knizhku. The abbreviation "St." could stand for a number of different 
things. 

Character of the Princess 275 
money and c'est si noble < . . .  >13 He starts the chapter without saying 
that he was depressed: "I had decided to break <with my father> 
anyway. I entered the flat," etc. 
After the confession, when the Youth tells Him about the scene 
behind the door at Tatiana Pavlovna's (about the letter), He says, 
having listened with rapt attention: "My friend, you are charging me 
with frivolity, cynicism, and frankness. Do you want me to show you 
how absolutely frank I am with you: tell me, why are you taking such 
an interest in the Princess?" (too much, that is). 
Bring .out the fact that the Youth is an enemy of socialism. He was 
aware of their ideas; "and though I said those things at Dergachev's 
mereယy in order to shine with my wit, I did know it from hearsay, as 
well as froq1 my discussions with Nikolai Semenovich." 
The character of the Princess ought to be set forth more simply, 
<in a> better <light> (a woman after the straightforward Russian 
fashion, that's why she could never get together with Versilov). It is 
necessary that the Youth get to know her from this brighter and more 
just point of view, and fall to thinking about it. He also must have 
several clashes with her, in the course of the novel, one of these being 
a major one. Prince S. also imagines that she is in love with him, and 
he actually chats about it with the Youth (but even this is not true). 
He once sends the Youth to her on an errand, yet all of the clashes 
between the Youth and the Princess are in his disfavor, and merely 
upset him and irritate him, as he gets to thinking that she is looking 
down on him with disdain. La haine dans l"amour.14 Invent some 
special details for these scenes in which the Youth clashes with the 
Princess. 
Motives of part one: 
During his confession the Youth asks Him if He believes in God? 
[See] Vasin says to the Youth: "I have heard of Him. He is a man 
who may make tremendous demands on himself, yet be accountable 
to no one," etc. "What about Catholicism?" I've got "I (i.e., Vasin) 
have got information to the effect that he actually is a Catholic, and 
a devout one. Yet it is unlikely that he believes in God." 
Vasin: "This is a very proud man. You know, very proud. People 
like to believe in God, especially people who have great contempt for 
mankind. It is something of a need to bow before someone, yet... 
13 French: "It is so noble." 
14 French: "Hate in love." 

276 His Exclusion from Society 
These people ရ are deceiving themselves and [in reality] they 
don't believe at all." 
"\Vhat a clever man you are, Vasin!" 
Important. The moment the Princess shows up: "So there she is! 
..J. about whom I've been thinking for a full year, even when still in 
Moscow." 
The old Prince about "that passive creature": "She, [that girl], is 
not very ... brilliantly endowed with qualities of the intellect, though 
she is an extraordinarily -fHte. kindhearted girl." 
The old Prince has the habit of saying about everybody: "Well, he 
is no genius." About Versilov: "A very witty man, but that wit of his, 
is it quite regular?" At this point the Youth immediately <inserts a 
remark> on the Prince's derangement. 
Occasionally the Youth <tells> about himself, about his secluded 
life while in high school, i.e., about details of his surroundings, for of 
course he could not withdraw from everything at once. 
He leaves the auction and decides: "Enough of this for the time 
being." 
The Youth makes a remark concerning the old Prince's wit. Later 
that night, at home, Versilov observes, regarding "those little girls": 
"After his illness he has grown very fond of bans mots, and keeps 
saying that other people are fools." The Youth: "Yes, today he said 
that your wit is 'an irregular wit.' " 
Having learned that the letter concerning the inheritance was pro­
duced by the Youth, the Princess falls to thinking: "i\laybe he's got 
the document, too?" (Maria Ivanovna.) 
Part one. In the first part, specify more exactly the nature of His 
exclusion from society. V/i:tat. \Vhat were the actual reasons? \Vhat 
did he actually lose? His official record. (A stockholders' meeting.) 
In the meantime, the Daughter is with the old Prince. The Daugh­
ter has heard that the Youth has got the document. She is making up 
to the Youth. But he refuses to talk. i\lakar Ivanov. Meanwhile the 
Prince is not too attracted by the Princess. The younger Prince goes 
on a drinking spree. 
[And really, in the end everybody is convinced that He is blindly 
in love with the Princess. It is the Youth who convinces them of this, 
while He remains proudly and contemptuously silent.] 
There is no young Prince. 
November 2-3, at night. 
LAST TRA;";SFOR::\IATI0:'\1. Fabula. 
The Lawyer had actually told the truth when he said that the 

The Prince and the Youth 277 
Prince had met his family in Luga. The Prince had returned to 
Petersburg shortly before the Princess. At the moment when he re­
ceives the money, he asks Him this question: "Weren't you the Prin­
cess's lover I Y2 <years> ago?" And the other man almost answers 
"Yes." The Prince tells Him that he is lying. He calls him out. The 
challenge is, however, quickly retracted. The Prince believes <Him>. 
Here, this psychological angle: the Prince was almost looking for a 
pretext to break with the Princess, for he had again met Liza, whom 
he had spared in Luga, and <now> again. [It was He who issued the 
challenge, the Prince was very glad to reject the challenge, on account 
of the fact that He is Liza's father.] He finds occasion to make friends 
with the Youth, introduces him in society. The Youth yields to his 
influence, drinking bouts and honor. Meanwhile He has moved in 
with <his> children (after having become engaged), and the Youth 
has joined his family. Here, arrival of Makar Ivanovich, and his death. 
Yet the Prince finds occasion to see her: at the family home as well as 
at the Youth's. Finally, she agrees to a rendezvous with him. He had 
approached the subject of Liza several times in conversation with 
the Youth, and had gathered from the latter's words that he was 
ready to sell <his sister> and to further his designs. But the Youth, 
though he did have a notion, still didn't quite understand what was 
going on. At that time, he was befogged by his drinking, and by his 
pride, continually put on edge and continually insulted, and also 
by the insults of the Princess who was taking him for a pandering 
brother. Meanwhile the Princess insults Liza. The Youth is gambling 
at the time. He is suffering from the awareness that he has betrayed 
his idea and is making money the wrong way. He is losing, takes some 
money from the Prince, who actually encourages him with a sneer: 
"Take it, take it, that's the only way to get your money back. You'll 
pay it back later and, besides, have some capital on which to withdraw 
from society." (The Youth's favorite dream is about that bootblack 
who later becomes a Lord, etc.) The Prince even suggests to him that 
the money is really his, the Youth's, for it was he who presented the 
document. The Youth can clearly see where the error and the false­
hood lie, yet he persists, as the game has gotten the better of him. In 
the meantime he is being rude with the Prince, and also with <some 
other?> gentlemen. He loses altogether nearly 80,000, and the Prince 
finally asks him to quit. He walks out into the fresh air, his head 
burning: to America, or kill himself. He returns, and suddenly some 
money has disappeared from the gaming tahle. He is under suspicion, 
he hits somebody, and is hit back. He is ejected. Night. Vasin has 

278 Boundless Pride 
been arrested. Lambert. Turned down at the old Prince's. The Prin­
cess is triumphant. Yet He shows complete indifference. Previously, 
he used to go and see Him, when he was on his drinking spree, when 
i\Iakar was there, and when he was having <trouble?> with the 
Princess. Both the Prit1ce and his father have been gathering informa­
tion concerning the Princess from him. The Prince kicks him out. A 
duel, but where is the money? etc. "You've been pandering your sister 
for me." The Youth is indignant. Ίleanwhile the Prince himself has 
left Liza and in the meantime received once again from the Youth 
(in some way) a firm statement to the effect that He is lying and that 
She was not with his father.* 
In the meantime, "that passive creature" has turned <Him> down, 
which proves that she is pas si bete,l5 while He has had a rendezvous 
with the Princess and has proposed marriage to her. Then, he tells 
the old Prince that she wanted to place him in an insane asylum. He 
asks for a proof. He writes a letter in which he says that everything he 
had said was a lie, and he also writes to the Prince that what he had 
said about <their> affair was a lie also. "That passive creature" turns 
him down. He moves in with the family, quarrels with the children, 
especially with <his> daughter. <Then,> he proposes marriage to 
<Makar's> wife, chops up those icons. He had told the Youth that 
the Princess was forever in love with him. Boundless pride. But that 
very night the Youth meets Lambert. Lambert is pushing him to 
extort some money and flee. The Youth-put the document to work. 
Conflagration. Set fire. Gain possession (for it would be a terrible 
thing for the Princess to lose the Prince's favor at this time). He, how­
ever, suspecting that the Youth may have the document, has been 
telling him a I ,000 times that she'd submit to him** immediately, and 
actually <had repeated this> the night before. The Youth comes, all 
consumed with passion, • * * and calls Him makes a confession to Him. 
He implores him to be generous and return the document, to remain 
proud without having said a word. She doesn't want to be saved; let 
her perish and be happy as before. And suddenly, in a frenzy. But 
Liza perishes. 
Break down the plot into individual parts and collate it with this 
• Unclear and not quite grammatical in the original. 
• • The Russian expression is vulgar. 
• •• Literally, "on fire." 
15 French: "Not so foolish." 

Liza 279 
plan. N .B. Think up some mysterious, yet striking action for Him, 
committed during the Youth's drinking spree, which is also the 
time when he is courting "that passive creature." That action must 
be connected with the Princess. That action must stun the Youth and 
make him think, and (2) all the time the Youth is on his drinking 
spree and in a frenzy, not knowing at all what he is doing, he must be 
watching his father passionately and excitedly, get reconciled to him, 
despair <of him>, live in <with> his character and his perturbations. 
For his father has captured his imagination once and forever. Mean­
while He is exploiting the Youth, but when the latter has lost all that 
money gambling, he suddenly begins to preach to him, partly with 
a wry smile, which always leaves a deep impression on the Youth, 
his theory of proud solitude, mentioning that people are mice, etc.,* 
and again scores a strong emotional effect on the Youth. He mentions 
the girl who hanged herself, saying: "There you have another case 
of my intervention. I wanted to save the Princess, too. Now I want to 
make her happy." 
Liza won't submit to the Prince, begging him not to do it, because 
it would be blamed on her mother. A simple Russian girl of inexpres­
sible loftiness. There is this particularly spectacular moment when 
she raises her arms and falls down before him, surrendering herself to 
him with a smile on her face, and when the Prince (certainly no ideal) 
acts like a hero, stepping away from her. The Prince i-s in a frenzy, 
thinking: "I haven't the strength to marry this perfection for the sole 
reason that she is a nobody by birth." He proposes to her. Liza says: 
"How could that be possible?" After Liza's death he breaks with the 
Princess. The Prince, when conversing with the Youth and with 
Vasin, likes to bring up certain independent and nihilistic ideas. 
Maybe Liza comes running to Vasin. 
An important and decisive N.B. If the novel is to be written in the 
first person) the Youth must describe all the scenes between Liza and 
the Prince as if this were a third person narrative: "Liza came, Liza 
left," etc. "She stretched out her hands," and then add: "I knew noth­
ing about it at the time." ّ.B. Later, he could have heard about it 
from the despairing Prince, after it is all over. 
Do not explain what is going on in his mind when he chops up 
the icons, or <when he challenges the Prince to a> duel. 
• As far as I can see, this is not an idiom. Therefore, a literal translation seems 
to be in order. 

280 His Lack of Love 
?Question: couldn't there be a third boy? One must create one. 
Early in the lst part, when the Youth hasn't gotten to be close to 
Him as yet, but is about to become close to Him, <there is a scene> 
where they are joking with each other and the Youth suddenly stops 
and says: "I don't want any jokes!" He was hesitating whether he 
shouldn't quit everything and leave, and was finding Him unworthy. 
His capricious behavior would amaze him time and again. But some­
times, when walking along the boulevard, he would say: "I was feel­
ing that I could not live without Him, I was full of spite, I was acting 
like a woman in love." And through the whole course of the novel the 
Youth is tormented by His reserve, His pride, His secretiveness, and 
His inh11manity, His lack of love for people, and for him. The Youth, 
on one occasion, defines His feelings for himself thus: He may, in a 
fit of remorse, wish to love aRa tmvara this him and is straining all his 
powers toward this, but he can't, for he is an egoist and a proud man, 
who loves no one. At the same time it is quite possible that he imag­
ines that He has already done a lot and that he has fulfilled his duty, 
having made some effort to conquer his own nature and force himself 
to be more attentive and more tender toward the Youth. \Vhat is 
going on between Him and the Princess is not passion, but a duel of 
pride. Yes, the Princess is that kind of a person herself. 
Tone! [Tone!] 
[tomorrow] Think over and overcome the difficulty connected with 
the circumstance that the Youth, being in possession of the document, 
must feel that he is the master of the Princess's fate. He was exploring 
the situation and waiting for an opportune moment to give the docu­
ment to his father, or should he give it to him?• Having it in his 
hands, he was satisfied just to be holding her fate in his hands. AT 
NIGHT he would know that he could ruin her, and he would find 
solace in the fact that he wasn't doing it, this being a feat of his 
unbeknown to anyone. He spent several nights roaming the streets in 
this fashion, finally confessed to his father. But then, temptation, and 
even lust for the woman. Set fire. (Despair about Liza, taking revenge 
on the Prince). 
A reference sheet. 
The Youth. Kraft has got the documents. 
"Thank you, Kraft. I like you for being a polite person." 
"Oh yes?" 
• Not quite grammatical in the original. 

Kraft Shoots Himself 28 1 
"If I were in your place, having this kind of Russia in my mind, I'd 
send everybody to the devil: beat it, carry on your intrigues, keep 
wrangling, or beslobbering each other as you wish, but leave me 
alone!" 
"You've met so few polite people. I have, for a long time-" 
"No, it is because I know how to be polite myself, on occasion, and 
this is why I like polite people. Good-bye, Kraft, may God give you to 
live to 90, rather than shooting yourself on account of such nonsense." 
"If I had three lives, I'd be vary happy to shoot myself three times, 
if only you would be able to prove to me, with mathematical cer­
tainty, that my sadness is all nonsense." 
"I can't prove a thing, I merely know that you can give me three 
lives to live, and it still won't be enough for me; I want to live so 
much.'" 
"And so much material." 
"An awful lot of material.'' 
"Your own idea." 
"That's right, my own idea.'' 
"You know what, I don't regret that I don't know what it is, for I 
don't believe in it. Au revoir-may it be a happy one.'' 
Kraft has shot himself. 
"It can't be true! You know what, I must have been thinking myself 
that he was going to shoot himself; I've been dreaming about it all 
night!" 
[The father of the family, suddenly: "He'll live two lives.]" 
[The Lawyer: "The Prince used to know your family in Luga. This 
is irrelevant to our case.] 
Points. Look into the documents, hide them at Vasin's. The Prince 
continues as before. His sister stuns him. Suddenly, the strange news 
that He is marrying the Stepdaughter. Makar Ivanovich, a frank talk 
about Liza, the younger Prince. 
The old Prince: "She is a stepdaughter of my late brother's de­
ceased wife, and I am responsible for her. She owns a fortune." 
As soon as He fouAd it considered <it opportune>, he moved in 
with his children, having gotten reconciled to them, and "that passive 
creature" comes visiting in order to get acquainted with his devout 
family. 
A reference sheet. 
Points. The Youth is being exploited. PoiAts. He gets his salary. 
The auction. He goes to see Vitia, the Dolgushins, and Vasin, comes 
home late. At home, a quarrel and <the day> ends upstairs with the 

282 
The Document 
conversation about i\lakar. On the following day, at Kraft's. He gets 
the documents. Meanwhile, the news about the lawsuit. 500 rubles. 
But the Youth has got that document. At home, scenes again. -+-fte. 
Youth His sister. The Princess arrives. The Youth goes to see a 
lawyer. The Prince. A meeting. A quarrel about the Princess. The 
Prince, condescendingly. [The Princess is at the aunt's, and some­
thing about Liza.] The Youth comes. A quarrel at home. "I don't 
want that job anymore." Tells Him off about everything, wants to 
make Him leave, "either He or 1." He takes the little boy away with 
him, shows Him the document. At Vasin's. Death of the young girl, 
caused by Him. The YoutA. sA.ows Wi1H tl'le aonH@Rt. The Youth 
suddenly finds out that He has returned the document. The young 
girl's death is explained. CoRfessioR Reconciliation and the Youth's 
confession before Him. His own idea. He tells him about the Princess. 
"They are all depraved." He appears before him as an ideal. "\Vhy 
aren't you rich? why are you weak?" The old Prince. [He1 to the 
Youth in the course of the confession: "You are everybody's equal."] 
[Kraft has shot himself.] 
N .B. He is in the old Prince's service since his very arrival. He had 
gotten the job through the influence of Tatiana Pavlovna, a person 
highly respected by the whole family. The old Prince is not conceal­
ing from him the circumstance that he is afraid of the Princess's ar­
rival, on account of having hired him. The Princess arrives and calls 
him le petit espion.16 A quarrel with the Princess. Later, at Tatiana 
Pavlovna's, he learns that the Princess is afraid of that letter. The 
Youth, having received the money, comes home (for the first time) 
and says that he is quitting his job, and that he is going to look for a 
<different> job. But when le petit espion <is brought up>. he makes 
a scene at home, too, insisting that his father leave the house. But 
after they have made up again he tells Him that the Princess is afraid 
of that document. 
[He has hidden the documents at Vasin's.] 
An exception <?> \Vith the Youth about women and the fact that 
they are all depraved. "Yes, yes! All." And the Youth, excitedly at 
night, in a hell <of conflicting emotions>, recalling that it isn't she 
whom he is about to ruin, is true to himself since his very childhood, 
1 6 French: "The little spy." 

No Christian Love 
283 
when he was suffering those beatings at Touchard's hands and with­
drew into himself.* 
Right from the l st part, a passionate attitude on the part of the 
Youth toward this creature. The latter, on the other hand, proud man 
and formidable reader of the human heart that he is, satisfied with 
his own pride in silence and without glory} and <feeling> that people 
are all mice, has understood from the very first moment that the 
Youth is in love with Him, accepts this as his due} and is merely 
playing his condescending game with -Him- him. He also tells him 
during his confession that He has been reading his feelings for a long 
time, but has remained silent, just studying him. There was one 
trait about this proud man (and a proud man he really was), how­
ever, which terribly impressed the Youth: that He was a great master 
of flattery, and that he dearly loved to flatter people. \Vhen he told. 
Him about it, He said: "One must handle them, without respecting 
them (like mice)." Christian love is beyond his understanding. 
The time of the Youth's drinking spree coincides with the time of 
the Youth's disenchantment with Him (because he is about to marry 
"that passive creature," because he is beginning to suspect <that He 
is> lying to the Princess). Also Makar, etc., enter the picture. An 
extremely egoistic attitude on his part toward the hellish situation 
the Youth finds himself in. And all in all, the whole novel is a poem 
of the Youth's love for Him. 
N.B. ·what is needed is another character who is as strong as the 
Princess. (There is Liza.) 
Perhaps the Princess does not love the Prince, but likewise because 
of her pride wants to dare him not to love her. In the finale she may 
admit this before the Youth. 
The old Prince has a dream and dies quickly. 
Shouldn't Lambert be introduced in connection with the old 
Prince; at [Mme] Andrieux's it was He who frightened the old 
Prince. 
About how Chernyshev,I' a Minister of the Czar, was eternally 
young, how did he do it? 
About how, at the wedding, a certain Notary hadn't ever heard 
• Ungrammatical and unclear in the original. 
17 Aleksandr lvanovich Chernyshev (1786-1857) participated in the wars of 
1 805, 1807, and 1812. He was war minister from 1832 to 1852. 

284 The Prince, the Youth, and Liza 
of either Victor Hugo or Dumas, and how one of the writers called 
himself "a proprietor," whereupon the other man began to treat him 
with a good deal of respect. 
In the Senate, he went down on his knees. 
Motives of the 2d part of the program of ϲovember I (in the first 
person). Autant de gagne.1s 
(November 2.] He enters the old Prince's <study>. At the very 
first step he is insulted by both the Princess and the Prince. But sud­
denly the 2d Prince appears ( Le capt if de Luga).19 He is the terror of 
the family, and especially of his older brother, who is poor but trying 
to restore the family honor, and boundlessly proud. The 2d Prince is 
pointedly seeking the Youth's favor. In the beginning debauchery 
stings his pride. He distinguishes himself in the company of high 
society playboys, his success being due to the 2d Prince's efforts. (The 
2d Prince is making up to the Youth because of Liza. But with that 
inheritance, toward which he has succeeded in obtaining some money, 
he has totally fallen for materialism, and that easy Petersburg life, 
from restaurant to restaurant.) His brother is desperate. A disgrace 
to the family. The Princess is also desperate (because the older 
brother is desperate), and they both hate the Youth. Whereupon he 
makes a point of carousing with even more vigor, to make both of 
them angry. 
At this point, perhaps an entrefilet,20 he couldn't go through with 
it and discovered that he was the Princess's master. But not quite. He, 
too, was quick to grasp the situation. N .B. He hardly tries to stop the 
Youth, for he is busy with his own affairs: a challenge to tR.e PriREe 
to the o<lder> Prince, and the Princess. The Princess insults Liza. 
The Youth still doesn't know a thing about Liza, and suddenly finds 
out by himself. He tells the young Prince. The latter promises to 
marry her. Lambert, a forged promissory note. He makes a present of 
it to the Princess. p{eaHwR.ile tR.e PriREe R.as lost all R.is IHORey gaiH 
9liRg aHa creait (He thinks, as a consequence of a stupid letter which 
the Youth has sent him, concerning the fact that he has got the docu­
ment.)* The Princess is indifferent, but has a meeting with the Youth. 
• Ungrammatical and unclear in the original. 
18 French: "So much gained." (The sense is that of being grateful for what one 
has gained even though it is less than one may have wanted. Perhaps "Better than 
nothing.") 
19 French: "The captive of Luga." 
20 French: "Newspaper item." 

The Main Idea 
285 
He restrains himself, she makes fun of him, showing that she isn't 
afraid of anything, and crushes him terribly with her haughtiness. He 
has a desire to get some money quickly, to win some money, some 
money of his own. (About the fact that he has departed from his idea 
a long way.) At this point, arrival of Makar Ivanov, and his death. The 
young Prince has lost all his money gambling and, in his anger, starts 
insulting the Youth, "for costing him so much." The Youth would 
like to have some money of his own, so he could win some. The young 
Prince steals some diamonds. They think that the Youth has done it. 
The Youth gets a beating. An exchange of vituperations between 
him and the Princess. The Youth wants to kill himself. Vasin is 
arrested.-He-But somehow it comes to light that it is the young Prince 
who has stolen the diamonds. (N.B. In the meantime, the Youth's 
relationship with Liza.) At this point, also, the episode when Versi­
lov's daughter wants to marry the old Prince. In one word, when the 
Youth is in trouble, everybody turns his back on him, including Him. 
Encounter with Lambert. Lambert's ideas. The Youth both rejects 
them, and is tempted to start a conflagmtion. • Meanwhile Liza is 
insulted again. After a period of mutual coolness, the Youth again 
gets to be on closer terms with his father. The father proposes mar­
riage; He denounces <the Princess?> to the old Prince. The Youth is 
surprised. Destroy the Princess, and end it all! A meeting. He. Liza's 
death. The young Prince and Lambert kill < . . .  >. The young Prince 
shoots himself. The old Prince dies after his engagement <to Versi· 
lov's daughter?>. The Princess marries her fiance. The mother dies. 
The Youth stands for his own idea. (:\'.B. A scene between the Prin­
cess and Him, in which he charges that she is corrupting the Youth.) 
But the plot must never deviate from the main idea: the Youth's 
urge to start a conflagration, as a perversion of his idea, and his first 
unsuccessful step in life. He is fascinated by his father, and He, in his 
immeasurable pride toward people, is really convinced that they are 
all "mice" (including the Youth, and everybody-they are all but 
the pawns of his desires). And so is also convinced that the Princess 
has been in love with him for three years, while he is merely her 
brother in Christ, and this until his ultimate state of frenzy in the 
plot. His indifference toward Liza, and toward the Youth. 
• Could also be: "and is tempting him to start a conflagration:· Ambiguous in 
the original. 

286 
The Solution 
In autanl de gag11t!.21 The Youth, on the other hand, arrives with 
all those documents, and is crushed by his responsibility. He wants to 
go to America. 
Liza, too, loves the elder Prince, and not the younger. 
He went to see Vitia, he also went to see Versilov. At the auction, 
at Dolgushin's. Again at Versilov's, the young girl and the 100 rubles. 
He goes home. "That passive creature." He hands over the letter and 
the l 00 rubles in the presence of "that passi,·e creature," knowing full 
well that it is a mean thing to do. The ripping of <the little boy's> 
mouth. The quarrel. He takes the child away. At Vasin's. That night, 
she hangs herself. Morning: The mother; He is present at the suicides' 
suicide's <flat>. The Youth rents himself a flat. He goes to pick up his 
belongings. The letter. The Princess, he leaves. He goes home. At 
home, Versilov. He is sad about his sister, and about everybody, to 
America, and suddenly, Versilov. A reconciliation. An agreement. 
Mixed emotions. He is fascinated and depressed by Versilov. The 
Youth tells him everything. He wants to challenge the Prince, with 
whom he had quarreled on the train. He goes to see the Prince, meets 
his sister <there>. He hands over the letter. 
The story of how he can't restrain himself and falls into debauch­
ery. Lambert, besides, about his father. (A task: compose it in a more 
lively way; He discovers that he is the Princess's master.) 
Motives of part one. 
Most important (the solution). 
"My dear, your admission of your innocence has always remained a 
surprise to me." 
The l' outh: "That morning I tried to be particularly gentle to 
him, as I had come with the intention of definitely quitting my job. 
I knew that it would chagrin him. He liked to talk with me about 
frou-frou." 
Most important. "I saw the Princess. Never in my life shall I forget 
that moment. I drank in the features of her face." 
"I almost took that letter for a joke, since I know that people make 
jokes in such cases." 
The Prince: "Cizer, I feel sorry for you." 
Hatred, frou-frou! 
Advice <?>. The story about <the episode on> the boulevard. 
21 French: "So much gained." See note 18 of this section. 

Most Important 287 
"Mais, mon cher,22 you've got a sister." 
["Imagine, my brother's stepdaughter finds him fascinating and 
handsome, I wonder where he may have seen her?"] 
He appeared fidgety to me, as he was awaiting the Princess, his 
daughter, whom he feared. 
I was getting some money from the old Prince since the very be­
ginning, hence then <our> conversation about my family, about him, 
and about the Princess. I was feeliRg th.at I sh.ould better ch.aRge th.e 
swbject 
The relics. "An irregular wit." On the deranged condition of the 
old man. 
On the day I was going to tell him that I was quitting I had planned 
not to stay long, but he was keeping me there. "Cher," he said to me, 
"when the Princess comes, j'aime le bon dieu."23 Change the subject 
-about how Versilov <likes to be> with young girls. "My fault! I 
can't talk to you about that, because you don't like to talk about 
young girls." F<rou>. 
<His?> sister and "that passive creature," the Princess has arrived 
and enters the room. "Good bye, my dear Prince. I'll never come back 
to you." 
He certainly discusses the lawsuit with the old Prince. A N .B. by 
the Youth: "And imagine, I didn't even know that the case was in 
court that very day. This is how talkative he was when it came to 
trivia, and how secretive with regard to things he knew. Everybody 
would have shared his concern. No heart. And, later that night: 'You 
concealed the lawsuit.' " 
MoTivEs oF PART oNE. 
MosT IMPORTANT. During the confession, his father says terribly 
seriously: "My dear friend, I saw <in you>, from the very beginning, 
[a whole month] a creature that had come to love me to the point of 
a· sort of passion, though I don't know for what... [And you were 
thinking that I was laughing at you.] You, my poor boy, dreaming of 
Ungern,24 still at Touchard's or later < . . .  >.'' 
"How do you know?" 
"I went to see Vasin on purpose, to talk to him after you had left, 
and he passed everything on to me th.e scouRdrel. No, he did it, be-
22 French: "But, my dear." 
23 French: "I like the good lord." 
24 See note 3 of Part II. 

288 
Why Do I Love Him? 
cause he had taken a strong liking for you. Don"t worry, he doesn't 
trust me either, and values you more highly." 
The old Prince. "I am there to entertain him, rheumatism and 
what not... Besides, I know that many people have deserted him. 
What with that change in his influence in the line of service, and with 
his illness, many of his friends, well, it isn't exactly that they have 
deserted him, but their attitude toward him has changed, and he has 
been noticing it: they're polite with an ambiguous smile. I wouldn't 
have been able to stand it: I'd have smashed something, told them to 
go to hell, and left. But I'll note the most important thing: his fear 
for his sanity, hypochondria ; this old man might fall seriously ill or 
even die; He- incidentally, this proved to be true, but about that, 
later." 
The old Prince about Versilov: "Cette histoire infdme,25 I don't 
believe it. I never did believe it, but I'm being forced to believe it, 
I'm being pressured: believe me, believe mel" 
The old Prince. He was afraid of the Princess. 
This Lambert, who plays a certain role in his notes in his own 
words. 
The document, does it လ have any importance? It has no impor­
tance, inasmuch as no direct legal application is involved, but it has 
some indirect importance-which might be great, since it might in­
fluence the opinions of the court. 
Motives of part one. 
The first night at home, upstairs, after his first conversation with 
his father, about Makar Ivanovich, etc. 'Vhen he is left alone: 
"'Vhy is this man so dear to me? Why am I forcing my love on him? 
So what if I have been seeing him in my dreams for those past 9 
years? I'll leave them all, and be independent. Yet what about the 
letter concerning the inheritance, which Kraft gave me, what should 
I do with it? Let me solve this last question, and then good-bye! I am 
finding him repulsive! Away with everything! Just my idea, and 
nothing else!" 
At Vasin's. The Youth is complaining about Petersburg, says that 
solitude is much better, <also mentions> his own idea, queer and 
nasty. Vasin says: "The fact that such minor events have caused you 
so much excitement indicates that they are too big for you, and that 
there must be quite a secret here. Secondly, you aren't content with 
25 French: "That base story." 

Important Solution 289 
solitude; on the contrary, you want to be right in the whirl of things, 
though on condition of being on top, having your revenge, and dom­
inating. That idea of yours, which you say can be a substitute for 
everything else, must be very powerful indeed, [if it is to be a substi­
tute for all these passionate impulses of yours."] 
He says the same thing after having heard about the Youth's "own 
idea" during the latter's confession. The difference lies in the circum­
stance that Vasin immediately begins to discuss the matter patheti­
cally, while He has up to this point approached it in a humorous vein. 
"I could understand this very well, my friend," He says, "and I could 
see that you needed the pathetic. How could your ideal behave in 
such a vaudeville-like and insolent manner, refusing to accept your 
love, and your friendly assistance! I could see all those things, but I 
wanted to wait and ... to take a closer look at you." 
After having eavesdropped at Tatiana Pavlovna's place, the Youth 
decides to sever relations and rents himself a room; a conversation 
behind the partition, tragic and terrible, Versilov's name. The 
mother begins to scream and runs out after her, on the stairs, the 
Youth <runs into her>. The mother says: "She is going to drown 
herself." But then, having looked him over attentively, she leaves and 
locks herself up in her room. In the meantime, the girl went to see 
her girl friend, at whose place she wrote a letter to Versilov and a 
note to her mother. The girl, with her letter, and the Youth meet on 
the stairway of Versilov's house. "Let's go in together." 
IMPORTANT SOLUTION OF A PROBLEM. After having seen the lawyer 
(think up something), the Youth gladly agrees to go and see the 
Prince. Most important to find out from him personally what his 
opinion of Versilov might be, and whether or not he had slapped His 
face. He admits that this is true, and the Youth almost challenges him 
to a duel. (The Versilovs have been robbed.) It does not come off. 
And only then, that scene behind the door at Tatiana Pavlovna's and 
all that follows. Already the night before, having gotten that letter 
from Kraft, the Youth knew that he was going to meet the Prince on 
the following day (having met the young Prince on the stairs of the 
old Prince's house recently one morning, he said to himself: he 
didn't know we were going to meet the next day). [Motives for part 
one.] But, having met and challenged him, he becomes even more 
confused about what he is to do: tHTR oveT should he present the 
letter, or shouldn't he? Present it. And if Versilov is going to hand it 
over, it will look like his revenge on the Prince, etc. 
Versilov denied that the Prince was deranged, and so was !-except, 

290 I A m  J\'ow l l 'riting Soberly 
perhaps, for his one strange idea: to remarry after having been a 
widower for such a long time, and incidentally, rather as a joke. 
"For Ivan An--ch has already let me know what he thinks of 
this matter, as a preventi\·e measure, and anticipating the general 
contingency of such an event, [as a preventi\·e measure, and fore­
seeing a certain contingency] and if he were to learn about this letter, 
I'd really get it <from him>, and perhaps something worse than that 
could happen." 
"I cannot lose my happiness. In particular, I am begging you, in 
this widowed state < . . .  >" 
The very first night Versilov asks him about the Stepdaughter 
("that passive creature"), whether he hasn't seen "that passive crea­
ture"? [In the beginning, at the Prince's.] 
I am now writing soberly and rather J3al"ti)' as an outsider. But how 
could I describe my melancholy mood of those days, so firmly en­
trenched in my heart, [which I remember] and most of all my excite­
ment which, at times, would reach so confused and feverish a state 
that I couldn't sleep nights, from so much vexation and so many un­
solved riddles, [from my own impatience at the riddles which I had 
posed for myself.] which then surrounded me and which I was unable 
to solve. I must note that on September 19 I almost decided to break 
with them. [That first month was really doing me in. One thing I 
could not stand was his pride.] "Do what you want, but do it without 
me! Solve your own problems, I won't be in your way." [waiting for 
that person] 
Absolutely, after the first [introductory] words about the Prince, 
<tell> how I used to entertain him, even before that, frou-frou and a 
tirade against women, and only after this: that morning, the money, 
about Versilov, etc. N.B. Some cute sayings for the Prince. 
· 
It (the Prince's marriage) was a threat to his older daughter, the 
Princess. 
"Finally, I have put down this fateful name!" 
Here, a chapter. 
Used to have to pawn that icon, that's why the salary < . . .  > 
About the sadness which I carried with me when I joined the old 
Prince. 
I decided to entertain the old man and to forgive him many a thing. 
I do not think that by making this decision I betrayed my honor in 
any way. 
Catholicism. Heard about it still in Moscow. An idea which I then 
laughed at, not taking it seriously at all. 

The Old Prince's Ideas 291 
At Dolgushin's: "That is, mercy. Satisfying one's own emotions. 
Whereas this other thing is demanded of you as a duty and a respon­
sibility. I owe nothing and am urider no obligation to anyone." 
"Only, he's trying to scare you too much when he speaks of the 
kingdom of heaven, and he likes it." 
"And believe me that I wouldn't have taken :\llle Sapozhkov with 
me to Italy. My attitude was of the holiest." 
The Youth to the old Prince: "You know what, it sometimes 
appears to me that I am a conglomerate of all vanities." Develop 
paternal relationships. [But I don't want to ask anyone's forgiveness. 
No one's.] 
The old Prince: "C'est moi} qui connait les femmes.26 The life 
of a woman is a constant search for someone she could submit to." 
AN ATHEIST. 
The night he won he sent for champagne. 
"The idea that is bothering me most is this: Couldn't it be my 
fault?-\Vhen I am accusing others." (Say that in the first person, at 
the end of some chapter.) 
The very first conversation was, of course, about women (with the 
old Prince). 
He is religious, and used to pray, but then all of a sudden he would 
say something like this: "But what if nothing of this ဝ really 
exists?" ["The spirit has been poured out."] 
The Youth, an entrefilet2; to himself: "\Vhat amazed me most, 
looking at him (the old Prince) at times, was that he had at one time 
sat in conference somewhere, and acted as a councilor, and it is said 
in one assignment had displayed much wisdom and done an impor­
tant service." 
The old Prince: "One shouldn't make women into an ideal (<they 
need> someone they can obey)." The Youth on Othello: "You know, 
the reason why he killed Desdemona was that he had lost his ideal." 
And suddenly the Youth looks at the Prince: "You know what, I am 
partly in the position of an Othello, because I am afraid I might lose 
an ideal." 
"My friend, have you really been in lm·e?" 
He hadn't understood a thing, I was speaking of Him. However, I 
told him about my love. I found it pleasurable myself to let myself be 
26 French: "It's I who know women." 
27 French: "Newspaper item." 

292 About Lambert 
carried away by funny recollections. Here, .fie. a description of my 
love, I was entertaining him. He got very interested. 
In the beginning, a discussion: pawn the icon. "That she,• the 
Princess, is the cause of all <our> misfortunes; just listen to the old 
man." He is a Catholic, God, relics. An atheist. I was looking at him, 
<thinking that this man had been a member of> the State Council. 
at WOR'l@ll in around young girls. First bits of information about "that 
passive creature," c'est moi, qui connait/8 looking for someone she 
might obey, can't make <them your> ideal. Othello. <About> love, 
I was entertaining him. Affectionate gesture, "You are my only one. 
She is coming, oh, she is coming today." And I didn't even know, 
trouble, a visit. She-I got up and left the room. 
COLLATE THIS PROGRAM WITH THE MOTIVES, AND CO:\IPLETE IT. 
\Vhen <he starts> about women and nakedness, the Prince stops 
him. About Lambert, "mon enfanl/9 yours was a terrible fate! These 
dear little children, when they grow up," etc. 
N.B. To the young Prince, [then] he went to consult the lawyer, 
to find out a thing or two about that slap in the face. 
N.B.2. LA!\tBERT ABSOLUTELY. He saw Lambert in his dreams (he 
was frightening a child in that dream). 
N.B. VASIN AND <the Youth's> SISTER. That night at Vasin's, the 
Youth notices that he knows his sister, and that he actually seems to 
have already discussed some things with her. It seems that Vasin is 
giving him a hint, that he is reproaching him and advising him to 
take more interest in his sister. 
A precious item. When the Youth is ardently begging Vasin not to 
ask him about his idea, Vasin agrees too easily. This hurts the Youth 
(secretly). 
The Prince has a tendency for fits of limpness. 
To start crying. ]e sais tout, mais je ne sais rien de bon.30 
"'Why, it is Faust who says this." 
"Is that so? And yet imagine, it is I who said it." 
"But you do know literature." 
In the street-an idea-new people. 
At Dolgushin's, the Youth meets Kraft. 
[Kraft] Take our railroads, every station master <uses> filthy Ian-
• Literally, "they," but it is apparently a polite plural. 
28 French: "It's I who know." 
29 French: "My child." 
ao French: "I know all, but I don't know anything good." 

Russians Are Second-rate 293 
guage, Columbus's (columbarum timilorum).31 Clean out the rail­
way carriage because, to tell the t:uth, Europe and the railroads have 
caught us without people <who are able to respond to these things>; 
we are incapable of being people. Some vain nonentity who is sitting 
in the Petersburg-bound baggage receiving office-that scoundrel can 
stop the train for a half hour and does so with absolute impunity. 
And a Justice of the Peace who doesn't know the law gets up, puts 
on his robe in front of the public, and goes on to "serve mass," fining 
a poor peasant woman 25 rubles-there you have him, your master, 
despot, the lord of your fate. Why are people fleeing abroad? It is 
physically impossible to stay. Absolutely no justice. I am not defend­
ing serfage, but before, there existed, if a bad <order>, still an order; 
now there is no order at all. District judges do as they please, in a 
drunken craze-so now there isn't any <order> at all. Things have 
never been worse than they are now. Yet this would mean absolutely 
nothing if things could only be straightened out in, say, a hundred 
years. But the situation is irreparable. Russians are second-rate mate­
rial. I can't live without being sad." 
[Kraft: ]" I would like to be an average man." 
He and Vasin, in passing, an exchange of words regarding Kraft, by 
the corpse of the girl who has hanged herself. About Kraft: He had re­
cently made a trip all over Russia. 
On the chosen nobility. 
Tomorow: Read the copied teH aRd corect whate·,.er is vritteR 
of the 2d chapter, to get it ready for writiRg at Right. 
On the boulevard, c'etait ignoble;32 I actually told it to start <my> 
punishment. 
"You probably suffered a good deal later." "No, I almost didn't 
suffer at all. I suffer later. Incidentally, I had a different idea at the 
time. You know what," I said suddenly, casting a glance at him, 
"when you are altogether possessed by another idea, your whole life 
seems to be just so-and many of your actions and many events leave 
no impression on you. Even your own abominations, of which later." 
How badly this fits logically! I had been waiting for a whole month 
for this door to open and for a certain person to enter the room. And 
this is why I began to talk about my hatred of women with great 
frankness and power. 
3l Latin : It should read columbarum timidarum or columborum timidorum 
(genitive plural of "timid doves"). 
32 French: "It was ignoble." 

294 A Proud Man 
Versilov about Makar: "That is, he was a house serf, but a house 
serf who was after a certain kind of glory." 
Portefeuille: "Merci, mo11sieur" (I was well dressed). 
\Vhen I had revealed my idea to Versilov: "Now I no longer have 
an idea of my own; now I am somehow on the same level as the rest 
of them. I have no fortress to which I can retire." 
"Vasin, why should I be honest?" And later, after hearing <his> 
arguments: "But I still don't know why I should be honest." 
Vasin: "There is something here that you can't express, while I 
am incapable of understanding you." 
Versilov's daughter, whispering something to the Prince, while the 
latter was smiling. I knew for a fact that he was greatly concerned 
about providing her with a proper and brilliant match. 
"I l<Row that you ·..-ould like to FRarry ler où." After Versilov's 
gesture of returning the money, and after Versilov and the young 
Prince had become reconciled (after the challenge), the old Prince 
suddenly conceives the idea to match up Versilov's elder daughter 
with Prince Sokolsky (so much does he ignore the liaison between the 
Prince and the Princess). 
Vasin, about Versilov: "A proud man." 
"\Vhat a clever person you are, Vasin." 
"Tell me, did I do wrong in telling that I was illegitimate?" I 
couldn't restrain myself, I melted, I embraced him, I couldn't restrain 
myself, "my own corner." 
"How do you know?" 
"Don't think that I am a fool, I was just talking a lot of nonsense, 
for three years I have < . . .  > I thought that they were going to defeat 
me, and I was afraid; I've got my own idea." 
Vasin smiled: "All right, you may come, but I am warning you, I 
have very little time, good-bye." 
"\Vhy are you ... 
" 
"Running after me? ... Go ahead, say it." 
I was walking along with Kraft. 
"It is true, I'm going to hang myself. I ought to be more somber. 
No-people, no matter who they are, I find hard to take." 
... and so he chooses God, or rather, it is <his> nature that 
does the choosing, for his intellect sometimes has no part in it. That 
isn't so bad at all. These people sometimes have a tremendous amount 
of faith, i.e., they haven't any faith, but they want to have faith and 
take that desire for faith itself. 
"It seems to me that I can't stay with people and it also seems to 

A New Breed of People 295 
me that you were the only one who didn't make fun of me," I sud­
denly said to Vasin, as I left. 
Make an effort to live according to the laws of nature and of justice. 
Kraft, an assistant and private secretary. Through court action by 
Andronikov. 
"They're cutting down Russia's forests," i.e., "I am stern, yet I feel 
sorry for them, too, and I would like to finish things off with a 
mutual embrace." 
I believed, I was being carried away, but <feeling> a secret shame; 
"I ought to be more somber, while actually I'm squealing, I, who was 
going to crush them all." But they "·ere remaining silent and were 
smiling . 
... you just follow the course of the people. Don't worry, even ,.;hile 
living in Russia you can be of some use to the common cause. You 
don't absolutely have to go to Germany for that. 
[February.] The Prince: "In our days, a new breed of people can be 
seen walking around, all bearded, and all with that same thought, so 
that one can judge from tɯeir physiognomies: Are they or aren't 
they readers of 'The Pickwick Club'?"33 
At Dolgushin's: "Sit down and don't worry; nobody is going to 
come in here who shouldn't be here." 
Still his own idea. Precisely his own idea. "Explain your idea. Any 
explanation of things is useful." "Join the people."34 "\Vhy should 
I be honest?" "\Vhy, this is my main point." 
"In that case, mustn't we all be watching our handkerchiefs?" 
"Oh, don't worry, I don't pick pockets." 
"That's precisely the point, for it means that you, theoreticians, 
don't transform your ϼ idea into action, and that all you do is 
dream. Well Sir, we are men of action." 
33 Reference to Dickens's The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club. Dos­
toevsky had great admiration for Dickens. In a letter to S. A. lvanova on January 
I ,  1868, when he was beginning to work on The Idiot, he compared Pickwick to 
Don Quixote-he considered them both positive types-and wrote: "There arises 
sympathy for the ridiculed hero who does not know his own value-and conse­
quently sympathy in the reader." 
34 A reference to the mass social movement in the spring of 1874, nurtured by 
the Russian populists, when more than 3,000 young intellectuals left their homes 
to propagate a vague doctrine of socialism and progress among the peasants. The 
unofficial leader of this movement was Nikolay Konstantinovich ǡIikhaylovsky 
(1842-1904), whose ideas and journal The Fatherland Notes created the atmo­
sphere from which the movement arose. 

296 An Overwhelming Thought 
Of such a well-fed cow. Vasin. Kraft's idea is <not> magnanimity, 
it's just perplexity. He definitely has a quarrel with Vasin. 
Kraft to the Youth about Dolgushin: "No, I'd like here < . . .  > for 
the last time." 
"You won't be going there anymore?" 
"No, I won't." 
He to the Youth : "But if this is so, the Prince can reward you in 
his will." 
[Very important] If I am describing this in such detail, it is actually 
<because it is> necessary. In the beginning it may have seemed that 
this wasn't so, but <those missing items> would be felt in their 
proper place. 
This, after his first sale: "I took this step for a trial, and I am post­
poning tlie rest for the time being." 
\Vhat kind of a "youth" am I? People don't grow any more at 
nineteen, or do they? 
He is leaving the Prince's house, asking himself: "What, she has 
insulted me? No, she hasn't. I almost loved ... I'm really glad." A tri­
umphant impression. 
Kraft: "\Veil, good-bye now, I'll be alone from here on. No, from 
now on I'm not going to see any more people." 
Vitia to be his second. "The devil take you. I may agree to load 
your pistol for you. But I'm not going to go and talk to him. You're 
such a lofty one." 
[February.] \Vhere's the beginning, and where's the end of Versi­
lov? This is not permissible. Versilov is before you, and that's enough. 
Any critique is unthinkable. 
"I don't understand," says Kraft, "how a person who is under the 
influence of some overwhelming thought, to which his mind and his 
heart have fully surrendered, how such a person can still live for 
something else, for something that is beyond this thought. If you 
believe in God and in the Church, why wouldn't you immediately 
become a monk; if you live in the lOth century and you are convinced 
that the Holy Tomb should be freed, quit everything and take the 
cross."35 
35 Compare these words to those about Alyosha in The Brothers Karamazov: 
"As soon as he thought seriously about it, he was struck with the conviction that 
God and immortality exist, and at once he said simply to himself: 'I want to live 
for immortality, and I will not accept any compromise.' " Part I, Chapter I :5. 

Kraft's Conviction 297 
"Do you believe that a person who believes with his whole heart 
must absolutely become a monk? I heard that thought only today." 
"\Vhy do you find it so strange if I, having become convinced of 
the correctness of my findings, decide to shoot myself?" 
"To take the cross or to become a monk are positive ideas, while 
this thing-why, it isn't even an idea." 
"True, but a [full] conviction is a feeling." [And if I've got that 
feeling, even if it be a feeling of despair < . . .  >] 
"That's it; that's exactly it! Conviction is a feeling. You know what, 
today, when I was at Dolgushin's, I was terribly afraid that they might 
shake me with their sophisms, for I, too, have [my own] conviction, a 
certain idea of m)' own. But I didn't know nor did I realize that a 
feeling cannot be shaken by reason, but that one must rather first 
eradicate the idea which has ensconced itself in one's heart in the 
form of a feeling, and replace it by a new, by a different feeling-only 
then might one be shaken. Anyway, what could they ever offer me in 
a positive way with their stupid little idea of 'joining the people'? 
Join them with what?" 
"So what, I just bought a thing and nothing more. Yet, what this 
step, this thought, this experiment meant for <me>! But about this, 
later." 
N .B. N .B. N .B. ''I'll return it to Versilov. I'll return it to her." 
"That is, you'll keep it and think for a long time if you should, 
and ... you will return it, if < . . .  >" 
I blushed and said nothing. 
"If I'm goiRg to T@tYTR it, B@li@¥@ m@, it will be for RotR.iRg.'' 
"\Veil, I don't care." 
Kraft: "From a legal point of view, this document, (this letter) 
isn't worth much. But there is a chance. I haven't been involved in 
this case; of course, the lawyer of the other party would know what 
he might do with this kind of a document, whether a lot or a little, or 
nothing at all." 
""What then, should I do?" 
"As you please." 
Still, it was terribly difficult to make a decision. If I gave it to 
Versilov, his conscience would bother him. If I gave it to the lawyer, 
this would mean that Versilov and my mother would be at <his> 
mercy. If I didn't give it to anyone, but kept it myself-! hadn't 
even known that this could be so hard." 
IN THE LAST CHAPTER OF part one, Versilov says, in response to the 
Youth's question, casually and while he is already about to leave: 

298 Illegitimacy 
"I've got that letter!" After <an initial> pathetic shock, this affects 
the Youth as if someone had thrown cold water on him. However, 
after his despair, the Youth decides to forgive Versilov this trick <il­
legible>. He just makes up his mind to watch Him and to study Him 
from here on. 
VERSILOV TO THE YOUTH: "It was quite unnecessary for you to 
present yourself as 'illegitimate' all around; you are perfectly 'legiti­
mate,' and you have quite needlessly smeared your mother's honor. 
Or did you, perhaps, find it unpleasant to admit that you were the 
son of a petit bourgeois, thinking that to be the illegitimate son of a 
nobleman was still superior [and more beautiful] than <to be the 
son> of a petit bourgeois?" 
(N .B. I had been aware of all this for a long time myself, and had 
long been bothered by it.) "\Vhy are you thrusting such a dishon­
orable thought on me?" 
"No, forget it, really, ɰ to be the offspring of a nobleman, even 
illegitimately, is more beautiful than to be a petit bourgeois. It is 
really a matter of taste. It depends on a man's inclinations." 
"\Vhy, I am not suffering from it in the least," Versilov tells him 
in reply to his remark concerning being persecuted by the Princess. 
The Youth says: "I don't know how to tell .fti.m. about my idea; it 
keeps coming out funny." 
'Til tell it for you," said Versilov and went on to explain to him his 
very own idea, <its> glitter, <its> tearful nights. 
"Yes, yes!" exclaims the Youth, "I am yours." 
IMPORTANT. The rupture, when he left for Vasin's, was a conse­
quence of the fact that he was called a spy-by her, also that he was 
fussing over the letter for days on end, furthermore, as a result of 
having met the Prince, as well as of a case of <bad> conscience, and, 
finally, on account of the governess and her letter.* After his father's 
action <when He> returns the money, he becomes purified and rises 
in stature (N .B. also, after <meeting> Vasin), and does not want to 
take advantage of the Princess's letter. "This was the purest minute of 
my life!" he exclaims on the last line of part one. 
He has just entered his mother's <room>. "Did he tell you about 
that thing?" Versilov: "He has got his own idea, and he is going to 
surprise us." 
I sadly said good bye to Kraft. "\Vhat I have learned from you 
• The sentence is awkward and barely grammatical in the original. 

He Fascinated Me 299 
< . . .  > I am no believer yet, but I feel that I'm going to make a 
break. One must start a new life. I'm not going to join Vasin." l:U€sed 
he who 
"So you are hoping to live. Blessed he who has an idea." 
"If you only knew what you've just said there. Kraft, I've got my 
own idea." 
I came home in a sad state of mind, and felt irritable. 
The Youth, at the end of his first showdown with Versilov: "No, 
this man must not know that I have suffered so much longing for him. 
He is not worth my tears." 
Versilov counted on stunning him with his coolness and irony. He 
isn't trying to justify himself (regarding the Princess, regarding the 
slap in the face), finding it to be below his dignity to make excuses to 
the Youth. The Youth is indignant, decides to leave. 
The Youth argHes quarrels with Vasin. 
The Youth to Versilov: "\Vhy am I surprised; would it be possible 
for you to talk other than wittily?" 
After the first showdown : A thirst of something higher, dissatis­
faction, ''I'll break <with them>, take a flat. I'm not going to join 
Vasin," regarding the document-a sad smile. 
A precious item. Suddenly, as he is about to go to bed: "\Vhy is 
it that I love Vasin less than before? Because I humbled myself too 
much before him the other day. 'I'm just a punk, and nothing else.' " 
The day after his first conversation with Versilov: Finish that thing 
with the letter. Reasoning thus: impossible to go and see a lawyer. 
To the Prince, to cnallenge hiin to a duel-no one to act as a second. 
\Von't go. However. .. He goes to see Vasin for advice. Vasin in a 
rooming house. Next door, the governess with her letter. To Tatiana. 
\Vith the Princess. She insults him terribly (tears). The document in 
his pocket. ''I'll tear it up!" Runs into the governess at the house: 
away. 
THE CHAR:\1 OF A DESCRIPTIO:\'. More lively and more concise. 
"As pertains to generals and such, I was routing [HERE] < . . .  > 
HERE IS l\IY IDEA, THE WAY IT APPEARED TO :\IE THE;\'. 
He fascinated me when I was still a child. Since then, <I'd be 
dreaming of Him> covering my head with my blanket. It wasn't my 
illegitimate birth that was torturing me. Yes, it was this man [a p­
peared in my dreams] who was torturing me. The fact that I had been 
left alone tortured me. I was dreaming of building a new nest. But 
in all probability I was that kind of a person myself. I was myself a 
Versilov. My dreams: <to become a> farmer. I am shining shoes. 

300 
The Akhmakov JVoman 
Then, a wealthy friend. But I wanted something immeasurably 
larger-pride. 
First place-but mysteriously. A professor. Ungern-Shternberg.36 
Finally, Rothschild. Save-not acquire it unnaturally! Finally, the 
triumph of lack of talent and mediocrity. That's what I arrived with. 
Don't tell that. Don't tell that under any circumstances. 
I entered my mother's room. Sunset. Description of the evening. 
[I had come in with the notion that I was going to break <with 
them> that day, or the next. Guilty all the same ... Versilov not in.] 
("What has this day given me? Vasin-I'm not going to join him." 
I was on my way <to Petersburg>: that document of the Princess's 
was with me. He entered; mother's gentle eyes. Versilov entered.] 
(There they have banks, business offices, playing the stock market; 
I knew nothing of that. Of course, one does run into people; even­
tually I would have worked out something.] 
I was imagining that proud creature of high society, the Akhmakov 
woman, and there, myself, taking the side of Versilov. I am the pos­
sessor of the document. Not just a help to Versilov: her tears, high 
society. Now everything appeared so childish. 
I remembered how I had shuddered during our recent meeting. 
[About how I clashed at Dergachev's. For me, it was important. I 
was timid, I feared for my idea: "They are thinking that I am a 
misanthrope. I know their ideas concerning private property."] 
(The idea was calling me.] 
Versilov's first talk. 
"My friend, it seems that your birth is bothering you. I am very 
sorry that you love me so much, considering that I haven't been able 
to do anything for you." 
"You are so sure that I love you." 
"Didn't you say yourself that you were fascinated by me, and that 
ever since that time, your dreams were wandering around me?" 
I remained silent, clenching my teeth. (How could he have 
guessed?) "Tell me, what kind of a person is my father?" (About 
Makar). "Tell me, what kind of a person is my father! What kind of a 
person is Makar Ivanovich?" Versilov's story. (Chases him out.) 
"You must have suffered a lot from the Princess. I saw her today." 
He: "I have noticed that you are taking an interest in many things 
and that you are worrying too much." 
36 See note 3 of Part II. 

I'll Be Superior to Everybody 301 
I was looking at his face. "Tell me, what kind of a person was my 
father? Leave me alone." 
Having left Kraft < . . .  > I didn't want to go to Vasin. The terrible 
document was in my hands. Sewn into my clothes. "Nobody can love 
me. " 
And suddenly, as I entered the house-the gentle eyes of my 
mother. 
At my mother's, after Versilov has come: "If I dream a lot, if I'm a 
dreamer, who has made me one? It is he who has made me become 
what I am." 
I, at Touchard's, but Touchard is an honest man. 
N .B. And generally, make that scene at mother's shorter, straight 
on to Touchard, which would correspond to that mood of desperation 
and "break with them," in which he returned from Kraft's. 
ORDER. Very important. When meeting the Princess for the second 
time, at Tatiana's < . . .  > I was seeing her for the second time; cir­
cumstances and the events of the preceding day had erased her image 
in my mind. (A strong impression this second time.) 
And later, he is too insistently questioning Versilov to find out: 
does He, or doesn't He love the Princess, in order to learn whether 
he can love her. Avenge his father. 
Mv OWN IDEA, the way I understood it at the time. 
Let there be envy, let me be worst of all <morally>, but to make 
up for it, I'll be superior to everybody. The moment somebody in 
Moscow got to be superior to me, I immediately quit speaking to him. 
Just the other day with Vasin, and there I am, already I'm beginning 
to love him less. Good or bad-that wasn't my worry. There was 
nothing but a feeling there. I needed power, with arguments of 
"right" and "wrong." I wasn't even embarrassed; on the contrary, I 
saw an indescribable beauty about it, and I still feel, even today, that 
nobody could have defeated my arguments. I am not crude, I knew 
what the ideals of good and of light were. Yet my own ideal seemed 
best of all to me. Was it simply that of a saver and moneymaker? I saw 
here only the brilliance of power and a guarantee of my own will, 
and that I'd be better than everybody else. How I would direct my 
will and my personality, whether I would take my vengeance on 
people or become their benefactor-all this would be within my 
powers. Though I was afraid of books, I knew the social arguments 
against my idea-about private property, and about capital, and that 
private property was nothing but organized fraud. Yet <their> para­
doxical nature was obvious to me, and altogether I hated these new 

302 
JVords Are Nonsense 
teachings, had a deep contempt for them on account of their errone­
ous premises concerning basic and primary ideas, their faulty inter­
pretation of the same, their theoreticalism, and the impurity of their 
ideal. "However, the devil take this all," I was thinking. "\Vhat mat­
ters isn't theory, but beauty; what really matters is power, power is 
the whole thing. The most important thing is /." 
Still, at Dergachev's I didn't have a chance to express myself. But 
could their views, their laughter, ever make me join them?-never! 
Insofar as I would always be inferior to somebody as far as talent is 
concerned, I'm not even going to make a try in that direction. I'll 
have the money. Even better, to get even with them, let me be a 
nonentity. I am not regretting <to have thought so> even today. 
I am putting this down not to beg anyone's forgiveness; it may well 
be that I haven't changed at all. Just that my idea has grown up. 
If I am going to fail, I am not going to join their association so that 
I can lean on all of mankind. I'll simply shoot myself, and let that be 
the end of it. I won't even be a beggar. But it would be in vain if I 
tried to explain all this graphically, in words. This is the weak side 
of my idea. \Vhat could I express in words? What I've got here is a 
feeling. 
I am convinced that I couldn't tell anyone about it: nobody would 
understand understand. I am convinced that even now, as I have 
written it down, no one will understand me. \Vords are nothing but 
nonsense. The real thing is left in those unsaid words, because they 
couldn't be expressed. \Vords are nothing but nonsense, the real 
thing is in what remained unsaid; that's the way it is, always, always! 
[Afy own idea) the way I understood it then.] 
I've got an assurance here, yet subject to all the chances of the card 
table, and still an assurance. 
Live some. To spend it is something of no consequence. Not 
money, but pleasure. Earthly blessings, a hotel, a wife, aristocraey an 
elegant circle of friends, all this isn't eKaEtl'' is actually base, that is, 
it isn't exactly base, but rather something petty, small. Some sort of 
exceeding narrowness of life. That is not the thing, it's better to sew 
it up in your clothes. 
No matter how educated I' might be, there will always be people in 
the world who are more educated. 
"Vanity?" you're going to say. "Oh, my God, I am not seeking to 
justify myself, I'm begging no one's, but no one's forgiveness." 
\Vhat if eventually I were suddenly to give everything to orphan­
ages, to education, to schools, to almshouses, to foundling hospitals? 

Stubbornness and Moderation 303 
The case of the abandoned infant. 
I could not stand those gentle eyes. 
\Vhy was I running after this man who wanted no part of me? 
A gorgeous lady. I was stung by my recent impression, that docu­
ment < . . .  > Sewn into <my clothes>. I only smiled. \Vhy should I 
go there? \Vhy, she is going to extend her hand to me, if I return it to 
her first. But if I give it to Versilov, he is going to embrace me, and 
tie me <to himself>, but will it be for long? Everybody thinks that 
I am just a youth. I'll forget about all of them, and I'll forget about 
the document, too--having left it on my person, sewn up in my 
clothes. 
I am not going to Vasin's. I am quitting loving him. Why should 
I be reproaching myself for it? For my own vanity? No, it is much 
better not to beg anyone's forgiveness. If there is something wrong 
with this, let it stay right here, with me. I'll go after my freedom, my 
will, into my shell, into my idea. 
Here, too, I kept seeing the eyes of my mother before me. Since 
my childhood. I once met her. Yes, that impenetrable environment. 
But I was feeling sorry. Sometimes I would come and be nasty and 
rude. Even this time they stopped their conversation as I entered 
(Tatiana Pavlovna). I sat down more cheerily. I had given my word 
that I wasn't going to be rude. <She'd like> to stroke my head, but 
she won't dare. She would address me as she would her squire's son. 
My own kind words. Tatiana Pavlovna turned her back to me; she 
quickly kissed my head, as if she felt guilty. Then, Versilov came in. 
My own idea, the way I understood it then. 
Most important: STUBBOR:'I:l':ESS and moderation, but this you can't 
explain to anyone, it's Hot fHOHe)' that fHatters Aet·e it is a feeling. 
Having attained power, all these Kokorevs,37 etc. I'll be reselling­
what exactly, I don't know, but I'll swindle them. 
In trying to make a profit, people are after a maximum profit, 
[while you] are shooting for the minimum. I've bought some shares, 
bought my way into a company. The shares may go bust, or they may 
yield 50, 60 on a hundred. But there's a big capitalist who regrets 
37 Vasily Aleksandrovich Kokorev was a financial power in the middle of the 
nineteenth century. He started from nothing and amassed a great fortune. He is 
in some sense the prototype of the Youth's Rothschildian motives. In the fifties 
and sixties he published articles on financial subjects and it is possible that Dos­
toevsky was acquainted with him. There is a reference to him as a type in the 
final version, Part I, Chapter 5:2. 

304 Making Money 
that he isn't a shareholder, and the business has just started to move. 
He'd give 10 percent. I paid 100 thousand, and I sell him my shares 
for I I  0. People tear into me, shouting that I could have taken so-and­
so-much. "All right, gentlemen, my 10 percent is already in my 
pocket, while your 60 percent is still a question mark." This is how 
I imagined it. And if not exactly like that, then certainly something 
of that kind. 
Order. Farmer. General. Scholar. Ungern.38 
They'll say: So he has saved a lot. Why not live like everybody 
else? A hotel, a family, social connections, etc. But here you have 
people who are stronger than I, more clever than I, and I am a 
second-rate figure; no--better untouched power, even a beggar with 
his money sewn up <in his clothes>-that is somehow more chaste. 
[Here] Socialism. Don't worry, though I haven't read any books, I 
used to know a thing or two, and besides, I had sometimes talked ɱ 
г to Nikolai Semenovich, and it is hard to be better educated than 
he is. 
\Vhy did Maria Ivanovna hand it over to me? It is her free will, 
her opinion. 
And so Jove is surely pretty tired of his thunderbolts, and he 
hardly thunders with them, except perhaps around St. Elias's day, 
but if some wretched little clerk were put up there, or some news­
paper correspondent, or some shyster lawyer, or some stupid peasant 
woman-we'd sure have [it will turn out] a lot of thunder, a lot of 
thunder. 
I can see that this whole thing-<being> a farmer, etc.-is turning 
out so embarrassing in writing that... a maR may iRV@Rt all kiRas ef 
stori@s aRa it woula eeme out BotA. Beautiful aRa iRterestiRg [It is 
easy to invent <a story> so that it will be beautiful and interesting: 
all you have to do is sit down and start lying; no, better write down 
the truth!] [\Vhy, I can't even write, I am writing these notes with 
disgust, for I know that I have now entered the circle of litterateurs, 
and there, everybody writes better than I, for they're writing to show 
off their elegant style, and not to tell you the truth.] 
Start off with "\Voe from \Vit" and the story of <my> defeat. If I'm 
going to describe what happened at Touchard's, then immediately 
after Touchard a curse to all writers who describe the years of child-
as See note 11 of Part II. 

Failure of the Idea 305 
hood in their works. (Copperfield.) And then about how te Reg I'd 
flog them, those orphans. 
I bought a rose for that little girl, Arinochka, when she was lying in 
her coffin, and put it into her little hands. 
She didn't cost me even as much as 25 rubles. I returned this money 
from the money I got from Versilov; he had sent me 30 rubles [at 
the time] for my trip from Moscow. 
It was my idea to become a Rothschild. I am asking the reader to 
remain serious. 
The Youth is stunned by Kraft's death, when he is eavesdropping 
at Tatiana Ivanovna's. He let "the spy" go, but when Kraft was men­
tioned, he came out: "Is it true that Kraft has shot himself?" She is 
puzzled. "I am going to return the document to you." Runs off. Later, 
having learned that the letter concerning the inheritance had been 
produced by the Youth, the Princess falls to thinking: "Could it be 
that he has got the document also?" (Maria Ivanovna.) 
[My own idea.] What I needed wasn't money; what I needed was 
property. 
I <had to be> in the forefront everywhere, first everywhere. 
In the lst chapter of the first half of part two. 
Do not forget that, having arrived from Moscow and entering the 
house, he meets his mother rather coolly. That "I cried, and cried" of 
his childhood years has become effaced. 
In my dreams everything goes marvellously and under great power, 
so long as I remain alone. But the moment I get rich, and get married, 
or return to my father, i.e., the moment I am back among people, I 
somehow become weak and confused, because there, quite naturally, 
I lost my superiority. I found myself in the general rut and, conse­
quently, immediately met people who were superior to me in beauty, 
wit, talent, wealth, and physical strength, whereas I couldn't imagine 
myself being anything but first. 
My own idea. 
I started trying to have just a piece of bread for my meals, to wear 
my clothes for three years, shoes-difficult, bad as our pavements are, 
a brush! How happy I was in those days of privation and a hermit-like 
existence! Though my idea hadn't as yet started <to be transformed 
into action>, and wasn't going to start for a long time yet, I still 
wanted to try it out, I was dying to try it out. 
This was my poem on independence. \Vhy then, that Akhmakov 
woman, why the document, why did I want to save Versilov from his 
enemies--by doinr all this, I was only betraying my idea. 

306 Essence of the Idea 
[Besides,] there wasn't a chance to learn the banking business 
[before finishing] <illegible> Besides, it isn't necessary, I'll start by 
<working> right in the stret the street,il+t4and one can learn how to 
work the streets only from experience. Having a corner to sleep in, a 
few kopeks for food, and 100 rubles operating capital-no, that way 
I couldn't fail. And as for high finance, there would be time to learn 
it in between. 
There is nothing immoral about it, I am no crook and no န 
thief. And besides, everything is in my own hands, etc. 
I do realize that, having become a Rothschild, I have excluded 
myself from society, no matter how much I might be giving to hos­
pitals and institutions. 
People are not nearly so fine as to justify doing something for 
them. \Vhy don't they, on their own part, approach me directly and 
openly? I am a grateful creature-1 would become sincere myself 
right away, and would begin to love them; yet each time this hap­
pened to me, I immediately found that I had been mistaken. But they 
went on to cheat me right away, and <thus> immediately shut me 
up again. Only Lambert, who beat me more than anyone else, was 
always sincere with me tho̖:gh for. 
Introduction. The 1 9th day. Various people and I. At Kraft's. "My 
own idea." 
Most important. \Vhen he is spending the night at Vasin's he 
explains a part of the essence of his idea to him (Sancho Panza).39 
Vasin responds from the socialist point of view. He co1,mters with 
bitterness. Suddenly he gets up: 
"Vasin, I can't stay here, I've come here by mistake, we are two 
different bodies (our differences are not limited to ideas)." 
Vasin makes his bed for him. 
"Are you really going along with these muddle-headed people?" 
(Dergachev). 
Vasin replies by <expounding his theory of> The Machine. At 
this point, about Liza and the Prince. A hint. And suddenly, the 
poisoning. 
[Here] On the second day thereafter, when the Youth breaks with 
Versilov in connection with the-girl-and-the-letter, he hands him the 
letter telling him that Kraft, who had shot himself the day before, 
39 Sancho Panza's dream that he would become the ruler of a Baltic island 
bears some resemblance to the Youth's fervent belief that he will become wealthy. 

Woman Is a Great Power 307 
had given him that letter three hours before he shot himself. The 
thought immediately occurs to Versilov: couldn't he have also handed 
him that most important document, the one which concerns the 
Princess? Versilov's visit to him on the following day is later ascribed 
by the Youth to that very circumstance, namely that Kraft might have 
handed him that document. 
At the tavern, Touchard simply < . . .  > 
To keep me separate from the Counts and Princes Touchard ac­
tually considered to be his sacred duty. 
I cannot understand how a person could not be moved by a boy 
who was eager to kiss his hands, and I was eager to kiss his hands. 
I had a feeling of surprise and cheerful forgiveness. I was not as yet 
familiar with shame. I would have liked to say: "Of course this is so, 
and we shall be playing together happily again, just as we did then." 
It was Lambert who explained to me what a "son-of-a-whore" was. 
Still during my period of innocence-run away. 
After my mother had left he pinched my cheek. 
I was dreaming all the time that one day, suddenly, somebody 
would come and take me away. 
I don't want <to make any "David> Copperfield<" out of this>. 
''I'd be flogging <them>." 
But I only want to tell about my idea. 
Now that I am advancing deeper into my novel, I want to tell about 
my idea. 
The finale. Leave it. Mother's eyes, holding the door handle. 
[Here] My own idea-the way I saw it at the time. 
This man is, [maybe,] himself, a Moscow gossip, just in a little bit 
different form. 
He is an unworthy person, break outright. What good is it, to that 
Akhmakov woman, the devil take him, <I'm withdrawing> [into my 
own idea.] 
He: ''I'm beginning to think that everything that bears the imprint 
of common sense in this country is designated by the general term of 
'Slavophilism.' " 
BECAUSE WOMAN IS A GREAT POWER. 
THE YOUTH IS FASCINATED BY THE LEGEND OF "ALEXIS) MAN OF 
GoD," WHICH HE HAS NEVER HEARD BEFORE. 
[February] ''I'm not too venerable as yet," says the old Prince. 
He: "One must learn how to love people. In Russia, no one has 
ever made a strong effort to cultivate himself. \Vithout a conscious 
effort there won't be any love, if there hasn't been any in the first 

308 
Tone Must Be Changed 
place. Nobody is born a ready-made person. It is only natural that 
you have no respect for people. It is very difficult to love them." 
It is He who talks about socialism. 
People must be treated without respect. 
Vasin, about his group: "Yes, they are moved by a live force. They 
are needed to give uninterrupted proof of the fact that there is real 
life (force) away from the center. Let them be weak, and insignificant; 
yet they are needed (necessary) for the continuity of their example. 
They never stop and they never run dry. And later Don't be disturbed 
by their insignificance: later, when we get to the real thing, both 
wisdom and knowledge will make their appearance. These are only 
the vanguard of the crusaders, all of whom perished, too, and before 
they ever got as far as Asia, and it is said that they perished disgrace­
fully, wretchedly. [The law of the demand of live force is apparently 
the same everywhere."] 
"Look how successful the Shtundists are,40 yet doesn't it appear to 
you that they stand for something that is quite contrary to the Russian 
national spirit?" 
November 25. 
The rude and insolent tone which the Youth displays in the early 
part of his notes must ..e. change in the last few parts. "It wasn't in 
vain that I sat down to write this; I have seen my spirit brighten, and 
presently I feel things more vividly and more truthfully ... " 'Varmth, 
and an admission to his father. An admission that he loves the Prin­
cess: "If I should ever manage that she might hear of me." By what 
means and how could this be done? 
These are the concluding words of the novel. "Forgive them (such 
simple-heartedness). Fooled me. Forgive me that I am talking about 
myself all the time. I'm not going to plant a tree. Oh yes, I forgot." 
'Ve haven't got any men of action. There's no one around who 
can get things done. 
'+ Best of all, leave everything as it is, and withdraw to your own 
place."• 
"'Vhere to? To America?" 
• Viti k sebe is ambiguous, meaning, literally, "to go away to oneself," but 
normally simply "to go home, to go to one's own place." 
40 A sect that had its origin in the south of Russia in the 1870's. The Shtundists 
denied the dogmas of the Orthodox Church and believed in the efficacy of indi­
vidual prayer. 

Columbus 309 
"That would mean to go see someone else, wouldn't it? To my own 
place, simply to my own place!" 
"Have you got such a place?" 
"Oh yes." 
ABOUT THE DOCUMENT. 
I replied nothing to Kraft's words. This was a complete secret. 
The Youth did not believe Kraft's story. 
"But if this document does exist?" 
"It exists, right here in this room." 
"BHt how coHld that beil Really? Then what should I do?" 
"Do as you please; I'll be glad." 
" Have you seen the document?" 
I submitted, for the time being. 
Oh, for a tree again, and like everyone else. 
As I have already mentioned-eleven years; and this was the 
stimulus. 
I would like to present a few traits from my biography, just a few 
traits. 
[Here, November 26] I hate the biography of <David> Copper­
field, but I want to put down in writing, at long last, my idea, which 
could not be understood without the circumstances under which it 
was conceived. I wouldn't understand it myself, though everything 
about it is so simple. I think, when Columbus-I'm not in the least 
comparing myself to Columbus, really, it would be embarrassing to 
me if people thought so. <I was drawing> this comparison because 
there isn't any. I was merely talking about simple ideas. Nothing is 
more difficult than to understand a simple idea. The simplest one; the 
simpler, the more difficult. 
Until he was transferred, as far as I am informed, by one of the 
newly appointed Ministers < . . .  > 
My heart, too, was breaking, to say good-bye to Versilov. But my 
mother's tear < . . .  > 
I was thinking very hard. 
I was waiting constantly for somebody to come and take me away. 
And there, a certain event took place the meaning of which I later 
made clear to myself. 
Eh, do they really think that I <am telling this> to stir their pity? 
No, much rather I shall, as I am advancing deeper into my novel, give 
an account of my idea. 
It was night already, past seven o'clock. As I approached the house, 
I remembered that still the other day the Princess had arrived from 

310 
My Childhood 
Moscow. I decided not to go to Vasin's. Part now. 'Why go and make 
inquiries with that Akhmakov woman, I had thought when still in 
ࠨfoscow. The letter is sewn into <my jacket>, but... I'll quit every­
thing. I'm not going to Vasin's. 'When I touched the door handle I 
strongly wished that Versilov might not be in. \Veil, and what could 
I expect from Kraft, what new information could there be? Now, as 
I am about to embark upon my Petersburg adventure, I'd better tell 
you about my idea. Besides, it will be easier to tell the story. 
An official record. 
Touchard. Frighten the child; I have many perverted fancies. 
'\Vho was sending him money to pay for me? I didn't dare to ask 
any such question. 
I became a lackey. 
There was a bookcase full of books. 
However, I am not describing my childhood here. That time, as I 
had left Kraft, I was carried away by my memories. 
I entered a tavern. I sat down and fell to thinking. Eh. I'll tell you 
about my idea! 
"Even without it, we're being fed well here." 
Hadn't seen <her?> in 5 years. A lone. 
"Are you angry?"-making a timid advance. 
She became embarrassed and stole a glance. 
"Are you really ashamed of me?" 
I remained silent. 
l\Iy Lord! She kissed my head. 
She began crossing herself, facing the church. 
"Stop it, they may see it," I said. 
"Are you really ashamed of me?" 
I said nothing. 
I can see him as if he were here now, in the flower of his prime, 
handsome. "Il faut le rosser."41 
And this is all. This is the only appearance of this man in the 
course of my entire childhood; this is how often I saw him. But then, 
a certain event took place. 
If he'd shown up now, I'd have stood in a corner and tried not to 
take an,y notice of him until he'd stepped up to me himself. Then, 
then too, I'd not have started to cry and to complain, but instead, I'd 
have started to laugh most ingenuously, as if we had parted only the 
day before. To be sure, I would have been cool, or so it would have 
41 French: "You ha\·e to beat him." 

The Man I Had Been Longing For 31 1 
appeared--cheerful, but cool. I'd be talking wittily, of course, but 
about trifles only, and I'd not be bringing up any subject myself, but 
would merely be answering his questions. And only later he would 
have gotten the idea: "Ah, for goodness' sake, what have I done!" All 
this I was dreaming up, dreaming up, dreaming up. 
He was short of stature, an insufferable boaster and braggart. 
·when Touchard died of a stroke, Tatiana Pavlovna suddenly ap­
peared out of nowhere and relocated me with Nikolai Semenovich, 
under whose tutelage I began to attend high school-where, in the 
beginning, I used to beat the smaller boys myself. There, things went 
differently. 
"All right, so I am a lackey, all right." That is to say, I wasn't 
agreeing with it at all, but was doing it out of spite only: "There you 
are, I can be a lackey, too." Incidentally, it is unlikely that I could 
really understand what I was trying to say. This was just a feeling, 
but it was growing all the time, growing and accumulating. 
It was a fateful moment. I had to make up my mind, finally. "All 
right, can you make up your mind, or can't you? \Vhat is it, what is it 
that you feel sorry for? Or are you afraid to go out into this dark 
night?" 
He had been slandered and disgraced; all these wretched people 
weren't worth the sole of his foot. 
The thought that I'd be at his side, that we'd be walking along 
hand in hand, and, most recently, the thought that I'd be coming 
there to defend him. 
And so this is the man for whom my heart had so long been beating. 
Ate at a tavern. 
It is a long way from the Petersburg side to Semenovsky Barracks. 
I just kept walking, lost in thought, without paying any attention to 
the way. I had also forgotten that I hadn't eaten. I entered a tavern 
and sat down by the window. 
He flashed by me l 0 years ago. 
By the way, here is his official record. 
Having finished with Touchard (would flog orphans). 
I made my way to <his> study and saw <him> in front of a mirror. 
I can't stand talking about <my> childhood-I'd better tell you 
about my idea, emearkiRg aeeHt FR}' R9\'el as I'm embarking upon my 
Petersburg adventure. • 
• Peterburgsky roman. Could also be "my Petersburg novel." 

312 Run Away, but Not to Him 
Eh, here I'd better tell you about my idea. 
I was not bothered by the fact that I had not finished. (See.) 
I liked none <of> those who were ahead of me in school, I didn't 
even like Vasin, and I even disliked Kraft a bit, for his having steered 
me to the door the other day. traRge, thougn I aiEl kROW tl:tat R@ 
An idea. 
A small child. 
In brief, what about niFR do I care about him, the document..ts-e& 
FR}' persoR is sewn into my pocket. 
To be sure, I did want to find out about my father from her, 
that's right, just go there and find out, but there was something about 
that document, something that reminded me of an island in the Baltic 
Sea-Ungern42-something that filled me with an irresistible longing. 
I smiled sadly at this stupidity of mine. I couldn't remain a daydream­
ing ass forever! 
No, not 20 nor 5, but rather, he wants--and why shouldn't he want 
-to be a man of property, and if this is indeed so he is unlikely to be 
capable of stubborn saving. 
Not so very eager to become a beggar, if that were absolutely nec­
essary, and certainly he would not resist the temptation to eat a piece 
of bread, or to give a piece of bread to someone else. 
I got the idea to run away. Oh, how my heart was beating when 
the .sun set! 
Run away, but not to him. 
This simple line of thought dawned upon me when I was still 17; 
there, perhaps, rests my whole tale. 
As briefly as possible. Show your conciseness in the Touchard 
episode. 
Directly and simply: He flashed by and fascinated <me> by his the­
atrical "il faut le rosser."43 But aloud, a different reminiscence, a loRg 
wa}' to tR@ tav@rR, SHRS@t. Unfolding the roll <of memories>, all 
about Touchard and my "lackeyism."• 
I wasn't beaten. 
I'd be beating them. 
Copperfield. 
I entered a tavern, sunset, FROtR@F aREl EliRRers and sat down to 
• Lakeizm, as much of a neologism in Russian as "lackeyism" is in English. 
42 See note 3 of Part II. 
43 French: "You have to beat him." 

The Youth Gets to Know Versilov 3 1 3  
think. I was perturbed ... ပcrushed and blown to bits, like that 
canary, into a hundred little feathers. 
I don't want to develop my thought (my idea). 
Illegitimate. 
Used to stand aside. 
I don't like either Vasin or Kraft. 
He took <over> all of my thoughts, but my dreams were somehow 
revengeful. Dreams about <becoming> a farmer, etc. <Then,> came 
my own idea. 
As I embark upon my novel, in the course of which I actually did 
get to know this man, and perhaps myself as well, I want to tell you 
about my idea. 
November 26. 
In the latter part of part one introduce the sister, and an encounter 
with the young Prince. 
(If necessary, even Lambert.) 
In the l st chapter of part one, the Youth gets angry at his mother 
for having told <him> about the money. The chapter is based 
entirely on this <circumstance>. 
Upstairs, he does not become reconciled to him; they part enemies. 
2d chapter. However, I did not deliver Kraft's letter. 
At Vasin's, new and final variant. 
At first, the Youth is seeking to elicit from him, whom he knows to 
be a socialist, some information concerning the weak points of <his> 
idea; but later, since their opinions differ so much, he would like to 
leave. He stays and tells him about the things he loves, as well as about 
his daydreams (one can "live by romances, like that timid farmer," 
Ungern).44* 
But after the turmoil in connection with the girl who had hanged 
herself, he begs his forgiveness. 
The night before, at Versilov's, he tells his mother about Touchard 
and everything. ("I disgraced you.") And announces that he is leav­
ing. He comes upstairs. Conversation about <his> father. 
"I don't love you. Go away. I've always been dreaming of how you 
would come. Of how I would run away." He: "This is terribly seri­
ous." "No, this is nonsense-but then, that story about how I became 
a lackey is more serious. A lackey." Then about my mother, then 
• Ungrammatical in the original. 
44 See note 3 of Part II. 

314 Dergachev Group 
upstairs, to Versilov, in vam, illegitimacy. "Go away, I do not love 
you," etc. 
"In the main, this is the cheapest trash that could possibly exist," 
he says about Dergachev's group, but only toward the end. 
"Oh, we have here a lot of people," says Vasin, "who are quite 
crude and who have no convictions whatsoever, and who are merely 
exploiting our ardent and pure youth for financial profit-in litera­
ture for example; yet all this is useful and therefore to the good." 
Occasionally, the young Prince would exclaim: "Oh, how un­
educated I am!" 
He is frankly convinced that the independence of Russia as a na­
tion, and of each Russian as an individual, is quite impossible, and 
that this is a proved fact. 
Vasin's weakness is to think of himself as a statesman and adminis­
trator; he has become a captive of glory, which he ostensibly detests. 
He is the personification of a broken-down feeling of absolute 
humility, based upon constant intoxication with his own superiority. 
Once, at sunset, Liza and the Youth, in an inspired state of mind: 
"Let us swear that we shall always be kind and good." Locked in an 
embrace. "\Veil, good-bye, good-bye. Did you want to say something 
else? All right, leave it to yourself, and Christ be with you." 
A Trait. Never present him other than in words which carry a deep 
irony. 
"You can't live without accepting any T@Sf30Rsibility responsibility," 
says the Prince. 
He. He gives his opinion on contemporary literature-that the 
types created by it are rather crude; Chatsky, Pechorin, Oblomov,45 
etc. Many fine nuances have passed unnoticed. There was too little 
understanding. 
\Vhen the Youth has been accused of theft, He straightens out the 
matter, i.e., really brings back the news that the real thief has been 
apprehended, but the Youth embraces him impetuously and fervently 
thanks him, as if he were his savior. 
A shabby little fellow had stolen the money, then had quarreled 
with his partner, who then turned him in on the following day. 
But when the young Prince apologizes (with reserve) to the Youth 
45 Chatsky is one of the protagonists of Griboedov's Woe from Wit (1822-25); 
Pechorin is the hero of Lennontov's The Hero of Our Time (1840); and Oblo­
mov is the hero of Goncharov's novel of the same name (1859). 

Eavesdropping 3 1 5  
for having, himself, suspected him, the Youth replies: "No, I won't 
forgive you," And says that, actually, he is not glad the thief has been 
found, and that he wouldn't havဖ cared if they had kept him in 
suspicion. 
SHOULDN'T WE LET THE YOUTH'S LANDLORD HAVE A LITTLE BOY? THE 
LITTLE BOY AND VERSILOV. 
In his last showdown with the Youth, at the end of part one, Versi­
lov discusses that slap in the face in connection with the subject of 
mice. "I have become ashamed of my challenge of yesterday," he said 
-as. 
During their last showdown, the Youth to Versilov: "\Vould you 
believe that I have had to regret a thousand times that I am not 
vindictive?-sometimes it is so annoying to be kind." (Just as it is 
to keep running after somebody.) 
The Youth at Tatiana Pavlovna's, eavesdropping. 
"Why have you been eavesdropping?" 
''I'll show you, 'eavesdropping!' " 
Tatiana Pavlovna, to him: "What document? what letter?" 
He, to the Princess: "You shameless woman, you !" 
"You are all without shame, men and women alike!" 
Vasin to the Youth about Versilov, after the latter has refused to 
accept the money: "Such things aren't done to show off, but rather 
they conform to something basic, something inward." 
"No, Vasin, you are wrong." 
The Youth at Vasin's about Kolosov,46 a characterization, "if 
they're crooks," etc. Asked about Dergachev. 
December 7. 
He. He has a high ideal of beauty; the chains <worn by ascetics as 
an act of penance> needed in his feat are easy to come by, for <His> 
ideal is humility, and all humility is based on pride. In agreement 
with the Youth's "idea." For example, the most shameful and the 
most terrible memories mean nothing to Him, nor do they cause Him 
any feeling of remorse, because He has got "His own idea," i.e., an 
ideal. It is an impure ideal. Self-deification. People are, for Him, no 
more than mice. (The character of the Princess is of the essence): 
46 The real-life prototype of Stebelkov. He was convicted, along with others, of 
counterfeiting shares for the Tambovsko-Kozlovsky railway. Dostoevsky followed 
his trial in 1874 very closely, and many of the real-life characteristics of Kolosov 
are preserved in the portrait of Stebelkov. 

316 Terrible Feats 
<He> undertakes terrible feats, of a kind that frequently goes beyond 
the common sense of practical life. On one occasion He makes a full 
confession before the Youth. And all in all, He casts his spell upon 
the Youth who, lonely as He is, ana all keeps breaking with Him, only 
to make up and become friends again (i.e., according to how much 
he is disenchanted or fascinated by Him). No disgraceful fall would 
ever stop Him: time and again He would get new comfort and new 
hope from the idea that, in spite of everything, people were still as 
good as mice, so that tomorrow He would again stand above every­
body. This last fall shocks Him deeply. This woman is killing Him. 
If He had not gone out of his mind, He would have shot himself. (A 
born gossip.] 
The Landlord with his theory that woman is a carnal creature. • 
A dreamer. 
The wife who is going to be fried. 
And the high school student who makes three attempts to shoot 
himself. 
And the young Prince.-All still in part one, find a place for him. 
A visit by the old Prince 
At Vitia's regarding a challenge to the young Prince. 
Something about his sister. 
Give an outline of the characters of the young Prince and of Vasin. 
The young Prince is a fop, disorganized, the last of his family and 
a degenerate; a spendthrift and a gambler; secretly, a coward. At times 
sincere, at other moments he turns up his nose in the vilest fashion. 
"I can't behave when I lose." Shoot himself. Exalted and sincere 
dreams. About the essence of being a nobleman, and a nobleman's 
calling, also about how he is going to marry Liza. Scenes with Liza 
during one of which the Youth is present, allowing this to happen. 
In the beginning he gives the Youth some money, but when the latter 
loses it gambling and asks for more, he quarrels with him. When some 
money has disappeared from the gaming table, he shamefully deserts 
the Youth. Back home he tells him to his face that he has been selling 
his sister to him. Dreams about starting his own roulette; in a word, 
all kinds of contradictions simultaneously. Fragments of thoughts 
and emotions, a quickness of wit and of understanding, as well as a 
lack of character. He does, however, spare Liza. The old Prince at 
• Sushchestvo miasistoe, literally, "a fleshy creature." 

The Young Prince 317 
one time had the idea of getting him married to Anna Versilov, but 
things took a different turn (N .B. Anna comes to find out from Ver­
silov if he is in love with the Akhmakov woman). The young Prince 
alternately brags that the Akhmakov woman is in love with him and 
is afraid of her. He had been expelled from his regiment and was 
living in Luga, under terrible conditions. Vasin knows him. The 
Akhmakov woman patronizes him and would like to save him, 
unfortunate man that he is, but she does not love him. Interested in 
Liza. ("Bear it!") The Prince perishes together with Lambert. (Every­
thing more concisely.) 
Vasin and the Princess are both needed. The Princess loves Ver­
silov. Vasin, who has such a strong mind, is stupidly caught as the 
author of a proclamation. 
A detailed plan. 
But in the first part there can't be any particular delay. 
December 1 2/ 1 3. 
[February] New program of characters, December 1 3j l 4. 
The young Prince is a somber creature, almost narrow-minded (?), 
always sincere, proud, short-tempered, in whom high society has 
awakened a sense of indignation and ambition (he and the Youth are 
of a kind, which is why they become friends), unbearably proud, 
pure in his intentions and in his ideals. 
He loses <at cards> on account of his pride, quits in anger, and 
sends the Youth to hell (though he later receives proof of the latter's 
innocence). He has a terrible temper, picks fights ("an outrage"), but 
in his narrow-minded way is pure and firm. For example, he admits 
that he is uneducated, yet at the same time he is immeasurably proud 
of his noble birth. 
[Liza alone can mollify him.] 
He had fallen in love with Liza by accident, in Luga, where he 
was then living after having been injustly cashiered from his regi­
ment. She is the sunshine of his life, and only in her presence does he 
have a feeling of light and of peace. Having met her in Petersburg by 
accident, he takes possession of her. Initially he had no intention of 
marrying her, but after those gambling losses, and seeing that he was 
going down the drain,* he decided to do the honorable thing. Liza 
awakens even more feelings in him. The General's widow is in love 
• Ogovnialsia, literally, "turning to shit." 

318 The Young Prince and Liza 
with him, and they are practically engaged. He turns down the 
General's widow. Finally, he decides that he can't be without Liza, 
marries her, transfers to the Army* and goes to Tashkent. 
HeѼ prophesies to Liza that her husband is going to be her ruin. 
A scene at her parents', her mother and l\lakar Ivanov, when the 
Prince comes to ask for their daughter's hand. [At first, Liza refuses, 
andဗ the Prince says farewell to her. ("Bear it!") But suddenly the 
Prince comes back and takes her with him.] 
N.B. At first, He, who has cast quite a spell on the Prince, makes 
the latter jealous of the Youth, who, in turn, is the object of the Prin­
cess's advances, and the Youth knows why, but the Prince chases them 
all away. The PriRces, iR her HIFR, is eRamored, to the last degree, of 
the youRg PriRce. lihe feels iRsulted wheR he abaRdoRs her. 
lihe is conpassioRate (a cmHic trait of her character). lihe пHaried. 
the CeReral oHt of compasioR, out of coJHpassioR <she loves> WiJH, 
aRd, l'iRally, out of coJHpasioR, the PriRce. 
• 
1\'.B. \Vhen the Prince arrives in Petersburg, he has already been 
"moved" by an urge for regeneration; the ferment is present in him. 
A new attempt to restore his name-it becomes repugnant to him. 
The WRONG way! And he takes Liza, not to atone for his guilt, but be­
cause "she is my sunshine." GHRIST 
A somber and hypochondriac person, at one time he wanted to 
become a monk. ?(C'est le mal qui anoblit)?41 
A perennial, hidden anger at the outrages and established ways of 
the world, as well as at his own. He starts changing this by <beginning 
to change> himself. "Then I shall be a true Prince." 
IN ouR society there exists a thirst for regeneration, for new and 
righteous ways, and for resurrection, something that K--v has 
failed to observe. "This is enthusiasm," says He; "They even reject 
God religiously." 
He says this to the young Prince and to the Youth, while placing 
himself (inside) magnificently above all this. But in a direct sense, a 
thirst for regeneration. 
This is the idea of the novel. 
"Cher," He finally says to the Youth, "this whole idea of yours is: 
'I am retiring to the desert.' " 
• A rmiia, "Army," here in juxtaposition to gvardiia, "the Guards." 
4i French: "It is misfortune that ennobles one." 

The Youth and the Princess 319 
"I would like to change many things in the early portion of my 
manuscript," writes the Youth. 
A spirit of regeneration, of searching for the right way ... 
[An idea.] The Princess is cheerful in a graceful way, and outwardly 
frivolous. She likes a good joke. She can be passionately bewitching. 
The Prince finds that she lacks seriousness; but she is uncommonly 
clever and can see right through Him. 
Ticle YoutA is passionately enthralled by her graceful image. He is 
in love with her, but makes himself believe that he hates her. 
The Youth He The novel ends, and the reader can see that he is 
in love and wounded, and that he escapes into daydnaFRiRg his idea 
out of spite. 
The Youth's finale. 
The dream to distinguish himself somehow, so she would hear 
about itဘ, and, angry at himself for this dream, he escapes into his 
"idea," about which he is having awful doubts. For the time being, 
however, he takes a job so that he may support his father. 
It is necessary that the Princess make fun of him throughout the 
entire novel, most gracefully so, but it makes him angry. But later 
she begins to despise him. This makes him even more bitter. 
"This was such a dark moment in my life," says the Princess to 
Tatiana Pavlovna, "I am not afraid to lose the money, but I'm 
afraid to lose his respect", i.e., her father's, the old Prince's. 
December 14. 
THE NEWEST. 
An idea. 
The Princess has an important suitor, so that the young Prince, 
whom He has made believe that he might have a chance, is making a 
fool of himself. 
The young Prince, who has been carrying on disgracefully, defi­
nitely marries Liza. 
The Princess has had a rendezvous with the Youth. 
He suspects that the Youth may have the document. He is jealous 
of him, and also makes him jealous of the young Prince (or just so he 
detests him). 
The Youth is disgraced, since he is suspected of theft: ticlis idea The 
suspicion must be growing stronger (for a month or so). 
The Princess and everybody else all sever all relations with him, 
as the Youth withdraws into his corner (his Hat-details). 
Meanwhile the young Prince was greatly impressed by Makar 
Ivanov. (He met Liza at Vasin's.) 

320 The Young Prince Sees Through Versilov 
He proposes marriage to the Princess (a scandal). 
The important suitor summons Him and threatens him, telling 
him not to make any more slanderous statements affecting the Prin­
cess. 
Vasin is arrested, and He is also arrested. 
The Youth gets quite mad at Him. 
Catching the Princess, together with Lambert. 
Meanwhile the old Prince is practically in open rebellion. He is 
at the Youth's Hat, being afraid that his family will put him in ward. 
He is released from custody. 
The arson scene. 
The old Prince dies and leaves everything to her. 
He <lives on> as an idiot. 
The Prince takes Liza with him. 
The Princess marries the important personage. She keeps seeing 
the Youth, etc. 
And all in all, He is corrupting the Youth. \Vhen the latter is in the 
Princess's good graces, He suspects that the Princess, by being kind to 
the Youth, is actually trying to establish a liaison with him; yet He is 
also jealous. 
Later, when the Youth has fallen into disgrace, He is actually in 
contact with Lambert, after having found out the whereabouts of 
the document. 
ʼ@€ iR tl:le old bok The young Prince is under Versilov's spell, but 
his pure heart allows him to see through Versilov's unhealthiness and 
impurity. He does not believe that the Princess is engaged in debauch­
ery with the Youth, but he despises the Youth for his foppishness. [(In 
<the latter's> reports about the Princess),] he does not like him. The 
Prince would rarely forgive anything at all. He is a hypochondriac 
who feels oppressed by the world. At one time he wanted to become a 
monk. He fell in love with Liza because she brought light into his 
life. The idea of marrying her seems terrible to him. He seeks the 
Princess's advice (with whom he has a relationship resembling my 
own with E. P. while her husband was still alive).48 But he, with 
48 The initials stand for Elena Pavlovna lvanova, Dostoevsky's sister-in-law 
(the sister of the husband of Dostoevsky's sister Vera 1\-Iikhaylovna). Dostoevsky's 
relations with her were friendly, and it was thought at the time her ailing hus­
band died that Dostoevsky would marry her. She bears some characteristics of 
Anna Akhmakova and may be considered a life prototype of her. 

Youth Must Fall in Love with the Princess 321 
comical seriousness, assumed that this was true; and suddenly the 
Princess tells him that she is going to marry Lanskoi. He is glad; a lit­
tle hurt. He is sad that the Princess is so frivolous on the surface, but 
he knows that she is clever and admires her very much. He discusses 
Him with her quite openly, and receives some strange comments. He 
is completely overwhelmed by Makar Ivanov. A need for regeneration 
and renewal. He takes Liza and leaves with her. 
In the beginning there is something like a liaison between the 
Youth and the Princess, that is, when he used to be with the old Prince 
every day. Their conversations. The Youth would threaten her with 
the document, letting her know. She would allow herself to be amused 
by him, just for fun. Princess Kitty's gracefulness. Later she contemp­
tuously abandons the Youth. 
[This is necessary] Her scenes with Him. She is the only person 
who completely understands Him. 
He is a gossip. He corrupts the Youth and incites him against her. 
Vasin-a desire to become a Field Marshal. At the time of his 
arrest the Youth is with Lambert. He learns from Lambert that He 
had the idea to rape the Princess, together with Lambert, and that he 
had praised <. . .> 
The Youth, who had had the very same idea, is indignant at Him: 
"How did He dare to want the same thing?'' 
In the meantime, the Prince refuses to take Liza's innocence, 
though she offers herself to him. A scene of struggle. 
Do not leave the Youth out of sight for a single moment. The 
Youth is the hero. Make his personality more attractive. 
It is absolutely necessary that the Youth, while seeing the Princess 
almost daily for a whole month, fall deeply in love with her, and that 
he tell her everything, including the story of his past... Later, the 
Princess hurts him deeply by making fun of him. 
EXPRESSIONS. 
The novel: Disorganized forces. 
[February] "Resting, so-to-speak, with my own capital." 
"Exceptions, if repeated time and again, eventually become the 
general rule." 
"I want to learn all about this high society" (so he hires a dancing 
instructor.) 
The young man on the train (an animal) takes out his money and 
counts it, while the Fool is looking on: "Money?" [ABOUT.] The other 
man answers: "Money." 
This stinking soul. 

322 
Versilov and the Document 
"A youth grown old, a toothless youth." 
"So what, I have enemies! That's why I'm talking (that's why I've 
started talking), so I would make some enemies." 
"To shut oneself in, to snort, and to take out one's own insignifi­
cance on others (that's it, that's it, clever, very clever)." 
At Vasin's. 
"There is a good deal of preud some sort of a proud challenge in 
your present fit of sincerity" (about Ungern).49 
"And you are a Field Marshal. I am sincere because I am breaking 
with everybody as of tomorrow." 
[At Vasin's, the Youth discusses the scene at Dergachev's place: 
"The more so, since I was absolutely right."] 
Belle idee! N .B. Versilov had come to see him solely because he 
thought that the Youth might have the document. His lie had been a 
sly maneuver-would the facial expression of the Youth change, or 
would his behavior? 
The young Prince says: "The plain people are given to frightful 
depravity, they care for nothing but themselves and debauchery­
bestial, terrible debauchery; they are given to it without regrets, given 
to it consciously. Given to it irretrievably. Ours are terrible times." 
(This he tells Liza.) 
But to emerge from a woman's bedchamber appeared as something 
so monstrous to me (in Tatiana Pavlovna's bedroom, while the Prin­
cess was there) < . . .  > 
Liza: "Mother said: Think about the thing I wouldn't dare to beg 
of you." 
Versilov about Vasin: "Yes ... he is a decent fellow." 
"Is that really all?" (I would have died if somebody· had said that 
of me.) 
"No, that's all." 
Vasin: "Have you ever had command of a Russian army?" 
"Been down on <my> knees in the Senate." 
"Or, when like a shyster lawyer he is goiag to is going to get rude 
with me." 
He went to see Vitia, on account of the duel. 
"\Vhy, you're too little for that." 
"Of course I am." 
49 See note -3 of Part II. 

The Final Showdown 323 
["You're growing." "No, you'll grow some yet." "You are tall and 
such a puffy one." 
"No, I won't go, I'm afraid they:ll kick me out." 
"So you're afraid." 
"I sure am." 
"He'll tell his lackey to kick me out. What am I going to do then?" 
"How dare he kick out a second?" 
"Come on, I'm still a boy, how could I be his equal?"] 
And here a scene took place which had so much real-life truth in it 
that it was positively repugnant. 
"I am already nineteen, I have my rights as a citizen." 
"Still you are too little." 
"It's a full year since I am allowed to get married." 
"Go ahead and get married, you'll still be a green kid."* 
Sullen and serious, like a caged bird that has ruffled up its feathers, 
and to top it-a mocking expression. People who haven't the right to 
display a mocking expression and who don't know it are revolting. 
Belinsky was a precocious man, and nothing more. 
During the final showdown: "My friend, I've come to get recon­
ciled to you. I knew that you wanted to come and see me yourself, 
wanted to do it all day, but I also knew that your pride overcame your 
generosity, and so I have come myself." 
When Versilov has returned the fortune, the Youth is gravely 
affected by the circumstance that Versilov had, for a whole month, 
heartlessly displayed before him nothing but his bad, foppish traits, 
never thinking of deigning to show his deeper features as well. "A 
careless and indifferent attitude toward my opinion. Can it be true 
that I was such a stranger, and so unimportant, to him?" N .B. The 
Youth states this in his conversation with Versilov. 
Finale of part one. He was doing it because, in his scheming and 
far-seeing mind, he was suspecting that I might possibly have that 
other document as well. For my part, I suspected nothing of the kind 
for the time being (it became clear to me later). 
In the morning, after <the episode of> Versilov and the girl who 
hanged herself, Vasin asks, having explained the matter involving 
the return of the money to the Prince, as well as the Prince himself (a 
hussar, etc.): "Are you very close to your sister?" That same morning, 
" Shibzdik, a word which I don't find in the dictionaries, but the meaning is 
obvious from the context. 

324 
Versilov's Character 
the Youth meets Liza, talks ("a ray of sunshine") about Luga, and 
suddenly about Vasin: "Why did Vasin get to talking about you im­
mediate! y after he'd been discussing the Prince?" (The Prince had 
been in Luga also.) And it is at this point that Liza says: "Let us 
always be wonderful people, let us always be honest, let us always 
remember this morning." Etc. 
Finale. "People are -RHEe-mice ... " 
"Perhaps now you're going to change your opinion, but now we're 
together, together; you never had a friend before." 
Vasin's action irked me. 
Having learned that Versilov was innocent, the Youth is delighted, 
rents a flat and fixes up his room. (Not telling the reader that Versilov 
is going to visit him.) 
Finale. Versilov: "I've come to make up with you," etc. 
The Youth: "I've been waiting for you." 
Versilov: "Thank you for having waited." 
His CHARACTER (in the final version). 
In order to gain possession of the document and to take advantage 
of the Youth, he unmercifully lures him into debauchery and moral 
degradation. He takes advantage of his love for the Princess; he takes 
advantage of his thirst for a conflagration, his vanity-which he 
kindles into a terrible flame-his vices, and his pride. Having sensed a 
superior nature in him, he would, occasionally but casually, throw 
him a crumb of some superior thought (socialism, Christianity). 
However, this deceit, this coaxing the document out of him, all this 
does not proceed in any Jesuitical or systematic manner, for His very 
intentions are undefined. 
First, He does not know himself what he wants to do with the Prin­
cess, and therefore, much to the Youth's surprise, he would suddenly 
become very casual with him, antagonize <him with his?> cynicism, 
as if he had lost sight of <the> goal, and all in all, begin to pursue his 
own goal in the novel, and <then again?> cast it <off?> convulsively 
many a time. • At times he would say flattering things about the 
Youth's "idea" of <becoming a> Rothschild and proud solitude, then 
again he would suddenly speak of it with casual skepticism, and 
<treat> the Youth's soul with cynicism. In spite of his self-adulation, 
he is restless, for he is often dissatisfied with himself. He wants the 
feats of a superior man, he wants chains and sacrifices, but his attitude 
• Ungrammatical and very unclear in the original. 

Vasin 325 
of considering people as being no better than mice*' as well as his 
pride justify Him to His own conscience every time. It is impossible 
to love people. The idea that he may be in love with the Princess is 
humiliating to Him, [and eventually leads to his ruin.] His restless­
ness makes him a gossip. He has failed to gain a real insight into 
Vasin's soul, for he sees in him nothing but a narrow-minded Field­
Marshal. Furthermore, he cannot exist without a circle of admirers, 
starting with poor Sofia. He likes to be adored even in the most petty 
ways and would be unhappy in a trivial way even if a Tatiana Pav­
lovna turned away from Him; yet it would never make him lose heart. 
A passion for the Princess. This is what he has to say about Vasin's 
stepfather: "A scoundrel, a liberal of the 1850's (Kolosov),50 then 
there's Lambert, still less complicated, finally, the Youth-and there 
you have all the types of this generation." But his love for the hunch­
backed child of the Youth's landlord and his relationship with ဋ 
youRg girl, wA@R tA@ yo:Rg girl Kolosov's wife, [or with the girl 
whom Kolosov wants to marry] whom the latter had sold to be the 
kept woman of the Aide-de-Camp's father, are strange phenomena 
about His character. He watches the Prince and Liza skeptically. 
[Vasin is a little Field-Marshal. Lambert and Kolosov had been 
forging stock certificates together, and Lambert had demanded his 
share, whereupon Kolosov denounced Dergachev to the police.] 
Makar Ivanov is an Orthodox Christian, the highest contrast to 
Him. 
N.B. Kolosov's wife, who loves Kolosov, but has been sold to the 
Aide-de-Camp's father and is seeking Vasin's protection. 
(Couldn't it be Andrieux?) 
Sketches of December 15. 
The Princess is a depraved woman-of-the-world. He didn't "have" 
her even once; rather, she chased Him away. (\Vanted to save <her>.) 
He also wanted to save that young girl. She sent the young Prince on 
his way having made sure that he had been unfaithful to her. Versilov 
strongly supported her in taking this step. Meanwhile the Prince be­
came infatuated with the Princess. He left for Paris, not knowing 
that she was pregnant. Versilov offered to marry the young girl. The 
Princess was against that. Meanwhile no one was aware of the fact that 
she was pregnant. Suddenly the young girl dies in childbed (phos-
• In the original, simply myshinyi vzgliad, "murine attitude." 
50 See note 46 of this section. 

326 The Princess, the Young Girl, and Versilov 
phoric matches). Versilov is being accused of having made her preg­
nant. Versilov says nothing, but he has a document and the child 
(i.e., the girl's letter). • The Prince can't h(lve any doubts on that score. 
The Prince remains in bondage as the Princess's lover. He breaks with 
her, wanting to be honest. Versilov attacks him vehemently. Having 
learned the secret of the child from Versilov, and also how the Prin­
cess has deceived him, making him believe that Versilov was the 
young girl's lover-the Prince is quite beside himself, and in spite of 
the fact that he loves Liza he insults the Princess. The Aide-de-Camp. 
(The Aide-de-Camp is under <her> spell, but figures on her dowry.) 
The Aide-de-Camp knows about that compromising letter and wants 
to threaten Versilov so that He ,\rill hand it over. 
OR. The Princess isn't guilty of anything at all. It is Versilov who 
has (out of sincere conviction, though the Princess thinks that it was 
with an ulterior motive) made the young girl believe that the Prince 
has been unfaithful to her with the Princess. The Princess had actually 
been opposed to Versilov's marrying the young girl, hoping that the 
Prince would marry her. But the Prince was chased away by the young 
girl, nor did he know that she was pregnant. He can never forgive 
Versilov that. Versilov, on the other hand, being fully convinced that 
the Prince has been and still is the Princess's lover, unveils the story of 
the child before him and tries to incite him against the Aide-de-Camp. 
The Prince can see Versilov's spiteful jealousy and despises him for it. 
But as if to make up for it, he fully succeeds in making the Youth be­
lieve every detail of this story, including that the Prince has always 
been her lover, and that he, Versilov, has always found her repulsive, 
for didn't He sever his friendship with her when he noticed that she 
was beginning to run after him? Then, the letter and the Aide-de­
Camp just as before. He motivates <his actions with regard to> the 
young girl by his desire to save her. 
However, after this story with Lidiia, the Prince's conscience kept 
bothering him, and even though he was courting ti:te aaugi:tt@r the 
wife of Kolosov ʽi:taviRg B@@R he was in Luga), etc., he finally took 
up the search for the child. Troubles in the service. Finally, having 
received the inheritance, he made an attempt to stifle his conscience 
by debauchery. It is at this point that Versilov shocks him (showing 
him the letter and the child) and turns him into the Princess's enemy. 
• Dokument i rebenok, "a document and the child," may be a hendiadys 
meaning "a document proving who the father of the child is." 

Kolosov 327 
? In the end, the Prince begins to realize that Versilov is jealous of 
him, thinking that he has had a liaison with the Princess. But Liza. 
He quits everything and leaves for Tashkent. He had completely 
submitted to Versilov's will. 
[Think it over here] Kolosov knows about the child aHd is coH 
viHc@d that it is \'@rsilov's that it is the Prince's, and that Versilov 
might ·get a large sum of money if he wanted. [But that he had a 
different scheme, that is, <to marry?> the Princess. That even if he 
got nowhere with the Princess himself, He could at least spoil things 
between her and the Prince, by letting <her> know about the child.] 
But absolutely the time in the first scene.* 
?Kolosov is one of the Princess's temporary advisors, during her 
stay in Germany, in the matter concerning putting <her> old man 
in ward. It was also he who delivered the letter to Andronikov. 
Versilov had already proposed marriage to the Youth's mother 
when he suddenly, and on the eve of the wedding, asked for the Prin­
cess's hand. 
N.B. The Prince would like to break with Versilov, but he won't 
dare, because he loves Liza, although to make up for it he kicks out 
the Youth. 
The Youth, having been kicked out, gets together with Lambert to 
set a fire. After the fire, the Youth gets in touch with the Princess. She 
explains the truth to him, as does the Prince. It turns out that Versilov 
is out to save <her>. But it is quite clear to the Youth that he is in 
love. Then, on the eve of his wedding with his wife,* *  he proposes 
marriage to her, fully convinced that she is in love with Him. N.B. 
N .B. (Here, the denouement requires something stronger than a 
fire.) (The old Prince goes out of his mind.) 
Or thus: 
The fire comes in the end. ဌAnd it is only the Youth who, in 
the course of the entire novel, has full faith in him and who has the 
<same> attitude regarding the depravity of this whole society, the 
Princess, the Prince, etc. Versilov does not reject him after he has dis­
graced himself but, on the contrary, takes him under his wing. He 
teaches him selflessness, contempt for people, and how to save others. 
The youth has the idea to disgrace the Princess. (They take the old 
Prince over to their place.) [?] The Youth becomes involved in all of 
• Incomplete and unclear in the original. 
•• Really l\lakar lvanovich's widow. 

328 
The Aide-de-Camp 
his schemes. It is the Youth, and not He, who lets the Prince know 
that they want to put him in a lunatic asylum. Versilov also entrusts 
the child to the Youth, after it had been with the blind woman, 
Tatiana Pavlovna, who keeps repeating: "\V'hat a saintly man he is, 
Andrei Petrovich." The Youth finally decides that he is a saint. 
<Somebody> insults Versilov. The Aide-de-Camp. He is arrested for 
three days. All of which incites the Youth to take final action. \V'HAT 
IS MOST IMPORTANT, he is incensed by the fact that he had been feeling 
guilty of a crime against his father, having been at one time in love 
with the Princess, as a result of which she becomes doubly odious 
to him. Finally, Versilov comes back to marry <the Youth's> mother 
but at the decisive moment he chops up those icons and disappears. 
Then, he makes his last proposal to the Princess. THis gives the Youth 
the idea that perhaps He loves the Princess. The Youth then decides 
to let Him have the document, and it is then that the catastrophe of 
the conflagration takes place. 
"Forgive her!" 
After the fire the Princess explains everything to the Youth. 
He gets the Aide-de-Camp confused by letting him know about the 
Princess's liaison with the young Prince, and also that while she is run­
ning after him He, Versilov, has rejected her. The proposal to the 
Princess is made in scandalous fashion, which is why the Aide-de­
Camp intercedes. <Her> father. He tells her father that she wants 
to put him in an insane asylum. The old Prince flees. The Aide-de­
Camp, embarrassed by the scandal and by public opinion, demands 
an explanation from Him. Versilov says, in his explanation, that she 
has always been in love with Him, and that, by proposing to her, he 
merely wanted to rescue her from herself. (He also points out her 
immoral liaison with the young Prince.) Everything turns out to have 
been a lot of nonsense. The Aide-de-Camp could be reconciled to the 
Princess, except for the document. At the crucial moment, when the 
old Prince is in <their> hands and the document could accomplish 
everything (N.B. The Aide-de-Camp and the Princess return the old 
Prince from the Youth and Lambert's to his own home, thanks to 
Tatiana Pavlovna). It isn't the money the Aide-de-Camp needs; yet 
he understands, in particular, the fact that it might be dangerous to 
show the Prince the document in his present condition. It is at this 
juncture that the Youth shows Him the document. "Forgive her." 
An idea: The Youth is constantly under His influence and is fanati­
cally devoted to Him. Versilov, in the full meaning of that word, 
controls his ideal and gives it any direction he may choose; <at times> 
he would show him the edge of a new horizon. 

Forged Stock Certificates 329 
Memento: The ideal. Field-Marshal General. Scandal-mongering 
at the flat of the Youth's landlord. 
A romance-invent a romance tJetween the Youth and the Princess, 
and how He saves her, everything invisibly and inaudibly. 
December 24. 
Vasin's btR@T stepfather, someone like Kolosov, has launched some 
forged stock certificates (Lambert), a liberal of the 1850's, conceited 
and very sure of himself. A blockhead, respected by Vasin, even 
though the latter has been working as a clerk at his savings and loan 
association. A businessman, uncomplicated; to protect himself, he re­
ports Lambert and his other associates to the police, for the forgery, 
as well as Dergachev <for political conspiracy>. He wants to marry 
the Aide-de-Camp's mistress for some money. With a capital of 50,000. 
He was once mixed up in some affair, had "suffered" (a month in 
prison), and drawn all possible advantages from it. On account o£ 
this, he has access to good society. He is making up to the Youth in 
order to use him for his own ends, etc. 
December 25. 
Kolosov, the editorial office. Vasin's stepfather, something like 
Zhemchuzhnikov, has the reputation of a capitalist, knows the old 
Prince through his business. At one time he toys with the idea of 
paying court to Anna Andreevna (meanwhile he is just an ephemeral 
fraud, and forges stock-certificates). However, Anna Andreevna sees 
through him and sends him on his way (he was expecting a dowry 
from the old Prince and was giving advice to Anna Andreevna) and, 
herself, makes the Prince marry <her?>. 
But the old Prince, having heard of the document and about the 
threat of being taken to an insane asylum, flees to the Youth. At this 
point, Kolosov and Lambert demand that Anna Andreevna give them 
50,000, for which they promise to arrange her wedding. Meanwhile, 
Kolosov is suddenly arrested (he had himself informed the police), 
and so forth (Vasin warns the Princess). (The young Prince severs 
all ties.) 
Plot, ]anum·y 13. 
Lidiia is a madwoman. The Prince has made her pregnant, then 
regrets it, and, in very mean fashion, rejoices when Lidiia herself 
chases him away. Meanwhile he has started to run after the Akhmakov 
woman and, since she is off to Paris, he's off to Paris also. N .B. He is 
passionate, disorganized; yet, by that time, he has already experienced 
fits of an urge to become honest. In Paris, the Princess flirted some 
with him, but there was no liaison. Meanwhile, his conscience is 
starting to bother him. He makes a clean breast of it to the Princess. 

330 The Very Last Variant 
She initially demands that he marry the girl, hut then, how could he 
marry a madwoman? The Princess quickly returns to Ems, where 
everybody has gathered coming from ..J.Ht.l..y-Switzerland. She finds the 
young girl still in love with Versilov. The Princess is opposed to a 
marriage to Versilov, writes a letter to the Prince, the latter having, 
however, suddenly become infatuated with Kolosov's wife. No answer. 
Finally, a date is set for the wedding, but Lidiia suddenly bears her 
baby two months prematurely and suddenly dies. The wedding with 
Versilov didn't come off because everything turned out differently 
than expected. The Prince returned; Versilov called him "a heel." 
The Prince challenged him. Versilov didn't want to fight a duel. The 
Prince slapped his face in public (disorder). Thereafter, the Prince 
was in Luga, with a female relative of his, at first, looking for <his> 
daughter, found Liza. Having returned his inheritance to him, Versi­
lov challenged him to a duel, but then withdrew his challenge. Ver­
silov became firmly convinced that the ymuဍg Prince had been the 
Princess's lover (the young Prince was not aware of the pregnancy). 
He found out about it from the young girl's letter, shown him by 
Versilov, ).l@anwhi]@ tR@ Frinc@s is convinc@d that it was \'@rsilov 
who l'Had@ crai!y Lidiia pr€gnant only toward the end of the novel. 
The romantic intrigue lies in the fact that the young girl had chased 
the Prince because Versilov had made her believe that the Prince had 
a liaison with the Princess. 
But when the Princess, upon her return from Paris, insists on 
Lidiia's marrying the Prince (she also had been writing him to Paris), 
Versilov tells her, while Lidiia, the old Prince, and <her?> husband 
are present, that she has had a liaison with the Prince all along, which 
is also why she is carrying on this intrigue (the letters to Paris not­
withstanding) to prevent the Prince from marrying Lidiia. There­
upon Lidiia dies unexpectedly, at a time when nobody had been able 
to reach any decision. 
THE VERY LAST VARIA:'T. January 1 3 / 1 4. 
The young Prince (disorder) has made Lidiia pregnant. But she 
is mad. He conceals it, which is possible, since Lidiia is fantastically 
deranged. He had her by accident, without love. However, he does 
not know that she is pregnant. But he does conceal the fact that he has 
had her. This is also what he tells the Youth, in all sincerity, in a few 
pages. And suddenly, for the first time in his life, he meets the Prin­
cess; they are all in Switzerland at the time, whereas the Princess just 
passed by en route to Paris. He immediately falls passionately in love. 
The Princess was accompanied by her father. He follows the Princess 

Kolosov and the Young Prince 331 
and the old Prince to Paris. (N .B. Since that time, the old Prince takes 
a liking to him, and begins to need him.) Also there, the Princess, sens­
ing her husband's imminent dea.th, does some flirting with him. 
Finally, she falls in love. She understands that the old Prince will give 
her another dowry. (N.B. While still in Switzerland, she had been 
imprudent enough to write, together with Kolosov, that letter to 
Andronikov.) In her flirting with him, she drives him to a frenzy, but 
does not submit to him. In the meantime, Kolosov has returned from 
Russia. He <is?> a doctor, '/@Tsilov an obstetrician. Versilov was 
seeking his advice (it is also from him that he learned about the letter 
to Andronikov which, incidentally, was actually sent, in part, upon 
his own instigation). Versilov, •.vith K through Kolosov, lets the Prin­
cess, who is now in Paris, know what kind of a person the young 
Prince is, and what he has done (all this, out of jealousy). In the 
meantime, in Paris, the young Prince, though he is very much in love, 
is also thinking of the young girl. He is thinking various somber 
thoughts, and is full of remorse. Suddenly, Kolosov arrives. The 
Princess learns everything, questions the young Prince, demands that 
he marry the girl, travels to Ems. From Ems, <she?> writes to Paris, 
for <she?> does not want Versilov to marry. The young Prince is 
procrastinating, he is in ill health (he has lost some money gambling, 
a bad incident in his regiment), fails to reply <to her letters>. She 
dies. The Prince shows up. Finds out from the Princess that Versilov 
has been carrying on an intrigue against him, with Lidiia; but he 
also learns from Kolosov that it was Versilov, too, who had dispatched 
that same Kolosov to break up his liaison with the Princess, having 
revealed his true nature to him. What is most important: though 
the young Prince, during his stay in Paris, had fallen to thinking a 
lot (gloomily, fits of honesty), he still wanted to conceal his liaison 
with Lidiia from the Princess, and at any cost. When he arrives in 
Ems, the Princess receives him most ungraciously. This is where he 
attacks Versilov. Versilov sees that the Prince is so passionately and so 
blindly in love that he actually shows no human feeling for the de­
ceased Lidiia or his daughter. He does not deliver the letter, and 
keeps the child with himself. For this, he has his face slapped. Later, 
the more time goes by the more he starts grieving for Lidiia. Luga and 
Liza are having an effect on him. Then, the lawsuit and a trip abroad, 
back in the service. An important mission to Berlin. Having returned 
to Petersburg <to attend> to the lawsuit, he suddenly gets the in­
heritance and a challenge from Versilov. But he has already changed 
his opinion of Versilov, and also knows himself that the Princess is 

332 The Princess Has Overwhelmed Him 
<now going> with the Aide-de-Camp. He makes friends with the 
Youth, meets Liza. Versilov hands him the letter and his daughter. 
Everything would be fine, but suddenly qe runs into the Princess 
again. He takes to carousing, out of vanity and jealousy, so that he 
might encounter [and meet] the Aide-de-Camp, to whom he has pre­
viously lost some money gambling. The Princess has completely over­
whelmed him. At this point Versilov suddenly gets complete control 
of him, assuring him that he has never been in love with the Princess, 
but that, quite to the contrary, she with him; right there in Paris, the 
Princess had been mentioning Versilov very frequently and had tor­
tured the Prince by making him jealous of Versilov. Versilov incites 
him against the Princess and the Aide-de-Camp. She treats the young 
Prince with contempt, insults Liza. N .B.? Perhaps still while Lidiia 
was alive, the Princess either told or wrote the Prince that Lidiia was, 
perhaps, bearing Versilov's child. And he did not know for sure: 
whose child? etc. (to Andronikov). As for Kolosov, he knows about the 
letter both because the Princess was later looking for it with him, and 
because Versilov was questioning him about it. N.B. Most important. 
Kolosov could know (as an obstetrician) only about Liza's pregnancy; 
but from whom?-This he did not know. Versilov, on the other hand, 
when he wrote to Paris,ဎ wrote nothing but this: "Make inquiries 
about Kolosov, only about the facts." 


v 
Notes to the Second Part of the Novel 
The notes for the second part of the novel refer at some length to the 
following events and situations: Arkady's meeting with Katerina 
Nikolaevna (the Princess), Versilov's character and his conversations 
with the Youth, the ambivalence of the Youth toward Katerina 
Nikolaevna and toward his father, the Youth's gambling sprees, an 
account of Katerina Nikolaevna's and Versilov's early relations and an 
account of Versilov's motives toward her, and, at considerable length, 
Prince Sokolsky's relationships with Katerina Nikolaevna, the Youth, 
Liza, Anna Andreevna, and Stebelkov. Near the end of this section of 
notes Dostoevsky defends himself and his place in Russian literature 
and insists on the universal importance of his discovery of the "under­
ground" type. 
These situations correspond roughly to those in the novel itself, but 
there are substantial differences in treatment and emphasis. By and 
large we find less mystery and obscurity in the notes that we do in the 
novel. Some of the ambivalence and obscurity of Versilov's motives 
and reactions toward Katerina N ikolaevna are eliminated by an ac­
count Dostoevsky gives us of the hostility which arises in their first 
meetings. Dostoevsky tells us the following of their early friendship: 
"Two years earlier, he had fallen in love with the Akhmakov woman 
-and, terribly naively, told her about his strivings. N.B. Price: 'Since 
she has learned about my thoughts and I 'have revealed my soul to her, 
she should have appreciated that. But she .. .' She was stunned, but 
only laughed at his sinfulness." He leaves the Akhmakov woman­
filled with shame and anger-for Lidiia, who, however, dies-perhaps 
from remorse-when she learns about the other woman. His hostility, 
as well as his attraction, seems to have been motivated by her lack of 
appreciation of him, so that "He is dreaming of saving her, and of 
334 

Full Treatment of Versilov 
335 
punishing her, and of forgiving her, etc." Versilov burns on the hate 
of spurned love and on the humiliation of ridiculed confession. Like 
so many of Dostoevsky's characters; Versilov is motivated by spite and 
revenge, but the Predatory Type of the early notes has been progres­
sively transformed into a charming type with "moral predatoriness," 
which has been systematically obscured and made ambiguous. This 
process is clear if one contrasts the account we receive here of his early 
relations with Katerina Nikolaevna and the account that we receive 
in the final version of the novel. 
Versilov's character receives fuller treatment m this sections of 
notes than it has up to this point, and what we learn about Versilov 
lends light to crevices of his personality that are never illuminated in 
the published version. Much of the obscurity of his motives, for ex­
ample, is dispelled by the following quotation: 
I) Versilov is convinced of the loss and of the stupidity of every 
ideal, as well as of the curse of stagnation that has hit the whole moral 
world. 
2) For a while he forced himself to believe in Christ. 
3) But his whole faith went to pieces. There remained only a 
moral feeling of duty as SYCR telling him to strive for self-perfection 
and good <deeds> under any ci1-cumstances (i.e., regardless of any 
loss of faith, or any kind of moral despair), owing to his own con­
scious will, a certain uncompromising desire. "Though my ideal may 
be lost and I may not know good from evil, still, I shall follow my 
conscience and, gropingly, seek to perfect myself-and I shall some­
where." Having lost his faith he decides, instead of succumbing to de­
spair, to start straight from himself, and he believes that he will get 
somewhere, and that something will be revealed to him along the 
way (the chains). 
Up to this point m the notes, Dostoevsky, and the Youth, had 
been unable to determine whether Versilov's faith was sincere or not. 
\Ve must remind ourselves that Versilov's preaching of Christianity 
and his wearing· of chains (apparently as acts of penance) are repeated 
refrains in the notes. The same ambivalence is present in the novel, 
and more than one critic has taken Versilov's Christianity as true 

336 
Versilov's Motives 
coin. This passage makes it clear that Versilov is neither a hypocrite 
nor a believer. The situation is more subtle, for Versilov is both sin­
cere and an unbeliever. He wants to believe but he cannot. He thinks 
like a believer, acts like one, but does not feel like one. His is a 
forced faith, and as such not faith at all. It is from this delicate 
situation that the frustration, rage, and inconsequent actions of Versi­
lov arise. 
Versilov's motives in the quotation above are "explained" in the 
way that they are not in the novel. In the notes Dostoevsky analyzes 
Versilov's character directly and permits him to analyze himself. In 
the novel he gives the point of view to the Youth, and with the 
point of view come all the ignorance, confused emotions, and willing 
blindness of the son toward the father. The Versilov the Youth sees 
and Dostoevsky conveys to us in the novel is enigmatic, contradictory, 
and ambivalent. Dostoevsky apparently wanted him that way, but we 
have, at least in part, in these notes an unenigmatic and unmysterious 
Versilov. Between the notes and the novel intervene all the "tech­
niques" by which Dostoevsky accommodates himself to his audience 
and to the demands of the novelistic art of stirring interest and hold­
ing attention. But more than rhetorical effects engage the reader's 
attention and more than interest is gained by the mystery and am­
biguity. To some extent the technique mirrors the actual ambiguity 
present in a faith that is striven for and desired but is incapable of 
realization because it is "forced" faith. 
Despite the fact that Versilov comes to occupy the center of the 
stage, both in these notes and in the novel, Dostoevsky continues to 
assert that the Youth is the hero of the novel and that all other char­
acters have reference to him. Dostoevsky says: 
N.B. 
And 
so, 
the 
whole project 
consists 
of 
three 
main and major sections (aside from the minor ones, all 
of which must be remembered). 
N.B. I) regarding the relationship between the Youth and 
Him, 
2) between the Youth and the Prince (Liza) , 
3) between the Youth and the Akhmakov woman. 

Father and Son as Sexual Rivals 337 
The Youth vacillates greatly from paragraph to paragraph in his in­
tentions concerning Katerina Nikolaevna. He loves and he hates her, 
and wants to save and to ruin her. His feelings toward her are not 
unlike those of Versilov, although more open and direct. The ques­
tion of sexual rivalry, which was put forth boldly and even coarsely in 
the very early notes, continues to present itself to the Youth's atten­
tion and consternation. There are repeated displacements and subli­
mations of the Youth's sexual feelings for the Princess in the notes and 
in the novel, but one of the most curious, if not the most revealing, 
is to be found in the following statement by the Youth to the Princess: 
"You are now like a mother to me." The Youth is tempted repeatedly 
to make coarse use of the document to gain power over the Princess, 
and Versilov has the same temptation. There is even a structural 
parallel to support the analogy of father and son in their relations 
toward the same woman. The climactic scene of Part II may be said 
to be the rendezvous between Katerina Nikolaevna and the Youth, 
and the climactic scene of Part III may be said to be the meeting 
between Versilov and Katerina Nikolaevna. The disorder that Ver­
silov embodies on a moral level is the disorder that is acted on by the 
Youth in his reckless gambling and his high living. Dostoevsky seems 
to have contemplated a similar analogy between Prince Sokolsky and 
Versilov. This is not surprising since the notes, and the novel, make 
clear that Versilov was supposed to embody in some form all the 
disorder of society. Dostoevsky explicitly reinforces the analogy be­
tween Versilov and the Prince in the following note: "Versilov and 
the Prince have some points of contact: refusal to accept the estate, 
Lidiia, the child; both hate the Akhmakov woman, and <their> 
nobility." The inner disorder of Versilov is compared to the "outer" 
disorder of the Prince. Versilov represents on the level of conscious­
ness a moral disorder that the Prince represents on the level of action. 
It is perhaps significant that the Youth falls into disorder because he 
loses faith in his father and lives with the Prince when he gambles and 
carouses. Dostoevsky says: "N.B. Versilov's cynicism was in part the 
cause of <the Youth's> passion for gambling." 
The tie between the young Prince and the Youth as double reflec­
tions of Versilov's inner disorder is found confirmed in the attitude 

338 Katerina Nikolaevna 
of each to Liza. The Prince "dishonors" Liza in act, and in the notes 
the Youth "dishonors" her in attitude. In the novel the Youth does 
not suspect that his sister has had an affair with the young Prince, but 
in the notes he hypocritically blinks at the affair and in one marginal 
note he cynically approves of it: 
For instance, he already suspects that Liza may have something with 
the Prince, but in his depravity he remains silent, lets it go, closes his 
eyes to it--only once does he make Liza an angry, unfair scene (that 
happens right before her disgrace;) and on the very last day <before> 
her disgrace he catches her, and is almost a witness of a scene between 
the Prince and Liza. (Or, he even pretends that he has become shame­
fully "civilized," and suggests, by various jocular and cynically vile 
hints, that there might be some very light sort of relationship between 
her and the Prince.] 
The object of the Youth's and Versilov's passion, the Princess 
(Katerina Nikolaevna) figures importantly in these notes, but little 
light is thrown on those qualities of her character that so violently 
provoke father and son. i\ either here nor in the novel does Katerina 
:\'ikolaevna fit the role Dostoevsky gives her. Versilov's entire pro­
gram of moral improvement without faith comes to shoal on the 
mysterious attraction that she exercises on him. And the Youth's 
idealism is wrecked in part by the emotions she generates in him. Yet 
the reader will search in vain, both in the notes and in the novel, for 
qualities that seem of sufficient importance to provoke such effects. 
She is mystery without substance, and some of Versilov's condemna­
tions of her as a shallow and worthless woman seem justified. The 
Youth in these notes during his rendezvous with her calls her a saint, 
but we are not told what her saintliness consists of. At best she is a 
woman who had once callously suggested sending her father to an in­
sane asylum, and who during the course of the novel is intent upon 
retrieving those rash words in order to safeguard her position and 
legacy. Her ambition seems to be to assure herself the calm and the 
dignity of social eminence that marriage to Baron Bioring will bring 
her, and the financial security that retrieving the letter will bring her. 
She is most decidedly not a sufficient "objective correlative" for the 
emotions and conflicts she arouses in the Youth and in Versilov. 

Biographical Reflections 339 
Her portrait in these notes is closer to that of the final version than 
that of the early notes. Like Versilov she has lost something of her 
predatoriness, although there is a passage in the notes in which she 
contemplates seducing the Youth. Parenthetically, however, she ex­
plains that she does not know how to seduce a man. Versilov's early 
coarseness is softened to subtleties and ambiguities, but her early 
coarseness evaporates and only a kind of vague innocuousness 
remams. 
Finally one must draw attention to several pages of biographical 
reflections by Dostoevsky on the nature of his art, near the end of this 
section of notes. Dostoevsky defends his portrayal of the "under­
ground type" against his critics as the true representative of Russian 
society. He has in mind, in contrast, the "normal" lives of Russians 
as portrayed by Tolstoy and Goncharov: "Tolstoy and Goncharov 
thought that they were describing the life of the majority; in my 
opinion, what they were describing were the lives of some exceptions. 
Quite to the contrary, their life is the life of exceptions, while mine 
is the life of the general rule. Future generations will find that out, 
because they will be more objective, and the truth ·will be on my side. 
In this I believe." To this he adds his comprehension of what the 
"underground type" consists of: "I am proud to have presented, for 
the first time, the real image of the Russian majority, and to have ex­
posed, for the first time, its misshapen and tragic aspects. The tragic 
lies in one's awareness of being misshapen." A few lines later in the 
notes he continues: "I have been the only one to bring out the tragedy 
of the underground, which consists of suffering, self-laceration, an 
awareness of a better <life> coupled with the impossibility of attain­
ing it, and, most important of all, a strong conviction on the part of 
these unfortunate people that everybody else is like them and that 
it is, therefore, not worthwhile to improve oneself: 1,"/hat vVhat can 
sustain those who do try to improve themselves? A reward, faith? 
Nobody is offering any reward, and in whom could one have faith? 
Another step from this position, and you have extreme depravity, 
crime (murder). A mystery." 
Dostoevsky, in his self-justification, has Tolstoy in mind, and he 
feels aggrieved that Tolstoy's reputation is greater than his, since he 
has seen more fully into the depths of reality. He adds, and not with-

340 The General's JVidow 
out some credibility, that "Bolkonsky reforms as he sees Anatole's leg 
being cut off, and we've all been shedding tears over it, but a genuine 
underground man wouldn't have reformed." 
January 20 
The Prince had been seeking Lidiia's hand, but was diverted by the 
General's widow, and Lidiia chased him away. In the meantime, 
Lidiia gave birth to his child. 
(N.B. The General's widow did not know, as she was enticing him, 
that he had a liaison going with Lidiia, but <thought> that he was 
merely wooing her.) On his return, the Prince finds Lidiia dead and 
learns that there had been a child (this, a long time after). He is 
stunned by all these developments, and already in the beginning of 
the novel, he has broken both with the Princess and with Liza. But 
then Versilov either brings them together again, so as to tear them 
apart later, or directly incites the Prince against her. Or brings them 
together again. As for himself, he proposes marriage to his "wife," 
after ϱlakar Ivanov's death, and chops up those icons. She turns him 
down. At this point the Youth turns up with the document. (Liza, 
"Bear it!") 
January 20. Second variant. 
The Prince is pursuing the General's widow. He is in love with 
her to the point of idea fixa. Now, he has come to town in connection 
with the inheritance and has sworn that he won't let her (the Gen­
eral's widow) marry the Aide-de-Camp. Having received the money, 
he flings himself into all the social gatherings at which the Aide-de­
Camp is present. Versilov makes friends with him and encourages 
him. Then she surrenders herself to the protection and guidance of 
Versilov, hoping that he might save her from the Prince. [Or else, he 
saves her of his own accord, without her having asked him.] Versilov 
takes up the matter, gets everything arranged, then, at the crucial 
moment, smashes everything to bits. 
Liza? 
Vasin's wife. She does know what to do with him, constant argu­
ments. Vasin's smugness. Stebelkov, scurrying around near Vasin, for 
he l:ias gst@A "'iAB has gotten wind of hts marriage. (But Vasin won't 
tell him anything about it.) Stebelkov is compromised in connection 
with the <forged> shares, but he isn't at all scared, but actually 

Vasin's Idea 
341 
expects to celebrate a triumph; Vasin, though , is hardly compromised 
at all. She is complaining to the Youth about Vasin, and makes fun of 
him. And only in the end it becomes apparent that she is Vasin's wife. 
Vasin goes out of his mind, and then the scene of the conflagration. 
N.B. He won't live up to his duties as a husband. About a divorce. 
january 24 . 
The Prince has gotten mixed up with Kolosov. His character is 
such that he is perfectly capable of making Lidiia pregnant. He was 
drummed out of his regiment by the other officers. Now he wants to 
try his hand at everything. Hatred for the General's <widow>, love 
for Liza. Kolosov is his ruin. Versilov puts him back on his feet again. 
The General's widow seeks Versilov's protection. But the PriRees 
General's widow loves Vasin; the latter is imfJossible. The Youth is 
convinced, through the entire novel, that there is no love between 
Him and her. He finally learns about her love for Vasin. And, toward 
the very end, about His love for her (after He has unexpectedly pro­
posed to her). Besides, he had made the proposal virtually on the eve 
of her wedding to the Adjutant-General. Then the Youth gives the 
letter to Versilov. N .B. The letter, in the meantime, is becoming more 
and more important as her wedding to the Adjutant-General is ap­
proaching. (If Vasin is to be made into a madman, oughtn't Versilov, 
in that case, have guessed long ago that this was so?) 
[Here] Vasin's idea. You can live happily only if the people who 
were there before you are good. But people are good only when they 
are happy. And therefore, everybody ought to be applying all his 
efforts to the end that everybody be happy. Consequently, <society> 
should be organized as a company of shareholders. A shareholder will 
be a lover of mankind whether he wants it or not, for if he won't, 
people will treat him badly, and he will be unhappy. 
Vasin: "I need nothing, not a single ruble more. What's the differ­
ence between Vasin in a suit of gold and Vasin as he is?" 
"Tasty morsels do not tempt me, neither do honors. What is the 
pleasure received from a tasty morsel in comparison with mine? Can 
any honor be compared to the position which I am now deserving of?" 
[February] "I am never bored. There are certain thoughts which 
will never allow you to get bored." 
"I know of nothing in the world that I wouldn't be familiar with. 
[Are there any ideas with which I am not acquainted?] I do not know 
of any. Of course I don't mean, in any special field: I couldn't be 
familiar with such-and-such invention in the field of railroading, but 
this isn't higher knowledge, of course." 

342 
Vasi11 and the Youth 
The governess has hanged herself. Vasin says: "This will go on 
forever." 
He has words of praise for Versilov, but just a tiny bit, just barely. 
"Yes, but everything ought to be in one piece. And this thing is too 
particular, and it is quite likely that he is motivated by considerations 
of personal advantage." 
The Youth is surprised that Vasin is so kind to him and talks to him 
as if he were his equal. 
"This isn't so, nor is it because of this," says Vasin. "It is because I 
see absolutely no difference between you and everyone else. I cer­
tainly don't consider you to be more stupid than the clever ones, 
more wicked than the good ones, or even younger than the old ones." 
"How could that be? Don't you really see any difference?" 
"Oh yes, of course, everybody differs from everybody else in some­
thing, but those differences do not exist for me. In my eyes everything 
becomes level with everything else." 
"But what about yourself?" 
"So far I have not entirely determined H!:)" ewn my position in this 
changing world.* I don't know. I am always satisfied with myself." 
"And you are never bored?" 
"No, because there is a lot left to desire. There are many things to 
be achieved yet." 
"People like Christ, Mahomet, Moses ... " 
Expressions. 
Surnames: Miss Comforting, a young girl;** i\frs. Perchatkin,*** 
a widow; Assafetidov,* *** a divinity student. 
The chatterbox: About how the English were going to give Zav­
ialov five million for his finn. 
About Chernyshev,1 the ΊIinister, and about Victor Hugo and 
Dumas on the marriage contract. 
"She isn't what you'd call 'well scrubbed,' she is 'well laundered.' " 
"He has as many virtues as he's got shortcomings.'' 
"Ah, you are flattering him too much.'' 
A delicate handwriting. 
• V mirovorote, literally, "in the whirl of the world." 
• • Uteshaiushchaia, participle of uteshat', "to comfort." The ,·erb is used with 
an obscene connotation. 
• • • Literally, "Mrs. Glove," but apparently not suggestive of anything. 
• • • •  From as(s)afetida, "asafetida," an evil-smelling resin. 
I See note 1 7  of Part IV. 

Contemporary Science 
343 
"And he is sitting at the most important spot in the world of learn­
ing?" (i.e., in the Academy, speaking of Str<akhov>). 
Nothing dies. On the contrary, eyerything continues to live organ­
ically; it just is reincarnated in different forms. 
"Everything is falling apart in this country. \Vhat we need is for 
educated people again to be at the head of our society." 
Rossen: "Isn't it true that educated men are even now at the head 
of our society?" 
Versilov: "Yes, if you see it that way, perhaps ... 
" 
"It is necessary that mankind be given justice; then it will remain 
at peace." 
"But what about freedom, equality, brotherhood ... ?" 
"These are all no more than very fine wishes, nothing that has 
been realized. They lack authority." 
"What about science?" 
"Contemporary science hasn't even started to make any moral con­
clusions to make, and if you want to know the whole secret, it is none 
of its business either. Science knows this very well itself, and this is 
why so far it has played merely a negative role relatively as regards 
the past; it has created nothing, only destroyed. Science does not 
create, it destroys. ·what it can create and build are railroads, and 
nothing more." 
"Isn't that a great deal?'' 
"The point is not that it is too little; the point is that it isn't 
enough. The point is that it is really not nearly enough, which I can 
prove to you right now. ·would you be satisfied with having railroads 
and nothing else, or would you like to have something else, too?" 
"Surely I shall want something else, absolutely." 
"And this is precisely what science will never be able to give you." 
"Do you really think so, do you really?" 
''I'm not trying to find fault with science at all: it won't give you 
<"that something else"> because that isn't any of its concem-that's 
all there is to it." 
"This is really the heart of the matter, as I see it." 
A good-natured person, but not a good man, as are most shallow 
people. 
Tatiana Pavlovna to the Youth: "I am convinced that you are 
thinking that he is doing all this just for your sake-1 mean, decline 
the inheritance, and challenge the other man to a duel-all this 
solely to become worthy of Arkady Makarovich." 
-She was beating me terribly, but I was kissing her. 

344 
Versilov a11d I deals 
They served a mass for Olia. 
On February 22, after his arrival in Petersburg, the Youth says: "I 
cannot understand how I could then, in my mother's presence, tell 
about Touchard! I never even thought that I ought to be ashamed 
of her!" 
"In a word, he has as many virtues as he has shortcomings." 
"Ή1y God, how you are flattering him! How could anyone have so 
many virtues?" 
The Youth to Versilov: "I always knew that we should never part. 
That time, when I was telling about Touchard, I was merely having 
a good time of it, even though I was feeling that I had broken with 
something: [absolutely.] Broken, yes, but not with you, I knew that 
we two would get together again. That time when I insulted you by 
chasing you from my room, my heart really sank <after I'd done it>. 
To be sure, I was terribly mad at you that time." 
"Acquire then, a feeling of shame, and at least a little bit of re­
straint in your anger." 
The Liar, a General on the railroad, they'll wait, and <in the mean­
time> the train would be gone. (Vasin's father, who sold his wife.) 
(Memento. Turgenev, in his opinion of <this> murder, called 
<him> "a Marquis"-while, in this case, the murderer displays 
nothing but his dullness of imagination as well as of reasoning.) 
F.ebruary 25. 
After Petersburg. 
I) Versilov is convinced of the loss and of the stupidity of every 
ideal, as well as of the curse of stagnation that has hit the whole moral 
world. 
2) For a while he forced himself to believe in Christ. 
3) But his whole faith went to pieces. There remained only a 
moral feeling of duty as such telling him to strive for self-perfection 
and good <deeds> under any circumstances (i.e., regardless of any 
loss of faith, or any kind of moral despair), owing to his own conscious 
will, a certain uncompromising desire. "Though my ideal may be 
lost and I may not know good from evil, still, I shall follow my con­
science and, gropingly, seek to perfect myself-and I shall get some­
where." Having lost his faith he decides, instead of succumbing to 
despair, to start straight from himself, and he believes that he will 
get somewhere, and that something will be revealed to him along the 
way (the chains). 
4) Two years earlier, he had fallen in love with the Akhmakov 
woman-and, terribly naively, told her about his strivings. N.B. 

The A khmakov Woman 345 
Pride: "Since she has learned about my thoughts and I have revealed 
my soul to her, she should have appreciated that. But she ... " She was 
stunned, but only laughed at his sinfulness. For there are two types 
combined in him-the idealist and, time and again, his former self, a 
most sinful and petty person. Yet Versilov was more right <than she 
was>: realizing his own sinfulness and his <many> falls, he did not 
become confused, hut admitted these to himself and, thus, lifted 
himself up. 
5) Then he left <the Akhmakov woman> for Lidiia, while jeal­
ously accusing the Akhmakov woman of sensuality and narrow-mind­
edness. Besides, he was terribly ashamed that he had bared himself 
so completely before the Akhmakov woman (about self-perfection, 
"You've taken off your chains, haven't you?"). [Lidiia, on the other 
hand, accepted him in an entirely different way, fool in Christ that she 
was, and followed him rapturously, and bowed before Him, as before 
a prophet.] 
6) But Lidiia died. ["She died because she realized that I still 
loved that other woman."] Full of shame, and continuing his <pro­
gram of> self-perfection, he lived another year and a half (he refused 
to challenge <the Prince> to a duel, for instance, after having had 
his face slapped, and did so to show his willpower, did it as a moral 
feat). 
7) At this point, the Akhmakov woman makes another appearance 
and the romance takes its course. (He is dreaming of saving her, and 
of punishing her, and of forgiving her, etc.) He has made himself 
believe that he does not love her, but that he, rather, has a tremendous 
amount of compassion for her, etc. In his pursuit of her, and in his 
love for her He sees his own weakness and his own fall ;  but in self­
control, and in suffering her insults, he sees-salvation. He has ex­
pressed his task in these two points, altogether too naively, almost 
childishly-and therein lies the beauty and truth of it. 
And so, Nota bene: 
In the 2d part he does nothing but bare himself quite unexpectedly 
and in a most disorganized way, [but most of all, quite unexpectedly,] 
thus surprising the Youth by his unsuspected and ideal aspects. 
[His action with regard to the Akhmakov woman comes entirely 
unexpectedly. A letter to her, or an insult to the Aide-de-Camp.] In 
the third <chapter?> when the Youth has fallen (that same night), he 
bares himself completely before him; [their friendship, and] here, sud­
denly, his terrible fall; his exceedingly mean action (denunciation) 
against the Akhmakov woman. A letter to her aRd soRietR.iRg with. 

346 
The Role of the Young Prince 
the Aide de Camp. The Youth leaves him, and he abandons him (per­
haps, marriage to <the Youth's> mother?). He chops up those icons 
and leaves. A marriage proposal to the Akhmakov woman and, finally, 
in the 4th <chapter>, the Youth and Lambert, and all the denoue­
ments, arrests, Stebelkov, the Prince, Liza, etc. [Here, too, the Prince's 
marriage.] The old Prince's wedding, and his death, and the affair 
with the Akhmakov woman, and the document. 
[Meanwhile, the Youth with the Princess, the Prince, Makar, and 
gambling. Makar in the third <chapter>?] 
In the 3d part, when He has undertaken to save the Youth and 
wholly bares himself before him-and besides, there is also Makar 
Ivanov-the Youth, though he is saved, still retains a certain amount 
of hidden, revengeful anger and spite, and though he has sincerely 
surrendered himself to the ideals of Makar and Versilov, Versilov's 
fall (proposing marriage to the Akhmakov woman, and the icons) dis­
tresses him greatly and awakens in him a boundless bitterness, and at 
this point-Lambert. But it isn't just the fall that has such an impact 
on him; it is precisely while overcome by the tenderest of emotions, 
after having heard his offer to set out on their pilgrimage into the 
desert, that he suddenly joins Lambert. (He also meets Alphonsine, 
and is glad he does.) 
He merely answers all of the Youth's questions most genially, while 
saying nothing on his own part (Speshnev).2 Yet he visits him fre­
quently and is affectionate and responsive, which moves and delights 
the Youth. 
N.B. b: A VERY RAPID ;\;ARRATIVE A LA PUSHKI;\;. 
Notabene's. Versilov is firmly convinced that the young Prince used 
to be the Princess's lover. 
February 25. Create <the image of> the Princess! 
February 26. The role of the young Prince. (Beside everything 
else, beside his sufferings which are due to his sense of duty and his 
insignificance.) He is terribly inclined to yield to his evil instincts. 
(The money which is his as a result of the successful lawsuit.) And, 
again, he is jealous of the Princess, on account of the Aide-de-Camp. 
The slander he has spread (under Versilov's hidden influence) about 
the Princess. The Youth, in his meetings with the Princess, wants to 
set all of this straight for her, and be of some service, and so he de­
velops, if not an outright hostility, at least an antagonism toward the 
2 See note 23 of Part II. 

Versilov's Letter to the Princess 347 
young Prince. But somebody talks some sense into the Prince. He 
admits that he was lying (this is already in the third part) Here, with 
Liza and, when caught together with Stebelkov. This is where Liza 
enters the picture. Tashkent. And so on. 
In the end of the 2d part, only a quarrel, involving the despotism 
of love, between the Youth and Versilov. (Besides, Versilov suddenly 
writes a letter to the Princess, asking her not to corrupt that adoles­
cent.) A terminal quarrel, that is, a quarrel which the Youth thinhs is 
terminal. But when, in part three, He comes to the Youth's rescue, 
soothes and revives him, new ties are established, which are now 
complete as well as sincere. Versilov bares himself down to his 
chains; and yet the whole thing ends in his proposing marriage to 
the Princess, and exactly after Versilov has been insulted by the Aide­
de-Camp. 
And so. 
In the 2d part, Versilov has merely become inexplicably attached 
to the Youth, but does not bare himself completely. A good deal of 
mystery is still left. The Youth would like very much to find out 
more about the Princess, but he does not get the whole information 
from Him, but rather gets it from the young Prince, from the Prin­
cess, and from Anna Versilov. 
In the end of part two, Versilov suddenly comes up with a mean 
trick, stunning the Youth. Besides, Versilov leaves his wife, nor does 
he pay any attention to the way the Youth is living and gambling. 
The latter fact greatly affects the Youth, so that he quarrels with him 
out of "a despotism of love." (In fact, Versilov disappears for a time.) 
The story with the card game, night (absolutely, the encounter 
with Lambert). 
2d part. 
Versilov's letter to the Akhmakov woman, asking her not to corrupt 
the Youth. A threat to tell the Aide-de-Camp. She complains to the 
Aide-de-Camp herself. The latter clashes with Versilov. Versilov is 
disgraced and disappears from the house. The Youth feels indignant. 
Cynicism gains a hold on his soul, debauchery, cards. 
Then, in PART three. In pan three, the Prince's remorse and de­
spair, and in the end he gets involved in that affair with Kolosov and 
Lambert. Versilov saves him, and here, now, everything becomes 
clear, and they join forces against the Princess, etc. Also, Makar 
lvanych, and all those stories with the old Prince (Lambert and 
Kolosov), and the young one. But then, the chopping of the icons 
and part four. 

348 
His First Visit 
The Youth is embittered, and all of the denouements, he joins 
Versilov only at the very end. Conflagration. 
N .B. Lambert, in vile fashion, entices the old Prince to come to 
<l\Jme> Andrieux's place (he "·ants to make him marry her). The 
old Prince escapes, rescued by the Youth and Anna Versilov, and­
already in part four-the Prince flees to the Youth's place (here, 
again, Lambert, and Kolosov, and the Youth, and Anna. But the 
Aide-de-Camp and the Akhmakov woman take the Prince away. But 
he still wants to get married, and dies suddenly). 
[In part four.] On one occasion Lambert says to him: "\Vhy won't 
you fuck <Mme> Andrieux?" He agrees and stays with Andrieux; 
however, they both start crying, nothing comes of it. That is already 
in part four. 
About how to set the city on fire, become a thief (a hellish night). 
Composition of the whole novel, already a definitive one, general 
summariwn) assigning their respective places to all the personages 
and stories in the novel, according to parts of the novel. (In general, 
but not in detail.) 
Aဏ EMBRYO. 
lst chapter of part two. The flat (a month later). Versilov's visit. 
The story of how he came to see him for the first time. Character-
istic discussions, arguments, and lectures. "I made a point of not men­
tioning the Princess or the Prince, nor did He say a word <about> 
what we'd be living on. Nothing about me and my affairs: I found 
it both reassuring and irritating (it worried me). Out of pride, I said 
nothing." The story with "that passive creature." Found that child. 
Versilov and his family. A small quarrel on account of "that passive 
creature" and the family. The Youth suddenly realizes that he is still 
very remote from Versilov. 
2d chapter (or 3d). Meanwhile, a liaison <has developed> between 
the young Prince and the Youth's sister. "I found out that there was 
something new going on between Versilov and the young Prince. 
Connections. The Prince is delighted. Getting to be close with the 
Prince. A night-suddenly the Youth wins <a lot of money>. The 
devil take it all! 
3d chapter (or 4th). Meanwhile, about the Princess, relations an 
anecdote about how he established contact with the Princess. It was 
a secret-both on Versilov's part, and the Prince's. The Princess 
suddenly takes him into her confidence, seduction. "You are seducing 
me." Quarrels, young love. (Introduce Vasin, Stebelkov, the child, 
and the rest.) [About Liza.] 
5th chapter. Playing cards with the Prince-life is really in full 

The Old Prince and the Document 349 
swing. A big quarrel with the Princess. The Aide-de-Camp. Some 
sally on the part of Versilov, in connection with a document, or some­
thing. The Youth treats him condescendingly. Anna Andreevna, the 
Prince-''I'm getting married." (Stebelkov.) (Perhaps, an encounter 
with Lamh€rt.) 
6th chapter. Reconciliation with the Princess, and her betrayal 
<of his confidence>. VersiloY Full of hatred, he gives Versilov a 
strong hint about the document. Here, suddenly, he meets Lambert. 
The money. Meanwhile the Youth has lost a lot of money gambling, 
and the Prince is beginning to sniff. A quarrel with the Prince, the 
last word about Liza, prior to that terrible night. Lambert has got 
money. The scene involving his loss. The terrible night. -Met-Lam­
bert. l\Ieeting with Versilov-i.e., the plot stays the same all the way. 
Part three. Solitude. "My idea." Versilov, friends again, but in a 
higher sense. Makar Ivanov, his death. Everybody is arrested (includ­
ing the Prince). Liza. Marriage. Versilov. Proposal to the Princess. 
Versilov and the Aide-de-Camp. Versilov's sudden fall, after <a pe­
riod of> ideal magnanimity. 
Part four. Goes directly to Lambert. [":\fo, evil is better!" Cyni­
cism.] Meanwhile he has got everything worked out with the Prince. 
(The old Prince is, in effect, frightened by Versilov's revelation con­
cerning the document.) [More about the old Prince in part three, save 
him.] Lambert et al. drive the Prince into a panic. He flees to the 
Youth's place. The Aide-de-Camp and the Princess save him. (Mean­
while, the story of the young Prince and Liza is coming to its end. 
Tashkent.) (N.B. The young Prince (out of stupidity) says disgraceful 
things about the Princess.) Suddenly the Youth, after all that has hap­
pened, decides upon the conflagration. He breaks with Lambert, 
arranging everything by himself. At the last moment he goes to 
Versilov. Both of them together. The conflagration. Explanation, and 
general denouement. 
Febntary 27. 
Detailed composition of part two. (A big job.) 
(At first a general, but detailed, idea of part two, and later accord­
ing to chapters. Then, the composition of the separate chapters, and 
most of all, the first. Separate and detailed reading of the material, 
with distinct marking of the selected passages.) 
N .B. I\'. B. M. St. The contacts between the Youth and the Princess 
in part two are kept secret from everybody. Think up a story about 
how the Youth was able to take up these contacts, and the first rendez­
vous. Just as with Anna Versilov. 
[Find out about Rudin] N .B. And so, the whole jnoject consists 

350 Letter about Corrupting the Youth 
of three main and major sections (aside from the minor ones, all of 
which must be remembered). 
N.B. I) regarding the relationship between the Youth and Him, 
2) ben,·een the Youth and the Prince (Liza), 
3) between the Youth and the Akhmakov woman. 
For instance, he already suspects that Liza may have something 
with the Prince, but in his depravity he remains silent, lets it go, 
closes his eyes to it-only once does he make Liza an angry, unfair 
scene (that happens right before her disgrace); and on the very last 
day <before> her disgrace he catches her, and is almost a witness of 
a scene between the Prince and Liza. [Or, he even pretends that he 
has become shamefully "civilized," and suggests, by various jocular 
and cynically vile hints, that there might be some very light sort of 
relationship between her and the Prince.] 
(N .13. By the way, he is mad at the Prince because the latter is 
telling him things about the Akhmakov woman, because he is after 
the Akhmakov woman, and because he wants to spoil her relationship 
with the Aide-de-Camp.) The Akhmakov woman suddenly shows him 
the door and disgraces him (after Versilov's <outrageous> sally, when 
he writes her a letter asking her not to corrupt the Youth). It is after 
this incident that the Youth, quite beside himself, goes gambling (the 
disgrace). (N .13. The Prince, also, disgraces himself with the Aide-de­
Camp. The Prince is angry (on the last day <before> the disgrace), 
and breaks both with the Youth and with Versilov.) At this point, a 
brief, but mean, conversation about Liza. 
(N.B. In the last scene, at night, Lambert lets him know that he has 
been with the young Prince for a long time already.) 
The role of Olia's mother. (And that of Vasin, the Dergachevs, etc.) 
(N .13. Start with this in part two, but the main denouement is in part 
three, i.e., as far as Vasin and the Dergachev group are concerned.) 
Stebelkov is at Anna Andreevna's and is involved with the Prince 
as <his> money-lender. 
In part three: A full, childlike confession and Christianity on the 
part of Versilov, until the chopping <of the icons>. Yet, already in 
part two, some hints. For, though he is playful and cynical, or very 
deeply melancholy, as far as the Youth can see, his urge for those 
childlike, tender revelations, which come up in part three, comes 
through here and there in part two. 
N.B. Absolutely essential: 
It is absolutely necessary to compose only one learned discussion 
between Versilov, the Prince, and the Youth, and besides, thousands 

His Carousing and Gambling 351 
of questions and answers between the Youth and Versilov: most 
difficult. 
N.B. Very imjJOrtant. Throughout part two. 
A whole series of contacts with <his> mother, with Liza, and with 
Tatiana Pavlovna, all of them quite abstract. Just as with Versilov, 
not a word about reality, but merely about various memories, jokes 
-in a word, about all perfectly happy relations, which must be also 
explained to the reader (i.e., that strange alienation from reality, and 
Hight into the abstract). And so, continue in this fashion right up to 
the last scene with Liza (which is real, acrid, terrible). 
But finally, Liza, his mother, and Tatiana Pavlovna get worried 
about his carousing and gambling, and this in spite of the fact that 
things have gotten right up to Spinoza;3 and so, when it happens, 
already toward the end of part two (တat a trying moment, when 
his heart is overflowing with pity), that Liza-replying to his re­
proachful question, ထ uttered while they are alone, why she was 
disturbing their mother by telling her about his carousing-suddenly 
starts talking to him quite seriously about his conduct, he responds, 
with a cynical and bitter laugh, that he isn't interfering with her 
freedom <in carrying on> with the Prince either, leaving her much 
embarrassed. And in an even more <climactic?> scene that follows,* 
on the last day, he suddenly attacks her, bringing up the subject of 
her shamelessness and depravity; he acts as if he feels hurt and leaves, 
but later makes up with her, so that Liza still talks to him, though in 
a casual way only.* *  
N .B. Important task. It is absolutely necessary to specify the par­
ticipants in the drinking spree, and the officers. 
Another task: About the Hat, description of the Hat and its occu­
pants. He makes <the Youth's> sister and mother laugh at his stories. 
N .B. (Tuck Olia's mother away somewhere.) 
• A v eshche bolee posleduiushchei stsene, literally, "in a still more following 
scene," where obviously one or two words have been left out. 
u The whole sentence is very awkward in the original, just barely grammatical. 
3 Dostoevsky became acquainted with Spinoza most likely from an article pub­
lished in Dostoevsky's magazine Vremia, by N. N. Strakhov, "Spinoza's Teaching 
About God," in the September issue of 1861. During the writing of A Raw Youth 
four volumes of Strakhov's translation of Spinoza appeared and Dostoevsky may 
have had firsthand knowledge of Spinoza. There is something of a parody of 
Spinoza to be found in the words of the old Prince in Part I, Chapter 2:3. The 
old Prince say"s: "If there is a higher being," I said to him, "and he exists as a 
person and not as some kind of diffused creative spirit, as some kind of lluid 
(because that is even more difficult to understand), then where docs he live?" 

3н9 
:l-
The Main Thing 
N.B. Important. The young Prince abandons him and rides m·er 
to Vasin's place to get some advice, or, in his presence, honors Vasin 
outrageously, thus terribly hurting the Youth. 
N .B. The Akhmakov woman also has something to do with Vasin­
jealousy. 
N .B. Feb mary 28. 
In part two. when the Youth discusses his relationship with the 
Akhmakov woman, he says: "And now I am getting to the most secret 
and confidential part of my story, which is in fact still confidential : 
that moming I had an appointment with ... " and so on. 
;\!.B. The most important and the main thing, absolutely. 
In part two, Versilov says this to the Youth: 
(On one occasion he said this to me, and h·e completely forgotten 
in what connection :] 
"My friend, you do remember, don't you, how you were asking 
questions of me, in that coffin <of yours>, concerning your mother 
and :Makar hanych-remember, then, how free and easy you were on 
that occasion? \Vas it proper for a son to speak of his mother in such 
terms, to show such curiosity regarding his mother? Nor were you 
blushing: I was looking at you, watching you on purpose, and I saw 
no color in your face ... \Vhy, now you are blushing ... " 
(For part three, for <his> generation.] "But what about you, your­
self-weren't you rather casual in your story about ࠦfakar h-anovich, 
too .(that time?"] 
"I purposely wanteEl was out to embarrass you, (You ought to be 
chasing me out right now] I was feeling you out, I was expecting you 
to blush ... 
" 
"And so you merely deceived me, making the pure spring of my 
soul e,·en more turbid than before. Yes, I am a wretched youth who 
does not know, from moment to moment, what is evil, and what is 
good. Had you then done e,·en the least bit to show me the right 
direction, I would have taken your hint and jumped on the right 
path right away. But you merely got me confused and angry. -Btl+ I 
swear to you, all the time you were telling me this, I was suffering 
and blushing deep inside; particularly since I had my cue: you were 
speaking with affectation, you were being witty in an unnatural way. I 
saw this and instead of blushing ended up by getting rather angry 
at you, and terribly angry at myself. But this was precisely iRsteaEl of 
what substituted for my blushing. This was precisely <what you just 
called> the color in my face. 1'\ow, of course, it is something else 
again, now it is all different again!" (for part three). 

Solution of a Problem 353 
"I saw all this perfectly well, I had noticed it, and fully understood 
you, and it is for this sole reason that I even then, immediately, [and 
with all my heart) forgave you the terrible thing you did to me on that 
occasion: for you literally showed me the door then, didn't you? But 
I was perfectly aware of the fact that you weren't angry with me, but 
with yourself, and precisely instead of blushing. This is wh)' I was 
actually glad for you, and on the ReM regained my composure ... I 
knew that, somehow or other, we would get together again . .. "* 
"\Ve got a lot of things straightened out," (the Youth remarks,) "in 
those days we were incessantly and eagerly trying to communicate 
with each other." 
February 28. 
Final task: Distribute the whole content of part two among 10 
chapters. 
About Spinoza, he to Versilov, in desperation [and despotically:] 
"\Vhy then were you just sitting there and not telling me that I was 
a fool?'' 
"If I had done that, you would have cursed me forever. As it hap­
pened, you were able to speak your mind, to cuss me, but good, and to 
return <to me> right away. And it all came out marvelously, and 
with grace. As for your coming back to me, I never doubted that for 
a moment. .. You are acting like a despot with me." 
March l f2. 
Solution of a pro/Jlem. 
Start part two with a single event, rather than splitting it up into 
four acts. Express everything that is of importance through artistic 
action, <that is> the words and actions of the characters. As for the 
historical part of the whole thing (i.e., how things happened to take 
this course), insert it, too, wherever necessary, in sections and frag­
ments. There must be a unifying plot (the search for the child, for 
instance, as far as the Akhmakov woman is concerned)-ei=- (the Akhma­
kov woman is trying to find out from him what Anna Versilov wants 
of the child, and he is both trying to dodge her prying, and yielding 
to it). As the action begins to unfold in part two, it should be apparent 
that he is already, in spite of all his successes and joys, beginning to 
have his doubts and to feel very depressed at times (he is in debt, the 
Prince is being rude and equivocal with him, Versilov). Later, 
• There is some indication that this paragraph was meant to be crossed out. 
Ambiguous in the text. 

35-! 
1'crsilov's Impulses 
<show> through scenes as well as the narrative, how such a scene 
could come about. A major quarrel, with the Aide-de-Camp im·olved 
in it, on account of Vcrsilov's letter in which he warns against cor­
rupting the Youth. The Aide-de-Camp had been threatening the 
Prince even before. The Prince tried to communicate this to the 
Youth, but then quarreled with no one but the Youth himself. In 
passing, a scene between the Prince and Liza, witnessed by the Youth 
-and he remains silent on account of the money (screams of remorse 
directed at the reader). After Versilov's letter, the young Prince, hav­
ing discovered that tR@ latter the Youth has been in contact with the 
Akhmakov woman, almost attacks him-sneers and anger and con­
tempt for him-after he has been a witness of that business with Liza. 
(N.B. The young Prince had been laughing most heartily even the 
other night, when the Youth had been thrown off a sleigh.) Lambert, 
etc. "His own idea" emerges toward the end of pan two. 
Suddenly, one night, in the street, to Versilov: "Dad, father. \Vhy, 
you are my father, and I haven't ever called you father yet!" (this, 
right after Spinoza.)4 
N.B. (Important.) This man Versilov does everything in spurts: at 
one time the Prince's family wouldn't have a chance, then again he 
relinquishes the inheritance of his own accord; he would challenge 
his man to a duel, then withdraw his challenge. He would be silent 
for a while; then suddenly, that insolent, insulting letter to the 
Akhmakov woman, which violates all the rules of decency and is 
altogether immoderate (Heeckeren). "I cannot understand how such 
capers could occur to such a composed, even-tempered, calm, and firm 
gentleman as Versilov" (remarks the Youth). 
"His own idea" comes altogether to the fore in its entirety"' during 
that hellish night) while it had hardly been mentioned in the 2d pan. 
(Only, perhaps, a thing or two while he is gambling, but otherwise he 
simply had no time for it.)-<Stan pan two?> with a single event in 
order to have the time to prepare the denouement involving the gam­
bling incident, and that whole episode. 
Regarding Lidiia Akhmakov, let something flash by in pan two, 
through the young Prince and, perhaps, through Versilov, where it is 
understood that it is precisely Versilov's account of Lidiia's storyࠩ 
• "In its entirety" is underlined twice. 
4 See note 3 of Part II. 

Versilov's Confession 
355 
Prince that shocks the Prince so much , and immediately wins him 
over. That this is how it actually happened, the Youth learns from the 
deeply shaken Prince, but he does·not as yet, in the 2d part, that is, 
know the very plot of Lidiia Akhmakov's story (he merely lets the 
reader know that there probably must have happened something ter­
ribly shocking, but that he learned about it only later (in part three) 
and would communicate it to his reader at the proper juncture). And 
so he learns the whole graceful and fantastic story of Lidiia only in 
part three, already from Versilov (who is in an exalted frame of mind 
at the time), and Versilov's raptures leave the heart of the Youth 
deeply shaken. Right here, in part three, "·e also have Versilov's 
confession, to the Youth, about the Akhmakov woman, though it is 
not a true confession but rather presents things the way Versilov him­
self wanted to understand them, including remorse, etc. On this 
occasion the Youth concludes definitively that He does not love the 
Akhmakov woman (and suddenly, in part three, He proposes mar­
riage to the Akhmakov woman), and so on. 
At dawn, after that hellish night, the Youth has a mass served for 
Olia (his last ruble). \Vithout explaining to the reader to what end, 
or why. After mass, he runs into Versilov: "He took me up to his 
place" (last line of part two). 
The Stolbeev woman has left for her country estate: so the Prince is 
alone at the apartment. 
At first, the Youth won some money at faro. At one time they were 
considering pooling their accounts, the Prince and he, that is. 
There is one scene where the Youth and the Prince get to be quite 
close-that's <during their discussion> about the sfJirit of the nobil­
ity. It was the Youth who was doing the talking. All of a sudden the 
Prince began to treat him with extraordinary respect (and then, later, 
accounts). 
Anna Andreevna asks Versilov if he is in love with the Akhmakov 
woman, even in part two. [Especially toward the end, after the row 
with the Aide-de-Camp in the Youth's presence]. 
In part two, the old Prince has fallen ill. Anna Versilov is in 
attendance, while the Youth chooses to neglect him. He had been 
thinking of borrowing some money from him, but was ashamed to 
ask him. Prior to that, he had consulted with Anna Andreevna, who 
apparently approved of it. Something like friendship between the 
Youth and Anna Andreevna (Varia). 
In part two, Versilov sometimes actually doesn't seem to notice 

356 
Liza Is jealous 
the insults and the tyran11y which he sulfers at the hands of the Youth, 
and comes to see him meekly, in childlike fashion , which surprises 
and delights the Youth. 
??? A vital task: the Youth's flat. 
! A PRECIOus scene. Practically on the last day (of part two), his 
mother suddenly pays a visit to the Youth at his Hat, something she 
had never done before. 
! In the course of part two the Youth tells his mother about how he 
had met her at Touchard's. 
In the final scene, Liza makes a confession to him, but only casually 
so. 
In part two, Liza is jealous of the Prince on account of the Akhma­
kov woman. Humiliations, but also tenderness, on his part. 
March I /2. Compose chapter one in detail, the rest, what with the 
material already on hand, will come by itself. 
The point, the pivot from which to start, the point of departure, 
the essence of the plot! 
! Reading the material! 
March 2-reading the material, 
March 3-<:omposing the pivot, 
and Ήlarch 4-start <writing>! 
ϲ.B. He has been thrown from a sleigh, snow ... If this is all to be 
developed, the Youth's drinking spree must start at the very begi11-
ni11g of part two. 
Part two in 4 stories. 
1) The story of the Youth and Versilov (the flat, Liza, mother). 
2) About the Youth and the Prince (the Prince's relationship with 
the Akhmakov woman, the beginning of the drinking spree, the Aide­
de-Camp), etc. 
3) About the Youth and the Akhmakov woman. 
4) About the drinking spree and his quarrel with his father. 
?? Here, this question: How much should be given in the form of 
a narrative, and how much as outright action? Should one start with 
outright action immediately (introducing the preceding in the form 
of narrative passages within the action), or would it be better to have 
<a series of> narratives? 
In part two, the Youth suddenly says: "I am now writing the book 
of my disgrace." 
N.B. Perhaps one shouldn't bring out Versilov's opinions and the­
ories too much in this second part. 
ϱlarch I j2. 

The Prince and the Youth 
357 
[So] .J.k. or the Youth arranges for some intimacy between the 
Prince and Versilov, or of their cm·n accord, they-that is, the Prince 
and Versilov-get together even . before the Youth <is around>, 
through the child (the infant child). An encounter with Anna An­
dreevna and the beginning of her schemes <connected> with the 
infant child. On the occasion of that encounter, Anna Andreevna 
suddenly invites the Youth to her place. Olimpiada is at her place. A 
conversation concerning the possibility of Olimpiada < . . .  > The 
Youth strikes a tone. Tableaux vivants.* Junior Chamberlain 
Versilov. 
(;\1.13. Junior Chamberlain Versilov is a silent and disdainful wit­
ness of the Youth's disgrace.) Prior to this, the Youth complains to 
Versilov about his brother. 
N .B. Perhaps a scene such as the following should be inserted. Once 
the young Prince has become fascinated by Versilov and is giving out 
shrieks of remorse, saying that he, the Prince, is an ignoramus and the 
unworthy scion of a great family, the Youth begins to preach to the 
Prince, and they become awfully close friends. Then, very quickly, 
comes the scene about the accounts and <mutual> loathing. Also, 
about the Princess ... 
As for "about the Princess," that's because 1...-and this is where 
the story of his romance with the Princess begins. 
N .B. His conversations with the Princess frequently approach the 
topic of the dowment, but the Youth keeps dodging her questions, 
nor does he explain this thing to his reader, not in part two. The 
same holds true for Versilov as well, as the latter, too, is out to get the 
document, without any explanation on the part of the Youth (except 
for these sudden words to the reader: "Inasmuch as I was seeing that 
he was after the document"). He is also confused by the fact that 
Versilov is apparently encouraging the Prince to pay court to the 
Akhmakov woman. 
:\'.B. Once, during a drinking bout, somebody says to the Youth: 
"Listen, Prince," but it is said naively and in a friendly way, and he 
does not take it up. 
?A fantasy: He has been teaching Liza and his mother philosophy 
(also, Tatiana Pavlovna), and then quarrels with them about philos-
• Zhivye stseny, literally, "living scenes," "lively scenes," but here apparently 
in the meaning of z.hilJ)'e kartiny. However, "some lively scenes," is a likely 
alternative. 

358 Stebclkov 
ophy (the absolute, Spinoza). He screams at Liza: "You are no longer 
my sister!" ;;md later And to his mother: " I  curse the day I was horn." 
Later he admits that he knows nothing, eYen though he wanted to 
enlighten them (N.B. This might come out quite graceful.) 
And later, to the reader: "I am putting in this lowly, humiliating 
scene, etc. It is Yery precious to me, hut if the reader does not want to, 
he must not read it, let him throw it out, and enough of it." 
N.ll. Imjwrtant. Characterizes the Youth. 
For some reason) the Youth avoids, throughout pan two, approach­
ing or questioning Versilov regarding those real essentials (or secrets), 
i.e., the Akhmakov woman, the infant child-even his intentions so 
far as his mother is concerned-but rather tries to make his own 
guesses, or to find out about these things by roundabout ways (the 
child, for instance). "\Vas this because I was ashamed? Or out of my 
adolescent stupidity ... I believe that the latter was the case, for any 
shame was sheer stupidity <under the circumstances>. It would have 
been quite possible to skip over <to any of these topics>." Yet he 
discusses nothing but abstract themes with Versilov ... All this he then 
admits to his reader, adding a detailed explanation of this foolishness, 
and of its consequences. (For instance, that it depressed and angered 
Versilov. In connection with this, mention Versilov's humility.) [So. 
March 1-2] 
?N .13. He sees Stebelkov at Anna Andreevna's and learns that Steb­
elkov has been in contact with the young Prince. He assumes that as 
a moneylender. On one occasion he goes to see Stebelkov himself, to 
borrow some money. [Arscniev.p Stebelkov, by way of repeated 
hints, suggests to him a project to sell Dergachev <to the police>, 
but seeing that the Youth is growing furious, adroit) y changes the 
subject (dissuading the Youth by putting on an innocent expression, 
and also by pretending not to understand why the Youth is getting so 
angry) and lets him know that one might take advantage of the old 
Prince (something like <Mme> Andrieux). 
Lambert, then, as he nms into the Youth in the final scene, after 
the latter's disgrace, makes some strong hints regarding Ia Andrieux, 
the old Prince, the young Prince, etc. lhtt he explains nothing, just 
strikes terror into the Youth's heart. 2,000, took them and lost them. 
s A  possible prototype of Stebelkov. Il'ia Aleksandrovich Arseniev was a jour­
nalist, owner of several newspapers, agent for the third section, and a thoroughly 
disreputable person. 

The Prince Insults the Youth 359 
ဒ.B. The Prince has just rudely refused to give the Youth any 
<more> money, and has rudely spat at him with 100 rubles, (the 
latter accepting them) as Lambert shows up, 2,000. Heဓrides to 
the gambling house} returns the Prince his 100 rubles, loses 2,000, 
and-night, flee to America. "His ow:-.: IDEA." (Or, the other way 
around, Lambert after his disgrace, that night, 2,000, but the Youth 
refuses the money and runs away.) Ήlass, Versilov. (1'\.B. But the 
earlier program is better. He loses 2,000, and Versilov somehow 
rescues him.) [Here.] 
Anna Andreevna's plan involving the old Prince, i.e., making 
<him> marry <her>, in part three, but in part two only some mys­
terious preparations and one scene "·ith Versilov. 
N' .B. brPORTAl\:T. In part three, Anna Andreevna takes her step 
fully. Though the Youth is isolated at Versilov's (ΉIakar's death also 
plays a role), he is, in a remote way, held in servitude by Lambert 
and in the beginning willy-nilly participates in the project (nega­
tively, freeing the Prince); but later, Lambert, having learned about 
the project involving Anna Andreevna from Stebelkov ("·hich Stebel­
kov has been keeping to himself), cooks up the "·hole crazy scheme 
according to which the old Prince is to flee to the Youth's, greatly 
frightening the old Prince (to which Versilov contributed [by his de­
nunciation] of the Akhmakov woman), which, incidentally, is also em­
barrassing to Anna Andreevna-and demands that the Youth help 
him.* But the Aide-de-Camp and the Princess rescue the Prince. On 
this occasion there is a scene between the Aide-de-Camp, on the one 
side, and Versilov and the Youth, on the other, the latter being, on 
the contrary, innocent, and after all this, Versilov's proposal to the 
Akhmakov woman and the chopping up of those icons. But the 
chopping up of those icons makes the Youth waver. The Youth now 
surrenders himself to Lambert, and at this point Lambert explains 
everything to him. 
The most characteristic feature of pan three is that Versilov has 
the Youth definitely convinced that he never did love the Akhmakov 
woman, but merely wanted to save her. 
Part four, all the denouements, the plot involving the fire, the 
final scene, the young Prince with Liza and on trial, the old Prince 
dies, etc. 
Ήlarch 2/3. 
• The sentence is ungrammatical in the original. 

360 
Vcrsilov and the A hhmakor• 1Voma11 
I, all dressed up. 1 112 months later. Let the reader try to imagine. 
I was m·erjoyed, but never again was there to be such shame. \Vhat's 
right is right. 
"He has rejected that conscientious and talented Frenchman, 
Charmeur, <he has> thousands, what thousands? Even Versilov 
hasn't told me a thing." 
Why so silent, why didn't he say anything-why didn't he guide 
<me>, abstract topics? 
I was staying at that flat-a small one-1 was hardly ever there. 
[Here] Versilov used to sit around there. 
This happened one evening. He came in. I [eKpected] you 
[Take it from the material] "I expected you." He remained stand-
ing in the middle of the room. 
"So you expected me? Really? \Veil, thank you, thank you very 
much for that." 
A conversation about everything (just as with Shatov), about God ... 
Changed to the landlord. The landlord. 
I went out to see him off. \Vent out to finish that conversation. \Vas 
ashamed to ask, about this and that. 
(In the same chapter.) "But I have stopped at what happened 1 112 
months later. I was on my way to the Prince's" --etc. (will be contin­
ued later). 
At the Prince's, I ran into Versilov, about how they got together 
through the child. (A pathetic scene. Versilov is the winner), about 
the nobility. The Youth has a discussion with the Prince; they are 
both delighted. Immediately thereafter, settling accounts on gam­
bling. As if somebody had thrown cold water <on me>. 
N .B. Important: In part two, the Youth casts an inquisitorial 
glance: Is there, or isn't there anything going on between Versilov 
and the Akhmakov woman? Getting carried away himself.*' Lets 
Versilov know. Conveys to the reader that it was then that he finally 
became convinced that there had been nothing ... and suddenly­
Versilov's crazy sally! 
An account of how it all happened (gambling) and what was going 
on in his soul-any breadth, or none, etc. A hint about Liza. Used 
to pay visits to Tatiana Pavlovna. Two meetings, at the child's, with 
Anna Versilov. 
• Or: "Becoming infatuated himself." 

Mysterious Relations 361 
At first, a scene with the Akhmakov woman, and then a description 
of how they got together. (The old Prince, etc., sick.) 
And one mysterious thing abouဃ the Akhmakov woman. 
At night, at his mother's . .\ quarr@) with h@r. Spinoza.r. Kissed her 
hand. Versilov, "dad." An accidental win, etc. 
N .B. His relations with the Akhmakov woman are of a mysterious 
nature, but the Youth finds it necessal)' to let Versilov know about 
them. And so from the very beginning of fJarl lwo. Versilov had had 
a presentiment about it, and had foreseen it. Their mutual relations 
and their opinions of each other after this revelation. 
N.B. And altogether, in part two, the Youth is bossing everybody 
around.* (Everything works well for him, and there is no holding 
him.) He even exuberantly cracks jokes in society <and> at cards, 
tells anecdotes, comes up with witticisms, disgracing himself (in bad 
taste)-about Chernyshevi and other things. [He even tells lies, and 
is caught.] He also bosses the Akhmakov woman around, as if she 
were accountable to him. She asks him a number of questions about 
the young Prince, while he tells her about Versilov. He is pouting 
about her becoming involved with the Aide-de-Camp. \Von't keep an 
appointment. Does some eavesdropping. Follows her to a masked ball. 
[On one occasion,] Versilov can't stand it anymore and gives him 
a lecture about Chernyshev, the rock, etc. Very sharp and caustic. 
"\Vhy didn't you tell me before?" the Youth asks. "You kept saying 
nothing (failed to give me any guidance)." "This was a stretch of time 
when I got carried away by the game and got entangled in my own 
lies," says the Youth, "and altogether, it was a period of disgrace." 
(N .B. But these trifles concerning Chernyshev, etc., He definitely 
considers on a par with the most serious and the most tragic events.) 
I discovered that some tales about the cossacks of 1 8 1 2  were still 
alive at the time, The Goat, etc. 
This all originates from the milieu of petty government clerks, 
yet such tales are the height of dishonorableness. 
The young Prince had spread some kind of slander about the 
Akhmakov woman. The slander made its rounds. (The Aide-de­
Camp.) On account of this, the Youth quarreled with the Prince 
and called him a slanderer. The Youth feels sad as he sees that Versi-
" Despotiruet, "is acting the despot," a neologism as far as I can see. 
G See note 3 of Part II. 
i See note 17 of Part IV. 

362 
Versilov and Lidiia 
lov is apparently inciting the Prince to make these slanderous state­
ments ... This happens in the very beginning of part two. This, pre­
cisely, is the plot. 
V@rsilov The Youth would like to brag some about knowing such 
a charming lady (the Akhmakov woman). Even if it be just to Tatiana 
Pavlovna. To Liza. 
Versilov and the Prince have some points of contact: refusal to 
accept the estate, Lidiia, the child, hate for the Akhmakov woman, 
and <their> nobility. 
[This is the last page of the first half of part two.] At one time the 
Youth made an attempt to discuss Liza with Versilov, but he saw that 
the latter did not want to listen to him. 
This is Versilov's second disappointment, and the beginning of his 
doubts, in the Youth : ""  
1st. His taciturnity. 
2d. There is a suspicion of <his> hatred for the Akhmakov woman 
(though not of love). The Youth is convinced that he loved Lidiia, 
and has heard about it from the Prince. "It is impossible to speak of 
Lidiia with such warmth of feeling without having loved her," thinks 
the Youth. 
3d. That Versilov is inciting the Prince to a frantic sally against 
the Akhmakov woman (secretly, Versilov is jealous of the Prince). 
4th. That when the Youth has admitted to Versilov that he is in 
contact with the Akhmakov woman, something quite inexplicable 
begins, as if he had stroked him the wrong way. 
5th. That Versilov does not want to hear anything about Liza. 
6th. That he definitely is trying to approach the subject of the 
document. 
In spite of all this, the Youth stands up for him every time and 
breaks lances for him as if he were his most devoted servant. And so 
it goes, right until Versilov's crazy sally, his letter to the Akhmakov 
woman in which he asks her not to corrupt <the Youth>. 
The Akhmakov woman finds out everything from the Youth (about 
Anna Versilov, for instance). The Youth, though he is giving in to 
her and telling her things, owing to his weakness <of character>, is 
also taking note of everything, and is merely angry at his own weak­
ness: Why is he yielding? 
Versilov has been telling the Prince a lot about the nobility, but 
• Apparently a lapsus calami: It ought to be the other way around. 

Stebelkov and Anna Andreevna 363 
the Youth clearly realizes, on that very same day, when he meets 
Versilov alone, that the latter does not believe in what he is saying, 
and proceeds to let the Prince kn<;>w about it in a half-facetious way 
just to tease him a little. 
Stebelkov is paying court to Anna Andreevna; he is having hopes, 
is expecting a dowry from the old Prince, and is instructing Anna 
Andreevna how to wheedle it out of him. But Anna Andreevna has 
kept him around just to find out everything about the Akhmakov 
woman and about Versilov, has given the appearance of being his 
willing pupil (and then some), and then she suddenly makes a fool 
of Stebelkov and all his hopes by picking the old Prince for her 
fiance. Versilov is worried during the entire time of Anna An­
dreevna's intimacy with Stebelkov. This is in part two. 
N .B. Even a long time before that, the old Prince would on 
occasion say words of praise about Anna Andreevna. 
The Prince is toying with the idea of setting up his own roulette. 
The old Prince is aware of the fact that Stebelkov is wooing Anna 
Andreevna. He is quite interested in this circumstance, but won't 
stand for it, figuring, rather, on Prince Serezha as <her> suitor. Con­
versation between the old Prince and the Youth about Stebelkov. 
Absolutely, about "that passive creature." 
?! Important N.B. A remark to the effect that the Prince is not 
accepted in the highest society. "At the Sportsmen's Club, what a 
game you can have there!" His application was turned down. The 
Prince is having some visitors. A retired officer, a member of fashion­
able society, is running a roulette. The Prince is outrageously flatter­
ing and fawning on persons belonging to fashionable society. This 
bothers the Youth a great deal. 
The old Prince: "I see a new type of people in the streets, all 
bearded; it would be interesting to walk down the street just with the 
idea of reading from people's faces whether they have read The Pick­
wick Papers, 8 or not." 
"I am not too ... venerable as yet," says the old Prince. 
Sometimes the young Prince would exclaim: "Oh, how uneducated 
I am!" 
Tatiana Pavlovna says: "I am convinced that you think He did it 
all for you, and no one else-challenged <the Prince> to a duel, and 
s See note 33 of Part IV. 

364 Stebelkov and Good Society 
turned down that inheritance-solely to become worthy of Arkady 
Makarovich." 
"A brilliant idea!" exclaims the Youth, "but. .. so help me God, I 
wasn't thinking that! And yet, absurd as it may sound, by God, it 
may be true!" 
The Youth to Versilov, about the Prince: "In a word, there are as 
many virtues in him, as there are shortcomings." 
Versilov: "But my dear friend, you are flattering him immeasur­
ably; if he really has so many virtues as A@ i:las si:lortcomiRgs, he is 
the most righteous man or else the Apollo of Belvedere." 
"Or a general on the railroad: they'll wait, and meanwhile the 
train is gone." 
The young Prince was originally thinking <of wooing> the Prin­
cess, but then he met the Aide-de-Camp and, through Stebelkov, Anna 
Andreevna (hoping to get a salaried position) (this, in the Youth's 
narrative); thus, he betrays Liza. 
See February, December l 3 f l4, character sketch of the Prince. 
The Youth was always wondering why Stebelkov was moving in 
good society, why he was received by decent people. \Vhat had hap­
pened was that he had "suffered" at one time, spent a month in 
prison; that's why some decent people would receive him, and he 
knew how to turn it to his advantage. 
The young Prince is honest, but his judgment is most irregular, as 
are his impressions. His relationship with the Princess resembles 
my own with E<Iena P<avlovna>.9 
About the young Prince, see February, toward the end of the book! 
Various cute expressions in the beginning of the book. See Feb-
ruary. 
"I've come to make up." 
"I've been expecting you." 
"\Veil, I thank you for that." 
Initially, the young Prince was counting on the Akhmakov woman 
(El<ena> Pav<lovna>). Then, on Anna Andreevna, which makes the 
Youth suspect that he apologized for the slap he gave <Versilov>, 
because he saw an advantage in it, but this is not true. The Prince 
begins to hate the Aide-de-Camp. \Vhereas the news that the Youth 
is also in the picture makes the young Prince very angry, as he 1s 
dreaming of Anna Andreevna. And what about Liza? 
o See note 48 of Part IV. 

The Nobility 365 
VERY IMPORTANT. Not so firmly and radically about gambling in 
the 1st half of part two. There haven't been any scenes yet, nor have 
there been any scenes involving gamblers (or gambling), or any de­
tails. Everything concerning gambling enters its mold only in the 
2d half of part two. [About gambling] 
The young Prince. He suddenly starts reading Belinsky. 
Lambert relates how he was living in the provinces and how he 
"had" Viktoriia (a Kirghiz). * 
March 3/4. 
Versilov in part two. (Words and cute expressions.)** 
Versilov is worried about Anna Andreevna. Having heard about 
her from the Youth, he asks him many further questions. He is wor­
ried about Anna Andreevna being on such intimate terms with 
Stebelkov. The old Prince also praises Anna Andreevna to him. 
He tells the Prince about the nobility. Deprived of everything, the 
nobility has even less than the other estates. And it would appear 
incomprehensible why it should still be an estate. But all of a sudden 
it is addressed <by destiny> and handed the guardianship of the 
spirit of the Russian nation, put at the head of <its> education.10 
And so, the banner which it is bearing remains a spiritual one. Now, 
after the abolition of serfage, this has become even more evident. I am 
in favor of the abolition of serfdom, a condition which the nation* * *  
could have blamed on the nobility. What remains now is the pure 
banner of <our> spirit. The nobility has been entrusted with Russian 
honor, a sense of responsibility. The banner is now more readily 
visible. Let it be an ideal, let just one in a million <hold it up>, but 
that is enough for it not to die. In order for the nobility to be regen­
erated, the gates to it are wide open. The nobility is the inelligentsia. 
The only ones who are laughing at the idea are those who are glad 
to have acquired the right to be dishonorable. The merchant and 
the scribe. 
The Prince remarks that this is all ideal and won't last without 
having any material roots. Versilov replies that it might be precisely 
the peculiar quality of the Russian race to be able to sustain an ideal 
without any material roots. 
• "A Kirghiz" is in the masculine gender. 
• • Slova i slovechki, where the latter means literally "little words." 
• • •  Narod is ambiguous here; it could also mean "the people." 
10 See note 26 of Part I. 

366 
Versi lov' s Cynicism 
"You are descended from Riurik. Set up yourself as an example. 
Self-perfection. Even a limited field of activity will do. These small 
efforts will not remain without recognition. The banner, etc., are 
important. This may be just the breadth of our Russian nature," 
Versilov says jokingly. "At the present time, though, this breadth (i.e., 
ardent faith and, at the same time, cynicism) is getting somehow 
more narrow: the Krafts are shooting themselves on account of the 
idea that Russia is second-rate. \Vhereas we only used to grow more 
handsome from such ideas," Versilov adds. After Versilov, the Youth, 
friendship, accounts. 
That night, Versilov says the same things to the Youth, this time 
with open cynicism. The Youth is surprised and angry. 
"One must have no respect for people. And I'm starting it with 
myself." 
Conversations about how he expected the Youth to blush while 
Makar was telling his story.* 
N.B. Versilov's cynicism was in part the cause of <the Youth's> 
passion for gambling ("had he taken me firmly into his hands that 
time," etc.). But on the other hand, Versilov's tender treatment of 
the Youth, his visits, etc. 
Discussion during the first showdown. 
Discussion about Chernyshev.11 
Versilov definitely approaches the subject of the document. An 
unpleasant impression on the Youth. 
"A man of indubitable mental faculties, yet... still not a very clever 
person." 
"A witty, but not a clever man." 
Versilov: "One must learn how to love people." 
"No one among us has ever tried to cultivate himself by force." 
"No one is born a ready person." 
"In our country, what they like is precisely to have things ready for 
them." 
"Lots of things in Russian life, and among them some of the most 
important, are sustained precisely and only by this quality of the 
Russian people." 
• Though this is what seems to be the only possible translation, the real mean­
ing ought to be: "While listening to <Versilov's> story of Makar <and his 
family>." 
11 See note 1 7  of Part IV. 

Contemporary Literature 367 
"It is natural for one not to respect people. It is very difficult to 
love them." 
Regarding contemporary literature, Versilov says that the types 
presented by it (Chatsky, Pechorin, Oblomov)12 are rather crude, and 
that many fine nuances and much that was undoubtedly real has 
slipped away from it; immeasurably more has slipped away than was 
actually captured by literature. For we have failed to understand our­
selves all along, and the moment some light was cast on one tiny bit 
<of our life>, it suddenly turned out that there was even more dark­
ness than before (during the past twenty years). 
MICE. 
"As many virtues as shortcomings" (see). 
Versilov says: "We have, in our society, on the one hand despair 
and purulent decay, and on the other, a thirst of regeneration, and 
enthusiasm. They are even rejecting God religiously." 
[Here.] For other statements by Versilov, see February, toward the 
end of the book. 
"Fight with words. [Ideas] Children fight precisely when [because] 
they haven't learned to express their thoughts yet." 
Or, they will insist on telling you in a whisper how an extremely 
important personage was, at one time, kneeling in the Senate before 
the Senators ... 
The trial of Christ in England. 
"I have come to make up with you." 
"I've been expecting you." 
"Well, thank you for that." 
TR.e )'ONRg PriRce "I have in me all the depths of degradation. But, 
to make up for it, I also possess all the sensations of 'exalted 
thought.' " 
The Youth is <at> the old Prince's, a learned conversation about 
how rocks will be flying <through space>. 
The old Prince: "Oh, my dear friend, why should you be worried 
about that, let them fly." 
tR.e yoaRg PriRce begaR to reaa 
He, to the Youth: "My friend, I am generally afraid of formulating. 
You see: suddenly, I believe in nothing and yet, at the same time, 
know firmly and at all times that 'I believe in a great idea.' My posi­
tion is of course untenable, for the whole trouble lies precisely in the 
12 See note 45 of Part IV. 

368 
Two Contrary Feelings 
question: '\Vhat then, does your great idea consist of?' What's both 
funny and absurd is that it never has been formulated: the moment I 
would formulate it, I would be the first to ridicule it myself. And 
that's the way it always happens." 
The Youth: "It seems to me that there's nothing to worry about 
here: a great feeling will appear as an impression-well, and that's 
enough. You go along, meet a certain fact, and say-'this is good!' ... " 
He: "That's precisely what is wrong with it." 
The Youth: "You mean, it is too little, it's not enough to have just 
the impression ... Listen" (at this point, about something else, about 
the Prince, for instance). 
He: "There's an excess of happiness boiling inside you, and I'd 
certainly hate to cool you off. That's why I am not even touching 
you." 
He, to the Youth: "My friend, I've been frequently telling my wife, 
your mother l=tere, I wil, at the beginning of our union, incidentally, 
in the beginning as well as in the middle, and in the end: 'My dear, 
I'm torturing you, and I shall torture you to death, nor am I feeling 
sorry for you, not as long as I have you before me. But if you should 
die, I do know for sure that I would [torture myself] to death, for 
having caused your death.' " 
He: "If at least I were a weak-willed nonentity, and could suffer 
from my awareness of that! But no, for I know that I am infinitely 
strong, and through what, would you think? \Veil, precisely through 
that immediate power of vitality and adaptability, so characteristic of 
all clever Russian people of our past generation. Nothing can destroy 
me, nothing can kill me, nothing can do me in. I have the vitality of 
a watchdog. I can most conveniently experience two contrary feelings 
simultaneously-nor would it happen of my own volition, I can as­
sure you. It is dishonorable-and precisely because it suggests that, 
in certain instances, the kinds of me can be exceedingly prudent. But 
just imagine, I have lived to the age of 50, and [to this day] I don't 
know myself if I have lived well, or badly. Of course I love life, which 
really follows from the rest of it. Yet, it is base for a man such as I 
to love life. Lately, there has been a new trend, and the Krafts <no 
longer> adapt themselves to things, but shoot themselves. But [it is 
obvious that] the Krafts are foolish, -we+- whereas we are clever, [on 
the other hand] and consequently, it is once more impossible to say 
whether it is good or bad anything. င Could it be really true that 
the world exists only forစ people such as myself? Most likely so, 
but this is really much too dismal a notion, for, if the Krafts are stupid, 

Versilov on the Intelligentsia 369 
then, [on the other hand,] we, the clever ones, are dishonorable to the 
marrow of our bones, and what is even viler, we are glad that this is 
so." 1.Ve are shafHeless, depra\'ed people, and nothing else. 
Versilov, on education: "I was almost glad that, during the past 1 5  
years or so, our whole intelligentsia, stimulated by Russia's needs, 
began to specialize in a variety of branches, and, so help me God, I 
was honestly glad about it, and I am, in this respect, really an enemy 
of any other kind of 'educational reform' as well as of any kind of 
external 'raising of the level' ... : for, in our dear fatherland, to raise 
the level of education invariably means to also raise the level of suf­
fering ... -at least this is how it has been up to now ... #tt-" 
"Listen," I interrupted him, "I've always suspected that you are 
saying these things merely out of spite, or suffering, and that secretly, 
in your own mind, you are perhaps the fanatical devotee of some 
higher idea, which you are simply concealing, for some reason, or are 
ashamed to admit..." 
"Do you think so?" 
On that occasion I went on to bombard him with a variety of ques­
tions [too much so], and I remember he answered all of them read­
ily and straightforwardly, though somehow much too briefly and 
abstractly, [and the world] veering off into the most commonplace 
aphorisms toward the end of each statement. I don't know whether 
or not he was just chatting with me, for he really didn't have ·anyone 
else to chat with. But it seemed to me that this was not the case. And 
yet ဆ all of these questions had been bothering me all my life 
and, let me admit this much, while still in Moscow I had been post­
poning their solution precisely until we would meet in Petersburg. I 
told him so directly, and he didn't laugh at me at all, but on the con­
trary, I remember, actually shook hands with me. Regarding general 
politics and social ideas, I was able to eJtract elicit next to nothing 
from him, and yet precisely those questions were, in view of my 
"idea," bothering me almost more than anything else. Regarding the 
likes of Dergachev I once wrested a "they're below criticism" from 
him; yet right there he added that he would "retain the right to 
consider his opinion utterly devoid of significance." [weH, and we 
are so clever] Then, concerning the eventual end of the state and the 
world as we know it, and the future regeneration of EHP6f3e the world, 
he dodged my questions for a long time, until I finally wrung a few 
words from him. "I think that all this will happen most simply and 
ordinarily," he once said, "very simply, all these different states will 
one day, in spite of all these balances and budgets, in spite of the 

370 Versilov's Ideas 
absence of any deficit and the presence of perfect controls, get all 
tangled up in their finances tm beau matin,ta i.e., every single one of 
them, and I mean every single one, will decide that he is no longer 
willing to pay his debts, so that a general regeneration by way of 
general [and solidary] bankruptcy will be in order and so ... a new 
and regenerate life may start-[i.e.,] with new loans, new budgets, and 
a new bankruptcy. Meanwhile the conservative element in the whole 
world will be opposed to this, for it is they who'll be the shareholders 
and the creditors who won't like to allow this bankruptcy to happen 
-even if it promises to regenerate the whole world. Then, naturally, 
there will start what you may call a general oxidation; there is going 
to be some forced oxidation, accompanied by a perfect awareness of 
one's own turning sour, whereupon all those who never have pos­
sessed any shares, who in fact have possessed nothing at all, i.e., the 
paupers, naturally will refuse to participate in such oxidation, for 
they won't have anything to lose. A struggle will stan, and after thirty 
or 70 defeats the paupers will destroy the shareholders, will take their 
places, and ... maybe they're going to say something new, and maybe 
they won't... More likely than not, they, too, will go bankrupt. Fur­
ther than that, [For the time being] my dear friend, I find it impossi­
ble to foresee anything at all in the fortunes of Europe aRd tHe 
в. which the face of this Earth has yet to see. [Incidentally,] you 
may look it up in the Apocalypse." 
"Is all this really so material, is the world as we know it really 
going to come to an end because of its finances?" 
"Of course not, I was merely taking one hundredth of the total 
picture, just one section of the whole business. But that small section, 
too, is connected with all the rest of it and, one might say, connected 
by indissoluble ties." 
"\Vhat then, is there to be done?" 
"\Vhat are you to do, my dear? Be honest, never say a falsehood, do 
not covet your neighbor's house; in a word, read the ten command­
ments; that's where it has been written down forever. ARd if lih? 
tHFRS OHt to Be just too eoriRg, tReR over aRd above tHat try to lev€ 
seFRebed)' or seFRetHiRg. 
"Eh, come on, this is all so old, and besides, these are only words." 
"Well, if things turn out to be too boring, then over and above that 
try to love somebody or something ... " 
ta French: "One beautiful morning." 

Versilov's Secret 37 1 
"Eh, of course, you're right, but that isn't the real thing either! 
What is of the essence is something to do, something to be done, and 
what is there to be done?" 
Versilov: "Ah, my friend, it is better not to do anything; at least 
you'll have a clear conscience knowing that you are not a party to 
anything." 
"And besides, what am I alone going to do with your ten command­
ments? That's nothing but a joke." 
"\Veil, you just go ahead and fulfill them, in spite of all your 
questions and doubts, and you shall be a great man." 
"Unknown to the world." 
"There is nothing <so> secret that it will not be made manifest." 
"Why, you are making fun of me!" 
"\Veil, if you are taking things so much to heart, it might be best 
if you'd try to find a specialty as fast as possible. Become a building 
contractor, or a lawyer, [or start making money] ... and then, being 
busy with a S@rious a real and a serious activity, you will naturally 
calm down and forget all th.is nons@nse, and EJ:Hit <about> asking ab­
stract questions." 
I remained silent. Really, it appeared to me at the time that he was 
sometimes laughing <at me>, [which] made me sad. And yet, per­
haps he wasn't after all, because after each such discussion I would 
fall to thinking and would get very excited. I saw that he was still 
guarding some kind of a secret: and it was that secret that was attract­
ing me to him. I was becoming more and more attached to him. And 
this even in spite of the fact that I was beginning to have my serious 
doubts about him. About that, later, and separately. I was postponing 
my telling him about "my idea"; it wasn't the proper time for it, I 
could see that, and besides, I was hardly capable of making up my 
mind to go through with it: to reveal it to him meant to deprive my­
self of everything, no matter what the outcome. But what was most 
important, it wasn't the proper time. God knows what kind of time it 
was, a time of enthusiasm and of disgrace all at once. 
"I swear to you that I felt no anger after he had slapped my face. 
I can remember how I told myself: 'Surely, I am feeling no anger be­
cause I actually deserved to have my face slapped.' But this was merely 
a pun: actually that slap in the face was undeserved; I really wasn't 
guilty." 
Once, in anger, the young Prince says aemit \'@rsilov to the Youth: 
¥Ie "You simply haven't done anything to deserve anyone's attention, 
and this is why you are envious of everybody, that's all there is to it." 

372 
Versilov on Dergachev 
The Youth asks: "Once you mentioned certain 'Genevan ideas,' 
and I failed to get it." 
" 'Genevan ideas,' that's virtue without Christ, the French ideas of 
today or, rather, of today's entire civilization ... In a word, this is one 
of those long stories which it is so boring to start <explaining>, my 
friend, nor is it Hlally worth so let's rather talk of something else." 
Versilov: "My friend, being the youth you are, you are dreaming 
of a resounding life, you desire to pick too conspicuous a lot-that of 
Napoleon the First, for example. But, you know these dreams are 
really something very primitive; and besides, that lot as such is 
a fussy on@ none too tempting, really: you are too much in the 
public eye, you must grimace and act, and pretend too much. 
\Veil, there are different tastes; simple freedom is certainly to be con­
sidered also." 
"And mystery." 
"\Vhat?" 
"Mystery. Besides freedom, I also love mystery." 
"Ahem. It may be that you've just said something very profound ... 
Though on second thought, I may be wrong. By the way, you really 
do have some sort of an 'idea,' don't you?" 
"Oh yes, but we'll discuss that later." 
"That's right, later, let's do it later," [he agreed, apparently] very 
glad <to stop it right there>, "and you know what, I do happen to 
be in a great hurry, good-bye then." 
The Youth asks: "\Vhat are you going to live on, having given away 
the inheritance?" 
He didn't even ask that either. 
Versilov: "I am one of the old, and I don't see any new men; and 
what I do see isn't serious." 
A bout Dergachev: "These are the fruits of the bankruptcy of the 
old generation. \Ve haven't passed on a single edifying thought, not 
even a single solid thought, to the new generation. Yet, all our lives, 
we were suffering from a thirst for great ideas. \Veil, what could I, 
for instance, pass on? I have nothing at all to pass on to you. I am a 
beggar myself. All my life I believed that I was rich, that I would 
never come to grief, and there, on the threshold of old age-l must 
beg my bread seg FRY lo.lreaa, seg FRY sreaa." 
"The fools are many, but the wise men are few. The wise [always] 
go away, while the fools [always] stay behind." 
Versilov: "It isn't that he is immoral, he's just an all-around scoun­
drel, though that is really a good thing." 

"Why is it a good thing?" 
A Secondary I de a 
373 
"It fits him better...lt woR't Elisturb For harmony." 
"Ah, my friend, we haven't got ·a nobility, and perhaps we never 
did have one." 
"Yes, he is acting the role of a very solid citizen." 
"In our society this is far from clear." 
"I know only that I suddenly looked around, and found nothing." 
"Did you look around only when you got to be forty?" 
"Le temps n'y fait rien.H But, never mind, 40 years of age." 
And besides, an insatiable appetite for life, for everything in life. 
"He even talks in a taciturn manner." 
"How's that-'talks in a taciturn manner'?" 
"\Veil, there are some people whose talking is as good as silence." 
"Yes, it is a felicitous expression." 
"Really, to talk the way we've been talking is just as good as re­
maining silent." 
"Ever since the moment when I realized that I would never be­
come a serious person, I have been determined ... " etc. 
"All this nervousness ... Better let's be silent about something." 
"My friend, remember that it is incomparably more advantageous 
to be silent, than to talk. And this is true in every single instance, 
without an exception. To be silent is good, safe, and beautiful-what 
more do you want?" 
"Beautiful?" 
"Of course. Silence is always beautiful, and a taciturn person is 
always beautiful; but more than anything else, it is to one's advan­
tage." 
"[Well,] that 'these stones be made bread' * 4-is- is a great idea." 
"No, my friend, there's more to this idea than you might think.""" It 
is a great idea, I won't argue that, but it is a secondary idea, and 
great only at a given moment. ["No, my friend, there's more to this 
idea than you might think. It is a great idea, I won't argue that."] 
["But of course, all this is quite abstract."] A man will eat his fill 
and not think of it anymore; what is on the contrary, he will im­
mediately say: "All right I have eaten my fill, and now, well, what 
• Matt. 4: 3. 
• •  Literally, "this idea has got a hook." 
14 French: "Time doesn't have anything to do with it." 

374 A Great Idea 
am I going to do now?' And so you are facing the same problem 
again: what should a man do?" 
"Mankind always does it that way. It is incessantly thirsting for a 
great idea. But the moment it is born it laughs at it ana, witi:l all its 
force, tries to f>resent it considers it to be its duty to go right ahead and 
spit on it, and to put it down, below itself." 
The Youth: "\Vhat, in general, are you calling a great idea?" 
Versilov: "I don't know what, my friend. I only know that it has 
always been that thing from which real life flows, that is, immeaiate 
life that isn't of the intellect hut immeaiate net manuʾacturea, that 
isn't made up in other woras, and -Ret, but beautiful, cheerful, and 
never boring; so that a great idea is great because, from which all of 
this -tl:H& emanates-[a great idea is absolutely essential for every 
society,] to everybody's chagrin, of course." 
"\Vhy chagrin?" 
"Because it is boring to be living with ideas, whereas without ideas 
wel always it is more cheerful ana inCOFRJ'larably more COFRfortabl@." 
[The Prince swallowed his pill.] 
"And what, in your opinion, is real life" (he was apparently getting 
angry). 
Versilov: Versilov: R.eal lie "I don't know that either, [my kiena 
dear Prince,] I only know that it ought to be something awfully sim­
ple [and even] trivial, something that would catch your eye every day 
and every minute and so simple we couldn't possibly believe that the 
whole thing was soဇsimple, and so, quite naturally, we keep walk­
ing by it, already for many thousands of years, -e¥@Fl- without noticing 
it let alone or recognizing it." 
He had some amazing ideas about nihilism, for instance says ti:le 
¥6t-Ht. Once, I remember, I told him: 
"The sequel of nihilism is going to be idealism." 
Versilov: "On the contrary, my friend, on the contrary, the sequel 
of our nihilism is going to be the most salutary and the most sobering 
positivism, for nihilism itself [is] nothing but idealism, but only in 
the very highest, and so far unheard of, degree. Nihilism is the ulti­
mate stage of idealism." 
"My friend, I am not drawing any definitive conclusions because I 
do not want to pass judgment on anyone." 
"\Vhy don't you?" 
"I don't know why, but I have an aversion against it. A certain wise 
woman has told me that I haven't the right to pass judgment, because 
I don't know how to suffer, and, in order to be a judge <of other 

Versilov on Nihilists 375 
people>, 'one must acquire the right to be a judge by one's own suffer­
ing.' It sounds a little pompous, but, if applied to me, it may be true." 
"It's awful how you always speak in such abstract terms." 
"So don't bother me with your questions.'' 
Versilov: "There isn't one honest man among a hundred thou-
sand." 
"I know one.'' 
"\Vho would it be?" 
"He is sitting right here and talking to me.'' 
Versilov (whispering in his ear): "He is lying." (He gets up and 
leaves.) 
Having only a single idea. People who have a single idea. 
"Our nihilists? Don't tell me this is a pure type, something equable 
and stable! It certainly is not! I had a premonition of what they'd 
be like even before they actually appeared, and, I must admit, they 
are exceeding my expectations. A real nihilist cannot, must not, dare 
not get reconciled to anything at all that is now in existence. He dare 
not make any deals, under any circumstances, and he knows full well 
that no deal is in effect possible. Well, and now ours: where's the 
negation in our nihilists? \Vith them, even the negation of religion is 
turned into religion. Their whole nihilism is nothing but a passionate 
faith; soFFletA:iRg Ffleaie•f'al. These people are perpetually praying, 
they are monks and hermits. There is something medieval about 
them, with the same kind of blind and passionate authority. Natu­
rally, I'm speaking of nihilists only, and not of scoundrels, or of 
people who are doing business with this idea. There is an awful lot of 
businessmen among this group, though even more are mere fools, 
granted that the latter don't count, for they are of no consequence." 
["One must believe <in> God. Eh, the devil. And if I don't believe 
in God? A very fine sign of that idea. How come, very fine?"] 
"[That atheist] The Russian atheist, if only he is a genuine atheist, 
and a little bit intelligent, is always inclined to show a real affection 
for God, for he is invariably [also] a kind person, being kind for the 
reason that he is immeasurably satisfied with his being an atheist. To 
our atheist, atheism is a source of honor and enjoyment, and certainly 
not of suffering. They are really fine people, honorable and loyal in 
the highest degree, the pillars of the fatherland, so-to-speak." 
"Pillars of the fatherland? Come on, you're letting your tongue run 
away with you!" 
"You are all wrong! \Vhy, that liberal of ours is really a most con­
servative person-and it has always been that way, which happens to 

376 Essence of Things 
be a fact well known for a long time to those ... who take a [special] 
interest in these things." 
"\Ve have survived the Tartar invasion, then two centuries of 
invasion slavery, solely because 4+& one as well as the other really 
happened to be to our liking. Now we must survive freedom. But are 
we going to make it? \Viii it be to our liking, I mean freedom?" 
"In your opinion, what is philosophy?" 
"Philosophy, my friend, that's something about the laws of the 
essence of things, where 'essence' must be absolutely and E.l:l, we 
kRow tl:lat under any circumstances above human reason, and this 
for the sole reason that man may seek to define it all his life, without 
succeeding in so doing. Tl:lis is, so to Sfleal<, aR aavaRC@Q V@TSiOR of 
bliRatBaR's bYfi. Moreover, it is absolutely necessary that man 
should never discover anything about the essence <of things>: it is 
more seemly that way, and that's what this thing is all about. This is, 
in a manner of speaking, an advanced version of blindman's buff­
that's all there is to it." 
"What do you think of progress?" 
"That whole progressive movement of ours during the past 15 to 
20 years has shown, more than anything else, that we are terribly 
uneducated." 
"If there weren't any misfortunes, life wouldn't be worth living." 
"You know what, sometimes you are a terrible reactionary," says 
the Youth. 
"My friend, I couldn't care less." 
"\Vhy then, didn't you come yesterday?" 
"Well, I was afraid that you might give me a tongue-lashing." 
N.B. The Youth tells him about his virginity. (He is telling him 
about the dangers of fornication: "Abstain!" This makes the Youth 
angry.) 
N.B. The Youth remembers that, at their first meeting, He very 
nearly began to cry. 
Versilov: "But, my friend, this very dullness may sometimes make 
a woman attractive. 'A foolish woman is good also,' says Iaichnitsa. • 
This isn't really the same thing, but the most depraved creature may 
sometimes be more attractive than an angel. But if she is dull, and 
unfair <to you>, so much more so, once she has had an impact on 
your feeling." 
• In Gogol's comedy The Marriage. 

Heroism and Happiness 377 
"You are corrupt to the marrow of your bones, that's what." 
"May be this is so; like all Russians, by the way." 
Versilov, to the Youth: "My friend, I am not trying to tempt you 
with some kind of bourgeois virtue, offering it as a substitute for your 
ideals, nor am I trying to tell you that happiness is superior to hero­
ism. On the contrary, my dear, heroism is superior to any sort of 
happiness, and the very ability to be a hero is a token of happiness. 
It is precisely for this that I respect you, as well as for the fact that 
you've got some kind of an 'idea of your own.' (Don't worry, I remem­
ber it only too well.) Yet in spite of all this, one must not forget to 
retain a sense of measure, for right now you wish to set fire to some­
thing, to smash something to pieces, to elevate yourself above all Rus­
sia, to sweep past like a storm cloud, leaving everybody behind in fear 
and in wonder, and then withdraw into the desert, or to the United 
States of America. I'm sure that something of this kind is going 
through your mind, which is why I'm considering it necesဈary to warn 
you, for I've grown sincerely fond of you, my dear.'' 
"Have you told this to your children?" 
"No, I do not intend to ask for their permission." 
"And what is most important, don't fall too much m love with 
yourself.'' 
N .B. "But what if she hates you?" 
"No, she adores me, and it is I who doesn't like her." 
"But she won't admit it." 
"Give her time; maybe she'll get wise enough to admit it to her-
self." 
N .B. She is bashful. 
"If she is bashful, what kind of a Messalina can she be?" 
"You wouldn't understand it." 
The Youth: "How come you, being a Christian, praise me for my 
hatred, and encourage me to persist in my hatred?" 
Versilov: "My friend, what I am praising is merely the fact that, 
in this jellylike age of ours, you were able to experience a profound 
feeling, to nurture it within yourself, and not abandon it. You say that 
I am encouraging you to persist in your hatred, don't you? But per­
haps you don't as yet know yourself that, hidden below your hatred, 
there is even more love (just as, vice versa, many a love is really hid­
den hatred). You are still going through a certain phase in your de­
velopment; wait a bit, you'll enter the next phase, and see things 
more clearly. I don't want to stop you from doing anything, since I 
believe in the principle [sticking to the principle] 'live and work 

378 Impossible to Love People 
yourself.' At any rate, I am not your nursemaid; live as best you can, 
and do what you think is best for you." 
The Youth about the Princess: "That woman was worrying me. 
Once she crossed my path, she would have to follow me; no one stops 
me on my way with impunity." 
Versilov: "It is impossible to love people the way they are. And 
yet, one must love them. And therefore, do good unto them, check­
ing your emotions, holding your nose, and closing your eyes (the 
latter being almost inevitable). Suffer the evil they will do to you v.·ith­
out getting angry with them, remembering if ever you can [keeping in 
mind] that you are, after all, a man, too. Naturally, it is your duty to 
be stern with them. People are base, they like to love and to ador@ 
from fear; so they will adore you, too. Do not succumb to their 
adulation, do not prove to be petty, and continue to despise them. 
Keep despising them even when they are good, for this is precisely 
where, more often than not, they are at their worst. \Vithout any 
doubt, Christ couldn't have loved them: he put up with them, he for­
gave them, but, quite naturally, he ဉdespised them. Personally, at 
least, I cannot understand his personality otherwise. Love of mankind 
must be held in suspicion, in tR@ id@al toward a perfected <man­
kind>, one which exists .efH.y- ideally, that is, in your soul, one that 
perhaps [probably] [most likely] will never come into existence­
though, let this be said, this circumstance should in no way interfere 
with any of this.'' 
"It will never+happen.'' 
"My friend, I agree that this [apparently] is rather stupid, but this 
is not my fault; my opinion was not heard at the creation of this 
world, which is why I reserve the right to have my own opinion." 
"After all this, how is it possible that people are calling you a 
Christian, a monk who wears chains, and a preacher?-! can't under­
stand it." 
"And who is it that has said these things of me?" 
I told him, and he listened most attentively. But our conversation 
had come to an end. 
"You know what, it is precisely you [however] who is a fanatic.'' 
It was in a strange way that he spoke about <his> contempt for 
people. Even his eyes were flashing, and yet at the same time I did 
not believe him, for it couldn't be that he would talk to me so seri­
ously about such things.'' 
"\Vhy do you love me so?" He suddenly says to the Youth. 
Here: "If you want to, quit your job with the old Prince." 

Versilov Denies Everything 379 
Versilov, at the end of part four, after the Youth has been telling 
him about the Akhmakov woman: "Let me kiss you just once--<:ome 
to think of it, I haven't ever kissed you yet!" 
"A lawyer is a hired conscience." 
"Everything has a limit, even our all-Russian stupidity, which IS 
nevertheless boundless." 
He: "What we are having everywhere is lazy atheism." 
He: "Meaning: Chacun chez soi and chacun pour soi;15 and ffiat. 
what will come of it, will come." 
The Youth: "I rushed over and started kissing the spot on which 
she had been sitting. I wouldn't have admitted that at confession." 
The Youth: "I was engulfed by disorder ever more and more." 
The Youth: "I felt that He, too, had his 'own idea.' " 
He: "I am one who denies everything, and I am desperate about not 
having anything to grasp at, yet at the same time I am attached to 
everything. Any nihilist, as long as he is not stupid, must think that 
way and feel that he is attached to everything. And as for the fact that 
people kill themselves with ease, it cleciclecll)' it really happens be­
cause it is the easiest thing to do and, [what is most important,] does 
not ask for too much thinking power." 
He: "My friend, I dislike having to expound anything at great 
length; what I like is to believe quietly in my own idea and to be 
silent about it. <In this respect> I am a lot like you. And here is 
another strange thing: whenever it happens that I begin to expound 
an idea of mine, an idea in which I believe, I swear it to you, it almost 
invariably happens that by the time I am through with my explana­
tion, I have quit believing in whatever I had been explaining, even 
though I'd been believing in it for three years. Later, if I continued 
to support that particular idea, it would be, so to speak, out of a 
sense of responsibility only. (\Veil, this is why I much prefer to feel, 
rather than to formulate."] 
The Youth: "My God, how many things you're telling me there, 
all of which require some thought, and which I had suspected even 
before." 
"Not a grain of truth." 
"What kind of a nobility is this? This isn't any nobility anymore, 
but rather some sort of a masonic lodge, the kind about which you 
were sermonizing this oaf the other day." 
15 French: "Everyone at home. Everyone for himself." 

380 
Versilov on Nobility 
"That is, the whole all of freemasonry, [the whole idea,] and not 
Uust one] lodge, i.e., [the whole idea,] and not to any oaf, but to a 
person well capable of honorable feelings." 
"I am sorry, not to any oaf, for I am no better than he is; but then, 
in that case, this is Herely we really haven't got any kind of nobility, 
nor have we probably ever had one, if it must be thusly reformulated, 
isn't that so? And besides, can it really exist in this form? Hardly, ex­
cept with constant and innumerable exceptions, wouldn't you say so?" 
"It did. exist before Peter <tRe Grea.t>, aHd precisely iH the sense 
I was serHioHii!iHg about today." 
"Wardly, except witH iHHHHiera.ble exceptioHs. fie! J.Vha.t iHpos 
sil:>le thiHgs )'OH are briHgiHg upl" 
"\Vhat exceptions? Exceptions pass on and come to an end, and 
they mean nothing, as long as there is a pivot, as long as there is but 
the tiniest light, shining in the deepest darkness. The tiniest fire can 
give birth to a universal conflagration. You have exactly the same 
thing б with an idea--one fiery spot in the deepest darkness, 
[provided it is not extinguished.] However, you are making me tired ... 
Let us leave all these things, I beg you, and you know what, let's 
leave them for good." 
IH tRe J.Vest, kiHgs aHa eHperors always were Ho Hlore tRaH tRe 
leaders of victorious parties, at first tR.e kHights agaiHst tR.e 13laiR 
13eople, later tR.e cities agaiRst tRe ltHig);}ts, aRd so oR. 0Hr Ci!ar Has 
beeR &oHietRiRg eRtirely ditiereRt. 
" 'And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness compre­
hended it not.'* And so it has been at all times, and with all great 
ideas. However, my friend, you are making me tired .. .'' etc. (N.B. 
Right here, also: A bout, "what I explain to somebody, I quit believ­
ing.") I.e.: "You ought to have compassion with me, an old man, and 
spare my feelings .. . ' '  
And so he was always getting off the hook, as a result of which it 
was difficult to determine if he had said these things in all seriousness, 
the other day when he was talking to the Prince, or just to be diplo­
matic. I was inclined to believe that he had been pursumg some 
political end. 
The one of them, all fancy and enthusiasm, and all but saying: 
"\Vhy won't you let me make this up, and you'll see how fine it will 
come out, and what a pleasure it's going to be <for you to listen>.'' 
• From John 1 :  5. 

The Prince and Stebelkov 381 
And the other, all prose, all spleen and bad manners: "No, I won't let 
you make up anything!"-"But for goodness' sake, my friend"-he 
got to talking about that rock-"why, that rock is still there; I guess 
it's on Malaia Millionnaia Street, and was never dropped into any 
hole." But I didn't take him up on it, I said nothing, out of tact, out of 
gentlemanliness, out of embarrassment, for t8e reason t8at I woHldn't 
-he- for aesthetic <considerations>, so-to-speak, for if I had acted 
otherwise, what sort of a gentleman would I have been after that?" 
"Oh, my God, that's what I mean, it is standing right there even 
now." 
"Well, yes, it's standing there all right, for this is really a delightful 
anecdote: 'and so things got before the Emperor.' " 
"Why, his soul must have been overflowing with joy during that 
moment when he was presenting his ideal his hero to the Emperor.'' 
"Always let the other man tell a small lie, it is quite innocent. Even 
let him tell a big lie. First of all, this will only show your tact, and 
secondly, they'll let you tell your own lies in return-two tremendous 
advantages at the same time. Que diable/6 one must love one's neigh­
bor." 
"In exactly the same way you may repeat the witticisms of Prince 
Menshikov and the one about voila Monsieur) qui se leva (Kiselev, 
that is). However, this one is a bit more genteel. All this survived to 
my own time. In fact, it exists even to this very day." 
"Or the one about Zavialov, whom the British offered a million for 
not putting his label on his goods." 
"My friend, there will always be an individuality, and the socialists 
have overlooked that." 
"Make sure you won't dare tell any of these anecdotes-it is a most 
dishonorable thing to do--and once you've taken the first step in this 
direction you'll be drowned in that cesspool on your second step." 
Also in part two, the Prince is having certain connections with 
Stebelkov, definitely something suggestive of what is going to come 
later, something that worries the Prince and makes him irritable; 
it is precisely at one of these moments that the Youth runs into him. 
In a word, make it so the reader will have a foreboding of the further 
developments (i.e., those Tambov shares). Also in the 2d half of part 
two, the Youth goes to see him for some money he'd like to borrow 
tG French: "What the hell." 

382 
The Prince Is an Idealist 
from him, and-N .B: also without letting the reader know before­
hand that he has been in contact with Stebelkov. 
Versilov is discussing communism: "It will start right here, in 
Moscow. There won't be any firewood left to heat homes, so there 
will be communal dwellings, and people will quit leading a family 
life. As a result of which, new customs are going to develop-etc.," 
in a mocking, lampooning mode. 
The Youth starts that hellish night thinking of LacenaireY 
Drop a few tRiRgs words in those conversations with Versilov to 
suggest that the ideals of Lacenaire, etc., are present in the Youth's 
mind. 
Ungern-Shternberg,18 maybe} in part three. 
In the second half of part two, the Youth's eyes are suddenly opened 
to Liza: he intercedes and is rebuffed by the Prince. 
A series of forceful witticisms on the occasion of his winning at 
roulette. 
[At Anna Andreev:na's. About El <ena> P <avlov> na.] 
The Prince is an idealist. He is still fascinated by Versilov, but is no 
longer under His influence. He is a single-minded person: either the 
full truth, or you're a scoundrel. He is sullen, sarcastic, and a fiery 
seeker of truth and beauty. "I am my own judge." He dislikes the 
Youth because he is taking money from him (selling Liza). "Versilov 
-why isn't He himself a man who lives what He preaches?" Versilov's 
idea about the nobility does not strike him as something impossible: 
he believes in it as if it were a trivial everyday thing; but "why isn't 
He like this himself?" he says to the Youth. It is precisely this idea that 
the Youth registers even as early as the lst half of part two. The Youth 
is asking himself this question: "\Vhat is it that makes Versilov fall 
short?" and he conveys this question to Versilov (in his confession). 
The Prince won't say: "What is it that makes him fall short?'' But in 
the second half of part two he says to the Youth: "He was making me 
run after the Akhmakov woman, and I could see that he was doing 
it with a purpose." About the Akhmakov woman, he says: "I wouldn't 
have her for nothing now .fiH, after I've found out what a treacherous 
11 Dostoevsky, as co-editor with his brother of the journal Vremia, published 
in 1861 an article on the trial of Pierre Fran־ois Lacenaire, a thief and mur­
derer. It is clear that what fascinated Dostoevsky was Lacenaire's emotional indif­
ference to the suffering of others and the worth of life. 'Vhen Lacenaire left the 
courtroom, he said, "My life to me is worth as much as a five sous piece." 
1 8 See note 3 of Part II. 

The Prince, Liza, and the Youth 383 
person she is, but why did she betray me?" The betrayal lies in the 
same as with El<ena> Pav<lov>na. *10 The fact that he has become 
involved in that business with the shares worries and irritates him, but 
he doesn't even suspect that Stebelkov, whom he hates, will dare to 
implicate him as his accomplice. However, Stebelkov tells him so in 
the second half of part two. The Prince shows him the door, but is 
frantic himself and would even like to shoot himself. He has a liaison 
with Liza, but he wouldn't even think of marrying her (''I'm a 
Prince, after all! "). But Liza, in the 2d half of part two, lets him 
know that she is pregnant. ည He, in turn, lets the Youth know 
about it, and there is a scene between Liza, him, and the Youth in 
the 2d half of part two. Then he declares this to the Youth: "You've 
been selling your sister to me, you've been taking my money," and 
kicks him out. ''I'm my own judge, no one else will be." The Youth 
bitterly and insultingly reproaches Liza. 'Vhat amazes him more than 
anything else is the fact that Liza takes it to be quite unthinkable 
that she could become the Prince's wife. It is at this point that he 
runs to see Stebelkov about some money. The latter refuses to loan 
him any money, but gives him 300, suggesting that he exploit the old 
Prince. The Youth is reduced to such straits that he apparently 
agrees (this is the idea involving Anna Andreevna) Figkt keFe, too 
(to let her marry the young Prince). What happens is that Stebelkov 
is offering Anna Andreevna to the Prince, which would mean a 
healthy commission for him, and a dowry from the Prince. Stebelkov 
is very friendly to the Youth, in part two, but when the latter comes 
to him for some money he offers him 100 at first, then 300, and finally 
even 1 ,000, but the Youth yells: "with no conditions attached!" 
<This,> in order to quiet his conscience, though he is in effect ac­
cepting the other's terms. (But the Prince rejects Anna Andreevna?) 
But when Anna Andreevna comes up with her tour de force, Stebel­
kov is beginning to threaten <the Prince>. 'Vhereupon the Prince 
himself reports everything to the police: "I am demanding to be 
punished, to be punished!" But he is acquitted. He would have liked 
to shoot himself, but he feels sorry for Liza. It is she who saves him. 
''I'll be tilling the soil." Etc. 
The Prince discusses noble and ignoble vices with the Youth. 
The Prince to Liza: "If you're going to drown yourself, I'll shoot 
myself." 
• The Russian sentence is ungrammatical. 
19 See note 48 of Part IV. 

384 
Liza Saves Him 
And later, after the trial : "How are you going to marry me, a vile 
convict?" 
"But you've been acquitted!" 
"It doesn't matter, I'm still a convict. You can't marry me." 
But Liza saves him. The Aide-de-Camp, the old Prince, and every­
body else show their concern. He says that he won't need any money, 
"<give me> a few acres of land, I'll be tilling the soil," and then, 
having made this decision, he suddenly shoots himself. 
"The world is in disorder," the Prince keeps repeating all the time. 
After he has shot himself, the mother says to Liza: "Bear it!" 
[Versilov, cute expressions.] 
"The ideal is as real as everything real," says Versilov. 
"The most iRtimidated intimidated crowd, even it. .. " etc. 
March 5. 
[lst half of part two.] 
A series of points. 
General information concerning clothes, the Prince, Versilov, the 
flat, and the reconciliation. Accounts. Nobility. Tlie Aklimal<m· ws 
ffiHh-Conversations. Puzzlement and Liza. Card games. The Akhma­
kov woman. At night, with his mother. Spinoza.20 With Versilov, 
told him about the Akhmakov woman. Pushed off a sleigh. Playing 
cards. General information in narrative form. The rest in scenes. 
[First half of part two.] 
[Slander against the Akhmakov woman.] November 15. First I 
shall tell in brief how this all happened. Then, the scenes of Novem­
ber 15. On the nobility, etc. (and, along with the scenes, explanations). 
Prior to the rendezvous, as He is waiting <for her>, this story, too 
<?> (i.e., how it all started with the Akhmakov woman), in narrative 
form, then, on to the end, up to where he wins all the money. [Not a 
word about the Akhmakov woman, right up to the very rendezvous.] 
A conversation about the Aide-de-Camp (in this scene). First meeting 
with the Akhmakov woman at the old Prince's. Prior to that scene, a 
whole chapter. The first chapter is about how it all came about. The 
2d chapter-the nobility. The Prince. Visitors. Liza. Accounts, puzzle­
ment. The Akhmakov woman slandered. Versilov does not, in his 
presence, discuss the Akhmakov woman with the Prince. The 3d 
chapter is about how it all happened with the Akhmakov woman, 
and a scene with her (about the Aide-de-Camp), kiss. 4th. At night, 
2o See note 3 of this section. 

Slander of the A khmakov Woman 385 
at his mother's. Spinoza. \Vith Versilov, an admission concerning the 
Akhmakov woman. Sfl:avecl a#f 5th. Playing cards. How it happened, 
and what came of it. They give him some gold, quarrel with the 
Prince. About the idea, dreams, as he falls asleep. 
N .B. After each of the first two conversations, the Akhmakov 
woman had forgotten about him. It was he himself who was trying 
to catch her attention, obtaining information, etc. 
About how I developed a crush on the Akhmakov woman, and at 
this point, a story. How he got together with the Akhmakov woman, 
[with Anna Andreevna] ("I shall be at Tatiana Pavlovna's to­
morrow"). But keep in mind that the reader shouldn't hear a word 
about the rendezvous, <for> the reader hears of the rendezvous quite 
suddenly, toward the end of this, the 3d chapter, and <without> any 
preliminary information. 4th chapter, the rendezvous, and his mother 
(Spinoza), with Versilov, an admission concerning the Akhmakov 
woman, etc. And chapter 5. "I am late": and straight on to the drink­
ing spree, in scenes, without forewarning the reader, and only after he 
has won all that money, only a few words about how he got side­
tracked. Here: at home, a quarrel with the Prince, he returns the 
money, enthusiasm, daydreams and the oppressive idea that he has 
been sidetracked. Don't forget about Anna Andreevna's flat. 
And so: about <his> clothes, and about the 1 ,000-however, with­
out any explanation-then, after his quarrel with the Prince on ac­
count of <his> slander of the Akhmakov woman-the story how he 
and the Akhmakov woman got together, but without any mention of 
the rendezvous. Later, dinner at his mother's, but prior to that, not a 
word about <his> relationship with the family, and, finally, he is 
late to the card game, and the card game without any comments. 
In the 1st part <of> chapter two, about the Prince in detail, and 
after Versilov, there is a touching scene between them, as they get 
things straightened out between each other, and are reconciled. Later, 
a hint regarding the Akhmakov woman. The Prince falls to thinking 
(about the Akhmakov woman). 
It is already after he has won all that money that there is a real 
quarrel between him and the Prince on account of the Akhmakov 
woman. He returns home for the night, recalls certain equivocal 
statements at the gambling house (a few insulting words, and persons), 
about the Akhmakov woman and the Prince, about "his own idea"­
about the document. He is drunk, his head is going round. 
About the fact that Versilov hardly ever mentioned the Akhmakov 
woman at all. 

386 
Olia's Mother 
By November 15 all of my suspicions had become stronger. 
In the narrative part, how he got together with the Akhmakov 
woman; he relates some details, what he's been telling her about 
Versilov and, in chapter four, some information about Versilov also, 
an announcement, and precisely on the current state of affairs (about 
the document, a quarrel on account of the document, as well as the 
Aide-de-Camp and the Prince). (N .B. Make it so the Akhmakov wo­
man won't appear to be too clearly inquisitive <about the docu­
ment>.) 
At his mother's. \Vith Versilov, and then the gambling episode. At 
the gambling house, the Prince's betrayal <of the Youth> as an actual 
fact. They quarrelled about the Akhmakov woman. 
So then, the plot of part two is this: the descriptive part aside, how 
the Youth got involved in a card game, and how he fell in love with 
the Akhmakov woman. 
N.B. Develop some kind of a scene in which Olia's mother comes 
to see him: "I have no one to turn to," and suddenly she begins to 
cry and presses herself against him. 
He meets Liza somewhere in the street (the Stolbeev woman has 
left). 
"Why are you taking money from him?" 
Back home, Olia's mother drops in on him, begins to cry. 
He walks over to the roulette game. 
Everything iR Rarative in scenes, November 15. 
Only in the beginning, for half a chapter, Versilov. 
The scene with the Akhmakov woman without any preliminary 
comments. At Tatiana Pavlovna's flat. 
She-I am waiting for her. "I, for a whole month < . . .  > I am 
giving you information. Who do you think I am, a petit espion?21 
YaH kFw tkat tkere is Re letter. \Vho am I to you?"-"A dear boy"­
about the Aide-de-Camp. She captivates him. He kisses the floor. 
N .B. In one scene, without preliminary comments. He leaves in­
toxicated. 
THE VERY LAST PAGE. Final <and> correct composition. March 
7 j8, in scenes. 
November 15. The flat. Versilov. By way of narrative. Brought him 
together with the Prince. A point of contact -wi-Ht- <is found in> the 
child and Lidiia-( and so on.] Tkis stery later. I kRew wkat ke was 
21 French: "Little spy." 

Rendezvous Scene 38i 
like duriHg th8:t peried onl}' from ti:le Prince's accoHnts. I was con 
vinced of only one thing, namely ti:lat it was precisel}' ti:lis ti:ling ti:lat 
was weigi:ling Hpon Versilov's soHl, and was serving as a point of 
contact with ti:le Aki:lmako·,r woman. How then, did all this happen? 
The story of my disgrace. In scenes, at the Prince's. Versilov, nobility. 
Versilov is gone. "I am an ignoramus, I know nothing." Our tirade, 
and comments. \Varm. 500 mbles. Better not take them, let it go at 
that. Stebelkov and after him, Baron Ditrin. [The Prince is afraid of 
Stebelkov.] Talks about a bank, "why not stan a roulette?" News of 
the Aide-de-Camp. The Prince, a sharp word about the Akhmakov 
woman. He leaves. Stebelkov also leaves. Conversation about the 
Akhmakov woman. The Youth becomes persistent, an insulting word 
of His, directed at the Youth. \Vants to return the money. "Take it." 
(They leave, having kissed each other.) 
He fHns acros Liza. Liza, at Anna Andreevna's: "\Vhy are you 
taking money from him?" 
"Here, give it back to him." "Lizochka, I have hun you." (And here, 
a few words on his own behalf: "Yes! I had been neglecting <her>.) 
Perhaps much of this will be forgiven me; I wasn't quite myself: the 
Akhmakov woman!" 
["\Vhy should I be at Tatiana Pavlovna's tomorrow, why not at my 
own place?"] 
Rendezvous scene with the Akhmakov woman. A full explanation. 
(The whole art.) The Youth would like to make an admission, but 
hasn't the courage to go through with it. About the Prince, about 
Lidiia. A firm conviction that the only thing on Versilov's conscience 
is Lidiia. The Aide-de-Camp. (Enter Tatiana Pavlovna.) She leaves. 
He kisses her tracks. Tatiana Pavlovna. 
Home in an enthusiastic mood. (Have dinner at mother's.) Tatiana 
Pavlovna is there. Spinoza. With Versilov, told him about the Aide­
de-Camp. Confessed about the Akhmakov woman. Versilov, a few 
words about the Akhmakov woman (but certainly none of the kind 
that would presage his crazy sally). At home. Olia's mother comes to 
see him. Ske bean to cry at ti:le Akhmakov woman's. She had had a 
good cry at the Akhmakov woman's. The drinking spree, roulette, 
winning. Settled accounts with the Prince. Quarrelled <with him>. 
At home-a palpitating heart. Intoxicated. A message for Anna An­
dreevna. "\Vhy are you gambling?" 
Visited Anna Andreevna, to find out about the Prince, since <he> 
hadn't been in that day. A whole scene. N .B. Give this some more 
thought. 

388 The Youth and the Akhmakov JVoman 
And then, home. Olia's mother. 
"\Vhy do you love me?" He pressed <me> to his heart. 
"No, I won't be seeing you." And this, at such a moment. 
"I won't ever forget it." 
Last page. 
N .B. "I shall be at Tatiana Pavlovna's tomorrow." 
"At what time?" 
"At three." 
All the time, while they were talking, he was waiting for her to 
mention the letter. (She didn't!) \Vhy here, and not at his own place? 
"Just for charm," (Versilov says to him). 
In the evening, after he had made his admission to Versilov, the 
latter started questioning him: "How did it work out?" By way of 
narrative. "No, I'm not going to speak ill of her." And at this point, 
a detailed narrative account of how he got together with the Akhma­
kov woman. (Being fully convinced that Versilov does not love her.] 
Then, to himself: "What have I been doing! \Vhat have I done!" (i.e., 
having told Him). 
Furthermore, he goes to see Anna Andreevna before <seeing> the 
Akhmakov woman, at half past one, and meets Liza at her place. 
(N.B. At Anna Andreevna's, regarding a possible match with the 
Prince. A description of his character.) ARetR.er were At Anna An­
dreevna's, he talks freely, but is rather depressed. "Ever since I got 
to know you," etc. (N.B. About Anna Andreevna, in more detail.] 
\Vhy is Liza here? But still another rendezvous. And here, a scene 
with the Akhmakov woman. At night, when he makes that admission 
to Versilov, he is presenting it as if he were in a hurry) but it turns out 
quite detailed. 
Most important. N .B. Liza is at Anna Andreevna's in order to find 
out (spy out) everything about Versilov, i.e., first of all) whether or 
not he might be capable of proposing marriage to the Akhmakov 
woman. Anna Andreevna confirms the news about the Aide-de-Camp 
to the Youth. The Youth tells her outright that Versilov wouldn't 
even think of being in love with the Akhmakov woman. 
"But what about her?" asks the Youth. 
"Her?" answers Anna Andreevna, "I don't know." 
"Can there really be any doubt here?" the Youth shouts. 
(Why is Liza at her place? "I swear, I knew from the very beginning 
that she is keeping us here just to get something out of us."] 
[As for Olia's mother, she has come to talk about the infant child.] 
And then, the rendezvous scene. 

The very last page. 
Versilov Loves the Akhmakov Woman 389 
Versilov, after the confession: "Why is it )'OU love me so?" Later: 
Didn't he go over to the infant child's himself, and find Olia's mother 
there, a scene? And from there, on to the roulette. 
And so there is hope: if told in a brief narrative, sticking to the 
most essential, it ought to turn out well enough. 
The Youth to the Akhmakov ·.voman to Anna Andreevna, about 
Lidiia: "If you only knew, if you only knew what Lidiia means!" His 
heart is bleeding. 
The A khmakov woman:* "\Vho told you?" 
The Youth: "Tatiana Pavlovna." 
Anna Andreevna confuses the Youth by telling him that Versilov 
is in love with the Akhmakov woman. He has a showdown with the 
Akhmakov woman and is told about the Aide-de-Camp in no uncer­
tain terms. 
Versilov, to him, about his blushing. (This is in the beginning.) 
The Youth says: "\Ve only had a couple of showdowns: the one 
about my blushing, and then that other one about..." See. 
[Most important] The Youth, as he makes his confession about the 
Akhmakov woman to Versilov: "I was sitting there, not knowing how 
I was hurting his feelings." "\Vhy is it you love me?" I shall never 
forget it. A tirade. 
Or: He was terribly calm. I can remember all the details. 
IR tke 2e half of part two, the YoHth's eyes are sHeenly openee to 
а 
[Not necessary. Quite the contrary] The Youth admits: "\Veil, I 
did have a vague and remote notion that He loved her. For a moment 
there, I wanted to shout to Him (more gracefully) : 'All right, so love 
her, I shall go away and .. . '  " 
Versilov* * asks: "Why the rendezvous at Tatiana Pavlovna's?" 
Versilov says: "You know what, my friend, she was there! I entered 
through the rear door, and there she was, in the kitchen." 
The Youth to the Akhmakov woman, about the Prince: "This is a 
man who has only one idea.'' Actually, the Akhmakov woman is afraid 
of a scandal on his part, because she is greatly concerned about not 
losing the Aide-de-Camp, who is a truly brilliant match. 
The Youth's meeting with the Akhmakov woman takes place, 
maybe1 at the old Prince's. 
• Apparently a mistake; should be: "Anna Andreevna." 
• • Apparently an error; should be: "The Youth." 

390 Disorder in the Society 
[Or better]-at Tatiana Pavlovna's, mostly because the Aide-de­
Camp arrives and the Youth quarrels with him, announcing that he 
won't be coming back. 
Yesides The Akhmakov woman is herself afraid that somebody 
might disturb them. But most of all, in order to flatter the Youth with 
the notion of a rendezvous. The Youth understood that she had 
talked things over with Tatiana Pavlovna beforehand. (The latter 
was sitting in the kitchen!) And subsequently, the Youth learns that 
Tatiana Pavlovna had actually been present. 
Both are convinced, after this meeting, that the Youth hasn't got 
the document. The Youth lets the reader know about this detail 
beforehand. 
The Yatth The Prince says to the Youth: "Seeking to support my 
princehood, I did some gambling and got stuck." 
The Youth: "To support one's princehood isn't such a base thing; 
rather, it is a thousand-year-old debt." 
"This seems to you that way," says the Prince, "because you ... (i.e., 
aren't of princely blood). Admit that you would like to be a Prince." 
N .B. This, either toward the end of the l st half of part two, or 
toward the end of part two. 
"There is disorder in society," the Prince keeps repeating. "You 
yourself are the product of nothing but disorder," he tells the Youth. 
"You haven't even managed to £annulate this." 
"\Vhat you've got isn't logic, what you've got is some sort of an 
emotion," says the Youth to the Prince. "You aren't able to refute 
Versilov's idea, and so you're merely saying: '\Vhy isn't He like that 
himself?' This is your logic, but this is rubbish, not logic. He could 
actually be evil himself, but at the same time He could be telling us 
the loftiest truth." 
"No, this isn't so at all," replies the Prince, "if you are telling a 
lofty truth, be a righteous man yourself." 
"Let's not talk about this. You seem somehow unhappy. Tell me, 
what is it you're accusing Versilov of?" 
The Prince won't answer, but says: "I slapped his face, which only 
ties me down. But I don't know if I still have a right to suffer this tie 
(string) to exist." 
"So this is it. Why didn't you say that? I would have let him know 
about it." 
"\Vell, I'm suffering you to be around, am I not?" says the Prince. 
The Prince says: 'Tve received a letter-my younger brother has 
died in Moscow, my father is decrepit and can no longer have any 

Stebelkov 391 
children, and I've got only two sisters left. This means that in my 
person, the family of the Princes Sokolsky, a family that traces its 
lineage from Riurik, is coming to an end." 
Old Prince Sokolsky, though from a more recent branch of the 
family, does not have any children. 
[Most important.] Stebelkov says: "His younger brother died. The 
old Prince has no children. Prince Sergei is the only representative 
<of the family>. If he were to marry the AkhmakoY 'NomaR Anna 
Andreevna, the old Prince <might give> him his entire fortune to 
preserve the family-that's an idea!" 
The Youth, definitely and even several times, repeats to himself: 
"I've behaved very badly, I've been making some bad jokes, a lack 
of discipline. I've been coming to the Prince's, as if I were living 
there. I've been talking to his friends, as if they were my own 
acquaintances.'' 
In this first half, too, the Youth says a few words to Stebelkov, even 
though these are arrogant words. 
When Ditrin is about to leave, Stebelkov tells him that they haven't 
received that forged promissory note. 
Stebelkov takes the Prince a part and says something to him (he is 
trying to scare him). 
Anna Andreevna has summoned the Youth decidedly in order to 
question him about the Prince. 
The Youth has an appointment with Stebelkov. "I can always give 
you some. Money. You get one half. To provide for your sister." The 
Youth listens to what he has to say, but arrogantly so. 
["Why won't you borrow it from me?"] 
Stebelkov about the Prince: "He r:an also provide for many others 
(i.e., Liza)." When he said that thing about Liza, the Youth jumped 
to his feet and said, with indignation: "You are a scoundrel." "Well, 
forgive me, forgive me, I know nothing at all." 
The rendezvous with Anna Andreevna. She actually had invited 
him herself, but as he was sitting there, she was pretending all along 
that he had dropped in accidentally, and persisted in this attitude to 
the very end. And finally, there was Liza. 
\Vith Liza, a mild scene before dinner. 
"A hypochondriac!" 
Or thus: "I had been asking Liza before. This is how it was. There 
is a little story to be told here." Liza said to him: "I am going to tell 
you all about myself, when the time comes for it. When the time 
comes for it-that's when I am going to tell you." 

392 
The Youth and His Own Adventures 
Stebelkov, as he is sitting at the Prince's, pretends that he abso­
lutely didn't invite the Youth O\'er. 
The Youth is at Anna Andreevna's, and suddenly, right in the 
middle of the scene, he addresses the reader and says: "I am going to 
tell you right here, she was trying to find out from me ... However, 
there was something indescribably charming about her." 
In this particular scene with Anna Andreevna, express, in artistic 
fashion, the dissipated swagger of the Youth during that period of his 
success and good fortune. 
N .B. Anna Andreevna and I met at the Prince's. [N .B.] Versilov 
showed a good deal of interest in what Anna Andreevna might have 
been doing at the Prince's. 
Olia's mother had been wandering about in the streets for three 
hours: "I think I might go and see him, he is so kind. You will for­
gi,·e me, won't you?" N .B. She had been seeing <me> even before, 
but very, very rarely. 
Toward the end of the lst half of part two, the Prince says to the 
Youth: "Come on, don't be angry, do not be ang-ry!" 
Toward tR.e eRd of the 2d R.alf The principal feature of part two 
is that the Youth keeps placing himself in the foreground all the time. 
He is by no means describing the adventures of straRge the other 
characters, but precisely his own adventures, nothing but his own, 
and those of other people only insofar as they pertain to his Jwn 
adventures. 
In the 2d chapter of part one, the Youth, upon beginning to relate 
his meeting with the Prince, reveals that, even then, he was not trust­
ing Versilov, and suddenly exclaims abruptly: "I can't understand 
how I could be visiting him then, at a time when I already knew so 
much, and, alas, at a time when I was already beginning to suspect 
a good many things. No, I shall never seek for any excuses!" And 
here: "My lack of discipline, I used to come to his place, as if I were 
living there," etc. 
Very important. \Vhat was also tying the Prince to Versilov were 
the accounts <they had yet to settle>. This was greatly worrying 
him. He made a strong effort to induce Versilov to accept one half: 
"My father is mentally incapacitated and for 10 years has not been 
legally competent, my younger brother is dead, and I am alone now, 
but, imagine, I am not as yet capable of assuming possession. But one 
half I could not, for-after all, my mother wouldn't agree."* Versilov 
• The last two sentences are unclear and ungrammatical in the original. 

Number One 
393 
was taciturn when he met him, and he didn't mention it with a 
single word, so that the Prince could not but acknowledge his dis­
interestedness. (Meanwhile the Youth had already been taking advan­
tage <of the situation> and had, little by little, received as much 
as three thousand <from the Prince.> The Prince says to the Youth: 
"Let Him have at least 20,000. I was going to get at least 10,000, and 
was calling for that rascal (Stebelkov), but he is trying to weasel out 
of it." 
When the Youth comes to have dinner with his mother, he says, for 
the first time, that the doors* of society have been opened to Versilov. 
Though he did show up at one or two places (I know this much), he 
continued to live at home. 
March 8. 
Stebelkov: "Look, this is the most important person around. Every­
where in the world, you have your number two man. There is number 
one, and there is number two, and it is number two who is the head 
man. Number one will be doing things, while number two will be 
taking things. Which means that number two is really number one, 
and that number one is really number two-you just watch it. [Is it, 
or isn't it so?" 
The Prince was looking for something in a book.] 
There was a revolution, and everybody was being executed. Then 
came Napoleon .:md took everything. The Revolution is the number 
one man, while Napoleon is the number two man. But then Napoleon 
became the number one man, while the Revolution became number 
two, isn't that so? 
"Let's go," said the Prince. 8a¥iRg goteR 1:1p, tlie book. 
My position. 
[Return the 300 here] Already toward the end of part two, and 
during his FReetiRg second meeting with the Youth, Stebelkov speaks 
of the impossibility of arranging a match between Anna Andreevna 
<and the Prince>, because of Liza's pregnancy-two sisters. This, 
the second time, he is already more firm and more frank. He has, 
however, gotten the idea that there might be the chance of a marriage 
between the old Prince and Anna Andreevna. ("Whereas the latter has 
just been asking Versilov if he were in love with the Akhmakov 
woman.) And so on. 
• Literally, "the houses." 

394 Stebelkov and Anna A ndreevna 
Olia's t'Rother: to come "You could see that I wasn't giving you any 
signs."• 
N.I3. \Vhen Stebelkov is starting to tell the Youth (at their first 
meeting) about a possible match between the Prince and Anna 
Andreevna, the Youth cuts him short: "/ /wow aiJo11t this idea." 
N .B. In this fashion, everything will come out in scenes, rather 
than in words. And then, when he goes to see Anna Andreevna, the 
Youth tells her about this idea of the old Prince's, about the old 
Prince and Anna Andreevna, how she met him at the Prince's. By 
chatting about the Prince while with her and maligning him, the 
Youth was unwittingly causing Liza great suffering. 
N .B. Stebelkov has the idea that it might be possible to transfer 
the entire fortune of the old Prince to the young Prince, through the 
latter's marriage to Anna Andreevna, <thus> bypassing the Akhma­
kov woman. 
Stebelkov suggests that the Youth help him to arrange this match 
for Anna Andreevna. An honorarium: if he could only exert some 
influence on the old Prince. Ruin the Akhmakov woman. 
The idea of breadth. 
The Youth to Stebelkov: "And you have the gall to believe that 
I'm going to work for the Prince for money!" 
"Aren't you taking his money now?" 
"How do you know that it isn't that <other> money, the money 
he owes to Versilov?" 
"But... you aren't a Versilov, are you? Aren't you a Dolgoruky?" 
Got angry: "What's the difference!" 
March 1 0. 
The most important about Liza. 
The Youth knows nothing, and suspects nothing, about the 
Prince's relationship with Liza. Stebelkov did tell him something, but 
he failed to get it. "I was acting like a fool!" I kept exclaiming. He 
meets Liza at Anna Andreevna's, and insults her. At home he tllllts, 
before dinner, he talks to her upstairs, quite beside himself with 
delight, and make it so that Liza does already realize that he has 
insulted her, while he does not. And only later, after he has won all 
that money gambling, a hint by the Prince-still vague. Doubts; but 
his ecstasies over his winnings, and other ideas, are clouding <his 
judgment> altogether. 
• The gender of the verb suggests a male speaker. 

The Youth Confesses to Versilov 395 
N .B. However, the narrator should mention, and make some hints 
(without going into the circumstances), that Liza has been there, and 
that she was already then having a.n affair with the Prince. 
The most important about Versilov. 
In the lst chapter, His visit to the Youth's comes about somehow 
without any explanations. He did, for a moment, make a move to 
accompany him, but nothing was said. And this is why it so developed, 
from the very first step, that he got to be ashamed of asking any 
questions; though, on the other hand, he was having a despotic sway 
over him. And only toward the very end, after his confession about 
<that?> woman: "\Vhy is it you love me so?" "\Vhy, I was waiting for 
you for three full days then, knowing that you would come." He 
answers: "Well, thank you, thank you," etc. in a more touching man­
ner. But after he has won all that money, he accuses Versilov of 
"having been keeping away from him and from Liza, and of not 
having been like a father at all," and all this because, the Youth adds, 
"I could see something wrong and something awkward (jealousy) 
about Versilov's reaction to my account of my contacts with the 
Akhmakov woman. I was only feeling it, though I wouldn't have ever 
admitted consciously, not at any cost, that all this was indeed the 
case!"* 
Last and most important: during his confession, the Youth inad­
vertently almost lets out the secret of the document and, after having 
won all that money (in the 2d half of part two), he is terribly afraid 
that he may have actually let it out. Also in the 2d half, there is a 
phrase, a trait of Versilov's insulting tone toward the Akhmakov 
woman which, obscure as it might remain to the outsider, proves that 
Versilov has already guessed that the document is in the Youth's 
hands (He has found out about it from Tatiana Pavlovna). 
N.B. When the Youth has been kicked out from the roulette place, 
he screams: ''I'm telling you, I'll report-yet-to the police, I'll get the 
police and tell them that you've got a roulette here!" 
Versilov has not been seeing the old Prince. 
The Youth, after he has won all that money, says to the Prince, 
when the latter, irritated and angry, gives him a very slight hint re­
garding Liza, which the Youth fails to understand: "\Vhat is it you 
are insinuating? What could my sister have to do with this?" The 
• This sentence is not quite grammatical in the original. 

396 Stebelkov 
Prince, with a malicious guffaw: "Nothing, of course, I just men­
tioned it, 011 11e parle pas d'une corde ... " 22 
Stebelkov: "All right, all right. He could provide for many others." 
"I don't want to." 
"All right, so don't take it, very well, very well, [so don't take it] 
(even though you are taking money, too), but you aren't alone: he 
may provide for some othern-s, too." 
Versilov "\Vhy, you must be out of your mind!" He'll become a 
Versilov. • 
Stebelkov is looking in his face, straight and for a long time: "You 
don't understand. (The other day I was mentioning that On<isim>­
ovna lady, wasn't I?] \Veil, all right, all right. It's all right if you 
don't understand. If you actually don't understand, (that's really very 
good, I am very glad that I've found that out."] 
("You don't say!] \Veil, you better leave me alone; really, to be 
bothering me with such trifles!" 
"These aren't trifles. You are leaving? You know what, you're going 
to be back." 
"No." 
"You'll come ... and then ... Then, we'll have a different kind of 
discussion. \Ve',·e had one discussion, but there will be another one, 
the main one." 
Stebelkov. Also, Stebelkov definitely confirms, by a hint on his own 
part, that there exist unbreakable ties between him and the Prince, 
and even that he's got the Prince in his hands. Also, a hint about 
Dergachev. 
March 1 2. 
Actually, Stebelkov calls in the Youth in order to talk him into 
supporting the Prince's marriage to Anna Andreevna (the old Prince 
is to marry Anna Andreevna). Believing, mostly, that the Youth 
would be opposed to it on account of Liza, having, at the same time, 
[a certain] influence on all of the Princes. The Prince tells him that 
night: "Stebelkov promised that he was going to make you do it by 
giving you some money; did you take his money?" 
࿼.B. In this 1st half of part two, Stebelkov isn't as yet too well 
acquainted with Anna Andreevna. 
• Unclear in the original. The translations is questionable. 
22 French: "One doesn't speak of a cord." 

March 1 3.* 
Liza's Love for the Prince 397 
[Here] \Vith insolent naivete, Stebelkov makes the Youth feel that 
he is really ashamed of spending the Prince's money, for isn't the 
money really Versilov's? 
"But I am a Versilov also." 
"No, you are a Dolgoruky, and besides, smce when do children 
dispose of sums belonging to their father?" 
"Enough, enough!" (Arrogantly.) 
Such a lesson, and from whom? From Stebelkov! I also knew that 
it was a vile thing to do, but I had to win, just win! 
The Prince: "[Last night] Stebelkov promised that he was going 
to make you do it by giving you some money; [did you take his 
money?]" 
At the end of the novel, the Prince says: "A few acres of land, not 
more, and I'll work <them> myself." And having made this decision, 
he shoots himself. He says, in his suicide note: "The Court has ac­
quitted me, but I don't want their charity. I am putting an end to 
my life because it has become repulsive to me. After some initial pain, 
Liza's wound will heal, and she is going to reFReFRber FRe will remem­
ber me with a good feeling. But if I remained alive, I would eKhaHst 
torture and weary her heart, and she surely would have quit loving 
me, and instead, would have begun to loathe me. I know that she 
couldn't stand my character. Really, all of that time, I couldn't under­
stand what it was that made her love me. The last moment. Liza's 
image is with me. Liza, farewell, and forgive me. Remember Lermon­
tov's line: 'But in a better world, they failed to recognize each other.' " 
Toward the end of the 2d half of part two, the Prince learns about 
Versilov's compromising letter -afld. to the Akhmakov woman and, 
being awfully angry with the Youth, tells him that he has been selling 
his sister to him. 
The Youth: "Was it you who called him an old wives' prophet?" 
The Prince: "No, it wasn't I. I can recall this sobriquet, but it 
wasn't I <who invented it>. [I am not so good at putting labels on 
people.]" 
The Youth: "Stebelkov tells me that it was you.'' 
The Prince: "He is lying. It was he himself who gave Him that 
• The original has "May 1 3," but this is wrong. It should be March rather 
than May, since this conversation with Stebelkov was printed in the April issue of 
the Journal. 

398 Stebelkov lnflrtences the Prince 
name, I can remember. He was afraid to tell you that it was he." 
The Prince was worried. Oh, at the time I could not as yet under­
stand all that was causing his restlessness, not being aware of the 
facts, and therefore I was, quite naturally, getting on his nerves­
either by my casual, easy tone, or by the insolence with which I was 
asking him certain questions. 
It is necessary to insert some strong hint) suggesting that something 
is tying the Prince inseparably to Stebelkov. The Youth may simply 
say: "It appeared to me then, that the Prince was tied to him by 
something, inseparably and painfully, and that it was quite implausi­
ble how the Prince, who sometimes would be sick after having been 
with Stebelkov, \\"auld still tolerate his presence and steadfastly con­
tinue to receive him. However, I attributed all this to their financial 
dealings, since I knew only too well that Stebelkov \\"as giving him 
money. The remaining instances of his perplexed and nervous be­
havior I attributed to the Prince's bad temper." 
A certain change. March 1 2. About the Prince. 
Stebelkov is instructing the Prince to marry Anna Andreevna; if 
othendse, he is threatening < . . .  > But the Prince is moved, (1) by his 
outraged pride, (2) in spite of everything, by his honest realization of 
Liza's condition, since, by now, she is pregnant, and (3) partly by a 
remote but mad hope to win the Akhmakov woman. Having learned 
from an important visitor that a marriage between the Aide-de-Camp 
and the Akhmakov woman is a possibility, The Prince flies into a 
rage. The Youth can see through all this and is infuriated by a few 
things the Prince says about the Akhmakov woman. 
N.B. The Youth, for some reason, is in favor of .ft.i.s. the Prince's 
marriage to Anna Andreevna. In the morning, the scene between 
them comes to a fortunate, though ambiguous, conclusion. "'Vhy are 
you defending this lady?" asks the Prince. But that same night, the 
Prince gets mad and (after the Youth has won all that money) tells 
him of Liza's pregnancy, and that he <the Youth> has been accept­
ing money for it. The Youth is crushed. The Prince's sarcasms ϻ 
important. Ίfaybe, the Prince has been seeing Anna Andreevna and 
has proposed marriage to her, but has been rejected. That's why he 
is so furious. This is why, that night, he tells the Youth that he had 
been obliged to do this, othenvise he'd be lost, and so, for his scoun­
drelly action, he got this refusal. "But why 'scoundrelly action'?" 
exclaims the Youth. "Because Liza is pregnant," answers the Prince. 
Then the Prince, in the 2d installment of part two, wants to vie with 
the Aide-de-Camp. [In the 2d half of part two the Prince is seeking 

Love, the Youth, and the Prince 399 
Vasin's advice.] Besides, the Prince had been supremely confident 
that Anna Andreevna would immediately give her consent! 
Or rather better, make it so the Prince has not proposed to Anna 
Andreevna and Liza is delighted. As for the Akhmakov woman, he 
is merely angry with her. And as for the Youth, he reproaches him for 
being in Stebelkov's pay. The Youth is furious, and the Prince holds 
up Liza's pregnancy to him. But in the 2d half of part two the 
Prince definitely wants to marry Liza. He is, however, secretly in­
furiated by Stebelkov's threats, and is himself threatening the latter 
to report the matter of the <forged> shares to the police. And he is 
the first to make a report (in part three). As for Stebelkov, it is he who, 
in part three, informs on the conspirators. 
In the 2d half of part two, the Prince responds to the Youth's de­
mands with haughty condescension. But in that scene with Liza, he 
does want to marry her, "but for this business, this business!" The 
Youth thinks that he is referring to his gambling losses, while the 
Prince is worried by the nagging thought that Stebelkov is threaten­
ing him. Meanwhile there is some talk ѻ in society about the dis­
covery of some forged <shares>, and in part three the Prince turns 
himself in. 
[The Youth, to her about the Prince: "I love him, I love him. He 
had me enthralled later."] 
Anna Andreevna had called him, mostly in order to࿽ find out: 
Does He, or doesn't He love the Akhmakov woman? And there, the 
Youth says to himself: "Now I know that she, of course, called me 
in order to find out whatever she needs to find out. Without having 
dropped a single inadvertent word herself, she has gotten a lot of in­
formation out of me. Oh, in those days many people were getting a 
lot of information out of me. [With Versilov alone an exception.] I 
was serving as an espion23 and kept letting out secrets all the time (out 
of the goodness of my heart). [But let me add one thing: I had nothing 
but the greatest contempt for her suspicion that Versilov might be in 
love with the Akhmakov woman;] it seemed both ridiculous and ab­
surd to me, and-I swear it-I am saying this in all sincerity." 
A nna A ndreevna. When I had hotly disputed the notion that Versi­
lov might be in love with the Akhmakov woman (and also <that 
rumor> about Lidiia), Anna Andreevna had been listening with 
23 French: "spy." 

400 The Youth and Anna Andreevna 
obvious satisfaction. (She was a marvelous listener.) She lowered her 
eyes when I was telling her Lidiia's story. 
"It seems that you are on friendly terms with Mrs. Akhmakov." 
"Oh, I've been seeing her." 
"I know that you've been seeing her. Don't fall in Jove with her." 
I blushed. 
["You used to mention her with so much indignation, it's quite 
different now." 
"A young and beautiful woman invariably elicits a feeling of 
indignation in a young man of your age." 
"Why so?" etc. 
"How clever you are, and how ... experienced." (She blushed.) 
"Forgive me" (ardently). "But you are wrong. I felt indignant with 
this woman only because I was considering her to be an enemy of 
Versilov's. Versilov. He was spreading the rumor that she was in love 
with him."*-"Do you know this for sure? That is, that Versilov is 
not in love with Mrs. Akhmakov?" 
"For goodness' sake, what an absurd idea!" 
"This ... That man. But if you knew the story of Lidiia." (She 
blushes.)] 
The Youth explains the story of E<lena> P<avlov>na24 to Anna 
Andreevna. 
"This was a prank, I have firsthand information." 
Anna Andreevna only smiled. (She blushed slightly. A delicate 
glow.) 
N.B. She was somewhat ashamed of Versilov. A strange relation­
ship. A few words about this relationship. 
The Youth to Anna Andreevna: "Versilov on the nobility. He 
started out as a retrograde, but later he showed some improvement. 
[Perhaps,] He was preaching a Utopia, He has a tendency to do this 
kind of thing, but who is the Prince to pass judgment on him?" 
The Youth: "I liked her austere, almost ascetic character. .. Fasci­
nated by her after a visit with her, I would sometimes feel sweetly 
consoled, thinking that, perhaps, I wasn't quite so bad after all, as I 
sometimes think I am, for couldn't I, too, experience thoughts that 
were noble and beautiful, etc.?" 
Anna Andreevna was managing to get along even with the Fanario-
• Here, it is not quite clear to whom these words belong. 
24 See note 48 of Part IV. 

The Prince> the Youth) and Debts 401 
tov woman, who already belonged to the very <elite,> court society, 
and not at all after the fashion of the ward in Pushkin's "Queen of 
Spades." 
She was very well educated, much more so than I; she knew 
mathematics. 
["You haven't distinguished yourself by anything, and that's why 
you are mad."] 
"You would like to be a Prince." 
The Prince. Already in the morning he got excited: "I am not 
responsible to you, I am my own judge. I am not obligated by any, not 
even the slightest, obligation." 
The Youth: "If you are speaking of the money which you owe my 
father, he isn't bothering you at all, or is he?" 
[For the 2d half, finale.] "I am not obligated to pay that money. It 
was of my own free will, my own desire, though I wasn't speaking of 
that money, for I wasn't speaking of your father, but of you, solely of 
you ... " 
"But am I not taking some of that very same money from you-so, 
really, isn't it all the same if you are speaking of me, or of my 
father?" 
"Not your father, but you, you alone, and [if you] < . . .  > insist 
on speaking of that money, why, I couldn't be giving you somebody 
else's money, your father's without having that person's permission. 
I've been giving you my own money, [and I've been giving it, natur­
ally, without expecting to get it back.]" 
"How do you mean, your own? But in that case, for what?" 
"Surely for friendship?" the Prince grinned, "pour vos beaux 
yeux."25 
"To hell with your friendship-take it all. I'm not going to take 
your money, like a beggar!" 
"As if you didn't know that you were getting it for. .. for your sister," 
etc. 
The Prince: "Oh, in the beginning I took you for an honorable 
person." 
Very definitely, the Youth is angered by a few words said about the 
Akhmakov woman. He said it so DitriR Ditrin said frivolously: "Well, 
it would seem that she was a little lady of easy virtue. Perhaps I've 
25 French: "For your beautiful eyes." 

402 Liza's Position 
heard that you, too, Prince, might have something to say here." Here­
A sharp word by the Youth. Here, about Liza, etc. 
But when the Youth and the Prince were left alone, the Youth be­
gan to talk of the Akhmakov woman, and the Prince jumped to his 
feet: "Nobody has the right" (hints about Liza). 
"Don't take the knife." 
The Youth says: "You always had something against the Akhmakov 
woman, because you were counting on her." (N .B. This, perhaps, at 
Stebelkov's, or at Anna Andreevna's.) 
"How could I, then, go back and take another 300 rubles! But, let 
me repeat it, I was then dwelling in higher regions."* 
Letter by Prince Serezha to the Youth, from prison: "Forgive me, 
I have done you a grave injustice ... My dear friend ... " 
"As if you didn't know that your sister is seeing me." 
Begins to cry. 
"Not about myself, about her." 
That very morning Liza says to her brother, in the 2d half of part 
two: "Do not tell them" (i.e., Versilov and her mother). 
In the 2cl Half of part two, the YoutH is seel:ing to establish Liz:a's 
Happines. THe 'Prince wants to FAary <Her(>. One FAust get soFA€ 
FAoney. THe· agne to try tHeir lucl< at gaFAbling. Ana tHe HellisH 
ğ 
J!'LB. THe Prince Hacl Hopecl, for a moFAeRt, to buy His freclom 
from Stebelkov. All tHat was neeclecl was tHat Stebelkov return those 
fatefHl clocHFAents, tHe 'Prince's letters. It goes witHout sa·ing tHat He 
is coRYincecl tHat Stebelkov would never turn HiFAself in. However, 
ti:lere is already soFAe talk about ti:lose si:lares, ti:lat ti:le· !:lave been 
forged, and discovered to be blse. But Stebelkov refuses to give i:liFA 
ti:lose docuFAeRts. The 'Prince realiz:es ti:lat ti:le whole aiiair will Gi?r 
teiNly be exposed, and so A@ turns hims€lf in. (But this is alreadĒ· in 
part ti:lree.) Lizi tileRs Ј·Q& Bġ"firs ef Bll thss thiNgs. All ti:lis is ex 
posed ia ti:le ead of part uvo, when Versilov looks up tA:e YoutH:. But 
in ti:le end of part two none of ti:lis has been exposed as yet. 
?N.B. But Liza's position in part three? (Must be defined.) : AND 
THEREFORE, HAVE IT THE OLD WAY, LETTING THE PRINCE REPROACH THE 
YOUTH, IN THE lsT HALF OF PART TWO, WITH LIZA's PREGNANCY. THIS 
HAPPE!';S ONLY TOWARD THE END OF PART TWO. (THOUGH IT IS VERY 
HARD TO SAY.) IT SEE:\IS THAT IT MUST BE THAT WAY. 
• Pelo v dushe, literally, "my heart was full of song." 

Liza 403 
[HERE] Most important. March 1 3  .J.Ie.- The Prince may reproach 
him, he also may get excited. However, he goes to the authorities and 
turns himself in only at th࿾ end of part three, when Stebelkov has 
worn him out, and there already have happened the whole business 
with the old Prince at the Youth's flat, Versilov' s proposal, and the 
chopping of the icons; and that's when the Prince is arrested. Mean­
while, in part three, Liza is simply at home, being the only one who 
is aware of the Prince's secret. At the same time, the Prince is very 
excited and extremely busy. Though perhaps in part three the Youth 
also knows the Prince's secret. 
March 13. 
Liza. 
Couldn't it be arranged so that Vasin proposes marriage to Liza, 
who unexpectedly hurts him by her refusal? 
N.B. Couldn't it be arranged so that Vasin entrusts Stebelkov with 
the documents of the cause} and so that the latter denounces <the 
secret society> to the police on the basis of these documents? 
Most important. So that in part three, Liza is awaiting a decision of 
the Prince's fate. Makar Ivanov is also there. 
[N.B. Stebelkov's role is as such a minor one; however, he is clearly 
indispensable for the Prince's fate} and later, for Vasin's. N .B. Stebel­
kov without Lambert. They do not know each other.] 
N.B. Inquire: The Prince, while he is under arrest, can he be see­
ing all of them? 
In the 2d half of part two. 
"The awakening was terrible" ... Liza came. Liza, wfl.at Savage re­
proaches. 
[".What could you find in him? Oh, I am cruel, cruel!)" 
The Youth: "If our mother has been living that way, why must we 
all live in disgrace?"] 
Liza left. I ran after her and asked her to forgive me. 
"Liza! Does mother know?" 
"I told her." 
"What does she say?" 
"She said: 'Bear it.' " 
"Oh, do bear it, do bear it, Liza!" (i.e., "don't drown yourself!") 
"I came to ask you not to tell father about it." 
Liza is telling her brother about the scene with the pocket knife. 
"How do you know that?" 
"Mother is begging you to think of what she won't dare beg of you." 
"Not to do any gambling, that is!" 

404 Lambert 
LAST DECISIO:-.:. Afarch 13. 
Both the arrest [of the Prince] and everything, perhaps, at the end 
of pan two. Then, in pan three, Vasin could propose marriage to 
Liza, who has been left alone. He admits that Stebelkov has got the 
papers, and Stebelkov denounces <the rest of them> so as to get a 
lighter sentence. The old Prince does not flee to the Youth's of his 
own accord, without Stebelkov. [Versilov and Lambert may be there.] 
But Lambert exerts an influence throughout part three. And when 
the Youth's depressed condition has assumed frightful proportions, 
especially under the influence of Lambert and his sneers, he conceives 
the idea of quitting everything, breaking with everybody, and going 
off to America. At this point, the conflagration. Thereafter, the 
Prince's acquittal. 
Vasin. ُlarch 1 3. 
Should it be arranged so that Vasin, who keeps giving advice to 
the Youth, gets caught himself, like a fool, with those documents and 
Stebelkov? He also offers his hand to Liza. Doesn't he, in the 2d half 
of pan two, warn the Youth about doing any business with the Prince, 
as well as about the latter's dealings with Stebelkov? And later, also 
about the fact that ࿿ some important documents of Vasin's were in 
Stebelkov's hands. 
After the Prince's death, Vasin, who has been acquitted, proposes 
to Liza, etc. 
Lambert. Lambert's appearance IHa)' lake place lewarcl the 'lery 
ena of part three, afteF tR.e chopping of tR.e icons. Perhaps one could 
altogether dispense with Lambert, and make it so that toward the end 
of part two so much spite has accumulated in the Youth's heart, so 
much spite and envy, that he decides to launch the document of his 
own accord. The document is tormenting him. Power. 
Or, perhaps, Lambert might be left in. 
Lambert used to be perfectly ingenuous and frank with me and, 
what's most important, I was struck by the fact that he never for a 
moment doubted that I was his friend. But not altogether a Russian. 
Not a Russian character-a villain, but not a Russian. No sullen 
dullard. (The sacramental act of a crime committed, with an in­
cessant view of taking vengeance on society, vicious because stupid 
and backward, and deifying his own spite, callousness, and nega­
tivism.) 
Olia's mother. 
''I'm wandering around, wandering around, pushing through 
crowds of people, sick of it. My sorrow." 

The Prince. 
"Your Sister Is Pregnant" 405 
Mention, in the beginning of the 2d chapter, that tR.e Fanariotov 
woman the Stolbeev woman is out of town, so that the whole fiat is 
at the Prince's disposal. 
The Youth had been thinking that Liza was seeing <her?> old 
nurse. 
"Come on now, could you have ever believed such nonsense as her 
going there for Varvara Ivanovna's sake only?" 
(The Youth, to himself: "I swear that this is what I was believing; 
no other thought ever entered my mind.") 
Ditrin asks: "\Vho was that sweet girl I met there?" 
Stebelkov: "Lizaveta Makarovna." 
"Ah, what if this is an indiscretion." 
The Prince: "She is seeing <her?> nurse. [Olia's mother.]" 
All of which was quite awkward. 
At the end of the lst half. 
"Your sister is pregnant. Here is your money!" I wanted to lunge 
at him-and suddenly I began to cry! 
Most important. March 14. 
The Youth's admission, in chapter two, that he used to enter the 
Prince's flat as if it were his own, make it -aiteF-on the occasion of a 
visit by some important guest, or something of that kind. 
The Prince: "Don't take that knife. You dare not take that knife." 
He stamped his foot. I threw those 300 roubles. Apologized. Mutual 
explanations. 300 roubles. "Take them, take them." 
But I had something entirely different on my mind, my heart was 
full of something else.* 
"You know what, I want to gamble, I want to win, gambling is 
abominable, but..." (and I had forgotten everything, as I was walking 
up and down the room in a state of exaltation. I repeat, something 
entirely different was filling all my soul).* *  
Organize a roulette. Wouldn't go i f  you're i n  the service. I 
looked back and saw that grin on his face. This was one thing I 
hadn't expected. 
"Naturally, I shan't carry it to a certain any excessive amount. 
Versilov is going to pay you" (How could I be saying things like that!). 
"I've never urged you to return any of the money," said the Prince. 
• Literally, "something was singing in my heart." 
• • Literally, "something else was singing in my heart." 

406 Stebelkov 
He hadn't been talking this way before. Before, he used to get up, 
shake hands with me, and wouldn't even let me finish. To be sure, 
even then, there were times when he would smile strangely ... How­
ever, I had attributed this simply to the mechanics of his smile, i.e., 
that his smile was always like that, and that by its very nature it hadn't 
much of good nature in it. 
Stebelkov. 
Stebelkov to the Youth, still at the Prince's, nodding at <his> 
clothes, tailored on Bolshaia ևlillionnaia <Street> (i.e., clothes) 
< . . .  > 
The Youth comes to see Stebelkov (he had been looking for Vasin): 
"\Vhy didn't you tell me over there (at the Prince's) what you 
needed?" 
"And you, why did you, too, remain silent there, and now you are 
coming [to me.]" 
St<ebelkov> : "You wrote me that you needed some money, I've 
got money." 
"Don't bother, I got some from the Prince." 
"Stop, it wasn't yours." 
"And he always smiles so when he is giving you money." 
"How do you mean, 'smiles'? He does not smile at all." 
"Today, for instance." 
''I'm attributing it simply to the mechanism of his smile. This is 
how God made him." 
"It isn't just the mechanism," Stebelkov said, with a wink. 
"\Vhat then? \Vhat is it you want?" I shouted. 
Stebelkov about Ditrin: "So they cosigned the note, and the money­
lender grabbed the promissory note allright, but didn't give them any 
money, while keeping the note-so tha_t's where the fun started." 
"Aren't you the moneylender?" I asked. 
"I own a bank, I have a Mont de piete. Have you heard what a 
Mont de piete is in Paris?" 
The money was Versilov's, no matter how you looked at it: how 
could I, then, reason in that fashion? However, it seemed to me that 
it really had to be that way, and not othenvise. At least it seemed that 
way two-thirds of the way, the remaining third [to be scored] to a 
guilty conscience. 
"Today I delivered a nice round sum to him" (speaking of the 
Prince). "At first he used to <see a lot of> the Akhmakov woman, 
but now it's gotten to be Anna Andreevna. Might get away easily." 

Appointment with the Akhmakov J Voman 407 
The Youth: "I never spoke a word with him about Anna An­
dreevna.'' 
"I understand, I understand that you really couldn't be talking 
about Anna Andreevna" (Liza). 
Stebelkov about the Prince: "He is putting on a big show ... but. .. " 
Stebelkov about the Prince: "He is furious" (about the Akhmakov 
woman). 
"Nonsense, he can't have any hopes." 
"He hasn't got any hope, but he's still furious." 
''I'll give <it?> to that litterateur. He's sold his wife to a General. 
I'll give <it?> to him."* 
"\Vhat filth!" 
"No, he is good and clean, very good and clean, all scented. He gets 
very mad whenever things aren't clean enough for him. Even if he 
feels like spitting, he'll always be looking for the very cleanest spot, 
before he'll spit there." 
The Akhmakov woman (the rendezvous). 
She: "So you really think that I've come here because of you." 
The Youth: (My heart sank. That's precisely what I'd been think-
ing.) "Yes, I've been thinking that you were coming precisely because 
of me," [I suddenly blurted out, flinging myself into the abyss, with 
chills going down my spine, but with my eyes flashing.] 
She: "No, I've let you go too far." 
1: ("Stay here, stay here")-"in order to ... steal the document from 
Versilov." 
The Youth is most curious and excited by the fact that the 
Akhmakov woman has decided to take this step, making this appoint­
ment with him: so he is anxious to find out what precisely madeက 
her do it. He almost knows it himself: that is, <she is trying> to find 
out for sure whether or not Versilov has the document. He thinks that 
perhaps she wants to make him steal the document. This thought 
causes him intense suffering: it would mean that she sees in him a 
spy, and not... a friend. He even makes up his mind to let her have 
the document, if she is going to conduct herself loyally. [Yet the news 
of] BtT the Aide-de-Camp leaves him bewildered. He is jealous. N .B.? 
However, she conducts herself with dignity and charm. He hints that 
• The context does not tell us what the object of "give" might be: "he," "she," 
or "it." 

408 
The Youth Meets the Akhmalwv Woman 
he might get the document for her. She suddenly g1ves him high 
hopes, leaving him enraptured. 
The Youth to her: "Fear nothing, I am your protector, I feel that 
you are the summit of perfection, though I used to think you were 
the summit of pride and ... of passions. • 
The Akhmakov woman: "\Vhere did you find out all these things 
(about the document)?" 
"From the late Kraft. Here's how the first lines <of the letter> go" 
(he says them). 
"So what? I am so confident of my father. And you've been think­
ing that I wanted you for a spy. Oh, how depraved you are (forgive 
me)." 
I was thinking of taking it out and giving it to her. "But what if 
she is lying? Look at her eyes (is she, or isn't she lying?). If I'm going 
to hand it to her, I'll be ashamed. (I'm not going to give it to her.)" 
"I am giving you my word of honor that this document does not 
exist and that Kraft tore it up in my presence." 
"Did you see it?" 
"I did." 
"Yourself?" 
"That's right." 
"Kraft tore it up. Thank God, it was a bad thing to do, but 1..." 
She, about Versilov: "(Perhaps I was not worthy of him.)" 
"No, you have given me great pleasure." 
"I can always be your friend." 
The Akhmakov woman: "You are still little, but you are already 
so depraved." 
The Youth (quite beside himself): "If you will prove to me right 
away that you aren't [depraved yourself, and that you are not] lying 
now, but are telling the truth, you don't know what I am going to do 
for you!" 
The A khmakov woman: "Now this certainly oversteps the limits." 
The Youth: "No, please, sit around for a while, and prove to me 
that you are a superior woman." 
The A khmakov woman: "\Vhat if I am going to prove it to you?" 
The Youth: "First: did you seek an appointment with me here, or 
didn't you?" 
• The Russian sentence is as awkward as the translation. 

The Youth Lies to the Akhmakov Woman 409 
The Ahhmakov woman: "Yes, I made an appointment with you" 
(blushing, and with a pleading smile). 
The Youth: "It is about that letter, isn't it?" 
The Akhmalwv woman: "Yes, I was fearing that letter, but I swear, 
not as much, not as much as you think. That time, at Tatiana 
P<avlovn>a's .. . ' '  
The Youth: "So then, I was merely a spy." 
The Akhmakov woman: "No, so help me God, I was also in love." 
The Youth: 'Til tell you about this letter. But let me tell you that I 
esteem you immeasurably higher than myself, because right now I'm 
telling you lies, while you aren't telling any to me, so it seems. How­
ever. .. however, I am your friend forever. I am going to tell you soon, 
very, very much I'm going to tell you.''* 
The Akhmakov woman: "Set my mind at rest on one thing. Is it 
with Versilov?" 
The Youth: "N-no! He hasn't got it." 
The Akhmakov woman: "Who then?" 
The Youth " Kraft. .. he destroyed it... with my own eyes ... " 
The A hhmakov woman: "Thank God.'' 
The Youth (alone): " ... I lied to her! Oh, how immeasurably below 
her I stood then, and how I despise myself at this moment! But per­
haps I was thinking at that moment: 'It is still in my powers to give 
everything back to you, and I shall reward you!' Was there any sus­
picion? Yes, there was. There was also a desire to hang on to the 
document. Oh, what a vile, oh, what a dismal character! I rushed to 
kiss the tracks of her feet. But I was happy and cheerful. I was singing 
and thinking: 'If things are vile in this world, it is only I who is vile, 
but there is also beauty in this world.' " 
\Vas it frivolity? Or was it extreme vanity? 
And later, in the scene with Versilov, he also speaks about the 
document with him, and also tells lies. 
After having discovered this thing about Liza, he is thinking of the 
Akhmakov woman. 
The A khmahov woman: "You have been at my place several times, 
<and> several times I've been meaning to find out for sure ... Only 
I don't know how to go about it." 
The Youth: "That time, Tatiana Pa<vlovna> said: 'Seduce him.' " 
• Equally awkward in the original. 

410 The Youth Lies about the Letter 
The Akhmakov woman: "I don't know how to seduce <a man> ... 
What good is it if nothing comes of it?" 
To pucker her little lips in laughter-this is her <typical> gesture. 
Toward the end, she pursed her little lips <speaking> of the Aide-de­
Camp: "Only, this would be just too funny," she said, as if begging 
forgiveness, and then suddenly hurst out laughing. 
The Youth: "I am not jealous, I am not jealous. Let it be that way." 
The Youth: "I deceived her, and Versilov, (about the letter), yet I 
was full of good cheer. But I was strong ... 'But if this woman ခis 
deceiving me, I shall know how to protect myself.' " (See, some­
where, an earlier N .B.) 
The Youth is telling her how he likes honesty about a woman, and 
adds a description of Anna Andreevna. 
Later, the Youth says, after the rendezvous, that he managed to 
remain sober, i.e., to believe that she was perhaps deceiving him, even 
though completely overwhelmed and carried away by his feelings, 
which is also why he himself deceived her. "I acted in precisely the 
same fashion that night, with Versilov," he says. "Well, was it cour­
age? Strong nerves, or that double monster, which is sitting inside me, 
and which Versilov esteems so highly, higher than singlemindedness," 
etc. 
N .B. The Akhmakov woman still did not belong to the [very] 
highest society, but Baron Bioring's proposal was about to elevate 
her to the very highest circles. 
"Yes, I was at fault." 
"How could you humble yourself so ... No, no, humble yourself in 
such a noble way. How could you confess to a person such as myself­
and just to find out about that thing!" 
"No, I was very much interested in you.'' 
"I have asked you to never mention Versilov in my presence." 
The Youth: "You are merely repeating yourself. And in the mean-
time, I've told you everything." 
"The letter has been destroyed. Kraft told me." (-gven her I I was 
deceiving her, too. I was only ashamed to admit that I had been put­
ting on a show. All these superior women were having a purifying 
effect on me. That very moment I made the decision to tear up that 
letter that same evening and to put an end to this "base and ridiculous 
intrigue.'') \Vhen she heard about Kraft, she said to me: "Thank 
God.'' I was not lying to her. [I was pure. These women were having 
a purifying effect on me.] 

And, as I was leaving: 
"I am a Bad JVoman" 41 1 
"Listen, are you marrying llioring, the Aide-de-Camp?" 
"Oh, I, never mind me, never mind me" (her little lips were trem-
bling with laughter). 
N.B. A tirade: "\Vhat you meant to me!" 
She has a feeling <for him>. 
"My dear boy, don't be angry with me." 
"This is all I want. I ࠧ shall never know another woman." 
She turned away, her little lips pursed: "Let me laugh a little." Then 
she turned back to me: a single tear. "I am a bad, I am a vile woman. 
If you should ever remember me: think something good of me." 
In his confession before Versilov, the Youth says to Versilov: 
"She was worried about the document." 
Versilov: "But you haven't got that document, or have you?" 
[I was expecting Him to ask me <outright>.] And what I really 
needed was this question. All this time, all of these two months, I had 
been asking myself: \Vhy doesn't He ask that question, why is He re­
maining silent? For don't I know that He has his suspicions? How­
ever, He remained silent even this time. I was very much ashamed 
deep inside. 
N .B. In part three, not a word about the document either (though 
this was not the prime concern of that period, nor did it fit in with 
our mutual emotional attitudes, or with the words which were then 
exchanged. And then, all of a sudden, I find out for a fact that He 
is looking has been looking for the document [in a certain place]). 
?N .B. Maybe. 
Among other things, Versilov lets the Youth know that the Prince 
has formally proposed to Anna Andreevna, but 4e- that she has re­
jected him. "And she also asked me a very strange question: 'do you 
love the Akhmakov woman?'." 
"\Vomanly curiosity." 
"Oh no, a categorical question. Don't you know something?" 
Confession. [Precious.] Suddenly, after all these stories about the 
Akhmakov woman, the Youth asks: "Listen, tell me what is philos­
ophy?" And a little later: "Why won't you give me a kiss?" 
Versilov, at the confession: "Kraft tore it up, didn't he? You 
aren't lying to me, are you?" 
And suddenly, that night, after I had returned from the Prince's, 
I suddenly recalled my recent conversation with Stebelkov. Stebelkov 
was bribing me so I wouldn't interfere with his matchmaking for 

412 Liza 
Anna Andreevna, or intercede in Liza's favor, and what's worse, he 
was saying: "My money is better <than the Prince's>! "• 
Falling asleep: "Really, there had been so many hints (about my 
sister). Really, after all this, I must have simply been stupid not to 
have realized what was going on. No, that can't be it: +fi.s. it must 
have been egoism, not stupidity, an egoism of the heart and-and, per­
haps, a belief in the saintliness of other people, a belief that everyone 
else was above me morally. Oh, of this I had always been con­
vinced. But what was perhaps the most important fact was that all 
these different hints as if on purpose had come into a focus only on 
that day, so that I hadn't had the time to realize what was going on, 
and besides, as if on purpose, I happened to be preoccupied with en­
tirely different things, being distracted by the Akhmakov woman. As 
a matter of fact, Stebelkov had, [on that same day] ... Do they force 
people to marry in such cases? ... pistol in hand ... I don't know. I shall 
act as an honest man should. Versilov-I wonder what Versilov's posi­
tion might be, did he or didn't he know?" 
Liza entered. 
About E<lena> P<avlov>na.26 
"Sure, you know all about youths such as myself." 
"This," said Liza, "is all because you are still little. You'll meet a 
beautiful woman, you'll fall in love, your heart will stand still... and 
later you'll begin to hate her." 
"\Vel!, and what if she prefers me to a grown-up man?" 
"That's when you will perish at her feet." 
"No, I'm not going to perish ... No, I won't perish. Rather, if a 
woman should in my way get in my way, she must follow me. No­
body crosses my path with impunity." 
She began to laugh. 
"How I like it when you're laughing at me! How I like to be with 
you!" 
I leave purified. 
He is leaving. Liza catches up with him, "Don't gamble," 300 rubles. 
"How do you know?" 
"Onisimovna told me." 
About the Aide-de-Camp. 
• The original says: "so I wouldn't interfere with his seeking Anna An· 
dreevna's hand." However, this is hardly what Dostoevsky wants to say. 
2G See note 48 of Part IV. 

The Youth and Liza 4 1 3  
The Prince somehow unhappy. He is a generous, kindly man. 
I'll admit that I had been invited, whereas she absolutely pre­
tended that I had dropped in by accident. 
Is this breadth? 
"What I've got is undisciplined dashing. I am gambling" (as I am 
leaving). 
"Come back more often." 
Versilov, it seems, was interested in knowing what Anna Andreevna 
had been doing at the Prince's. "He keeps asking me questions about 
you," he says to Anna Andreevna. 
"How pleasant it is to say something pleasant to a person." 
[Olimpiada] 
"Ever since I got to know you." 
"He does not love <her>, 
But does She love Him?" 
"And when he (the Prince) and I quarrel-it hurts me." 
Having left Anna Andreeva, <I> rushed along. I was late. 
"Is it true, is it really true that she has made an appointment with 
him?" 
To Liza (as he is leaving): "You were at Daria Onisimovna's the 
other day, weren't you?" 
"I am looking at Russia." 
"Listen: we have withstood the Tartar invasion, then two centuries 
of slavery, ဂ i.e., both the peasants and their squires, solely for 
the reason that they found both things to their liking. Now, we have 
to withstand freedom: are we going to do it, is freedom going to be to 
our taste?" 
Anna Andreevna got up and left. 
Liza: "Exactly like your father. \Vhy, you must have taken this 
from him." 
"So you're denying that I have a mind of my own?" 
"Come on, don't talk that way." 
Kissed Liza's hand. 
Liza: "You are kind and very nice." 
"With that whole progressive movement of ours during those past 
1 5-20 years, we have proved first of all that we are terribly unedu­
cated." 
Liza: "It's terrible how abstractly you talk these days." 
The Youth: "\Vhy are you picking on me, Liza?" 
The Youth: "I carry in me all the depths of abjection!" 
"Here you go again. You are finding that Versilov, such an ex-

414 The Forged Stock Certificates 
tremely honorable man, is dishonorable. <Yet,> you couldn't even 
express it." 
The Youth: "One should not respect people, and so I make a start 
with myself." 
About the forged stock certificates. 
The Prince. 
"You know what, I want to gamble, I want to win some money, 
gambling is an abomination, but this is all temporary only, just so I 
could win a certain sum ... and ... then ... " 
I looked at him and saw a grin on his face. "Of course, I am not 
going to take it past a certain figure." 
"You want both to retain your innocence and to acquire a capital. 
I want I want you to take it! You don't know what I've got!" 
"I£ you and I will kiss ... " 
"If you will kiss! \Vhat tenderness all of a sudden." 
He kissed me with aversion. 
"\Ve used to be friends." 
"All right, all right... that'll do ... " 
"I really don't know, those 300." 
"Take them, take them." And I took them. 
If you only knew what was in my soul. Oh, had he only known 
what was in my soul! 
And I took the money. I could have gotten it <elsewhere>. I could 
have gotten it from Stebelkov, and I had gone to see him for every­
thing but money. Yesterday I had received a note. 
In Stebelkov's presence: "You've got another Bioring there. You 
are educating yourself, my Prince." "I beg you to put this book 
down."* 
About Stebelkov (Well, at least he's brought the money). 
"Makes no difference." 
"Come on, I've brought it for you." 
"Brought it, brought it." 
A visitor arrived. An individual such as Stebelkov, naturally, had 
to catch his attention. It goes without saying that on occasion I did 
know how to behave, and the Prince apparently tl:lat means was 
ashamed of me also. This notion made me furious. 
In Ditrin's presence, "The way out is to shoot oneself." 
"I have the pleasure of knowing Katerina Nikolaevna personally." 
After the rendezvous. 
• The whole paragraph is quite unclear in the original. One might also trans­
late: "In Stebelkov's presence, you've go ... " 

Society in Disorder 415 
Something very intimate from the Youth's recollections. 
There was something wrong there, something apt to humiliate 
Liza. 
St<ebelkov> about Ditrin. "This isn't done" (the promissory note). 
"What do you want? \Vhy did you keep sitting around?" 
"But... about that, that... How do you mean, my Prince?" 
"No, no, and no." 
<He went> to the door. ''I'm not afraid of you," then suddenly ran 
after him and started talking <to him> very rapidly. Stebelkov was 
listening with his eyes screwed up, then shook his head: "Come on, we 
know that," and left. The Prince returned, all trembling. He made a 
move to sit down, but took a look at me and remaind standing. 
It was as if his eyes were saying: "\Vhy have you been sitting around 
here?" 
"I, my Prince," I started. 
"Eh, what's the Hse" 
"Honest, I haven't got time, I must be leaving right away." 
"All right, so take your 300 rubles first." 
\Vhen I was telling of <my> meeting with the Prince 
I admit, I was abasing myself, but invincibly < . . .  > So as not to 
prevent from transporting < . . .  > 
About the nobility, about faith-at the Prince's. 
"Now this is already something ideal, some sort of masonic lodge" 
(the Prince was terribly uneducated). Versilov realized that he was 
trying to put up an argument for spite only. 
"This is tantamount to annihilation of the nobility." 
"If you want to put it that way, it may well be that it has never 
existed," etc. 
"Only in the beginning did his words seem reactionary to me. 
Later I liked the idea" (repeat three times!). 
"Our society is in disorder. You yourself are nothing but a product 
of disorder." 
From among courtiers and slave owners. 
"My God, how you are flattering him." 
"He's got as many virtues as he's got shortcomings." 
"My God, how you are flattering him." 
"Flattering, how come? <I said> not understanding him right 
away. 
"You were trying to say something, but didn't succeed in express­
ing it. There is Bioring for you." 
"Please, leave me alone with your laws." 
"\Veil, what you've got there isn't logic; what you've got is some 

4 1 6  The Youth about the Prince 
kind of a feeling." Oh, how unsophisticated I was. To be sure, I 
had something completely different in mind t!:ten filling all my heart. • 
"\Vhy, his relics will perform miracles, if he has this many virtues." 
In this sense, the Prince was more clever than 1 :  he immediately 
noticed that the other man was using a joke to get off that subject. 
Something like baring his teeth. 
"You say about Versilov, 'Why isn't he like this himself?'-this is 
your logic. But it's rubbish and not logic, for even if he weren't like 
this at all, he could still be preaching the truth. And secondly: \Vhat 
is so wrong about him?" 
"Oh no, once you've begun to preach your higher truth, you've 
got to be righteous yourself." 
"Was it you who called him an 'old wives' prophet'?" 
It says in the Koran that one should look upon such people as if 
they were mice, and stick to one's business. 
I .  A notion just as monstrous as that other slander about her, 
namely that she had promised to marry Prince Sergei Petrovich, even 
while her husband was still living. 
2. "This was just plain stupidity, I know, for I have firsthand 
knowledge," I explained. 
This was a gay, light, facetious conversation at a bright, cheerful 
moment, when the Prince, in view of her impending widowhood, had 
insinuated something to her, and she had answered, with a smile: 
"Maybe." This was frightfully frivolous, I agree, but ,\rhat could her 
"maybe" possibly mean? I know only too well that the Prince could 
not possibly attach any importance to this kind of a promise. "And 
having no intention, besides," I added, realizing that I had said a 
little too much about the Prince, and seeking to correct my mistake ... 
"I love him very, very much," I suddenly started again, "in spite of 
all his shortcomings, he is a very nice person. There is a certain 
single-mindedness, a certain abruptness in his thinking, to be sure, 
but all this has a most honorable foundation: 'That's right, if fG*­
yourself you are talking of honor, you'll have to be an honorable man 
yourself; if not so, I'll attach no value to your words.' This is illogical, 
for a man who isn't honorable himself may very well express a truth. 
However, such thinking does reveal the Prince's noble aspirations and 
desires notwitl:tstaHsiRg tA@ fact that he has beeR reduces ... Hmvever 
• Literally, "singing in my heart." 

The Prince, the Youth, and Liza 
4 1 7  
... Sl:tow me ... I. Oh, my God, is it already three o'clock?" I suddenly 
exclaimed, looking at the clock. 
"Ten to," said Anna Andreevna. 
I began to take my leave, dithyrambs. 
"Really, one might suspect that you are under the influence of 
some woman." 
3. "Mother is begging for something she's afraid <to ask of you>." 
"Sometimes, I am most wicked. Well, I shall leave you to your 
little secrets. Especially since I'm in a hurry." 
"Liza, why were you not quite so kind to her? Why were you tug-
ging <at my sleeve>? Isn't she a wonderful girl, isn't she?" 
"I, I'm sometimes most wicked." 
"She is no good." 
"All right, Liza." 
"Well, ih that case, I'm no good." 
After the meeting with Anna Andreevna, Liza went into the other 
room with him. "Don't gamble. You've been taking money from the 
Prince." And suddenly she pulled him over with all her strength: 
"Let's stand over here. Behind the door-curtain." The Prince walked 
past. Spurs. 
"This is the Prince. What are you afraid of?" 
"Oh, nothing. I just don't want him to see me." 
"It sure gave you a scare. Could it be that he is running after you?" 
"Enough of that." 
"I'd really let him have it..." 
"You are against him, you dislike him a great deal." 
"No, Liza, I like him. Why did he insult me?" About those 300 
rubles. 
"How do you know? The Prince." 
"He wouldn't get too far, would he? My little Liza couldn't pos­
sibly fall in love with the likes of him. But you know, really, I am 
ready to forgive him. He did insult me, but I am ready to forgive him. 
When one is happy, one tends to be kind." 
"And you are happy?" 
"Terribly, terribly happy altogether I'll tell you everything later, 
Liza." 
"Well, of course it is all nonsense. Forgive me. I shall win back the 
money I lost, ana return it to him. You know what I'm going to tell 
you ... " 
"No, let's go out. I don't want him to know that I come to this 
place at all." 

418 The Youth Explai11s to Liza 
"Aren't you on your way there?" 
"No, I'll go with you." 
"Did you say good-bye?" 
"I did." 
We left. 
"\Vhat I was gomg to tell you IS that he came here to propose 
marriage to her." 
"This couldn't be true." 
"Why not?" 
"You know what, you go ahead and take your cab, while I I'll iRl 
m@diately will walk." 
"Are you going to have dinner with us? I'll be there." 
"Mother has asked me to tell you something she does not dare tell 
you." 
"Liza! I know that this is all but petty faint-heartedness, but ... 
these are only trifles. But you see, I've run into debt, and I want to 
win some money so I can pay my debts. It's quite possible to win. 
It's easy, as long as one isn't carried away. I am going to count e,·ery 
ruble, but I shall pay my debt and call it quits, and then I'll be all 
yours, inseparably yours, and do tell Mother that I'm never going to 
leave you. But today ... " 
-¥es- "Are you going to have dinner with us tonight?" 
"Oh, sure. I'll be home for dinner, as I promised. Half-past four." 
"Are you very happy? You just said that you were happy." 
"Give me your hand, for good luck." 
"For good luck, my hand-never!" she said. 
''I'm leaving. Lizochka, my dear \Vhat 8ave I doRe to you, how I 
did torture you." I can remember her glance when she said to me: 
"And are you happy?" There must have been something there, in 
your heart. \Vretched, wretched mole that you were: I could see 
nothing, understand nothing. 
[And perhaps it was precisely that happiness of mine that was the 
main reason why I couldn't understand anything of what was going 
on.] 
"Not only have I not been in your room ... " 
"\Vhy, he has come to propose marriage to her." 
"N -no," she said, smiling a kind of pale smile. 
I was riding along, just as sunny. "Three o'clock, three o'clock," I 
was thinking. ϱfy heart was palpitating something terrible. At three 
o'clock she was to be at Tatiana Pavlovna's. "Is she really going to be 
there?" 
"What shall I need, boldness or timidity? Eh, I won't fail!" 

The Youth's Rendezvous with Her 419 
I entered. Nobody home. I'll wait. I entered: she was sitting there, 
waiting for Tatiana Pavlovna. 
"Yes, I haven't met her." "You probably forgot to tell her." 
"1... I haven't even seen her." 
"But didn't I ask you to tell her, last night, that I would be at her 
place at three o'clock?" 
"Either I didn't hear you right, or you forgot to tell me." 
"It is hard to imagine that I would have forgotten it." 
So this is how it was! And I, I had been thinking that she was giv­
ing me a rendezvous!" 
"Oh, my God, why are you here? Oh, my God! \Vhy have you come 
here?" 
I was getting ruffled. She began to laugh. 
"Yes, you cannot help laughing!" ¥et (Angrily:) "You aren't like 
Anna Andreevna." 
"Have you been at Anna Andreevna's?" 
"Yes, I've been there, and I heard that you are getting married." 
"To whom?" 
"To Baron Bioring." 
"Did you hear that from her?" 
"No, not from her. At the Prince's" (good-naturedly). 
"I like your good nature." 
"Everybody praises me for my good nature, while I am really 
wicked. Incidentally, Nikolai Alekseevich made that wisecrack about 
my being acquainted with you, that young men ... from a corner. .. " 
"They told me, and I said that if anybody should be standing in 
my way ... They laughed. I am humiliating myself so terribly with 
you." 
"I do not want that... because I have you <illegible>." ;'\/.B. Or so, 
with the Youth still speaking: "Do you want me to tell you what 
kind of a person you are?" And he goes on to develop it. 
"I'll tell you everything. The document. Is it true?" 
"Tell me, really, and I shall forgive you." 
"I am glad that you have started to talk <of your own accord>." 
"But why didn't you start to talk yourself?" 
"\Veil, I don't know how." 
"You know, I've been afraid of you all the time, and I'm still 
afraid of you." 
"Afraid of what?" 
"\Veil, that you might jump up and do something violent, like 
breaking this wall." 
''I'm not going to break any walls." 

420 Deception about the Dowment 
"Really? without making fun of you, and without any second 
thoughts." (Simply because you don't believe that I'm not going to 
break anything.) 
I: "\Vhere do you get these cute expressions from?" 
"Why, the very idea that somebody might believe I might break a 
wall." 
"\Vhat am I to do with you? Why must I always laugh when I look 
at you? You are a joy" (a dithyramb). 
"Forgive me, but would you mind shedding your pride for just 
one moment?" 
And then, in the end, he suddenly, just before leaving, produces 
another dithyramb. 
"I was thinking of a poor boy, a neglected, unhappy boy. I came to 
love you because you were unhappy. ·ُ1y dear boy,' as my father calls 
you." 
"I like to have a confidant such as you. Yours is a pure soul." 
"Like cat and mouse ... 
" 
"What kind of a cat am I?" 
"Let's each suggest some good idea to the other." 
"And you aren't jealous about my getting married?" 
"No, may God give you happiness. Love him. This is higher than 
thoughts could be, isn't it so?" 
And yet I deceived her. I was capable of deceiving her (about the 
document). Is that "breadth"? No, I wasn't deceiving her. I was going 
to tear up the document that very night. 
But there is still another trait, typical of those days, which would 
let you commit your villainy while you'd be saying: "Later." 
"Listen, when I was taken out for the first time < . . .  > 
Not one single bad experience. 
Because nobody can see it. 
Ambiguously about Versilov: "\Vhat is He doing, how IS He 
doing?" 
I. "It may be that I am very guilty before him." 
"How?" 
II. "I do not know. By showing myself to him, frankly and openly, 
as I am doing it before yon right now, <by baring> my whole soul, 
with my evil vices." 
III. "Which would be?" 
"Frankness. A desire to conquer, to attract, to make happy 
immediately." 
N .B. IV. "How can that be? A woman shouldn't be frank the way 

After the Rendezvous 42 1 
I am. She shouldn't attract without love. ·while 1-I really love no 
one ... I love everybody. I am destined to love everybody) and so no 
one. " 
V. "\Vhy did I let this happen? Only because no one is going to 
find out about it. \Veil, and even if they did find out." 
"But you are a chivalrous man. You are going to say: She was mad. 
But you'll smile and-forgive me." 
Some kind of trifle, as a result of Liza's action. 
[Here.] First chapter. After the rendezvous, going home: "The fact 
that Liza had been so ungrateful, even before Anna Andreevna the 
other day, worried me particularly. And why are they so easily an­
gered, so irritable? They don't know life. Life is quite different from 
what they think it is; everything is so good and so clear." 
For the monologue. 
"Your passions ... " She shuddered. "You are full of fear, and yet even 
in your fear, you smiled." (She smiled.) 
"I have become so attached to you precisely because you have such 
simplicity." 
"I wouldn't have started talking unless I hadn't actually reached 
a decision." 
"If you want it, happy as well."* 
"I, afraid to leave you?" 
"Is this to say that you weren't thinking of how you could wheedle 
the document out of me all the time?" 
"Oh no, I was forgetting it altogether quite often." 
Jesuitism, cunning, a spying serpent... and what I discovered was 
honor, glory, a student. 
"Tell, what has made you laugh just now?" 
J,Vl:tat's so "You've got such words ... what is a 'spying serpent'?" 
"No, I am thankful to you for having broken the ice. You've done 
it in a terribly tl:taRkfHl original fashion. 
"About the blessings, he knows." 
"Versilov has been telling me that Othello didn't kill, and then 
killed himself, because he was jealous, but rather because he had lost 
his ideal." 
"I can understand that." 
"This was really well said by him." 
She was getting ready to leave. 
• Unclear in the original. 

422 
The Real Life 
I got up, not knowing what to say. There was, at first, a certain 
moment after which I had suddenly made a tremendous decision and 
knew that I was going to fulfill it. Having once accepted this decision, 
I immediately ,,·ent mad and began to talk-as I had never talked 
before. 
In the sleigh, a marvelous idea occurred to me. "This then, is real 
life," I thought, "the real life Versilov has been talking about. He has 
failed to understand that she is so very sim pie and has accused her of 
all kinds of vices. But he has never had any real love for her, but 
merely wanted 'to sa,·e her'-there's the solution of the riddle-also, 
about Liza's thanklessness. That"s what she has always been like, all 
the way."* 
"This is precisely what people fail to understand (about real life) 
and what Versilov has failed to understand." 
There was one most precious word here: how could she say that "I 
counted on your ardor" ... All right, she was a saint, even according 
to her own admission, but this still would have to be what amounted 
to a truly monstrous frankness, for a woman of the world (but not in 
these words; as a woman of the world, she could have avoided it to 
preserve her own dignity), yet also saintly, for by saying this she was, 
in her purity of spirit and out of deference to me, to my condition as 
a youth and unprotected adolescent, actually blaming herself. • • 
I recalled <her> cute little sayings, following the example of 
earlier meetings. 
And so by baring her own guilt before me, she was, by virtue of 
doing just that, and quite perceptibly to me, already now and forever 
stopping that game-that game of enticing a boy-and was now not 
only educating him but also elevating herself to a higher point. 
Though this means nothing, for she is a saint all over. 
N.B. Leaping across all my many falls, I shall say: That's what she 
really was like-saintly and righteous! 
"Now it is no longer possible, now it would be even sinful! Oh, 
how much frivolity there was on my own part!" 
"I liked to listen to my husband. I used to love Prince Sokolsky's 
quest for honor." 
Versilov. 
"I was then sitting behind the door-curtain. You were talking about 
• The end of this paragraph is somewhat incoherent in the original. 
• • The sentence is awkward and curiously involved in the original. 

A n  Imprudent Action 423 
the letter. I ju.mped out from behind <the curtain> and let out my 
secret. You were bound to realize that I knew something. \Vait, don't 
answer me yet. Your suspicions '࿰ere well founded. Kraft. Kraft had 
it, he shot <himself>." 
She: "Is that really so? Did you see it yourself? Thank God!" 
(N .B. I wasn't lying to her, I was pure.) 
"Tell me then, why were you attracting me to yourself, why were 
you being kind to me, why were you receiving me? Don't hurry your 
reply. I'm not going to he angry-there's nothing to worry about-if 
it is the document that has been worrying you." 
"Tell me, was it because of this?" 
"It was." 
''I'm guilty." 
"\Vait a moment, you've got me stunned, and I can't understand 
a thing. If it's true that it was because of this, why don't you get up 
and leave? Instead, you're saying: 'I'm guilty.' How could you 
humble yourself so much? Listen, nine-tenths of all ladies would have 
left..." 
"\Vhy then?" 
"Because you are not afraid of me, because you believe that I shall 
open the door myself." 
"I can see that I was really most guilty." 
"Tell me, why didn't you say anything before?" 
"I didn't know how. I was ashamed. Later, I got attracted to you, 
I thought that you might notice it, and I felt ashamed. I was for­
getting." 
"And why did you make this appointment here?" 
"Now the time has come. I was thinking that things might go more 
smoothly at this place, that I might succeed in making you talk while 
we were here." (She smiled, as if asking for my indulgence.) "Oh, I've 
been very imprudent about this thing! Just as in everything that per­
tains to this story with that letter. This document is one of the saddest 
and most imprudent things (actions). ࿱ I actually did think that 
you had it. But then you started to come to our place <regularly>, 
and I became attached to you." 
"How could I, a poor youth, how could 1..." 
"I rather dislike society, my husband, like students-you've got 
such words ... Versilov-all the vices." 
"EnaNgk, }'EJN kave planted paradise \Vhat vices? You haven't got 
any.'' 
"Oh yes, I do." 

424 JVIzy Did Kraft Tear It Up? 
"\Vhat specifically? Tell me! To he sure, don't tell me if you can't, 
but better tell me." 
"I wanted to be liked by everybody." 
"Could it he true that this includes me?" 
She looked up and smiled. 
"Enough, you have planted paradise <in my heart>. I am grateful 
to the 'spying serpent' ... " 
"\Vhat words!" She smiled. 
"But now, now don't come to see me." 
"It won't go, it's my fault. Sinful. A poor, dreamy nay." 
"Not so often." 
He- Othello, jealousy. 
"Is it true about Bioring?" 
"I don't know. He is a very clever man. A clever and firm man. 
Kind and generous." 
"Yet he didn't believe <what I said?> and became my enemy, 
enough of him. I beg you to never mention him again." 
"God bless you." 
"No, I shall only retain the ideal in my heart, which is good enough 
for me." 
She: "Shall we never talk that way to each other again?" 
"Never, never." 
"ϲo. you must leave before." 
"Yes, I didn't know how. Actually I do know how, but I don't like 
it, and that's why <we shall be> like students." 
"But this means nothing, for you actually needed something <from 
me>." 
"No, I didn't need it so much, you are putting me to shame. I did 
make a mistake: I'm very much for I actually was counting on your 
ardor. But why did Kraft tear it up? And do you know for sure that 
he did?" 
[Here] "Yes! Yes!" (''I'm going to burn it right today," I was 
thinking.) 
"You are now like a mother to me." 
March 22. 
For the preface. 
Facts. They are passing by. They don't notice. There are no citi­
zens, and nobody wants to make an effort and force himself to think 
and to notice things. I haven't been able to tear myself away, and all 
the shouts of our critics, ha\·en't dissuaded who say that I am not 
depicting real life, haven't dissuaded me. Our society has no founda-

Dostoevsky on the Underground T)'pe 425 
lions, it hasn't worked out any rules <of life>, because there really 
hasn't been any life either. A colossal shock-and everything comes 
to a halt, falls down, and is negated as if it hadn't ever existed. Ana 
not just externally, as in the 'Vest, but internally, morally. Our most 
talented writers, who have been describing, in highly artistic form, 
the life of our upper middle class (from the vantage point of the 
family)-Tolstoi, Goncharov-thought that they were describing the 
life of the majority; in my opinion, what they were describing were 
the lives of some exceptions. [Quite to the contrary, their life is the 
life of exceptions, while mine is the life of the general rule. Future 
generations will find that out, as they will be more objective, and the 
truth will be on my side. In this I believe.] 
It has been said that I was describing real thunder, real rain, just 
as on stage. 'Vhere then? Could it be true that Raskolnikov, Stepan 
Trofimovich (the principal heroes of my novels) may give grounds 
for such an assertion? [Or Akulka's husband in Notes from the 
House of the Dead, for example? It was precisely this (civic) feeling 
that made me, for a moment, consider joining the Slavophiles, with 
the idea of resurrecting the dreams of my childhood (I had read 
Karamzin, <and was familiar with> the figures of Sergius, Tikhon).] 
And what about the underground and Notes from the Underground? 
I am proud to have presented, for the first time, the real image of the 
Russian majority, and to have exposed, for the first time, its mis­
shapen and tragic aspects. The tragic lies in one's awareness of being 
misshapen. As heroes, those beginning with Silvio and the Hero of 
our times down to Prince Bolkonsky and Levin stand for nothing but 
petty self-love, which is "not good," they were "brought up the wrong 
way," they have a chance to improve themselves, for excellent exam­
ples are available (Saks in Polin' ka Saks, also the German in 0 blo­
mov, Pierre Bezukhov, the tax farmer in Dead Souls and ffiaH)' 
࿲). But this is so because they are representative of nothing more 
than ࿳heroes of petty self-love. I have been the only one to bring 
out the tragedy of the underground, which consists of suffering, self­
laceration, an awareness of a better <life> coupled with the impossi­
bility of attaining it, and, most important of all, a strong conviction 
on the part of these unfortunate people that everybody else is like 
them and that it is, therefore, not worthwhile to improve oneself! 
WHat- 'Vhat can sustain those who do try to improve themselves? A 
reward, faith? 1\'obody is offering any reward, and in whom could 
one have faith? Another step from this position, and you have extreme 
depravity, crime (murder). A mystery. 

426 Poet of the Underground 
They are saying that Olia has made it insufficiently clear why she 
is hanging herself. However, 1 am not writing for fools. 
Bolkonsky reforms as he sees Anatole's leg being cut off, and we've 
all been shedding tears over it, but a genuine underground man 
wouldn't have reformed. 
"Underground, underground, poet of the underground/' our feuil­
letonists have been repeating over and over again, as if this were 
something derogatory to me. Silly fools, it is my glory, for that's where 
the truth lies. It is that very underground which made Gogo!, in his 
solemn testament, speak of his [last] narrative which had risen from 
the bottom of his soul, like a song,"" and which actually would didn't 
even exist. \Vhy, it is quite possible that, when he began to write his 
testament, he didn't even know that he would write this thing about 
his last narrative. Now, what is this power that makes even an honest 
and serious person lie and clown in this manner, and what's more, in 
his own testament? (This power is peculiarly Russian, in Europe 
people have more integrity, while our people are dreamers and 
scoundrels.) 
The reason for the underground is the destruction of our belief in 
certain general rules. "Nothing is sacred." 
Unfinished people (as a consequence of the Petrine reforms in 
general), like the engineer21 in The Possessed. 
Continuation and conclusion of part two. April 4/5. 
[MoRE BRIEFLY] Dinner at mother's. Versilov is grumbling. Tatiana 
Pavlovna approaches <him?>, very mean with him. The Youth is 
both full of joy, and awkward. Upstairs, he surprises his mother and 
Liza in an embrace. He says something stupid to Liza, but acciden­
tally it is an obvious hint. Leaves with Versilov. Conversation. More 
briefly. At home. Olia's mother. Gambling. The scene with the 
Prince. Learns everything. Tomorrow, Liza. The Prince to the Youth, 
in Liza's presence. Definitely, a scene between them. Goes to see 
Stebelkov. The latter (Arseniev).28 He <goes> to see Vasin. Vasin 
warns him. [At the landlord's,] [(scene between the Prince and Liza).] 
His relationship with the Prince. The Youth's sufferings and cyni­
cism. Versilov is cool toward him. Suddenly, Tatiana Pavlovna asks 
the Youth: "\Vhat has he been doing? Versilov has written a letter on 
• vypelas' iz dushi ego, which I found untranslatable. 
27 Reference to Kirilov of The Possessed. 
28 See note 5 of this section. 

Does Not Admit that He Is in Love 427 
account of it." A whole story, and scenes, in connection with the 
letter. [Tatiana Pavlovna says that she had been behind the door that 
one time.] The old Prince. Anna Andreevna. The Youth is really mad 
at Versilov. The old Prince, [through Anna Andreevna, shows the 
Youth the door.] The latter is desperate. [To the Akhmakov woman, 
encounter with Bioring.] [Insulted by Bioring.] Fireworks of ideas: 
to America. (There's a funeral at his landlord's.) A quarrel with the 
young Prince on account of Liza, and another quarrel, this one with 
Liza. He gets some money. Win back the money he had lost and quit 
everything! Losing, and the scene at the roulette. 'Til inform the 
police." A terrible night, encounter with Lambert. Andrieux. 
Fantastically. 
N.B. Pay more attention to Liza, more warm th. After the letter, 
Versilov doesn't show up at home. (A visit to the child, and a mass 
for Olia.) 
MORE RAPIDLY. 
She's cold. A little girl. A little girl (cold). He needs her throughout 
the novel as a refuge from Versilov, Lambert, Liza's distrust, his 
mother's apathy. He secludes himself with her. The little girl dies 
right before <the execution of his> scheme-the decision to <as­
sault> the Akhmakov woman, downtrodden. Her death makes the 
Youth desperate. 
However, the scheme against the Akhmakov woman had come into 
existence while Makar was still alive. Here, one might introduce, 
still during Makar's life, a sudden sally of his against Bioring, the 
Aide-de-Camp. The Youth is insulted. 
Arrival of Maria lvanovna. 
The landlord's wife does not die. He merely reconciles the land­
lord to the landlady. However, the landlord will come in handy when 
the old Prince flees to the Youth's flat. 
He wanted to set fire and < . . .  > She is so cold. They've given her 
a beating at home drO\'i'R oReself. Drown oneself. Lambert. 
The 2d part MORE RAPIDLY. 
Current matter. April 4,15. 
The Youth admits to Versilov (after dinner) (at the entrance to the 
tavern) that he has met the Akhmakov woman, but referring to her 
in a haughty manner, without admitting that he is in love with her 
and saying merely that she has been asking him about the document. 
He does everything just to say it, treating the Akhmakov woman with 
haughty condescension at first, then suddenly giving himself away and 
admitting that he loves her. Versilov asks him all kinds of questions. 

428 Versilov's Letter to Her 
<He tells him?> everything, in his enthusiasm. Here, also about 
happiness for mankind and about philosopny. A kiss. ''I'll giH )·ou 
࿴ Versilov at the tavern. ևfore lively. At home, Oiia's tHother. 
Ganhling. At home, Olia's mother. (He is still in that enthusiastic 
frame of mind.) Gambling, and the Prince. The awakening. Liza at 
his place. Enter the Prince, too. 
Toward the end of part two, already after the betrayal, <he goes> 
to <see> the Akhmakov woman, to tell <her> that it is now almost 
impossible for him to quit the game. "The idea." "Some day she will 
learn about my idea, but should I really turn myself into a mouse 
now? I must meet Bioring in society ... I ࿵am obliged to meet 
with Bioring now." 
Before the General's widow's betrayal: "There are moments when 
the truth of reality descends upon .fis. my heart: so what, let my 
sister be somebody's mistress, and a kept woman-isn't everybody? 
'Vhy, Versilov is not terribly embarrassed, or is he? Eh, Versilov! 
Versilov-a phrase ... 
" 
"I was ready to kiss." I was kissing. I threw myself on the floor a 
couple of times, kissing the rug on which she had been standing. 
At dinner, Versilov acts bored. Show more clearly that it is for that 
very reaso11 (Bioring). 
Versilov, with much ardor, tells him about legio11 d'homzeur. This 
could preserve happen in two different ways, either through the 
government, or privately. 
Versilov again tears him away from the family and from Liza. The 
Youth has made an appointment with Liza to get reconciled, etc. 
From Versilov's letter to the Akhmakm· woman: " ... This docti­
ment exists: I could see it from the eyes of that little fool, who wanted 
to make me believe that it had been burned. But it hasn't been 
burned, and therefore, beware." 
THE PRI:'I:CE. The Prince: "Maybe I shall marry your sister." 
"Eh, this has been all nothing but thoughts, now some action." 
"Your sister has also told me that you knew nothing, though I still 
couldn't make myself believe it." 
Versilov's words: "As for Petersburg, these are all paper people, 
really almost people made of paper." 
Versilov, speaking of the Prince's liaison with Liza: "How can I 
help it, the human heart is free." 
'Vhen Liza's pregnancy has become known to him, the Youth 
asks Versilov: "How could you, suspecting that I am aware of Liza's 
liaison with the Prince, and seeing that I am, at the same time, taking 

The Very Last Decision 429 
money from the Prince-how could you keep talking to me, shake 
hands with me, fail to despise me worse than a dog?" 
Versilov: "My friend, it's all a matter of one's conscience. I have 
been meddling in other peoples' consciences more than enough, earn­
ing nothing but rebuffs and sneers for it; I don't give a damn about 
the rebuffs, but what really matters is that this kind of maneuver will 
take you no place: nobody is going to listen to you." And at this 
point, about <the Youth's> blushing. 
"How could you, suspecting that I knew of Liza's liaison, stretch 
out your hand to me?" 
Versilov: "How could 1? ... Perhaps I, too, was afraid to lose my 
ideal and to face a scoundrel, instead of my ardent and honest boy. 
\Vhy couldn't you suppose there was something other than perfidy in 
me, something closer to naivete?" 
["So you were not sure, not sure." 
"I am an old man. I don't know young people."] 
In part three. 
"I do believe, my friend, I do believe in stinking Lizaveta, I believe 
in her with all my strength." 
(Stinking Lizaveta, according to legend, screams to Christ: "All 
right now, Christ, you won't dare refuse me thy Kingdom ... And if 
you refuse, I'll still shout 'Holy!' to you. You may elevate others, and 
I'll shout 'Holy!'--cast me in Hell, and it's still 'Holy!' Let me be in 
the hellish fire, with the devils, and I'll still be yelling 'Holy, Holy, 
Holy!' " (N .B. Mad frenzy, fakirism.) 
... And always smut on <her> nose. 
[The Youth's mother.] 
THE VERY LAST DECISION. APRIL 4 /5. 
In part two, introduce only Stebelkov's offer to sell those people 
to him. The Youth is outraged and goes to see Vasin, whereupon 
Vasin warns him of the Prince (the stock certificates). Then, in part 
three, Vasin, even though he is compromised by Stebelkov, entrusts 
<his?> manuscript to the Youth. The latter, even though he is under 
Versilov's and Makar Ivanov's influence, wants to join the conspira­
tors himself, being under the impression that the manuscript has 
been entrusted to him. \Vhen [Lambert] informs the police of the 
manuscript, Vasin is arrested. The Youth meanwhile had spent a 
night at his place. Vasin suspects that it was he who informed the 
police, and since the Youth is suspected of having informed the police 
about the roulette, he is quite crushed by this suspicion and wants 
to set everything on fire. 

430 The Youth and Liza 
April 7. 
THE LITTLE GIRL. Liza has rejected the Youth, so it appears to 
him. It seems to him that everybody is wronging him, so the little 
girl is the only one he's got <in the world>. 
April lS. 
The girl is quite frozen. As she dies, she says: "ll's all right!" 
(Bismarck's ring.) Instead of being affectionate, she says to the Youth : 
"Here!" and gives him some treasure of hers, a toy or something. 
(To Liza, as she is leaving:) "Liza, I think that you are a strong 
individual; I've been talking all the time, while you have told me 
nothing, and are leaving as the winner. Yes, I believe that you're 
going to subdue him, and that you're going to subdue me also." 
"I take a dim view of everything. I'll earn my spurs before her. 
Don't tell her. Listen, I told you about (the marriage proposal to 
Anna Andreevna), because it has been bothering me too much." 
"It isn't I who refuses <to marry her>, it is she who has turned me 
down. I am gravely afflicted by it." 
"You have proposed to her?" 
"Yes, I was there to propose marriage to her." 
"And later, I didn't go through with it; I said nothing, but only 
because I didn't get around to it. She forestalled me and said that this 
was an idea <only>." 
""Which means that it was just as if nothing had happened, and 
your pride must be ... 
" 
"Still, before Liza I'm a scoundrel-don't tell her." 
Earlier} we had been talking of roulette. 
At night, I found a note from Stebelkov. Saw Versilov in a tavern. 
Anna Andreevna. After the Prince, in the morning, Tatiana Pav­
lovna. At Stebelkov's (about Anna Andreevna). At Vasin's (a second). 
To the old Prince-about Anna Andreevna, and the letter. At the 
entrance, a kick in the arse by Bioring. Came running to Tatiana, 
weeping: Versilov's letter. To Versilov: Baron Roden (mother and 
sister upstairs): "You are a maniac. You will be summoned before 
a higher agency. In that case he is going to protect himself, and you 
will be summoned to appear at an altogether different place. Bioring, 
so far, is not involved at all. Let the young man be here." \Vhen 
Roden has left, Versilov laughs: "You know, I made them sit upstairs 
in the meantime. Eh, leave me in peace, let's go." At this point, a 
letter from the Prince. 
"Isn't it wonderful to be dealing with a person who can express 
himself so clearly and so concisely?" 

The Prince Gives Himself Up 431 
"Oh, you are witty-! have heard about that-but wit is not ah,·ays 
wisdom." 
"A most profound observation, Mr. Baron Rossen." 
"Oh, I have heard that you are a witty man, but you know that wit 
is not always wisdom." 
"The devil take it, you are really tempting me." 
"A retraction of one's words such as you are giving me is almost 
tantamount to reaffirming them." 
"Is that really so?" Versilov said with a smirk. 
On the next day the Prince gave himself up. His letter to me. 
Mother, Liza. (She keeps her wits.) To America, wm some money. 
The scene at the roulette table. 
Vasin: "There's nothing to it, believe me; in reality there is noth­
ing to it at all. Nothing but talk. I am telling you this confidentially, 
and as to a person whom I trust. However, I am still grateful to you ... 
He knows only too well that I'm not a party to it." 
Versilov: "This marriage (of Anna Andreema's) is quite typical of 
society." 
"That she would like to have some money, and a position in soci-
ety? \Vhy, isn't this worth it?" 
Bioring won't like the taste of this a bit. 
"And it has been made public?" 
"No, nothing has been. I have it from his son, Andrei Andreich. I 
don't know how it was done; nor whether it is still a big secret or 
not; but all I have told you is true." 
"\Vhat about the old Prince?" 
"That's precisely the point, he is delighted. And of course there 
is a lot of commotion over there. You can understand this. So they 
laughed at you over there! Ah, poor boy!" (And he laughed right to 
my face.) 
Everything is in confusion, the roulette. 
The Prince in his letter: "I told her that I had proposed marriage 
to Anna Andreevna. She forgaye me everything. And there is one 
more thing: I must tell you that I am actually more guilty in that 
business (the stock certificates) than I let you know yesterday." 
"I find it awfully base to 10\·e generosity in the ideal, yet allow 
oneself to go from degradation to degradation." 
The Prince, before they go to play roulette: "Don't you find this 
sordid? (\Ve've been doing it a thousand times.)" 
The Youth: "Money is always sordid." 
"A kopek earned by hard work isn't." 

432 
Versilov's Showdown with Bioring 
"Let's do it one last time, and then repent." 
"This is what I've been telling myself a thousand times. This has 
been my ruin." 
"You are so right, but what if there's no other way?" 
"No, there is a way out, the princely one." 
"And that would be?" 
"Later. Let's go." 
Let's try it once. 
My jaw was trembling from nervousness all night. "Is he really 
so noble (Bioring), selling himself; and Anna Andreevna, too, is 
selling herself, selling everything. And Versilov is a maniac." I 
laughed spitefully. "Yes, a maniac, a maniac" (jealous of Katerina 
Nikolaevna). "You <withdraw> into carnality, and I, and I, into 
my idea. But that woman, that woman. Oh, this is lower than the 
lowest." 
PS also in the letter: "I have told you that there is a way out: the 
princely way. I have taken it. However, even with this, I was late. 
I shouldn't have gone gambling." 
Versilov: "'Vhat's worst of all is that you've been rubbing elbows 
with these people, gambling; however, I am not judging you." 
After Versilov's showdown with Bioring: "Let's give it one try 
(roulette)." The Prince smiled: ''I'll think it over. Right now I'm 
sick." 
To the Prince, at the roulette table: "You have renounced me!" 
"'Vhat else could I have done? Even without it, I am quite crushed 
by the very fact that I decided to follow your advice and that I've 
come to this place." 
"You are a vile little aristocrat." 
''I'll prove to you that I am not." 
A t  the roulette table: "Yes, I can testify that Mr. Dolgoruky cannot 
have stolen <that money>, at least so far as I know him." (Before he 
is searched.) 
"Is this to say that you do not know him well enough?" 
''I'd rather like not to answer certain questions." 
In his letter: "I did not renounce you; I could, however, have acted 
in your behalf more resolutely." 
At the Prince's, that night. Story of the Ensign. "I wanted to write 
to the Officers' Club and to the Ensign while I was in Luga. I was 
wavering and suffering. It was then that I made a clean breast of it 
before Lizaveta Makarovna." 
"What did Liza say?" 

Money and Gambling 433 
"Not to write." 
"Set that straight." <?>-"She told me, of course not directly, but 
in all too transparent terms, clearly and tactfully, that this was an 
impossible idea." 
"She decided the matter as a woman would." 
"She said that I would <in that case> love myself just as much. • 
Is that so? Is that so?" 
"Yes, I think that they don't have full proof. But what about having 
to lie to them?" 
"Does Liza know about it?" 
"No, she does not know everything. Because I myself have found 
out all about this affair only now, from Stebelkov and from Zhirond­
sky. I had already forgotten about it." 
"But listen, if they tell the police about it, they are really turning 
themselves in, aren't they?" 
"But to be in partnership with these crooks! To be their associate 
for ever and ever! What are they talking about now, what are they 
threatening to do, what do they want money for? They are saying: 
yoH kRow, R.er 'Of course we shall not give <you> away, but in 
case .. .' It is Zhirondsky who is uttering these threats, and Stebelkov 
is passing it on to me. This Zhirondsky, it seems, is planning to steal 
something, some money entrusted to him, and to go to America. 
Stebelkov has explained something along these lines to me. Well, 
that's what it is, he needs some money to go to America." 
After the scene with Bioring's second I came running to the 
Prince's, and he said to me: "I almost decided to go and play some 
roulette! Will you despise me ... " 
"No, I also, I also ... " 
"Don't you find this sordid?" 
"Money is sordid, but... I've run out of money completely, and I 
have to go out no matter what happens." 
"What hatred!" I exclaimed. 
"Hatred!" Tatiana hissed, laughing venomously to my face. 
"I have come to the conclusion: no, there can't be a duel." 
"Perhaps so much the better for Baron Bioring." 
"Oh, I know that you are a witty man, but wit is not wisdom, and 
moreover, I admit that I am most grateful to you for saving me all 
this trouble. I so dislike all this nonsense.'' 
• Not quite clear in the original. 

434 jealous of Versilov 
"Yet you are allowing yourself ... " 
"\Ve are not living in the woods, but in a well-organized state." 
"Is that what you think, my good Baron Rossen?" 
''I'll admit that you are greatly tempting me to show you that I'm 
not so very much 'your good Baron Rossen.' "• 
Only one strange sensation stuck in my mind, namely that I had 
told Lambert that I'd got a document by which I could destroy 
everybody and everything. 
\Vhen I woke up--I felt so glad that Lambert did not have my 
address, but how great was my surprise when I realized, after a 
moment's thinking, that I did not have his address either. I had 
completely forgotten where I had been. I could remember the room, 
Adolphine, but where it had been, in what street, I had forgotten. 
Suzdal' boyars. 
"First of all, the question regarding Katerina Nikolaevna Akhma­
kov must be completely eliminated." 
"There might have been other ways to bring you to reason, but 
certain allowances were made. You are proving to be unworthy of 
such indulgence.'' 
Jealous of Versilov on account of Katerina :\likolaevna. \Vas this 
a monstrous idea? Everything was possible, I was a medley of sensa­
tions which were staggering me, and of which I was not consciously 
aware. There was-remained a single point of rest: my idea} and that's 
what I was clinging to. 
It appeared that she had some close connections with la maison 
Andrieux} and that she actually came from la maison de monsieur An­
drieux} but was then torn away from la maison Andrieux. It was hard 
to imagine that she was his mistress, but even that could be." 
"Ou allez-vous} monsieur?" she screamed in a torn, broken voice. 
This stern face, this stem and beautiful face, is the face of the 
best, of the most marvelous English etching. 
David-Salomon} everything is going round in my mind. 
Anna Andreevna told me this herself. This was perfectly chaste, 
pure, and wonderful, something like a poem ... I kissed her hand and 
began to cry in delight... 
(And he began to cry.) "Let it be only a dream ... But don't let them 
take this dream from me. Let me die with my dream. Even Katerina 
• A pun, difficult to translate: dobryi baron Rossen could also mean "kind 
Baron Rossen." The Baron is implying that he could be quite nasty, too. 

The Old Prince 435 
Nikolaevna has promised me this. \Ve have started this romance, so 
allow us to finish it. Let it be a dream ... But don't let them take this 
dream from me. Let me die with this dream." 
"Life with friends, with my family, with my dear ones. This is 
heaven. I would forgive them all. I want to forgive everybody; I 
haven't been angry with anybody in a long time. Katerina Nikolaevna 
is smiling to my face: but, rna cherie) I am not saying at all that I am 
altogether King David. Never mind, it is just a simile, la poesie dans 
la vie. I say, what is it that makes you smile? Chere) chere) I want to 
do harm to no one. But I am strong, I have support. Quelle charmante 
personne) ah?" 
"But how long it is since you were here, my friend, and how very­
very-very much has happened since." 
"I don't know why life should be so short; I suppose so we won't 
get bored, of course, for life is the Maker's work of art, something 
like a poem by Pushkin. At least one should let those who are not 
bored live longer. I, for instance, am not bored. Les chants de Salo­
mon) mais non) c'est David) qui mettait les jeunes belles dans son lit 
pour se chauffer dans sa viellesse.29 1\Iy dear friend." 
The old Prince: "History remains silent on this point, but other­
wise, what's the difference? So this is what we have decided. This 
should stay in the family, strictly in the family. I told Katerina 
Nikolaevna about it only because I feel guilty before her. Every 
matter can be both majestic and ridiculous. In <a novel by> Paul 
de Kock this would have become une une scene de bassinoire30." 
"Paul de Kock lacks elegance; otherwise he would be magnificent. 
They've got no taste, I swear, le gout est chez nous)31 in Russia, in our 
ancient mansions ... those which are still standing. In this respect, I 
am a patriot." 
29 French: "The songs of Solomon, but no, it's David who placed the young 
beauties in his bed to keep himself warm in his old age." 
ao French: "a scene with a hot water bottle." 
31 French: "we ha,·e the taste." 



VI 
Notes to the Third Part of the Novel 
The confession of Versilov to Arkady and the meeting of Versilov 
with Katerina Nikolaevna hold the center of interest in this section 
of notes. In both notes and novel Katerina N ikolaevna is intimately 
tied with his fate and in some way she represents and confirms Versi­
lov's fall. In the novel the connection between Katerina Nikolaevna 
and Versilov's failure is dramatically implied, but in the notes it is 
explicitly insisted on: "Here, Finis. (\Vhat's most important.] Versilov 
says: 'I hate this woman, for she has stolen my peace from me. If I 
were to fall in love with her, I would ffi)'Self kill either myself, [or 
her]." Neither she nor Versilov, nor indeed the Youth understands 
why Katerina Nikolaevna should exercise such power over him, but 
by his contradictory statements and his violent actions Versilov con­
firms the power. Katerina Nikolaevna cannot understand why he 
loves her: "You see how nasty I am, really, why should you love me? 
\Vhat else can you want?" The Youth cannot understand why Versilov 
loves her, and he feels ashamed for him and ashamed of himself for 
loving her in competition with his father. His suggestion that Kate­
rina Nikolaevna be humiliated by Lambert is a desperate effort, 
born of bruised love, to restore to Versilov his lost pride and to him­
self the ideal that he has of his father. 
Some light on the power of Katerina N ikolaevna maintains over 
Versilov is cast by the meeting between the two in the notes. In the 
novel she assures him that he is a respected and a valued friend, even 
while rejecting him. The implied criticism in the rejection is power­
ful enough to the sensitive Versilov for him to explode into expletives 
at junctures in the meeting. But in the notes the criticism of Versilov 
is direct, explicit, and even scathing. Katerina Nikolaevna does not 
speak to him in the novel as in the following passages taken from 
these notes: 
438 

Katerina's Understanding of Versilov 439 
She to Him: When falling in love with me, you were falling in love 
with no one but yourself, and, besides, you certainly couldn't have 
forgiven me that confession which you made before me, for you saw 
it as a humiliation. You vain man, you couldn't even stand that. How 
then was I going to help laughing at you. 
A little later in the meeting, she adds: 
She: ("Lack of all form") I have seen your pride, which consists of 
the idea that, inasmuch as I have learned about your thoughts and 
you have exposed your soul before me (you have deigned to open it 
to me), I should therefore value this very highly. I have seen this in 
every movement of yours, and I've made a point of ceasing to value 
it; quite on the contrary, I've often been laughing at it. This alone is 
utterly disgraceful. 
At one point she states quite openly that she considers him to be false: 
Versilov to her: ''I'm one of those people who cannot remain indif­
ferent when they have nothing to believe in." 
"You are exaggerating, as always," she says. 
"No, with a single glance, with a single smile, you have been de-
stroying the whole path to my salvation." 
"Because I saw through <its> falseness. 
"There was no falseness." 
"I am not talking of any kind of fraud. What I saw was simply the 
falsity of the idealist, the stiltedness, the affectation." [NB. Lidiia.] 
Also: ["I have seen your moral disorder. .. "] 
But Katerina Nikolaevna recognizes only the symptoms, not the 
causes. She sees the stiltedness, affectation, posing, and pride, but 
she does not see what has brought Versilov to this state. At one point 
in the notes she asks Versilov about his "idea," and he delivers a long 
analysis of it. The explanation is not given in the meeting between 
the two in the final version, and yet it is the key to Versilov's character 

440 Katerina's Effect on Versilov 
and to the connection he sees between his efforts and his failure. 
Versilov says: 
I conceived, at that time, my original idea: seek to perfect yourself, 
try to break your own resistance as your conscience and your faith 
will tell you, to the best of your ability, and, once having conquered 
yourself, you may perhaps also find that ultimate idea, your own 
solution to "what to do?" and "what to preach?" I passionately clung 
to this idea. You were all laughing at my chains. Why? I was actually 
wearing them, but you didn't know what was going on in my soul. 
Yes, it may be that, finally, I did persuade myself that mine was the 
right way, but then you appeared before me, and I suddenly realized 
that without you I am nothing, and that my idea is unrealizable. 
The intent seems to be admirable. Versilov had lost his faith in but 
not his yearning for something to believe in, and he formed a pro­
gram to discover by discipline and self-perfection what to believe in. 
Culture, wisdom, firm will, sacrifice, and devotion to his program 
would restore what history had robbed him of. But, as Versilov tells 
Katerina Nikolaevna in the notes, "\Vith a single glance, with a sin­
gle smile, you have been destroying the whole path to my salvation." 
Why should this be so? Why should a trivial woman destroy what 
refinement, will, and culture have achieved? The notes tell us why. 
Versilov's vanity had been touched by her rejection of him in the 
beginning, so that he turned to a sick half-wit for the adoration 
Katerina N ikolaevna would not give him, and his vanity is touched 
again later when the hope of reconquering Katerina Nikolaevna is 
threatened by her intention to marry Baron Bioring. According to 
his plan Versilov was supposed to be the master of his fate: he would 
believe in what he had created, rest in superior isolation in a world he 
had constructed and in beliefs that he had erected. But his love-hate 
of Katerina Nikolaevna irrationally breaks down his solipsistic world, 
and hence his fury and rage. \Vhat threatens him, he attempts to 
destroy. One way or the other she too must be brought under his 
command: either by loving him and acknowledging his perfections, 
or by being unworthy of his love. She must be the best of women­
if she loves him--or the worst of women, if she does not. Thus the 

"We are Both Vile" 441 
agonizing and violent contradictions of word and feeling. Even Versi­
lov has a moment of sane penetration to his motives when he says to 
the Youth: "I am afraid of one thing," he said suddenly, "namely, 
that we are both vile, which is also why we wish that she were vile, 
and not at all because she really is vile." 
At bottom what Dostoevsky is telling us about Versilov is what 
Katerina Nikolaevna herself partially perceives when she says to 
him: "\Vhen falling in love with me, you were falling in love with 
no one but yourself ... " Dostoevsky had told us many times before and 
he was to tell us again in The Brothers Karamazov that when one 
loses one's belief in God, one has only oneself to believe in. Beneath 
the culture, refinement, and intelligence, and despite the efforts to 
believe and to be virtuous, there was in Versilov only the vanity and 
impotence of the self. Dostoevsky is thinking of Versilov as a repre­
sentative of contemporary man, when he says of the contemporary 
man: 
The ideal, its presence in one's soul ,  a thirst, a need to believe in 
[something ... to worship something] and the absence of any kind of 
faith. This gives birth to two feelings in <the soul of> a high type of 
contemporary man : boundless pride and boundless self-contempt. 
Observe his hellish sufferings, watch him trying to convince himself 
that he is actually a believer ... And then, his clashes with reality, 
where he invariably shows up so ridiculous, so ridiculous and so 
petty ... and so insignificant. He suspects that what one must do is 
work on oneself, restrain oneself, and that this would cost an endless 
effort. And so he does tax himself with the duty of self-perfection, 
does it gladly, enthusiastically ... [choosing for himself nothing but 
chains all along.] Occasionally, he would be bothered by a feeling of 
tormenting unbelief and skepticism, but He stands firm and, finally, 
it appears that he has come close to his goal... And there, as he 
clashes head-on with reality, he takes a terrible fall, showing himself 
feeble and nerveless. Why? <Because> He is uprooted from the soil, 
a child of his age ... 
\Ve find neither an explicit analysis of Versilov's idea, nor the 
explicit and scathing exposure of its falseness by Katerina Niko-

442 
The Grand Theme 
laevna in the no\'el itself. There is a brief allusion to the idea of 
mortifying one's will by monastic discipline in the no\'el by the 
Youth as he re-creates what Versilov said during his confession. But 
the decision to discipline the will is put forth as a consequence of his 
break with Katerina Nikolaevna, as some kind of punishment of him­
self for having been attracted to her. In the notes the "idea" to disci­
pline his will, which is analyzed much, more fully, predates his rela­
tionship and break with Katerina i\'ikolaevna. One is at a loss to see 
what-except for mystery and vagueness-Dostoevsky gained by these 
changes. The notes tell us quite fully what Versilov's "idea" was, 
why he is so violently attached to Katerina Nikolaevna, and as a 
consequence what moves him in his irrational acts. \Ve do not know 
these things from reading the novel alone. 
The grand theme of the no\'el is order and disorder. Versilov is 
disorder and Makar is order, and the Youth stands between both. 
And as Lebedev in The Idiot exposes by caricature the disorder of 
the society about him, so Lambert in caricature makes evident the 
disorder that Versilov conceals and the Youth attempts to avoid. 
Makar is supposed to be the antipoise to Versilov in both the novel 
and the notes, but in neither do his anecdotes, biblical sayings, or 
his aphorisms convince the Youth or the reader. Several times in these 
notes Dostoevsky tells us that ࠤIakar's influence on the Youth is 
immense, but nothing in the Youth's actions or thoughts or feelings 
confirm what Dostoevsky desired. 
One must point finally to a number of passages, some of which 
reappear in Versilov's confession to the Youth, where Versilov ex­
presses ideas that were sacred to Dostoevsky. Dostoe\'sky himself could 
have said what Versilov says in the following passage: 
Society must be built upon moral foundations ;  nothing can be 
founded upon the flesh , upon an economic idea, upon making stones 
into bread, and so far our politicians are fooling only the gullible. 
The moral ideas of a nation are derived from religion , or are formu­
lated by popular religion. Anyone who wants to rejen and ilreak up 
the old foundations, such as private property, family, etc., must break 
up the old faith ... For a Russian nobleman is the universal reconcilia· 
tion of ideas. For, in our time, educated Russian thought is the uni­
versal reconciliation of ideas. The educated Russian type is a uni-

Versilov Is an Enthusiast 443 
versa! h uman type, and up to now it has heen only the Russian 
nobleman. A Frenchman is only a Frenchman , hut a Russian ... a 
R ussian is a progressive; his thinking is very m uch ahead of everyone 
else's. The bearer of a universal ideal. 
But these are only ideas, and not beliefs, and the difference is in­
surmountable for Dostoevsky. 
May 9. 
Makar has a shattering impact on Liza, awakening in her a pas­
sionate religious feeling. She says: "I knew nothing about this." Then, 
suddenly, she is angry with Makar, pouts. Later, she is listening to 
Versilov (his ideals) also, and accepts a good deal of it. She is, however, 
a practical person. Marriage to the Prince. The Prince has been 
acquitted, is full of enthusiasm, and-shoots himself. (N .B. He must 
elicit extreme sympathy.) 
After <his> illness, the Youth, in spite of Makar and Versilov, 
develops a very somber emotional attitude. Feelings of vengefulness 
and jealousy make their appearance. A yearning for the ideal. 
(I) The idea of self-perfection, and (2) to become famous as quickly 
as possible, [in order to take his vengeance]-a struggle between these 
two ideas. 
Meanwhile, the "idea"-this he realizes only now-was nothing 
but an outgrowth of <his idea of> revenge for everything. for every­
thing, even if it took him 50 years. 
N.B. Versilov's terrible ingenuousness makes a tremendous impres-
sion on him. 
See in the yellow book, February 25. 
"Shut up and say nothing to anybody! This is my new rule." 
Versilov is an enthusiast, which is why he was discussing socialism. 
(Ingenuousness.) 
After his recovery, Versilov and the Youth-they're related <spir­
its>, fervent compassion for Versilov, <though> mute. 
They abduct the old Prince. 
After <his> recovery, the Youth <is obsessed> by the idea of 
her, a yearning for the ideal. And through the remaining two parts, 
he either has spells of a passionate renascence of his faith in her 
purity [("a forced faith," says Versilov),J or experiences an even 

144 Liza's Religiosity 
deeper fall. Finally he becomes convinced of her guilt (through Ver­
silov). Then, disenchantment, cynicism, a.nd Lambert. The somber 
idea to catch her using the document as bait (the conflagration). But 
right before the execution <of this scheme>, a more noble thought: 
hand over the document to her, i.e., fulfill the duty of honor, and pass 
on, into "his idea." (?N.B. Perhaps: Alphonsine hides him. Lambert 
and Versilov attack her, the Youth saves her.) They steal the docu­
ment, and resew the pocket, with Alphonsine doing the sewing. 
After <his> recovery: a yearning for the ideal, the idea of revenge 
and jealousy, and the struggle with the ideas of l\Iakar and Versilov. 
Versilov finally explains to him his own relationship to the Akhmakov 
woman. At this point, a quick meeting between the Youth and the 
Akhmakov woman, and another insult from Bioring (in connection 
with the old Prince's flight to his place). He once more becomes 
disenchanted with the Akhmakov woman. 
Liza: All of a sudden, she develops a religious feeling. And while 
the Youth and Versilov (after Makar) are still making their prepara­
tions, she decides, after the Prince's death, to enter a monastery. But 
the child. 
[2d chapter] Besides her religiosity, there is also haughtiness in 
her. It is well possible that she fell in love with the Prince partly 
because his character was inferior to hers (weaker), and he needed her 
help. (Her character resembles that of Versilov. \Vhat is needed ts 
a scene featuring her and Versilov. Also, her and Makar.) 
[Regarding the monastery, she contradicts and argues.] 
[Here. NB! ! That is the beginning of the 2d chapter.] 
Versilov's mad and morbid letter to the Akhmakov woman has 
been dispatched, not just in a delirium or with the sole desire to insult 
her, whatever the cost, but also with considerable forethought: inas­
much as she was about to marry Bioring, and knowing H.ow tR@}' 
people like Bioring, he was figuring on stopping him by his fedr of 
a possible scandal, thus destroying (severing) their budding marital 
union. And to be sure, he was-very pleased with the fact that Bioring, 
in sending Rosen to him, was was particularly insisting that every­
thing pertaining to that lady should be removed from their declara­
tions. 
July 30. [N .B. Going to bed: "Why is she alone pulsating in my 
head? Even Lambert doesn't have this strong an effect. The thing is 
that I love her."] 
Versilov: "It is Christ who is going to save Russia, for that is the 
only thing she's still got that is national; really, Christ is the only 

Makar 445 
national element [Russia] ever had. If their faith in Christ comes to 
an end, this will also be the end of the Russian people." 
Practically-preach, feats. 
"Let us perform some feats" (naive agreement). 
["Yes, my friend, go right ahead." (And here, He makes his confes-
sion about her.)] 
"Marry my mother." 
"Yes, my friend, if you please, my friend." 
(Makar had willed the same thing.) (He chops up those icons.) 
"Let us perform some feats." (And at this point, this confession 
about the Akhmakov woman.) 
"\Vhat does an ancestor, or the memory of an ancestor, mean?" 
(ࠤlakar). 
"Thank <God> for your soul." 
"Every blade of grass is singing a song." 
"A new nation is arriving" (a patriot). 
"Silly little deniers of God, nihilist and nihilist woman." 
The Youth: ["I have been thinking of you, but your hermit doesn't 
even know the laws law of gravitation." 
"\Vhy do you think so? There are different kinds of knowledge." 
"What kind of people go there?"] 
Forests-meadows, nature. 
"At first, while amidst nature, I was feeling sorry about being 
alone, but later I found out that I was with everybody. And so a 
hermit, forty years in the desert, yet he is with everybody." 
"But where's the profit?"-"God won't let anything pass without a 
profit, he'll make it manifest, too, ࿶lary of Egypt." 
Makar and the children. "\Vhat is a child?" 
About how Christ will come. 
About how the third part of all grass will be burnt up (power). • 
"But Christ... Ah my dear ones, have you forgotten, look at this 
grass ... this birdie." 
"Remember your forefathers, but even if you will not remember 
them-that's all right, for I am with you." 
A village cemetery.1 
"I am too kind," says the Youth, "I ought to be meaner, this way I 
won't get through life." 
• Quoted inaccurately from Rev. 8: 7. 
1 Reference to Zhukovsky's translation of Gray's "Elegy ·written in a Country 
Church-Yard." 

446 Makar's Faith 
[For chapter two (2d part)] My whole "idea" is nothing but a lot 
of kindness, it is funny and comical, and therefore base. (As he is 
sitting down to start listening to Makar.) [(Lambert isn't the one who 
makes him confused, but he's got his own idea, i.e., a kind of con­
flagration, a ࿷ revenge of magnanimity.)] 
The idea to become a pilgrim, to suffer from everybody, while 
loving everybody, or else the darkness of <his> idea. 
"Suffer, suffer," (says Makar,) "and then you'll even quit suffering 
(for your heart will be filled with love). You won't even feel your 
suffering.'' 
See St. after Petersburg. February 25. 
[(N.B. The age and contemporary man.)] 
It isn't the fact that Versilov has experienced another fall that con­
fuses him; rather, even while he is still deeply moved and right after 
he has offered to join Versilov on a pilgrimage, he suddenly meets 
Alphonsine, and is glad about it, and goes to see Lambert, and talks 
to him. ("This man is more akin to me, a little sordid.':) 
On the contrary, Versilov's fall (the icons) elicits his compassion. 
\Vhereas the fact that he is glad to have met Lambert is <to be ex­
plained by> his hidden anger at those who had insulted him, and at 
her. 
And there she suddenly offers him a rendezvous. 
Finish part three with this, i.e., with the Prince's flight, the chop­
ping of the icons. 
Makar: "Let us weep until we get justice from the Lord. [Some­
times, in the springtime, a whole crowd of poor people will be seen 
weeping.] You raise your head, they're asleep, it's cool, a child, you 
give a sigh and fall asleep again. [Every little leaf, the birdies, and 
there's a tree standing there, and the tree is growing, and a little leaf. 
Isn't this a mystery? We rejoice at it."] 
"God's little birdie is a mystery, and isn't it marvelous (that it is a 
mystery)?" 
"\Vhat is there to be found out?! Even if you did find out, you 
would still have even less understanding, for it is not for your 
mind to deal with these things. What is this? God's green grass, let it 
grow (in peace), God's green grass. You look around, and you see 
beauty (everywhere). God's mystery." [For chapter two] 
"Are you a pilgrim?" 
"A pilgrim, my dear. And sinful and vain while I was still of this 
world." 
"What is it that makes you rejoice so much?" 

"One rejoices at the Lord." 
"That is, that He is merciful?" 
Liza 447 
"Both for the innumerable times He has shown mercy to us, and 
just simply so, just rejoicing that He is there," he answered, quite 
unaware of the insidiousness of my question about God's mercy. 
Liza, having learned of the Prince's decision, and of his arrest, says: 
"That's the thing I have been afraid of. I knew that he is too wonder­
ful and is capable of anything great." 
And so she makes home a hell for everybody: she is suspicious of 
everyone, fearing that they might attack and slander the Prince, but 
when somebody is speaking well of the Prince, she refuses to believe 
in that person's sincerity, thinking that whatever was said was only 
meant to console her. This goes even for her mother. But when some­
body is giving sincere praise to the Prince, she gets angry, claiming 
that he isn't getting enough recognition, [that he has suffered] that 
he stands higher than anyone else, and is so much nobler, so much so 
that even those who praise him couldn't possibly grasp it. The whole 
reason for this is that she can herself very clearly see how worthless a 
person the Prince is. But then there is love. She receives Makar's 
sermon with hostility. Finally, she becomes openly defiant, and admits 
before Makar that she is pregnant. The latter, something like the 
woman who was granted forgiveness in the temple,* gentle and timid. 
Suddenly, Liza is defeated. She actually admits right there (abruptly, 
inadvertently) that the Prince is a worthless person. ("But he is dear 
to me.") The Prince's jealousy throws her into a frenzy. She keeps 
running to visit him, to see his lawyer, she is rushing to <plead for 
him with> the authorities, to the courts; marriage ... 
In this fashion, Liza's role is established. 
Even amidst such inconsolable grief, occasionally laughter and 
jokes. (Rays of sunshine continue!) 
[2d chapter] And only after the Prince's death, Liza, terribly 
shaken, forever <her> mother.* *  
"So you rejoice because there is mystery." 
"Your repose is mystery, and your sigh is mystery." 
"So it is just wonderful that there is mystery? I shall remember 
this. However, in the light of reason ... this isn't how I myself under-
• John 8: I .  
• • The phrase is unclear i n the original. 

448 Rumors abo11t Katerina Nikolaevna 
stand it, I have been grumbling myself. It seems to me that people 
know very little, and that they are much too proud." 
"You've got such a mind ... " 
"A microscope is even more of a mystery." 
"You may, perhaps, not know it yourself, but what you've said 
there is true." 
"Know, oh elder: the more a man has learned, the nearer he is to 
God." 
"\Veil, it is not always that way." 
"Not always, my friend. I have seen many learned men." 
"The deeper the mystery becomes, the nearer it takes you to God. 
But whosoever will say, in his pride: 'There is no more mystery, I 
have learned everything,' forsakes God and the true light and falls 
into darkness, and is having a bad time of it in the darkness. Yes, my 
friend, and in the meantime the mystery continues inviolate." 
And I remembered these words. 
Memento. (Supporting details.) In the yellow book: beginning 
February 25. In the same book: page X0. (Versilov's words and cute 
sayings at the end of the book, see February, and also at the begin­
ning.) Then, according to names: Vasin, the Prince, the Akhmakov 
woman, etc. Then, p. YZ-Versilov's words. ZZZ at the very end (No­
vember 26). In the beginning, about Vasin, 570. 
Ems. 
[2d chapter] N.B. I was pretending that I wanted no part of that 
business; yet I was stunned by this remote news about Katerina 
N ikolaevna. 
Here, Anna Andreevna is asking N <astasia> Egor<ovna> to pay 
her a visit. 
Nota bene, important. Rumors the effect that Katerina Niko­
laevna, who had previously shunned high society, had made a new 
appearance there and was having extraordinary success. Simulta­
neously, the news that the episode with Bioring had ended in a sepa­
ration, which isn't quite correct; rather, a certain coolness developed 
between them as a result of the fact that Bioring, after Versilov's 
letter, took fright and wavered for a moment, showing a desire to 
withdraw. But not entirely so. The caution with which Bioring had 
separated his from hers in Versilov's letter had offended Katerina 
N ikolaevna. Her success in society had again turned Bioring's head. 
The Youth is jolted by the news of Katerina Nikolaevna's success 
in society, which fills him with hatred caused by jealousy. (The image 
of a youth, standing in a corner during a ball, while his beauty is sur-

Liza and Vasin 
449 
rounded by a throng of dandies.) Jealousy and hatred, and when she 
grants him a rendezvous in passing, as if throwing it to him like 
charity (while he is actually delighted), he really does begin to hate 
her, whereupon he immediately joins Lambert... 
? (N.B. Versilov has proved to Bioring that the Prince is going to 
disinherit her; or, he has succeeded in getting Bioring involved with 
him, etc.). [Such is the Youth's suspicion.] 
Liza is now in close contact with Vasin and is using his advice 
(without the Youth's knowledge), and at home she is short-tempered 
with everybody. The Youth thinks that this is "because she feels that 
I have little love or esteem for the Prince." ·whereupon his mother 
says to him: "Leave her alone, she is doing it out of pride; she is find­
ing it hard to face our pity for her, and for him" (i.e., for the Prince). 
"I am the happiest woman in the world," says Liza, "he is great, 
he has done something you would never have done." 
Meanwhile, Vasin suddenly proposes to her, and is angered when 
she turns him down. Liza is terribly offended and irritated by the 
proposal. 
[2d chapter] The Youth discovers that Liza has been secretly in 
touch with Versilov. Like a pupil with her teacher, and he has had a 
strong influence on her. 
The Youth to Makar, speaking of <his> scalded hand: "Don't 
tell me about it, don't embarrass me." 
Meekness is strength. Meekness will conquer everything. 
Versilov: "Meanwhile I have returned to my former filthy 
condition." 
News-"Don't you think that your mother's soul is gravely afflicted 
by her sin?" 
"And I thought that you were in favor of all those new ideas?" 
"There are no new ideas: the ideas are still the same, beginning 
with Job. Proudhon and Job--the temptation of Christ."2 
2 Dostoevsky wrote to his wife about the "Book of Job" on June 10, 1875: "I am 
reading the book of Job, and it brings me to painful ecstasy. I leave off reading 
and I walk about my room for an hour, almost crying. This book, Anna, strange, 
it was one of the first that made an impression on my life; I was still then almost 
a child!" The influence of the book of Job is pervasive in The Brothers Karama­
zov, especially in the words of Father Zossima. Proudhon's La Celebration du 
dimanche was one of two forbidden books found in Dostoevsky's apartment when 
it was searched at the time of his arrest in 1849. Two books on Proudhon ap­
peared also in Russia at this time: 7.hizn' i perepiska Prudona (The Life and 
Correspondence of Proudhon) by A. N. Pleshcheev in 1873, and P. Zh. Prudon v 

450 Lambert Believes in God 
[Here, chapters 3, 4] About Makar: "Two views. Self-possession or 
independence of anything in the world. This has also been the same 
since the beginning of time." (Freedom of will.) 
"I shall not relate what we discussed on that occasion. Oh, those 
days, I consider them sacred to this very day." 
His naivete and ingenuousness, his childlike nature. Those who 
are difficult to reach, who seem to be mocking everything and, most 
often of all, children when they are truly beautiful, are exactly like 
that. 
Lambert: "Remember our gang of robbers?" And some day you are 
yet going to gain the kingdom of God. 
Lambert is actually a good man. Lambert believes in God. It's be­
cause he is healthy, that is why he is a villain. Let him grow old, or 
fall ill-and he'll start buying candles for the Church. Every average 
man is like that. 
Makar Ivanov. About the landowner, who rebuilt a village that 
had burned down. About how the children were begging the mer­
chant, yet he didn't forgive. About how the little boy drowned him­
self, the siskin. About how he used to rake out oats from a horse's 
<crib>. Stinking Elizaveta. About how some holy monks killed 
another monk. And so on. 
Mother's name day. Versilov brings a bouquet and ends up chop­
ping up the icons. 
Makar: "The siskin. I wonder what that little soul (the boy's) said 
to God?" 
[Chapters 3, 4] "\Vhy, you are telling things which are right against 
you<r ideas>!" shouts the Youth. 
"Don't you get upset about it. (The world is always like this, what's 
important is only that truth never die in it.)" 
Versilov: On God's ways, Philidor and Lagrange. 
[2d chapter] The Youth (to himself): "I haven't told Him a word 
about his turn of speech in that letter to her, that the document is 
intact (as if nothing had happened)." But later He says to Lambert: 
"The document is intact, and he's got it." 
Lambert: "How can you know that for sure?" 
Versilov: "Because he has not told me a thing about those words in 
pis'makh (P. f. Proudhon in His Letters by P. D. Boborykin. Dostoevsky may 
also have been acquainted with Sainte Bem·e's P. f. Proudhon-sa vie et sa 
correspondance, 1838-1848 (1872)- In linking the two, Dostoevsky may have had 
a contrast in mind. There is a reference to Job in the final version of A Raw 
Youth in the words of :\Iakar Dolgoruky, Part III, Chapter 4:2. 

"I am an Ordinary IVoman" 451 
that note of mine, even though he knew them, [having read the 
note."] 
Here, Finis. [What's most impo1·tant.] Versilov says: "I hate this 
woman, for she has stolen my peace from me. If I were to fall in love 
with her, I would FRyself kill either myself, [or her.] On the contrary, 
I hate her and I'm glad that I do." 
And he actually does hate her. 
In his letter to her: "Take me, I shall be nothing before you." 
(N.B. Let Lambert, or somebody, give the Youth a chance to be 
the secret witness of a meeting between her and Versilov.) 
She says to Versilov: "If you'd love me less, I would have married 
you." 
"Go into the desert, serve iH chains God in chains, those chains 
which you have displayed before me, and you will thus subdue your 
pride." 
"I hate you, I don't love you," says he. 
She to Him: "I am afraid of such passiOn, I am an ordinary 
woman." 
She to Him: "\Vhy are you being unfair to that wonderful woman, 
the mother of your children, I know all about her; I have been watch­
ing her." 
She: "You are a hero, and not an ordinary person, which says 
everything." 
"Haven't you been making fun of me, you frivolous woman, you, 
which is why I have cast you off, like a rag, before whom?" 
He suddenly begins to reproach her for her vile actions, for her 
animal voluptuousness, <saying these things> to her face (while she 
is pure, and he knows very well himself that she is pure). 
đl=te to Him: "I 
He to her, upon her mocking remarks about his chains: "If I had 
only known that this might seduce you, I would have spent 30 years 
as a stelite, standing on one foot." 
She to Him: "On one foot, that is too much. ֆo, I am an ordinary 
character, and this won't seduce me." 
"Don't talk this way, don't. I am thinking of you at night. Some­
thing frenzied, nightmarish." 
She to Him: "Listen, I feel sorry for you ; I swear, I would love you 
if I could, but I can't. I love you even now; I loved you even before, 
precisely because you are suffering, and tormenting yourself so 
much." 
"\Vhat kind of suffering this may be, and what it may consist of, 

452 A Depraved JVoman 
is not for me to judge, but you were suffering, and I came to love you. 
But remember, this is only compassion, and not love. I don't know 
why I can't love you. It may be because you do not command my 
respect. Though your sufferings are sincere, there is something very 
false about you." 
"Forgive me, sometimes I felt like laughing at you. Look what kiHd 
of a persoH I an:t. Perhaps it is all my own fault, that I do not under­
stand. You see how nasty I am; really, why should you love me? \Vhat 
else can you want? Love from pity-could that be it? \Vould you 
really want that? Oh, do forgive me this, my feeling sorry for you." 
He: "I haven't any pride, not even that. A beggar cannot help 
despising himself. Before you, I am a beggar. Please, love Hle enR if 
it be for pity aloRe I've been already begging for charity. I'll ac­
cept it." 
She to Him: "Perhaps I might get to love you. Right now, I feel 
in my heart that I could get to love you, but you will later take 
bitter revenge on me for having been a beggar before me. I am 
scared. I can't." 
[At this point, about mother. 
"Don't you dare talk about her. Nor shall I forgive you that I've 
been ridiculous.]" 
["I know you're· a Catholic monk, I know you are a Jesuit aRd 
pilgrim, a hermit. I know that you',·e spent a year there and that 
you've come out only to make propaganda, and that's where you 
met me."] 
N .B. What's most important. Up to this time, He has been suggest­
ing to the Youth that she is the most depraved woman in the world. 
After having witnessed this meeting, the Youth, who had practically 
agreed to join Lambert in "setting the fire," (or even without Lam­
bert's knowledge), abandons these plans and goes to see Tatiana. 
And this is where the document is stolen from him. And this is then 
where the final scene of the conflagration follows, with the Youth 
saving her. 
Tatiana had a lawsuit with her cook pending at the Justice of the 
Peace. 
All the vices. 
Versilov: "She is supposed to be perfect in everything, meanwhile 
she is vain, jealous, cowardly, a tease, stupid-exactly like all ordinary 
women!'' 
The Youth: "Why is she supposed to be perfect in everything?" 

Versilov Never Loved Her 453 
Versilov: "Because she is beautiful, because she is kind, clever, 
generous ... " 
The Youth: "But you are contradicting yourself, aren't you? You 
were just saying that she was stupid and jealous." 
Versilov: "No, I am not contradicting myself; she is depraved like 
no one else, depraved as all women are. She is vile, the embodiment 
of vileness. She is supposed to be perfect in everything. Nor can she 
be like all other women, she alone in the whole world. Nothing but 
compassion led me to her. I wanted to save her from herself. I wanted 
to restore the ideal... I did not love her, or loved her as my future 
creation: my proof-1 don't care whom she marries. You know what, 
Bioring has left her." 
The Youth: "Listen, I am convinced that you didn't write that 
letter simply to insult her, but also to scare away that German, 
Bioring, so he'd leave her alone and run away from her." 
"Why, it's you who did it." 
And later he comes to see the Youth: "I cannot stay here. I am 
going to marry your mother and leave town." 
"Where to?" 
"I do not know." [(By the way, he thinks up some scheme.)] 
Versilov, suddenly ex abrupto to the Youth: "Do you think that I 
was envious of him (Makar)?" 
"I have never thought that." 
[2d chapter] See the finale of chapter one, Versilov's opinion of 
Makar. 
The Youth (to himself): "I had the desire to hurt somebody, so 
that I could then immediately say to myself: Look how kind I am, 
look how generous I am." 
[2d chapter] The Youth suddenly develops a desite to get close 
with Liza: "We are both disgraced." 
Versilov: "Oh, I have never loved her; oh, if I could but love her, 
I could bear anything." 
She to Him: "When falling in love with me, you were falling in 
love with no one but yourself, and besides, you certainly couldn't 
have forgiven me that confession which you made before me, for you 
saw it as a humiliation. You vain man, you couldn't even stand that. 
How then was I going to help laughing at you?" 
He to her: "Why laugh? Why laugh? That's what is most im­
portant." 
"So you really wanted me to cry?" 

454 Liza Is Hurt 
"No, just not to laugh, even that would have meant a helping 
hand to me. That alone. I would have valued it greatly." 
"But what business was this of mine?" 
"\Vhat do you mean? You were in my debt, you were obligated 
to me!" 
Final plan. June 16/28. 
A few introductory words. A ray. First meeting with Makar. \Vent 
to his own place; about the family and the doctor. Versilov and the 
family. Mother's role. \Vhen I went down to see Makar on the next 
day I found everyone present there. News that Tatiana Pavlovna's 
trial is up; Versilov's story. Tatiana comes in. Liza comes in. Her 
relationship with Makar. Something like a quarrel. Makar's story; 
wanderings and anecdotes. "\Vise guy! Wise guy!" \Vith Versilov, on 
family affairs (not a word about "that"). I adjusted my clothes and 
left. Nastasia Egorovna-Anna Andreevna. News about her) very 
much excited. \Vent to see the Prince, Vasin, very much excited, 
found out from Versilov. A feeling of disorder. Came back home­
again to Makar. About Elias and Enoch. A hot discussion with Versi­
lov about communism, and Christ, and Makar. 
But the Youth restrains himself; he is hurt. Yet to himself he is 
saying that he has never been more devoted to Versilov than he is 
now. A feeling of hatred for her. 
Liza's episode with Vasin. Liza is hurt. The Prince is jealous. Vasin 
is suddenly arrested. [At this point, first encounter with Lambert. 
Again the document.) Charity. [He goes to see Versilov.J ̔neounter 
witA. LaHlbert. The Youth goes to see Him at the flat, and tells Him 
about his meeting with her. An unexpected meeting with Lambert. 
The latters tells the Youth that he already knows Versilov. The 
Youth even drops a hint about the document. Again, some disgraceful 
happenings. The idea of "the aisgraeeful."j(' .\ aepressea feeling. 
Makar's sudden death. [lh of part three] 
On the day of Makar's death, He comes to see him. At this point, 
feats, the confession; they become friends. About the "idea," and even 
about Lambert. The Youth reports, with almost too much conviction, 
what an impact Makar has had on him. [The Youth tells about 
his meeting with her. (He: "I used to hate her, but this must now 
end." The Youth is glad: "Versilov has risen from the dead!" Har-
• Bezobrazie is hard to translate; literally, "absence of all form," "deformity," 
"disorder," "disharmony." 

They Cut Open His Pocket 455 
mony."" At this point, once again news of Bioring and <her> wed­
ding. A letter containing a marriage proposal.)] Anna Andreevna, in 
About the Prince, about Liza's wedding, etc., about those under 
indictment. Suddenly Anna Andreevna conveys His marriage pro­
posal to her. Mother's birthday, a bouquet, chopping up the icons, 
Versilov disappears. He is looking for Versilov. Versilov's rendezvous 
with her. He goes to see Lambert. Very nearly a plan. But as he is 
leaving, he decides to go it alone. [He hates her, i.e., he is jealous.] 
The insult. The police station. Flight of the old Prince. [ End of 
part three] The Youth suggests that Versilov take some action with 
the aid of the document. Highsounding words. N.B. How does Ver­
silov show up? His liaison with L<idiia>. The Youth goes to see 
Lambert (but decides to go it alone). They cut open his pocket, put 
a blank piece of paper there. A night of doubts. The Youth to Tat­
iana. And here, the whole story. Then, the denouement: the young 
Prince shoots himself, the old Prince dies. Versilov an idiot, and she} 
her image. The "idea." But most important of all: the memory of 
Makar} a colossal role. 
An important remarque. \Vhen they had cut open his pocket and 
he woke up, he found himself alone with Alphonsine. He gives her 
an explanation, overcome by a strong emotion. He wants to return 
the document. He wants to ask Alphonsine to come with him when 
he goes to see her. No, Tatiana. Chez qui} chez qui} and [Versilov 
gets an idea, the cook.] 
Versilov says: "Having lost my faith, I have fixed my attention on 
the idea of self-perfection." 
"\Vhat a wonderful idea!" she exclaims. 
"Take your time dying of despair," I was thinking to myself, "seek 
to perfect yourself and later you will perhaps tell yourself something 
entirely different, and you may even find something to believe in. 
What was so funny about this? \Vhere is my idea wrong?" 
"I met you, and everything about you was telling me that there was 
something wrong with me." 
"I was myself glad to have encountered your idea, quite the other 
way ... Yes, you are going to need your chains for a long time yet, if 
you want to contain yourself; you haven't got any self-restraint," she 
says. 
• Blagooorazie in contrast to bezobrazie. Sec preceding note. 

456 
Versilov and Katerina Nikolaevna 
She: ("Lack of all form." •  "I have seen your pride, which consists 
of the idea that, inasmuch as I have learned about your thoughts and 
you have exposed your soul before me (having deigned to open it 
to me), I should therefore value this very highly. I have seen this in 
every movement of yours, and I've made a point of ceasing to value 
it. Quite on the contrary, I've often been laughing at it. This alone 
is utterly disgracefuJ."U 
"\Vhy were you laughing? You should have helped me." 
"I am no charity worker."• • •  
"You were obliged to." 
"In a word, I was not aware of your complete sincerity at the time, 
nor did I understand it, which is also why I was not obligated to be 
compassionate, or to help you with acts of charity." 
"But now you see my sincerity." 
"I see it and I am surprised ... but I still do not value it." 
"It's not worth it?" 
"It is not. Side-by-side with a positive feat, you'll be ready to com­
mit a crime. You haven't got any self-restraint. I repeat, there is dis­
order inside you. No, you'll have to wear your chains for a long time 
yet." 
"Incidentally, do you remember Lidiia? Angry because I had re­
jected your love, you made yourself believe that you loved her ... and 
ruined her. Oh, I am not accusing you of anything, you were sincere 
then, but I did value the heart of that unfortunate imbecile-in-Christ, 
and you took it away from me." 
["I say: imbecile-in-Christ."] 
"And this dissolute Prince was capable of taking advantage of such 
a high-minded girl. There's another type of moral deformity for 
you!•••• You have it in all of contemporary <Russian> society. 
'Vhere is one to find anything better?" 
[There is something ridiculous about you.] Or alHong sudt Makar 
h•aaov 
"Rather among such fools as Makar Ivanov, or in a revolver." 
She: "I am marrying Bioring most of all because I shall have peace 
with him: I will retain possession of my soul." 
• See n. (•), p. 454, above. 
• • See n. (•). p. 454, abo\'e. 
• • • Sestra miloserdiia, literally, "sister of mercy," normally "nurse." 
• • • • Nravstvennogo bezbraziia. See n. (•), p. 454, abo\'e. 

Versilov's Rendezvous with Her 457 
''I'll admit, I like this captivity, and even our high society. In it, 
everything is a lie, a falsehood, deceit, and complete disorder. ࠥot a 
single one of all these people will pass the test: complete immorality, 
perfect cynicism in each and every one of them. They are all robbers 
and petty crooks, all and sundry. Do you think that I don't know 
this?" 
"\Vhy then are you joining them?'' 
"But then there is that exterior, an external appearance of some­
thing stern, moral, stable, something that holds together these scoun­
drels. They submit to it, and there are even some who (as a result of 
this) believe in justice, while still remaining robbers. \Vhat is there 
to be done? There is no better place to go-you really ought to feel 
sorry for me. I would myself join a conspiracy and start wrecking it 
all, if only this would lead to any end." 
"\Vhy won't you try a <spiritual> feat?" 
"Feats can be performed anywhere, they won't run away from me, 
if I decide to do them, but you show me a righteous man, and I shall 
follow him. But you are not a righteous man, which is why I don't 
believe in you; all you could be is a sufferer." 
"That's enough from you." 
"\Vhat a strange thought: to sacrifice everything for the sake of 
such a sufferer, merely out of compassion." (And here, about 
compassion.) 
For the first time, a feeling of moral deformity.* I decided to leave 
everybody alone, and went to visit them all, in order to have done 
with them. A feeling of being humiliated. Admits that he wanted to 
take some action with the aid of the document. He had this idea 
while in bed. For the first time, perhaps, he dares to criticize Versilov. 
He takes a cynical look. He looks and sees how he and Versilov have 
both been lying to themselves, and about what. 
A n  important change in the plan. 
After Versilov's rendezvous with her, when He has disappeared, the 
Youth goes to see Lambert (this is earlier), almost the plan. Then to 
Versilov; he suggests that they act with the aid of the document. 
Then, the flight of the <old> Prince. A turmoil, police station. 
Leaving the police station, dark night in his soul. At Lambert's, 
drunk, they cut open <his pocket>. And here, remorse and the whole 
conflagration. [That is,] the flight of the <old> Prince and the police 
• Bezobrazie. See n. (•), p. 454, above. 

458 "Don't Marry Bioring" 
station have had an influence not in the direction of vengeance, but 
in that of a more sober attitude. 
Versilov learns about Lambert's trick and says: "That's the boy!" 
He also laughs about the police station. 
On the day of Makar's death, He comes to see him. He has some 
tender recollections of Makar, of <the Youth's> mother, says that 
࿸fakar had the right idea. 
Versilov has disappeared. The old Prince flees even without Versi­
lov. [Here] At this point, Lambert. 
Lambert has brought him a photograph and some prints. (From the 
Youth. The latter had not given him a letter of recommendation.) 
After this meeting the Youth conceives the notion that she is not 
a saint, and that Versilov is needlessly suffering on her account: she 
is not worth it. 
Versilov says or thinks: "My friend, in that case I shall begin to 
love her 10 times more than I do now." 
She says: "It goes without saying that one does not speak about such 
ideas (as self-perfection); whereas you, having introduced me to that 
idea, immediately demand that I respect )'Oll, etc." 
"Don't marry Bioring, don't marry him! If you do not want me, do 
not marry him ... or ... or I shall do something." 
She: "Be my friend, stop this, and I'll appreciate it." 
"Help me, give me a helping hand ... " 
"/ can't." 
The Youth decides not to leave Him, but to save him. 
PSYCHOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF VERSILOV's CHARACTER. 
During his confession and so every other time (right up to his 
meeting with her, secretly witnessed by Versilov)* He tells the Youth 
that she is the epitome of corruption, vice, a moral monster, in spite 
of her apparent beauty and harrnony. "I hate her," He says, and the 
Youth correctly observes that He isn't lying, but is telling the truth. 
But during their meeting, His passionate love for her is plainly 
visible: "\Vhy is it that you have the gift of harmony for naught?" 
He says to her. "Because you are perfection itself." 
"I have suffered, I have arrived at the idea of self-perfection, and I 
would never have thrown off my chains, you can rest assured of that; 
rather, it is you who have taken these chains off me. You have done 
it by returning me to my former condition of faint-heartedness. That 
• Obviously an error; should be: "the Youth." 

She Sees Versilov's Falseness 459 
which others achieve through suffering and feats, you have received 
for nothing," He says. 
Versilov to her: "I am one of those people who cannot remain in­
different when they have nothing to believe in." 
"You are exaggerating, as always," she says. 
"No, with a single glance, with a single smile, you have been de-
stroying the whole path to my salvation." 
"Because I saw through <its> falseness." 
"There was no falseness." 
"I am not talking of any kind of fraud. \Vhat I saw was simply the 
falsity of the idealist, the stiltednes, the affectation." [ϲ.B. Lidiia.] 
"There was no stiltedness. If you are beautiful, you have an obliga­
tion before the world. \Vhy didn't you want to follow me?" 
"Where to? That is, promise you that I would marry you, [when 
you were running after me?"] 
"That's not it, but perA.aps suppose it is?" 
"I could not love you." 
"But you are obligated for the sake of the idea, for the sake of the 
whole." 
"As if you were such an idealist yourself." 
"To be an 'idealist' means to be false, a fraud. As far as I am con­
cerned, go ahead and marry Bioring. But what have you found in 
Bioring? Do you want me to tell you? You are seeking a position in 
society, like the coarsest of women." 
"I never vowed to perform any feats." 
"But you were obligated." 
["I have seen your moral disorder ... "]* 
And finally she says to Him: "Be my friend and leave me alone. 
Make this your feat." 
"I threw off my chains and spat on my feats because of you, but so 
far I have not become a villain. However, you are going to turn me 
into a villain. Yes, I am going to be a good husband ... " 
Then, the Youth goes to see Lambert and almost states his plans 
to him. However, he decides right then and there to go it alone (i.e., 
to expose her). The Youth develops a hatred [simply jealousy] for her 
in connection with the fact that she is not nearly perfect, but falls at 
the first opportunity. u Then, the flight of the <old> Prince througfi 
• Bezobrazie. See n. (•), p. 454, above. 
• •  The original is equally awkward. 

-:160 Definitive Plan 
Versilov. The Youth is insulted. However, the affair is settled honor­
ably after all. i'\evenheless, having settled that affair with honor, he 
goes to Versilov and conveys to him his devilish plan of violating 
<her> (his own plan). "She is not to stand up under pressure; she will 
fall, and you will see that she is not nearly so perfect. You will be 
cured ... " Versilov is in full agreement with him. Versilov guffawing 
in a state of frenzy. \Vhen the Youth leaves him, the darkest night 
has gained possession of his soul. He gets drunk, they cut open <his 
pocket>. Then, the whole next day he is in a daze: he could never 
forgive Versilov for his agreeing <to his scheme>. He makes up his 
mind to go on a pilgrimage all by himself. :Makar. "Get rid of every­
body." However, he goes to see Tatiana instead; he tells her every­
thing with tears in his eyes, his only wish being to hand over <the 
letter>. "She is an ordinary woman, but I am just as ordinary my­
self. I shall return the letter, and we shall forgive one another." In 
the meantime, a hellish intrigue. 
Definitive plan. 
June 1 8/30 
A few words of introduction. Offended, spite<ful>. He is so mad 
he begins to cry. "Keep quiet. I have been watching them." They 
haven't been asking any questions, which is both a good thing, and 
insulting. Liza and Versilov-insulting. Lambert. A new idea, but­
keep quiet. (A ray?) "God beware. \Vho is it? I've been wanting to 
ask for a long time, but I haven't, out of spite." Got up and left. "And 
I must admit that I find it most annoying to have to tell all this in 
my own name. Of course, I am a different person now." (See the 
large sheet.) First meeting with l\lakar, about life and the elder. 
Comes back. At this point, for the first time, a ray <of light>. (A 
surge of energy. Edgar.) He says to l\Iakar: "I like the way you are 
so decorous. • He has to make an effort not to start crying (a ray) Uoy). 
Great curiosity. 
About the family and the doctor. Versilov and the family. With 
Versilov, not one word about the main thing . . Mother's role. 
"\\'hen I went downstairs to join l\lakar the next day, everybody 
happened to be present. After me. I thought that they weren't there. I 
was annoyed but refused to show it. Versilov's story about the trial of 
Tatiana Pavlovna. Tatiana shows up. l\lakar is drawn into the con-
• Blagoobrazny. See n. (•), p. 455, above. 

Makar's Death 461 
versation. Episode with Liza, something like a quarrel. l\lakar's story, 
<his> wanderings and anecdotes: "You are contradicting yourself." 
"\Vise guy, wise guy!' ' 
With Versilov, about all kinds of domestic matters, but not a word 
about that. He goes on to tell him some things about Makar. I ad­
justed my clothes and left. N astasia Egorovna, Anna Andreevna 
(excited by the news about her). 
I decided to leave them all and visited each of them to have done 
with them, Vasin, the Prince. (Vasin and Liza.) "I've got an idea. I am 
free." I sadly admit that I did have the intention of acting through 
the document. Return the document. Decides to criticize Versilov (to 
make someone else responsible), takes a cynical look. He takes that 
look and sees how and why both he and Versilov have been lying to 
themselves. 
A sudden meeting with Tatiana. Tatiana, having learned that he 
is intending to leave, whispers to him, mysteriously: "Be at my place." 
His heart sank. "Charity." A conversation with Tatiana about Versi­
lov and about everything (more briefly, just a few words). 
Returned home with a joyous feeling. Elias and Enoch. Versilov 
about communism and socialism. "It's <like> a thicket inside him."• 
The Youth is restraining himself, but he is deeply moved. He is de­
voted to Versilov; toward her, a feeling of hatred (later,.make it clear 
that it was really jealousy). 
N.B. Here. The episode between Liza and Vasin. Liza is offended. 
Liza and Makar. [The main thing.] The Prince is jealous. Vasin is 
suddenly arrested. (A denunciation, N.B.) News about Bioring, 
excitement. An unexpected meeting with Lambert. He is glad. It 
is here that he tells the Youth that he already knows Versilov. First 
hint about the document. (A feeling of moral disorder, again to 
Makar.) 
Makar's sudden death. 
On the day of Makar's death, He comes to see him. Right here, 
feats, confession, they become friends. "About the idea," and even 
about Lambert. The Youth expresses, with all too great conviction, 
what an impact Makar has had upon him. About her. He: "I used to 
hate her, but this must take an end." "Versilov has risen from the 
dead!" Harmony. He talks about charity. ࿹fakar's got the right idea. 
• V em gushchina. A crassly dialectal phrase, definitely "sub-standard." 

':162 
The Youth's Love for Her 
Tender recollections. A lot about mother. "How wonderful you are!" 
naively and ingenuously. 
About the Prince, about Liza's wedding, and about the other de· 
fendants. Something with Bioring. (An escapade is needed: Versilov 
and Bioring.) The Youth won't believe the rumors. ࠦlad at her. 
Mother is crying. Tatiana is out of countenance and has her hands 
full. 
Anna Andreevna calls him in. A letter containing <his> marriage 
proposal (through Anna Andreevna). This is why Tatiana and 
;\father were out of countenance the other day. 
[3d chapter] I. Evenings. Conversations at home. Versilov used to 
be most affable. About the Chinese. (":\lakar Ivanovich likes politics," 
He remarked to me.) (Suddenly, a retort by Mother regarding the 
Chinese.) 
Conversations in the evenings. About a doctor. "I want no pan of 
the present generation, I belong to a new, a future generation, and 
if it isn't going to be like me, I shall be the only one of my kind ... 
" 
Here, N.B. Having awakened from his feverish ravings, He kept 
daydreaming about her, and the longer the more so. He was making 
inquiries regarding Bioring, Anna Andreevna-and suddenly, 
charity. That bit of charity gave him a real shock: he was now 
hopelessly in love, but at the same time had begun to hate her terribly 
for her charity (as if he were a small boy). And here then, for the first 
time, Lambert. "No, this Lambert ought to be kept in store," he says 
as he is leaving his place. But immediately thereafter he is sad about 
his own degradation. There is something vile weighing upon his 
soul, and suddenly, Makar's death. Spiritual purification, a pact with 
Versilov. The Youth gives Him his own spontaneous opinion of 
her. (And here the Youth consciously expresses his hatred for her, 
defaming her before Versilov.) Her meeting with Versilov merely 
strengthens these thoughts of his. Launch the document. He would 
like to kiss her, at night he sees her in his dreams. Frightening audac­
ity while wide awake. Red-eyed and quite beside himself, he offers 
to dishonor her. But he definitely makes up his mind to join Lam­
bert, and not Versilov. At this point, the flight of the old Prince, 
and the insult from Bioring, the police station. And only now, im­
mediately after the police station, or during the very night <he 
spends at> the police station, he conceives the thought of Versilov's 
fall. "No, I am going to show her my generosity. I am her knight, I 
love her, but to meet her, to meet her, for the last time, and then off 
into the desert, into <my> idea!" TatiaRa Makar. Tatiana agrees, and 

Lambert and the Document 463 
here then, the plot and the conflagration. Keep in mind: the Youth's 
irrepressible love. 
"Please do forgive me!" Her final words in the epilogue. 
July 23. 
Here, for the first time, he accidentally mentions the document to 
Lambert quite unmistakably, and that same night (when he is drunk) 
his pocket is cut open. In the morning he returns to his home. He 
finds the old Prince at his Hat. A funny day. He communicates his 
plan to Versilov, and in the evening he is insulted by Bioring and 
<taken to> the police station. At the police station. He leaves the 
police station a new man. [An encounter with Lambert, and a 
quarrel.] To Tatiana. The scheme and the conflagration. 
VERSILOV's SON. 
Mother's birthday, a bouquet, chopping up the icons [("At least 
say good-bye, Andrei Petrovich!")] (I had seen it coming: that moral 
disorder again.) Looking for Versilov. At Lambert's. About the old 
Prince. Almost a plan. He lets out the secret, like the youth he is. A 
depressed feeling. But it is impossible to break it off. [Makar] Versilov 
is dear to him. His meeting with her. The Youth witnesses it. The 
Youth is indignant. A night of doubts, his whole jealousy breaks 
loose. Dreams of a conflagration. 
I) Meeting with Versilov, he tells him of his plan to cause a con­
flagration. He leaves to Lambert, etc. . 
2) Back home, suddenly, the flight of the old Prince. [Lambert 
has arranged it all by himself.] (Le careme.)3 The insult. A night at 
the police station. He leaves the police station realizing to his horror 
that Versilov had raised no objections. And then on to Lambert. (See 
3) Makar. 
3) He goes to see Lambert. Drunk (they cut out the paper). Lam­
bert: "You don't know how to do it." 
"Lambert, I'm going to pay you back for everything, for everything, 
for my childhood." 
Drunk. In the morning, Alphonsine. The Youth explains to her, 
overwhelmed by a powerful emotion, that he is about to return the 
document. At first he wants to send Alphonsine to her, but then he 
changes his mind: to Tatiana. Chez qui, Chez qui?4 Makar. The 
whole plot. The conflagration. 
3 French: "Lent." 
4 French: "At whose place, whose place?" 

464 
The Inevitability of Communism 
Denouement: the young Prince shoots himself, the old Prince dies. 
Versilov, an "idiot." She and her image. "The idea." And above it 
all, Makar. His concluding tirade. 3d chapter. 
[2d chapter] A sudden explanation regarding himself, addressed to 
the reader (for the sake of CLARITY a Ia Leo Tolstoi)." After "hatred." 
I suppose that I was simply in love with her, madly in love, yet at 
the same time also hated her, I don't know why, or as a matter of 
fact, I do know why ... (like somebody standing in a corner at a ball). 
I WAS JEALous. But at the time, this idea would have made me furious. 
The document. "I'll let <her?> know, but I'll fail to mention," 
< . . .  > everything is up < . . .  > 
[2d chapter] At the end: join Dergachev's group, becoming an 
ardent supporter of their role. Or study (Tatiana). "I don't know. But 
I've still got that idea, I'll never let go of it." 
"Dergachev... is this really ignoble? They were in error, they 
understood things too shallowly, but they did sacrifice themselves to a 
great common cause, even though they had no understanding whatso­
ever of it, of course. But I could introduce a new idea. It would just 
be necessary to study all these things. My knowledge of socialism 
leaves much to be desired, though I do know enough." 
"Too bad that Versilov" < . . .  > 
(And still, Makar comes to the fore.) 
I have noticed that Russian youths have an urge to sacrifice them­
selves. Yet I have done so very little. 
But as for the fact that among those youths <there are also some> 
who became shyster lawyers or railway engineers (Aleksandr Alek­
sandrovich )"6 <. . .> 
Versilov on the inevitability of communism. People's life consists 
of two parts: the historical, and the one the way it ought to be (the 
one that finds its justification in Christ incarnate). Both parts have 
their own unchanging laws. According to these laws, communism will 
triumph (regardless of whether the communists are right or wrong). 
But their triumph will be the farthest point of withdrawal from the 
kingdom of Heaven. Yet this triumph is something we have to ex­
pect. Nevertheless, none of the rulers of this world is expecting it. 
5 Dostoevsky may have had in mind Tolstoy's Childhood and Boyhood, which 
served as models for the Youth's confession. 
6 This is a reference to Dostoevsky's nephew (the son of his sister Vera Mikhay­
lovna). He was a railway engineer by profession. 

Project with Lambert 465 
Still, what a great thing it would be if Russia could understand 
European communism, understanding, by the same token, how far 
removed from it she is. 
Versilov sent Lambert out in front, while hiding himself, because 
he decided in his own mind: "In my presence she won't dare; she is 
proud and would rather lose her fortune than humiliate herself be­
fore me. Whereas Lambert is incognito, somebody who just came 
and went. \Vhat I'll do is come out when everything is over between 
her and Lambert, thus catching her iR the act catching her in the act." 
[Finale] When the Youth has told Versilov about his plan of 
causing a conflagration, and Versilov has accepted it, the Youth says 
to himself: "Oh, I shall never forget this, nor shall I ever forgive him 
this; He has filled my heart with sadness. Better if it had been I, 
rather than he." He is struggling <with himself> during the night­
the result: "Let everything go to the devil with a big bang, all this 
disorder deserves it; and then, my own idea." 
The result: Give Versilov some more attractive, childlike, ingen­
uous traits. 
His project together with Lambert: "This was a complicated and 
clever thing, also risky," says the Youth. 
His meeting with Katerina Nikolaevna: when she displays so much 
kindness, Versilov exclaims: "How kind you are, how kind you are! 
You are overwhelming me." 
And later, He to the Youth: "SHE? \Vhy, for the sake of her own 
order and peace, she is willing to do this thing, that is, any kind of 
baseness. The Youth believes him and tells him about his plan. 
Versilov approves of it with reckless abandon. The moment he is 
gone, the Youth immediately gets very sad on account of him. A 
night of <internal> struggle, etc., he almost hates her because of this, 
etc., and in the morning, Alphonsine. 
[Finale] Liza keeps contradicting Makar as long as he is alive, but 
when he dies she is terribly sad. 
Versilov to the Youth, during the confession : "I am afraid of one 
thing," he said suddenly, "namely, that we are both vile, which is also 
why we wish that she were vile, and not at all because she really is 
vile" (naivete). 
An important page. 
Elias and Enoch. 
In the charity <scene>, She tells the Youth about Him, describing 
his character (the beauty of all-forgiveness, of forgetting an injury). 
[More briefly] "He used to get hurt by all kinds of trifles," she 

466 Her Charity 
says and recalls some examples (however, she does not conceal the 
fact that He was most charming in his ingenuousness; and altogether, 
the Youth can see that she willy-nilly respects Him, that she actually 
would like to become His friend). 
This "charity," and the whole meeting--though they captivate the 
Youth and have a great impact on him, still, he immediately feels 
that he is angry: after so much suffering, He still has not achieved that 
harmony which she has received for nothing: she was born that way! 
And in connection with this, in the recesses of his soul there develop 
an increased and nurtured suspicion and hatred for her. He hates 
her, exactly in the same way He does, namely for her being perfect. 
He would be glad to be a witness of her degradation, of her vice. He 
is taking His side. 
Even at the time of <her> "charity" he is arguing with her, telling 
her that He never loved her, assuring her, presenting proof to her, 
retelling conversations with Him. 
N .B. She explains His noble actions to him, his refusal to accept 
the inheritance; yet she is calling him a child of his age. The Youth 
is deeply hurt by her comparing him to a child. 
"If this is beyond your comprehension, and if you have received 
this gift for nothing, you must still respect the sufferings of others." 
Later, after she has left, a conversation with Tatiana about Him. 
An old spinster; cries; tells him a part of <Versilov's> past; tells him 
about his mother. 
The Youth tells Him about the meeting <with her> in detail 
(i.e., even that she loves Him and that she wants to be His friend); 
he inflames Him by telling him these things. But they both decide 
that she is merely a society lady, who wouldn't stand the test. Still, 
the Youth does not dare to tell him about the document, whereas He 
drops a few hints concerning the document. 
The Youth leaves, with the seed of an idea of taking revenge on 
her and exposing* her. The encounter with Lambert. (He learns, 
among other things, that He is already acquainted with Lambert.) 
[l\foRE CLEARLY] At this point, Makar's death. A rumor about a 
marriage proposal on His part. Mother's birthday, a bouquet, the 
icons. The Youth leaves, with the idea of "disorder" in his mind. 
His rendezvous with her. After the rendezvous, back to Lambert. He 
almost unveils his secret. But then he decides to go ahead without 
• This word is underlined twice. 

Important Adjustment in the Plan 167 
Lambert. Here (through Versilov), the flight of the old Prince (both 
Lambert and everything else). The Youth straightens everything out 
again. He is also the one who, for all the good he has done, must suffer 
humiliation and <being taken to> the police station. N .B. (Having 
seen through His vileness, the Youth still refuses to leave his side!) 
He goes to see Him and communicates to Him his own idea of expos­
ing <her>. But as he is leaving Him, he is already cursing Him. 
N.B. (Shouldn't it be done this way: He advises the Youth not to use 
violence, but rather advises him to overwhelm her with his magna­
nimity: spare her.) The Youth leaves, and night. He is wavering: 
(he is now definitively and cynically criticizing Versilov) decides in 
favor of disorder. In the morning, Lambert and Versilov. The notion 
that He has joined forces with Lambert in such a villainy lies heavy 
on the Youth's mind. And so on. 
At the time Makar was discussing Elias and Enoch. About how 
the Antichrist-to-come will capture people by <his> beauty. The 
springs of morality will grow turbid in the hearts of men, the green 
grass will be dried out. 
"He used to talk (there's a thicket in his heart),* while I was 
marveling at Him," thiak said writes the Youth. And later, to Him: 
"Do you really believe?" 
He to him: "Maybe, no. Yet we were still capable of getting carried 
away and deceiving ourselves, thinking that (we believed in the 
beautiful) we believed in something, while you aren't capable of this 
either." 
"Well, this may be all to the good," says the Youth. 
"It is all very bad," He replies, "and what is worst of all is that 
you've got nothing with which to replace these daydreams." And this 
is where he tells him about communism and Christianity. 
And later, after Makar's death, they decide <to perform some> 
feats, and He delivers his confession before him. 
THE MOST IMPORTANT OF ALL THE IMPORTANT ADJUSTMENTS I:-1 THE 
PLAN. 
Prior to the "charity" <incident>, the Youth hasn't been discussing 
her with Him at all, nor was there any confession on His part. The 
only thing they discussed were Elias and Enoch, communism, Chris­
tianity, and Makar, and that's the extent of it. (Also about the feats.) 
But after the "charity" <incident>, the first thing the Youth does is 
• See n. (•), p. 461 ,  above. 

468 
To Perform a Feat 
to go to see Him and tell Him the whole thing. That's where he gets 
his impression, ࿺lakar's death, and only after that (immediately after 
Makar's death) He approaches the Youth and says: 
"\Ve wanted to perfonn a feat; here's one for you: a confession," 
and he tells him everything, communicating it with energy, fervor, 
animation, sadness, bitterness, and <self->accusations. The Youth, 
while he is listening, contradicts Him. The latter defends himself, 
refutes the other's arguments, gets angry, but finally says: 
"\Vhen She was attacking me, you were probably contradicting her, 
just as you are contradicting me now; now, you do not believe me, and 
are taking my* side." 
At this point there takes place, between Him and the Youth, a most 
ardent and irrepressible declaration of love: "I understand every­
thing. You love me, and I love you; you are dear to me; now I am 
yours forever. I understand everything, all your actions. Your simple­
heartedness fascinates me. I had thought that there was more of a 
mystery about you." About Mother, about Liza, "Let us lead an 
orderly life, devoted to self-perfection." About the idea and even 
about Lambert. 
About Mother: a few anecdotes about her. Encounter with Lam­
bert. An agreeable impression. Suddenly, the maniage proposal 
(from Anna Andreevna). Mother's birthday: the bouquet and the 
chopping up of the icons. He jaiRs LaffibeFt. Almost. He is looking 
for Versilov. His• * meeting with her. Then, on to Lambert ("I felt 
insulted"). Almost a plan. Flight of the old Prince-the insult, the 
police station. The Youth goes to see Versilov, to offer him the 
document. (Magnanimity.) And suddenly He is with Lambert 
(traitre/ couldn't stand it through the night). The conflagration. 
Then, the Prince. He shoots himself. Death of the old Prince. Ver­
silov. And she, her image. And then, THE IDEA. 
One ought to give some thought to a definitive and most detailed 
plan. 
Minute.••• 
I was understanding only too well what could happen ... <?> I 
think that we were both feeling that we owed each other many ex-
• Apparently an error; should be "her." 
• • Capitalized, therefore Versilov is meant. 
• • •  In French. 
7 French: "Traitor." 

Versilov and Makar 469 
planations ... or, perhaps, none at all. Though I was looking him in 
the eye, but his eyes were telling me nothing on this score. Yes, there 
were some scores to be settled between us ... But I like this kind of 
people: "Let begones be bygones, and let's start a new score." He 
explained this and that to me ... "No, they weren't questioning me 
about everything." "Very good." I remained silent. Lambert. Alas, 
they already knew, while I was still afraid of mentioning Lambert. I 
had forgotten where he lived. [I was worried by one thought.] 
He, to Makar: "I like the harmony you carry." 
Bending over <to me>, in a whisper: "They lack order and har-
mony; I don't like them." 
""\Vhat are you saying there?" 
"Keep quiet, I'll come to see you." 
<I> returned, and regeneration to a new life. But initially, simply 
a ray <of light>. I returned with great curiosity. 
After Makar tells about his wanderings, Tatiana Pavlovna, who 
had been afraid that the Youth might make some boorish remarks, or 
chuckle <disrespectfully>, suddenly says to him: "Good boy, good 
boy." 
For the first time, a feeling of "moral disorder." 
... Regenerate, but not reformed. My feelings were not of the best, 
I'll admit that. 
A feeling of vengefulness. Against whom? Oh, I knew even then 
against whom, i.e., I had picked out the person on whom I would 
vent my feelings, but I am not going to name that person right now. 
A lot of it was quite wrong, but some of it was right. Some of it. 
And she, the poor dear, thought < . . .  > 
Incidentally, this thing: I always did love Mother. 
"You are my enemy, but one can do business with you." 
I decided to think it over as far as Lambert was concerned. 
The venerable old man must die away.* It is more splendid that 
way. "Thank you, you have edified me. They both teach: the old man 
the old <wisdom>, the young man the new." "You are a wanderer, 
what is a hermit going to teach you? He doesn't know life." 
After his first meeting with Makar, his mother says, in passing: 
"Our dear and welcome guest." "Darling, dear mother," and I was 
stroking her cheeks ... No matter what moral disorder you may be liv-
• Ugasat', a verb used mainly of a fire or of a candle. 

470 The Document 
ing in, but as long as there is such a thing as motherly lo\'e, that is, so 
long as there is still moral beauty in this world. < . . .  > "Don't tell 
them, mother." "Very well, my dear, but why are you angry with 
Liza?" ... and she left. I was not angry with her. 
[Here] i\lakar about the hermit, about the fact that he is not 
alone ... "There's the grass growing." 
[2d chapter] Liza. Not enough honor to the Prince. To Vasin. (i\ly 
anger.) I decided to go and see the Prince immediately after rising. 
(Stebelkov has been arrested.) Versilov, i\lother revered Versilov for 
his behavior. The doctor. (In narrative form.) 
[3d chapter] ;\lakar's stories. He is contradicting himself. Versilov's 
opinion (of Makar). 
Minute. 1) The tone of the narrative (after Ίfakar, suddenly ex 
abmpto). 
I adjusted my clothes and left, and this is what I decided: "I am 
free. Turn over the document, the Prince, etc. Arrange things for 
them. As for Versilov. either save him, or abandon him, but act 
energetically at any rate." Nastasia Egorovna and Anna Andreevna. 
Minute. 2) 
[4th chapter] I adjusted my clothes and left. Here's what my plan 
of action was like: hand over the document, meet my obligation, and 
leave Versilov without saying a word, without asking any questions, 
which is going to surprise him, and also be his punishment. (N .B. 
Prior to this, <I> had been in love with Versilov, for the way he was 
treating i\[akar. N.B. Versilov's opinion of ;\fakar, and the Youth 
delivers his tirade on "moral deformity." Я Versilov remains 
silent and, up to this point, does not offer to join the pilgrimage. 
Then, the Youth cuts their conversation short, and leaves.) 
And then, I've got: 300 rubles which is enough. I left. The 
Prince, Liza, Vasin, Nastasia Egorovna, Anna Andreevna. No, leave 
everything, everybody, everybody. [Only that last thing remains.] In 
a hurry. I haven't mentioned it yet: The other day, Tatiana had 
told me in a whisper that I should come to her place. Charity: I hadn't 
expected it. At first I was talking to Tatiana; then the other woman 
suddenly opened the door. Yet I did not hand over the document. 
How many-sided man is: I did not hand over the document! Return. 
;\load. "There's a thicket inside him."• Devoted to Versilov, a scene, 
night and hatred for her. 
• See n. (•), p. 461, above. 

Versilov's Idea 
471 
And on the following day, another event: Liza's story with Vasin. 
The Prince is jealous (the day of the wedding had been set before, 
in narrative form). The denunciation. 0: ews about Bioring, excite­
ment. Appeal to action, rather than to solitude. Lambert (an un­
expected encounter), a feverish conversation, first mention of the 
document. As he is leaving Lambert, this psychology: "\Vhy did I 
mention the document?" (he explains his soul to the reader). [The 
sadness of terrible moral disorder.] [6th chapter] To Makar. Makar's 
sudden death. 
Versilov's idea. Rule over mankind. A better man cannot possibly 
escape solitude. <His> spiritualism comes to the fore. An image of 
Russia. To perfect oneself. ["Are you a party to that conspiracy?"] 
"This is no conspiracy." Freemasonry. "I'll explain it to you later, 
let's walk together. She's got me confused" (with boundless mockery 
of himself as well as of her). "Let's walk together." The Youth tells 
him about her, and gives him the details of his meeting with her. 
Nai"vely admits his hatred for her. 
And so Versilov's idea has remained unexpressed. Marriage to 
<the Youth's> mother. And then, on the following day, the news of 
His sally against llioring and about his proposal to her. Mother is 
crying. Anna Andreevna. I was running around looking for him. At 
his mother's party. Chopping up the icons. 
"Our best people are lost, many men, many minds. Samarin, 
Fadeev, communism." 
"The best people of Russia must unite." 
But everything feverishly, fervently, and sincerely. 
Liza was rude <to Makar.> 
"I mean my legs." 
He began to laugh, to my surprise. 
Liza flushed. 
Versilov with a radiant smile. (A radiance emanating from his face.) 
I felt like embracing them all. "\Vhat a rogue I am, yet I want to 
'remain silent' !" "1'\o, THIS IS l'\OT WHAT HE WAS LIKE," SAYS \'ERSILOV 
OF MAKAR: "HE IS ABOUT TO EXPIRE." 
"Even from my grave, I still love you, my dear ones." 
I staggered back, quite delirious. Suddenly my mother came m. 
Mother: "He is quite delirious." 
"Our dear guest." 
/: "Shine, oh beautiful ray of light, sing, <of> God's green grass." 
july 23. 
He announces to Versilov that there isn't anything viler than those 

472 A Yearning for Harmony 
lives of theirs-his mother's and his, Liza's with the Prince-as far 
as he can tell, and that his own life is the worst of them all... Moral 
deformity. 
Versilov says outright that he is ready to go on a pilgrimage. About 
Christ. 
About Christ. About how He discovered Christ while he was work­
ing as a District Commissioner <during the Land Reform>. 
"Don't wish to be better than other people; rather, make it your 
first concern to be yourself." 
"And so he never did express his idea." 
""Why, isn't it all the same what your idea is?" 
Aren't all Russians obsessed with ideas? "Wisdom, a capability of 
sacrificing oneself, both in one's youth and in one's old age, a thirst 
for the common good, a passionate civic concern-all this the Rus­
sians have, but they lack one thing: something in common, concord. 
They don't have three men who could agree about anything. 
Isn't an immediate and frighteningly powerful feeling for her to 
be preferred? Happiness with her. This is given once. 
[Insert this into chapter one.] [Here chapter two] "\Vhen is a man 
morally beautiful?" I suddenly asked Versilov three or four days later, 
without any preliminary remarks, right in the middle of some trival 
and unimportant conversation. 
""When he firmly knows what he has to do and wl:tat J:te is always 
going to do," he answered, also quite suddenly and withm:il without 
giving the matter any thought, ttH4 as if he had had the answer ready 
for a long time, and as if he had been doing nothing all this time but 
continually thinking about this question. But about this, later. 
(A bright spot. Mother.) 
A spiritual program. 
A yearning for harmony. Harmony is in its apogee after Versilov's 
Confession. Moral disorder (jealousy) is in its apogee after the con­
versation between Him and her, which the Youth overheard. 
He gets drunk at Lambert's. Revenge. (Little boy, little boy. 
Alphonsine's lullaby.) 
Flight of the old Prince. \Vork, the insult. A night at the police 
station. 
A thirst to break <with everything> and escape to a harmonious 
life. An anguished feeling for Him, because He has taken another, 
decisive, fall in accepting the Youth's plan of revenge with the aid 
of the document. 
The conflagration. 

The Youth's Frantic Actions 473 
Epilogue: An explanation, a ࿻ thirst for a harmonious life, yet 
wordly life and all the instincts, she! 
All this was very well, but it was now time, to prove." 
CHAPTER IX. 9th chapter. 
I woke up rather refreshed. My ideas were now clearer. I was 
understanding him. I was struck by the notion that it was so simple, 
and felt a little sorry that it was so simple. To be sure, <the truth> 
about <his> love was more complex, but even that I was understand­
ing better than the day before. He didn't want fatum <to take its 
course>. She. I am for him. Mother won't fill the want. That's how 
it should be. Their destiny. An avenger, but more than anything 
else-the golden age. But then, there is Lambert, what about that? 
The document. Fallen out of love. Oh, I believed <it>, precisely on 
account of the senselessness of that last explosion. However, restless­
ness. Nastasia Egorovna. [The spy.] Call <her in?>. "Tell me .Hfr 
aot goiag to come this very important thing." "Allright, allright." 
I'm not going there. I'm going to tell Him! Now, briefly. \Vent to 
see him, not in. 'Vent to see my mother, sadness, tears, Liza, interro­
gated by Tatiana Pavlovna (tenderness). "Let me know if you should 
see <him?>." Again back to His place, in anxiety, not in. "'Vhy 
won't you run over to Anna Andreevna's?" Over to my own place. 
Lambert: "Your lies are too plain." "Did you tell Him about the 
document?" "No." "Anna Andreevna has been telling me <this>." 
"There's -agaia-something fishy about this, come to my place" (that's 
Lambert). Lambert was asking me: "How was that thing you said 
about Anna Andreevna?" Tke Laacllorcl The Landlord furnishes a 
room (for the old Prince). Strange inquiries. I was lying there, sud­
denly jumped up, tapped my forehead, "Could it be that he went to 
Tsarskoe Selo?" Alphonsine-asking me to come over to Lambert's 
place, right away. She, she is promising me some news about her. 1: 
("Go to hell, a Ia porte!")8 Trishatov. "I shall never come to your 
place!" Before Alphonsine's visit: "Never see Lambert!" (before Lam­
bert). Fell asleep. The following day, to his place: "No, nor has he 
been in." To the funeral. To Anna Andreevna's place, not at home, 
to Tsarskoe Selo. Mother, at home. Name day party. Daydreams. He 
arrives with a bouquet of flowers-in the evening, at teatime. Makar 
had willed the icon to Him. Irritation. Grabbed the icon and broke 
it to pieces, then left. "Say farewell!" 
• Unclear i n  the original. 
s French: Literally "'To the door," but idiomatically, ""Get the hell out." 

474 The Youth's Visits 
x. Ran over to Anna Andreevna's place. "I've been telling you."* 
Over to his place. At the door, Tatiana Pavlovna. ّastasia won't let 
<him?> in. But they bring the Youth back. He is yelling. Tatiana 
Pavlovna: "'Viii you give me your word that you won't go in?" "I do, 
I do." They enter. She and He. A showdown. I run over to Lambert's. 
Lambert is not in. "]e vous cherche."u Alphonsine with her guitar. 
Asked for some wine. Pawn something. Champagne. About vieux 
prince. Drunk. Lambert. Got drunk-in the morning: they cut out 
<the letter>. 
"They'll get her entangled also." 
"How do you mean, entangled, in what?" 
"'Veil, you can be sure, they'll get her entangled." 
Une rose. 
This is more important than pride. 
The double burst out laughing at the funeral. 
Passion and fame. 
Fell asleep: All this high society is frivolous. 
I was in that tavern on Canal <Street>. Had something to eat. 
Lambert came in several times. 
1st chapter: 'Vent to see Anna Andreevna-left. That night the 
Junior Chamberlain was there. Don't get involved with Lambert. 
Trishatov. Fell asleep. A frightful intrigue. 
XI. Came home. The old Prince. Careme1 10 the Landlord. Anna 
Andreevna. The Junior Chamberlain. I went to see Tatiana, made an 
appointment with her, returned. The Junior <Chamberlain> had 
withdrawn, the Landlord too. Bioring: an insult. The Prince flings 
himself into <my> embrace, sobbing. To the police station. ("I love 
her.") ["<i\fy> head, and I'll go out of my mind."] 
XII. A night at the police station. In the morning, went out to see 
Tatiana. Now, all <the rest> in a few words. A hellish machination. 
And how the whole thing happened. The conflagration. 
xm. Conclusion. 
9th chapter. Lambert: "'Veil, let's go, let's go and have dinner, 
let's have a drink, I'm going to get her for you, you fool, you." But 
I still believed in <his> sincerity. That wench had me fooled. 
Here1 the programme. 
• The gender of the verb suggests that this is said by Anna Andreevna. 
9 French: "I am looking for you." 
1 0 French: "Lent." 

Makar on Man 475 
A sheetful of cute expressions. 
After the chopping of the icons: Mother shouting after Him: 
"Andrei Petrovich, at least say farewell to me, before we part forever." 
"I am afraid of Him; I knew that He was going to start laughing." 
lN <His> coNFESSION} prior to this, He is talking to the Youth about 
<the latter's> mother, as if he were driven by something. 
The Youth, after "he has not forgiven": "\Vhy, you are arguing 
against yourself by saying this." 
He was telling how that mother lost all of her children, and how the 
last one, a consumptive boy, was at the factory, and how that merchant 
grew fond of him: ''I'll spend my whole capital, but I'll have him 
cured!" He died. The little one was left after him (he married her). 
Makar: "No one can say how the word enters a man's heart, or by 
what routes it travels. Nor does anyone know how God is going to 
exact a return <of our debts>. The seed in the ground." 
Makar: "If each were helping the other, do you think that we 
would have famine and plague? \Ve'd have paradise. But now you'll 
rake together a lot of gold, all by yourself-and you're bored to death. 
But if this other thing happened, it would all be such fun. (Descrip­
tion of how it would be fun.) \Ve don't need to have any property of 
our own. Take mine." 
And suddenly (at Lizaveta's). \Veil now, what do you think hap­
pened? The merchant died and left seventy thousand to the blessed 
Lizaveta in his will. She gave away everything. Asked to accept the 
money and sign for it, she signed everything (they'd have put it in 
trust, but she screamed, "I don't want that!"), took the money, signed 
for all of it, brought it home. She started handing it out to people, 
["you better look out."] So they sent a policeman to guard her, <and> 
she took fright. Everything to children, to orphans. 
I am thinking in my mind that often, when a man laughs, it is 
quite repulsive to watch ffim. And altogether, there is something ba­
nal, base about laughter. To be sure An extraordinarily large number 
of people don't know how to laugh tt-a!l. Ю So that those thou­
sands of people who to be sme not only don't know how to laugh but 
don't laugh at all are actually enjoying an advantage. Many a man will 
altogether give himself away by his laughter, and all of a sudden you'll 
know him inside and out. \Vhat is most important about laughter is 
sincerity, and how many people have sincerity? It would seem that 
laughter asks for good nature, while most people laugh maliciously. 
Sincere and good-natured laughter means gaiety, but -Feal+y-where do 
you find gaiety in people; in fact, do -tftey- people still know how to 

476 Basic Ideas 
be gay? I am saying one thing: If you want to examine a man and 
learn something about his soul, [observe him carefully, not when he 
is silent, nor when he is talking, nor when he is weeping, nor even 
when he is full of the noblest indignation, borne by the loftiest of 
ideas, but] rather observe him when he is laughing: if his is a good 
laughter, ingenuous and gay, he is a good man. 
Note, however, that neither should a man's laughter appear stupid; 
you may be stimulated to feel amused, and cheerful, and communica­
tive, by a man's laughter; yet it is also important that the man him­
self shouldn't appear funny Э· In a word, laughter is the most 
reliable test of the soul. 
The old man was laughing. I am recommending this especially to 
women, and in particular to brides who are about to pick out tfi.ei.F. 
bridegroom or prospective husbaRd. There are some characters whom 
it takes a long time to crack-you might not be understanding a 
person, but there, suddenly, he'll become gay, or think that now is 
the time to be gay, and he'll be spread before your eyes, as if on the 
palm of your hand. Only a man who has gone through a superior and 
a most felicitous mental development knows how to be gay in a com­
municative, that is, in a perfectly good-natured way. 
"l\Iy legs, I'm very much afraid, still don't carry me." 
Makar admires him: "He is bright, really bright." There's another 
trait that reveals a man's character, that thing about his hands and 
feet. 
July 25. 
BASIC IDEAS 
In the Finale. Though I have been warning my reader many times, 
in the course of these "Notes," that now, as I am writing them, I am no 
longer the person I was at the time <it all happened>, it sems to me, 
after having studied all the pro's and con's, that I am really entirely 
the same person. The person I used to be, the person I am now, and 
the person wheR I was aRd lived I was when all this happened, and 
later, when I was writing about it, and now, when I've quit it. I 
was merely saying it for my own consolation. 
By smashing the icons he was, perhaps, renouncing all of his ideas. 
July 26/27. 
The Prince betrays Dergachev, but Stebelkov had almost at the 
same time betrayed them both. The Prince could have kept it to him­
self, but he revealed it <to the authorities>. [Here] 
His rendezvous with her must be sincere in the highest degree on 
His part, as well as REVEALING. 

Versilov's Confession 477 
"You used to have your idea; weren't you pursuing some kind of 
an idea?" she says to Him (:'-:.B. She must also be speaking with the 
greatest sincerity and -a-s-i+ timidly, which also comjJletely explains the 
plausibility of this last meeting and a personal showdown between 
these two people. For she is hoping that she may talk Him into 
leaving her alone: which is also based on her continued and unim­
paired respect for his high calling). 
"Yes, I do have an 'idea,· " He answers, "an idea which tells me 
what we all ought to be doing right now and which might save all of 
us, but what does it matter to you what this idea might be-in fact, 
what does it matter to anybody? Aren't there thousands of people each 
of whom has his own idea and, along with it, a belief that it is pre­
cisely his little idea that is going to save everybody? I belong to 
those thousand or so people who cannot remain indifferent to all this 
confusion and nonsense, but who would rather die than pass by it 
apathetically. Rather than give up one's search for a solid founda­
tion, and remain content with some kind of a compromise. 'Ve, i.e., a 
thousand or so people, are each of us suffering sincerely, and this is all 
that is worthwhile about us. However, it goes without saying that 
among those thousand people you wouldn't find as many as two who 
would agree with each other (irony)." 'Vhen 
"You see, people in Russia have been doing a lot of thinking, hut 
they haven't been living at all. And therefore, it really does not mat­
ter what my idea is all about, this or some other thing. 'Vhen I was 
dislodged from my rut (perhaps because there really wasn't any rut, or 
because the rut came to an end), I went mad and wanted to take my 
own life. That's when I escaped abroad. But I did not destroy myself: 
I conceived, at that time, my original idea: seek to perfect yourself, 
try to break your own resistance as your conscience, and your faith 
will tell you, to the best of your ability, and, once having conquered 
yourself, you may perhaps also find that ultimate idea, your own 
solution 'what to do?' and 'what to preach?' I passionately clung to 
this idea. You were all laughing at my chains. "1hy? I was actually 
wearing them, but you didn't know what was going on in my soul. 
Yes, it may be that, finally, I did persuade myself that mine was the 
right way, but then you appeared before me, and I suddenly realized 
that without you I am nothing, and my idea is unrealizable. 'Vhat 
kind of an "idea" is this <, you ask,> which suddenly turns into 
nothing only because you appear on the scene? I don't know if I love 
you, I only know that I need you. In my pride, I came to hate you. 
I convinced myself that you have all the vices ... I swear, I was capable 

478 
Versilov and Self-perfection 
of persecuting you with slander. Perhaps, capable of poisoning you." 
[She: "That is, capable right now."] 
["You know what, I actually could ha,·e poisoned you. Do you 
know that there already was a day and an hour when your life was 
hanging by a thread?"] · 
"You repulsed me. I sought salvation in Lidiia, finally thinking that 
I had forgotten you. Oh, how I laughed at my own 'self-perfection.' 
Here then, I decided I "·ould devote myself to food and family life, 
later join some little conspiracy, some kind of socialist propaganda or 
something, picking out the most stupid and insignificant, so I'd be 
tried and deported. Oh, believe me, I know how to loathe myself, 
and how to hate myself. \Vhat is most stupid about this thing is the 
fact that, eventually, I forgot about you altogether, and found myself 
laughing at that silly little passion of mine. And here now, the nadir 
of my humiliation: so long as I was hearing of you, knowing that you 
were single, I was quite indifferent, but when I heard the first report 
about your getting married, I was thrown into a frenzy. [Oh, what do 
I care about that man?] Forgive tHe that I have proposes maHiage 
to you, it's an absurdity, but how could you com@ to this T@nd@"ous? 
I have proposed maniage to you. I need you. Let us go on together. 
You know, I still believe that, though I may not save mankind, I may 
still do a lot of good. So let us go on together. I am yielding. All right, 
let it be an act of charity on your part. I'll accept charity from you ... " 
And later: "Tell me outright (for I can see from your face that you 
are not deceiving me, and that you are ready to tell me everything): 
did you ever love me at all, even a little bit?" 
She flushed. 
" I  did." ("That's what I expected," says the Youth.) 
"And now?" 
"No, maybe, I don't. I don't love you. I don't want you ... " 
In the finale of the scene, He says: "I am going to destroy you." 
[AT :\!OTHER's SIDE] "Perhaps there is a lot of faith in :\IE even now. 
Let us go on together. I have been saving <for it>, like a miser, while 
you are spending it, gathering nothing. I have been suffering, while 
you have been getting it for nothing. \Vould you believe that I hated 
you? Of course, I am insulting you. This must be what is called a 
passion. So far I have never known passion, though I have had a 
number of affairs. I could hardly define this fire even now, not know­
ing what it is, or what it is that I want of you. \Vhat I do know is that, 
without you, I am finished. I also know that he who experiences such 
passion can also hate lo..-e ana hate at the same time. Hate as much as 
love. Have mercy on me, I can't go on this way." 

Versilov Threatens to Kill Her 479 
At the rendezvous, She (standing there, wavering) : "I do not know, 
I can't. You are going to take revenge on me, if I should hand out 
some charity to you." 
He: "Do you remember Abishai in the Bible, remember, I read it 
to you. Perhaps you are right. Having accepted your charity I may, 
perhaps, get to hate you, remembering: 'Why did I injure this 
woman?' " (pointing at the portrait of the Youth's mother). 
She: "If this is so, what am I to do?" 
He: "Why, of course, you are going to leave me" (lost in thought). 
[Here.] And, as he leaves: "Don't love me, don't live with me, let's 
never meet. I shall be your slave, if you should call for me, [I am not 
going to harm you.] And I shall be tHat I shall disappear, if you want 
me to, so you won't see me, or hear of me. I shan't bother you, nor 
shall I do you any harm. I shall disappear, only, only ... only don't 
marry any other man!" (This is his very last word, as He is already 
leaving, and after the words: "I will destroy you!") "I SHALL DESTROY." 
She, to Him (incidentally, about the Youth's mother), later: "You 
believe in God, you were preaching Him so ardently and so sincerely. 
You loved God." 
"Is this what you think? Yes, I believe, but I have quit thinking of 
Him, ever since you appeared and all my thoughts were stopped. I 
cannot -HeW think of Him, I haven't been thinking about anything 
at all in a long time. I am finished ... 1... I don't care. I-I-I am 
going to destroy you, that's what I'm going to do" (he got up from 
his seat, pale). 
Belle-vu <sic> 
"I am giving you a deadline, think it over. You see, I-1'11 try to 
kill myself first, so I wouldn't kill you." 
"But if I should be unable to restrain myself, I might kill you first, 
and only then, myself." 
In the very finale of the novel: and so, His "idea" has remained 
unexpressed. "\Vhy, what does it really matter?" as He himself once 
said. 
N .B. In Versilov's Confession: the most sympathetic, the most 
sincere, and the most naive words about <Russian> youth. 
She: "And this is Versilov? A man of honor, spiritual strength ... I 
have always believed in you!" 
She: "What am I to do then?" 
And later, immediately: "N'o, for nothing in the world. You are 
threatening me with death-for nothing in the world." 
He: "I am not threatening, just understand ... " 
"No, I don't love you. I can't. Better kill me." 

480 A Noble Idea 
?(''I'll kill you") (and suddenly, some affectionate word, some kind 
question: "Tell me, didn't you then ... where have you put my por­
trait?"). ("And do you remember. .. " And so on, about Abishai, about 
the Bible. "Tell me, what does your 'idea' consist of?") 
"I don't want this kind of a Versilov." 
He: "\Vould you take any other kind?" 
"\Vhere were you later? In Paris?" (Private conversation. This is 
before the very finale.) 
She to Him: "I can't wish you any evil. I have always wished you 
well." 
He to her: "You were laughing at me." 
She: "I never did. \Vhat I always valued so highly about you was 
your sincerity. l\ly poor father, you drove him right out of his mind 
then. I saw in you a man ... " etc. (Affectionate, kind, warm words.) 
"You were one of those few sincere people whose minds are never at 
rest. You are the noble bearer of an idea. Believe me, I shall love 
you, <but> leave me alone." 
He, in passing: "The world must be refashioned, so let us start 
with ourselves." 
She: "Listen, you were never a spiritualist, were you?" 
"No." 
"Are you a Mason?" 
"No." 
He, in passing: "It is my idea that the world must be refashioned, 
but that the first step ought to consist of definitely starting with 
oneself." 
"How does one start?" 
"Get honest." 
"Aren't there any honest people?" 
"Not one" (silence). "However, what do you care for my idea!" 
(Irony.) 
She: "No, no, listen, you said-honest, what about her, <the 
Youth's> mother?" 
(He: irony.) 
?("But with Lidiia, was it honest?") 
(He: "Yes, it was."). 
july 27. 
Schedule. 
3d part, 1st half. Makar's death. "Let's go to my place. I'm going 
to show you my child. You must absolutely come. Go! go!" 
2d half. Versilov makes a confession even before the rendezvous 
with her. 

The Effect of Versilov's Letter 481 
4th part, lst half. From the rendezvous (at Lambert's, right after 
the rendezvous) up to and including the conflagration. 
<4th part>. 2d half. Epilogue. 
In the Confession, not a word about her: "Let's forget about her." 
And, in the Confession, at first life with <the Youth's> mother. 
Memories. Makar-on the harmonious life. 
All about the subject of the harmonious life. Marrying <the 
Youth's> mother, etc. 
At the time of the funeral, a most complete report about Bioring. 
So that Versilov had sent the letter on the day of the bouquet, and 
after chopping up <the icons>. Anna Andreevna brings <the news 
about> the letter. 
About zoology. However, also about Stebelkov's arrest, about her, 
about the existence of the document in His letter to her. 
<July> 27 /28. 
AeoHt Liza. ̗Jot a word aeout tA.e 8ocument. Minute.* Filigrane. 
2<d chapter>. Everything about Liza. Can't renounce them; yet 
they are my own. It wasn't I who divided them. ·where did <he?> 
learn about Liza and Vasin? Yet I could not flee. Nastasia. Nastasia's 
report about the old Prince, to Anna Andreevna (in narrative fonn, 
and in scenes) about the infant ("I should also like to tell you: This 
is about Lambert," after her).** About her, about Bioring, he has 
fallen behind. The effect of Versilov's letter, about those words in 
the letter which suggest that the document has not been burned. My 
excitement (about the young Prince, Liza). The absence of harmony. 
I got up and went down to see Makar. As if on purpose, Liza and 
Versilov were with him. (How Versilov treated Makar.) The story 
of Tatiana's trial. Makar's tale. He gets up: "What is harmony?" An 
excited night, in love. An explanation of my love. Isn't this where 
the conflagration comes in? 
3d chapter. ̕4altar Recidive of his illness. A few days. I shall not be 
describing my sufferings. Makar's tales, his influence. Versilov's opin­
ion of Makar, Versilov has forgotten to add <something>. I suddenly 
came up with a tirade on the harmonious life. Versilov [abruptly] 
agreed. Suddenly, Liza's affair with Vasin. 
4th chapter. My sudden departure. Everybody ... Anna Andreevna 
with something new (perhaps about Lambert?). The young Prince. 
(In his excitement, he has just made his denunciation, is jealous, mar-
• In French. 
• •  The gender of the verb suggests that the remark is made by a female speaker. 

482 Anna Andreevna and Lambert 
riage.) Full of ·excitement about the news concerning Lambert. To 
Tatiana. Charity. 
5th <chapter.> Came home. Liza has been insulted. Makar about 
the closet <?>. To go on a pilgrimage. Versilov. Couldn't stand it. To 
Lambert, blackmail, about the document. Got me confused. ࠣmmg@ 
f@@.ling. From Lambert, he learns of her <planned> wedding with 
Bioring. (Bioring's affairs have picked up.) Home. A terrible night 
of <inner> struggle. The image of a conflagration. 
On the following morning, the news of everybody's arrest. (A 
strange note from the Prince.) Suddenly, I felt like fleeing. Flee, but 
then there is Makar. I've got 300 rubles. Rent a flat. To Makar, or 
to Lambert, and that's it. Makar's sudden death. [Versilov embraces 
my mother. "Come to my place, I'll show you <my> child." At home, 
the confession. The Youth is deeply moved, and reconciled <to 
Versilov>: "I shall return the document to her." Frightful pangs of 
conscience on account of the conflagration. A horror of Lambert. I 
shall never forget these moments of gratitude which I felt toward 
Versilov for this purification.] 
Versilov's confession. On the day of the funeral, he chops up those 
icons. [And then, already after the chopping, the letter.] 
[Here: Anna Andreevna had actually been sending <me?> there 
on account of Lambert. She had also been trying to find out some 
things about Lambert herself (not necessary to mention the fact that 
Lambert had been previously acquainted with Versilov). Then, when 
the Youth is at Lambert's, the latter is talking mostly about the docu­
ment, and mysteriously in a general way. There seems to be a mystery 
everywhere. The Youth lets <the reader?> know that, although he 
had inadvertently let out the secret of the document before Lambert, 
he also realized that this was really all that Lambert "·as after. Lam­
ben arranges for the Youth to come and see him, then later goes to 
look for him himself. The Youth wants to rent a flat. Dreams of a 
conflagration. Again, he meets Lambert. They quarrel in the street. 
He goes home. Makar's death. Versilov embraces . <the Youth's> 
mother, and says to him: "To me, to me."] 
10) At Lambert's, drunk, they cut open <his pocket>. The old 
Prince, the police station, struggle. Conflagration, etc. 
27 July. 
Final minute.* 
• In French. 

The Thicket 483 
2d chapter. About Liza. Briefly and completely, yet in a business­
like manner, and abruptly. " I  decided to get busy as soon as.I got up. 
I decided not to do any thinking. Imagined myself <in such-and-such 
situations>. <Decided> not to discuss her with V࿬rsilov." (A flashing 
thought: 'Vhat is Versilov's attitude toward :\lakar Ivanovich?) A 
propos: about His letter to Bioring. ֆastasia's visit. ֆ ews, in great 
excitement. 'Vent to see Makar. Tatiana's story, about Liza, form an 
alliance with her. "\Ve have both been insulted." One of :\fakar 
Ivanovich's stories, "Makar Ivanovich, have you ever seen anything 
of this kind?" (Tatiana's question), and here then, Makar's story. 
I got up and left. This time, I liked the old man very much. Versi­
lov's opinion of Makar. Suddenly asked Versilov about the harmo­
nious life. 
That night, excitement. About the document (was I really jealous?) 
iR tR.e form of a RigR.tmare A nightmare. Lured her <to his flat> in 
order to rape her, and Lambert. 
3d <chapter>. As a result of such anguish, a relapse. ('Til return 
the document!") Evenings. Stories. Versilov on communism. Mother. 
["There's a thicket inside him."] * Tatiana would join us on those 
nights. [At this point, all of a sudden, Liza's episode with Vasin, the 
Prince is jealous.] [I am going to step out tomorrow.] Suddenly I gave 
Versilov my opinion regarding the harmonious life. 
And, 4th <chapter>. I was going to surprise them the following 
day-by leaving the house. I stepped out and visited everybody. The 
Prince. The Prince wants to get married. To Tatiana. 
5th <chapter>. I came in-Makar. Shouldn't Liza's episode -wifi­
¥asfi.take place earlier, and now the Prince is jealous, and only then, 
Makar about that little closet* *  and about Liza. The thicket. Let's go 
on a pilgrimage. I am delighted. Versilov. At night, mental anguish. 
Btt I Has ai'lertea. On the following day, Vasin's arrest Tl'le SlOF}' of 
Liza aRa VasiR. VasiR's arest. The PriRee's maHiage. Confused. 
\VeRt oHt. Encounter with Lambert. A conversation. Acquainted with 
Versilov. Blackmail. About the document. 
Then: a feeling of moral deformity. On to Makar. Makar's sudden 
death. 'Vhile Makar is laid out-Versilov comes in-the Confession. 
On the following day, at Anna Andreevna's. A letter containing a 
• See n. (•), p. 461, abO\·e. 
• • Could also be "cage." 

484 Revenge on Her 
marriage proposal. ;\lakar's funeral. Mother's name day. Chopping 
up the icons. 
Min11te (2d chapter). The Prince is a nonentity ... However, she 
was partly right (partly), because, actually, and everything considered, 
the Prince never really was altogether worthless, and indeed, pre­
sented me with a problem [by his person] for a long time to come ... 
However, I wanted to keep aloof from the Prince's affairs, as if none 
of it were any of my business, and I even tried to pretend that I wasn't 
a bit worried about what was going on, and if I really had started a 
conversation, I'd have [purposely] talked about zoology or the Roman 
empire, just to show that I had no desire to participate in any current 
affairs, and theirs least of all. 
I am talking merely about the act I was putting on, but then, 
Nastasia Egorovna's visit brought back the pain ... [About the docu­
ment. Take revenge on her.] I had everything ready-and I was 
anxious to get up as soon as possible. My heart began to palpitate, 
and I went to see Makar. Liza. "\Ve have both been disgraced." "I am 
too goodnatured." Here, all of a sudden, Versilov. His attitude 
toward Makar. He relates Tatiana's trial. Liza's quarrel with Makar. 
\Vhich means that we had been gathering around him even before. 
Versilov's opinion of him. "Tell us the end of that story about the 
merchant," said Tatiana. [About how Stebelkov has been arrested.] 
3d chapter. Recidive of <my> illness. Evenings. The document. 
About how Makar Ivanovich had many stories to tell. Lizaveta, etc. 
How Versilov would meddle in the conversation. Here, Versilov's 
opinion about him. My opinion, stated to Versilov, concerning the 
"moral disorder" of their life. 
4th chapter. (Yet Versilov had achieved his goal. By writing that 
letter he had stopped Bioring from marrying <her>.) I passed by 
everybody as I was leaving. I was in a hurry. The Prince (Liza is 
there), Vasin. The Prince is jealous of Vasin. To Anna Andreevna. 
About her. At Tatiana's-charity. 
5th chapter. I returned, Versilov and everybody else at Makar's. 
About communism, "There's a thicket inside him." Vasin proposes 
marriage to Liza. \Vent to see Lambert, then back home. Excitement, 
and hatred for her. 
6th <chapter>. Rapid narrative about how Dergachev and Vasin 
were arrested. The Prince gets married. News of Bioring's success, 
and about his encounter with Versilov, or something lilu that. A feel­
ing of "moral disorder," restlessness. Back to Makar. l\Iakar's sudden 
death. 

Stebelkov 485 
[psychology] 7th <chapter>. On the day of Makar's ࿭funeral 
-H-e-I went to see him. Confession. Everything is said, and nothing is 
made clear.* Regeneration. About Lambert and Vcrsilov. 
8th <chapter>. OR the follmviRg da}', Anna ARdreevRa. Three 
days later, a lot of fuss and excitement around the house: Versilov is 
gone. Anna Andreevna, His letter to her. Lambert with Anna An­
dreevna. Mother's name day, chopping up the icons. 
9<th chapter>. A depressed feeling. His rendezvous with Her. 
(Occasioned by her engagement to Bioring.) 
Vasin to Liza: "It is unwise to love the Prince. You are mistaken in 
your feelings." 
The Prince to the Youth: "I want you to he my witness." He tells 
the Prince about Makar. 
Like an entrefilet11 in a newspaper. 
"\Vhat did I know? Me, I knew the dream." 
"So you denounced these people solely to get rid of your enemy, 
Vasin?" 
Stebelkov. He denounced <those other people> in order to ease 
his own position.** 
The finger. Calmed him down, talked about Zershchikov; he had 
forgotten, refreshed his memory. "All right then, and how are you 
now, my dear Arkady Makarovich? Let us now pass on to the main 
point." Vinegar. God knows what about the main point-live in 
Northern parts,*** with Liza. "And Liza, Liza-are you taking her 
• Difficult to translate: the original has the verb govorit', "to speak," with two 
different prefixes: Vse vyskazano i nichego ne doskazano. 
• • There follow some entries in chaotic disorder: "they want to organize a 
latrine," "this is as clear as day," "the whole value of the document," "The sordid­
ness Stebelkov of these crooks and, perhaps, a whole gang of crooks, better to­
gether with me. This is why she was calling me so. But on the day I left the house 
he did not try to contact her. Regarding this particular thing he had he did not 
ftwe.his own plan. But, first of all <?>, let me repeat, this is an entrefilet. I knew 
nothing-But I had a premonition on account of that dream. Now I shall begin 
right where it all started. It started from a distance. I had not left the house yet. 
LiЇ:s, Vsin Mother's name day. When he could already see that I could be talked 
to in clear terms, then Anna Andreevna, too. Why should I be listening-if he's a 
scoundrel as you say. This is quite intolerable, to insult a person in this fashion. 
Oh, I was then talking as if in a delirium, saying that I felt insulted by Bioring, 
and what's more, at Lambert's, I was in a state of ecstasy. Then, I could have 
never imagined it, but now I know for sure that he had gotten on the tracks of 
this thing even while I was still ill. But even after the good French fashion, your 
surname; it is so important that you did not tell it." 
••• Euphemistic for "Siberia." 
11 French: "Newspaper item." 

486 The Plot, a Strugg/(' 
along, to ruin?" He got up without a word, turned around, grabbed 
his head, sat down again. )·ou're not so ''I'm dreaming of spiders all 
the time. You wouldn't believe how much she means to me." 
"You are all excited." "l"o, allow me, we must reach a decision." 
Again about Zershchikov. Stebelkov is a pig, but about ِIakar. "Oh 
yes, let it be; well, you know, it's just I am that way." 
I got up. "Spare Liza, and good-bye, I find it painful to look at you." 
Vasin. 
"Have you made out the main thing-my son?" Bioring and the 
Akhmakov woman. Nastasia Egorovna. "Do you remember Nastasia 
Egorovna?" "Oh yes. I'm quite sure. I also used to know a certain old 
man. Oh yes, right here, a guard." 
Vasin. The insult. I was getting ready to leave. Liza was lying 
there. OR the followiRg day, Liza. Ίfakar Ivanovich about Mother. 
Mother's name day. (Versilov and ևlather.) The end of my life is at 
hand. On ti'le followiRg day Liza. An impression on Liza. She began 
to cry, went upstairs. On the following day, insulted by the Prince. On 
<her?> knees before Makar. Doesn't know life. Heard that Vasin has 
been arrested. 
Liza: "Be at his place tomorrow." 
Night, She, am I in love? Evil spirits. The plot, a struggle. The day 
I left the house ti'le plot. The young Prince. He betrayed <them?> 
ARRa ) .. Rdreevna a woTRaR's inʻueRce sceRes The Youth is told about 
their intrigues, i.e., Versilov <tells him>. About "that business," con­
temptuously about Anna Andreevna. Stebelkov had told <him?> 
about Bioring. At llefore Anna Andreevna's, a woman. Explanation 
of their plot (BY THE NARRATOR). (About Bioring)? About Lambert. 
5th chapter. Lambert. Blackmail. An affair. 
"What is she thinking of me?" A student. 
I am now embarking upon the catastrophe. It started at a distance. 
Vasin, etc. ... (learned from Mother). Then, at l\Iakar's. Mother. 
Liza on her knees before Makar. Liza leaves, greatly shaken. 
N.B. And this is where it happens! Night. An evil spirit. She leaves, 
etc. 
. On the following day (more rapidly). News of <his> arrest. On 
<her> knees before ΊJakar. They have been arrested. (He does not 
know people.) ِJakar orders her to get married. "Give me your 
blessings for my many sufferings." An oration, admonitions to me, 
to her, about Liza. "Dear Sir," etc. "The end of my life is at hand." 
"You know, they have been arrested." 

The Whole Idea 
487 
Through my dream, I understood Lambert's role. Through my 
dream about the document, I both knew, and didn't. 
An idea: Should I start with an explanation of Lambert's scheme, 
when I was at Lambert's? (I had a premonition. Through that dream.) 
And that's it. Now let me start. It all started at a distance, Vasin, etc. 
But the dream before I left the house, and evil spirits. "\Vhat, _in 
particular, is she thinking of me?" The catastrophe. However, I must 
anticipate a part of my explanation, otherwise I won't manage to tell 
it properly. At the time, of course, I knew nothing at all, but I am 
going to explain that which I know now. (More briefly.) Lambert. 
Blackmail. (More briefly.) All frozen stiff, he lets out the secret. 
About her. "Now, now," he shouted, "really, what am I doing? 
There, read this!" he threw the letter to me. "Nastasia Egorovna!" he 
shouted and left the room. 
I say, he has forgiven my mother. She has put a stop to my wander­
ings, to my anguish. Tatiana. This is a nice woman. She loves the 
poet in me. "I love you for your whimsical traits." To write, grammar, 
she began to cry. In creatures such as Makar you will find the kingdom 
of Heaven. I am lower than anything, lower than anybody. I love 
children. Laughter, she is cheerful. "I'll go in," and the other 
woman < . . .  > 
THE WHOLE IDEA. 
A passion for Mother. 
"I must make at least one person happy. And suddenly-passion." 
"At times, a cerebral and a generous love, and at times, very real 
love. You, generous and cerebral person that you are, couldn't go 
through with this thing." 
"I do not think so, my boy." Sunken cheeks. "I realized that 
Mother's return was the best thing about all my wanderings. I'll do 
away with Mother's fear, I'll show myself with all my shortcomings. I'll 
explain to her how, in a sense, she stands above me. I barely made it 
to Konigsberg. All the time, I loved her while away from her. All of 
a sudden I felt that I needed her." 
"She is in my way )'et this was a love at oRe time. But this is not 
love. Was at least one person ever happy? <?> No, it began all of a 
sudden, from love. Memories of a kiss. He shudders. 
I was looking at him, enraptured. 
He was telling me anecdotes; he wasn't going to let me go. Accom­
pany me. "Stay for a while, why won't you stay!" About Lambert 
About Lambert. 

'188 Enumeration of Events 
"Oh, let it he blessed, and even though other things may have 
happened thereafter, that evening will remain." 
Perhaps all this is merely the portrait of a bookish man, but why 
is it that only these bookish, these "paper" people go through so much 
real suffering, and why do some very real tragedies occur among 
these people? Chastity and pride. 
Finis. Ήlost of all, his humility before me, his sincerity before 
such a boy. 
8th chapter. Now I shall try to finish my account by way of a very 
concise narrative. 
This is how everything happened. She knew through Lambert. The 
whole fact of <her?> perfection is colossal. His face darkened. "But 
how is that?" However, he revealed it to me. ࿮met her. Told 
<me?> about Lidiia, etc., the chains, the slap in the face. Now Bio­
ring. "You think so" (bis). He jumped up from his chair: "There, 
read it, read it!" (her letter). "And so what, a story, <I> felt nothing. 
\Vent to see Ίfather. Death. "Oh, I sent her my blessings." (About 
life.) "Oh you did?" .L\'ot yet, though." 
The historical <aspect>. 
Levin. 
Look at Versilov and his family. And therefore, if the novelist is a 
youth, an accidental family. "You there, you are an accidental 
family." 
1st embryo of a plan. 
10 days of illness. 
[3 weeks] 1st half of part three. (Enumeration of events.) Ίfakar and 
Versilov. Liza and her sallies. Vasin and the news of Kolosov and the 
other people arrested. Tatiana and her maid. Anna Andreevna 
(Bioring, news about her). A fatal heart attack. Lambert. (A scene 
with her, at Tatiana's. A bit of charity, in passing.) [a week) (Chop­
ping up the icons. Versilov is gone.) A letter to her, containing a mar­
riage proposal. Hatred. To Lambert. Telling <him?> of the plan. 
Lambert about Anna Andreevna. Almost an agreement. Antics Ver­
silov's antics at the old Prince's (they want to lock him up). At­
llioring's. [a week] The old Prince flees to the Youth's place of his 
own accord, so that Anna Andreevna does not have to do a thing. 
Bioring and she tear the Prince away from the Youth by giving him 
a promise that the old Prince will get married. Versilov goes to see 
Bioring and unsettles him. Versilov, the letter witH. tJ.:te ffiarriage сro 
posal. Rendezvous. The }·oung Prince on trial. The Youth's agreement 
regarding the letter. \Vith Lambert, but finally he decides to go it 

Lambert 489 
alone. (Liza, etc. Mother.) Versilov, a meeting with her. The Youth 
witnesses it [2 weeks] He withdraws into himself, gives up his <form­
er> intentions. He goes to see Tatiana. The }'otng Prince on trial. (Al­
phonsine's treachery. All the scenes of the conflagration.) The young 
Prince on trial, and he shoots himself. 
<July> 27/28. 
Last minute.* 
But Lambert! Lambert! Who is Lambert? The conflagration, a 
dream, at the end of chapter two, a relapse. Makar's tales. He puts his 
dream aside. 
3d chapter. Liza, suddenly, to him: "We- The Prince is calling you 
(tomorrow)." To Versilov, on the harmonious life, a tirade. But on 
the following day, the Prince has made his denunciation. Anna An­
dreevna. Lambert. Goes to see Lambert. The document, conflagra­
tion. He leaves-horror. Find a flat. To Makar. Comes there. Makar. 
"My little closet."* *  Makar's sudden death. Sundown. Versilov em­
bracing Mother. Liza her brother. Suddenly, Tatiana. Sternly. "Come 
here, come here (to me)." He: "Why, everybody here is worrying ... " 
Went <there>, and "charity." He is crying about "the harmonious 
life." Failed to hand over the document. Leaves, runs into Versilov­
"Come to me, to me." All this, the first day he leaves the house. See 
Basic ideas. Versilov's role in chapter three, see Basic ideas. 
August 1. 
3d part, 2d chapter. Before he leaves he gives Versilov a tirade on 
the harmonious life in no uncertain terms, even though he had 
promised not to say a word. Versilov's "you are right" leaves him 
stunned. The dream. 
3d part. In chapter three. Now I shall leave my own inner life. 
I'll say just one thing: I had already been stung by the serpent, and I 
was guarding my wound from everybody, as if it were a precious 
treasure. The impact of the dream was still present. "\Vhat she meant 
to me: I was in love, every bit of news about her would take my 
breath away, yet at the same time I-I was yearning for Lambert. 
There was that dream. 
[3d chapter] [Evenings and relationships] But I'll leave this for 
later, until the proper time. I shall now proceed to my description 
of those two men who have had the greatest impact on me in my life 
• In French. 
• • Or: "cage." 

490 
Versilov and Makar 
so far: 1\Jakar and Versilov. As for Versilov, my studies and observa­
tions are surprising indeed; as for i\fakar, this is what happened: in 
the beginning, and so long as he was hanging around right in front 
of me, it was as if I couldn't make him out. Even if I wasn't actually 
treating him with condescension, I was indifferent to him, and this 
in spite of the fact that during that particular period my heart was, 
imperceptibly to me, opening itself to many and immense <impres­
sions>: for my whole life, through Makar. However, I began to 
feel "this, and became aware of it, only much later, and for the time 
being I was behaving, as already said, with a certain condescension 
and without the proper attention, so much so that if there hadn't been 
Versilov's example, who was surprising me by his respectful attitude 
toward 1\Iakar, I might have failed to observe, and missed forever, 
many things. Right here, at this spot, Versilov's opinion of Makar 
Ivanovich. So then, what did actually happen? Nothing special, it 
would seem. \Ve got into the habit of getting together in the evening. 
Incidentally: if somebody should ask how it was possible that I 
should, after what I had stated about my relations with Versilov, 
and to him> too, and after the things I had come up with before my 
family, still participate in these evening gatherings, I will answer 
him as follows: Anything would be possible with Versilov. He was 
asking no questions, nor was he angry with me; he treated me exactly 
as before. This was his manner of being above things, and his perma­
nent attitude. But I was also getting to see some other attitudes 
toward me. (N.B. 1\lagnanimity toward the world, not getting angry 
with people, <is> one of his most captivating traits.) As for 1\lother 
and the others, they were, of course, feeling some compassion for a 
sick <member of the family>, as well as something else they must 
have agreed on concerning me. But for the time being I didn't really 
care. I was feeling drawn to something entirely new-something very 
firm, but something that I was postponing for the time being, so that 
I wouldn't even be thinking of it before I recovered from my illness. 
And so in the meantime I began to participate in their gatherings 
with undivided attention and without giving myself any airs; on the 
contrary, quite amiably and in friendly fashion. \Ve used to get 
together. Even the doctor. It started with some stories ... Versilov. 
Liza and Vasin. How he used to teach :\lother how to walk. "Our 
dear Andrei Petrovich, Sir." 
Liza: "Come to his place tomorrow." ?(From Tatiana: "Tomorrow 
at 7 o'clock P.:\L be at my place wil I be there?." "Liza, I'll be there, 
only don't tell anybody that I am going out.") The Prince left the 

"Everything Is Mystery" 
491 
house. Anna Andreevna (striking news and riddles, not a word about 
Lambert). To Lambert: at Lambert's, a terrible outburst of emotion, 
with eyes flashing, Mother. As <I> left, remorse over this fall, crossed 
<myself>, on the boulevard. ("Oh, there were many such moments 
of remorse in my life." The little beetle.) Oh, it is not frivolity on my 
part that makes transgression and remorse appear in such rapid suc­
cession: the punishment was already in my heart, even while it was 
still full of criminal intent, even as I was entering the door to 
Lambert's flat. It was just that my emotions had caught up with me 
after a hot pursuit; and when I develojJed this emotion before 
Lambert, punishment followed quite automatically, to counterbal­
ance it. [MOST IMPORTANT] 
The old Prince dies without having <re>married. Versilov an 
idiot. Finale. 
Bioring, while taking the old Prince away from the Youth's flat, 
terribly insults the Youth. 
"C' est le careme,"12 says the old Prince. 
I was very much irritated by their pity for me, and once when 
Mother gave me something to drink, I began to cry. Night, light. The 
idea of being resurrected to a new life. 
Silently; we must be silent now, never say a word, never. 
Makar: "An old man must be satisfied with just being alive. 
Enough!-Everything is good. An old man must die in the full flower 
of his wisdom, like a magnificent ripe fruit which has fulfilled its 
mystery." 
"\Vhat is a mystery?" 
"What is a mystery? Everything is a mystery." 
And Makar: "You are a youth, you are having it wonderful. But it 
is also wonderful that I have gotten up--1, an old man. I would like 
to live again. Life is ahead of you. An old man blesses sunset, but to 
live again would be good also. Perhaps this is a sinful thought." 
The Youth: "\Vhy sinful?" 
"I don't know, my friend, In my own opinion it is not. If some­
one were to raise a murmur, saying that life is too short, well, that 
would be sinful; but if it is without a murmur, while blessing the 
ray, the bounties of the Lord < . . .  >" 
Now about something entirely different. By the way, I'll say a word 
or two about myself (i.e., about the state of my mind). Now about 
12 French: "It is Lent." 

492 
The Epilogue 
something entirely different: a whisper, <I> came down-and later, 
after the scene with 1\lakar-about the state of my mind. 
August 2. 
Final division. 
I st half of pan three. Makar's death, and she steps out of the door. 
2d half of pan three: Prior to that night at Lambert's and about 
how they cut out the document. I.e., she. His confession-the funeral, 
chopping up the icons, at Tatiana's, Lambert, Anna Andreevna lets 
<me> eavesdrop on <their> confession rendezvous. A night at 
Lambert's. 
4th part, 1st half. The Prince at his place. The scene with Bio­
ring. The police station, and in the morning, at Tatiana's. Conflagra­
tion. 
2d half: Everything that's in the epilogue. 
See sheet 4. Silence and distrustfulness. Makar and accessories. ࿯ 
F@nd@t:.vous.) Versilov, the confession. Link up Tatiana and her cook 
<to the plot> better. Justice of the Peace. I am saying nothing about 
Liza. Narrative-Liza, sallies, Vasin, I went to see the Prince, Vasin. 
Meeting with Anna Andreevna (she herself calls me to her place). 
Took a letter containing his marriage proposal over there. • At this 
meeting, Anna Andreevna expresses herself unclearly. However, the 
Youth assures her that He hates Katerina Nikolaevna, and expounds 
his own theory about him to Anna Andreevna. I am excited. Makar's 
sudden death. First encounter with Lambert. Mother's birthday, the 
bouquet, chopping up the icons. 
After having left there, a sudden scene with Tatiana. Rendezvous 
and charity, Tatiana's confession. An old maid. Sheds tears. Discus­
sion about: Is He, or isn't He in love? (As a result of <his> conversa­
tion with Anna Andreevna, he is under <her> influence. Tatiana's 
true character is revealed.) Makar's sudden death. A decisive conver­
sation with him-1st half of part three-more rapidly and sticking to 
the main subject. Anna Andreevna calls him quickly, tells him about 
the letter containing a marriage proposal. He goes to see Lambert. 
Mother's birthday, the bouquet, chopping up the icons. Versilov is 
gone. Anna Andreevna, a rendezvous at Nastasia Egorovna's (the 
flat is being rented in Nastasia Egorovna's name, but by Versilov). 
Again, a meeting with Lambert. Almost an agreement. Suddenly, 
• The gender of the verb suggests that Anna Andreevna is the subject of this 
sentence. 

Denouement 493 
flight of the old Prince. (Versilov has given him a scare.) Anna An­
dreevna says: "I don't want it this way." Lambert. The Youth swears 
to save her. Bioring insults the Youth. The police station. (A lively 
scene.) Liza's wedding. End of part three. 
Makar, after the first scene, simply anecdotes, then about Liza and 
her relations. Tatiana and her cook. \Vith Versilov, about things con­
nected with Mother. Then, it was on that day that I left the house. 
Makar about Elias, Enoch-with Versilov about communism, with 
Lambert. On disorder and order. The Youth declares his love for 
Him to Him. Makar's death, a confession about feats. 
The Youth in the midst of a deep and decisive inner struggle: 
should he take his revenge, or should he persist in virtue. An aware­
ness of disorder. A decision in favor of withdrawing from people. 
(Makar and Versilov.) Order and disorder. The Youth has a hunch 
that all this disorder and mess has something to do with the <present> 
generation. He makes a generalization, integrates it, reducing it to 
our society and its laws. This is the most important page of the novel. 
He is, of course, struggling against the idea that Versilov is only 
an exception, an ideal. However, he suspects and then actually con­
cludes in his own mind that, in Russia, these ideals do in reality 
exist, that it is they who have such influence, that it is they who are 
playing a decisive role, for they are <Russia's> thermometer and ba­
rometer, and not any railwaymen or shyster lawyers, nor that old 
society of Levins (Count Tolstoi); also, that you won't get very far 
with these ideals. 
The good wins the upper hand. He goes to see Tatiana. He tells 
Tatiana about the document. A rendezvous with her. Lambert makes 
him drunk. An argument about <his> idea. He falls into Lambert's 
hands, drunk. He regains his senses, having lost the letter, but with­
out being aware of this. Rapid narrative about how they succeed in 
luring her to the flat, having tricked Tatiana into leaving it. The 
cook plays a role <in this>. The conflagration scene. lst half of part 
four. 
Denouement. The young Prince is released. Death of the old 
Prince. Her illness and her meeting with him. The image of Versilov­
the-idiot. The idea lies in the future. Tatiana's role. Liza's role. 2d 
half of part four (see 3d sheet). 
"\Vhy then, are angels sent down to Earth, if this is really so? You 
are an angel, consequently you haven't the power to do as you please, 
consequently you have an obligation by virtue of this very fact. You 
had an obligation." She to Him: "I am an ordinary woman. It is you 

494 
Extraordinarily Important 
who elevated me to being an angel. \Vhy, besides, there aren't any 
angels." 
"How much pride there is in these words." 
She: "Leave me alone, leave me alone! I find it hard to stand your 
presence." 
He: "Beware!" 
She: "I know that you are capable of everything; but I am not 
afraid. I can't be afraid. I am in the right." 
1Uost important. The Youth observes, on his own pan: "All these 
declarations of his, the whole impatience of his declarations-all this 
was so naive and ingenuous that I felt charmed and full of compassion 
for him." And later: "It was truly a strange man who was showing 
himself there: naive like a child, ingenuously impatient, with a deep 
content inside, and the most childlike external form, so that even 
I could understand him." 
Extraordinarily important: 
I wanted to put him to the test: "Let's go and perform some feats." 
"Let's go." 
"Are you really serious?" 
Toward the very end, the Youth finds out that (contrary to Lam­
bert's banal view) she isn't really too afraid of the document. But he 
is begging Tatiana to arrange for a rendezvous between him and her 
at Tatiana's flat, solely so that he can explain things to her, tell her 
the whole truth, and return the document to her, after having pleaded 
guilty before her. And not at all with the idea of frightening her. 
6th chapter. "But you are good children .. . " Makar Ivanov (about 
his wife). "It is all my fault, for it was I who allowed this to happen. 
(His wife with Versilov.) Should have used the rod. But I felt sorry 
for you. Forgive me, my children, forgive me, my dear ones. And for­
give me, too, Sir, for the rod should have been applied to you, too, 
for even though I should not have used it in a bodily way, I could 
have spiritually. And why not even in a bodily way? Even thanvould 
have been possible, for, though gracious, and given to new ideas, 
<you> still would have sent <me> to Siberia." 
"As she threw herself on the ground before me .fi., in the store­
room, kissing my feet... the Lord will forgive! (Giving her a tender 
look) Listen, Sofiia, don't blame yourself. The sin was mine. The 
husband is head: understand that." 
"And she (Stinking Eliza veta) heard a voice: 'Keep silent, wild one.' " 
During his confession there suddenly became apparent about Versilov 
something which he wasn't aware of himself--something frightfully 

Beginning of the Second Part 
495 
small, whereas I had always thought that there would be something 
great. 
Anna Andreevna. "I am motivated by the most sacred of feelings." 
"He is compromising us too much." 
"You are having an extraordinary influence on him." 
"l-Ie is compromising us too much." 
"You are his favorite child." 
Nastasia Egorovna joined Anna Andreevna's household, i.e., to nurse 
the infant. 
".Maximum! I have sworn to protect her!" 
1'\.B. Versilov had explained to Lambert the irRportance the mean­
ing of the document, and Lambert knew where the document was. 
Regarding the confession. The Youth is telling the story of Versilov 
and her from his own point of view, but interspersed with His words. 
Order: First the letter with the marriage proposal. Then, Anna 
Andreevna summons the Youth and shows him the letter. 
(End of conversation ex abru pto.) Then, Anna Andreevna 
let him eavesdrop on the rendezvous. Then, when the old 
Prince has run away, Anna Andreevna takes fright: "/ don't 
want it to be that way." 
To Makar. Only at this minute is this old man (dear to us). His 
death. Tatiana is not present. "\Vent to see Tatiana. "Listen, you, stay 
here," and she left. I was crying. 
That night, at Versilov's (during the Confession), I finally found 
out who Makar really was, and, also from Versilov, a complete under­
standing of him, one might say. 
IMPORTA;>.;T. 
Start the 2d half of part three this way: ::'\ow only the facts, and 
there couldn't be a more suitable matter to begin with than an expo­
sition of that momentous event, an exposition which has been pre­
pared without my heart having any part in it, as if I weren't actually 
reporting it either, but as if it were some entrefilet1;; from a news­
paper. And here then, the news of Bioring and a positive announce­
ment of their wedding. I shall add nothing more. I knew nothing of 
all this just a few days earlier, but l\Iother was sad. Versilov is not 
there. A strange welcome. Lambert. A quarrel with Lambert. The 
funeral and the bouquet: factual description a Ia Shakespeare. On the 
13 French: "ֶewspaper item." 

496 Psychological Arrangement 
following day, from Anna Andreevna, the secret about Bioring. The 
harmonious life exemplified by Makar, disorder exemplified by Ver­
silov. The Youth wants to escape from disorder. 
Ps)·clzological arrangement. At first, the Youth is under the influ­
ence of an evil emotion (revenge) and so becomes involved with 
Lambert, actually communicating his project to him. But after his 
meeting with her (charity), after that scene with Versilov, after 
Makar's death, and finally, after the breaking of the icons and the 
flight of the old Prince-THE YOUTH IS SUDDE:'I:LY STU:'I::'I:ED BY THE 
:\lORAL DEFOR:\IITY OF THIS MILLIEU, he becomes devoted to her, swears 
that he will protect her honor, and this in spite of the fact that he was 
insulted by Bioring and <had spent a night> at the police station. 
However, he sees in this only order} that is, in returning good for 
evil. But after that night at the police station, very much excited, he 
spends a night at Lambert's place, and it is there that the latter cuts 
open his pocket. N .B. That same night he learns from Lambert that 
the latter is acquainted with Versilov. Lambert had made VERSILov's 
ACQUAI;\;TA;\;CE much earlier, while <the Youth> was sick in bed: 
Lambert used to come and see <him>.) The Youth tells, from his 
own point of view, how Lambert and the others got it all set up. 
In the end, the Youth feels insulted, but withdraws into himself. 
<His> idea, more than ever before. SoLITUDE. The child. He becomes 
attached to the child. 
Versilov, an idiot} kissing Mother's hands and praying. 
Afaximum. Contacts with Tatiana, and an explanation from Tat­
iana. The old maid (cries). Tatiana used to be in love with Versilov. 
2d chapter. N.B. Versilov has one principal point, which is: Her 
marriage to Bioring. This he cannot stand. He would have left her 
alone, if she had remained single. 
"How is it that you are the permanent guardian of my conscience 
and of my morals," she says to Him, "who gave you this assignment? 
And why is it that it is I whom you must absolutely save?" 
¥es-The Youth to :\fakar: "Say, you are wrong here, you are mis­
quoting the text." 
Makar: "\Vhy, you may be right. I am not a learned man. There 
you have it, he's set me straight. Sman boy." 
\Vhat purpose do Vasin and Dergachev serve in this novel? 
Answer: As an accessory which sets off the figure of the Youth so 
much more clearly, and as a motive for that definitive discussion 
between the Youth and HI:\1. 
[4th chapter] It is now time to admit something: why did I write 
these notes? I was struck by that disorder 
.• Oh yes, I was very angry 

Order and Disorder 497 
even at school; yet, before I came to Petersburg I really knew noth­
ing. I imagined some things to be even worse, I did imagine villains, 
but I was thinking that all men, villains and good men alike, have 
something in common, something which they respect, something 
which they hold sacred and about which they have no arguments. 
Versilov's moral disorder} that absence of principles. Makar alone is 
in order, but is he possible <as a contemporary man>? My mother 
alone is a saint, but how does she live? I came to have great faith in 
her} but how does she live, what goals does she have? She'll be at my 
feet on account of that document. Most important. N .B. The reason 
why he is so glad to have <his> idea is that she does not fear the docu­
ment. To her} Bioring means strict order, while "the world is dis­
organized and depraved" (she says that herself) "and everything in it 
is in ferment, and nothing is really there in it." "I am thirsting for 
order," she says (to Versilov), "And I, too, am thirsting for order." It 
develops that the Youth has picked up the word disorder from her. 
She had already talked about it to Versilov during their rendezvous, 
which the Youth had secretly witnessed. She has this to say about 
Bioring (to Versilov): "He is honest, a man of strict, old-fashioned 
principles, even educated, definitely no fool, and what's most impor­
tant, a German, not a Russian. For with a Russian, things are always 
in disorder, Russians know no order." Though she is saying this in a 
half-mocking tone, the Youth later thinks to himself, it sounded a 
lot as if she actually felt that way. 
[2d chapter] Versilov himself, guiding the Youth, imperceptibly, to 
the conclusion that Makar is "impossible," suddenly has this to say 
about Makar: 
"WHY, HE ACTUALLY DOES NOT KNOW LIFE AT ALL." 
What he has failed to mention, though, is the fact that, although 
Makar may not know life, the very possibility of his appearance 
among people is incomparably more useful than He, Versilov, with 
all his "knowledge of life," and with his desperation, directly emanat­
ing from such knowledge. 
VBrsile"b' The Youth to Anna Andreevna (when the old Prince has 
just run away) : "I don't know, Anna Andreevna, but I am constantly 
struck by the disorder of our society. As long as everything remains 
within an official and prescribed framework, Russian man and the 
Russian family retain the semblance of some kind of order. But the 
moment a misfortune befalls them, all this will immediately become 
apparent-that total absence of any moral foundation-and disorder 
will set in ... " This, he says to Versilov, and coNTINUALLY after Makar 
<begins to exert an influence on him>. 
Versilov, in his confession: "She was watching me with a mocking 

498 
The Idea of Revenge 
smile, and the closer I looked at her, the more I saw that laughter in 
her face." 
During his meeting with her} Versilov tells her that she is perfection 
itself (he had been telling the Youth that she had all the vices). She 
tells Him that she is a very sinful woman, but that he would very 
much like to find some particular vice in her, so as to smother her 
reputation with it. 
"Let's rather be friends," she tells Him (Irkutsk), "I am going to 
respect you. It's a lot better this way, than living in disorder. I am not 
getting married just to settle down; I am looking for some order, I 
don't love Bioring at all." 
As he is leaving her} Versilov accuses her of being ready, for the 
sake of acquiring a position in society, to come up with a vile action 
and to betray her conscience (i.e., let herself be raped by Lambert 
just to get that document, all the vices), which is also why he incites 
Lambert to give it a try. 
To the very end, the Youth is possessed by the somber idea of 
taking revenge on someone (he has picked her to be his victim). :B+H­
He communicates his entire plan to Versilov hut Versilov prefers 
LaFBbert to fiiFB, at white heat (to which end he goes to see Him and 
finds Him in some dive, especially after having been insulted by 
Bioring). Versilov, it seems, is ready to go along with him, but then 
he prefers Lambert to him. This leaves the Youth [Jadly shaken. Even 
before Alphonsine<'s visit>, he had been struggling with himself all 
night (i.e., should he, or shouldn't he start that conflagration?), and 
suddenly, Alphonsine. He runs over to Tatiana, etc. The whole 
scheme. Having communicated his plan to Versilov for the first time, 
the Youth leaves him in a sad mood: \Vhy did He agree? "All right, let 
me be vile, but not Him," and here, a night of vacillation; he [finally] 
decides to go it alone, without Him. Sneering at the world. And then, 
suddenly, Alphonsine. 
IN HIS CONFESSION, Versilov makes this important admission : 
"Makar has had an impact on me during my entire life. Let's go on 
together. I am renouncing the demon (she)!" 
[2d part] "Demon, demon! Minutes of happiness, life be blessed, 
let's drink to this." Makar: "To Mother."* 
At the end of the 2d chapter of part three, and throughout the third 
chapter: "Lambert, Lambert, what is Lambert? (N.B. \Vhy should I 
• Or: "Let's drink to this, Makar, to Mother." 

Lambert Knows Everything 199 
be afraid of Lambert? I am stronger than he!)." Suppositions, dreams, 
and convulsions, along with being deeply moved by Makar. 
In the 3d chapter. Every time I returned deeply moved by Makar's 
stories, but at night, dreams, voluptuous dreams, finally (return the 
document!) a decision, evil spirits, and good ones. With Versilov, 
abo!lt communism. But he does not discuss Makar with Him prior to 
his confession. On the day he leaves the house. "Do not visit 
Lambert!" But he did go, and he dirtied himself. To Makar! Sunset. 
The Youth, as he is quarreling with Lambert: "Look, friend, I am 
now stronger than you." 
At Lambert's, during his first visit. His friends, a breakfast with 
champagne, then the lure: "You'll get your revenge, and I'll get my 
money. You'll get the higher, and I the lower, thing." 
N.B. Here. "No, you're just a youth, you are still little. \Ve had 
that one-such virtue-and the same kind as this one of yours, too; 
yet she began to tremble all over when we threatened to make every­
thing public. She was quite docile. We took both one thing, and the 
other, and money. Now she is a society lady, inaccessible, all virtue. 
Fie, the devil, if you had only seen what barn it was, where it all hap­
pened. What barns they wouldn't shun, these ladies! [Alphonsine 
occasionally goes to Tsarskoe Selo, bringing <her> some toys.]" 
("We've got a gang-leader-a whole story.") "I am leaving for Amer­
ica. They are depraved to the core. I've been thinking of that!" the 
Youth keeps exclaiming. 
N.B. Lambert: "Is she pretty?" 
The Youth: "She is." 
Lambert: "I have seen her." 
The Youth: "I know that you have seen her." 
And again, and again: "I've been thinking of that, I've been think­
ing of that!" And later, as he is leaving, desperate about having 
soiled himself, he keeps exclaiming: "Yes, I have already become 
depraved IT!yself, I've been thinking of this, and when? When 
Makar was telling his touching stories! I've been thinking of it every 
night" (good and evil spirits). Remorse: "To Makar! to Makar!" 
Sunset. 
With Lambert. Lambert simply takes him under his wing and it 
turns out that he already knows everything. "I've been expecting 
you." A sensation: "TheJtgh It was giving me great pleasure to 
work hand in hand with him. This pleasure was being enhanced by 
the thought that, so far, I was still independent, and that I was doing 
everything of my own free will." 

500 Lambert's Plans 
Lambert is in possession of some details about her, he shines <with 
his knowledge>; Lambert has got everything arranged; he has spread 
his nets everywhere-he even knows Bioring. 
Lambert: "(You could even marry her.) Doesn't she love you? 
Doesn't she? Haven't you been telling me that she does?" 
"That was then, when I was delirious." 
"You could marry her, but then you really ought to rule her with 
an iron rod. These noble ladies must be treated despotically." The 
idea of marrying her pierced my heart with a voluptuous feeling. Oh, 
I was stupid. Let me note here this terrible stupidity of mine: I was 
dreaming of marriage even when I was only 16. This hit of informa­
tion really ought to be crossed out. But all right, let it stand. [Very 
important.] I gave Lambert a look; <he?> was serious. "Versilov 
hates her. Hates her." 
The Youth to Lambert, about him and about her: "There is an ani­
mosity between them, animosity, such animosity, that I have actually 
lost track. I've been watching them, but quit. fl:ett Only it is a terrible 
enmity, of that old-fashioned kind, on account of something exalted, 
some kind of nonsense, in the Romantic style of the forties." 
"\Ve shall save her from his revenge." 
"But what if I have such a document?" I shouted, with my eyes 
flashing. 
Lambert: "Do you really think I don't know that you've got it? You 
told me yourself, didn't you?" 
"When? While I was delirious?" 
"Yes." 
Lambert: "You are very kind, yeH are geRerem." 
The Youth: "Yes, I am kind." 
Lambert: "You are generous." 
The Youth: "Oh, I am generous." 
Lambert: "I saw her, but she didn't see me. It is important that she 
shouldn't see me." 
"Only you're stupid, Lambert, that's what; really, you don't under­
stand a thing of what I'm saying." 
Lambert does not argue the point. 
In chapter three, Versilov's role, communism, inevitability, eco­
nomic overcrowdedness in the world. Suffocation (a fantastic picture, 
with brilliance). 
"The Lord will save us, He will send us something." 
Political ideas. Talked about the future of Russia, about wealth. 
Versilov about the Chinese. 

After the Confession 501 
N.B. All this together<is> two chapters. Lambert, also a separate 
chapter. 
AFTER THE RENDEZVOUS SCENE, and SO to the very end, the Youth 
is tormented by the thought that he loves the woman with whom his 
father is also in love. That drunken night at Lambert's he hated 
<Him?> for this. But he has a change of heart and loathes himself 
for it the next day. 
In the beginning of chapter three. Versilov came to my place and 
timidly said: "Makar Ivanovich is asking for you. \Ve have decided 
to keep it secret from your mother. Be patient, my friend, if you can. 
And if you can, please come down and join <them>." 
I was moved ... I'll say nothing about myself. 
And then, throughout the chapter: And later: he returns, and a 
dream, a dream, a different, bestial dream, how could hell get on 
with paradise so well? 
[3d part. More briefly] For the first time I was observing myself 
with some puzzlement. 
I should have placed some value on Versilov's feelings toward my 
mother, but even then I didn't know everything, and the rest was a 
part of me.* 
AFTER THE CONFESSION. "Qh, blessed be this minute, Versilov. +fie. 
ffleflery The memory of those great moments. N' o matter what would 
happen later ... I regret that I started these notes in this tone of a raw 
youth. Yet, I do have some things to remember, too!" 
6EPIERAI:. TIOU611T5 
IN HIS CONFESSION Versilov speaks with enthusiasm of the sincerity 
of a youth (about Diakov, etc.), about Mother, about her purity. 
"Long live everything great!" "What is great?" "Sincerity." 
3d CHAPTER. Not a word about myself. I was well again after three 
days. A feeling of convalescence. Versilov came to my room: "Makar 
Ivanovich is asking for you. Be careful." I am not describing it in 
consecutive order. I was feeling attracted by the old man. Versilov's 
opinion. I would have liked to ask him: "Aren't you envious?" But 
I found it impossible: obvious sincerity. I was surprised by his defer­
ence. Stories. Tatiana. Stinking Lizaveta. "There is understanding 
in you." N.B. These few days, oh, blessed be ... A different Versilov, 
evenings, Mother. This old man. Versilov's opinions. We did a lot 
of talking. But I no longer was afraid to talk. All this was only about 
• Unclear in the original. 

502 
The Finale 
Roman emperors, and such things. :'\ot a word about her, and I was 
feeling at ease. Arguments. Politics. Mother. \'ersilov about socialism. 
Soon, Mother's name day; ;'\fakar about :\lather's childhood. The 
episode with Vasin. Thereupon, their arrest. Liza insulted, the mar­
riage. Versilov: "He can't tell her a thing, he does not know life." 
Liza at ;'\lakar's, tears, Liza. "All kinds of grief will pass, Job had chil­
dren," \'ersilov ("I'll get married"). I to Liza: "Tomorrow I shall go 
out, only don't tell anyone." Good spirits and evil. Lambert, the 
crime, and this immediately after the scene at ;'\fakar's. 
THE CHILDRE:\' OF JOB. 4<th chapter>. Going out. 
After the meeting with Lambert in chapter four. Dirtied myself. 
But something was pulling me toward that snake pit with a furious 
vehemence, with a voluptuous feeling, and a sinking heart. I wanted 
to escape from that moral deformity and ended up by outdoing all 
the others. I was frightened. I got scared. To Makar. 
BASIC IDEAS. 
In chapter three: "\Vhat cottld she have been thinking of me?" 
(Ever since that first letter to Bioring). 
In chapter four, after Lambert, returning to ;'\fakar. "They've got 
a scheme, a scheme! Run." 
[HERE] Il\' THE FI:\'ALE. When did the old Prince flee? his flight 
takes place in the morning. Lambert, together with Anna Andreevna, 
but he cheats her right there: He had promised her that, upon the 
old Prince's flight, he would confirm him in his ideas by showing him 
the document. But what actually happened was that the night before, 
having gained possession of the document, Lambert decided to wait 
and not show it to the old Prince, fflt. figuring that Anna Andreevna 
might not marry <him> after all, for some reason or other; so that, 
in that case, he couldn't collect on her I.O.U. But having the docu­
ment in hand, he decided to better wait another day or so and try to 
sell the document to her: collecting on an 1.0. U. of hers would be a 
much surer thing. In the meantime Anna Andreevna has already 
given the old Prince a bad scare by telling him t-Hat orally that the 
document exists and that she is going to show it to him, as soon as 
he runs away. But the document ne,·er is produced. And then, Bioring 
appears on the scene, and the Prince leaves, angry at Anna Andreevna 
because he thinks that she has deceived him. However, the Prince 
had been frightened more than one might have expected beforehand. 
\Vhen Bioring appeared, he embraced him with tears of remorse, tell­
ing him about the document, and that he had been deceived. All this 
day Anna Andreevna was pestering Lambert, urging him to let her 

Understanding Makar 503 
have the document as promised. But Lambert failed to show up, 
giving as an excuse that it was the Youth who had the document. The 
Youth, in turn, proudly declares to Anna Andreevna that he's got 
the document in his pocket and that he is not going to give it to 
anybody. Yet it is he again who is insulted by Bioring, after having 
acted in this fashion. 
3d chapter. One more programme. 
[I've gotten up and I'm not going back to bed again. I am putting 
this down because everything that happened then meant the forma­
tion of something new, the formation of a <new> life.] 
Convalescence. Strength. Versilov comes to see me: "Makar Ivano-
vich is asking for you." Makar Ivanovich. His health. I was touched 
by their common sympathy. That time, of the evening. 
[Tales about saints. Few images. <Illegible> a dreamer.] 
As I recall it, this old man was treating <me> with a strange 
condescension. I'm afraid to say that it is perhaps the brightest 
<memory in my life>. 
Arguments-about the hermit, about the reign of Christ. This is 
communism. Not entirely so. "You are a great dreamer." Enthusiasm. 
Tales about saints. Mary of Egypt. 
[A few days of convalescence. Even the doctor.] 
[I forgave the doctor a lot. Of course, this was one of those rather 
most ordinary people. But I liked his affection for our family. Medical 
arrogance.] 
[Versilov's respect for Makar, Versilov. Mother is grateful. But I 
noticed that even Versilov himself used to pay visits to Makar. I was 
very anxious to hear what they might be talking about. They are 
interpreting <the Book of> Job.14 A thicket.] I was surprised at 
Versilov's respect for Makar. 
Only after a long time did I understand who Makar was. Evenings. 
Used to tell stories, inconsistency. For example, how they beat up 
that monk. "You are contradicting yourself." About the merchant. 
About Stinking Lizaveta. About Job. Satan, etc. About the future of 
our world. (All exalted ideas.) "There is a thicket inside him." Once, 
about politics. Mother stands up for Russia. By the way, about 
Mother, her childhood. (Here, Tatiana.) N.B. Polish this. 
Back to bed. An evil spirit bit me. A wound. "I wonder what she 
thinks of me?" (Bioring). Shines. A dream (brieRy, forcefully and 
14 See note 2 of this section. 

504 Factual Narration 
through hints, the document). Evil spirits. Liza. Vasin. She feels in­
sulted, in brief, <her> story. Liza. They've been arrested. "He is 
calling you." 
My heart was palpitating ("Go, go! "Should I see Lambert, or 
shouldn't I?"). Absolutely, absolutely! I am stronger than Lambert. 
N.B. "That's what it means to live in sin: the tale about that 
soldier, a soldier is a muzhik gone rotten. A lawyer is a hired 
conscience." 
In <his> confession-Versilov about the harmonious life. 
"\Vhen you pronounced that word 'the harmonious life,' I thought 
to myself, why really, this is my own idea, and you are mine, you 
are my son." 
A first, gasping for breath. 
Later, communism, the idea contained in atheism. 
Makar: "l\ly dear children, it isn't that I'm <praising?> dead 
nature, and they shall see the sign of the Son of man, and they will 
prostrate themselves." 
"l\tost probably you are right, l\lakar Ivanovich." 
N.B. N.B. N.B. 
About politics, after the stories. 
This is what he told <us>-l\lother is a patriot. Then about Job, 
about Mother. I'll never forget it the story, <that> night, about 
atheism, and gasping for breath. 
In the morning, Liza. The arrest. Liza with Makar. Liza. "What is 
he going to tell her? He does not know anything about peopl@ 
people." About the arrest. "He isn't as he used to be before; he is 
dying, he is going to die soon, he is going to die much sooner than we 
think, we must be ready." 
I shall not try to formulate <my> mental condition. If my reader 
were to find out he wouldn't believe it. Rather, I'll tell about it 
later, in a factual way that will allow me to express myself better. Let 
my reader only keep in mind the soul of a spider, and this in a 
person who was going to leave them all, and forsake the world in the 
name of "the harmonious life." A thirst for the harmonious life 
coupled with God only knows what other thirsts, and all of it in 
perfect consciousness. 
"Is it a breadth of character that one finds in Russian people, or is 
it simply baseness?" said Andrei Petrovich, "here is what I have to 
say: I didn't know myself at that moment whether I ought to be 
proud, or ought to despise myself." 

Basic I de as 505 
"As for them, they've all condescendingly forgiven it." Versilov. 
<?> 
"So then, tomorrow I am leaving the house: I wonder what she 
thinks of me? Here, here is my most important line ... " Leaving the 
house. 
A few days passed. How one thing could exist right next to the 
other. A calm with stormy intentions. A rich man. 
But before <beginning to realize> my stormy intentions, I decided 
I was going to get completely well again, and in the meantime take 
advantage of the calm. 
See BASIC IDEAS. 
"Why pamper them? If I did, they'd࿧ raise an even louder howl 
against me. \Vhy feel sorry for them? All this will be to no avail­
people will talk even more." 
Could it be that anybody would refuse to accept such great luck? 
Finally, he says to her: "Here's what, my honest widow ... " 
Again, there's a lot of stealing going on. 
These people are like little children; whatever they see they grab. 
To take upon oneself such eternal torments. 
I also used to eKecute administer similar beatings to the one 1 had 
before. 
Learn something, don't fool around. 
All this is to no avail. People will talk even more. 
This man has turned into a brute. 
The Abbot. ·whispered something in her ear. She agreed. 
The livelong day. As was your pleasure. 
Any good thing takes time. Keep still, don't fuss around. 
Not exactly aunts, just distant relations. 
Comfort in my grief, which has afflicted me gravely.* 
This arrow has pierced my heart. 
As Thou didst, at one time, oh Lord, accept Paul, so accept me, oh 
Lord, me the cursed, me the outcast.* *  
I f  I spend my time without profit to my soul, I won't be able to 
return it. 
There was an unhypocritical love between them, and like a single 
soul in two bodies. 
• Entirely in Church Slavonic; perhaps a biblical quotation. 
•• Entirely in Church Slavonic. 

506 Biblical Quotations 
You have turned me over to all <these> people to be trod upon. 
One does not communicate with a stranger (not communicating). 
Nor will the Lord leave my sorrow unrewarded, nor my wander-
mgs. 
And to leave all this is no mean cross, nor a light sorrow. 
And for a woman to remain alone, like a swallow that has lost her 
nest. 
He was tossing about and grieving, like a fish on dry land. 
And he lost some of his own capital. 
These people are worn out. And you are more worn out than they 
are. 
Even God's angels are imperfect; only our Lord Jesus Christ ts 
perfect and without sin, which is why the angels serve him. 
The words of a desperate man are spoken to the wind. 
He hath cast me into the mire, so J:hat my very garments loathe me. 
My glory hath been dispersed, like the wind, and my happiness hath 
passed, like a cloud. • 
Inescapable grief. 
"I was hard and cruel, I imposed heavy burdens and was demand-
ing of people." 
"\Vhat does a man live by, but good examples." 
"My life is coming to an end." 
\Vhosoever does not want to work, let him not eat either. 
A man is being stubborn: ''I'm not going to forgive you," for per­
haps that man doesn't even know what makes him stick to his own 
<position>. 
These are worn-out people in these parts, people here can't take 
much. 
Little children, little troubles. u 
Live off you for a while. 
Do us a favor, show us your favor. 
"So that's what you thought." 
"I have been administering similar beatings to the others as well, 
so what does he <illegible>." 
To get married. 
• Apparently these last two or three phrases are quotations from memory from 
the Book of Job. 
• •  The Russian editor has detki malen'kie, tak i vedki malen'kie, where vedki 
(which makes no sense) is clearly misread, or misprinted, for bedki, 'troubles.' 

I I! coherent Stories 507 
I was in profound agreement with him. The doctor: prescribed 
some drops, left, took 800 rubles. 
He had committed many sins, without giving it any thought at all, 
but now this one little sinless soul had him caught. He could not stand 
it. This is how miraculously things happen at times. 
"You, my honest widow, you are still young and lovely, I know 
what you need, you need a husband," he was saying that in a frenzy. 
There is such cough ; whooping cough it is. called. 
And so they got that cough. 
The girls. 
Little children, in the sunshine, in their bare feet... they see no 
evil, sense no danger, sunshine-they are so happy, sleep at night like 
little angels. 
She gave all her money to her monastery, to be distributed among 
widows and homeless orphans. As for Afimevsk, things went a lot 
worse than before after he had given up the factory. 
So he is sitting there, in the tavern, naked, not a thread on his body. 
He'll leave the tavern-these are worn-out people, they'll get drunk 
themselves, then wail over their own misfortunes ... 
"You can't deal with these people in any different way," says the 
merchant what ar@ th@)' complaiaiag about, •Nhat, for he would pay 
them at his own pleasure, "I know," he would say, "when it is the 
right time to pay a man." 
About the boy: He isn't this, nor is he that, he's just looking at 
him in wonder. He's got him scared, that's what it is. Only he doesn't 
know that. "\Vhy doesn't he love me?" 
"The boy is not going to forgive us." She shakes all over, makes a 
bow before him, and so each goes his own way. Having mourned her 
children and her husband, for she had, in those three years, come to 
love him in her heart. 
But it hasn't the right foundation ; all this can't overcome, in his 
heart-those things that had happened before. 
He summoned a painter. 
2 little fists, God, the river, got himself all worn out. 
"The child has not forgiven us." 
"I am going to build a church for him." 
They went. 
They called in doctors from the capital. 
A good deal of incoherence about these stories, i.e., sometimes it 
remained completely unclear with what aim the story was being told. 
I repeat, from tender emotion. 

508 
Versilov's Opinions 
Not too mystical. 
Not too interested in current secular events. 
His pleasure at hearing certain political news sometimes would 
reach the level of pure bliss. 
"This is what the communists believe," he would add every minute. 
"However, I do not know whether this is what the communists 
believe in, for I am not sufficiently familiar with this matter." There 
remained a terrible suspicion in my mind: "Don't you believe in 
these very things yourself?" I was avidly listening to him. 
Versilov: "No, this is what the communists believe in, at least 
this is what they ought to believe in, because otherwise they won't get 
anywhere at all." 
I: "This is still dead nature" (Oh, I didn't understand, then). 
"Dead, my friend," exclaimed Makar, "but suddenly there is Christ 
who says: 'Here I am.' " 
Mother is a patriot, Mother's childhood, on the occasion of 
Mother's name day. 
After the stinking one: Mother's name day was approaching, if I'd 
only stay alive until then. 
Incidentally, Mother is a patriot. 
Recollections of Mother. 
"Allow me to shake hands with you and to declare that, sometimes, 
you are still an honest man." 
Versilov and I: I'm feeling uneasy. 
For there are instances where even the victor is sometimes ashamed 
before the man he has defeated, for having gotten the better of him. 
\Ve both seemed to be embarrassed. Though there were frequent 
outbursts of irrepressible emotions, we were still seeking to restrain 
ourselves, as if we were both ashamed of each other because and, to tell 
the truth, it apparently made the whole thing more pleasurable. -Fef'­
there are instances 
Communism. Oh yes, this is so-but he was greatly interested, was 
asking questions very eagerly, but then Versilov cut us short. 
There are many diversions; you may easily forget all about man­
kind. Money isn't a god, it is a demigod. I learned this from his 
stories. They didn't have the slightest moralizing tendency; all that 
seemed to matter was that they should be very moving. A house serf, 
a passion for ideas, for news, a respect for education, because he 
doesn't mind being close to his masters. Politics "You know, he 
actually likes politics. A muzhik couldn't care less about such things, 
not excluding, perhaps, even the bible-reading sectarian.'' 

Communism and God 
509 
Communism: Economic power will never tie people together, only 
moral power will. \Vhere, then, do we get this integrating moral 
power? Versilov was claiming that the most advanced among the 
communists were seeking it in atheism. The love of God and God 
divert man from his love of mankind. But then, everybody will move 
up closer to everyone else, like orphans, and man will begin to love 
his own solitary majesty. In the beginning, a man will sacrifice every­
thing for the sake of another man. Later, all of mankind <will do 
the same> for the sake of nature. 
If we believe in God, our respect for human reason must needs 
disappear, and from <a disappearance of> respect for human reason, 
also our respect for the image of man, which gave birth to reason, and 
consequently, also <our respect> for human dignity <must disap­
pear>, and so our respect for one another. 
But all this he would repeat only in a casual manner: most of all he 
liked that mood of tender emotionality, which is why he was often 
telling us his stories. 
Job-new children. 
Old evil vanishes, and changes into tender emotion. Here, Makar 
switches from his own stormy <?> life to recollections of my mother­
how she used to sanctify his soul even while still a child., 
Children don't stand <on the same spot very long>. This is how 
God will sometimes find a human soul. "I am going to make a man 
out of him, he does not love me. \Vhy doesn't he love me? He is not 
devoted to me." 
He took him from the factory. "Maybe I will make him the heir of 
my entire fortune." He pressed his two little fists to his heart. 
Finale. l st, starting with a new chapter. 
I verified these words on my own part: I remember, that morning I 
was struck by a feeling of sympathy. \Vithout Versilov, I would have 
missed a lot about this old man, who has left some momentous mem­
ories in my heart. He had little education, didn't know any <?> 
broader ideas. 
Versilov: "He wasn't that <bad>. He is approaching his end." 
"Come on, he'll live some more, but is it true that he is really that 
bad?" 
N.B. Made up with the doctor. I ascribe this also to <my> 
convalescence. 
In the Finale. Yet Lambert found out something that was of great 
value to him. He realized what the document was really worth, seeing 
and deducing it from the scare it gave the Prince-a scare which he 

510 At Anna Andreevna's 
hadn't at all expected to be that strong. This is why he got the idea 
that some people who had an interest in this matter might really pay 
a lot for that document. 
Liza: "So you know? You really know?" \Ve embraced on the stairs. 
Lambert, during our very first meeting, began to talk about how 
one might shake <her> down for some money. I decided that I was 
going to be broad-minded} so I sat there and listened to him. "Lam­
bert, but this is called blackmail!" "They are pigs themselves." 
AT A:-.:NA A1"DREEV:-.:A's. I felt that she was lying, and that she was 
a wicked woman, but it is a strange thing with women: this semblance 
of integrity, these manners, this impregnability of high society emi­
nence and proud chastity, this show of virtuousness-all this got me 
confused, and I began to find myself in agreement with her, that is, 
so long as I was sitting there with her. At least I wouldn't have dared 
to contradict her, not for anything in the world. A man is decidedly, 
in a moral sense, a woman's slave. Such a woman can persuade an 
inexperienced and generous man of almost anything. I was actually 
feeling sorry for her, by the way, for only recently I had still loved 
her and, as far as her scheme with the old Prince was concerned, I 
still did not entirely understand the whole extent of it. 
ϲ.B. Anna Andreevna would have preferred to be dealing with me, 
rather than with Lambert (N .B. Absolutely include an explanation 
on the part of the Youth). I was sitting there, thinking to myself: 
"How could she join Lambert?" 
Anna Andreevna: "I am too proud to deal with persons unknown 
to me." And, during our second meeting: "But you have got the 
document?" Nastasia Egorovna: "And you aren't going to run off, 
Sir?" 
[Anna Andreevna is hoping that the old Prince will send for Prince 
Platon and some other people to whom he will then show the .JeH.eF. 
document, to prove that he is not insane.] 
Paid no attention to broad-mindedness. Is this broad-mindedness, 
or simply baseness? (After the Prince's confession) I always asked 
myself this question: Is this <a sign of> broad-mindedness in the 
Russian character, or is it simply baseness? 
The Youth to Lambert: "I've got an idea." 
At the police station. The police officer. On the next day. 
"I am told that you've come up with something." 
"I haven't done a thing, I was at my own home." 
He used to kiss her (Mother), he used to call her his wife. Never 
would I have suspected such powerful feeling in him. Before me, 
there was standing a different person. 

Lambert's Two Plans 51 I 
The Youth to Lambert, regarding His love for her: "I was believ­
ing it, but only for one moment, but now I don't, now I know what 
the situation really is like." (It is pride.) 
[Chapter, beginning.] I must explain directly something I still did 
not know then, though I did of course have my suspicions, or, to put 
it better, I was suspecting the worst, without being fJroperly afraid 
of it: Lambert was the ringleader of a so-called blackmail ring. He 
had heard about the document from me. But, after his own fashion, 
he was extremely smart. His further fJlans will be explained later. Oh, 
he would have betrayed me. He wanted to join Anna Andreevna, but 
the thing was that the document was then still in my hands. 
Lambert and I, for the first time. 
All the things which we had been talking about were, so it appeared 
to me, completely implausible, unrealizable, and fantastic, yet I 
was discarding, one by one (as if I were reading an implausible, yet 
enticing novel) all of these improbabilities, as I kept on talking solely 
to enjoy my own fantasies, and something else yet, something that 
was swarming all over my heart, like some predatory beast, like some 
vile serpent. Before leaving the house: "Now I must myself piece 
together this whole plot." Did I really love her? 
AT THE POLICE STATION: PRINCE DoLGORUKv? 
The Youth lets Anna Andreevna know that she has treated him so 
very badly (giving in). Anna Andreevna is enthusiastic in her sym­
pathy for him. 
·with Anna Andreevna: that Katerina Nikolaevna has again begun 
to show herself in society, about fiioring ("Maybe I've got Bioring"). 
Anna Andreevna was feeling that things were again going smoothly 
between <her and> Bioring, and was worried that there might be 
another sally on the part of Versilov, which is why she was seeking 
the Youth's help. This the Youth explains, as he is leaving Anna 
Andreevna, already from his own point of view (i.e., that thing about 
fiioring). 
Lambert has two plans: if the document does exist (as he has told 
Anna Andreevna), then either sell it to Anna Andreevna for money, 
after she has gotten married, or sell it to her? [or to Bioring?J \Vhat 
would be the most profitable? That's why he is informing himself 
through the Youth : where would he have a better chance? And what's 
most important, he would very much like to become the sole holder 
of the document, by cheating the Youth, which is also why he is nee­
dling the Youth with such questions as: Did it hurt a lot when Bioring 
gave him that licking? 
Or to Bioring, or to Versilov? But he never does approach Versilov. 

512 Anna Andreevna's Plotting 
The Youth, from his own point-of-view, to the reader about how 
Lambert succeeded in "filtering himself through" to Anna An­
dreevna. "How did they do it? And what could they have said to 
each other? I couldn't ha,·e done it." 
A project to kidnap the Prince and bring him to my flat, and to 
show him the document right there. 
[Lambert's simplicity.] 
It is Anna Andreevna who asks the Youth that definiti,·e question: • 
i.e., "Can I count on you if the Prince seeks refuge at your flat? That 
is, that you are going to show him the document." 
[Here.] \VHAT's ȐlOST 1!\IPORTA:\'T, all this is told from the Youth's 
own point of view, though, at their first meeting, Anna Andreevna 
says next to nothing directly, only in obscure allusions, which goes 
for Bioring, and the flat, and the document. Instead, she sends him 
to Lambert. She tells him that Lambert had come to see her to inquire 
about the Youth's health, while he was ill, asks him about that night 
and about how he was insulted by Bioring; in a word, she is exces­
sively solicitous. 
[He is greatly pained by those rumors about Bioring.] 
In theory, it didn't bother me. 
That demon, that demon, and life be blessed; that shame; I swear 
it was all so innocent. Just an urge to live, to live. No, I think that I'll 
accomplish a good deal in my lifetime. So far I have never once lost 
hope. 
Alphonsine to Tsarskoe Selo. But about this, later. The small 
pictures in the stethoscope. Alphonsine, la voila. Ah-ah-ah, tooboe ... 
Further idea of parts three and four. 
Versilov lays himself bare entirely. He speaks of humility as of the 
greatest power, which has conquered the world, and of independence 
through self-restraint; chains (he is rather cool toward Makar), and 
only occasionally does he allude to the letter, in a strange, fitful way. 
(The Youth suddenly learns that he Ras beeR is looking for that let­
ter.) Finally, he decides to marry Sonia Andreevna. The Youth is 
begging him to do it. (A pathetic scene.) Suddenly, chopping up the 
icons and, the day before, a marriage proposal to the Akhmakov 
woman who, in turn, is already engaged. Then, he disappears until 
• In the original, a lapsus calami: "answer." 
• • For tout beau. 

Versilov's Double Character 513 
the Youth finally finds him. (This is pride and passion in the highest 
degree, to the point of madness.) 
And then the conflagration. 
[In part four] ·when the Youth told him about the document he 
said: "I always suspected it, in fact I was convinced of it." 
In part three, the Youth is wondering why Versilov seems to have 
forgotten all about the document. But, having chopped up the icons, 
and disappeared out of sight, Versilov did make an attempt to make 
a deal with Lambert and with Stebelkov. But then he left them in a 
hurry. ·when the Youth has finally found him, he lets him have the 
document. He does not take it. They go on together. 
The ideal, its presence in one's soul, a thirst, a need to believe in 
[something ... to worship something] and the absence of any kind of 
faith. This gives birth to two feelings in <the soul of> a high type of 
contemporary man: boundless pride and boundless self-contempt. 
Observe his hellish sufferings, watch him trying to convince himself 
that he is actually a believer ... And then, his clashes with reality, 
where he invariably shows up so ridiculous, so ridiculous and so 
petty ... and so insignificant. He suspects that what one must do is 
work on oneself, restrain oneself, and that this would cost an endless 
effort. And so he does tax himself with the duty of self-perfection, 
does it gladly, enthusiastically ... [choosing for himself nothing but 
chains all along.] Occasionally, he would be bothered by a feeling of 
tormenting unbelief and skepticism, but He stands, and, finally, it 
appears that he has come close to his goal... And there, as he clashes 
head-on with reality, he takes a terrible fall, showing himself feeble 
and nerveless. ·why? <Because> He is uprooted from the soil, a child 
of his age ... 
[Makar the ·wanderer, the one who just died, gave me this idea.] 
You are angry because there are such people. In order to get a 
really close look at them, in order to discover what is innermost in 
them, one must have a love of people. Then, you'll also have the 
eye for it, and you will see that there are many of them. 
N .B. August 11. [this, in the confession <scene>] 
It is Versilov who makes this revelation to her, and she suddenly 
says to him: "You are going to seek a terrible revenge for the humilia­
tion of this confession.'' 
"\Ve are among those who are unable to remain at rest in a vacuum. 
And so, finally, I acquired a faith in self-perfection and in my chains. 
Let it be that I believe in nothing, but this is because I am a<moral> 
cripple, a child of my age, [Russian] and have to bear the curse of my 

5 14 Lambert about Versilov 
age, because I am depraved and was born depraved, for Russians, for 
these last two centuries, have been born depraved. But I am going to 
break myself, and then my vision will be purified. Then I shall 
believe, and here You are!" 
The underground man is the principal type of this Russian world. 
I have discussed him more often than any other writer, though 
others have discussed him too, for it was impossible not to see him. 
My story about the merchant. Such complexity, along with such 
immediacy, you won't find in any other writer today. 
Versilov (on the day before <the Youth> leaves the house) about 
the Prince (they have been arrested), and furthermore: "My friend, 
I'd wish to warn you of some scoundrels and ... (here we looked at each 
other, and both of us blushed) However, what am 1... how silly!" He 
grinned, and left. 
Ohe, Lambert, ou est Lambert, as-tu vu Lambert?15 
Lambert. 
"I've got an idea." 
"Why, you always used to have ideas, you were the most clever 
of all of us in school." (This coarse flattery had its effect.) 
"Versilov is clever, he is deceiving you." 
"You know nothin'g, you ... dog (why was I calling him a dog?). 
Now I'm stronger than you are, I can beat you up." 
''I'd deserve it." 
"But remember, Lanz, the Catholic?" (he's a good fellow, I 
thought). 
I left, drunk. Having left drunk, I remembered on the boulevard: 
"She, a student, what would she be thinking of me!" 
It was the Prince who denounced <them>. Of course, he knew 
nothing very substantial himself, and his denunciation was made on 
a random guess; yet it turned out that he had known a thing or hvo 
after all. \Vith Liza. Oh, how we embraced. And I still went to see 
Anna Andreevna. 
Dinner: The fat-arsed little Prince was crying. Kept pestering some 
officer. The pock-marked fellow was sulking and remained silent. 
While the taciturn tall fellow suddenly began to shout Ohi, Lambert! 
THE NIGHT THE DOCUMENT WAS CUT OUT, the Youth, in a frenzy (at 
Lambert's) : "He is the purest of men, and He must not know about 
this, but I shall show Him what kind of a woman she is. She is in His 
15 French: "Oh, Lambert, where is Lambert? Have you seen Lambert?" 

The Youth Loses the Dowment 515 
way. She has ruined His life. She has received so much for nothing, 
while He has had to pay for it with his own suffering, and she tri­
umphs, while He is lost. I want to save Him. I want to smash His idol. 
Let me have Him back. I want to restore him to the state which He 
was in three days [nights] ago. I will show Him what she is capable of. 
"You take the money, and 1... and when she hands over the ransom 
money, I'll fling that document in her face! Let Him see all this filth, 
and come to his senses. You, Lambert, are a scoundrel," etc. 
On the next day at the AkhR'lakov 'NOR'lan's at the old Prince's (i.e., 
at my own place). Won't release the document. \Vhat was I waiting 
for? But how could one smash His ideal? \Vhich is the better: not 
smash it, or smash it? Not knowing which was better: <I> refused to 
let anyone see the document. Thereupon, <my> arrest, and a night 
at the police station. Unequivocal decision to clear myself, and then 
<pursue> my idea, my idea! 
The day before, at the time of the old Prince's flight, Lambert 
had learned from the Youth that the latter had agreed to let her have 
the document, on the following day and through Tatiana, at Tat­
iana's flat. They arrive. Makar lvanovich : "Leave it, forget it." 
Versilov's son, <his> role. 
Finale. And how could I stand the fact that Versilov was right 
there, with him, with Lambert, involved in a blackmail plot, robbers, 
my ideal trampled underfoot. 
In the last chapter: A letter to her} about the document. Must be 
from Tatiana. 
The Youth made an arrangement with Tatiana the day before, 
still on the day of <the scene with> Anna Andreevna, according to 
which Tatiana would write her that the Youth would like to hand 
over the document to her. Tatiana did write that letter. [The first 
meeting does take place at Tatiana's.J A night at the police station, 
but the document is already gone for a long time. \Vent to see 
Tatiana. He reaches into his pocket-no document! At Lambert's. 
Alphonsine comes running (or the Youth): "C'est chez nous!"16 
Tatiana then over to her} to tell her that she shouldn't come. The 
Youth to Lambert, along the way he learns that it isn't Lambert who 
has it <now>, but Tatiana. He returns and catches her. "Il n'est plus 
temps."11 To my flat. Alphonsine, on the contrary, tells the Youth, 
16 French: "It's our place." 
17 French: "There's no more time." 

516 Universal Conceit 
"C'est chez nous/'18 Tatiana has been tricked. Let Tatiana know so 
that she can warn her not to come. Tatiana .sends word to her, and 
she comes to see Tatiana, and so they are both at Tatiana's, which 
the Youth has found out, so that he stays at Tatiana's. • 
At Lambert's, le grand dadais and le petit vilain/u at three roubles 
each. Le grand dadais had been kicked out of Dussot's <restaurant> 
for pestering some officer. He was standing there, waiting, at the 
windows for a long time. 
Dies irae, dies illa solvet saeclum in favilla. I love Margaret, 
crying.20 
Something more delightful. 
About EFIM. 
!Lambert! There is a PRIEST there. 
[Here.] IN THE FINAE. The Youth : "I let a certain person read my 
notes, and here is what he told me" (and here, quote the author's 
opinion, that is, my own). 
And instead of the traditional family (the Rostovs), an emerging 
family, an ephemeral family, and new, searching for the harmonious 
life, seeking to find its own level, and even (new) forms. 
Versilov's confession. A pattern of universal self-conceit, a pattern 
of universal searching for the cause of our <present> misfortunes, 
and of seeking to find a remedy for them in certain external causes, 
<all this> has made me turn to the inner man, and to ask myself: 
"Could it be that I myself am guilty?" And therefore-self-improve­
ment. 
"\Vhy, you are yourself a crook. \Vhy do you think people ought 
to be honest?" I said to Lambert. 
"Doesn't one need honest people in a crooked business? Much more 
so than anywhere else, ha-ha-ha!" 
As the Youth is walking over to Tatiana Pavlovna's immediately 
after Makar's death, to inform her of it, he thinks to himself: "How 
is this? Only the other day Makar lvanovich was prophesying his own 
death, and on the very next day he actually died." 
The Youth and Lambert, in their second meeting, prior to the 
chopping up <of those icons>. 
• Not quite clear in the original. 
1 8 French: "It's at our place." 
19 French: "The big clown." "The petty villain." 
20 Latin: "Day of wrath, the day that will turn the world into ashes." From 
scene xx of Goethe's Faust. 

The Gist of the Confession 517 
"Because this is so simple and so banal." 
["It can't be that simple."] 
"Because you are hidebound. You are obtuse. [I've got you 
caught."] 
In the Finale (the Youth is seeking <his own level>, the lost level 
of the Rostovs). [They go and join the people.] The Russian family 
as such is seeking <its own> level. 
But in Russian youth, there is a good deal of instinctive striving 
for the good, for light ... Versilov in <his> confession ... This is 
touching, this is naive. His whole irrepressible love for you has 
come to the fore <here>." 
His was a great idea-but he had none of the means to transform 
it into action. There aren't any bad people in Russia, there aren't any 
at all. 
Lambert, during their encounter: "You know, they (Mikhailov, 
Trishatov) have gone over to his side (i.e., to the pock-marked 
man's)." 
Lambert: "I am no criminal, but he (the pock-marked man) is. He 
would drive nails into a box containing a corpse to <the accom­
paniment of> a piano, and he will corrupt them." 
I to Lambert: "You are getting all excited about that pock-marked 
man. It seems that I am the only one left with you." 
· 
N.B. MAKAR's DEATH and <Versilov's> decision regarding Mother 
(i.e., his decision to leave her for good)-such is the effect of Makar's 
death upon Versilov. 
N.B. THE LIFE of that old man was tying ME down, I couldn't de­
cide my own fate. 
THE GIST OF THE CONFESSION. \Vhat she meant to Him. "Now I am 
leaving her with a feeling of reverence. I am free. I have a feeling that 
I can leave her. Let's go. I love you, my boy. Your mother has allowed 
me to marry her. Do you know this? An ecstatic image of youth, of 
everything, of a new life, which has begun for Versilov. Blessings, "I 
am drinking to her. This is what she has meant to me" (story). Then 
the story of my mother, in a few lines. "I was noticing the thoughts 
she was having, as I looked at her surprised face, when she (Mother) 
and I were setting out to meet life together, and she was getting in­
volved deeper and deeper. (The difference in our backgrounds, in our 
education, all this she did see, she the ignorant peasant woman!) Oh, 
if you only knew what a human being she is." ("The little beetle." A 
feat for her sake. About Lidiia.) 
About Mother and Makar. The little beetle. Self-perfection. SHE. 

518 Versilov's Confession 
Got it for nothing. Mother has allowed me to marry her. He about 
about her-badly. "Now again, just as an ordinary mortal, as your 
Mother's husband and your father." About Tatiana Pavlovna. The 
boy on the harmonious life. 
You've been looking for it. The Rostov family, going out to join 
the people. "Let's drink!" 
Jn the confession} THE ȑlOST IMPORTA!\'T THI!\'G. 
Versilov: "All she has given me is torture, so let us drink to 
torture! Now away with this, I am renouncing it, I love only you! 
\Vhy, do you really think that you'll escape from me? You have de­
feated me, boy!" 
Sitting in a comer... (A tender and ecstatic declaration of love. 
Princess Katia.) 
Now I was suddenly feeling as if all this were only a mirage. The 
harmonious life. I was looking for it. Living to become like the Ros­
tovs. "And so you escaped into your idea. You are dear to me. You 
have defeated me, boy." 
"Everything is good, all life is good, merge with the universe." 
Atheists. Christ on the \Vhite Sea.21 
"(Are you a Freemason? Are you in on some plot?)" 
"No, my dear." 
"I was, my dear. Could there be a Russian who was not, at one 
time, involved in a conspiracy?" 
Finale ... Isn't it Tatiana who writes a letter about the document, 
so that the rendezvous will take place at Tatiana's flat? 
Versilov} s criticism. 
Makar: "Love had grown in her heart." He'd come up with such 
colossal pronouncements with the greatest of ease, yet at the same 
time he'd be talking about the rod. 
Makar. I was struck by his humane attitude. He thought in terms of 
the rod, yet "love was growing in her heart." 
From Versilov's confession it becomes apparent how much Mother 
means to him (that He had loved her I ,000 times more and had been 
taking this liaison much more seriously than the Youth would have 
ever thought. "The little beetle," and suddenly, a meeting with her. 
Konigsberg and Mother.) 
21 Reference to Heine's poem "Frieden" from his cycle Das Buch der Lieder. 
Heine narrates the return of Christ to earth and the regeneration of the people 
under Christ's Jove. Heine's poem, as well as Versilov's dream, must be counted 
as precursor of "The Legend of the Grand Inquisitor." 

[Recalled ُfakar.] 
Versilov's Rendezvow with Her 519 
After "the little beetle"-about i\fother, her surprise. Wrote for 
Mother to come, and there she suddenly was. 
A thirst for the harmonious life. "You, my dear, were enthralling 
me; the same was happening to me as was then happening to you. 
After that outburst with llioring, a reaction took place: I felt that this 
had been my last insane act and that I was, like you, thirsting for a 
harmonious life. And who was it that planted these feelings inside 
me? He and no one else, Makar, 'innocent infant, grow, God's green 
grass.' " 
"Today is the day of <my> great triumph. I feel that my madness 
has ended. Let us drink to her. This has been a captivity of beauty. A 
powerful feeling, here on Earth. She got it for nothing. She is actually 
evil.* She is a most ordinary woman. She is virtuous enough to feel 
sorry for Mother. If I were to abandon her too lightly, she'd poison 
me after your own fashion. Oh, if she only were to hear me, she'd 
forgive unde.rstand me. But let nobody know about it.'' "She is going 
to know," the Youth shouts. "And you love her": passionate words. 
[Here] Also, in the beginning of the confession-a critique of 
society, of degenerate Russian thought. 
N.B. Take from the Little Beetle: about responsibility to oneself, 
once one has become conscious, and about the golden age. 
He to her at the rendezvous: "I would like you to understand my 
inpocent one, in what state you are leaving me here." 
He: "I would like to know that you have understood in what state 
you are leaving me here.'' 
"I am going to destroy you.'' 
She: "And you won't feel sorry for my youth, aren't you going to 
feel sorry for what has been before?" (She is afraid). 
"Say yes, submit.'' 
She (proudly): "No ... Let it stay the way it is. I am myself a little 
like you." 
He: "That's better. A little more, and I might have forgiven you 
and left-now you are beautiful that way." 
She: "Let's both forgive everything to each other and-go our 
separate ways." 
He: "Vlhat if I caR't? I cannot... because everything is finished. Nor 
does it really matter.'' 
• Durna: ambiguous in Russian, since the adjective means "evil" and "ugly." 

520 She Criticizes Versilov 
He: "No, as for revenge, blood-that's, too, a son of possession." 
<His?> blood all clotted in bruises. 
She: "Why, this is all from books." 
She: "Why won't you kill me right away?" 
He: "I can't right now." 
She: "Oh yes, your word of honor." 
"No, it isn't that; rather, I'll be thinking about you tonight yet." 
She: "Torment yourself as you did that time?" 
"Let us pan: and I shall be thinking of you as of a most precious 
person, as of a great heart, as of something truly great for me to 
respect and to love. You are going to be a great and a most serious 
thought in my life." 
(She laughed at debauchery among children. N .B. Some kind of 
graceful confession to him, a la Princess Katia.)22 
She to Him: "Yes, I used to love you; but not enough. I quit loving 
you very soon, seeing that here ... I hadn't found what I needed." 
""What is it you need? Please do condescend to my insignificance. 
Tell me what is it you need?" 
(She advances the ideal of a simple and clean-cut man.) ("I like 
cheerful people.") 
She to Him: "I am not worthy of you. I am a blockhead." 
""\Veil, I'm going to tell you the whole truth: There is something 
funny about you." 
She to Him: "Be virtuous, marry Mother." 
A bout Mother-"Don't you dare to mention her." 
"You're inhuman," Bioring. 
"Now I believe that you are telling the truth." Here, the Finale. 
"Because you have been taking such great risks, I may actually 
forgive you. Leave me alone, spare me this." 
After having chopped up the icons: "No, this isn't so simple. 
[Remember forever.]" 
Lambert and He agree that Lambert is going to rape her. 
She to Him: "If that's what you want, I'll marry you, just don't 
kill me." 
AFTER THE CONFESSION CHAPTER: Now I shall proceed in simple 
narrative style so far as this is possible. At Mother's. Body. Tears, etc. 
The Youth explains, from HIS OWN POINT OF VIEW, His character 
prior to the concluding scene of the conflagration) i.e., of the fatum of 
22 A reference to a character in Dostoevsky's Netochka Nezvanova (1849). 

Why Does Lambert Need Versilov'! 521 
love. That is, how he had hoped, having become convinced of her 
high society vileness (with Lambert), to fall out of love with her, and 
become cured. N .B. "But, having failed to fall out of love, he quite 
naturally went out of his mind," the Youth notes ON HIS OWN PART. 
She: "Maybe I'll marry <you>, I'm very much afraid." 
He: "I keep imagining you, and I do nothing all the time but talk 
to you. You are laughing all the time (during these nocturnal con­
versations)." A double. Madness. 
One man burst into laughter over the grave. 
I broke the icon. 
The night before, Alphonsine, "chez qui, chez qui?" Later, 
Alphonsine saw the Youth entering Tatiana's flat. Later, the Youth 
<tells> Lambert, both the day before as well as after he is released 
from the police station, that he is going to see Tatiana. Then, when 
he shows up at Tatiana's: Alphonsine: "C'est chez nous,"23 he cuts 
open the pocket and finds ... a piece of paper. Alphonsine shows some 
remorse. So Alphonsine runs over to Tatiana's place. Tatiana, having 
received word from Alphonsine, runs over to her place; meanwhile, 
the Youth has just left and sees Versilov and Lambert. He pushes 
Alphonsine aside and enters through Maria <'s room?>. 
A BIG QUESTION: Why does Lambert need Versilov? 
Versilov may have had an agreement with Maria, and has thought 
it all up. 
N.B. It's the idealist, more than anyone else, who is inclined to 
believe anything vile <of someone else>. 
The Youth relates: He was convinced that she would fall with 
Lambert. 
This is how Lambert begins <his interview> with her: "I am a 
friend of the Youth's, he has asked me to hand this to you, here's 
the letter." 
It might have been assumed that Katerina N ikolaevna would come 
by our place first, to clarify the matter, but it could have happened 
otherwise, too; she could have proceeded to the other location directly, 
and in that case she would have been lost. Versilov <illegible> the 
double, <illegible>-"That's precisely it, the double, that's it," 
Tatiana Pavlovna drawled. 
Lambert was exaggerating the importance <of the document?>, 
nor did he realize with whom he was dealing. 
23 French: "It's at our place." 

522 Russian Nobility 
7) "My friend, if I were a Russian writer of talent, I would defi­
nitely take my heroes from among the Russian hereditary nobility, for 
it is only among this particular type of Russian people that there is 
a possibility of finding, if not order, <so> at least a semblance of 
beautiful order and of that very "harmonious life" which you and I 
have been looking for. You are laughing. Yet I'm [almost not talking 
nonsense,] really, and I'm almost not joking either. Already Pushkin, 
[our dear Push kin J gave an outline of the plots of his future novels in 
"Onegin," at least some appointments, • and believe me that this is 
all that we've got beatttifui• • that's beautiful not beaHtifHl So aeauti 
fit.l, at least as a whole, this social class is is everything we've got that's 
at least to some extent perfect. I am not saying this because I am 
Versilov and [so myself a nobleman J it turns out, being the descendant 
of Suzdal' princes of the twelfth century, and very fond of being a 
nobleman, but rather because there is, at the foundation of this high­
est class of people, something that is without any doubt, immovable 
and incontestable. I am saying this because here tkere are already 
enistent, kave been created there already exist certain finished forms 
of honor and of duty, ana consequently, "Both the touching aBEl th€ 
pathetic are open to the novelist. There is nothing in Russia that 
nothing, save the noeility, @Xists in Rusia! (that nowhere, except 
here in Russia, has ever been begun, much less completed] (that 
nowhere in Russia not only was never completed] which is the thing 
you find rarest of all in Russia. TH.ere \Vhether that honor is good, 
or whether the nobleman is true to his duty is a different question. 
\Vhat is important is the completeness acquired of these forms and, 
whatever kind of order it may be, an order acquired over the C@n 
turies, saved "By succesive generations not established by decree from 
above, but rather developed by the Russian people themselves -hy­
tH.e people themselves. My God, why, the most important thing 
for Russia is to have at least some sort of staBility ana @Y@n the }@ast 
something stable, and an order which has not been decreed from 
above. Ana what kina of a noele theR'le for a v.·riter Oh, ha..-ing la 
menteEl. So then, if I were a novelist, I could be a realist in the H.igh 
࿨to the highest degree. [and so my novelist said to himself, having 
no apprehensions whatsoever.] (Old-timers at the Club. Moscow 
gossips.] I might make no effort whatsoever at realisFR to conceal the 
• Unclear in the original. 
• • Here Dostoevsky is vacillating between prekrasny and krasiuy. 

Family and Tradition 523 
fact that my heroes are most frequently the most ordinary people, that 
there are some very funny people among them not being afraid to 
totch ttpon the highest horn. I shall actually show [even] the most 
monstrous cripples, such as Silvio and the Hero of our time. I can 
trace the whole transformation of European ideas in the persons of 
the Russian nobility there are going to show up in FA)' work and 
among them also Fremasons and Decembrists, and each of these 
individuals may emerge from my pen my side reall)· veq· h-mny as a 
most entertaining personage, and with amazing humor, and still -ft@. 
is firFH as a whole, and beautiful present an integral whole-all this 
is going to be <a portrait?> poetic <?> of [extremely] <?> as a whole, 
whereas it is dear to tts e·len as a FRere Rope and FHore hrFHI)' in tHe pic 
ttre as a wHole, beautiful and even sweet willy nilly as in a pictur@ 
and even hope. 
Here there is hope, and you can rest your eyes: at least something 
that is complete. Here you've got a family, here you've got ties and 
traditions, and in fact faith, -9tH- not a wrecking job, no debris or 
rubbish, from which nothing has come during those past two hun­
dred years. Wherever it may be hidden, but still, some genuine faith. 
My dear, Bttt there is still anotHer type of ntltured individual 
which I haYe neYer failed to observe and which I Ra\'e noticed even 
wHile I was still in scHool I know that we have some children who 
even in their childhood think about their families, who even in their 
childhood are already hurt by the unharmonious life of their fathers 
and of their whole environment. My friend, I haYe known tHis for a 
long time, since FRY earliest cHildHood, ltnown that e•;en in our 
schools, that we've had we've developed for a long tiFHe soFHe strange 
[We've got many underground men]. [But what about the people, 
what about the Makar Ivanovich's?] 
"Now. Now there are more of them. There aren't any established 
forms in existence here. I've been thinking about you and, inciden­
tally, I've been very much afraid that you might <decide to> 'join 
the people.' " 
"I shall follow you." 
"<I have> finished <my> wanderings. I was very much afraid 
for you, my dear. Thousands of times did I see you before me, at 
night, under your blanket. These are attested <?> ·when I went 
abroad-this you must know-I severed my ties. I was leaving for­
ever. I emigrated." 
"To join Herzen?" 
"No, my friend." 

524 Claude Lorrain 
"A condition of serfage. Didn't we emancipate the peasants? 
\Vasn't I a District Commissioner myself? But suddenly it began (the 
backslide) ; do you think I was afraid of those feuilletonists, or of 
that disorder which is now becoming the perdition of Russian youth? 
Peter the Great made us citizens of Europe, and we became the 
bearers of that universal union of ideas. Europe has been dear to us 
for 200 years. A Russian nobleman cannot live without \Veltschmerz, 
and so I, too, had to suffer from it. Beppo."2࿩ 
"Isn't it true that, before these men, you < . . .  > 
Claude Lorrain. The setting sun <. 
.> 
"What about the chains?" 
"I was saying farewell to Europe. I knew that everything was 
doomed. Claude Lorrain.25 Oh, if I could only believe <in> barri­
cades! Too late. It couldn't be. I didn't believe either over there, 
or here. (A shoemaker.) Because I was feeling very sad. A Russian 
nobleman. \Vhims of a Russian nobleman." 
"Let it be that our bones are rotten and tired. [As a Russian 
nobleman I was an atheist. The sun setting over the Tuileries. I 
want to em brace you."] 
[I was a melancholy wanderer/ Beppo a Russian nobleman cannot/ 
The attempt/Tuileries <twice>jYou won't understandjchainsj 
Then they burned/ Atheism/ After atheism, BeppojClaude Lorrainj 
Before these men/Claude Lorrain/AtheismjMother, and <his> 
passion for her.] 
"As a Russian nobleman, I was an atheist. But in Europe, I would 
have been alone even as an atheist. I had the feeling that the sun was 
setting, only for the last time." 
"\Vhat then saved you?" 
"Mother, Mother. Blessed be the day she appeared <before me>." 
Slippery ground (atheism). "I am telling you these things because 
I want to embrace you." 
24 Comic narrative poem by Lord Byron written in 1817 and published in 1818. 
25 Dostoevsky saw Claude Lorrain's painting "Ads and Galatea" in Dresden 
in 1 867, and it served as inspiration for Stavrogin's dream of the golden age in 
the suppressed chapter of The Possessed and for Versilov's dream in A Raw 
Youth, which appears in Part III, Chapter 7:2 of the final version. Claude Lor­
rain (1 600-1 682) was a painter of idyllic landscapes, often depicting, as in this 
painting, the happiness of primitive peoples. Dostoevsky extended the meaning, 
in all probability, beyond Lorrain's intention. There is explicit reference in the 
novel itself to Lorrain's painting in Pan III, Chapter 7:2. 

Universal Suffering Type 525 
"But what then saved you?" 
"Mother, <her> sunken cheeks. Love." 
"Don't I know that this is what's going to happen, everything is 
going to perish in this conflagration (the Tuileries). But I don't want 
this to happen. I love my past. And if there are any conservatives at all 
in Europe, it is we, the Russians. Claude Lorrain, and a description 
of melancholy. I knew that this had to perish. Europe has become our 
home. I exchanged Beppo26 for Venice-Prince Vronsky's Venice.27 
But it is still Venice. And I am still proud of Proudhon. The French 
never liked us, but we really were their kin." 
HERE. 
N .B. "How did it happen that we have developed this curious type 
of a universally suffering man, from Peter the Great's nobility? [And 
why say that he is good for nothing but wandering from place to place? 
Why, could it not be true that Weltschmerz is also a great thing? 
Have all of them really suffered thusly? They have been the leaders, 
and they still are." 
"Really, and the serf-owners, too?"] 
"Sure, exactly the serf-owners. Beginning with Chatsky28 the serf­
owner; but isn't one out of a 1 ,000 enough-thousands and tens <of 
thousands> have passed on without leaving a trace, bat this Chatsky 
is the one who is remembered. Oh yes, there were many braggarts 
among them, many ridiculous people; why, I'm not praising every­
thing." 
The Youth: "I've seen her. She said ... regards to you." 
"Do you love her?" 
"0, blessed be" (the tone of these notes). 
Music. 
The Boy about Dadais: "He has wasted his sister's dowry on food 
and drink, left her as good as penniless, I can see that he is suffering, 
he quit washing himself. Oh, how he can sometimes sing! I feel so 
very sorry for him-both of us; everybody wants to be honest. I want 
to save him ... yet I am myself such a worthless, confused boy. Will you 
let me stay with you?" 
26 See note 24 of this section. 
27 Prince Vronsky and Anna spend some time in Italy at the beginning of their 
cohabitation. 
28 See note I of Part IV. 

526 The Youth and Lambert 
FI:'\'ISH IT AT ¨IILIUTI:'\''s STORE, WITH A QUARREL WITH LA¨I BERT. 
"The trouble is you're so stupid, Lambert, that's what you are, why, 
you don't understand a thing of what I'm saying." 
The Youth to Lambert: "I am stronger than you are." [he is a mod­
est man; he'll meet you.] 
The Youth to Lambert: "I am listening to you only because I am 
broad-minded.'' 
The Youth to Lambert: "I've got an idea. You know what: if 
this whole business is going to flop I'll still have my 'idea,' into 
which I'll then withdraw." 
"You were acting odd only because you were unhappy about 'hav-
ing become a victim of your environment.' " 
"Oh, my friend, what's the difference! Let's drink.'' 
"I am like Herzen." 
Out into the street: "\Vhat is it makes her so excited?" Everything 
else aside) I am stunned by this question. \Vhat is their relationship? 
\Vhy is she thinking that now something has happened so that he is 
going to leave her in peace? Of course, the fact that he is going to 
marry Mother. Oh yes, he is going to. For sure. Yes! So then, what 
about her? Wft.y Is she glad that He is getting married [and, having 
gotten married, is going to leave her in peace,] or is she unhappy 
about it? \Vhy was she so excited? 
Yes, this thought did flash through my mind. I remember. I am 
mentioning it, since it is important for me. ["This thought, which 
flashed through my mind then, as a memento."] I shall not try to 
describe [But actually] my own excitement, Ь a painful emotion 
was gnawing at my heart. It was a chaos-not just a painful feeling. 
Yet I was ecstatic <also>. 
An encounter on a sidewalk. "Is this you? This must be providence. 
You know, I already was at your place, and you were not in [your 
government clerk said, as if this \\·as what I needed.] \Vhere should 
I be looking for him, I thought. So I went along, and I swear, I was 
firmly convinced that I was going to run into you, my dear boy; so 
I'm going to be sitting with you all night, talking. Let's go to my 
place.'' 
Excitement. The flat. Superficial description. The Prince's child. 
"There's <her> portrait. A madwoman. I was going to marry her. 
Your mother had assented to it. (Definitely a madwoman.)" 
Nobody ever comes to this place, except Liza. Even Tatiana Pav­
lovna doesn't. 

The Golden Age 527 
"I have been thinking, even since before your arrival from Moscow, 
that you and I might live here together." 
"So you did love me?" (a Ia Princess Kitty).29 
"\Vhat could I tell you, my dear boy? You are looking for the 
harmonious life, and so am I. \Vhich means simply to persist in one's 
disorderly ways. This is most remarkable. You belong to the same 
type as I. I have noticed that you have a need for the harmonious life. 
\Vho are you? \Ve are a thousand old-tirners1 we are glad to have 
reached our conclusions-that's what we've got en lieu30 of life. (So 
the more you love me, the more you will be my judge.) You've got 
an idea? To be the sovereign king of an island. I knew it, Freemasonry 
is waiting for you." 
"The Rostovs and you, the new <generation>-which has always 
existed-you are looking for the harmonious life. (You've condemned 
serfage.) (A Jewish officer-something one's got to get used to.) You've 
got purity. (Nihilistics. Thirst of glory, of harmonious new forms.) 
You are good. Of course, there are awfully many beefy ones among 
you-but you are the ones that count. \Vhy, it's the one in a thousand 
who is in command. Oh, I've been depressed for those past 10 years. 
Right after I quit as District Commissioner I rushed abroad. Makar 
being the reason. I couldn't stand your mother. Surprise. A close 
look. Abroad, Venice. Then, the Tuileries were taken. I also want 
to take a firm stand, to believe, <yet> I believe in nothing. I was 
saying farewell to Europe. A picture. The golden age. Mother. To 
be honest. Let it be true that the environment is at fault, but so am 
I. (I've come to this conclusion through experience.) At least I have 
gone through everything. Something of that sort. Then things got to 
where I began to wear chains (in a humorous vein). I sent for your 
mother. She had stopped in Konigsberg. Meeting her." 
"She's an ordinary woman. She is the average woman. She took 
everything. She chased me away; yet at the same time she would have 
resented it, had I left her. But what does it matter anyway, say what 
you want: it became a passion. I abandoned everything: that con­
sumptive girl, Liza-I talked myself into believing that I actually 
loved the consumptive girl, trying to save myself. I abandoned every­
thing, returned <to Russia?>. That slap in the face made me so glad; 
29 Reference to Kitty of Anna Karenina. 
ao French: "In place of." 

528 "Let's Drink to Life" 
that I could bear it. I lived on, having lost my respect for myself. Now 
you've come-the last outburst, let's drink to life-<:hampagne! To­
day I've found out that life has started <again>, that N'ovra <?> 
has been strangled. Here is <her> letter: she is going to marry Bior­
ing, and I have come <here> with the idea of resurrection. I've em­
braced your mother. Now I am her husband and your father. Let's 
drink to life! Let's drink to it! I am like a convict whose chains have 
just been removed! I have been waiting for you, my boy. Praised be 
my boy and his mother. Now leave me, I'll be walking around all 
night. Save yourself from Lambert. There's this letter-tear it up. 
\Ve are happy. Let's become pilgrims} good-bye!" 
(N .B. \Vhere is the pakage. HERE.) 
He refused the inheritance. This was sincere. \Vhich means that 
he was capable of anything, provided (yet He) < . . .  > 
"Let's dring to madness, too. Maybe that's what life really is." 
"Really?" 
"Then what is the harmonious life? How should I know?" 
"Don't you love her? of course you do!" (The dear.) (Some funny, 
cheerful stories.) About those I ,000 who are not indifferent. N .B. 
(basic ideas) N .B. and (HERE) 
"Are you involved in a secret society?" 
"I love children. I've come to love this child." 
"I realized that I wasn't the same anymore, which is not to say that 
I had fallen behind the times, it's just that I wasn't the same man 
anymore. There were other times when it appeared to me that I 
wasn't standing on the sidelines at all, but on the contrary, that I 
might have been at the head of a movement, and become a leader. 
But look here, I must admit that I haven't even to this day made up 
my mind." 
"A Freemason? You might find consolation in being a Mason, or 
a leader. I don't. This isn't what I need. I don't even need life. \Vhat 
I need is the harmonious life-truth, peace with myself-and if I 
had to be a bad man, so solely by my own fault, so that I could 
always set it straight myself, for there would be something perfect out­
side me. Oh, if this were so, I'd fear no chains in the world." 
I: "I don't understand you." 
["My dear, this is a long story-for example, what should one be: 
universal man or Russian? I still don't know. I can't be either the one 
or the other, because there isn't such a thing as the first, and I my­
self don't want to be the second. With my friends, these things 

The Golden Age 529 
usually end in a joke or some witty remark, but those I ,000 of us, 
we suffer from each of these trifles."] 
"How sad it is, as a somnolent shadow-• 
"But this is not my case. Show me the sun, and I shall die with joy, 
I'll be glad, even if I were left behind." 
"Now I shall simply be a father, a husband, and a humane man. 
This is entirely sufficient and, what is most important, I'm glad I 
have the chance. The chains have fallen!" 
Underground man is the most important type <today>. 
A man of culture? 
Melancholy Levin.a1 
"I am convinced, my dear, that you won't understand even half 
of what I'm saying, but I really needed you today." 
The golden age. Makar Ivanovich and Mary of Egypt. "Join the 
people; it's better, after all, than butchery.* *  Let the Minister of 
Public Education say of me, too, that it happened 'by permission of 
his parents,' though, let me say this, if all our fathers were like me, 
things wouldn't be in such vile shape. We <were> sincere, my dear, 
that's what we were. Oh, we were little liars, too, but we loved 
truth." 
"Let my bones be weary, but show me the sun, and some move­
ment, and I'll welcome it, every bit of it, including the fact that I've 
myself fallen behind; grow, God's green grass, even from the grave, 
my love." 
"'\Ve have the right to be irreconcilable, for we haven't forgiven 
anything to ourselves either." 
"Those who are born with a snotty nose" (Versilov used to say.) 
The deputies Naquet and Madier de Montjau. <Sic!> 
A fine country across the Altai 
Flung an Elbow over to China. 
Tra-ta-ta, ta-ta-ta, 
The cat married the tomcat. 
• A quotation from F. I. Tiutchev's poem "Kak ptichka ranneiu zarioi" (1836). 
• • Used apparently without the connotation of the English word, but as a 
metaphor for "a coarse, animal existence." 
31 Levin of A nna Karenina. 

530 Ra11dom Comme11ts 
He is much more educated than I am, but he has decided to con-
cern himself with nothing anymore. He is a cynic. 
"Good-bye!" (abruptly and gloomily). 
He knows what Butte aux Cailles is. 
"I am a citizen of the town of Butte aux Cailles." 
"Stance, paniet• Butte aux Cailles, that's where you will observe 
that a pair of trousers is worn for 15 years, without taking them off 
once, and no shirts are worn at all. Mile Alphonsine, will you fix my 
tie (le vilain, he bought it for his own money)." 
"Allo11s prendre un vene de l'alJse11the vert et33--<illegible>. You 
are dressed like a dandy. A jacket, have you got an-other jacket? I can 
give you some money, come to my place." 
"Nous avons un rouble d'argent de parier• • jaune que nous avons 
prete chez notre ami.naa 
He was talking in sections between two commas, and it might have 
been funny, if it hadn't been so long. 
"He knows his business. Vous VOilS repetez.34 (He knows his busi­
ness.) ]e voudrais vous pleurer, quand vous mourrez ... Ou est done 
votre montre?35-Spent it on food-Le petit vilain, n'as pas so11 
montre,36 gilded, 8 rubles." 
"Si vous ne rendez pas 10 roubles je parlerai de mon nouvel ami 
Dolgorouky de grosse voix.JJ3i 
Lambert got mad. 
They cost more than there is use in them. 
\VALKI:'\G HOME DRU:'\K, ABOUT LE VILAI!':: "A dear boy, an unfor­
tunate boy! Why, I'll be exactly like him, I am, too, a vilain, 'File 
petit vilain!'38 \Vhy does she have an aversion to him?" 
Lambert goes with him, he is talking about them and, apparently, 
cannot restrain his anger; only from time to time he says to the Youth: 
• Polish: "The Sun, Sir?" 
• • Apparently a misprint for "papier." 
32 French: "Let's have a glass of green absinth." 
33 French: "\Ve have a ruble of yellow paper money that we borrowed from 
our friend." 
34 French: "You are repeating yourself." 
35 French: "I would like to cry, when you die ... Where then is your watch?" 
36 French: "The petty villain does not have his watch." Dostoevsky uses the 
wrong gender for "watch." He says "son montre" instead of "sa montre." 
3i French: "If you do not give back the ten rubles, I will speak of my new 
friend Dolgoruky in a loud voice." 
38 French: "Run off, petty villain." 

The Idea of Self-perfection 53 1 
"Well, how glad I am, how glad I am!" And then again: "These 
skunks," etc. ''I'm finding it so annoying, I wasn't expecting you­
there will be anoth࿪r fellow, a real bore, please do put up with it, and 
after dinner you and I will <really talk things over>." 
"Oh, I'm going to break with them!" 
And right there, with the oysters, he virtually forced him to have 
one drink after another and tried to take him over to his own place, 
but he didn't want to drink. 
?About Anna Andreevna? A question. Shouldn't it be told so that 
both Lambert and the Youth fail to mention her on purpose, and that 
later, when drunk, the Youth says: "Isn't it true that we both pur­
posely refused to mention Anna Andreevna?" 
The tall fellow knocked down Lambert's hat. Lambert: "This is 
<just> a kopek's worth, but you could really deliver me (your friend) 
<from these people>. If we could make 3,000 I'd send them all 
away to the thieves' den where they belong." 
Astonished eyes. "And we are strangers, always strangers to each 
other." 
"Your sincerity has won me over: ࿫I  thought that there was 
more of a mystery about you. I am glad that this was all so simple. 
Let's live together, in order and in self-perfection. I am yours, yours 
forever. Let us go." 
Or: "So then, what's the matter with you is merely that she got in 
your way, when you and she met, that you were already about to start 
a harmonious life when she came along and destroyed everything?" 
"Almost like this, my dear boy," he smiled. 
His idea, formerly: could it be that self-perfection, the <moral> 
feat, would lead one to everything else as well? Be a man-this before 
everything else. All right, let there be some hitch-it can't be helped. 
So you suffer some-that's what life is for; but to make up for it, 
you've done everything you could do. 
"You haven't achieved it even after all those sufferings, while 
She's got it for nothing!" shouts the Youth. 
N .B. Envious of Makar (<who is> harmonious and calm), he went 
abroad. Thoroughly investigated the i"dea with those chains. He 
wrote to her asking her to join him, [Mother ("thinking that I was 
condescending to her. <Actually> I was being arrogant, just as with 
Makar. She could teach me many things").] (Turn all the goods over 
to her.) And there, that meeting with her-and everything collapsed. 
"Yes, fasting, genuflections. The longer I watched myself the more 
thralldom I saw in myself." 

532 Lambert m1d the Rape 
N .B. "i\fy story is a comical one," he begins his narrative. "I dis­
covered the slave in a free and perky man. Only they (those who 
practice self-perfection) have a right to judge society and to make de­
mands on it. Yet they won't judge it either, they'd much rather help." 
The Youth: "I understand. The servitude of the nobility." 
He: "Not at all." 
i\loving abroad; a complete rift between one's life and one's con­
victions. At every step. People have one balsam-self-esteem (the last 
of the passions, which does not desert the wise man, according to 
Tacitus). 
"\Vhat should I be, what should I do? Be content with the role 
of a humble shoemaker (as our new people have prescribed us)­
a man of the caliber of those who die on the cross couldn't stand 
for this." 
"Did you ever join a secret society?" 
"No, my friend." 
["I am a nobleman-to serve the nobility is not enough."] 
"This animal idea of love is torturing me to death, so humiliating it 
is. I was aspiring to perfection ... This was very funny. But that's the 
way I am. The most important fact here is that I was capable of be­
lieving in perfection. I'm believing in it even now ... there are 1 ,000 
of us. There must be many of us, some pulling one way, and the 
others pulling the other way, in these times of transition." 
N.B. "\Vhy, she isn't perfect at all," He says, giving the Youth a 
strange look. "But she must be perfection itself." 
"Why?" The Youth is giving him an astonished look. 
"But if she has such power over a man, she must be perfect." 
HE HAS AGREED WITH LA:<.IBERT THAT LA:<.IBERT should rape ha. 
He believed that she would consent. (A psychological trait of his 
character.) Besides, he hoped that if she consented, he might be cured 
of his love for her. But having realized that he couldn't be cured, he 
went out of his mind. 
She to Him: "Please, I shall marry you, <but> don't kill me." 
His IDEA: She is not worth his love; such torture and a whole life 
broken for her sake, "<your> mother is worth incomparably more." 
[THE YOUTH EXPLAINS, FROM HIS OWN POINT OF VIEW, HlS <Versi­
lov's> CHARACTER, PRIOR TO THE CO:'\CLUDl:'\G SCE:'\E OF THE CO:-.;"­
FLAGRATION, I.E., THE FATUl\-1 OF LOVE.] 
And now HE Hl:<.ISELF, in his confession} explains to the Youth what 
precisely has been so tormenting Him, what precisely has been hurt­
ing Him so much. \Vhy this fatum} which has broken [all his life to 

The Slave behind the Mask 533 
pieces,] a blind love for an unworthy creature, whom he rejects, for 
he has begun to love Mother. As for that, he had begun to love Mother 
abroad, after "the little beetle." (N .B. There is, however, the curious 
fact that every time he got together with Mother, he always grew in­
different and developed a contempt for Her. "Could it be that I have 
not found my ideal in Her? I couldn't help despising her as I would 
any vile society woman.") 
"And now I am cured." 
DELIGHTED WITH MOTHER. That night, enthusiastic words of praise 
TO HER. 
"Oh, don't be scared, we are still the same old liars, yet we love 
truth." 
"I used to love suffering, those sunken cheeks, that beauty spent on 
me; Russian women lose their beauty early. And still... The Beauty­
of other forms-and everything is finished." 
"I left <Russia> to get away from <its?> movement, and I was a 
wanderer out of pride, not from remorse, without anger." 
"Were you regenerated by Europe?" 
"Europe was those very same noblemen who'd run away from 
their nobility." 
"Serfdom. Why, weren't we the emancipators, didn't we abolish 
serfage, Anton Goremyka: 39 I left Russia out of pride, and actually 
not because I had not received enough in return for my liberalism. On 
the other hand, I was repulsed (I) by those self-satisfied fools, those 
brazen-faced fellows, those opinionated feuilletonists, (2) by the 
crooks who were using those new ideas to enrich themselves, and (3) 
by those poor souls who are now 'joining the people,' and <finally,> 
by the fact that I could see [everywhere] the slave behind that mask of 
insolence. I simply asked myself what my role was and what I had to 
do, whether I ought to become a humble shoemaker," etc. 
[I am searching for the harmonious life.] Breaking up one's own 
self (Makar, envy of Makar. "Grow, God's green grass.") 
"For us, foreign countries are <like> stones; why, before these 
men you are-the Tuileries-the golden age." 
"Just be a loving <husband?>, she, she." 
In the meantime, <my> idea was growing. 
"We could not help developing into propagandists and promoters 
39 See note 16 of Part III. 

534 
The Russia,1 ,\fan 
right away. 1\o one knows where to draw a limit. 1\ot to himself, nor 
to his epoch." 
"I made a start with my chains. But there She appeared.'' 
The Youth comes out running to his own place. His character. He 
has passion. (He found that out.) And in such passion-the insult. 
Resurrectiou. 
"Byron, Beppo, Venice, the Tuileries, a Point of rest. I was sad 
during my wanderings. I was saying farewell to Europe. I believe in 
nothing new. [In nothing at all. Oh yes, I belie,·e in an economic 
breakup, in the hearth, but in nothing else."] 
"I am the last of the Mohicans. The Tuileries. Really, before these 
men you < . . .  > \Ve, the Russians of former times, used to wander 
around and pray; like Makar hanovich, we were pilgrims." 
Claude Lorrain.40 The beginning of European humanity. 
Ή[other. You. She. 
Specialists, etc. 
The Youth: "You are hostile to specialists. I am noticing a certain 
amount of hostility about you." 
He: "Perhaps this is so, my dear, and I am altogether grateful to 
you for your remarks. I like your remarks very much." 
"Russian man would acquiesce in being no good himself, as long 
as, outside himself, there remained something which was inaccessibly 
holy. But when e\·erything that is outside has been destroyed and he 
has been left alone, Russian man will refuse to go on. [That's why 
we've got the type of the nobleman to help us reco,·er our identity at 
a <time> like this.]" 
Self-satisfaction comes with contempt <for others>. (Atheism is 
love for mankind.) I was having a feeling of hatred. I had a need for 
what had been before. To adore the past. I was seeing nothing at all 
in those new people save traits that were deserving of contempt. Be­
came a misanthrope. \\ras saying farewell to Europe. Claude Lorrain. 
Mother. 
N .B. Up to this point, not a word about Mother. 
Sunken cheeks. 
Breaking oneself. 
"\Vere you a believer?" 
"No, my friend, I believed in nothing." 
An image of atheism. Belong to them, the whole immediacy of 
40 See note 25 of this section. 

Atheism 535 
life through this love for her. I did not want to participate in life in 
this fashion. I had been preaching something different, I wanted to 
fight, and there, falum. She was bound to be perfection itself. 
"Let's drink to Mother and to her. (N.B. The fact that I am 
drinking to her, proves that I am cured.)" 
Atheism is the love of mankind. 
The Youth: "If you understood it that way, why then, could you be 
unhappy? \Vhy didn't you join them?" 
He: "I was having a conten1pt feeling of contempt for them. OuRs, 
too, i.e., I, for my part, could tell them what their philosophy was. 
Whereas they could do nothing of the kind. Besides, I had remained 
true to the past." 
"Is this how you believe in Christ?" 
"Yes, this is how I believe in Christ," he said (alas, he did not 
believe). 
"Eh, no, my dear, I believed in nothing!" 
[My friend. I have never believed in Christ."] 
"Is that really so? But what about your chains?" 
"My friend, you are my judge. I have been expecting you. What 
would I have told you right now, as you are my son,, and she is my 
wife ... 
" 
"I am an idealist. Yes! I couldn't stand their coarse, positivistic* 
atheism." 
About food, a cult of blood, for the sake of blood, even before anger. 
The burning of the Tuileries. In order to prove that we dare 
do it. 
Oh, these phrase-mongers. 
"Oh, we were understanding it differently. Atheism." 
"Yes, to be sure, it is scary without God, but we can nestle up to 
mankind and to all the universes-" 
"This is a deity, too." 
"No, my friend. This is anti theism." 
"But what are you doing to me!" (exclaims the Youth). 
He describes the picture to Rostov. 
"Why didn't you call for me?" (I put my hand on him). 
"What should I have told you?" 
"This very thing." 
• Sapozhnogo ateizma, literally, "boot atheism," alluding to the positivist 
slogan that "boots were more important than the Dresden 1\Iadonna." 

536 Immediate Life 
"I was thinking of that. I was thinking right now, as I was waiting 
for you. I've always been thinking. But who was I myself?" 
"Oh, I need you tonight, hear my confession. People aren't this 
cruel, you are wondering what it may he that I love so much. Yet I 
have quit it. After <my tenure as> District Commissioner <I went> 
to Europe." 
IN PASSI:o-:G: About the Russians who were then in Europe, after hav­
ing abolished the old order based on serfdom (he touches all this 
i1l passirzg). 
Russia is so strong, still <we have> no fatherland. 
But better let it be not me, but the new <generation>. 
I'd let the people in on everything (exhaustion of authority), 
and <even> those rampaging seminarians who have replaced the 
nobility. • 
The Youth: "It seems to me that you are so much an idealist that 
you could not stand real, immediate life." 
("Your remarks are amazingly original.") 
He: "I know that communism will fail, and that it is gomg to 
come." 
The little beetle. "This is where I wrote to your mother that she 
should join me. Note that she didn't actually get there, but got stuck 
in Konigsberg. I've seen her, she has allowed me to marry."""* 
[Here.] "Why didn't you call me?" 
"What could I have told you? Do you think that it has been very 
often that I have been in a position so close to an integral and perfect 
completion of my affairs, as I am today? What could I have told you?" 
"Well, this very same thing," etc. 
That sunset in Claude Lorrain's picture is a riddle and a mystery. 
But I dreamed that the mystery had already been realized; why, 
really, before these men ... < . . .  > 
"1\1other, you." 
Atheism is a state of deep orphanhood, there is rzo God to nestle up 
to ... 
If they took away God and all gods 
Deification of mankind in place of God. 
The great mystery was accomplished, the appearance of Christ. 
• This as well as several of the preceding phrases are unclear in the original. 
• •  ;\fight also be: "I saw her, and she gave me permission to marry <Lidiia>." 

Cultural Life in Russia 537 
̓YeF}'body woFshipped What is it I have been teaching you? Every-
body worshipped. 
Eternal life. 
[Makar (One cannot help worshipping).] 
The Youth: "This is atheism-this is pure atheism! Which comes 
with God on your lips." 
In the beginning, Claude Lorrain-everything will pass, but in­
stead of pictures [of blood, or freezing to death,] dreams, ideals were 
created. Later, atheism. 
"Idealist! Idealist!" 
But at this point, the idea of the chains. Then, the idea of Mother, 
sunken cheeks, amazing views. 
He didn't come for a long time, chains. At this point, he meets 
Her. 
Resurrection, She had written me a letter. 
I read it, got up, and instead of hatred, sent her my blessings. 
"I understand that you have respect for it. Yet in the meantime you 
are telling a mere youth, such as myself, about it." 
"Why, no one is forcing me to say a thing. I'm doing it to embrace 
you. Today I have a son, and, consequently, a new life is beginning 
for me." 
"For us, we together," says the Youth. 
"They become attached to the civilized type, but to some of them 
with hatred; I always imagined leaving you as such." 
The Youth: "But Mother and her tranquillity won't give you your 
peace. You will be again tormented by pictures and the fate of man­
kind." 
"And let it be, such is our life! In Russia, there seems to have 
developed a strange cultural type of <people who feel> Weltschmerz 
for the whole world ... Let it be suffering, we wouldn't have accepted 
happiness anyway. It is a ridiculous type, but let it be. I want nothing 
good and new, I love the old, my own." 
The sun, and movement. 
"But playing the fine gentleman is a good thing, my dear." 
Venice, Beppo, Laura. I loved Venice more than Russia. 
"You again, with that serfage of yours." 
"What good is this life to me, once I have seen that I can be a 
criminal (poison her)." 
[A task for 1 ,000 people] It's enough if there is one in a 1 ,000, but 
there are more of them. 
Later, join the people. [make <her> a cripple] 

538 "My Wanderings Are Over" 
The Yo11th: "But I am satisfied with you alone. I shall follow you!" 
"Me? Oh, my friend, what did you just say? My wanderings are 
over. The last act took place several years ago when I went abroad. To 
call you then, to take you with me, I wasn't able at the time, I really 
wasn't able. I cursed everything, abandoned everything, and left in 
a terribly depressed state of mind. [Yet I <even then> believed more 
in you and in your mother, than in all] of my wanderings. My dear, I 
am telling you all of these things in some kind of a strange hope that 
you may understand all this balderdash. I have called you here (in 
the end) because I felt a need to embrace you and to call you my son." 
(N .B. Here, a picture of Europe.) + 
(Atheism.) "This is where I never knew how to bring things to an 
end. Here, I always ran into some kind of mystery. I <never> man­
aged to end it simply." 
"Perhaps it is really so that there is no simple ending to it." 
He: "Entirely possible, my dear. I like your remarks, my dear." 
The funny thing was that I never got the idea (that I should love 
Mother). But I was all too happy when I <finally> got the idea. 
[\Vhat is of the essence here is a bit more serfdom, <somebody to tell 
you> what to love, what to believe in, and what to [Je.] 
A cadet-a Jew-why did I take offense? 
Venice-why do I love Venice more than Russia? 
The Rostovs changing into the new <generation>. Oh, I am not 
talking about the fact that <Russian> fathers are welcoming dis­
honor, or the fact that they have become mortgagers, or feuilletonists 
gloating about the latter fact. But rather, about the fact that all this 
is, say what you want, simply a mirage. 
He must himself define beauty. 
Restless and skeptical even in their childhood. 
Yet it is impossible to show mercy to them, for already their ranks 
have been swelled by prodigious masses of noblemen as well. 
Abroad, we have noblemen who have fled the nobility. 
I am not feeling sorry about that; much rather, I am for these new 
ideals. However, I do want to establish the fact that our country is 
now in ferment, and that it is impossible not to register this in a 
chronicle of our time. 
"My boy, I've said this about you only right now. This is how I 
used to see you at the time I was dreaming of you." 
Love for Mother and her sunken cheeks would not atone for any­
thing, however. .. 

Crude Positivism 539 
As far as I was concerned, atheism would not lead to bloodshed, but 
to every man embracing and welcoming the other. 
A Russian nobleman cannot help suffering from \Veltschmerz, and 
Peter implanted an idea < . . .  > 
Could it really be that my yearning (abroad) was only a whim? 
I am saying that there are 5,000 of us-
\Vhy, before these men < . . .  > 
This crude positivism* was getting me confused. lly the way, there 
is a secret hidden here the ideal. 
[A task, there are 1 ,000 of us.] Reality always smacks of boots, even 
in the presence of a most vivid and pronounced striving for an ideal. 
The Tuileries shouldn't have disturbed me. But I didn't want to 
submit. This thing was repulsive to me, and I turned away. I don't 
want any part of the new, I want my own queer ways. 
A theism. 
Bone-tired. 
"But who knows: perhaps I was really grieving over the ruin of 
the nobility." 
But that a nobleman and a man of culture < . . .  > 
"I am a young swell. I am a District Commissioner. I am disen­
chanted. I am suffering from Weltschmerz. ϱIy friend, all this may 
perhaps sound funny to some people, but please do show some regard 
for the fact that I have saved this for you, that I have decided to make 
this confession before you. For this is the most important thing in the 
life of a cultured Russian." 
"\Vhat is perhaps the strangest thing about this confession of mine 
is the fact that I want to make it so clear." and tl=tat I aHl trying 
A most honest young girl. 
She is working for a living, for she finds it too much of a burden 
to eat her father's bread. 
This is true in 1 ,000 exceptional cases, but in general as a ࿢ 
general rule it presents a frightful distortion of human feeling. 
"Really, what are you doing to me," exclaimed (the Youth). I was 
all rapt attention. In a frenzy. 
"That was affected 'love of mankind,' while this is, on the contrary, 
immediate, genuine love. Being the idealist you are, you are fright­
ened by such immediacy right away." 
• See n. (•), p. 535, above. 

540 Society and Moral Foundations 
"I like your remarks, my dear." 
"Atheism-! have felt universal love, but I don't love Mother." 
"1\Jon cher, je suis gentilhomme avarzt tout et je mourmis gerztil-
homme."41 
"My dear, I am a little overcome by my ridiculous enthusiasm, and 
I keep digressing into extraneous details." 
"You won't understand it, but still I'm going to plant some seeds 
[in your mind]." 
Then they burnt the Tuileries. A Russian nobleman could not 
approve of that. 
The Russian nobleman as a herald of world (and of the union 
of all mankind) citizenship and of universal love. He has received 
this mission from .fi5. the course of history. These vistas were opened 
to him by Peter, and formulated by Catherine the Great. Let it be 
the mission of all Russian people. Yet the Russian nobleman was a 
pioneer, a leader of this <movement>. I stand for it, and this is how 
I have understood its calling. [To be the pioneer of a great idea in 
Europe, and perhaps for all of mankind.] [Nastasia Egorovna, get us 
some wine. Two hours before Makar <?>. I needed you.] ["Looks 
like boots."] And indeed, what else could he be but a pioneer, since 
he alone was the bearer of enlightenment and of honor. 
"But what about Makar lvanovich?" I was embracing him. 
"The truth of our people will be fused with ours, and we shall go 
on together. The time is near." 
"Society must be built upon moral foundations; nothing can be 
founded upon the flesh, upon an economic idea, upon making stones 
into bread, and so far our politicians are fooling only the gullible. 
The moral ideas of a nation are derived from religion, or are formu­
lated by popular religion. Anyone who wants to reject and break up 
the old foundations, such as private property, family, etc., must break 
up the old faith. So they have announced that they are atheists. The 
Russian gentilhomme could not agree with this, or cure himself, 
being himself an atheist-I've been seeking to reconcile-<and> 
sought to reconcile many <of these conflicting tendencies>. I could 
not, of course, but admit that atheism was on the ascent in this world. 
Yet I was viewing the setting of our old sun with sadness. Even if it 
passes, a great <new age> will begin. This is actually what I wanted 
to express. But so far no one has been able to understand me. And 
41 French: "My dear, I am a nobleman first of all and I shall die a nobleman. 

The Russian Type 54 1 
I have been wandering alone. For only a Russian heart can divine 
the future of this world, that is, a Russian of the advanced, civilized 
type. You are laughing. I am not a madman. Then they burned the 
Tuileries. And after the Tuileries, a uni versa! reconciliation of ideas. 
For a Russian nobleman is the universal reconciliation of ideas. For, 
in our time, educated Russian thought is the universal reconciliation 
of ideas. The educated Russian type is a universal human type, and 
up to now it has been only the Russian nobleman. A Frenchman is 
only a Frenchman, but a Russian ... a Russian is a progressive; his 
thinking is very much ahead of everyone else's. The bearer of a 
universal ideal. You are surprised, my boy. My soul is outraged. They 
burned the Tuileries, they fought. Only the nobleman is waiting, 
biding his time. You are surprised. How this amuses me. 'Ve have 
developed a type. The Russian land is demanding an ideal of me. 
Universal reconciliation of ideas. But this you haven't got in Europe. 
Except for our I ,000 people. 'Ve are the bearers of an idea. A cis and 
Galatea."42 
"'Vhat are you doing to me?" 
"My dear, I have called you in, so you might understand one­
hundredth <of my ideas>. The Russian nobleman, a universal idea. 
I am little bit in a state of enthusiasm," and here, the mission of the 
Russian nobleman. "A pioneer." "I did not cease calling myself a 
Russian when I realized that I loved Venice more than Russia." 
"But weren't you in the government service prior to that?" 
"Such was the legacy of Peter and Catherine. A pioneer, though 
much of it might have never happened." 
"Yet I was sad. The Tuileries." 
Solomon-everything will pass away. 
"EvERYTHil\'G WILL PASS AWAY?" "Everything, my friend, and per­
haps nothing of what you have loved will remain, because a new 
order will begin." 
"As a nobleman I cannot allow this to happen-as a nobleman." 
The sun, and movement. 
"'Vhat utter weariness, while I do have faith, and an idea. I want 
no part of the new. 'Vhat is left to me is my dream that perhaps things 
may turn out my way after all." 
Atheism. Makar: "I love even from the grave." 
42 The title of Claude Lorrain's painting. See note 25 of this section. 

542 Makar's Idea 
Every Frenchman and German. Only a Russian can Le more French 
than a Frenchman. 
Universal reconciliation of ideas. Beppo, stones. \Vhy, before these 
men, you are. • Atheism. They were persecuting God. Crude posi­
tivism ... I have a sad feeling. For it is my idea, after all, that is right. 
Oh, it seemed to me, the gold<en age>. 
Fatum. "Why did I have to insult her? But I did insult her. She 
was sitting there, in Konigsberg, and I didn't even send her any 
money. [Incidentally, note that I was taking her (.Mother) <abroad> 
to tear her away from her native land, since I wasn't intending to 
return to Russia.]" 
"I was beginning to feel tied down, and I wanted to kill her." 
Makar's idea. Asceticism. 
"<You> simply could not stand an immediate love." 
THE Cmii:'\G OF CHRIST. \Vhy, this is it. The very thing. 
(There it is, the dream of a Russian nobleman.) 
About Mother, about Tatiana. Her love. [ϱlade her happy with a 
kiss.] 
\Veil really, how could she understand a nobleman's melancholy. 
Tatiana understands it. 
To be an honest man. Support her and make her happy. 
"]e suis barinet gentilhomme."43 
Makar Ivanovich, [being part of the people,] belongs to the 
nobility. 
"This is how I understand it, my dear, our role. And this is my 
final conclusion." 
"She has broken the flow of my thoughts." 
"\Ve [Russian] nobles are now concentrating on a new universal 
union of ideas. And in the meantime-in the meantime it represents 
all that is positive about the future, ad what is really going to 
happen." 
Russian self-restriction is neither cynicism nor shamelessness, as is 
the the case with those people who are thirsting for their right to 
be dishonorable, but merely sincerity with a striving for improve­
ment. The ideal. To bow before something outside one's own self 
(see page 5). 
• Apparently an incomplete phrase, though it might be translated: "Why, you 
are before these men." 
•• Sapozhnost'. See n. (•), p. 535, above. 
43 French: "I am a noble lord." "Barinet" is probably a misprint for "barine." 

"Yet you were happy." 
The Youth and Lambert 543 
"Who told you that I was unhappy? I've been happy all my life, but 
I was sad, and ... and ... ther@ was there came a moment when I was 
perfectly happy. Mother." 
"Oh, my dear, how often does love meet hatred, or even look alto­
gether like hatred." 
?To develop such a beautiful type-it cost dearly. Mine, a noble­
man's happiness, and mine, a nobleman's idea. 
The muzhik and Mother, sunken cheeks. For me, it all started 
with her sunken cheeks. Her photograph. I wrote to her, asking her 
to join me, but in the interval I fell in love. About Mother. She didn't 
even make it to Konigsberg. 
A letter from her. 
Oh, it didn't happen suddenly, that I fell out of love with her. 
Even to the very last outburst. .. I was reproaching myself that I was 
acting that way toward Mother. 
I was feeling, and had felt for a long time, that I was free. This 
outburst was ... probably some sort of recollection, the dregs, some­
thing external and incongruous-yet I myself was already free. 
What then, was the meaning of those recent events, of that last 
outburst and, last but not least, of Lambert? He and Lambert. Hadn't 
Lambert been offering him something? 
And later, when I met Lambert, he lied to me: "l\'o, I haven't been 
telling him a thing." 
Miserables/4 and Mother in Konigsberg. All the same, a man's life 
is like a book read to the end.* 
"Mother, allow me to read to you from the Gospels." 
"Ah, how well you read, my dear. Read this Epistle, he used to love 
this one particularly." 
I at Lambert's. "<Meet> her in some dive. Invite Him. Let ࿣ 
him see, let him!" "This can be done," says Lambert. 
\Vhen the old Prince has come to stay at his place, he goes to see 
Tatiana and tells her about the letter. They agree that Tatiana should 
write to her the next morning. But upon leaving Tatiana he runs 
into Lambert and tells him that he will be at Tatiana's on the follow-
• This phrase is quite unclear in the original. The translation is a mere 
conjecture. 
44 Reference to Victor Hugo's Les Miserables, which Dostoevsky ranked above 
his Crime and Punishment. The novel is referred to in the final version in Part 
Ill, Chapter 8: I. 

544 The Accidental Family 
ing day, that he is going to return the letter to her, thus putting an 
end to the whole affair. As for his visit to Tatiana, he had come to 
tell her the news about the old Prince, and she informed Bioring of it. 
The question of that letter written [by Tatiana] : How did Lambert 
and He find out that Tatiana had written that letter? (Perhaps 
<through> Maria?) Think over and find out. 
ϲ.B. Solution of the problem: The day before, the Youth had left 
the old Prince <at his fiat> and visited Tatiana, to tell her that she 
should write to her. Tatiana had given him a tongue-lashing, but she 
had written the letter, sent Maria to deliver it. [Here N.B.] 
?They started begging Maria not to deliver the letter. But Maria, 
once she had received the letter, delivered it, and he and she quickly 
sent her over to her place, and Alphonsine to ours. In Tatiana's letter 
not a word was said specifically about the fiat. 
You ARE THE TYPE OF A;\1 ACCIDE:-.:TAL FAȒIILY, AS OPPOSED TO A 
TRADITIO:-.:AL FAȓIILY. THE TRADITIO:-.:s OF A RUSSIA:-.: FA¯fiLY-THAT'S 
BY PusHKI:-.:. 
There was no better way to use your leisure or, so-to-speak, your 
day of rest. 
BuT THERE IS THIS QUESTIO:-.:: ARE THERE ȔfA:-.:Y TRADITIO:-.:AL FA¯l­
ILIES LEFT, A:-.:D AREN'T EVE:-.: THE TRADITIO:-.:AL FA¯IILIES TUR:"'II:-.:G !:"'ITO 
ACCIDE:-.:TAL o:-.:Es (as a result of our ideological chaos). Versilov has a 
lawful family. Just see if the family unit is intact here! The Junior 
Chamberlain and Ίlitrofaniia. A personage showing the dimensions 
of the Very Reverend Mother Superior, Mitrofaniia,45 of course, 
without meaning to suggest anything criminal. 
The Professor: "You were concealing your document-this is most 
characteristic.'' 
"Look at the persuasions of your father: he is a nobleman, of an­
cient lineage, and yet at the same time a Communard, and simul­
taneously, a true poet without any faith at all, yet one who is ready 
to die for something quite indefinite, in which he believes, following 
the example of countless civilized and Europeanized Russians of the 
Petersburg period of Russian history. Leo Tolstoi did not spare even 
his own Pierre, whom he had been leading with such a firm hand 
throughout his novel, even in spite of <his> Freemasonry. He loves 
Russia, yet rejects her altogether; he tortures the members of his 
family, and considers this to be his right, his responsibility (Makar 
45 She was accused of forgery. Dostoevsky was acquainted with the trial. 

Education and Scientific Discipline 545 
Ivanovich, Mother, guilt, illegitimacy, Liza is pregnant). \Vhat could 
be more perverted, more disorganized?" 
["You are a youth from an accidental family. God save you."] 
N. Nik. About Versilov. No signs of edt:tcatioR strict scientific disci­
pline. All these people were living in terms of inspiration and proph­
ecy. Even public figures, even scholars-the whole thing being <a 
lot> like the practices of the Khlysts:46 spinning around in a circle, 
and prophecy. Just as the system of serfdom placed the nobleman 
under an obligation to get an education (ever since Peter), so a 
merchant's inherited millions present an absolute obstacle to his 
getting educated. \Vhat do you care about scholarship when, at 
twenty years of age, you've got millions on your hands? And as for 
our Seminarians, though they are the most educated of us all, they 
have the quality of taking everybody else, i.e., all Russia-simply 
everybody-for the very kind of Seminarians they themselves are, 
which is also why they are so much bolder than anyone else in their 
conclusions and in their views. 
A history of the Russian [noble] family . 
... In the form of a magnificent historical picture (\Var and Peace) 
which will be handed down to posterity, and without which posterity 
could not carry on. 
The accidental family is a much more difficult project. 
N. P. : "If you were to publish this manuscript (your sincerity 
would be against you), -6t+ your strong sincerity would harm your 
belletristic success ... 
" 
N. M. : "All the old has been destroyed rather thoroughly and 
accurately; what's ahead of us--Qne can only speculate on what's 
ahead: it's almost frightening." 
[Letter of Nik. Semen.] "Our youth is 'joining the people,' yet it 
is full of self-sacrifice, some fine feelings have remained even from 
our past history, though the future is altogether problematic. You 
are from an accidental family ... [God save you]." These are the last 
lines of the letter, and suddenly a postscriptum. About an abandoned 
infant and Nikolai Petrovich's role (three or four lines with a nuance 
of touchiness). 
46 A religious sect that arose in the middle of the seventeenth century. By the 
middle of the nineteenth century they had disintegrated and no longer functioned 
as a group. They were distinguished by the belief in eternal rebirth, and the 
materialization of the holy spirit. They whipped themselves (Russian word Khlyst 
means "whip") to drive demons from their bodies. 

546 
The Old Prince 
The career of a lawyer. I myself have been thinking of one-the 
satisfaction deri,·ed from money, fame coupled with dignity and even 
some of that breadth to which you devote a good deal of attention in 
your notes as well as in your fantasies. 
(The old Prince keeps closing his ears and waving everybody aside.) 
"Don't say that! Don't say that!" If somebody enters his room, he 
gives him those pained glances. They put him to bed, then dinner. I 
had stuffed Katerina l':ikolaevna's photograph into the bag. 
About young Versilov. "Ce jezme homme, il eJt charma11t, mais je 
11e l'aime,H don't let him into my room, don't let him." :1\:asty little 
photographs. He looks, laughs with affectation, and then suddenly 
bursts into tears precisely [because] they are making him laugh. 
Oh, people are very nice. Yes, but this is not going to be pan of 
my plan. 
[It's the flat that matter, she about the little dog.] 
"My friend, I am in a very immediate way convinced of my <im­
minent> death," an old man with an icon, with an icon split in half. 
[It seemed to me all the time that this was merely an allegory and 
that, though he did love Mother, he was still in a state of frenzy and 
had the absolute desire to bring something to an end, just as he had 
<finished off> this icon.] 
Versilov went out of his mind; I had been predicting it. 
A shirt. 'Vhat shall be put into <his> grave? "If you know some­
thing, better not tell anybody. Let them do what they want. Is it true 
that they want to put me in an insane asylum?" (and he burst into 
tears). 
The conflagration. "He is going to kill her!" I shouted. "Quite 
likely!" said Tatiana. 
[Anna Andreevna, to the Youth, about the old Prince: "No, on 
the contrary, I sent you to him f3eFRaf"S also so He couldn't kill her."] 
The old Prince to Anna Andreevna: "Why can't I see both of you 
together? 'Vhy won't the two of you make up, et voiLa tout."48 
About von Sohn. "1\fais, mon cher, je suis libre, n'est-ce pas?"49 
The Junior Chamberlain. Split the fortune. 
After the funeral Liza whispered to him that they were expecting 
him, that He might actually come. 
4i French: "This young man; he is charming, but I don't like him." 
48 French: "And that's all." 
49 French: "But, my dear, I am free, am I not?" 

Versilov and Katerina N ikolaevna 547 
[N.B. important.] Lambert needed Versilov to get her out of the 
way, for his influence, for his familiarity with the circumstances­
and, in the case of a commotion, so he could blame the whole con­
spiracy on Versilov; this is what I think-the more so, since Versilov 
did not need the money and Lambert was getting all of it, as much 
as he could extort <from her>. 
AT THE RENDEzvous. She tells Him about the document, about 
Mother, what a wonderful woman she is, "You-how I respect you" 
-(feverish!). He was all Hushed. 
N .B. (More than anything else, she fears the document), [and noth­
ing else.] 
She: "Compared to you, I am <like> a stone." 
He, pointing at Mother's portrait: "I know that you know her. 
There she is." 
"The dear." 
"My angel, be my angel." 
"I shall be your angel, certainly. I shall make a point of becoming 
worthy of you; I shall respect and esteem you immeasurably." 
"Perhaps I shall destroy you. I gave you my word. Go." 
Folding <her> hands: "Don't ever threaten me again,-5f*tFe-forgive 
me." 
And VERSILOV entered the room: here now is the whole terrible 
scene, as things happened, one after another. 
Feebly <?>: "This, however, is not why I have come ... This is not 
what I wanted to tell you ... Sonia, have pity on me, poor wretch that 
I am!" 
"Really, wouldn't you at least say farewell to her?" 
The old Prince: "Le careme-Dites, dites, y-avait-il quelque 
chose,"50 and he went down on his knees (toward the end, after this 
the Youth goes to see Tatiana Pavlovna). 
A panegyric to Katerina N ikolaevna [by the old Prince,] memories 
of her. 
"ANNA ANDREEVNA, YOU l\IADE THIS RENDEZVOUS POSSIBLE, counting 
on a scandal; even while admitting me, you counted on him" (at 
Lambert's, on that drunken night). 
At Lambert's: 'Til see to it that Bioring won't get her!" (i.e., he is 
himself in love with her). 
50 French: "Lent-say, say, wasn't there something?" 

5-l8 He Chops Up the Icons 
Lambert: "She reveres him something terrible." 
"You know, Lambert, she may really be in love with him." 
A:-::-:A A:-o:oREEV:-.:A: "Lambert has disappeared. He has promised me 
an awful lot, but now he is gone." 
I'll admit that I was feeling sorry for her. 
Chistov's house. His wife. The Junior Chamberlain, an incident, 
to Anna Andreevna. 
Curreut affairs. At the tavern. About the pock-marked man. Lam­
bert has been imprudent, he has done a foolish thing. 
At the tavern on Canal street. He was there. I ate, then just sat 
there waiting, about ࠢlother. The Junior Chamberlain. Came home. 
Alphonsine, at the government clerk's, steal the document, steal, 
[perhaps even kill the landlord.) 
\Vhat made me mad was the fact that Alphonsine was in my room. 
Asked to send the pock-marked roomer out. 
"I gave her my word of honor, I vouched for him."• And alto­
gether, watch her very carefully, don't leave her out of sight, (and the 
landlord), and, one must give her credit, she did take care of her 
commission, though dishonestly, then, u 
"\Vas she really so much afraid?" 
"Yes, he had threatened to kill her before." 
Little Trishatov. Ran over to his place once more and fell asleep. 
Asleep, Mother's face. These are the high society people who have 
offended <me?>. The golden age. But be he blessed! 
In the morning, among other things, back to Anna Andreevna, told 
that she'd be in at five o'clock. 
N .B. In the morning, the Youth is even more strongly convinced 
that He loves his mother, and didn't he actually start to console 
<him?> along these lines, while reading the Gospel (warm words). 
"/ know for sure." And after the chopping up of the icons he learns 
about the letter from Anna Andreevna (about Bioring)-and (?) that 
he had also conveyed the letter to her through Anna Andreevna. The 
latter had promised. :\!astasia Egorovna. "Go and tell Nastasia Egor­
ovna from me that she should let you in, and don't you forget that I 
did this for you. Only <for you?>." 
'"When the Youth comes to Tatiana to deliver the document: 'Til 
hand it over myself." 
• The gender of the verb suggests that this is a woman speaking. 
• • The whole paragraph is quite unclear in the original. 

Anna Andreevna 
549 
"He wants to show off." 
"Well no, I'll give it to her myself." 
N .B. The effect of the document on the Prince and on Katerina 
N ikolaevna was stronger than I had ever expected. 
The assistant to the officer in charge of the Police Station. At the 
Police Station. "i\fy, what a strange young man you are; I haven't ever 
seen one like you." 
The old Prince: "Cher enfa11l1 if you have something you want to 
tell me, better leave it unsaid." 
Anna Andreevna, having told the Youth of the rendezvous she had 
granted him upon his entreaties (under her guarantee), gave it some 
thought, then allowed me to listen in. <:".B. "Oh no, oh no, I won't 
eavesdrop under any circumstances!"). For the sake of clarity, let me 
make a preliminary remark. In allowing me to overhear <their ren­
dezvous>, she had her own, strong reasons. Knowing Katerina Niko­
laevna and their relationship, she was firmly convinced that the ren­
dezvous would lead to nothing at all (i.e., regarding acceptance of his 
marriage proposal), but then again, I might rush in and create a most 
beneficial scandal, and secondly, my presence would still be a guar­
antee that he wouldn't kill her (which possibility Anna Andreevna 
may have been considering), and finally, the last r࿤ason, she was 
hoping that after it was over I might release the document. And, 
finally, that I would retell everything to her. Anna Andreevna always 
hoped that <one day> I would lose my temper and present the docu­
ment-to the old Prince, of course. 
It wasn't Anna Andreevna who gave him permission, but Nastasia 
Egorovna. 
A new version of the CO:\'FLAGRATIO:\'. The night before, prior to 
Bioring's raid, Tatiana had been to lza place to tell her that I would 
come at I I  o'clock of the following day to hand over the document 
to her. And so it would have actually passed, and they would never 
have found out about it, but then, late that night, Katerina Niko­
laevna heard of my arrest, and, in the morning (before she had had 
a chance to see Bioring, at 8 o'clock, when it was still dark), she 
showed up at Tatiana Pavlovna's to find out what had happened to 
me, w!:tat is it "Is it really true that he has been arrested?" They then 
hurriedly agreed that she would come at I I  o'clock as scheduled be­
fore, while Tatiana Pavlovna would run over to the Police Station to 
get in touch with me. But it happened that I met Tatiana while 
already on my way and that, upon entering the house, we didn't find 
࿥[aria at home (she had been bribed). In the meantime, ;\laria rushed 

550 
Versilov on Civilization without God 
over to let them know, and an hour later, while we were still warming 
ourselves, suddenly, Alphonsine ... "i\fais s'est chez rzous ... "ѽ1 <sic!> 
Then, etc., FINALE. 
The rose. I was crying about something, melting into tears and 
kissing the rose (I had forgotten about all of them)-1 am reporting 
this as a strange psychological fact. Since I had forgotten them all, I 
was merely kissing <the rose>. 
"The other day I sent <for him?>, and he seemed not to have 
paid any attention to her letter."4 
Delivery by the pock-marked man, 
"Really, at times I am trying to imagine: How is man going to live 
without God, and will this be ever possible, and I must admit, my 
dear, I invariably reach the conclusion that it is impossible, that 
people will still end up going back to Him! But for a certain period, 
conceivably ... as a consequence of the principle.""" I am imagining, my 
dear," he went on, smiling, "that the battle has ceased and the strug­
gle has subsided. ARd there I I imagine that, after the battle, after 
curses, ࿦ clods of dirt, and whistling, and when e•,rerybody the 
struggle has subsided, people will suddenly sense that they are alone 
on this earth. This would be just as in Claude Lorrain's painting, also 
with the sun setting, majestically and with a strong call, yet setting 
as it were on the last day of mankind, That great source of strength, 
which had until then fed and given warmth to mankind, was passing 
away, just as that sun, and people would suddenly have a deep sense 
of their orphanhood . .Qft. My dear boy, I could never imagine people 
as being thankless and having grown stupid. Alone and orphaned, 
they would immediately nestle up to each other so much more closely 
and lovingly; they would grasp each other's hands, understanding 
that now merely only they alone -efH.y- are everything there is to one 
another. That great idea of immortality would have disappeared, and 
it would have to be replaced, and the entire great surplus of former 
love for Him, whom they had left, would now be turned, in their 
hearts, toward nature, the world, people, any little blade of grass. 
They would begin to love the earth and life with a special, no longer 
with their former, love; they would observe and discover in nature 
• Quite unclear in the original. The gender of the verb suggests that the 
speaker is a woman. 
• • Unclear in the original. 
51 French: "But it's at our place." 

Versilov on Orphaned Humanity 55 1 
such phenomena and mysteries as no one would have even suspected 
to exist before, for they would now be viewing -lieF- nature as a lover 
views his beloved, and not just with a knife in hand hefore, the 
former Htility as before, not just for gain, utilitarianism, and -wefr 
mere curiosity. They would awaken in the morning and -€tFe5S- kiss 
each other, hastening to love each other, each of them knowing that 
his days are short, and that this <life> would be all that he'd get. 
They'd be working to help each other, and each would he happy to 
give his own to everyone else. Every child would know and feel that 
any person he'd meet around he'd chance to meet was his mother and 
his father. 'Let tomorrow be my last day,' each of them would think, 
looking at the setting sun, 'hut all the same, I shall die, yet all the 
others will still be there, and after them, their children,' and the 
very thought that they would still be there, still loving each other, 
their hearts still throbbing for each other, would replace the idea of 
a reunion in a life beyond the grave. 'Let me die without leaving a 
trace, but there will remain in their hearts the memory that I have 
lived and loved them, and when they, too, have passed on, and an 
entirely new generation has arrived, even then, thousands of years 
later, those new people will remember us all, all of us who lived 
before, that we were once alive and loved them before they ever came 
to life on this earth, and that we would have liked to see their happi­
ness. And let it be true that in the end the earth will come to its 
end, and the sun will be extinguished, and yet somewhere in the 
harmony of the universe there will remain the thought that all this 
did once exist and in some way served universal harmony the all­
and people will come to love this thought. Oh, they'll hasten to start 
loving each other, yet the longer, I think, the sadder .tfley will all be. 
They will be proud and strong each for himself, yet they'll become 
they will become timid for each other. They'll become tender toward 
each other, nor will they be ashamed of this, but will caress each 
other, like children. +ftey-\Vhen meeting each other, they'll look at 
each other deeply and meaningfully, and in their glances there will 
be love and sadness. And each will tremble for the life and happiness 
of every other. And then, a great vision wil arise before the e}·es of 
al men 
oh, I cannot imagine an}·more imagine people without 
Him} my dear! He was here once, and He cannot leave <us>. And 
even if He leaves, they will have found Him themselves. I imagine 
that He will stand up among all those people, hold out his hands, and 
say: 'Ghilclren, angels but -yet- how could you forget Him? And He 
will lead them to Him. And it will be as if the scales have fallen 

552 
Versilov's Vision 
from the eyes of all men, and shouts of delight and happiness will 
ring out everywhere on earth, and everybody will be resurrected to a 
new, now already a boundless, love. Forgive me, my friend, but I 
couldn't help concluding my little picture of the future of the human 
race in this, and in no other fashion. I am a philosopher and a deist, 
but being a Russian I am also a dreamer who just can't help dream­
ing. Of course I have always ended up leading them to Him, and here 
is my profession de foi: My dear, this is a fantasy, and really an un­
likely one. But I swear I want to confess just one secret to you: it is 
only too often that I am imagining it as I tHink al:wut the future ef 
tHis world 
but how? Even now I frequently imagine it, for I just 
can't help thinking of it. Oh, I can't, I just can't help thinking about 
it, or something of this kind. But I have always concluded my picture 
with a vision, like Heine's, on the Baltic Sea: He was coming. He 
was coming, and they were all recognizing Him. \VhaL are these 
chains of mine?-All nonsense! But I'll confess just this one thing 
before you: I could never imagine people without Him. I always 
ended up by leading them to Him." 
"\Vhat <were you doing?> before you no longer cared, and how 
did you treat her?" 
"I sneaked up to her and kissed her." 
"Suddenly I remembered this and fell in love <with her>." 
She didn't even get as far as Konigsberg. 
I sensed, however, that there was in it all, something that had been 
prepared beforehand, something like an earlier involuntary daydream 
about how he was going to relate this dream to me. Yet there was 
nothing unnatural about it; it was all pure feeling. I thought a little 
and told him so. 
About her. This was a mood, I don't know how I fell in love with 
her. N .B. And frowning from time to time, and even angrily. 
Mother. The photograph. A saintly Russian woman. Lidiia-don't 
be jealous. An idealist's remark. "I was waiting for you here" (the 
child, tea). "\Vhy didn't you call me?" "But what could I have told 
you?" 
Rostov. "Joining the people." "Are you a Freemason?" "\Vhy, why 
didn't you call me?" "You are stingy." The confession. I was a wan­
derer. Everything will pass. I didn't believe and wanted nothing 
better. I didn't want anything new, even if it were better <than the 
present>. "That's serfdom," the feuilletonist is going to say. Really, 
so help me God, he may perhaps be right. An old type. A Jewish offi­
cer. Atheism. \Vhy, before these men, you ... Venice. Fell asleep. Claude 

The A nguish of a Russian Nobleman 553 
Lorrain. i\lother. About love for i\lother ("Grow, God's green 
grass!"), with love grown infinitely great. ϱIy idea (later, in the form of 
madness caused by <his?> loYe for her). i\Iakar: "God's gTass is to 
grow." Chains. i\leeting with her. She, falum. The cure. About 
ϱlakar. Today is Sunday. Let's drink. Let's go on a pilgrimage to­
gether, enthusiasm (Princess Katia). Order: Venice. Men. Claude Lor­
rain. A mystery solved, or atheism. The coming of Christ. The idea 
of chains. Mother's sudden idea. She. 
Order. "Ήly God, what is most important here in Russia is 
stability and order ... Fathers and mothers, who are not in the least 
ideal, but who represent something complete; there's something both 
touching and pathetic <about it?>, there's something stable at the 
foundation." 
"The abolition of serfdom." 
"Look at our seminarians." 
"They've got no traditions, no faith, and no form. And yet they 
have taken root." 
"The likes of Shevchenko." 
"They've got no traditions. Up to now they used to take root. llut 
now, perhaps as a result of their condition of servitude, they've be­
come rickety. Yet they, too, will become a part of the people."* 
"But having found you, I am beginning to take root." "\Vhy, 
fathers don't fall from the moon, or do they?" And while still in the 
nursery, <my> soul was seeking its proper place, and order. Such 
searching may cause one great mental anguish. Oh yes, of course, some 
would take root in a slavish way, still others with envy and bitterness. 
Only recently one could hardly notice them, though there were 
enough of them. 
"This was the anguish of a Russian nobleman." 
"]e s11is gentilhomme avant lo lll. "52 About His nobleman's an­
guish. 
"\Ve emancipated our serfs just so, there are I ,000 of us. A part 
remains. Out of l ,000 or so people there is one stelite." 
"I was dear to you, wasn't I?" 
"Oh, I shall follow you." 
N.B. References in Otechestvennye zapiski.** 
N .B. References in books about the Rostovs, etc. 
• The whole paragraph is quite unclear in the original. 
+ + Fatherland Notes, the journal in which A Raw Youth appeared. 
"2 French: "I am a nobleman first of all." 


Name and Topic Index 
Abandoned child, an, 32-33, 35-36, 264, 
303, 545 
Abbot, the (in ȉfakar's tale), 505 
Abishai (biblical figure), 479-80 
Absence of harmony. See Lack of all 
form 
Acis and Galatea (a painting by Claude 
Lorrain), 524, 54 1 
Adjutant-General, the (one of the Prin­
cess's suitors), 341 .  See also Bioring, 
Baron 
Adolphine, 434. See also Alphonsine 
Afimevsk (a city in which Ȋfakar's tale is 
set), 1 78, 507 
Aide-de-Camp, the, 326, 328-29, 332, 
340, 345-50, 354-56, 359, 361, 364, 
384, 386-90, 398, 407, 4 1 0-12, 427. 
See also Bioring, Baron 
Akhmakova, Katerina Nikolaevna, 7-1 1 ,  
14, 16, 22, 256-59, 300, 305, 307. 3 10, 
317, 329, 334-39, 344-47, 350, 352-
63, 379, 382, 384-95, 398-402, 406-
24, 427-28, 432, 434-35, 438-46, 448, 
451-58, 472-73, 476-8 1, 486-89, 
492-503, 5 1 1-12, 514-15, 5 1 7-21 ,  
526-28, 531-35, 537, 546-49, 553. 
See also Countess, the; Daughter 
(the old Prince's); ȊIessalina; Prin­
cess, the; She; Widow (the Gen­
eral's); Wife (the Count's); Wife 
(the old Prince's) 
Akulka's husband (Notes from the 
House of the Dead), 425 
AI. Alekseevich, 1 23 
Aleksandr Aleksandrovich, 464 
Aleksandrova, 59 
Alexis, Man of God (a legend), 307 
Alphonsine, 346, 444, 446, 455, 463, 465, 
473-74, 489, 490-99, 5 12, 5 1 5, 52 1 ,  
530, 544, 548, 550. See also Adol­
phine; Andrieux, ǡIlle and ǡIme 
Altai (a mountain range in Asia), 529 
Alyosha Karamazov (The Brothers Ka­
ramazov), 219, 296 
America, 250, 261, 277, 286, 308, 359, 
404, 427, 431, 433, 499. See also 
United States of America 
Anatole [Kuragin] (War and Peace, by 
Tolstoi), 18, 340, 426 
Andreev, 85-86, 94, 1 3 1-33, 1 39, 14 1-42, 
144, 163, 1 8 1-82, 190, 195, 201-2, 
210, 2Z3, 230-3 1 , 238, 261 , 266, 273. 
See also Andronikov 
Andrei Petrovich. See Versilov, Andrei 
Petrovich 
Andrieux, ȊIIle, and ȊI me, 26, 47-48, 57, 
59, 74, 76, 8 1 ,  147, 193, 197, 208, 216, 
238, 283, 325, 348, 358, 427, 434. See 
also Alphonsine 
Andronikov, 295, 327, 331-32. See also 
Andreev 
Anna Andreevna. See Versilov, Anna 
Andreevna 
Antichrist, the, 156, 467 
Anton Goremyka (by D. V. Grigorovich) 
214, 533 
Apocalypse, the, 370 
Apocryphal gospel, an, 24 
Apollo of Belvedere, 364 
Arinochka (a little girl, dies), 305. See 
also Little girl, a (who dies); Daugh­
ter (the doorman's) 
Arkady ǡfakarovich, 12-14, 16-17, 2 1 ,  
1 72, 334, 364, 438, 485. See also 
Youth, the (and other identities 
listed thereunder) 
Arseniev, I. A., 358, 426 
Assafetidov (a dh·inity student), 342 
Atheism, Atheists, 23, 26, 29, 3 1 ,  34, 37, 
41, 47, 56-57, 64, 7 1 , 74-75, 77, 1 19, 
124, 1 3 1 ,  143, 1 59, 168, 176, 1 84, 
222, 230, 232, 234, 247, 250, 290, 
292, 375, 379, 504, 509, 5 1 8, 524, 
534-42, 552-53 
Aunt (in Luga, godmother of the young 
Prince), 230. See also Old lady, an 
(in Luga) 
Aunt(s), 45, 49, 53, 58, 69-70, 73, 78, 84-
86, 94, 98-99, 109-1 1, 132, 1 35, 1 38-
40, 144, 151, 155, 1 57-58, 1 63, 172, 
1 80-81 ,  183, 185-88, 190-93, 196, 
200-201, 203, 209-1 3, 230-3 1 ,  245-
555 

556 Index 
.-\unt(s)-Con/. 
46, 248-49, 282, 505. See also Ta­
tiana Pavlovna, ȉ[arfa Petrovna 
.-\neenko, V. G., 26 
Bakhmut (a city in Russia), 25 
Baranov, 3 1  
Bashmakov, 3 1  
Beetle, the. See Red beetle 
Belinsky, V. G., 38, 84, 1 5 1 , 233, 323, 365 
Belkin, han Petrovich (The Tales of 
Belkin, by Pushkin), 8 1 ,  99 
Benediktov, V. G., 233 
Beppo (by Byron), 524-25, 534, 537, 542 
Berlin, 33 1 
Bespopovtsy (a sect), 172 
Bez.obraz.ie. See Lack of all form 
Bible quotes and references, 36, 60, 75, 
1 0 1 ,  I l l, 1 48, 1 50, I72-78, 2 1 0, 219, 
252, 370, 373, 380, 434-35, 445, 447, 
449, 467, 477, 480, 502-3, 505-6, 
54 1 ,  543 
Bioring, Baron, 8, 338, 4 1 0, 4 1 4- 1 5, 4 19, 
424, 427-28, 430-33, 440, 444, 448-
49, 453, 455-56, 458-59, 461-63, 
47 1 ,  474, 481-86, 488, 49 I-93, 495-
98, 500, 502-3. D 1 1-12, 5 1 9-20, 528, 
544, 547-49. See also Aide-de-Camp, 
the; Fiance (the Princess's) 
Bismarck, Prince Otto von, 230, 430 
Blagoobmz.ie. See Harmony 
Blind woman, the (takes care of Lidiia's 
child), 328 
Boborykin, P. D., 450 
Bolkonsky, Prince (JVar and Peace, by 
Tolstoi), 1 8, 23, 340, 425-26 
Boy, a (consumpth·e, in Makar's story), 
507. See also Boy, a (with a "birdie") 
Boy, a (deserts a gang of children to join 
Him), 30 
Boy, the (His brother), 44-46. See also 
Younger brother 
Boy, a (leader of a gang of children), 30. 
See also Fighter, the 
Boy, the (Liza's brother, drowns him­
self), 44, 48, 52, 74-75, 77, 82, 84, 
89, 9 1-92, 98-10 1 ,  1 05, 1 38, 140-42, 
1 44, 148, 1 57, 1 59, 1 80-82, 1 86--88, 
1 9 1 , 193-95, 1 98, 200, 20E 22 1 ,  223, 
225, 237, 240, 247-48, 282, 286, 3 1 5, 
496. See also Boy, a (with a "birdie") 
Boy, a (Lambert's friend), 525. See also 
Petit vilain, le 
Boy, a (with a "birdie," drowns himself), 
52, 74, 1 78, 450, 475. See also Boy, 
the (Liza's brother) 
Boy, the, 57, 6 1 ,  74, 1 3 1 .  See also Youth, 
the 
Bright idea, the. See Great idea(s) 
Brother (Fyodor Fyodorovich's), 32, 35. 
See also He (where other identities 
are listed) 
Brother (Her), 40 
Brother (His), 33-34, 44. See also Fyodor 
Fyodorovich 
Brother (Liza's), 44, 49. See also Youth, 
the 
Brother (the old Prince's), 50, 209. See 
also Father (of Katerina 1\'ikolaevna 
Akhmakova) 
Brother (of the second Prince), 284. See 
also Older brother (the young 
Prince's) 
Brother (Vasin's), 1 32 
Brother (the Youth's), 1 8 1 ,  1 90, 194, 209, 
261 ,  357. See also Boy, the (Liza's 
brother); Versilov, Andrei An­
dreich 
Brusilov, 64, 1 1  I. 1 37-38, 1 40, 1 42, 144-
45, 149, 1 54, 1 68, 1 8 1 ,  229. See also 
He (where further identities are 
listed) 
Burdonky (The Idiot), 2 
Butte aux Cailles, 530 
Byron, Lord, 1 29, 524, 534 
Catherine the Great, 540-4 1 
Catholicism, Catholics, 222, 227, 257, 
261-63, 27 1 ,  275, 290, 292, 452 
Chambermaid, the. See Housemaid, the 
Charles X, 78 
Charmeur (a Frenchman?), 360 
Chatsky ("Woe from Wit," by Griboe-
dov), 247, 26 1 ,  3 1 4, 367, 525 
Chernyshe,·, A. I., 283, 342, 36 1 ,  366 
Chernyshevsky, 1\'. G., 234 
Child, a, 482. See also Child (Lidiia's); 
Infant (cared for by Anna Andre­
evna Versilov) 
Child (Lidiia's), 258, 326--28, 332, 337, 
340, 348, 353, 357-58, 360, 362, 386, 
388, 427, 526, 528. See also Daugh­
ter 
(the 
young 
Prince's 
and 
Lidiia's); Infant (cared for by Anna 
Andreevna Versilov) 
Child (Liza's?), 444 
Child, the. See Boy, the (Liza's brother) 
Children (a gang of children, and "a 

novel about children"), 21-22, 24-
26, 28-32, 34-35, 37-38, 40, 46, 49, 
52-53, 58, 64, 86 
Children (His, legitimate), 221, 246, 
377. See also Vcrsilov, Andrei An· 
drcich; Vcrsilov, Anna Andrcevna 
China, 234, 462, 50ָ 529 
Chistov, 548 
Christ, 8, 34-35, 57, 60-6 1, 70-72, 98, 
I 10-1 1, 148, 150, 169, 172-79, 187, 
209-10, 217-19, 222, 233, 235, 243-
44, 246, 25 1-52, 271, 285, 3 14, 318, 
335, 342, 344-45, 367, 372, 378, 429, 
444-45, 449, 454, 456, 464, 472, 503-
1, 506, 508, 5 1 8, 535-36, 542, 55 1-53 
Christianity, Christian religion, 7, 10, 
22-23, 34-36, 4 1' 56-58, 64-65, 68, 
77, 88, 98, I 10-12, 144, 148, 150, 
152, 156, 159, 161-63, 168, 184-85, 
189, 203, 2 16, 218, 224-25, 235, 24 1 ,  
283, 324-25, 335, 350, 377-78, 467 
Citizen, The (Grazhdanin), 2, 62, 104 
Columbus, 293, 309 
Comforting, i\r iss ( U teshaiushchaia ), 342 
Commune, Communards, 24-25, 62, 
260, 544 
Communism, 21, 24-25, 32, 35-37, 75, 
88, 98, 252, 382, 454, 461, 464-65, 
467, 47 1, 483-84, 493, 499-500, 503-
4, 508-9, 536 
Confcssion(s), 52, 74, 79-81, 88, I 06, 
1 15-16, 132, 135, 141, 145, 155, 158, 
161, 163-65, 188, 190, 217, 227, 265-
66, 269, 273-75, 278, 280, 282, 287, 
289, 316, 335, 347, 350, 355-56, 379, 
382, 389, 395, 4 1 1 ' 420, 438, 442, 
445, 453-54, 458, 461 ,  464, 467-68, 
472, 475, 479-83, 485, 492, 494-95, 
497-99, 50 1 ,  504, 510, 5 1 3, 5 1 6-19, 
532, 536, 539, 552 
Consumptive girl, a, 527. See also Lidiia 
Cook (Tatiana Pavlovna's), 452, 455, 
492-93. See also ]\[aria lvanovna 
Count, the, 34, 37-38, 40. See also Old 
Prince, the 
Countcsֹ, the, 246. See also Princess, the 
Czaֺ ֻlc, 61-62, 72, 79, 26ּ 283, 380-8 I 
Danilo, Prince (Pugachev's Followers, 
by Evgcny Salias), 26-27 
Daria Onisimovna, 4 1 3. See also Onisi· 
movna 
Dashkova, Countless V--a, 30 
Index 557 
Daughter (the doorman's), 1 38. See also 
Arinochka; Little girl, a (who dies) 
Daughter (His), 185. See also Olia; Liza; 
Vcrsilov, Anna Andrcevna 
Daughter (Kolosov's), 326 
Daughter (the old Prince's), 181, 184, 
201 ,  209, 223-24, 230, 235-36, 248, 
266, 274, 276, 287, 290. See also 
Akhmakova, Katcrina Nikolacvna 
(and other identities listed there­
under) 
Daughter (Vcrsilov's), 285, 294. See also 
Liza; Vcrsilov, Anna Andreevna 
Daughter (the young Prince's and 
Lidiia's), 330-32. See also Child 
(Lidiia's) 
David, King, 434-35 
David Copperfield (by Charles Dickens), 
305, 307, 309, 3 1 2  
D e  Berry, Due, 78, 218 
Decorousness (blagoobrazie). See Har-
mony 
Deformity (moral). See Lack of all form 
De Kock, Paul, 435 
Dergachcv, 3, 4, 16, 79, 1 20, 275, 300, 
302, 306, 314-15, 322, 325, 329, 350, 
358, 369, 372, 39.6, 464, 476, 496. 
See also Dolgushin 
Dcrzhavin, G. R., 1 1 7 
Desdemona, 29 1 
Deserted, cold globes whirling through 
space, 39, 57. See also Earth, cov­
ered with snow in 100,000 years; 
Icc-covered rocks 
Devil, the, 24-26, 40, 70, 72, 81, 148, 
150, 160, 173-74, 177, 219, 429 
Diakov, A. A., 50 1 
Dickens, Charles, 295 
Disgraceful, the (bezobrazie). See Lack 
of all form 
Disintegration (as "the principal visible 
idea of the novel"), 37-38, 83, 86, 
91, 106, 1 17, 120, 193, 252, 293, 321 ,  
343-44, 367, 425-26, 497, 523, 540 
Disorder (moral and social, as a theme 
of the novel), I, 9, 16, 22-23, 44, 
5 1 ,  58, 65, 86, 91-92, 101, 105-6, 
1 20-23, 1 27-28, 136, 143, 146, 149, 
159-60, 162, 167' 178, 193, 202, 252, 
330, 379, 384, 390, 4 15, 442, 454, 
456, 465-67, 493, 496-97, 544 
Ditrin, Baron, 387, 39 1, 401, 405-6, 414-
15 

558 Index 
D--ko, !':. V., 27 
Dmitri Karamazov, 6, 1 7, 2 1  
Dmitriev, I .  I . ,  1 1 7 
Dobroliubov, N. A., 234 
Doctor, the (in l\lakar's story), 507 
Doctor, the (treats the Youth), 454, 460, 
462, 470, 490, 503, 509 
Document, the. See Secret document, 
the 
Dolgoruky, Arkady l\lakarovich, 228, 
262-63, 394, 397, 432, 530. See also 
Youth, the 
Dolgoruky family, the, 226, 268 
Dolgoruky girl, the, 2 1 8. See also Liza 
Dolgoruky, 1\1 akar I vanovich, 24, 33, 
2 1 1 , 450. See also l\lakar Ivanovich 
Dolgoruky, "Prince," 
5 1 1 .  See also 
Youth, the 
Dolgushin, A. V., Dolgushintsy, 3-4, 79, 
87-88, 95, 98-1 00, 1 02, 1 04, 1 2 1 -22, 
1 40-4 1 ,  1 46, 1 49, 1 57, 1 85, 208, 240, 
252, 260, 263, 269, 28 1 ,  290, 292, 
295-97. See also Dergachev 
Dolinin, A. S., 1 8, 90 
Don Basilio (nickname of V. P. Botkin), 
250 
Don Quixote, 24, 99, 295, 306, 3 1 2  
Doorman, a, 1 38, 
1 4 1-42. See also 
Shveitsarov 
Dostoevsky, A. G. (the writer's wife), I ,  
53, 79, 449 
Dostoevsky, F. l\1., 1-23, 30, 32, 38-39, 
62, 64-68, 70-72. 76-77. 90, 99-1 00, 
1 04, 1 29, 1 3 1 ,  1 5 1 ,  1 66-7 1 ,  233-34, 
250-5 1 ,  254-60, 303, 3 1 5, 320, 333-
39, 35 1 ,  4 1 2, 436, 44 1-43, 449, 464, 
5 1 4, 524, 543 
The Brothers Karamazov, 1, 1 6- 1 8, 
2 1 ,  24, 26, 70, 76, 8 1 ,  1 1 2, 2 1 9, 
296, 44 1 , 449 
"Confession of a Great Sinner," 79, 82 
Crime and Punishment, 1-2, 1 3, 543 
Diary of a Writer, 24, 39 
The Gambler, 90 
The Idiot, 1-2, 5, 1 5- 1 6, 2 1 ,  27, 77, 
79, 1 29, 1 66, 236, 295, 442 
"The Life of a Great Sinner," 2 1 ,  24 
Notes from the House of the Dead, 
425 
Notes from the Underground, 234, 
425 
"The Parsons" (Batiushki), 25 
The Possessed, 1-2, 4, 1 5- 1 6, 2 1 ,  24, 
27, 3 1 ,  166, 2 1 4, 236, 426, 524 
"Pushkin Speech," 2, 77 
A Raw Youth, 1-6, 1 3-18, 27, 166, 35 1 ,  
397, 442, 450, 524, 553 
Doֽtoevsky, l\1. A. (the writer's father), 
1 26, 25 1 
Dostoevsky, V. l\1. (the writer's sister), 
320, 464 
Double, a (Versilov's), 52 1 
Dreams, 33, 1 35-36, 1 75, 2 1 1 ,  244-45, 
263, 28 1 ,  283, 288, 292, 299, 306, 
485-87, 489, 499, 503, 524, 536 
Dresden, 524 
Drouchard, 261 
Druzhinin, A. V., 2 1 4  
Dumas, Alexandre, 284, 342 
Dussot's (a restaurant), 26, 5 16 
Earth, the (covered with snow in 
1 00,000 years), 38, 48. See also De· 
serted, 
cold 
globes 
whirling 
through space; Ice-covered rocks 
Edgar, 460 
Efim, 5 1 6  
Eilekon, 1 1 5 
Elena Pavlovna. See E. P. 
Elias (the prophet), 1 72, 304, 454, 461 ,  
465, 467, 493 
Elpidiforova, 59 
Ems (a spa in Germany), 28, 258-59, 
330-3 1 ,  448 
Engineer, the. See Kirilov 
English atheist, an, 56 
Enoch (biblical figure), 1 72, 454, 46 1 ,  
465, 467, 493. 
Ensign, the (in the young Prince's regi­
ment), 432 
E. P., 320, 364, 382-83, 400, 4 1 2. See 
also Elena Pavlovna; E. P--na; 
Ivanova, E. P. 
E. P--na. See E. P. 
Epoch, The, 7 1  
Eroshka (The Cossacks, by L. N. Tols­
toi), 23 
Europe, Europeans, 6, 8, I I , 57, 1 07, I l l , 
1 15, 1 69, 225, 232-33, 293, 369-70, 
426, 465, 523-25, 527, 533-34, 536, 
538, 540-4 1 
Exploits. See Feats 
Fadeev, R. A., 47 1 
Family, the. See Russian family, the 
Fanariotov woman, the, 400-401, 405 

Father (the Aide-de-Camp's), 325 
Father (the Princess's), 1 96, 20 1 ,  272, 
328, 330, 480. See also Old Prince, 
the 
Father (of the Princess, and brother of 
the old Prince), I I , 50. See also 
Brother (the old Prince's); Father 
(the Princess's) 
Father (Vasin's), 1 25, 329, 344 
Father (the young Prince's), 390, 392 
Father (the Youth's). 69, 75, 80-83, 85, 
1 02, 1 04, 1 09-1 0, 125, 1 4 1 ,  1 58-59, 
167, I SO, 1 90, 1 93-95, 201-3, 206, 
208, 2 1 0-1 1 '  220, 224-25, 227-28. 
23 1 , 236, 238, 24 1 , 245-47, 249, 252-
53, 256, 262-63, 265-67, 269-7 1 ,  
273-75, 278-82, 285-86, 288, 298, 
300-301 ,  305, 308, 3 1 2- 1 3, 3 1 9, 328, 
334, 336, 356, 395, 397, 40 1 ,  403, 
4 1 3, 50 1, 5 18, 528-29, 544. See also 
He (where further identities are 
listed) 
Fatherland Notes (Otechestvennye za­
pȯk0, 2-3, 3 1 ,  38, 295, 553 
Faust (by Goethe), 25, 232, 292, 5 1 6  
Feat(s) (His), 43, 70, 454, 456-57, 459, 
467-68, 493-94, 53 1 
Fiance (Liza's), 205, 240. See also Young 
man, the (the young Prince wants 
him to marry Liza) 
Fiance (the Princess's), 285. See also 
Bioring, Baron 
Field-Marshal, a, 82 
Fighter, the, 24. See also Boy, a (leader 
of a gang of children) 
Fool, the (on the train), 32, 80, 97, 1 0 1 ,  
1 09, 1 4 1 ,  1 55-56, 1 87, 1 9 1 ,  1 94, 1 97, 
205, 208, 238, 321 
Freemasonry, Freemasons, 47 1 , 480, 5 1 8, 
523, 527-28, 544, 552 
Frenchman, a (whom the Princess al­
most married), 20 1 
Freud, Sigmund, 1 4  
"Frieden" (by Heinrich Heine), 5 1 8, 
552 
Frou-frou, 80, 97, 1 0 1 ,  1 08, I I I , 1 36, 
1 54, 1 87, 1 92, 2 1 2, 23 1 ,  246, 261-
62, 286, 290 
Future. See Society of the future 
Fyodor Fyodorovich, 2 1 ,  30-33, 35-38, 
40, 73 
Fyodor Petrovich, 25, 64 
Index 559 
Fyodorov, Pavel Fyodorovich, 1 55. See 
also Youth, the 
Galileo, 1 1 3 
Garibaldi, Giuseppe, 1 07-8 
General, the, 4 1 ,  262, 265. See also Old 
Prince, the 
General, the (late husband of the prin­
cess). 50-5 1 ,  74, 1 29, 1 8 1 ,  195, 201, 
27 1-72, 3 1 8. See also Husband (the 
Princess's) 
General, a (on the railroad), 344, 364 
Genevan ideas, 70-7 1 ,  73, 225, 372 
Gerigk, Horst-Jiirgen, 1 5  
German, the (Stoltz, in Goncharov's 
Ob/omov), 425 
German, a (with whom the Youth stays 
while attending high school), 20 1 ,  
2 1 1 ,  231-32, 238, 246 
Gil Bias (by Lesage), 99, 1 04 
Girl, a (hangs herself), 247, 279, 289, 
293, 306, 3 1 3, 323. See also Olia 
Girl, a (whom the Youth meets), 26 1 .  
See also Wench, a; \Vhore, a 
Globes. See Deserted, cold globes 
God, 6, 1 0-1 1 ,  23, 34, 36, 40, 47, 49, 59, 
1 1 9, 1 70, 1 72-73, 1 76, 178-79, 1 99, 
235, 244, 250, 275, 292, 294, 296, 
3 1 8, 360, 367, 375, 44 1 , 445-48, 450-
5 1, 475, 479, 505-9, 535-37, 542, 
550-52 
Gogol, N. V., 24, 1 5 1 ,  1 62, 376, 426 
Dead Souls, 425 
"The Marriage," 1 62, 376 
Taras Bul'ba, 24 
Golden age, the, 6, I 0, 27, 5 19, 524, 527, 
529, 533, 542, 548. See also Claude 
Lorrain; Acis and Galatea; Society 
of the future 
Golitsyn, Prince, 30, 33-34, 39-40, 69, 
1 8 1 ,  1 85. See also Young Prince, the 
Goncharov, I. A., 1 7, 3 1 4, 339, 425 
Good order. See Harmony 
Governess, the, 298-99, 342. See also 
Olia 
Governess (Oiia's). See Swiss governess 
Government clerk, a (from whom 
Fyodor Fyodorovich buys a win­
ning lottery ticket), 35 
Government clerk, a (who tells the 
story about the huge rock), 1 89, 
1 94, 548. See also Landlord, the 
Governor, the (in The Possessed), 3 1  

560 Index 
Grand dada is, le, 5 I 6, 525 
Grand Inquisitor, the (The Brothers 
Karamazov), 24, 76-77, 5 1 8  
Gray's "Elegy Written in a Country 
Church-Yard," 445 
Great idea(s), 42-43, 72, 75-77, 87, 94, 
99-100, 102, 106-7, I 1 8, 1 37, 150, 
1 53, 159, 2 14, 367-68, 372-74, 380, 
5 I 7, 540. See A lso Higher idea, a; 
Idea (Versilov's) 
Great sinner, the, 28, 79 
Griboedov, A. S., 26 1 ,  3 1 4  
Grigorovich, D. V., 2 1 4  
Guizot, Fran<;ois Pierre Guillaume, 59 
Hamlet, 24 
Harmonious life, the. See Harmony 
Harmony (blagoobrazie), 1 78, 454-55, 
460-6 1 ,  466, 469-70, 472-73, 48 1 ,  
483, 489, 496, 504, 5 1 6, 5 1 8- 1 9, 522, 
527-28, 531, 533. See also Good 
order; Harmonious life, the; ȉlora! 
beauty 
He, 12, 14, 1 6, 22, 30-39, 4 1 -60, 67-1 68 
passim, 1 80-337 passim, 347, 350, 
357. 368, 379, 383, 395, 420, 424, 
439, 450, 453-54, 458-59, 46 1-62, 
465-68, 
473-80, 
492-93, 495-98, 
5 1 3, 5 1 5, 5 1 8-2 1 ,  532-34, 548, 553. 
See also Brother (Fyodor Fyodoro­
vich's); 
Brusilov; 
Father 
(the 
Youth's); Middle Brother (Fyodor 
Fyodorovich's): Older brother (the 
Youth's); Predatory type, the; Step­
brother (Fyodor Fyodorovich's): 
Stepbrother (the Youth's); Step­
father (Liza's and her brother's); 
Stepfather (the Youth's); Versilov, 
Andrei Petrovich 
Heeckeren, 354 
Heine, Heinrich, 5 1 8, 552 
Hero of our times, the. See Pechorin 
Herzen, A. 1., 4, 84, 88, 250, 523, 526 
Higher idea, a, 43-44, 6 1 ,  86-87, I 1 6, 
369, 4 1 6. See also Great idea(s), 
Idea (Versilov's) 
High school boy (with whom the Youth 
plans to run away to America), 49 
High school student, a (kills himself 
finding studying too hard), 245, 3 I 6 
Housemaid, a (dismissed on a false ac­
cusation), 44-45, 49, 75, 84, 9 1 ,  98, 
1 26, 140, 157. See also Chamber­
maid, a 
Hugo, Victor, 102, 284, 342, 543 
Husband (the Princess's), 46, 144, 146, 
33 I, 422-23. See also General, 
the; Old Prince, the 
laichnitsa (in "The ȉIarriage," by Go­
go!), 1 62, 376 
Ice-covered rocks, 108, I 1 2, 152-53, 2 1 9, 
224, 367. See also Earth, the (cov­
ered with snow in I 00,000 years); 
Deserted, cold globes whirling 
through space 
Icons (smashed by Versilov), 22, 34, 56-
58, 60, 70-75, 77, 85, 92, 94, 1 0 1 ,  
1 22, 
1 27, 1 36, 
1 5 1 ,  161-62, 
182, 
I 86-87, 
I 93-96, 
I 99-200, 
208-9, 
223, 
226, 25 1 ,  278-79, 328, 
340, 
346-47, 350, 359, 403-4, 446, 450, 
455, 463, 466, 468, 47 1 ,  473, 475-
76, 481-82, 484-85, 488, 492, 496, 
5 12-1 3, 5 1 6, 520-2 1 ,  546, 548 
Idea (l\Iakar's), 542 
Idea (Vasin's), 34 I 
Idea (Versilov's), 52, 1 43, 150, 1 52, 168, 
233, 237, 27 1 ,  298, 3 1 5, 344, 365, 
379, 390, 4 1 5, 439-44, 455, 47 1-72, 
476-77, 479-80, 504, 5 1 7, 53 1 , 54 1-
42 
Idea (the Youth's), 45, 52-53, 76, 78-8 I ,  
84, 93, 95, 97, 1 0 1 ,  1 08-9, I I I ,  I 1 3, 
I 15- 1 6, 1 25, 139-4 1 ,  144-50, 1 52, 
1 54-55, 1 58, 1 8 1 ,  1 85, 1 87-89, 1 92, 
194, 201-12, 2 1 7-2 1, 23 1 ,  237-4 1 ,  
249, 253, 261-66, 269-70, 273, 277. 
281-82, 285, 288-89, 292-95, 297-
303, 305-7, 309-1 0, 3 1 2- 1 3, 3 1 8-
1 9, 324, 349, 354, 359, 369, 371-72, 
377. 385, 428, 434, 443, 446, 454-55, 
462, 464-65, 468, 496, 5 I 4-1 5, 5 I 8, 
526-27, 533, 553. See also Roths­
child 
Idealism, Idealists, 9, 77, I I 7, I I 9-20, 
1 60, 1 92, 195, 2 1 3, 338, 345, 374, 
382, 459, 52 I, 535-37, 539 
Idiot, an (Versilov, an idiot), I 90, I 94, 
320, 455, 464, 49 1 , 493, 496, 52 1 , 546 
Infant, an (cared for by Anna Andre­
evna Versilov), 48 1, 495. See also 
Child, a 
lppolit Terentyev (The Idiot), 22, I 1 5  
Irkutsk (a city in Siberia), 498 
Isaev, P. A. (the writer's stepson), 1 04 
Ivan, Father (Ivan Rumiantsev, priest 

in Staraia Russa), 79 
Ivan An--ch, 290 
Ivan Karamazov, 6, 66, 8 1 ,  2 1 9  
lvanova, S. A., 295 
lvanova, E. P., 320. See also Elena Pav­
lovna, E. P., E. P--na 
Jerusalem, 24 
Job, 449, 502-3, 509 
John (the Evangelist), 172 
Joining the people. See People, the 
Jove, 304 
Junior Chamberlain, the. See Versilov, 
Andrei Andriech 
K. (mentioned in a suicide note), 1 06 
K. (Versilov sends a message to Kolosov 
through him), 331 
Karamzin, N. 1\1., 1 14, 425 
Katerina Nikolaevna. See Akhmakova, 
Katerina Nikolaevna 
Katia, Princess (Netochka Nezvanova), 
5 1 8, 520, 553 
Katkov, 1\1. N ., 2, 32 
Kazin, Alfred, 5 
Kharkov (a city in the Ukraine), 1 1 5 
Khlysty (a religious sect), 27, 545 
Kirghiz coachman, a, 55, 365 
Kirilov (The Possessed), 4, 5, 1 6, 426 
Kiselev, 381 
Kitty, Princess (Anna Karenina, by 
Tolstoi), 32 1 ,  527 
Kokorev, V. A., 303 
Kolosov, 3 1 5, 325-27, 329, 331-32, 34 1 ,  
347, 488. See also Stebelkov 
Kolpino (a railway station on the 
Petersburg-Moscow line), 1 10 
Konigsberg (a city in East Prussia), 487, 
5 1 8, 527' 536, 543, 552 
Koran, the, 4 1 6  
Kozlov, P. A., 72, 82 
Kraft, 25, 43, 60, 8 1 ,  89, 98, I 02, 225, 
262, 264-66, 268, 272, 274, 280-82, 
288-89, 292-99, 301, 305-7, 309- 1 0, 
3 1 2-1 3, 366, 368, 408-1 1 ,  423-24. 
See also Man, a (who shoots him­
self) 
K--rov, A., 222 
K--v, 3 1 8  
Kuznetsky Bridge (in 1\loscow), 246 
Lacenaire, Pierre Franr;ois, 382 
Lack of all form (bezobrazie), 439, 454, 
Index 561 
456-57, 459, 46 1 ,  463, 469-72, 48 1 ,  
484, 496, 502, 523. See also Dis­
graceful, the; Moral deformity; 
Moral disorder 
Lackey, a (with whom the Youth has a 
conversation), 84, 2 1 1 ,  2 1 7- 1 8, 230, 
252 
Lagrange, Joseph Louis, 450 
Lamansky, P. 1., 1 3 1  
Lambert, 7 ,  22-24, 26, 34, 37, 40, 43-44, 
48-50, 53-56, 58-59, 6 1 ,  67, 69, 74, 
76, 80, 83, 85-86, 91-93, 98, 1 20, 
1 28, 1 34-39, 1 4 1-42, 1 45, 149, 1 62, 
1 64, 1 67, 1 7 9-80, 1 82-84, 1 86-87, 
189-90, 192-94, 196-99, 202, 204-5, 
207, 209, 225-27, 229, 23 1 ,  235-37, 
239-4 1 ,  246-47, 261-63, 267, 273, 
278, 283, 285-86, 288, 292, 306-7, 
3 1 3, 3 1 7, 32 1 ,  325, 327, 329, 346-
50, 354, 359, 365, 404, 427, 429, 434, 
438, 442, 444, 446, 449-52, 454-55, 
157-60, 462-63, 465-69, 4 7 1 ,  473-
74, 481-89, 491-96, 498-504, 509-
1 7 '  520-2 1 '  526, 528, 530-32, 543-
44, 547-48. See also Son (Souchard's) 
Landlord (the Youth's), 1 88, 1 90, 1 93, 
2 1 2, 3 1 5- 1 6, 329, 360, 426-27, 473-
74, 548. See also Doorman, a; Gov­
ernment 
clerk, 
a; 
Liar, 
the; 
Shveitsarov 
Lanskoi (one of the Princess's suitors), 
321 
Lanz (a Catholic, the Youth's school­
mate), 5 1 4  
Last of the Mohicans, The (by J. F. 
Cooper), 534 
Laura, 537 
Lawful daughter, the (His), 222, 226. 
See also Versilov, Anna Andreevna 
Lawyer, the, 28 1-82, 289 
Lebedev (The Idiot), 76-77, 1 1 8, 442 
Lebiadkin, Captain (The Possessed), 
2 1 4  
Lermontov, M. lu., 1 5 1 ,  3 14, 497 
Le Sage, Alain Renַ, 99, 1 04 
Les Miserables (by Victor Hugo), 543 
Letter(s), the (important for the plot of 
the novel), 49, 67, 74, 85, 1 3 1-34, 
1 40-42, 1 44, 146, 1 48, 1 50, 1 58-59, 
1 63, 
167, 1 82-83, 
1 88, 
1 90, 
1 93, 
1 98-200, 204, 206-7, 209, 2 1 1 ,  220, 
224-30, 232, 238-39, 248, 264, 267, 
273-75, 282, 286, 289-90, 297-98, 

562 Index 
Letter(s), the-Coni. 
307, 3 1 0, 3 1 5, 326-27, 34 1 , 388, 408-
10, 423-24, 430, 474, 493, 5 1 0, 5 1 2, 
543-44. See also Secret document, 
the 
Levin (A nna Karenina, by Tolstoi), 
425, 488, 493, 529 
Liar, the, 1 89, 208, 2 1 7, 344. See also 
Landlord, the 
Liberalism, Liberals, 1-3, 38, 1 19, 2 14, 
250, 329, 375, 533 
Lidiia, 1 0, 258-59, 236, 329-32, 334, 
337, 340, 345, 354-55, 362, 386--87, 
389, 399-400, 439, 455-56, 459, 478, 
480, 488, 5 1 7, 526, 536, 552. See also 
Consumptive girl. a; Stepdaughter 
(Katerina 
Nikolaevna 
Akhma· 
kova's); Young girl, the 
Lieutenant, a (friend of the doonnan), 
1 38 
Litterateur, a (has sold his wife to a 
General), 
407. See also Father 
(Vasin's) 
Little beetle, the. See Red beetle, the 
Little boy, the. See Boy, the (Liza's 
brother); 
Boy, 
the 
(with 
the 
"birdie") 
Little girl, a (dies), 1 42, 427, 430. See 
also Arinochka; Daughter (the 
doonnan's) 
Little girl, a (seduced by the Predatory 
Type. hangs herself), 29-30, 4 1 .  See 
also Liza; Olia; Young girl, a 
Little priest, the, 25 
Little Prince, the, 49-52, 1 99, 23 1 ,  235, 
239. See also Young Prince, the 
(and further identities listed there­
under) 
Little, red beetle. See Red beetle 
Liuban' (a railway station on the 
Petersburg-Moscow line), 95, 105, 
2 1 0  
Liza, 22, 24, 40, 44, 46, 48-52, 54-56, 64, 
66-68, 74, 80, 83-87, 89-98, 1 00-
1 02, 1 04-5, 
108-1 0, 
1 1 2- 1 4, 
1 1 7, 
1 2 1-24, 1 26, 1 33-36, 1 39-42, 1 48, 
1 54-65, 1 67, 1 76--77. 1 80-84, 1 86-
87, 
1 89-94, 
1 96--98, 
200, 
203-
9, 2 1 6--17, 22 1 ,  224-26, 237, 239-
4 1 ,  248, 27 1 ,  273-74, 277-86, 306, 
314, 
3 1 6--22, 
324, 
326--27, 
331-
32, 334, 336, 338, 340-4 1 ,  346, 349-
5 1 ,  354, 356-60, 362, 364, 382-83, 
386-89, 
39 1 ,  393-405, 
407, 
409, 
4 1 2- 1 3, 4 1 5, 4 1 7-18, 421-22, 426--
33, 443, 447, 449, 453-15, 4 1 7- 1 8, 
421-22. 426-33, 443, 447, 449, 453-
55, 460-62, 465, 468-73, 48 1-86, 
488-90, 492-93, 502, 504, 5 1 0, 5 1 4, 
526-27, 545-46. See also Dolgoruky 
girl, the; Lizaveta Makarovna; Sis­
ter (the Youth's); Stepdaughter 
(His wife's); Stepdaughter (the 
Predatory Type's); Olia (and fur­
ther identities listed thereunder); 
Young girl, a 
Liza,·eta. See Stinking Lizaveta 
Lizaveta J\lakarovna, 205, 405, 432. See 
also Liza 
Lizochka. See Liza 
Lorrain, Claude, 524-25, 534, 536-37, 
54 1 , 550, 552-53 
Louis XVII, 102 
Luga (a city in Russia), 1 8 1 ,  1 85, 20 1, 
204-5, 23Ò 26 1 ,  277, 28 1 ,  284, 3 1 7, 
324, 326, 330-3 1 ,  432 
1\lac;\lahon, 1\larie Edme Patrice Maur­
ice (president of France), 62 
͖͕ adier de ȉ͕on tjau (French deputy), 
529 
Magician, a, 26 
.!\fahomet, 342 
Makar lvanovich, 1 67, 1 72, 1 76--8 1, 185-
87, 1 90, 192, 1 94, 1 96, 1 99, 20 1-3, 
206, 208-9, 2 1 1-12, 2 1 4- 1 5, 2 1 7. 
22 1 ,  223, 230-3 1 ,  234, 238, 24 1-42, 
264-65, 269-70, 273, 276--78, 281-
83, 285, 288, 294, 300, 3 1 8-19, 32 1 .  
325, 340, 346--47, 349, 352, 359, 366, 
403, 427, 429, 442-50, 453-56, 458. 
460-7 1 ,  473. 475-76, 480-86, 488-
509, 5 1 2- 1 3, 5 1 5- 1 9, 523, 527, 529, 
531, 533-34, 537. 540-42, 544-45, 
553. See also Dolgoruky, Makar 
lvanovich 
͖lalaia Vishera (a railway station on the 
Petersburg-Moscow line), 95 
.!\faly Iaroslavets (a city in Russia), 26 
;'\lan, a (who shoots himself), 25-26. See 
also Kraft 
Marfa Petrovna (one of the Youth's 
aunts), 1 1 0. See also Aunt(s) 
.!\largaret (Faust, by Goethe), 5 1 6  
Maria lvanovna, 272, 276, 304-5, 427, 

52 1 ,  544, 549. See also Cook (Ta· 
tiana Pavlovna's) 
Mark us, F. A., 25 1 
Mary of Egypt, 445, 503, 529 
i\I atricides, the, 35 
Matryosha ("Stavrogin's Confession"), 
27 
1\lenshikov, Prince, 38 1 
Merchant, a (in Makar's story), 450, 475, 
484, 503, 505-7, 509, 5 1 4  
1\Ieshchersky, V .  P., 2 
Messalina, 223-24, 226, 230, 235, 272, 
377. See also Akhmakova, Kate­
rina Nikolaevna 
Michelet, Jules, 250 
Middle brother (Fyodor Fyodorovich's), 
40. See also He (and other identi­
ties listed thereunder) 
Mikhailov, 5 1 7  
1\fikhaylovsky, N. K., 3 1 ,  295 
Miliutin's store, 526 
Milusha (a character in Pugachev's 
Followers, by Evgeny Salias), 26 
Minin (a frigate), 234 
Mistress (the Aide-de-Camp's), 329 
Mitrofaniia, Very Reverend Mother, 
544 
Monaco, 39 
Moral beauty. See Harmony 
Moral deformity. See Lack of all form 
Moral disorder. See Disorder; Lack of 
all form 
Moral regeneration. See Regeneration 
Moscow, 69, 92-93, 95, 1 39, 1 5 6-57, 1 80, 
1 96, 202-4, 230, 237, 246, 262, 267, 
272, 274, 276, 290, 301 ,  305, 307, 
3 1 0, 369, 382, 390, 522, 527 
Moscow News, The (Moskovskie vedo­
mosti), 25-26, 222, 225 
Moses, 342 
Mother (the consumptive little boy's, in 
Makar's tale), 475, 505, 507. See 
also Widow (the merchant's) 
Mother (Lambert's), 1 38 
Mother (of the Iitle girl seduced by the 
Predatory Type), 29 
Mother (Liza's), 44, 54, 74, 86, 90-93, 
1 14, 1 24, 1 27, 1 57, 1 62, 1 76, 1 93, 
206, 24 1 ,  3 1 8, 402, 447. See also 
Mother (the Youth's) 
Mother (Olia's), 2 1 0, 360-5 1 ,  386-89, 
392, 394, 404-5, 426, 428. See also 
Mother 
(the 
schoolteacher's); 
Index 
563 
Mother (the suicide's) 
Mother, a (who has remarried), 24. See 
also Mother (Liza's) 
Mother (the schoolteacher's), 230. See 
also Mother (Olia's) 
Mother (the suicide's), 268, 286, 289. 
See also Mother (Olia's) 
Mother (the young Prince's), 392 
Mother (the Youth's), 24, 1 37, 1 80, 1 82, 
1 85-90, 
1 92, 
1 94, 
1 98, 
200-20 1 ,  
204-6, 2 1 0, 2 1 3-14, 232, 238, 240, 
246-48, 260-64, 27 1 ,  285, 297-98, 
300-30 1 ,  303, 307, 309-1 0, 3 1 2-1 3, 
322, 327-28, 346, 35 1-52, 356-58, 
361 ,  368, 384-87, 393, 40t 4 1 7- 1 Ó  
426-27, 429-3 1 ,  449-55, 458, 460, 
462-63, 466, 468-7 1 ,  473, 475, 478-
93, 495-98, 50 1-3, 508- 1 0, 5 1 7-20, 
524-28, 532-38, 540, 542-43, 545, 
547, 
552-53. See also, Mother 
(Liza's); Mother, a (who has remar­
ried); 
Sofia Andreevna; Sonia; 
Stepmother (Liza's); Widow (Ma­
kar's); Wife (His); Wife (Makar's); 
Wife (the Predatory Type's); Wife 
(Versilov's) 
Myshkin, Prince (The Idiot), 5, 2 1  
N. (a socialist, member of the Dolgushin 
circle), 1 02, 304. See also Nikolai 
Semenovich, N. S. 
N. A., 247. See also Nikolai Alekseevich 
N adezhda Prokofievna, I 00 
Napoleon I, 7 1 ,  78, 246, 372, 393 
Naquet (French deputy), 529 
Narodnost', 32, 38 
Nastasia Egorovna, 448, 454, 4 6 1 ,  470, 
473-74, 4 8 1 ,  483-84, 486-87, 492, 
495, 5 1 0, 540, 548-49 
Nastasya Filippovna (The Idiot), 4-5 
Nekrasov, N. A., 2-3, 205, 2 1 1  
Nihilism, Nihilists, 1-3, 6-7, 47, 56, 6 1 ,  
77, 87, 1 02, 1 1 0, 1 1 6-17, 1 1 9-20, 
1 6 1 ,  202, 233-34, 25 1 ,  279, 374-75, 
379, 445, 527 
Nihilist girl, a (shoots herself), 250 
Nikolai Alekseevich, 4 1 9. See also N. A. 
Nikolai Petrovich, 545. See also N. P. 
Nikolai Semenovich, 275, 304, 3 1 1 ,  545. 
See also N.; N. S. 
Nil Sorsky (fifteenth-century church­
man), 179 
N. M., 545 

564 Index 
Ϻ. :\., 86. See also He 
::-.:. ::'\ik., 545 
:'\ability, the, 233, 274, 293, 298, 3 1 6, 
355, 362, 373, 379. 380, 382, 384, 
387, 400, 4 1 5, 442, 522-25, 532-34, 
536, 538-43, 545, 553. See also Rus­
sian nobleman, the 
:\otary. a, 283 
f'ovelistic technique. See Technical 
and stylistic reminders 
N. P., 545. See also Nikolai Petrovich 
N. S., 26 1-62. See also Nikolai Semeno­
vich 
Nurse (Liza's). 405. See also Varvara 
Ivanovna 
Oblomov (by I. A. Goncharov), 3 14, 367, 
425 
Older brother (the young Prince's), 284, 
286. See also Brother (of the second 
Prince) 
Older brother (the Youth's), 21-22, 45. 
See also He 
Old lady, an (in Luga, a relative of the 
old Prince's; 1\lakar's family stay 
with her), 1 85. See also Aunt (in 
Luga) 
Old Prince, the, 1 6, 23, 39, 46-50, 52, 
56-58, 67, 69, 84-85, 97-98, 1 04, 
1 22-23, 1 29-32, 1 40, 143-44, 147, 
1 52, 1 60-6 1 ,  1 63, 1 80-85, 1 87, 1 89-
90, 
1 93-95, 
1 97-201 ,  203-4, 206, 
208-9, 2 1 6-17, 223-27. 229-3 1 , 233, 
236, 238, 240-4 1 ,  248-49, 263, 266-
68, 27 1-72, 274, 276, 278, 28 1-92. 
294, 307, 3 1 6, 3 1 9-2 1 ,  327-3 1 ,  346-
49, 35 1, 355, 358-59, 36 1 ,  363, 365, 
378, 
383-84, 
389, 
391 ,  
393-95, 
403-4, 427, 430-3 1 ,  435, 443, 449, 
455, 457-59, 463-64, 467-68, 473-
74, 48 1-82, 488, 491 ,  493, 495-96, 
502, 5 1 0, 5 1 2. 5 15, 543-44, 546-47. 
549. See also Count, the; Father (of 
Katerina Nikolaevna Akhmakova); 
Father (the Princess's); General, 
the; Husband (the Princess's); Old 
Prince Sokolsky; Prince, the 
Old Prince Sokolsky, 391 .  See also Old 
Prince, the 
Olia, 1 80, 182, 1 84-86, 1 88, 2 1 0-1 1 ,  344, 
355, 426-27. See also Governess, 
the; Roomer, the; Suicide, the; 
Teacher, the; Young girl, a 
Olimpiada, 357, 4 1 3  
Onegin (Eugene Onegin, by Pushkin), 
522 
Onisimovna, 396, 4 1 2. See also Daria 
Onisimovna 
Othello, 29 1-92, 42 1 ,  424 
Painter, a (in 1\lakar's story), 507 
Paris, 25, 1 14, 1 1 5, 261, 325, 329-32, 406, 
480 
Paris commune. See Commune 
Parthenios, 2 1 1  
Pasha. See Isaev, P. A. 
Passive creature, the (podushka), 200, 
202-6, 208, 223, 226, 229-30, 262, 
270, 272, 276, 278-79, 28 1 ,  283, 
286-87, 292, 348, 363. See also Step­
daughter (the old Prince"s); Step­
daughter (the old Prince's bro­
ther's) 
Paul. See St. Paul 
Pechorin (A Hero of Our Times, by 
Lermontov), 3 14, 367, 425, 523 
People, the, 32, 38, 6 1 ,  1 02, 1 74, 2 1 5, 
233, 250, 
295, 297, 365-66, 445, 
5 18, 523, 533, 536, 540, 542, 545, 
552-53 
Perchatkin, 59, 1 28, 222, 225, 229 
Perchatkin, Mrs. 98, 342 
Peter the Great, 59, 24 1 -42, 380, 426, 
524-25, 539-4 1, 545 
Petersburg, 26, 45, 5 1 ,  72, 80, 92, 94-96, 
98, 1 0 1 .  1 12, 1 39, 148, 1 54-56, 1 80-
8 1 ,  1 85, 20 1-2, 205, 2 1 0, 2 1 2. 2 1 6, 
230-32, 237-39, 246, 253, 269, 277. 
284, 288, 293, 300, 3 1 0-1 1 ,  3 17-18, 
33 1 ,  344, 369, 428, 446, 497. 544 
Petit vilain, le, 5 16, 530. See also Boy, a 
(Lambert's friend); Trishatov 
Petrashevsky circle, 1 04, 1 10 
Philidor, 450 
Pickwick Papers, The (by Charles Dick­
ens), 295, 363 
Pierre Bezukhov (War and Peace, by 
Tolstoi), 425, 544 
Pisarev, D. I., 234 
Platon, Prince, 5 1 0  
Pleshcheev, A. N., 449 
Pockmarked man, the (one of Lambert's 
associates), 5 14, 5 1 7, 548, 550 
Poletika, Count, 38 
Polinka Saks (by A. V. Druzhinin), 2 14. 
425 

Poretsky, I 04 
Positivism, 1 1 9, 25 1 ,  374, 535, 539-40, 
542 
Predatory Type, the, 7, I I , 1 3, 2 1 -24 
26-28, 33, 4 1 ,  60, 64, 7 1-72, 83-84 , 
86, 88, 90, 92, 94, 99, 1 02, 1 05, 1 22, 
1 35, 1 59-6 1 ,  1 64, 1 68, 1 84, 335, 339. 
See also He 
Prince, the, 27, 29-30, 39, 44-47, 52, 68, 
70, 72-73, 78, 84, 86, 90-92, 97, 1 27-
28, 1 32, 1 35-36, 1 40-4 1 ,  1 8 1 ,  1 89, 
1 92-93, 
1 96-97, 
200-203, 
205-6, 
2 1 6- 1 7, 
222-24, 
226-27, 
229-30, 
232, 238-40, 247, 257-59, 262, 264-
67, 270, 272, 274, 276-82, 284, 286-
87, 289-92, 294-96, 298-99, 306, 
3 1 4, 3 1 7-2 1 ,  323, 325-27, 329-30, 
332, 336-338, 340-4 1 '  345-5 1 '  353-
65, 367-68, 374, 380-4 1 7  passim, 
4 1 9, 426, 428-32, 444, 446-47, 449, 
454-56, 46 1-62, 470-72, 474, 476, 
482-86, 488-90, 492, 502, 509-1 0, 
5 1 2, 
5 1 4, 
549. See also Young 
Prince, the; Old Prince, the 
Prince, a fat-arsed, little, 5 1 4  
Prince S., 275. See also Young Prince, 
the 
Prince Sergei Petrovich. See Young 
Prince, the 
Princess, the, 14, 1 6, 22-24, 27, 34-35, 
43-53, 55-56, 64, 66-70, 73-74, 76, 
78, 82, 84-88, 9 1-97, 99, 1 04, I l l , 
1 1 4, 1 1 9, 1 22-24, 1 26, 1 28-36, 1 40-
4 1 ,  144, 1 46, 1 48-49, 157-58, 1 60-
64, 1 67-68, 1 80-2 1 1  passim, 2 1 7-
3 1 ,  235-4 1 ,  247-48, 256-59, 262-
63, 265-68, 27 1-88, 29Ô 294, 298-
30 1 ,  305, 307-9, 3 1 5, 3 1 7-32, 334, 
337-38, 340-4 1 ,  346-49, 357, 364, 
377-78. See also Akhmakova, Kate­
rina l\'ikolaevna (and further iden­
tities listed thereunder) 
Professor, a, 544 
Professor, a (of l\(oscow University, 
whose examination the Youth has 
failed), 78, 80 
Professor, the (whom the Youth visits), 
45 
Prokhodimov, Ivan :\(atveevich, 24 
Proudhon, Pierre Joseph, 449, 525 
Prutkov woman, the, 261-62 
Pugachev, Emelian, 1 1 7 
Pushkin, A. S., 78, 80, 1 5 1 ,  1 87, 195, 2 1 8, 
Index 
565 
233, 24U, 346, 401, 435, 522, 544 
"The Covetous Knight," 78 
Eugene Onegin, 522 
"Queen of Spades," 401 
"Songs of the Western Slavs," 1 1 7 
"The Tales of Belkin," 8 1  
Putilin, 250 
Raskolnikov (Crime and Punishment), 
2, 5-6, 425 
Realism, 4, 232, 522 
Red beetle, the, 6, 27, 30-3 1 ,  42-45, 52, 
60, 72-73, 83, 86, 89, 9 1 ,  49 1 ,  5 1 7-
1 9, 533, 536 
Regeneration, 28, 3 1 8- 1 9, 32 1 ,  365, 367, 
369-70, 469, 485, 49 1 , 503, 534, 537. 
See also Self-perfection 
Resurrection. See Regeneration 
Revolution, Revolutionaries, 25, 
27, 
1 02, 103-4, 1 07, 1 20, 393. See also 
Commune; Communism; Dolgush­
intsy; Nihilism 
Right to he dishonorable, the, 36, 38, 
44, 1 1 6, 232, 538, 542 
Riurik, 366, 39 1 
Rocks. See Ice-covered rocks 
Roden, Baron, 430. 'See also Rosen; 
Rossen, Baron; Second (Bioring's) 
Rogozhin (The Idiot), 5 
Roomer, the, 264. See also Olia 
Rosen, 444. See also Roden, Baron; 
Rossen, Baron; Second (Bioring's) 
Rossen, Baron, 343, 4 3 1 ,  434. See also 
Roden, Baron; Rosen; Second 
(Bioring's) 
Rostovs, the (War and Peace, by Tol­
stoi), 5 1 6- 1 8, 527, 535, 552-53 
Rothschild, 22, 46, 48-49, 52-54, 73, 75, 
77-78, 1 05, 1 1 5, 1 20-2 1 ,  1 24, 1 4 1 ,  
1 47, 1 5 1 ,  153, 2 1 8, 220, 238, 245, 
248, 25 1 ,  260, 263-64, 300, 305-6, 
324. See also Idea (the Youth's) 
Rousseau, J.-J., 70, I 04 
Rudin, 349 
Russia, Russians, the Russian spirit, 
Russian types, I , 6, 8, I I , 25, 32, 43-
44, 59, 6 1 ,  66, 68, 7 1-72, 75, 8 1 ,  89, 
1 04, I 14-15, 1 69, 1 77, 1 85, 1 92, 20 1 ,  
2 1 1 , 2 1 3, 222, 225, 233-34, 249, 263, 
275, 279-80, 293, 295, 307-8, 3 1 4, 
322, 339, 365-66, 368-69, 375, 377, 
379, 404, 4 1 3, 425-26, 435, 442, 
444-·15, 464-65, 471-72, 477, 493, 

566 Index 
Russia-Cont. 
497, 500, 503-4, 5 1 0, 5 1 3-14, 5 1 7-
1 9, 522-25, 528, 533-34, 536-42, 
544-45 
Russian family, the, 37-38, 74, 425, 497, 
5 1 6- 1 7, 523, 544-45 
Russian Messenger, The (Russkii vest­
nih), 2, 26, 32 
Russian nobleman, the. See :\'obility, 
the 
Russian World, The (Russkii mir), 62 
Sainte-Beuve, Charles, 450 
St. Paul (the apostle), I 72, 252, 505 
St. Petersburg Xews, The, 2 1 8  
St. Stephen (the apostle), 252 
St. Theodosius, 39 
Saks (in Polinka Saks, by A. V. Druz-
hinin), 425 
Salias, Evgeny, 26 
Samarin, Iu. F., 4 7 1  
Sancho Panza, 306 
Sapozhkov, Mile, 29 1 
Satan, 59, 96, 1 79, 503. See also Devil, 
the 
Schiller, Friedrich, 25, 6 1  
Schoolteacher, a, 24 
Schoolteacher, a (woman). See Teacher 
Scott, Sir Walter, 245 
Second (Bioring's), 433. See also, Roden, 
Baron; Rosen; Rossen, Baron 
Second Prince, the, 284. See also Young 
Prince, the 
Secret document, the, 73, 86, 1 80-84, 
1 93, 1 95, 198-99, 202, 204, 207-8, 
2 1 8, 227, 256, 260, 268-69, 27 1 , 273-
74, 276-78, 280-82, 284, 286, 288, 
297, 299-301 ,  303, 305, 307, 309, 
3 1 2, 3 15, 32 1-22, 324, 328, 337, 346, 
349, 357, 362, 366, 385-86, 390, 395, 
404, 407-8, 4 1  I, 4 19-2 1 ,  423, 427-
28, 444, 450, 452, 454-55, 457, 461-
64, 466, 470, 472-73, 48 1-84, 487, 
489, 492-95, 497-500, 502-4, 509-
15, 5 1 8, 52 1 ,  547-49. See also Let­
ter(s) 
Self-improvement. See Self-perfection 
Self-perfection, 8, I 60, 244, 345, 366, 
425, 440, 443, 455, 458, 477-78, 480, 
5 1 3, 5 1 6-17, 531-32, 542 
Semenovsky Barracks, 3 1 1  
Seminarian, the (on the train with the 
Youth and Liza), 97 
Serezha, Prince, 
363, 
402. See also 
Young Prince, the 
Sergei, Prince, 4, 7, 10-1 1 ,  24, 27, 39 1 .  
See also Young Prince, the 
Sergius, 425 
Shabby little fellow, 
a (steals some 
money at the gambling house), 3 1 4  
Shakespeare, William, 495 
Shatov (The Possessed), 4, 6, 27, 360 
Shchelkov, 72-73 
She. See Akhmakova, Katerina Niko-
laevna 
Sherstobitov, 250 
Shevchenko, T. G., 553 
Shtundists (a religious sect), 308 
Shveitsarov, 142. See also Doonnan, a; 
Landlord (the Youth's) 
Sick boy, the. See Boy, the (Liza's 
brother) 
Silvio ("The Shot," by Pushkin), 425, 
523 
Sister (the Youth's), 247, 263, 265, 268, 
277-78, 28 1-82, 286-87, 292, 323, 
338, 348, 35 1 ,  358, 39 I, 395, 397, 
401-2, 405, 4 1 2, 428, 430. See also 
Liza (and further identities listed 
thereunder) 
Sister (the Youth's and His), 50. See 
also Liza 
Skoptsy (a religious sect), 27 
Slap in the face, a, 27, 3 1 ,  34, 39-40, 43, 
45, 49, 70, 226, 258, 282, 289, 299, 
3 15, 330-3 1 ,  345, 364, 37 1 ,  390, 527 
Slavophilism, Slavophiles, 1 68, 247, 307, 
425 
Sobakevich (Dead Souls, by Gogo!), 73 
Socialism, Socialists, 1-3, 24, 35, 70, 79, 
I 1 6, 1 25, 1 29, 1 45, 1 50-52, 156, 169, 
188-89, 225, 232, 234-35, 237, 250, 
260, 27 1 ,  27 5, 30 1-2, 304, 306, 308, 
3 1 3, 324, 38 1, 443, 46 1 , 464, 478, 502 
Society of the future, the, 24-25, 29, 35-
36, 76, I 08, I 23, I 52, 253, 269, 34 I .  
370, 378, 382, 400, 500, 503, 540-42, 
550-52. See also Golden age, the 
Sodom, 244 
Sofia Andreevna, 24, 257, 325, 494, 5 I 2. 
See also Mother (the Youth's) 
Sokolsky, Prince Sergei Petrovich, 32, 
256, 258, 294, 334, 337, 39 1, 422. 
See also Young Prince, the 
Soldier, a (in one of Makar's stories), 
504 

Soldier, a (sells something to the Youth), 
124, 152 
Soldier, a ("unctuous"), 142 
Solomon, King, 434-35, 54 1 
Son (Souchard's), 137. See also Lambert 
Son (Versilov's), 463, 5 15. See also 
Versilov, Andrei Andreich 
Sonia, 547. See also l\lother (the Youth's) 
Sonia (Crime and Punishment), 2 
Souchard, 1 1 1-12, 1 1 4-15, 1 37-38, 140, 
144, 146, 1 54-55, 1 58, 186, 201 ,  213, 
238, 24 1, 245. See also Touchard 
Speshnev, N. A., 104, 346 
Spinoza, Benedict de, 35 1 ,  353, 358, 361, 
384-85, 387 
St., 446 
Staraia Russa (a city in Russia), 28, 7 1, 
79, 254 
Stavrogin (The Possessed), 4-6, 16, 21-
22, 27 
Stebelkov, 4, 16, 315, 340, 346-47, 349-
50, 358-59, 363-65, 38 1-83, 387, 
391-94, 396-99, 402-7, 4 1 1-12, 414-
15, 426, 429-30, 433, 4 70, 4 76, 48 I .  
484-86, 5 1 3. See also Kolosov 
Stepbrother (Fyodor Fyodorovich's), 33. 
See also He 
Stepbrother (Liza's), 49 
Stepbrother (the Youth's), 45. See also 
He 
Stepdaughter (His wife's), 49. See also 
Liza 
Stepdaughter 
(Katerina 
Nikolaevna 
Akhmakova's), 258. See also Lidiia 
Stepdaughter (the old Prince's), 195-96, 
199-202. See also Passive creature, 
the 
Stepdaughter 
(the 
old 
Prince's 
brother's), 266, 28 1 ,  287, 290. See 
also Passive creature, the 
Stepdaughter (the Predatory Type's), 7, 
24, 30, 74. See also Little girl, a 
(seduced by the Predatory Type); 
Liza; Young girl, a (seduced by 
Versilov) 
Stepdaughter (the Princess's), 263, 272. 
See also Lidiia 
Stepfather (Liza's and her brother's), 
74. See also He 
Stepfather (Vasin's), 325, 329 
Stepfather (the Youth's), 73, 84. See 
also He 
Stepmother (Liza's; later, the Youth's), 
Index 567 
30, 49-52, 69, 86, 90, 93, 98-99, 
1 22-28, 1 30-3 1 ,  135-36, 139-40, 
143-44, 151, 155, 157, 160-6 1 .  See 
also l\lother (the Youth's); l\lother 
(Liza's) 
Stepson (His), 84, 1 14. See also Youth, 
the 
Stinking Lizaveta, 172-73, 1 75-80, 244-
45, 429, 450, 475, 494, 50 1, 503, 508 
Stolbeev woman, the, 355, 386, 405 
Strakhov, N. N., 1 29, 343, 35 1 
Student, the (shouts obscenities at pass­
ing women), 25, 80, 84, 1 1 7, 1 54, 
187, 202, 212, 23 1 ,  24ֲ 26 1-62 
Suffering, 43-44, 57, 65-66, 74-75, 89, 
92, 94, 1 1 3, 1 1 9, 124, 127, 1 35, 1 37, 
146, 151, 179, 244, 247, 293, 298, 
369, 372, 374-75, 382, 394, 425-26, 
44 1,  446-47, 45 1-53, 457-59, 466, 
477-78, 481, 486, 5 1 3, 5 15, 525, 53 1 ,  
537, 539 
Suicide, 25, 29-30, 44, 5 1 ,  56, 60, 74-75, 
81,  82, 89, 96, 101-2, 105-7, 1 14, 
1 16, 124, 127-28, 142, 1 5 1 ,  162, 1 68, 
182, 184, 186-87, 193-95, 198, 200, 
205, 207-8, 2 17, 22 1-22, 225, 230, 
240, 245, 247-48, 25͔5 1, 265, 268, 
272, 277, 281-82, 285-86, 289, 293-
94, 297, 302, 305-6, 3 1 6, 323, 342, 
366, 368, 379, 383-84, 397, 403, 4 14, 
423, 426-27, 45͔5 1, 455, 464, 468, 
477, 479, 489 
Suicide, the, 268, 286. See also Olia 
Suitor (Liza's), 207, 240. See also Young 
man, a (whom the young Prince 
wants to marry Liza) 
Suitor (the Princess's), 3 19-20. See also 
Bioring, Baron 
Suslova, Paulina (Apollinaria), 90, I 00 
Suvorin, A. S., 267 
Suvorov, Prince, 72-73 
Suzdal' (a city in Russia), 434, 522 
Svidrigaylov (Crime and Punishment), 
22 
Swedish King, a, 25 1 
Swiss governess (Olia's), 209 
Tacitus, Publius Cornelius, 532 
Tambovo-Kozlovsky railway shares for­
gery, 4, 315, 381 
Tashkent (a city in Central Asia), 3 1 8, 
327, 347, 349 

568 Index 
Tatiana Pavlovna, 257, 262-66, 272, 
275, 282, 289, 299, 30 1, 303, 305, 
31 1 ,  315, 319, 322, 325, 328, 343, 
35 I. 357' 360, 362-63, 385-90, 395, 
409, 418-19, 426-27' 430, 433, 452, 
454-55, 460-64, 466, 469-70, 473-
74, 48 1-84, 487-90, 492-96, 498, 
501, 503, 515-16, 518, 52 1, 526, 542-
44, 546-49. See also Aunt(s) 
Tax·farmer, the (l\f urazov, in Dead 
Souls, by Gogol), 425 
Teacher, the, 222, 225, 229-30. See also 
Olia 
Technical and stylistic reminders 
characters, 4-5, 31, 34, 46, 49, 52, 74, 
81-82, 87-88, 101, 1 28, 1 36-37, 
I63, 1 67-72, 184-85, 187, I92, 
205, 213, 228, 257, 3 1 6-17, 32 1, 
324-25, 335-37, 346, 358, 364, 
395, 404, 450, 465, 493, 496 
composition and motivation, 5, 37, 
40, 46, 50, 52, 56-58, 68, 73-74, 
79-81, 83, 94, 96-97, 99, 127, 1 30, 
1 35-39, 142-43, 15I, 154, 163, 
166, 191, 200-201, 204, 218, 236-
37, 256, 267-68, 270, 281 ,  286, 
289, 296, 301, 346, 348-49, 353-
56, 358-59, 365, 384-85, 388-89, 
395, 398, 402-3, 4 1 1 ' 427' 448, 
464, 467, 474, 481, 492, 496, 503-
4, 544 
creative process, 31, 293, 333, 356, 
436-37, 503, 522 
"ideas and plans," 37, 42, 46, 52, 66, 
70, 81, 89, 92, 97, 105, 127, 143, 
148, 192, 195, 265-68, 274-75, 
281-82, 284, 286-88, 299, 3I2, 
319, 322. 328, 442-43, 460, 476, 
487-89, 502, 505, 512 
plot, 12, I6, 44, 64, 68, 73, 76, 78, 
81-82, 85-86, I 14, 128, I 36, 164, 
166, 1 87, 195, 256, 267-68, 274, 
276-79, 285, 356, 362, 386, 467-
68 
point of dew and narrator, 12-13, 42, 
67-68, 79-80, 82, 91, 95, 101, 128, 
1 35, 142-43, 146-47, 149, 151, 
163-64, I70-7 1 ,  190-91, 193, 195, 
200, 203, 212-13, 224, 246, 260, 
279, 392, 476, 496, 5 12, 520 
psychology, 43, 54, 68, 82-83, 93, 1 35, 
14 7' 158, 162, 182, 277, 299, 406, 
444, 458, 464, 47 1, 475-76, 485, 
496, 532, 550 
structure and focus, 15, 28, 45, 10 I ,  
128-29, 141-42, 149, 164, 187, 
194-95, 237, 321 ,  336-37, 348-50, 
468 
style and tone, 70, 74, 80, 82, 86, 96, 
98, 100, 129, 1 36-37. 143, 147, 
187, 191-92, 195, 200-201, 203, 
218, 260-62, 314, 346, 35 1, 365, 
384, 392, 427, 477, 483, 485-86, 
488, 495, 520 
theme, title, and "main idea," 66, 81, 
85-86, 92, 99-101, 120, 124, 1 28-
29, 136, 142, 146, 2 12, 283, 285, 
442, 473, 487, 493 
Third boy, a, 280 
Third brother, the, 37. See also Younger 
brother (His and Fyodor Fyodoro­
vich's) 
Tikhon (The Possessed), 425 
Tiutchev, F. I., 105, 529 
Tolstoi, L. N., 17-IS, 23, 84, 105, I I  I ,  
129-30, 339, 425, 464, 493, 544 
Adolescence, 104, 464 
Anna Karenina, 529 
Childhood, 17, 104, 464 
The Cossacks, 23 
War and Peace, 18, 23, 516, 545 
Touchard, 249, 261, 263, 283, 287, 301, 
304, 307, 310-14, 356. See also 
Souchard 
Trishatov, 473-74, 517, 548. See also 
Petit vilain, le 
Tsarskoe Selo (a suburb of St. Peters­
burg), 473, 499, 512 
Tuileries, the, 36, 235, 524-25, 527, 533-
35, 539-4I 
Turgenev, I. S., 24, 151, 233, 250, 344 
"Gamlet i Don Kikhot," 24 
Umetskaia, Olga (Notebooks to The 
Idiot), 3 
Underground man, the, and Under· 
ground type, 6, 17, 21-22, 76, 79, 
1 1 5, 169, 235, 334, 339, 425-26, 514, 
529 
Ungern·Shternberg, 70-7 I, 82-83, I05, 
1 32, 137, 183, 209, 2 I 3, 226, 245-46, 
26I, 287, 300, 304, 3I2-13, 322, 382 
United States of America, 250, 377. See 
also America 
Utopia. See Society of the future 

Valet (the young Prince's), 2 1 1  
Valikhanov, 74 
Varia, 355 
Varvara lvanovna, 405. See also l':urse 
(Liza's) 
Vasia, 210. See also Youth, the 
Vasin, 102-3, 105, 1 17-18, 124, 129, 1 3 1 ,  
134, 139-50, 1 52, 157-58, 167, 185, 
187-90, 192-91, 200, 203, 208-9, 21 1, 
2 1 3, 216-18, 221, 224, 238, 245, 247-
49, 260, 263-66, 268-69, 273-77, 
279, 28 1-82, 285-89, 292, 294-96, 
298-301 ,  303, 306, 308, 310, 3 1 2-17, 
319, 32 1-25, 329, 340-42, 350, 352, 
399, 403-4, 406, 426, 429-3 1,  448-
49, 454, 46 1, 470-7 1 ,  48 1, 483-86, 
488, 490, 492, 496, 502, 504 
Venice, 185, 525, 527, 534, 537-38, 54 1,  
552-53 
Verkhovensky, Peter (The Possessed), 
4-5, 22 
Verkhovensky, 
Stepan 
Trofimovich 
(The Possessed), 6, I 0, 21 ,  425 
Versilov, Andrei Andreich, 357, 43 1 ,  
474, 544, 546, 548. See also Brother 
(the Youth's); Children (His, legiti­
mate); Junior Chamberlain, the; 
Son (Versilov's) 
Versilov, Andrei Petrovich, 4-1 1,  13-16, 
21-24, 27, 32, 64-68, 167-72, 1 79, 
233-35, 241 ,  249, 256-62, 268, 273-
76, 286, 288-90, 294, 296-301 ,  303, 
305, 307, 309-10, 314-15, 320, 322-
553 passim. See also He (and fur­
ther identities listed thereunder) 
Versilov, Anna Andreevna, 274, 3 1 7, 
329, 334, 347, 349, 353, 355, 357-60, 
362-65, 382-83, 385, 387-88, 391-
94, 396, 398-402, 406-7, 4 1 0-13. 
4 1 7, 4 1 9, 42 1, 427, 430-32, 434, 
448, 454-55, 461-62, 468, 470-7 1 ' 
473-74, 481-86, 488-89, 491-92, 
494-97, 502-3, 5 1 0-12, 5 14-15, 53 1 ,  
546, 548-49. See also Children (His, 
legitimate); Daughter (Versilov's); 
Lawful daughter (His) 
Vienna, 26 
Viktoriia, 55, 365 
Vilain, le. See Petit vilain, le 
Virginsky (The Possessed), 214 
Vita, 49, 61, 73, 79, 98, 108, 1 39, 157, 
187, 263, 281 , 286, 296, 322-23 
J'oice, The (Golas), 106, 252 
Index 569 
Von Sohn, 546 
Vrangel, Baron A. E., 74 
Vremia (Time, a journal published by 
the Dostoevsky brothers), 7 1 ,  35 1 ,  
382 
Vronsky, 
Prince 
(actually, 
Count 
Vronsky in Anna Karenina, by 
Tolstoi), 525 
\\'eltschmerz. See Suffering 
\\'ench, a (with whom the Youth has 
an adventure one night), 1 88, 203, 
239. See also Girl, a (whom the 
Youth meets); \\'hore, a; \Voman 
(fallen) 
Westernizers, 168, 247 
\\'hore, a (whom the Youth meets one 
night), 27 1. See also Girl, a (whom 
the Youth meets); \Vench, a; 
Woman (fallen) 
Widow (the General's), 181-82, 1 85-90, 
195, 198, 203, 3 1 7-18, 340-4 1 ,  428. 
See also Akhmakova, Katerina 
ֳikolaevna 
Widow (:\lakar lvanovich's), 182, 327. 
See also :\lother (the Youth's) 
Widow (of a merchant, in ִIakar's 
story). See :\lother (of the con­
sumptive little boy, in Makar's 
story) 
\Viesbaden (a city in Germany), 225 
Wife (Andreev's), 23 1 
\Vife (another man's; the Predatory 
type is in love with her), 30, 32. 
See also Wife (Fyodor Fyodoro­
vich's) 
Wife (Chistov's), 548 
Wife (the Count's), 34, 37. See also 
Akhmakova, Katerina !1\ikolaevna 
Wife (the doorman's), 1 38, 141. See also 
Wife (the landlord's) 
Wife (Fyodor Fyodorovich's), 31-33, 35, 
37. See also Wife (another man's) 
Wife (the German's), 23 1-32 
Wife (His), 22, 34, 37, 39, 4 1-46, 49-54, 
56, 58, 66, 69-70, 72-74, 82, 84-88, 
90, 105, 1 19, 1 24-28, 143, 1 58, 160, 
162, 180, 182, 2 12, 248, 327, 340. 
See also :\Iother (the Youth's) 
Wife (Kolosov's), 325-26, 330 
Wife (the landlord's), 193, 212, 3 1 6, 427. 
See also Wife (the doorman's) 

570 Index 
Wife (ǡlakar lvanovich's), 1 80, 182, 187, 
193, 196, 198-200, 207-8, 214-15, 
278, 494. See also ֵfother (the 
Youth's) 
Wife (the old Prince's), 46, 129, 160. See 
also Akhmakova, Katerina Niko­
laevna (and further identities listed 
thereunder) 
Wife (the Predatory Type's), 29-3 1 ,  33. 
See also ǡlother (the Youth's) 
Wife, the (as a tracehorce), 25 
Wife (Vasin's), 340-41 
Wife (of Vasin's father), 125, 344 
Wife (Versilov's), 7, 347, 368. See also 
:\I other (the Youth's) 
Woe from Wit (a comedy by A. S. 
Griboedov), 261, 304, 314 
\\'oman (fallen, whom the Youth meets 
one night), 222. See also Wench, a; 
\Vhore, a 
Woman, a (falls in love with the Preda· 
tory Type), 29 
Young boy (associates with Him), 26, 28 
Young boy (His brother, works for the 
Count), 34, 40-4 1 ,  43. See also 
Youth, the 
Younger brother (the young Prince's), 
390-92 
Younger brother (His and Fyodor Fy· 
odorovich's), 21-22, 34-35, 37, 40-
4 1 ,  44, 58. See also Third brother, 
the; Youth, the 
Young general, a (helps the young 
Prince), 186 
Young girl, a, 260, 265, 282, 286. See 
also Olia 
Young girl, the, 325-26, 330-3 1. See 
also Lidiia 
Young girl (finds it too much of a bur· 
den to eat her father's bread), 539 
Young girl, a (loves and is loved by 
Him), 30-3 1. See also Liza 
Young girl (seduced by Versilov, com· 
mits suicide), 7, 21, 168. See also 
Little girl, a; Olia (and further 
identities listed thereunder) 
Young man, the, 26, 28-29, 32, 46, 59, 
73, 75. See also Youth, the; Great 
sinner, the 
Young man, a (on the train), 321 
Young man (a wealthy landowner, he 
apprentices himself as a laborer), 
103-4 
Young man, the (the young Prince 
wants him to marry Liza), 205-7, 
217, 240. See also fiance (Liza's); 
suitor (Liza's) 
Young Prince, the, 1 6, 49, 5 1 ,  56, 67, 69, 
96, 99, 105, 122, 124-25, 127. 130-
32, 140-4 1, 143, 162, 167, 180-87, 
189-98, 201-8, 2 1 1 ,  2 17, 222-30, 
236-40, 261 ,  270-72, 276, 28 1, 284-
86, 289, 294, 313-14, 31 6-20, 322, 
328-32, 337-38, 346-48, 352, 354, 
357-59, 361 ,  363-65, 367, 37 1 ,  394, 
455, 463, 481 ,  486, 488-89, 453. See 
also Golitsyn, Prince; Little Prince, 
the; Prince, the; Second Prince, 
the; Serezha, Prince, Sergei, Prince; 
Sokolsky, Prince Sergei Petrovich 
Young Versilov. See Versilov, Andrei 
Andreich 
Youth, the, 3-6, 1 1-14, 16, 21-24, 45, 
48-50, 52-57, 61-62, 64-553 passim. 
See also Arkady ;\Jakarovich; Boy, 
the; Dolgoruky, Arkady Makaro­
vich; Dolgoruky, "Prince"; Fy­
odorov, Pavel Fyodorovich; Third 
brother, 
the; 
Vasia; 
Younger 
brother (His and Fyodor Fyodoro­
vich's); Young boy (His brother); 
Young man, the 
Zavialov (a merchant), 342, 381 
Zeromski (a Polish lawyer), 27 
Zershchikov, 485-86 
Zhemchuzhnikov, 329 
Zhirondsky, 433 
Zhukovskii, V. A., 38, 445 
"The Anniversary of Borodino," 38 
Zossima, Father (The Brothers Kara­
mazov), 70, 1 12, 449 
Zverkov (Notes from the Underground), 
79 

