
PYoooR DosTOYEVSKY was 
born 
in Moscow on October 30, 1821. 
He was educated in Moscow and at the School of Military 
Engineers in St. Petersburg, where he spent four years. 
In 
1844 he resigned his Commission in the army to devote himself 
to literature. In 1846, he wrote his first novel, Poor Folk; it 
was an immediate critical and popular success. This was fol­
lowed by short stories and a novel, The Double. While at work 
on Netochka Nezvanova, the twenty-seven-year-old author was 
arrested for belonging to a young socialist group. He was tried 
and condemned to death, but at the last moment his sentence 
was commuted to prison in Siberia. He spent four years in the 
penal settlement at Omsk; then he was released on the condi­
tion that he serve in the army. While in the army he fell in 
love with and maried Marie Isaeva. In 1859 he was granted 
full amnesty and alowed to return to St. Petersburg. In the 
next few years he wrote his first full-length novels: The Friend 
of the Family (1859) and The Insulted and the Injured 
(1862). Notes from Underground (1864) was in many ways 
his most influential work of this period, containing the well­
springs of his mature philosophy: the hope of gaining salvation 
through degradation and suffering. At the end of this literary 
period, his wife died. Plagued by epilepsy, faced with financial 
ruin, he worked at superhuman speed to produce The Gambler, 
dictating the novel to eighteen-year-old Anna Grigorievna 
Snitkina. 
The manuscript was delivered to his publisher in 
time. During the next fourteen years, Dostoyevsky wrote his 
greatest works: Crime and Punishment, The Idiot, The Pos­
sessed, and The Brothers Karamazov. 
The latter book was 
published a year before his death on January 28, 1881. 

DOSTOYEVSKY 
The Dream of a 
and 
SELECTIONS FROM 
 A SIGNET 
CLASSIC 

Notes jro1n Underground 
White Nights 
Ridiculous Man 
The House of the Dead 
A NEW TRANSLATION WITH AN AFTERWORD 
BY ANDREW R. MACANDREW 
PUBLISHED BY 
THE NEW AMERICAN LffiRAR Y, NEW YORK AND TORONTO 
THE NEW ENGLISH LIBRARY LIMITED, LONDON 

CAREFULLY SELECTED. EDITED. AND PRINTED. 
SIGNET CLASSICS PROVIDE A TREASURY OF THE WORLD'S 
GREAT WRmNGS IN HANDSOMELY DESIGNED VOLUMES. 
COPYRIGHT @ 1961 BY 
ANDREW R. MAcANDREW 
All rights reserved 
Sixth Printing 
BIQNET TRADEMARK REO. U.S. PAT. Ol'B'. AND JI'OREION COONTBIBB 
BlDQIBTERmD TBADIIMABK-MABOA BliOISTBADA 
BBOHO BN OBIOAQO, 0.8..&. 
SIGNET CLASSICS are published in the United States 
by The New American Library, Inc., 1301 Avenue of the 
Americas, New York, New York 10019, in Canada by The 
New American Library of Canada Limited, 295 King 
Street East, Toronto 2 ,  Ontario, in the United Kingdom 
by The New English Library Limited, Barnard's Inn, 
Ho1born, London, E.C. 1 ,  England 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

Contents 
White Nights 
7 
Selections from The House of the Dead 
62 
Baklushkin's Story 
62 
Akulka's Husband 
69 
In the Hospital 
81 
Notes from Underground 
90 
The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
204 
Afterword 
227 
Selected Bibliography 
240 


lVhite Mghts 
A TALE OF LOVE FROM THE REMINISCENCES OF A DREAMER 
Could he be born from the start, 
If only for a fleeting moment, 
To be so dear to your heart? 
IVAN 'fuRGENEV 
The First Night 
I
t was a marvelous night, the sort of night one only 
experiences when one is young. The sky was so 
bright, and there were so many stars that, gazing upward, 
one couldn't help wondering how so many whimsical, 
wicked people could live under such a sky. This too is a 
question that would only occur to the young, to the very 
young; but may God make you wonder like that as 
often as possible! 
Now, mentioning whimsical, angry people makes me 
think how well I behaved that day. A strange anguish 
had tormented me since early morning. I suddenly had 
the impression that I had been left al alone, that every­
one was shrinking away from me, avoiding me. You are, 
of course, right to ask who that "everyone" is, for al­
though I've lived in Petersburg for eight years now, I 
haven't managed to make a single friend. But what do I 
need friends or acquaintances for? As it is, I'm acquainted 
with al of Petersburg. And that's why I had the impres­
sion of being abandoned by everyone when the whole 
city rose and left for the summer. I was afraid to be left 
7 

8 
White Nights 
alone, and for three days I roamed dejectedly through 
the city, unable to understand what was happening to me. 
Whether I went to Nevsky Avenue, to the park, or wan­
dered along the embankments, I never came across the 
people I was accustomed to meet in certain spots at cer­
tain hours al year round. They, of course, didn't know 
me; but I knew them, al right. I knew them intimately, 
and having studied their faces, I rejoiced with them 
when they were cheerful and grieved with them when 
they were downcast. I almost became friends with a lit­
tle old man whom I met every day at a certain time on 
the Fontanka Embankment. His face was so dignified and 
thoughtful; he carried a knotty walking cane with a gold 
top in his right hand, swinging his left arm, and was 
constantly mumbling something inaudible. He even no­
ticed me and took a keen interest in my existence. 
I'm sure he must've been quite upset when I did not 
appear at a given hour on the embankment. That's why 
sometimes 
we 
almost 
exchanged 
greetings, 
especially 
when we both happened to be in a good mood. Recently, 
two days went by without our seeing each other, and on 
the third day, our hands almost shot up to our hats, but 
thank God, we came to our senses, dropped our hands, 
and passed by with mutual sympathy. 
I'm acquainted with houses too. As I walk up a street, 
each house seems to have darted ahead and to be waiting 
for me, looking at me out of all its windows, almost 
saying: "Hello! How are you getting on? I'm fine myself. 
And you know what? They're going to add another story 
to me in May!" Or: 
"How are you? Well, me, I'll 
have to undergo some repairs tomorrow." Or: 
"You 
know, I almost burned down last night. It gave me 
such a fright!" And other things of that sort. Among 
houses, I have my favorites. Some are intimate friends. 
One had decided to undergo a course of treatment with 
an architect during the summer. I'll make a point of 
visiting him every day, in case the treatment turns out 
to be fatal, God forbid! I'll never forget what happened to 
one very pretty, 
rosy 
little 
house. Although he was 
rather haughtily distant with his clumsy neighbors, that 

White Nights 
9 
little stone house used to look at me so nicely that I 
always felt glad as I passed by. But last week, as I was 
walking along that street, my friend looked at me de­
jectedly, and I heard his plaintive cry: "They're painting 
me yellow!" Ah, the criminals! The barbarians! They 
spared nothing; neither the columns nor the cornices, 
and my friend became yellow as a canary. I nearly had 
an attack of jaundice myself, and I still haven't been 
able to go back and visit my poor disfigured friend 
painted in the color of the Celestial Empire. 
So you see, that's what I meant by being acquainted 
with al Petersburg. 
As I said, I'd been uneasy for three days and now 
I'd discovered why. Things didn't feel right in the street 
-this one was missing, that one was missing, and where 
on earth was such-and-such? And at home, too, I wasn't 
quite myself. For two whole evenings I'd tried to de­
termine what I was missing in my comer, why I was so il 
at ease there. Puzzled, I kept examining my green walls 
with their black soot stains, the ceiling covered with 
cobwebs that 
Matryona 
cultivates 
with such 
eminent 
success. I examined every piece of furniture, every sin­
gle chair, to see whether the trouble wasn't hidden just 
there. For I know that I can be badly upset if a chair 
is not in exactly the same place as it was the day before. 
I also looked at the window. But all in vain. I even 
decided to call in Matryona and give her a fatherly 
scolding about the cobwebs and about her slovenliness 
in general. But she only looked at me, surprised, and 
left without answering a word; the cobwebs remained 
unmolested. 
It was only this morning that I realized what was hap­
pening. Why, they were deserting me for their summer 
places. I must apologize for this trivial way of putting 
it, but I can't be bothered with style just now, because 
everyone is 
either 
leaving 
Petersburg 
or has already 
left it; because every 
respectable-looking 
man hailing 
a cab in the street is thereby, before my very eyes, 
turning himself into a venerable pater familias, who, 
having taken care of his usual duties, departs, just as 

10 
White Nights 
he is, to join his family in their country house; because 
every passer-by in the street has a special look about 
him that almost audibly announces to the world at large: 
"I'm only passing through town-in a couple of hours or 
so, I'll be back in the country." If slender, sugar-white 
fingers drum on the inside of a window pane, if that 
window then opens, and a pretty face peeps out to buy 
some potted plants from a street flower vendor-! im­
mediately imagine that she's just buying them to pass 
the time and not at al to enjoy spring and flowers in a 
stuJiy city apartment, and that anyway the people in 
that apartment wil leave for the country and take the 
flowers along. I've become so perspicacious that I can 
tell with certitude from people's faces what kind of summer 
houses they live in. Those from the Rocky and Apothe­
cary Isles, or from the places along Peterhof Road, are 
recognizable by the studied exquisiteness of their man­
ners, the elegance of their sumer suits, and the mag­
nificence of the carriages in which they drive into the 
city. Those from Pargolov and places beyond always im­
press me with their solidity and their down-to-earth air. 
A visitor from Krestovsky Island is distinguishable by 
his imperturbable cheerfulness. Whether I happen to meet 
a long caravan of movers' wagons loaded with moun­
tains of furniture-tables, chairs, sofas (Turkish or other­
wise), and al sorts of household junk, on top of which, 
moreover, a thin female 
cook is 
enthroned, 
looking 
after her master's belongings like a nesting bird after 
her eggs-or watch the boats and barges, heavily loaded 
with household goods, sliding down the Neva or the 
Fontanka toward the Black Stream or the Islands-in 
my eyes, the wagons and barges multiply by tens and 
hundreds, and I have the impression that everything has 
risen up and started moving in long files out of the city 
to the countryside, that Petersburg will soon be a desert. 
So, in the end, I feel offended, ashamed, and sad. I 
have absolutely nowhere to go and no reason to go out 
of town. I long to leave on any wagon, to drive off with 
any gentleman hailing a cabbie. But no one has in-

White Nights 
1 1  
vited me. They seem to have completely forgotten me, 
as if I really were a stranger to them! 
I'd been walking for hours and, as usual, I'd lost track 
of where I was, when I suddenly realized I'd reached the 
city limits. I immediately felt happy and, without hesi­
tation, passed beyond the barrier and found myself walk­
ing between cultivated fields and meadows. I didn't feel 
tired at all. On the contrary, every joint in me was as 
relaxed as if a load had been lifted from my shoulders. 
Al who drove by smiled at me engagingly, almost bow­
ing to me. They looked pleased about something and the 
whole lot of them were smoking cigars. And I too was 
happier than I'd ever been before. Such was the impact of 
nature upon me, a semi-invalid city dweller who'd al­
most suffocated within the city walls, that I felt almost as 
if I'd found myself in Italy. 
There's something inexpressibly moving in our Peters­
burg countryside when, with the arrival of spring, it sud­
denly reveals itself in all its might and with all its 
God-given gifts; when it dresses up, adorns itself with 
bright, multicolored flowers. . . . It makes me think of a 
weak, frail, sickly young girl, usually regarded with pity, 
sometimes with compassionate love, and sometimes not 
even noticed, who for one moment, as if by accident, 
suddenly becomes immensely beautiful; and, struck and 
charmed, you can't help wondering what force could have 
lighted the flame in those sad, dreamy eyes. What has 
caused the blood to rush to those pale, sunken cheeks? 
What has brought this passion to her delicate features? 
Why does her bosom heave like that? What has so 
suddenly communicated vigor, life, and beauty to the 
poor girl's face; given it that radiant smile; produced 
that glittering, sparkling laughter? You look around, you 
try to guess. But then it's all gone, and the next day 
perhaps, you'll meet her usual pensive, abstract gaze 
again, recognize her pale face and the timid humility 
of her movements; you'll even detect remorse and signs 
of some deadening anguish and shame over that momen­
tary exaltation. . . . And you're sorry that the ephemeral 
beauty has faded so rapidly, so irretrievably, that it 

12 
White Nights 
flashed so deceptively and pointlessly before your eyes­
you're sorry, for you didn't even have time to fall in 
love with her ... . 
But, even so, the night was better than the day! This 
is what happened. 
It was very late when I got back into the city. As I 
approached the house I live in, it struck ten. I was 
walking along the embankment; at that hour there was 
no one around, for I live in a remote part of town. I 
sang as I walked, for when I'm happy, I always hum 
something-as does every happy, friendless man who has 
no one with whom to share his happiness. Then suddenly 
the most unexpected thing happened to me. 
I saw a woman leaning against the railing along the 
embankment. She appeared to be gazing attentively at 
the murky water. She wore a ravishing little yellow hat 
and an elegant black cape. "She must be young and dark­
haired," I decided. I don't think she heard my footsteps, 
and she didn't even stir when I passed her, holding my 
breath, my heart beating wildly. "Strange," I thought, 
"she must be quite lost in thought-" Suddenly I 
stopped dead. Stifled sobs reached my ears. Yes, that 
was it-she was crying. Again I heard the girl trying 
to catch her breath. Ah, God! My heart contracted with 
pity, and shy though I am with women, I retraced my 
steps and walked up to her. I'm sure I'd have exclaimed 
"Madame!" had I not been so acutely aware that this 
form of address has already been used so often in Rus­
sian novels with a high-society background. That was 
all that stopped me. But while I was searching for an 
alternative approach, the girl recovered, turned her head, 
glanced at me, looked away, and darted off along the 
embankment. I followed her. She must have realized, for 
she turned her back to the water, crossed the street, and 
went along the opposite sidewalk. I didn't dare follow 
her across the street. My heart was quivering like that 
of a bird held in a man's hand. Then something came to 
my assistance. 
I saw a man walking on the other side of the street, 
not far from the girl. He wore a frockcoat, and seemed 

White Nights 
1 3  
to have reached an age of respectability, although there 
was nothing respectable about his gait. He was staggering 
and stumbling along, guiding himself by leaning against 
the walls. Now the girl was moving lightly and apprehen­
sively, as girls do at night when they don't wish strange 
men to offer to see them home; the staggering gentleman 
never would have caught up with her if he hadn't changed 
his tactics (for which I thank my lucky stars). 
But suddenly, without uttering a word, the man set off 
at a gallop. She darted ahead with quickened, fearful 
steps, but the swaying figure kept gaining on her. He came 
closer and closer, then he caught up with her. The girl 
let out a cry, and-I thank my lucky stars again for 
placing my excellent knobby walking stick in my right 
hand. In no time, I was on the opposite sidewalk; in no 
time, the uninvited gentleman made a practical appraisal 
of the situation, took into consideration the unanswerable 
argument in my hand, slowed down, and fell back. And 
only when he felt there was a safe distance between us 
did he voice his indignation in no uncertain terms. But 
his words hardly reached us. 
"If," I said to the girl, "you wil allow me to take 
your _arm, that man won't dare annoy you again." 
Silently she allowed me. Her hand was still trembling 
from fear and her earlier emotions. Ah, what blessings 
I wished at that moment upon the unwelcome gentle­
man! I squinted at her discreetly. She was terribly pretty. 
Her hair was dark, just as I'd guessed. Tears glistened 
on her black eyelashes, whether from her recent fright 
or from her sorrow, I didn't know, but a smile was 
already sparkling on her lips. She glanced at me out of 
the comer of her eye, blushed, and looked down. 
"Now, you see, you shouldn't have spumed me like 
that. Nothing would've happened if I'd been at your 
side." 
"But I didn't know you; I thought you too ... " 
"Do you feel you know me now?" 
"A little. For instance, I know you're trembling. Tell 
me why." 
"Ah, you've guessed right from the start!" I said, 

14 
White Nights 
delighted that she should tum out to be so clever­
never a drawback in a woman, as long as she's pretty. 
"Yes, you've seen through me straight away. I'm afraid 
of women, and it's that fear that makes me tremble, 
just as it made you tremble a few moments ago when 
that gentleman frightened you. I'm frightened now, all 
right. It's like a dream, although I've never actually 
dreamed that I'd be talking like this to a woman." 
"Really?" 
"Yes. And if you feel my arm tremble, it's because it 
has never yet been held by a pretty hand like yours. I'm 
quite unused to being with women. In fact, I've never 
got used to them. I live all alone. I don't even know how 
to talk to women. For instance, I don't know if I haven't 
said something stupid to you. Please, tell me frankly-! 
promise I won't be offended." 
"No, no, on the contrary. And since you want me to 
be frank, let me tell you that women like your sort of 
shyness; I'll even tell you that I like it too, and I won't 
ask you to leave me until we're at my doorstep." 
"If you go on saying things like that," I said, out of 
breath with enthusiasm, "I'll lose my shyness and, along 
with it, my advantage .... " 
"Advantage? Advantage to what end? Ah, now you've 
said something I don't like." 
"I am sorry, it just slipped off my tongue. You can't 
really expect that, at such a moment, I shouldn't wish 
that . .. 
" 
"What? Wish that I should like you?" 
"Yes, that's it. But please, try to understand: 
I'm 
twenty-six already and I've never known anyone closely. 
So how can I be expected to be good at speaking to 
people? How can I say things well and to the point? Be­
sides, isn't it better for you when everything is out in the 
open? For I don't know how to be silent when my heart 
is talking. Well, what's the difference? But believe me, 
I've never, never spoken to any woman. Never. I've 
never known one. I've only gone around dreaming that 
one day I might meet someone. If you only knew how 
many times I've fallen in love that way .... 
" 

White Nights 
15 
"But how's that, who did you fall in love with?" 
"Why, no one in particular, just with the ideal woman, 
the one I'd dreamed of. I can dream up whole novels, 
you know. Oh, you really have no idea about me! Of 
course, as you can well imagine, I have come across two 
or three women in .my time. But what sort of women 
were they? They were such housewives that- But now 
you'll laugh when I tell you that I planned for a long 
time to address some aristocratic lady in the street. 
When she was alone, of course. Talk to her shyly, re­
spectfuly, · passionately; tell her that I was perishing 
in my loneliness; beseech her not to send me away; say 
that it was impossible for me to get to know any other 
woman; persuade her that it was even the duty of a 
woman not to spurn the timid approach of one so un­
happy; convince her that, finally, all I wanted from her 
was a few understanding, sisterly words, and that she 
shouldn't just turn her back on me, but should believe 
what I told her-then she might laugh at me if she 
wished, so long as she said one or two words of hope, 
only two words, then, if she wished, we'd never meet 
again! ... I see you're laughing .
.
•
.
 Well, that's why 
I told you about it, after al." 
"Don't be offended. I'm only laughing because you're 
your own worst enemy. If you'd tried you'd have suc­
ceeded, maybe even in the street. The simpler, the easier. 
. . . 
No decent woman, unless she was dismally stupid 
or happened to be very irritated about something at that 
particular 
moment, 
would 
have 
refused 
you 
the two 
words for which you begged with such humility. 
• 
• 
• 
Although, after all, she might very well have taken you 
for a madman. I was thinking of how I would have re­
acted, but then I have quite a good idea of what life 
is al about." 
"Oh, thank you, thank you!" I cried. "You have no 
idea what you're doing for me!" 
"All right, all right. But tell me, what made you think 
I was the type of woman with whom . . . well, who 
would be worthy of ... your attention, your friendship? 
How did you know that I was not just another house-

16 
White Nights 
wife, as you put it? What made you decide to speak to 
me?" 
"What made me-why, you were alone, and that man 
was most indiscreet, and it's night time. . . . I couldn't 
have done anything else." 
"No, no, before that, on the other sidewalk. Weren't 
you thinking of speaking to me?" 
"On the other sidewalk? I really don't know what to 
say. I was happy today. I was walking along and singing. 
I went beyond the city limits. I'd never before experi­
enced such happy moments. And you-please excuse me, 
I may have imagined it, but I thought you were crying, 
and I couldn't bear it. . . . My heart shrank. . . . Ah, 
God, why shouldn't I be entitled to grieve with you? Why 
is it a sin for me to feel brotherly compassion for your 
sorrow? . .. Excuse me, I said compassion .. . .  Well, 
I don't see why it should offend you if I couldn't resist 
my impulse to come over and talk to you." 
"Enough, don't talk of it any more. " She lowered her 
head, and her fingers pressed my arm. "It's my fault for 
bringing it up, and I'm so pleased that it wasn't a mistake. 
. . . But we're almost at my place. I must tum here, 
into that street. It's only a few steps from here. Good­
by now, and thank you very much!" 
"But is it possible that we'll never meet again? Can 
we leave it like this?" 
"But you said you were only after two words," the 
girl said, laughing, "and now you . . . However, who 
can tell, perhaps we'll meet again some day. " 
"I'll be waiting here tomorrow. Forgive me, I seem 
to be demanding things already. " 
"Yes, you're quite impatient, and you are almost de­
manding things- " 
"Listen, listen to me, " I interrupted her, "and forgive 
me if I say something wrong. You see, I can't help com­
ing here tomorrow. I'm simply a dreamer who has little 
real life, and moments like this are so rare in my exist­
ence that I must repeat them again and again in my 
thoughts. You'll 
stay in my 
thoughts 
throughout the 
night-throughout a whole year. I'll be here without fail 

White Nights 
17 
tomorrow, in this very spot, at this very time-and I'll 
be happy thinking of what happened today. Already this 
spot is dear to me. I have two or three spots like this in 
Petersburg. Once I even cried, like you . . . .  Well, how 
can I know? Perhaps a few minutes ago you too were 
crying at the thought . . . Ah, forgive me, I'm forgetting 
myself again. . . .  I simply meant, perhaps you were once 
especialy happy here somehow . . .. " 
"Al right then," the girl said, "I suppose I'll be here 
tomorrow night too. At ten. I see I can't stop you, and 
I have to come here anyway. But don't think I've made 
a date with you. I warn you: I have to be here for my 
own reasons. So I may as well tell you now: I won't 
mind if you're here too, because that may save me an 
unpleasant incident like· tonight's. But that's just inci­
dental. To be brief, I'd be very pleased to see you ... 
to say a couple of words to you. But I don't want you 
to think badly of me. You mustn't think that I make 
dates so easily. I would never have agreed to meet you 
again had it not been for .. . No, let it remain a secret! 
Only, from now on, let's reach an agreement." 
"An agreement? Just name it! I agree to anything in 
advance!" I said with ardor. "I assure you, I'll be docile, 
respectful . . . you know me. " 
"It's because I know you that I want you to come 
tomorrow," the girl said, laughing. "And I know you 
fully. But if you come, it must be on my terms. First­
and please do as I ask, for I'm being completely frank 
about it--don't fall in love with me. You mustn't, believe 
me. But I'd like us to be friends. Here, let's shake 
hands on it. But, remember, no falling in love!" 
"I swear!" I shouted, taking her hand. 
"Stop, don't swear so readily. I know very well that you 
can burst into flame in a second, like gunpowder-forgive 
me for saying so. Ah, if you knew . . . I, too-l have 
had no one with whom I could exchange a word, of 
whom to ask advice. Where could I look for advisors? 
Certainly not in the street. But you're an exception. I 
know you as if we'd been friends for twenty years. Am 
I right in thinking you won't let me down?" 

18 
White Nights 
"You'll see. Only I don't know how I'll keep myself 
alive, waiting for twenty-four hours." 
"Sleep deeply. Good night, and remember I've put my 
trust in you. But you put it so well yourself: Does one 
really have to give an account of every feeling, even of 
brotherly compassion? You know, you put it so well 
that right away I decided to confide in you." 
"For heaven's sake, what is it? What?" 
"Tomorrow. Let it remain a secret for the moment. 
It's better for you that way; at least from a distance al 
this may resemble a romance. I may tell you tomorrow 
and I may not. I'll talk to you some more; we'll become 
better acquainted first." 
"Well, I-l'll tell you everything about myself to­
morrow! But it's as if a miracle were happening to me. 
Where am I? Oh, God! Tell me, are you glad you didn't 
get angry with me and chase me away at first, as another 
woman would have done? It took you two minutes to 
make me happy once and for all. Yes, happy. Who knows, 
perhaps you've made me accept myself, maybe you've 
resolved my doubts. Perhaps such moods come over me 
that .. . Well, I'll tell you everything tomorrow, you'll 
know al . . . .  " 
"Good, I accept; and you'll begin . ... 
" 
"Agreed." 
"Good night." 
"Good night." 
We parted. I walked around all night. I couldn't make 
myself go home. I was so happy .
.. .  Tomorrow! 
The Second Night 
"So you survived after all," she said to me, laughing 
as she pressed my hands. 
"I've been waiting for two hours. You can't imagine 
how I got through the day. " 
"I know, I know .. .. But let's talk business. Do you 
know why I really came? Certainly not to talk nonsense 
as we did last night. You know, from now on, we'll act 

White Nights 
19 
more intelligently. I thought a lot about it last night." 
"In what? More intelligently in 
what? I agree to 
whatever you say, but to be absolutely sincere, it seems 
to me I've never been cleverer than now in my whole 
life." 
"Is that so? Well, in the first place, I'd like you to stop 
squeezing my hands like that, and in the second, I wish 
to inform you that today I've given quite a bit of thought 
to you." 
"And what conclusions have you reached?" 
"Conclusions? Well, I decided to start all over again 
because I concluded that I stil knew nothing about you, 
that yesterday I acted like a child, a little girl-and I 
ended up blaming everything on my oversensitive heart. 
In other words, I ended up praising myself-the way 
we always end when we begin analyzing ourselves. Now, 
to correct that mistake, I've decided to find out every 
little thing about you. And since I have no other way 
of finding out, you'll just have to supply me with all the 
information. So, what manner of man are you? Quick, 
start telling me your story!" 
"My story!" I said, becoming alarmed. "What makes 
you think I have a storJ to tell in the first place? In 
fact I don't have any--" 
She laughed. 
"But how could you live and have no story to tell?" 
"So far I've lived without any stories at all. I've lived 
keeping to myself, as they say, which means that I've 
been completely alone. Alone, all alone-do you under­
stand what that means?" 
"What do you mean alone? You never saw anyone?" 
"No, I saw people, of course. But still I was all alone." 
"What then? You mean you never spoke to anyone?" 
"Strictly speaking, I didn't." 
"But who are you, anyway? Tell me! No, wait-1 think 
I can guess. I'll bet you have a grandmother, as I do. 
Mine is blind, and she doesn't let me go anywhere-! 
almost forget how to talk. A couple of years ago, when 
I misbehaved, she felt she couldn't control me any longer, 
so she called me over to her and pinned my dress to 

20 
White Nights 
hers with a safety pin. Sometimes we sit like that for 
days at a time, she knitting a sock despite her blindness 
and me, at her side, sewing or reading something aloud 
to her. So, I've been pinned to someone for two years, 
a rather strange situation, don't you think?" 
"Ah, that's really awful! But I don't have a grand­
mother." 
"You haven't? Then how can you sit home al the 
time?'' 
"Listen, shall I tell you who I am?" 
"Yes, of course." 
"Shall I tell you exactly?" 
"Yes, exactly." 
"Al right then, I'm a queer fish." 
"So, you're a queer fish, are you? What sort of queer 
fish?" the girl said, exploding with laughter, as if she 
had been holding it in for a whole year. "Ah, you're 
really great fun to be with! Let's sit down on that bench 
over there. Nobody ever passes there, so you can tell 
me your story without being overheard. Go on now, 
I want to hear it! You can't make me believe you have 
nothing to tell; you're just being secretive. First of all, 
what's a queer fish?" 
"A queer fish? A queer fish is a ridiculous man, a man 
unlike others," I said, infected by her childish laughter. 
"He's a sort of freak. Listen, do you know what a 
dreamer is, for instance?" 
"A dreamer? Well, how could I not know what a 
dreamer is? I suppose I'm one myself. You can't imagine 
what things go through my head sometimes, as I sit 
next to my grandmother! I plunge into my dreams, and 
sometimes, when I really get going, I reach a point where 
I marry a Chinese prince .... Why, sometimes it's 
so nice to dream!" But then she added unsmilingly: "Well, 
not really! Especially whġn there are other things to 
think of." 
"Wonderful! Since you've already been married to a 
Chinese potentate, you'll probably be able to under­
stand me too. So listen ... But wait, I don't even know 
your name." 

White Nights 
"It's Nastenka." 
"Nastenka. Is that all?" 
21 
"Is that all! Nothing satisfies you. You seem to be 
insatiable." 
"Ah no, it satisfies me all right, it thoroughly satis­
fies me! You're a very nice girl to become Nastenka for 
me right away!" 
"That's better! But go on, tell me about yourself." 
"Al right, Nastenka, listen to this ridiculous story 
then." 
I installed myself on the bench next to her, assumed 
a grave, theatrical pose, and began, as if I were reading 
the script of a monologue: 
"There are, my dear Nastenka, in case you don't know, 
some rather strange comers in Petersburg. It's as if 
the sun that warms the rest of the city never shines on 
them, and instead another sun, especially designed for 
them, supplies them with a diferent light. In those cor­
ners, Nastenka, a life goes on quite unlike the one seeth­
ing around us, a life that is possible in some far-away 
dreamland but certainly not here in our over-serious 
time. That life is a mixture of something out of pure 
fantasy ardently idealistic, with, alas, something bleak 
and dull and ordinary, not to say outright vulgar." 
"Brr! 
.
•
.
 What an introduction! What am I to hear 
next?" 
"You'll hear, Nastenka-1 think I'll never get tired of 
calling you Nastenka-that dreamers live in those cor­
ners. A dreamer, if you want me to define him, is not a 
real human being but a sort of intermediary creature. He 
usually installs himself in some remote comer, shrinking 
even from the daylight. And once he's installed in that 
comer of his, he grows into it like a snail or at least like 
that curious thing which is at the same time an animal 
and a house-the tortoise. And why do you think he so 
loves his four bleak walls that are sooty, reek unspeak­
ably of tobacco smoke, and are always daubed over 
with green paint? Why do you think this ridiculous crea­
ture, when some rare acquaintance comes to see him 
(ultimately he's bound to lose all his acquaintances any-

22 
White Nights 
way), looks so embarrassed and taken aback, as if he'd 
just committed a crime between those very walls, as if 
he'd been forging money or writing verses to be sent 
to a magazine with an anonymous letter explaining that 
the author of the piece is dead and that the sender con­
siders it his sacred duty to see the poem published? Why 
do you think, Nastenka, that conversation between the 
two of them is so painful? Why can't the visitor laugh or 
say something amusing now? In other circumstances he 
is prone to laugh, say amusing things, and chat about the 
fair sex and other pleasant matters. Why does that ac­
quaintance, probably a recent one, on his very first visit­
for under such circumstances there cannot be more than 
one visit, as no friend returns for a second time-even 
assuming that he's exceptionally perceptive, why does he 
feel so awkward looking at the agonized face of his 
host, who, after desperate but futile efforts to comfort 
the hapless man who has blundered into his house on a 
friendly visit by making the conversation flow, giving it 
some sparkle, and showing that he too is fully aware of 
elegant ways and can talk about the fair sex, has become 
completely lost by then? And why, in the end, does the 
visitor suddenly remember that he has some terribly ur­
gent matter to attend to, grab his hat and dart off, manag­
ing to free his hand from the warm pressure of his host's 
while the host tries by every means possible to show that 
he's sorry and is trying to redeem himself? Why does 
the departing visitor laugh as he closes the door behind 
him and promise himself never to return to the house 
of that queer fish, although deep down the queer fish really 
means well? Why, at the same time, is the visitor unable 
to refrain from comparing his host's face during his visit 
to a kitten perfidiously captured, manhandled, and scared 
by children-which kitten then, completely bewildered, 
hides under some chair in the darkness, and can't help 
bristling and spitting while he washes his offended little 
face with his front paws, and even after that, goes around 
for a long time looking with apprehension and hostility at 
the world and even at the titbits from the master's table 
saved for him by a compassionate housekeeper?" 

White Nights 
23 
"Now look here," Nastenka interrupted me. She had 
been listening with her eyes and her small mouth wide 
open. "I have no idea why it all happened nor why you 
should ask me to answer all those ridiculous questions. 
I'm sure of one thing only: that all this happened to you 
exactly as you have told me." 
"You're right," I said with a straight face. 
"Well, why don't you go on? I'm anxious to find out 
how it all ends." 
"You'd like to find out, Nastenka, why the hero of the 
story-that is, me-was so perturbed 
and bewildered 
by the unexpected visit of a friend? You'd like to know 
why I became so flustered and turned so red when the 
door of my room was opened, why I was incapable of 
receiving my visitor properly. and why I was crushed so 
ignominiously under the weight of my embarrassment?" 
"Well, yes, yes, that's just itl And then-you speak 
beautifuly, but couldn't you please speak less beauti­
fully? You sound as though you were reading aloud from 
a book." 
"Nastenka," I said with ponderous gravity, hardly able 
to control my laughter, "I know I say things too beauti­
fully; I'm terribly sorry, but I don't know how to say 
them otherwise. At this moment, Nastenka, I feel like 
the spirit of King Solomon that has been kept imprisoned 
for a thousand years in a jar under seven seals-and now 
all the seals have been removed. Now, Nastenka, that 
we have come together again after our long separation­
for the fact is, I've known you a long time. You see, I've 
been looking for someone, and that's a sure sign that it 
must have been you I was looking for and that we were 
destined to meet. Now, thousands of valves have been 
opened in my head, and I cannot hold back the torrent of 
words or I'll burst. So, I must ask you to be a good girl 
and listen to me without interrupting. Otherwise, I won't 
tell you any more!" 
"No, no, please go on! Keep talking, I won't say another 
word." 
"So, I'll go on, N astenka. There's a certain hour of 
the day, my dear, of which I'm particularly fond. It is 

24 
White Nights 
the hour when practically all business, office hours, and 
all that sort of thing come to an end and people rush 
off home to dine, to have a little rest; and on their way, 
they think up ways to spend the evening ahead, the night, 
or whatever free time is left to them that day. At that 
hour, the hero of this story-for I hope you'll allow me, 
N astenka, to go on telling it in the third person, it's 
really too embarrassing to say certain things in the first 
person-at that hour, my hero walks along among the 
others. But there's a strange, pleased expression on his 
pale, somewhat crumpled face. He watches with a certain 
pleasure as the red sunset slowly fades in the cold Peters­
burg sky. When I say he watches, I am wrong; he takes 
it in distractedly, like someone too tired to look or pre­
occupied with some more absorbing matter, so that he 
has only a passing awareness of what is going on around 
him. 
He's 
pleased, 
for 
he's 
through 
until tomorrow 
with business that bores him. He's like a schoolboy let 
out of school hurrying to play his favorite games or pull 
his favorite pranks. Look at him from the side, Nastenka, 
and you'll see right away that his happy feeling has al­
ready had a beneficial effect on his weak nerves and over­
excitable 
imagination. 
Now he 
is 
plunged 
deep 
in 
thought. . . . Thinking of dinner? Of the approaching 
evening? What is he looking at like that? Isn't it at that 
dignified-looking 
gentleman 
who 
has 
just 
bowed 
so 
gracefully to the lady driving past in a glittering carriage 
drawn by fleet-footed steeds? Oh no, Nastenka, he has 
no time for such trifles now! Now he's rich in his inner 
life. And he has struck it rich suddenly-the last rays 
of the setting sun restored warmth to his heart and stirred 
up a whole stream of impressions. Now he hardly no­
tices the street where, before, the tiniest detail would 
have struck him. The Goddess of Fantasy has already 
spun a golden web with her divine hand and has started 
unfolding before his eyes patterns of an imaginary, mar­
velous life; who knows, perhaps she has picked him up 
with her divine hand and transported him from the gran­
ite sidewalk he is still following to paradise. Just stop 
him now and ask him which streets he took to get here 

White Nights 
25 
and where he is now. I'm sure he won't know, so he'll 
blush and invent some lies just for appearances' sake. 
That's why he started so violently, almost let out a 
cry, and looked around apprehensively when a nice old 
lady stopped him in the middle of the sidewalk and asked 
him to help her find her way. Now frowning angrily, he 
resumes his way, hardly aware of the grins on the faces 
of the people he passes, some of whom even stop to give 
him a second look; oblivious of the little girl who jumps 
quickly out of his path, bursts into loud giggles, and 
gapes indiscreetly at his absent smile and gesticulating 
arms. And already the same Goddess of Fantasy has 
managed to catch in flight the old lady who'd lost her 
way, the curious passers-by, the giggling little girl, the 
bargemen on their barges tied up along the Fontanka, and 
everything around the Fontanka Embankment-assum­
ing that our hero happens to be walking there at the 
time. The goddess then playfully weaves everyone and 
everything into her canvas like flies in a spider's web. Now 
the queer fish carries these new acquisitions off to his den. 
He sits down at his table, and after his dinner is long 
over, he is stil sitting there, reviving only when the 
dreamy and ever-sad Matryona removes the remains of 
the meal and brings him his pipe. Then he suddenly real­
izes that he's already dined, although dinner had com­
pletely escaped his attention. The room has grown dark. 
His heart feels empty and sad. His world of fancy si­
lently and without a crackle collapses around him and 
evaporates without his being able to remember what he 
was dreaming about. But some dark feeling presses on 
his breast, making it heave faster; a new desire tickles 
and excites his fancy; and, almost without noticing it, he 
summons an array of new ghosts. The little room is dark. 
Loneliness and idleness excite the imagination. The gentle 
flame is lit, and fancies start perking like the water in the 
coffee pot around which Matryona is fussing in the kitch­
en. Then fancy becomes like a flame itself, flashing and 
flaring so that the book picked up at random drops out 
of the dreamer's hands before he has reached the third 
page. Now his imagination is again vibrating, and sud-

26 
White Nights 
denly another world with a different life unrolls its en­
chanted horizons before his eyes. A new dream-new 
happiness! A new dose of refined, voluptuous poison! ¤ 
what's real life to him! To his perverted eye, your life, 
Nastenka, and mine are unbearably humdrum, slow, and 
sluggish. He feels we're discontented with our lot and 
tired of life. And indeed, at first glance, life is bound to 
appear cold, gloomy, and rather unfriendly. Ah, the poor 
creatures! 
the dreamer thinks-and no wonder. 
Just 
look at the magical phantoms who so charmingly, subtly, 
yet somehow casually fall into place in the panoramic, 
animated picture that shapes itself before him, a picture 
in which his own exalted person is always in the fore­
ground. Look at all the different adventures he has there 
-the endless succession of blissful visions! Now perhaps 
you would like to ask what he's dreaming about. But why 
ask? He dreams of everything 
• 
. . of being a poet, at 
first unrecognized, later crowned; of friendship with Hoff­
mann the poet; of St. Bartholomew Night; of playing a 
heroic part in the storming of Kazan under Ivan the Ter­
rible; of Diana Vernon, Clara Mowbray, Effie Deans, 
and other heroines of Sir Walter Scott; of Jan Hus facing 
the tribunal of prelates; of the rising of the dead in 
Robert the Devil (Remember the music? It has a smell 
of the churchyard about it, don't you think?) ; of the 
Battle of Berezina; of a poetry reading at the Countess 
Vorontsova-Dashkova's; of Danton; of Cleopatra i suoi 
amanti; of Pushkin's "Little House in Kolomna"; of having 
a little house of his own and being there on a wintry 
evening with his beloved listening to him with her eyes 
and mouth wide open, just as you're listening to me now, 
my dearest angel. . 
. 
. 
"No, Nastenka, what can this voluptuous idler find in the 
life so dear to people like you and me? He thinks it a 
poor life, without realizing that for him too there may 
come a sad hour when, for a single day of that miserable 
life, he would give away all his years of fancy. And he 
would exchange his dreams neither for happiness, nor 
joy; at that grim hour of regret and unrelieved gloom 
he won't even care to choose. But until that perilous time 

White Nights 
27 
comes, the dreamer can have no desires, for he has 
everything; he is above desire, he is surfeited, he is 
himself the artist creating his life at every hour, guided 
only by his own inspiration. 
"And how effortlessly, how naturally the dreamer's 
world of fantasy springs up! It looks so real and not 
at al like a mirage! In fact, sometimes he almost believes 
that his dream life is no figment of the imagination, no 
self-deception, no delusion, but something real, actual, 
existing. 
"Now tell me, Nastenka, why does he so often feel out 
of breath at those moments? Tell me, by what magic, 
by what uncanny chance, does his pulse quicken, do 
tears gush from his eyes and his pale cheeks flush, as 
his whole being fills with inexpressible delight? Why do 
sleepless nights flash by in a second, in inexhaustible 
gaiety and happiness? Then, when the rosy rays of 
dawn appear in the window and the uncertain light of 
our Petersburg morning fills the gloomy room, our ex­
hausted dreamer throws himself on his bed and falls 
asleep with an aching feeling of rapture. 
"Yes, Nastenka, he deceives himself and winds up by 
believing that he is moved by true, live passion, that 
there is substance-flesh and blood-to his fancies! And 
it is quite a deception! Just look at him and see for 
yourself. Can you believe, looking at him, N astenka, that 
he doesn't even know the woman he loved so passionate­
ly in his sultry flights of fancy? Can you believe that he 
has only seen her in irresistibly voluptuous mirages and 
that he simply dreamed that passion? Is it really possible 
that they have never walked hand in hand during so many 
years, spuming the rest of the universe, merging their 
own two worlds and lives? Is it possible that at the late 
hour when they had to part, she didn't really lay her 
head, sobbing and miserable, on his chest, not hearing 
the wind that snatched tears from her black eyelashes? 
Would you believe it was all nothing but a dream-the 
wild, neglected garden with its path overgrown with moss, 
so lonely and desolate, along which they used to walk 
together so often, hoping, suffering, loving so tenderly 

28 
White Nights 
and for so long? And that there was no strange, ancestral 
home where she had lived for so many dull, lonely years 
with her stem old husband, always silent and iritable, 
who frightened them, 
timid children that 
they were, 
children sadly and shyly hiding their love from each 
other? Ah, how afraid they were, how they languished, 
how pure and innocent was their love, and how wicked­
it goes without saying, N astenka-were the people around 
them! And did he never meet her later, far away from 
their native shore, under an alien, southern sky, in a 
divine, eternal city, at a glamorous ball, to the thunder 
of music, the whole affair taking place in a palazzo (it 
must be a palazzo) drowned in a sea of lights? . . . They 
are on a terrace wreathed in myrtle and roses 
• 
• . she 
recognizes him, tears off her mask and, whispering, "I 
am free now!" flings herself into his arms, trembling with 
rapture .... They hold each other tight, and in a moment 
they've forgotten their unhappiness, their separation, all 
their sufferings, the forbidding house, the old man, the 
bleak garden in their remote homeland, the bench where 
he kissed her for the last time, holding her in his des­
perate embrace from which she had to tear herself, 
leaving him with his suffering .... 
"Ah, Nastenka, you must agree that anyone would feel 
awkward and embarrassed and would tum red like a 
boy who has just stuffed into his pocket an apple he's 
stolen from the next-door garden if some long-legged, 
healthy joker, an uninvited friend of his, opened his 
door and announced, as if nothing had happened: 'Hi 
chum! What do you know, I've just arrived from Pav­
lovsk!' 
"It's unbearable. In dreamland the old count is dead 
and an inconceivable happiness is mine, and then this 
fellow arrives from Pavlovsk!" 
My dramatic exclamations over, I fell dramatically si­
lent. I remember that I wanted to force myself to laugh, 
for I felt that some hostile imp had installed himself in­
side me and was squeezing my throat, making my chin 
tremble and my eyes grow damp. I expected Nastenka, who 
had been listening with her intelligent, wide-open eyes 

White Nights 
29 
fixed on me, to burst out in uncontrollable, childish 
laughter at any second, and I was already regretting hav­
ing gone too far and told her things which had been 
weighing on my heart for a long time, things about 
which I could talk as smoothly as a book because I had 
long ago pronounced judgment on myself and couldn't 
help reading it out now and confessing without expecting 
to be understood. But to my great surprise, she remained 
silent for a while, then, pressing my hand slightly, asked 
me with a sort of timid understanding: 
"Is that really how you've lived al this time?'' 
"Al the time, Nastenka, and it looks as if I'll go on 
like that to the end." 
"No," she said, looking worried, "that won't happen. 
That would be like me spending my whole life at my 
grandmother's side. Listen, I tell you it's not right to 
live like that." 
"Ah, don't I know it, Nastenka!" I exclaimed, unable 
to control my emotions any longer. "At this moment, I 
see more clearly than ever before that I've wasted my 
best years. And the realization hurts me even more be­
cause it was God who sent you to me, my lovely angel, 
to make me see it. As I sit here next to you, it is already 
painful to think of the future, because there's nothing in 
it but a lonely, stale, useless existence. What could I 
dream of, now that I've been so happy with you in real 
life? Oh, bless you, my dearest girl, for not spurning me 
at first sight, for enabling me to say that I've lived at 
least two evenings in the course of my existence!" 
"Ah no, no!" Nastenka said with emotion, tears spar­
kling in her eyes. "No, no more of that life! We shan't part 
like this! What's two evenings?" 
"Ah, Nastenka, Nastenka! Do you realize that you have 
reconciled me with myself for a long time to come? Do 
you realize that now I'll never think quite as badly of 
myself as I sometimes have in the past? Do you know 
that 
perhaps 
I 
won't 
be 
unhappy 
any 
more 
over 
having committed a crime or a sin in my life, because now 
I realize that my whole life was nothing but a crime and 
a sin in itself? And don't imagine, please, that I'm ex-

30 
White Nights 
aggerating, Nastenka, for there . are moments when I'm 
overcome by such anguish and despair that . . . In those 
moments, I feel that I'll never have a true life because I 
feel sure I've entirely lost touch with reality; because I 
feel damned; because, in the middle of my fancy-filled 
nights, I have moments of lucidity that are unbearable! 
In the meantime, I hear the din of the human crowd 
around me and see how people who are awake live, and 
I realize that their lives are not made to measure, that 
they don't shatter like dreams, like visions, that their 
lives are perpetually renewed, every hour in them dif­
ferent from the one before, whereas the timid daydream 
is horribly monotonous, a slave to the shadows, to ideas, 
to the first cloud that suddenly hides the sun and squeezes 
in anguish the heart of a true inhabitant of Petersburg 
who must have his sunshine-for what fancy is there 
that can do without sunshine? In the end, you feel that 
your 
much-vaunted, 
inexhaustible 
fantasy 
is 
growing 
tired, debilitated, exhausted, because you're bound to 
grow out of your old ideals; they're smashed to splinters 
and tum to dust, and if you have no other life, you have 
no choice but to keep rebuilding your dreams from the 
splinters and dust. But the heart longs for something dif­
ferent! And it is vain to dig in the ashes of your old 
fancies, trying to find even a tiny spark to fan into a 
new flame that will warm the chilled heart and bring 
back to life everything that can send the blood rushing 
wildly through 
the 
body, 
fil 
the 
eyes 
with 
tears­
everything that can delude you so well! 
"And shall I tell you, Nastenka, how far I've gone? 
Would you believe that I have taken to celebrating the 
anniversaries of my sensations, the anniversary of some­
thing that was delightful at one time, of something that 
actually never occurred. I am reduced to celebrating an­
niversaries because I no longer have anything with which 
to replace even thnse silly, flimsy dreams. For dreams, 
Nastenka, have to be renewed too. I like revisiting, at 
certain times, spots where I was once happy; I like to 
shape the present in the image of the irretrievable past. 
So I often roam like a sad, gloomy shadow, without 

White Nights 
3 1  
need or aim, along Petersburg's streets and alleys. And 
what memories come to me! I may remember, for instance ' 
that exactly one year ago, at this very hour, in this 
very street, I was walking along this very sidewalk, just as 
gloomy and lonely as now. And I may remember that 
although my dreams were sad and life was painful, some­
how it was not as agonizing as it has become now; the 
black forebodings that have 
since taken hold 
of me 
weren't there yet; nor was there the gnawing, dreary 
feeling of guilt that now torments me day and night, 
never leaving me a moment's peace. And so I ask my­
self: 'Where are your dreams?' And I shake my head 
and mutter: 'How the years go by!' And I ask myself 
again : 'What have you done with those years? Where 
have you buried your best moments? Have you really 
lived? Look,' I say to myself, 'how cold it is becoming al 
over the world!' And more years wil pass and behind 
them wil creep grim isolation. Tottering senility wil come 
hobbling, leaning on a crutch, and behind these wil 
come unrelieved boredom and despair. The world of 
fancies will fade, dreams will wilt and die and fall like 
autumn leaves from the trees . . . .  Ah, Nastenka, won't it 
be sad to be left alone, all, al alone, without even having 
anything to regret-nothing, but nothing; for everything 
I've lost is nothing but a stupid, round zero, nothing but a 
flimsy fancy?" 
"Stop it, stop it . . . .  
" Nastenka brushed away a little 
tear. "It's all over now. Now there'll be the two of us. 
Now, whatever happens, we'll never part again. Listen. 
I'm only an ordinary girl. I've studied very little, although 
my grandmother did hire a teacher for me. But, believe 
me, I understand everything you've said because I felt 
the same way when Grandma pinned me to her dress. 
Of course, I can't express it as well as you because of my 
lack of education," she remarked shyly, apparently feel­
ing that she ought to pay tribute to my pathetic mono­
logue and high-flown style. "But I'm very glad that you've 
told me everything so frankly. Now I know you complete­
ly. And now I want to tell you my story, without holding 
anything back, then perhaps you'll give me your advice. 

32 
White Nights 
You are so intelligent-! want you to promise to give me 
advice." 
"Ah, Nastenka, I've never been much of an advisor, es­
pecially an intelligent advisor, but since we're going to be 
together, I feel that my advice will be terribly clever and 
that each of us will have many, many intelligent sug­
gestions to offer the other. Well, then, pretty Nastenka, 
let's see what advice I can give you. Come, tell me 
everything-l'm so happy, cheerful, daring, and clever 
that I'm sure I won't have to search for words." 
"No!" Nastenka laughed. "It isn't clever advice I'm af­
ter, it's brotherly understanding from someone who, as 
it were, has loved me all my life." 
"That suits me, Nastenka, suits me fine! As to loving, 
had I loved you for twenty years, I'm sure I couldn't 
possibly love you more than I do now." 
"Give me your hand," Nastenka said. 
I gave it to her. 
"Here goes," she said. 
"You already know half my story. You know I have 
an old grandmother--" 
"If the other half is as short as the one I know •
.
.
 
" 
I interjected, laughing. 
"No, just keep quiet and listen. Don't interrupt me; it 
puts me off. Just listen. 
"I have an old grandmother. I've lived with her ever 
since I was a very little girl, because my parents are 
dead. Grandma apparently was much better off be­
fore, for she keeps remembering better days. It was she 
who taught me French and later hired a teacher for me. 
I stopped taking lessons when I was fifteen-I'm seven­
teen now. When I was fifteen, I did something naughty. 
I won't go into what I did exactly, except to say that 
it wasn't much. Still, Grandma called me over to her that 
morning and said that s4lce she was blind she couldn't 
very well watch me. Then she took a safety pin and 
pinned my dress to hers, saying that we were going to 
stay sitting like that forever, unless, of course, my be­
havior improved. Well, to make it short, at first it was 
impossible for me to move away from her; I had to 

White Nights 
33 
work, 
study, 
read-everything:-sitting by my grand­
mother's side. Once I tried to trick her by persuading our 
maid Fyokla to sit in for me. Grandma had fallen asleep 
in her armchair. Fyokla is deaf, you see, and she took 
my place while I ran out to the house of a girl, a friend 
of mine who lived nearby. But it ended badly. Grandma 
woke up and asked something, assuming that it was me. 
Fyokla saw Grandma was trying to say something but, 
of course, she couldn't hear what it was. So, not knowing 
what else to do, she unfastened the pin and ran away." 
1bis memory made Nastenka laugh so much that she 
had to interrupt herself. I laughed too, but as soon as she 
realized I was laughing, she stopped short and said: 
"Now look here, you mustn't laugh at Grandma! I 
laugh because I can't help it-she really is so funny. But 
then, you see, I'm fond of her at the same time. Anyway, 
I was in real trouble. She pinned me to her again, and I 
wasn't even allowed to move. 
"Ah, I forgot to tell you that my grandma owns the 
house we live in. It's just a tiny wooden house with three 
windows, and almost as old as she is. It also has an attic 
room, and a new lodger came to live in the attic-" 
"Therefore, I assume that there was a lodger before 
him," I remarked. 
"Of course there was-and he could keep quiet much 
better than you can," Nastenka said. "True, he had dif­
ficulty moving his tongue at all, for he was a very, very 
old man, quite mute, blind, and lame; in the end, living 
became too much for him and he just died. So a new 
lodger took his place, for we can't afford not to have a 
lodger. That and Grandma's pension make up our entire 
income. Now, the new lodger happened to be a young 
man. He came from out of town. When Grandma told 
him what the rent was, he didn't bargain, so she took 
him and then asked me: 
" 'Tell me, Nastenka, the new lodger is a young man, 
isn't he?' 
"I couldn't lie to her, so I said that although he wasn't 
old, he wasn't so young either. 
" 'Is he good-looking?' she asked me then. 

34 
White Nights 
"Again I didn't want to lie. 
" 'Yes, Grandma, he's quite good-looking.' 
" 'Ah, that's really too bad!' Grandma said, 'because 
I'm asking you all these questions so you won't keep 
staring at him. Ah, what times we live in,' she added. 
'Think of it-just an insignificant lodger and he turns 
out to be handsome, too. Ah, what're we all coming to? 
You never saw such things happening in the good old 
days.' 
"According to Grandma, everything was just wonder­
ful in the good old days-she was younger in those days, 
and the sun shone brighter and was warmer, and milk 
didn't go bad as it does now! And while she goes on and 
on like that, I sit in silence and think to myself: 'It looks 
as if Grandma were trying to give me ideas, asking 
whether the lodger is handsome or not.' And then I got 
absorbed in counting the stitches in my knitting, and the 
lodger completely vanished from my mind. 
"Then one morning the lodger came to inquire when 
they were going to paper his room as he'd been prom­
ised. And, Grandma being a great hand at chatting, they 
got into a conversation in no time, then she says to me: 
'N astenka, run and bring me the abacus from my bed­
room.' I don't know why, but that made me tum red. 
I forgot al about the safety pin and jumped up to scam­
per into the other room. The movement yanked the pin 
and Grandma's armchair came rolling along on its casters. 
I don't know how I could have forgotten about that 
safety pin and neglected to unfasten it discreetly! And 
now, realizing that the lodger had found out about it, I 
stopped dead where I was and burst into tears. I felt 
so hopelessly ashamed and humiliated at that moment 
that I thought I'd never be able to face the world again. 
" 'What are you waiting for?' Grandma kept shouting 
at me, but that only made me cry worse. And the lodger, 
seeing how embarrassed I was, muttered some excuse 
and rushed off. 
"After that day, I felt like dying whenever I heard 
the slightest noise in the passage. The lodger's coming, I 

White Nights 
35 
said to myself each time, and I'd quietly unfasten the pin. 
But it was never him. 
"A couple of weeks passed, and the lodger sent us a 
note by Fyokla saying he had a lot of books, some 
French ones among them, and perhaps Grandmother 
would like him to send us some so that I might read to 
her to pass the time? Grandmother accepted gratefully af­
ter first inquiring whether they were decent, proper books. 
'Because if they aren't,' she told me, 'I won't allow you to 
read them, for I don't want you to learn any wicked 
things from them, N astenka.' 
" 'But what sort of wicked things,' I asked her, 'could 
I learn from them, Grandma?' 
" 'Well,' she said, 'they may describe young men se­
ducing well-brought-up young girls, abducting them from 
their parents' homes under the pretext of wishing to 
marry them, then abandoning them to their fate and per­
dition. I have read many books like that,' Grandma told 
me, 'and they describe that sort of thing so well and so 
vividly that sometimes I used to read them on the sly 
throughout the night and into the morning. So mind, Nas­
tenka,' 
she 
added, 
'you stay away from books like 
that. Now what are the books he's sent us called?' 
" 'They're al novels, Grandma, novels by Sir Walter 
Scott.' 
" 'Walter Scott, you say? You'd better make sure there's 
no trick. See that he hasn't tried to slip some note in 
along with them, some love letter.' 
" 'No, Grandma, there's no note 
•
•
.
 nothing.' 
" 'Yes, but we'd better watch out!' 
"So we started reading Walter Scott, and within a month 
or so, we were through almost half of it. Later he sent 
us some more books, including Pushkin; finally, I couldn't 
imagine how I could live without books, and I stopped 
dreaming about marrying that Chinese prince. . 
. . 
"That was the situation when one day I bumped into 
our lodger on the stairs as I was going on some errand 
for Grandma. He stepped back, and I saw he'd turned 
red. But he laughed, said hello, inquired after Grand­
mother's health, and asked me: 

36 
White Nights 
" 'Have you read the books?' 
" 'I have.' 
" 'And which did you like best?' 
" 'Ivanhoe,' I said, 'and, of course, Pushkin.' 
"And that was all that happened that time. 
"A week later we again met on the stairs. This time 
Grandma hadn't sent me. I was going somewhere on an 
errand of my own. It was around two in the afternoon, 
and that happened to be the time at which the lodger 
usually came home. 
" 'Hello,' he said. 
" 'Hello,' I answered. 
. 
" 'Tell me,' he said, 'don't you get bored sitting all day 
with your grandmother like that?' 
"Now when he asked that, I don't know why, but I be­
came very embarrassed, and flushed. I felt humiliated be­
cause apparently even strangers were begining to in­
quire about what was going on. I decided not to answer, 
just to tum away and leave, but I didn't have the strength. 
" 'Please,' he said, 'forgive me for speaking to you 
like that. I have great respect for you, and believe me, 
your well-being means more to me even than it does to 
your grandmother. Don't you know any girls whom you 
could visit?' 
"I explained to him that I had only one friend, called 
Mashenka, and that she'd moved to Pskov with her 
family, and I had no one left. 
" 'Tell me,' he asked then, 'what would you say if I 
asked you to come to the theater with me?' 
" 'The theater? But what about my grandmother?' 
" 'Couldn't you manage it without her finding out?' 
" 'No,' I said, 'I don't want to deceive my grandmother. 
Good-by.' 
" 'Good-by then.' 
"And that was all he said. -
"But, after dinner, he came down to our rooms, sat 
down, and had a long talk with Grandma. He asked her 
whether she ever went out and whether she had any 
friends, then suddenly slipped in, as if in passing: 
" 'I have tickets, a loge in fact, for tonight's perform-

White Nights 
37 
ance of The Barber of Seville. Some friends of mine 
got them, but couldn't make it tonight, so I have the 
tickets--' 
" 'The Barber of Seville!' Grandmother exclaimed. 
'Why, it must be the same Barber they used to put on in 
the good old days!' 
" 'Yes, ma'am,' the lodger said, 'the very same!' 
"And as he said that he gave me a look that made me 
go crimson and set my heart skipping in expectation. 
" 'That's one opera that I really know,' Grandmother 
said. 'In fact, in my younger days, I myself sang Rosina in 
an amateur dramatic group.' 
" 'Wouldn't you like to come with me tonight? I think 
it'd be a shame to waste the tickets.' 
" 'Well, I don't see why we shouldn't go,' Grandma de­
cided, 'especially as my Nastenka here has never been 
to the theater.' 
"Ah, what a joy it was! We immediately started pre­
paring, got dressed, and drove over to the Opera. Grand­
ma, although she couldn't see a thing, still wanted to 
listen to the music. And, deep davin, she was a kind old 
thing and very pleased that I should have such fun-we 
would never have gone 
anywhere without this oppor­
tunity. 
"I won't describe my impressions of The Barber of 
Seville, but I'll tell you that all that evening the lodger 
kept looking at me so nicely and talking to me so elo­
quently that 
I 
realized 
that, 
by 
asking 
me 
earlier 
whether I'd come to the theater with him in secret, 
he'd only wanted to test me. Ah, it was such joy! So I 
went to bed incredibly proud and happy, and my heart 
beat so hard that I worked up a slight fever and raved 
about The Barber of Seville the rest of the night. 
"I imagined, after that, that he'd come to see us often. 
But, on the contrary, he hardly ever came. He might 
come in once or twice a month, and only to invite us 
to · the theater. In fact, we went twice more with him, 
I believe. But I was no longer happy on those occasions. 
I thought he was just sorry for me leading that sad life 
with my grandmother and that there was nothing else to 

38 
White Nights 
it on his part. And, as time went by, strange moods 
started coming over me. I was unable to stay quiet, 
unable to take in what I was reading, unable to con­
centrate on my work; sometimes I burst out laughing 
just to irritate Grandmother, and sometimes I suddenly 
dissolved into tears. I grew very thin and was almost 
seriously il. The opera season was over, and the lodger 
stopped coming at al. And when he did meet me­
always on the stairs, of course-he bowed so unsmiling­
ly that I felt sure he didn't even wish to talk to me; and 
after he had already left the house, I would still be stand­
ing in the middle of the stairs, red as a cherry, for when I 
saw him, the blood never failed to rush to my head. 
"Now, let me tell the end of my story. Just a year ago, 
in May, the lodger came to tell my grandmother that his 
business in Petersburg was over and that he must now 
move to Moscow. When I heard that, I turned as pale 
as the tablecloth and went all limp in my chair. Grandma 
never noticed anything; the lodger just said goodnight 
and left. 
"What was I to do? I racked my brains in despair, and 
finally, I decided. The day before he was to leave I de­
cided to take a desperate step in the evening, after Grand­
ma had gone to bed. And I did. I picked out some dresses 
and the necessary underwear, made a bundle out of them 
and, carrying it, went, half alive, half dead, upstairs 
to the lodger's room. Walking up that flight of stairs 
seemed to take a whole hour. 
"When I opened his door, he turned his head and, see­
ing me, let out a cry. He must have taken me for a ghost, 
for I had turned white, and my legs were hardly able 
to carry me. He hurried to get me some water. My heart 
was beating so hard it hurt, and my head ached, and 
everything inside it went all blurry. 
· 
"When I came to, the first thing I did was put my 
bundle on his bed, sit down next to it myself, and let my 
teąrs Ćur in two rivers. I believe he understood every­
thing n
_
ght away. He stood there looking at me, and his 
expressiOn was so wretched that my heart was tom by 
a terrible anguish. 

White Nights 
39 
" 'Nastenka,' he said at last, 'I want you to understand. 
I can do nothing. I'm poor; I haven't a thing to my name. 
I don't even have a decent job. So what would we live 
on if I married you?' 
"We discussed it for a long time, in the end, I lost all 
control over myself and declared that I could no longer 
live with my grandmother, that I'd run away, that I'd 
had enough of being fastened to her with a safety pin, 
and that, whatever he might say, I was going to Moscow 
with him because I couldn't live without him. Shame, 
love, pride-everything-was seething within me at the 
same time, and fearing that he might refuse me, I col­
lapsed on the bed almost in convulsions. 
"He sat in complete silence for a few moments, then he 
got up and took my hand. 
" 'Listen, my nice little Nastenka,' he said, and I saw 
that there were tears in his eyes, too. 'I swear to you that 
I'm certain I'd be happy with you if I were ever in a po­
sition to marry you. Listen: I have to go to Moscow, and 
I'll be staying there for exactly a year. I must go there to 
take care of my business. When I come back, if you 
still love me, I swear we'll be happy. But now I have no 
right to promise you anything. I'll say too, however, that 
if I can't make it in one year, I'll stil come and find you 
later-that is, if you don't prefer someone else by then, 
because I cannot, I have no right to bind you to me by 
promises.' 
''The next day he was gone. We'd agreed not to say a 
word to Grandma. He'd insisted upon that. Well, that's 
about al there is to my story. The year has gone by, and 
he's come back. Indeed, he's been here for three days 
already, and-and-" 
"And what?" I cried, unable to stand it any longer. 
"He hasn't come to see me," N astenka said, and I 
felt that she was making a great effort, "he hasn't given 
a sign of life-" 
She cut herself short, remained silent for a few seconds, 
then covering her face with her hands, burst into sobs 
that tore at my heart. 
I hadn't expected such an ending. 

40 
White Nights 
"Nastenka," I ventured imploringly, "please, please 
don't cry. Maybe he simply hasn't come yet . . . .  " 
"No, no, he's here, he's here!" Nastenka cried. "I know 
it! We agreed that evening before he left . . . .  After we'd 
said al the things I've already told you, we came out to 
take a walk on this embankment. It was ten o'clock. 
We sat down on the bench; I'd stopped crying. I loved 
the things he was saying to me. . . . He told me that as 
soon as he was back in town, if I still wanted him , we'd 
tell everything to Grandma. And now he's back in town-I 
know it for sure-but he still hasn't come to see me . . . .  " 
And she burst into tears again. 
"But, my God, is there really nothing I can do for you?" 
I leaped up from the bench in complete despair. "Tell 
me, N astenka, couldn't I go and see him or something?" 
"Do you think that's possible?" she said, suddenly rais­
ing her head. 
"No, of course not," I said, coming back to my senses. 
"You know what you should do? Write him a letter." 
"No, I can't; that's impossible too," she said firmly, 
but this time she lowered her eyes. 
"Why is it impossible? Why?" I insisted. "Do you know 
what letter you ought to write, Nastenka? There are let­
ters and letters, you know. So please trust my judgment; 
I won't give you bad advice. Everything wil tum out fine, 
I'm sure. You took the initiative in the first place, so why 
not now?" 
"Impossible, impossible, it would look as if I were 
throwing myself at him--" 
"But no, you're wrong, dear little Nastenka!" I in­
terrupted her without trying to hide my smile. "You have 
the right to demand. He promised, after all, didn't he? 
And, from what I understand, he's an honest, considerate 
man, and I'm sure there's nothing dishonorable in his 
behavior." I continued, admiring the logic of my own rea­
soning and arguments more and more: "What did he do? 
He tied himself down by a promise. He declared that if 
he married anyone it would be you, while leaving you 
completely free to refuse him if your feelings changed. 
So it is quite natural that you make the first move. It's 

White Nights 
41 
your right, your advantage over him, and you should do 
it even if, for instance, you decide to release him from his 
word." 
"Tell me, how would you write to him?" 
"What?" 
"The letter, of course." 
"Well, I'd start like this : 'Dear Sir-' "  
"Must I really address him 'dear sir'?" 
"Yes, it's indispensable. But after all, I think-" 
"Well, go on!" 
"I'd write like this: 
" 'Dear Sir, Forgive me-' No, no apologies are neces­
sary. The letter justifies itself. Write simply: 
" 'I thought I would write to you first. Please forgive my 
impatience, but for a whole year I have lived on hope. Am 
I to blame, then, if I canot stand even one day of doubt? 
Now that you are back in town, and may have had a 
change of heart, let me assure you by this letter that I 
have nothing to reproach you for, for I cannot command 
your love. So I wil consider it simply as my fate. 
" 'You are a decent and honorable man, and I am sure 
you wil not laugh or be angry reading these impatient 
lines. You wil keep in mind that they are written by a 
por, lonely girl who has no one to advise her and 
who never could control her own heart. But forgive me 
for entertaining even a fleeting suspicion that you could 
hurt, even in thought, the girl who has loved you so much 
and who still loves you.' " 
"Yes, yes, that's exactly what I had in mind!" 
Nastenka was very enthusiastic and her eyes sparkled 
with joy. 
"Ah, you have resolved my doubts! I think God Him­
self sent you to me! Thank you, thank you, thank you!" 
"Thank me for what? For being sent by God?" 
It was a delight to look at her pretty face, so happy 
now. 
"Yes, thank you for being sent to me to begin with.'' 
"Ah, Nastenka, since we feel grateful sometimes to 
people just for living with us, let me thank you for hav-

42 
White Nights 
ing met you, for making it possible for me to remember 
you as long as I live." 
. 
"Well, that wil do for now. Listen, we agreed that 
when he came back, he'd let me know by leaving a let­
ter for me with some friends of mine, nice, simple people 
who know nothing about this. Or, if he couldn't leave 
the letter, he'd come here to this bench, at ten in the 
evening, on the very day he returned to Petersburg. Now 
I know he's in town, but he hasn't kept our date or writ­
ten the letter. I canot possibly leave my grandmother 
in 
the 
morning, 
so 
couldn't 
you, 
please, 
take 
my 
letter to those friends I mentioned? They'll see that he 
gets it. And if there's an answer, bring it to me here to­
morrow evening at ten." 
"But what about the letter? You have to write it first; 
at best, you might get a reply the day after tomorrow." 
"The letter .
•
.
 " N astenka said, somewhat at a loss, "the 
letter . . .  but . . .  " 
She didn't finish. She suddenly turned her face away 
from me, growing red as a red rose, and I felt her 
slipping a letter into my hand that, it turned out, had al­
ready been written and sealed. Something light, graceful, 
and familiar flashed through my mind. 
"R-r-o-si-i-na . . .  " I intoned. 
"Rosina!" we sang together, and I was so moved and 
delighted that I felt terribly like putting my anns around 
her. She was blushing deeply and laughing, and tiny glis­
tening tears hung on her black eyelashes. 
"Enough, enough. Good-by now, good night!" she rat­
tled. "You have the letter and the address. Good night, 
see you tomorrow!" 
She pressed both my hands hard, nodded, and darted 
off. I remained standing there for a long time, following 
her with my eyes. 
"See you tomorrow . . .  tomorrow . . .  
" flashed in my 
head as she disappeared around a comer. 

White Night3 
43 
The Third Night 
It has been a sad, drizly day, without relief-just like 
my future senility. I am oppressed by strange thoughts 
and dark sensations; throngs of vague questions obsess 
me, but I have neither the strength nor the desire to 
cope with them. No, I cannot cope with it al! 
We won't meet tonight. Last night, as we parted, 
clouds overcast the sky and a mist was rising. "Tomor­
row wil be a miserable day," I said. She didn't answer. 
She didn't want to shed doubt on a day that shone before 
her bright and sunny. She didn't want to cast a single 
cloud over it. 
"If it rains tomorrow," she said, "I won't come." 
I didn't think she'd notice that it was raining, but she 
must have, for she didn't come. 
Last night was our third meeting, our third white 
night . . . .  
Yes, joy and happiness do make a person beautiful. 
His heart overflows with love, and he seems to try to 
pour that love into the heart of a fellow creature. He 
wants everything to· laugh and to sparkle. And his joy 
is so contagious! There was so much tenderness, so much 
friendliness, for me in her heart last night. She was so 
ful of solicitude for me and tried so hard to make me 
feel happy. Ah, a happy woman is always so full of 
seductive charm, but I 
•
•
•
 I took it at its face value; I 
imagined that . . .  
But how could I imagine anything of the sort. How 
could I be so blind, since I knew that all that had 
already been taken by someone else, that none of it 
could be for me; that even her niceness, her solicitude, 
her love-yes, her love for me-was nothing but happi­
ness caused by a forthcoming meeting with another man, 
a wish on her part to impart a bit of that happiness to 
me. And when he didn't tum up, when we'd waited in 
vain, she frowned, lost her composure, looked afraid. 
Her movements and her words were no longer light or 

44 
White Nights 
playful or gay. And, strangely, she doubled the attentions 
she showered on me, as if she wanted instinctively to 
give me something she was longing for herself, some­
thing she feared she wouldn't get. Nastenka had become 
so timid and fearful that I believe she grasped finally 
that I was in love with her and took pity on my poor 
love, for our own unhappiness makes us more sensitive 
to the unhappiness of others. When someone is unhappy, 
his sensitivity is not scattered; it becomes tense and 
concentrated. 
I had come to meet her tense with emotion, hardly 
able to wait for the moment of meeting. I never expected 
to feel what I felt, nor that it would end the way it did. 
She was beaming. She expected an answer from him. 
The answer was to be himself; he would come running 
in answer to her call. She'd come a whole hour before 
me. At first, every word made her burst into happy 
laughter. 
"Do you know why I'm so happy tonight?" she said. 
"Why I'm so pleased to see you? Why I like you so 
much?" 
"Yes?" I said, beginning to shiver. 
"I like you so much because you haven't fallen in 
love with me. Someone else in your position might have 
started pestering me, become ful of self-pity, moaned­
but not you, you're so nice!" 
She suddenly pressed my hand so hard that I started 
and almost cried out. She laughed. 
"Ah, you're such a wonderful friend," she said a mo­
ment later, seriously this time. "Yes, God sent you to 
me, really, I mean it. I can't imagine what would have 
become of me without you. You're so selfless, you've 
been so nice to me! When I'm married, we'll see a lot 
of each other, we'll be closer than brother and sister. 
I'll love you almost as much as I love him . . . .  
" 
Somehow I felt awfully sad, yet something resembling 
laughter stirred somewhere deep down inside me. 
"You're overwrought," I said. "You're afraid he won't 
come." 
"Whatever are you talking about? If I weren't so 

White Nights 
45 
happy, your remarks and your lack of trust in me would 
make me cry. But it makes me think, after all . . .  But 
I'll think later; in the meantime, I admit you're right. 
Yes, I'm not myself now, I'm all expectation, I feel a 
little too light. . . . But let's leave this conversation 
about feelings--" 
At that second we heard steps and we saw a figure 
moving through the darkness. It was coming toward us. 
We both began to tremble. She just managed to suppress 
a cry. I let go of her hand and moved away discreetly. 
But it wasn't him. 
"What are you afraid of? Why did you let go my 
hand?" She thrust her hand back into mine. "Well, what 
do you say, shall we meet him together? I want him to 
see how much we love each other." 
"How much we love each other?" I repeated. 
"Ah, Nastenka," I thought, "those words mean so 
many things! That sort of love sometitnes freezes a heart 
and makes life seem unbearable. Your hand is cold­
mine is burning. You're blind. There certainly are times 
when happy people are unbearable-but I could never 
be angry with you!" 
But finally I couldn't stand it. 
"Listen, Nastenka," I said tensely, "to how I got 
through this day." 
"What? Tell me! Why haven't you said anything about 
it till now?" 
"First I went to carry out all your errands. I went to 
see your friends, left your letter there, then . . . then I 
went back home and turned in." 
"And that's all?" She laughed. 
"Almost all . . .  
" 
I made a great effort to control the idiotic tears that 
otherwise would have spurted from my eyes. 
"Then I woke up. About an hour before I was to meet 
you. But I felt I hadn't slept at all. I didn't know what 
was happening to me. It was as if time had stopped and 
one sensation, one feeling would remain in me from then 
on; as if one minute was going to stretch out into eter­
nity; as if life would stop and 
stand 
still for me. I 

46 
White Nights 
was going to tell you all this as soon as we met. When 
I woke 
up, 
I 
was 
under 
the 
impression that some 
sweet melody, heard somewhere long ago and since for­
gotten, had come back to me now, that for all these 
years, I'd been searching for it, longing for it, but only 
now--" 
"My God, what's this all about?" Nastenka interrupted 
me. "I don't understand a thing you're saying." 
"I was trying, Nastenka, to make you understand the 
strange feeling--" I started in a pitiful voice in which 
there was still a note of hope, even if a very faint one. 
"Stop it! That's enough, stop it," she repeated quickly. 
It hadn't taken her long to guess, the sly girl! She 
suddenly became very talkative, gay, and ful of jokes. 
Laughing, she took my arm, trying to make me laugh, too. 
Every awkward, embarrassed word of mine set off such 
long peals of silvery laughter that I was on the point 
of losing my temper. Then she became flirtatious. 
"You see," she began, "I'm a bit offended with you 
for not falling in love with me. People don't always 
make sense, remember! But still, Mr. Unmovable, you 
can't avoid complimenting me for being so straightfor­
ward. Why, I tell you everything, however inane, that 
crosses my mind." 
"Wait, I believe that's eleven striking," I said. The 
even booming had started in a distant clocktower. She 
stopped laughing, and counted. 
"Yes, eleven," she said in a weak, hesitant voice. 
I was sorry that I had alarmed her and had made her 
count the strokes. I cursed myself for my spitefulness. 
I felt miserable for her, and didn't know how to make 
up for my nastiness. I tried to cheer her up, to find 
good reasons for his failure to tum up, to argue, prove, 
plead. She was, of course, very easy to convince on that 
subject, 
only 
too 
delighted 
to 
clutch 
at any excuse 
for him that I could think up. 
"It's really funny," I was saying heatedly, admiring 
the persuasive power of my own arguments, "your as­
surance that he'd be here led me to accept it as a fact 
and even lose my sense of time. Actually, he couldn't 

White Nights 
47 
possibly have made it. Just think, he's hardly had time 
to receive the letter. Now suppose he couldn't come 
tonight and wrote a note to that effect. It couldn't get 
to your friends' before tomorrow, could it? I'll go and 
see 
first 
thing tomorrow morning and let you know 
right away. Now there are hundreds of other possibilities; 
for instance, he may not have been at home when the 
letter arrived, and maybe he hasn't read it to this very 
moment .
.
.
.
 Anything could've happened." 
"Yes, of course," Nastenka said, "that hadn't even 
occurred to me. Of course-anything could have hap­
pened." 
Her tone was extremely cooperative, but I detected a 
jarring, discordant note in it, an echo of thoughts of a 
diferent kind. 
"Here's what we'll do," she said. "You'll go there to­
morrow as early as you can, and if there's something, 
you'll let me know immediately. You know where I 
live, of course." And she repeated her address. 
Then she became breathtakingly tender and at the 
same time shy .
.
.
.
 I thought she was attentively fol­
lowing what I was saying, but when I asked her some 
question, she said nothing, became embarrassed, 
and 
turned her head away from me. I looked into her eyes. 
That was it-she was crying. 
"You mustn't, you mustn't! Ah, you're behaving like 
a child. You're just a baby!" 
She tried to smile to control herself, but her chin was 
trembling and her bosom heaving. 
"I've been thinking of you," she said after a moment's 
silence. "You've been so kind that I'd have to be made 
of stone not to be touched. And, you know, I compared 
the two of you and decided that you are the better of the 
two, although I love him more." 
I didn't answer. She seemed to expect me to say 
something. 
"Of course, I may still not understand him or know 
him perfectly," she said. "Come to think of it, I've al­
ways been afraid of him. 
He's always been so grave, 
so proud in a way. Of course, I know that it's only 

48 
White Nights 
the way he looks, that there's more tenderness in his 
heart than in my own. . . . I remember how he looked at 
me when-remember?-! came to his room with that 
bundle. Still, I look up to him with respect, which may 
mean we aren't equals, don't you think?" 
"No, Nastenka, no, it simply means that you love him 
more than anything in the world, and much more than 
yourself." 
"All right, let's assume you're right," naive Nastenka 
replied. "But shall I tell you what has just occurred to me? 
Al right. Only I won't talk about myself now but speak 
in general, for this thought has recurred to me several 
times. Tell me, why aren't we all like brothers? Why does 
even the best person hold back something from another? 
Why not say directly what we feel if we know that what 
we entrust won't be scattered to the winds? As it is, 
everyone looks much tougher than he really is, as if he 
felt it'd be an insult to his feelings if he expressed them 
too readily--" 
"Ah, that's it exactly, Nastenka," I interrupted her, 
doing more violence than ever to my own feelings, "and 
it's due to many causes--" 
"No, no!" she said heatedly. "Take you, for instance­
you're not like the rest. I don't quite know how to ex­
plain it . . . but I feel . . . yes, even now, you are 
sacrificing something for my sake." She shyly cast a side­
long glance at me. "Forgive me for speaking to you like 
this, but I'm a simple girl who hasn't seen much in this 
world yet, and there are times when I can't talk." Her 
voice trembled with some hidden emotion and, at the 
same time, she tried to smile. "All I wanted to tell you 
was that I'm grateful, that I too-l feel all that- Ah, may 
God reward you with happiness! But what you told me 
before about that dreamer of yours, that's untrue. I 
mean, it has absolutĖly nothing to do with you. You're 
recovering now; you're really a completely different per­
son from the one you tried to pass yourself off as. If 
you ever fall in love, may you be happy with her! And 
I don't have to wish her anything, for I know she'll be 

White Nights 
49 
happy with you. I know it, for I'm a woman myself, 
and you must believe me . . . .  " 
She fell silent and squeezed my hand. I couldn't utter 
a word. Several minutes went by. 
"Well, it doesn't look as though he's coming tonight," 
she said at last, lifting her head. "It's getting quite late." 
"He'll be here tomorrow," I said in a firm, convincing 
voice. 
"Yes," she said, growing suddenly cheerful, "I can se 
now that he'll come tomorrow. So good night, see you 
tomorrow. If it rains, I may not come. But the night after 
that I'll be here, without fail, whatever happens. You 
must be here too; I want to see you and tell you every­
thing." 
When we were saying good-by, she gave me her hand, 
looked at me brightly, and said: 
"We'll always be together now, won't we?" 
Oh, Nastenka, Nastenka! if you had any idea how 
lonely I feel! 
When it struck nine I couldn't stand it in my room. 
I dressed and went out. I walked over to our spot and 
sat on our bench. Then I walked along her street, but I 
felt ashamed and, before I'd quite reached her house, 
turned back without even glancing at the windows. I 
returned home in a state of dejection such as I'd never 
known before. What gloomy, damp, depressing weather! 
If only it had been fine I'd have walked around her 
neighborhood al night. 
But she'll tell me everything tomorrow. 
Of course, there wasn't any letter today, but then, 
that's quite natural. They're together already. 
The Fourth Night 
My God, what a way for it al to finish! Ah, what 
an ending! 
I got there by nine. She was already there, waiting. I 
caught sight of her when I was still at a distance. She was 

50 
White Nights 
standing as she was the first time, leaning on the guard­
rail of the embankment, and didn't hear me approach. 
"Nastenka!" I called out to her, managing to overcome 
my anguish. 
"Come here," she said. "Hurry!" 
I looked at her without understanding. 
"Well, let me have the letter! You have it, haven't 
you?" She clenched the railing with her hand. 
"No, I have no letter," I said finally, "but haven't you 
seen him yet?" 
She went terribly pale and stared at me. I had shattered 
her last hope. 
"Well, good luck to him," she said in a gasping tone. 
"Good luck to him, if that's the way he feels about me." 
She lowered her eyes, then tried to look up at me, 
but couldn't. For several moments more, she tried to 
get hold of herself, but she couldn't. She turned her 
head away, leaned on the rail, and dissolved into tears. 
"Stop, stop .
.
.
 
" was all I said. Looking at her, I 
hadn't the strength to say more-and anyway, what else 
was there to say? 
"Don't try to make me feel better," she said, crying. 
"Don't mention him, don't tell me he'll come, don't per­
suade me he hasn't thrown me over so cruelly, so cal­
lously as he has. What did I do wrong? Could it be some­
thing I wrote in that il-fated letter?" 
At this point, sobs overwhelmed her. I couldn't bear 
to see her this way. 
"Ah, how cruel and callous!" she said again. "And he 
never even bothered to write me a single line! If only 
he had answered that he didn't need me, that he rejected 
me. But no, he hasn't written a word during these three 
days! How easy it is for him to hurt and humiliate a poor 
girl whose only sin is to love him! Ah, how much I've 
been through in these three- days! Ah, my God! My God! 
When I think that it was I who came to him in the first 
place, that I humbled myself before him, cried, begged 
him for a crumb of his love. . . . And after all that! . . . 
Listen," she said, turning her flashing dark eyes to me, 
"it can't be-it's not natural-one of us, you or I, has 

White Nights 
5 1  
made a mistake! Maybe he never got my letter! Maybe 
he doesn't know a thing to this minute! How is it pos­
sible-please explain to me, for God's sake-for him to 
be so unspeakably rude to me? Not a single word! People 
show more pity than that for the lowest of creatures! 
Maybe he's heard something; maybe someone has told 
him some slander about me? What do you think?" 
She shouted the last question at me . 
.. I'll go, Nastenka, and see him on your behalf tomor-
row." 
"Yes?" 
"I'll tell him everything and ask him to explain." 
"Yes? Yes?'' 
"Write him a letter. Don't say no. Wait! I'll force him 
to respect what you did. He'll be told everything, and 
if-" 
"No, my dear, no, that's enough! No more about it; 
not one line, not one word, enough's enough! I don't 
know him. I don't love him any more. I'll forget him . • •  
" 
She couldn't complete her sentence. 
"Calm yourself, calm yourself, Nastenka! Here, sit 
down," I said, indicating the bench. 
"But I am calm! Stop fussing! It's true. My tears wil 
dry. You don't really think that I'd go and drown myself 
or something, do you?" 
My heart was overflowing. I tried to speak but words 
wouldn't come. 
"Tell me!" she said, catching hold of my hand, "you 
wouldn't have acted that way, would you? You wouldn't 
have hurled a shameful sneer at a girl who'd come to 
you herself; you wouldn't have made fun of her weak, 
tender heart. You'd have spared her. You'd have realized 
that she was lonely, unable to take care of herself, un­
able to prevent herself from falling in love with you, that 
she hadn't done anything wrong . . . that she hadn't done 
anything .
. . Ah, my God, my God!" 
"Nastenka!" I cried, completely overcome, "you're tor­
turing me, Nastenka! You're tearing at my heart, you're 
killing me! I can't remain silent! I must tell you, at last, 
all that has accumulated inside me." 

52 
White Nights 
I got up from the bench as I said that. She took my 
hand, looking at me surprised. 
"What's come over you?" she said. 
"Nastenka, everything I'm going to tell you now is 
absurd, impossible, idiotic! I know that it can never hap­
pen, but I can't remain silent. So, in the name of your 
present suffering, I beg you to forgive me in advance!" 
"Well, what is it?" She stopped crying and looked at 
me closely. There was a strange curiosity in her eyes. 
"I know it cannot be, but I love you, Nastenka. That's 
what it is. Now you know everything." I shrugged hope­
lessly. "Now see if you can still talk to me the way you 
did before, if you can listen to what I'm going to say--" 
"But what of it?" Nastenka interrupted me. "I've known 
al along that you loved me, but I thought that you just 
loved me simply-you know . . . Oh, good gracious!" 
"It was simply at first, Nastenka, but now-now­
I'm exactly in the position you were in, Nastenka, when 
you came to him with that bundle of yours. In fact, my 
plight is even more hopeless than yours was then, for he 
wasn't in love with anyone, but you are." 
"What are you saying? You puzzle me altogether. But 
listen, why do you . . . I mean, how is it that . . . Ah, 
God, I don't know what I'm saying. But you . . .  " 
She became completely confused. Her cheeks were on 
fire; she lowered her eyes. 
"Well, what am I to do, Nastenka, what? I'm to blame 
for having abused . . . but no, no, it's not my fault, 
really-I know it, I feel it-for my heart tells me I'm 
right. There's no way I can harm you or offend you! I 
was your friend before, and I'm your friend now. I haven't 
betrayed a thing. And now, Nastenka, the tears are run­
ning down my cheeks; let 'em run, they aren't hurting 
anyone. They'll dry, Nastenka . . . .  
" 
"Oh come, sit down, sit down," she said, pulling me 
down on the bench. "Ah, dear God!" 
"No, Nastenka, I won't sit down; I can't stay here. 
You shouldn't see me any more. I'll tell you all I have 
in my heart, then leave. I want only to tell you that you'd 
never have found out I love you. I'd have kept my secret. 

White Nights 
53 
I wouldn't have inflicted my selfishness upon you at such 
a moment. No! But I couldn't keep it to myself. It was 
you who brought it up; it's your fault, it's all your fault. 
You can't send me away." 
"But no, of course not. I don't intend to send you 
away," Nastenka rattled off quickly, trying, the poor 
dear, to conceal her embarrassment. 
"So you won't send me away? But I was going to run 
away from you anyway. I'll leave too, but first I must tell 
you everything because I could hardly bear it when 
you were talking and crying and so full of despair, be­
cause 
.
•
.
 well, because-let me say it, Nastenka-be­
cause you have been rejected, because your love has 
been spumed. 1-1 felt so much love for you, Nastenka, 
so much love . . . and I felt terribly bitter because I 
couldn't do anything for you, despite all that love 
•
.
.
 I 
felt I was being tom to pieces. I couldn't keep silent, 
I had to talk. I had to, N astenka." 
"Yes, yes, tell me, talk to me!" Nastenka said with an 
inexpressible gesture. "It must seem strange to you that 
I should say that, but go on, speak! I'll explain later; I'll 
explain everything!" 
"You're sorry for me, Nastenka, you're simply sorry 
for me. Well, the way I look at it_:_what is lost is lost, 
what has been done cannot be undone. Isn't that so? 
Now you know everything, and that's the point of de­
parture. Al right then, that's fine, but listen to this: 
while you were sitting here crying, I thought--oh, please 
let me tell you what I thought-! thought--of course 
I'm well aware it cannot be, Nastenka-1 thought that 
somehow or other, without it having anything to do 
with me •
•
.
 you didn't love him any more .
.
.
•
 In that 
case, Nastenk:a-1 thought of that yesterday and the 
day before-! would've behaved in such a way that 
you'd have come to love me. , , . For you said your­
self that you'd almost fallen in love with me, Nastenka, 
you said so yourself! And what then? Nothing much. 
That's just about all I had to say! Al I have left to de­
scribe is what it would have been like had you fallen in 
love with me. But there's not much I can say about that. 

54 
White Nights 
So listen, my friend Nastenka, for you're still my friend­
! am, of course, a simple man, poor and unimportant, 
but that's not what matters (I keep straying from the 
subject out of shyness, Nastenka) ; only-I'd have loved 
you so much that even if you'd stil gone on loving that 
man, you'd still never- have felt my love as an imposition 
upon you. You'd only have heard a grateful, warm heart 
beating by your -side and felt its proximity every sec­
ond . . .
. Ah, Nastenka, Nastenka, what have you done 
to me?" 
"Stop, I don't want you to cry!" She got up quickly from 
the bench. "Come, get up, come with me, and stop crying! 
Stop it!" She dried my eyes with her handkerchief. "Come, 
perhaps I'll tell you something. After all, he's abandoned 
me, forgotten me, even though I still love him, for I 
don't want to lie to you .
•
.
.
 But tell me truly: if, for 
instance, I did come to love you-that is, if I only-oh, 
my dear, dear friend, when I think how I hurt you, when 
I laughed at your love, pretending to congratulate you for 
not falling in love with me- Ah, God, how could I have 
failed to foresee . . .  How stupid I was! But now I've made 
up my mind-I'll tell you everything." 
"You know what, Nastenka, I'll go away! I simply tor­
ment you when I'm near you. Now, because of me, you're 
feeling guilty about making fun of me. But I don't want 
to add to your sorrow. I am the guilty one, Nastenka, 
but forgive me and farewell!" 
"Wait, listen to me! Can't you wait?" 
"Wait? Wait for what?" 
"I do love him but I'll get over it. I'm bound to. In fact, 
I'm already getting over it. I feel it. . . . One can never 
tell, I might even overcome it today. Because I hate him­
he was making furi of me while you and I were crying 
here together. Because you haven't pushed me away as 
he has; because you love me, and he never loved me; 
because, finally I myself-! love you. . . . Yes-1 love 
you-1 love you the way you love me. Remember, I told 
you that before; you heard mel Because you're a better 
man than he is; you're more honorable; because he . . .  
" 
Nastenka was so moved that she couldn't finish. She let 

White Nights 
55 
her head rest on my shoulder; from there it slipped onto 
my chest as she shed bitter tears. I tried to cheer her up, 
but she couldn't stop crying. She just kept pressing my 
hand and repeating between sobs: 
"Wait, wait, I'll get over it in a moment. .
•
.
 Don't think 
these tears mean that . 
. 
• I just feel weak. 
. 
• 
. " 
Finally she stopped crying and wiped away her tears. 
We resumed our walk. I would have spoken, but she 
wanted me to wait a bit longer. So we walked in silence. 
At last she mustered up her courage and spoke. 
"You know," she began in a weak, quivering voice that 
nevertheless had something in it that immediately clutched 
at my heart, making it throb with a sweet pain, ''you 
mustn't think I'm so fickle and irresponsible, that I'm so 
quick to forget and to betray. I've loved him for a whole 
year, and I swear to God that I've never, not once, been 
unfaithful to him. Not even in thought. But he's scorned 
that; he's made light of my feelings. Well, good luck to 
him! But he has also wounded me and slighted my love. 
No, I don't love him, for I can only love one who is 
generous, understanding, and kind, because I myself am 
like that-so he's unworthy of me. Al right, I wish him 
al the best! It's better like this than finding out later 
that I had deluded myself, than discovering too late what 
sort of man he is. . . . Anyway, it's over! But come to 
think of it, my dear, maybe al my love for him was noth­
ing but a delusion; maybe it began as a childish adven­
ture; maybe it was caused by the wish to escape from 
under my grandmother's thumb; maybe I was destined to 
love a man other than him, a man who could feel for 
me, understand me, and . . .  But let's leave that!" Nas­
tenka was short of breath in her excitement. "Al I want 
to say is that if, although I love-no, rather loved-him­
although, you might say .
. . If you think your love is great 
enough to displace my former love . . . If you wil take 
pity on me and not leave me to face my destiny all alone 
without offering me consolation, support, and hope-if 
you're willing to love me always as you love me now, then 
I swear to you that my gratitude-! mean my love-wil, 

56 
White Nights 
in the end, be worthy of your love. 
• 
• 
• Here, will you 
take my hand now?" 
"Nastenka!" I cried, choked with sobs, "Nast.enka! Oh, 
Nastenka!" 
"Enough, enough for now, that's definitely enough," she 
said, getting hold of herself. "Everything has been said 
now, hasn't it? Right? And you're happy and so am I. 
Not another word about it. Wait. Spare me. For heaven's 
sake talk of something else!" 
"Right, Nastenka, enough! I'm happy now, I .
. . So, 
Nastenka, let's talk of something else. Quickly. Yes, I'm 
ready . . . .  
" 
We didn't know what to say. We laughed. We cried. We 
exchanged thousands of disconnected, meaningless words. 
We walked along a street, then suddenly turned and re­
traced our steps. Without any apparent reason, we crossed 
the street to the opposite sidewalk; we went to the em­
bankment. . . . We were like a couple of children. 
"I live all by myself now, Nastenka. But tomorrow . . .  
Of course, you know, I'm poor. I've only twelve hundred 
rubles, but it doesn't matter, for--" 
"Of course not. And then my grandmother has a pen­
sion. So she won't be a liability. She must, of course, come 
and live with us." 
"Certainly, of course she must live with us. The only 
snag is that Matryona--" 
"Ah! And we have our Fyokla!" 
"Matryona's kind. The only thing wrong with her is 
that she has absolutely no imagination. But it doesn't mat­
ter!" 
"Never mind, they can live together. Anyway you're 
coming over to live with us tomorrow." 
"What did you say? Come to your place? That's fine 
by me!" 
"Y es, you must rent our top floor room. It's empty 
now. There was an old woman living there but she's left 
and I know Grandma wants to let it to a' young man. j 
Šsked her, 'Why a young man?' and she said : 'I'm get­
tmg old, see, but don't you get it into your head, Nas-

White Nights 
57 
tenka, that I'm trying to marry you off.' So I guessed 
that that was the reason." 
"Ah, Nastenka!" 
We both laughed. 
"Al right, that's enough now," she said. "And, by the 
way, where do you live? I've forgotten." 
"Over there, by that bridge, in the Barashnikov House." 
"The large house?" 
"Yes, it's quite large." 
"I know it. It's a nice house, but forget it anyway and 
come and live with us. Quickly." 
"I'll come tomorrow, Nastenka, no later than tomor­
row. I'm somewhat late with my rent, but that'll be all 
right. I'll be getting my pay soon." 
"You know what? Perhaps I'll give private lessons. 
First I'll learn somethmg myself, then I'll teach it." 
"It's al turned out wonderfully . . .  and soon I'm due 
for a bonus, Nastenka." 
"Then, starting tomorrow, you'll be my lodger." 
"Yes, and we'll go to see The Barber of Seville, for 
they'll be putting it on again soon." 
"Yes, yes, let's," Nastenka said, laughing, "and if 
not The Barber, we'll go and see something else." 
"Al right, something else then. That would be better, 
of course. I should have thought of it myself . . . . " 
Talking that way, we walked as if in a drunken haze, 
like walking through clouds, with no idea of what was 
going on around us. We stopped, chatted without moving 
from the spot, then set off walking again, God knows 
where, as we laughed, cried, and laughed again . . . .  Nas­
tenka decided to return home, and I didn't dare detain 
her; I accompanied her to her very door, but a quarter 
of an hour later, we found ourselves back at our favor­
ite bench. She sighed and a tear glistened in her eye 
again; I became frightened, turned cold . . .  But she im­
mediately pressed my hand and pulled me along behind 
her, and we again walked and chatted and talked . . . .  
"It's time for me to go back home now," Nastenka de­
clared finally. "Enough of this childish stuff!" 

58 
• 
White Nights 
"All right, Nastenka, but 1-1 won't be able to go to 
sleep tonight, so I don't think I'll go home." 
"I don't expect to sleep either. Nevertheless, I want you 
to see me to my door." 
"Most certainly." 
"But this time it must be for good." 
"Yes, yes, of course." 
"Do I have your promise? For I must get home in the 
end." 
"I promise," I said, laughing. 
"Then let's go." 
"Let's go, Nastenka," I said. "And look at the sky: it 
will be a wonderful day tomorrow. What a blue sky I 
What a moon! Look at that yellow cloud about to 
veil the moon. Look at itl look at it-no, it has just 
missed the moon. Look at it-look!" 
But Nastenka wasn't looking at the cloud. She stood 
still as a tree. Then, after a while, she pressed herself 
against me in a strange way. Her hand was trembling in 
mine. I looked at her. She pressed herself even closer to 
me. 
At that moment, a young man was passing near-by. 
Suddenly he 
stopped and gave us a close, scutinizing 
look. 
Then he walked a few more steps. My heart 
throbbed. 
"Nastenka," I said very softly, "who is it, Nastenka?" 
"It's him!" she whispered, pressing herself even more 
closely to me. I could hardly keep my feet. 
"Nastenka, Nastenka, is that you?" I heard a voice be­
hind us, and the young man came toward us. 
My God, that cry! The shiver that passed through her! 
She tore herself from my arm and rushed toward him. I 
stood staring at them. I was dead. But she hardly had 
time to seize his hand and fling herself into his arms be­
fore she turned her head and looked at me. Then, with 
the speed of lightning, she was by me, her arms were 
around my neck, and before I knew what had happened, 
I felt her passionate kiss. Still without uttering a word, she 
again rushed toward him, caught his hand 
and hurried 
away with him. 
' 

White Nights 
59 
For a long time I kept following them with my eyes •
•
•
 
Finally they vanished from sight 
The Morning 
My nights were over. It was the morning after. The 
weather was bad. It was raining. The rain beat a gloomy 
tattoo on my window. It was dark inside my room and 
bleak outside the windows. My head ached. Objects swam 
before my eyes. Fever was sneaking along my limbs. 
"There's a letter for you." Matryona's voice hovered 
somewhere over me. "It has just come." 
I jumped up. 
"What letter? From whom?" 
"How do I know who it's from? Look; maybe it says 
inside who wrote it." 
I opened it. It was from her. It said: 
Please, please forgive me! I beg you on my knees. For­
give 
me! 
I deceived both you and myself. 
It was a 
dream, a mirage. I feel terrible about you now. Forgive 
me, forgive mel 
Don't be too hard on me, for what I feel for you 
hasn't changed. I told you I loved you-well, I do love 
you, and it's even more than love. Oh God, if only it 
were possible to love both of you at the same time! Ah, 
if only you could be him! 
"Oh, if only he could be you." The thought flashed 
through my head. I remembered your very words, Nas­
tenka. The letter continued: 
God only knows what I wouldn't do for you! I know 
that you feel sad and depressed. I have hurt you. But, 
as you know, we won't resent for long a wound inflicted 
by those we love, and you do love mel 
Thank you! Yes, thank you for that love! It lingers 
now in my memory like a sweet dream that remains 
long after awakening. I will always remember the mo­
ment when you opened your heart to me so fraternally 
and when you so nobly accepted the gift of my heart-

60 
White Nights 
wounded as it was-to love and cherish it, and heal its 
wounds. . . .If you forgive me, my memory of you wil 
be ennobled by gratitude that wil never fade. I shall 
cherish that memory, be faithful to it always, never 
betray it, never betray my heart-it is too constant for 
that. Only yesterday it went back to the one to whom it 
belongs forever. 
We11 meet again. You'll come to see us. You won't 
abandon us. You'll always be my friend and my brother. 
And when we meet, you'll give me your hand, won't 
you? You'll give it to me because you love me as much 
as ever. 
Please love me, and don't abandon me, because I love 
you so much at this moment, because I'm worthy of 
your love, because I'll earn it. 
• 
•
.
 oh, my dear, dear 
friend! 
I'm marrying him next week. He came back to me 
full of love. He hadn't forgotten me. . . . You won't be 
angry with me for writing this about him, will you? I 
want to come and see you with him. You'll like him. 
won't you? 
So forgive, remember, and go on loving 
your N astenka 
I read and reread that letter. I was on the verge of 
tears. At last it fell from my hands, and I covered my 
face. 
"Here, look at that!" Matryona said. 
"What is it, old woman?" 
"Why, I've swept all them cobwebs from the ceiling so 
now you can marry any time and, while you're at it, in­
vite a houseful of guests." 
I looked at Matryona. She was still vigorous. She was a 
very young old woman, but I suddenly visualized her all 
wrinkled and shrunk, an invalid. And I don't know why, 
but my whole room suddenly aged the way an old woman 
ages. The walls and the ceilings peeled, everything faded, 
cobwebs multiplied. . . . And when I looked out of the 
window, I don't know why, but the house opposite turned 
dimmer too, the plaster on its columns fell off, the cor­
nices became all grimy and full of cracks, and the walls, 
which used to be dark yellow, turned grayish. 
A ray of sun that for a second had broken through a 

White Nights 
61 
rain cloud disappeared behind it again, and everything 
darkened once more. Or was it just my sad and barren 
future that :flashed before me? Did I see myself exactly 
the way I am now, fifteen years later, having aged in this 
very room, just as lonely, still living with Matryona, who 
hasn't grown any more intelligent in all these years? 
I remember the hurt inflicted upon me, Nastenkal 
But I never sent a dark cloud to sail over your clear, 
serene sky. I never reproached you, never made you sad 
or gave you a secret guilty feeling. I never trampled any 
of the tender :flowers that you entwined in your black 
curls when you walked to the altar with him. Oh, never, 
never! So may the sky lie cloudless over you, and your 
smile be bright and carefree; be blessed for the moment 
of bliss and happiness you gave to another heart, a 
lonely and a grateful one. 
My God, a moment of bliss. Why, isn't that enough for 
a whole lifetime? 

From: The House of the Dead 
BAKLUSHKIN'S STORY 
I
've never met a man with more charm than Baklushkin. 
He didn't let anyone push him around or poke his 
nose into his afairs, and as a consequence, he had 
a few clashes with other prisoners, in which he showed he 
knew how to take care of himself. But he never held a 
grudge for long, and I believe everyone liked him. Where­
ever he went, people seemed pleased to see him. Even 
outside the penal settlement he was known as the most 
amusing of the convicts, a man whose cheerfulness never 
deserted him. 
He was a tal fellow, around thirty, with a bold, open, 
rather handsome face with a wart on it. Sometimes he 
twisted that face of his into the most extraordinary ex­
pressions that made us all roar with laughter. He was al­
ways ready with a joke, and since the kiljoys knew he 
wouldn't take it, they never dared call him a useless 
empty-head to his face. He was very lively and full of 
fire. 
I got to know him soon after my arival here. He told 
me he had been a noncom in the army and once had even 
been noticed and praised by some very high ranking of­
ficers, a fact of which be was proud to that day. When we 
met, he immediately started asking me all sorts of ques­
tions about Petersburg, where he had been stationed at 
one time. He apparently had even read some books. 
It turned out, though, that Baklushkin hadn't stayed 
62 

Baklushkin's Story 
63 
very long in the capital. He'd got into trouble there, 
and had been transferred to the garrison battalion at 
R--, retaining, however, his rank as a noncom. 
"And from there I landed here," Baklushkin said. 
"What happened?" 
"What happened? It happened that I fell in love. So it 
was love that brought me here." 
"I didn't know they sent people here for that." 
"Well, maybe it was also because I happened to kil 
one of the local Germans with an old pistol. But do you 
really think it's right to send a man here for kiling a 
German?" 
"But what happened? Tell me. It sounds interesting." 
"It's a very funny story." 
"Well, so much the better; go ahead and tell me." 
"Al right." 
And then I heard a story that, although it wasn't 
really so funny, was an unusual murder story. 
"Here's what happened," Baklushkin began. "When I 
got to R--, I found it was a nice, large town, although 
there were really too many Germans. Well, I was young 
and cocky, and had managed to get on good terms with 
my superiors, so I spent most of my time swaggering 
around the place with my cap over one eye, winking at 
the German friiuleins. And what do you know, I took a 
fancy to one of them. Luise was her name. She and her 
aunt worked as laundresses, and the clothes they washed 
were the cleanest I'd ever seen. The aunt was old and 
stuck up, and they lived quite well, I'd say. At first I just 
walked up and down in front of her windows, but later I 
became really friendly with her. That Luise, she even spoke 
good Russian, except for her 'rs'-she couldn't manage 
those. She was such a nice, pretty thing; I'd never seen 
anyone like her before. At first I tried, you know. I tried 
this way and that, but she always said to me : 
" 'No, Sasha, I can't let you. I want to keep it and be a 
wife worthy of you.' And she cuddled up to me and 
laughed, and that laugh of hers 
sounded so nice. 
"Yes, she was purer than any I'd ever seen, and it was 
she herself who put the idea of marrying into my head. 

64 
SELECTIONS FROM 
The House of the Dead 
And how could I not want to marry her? Just think ofj 
it! Well, I was already preparing to put in a request to 1 
my colonel for permission to get married. 
"Then I realized something had happened. Luise didn't' 
tum up at our usual meeting place. She wasn't there again 1 
the next day and the day after. I sent her a letter, but t 
there was no answer to that either. I couldn't under- · 
stand what was going on. If she'd wanted to lead me : 
on, she'd have managed to keep our dates and to answer · 
the letter. But she didn't know how to lie, so she simply 
broke it off, just like that. 'It must be that aunt of hers,' ' 
I said to myself. You see, I'd never been to their house, 
although the aunt knew wh11t was going on between us; 
we always met outside, sort of on the quiet. 
"So I went walking al around town like a crazy man, 
then I went back and wrote another letter to Luise, warn­
ing her that if she didn't show up next time, I'd come to 
the house, aunt or no aunt. That did it. She got scared and 
came. She cried. There's a German by the name of 
Schultz, she said, a watchmaker, some distant cousin of 
theirs, and he's rich and quite old already, and now he 
suddenly wants to marry her-to make her happy, he 
says, and also not to be without a wife in his old age. And, 
she added, it turns out he's loved her for a long time, 
but has never told her. 
" 'So you see, Sasha,' she said, 'that's how it is. He's· 
rich, and it looks to me like great luck, and I don't be­
lieve that you, Sasha, would want to deprive me of my 
happiness. • . .' 
"She was crying, and she .put her arms around me. 'Ah,' 
I said to myself, 'what she's saying makes good sense. Why 
should she marry a soldier, even though I am a noncom?' 
" 'Well, good-by then, Luise,' I said. 'Why should I de­
prive you of your happiness? Best of luck to you. But 
tell me,' I added, 'is he good-looking at least?' 
" 'Oh no,' she said, 'he's no youngster, 
and you 
should see the nose he's got!' And she even laughed her­
self. 
"So I walked away from her, thinking, 'Well, what can 
I do about it? It just isn't my fate, I guess.' Still, the 

Baklushkin's Story 
65 
next day I went along the street where she'd told me he 
had his watch store. 
"I looked inside through the shop window, and there 
was a German sitting there working away on a watch. He 
was around forty-five, his nose was hooked, and his eyes 
bulged out, he wore a tail-coat and stand-up collar, and 
looked mighty important. I spat, and really felt like 
breaking his window for him, but I said to myself, 'What 
the hell! It's all over anyway, and that's all there is to it.' 
So I went back to the barracks, as it was beginning to get 
dark, lay on my cot, and believe it or not, burst out cry­
ing .
•
•
•
 
"Well, one day passed, then another, and a third, with­
out my seeing Luise. Then I heard from another old 
laundress who did some work for Luise that the German 
had found out all about our love, and that was what had 
made him decide to marry Luise in a hurry. Otherwise 
the laundress said, he might have waited for another 
couple of years. And now he'd made Luise swear she'd 
never see me again-for he was still free to change his 
mind, so he had both Luise and her aunt under his thumb. 
She told me also that he'd invited them both to have cof­
fee with him on Sunday and that another relative of his 
would be there, an old man who used to be a shopkeeper, 
but was now completely broke and was a watchman in 
some basement or other. 
"Now when I found out that they wanted to settle the 
whole matter the next Sunday, and without consulting me, 
I got mad. I couldn't control myself any longer. All the 
next day, which was a Friday, and all of Saturday, I 
couldn't think of anything else. I think I could've eaten 
that German then. 
"I still had no idea what would happen Sunday morning. 
But, after church parade, I put on my overcoat and went 
over to the German's place. I expected to find them all 
there, but I swear I hadn't the slightest idea why I was 
going or what I meant to tell the German. Still, somehow 
I slipped my pistol into my coat pocket. I'd had that 
lousy old pistol with its old-fashioned trigger for a hell of 
a long time. In fact, I used to fire it when I was a boy. I 

66 
SELECTIONS FROM 
The House of the Dead 
didn't even think it'd go off anymore. I loaded it, how­
ever, telling myself that if they tried to be rude and throw 
me out of there, I'd bring out the pistol and scare the day­
lights out of 'em. 
"I walked over to the German's place. There was no 
one in the store; they were al in the back room. And 
aside from them, there was no one around-no servants, 
not a soul. Anyway, he only had one German woman 
working for him, and she cooked for him, too. I crossed 
the store and saw that the door leading to the inside room 
was locked. It was an old door, and it was fastened with a 
hook. I stopped by it and listened. My heart was beating 
like crazy as I stood there listening. They were jabbering 
in German among themselves. 
"So I gave the door a terrific kick, and it flew open. 
The table was set and there was a large coffee pot perking 
over an alcohol heater on it. There were cookies on a 
plate and a tray with a decanter of vodka, herring, salami, 
and another bottle of some stuff-wine or something. 
Luise and her aunt, in their Sunday best, were sitting on 
a sofa. Next to them, on a straight chair, was the German 
bridegroom, all carefully combed and wearing his frock­
coat and his stand-up collar. A bit to one side, also in a 
straight chair, sat the other German. He was really an 
old man, fat and white-haired; and he said nothing. 
As I broke into the room, Luise went al white; her 
aunt jumped up, then let herself slide back onto the 
sofa again. 
"The German frowned. He looked very angry as he 
came toward me. 
" 'Vat ees eet,' he said, 'do you vish?' 
"I felt kind of stupid, not knowing what to say, and then 
my rage got the better of me. 
" 'You ask me what I want!' I said to him. 'What kind 
of manners is that? I've come to visit you, so you'd better 
offer me some vodka.' 
"The German gave it some thought, then said: 
" 'Goot, you seet down.' 
"I sat down. 
" 'How about that vodka?' 

Baklushkin's Story 
67 
" 'Here's votka, helb yourzelv, blease.' 
" 'Come on,' I said, 'I want some decent vodka. And 
you'd better get me some.' 
"As you can see, I was working myself up and getting 
really nasty. 
" 'Dis ees goat votka.' 
"It made me even more furious him treating me so off­
hand, and what made it worse was that Loise never took 
her eyes off me. I downed the glass, then I said to him: 
" 'Why are you being so rude, German? I've come here 
to be pals with you, so why don't you treat me like a pal?' 
" 'I cannot pe your bal pecause you're chust an en­
listed man.' 
"That made me really wild. 
" 'Ah, you damned, sausage-eating kraut, you lousy 
scarecrow! You've no idea what I can do to you if the 
fancy takes me. Would you like me, for instance, to shoot 
you with a pistol?' 
"I got out that old pistol of mine and put the muzzle 
against his head. When they saw that, the others were 
neither dead nor alive. They were afraid to make a sound. 
The old man shivered like a leaf in the fall. He couldn't 
utter a word, and his face turned ashen. 
"The German was kind of taken aback at first, but he 
got hold of himself and said to me: 
" 'I'm not afraid ov you, und I request you stop dis 
choke pecause I'm not scared ov you ad all.' 
" 'Oh no?' I said. 'You're lying-you're scared to 
death! 
"And I saw that he didn't dare move his head away 
from my pistol; he just sat there like a lump. 
" 'No,' he repeated, 'I'm not afraid, und you'll nefer do 
id! 
" 'What makes you so sure?' 
" 'Pecause idz strickly forbitten to do deese tings, und 
zey bunish you fery zeverely for it. Oat's vy I tink you 
don't do it! 
"Damn that stupid German son of a bitch! If he hadn't 
pushed me so fa.r, he'd still be alive today. The whole 
matter was in that argument now. 

68 
SELECTIONS FROM 
The House of the Dead 
" 'So you don't think I'll do it?' 
" 'No, you vee! not.' 
" 'No?' 
" 'I said no, und you nefer dare-' 
" 'All right, take that, you liverwurst.' And I let him 
have it. He rolled off his 
chair 
and all the others 
shouted . . . .  
I slipped the pistol into my pocket and got out of 
there, but fast. Then, as I passed by the gate of the 
barracks, I tossed the pistol into the nettles. 
"I went to my room, threw myself down on my cot, 
and waited for them to come for me. An hour passed, 
then another, and still no one came . . .  
"I stayed there until it started to get dark, and I got so 
blue and sick inside that I couldn't stand it any more, 
so I went out. I had to see Luise if it was the last thing 
I did. I passed by the watchmaker's shop and I noticed 
that there were plenty of people around and some cops, 
too. Then I ran to the old laundress and asked her to 
call Luise. I didn't have to wait long. In a little while I 
see Luise running toward me. 
"Ah, you should've seen how she threw herself at me, 
flung her arms round my neck, and cried and kept re­
peating, 'It's all my fault, Sasha; I shouldn't have listened 
to my auntie in the first place.' She also told me that 
after what happened in the morning, her aunt was so 
scared that she'd gone to bed sick and had said she 
wasn't going to tell anyone a thing and that Luise should 
keep her mouth shut too and let the police do what they 
liked. 
" 'No one saw us going out,' Luise told me, 'for he'd sent 
away the woman who worked for him because she'd 
have scratched his eyes out if she'd found out he was 
about to get married.' He had made the coffee and 
prepared the snacks himself, and as for that relative, he 
hadn't spoken a word-he'd just grabbed his hat, and was 
the first to leave. 'And,' Luise added, 'I'm sure he'll keep 
his mouth shut too.' 
"And that's just what happened. For two weeks no one 
bothered me. It looked as if they never even suspected 

Akulka's Husband 
69 
I'd had anything to do with it. And, believe it or not, it was 
in those two weeks that I found out what happiness really 
is. I saw Luise every day, and she got terribly fond of me 
too. 
" 'I'll follow you wherever they send you,' she told me, 
crying. 'I'll leave everything and come with you.' 
"I couldn't stand it. That girl really did something to 
me inside . . . .  
"Well, after two weeks, they took me in. The old man 
and the aunt talked it over and decided to inform on 
me . . . .  
" 
AKULKA's HUSBAND 
I
t was late at night, twelve or so. I had dozed off, then 
suddenly awakened. A dim night-light glimmered faint­
ly in the ward. Almost everyone was sleeping. Even Us­
tyantsev was asleep. It was hard for him to breathe, and 
in the silence, I could hear phlegm gurgling in his throat 
with every breath. In the passage outside, the heavy foot­
falls of the relief guard resounded. A rifle outt clanged 
against the floor. The door of the ward opened; a corporal 
came in, trying to walk quietly, and checked over the sick 
prisoners. A minute later, the ward was locked again, a 
new sentry was posted at the door, 
and the patrol 
marched off. Then all was quiet again. Only then did I 
notice that a few beds from me, on my left, two men were 
awake, whispering to each other. Sometimes in prison 
wards two men will lie side by side for days, even months, 
without exchanging a word, then suddenly, swayed by the 
stillness of the night, one of them wil start laying bare his 
past to his neighbor. 
They must have been talking for quite a while. I'd missed 
the begining, and even now I couldn't make out their 
words distinctly. Little by little, however, I got into 
it, and what they were saying began to make sense. Un­
able to sleep, I listened. 

70 
SELECTIONS FROM 
The House of the Dead 
One of them was speaking heatedly. He'd propped him­
self up in his bed and was craning his neck toward the 
other. He seemed excited and agitated, obviously bent 
on getting his story out. His gloomy, indifferent listener 
sat up in bed, constantly stuffed snuff into his nose, and 
now and then grunted sympathetically-out of politeness, 
I felt, rather than real interest. He was a soldier from the 
penal battalion called Cherevin, a man of fifty or so, sul­
len, finicky, a squabbler, and a conceited fool. 
The speaker, Shishkov, was a civilian prisoner, still 
young, around thirty, who worked in the prison tailor 
shop. Until then I had never paid much attention to him 
and, even after that night, I never really felt like getting 
to know him better. He was shallow and impulsive, often 
sullen, gloomy, and unfriendly. Sometimes he didn't say 
a thing for weeks on end; then suddenly, he got in­
volved in something. He'd get excited, go around gos­
siping and spreading all sorts of rumors. Then he'd get 
beaten up and relapse into silence. He was a cowardly, 
pitiful fellow, 
thin 
and 
rather small, 
and the others 
treated him rather contemptuously. His eyes usually had 
a restless quality about them, but occasionally they were 
stilled by a dull dreaminess. Sometimes he talked with 
considerable ardor, gesticulating wildly, then suddenly inter­
rupted himself or abruptly changed the subject, and plung­
ing into something altogether different, completely for­
got what it was he had started to say. He had many 
arguments with other prisoners, during which he never 
failed to accuse his opponent of having done him some 
wrong at one time or another that had nothing to do with 
the matter at hand. He'd make these reproaches emotion­
ally, almost tearfully. He enjoyed playing the balalaika 
and could play it rather well. On holidays, he even danced 
occasionally, and he danced well when he was pushed 
into it. It was really quite- easy to make him do things. 
Not that he was so amenable, but he wanted to be "one of 
the gang" and would do anything to be accepted. 
For a while, I couldn't make heads nor tails of what he 
was saying. At first, he seemed to be holding back from 

Akulka's Husband 
71 
his real subject and getting involved in irrelevancies. 
Maybe he suspected that Cherevin did not really care to 
hear his story, yet wanted to convince himself that his 
audience was lapping up every word. Probably he'd have 
been quite miserable if he'd failed to do so. 
"So he'd come to the market place," Shishkov was say­
ing, "and everyone would start bowing and scraping to him 
-he was the rich man, no doubt about it." 
"Did you say he was a merchant?" 
"Sure he was. And, I'm telling you, there weren't many 
like him. The rest-a bunch of beggars, the lot of 'em, 
see? The women had to fetch water from the river and 
haul it up the steep bank for their vegetable patches. 
They ran themselves ragged but, come fall, there wasn't 
even enough for cabbage soup anyhow. Real misery. But 
he-he'd leased a piece of land, hired three hands, and 
then he had his own beehives and sold the honey. He had 
cattle too, so everyone respected him plenty. He was 
pretty old, seventy, I'd say, white-haired, big-boned, heavy 
set, like. As I said, when he turned up in the market 
place in his foxskin coat, everybody bowed and scraped 
to him. They felt his importance, all right. 'Good day to 
you, Ankudim Trofimych, sir!' they would say. 'Good 
day,' he'd answer, 'to you too.' He never turned up his nose 
at a person. 'God keep you,' they'd say, 'Ankudim Tro­
fimych!' 'And you, how's business?' he'd ask. 'As usual­
as white as soot. And you, sir?' 'I'm getting along too, and 
still smoking up heaven with my sins.' 'May you continue 
like that for a long time, sir.' As I said, he never turned 
his nose up at anyone, and his every word was as good as 
a silver ruble. He was a Bible reader, sort of literate, 
always reading something godly. He'd sit his old woman 
down in front of him and say, 'Listen, Wife, try to 
understand . . .  .' and he'd start talking away. As a matter 
of fact, his old woman wasn't al that old-she was his 
second. He married her because he wanted kids-the 
first hadn't had any. From her, Maria she was called, 
he got two children-Vasya, the little one, who was 
born when Ankudim was all of sixty. He was stil a kid. 

72 
SELECTIONS FROM 
The House of the Dead 
Then there was Akulka, the girl. She was eighteen, see." 
"And she's your wife, right?" 
"Wait a minute! First there was that Filka Morozov, 
who caused ail that mess. 'Let's,' Filka says to Ankudim, 
'divide everything up. I want the whole four hundred 
rubles that's coming to me. What d'you take me for-your 
hired hand or something? I don't want to stay in the busi­
ness with you and I don't want any part of your Akulka 
either. Now that my parents are dead, I'm going on a 
binge, see,' he says to Ankudim. '1'11 drink every kopek 
they left me, then I'll hire myself out as a substitute for 
someone who's been drafted, and in ten years 1'11 be back 
here as a fieldmarshal.' So Ankudim paid up, every penny, 
because, you see, he and Filka Morozov's old man had 
been business partners. And as he handed Filka the 
money, he says to him : 'You, Filka,' he says, 'are a lost 
man.' 'We'11 see whether I'm lost or not,' Filka says to him 
just like that, 'but with you, you gray-beard, I'd wind up 
eating my soup with an awl. To save an extra kopek,' he 
says, 'you'd collect every piece of garbage and put it in your 
stew. You make me sick,' he says, 'I can't stand all this 
saving. You save and save and you never get anything 
out of it. I'm a man with a strong character,' Filka says. 
'And as for your Akulka, I won't marry her whatever you 
do. 
Anyway,' 
he says, 
'I've already slept with her.' 
'What are you saying!' Ankudim said, and he started to 
shake with anger. 'How dare you come and tell me, her 
father, that you've disgraced her, you filthy, fat-headed 
adder, you lousy fishbelly .
.
•
 .' I got the story from 
Filka himself. 
" 'Not me nor anyone,' Filka said then, 'I'll see to it 
that nobody marries her-not even Mikita-because she's 
been disgraced. We've been sleeping together since the 
fall, and now I wouldn't touch her for a hundred rubles. 
Try'-he dared Ankudim-'offer me a hundred rubles; 
I won't go through with it.' 
"Filka went on a binge after that, and he was so wild 
that the whole town rang and the earth itself moaned. 
With all that money, he soon had a whole bunch hang­
ing around him, and in three months he'd spent it all. 

Akulkds Husband 
73 
'When I'm through this lot,' he said, 'I'll sell the house, I'll 
sell everything, drink that money too and then join the 
army or tum tramp.' So he was drunk from morning til 
night, driving around in a cart drawn by a pair of horses 
with bells on their harness. And you should've seen-the 
girls loved him something terrific! He was such a fine 
accordion player!" 
"So he'd been carrying on with Akulka even before 
that?" 
"Wait, don't get ahead. I'd also buried my father around 
that time, and my mother was working for Ankudim, 
making gingerbread; that's how we lived. It wasn't much 
of a life, that's for sure. We also had a little lot behind the 
woods, and we used to sow com on it, but after my 
father died, we got rid of it, because I went on a spree 
too, and after that I even beat my mother to get money 
out of her . .  .'' 
"It's not right to beat your mother; it's a terrible sin.'' 
"What do you want, friend? I was drunk from morning 
till night. We stil had our house. It was old and rotten, 
but it was still ours. But it was bare and empty inside­
you could've chased a rabbit around in it. So we sat there 
with nothing to chew on for days on end, and my mother 
nagged me al the time. But I didn't care. At that time, I 
hung around with Filka Morozov from morning till 
night. 'You must play your guitar for me,' he'd say, 'and 
dance if I tell you to. And I'll lie down and toss money 
at you, because I'm the richest guy around here.' Oh, the 
things he came up with! Just the same, there was one thing 
he didn't do-receive stolen goods. 'I'm an honest man and 
ilo thief,' he always said, 'so if you want to do something 
for me, let's go and smear Akulka's gate with pitch, be­
cause I don't want Mikita to marry her. That's more 
important than money to me now.' You see, old An.kudim 
had had his eye on Mikita for Akulka for a long time­
even before al this happened-for Mikita was an oldster 
like himself, a merchant too and a widower, who went 
around in glasses. When old Mikita heard all those rumors 
about Akulka, he started hedging. 'It would be a great 
disgrace for me, Ankudim,' he said, 'and besides, I don't 

74 
SELECTIONS FROM 
The House of the Dead 
think I'll marry after all at my age. Well, we smeared 
Akulka's gate with pitch and she got whipped something 
terrible for it and her mother'd shout: 'I'll kill you! There's 
no room for the likes of you on this earth.' And her 
father'd explain that in the old days, under the patriarchs, 
he'd have burned her at the stake himself, but he's not 
allowed to do it now because the world's gone to pot. 
Sometimes, even from the street, you could hear Akulk:a 
bawling as they thrashed her. And Filka kept chanting 
al over the market place : 'Who wants a dame?/Just 
come to me;/l've one of some fame,/and there's no 
fee./She drinks and wears clean underwear;/she's a good 
one-that I'll swear.' 
"One day around that time, I met Alrulk:a. She was car­
rying buckets, and I shouted at her:· 'Good morning, 
madam, to you./The sky is bright and blue./That's a fine 
shawl on your head./Who was the last man in your bed?' 
She just looked at me. Her eyes were big, for she'd grown 
al skinny. As she was · looking at me, her mother, who 
thought she was fooling around, 
shouted from their 
window, 'What're you up to this time, you shameless 
hussy? Get back in the house this minute!' And so she 
gave Akulka another whipping. In fact, she beat her for a 
whole hour, hollering al the time: 'I'll beat you to death 
-you're no longer a daughter of mine.' " 
"She was kinda whorish, I gather?" 
"Wait, just listen to this. I was hanging around with 
Filka, remember? My mother comes to me one morning 
when I'm still in bed and says, 'Huh, you still in bed, 
you scum?' And she starts nagging me. 'You'd better get 
married,' she says. 'How about Akulk:a, now? They'd be 
glad to have even you, and they'll fork out three hundred 
in cash alone.' 'But,' I says, 'she's been disgraced before the 
whole world.' 'You stupid fool,' she comes back at me, 
'don't you know that mariage'll cover everything and it'll 
be all to your advantage, for she'll feel guilty toward you 
as long as she lives? And we could use that money,' she 
says. 'I've already had a word with her mother about it, 
and she sounded very eager, too.' So I says to my rna: 
'Twenty rubles on the table, and I'll marry her.' And 

Akulka's Husband 
75 
after that, believe it or not, I never sobered up till the 
day of my marriage. And all that time, Filka Morozov, he 
kept threatening me : 'I'll break every bone in your body, 
you Akulka's husband, you! And I'll sleep with your 
wife whenever I fancy.' 'You're lying, you dog's carrion!' 
I says, so he let me have it-shamed me before the 
whole street. I went running home and told my rna : 'I 
won't marry her unless you give me fifty, and I want 'em 
right now!' " 
"And they let her marry you?" Cherevin asked. 
"Let her marry me? Why not? We weren't the ones 
who were disgraced, were we? My pa only went broke to­
ward the end of his life, and that was due to a fire. Be­
fore that, we were maybe even better off than them. An­
kudim said to me, 'You're just a penniless bum,' and I 
told him, 'It looks like your gate hasn't been smeared 
with pitch enough yet.' 'No need for you to be so clever,' 
he said. 'First prove she's been disgraced if you can. People 
just wag their tongues, and there's no way of stopping 
them. That's all there is to it. Here's the door,' he said, 
'take it instead of Akulk:a. But then, I want the money 
back you got from me in advance.' So I talked it over 
with Filka and sent a fellow to tell him I'd make him 
look stupid yet. Then I really got dead drunk and stayed 
that way till the wedding day. My head only began to 
clear a bit in the church. And when we got back from 
church, my Uncle Mitrofan said to me, 'It's not an honor­
able deal, but it's signed and sealed now.' Old Ankudim 
got drunk too. He sat there and cried, and I could see 
the tears glistening in his whiskers. Now, I'll tell you what 
I did. I'd got me a whip even before the wedding, and I 
decided I'd have fun with Akulka and teach her a lesson, 
because I'd been tricked into marriage. That way, I 
thought, people would at least see that I hadn't really 
been made a fool of . .  .'' 
"I don't blame you for that. It was right that she 
should know her place in the future--" 
"Shut up and listen. In my part of the country, when 
the newlyweds come back from church, they're locked in 
a room by themselves right away, while the others go on 

76 
SELECTIONS FROM 
The House of the Dead 
drinking. So they locked me in with Akulka, and I looked 
at her sitting there all white, not a drop of blood in her 
face scared like, see. Even her hair was like flax, almost 
white, you know, and her eyes were very big . . . .  Later, 
she was like a mute around the house, never saying 
much, real strange. I had that whip ready by the bed. 
But then, believe it or not, it turned out that she wasn't 
guilty of the things they'd said about her, after all." 
"How's that possible?" 
"I'm telling you, she was completely innocent! So why 
did she have to go through all that misery? And why did 
Filka Morowv go around telling al those lies about her 
and disgracing her in the eyes of the world?" 
"Yes, I'll say--" 
"So I got out of the bed and down on my knees before 
her. I clasped my hands like I was praying, you know, and 
I said to her: 'Forgive me, dear Akulka, fool that I am, 
for believing all thù things people said. Forgive me, I 
beg you, for I know I behaved like a dirty dog.' And she 
just sat there in front of me, looked at me, put her hands 
on my shoulders, and laughed, tears pouring out of her 
eyes; she cried and laughed and cried .
.
.
•
 
"When I went out of that room to join the others, I said 
to myself: 'Just wait til I lay my hands on that bastard 
Filka Morozov. There's no room for him in this world 
now.' Her parents didn't know what to do with them­
selves. The mother, howling away, almost kissed her 
daughter's feet, and the old man said, 'If we'd had any 
idea, my dearest daughter, we'd have found you a better 
husband than this!' And when, on the first Sunday after the 
wedding, we went to church, I wore an astrakhan cap, a 
coat of fine cloth, and corduroy trousers, and she had on 
a brand new rabbit-fur coat, and a silk kerchief. We were 
quite a couple, and everyone was looking at us; and, if 
I do say so myself, we didn't look bad at al.'' 
"So everything turned out al right in the end." 
"You listen, and I'll tell you how it turned out. After 
the wedding, although I was still drunk, I managed to get 
away from my guests and went running around shouting: 
'Show me where that no good son of a bitch Filka Morowv 

Akulka's Husband 
77 
is, I'll teach the bastard!' I shouted that all over the 
market place. I was very drunk, I must say, and I was 
finally collared near the Vlasovs' house; it took three 
men to get me back home. And all over town, the girls 
whispered, 'What d'you know, Akulka was honest, after 
all.' One day I met Filka, and he said to me, in front of 
people : 
'Why don't you 
sell 
your wife? You'd make 
enough to keep yourself drunk. We used to have a soldier 
round here,' he said. 'Y ashka was his name. That Yashka 
married specially for that; he never once slept with his 
wife, but he managed to stay drunk all the time.' 'You're 
a dirty swine,' I told him. 'And you,' he says, 'are a damn 
fool. Why, you were cockeyed drunk on your wedding 
day,' he sneered, 'how could you possibly understand 
what was what?' So I returned home hollering, 'Hey, 
they married me while I was drunk!' My rna was there, 
and she tried to calm me down. 'You must have your ears 
stuffed with gold, rna, you'd better send Akulka in here!' 
And I started pushing Akulka around and hitting her; 
I went on like that for two hours, till I was too tired to 
stand up myself. She couldn't get out of bed for three 
weeks after that." 
"To be sure," Cherevin remarked ponderously "if you 
don't beat 'em, they just . . .  But did you catch her with a 
man?" 
"No, I didn't," Shishkov said with an apparent effort, 
after a pause. "But the whole thing made me sore. They 
teased the hell out of me. Particularly Filka. He was the 
worst of the lot. 'Your wife,' he said, 'is so virtuous, men 
should take their wives to watch her and copy her-she's 
kind and noble and everything; but you seem to forget 
that you yourself used to smear her gate with pitch.' I 
was drunk when he said that. Suddenly he grabbed me by 
my hair, and pulled my head down. 'Dance!' he shouted: 
'dance, you Akulka's husband, you! I'll lead you by the 
hair, and you'll dance to amuse me.' 'Son of a bitch!' I 
shouted at him, and he says, 'I'm coming to your place with 
some friends of mine. I'm going to give your wife a whipping 
while you watch-I'll beat her till I've had my fill.' After 
that, I was scared to leave the house. 'Now, he'll come and 

78 
SELECTIONS FROM 
The House of the Dead 
disgrace me,' I kept thinking. And that's why I started 
beating her . . . .  " 
"That kind of beating is no good! Wagging a whip 
doesn't stop wagging tongues. It's all right to punish, but 
after that a man must be nice to his wife. She's his wife, 
after all, isn't she?" 
Shishkov remained silent for a while. 
"I was sore,'' he began again, "and then I got into the 
habit. Sometimes I'd beat her from morning till night for 
not getting up quick enough or not walking fast enough. 
She sat by the window and said nothing, and she cried and 
cried till I felt sort of sorry for her-but I still beat her. 
My mother kept nagging me about her. 'You low bully,' 
Ma would say, 'you carrion!' 'Keep out of it, or I'll 
kill her,' I'd yell. 'Don't say a word, any of you, now it 
was you who tricked me into this marriage!' At first old An­
kudim tried to stop me. 'You aren't so tough,' he told me, 
'I'll find a way to cope with you.' But he soon gave up. 
Then his wife came over, and she really groveled and 
cried. 'I've come to beg you,' she whimpered, 'calm down, 
dear boy. You know yourself that our daughter was 
slandered by wicked tongues.' And she cried and cried. But 
I just looked her up and down. 'I don't even want to 
listen to you,' I said. 'As far as the lot of you are con­
cerned, I'll do as I please, because I don't have to control 
myself any more. And Filka Morozov,' I added, 'is my 
pal and I'm his best friend . . .  .' " 
"So you two went on a binge again?'' 
"What're you talking about? I couldn't even get close 
to him. He'd drunk everything away and hired himself 
out to a shopkeeper to take the place of his oldest son 
in the army. And, let me tell you, in my part of the 
country, when a man hires himself out to replace a rich 
son in the army, everyone in that house has to lie down at 
his feet until the army gets him out of the way. He gets 
his money down the day he agrees to go, but, while he's 
waiting-and sometimes he waits six months-he can 
live in his 'employer's' house. He can make them put up 
with so ąuch that they're better off taking the ikons out, 
so the samts don't see what goes on. It's like this: 'I'm 

Akulkds Husband 
79 
taking your son's place in the army, so I'm your bene­
factor, and you'd better respect me, or I won't go through 
with it.' So Filka is having one hell of a time at the shop­
keeper's: he sleeps with the daughter, pulls the father 
around the house by his beard every day after dinner, 
and does just about anything that comes into his head. 
He ordered a steam bath every day and demanded to 
be carried to the bath house by the women and have vodka 
added to the water too. Sometimes he'd come home from a 
drinking bout, stop in the street, and summon his shop­
keeper. 'I don't want to go into your yard through the 
gate; I want you to have the fence taken down right 
here.' And that's where he went in. Finally his time came, 
and they sobered him up and drove him off to hand him 
over to the army. People poured out into the street: 
'Hey,' they buzzed, 'Filka Morozov's being turned over 
to the army!' And Filka bowed to everyone. It so hap­
pened that my Akulka was coming from our cabbage 
patch just at the moment when they were driving Filka 
past our gate. 'Stop!' Filka shouted. Then he jumped down 
from the cart and threw himself at her feet. 'Ah,' Filka 
says to her, 'I've loved you for two whole years, and now 
they're taking me away to the army. Forgive me, you 
honest daughter of an honest father, for I'm a low son 
of a bitch and I'm guilty before you!' And he got up and 
bowed to the the ground before her. Akulka looked scared 
at first but then she bowed back to him. 'And you for­
give me too,' she said, "for I bear no malice toward you 
in my heart.' I went after her into the house-'What did 
you say to him, you bitch?' And she, believe it or not, 
she looked at me, j1,1st like that. 'Now,' she said, 'I love 
him more than all the world put together.' " 
"You don't say!" 
"I never said another word to her till the end of the day. 
Then, in the evening, 'Akulka,' I said to her, straight out, 
'I'm going to kill you now.' I couldn't sleep that night, so 
I got up to draw myself a glass of kvass and I saw it 
was beginning to get light already. I went back in the 
house. 'Akulka,' I said, 'get ready to drive out to the 
field.' My rna knew I'd been intending to drive over there 

80 
SELECTIONS FROM 
The House of the Dead 
for some time, so she said : 'That's right, you'd better go. 
The laborer's been laid up with a pain in his stomach 
for three days now, and it's harvest time.' I said nothing, 
just harnessed the horse. There's a pine forest stretching 
for maybe ten miles all around our village, and we had to 
drive through it to get to our field. We drove about 
three miles into that forest, then I stopped the horse. 
'Get out of the wagon, Akulka,' I said, 'your end has 
come.' She stared at me, She looked scared, standing 
there in front of me and saying nothing. 'I'm fed up with 
you,' I said. 'Say your prayers.' I grabbed her by the hair, 
quickly like. She had two long, thick braids, and I wound 
them round my hand. I held her tight between my knees 
from behind, got my knife out, pulled her head back, and 
slid the blade across her throat . . . Then she let out a 
cry, and the blood spurted out all over the place. . . . I 
threw away the knife, put my arms around her, and lay 
down on the ground; I was screaming and bellowing 
like a bull. So I yelled and she yelled too. She was shiver­
ing all over and pushed me away, and tried to slip out of 
my embrace; meanwhile, her blood kept spurting, and I 
got it al over me, my hands, my face-it kept streaming 
and streaming . . .  so I let go of her. I got so scared I 
left the horse and cart there and just ran and ran like a 
madman. I slipped through our backyard and shut myself 
in the bath house, which is old and never used. I hid my­
self under a bench and sat there till night.'' 
"And what about Akulka?" 
"Akulka? Looks like she got up after I left and tried 
to get home too. They found her later about a hundred 
yards from the spot." 
"So you hadn't cut deep enough then?" 
"Yes . . . .  
" Shishkov stopped for a moment. 
"There's a special vein,- there, you know," Cherevin 
commented. "If you don't manage to cut through it on 
the first slash, a man will keep kicking, and no matter how 
much blood he loses, he won't die.'' 
"But she did die. They found her there in the evening­
dead. The police came looking for me, and found me in the 

In the Hospital 
8 1  
bath house that same night. . . . This is my fourth 
year here," he added after a pause. 
"Yes, to be sure, if we don't beat 'em, no good wil come 
of it," Cherevin observed with detachment, slowly and 
deliberately helping himself to some snuff. "But then, I 
must say, lad, you're something of a fool. I also sur­
prised my wife with a man. So I called her into the bam 
and folded the bridle in two. 'Who was it you swore to 
be true to? Who was it-I'm asking you?' And I beat her 
with that bridle for, I'd say, an hour and a half. She 
screamed. 'Forgive me,' she yelled, 'I'll wash your feet 
now and drink the water too.' Ovdotya, her name was.'' 
IN THE HOSPITAL 
(Punishment and Punishers) 
I
'll speak here of punishment and of those who were en­
trusted with this interesting duty, because it was only 
in the hospital that I acquired a clear understanding of 
these matters. Until then, al I had known about it was 
hearsay. 
Al the prisoners from the surrounding area, whether 
military or civilian, were sent to our two wards after they 
had suffered corporal punishment. 
During those early days, when I still drank in every­
thing that went on around me with such fascination, al 
these strange happenings, all these men who had been 
punished or were awaiting punishment, naturally made a 
deep impression upon me. I felt agitated, troubled, fright­
ened. I remember that I suddenly began impatiently in­
vestigating every detail of this aspect of prison life, which 
was quite new to me. I listened to what the other pris­
oners said, to their stories connected with punishment; I 
questioned them, too. I tried hard to understand. Among 
other things, I wanted to find out the various gradations 
of sentence and punishment-all the shades of punish­
ment, and the prisoners' attitude toward them. I tried to 
picture to myself the states of mind of prisoners going 

82 
SELECTIONS FROM 
The House of the Dead 
out to be punished. I have already said that it was rare 
to find a man who remained cool before punishment, even 
among those who had repeatedly been beaten. Generally, 
the condemned man suffers an acute, but purely phys­
ical, fear-an inevitable reflex that utterly crushes a man's 
spirit. Later, too, during my prison years, I couldn't help 
watching prisoners who stayed in the hospital until their 
backs were healed, then were discharged to face the 
balance of the strokes coming to them. It was always the 
attending · physician who decided whether or not the 
punishment was to be divided into two parts. If the sen­
tence called for more strokes than the prisoner could 
stand at one time, then they dealt them out to him in two 
or even three parts, depending on what the doctor said 
during the punishment itself-whether the prisoner was 
able to continue running the gauntlet or whether it would 
endanger his life. Usually five hundred, a thousand or even 
fifteen hundred strokes were meted out in one session, 
but if the sentence called for two or three thousand blows, 
then they divided it into two or even three sessions. 
Those who, their backs healed, were leaving the hospital 
to take the second installment of their punishment were 
usually very sullen, morose, and silent the day before and 
on the actual day of their discharge. I noted in them a 
certain dullness of mind, a strange absent-mindedness. A 
man in this position is reluctant to talk; he mostly re­
mains silent, and what's more, the other prisoners never 
address him and avoid mentioning what is in store for 
him. No unnecessary word, no comfort-they try to take 
as little notice of him as possible. This, of course, is 
better for him. 
There are exceptions. Orlov, for instance. Mter the 
first installment of his punishment, all he wanted was for 
his back to heal quickly so that _ he could be discharged 
from the hospital for the second beating, then leave under 
convoy for his final place of imprisonment-and escape 
on the way there. But then, it was this aim that kept 
him going, and God knows what went on in his mind. His 
was a passionate nature, tenacious of life. He was pleased 
and excited in the hospital, although he tried to conceal 

In the Hospital 
83 
it, because he had never expected to come out from the 
first half of his punishment alive; he had been sure that 
his time to die had come. Even during his trial, he had 
heard rumors about the way sentences were carried out, 
and he had prepared himself for death then. But, having 
come through the first half, he recovered some hope. He 
was half dead when they brought him into the hospital 
-I'd never seen such welts. But he was cheerful and hope­
ful that he would live, pleased because the rumors had 
proved false and he had come out alive from under the 
sticks. Now, after his long imprisonment before his trial, 
he started to dream again of the forthcoming journey, of 
escape, of freedom, of fields and forests. Two days after 
he was pronounced fit to undergo the second half of his 
punishment, he was brought back to the hospital to die 
on the same cot. The balance of the strokes had proved 
too much for him. 
And yet, the very prisoners who looked so miserable 
during the days and nights preceding their punishment 
took their beatings manfully, even the most fainthearted of 
them. I hardly ever heard any of them, including those 
most dreadfully beaten, moan, even during their first 
night. In general, these simple people know how to bear 
pain. I asked many questions about the pain itself. I 
wanted to find out just how intense it was, what it could 
be compared with. I really don't know why I was so con­
cerned about it. I only remember that it wasn't idle curi­
osity. As I said before, I was agitated, shaken. But no 
matter whom I asked, I never obtained an answer that 
satisfied me. "Bums like fire," was al I could get out of 
them; "it bums," and that was all. In those early days, as 
I got to know M--better, I asked him about it, too. 
"It hurts terribly," he told me. "Bums. It's like my back 
was roasting over the hottest fire." They all said the same 
thing, almost word for word. 
Incidentally, I made one strange observation at that 
time. I can't vouch for its authenticity, but it was strongly 
supported by the unanimous opinion of the prisoners : the 
birch, if you're given a large number of strokes, is the 
worst of all the punishments practiced. This may seem 

84 
SELECTIONS FROM 
The House of the Dead 
absurd and impossible at first sight, but a man may not 
survive four or five hundred strokes of it and almost 
certainly not more than five hundred. Even the strongest 
man could not endure a thousand strokes at one time, 
although five hundred with a stick can be borne without 
the slightest risk to one's life. Even a man of mediocre 
constitution can take a thousand blows with a stick, and 
a healthy man of medium strength can survive two thou­
sand. Al the prisoners agreed that the birch was worse 
than the stick. 
"The birch smarts more," they said. "It's worse." 
Certainly the birch causes greater suffering than the 
stick. It is harder to bear, acts more violently upon the 
nerves, exacerbates them more, and gives you a greater 
shock. 
I don't know how it is today, but in the not-too-dis­
tant past, there were distinguished people to whom beat­
ing some victim afforded feelings similar to those of the 
Marquis de Sade and the Marquise de Brinvilliers. I think 
that there is something in these sensations that, in these 
people, make the heart stop in agonizing delight. There 
are people like tigers who long for a taste of blood. Any­
one who has once experienced this power, this unlimited 
control over the body, blood, and spirit of a man like 
himself, a fellow creature, his brother in Christ-anyone 
who has experienced the power to inflict supreme humilia­
tion upon another being, created like himself in the image 
of God, is bound to be ruled by his emotions. Tyranny is a 
habit; it grows upon us and, in the long run, turns into a 
disease. I say that the most decent man in the world can, 
through habit, become as brutish and coarse as a wild 
beast. Blood and power intoxicate, callousness and vice 
develop; the most abnormal things become first acceptable, 
then sweet to the mind and heart. The human being, the 
member of society, is drowned forever in the tyrant, and 
it is practically impossible for him to regain human dig­
nity, repentance, and regeneration. One such instance-the 
realization that such arbitrary power can be exercised­
can infect all society; such power is seductive. A society 

In the Hospital 
85 
which can watch this happen with equanimity must it­
self be basically infected. 
Thus, the power given to one man to inflict corporal 
punishment upon another is a social sore; it is perhaps 
the surest way of nipping the civic spirit in the bud. It 
wil inevitably lead to the disintegration of society. 
Society abhors a flogger. But gentlemen-whippers are 
far from being abhorred. The latter opinion has been 
disputed, but only in books, and abstractly at that. And 
not all those who have disputed it have managed to sup­
press their own need to tyranize. Every manufacturer, 
every business man, must feel a sort of peevish pleasure · 
in the realization that the worker and all his family are 
sometimes entirely dependent upon him. That is certainly 
so, for one generation does not so easily tear itself away 
from what it has inherited; a man does not deny so 
quickly what is in his blood, what he has drunk in, one 
might say, with his mother's milk. Such sudden reversals 
do not occur. To recognize one's guilt and the sins of 
one's fathers is a small part of it, a very small part; one 
must rid oneself of the habit altogether. And that can­
not be done so quickly. 
I have mentioned floggers. There are traces of the 
whipper in almost every man. But then, the bestial side 
does not develop equally in all men. If the beast in a man 
overpowers all his other sides, he becomes horrible, mon­
strous. 
There are two kinds of floggers : the volunteers, and 
those who are forced into it. Of course, the volunteers 
are worse, from every point of view, than the others; 
yet people abhor the latter, displaying terror, revulsion, 
and an unaccountable, almost superstitious fear of them. 
Why this horror for the one and such indifference, border­
ing on approval, of the other? 
I have known the most incredible instances where peo­
ple-even good, honest, respected people--could not bear 
it if the victim undergoing punishment did not cry out 
under the birch, cringe, and beg for mercy. Men being 
punished are supposed to cry out and beg for mercy. It 
is considered the decent thing to do and quite essential. 

86 
SELECTIONS FROM 
The House of the Dead 
Once when the victim refused to cry out, the flogger, 
a man whom I knew and who, in other respects, could 
even be considered kindly, took it as a personal offense. 
At first he had intended to make the punishment a light 
one. But when the usual cries for mercy were not forth­
coming, he grew furious and ordered fifty extra lashes, 
seeking both cries and begging-and he had his way. 
"What could I do-the man was so insolent," he said 
quite seriously in answer to my questions. 
The ordinary flogger, the man who has been ordered to 
do his job, is just another prisoner. Instead of being de­
ported to Siberia, he is retained in a central penitentiary 
to serve as flogger. First he has to learn his trade from 
an experienced colleague. Then, when he has learned, 
he is kept permanently in one prison, where he keeps 
to himself, has his own room, and even does his own 
housekeeping, although he is almost always under guard. 
Of course, a man is not a machine; although he beats 
another man because he has to, he sometimes becomes 
emotionally involved. Nevertheless, he hardly ever feels 
personal hatred for his victim, even though he may derive 
a certain pleasure from his 
work. 
His 
self-esteem is 
heightened by his agility in administering his blows, by 
his mastery of his trade, by his desire to show off before 
his audience. He does his best for art's sake. Besides, 
he knows very well that he is a total outcast, that every­
where he goes he will be met by superstitious fear-and 
it is impossible to assert that this has no influence upon 
him, that it doesn't push him toward further violence 
and exacerbate his bestial inclinations. Even the children 
know that "he has disowned father and mother." Strangely 
enough, every flogger I have ever known was intelligent, 
clever, and sensible, with an extraordinary amount of 
self-respect and even pride. Did they develop this pride 
to counteract the general scorn? Was it strengthened by 
their awareness of the fear they inspire in their victims 
and their feeling of mastery over them? I can't say. 
Perhaps the ceremoniousness and theatricality of their 
appearance before the public contribute to the develop­
ment of a certain haughtiness in them. 

In the Hospital 
87 
I used to know a flogger, and was able to observe him 
closely. He was a fellow of about forty, of medium 
height, lean and muscular, with a pleasant, intelligent face 
and curly hair. He was always very dignified and com­
posed and, outwardly at least, conducted himself like a 
gentleman. When I spoke to him he always answered 
briefly, to the point, even amiably, but with a sort of 
haughty amiability, as if he felt somewhat superior. I 
detected a certain respect for him in the way the officers 
on duty talked to him in my presence. He sensed this, 
and in talking to an officer, deliberately doubled his polite­
ness, his terseness, his air of self-esteem. The more ami­
able the officer's tone, the more unbending he became 
and, although he in no way departed from the most re­
fined politeness, I'm sure that he considered himself im­
measurably above the officer. It was written al over his 
face. 
Sometimes, on very hot summer days, he was sent, 
under guard and armed with a long, thin pole, to round 
up the town's stray dogs. There were an incredible num­
ber of dogs in that town that belonged to no one and 
multiplied with extraordinary rapidity. In hot weather, 
they were a menace, and by order of the authorities, 
the executioner was sent to exterminate them. But even 
this degrading job did not seem to degrade him. He 
walked through the streets of the town, accompanied by 
his weary guard, with such dignity, it had to be seen to 
be believed. The mere sight of him frightened the women 
and children, and he calmly, even patronizingly, met the 
gaze of everyone he encountered. 
However, floggers have an easy life. They have money, 
they eat very well, they get vodka. They get the money 
from bribes. The civilian prisoner sentenced to corporal 
punishment always gives the flogger something, even if it 
is his last kopek. And of an afHuent prisoner, the flogger 
himself demands money, fixing the sum according to the 
man's reputed means. It can be as high as thirty rubles 
and more. There may be quite a bit of bargaining with 
the very well-off. 

88 
SELECTIONS FROM 
The House of the Dead 
Of course, the flogger cannot make the punishment too 
obviously mild-he'd answer for it with his own back. 
Nevertheless, for a certain sum, he promises the victim 
not to beat him very painfully. Almost everyone agrees 
to his price, for . if they don't, he can make the punish­
ment really savage. He wil sometimes demand a con­
siderable sum from a poor prisoner. The man's relatives 
go to him and bargain with him most respectfully, and 
God pity the victim if they don't satisfy him. On these 
occasions, the superstitious fear he inspires is a great 
asset. 
All sorts of legends circulate about floggers. Prisoners 
themselves have assured me that they can kill a man 
with a single blow. Yet, when has this contention ever 
been tested? But, after al, it could be so. The prisoners 
were certainly convinced of it, and a flogger himself 
assured me that he could do it. I have also been told 
that he can strike a prisoner on the back with a full 
swing in such a way that not even a tiny welt will be 
raised by the blow, and the prisoner will not feel the 
slightest pain. But there are already far too many stories 
about these tricks and subtleties. 
Be that as it may, even when an executioner takes 
a bribe to beat a man lightly, he still delivers the first 
blow with his full strength. This is a tradition. The sub­
sequent blows he softens, especially if he has been paid 
beforehand. But whether he has been paid or not, the 
first blow is his own. I'm sure I don't know why there is 
such a custom. Is it so that the victim will be prepared 
for the subsequent blows, on the theory that after such 
a heavy blow the light ones won't seem so terrible? Or 
is it simply a desire to show the victim who is master, 
to instill fear in him, to stun him from the start, to make 
him see whom he has to deal with, to show the flogger's 
actual power? In any case, prior to the beating, the 
flogger is in a state of excitement; he has a sense of his 
own power, feels himself the lord and master. At that 
moment he is an actor; he fills the public with wonder 
and terror, and it is with a feeling of pleasure that he 

In the Hospital 
89 
shouts to his victim before the first blow: "Look out 
now! I'll scorch you!"-the sinister words usually used. 
It's hard to imagine to what an extent a man's nature 
can be corrupted. 

Notes from Underground 
Part One 
The Mouiehole* 
I 
I
'm a sick man 
• 
• . a mean man. There's nothing at­
tractive about me. I think there's something wrong with 
my liver. But, actually, I don't understand a damn thing 
about my sickness; I'm not even too sure what it is 
that's ailing me. I'm not under treatment and never have 
been, although I have great respect for medicine and 
doctors. Moreover, I'm morbidly superstitious--enough, 
at least, to 
respect medicine. 
With ily education I 
shouldn't be superstitious, but I am just the same. No, 
I'd say I refuse medical help simply out of contrariness. 
I don't expect you to understand that, but it's so. Of 
course, I can't explain whom I'm trying to fool this way. 
I'm fully aware that I can't spite the doctors by refusing 
their help. I know very well that I'm harming myself and 
no one else. But still, it's out of spite that I refuse to ask 
• It goes without saying that both these Notes and their author 
are fic:titious. Nevertheless, people like the author of these notes 
may, and indeed must, exist in our society, if we think of the 
circumstances 
under which 
that 
society 
has 
been 
formed. It 
has been my wish to show the public a character of the recent 
past more clearly than is usually 
shown. He belongs 
to the 
generation that is now rounding out its days. In the excerpt 
entitled "The Mousehole," this man introduces himself and pre­
sents his views, trying to explain why he has appeared, and could 
not help but appear, in our midst. The next excerpt consists of 
this man's actual "notes," relating to certain events in his life. 
FYODOR DosTOYEVSKY 
90 

Notes from Underground 
91 
for the doctors' help. So my liver hurts? Good, let it 
hurt even more! 
I've been living like this for a long time, twenty years 
or so. I'm forty now. I used to be in government service, 
but I'm not any more. I was a nasty official. I was rude 
and enjoyed being rude. Why, since I took no bribes, 
I had to make up for it somehow. (That's a poor attempt 
at wit, but I won't delete it now. I wrote it thinking it'd 
sound very sharp. But now I realize that it's nothing but 
vulgar showing off, so I'll let it stand if only for that 
reason. ) 
When petitioners came up to my desk for information, 
I snarled at them and felt indescribably happy whenever 
I managed to make one of them feel miserable. Being 
petitioners, they were a meek lot. One, however, wasn't. 
He was an officer, and I had a special loathing for him. 
He just wouldn't be subdued. He had a special way of 
letting his saber rattle. Disgusting. For eighteen months 
I waged war with him about that saber. I won out in 
the end, and he stopped the thing from rattling. All this, 
however, happened when I was still young. But shall I 
tell you what it was really all about? Well, the real snag, 
the most repulsive aspect of my nastiness, was that, even 
when I was at my liverish worst, I was constantly aware 
that I was not really wicked nor even embittered, that 
I was simply chasing pigeons, you might say, and thus 
passing the time. And so I might be frothing at the 
mouth, but if you had brought me a doll to play with 
or had offered me a nice cup of tea with sugar, chances 
are I would have calmed down. I'd even have been deeply 
touched, although, angry at myself, I would be certain 
to gnash my teeth later and be unable to sleep for several 
months. But that's the way it was. 
I was lying just now when I said I used to be a nasty 
official. And I lied out of spite. I was having fun at the 
expense of the petitioners and that officer, but deep down, 
I could never be really nasty. I was always aware of 
many elements in me that were just the opposite of wicked. 
I felt that they'd been swarming inside me al my life, 

92 
Notes from Underground 
trying to break out, but I had refused to let them. They 
tormented me, they drove me into shame and convul­
sions, and I was fed up with them. Ah, how fed up I was 
with them! Doesn't it seem to you as if I were trying to 
justify myself, to ask for your forgiveness? I'm sure you 
must think that. . . . Well, believe me, I don't care if 
you do think so. 
I couldn't manage to make myself nasty or, for that 
matter, friendly, crooked or honest, a hero or an insect. 
Now I'm living out my life in a comer, trying to console 
myself with the stupid, useless excuse that an intelligent 
man. canot tum himself into anything, that only a fool 
can make anything he wants out of himself. It's true that 
an intelligent man of the nineteenth century is bound 
to be a spineless creature, while the man of character, 
the man of action, is, in most cases, of limited intelli­
gence. This is my conviction at the age of forty. I'm 
forty now, and forty years is a whole life-forty is deep 
old age. It's indecent, vulgar, and immoral to live beyond 
forty! Who lives beyond forty? Answer me honestly. Or 
let me tell you then: fools and good-for-nothings. I'll 
repeat that to the face of any of those venerable patri­
archs, those respected grayheads, for the whole world 
to hear. And I have a right to say it, for I'll live to be 
sixty. I'll live to be seventy! I'll live to be eighty! . . . 
Wait, give me a chance to catch my breath . . . .  
Do you think I'm trying to make you laugh? Then 
you've got me wrong again. I'm not at all the cheerful 
fellow you think I am, or you may think I am. But if 
you're irritated by all my babble (I feel you must be by 
now) and feel like asking me who the hell I am after all, 
I'll have to answer that I'm a collegiate assessor. I en­
tered the service to have something to eat (and for that 
only) .  And so, when a distant relative died, 
·
leaving me 
six thousand rubles, I imriŁdiately resigned and installed 
myself in my comer here. I had lived here even before 
that, but now I've really settled down. My room is mis­
erable and ugly, on the outskirts of the city. The maid 
here is a peasant woman, nasty out of sheer stupidity; 

Notes from Underground 
93 
moreover, there's always a bad smell about her. They tell 
me that the Petersburg climate is bad for me and that, 
with my miserable income, it's a very expensive place to 
live. I know all that myself. I know it better than all my 
would-be advisers. But I'm going to stay in Petersburg! 
I won't leave! I won't leave because . . .  
Ah, it's really all the same whether I go or stay. 
Now then, what does a decent man like to talk about 
most? Himself, of course. So I'll talk about myself. 
I I  
Now I want to tell you, ladies and gentlemen, whether 
you like it or not, why I couldn't even become an insect. 
I must first solemnly declare that I tried many times to 
become one. But even that was beyond me. I swear that 
too great a lucidity is a disease, a true, full-fledged dis­
ease. For everyday needs, the average person's awareness 
is more than sufficient, and it is about a half or a quarter of 
that of the unhappy nineteenth century intellectual, par­
ticularly if he's unfortunate enough to live in Petersburg, 
the most abstract and premeditated city on earth (there 
are premeditated and unpremeditated cities ) .  The ex­
tent of consciousness at the disposal of what may be 
termed the spontaneous people and the men of action 
is sufficient. I bet you think I say that just to take a crack 
at men of action, and that this kind of showing off is 
just as much in poor taste as the saber rattling of that 
officer I mentioned. But I ask you, who on earth goes 
around showing off his sickness, and even glorying in it? 
On second thought though, I'd say that everyone does. 
People do pride themselves on their infirmities and I, 
probably, more than anyone. So don't let's argue about 
it-I admit my contention was inane. But I still say that 
not only too much lucidity, but any amount of it at al 
is a disease. That's where I stand. But let's leave that for 
a moment too. Now tell me this : why, just when I was 
most capable of being conscious of every refinement of 
the "good and the beautiful," as they used to put it once 

94 
Notes from Underground 
upon a time, were there moments when I lost my aware­
ness of it, and did such ugly things-things that everyone 
does probably, but that I did precisely at moments when 
I was most aware that they shouldn't be done. 
The more conscious I was of "the good and the beauti­
ful," the deeper I sank into the mud, and the more 
likely I was to remain mired in it. But what struck me 
was the feeling I had that, in my case, it wasn't accidental, 
that it was intended to be that way, as if that were my 
normal state rather than a sickness or depravity; so that 
finaly I lost all desire to fight my depravity. In the end, 
I almost believed (perhaps I even did believe) that it 
actually was my normal state. 
But, in the begining, what agonies I went through 
in this iner struggle! I didn't believe that there were 
others who went through all that, so I've kept it a secret 
all my life. I was ashamed (perhaps, even now, I am stil 
ashamed) . I reached a point where I felt a secret, un­
healthy, base little pleasure in creeping back into my hole 
after some disgusting night in Petersburg and forcing my­
self to think that I had again done something filthy, that 
what was done couldn't be undone. And I inwardly gnawed 
at myself for it, tore at myself and ate myself away, 
until the bitterness turned into some shameful, accursed 
sweetishness and, finally, into a great, unquestionable 
pleasure. Yes, yes, definitely a pleasure! I mean it! And 
that's why I started out on this subject: I wanted to find 
out whether others experience this sort of pleasure too. 
I'll explain it to you : I derived pleasure precisely from 
the blinding realization of my degradation; because I felt 
I was already up against the wall; that it was horrible 
but couldn't be otherwise; that there was no way out and 
it was no longer possible to make myself into a different 
person; that even if there were still enough time and 
faith left to become different, I wouldn't want to change 
myself; and that, evĀn if I wanted to, I still wouldn't have 
done anything about it, because, actually, there wasn't 
anything to change into. Finally, the most important point 
is that there's a set of fundamental laws to which height­
ened consciousness is subject so that there's no changing 

Notes from Underground 
95 
oneself or, for that matter, doing anything about it. Thus, 
as a result of heightened consciousness, 
a man feels 
that it's all right if he's bad as long as he knows it-as 
though that were any consolation. But enough. . . . Ah, 
what a lot of words! And what have I explained? What's 
the explanation for this pleasure? But I'll make myself 
clear! I'll go through with it! That's why I've taken up 
my pen. 
I, for instance, am horribly sensitive. I'm suspicious 
and easily offended, like a dwarf or a hunchback. But I 
believe there have been moments when I'd have liked 
to have my face slapped. I say that in all seriousness­
l'd have derived pleasure from this too. Naturally it 
would be the pleasure of despair. But then, it is in de­
spair that we find the most acute pleasure, especially when 
we are aware of the hopelessness of the situation. And 
when one's face is slapped-why, one is bound to be 
crushed by one's awareness of the pulp into which one has 
been ground. But the main point is that, whichever way 
you look at it, I was always guilty in the first place, and 
what is most vexing is that I was guilty without guilt, 
by virtue of the laws of nature. Thus, to start with, 
I'm guilty of being more intelligent than all those around 
me. (I've always felt that and, believe me, it's weighed 
on my conscience sometimes. All my life, I have never 
been able to look people straight in the eye'-I always feel 
a need to avert my face. ) And then, I'm also guilty be­
cause, even if there had been any forgiveness in me, it 
would only have increased my torment, because I would 
have been conscious of its uselessness. I surely would 
have been unable to do anything with my forgiveness :  I 
wouldn't have been able to forgive because the offender 
would simply have been obeying the laws of nature in 
slapping me, and it makes no sense to forgive the laws 
of nature-but neither could I have forgotten it, because 
it is humiliating, after all. Finally, even if I hadn't wanted 
to be forgiving at all, but on the contrary, had wished to 
avenge myself on the offender, I couldn't have done it, 
for the chances are I'd never have dared to do anything 

96 
Notes from Underground 
about it even if there had been something I could do. Why 
wouldn't I have dared? Well, I'd especially like to say a 
few words about that. 
I I I  
Now let's see how things are with people who are ca­
pable of revenge and, in general, of taking care of them­
selves. When the desire for revenge takes possession of 
them, they are drained for a time of every other feeling 
but this desire for revenge. Such a gentleman just rushes 
straight ahead, horns lowered, like a furious bull, and 
nothing stops him until he comes up against a stone wall. 
(Speaking of walls, it must be noted that spontaneous 
people and men of action have a sincere respect for them. 
For these people a wall is not the challenge that it is for 
people like you and me who think and therefore do 
nothing; it is not an excuse to tum back, an excuse in 
which one of our kind doesn't really believe-although he 
always welcomes it. No, their respect is perfectly sincere. 
A wall has a calming effect upon them; it is as though 
it solved a moral issue-it is something final and, perhaps, 
even mystical. . . . But we'll come back to walls later. ) 
In my view, such a spontaneous man-the real, normal 
man-is the fulfillment of the wishes of his tender mother, 
Nature, who so lovingly created him on this earth. I envy 
that man. I'm bilious with envy. He's stupid, I won't 
dispute that, but then, maybe a normal man is supposed 
to be stupid; what makes you think he isn't? Perhaps 
that's the great beauty of it. And what makes me even 
more inclined to suspect this is that if we take the antith­
esis of a 
normal 
man, 
the man of heightened con­
sciousness, who is a test-tube product rather than a child 
of nature (this is almost mysticism, my friends, but I 
have a feeling that it is so) ,  we find that this test-tube 
man is so subdued by his antithesis that he views himself 
-heightened consciousness and all-as a mouse rather 
than a man. So, even if he's a mouse with a heightened 
consciousness, he's still nothing but a mouse, whereas the 

Notes from Underground 
97 
other i s  a man. S o  there. And, what's more, h e  regards 
himself as a mouse ; no one asks him to do so. This is a 
very important point. 
Now let's look at this mouse in action. Let's assume it 
bas been humiliated (it is constantly being humiliated) 
and that it wishes to avenge itself. It's possible too that 
there's even more spite accumulated in it than in l'homme 
de la nature et de la verite. The nauseating, despic­
able, petty desire to repay the offender in kind may 
squeak more disgustingly in the mouse than in the nat­
ural man who, because of his 
innate 
stupidity, 
con­
siders revenge as merely justice, whereas the mouse, with 
its heightened consciousness, is bound to deny the justice 
of it. Now we come to the act of revenge itself. In ad­
dition to being disgraced in the first place, the poor 
mouse manages to mire itself in more mud as a result of 
its questions and doubts. And each question brings up so 
many more unanswered questions that a fatal pool of 
sticky muck is formed, consisting of the mouse's doubts 
and torments as well as of the gobs of spit aimed at it by 
the practical men of action, who stand around like judges 
and dictators and laugh lustily at it till their throats are 
sore. Of course, the only thing left for it to do is to shrug 
its puny shoulders and, affecting a scornful smile, scurry 
off ignominiously to its mousehole. And there, in its re­
pulsive, evil-smelling nest, 
the downtrodden, 
ridiculed 
mouse plunges immediately into a cold, poisonous, and 
-most important-never-ending hatred. For forty years, 
it will remember the humiliation in all its ignominious de­
tails, each time adding some new point, more abject still, 
endlessly 
taunting 
and 
tormenting 
itself. 
Although 
ashamed of its own thoughts, the mouse will remember 
everything, go over it again and again, then think up pos­
sible additional humiliations. It may even try to avenge 
itself, but then it will do so in spurts, pettily, from behind 
the stove, anonymously, doubting that its vengeance is 
right, that it will succeed, and feeling that, as a result, it 
will hurt itself a hundred times more than it will hurt the 
one against whom its revenge is directed, who probably 
won't even feel enough of an itch to scratch himself. 

98 
Notes from Underground 
Then, on its deathbed, the mouse will remember it all 
again, plus all the accumulated interest and . 
. 
. 
But it is precisely this cold, sickening mixture of hope 
and despair; this deliberate retreat to a tomb under the 
floor for all these years; this artificially induced hopeless­
ness, of which I'm still not fully convinced; this poison 
of thwarted desires turned inward; this feverish hesitation; 
the final resolutions followed a minute later by regrets­
all this is the gist of the strange pleasure I've mentioned. 
This pleasure is so subtle, so evasive, that even slightly 
limited people, or people who simply have -strong nerves, 
won't understand the first thing about it. 
"It may also be difficult to understand for those who've 
never been slapped around," you may add with a self­
satisfied grin. 
Thus you may politely suggest that I'm talking like an 
expert because I've been slapped. I bet that's just what 
you think. But let me reassure you, ladies and gentle­
men : 
I don't care in the least what you may think, 
but I haven't really been slapped. But that's enough on 
this subject that seems to interest you so much. 
I'll continue calmly about people with strong nerves 
who can't understand the somewhat more subtle aspects 
of pleasure. Although, under other circumstances, these 
people may roar like furious bulls and this may add im­
mensely to their prestige, they capitulate at once be­
fore the impossible, that is, a stone wall. What stone wall? 
Why, the laws of nature, of course; the conclusions of 
the natural 
sciences, of mathematics. When they are 
through proving to you that you descend from the mon­
key, it will do you no good to screw up your nose­
you'll just have to take it. Trust them to prove to you 
that a single drop of your own fat is bound to be dearer 
to you, when you come down to it, than a hundred thou­
sand human lives and that _ this conclusion is an answer 
to all this talk about virtue and duty, and other ravings 
and superstitions. So just take it for what it is-there's 
nothing else you can do; it's like two and two make 
four. That's arithmetic. Just try and disprove it! 
"Wait a minute," they'll call out to you, "why pro-

Notes from Underground 
99 
test? Two and two do make four. Nature doesn't ask 
your advice. She isn't interested in your preferences or 
whether or not you approve of her laws. You must ac­
cept nature as she is with all the consequences that that 
implies. So a wall is a wall, etc., etc . . . .  
" 
But, good Lord, what do I care about the laws of na­
ture and arithmetic if I have my reasons for disliking 
them, including the one about two and two making four! 
Of course, I won't be able to breach this wall with my 
head if I'm not strong enough. But I don't have to ac­
cept a stone wall just because it's there and I don't 
have the strength to breach it. 
As if such a wall could really leave me resigned and 
bring me peace of mind because it's the same as twice two 
makes four! How stupid can one get? Isn't it much better 
to recognize the stone walls and the impossibilities for 
what they are and refuse to accept them if surrendering 
makes one too sick? Isn't it better, resorting to irrefuta­
ble logical constructions, to arrive at the most revolting 
conclusions on the eternal theme that you too, somehow, 
share the responsibility for the stone wall, although it's 
obvious that you're not at all to blame for it; and then, 
to sink voluptuously into inertia, gnashing your teeth in 
impotent rage, unable to find someone on whom to vent 
your rage and hatred, and losing hope of ever finding any­
one; feeling that you've been short-changed, cheated, de­
ceived, that everything is a mess in which it is impos­
sible to tell what's what, but that despite this impossibil­
ity and deception, it still hurts you, and the less you can 
understand, the more it hurts. 
I V  
"Ha!" you may object sarcastically, "this way you'll 
soon find pleasure in a toothache." 
"Well," I'd answer, "there's pleasure in a toothache too." 
Once I suffered from a toothache for a whole month, 
and I can tell you there's pleasure in it. In this instance, 
of course, people don't rage in silence. They moan. But 

100 
Notes from Underground 
they are no ordinary moans; they're malicious, and in 
this maliciousness lies the point. It's this moaning that 
expresses the pleasure of the sufferer, for if he didn't 
enjoy it, he wouldn't moan. This is a good example of 
what I mean, so I'll dwell on it for a while. To start with, 
these moans express all the humiliating pointlessness of the 
pain, a pain that obeys certain laws of nature about which 
you don't give a damn, for you're the one who must suffer, 
and nature can't feel a thing. Thus, these moans indicate 
that, although there's no enemy, the pain is there; that 
you, together with your dentist, are completely at the -
mercy of your teeth; that if it pleases someone, your 
toothache will stop, and if it doesn't, it may go on for 
another three months; and that, finally, if you refuse to 
resign yourself and go on protesting, all you can do to 
relieve your feelings is to give yourself a whipping or 
pound the stone wall with your fists. Tht;re's definitely 
nothing else you can do. 
So it is these horrible insults and humiliations, inflicted 
on us by God knows whom, that generate a pleasure that 
sometimes reaches the highest degree of voluptuousness. 
Please, ladies and gentlemen, listen carefully some time to 
the moans of a nineteenth century intellectual suffering 
from a toothache. Listen on the second or third day of 
pain, when he is no longer moaning the way he did on the 
first day, that is, simply because his tooth ached. His 
moaning is quite unlike the moaning of a peasant, for he 
has been affected by education and by European civil­
ization. He moans like a man who, as they say now­
adays, "has been uprooted from the soil and lost con­
tact with the people." His moans soon become strident 
and 
perverse, 
and 
they 
continue day 
and night. He 
certainly knows that he's not helping himself by moaning 
like that. No one knows better than he that he's tormenting 
and irritating himself and others for nothing; that his auū 
dience, and this includes his family, for whom he's try­
ing so hard, is listening to him with disgust; that they 
don't believe he's sincere in the least and realize that he 
could moan differently, more simply, without all these 

Notes from Underground 
101 
trills and flourishes; and that he's putting it all on out 
of sheer spite and viciousness. 
Well, there's voluptuous pleasure in all this degradation 
and in the realization of it. 
I'm disturbing you? Breaking your heart? Keeping every­
one awake? Al right, stay awake then, feel every second 
that my teeth ache. To you, I'm no longer the hero I 
tried to appear at first, but simply a despicable little 
man. So be it. I'm very glad you've managed to see 
through me. It makes you uncomfortable to listen to my 
cowardly moaning? Well, be uncomfortable. I'll produce 
one of those moaning flourishes in a minute, then you can 
tell me how you feel. . . .  
You stil don't understand what I have in mind? Well, 
then it looks as if you have to grow up and develop your 
comprehension so that you can grasp all the twists of 
this voluptuousness. That makes you laugh? I'm very 
happy it does. Of course my jokes are in poor taste, 
inappropriate, 
and confused; they reveal my lack of 
security. But that is because I have no respect for my­
self. After all, how can a man with my lucidity of per­
ception respect himself? 
v 
How can one, after all, have the slightest respect for 
a man who tries to find pleasure in the feeling of hu­
miliation itself? I'm not saying that out of any mawkish 
sense of repentance. In general, I couldn't stand saying 
"Sorry, Papa, I'll never do it again." 
And it wasn't at al because I was incapable of saying 
it. On the contrary, perhaps it was just because I was 
only too prone to say it. And you should've seen under 
what circumstances too! I'd get myself blamed, almost 
purposely, for something with which I'd had nothing to 
do even in thought or dream. That's what was most dis­
gusting. But, even so, I was always deeply moved, re­
pented my wickedness, and cried; in this, of course, I 
was deceiving myself, although I never did so deliberately. 

102 
Notes from Underground 
It was my heart that let me down here. In this case, I 
can't even blame the laws of nature, although those laws 
have oppressed me all my life. It makes me sick to re­
member all this, but then I was sick at the time too. It 
took me only a minute or so to recognize that it was all a 
pack of lies; al that repentance, those emotional out­
bursts and promises of reform-nothing but pretentious, 
nauseating lies. I was furious. And if you ask me now why 
I tortured and tormented myself like that, I'll tell you : I 
was bored just sitting with my arms folded, so I went in 
for al those tricks. Believe me, it's true. Just watch your­
self carefully and you'll understand that that's the way it 
WOiks. I made up whole stories about myself and put 
myself through all sorts of adventures to satisfy, at any 
price, my need to live. How many times did I convince 
myself that I was offended, just like that, for no reason at 
al. And although I knew that I had nothing to be offended 
about, that I was putting it all on, I'd put myself into 
such a state that in the end I'd really feel terribly of­
fended. I was so strongly tempted to play tricks of this 
sort that, in the end, I lost al restraint. 
Once, or rather twice, I tried to make myself fall 
in love. And, believe me, ladies and gentlemen, I cer­
tainly suffered! Deep down, of course, I couldn't quite 
believe in my suffering and felt like laughing. But it was 
suffering nevertheless-the real stuff, with jealousy, vio­
lence, 
and 
all the 
trimmings. 
And all that out of sheer boredom, ladies and gentle­
men, sheer boredom. I was crushed by inertia. And what 
would the natural, logical fruit of heightened conscious­
ness be if not inertia, by which I mean consciously sit­
ting with folded arms! I mentioned that before. And I 
repeat again and again: spontaneous people and men of 
action can act precisely because they are limited and 
stupid. How shall I explain? Let me put it this way: be­
cause of their limitations, these people mistake the near­
est secondary causes for primary ones. This way they be­
come convinced faster and more easily than others that 
they have found an incontrovertible reason for acting, 
and they have no further qualms about acting, which, 

Notes from Underground 
103 
of course, is the important thing. Obviously, in order to 
act, one must be fully satisfied and free of all misgivings 
beforehand. But take me : how can I ever be sure? Where 
wil I find the primary reason for action, the justification 
for it? Where am I to look for it? I exercise my power 
of reasoning, and in my case, every time I think I have 
found a primary cause I see another cause that seems 
to be truly primary, and so on and so forth, indefinitely. 
This is the very essence of consciousness and thought. 
It must be another natural law. And what happens in the 
end? The same thing over again. 
Remember when I spoke of vengeance (I bet y'ou didn't 
follow me too weB ) ?  It is said that a man avenges him­
self because he thinks it is the just thing to do. This 
implies that he has found the primary reason, the basis 
for his action, which, in this case, is Justice. This gives 
him foolproof peace of mind, so he avenges himself 
without qualms, efficiently, certain throughout that he's 
acting fairly and honestly. 
But I can't see any justice or virtue in vengeance, so 
if I indulge in it, it is only out of spite and anger. Anger, 
of course, overcomes all hesitations and can thus re­
place the primary reason precisely because it is no reason 
at all. But what can I do if I don't even have anger 
(that's where I started from, remember ) ?  In me, anger 
disintegrates chemica11y like everything else, because of 
those damned laws of nature. As 
I think, the anger 
vanishes, the reasons for it evaporate, the responsible 
person is never found, the insult becomes an insult no 
longer but a stroke of fate, just like a toothache, for 
which no one can be held responsible. And so I find that 
al I can do is take another whack at the stone wall, 
then shrug the whole thing off because of my failure to 
find the primary cause of the evil. 
And, if I did try to follow my feeling blindly without 
thinking about primary causes, if I managed to keep my 
consciousness out of it, even temporarily, if I did make 
myself hate or love just to avoid sitting with folded arms 
-then, within forty-eight hours at the most, I'd loathe 
myself for deliberately sinking into self-deception. And 

104 
Notes from Underground 
everything would burst like a soap bubble and end in 
inertia. 
You know, ladies and gentlemen, probably the only 
reason why I think I'm an intelligent man is that in all 
my life I've never managed to start or finish anything. 
I know, I know, I'm just a chatterbox, a harmless, boring 
chatterbox like all my kind. But how can I help it if it is 
the inescapable fate of every intelligent man to chatter, 
like filling an empty glass from an empty bottle? 
V I  
If only my doing nothing were due to laziness! How I'd 
respect myself then! Yes, respect, because I would know 
that I could be lazy at least, that I had at least one 
definite feature in me, something positive, something I 
could be sure of. To the question "Who is he?" people 
would answer, "A lazy man." It would be wonderful to 
hear that. It would imply that I could be clearly charac­
terized, that there was something to be said about me. 
"A lazy man." Why, it's a calling, a vocation, a career, 
ladies and gentlemen! Don't laugh, it's the truth. I'd be 
a member of the foremost club in the land, and my full­
time occupation would be constant respect for myself. I 
once knew a gentleman who, all his life, was proud of 
being a connoisseur of Chateau Lafitte. He considered it 
a great virtue and never had any misgivings about it. He 
died with a conscience that was not merely clear but 
jubilant. And he was absolutely right. If I'd had a choice, 
I'd have chosen for myself the career of a lazy man, a 
glutton-but one who would have been, at the same time, a 
supporter of "the good and the beautiful." How would you 
have liked that? I dreamt of it for a long time. "The good 
and the beautiful" sticks in my throat today, when I'm 
forty, but it didn't always. At one time I'd immediately 
have found some appropriate activity for myself, such as 
drinking to "the good and the beautiful." At every op­
portunity I'd have allowed a tear to roll down my cheek 
and fall into my glass, and I'd have raised my glass and 

Notes from Underground 
105 
emptied it to "the good and the beautiful." Then I'd have 
turned everything under the sun into goodness and beauty. 
I'd have uncovered it in the most unmistakable piece of 
rubbish. Tears would have oozed out of me like drops 
squeezed out of a sponge. An artist paints a picture of 
s--. All right, let's immediately drink to the health 
of that artist, because I'm a lover of everything that's 
"good and beautiful." Some author writes something that 
will be to _everybody's liking, so let me drink to every­
one's health, because I stand for "the good and the 
beautiful"! 
And for this, I'd have demanded respect and have gone 
for anyone who grudged it to me. 
So I'd have lived without worrying and died gloriously. 
What could be more delightful? And think what a belly, 
what a triple chin I'd have grown myself, and what a 
ruddy nose! 
Everyone who came across me would've 
said: 
"There's a man for you! There's no doubt about him 
being a real, positive person, at least! "  
And, say what you like, it's pleasant to hear such re­
marks in our negative century, ladies and gentlemen. 
V I I  
But these are just golden dreams. Who was it that 
first said that man does nasty things only because he 
doesn't know where his real interests lie, that if he were 
enlightened 
about 
his 
true 
interests, 
he 
would 
im­
mediately stop acting like a pig and become kind and 
noble? Being enlightened, the argument goes on, 
and 
seeing where his real advantage lay, he would realize 
that it was in acting virtuously. And, since it is well 
established that a man will not act deliberately against 
his own interests, it follows that he would have no 
choice but to become good. Oh, the innocence of it! Since 
when, in these past thousands of years, has man acted 
exclusively out of self-interest? What about the millions 
of facts that show that men, deliberately and in full 

106 
Notes from Underground 
knowledge of what their real interests were, spurned them 
and rushed in a different direction? They did so at their 
own risk without anyone advising them, refusing to fol­
low the safe, well-trodden path and searching for another 
path, a difficult one, an unreasonable one, stubbornly 
working their way along it in the darkness. Doesn't this 
suggest that stubbornness and willfulness were stronger 
in these people than their interests? 
Interest! What interest? Can you define exactly what 
is in the interest of a human being? And suppose the 
interest of a man is not only consistent with but even de­
mands something harmful rather than advantageous? Of 
course, if such an instance is possible, then the whole rule 
is nothing but dust. Now, you tell me-is such an in­
stance possible? You may laugh if you wish, but I want 
you to answer me this : is there an accurate scale of 
human advantages? Aren't there any advantages that are 
omitted, that cannot possibly be included in any such 
scale? As far as I can make out, you've based your 
scale of advantages on statistical averages and scientific 
formulas thought up by economists. And since your scale 
consists of such 
advantages 
as happiness, prosperity, 
freedom, security, and al that, a man who deliberately 
disregarded that scale would be branded by you-and by 
me too, as a matter of fact-as an obscurantist and as 
utterly insane. But what is really remarkable is that all 
of your statisticians, sages, and humanitarians, when list­
ing human advantages, insist on leaving out one of them. 
They never even allow for it, thus invalidating all their 
calculations. One would think it would be easy just to 
add it to the list. But that's where the trouble lies­
it doesn't fit into any scale or chart. 
You see, ladies and gentlemen, I have a friend-of 
course, he's your friend, too, and, in fact, everyone's 
friend. When he's abouL to do something, this friend 
explains pompously and in detail how he must act in ac­
cordance with the precepts of justice and reason. More­
over, he becomes passionate as he expostulates upon human 
interests; heaps scorn on the shortsighted fools who don't 
know what virtue is or what's good for them. Then, 

Notes from Underground 
107 
exactly fifteen minutes later, without any apparent ex­
ternal cause, but prompted by something inside him that 
is stronger than every consideration of interest, he pirouettes 
and starts saying exactly the opposite of what he was 
saying before; that is, he discredits the laws of logic and 
his own advantage; in short, he attacks everything. . . . 
Now, since my friend is a composite type, he cannot be 
dismissed as an odd individual. So perhaps there is some­
thing that every man values above the highest individual 
advantage, or (not to be illogical) there may exist a human 
advantage that is the most advantageous (and it is pre­
cisely the one that is so consistently left out ) ,  which is 
also more important than the others and for the sake of 
which a man, if need be, will go against reason, honor, 
security, and prosperity-in short, against al the beauti­
ful and useful things-just to attain it, the most advan­
tageous advantage of the lot, the one which is the dearest 
to him. 
"So," you may interrupt me, "it's an advantage al the 
same." 
Wait a minute. Let me make myself clear. It's not a 
question of words. The remarkable thing about this ad­
vantage is that it makes a shambles of all the classifica­
tions and tables drawn up by humanitarians for the 
happiness of mankind. It crowds them out, as it were. 
But before I name this advantage, let me go on record 
and declare that all these lovely systems, all these the­
ories that explain to man what is to his true advantage so 
that, to achieve it, he wil forthwith become good and 
noble-all these are, in my opinion, nothing but sterile 
exercises in logic. Yes, that's al there is to it. For in­
stance, propounding the theory of human regeneration 
through the pursuit of self-interest is, in my opinion, al­
most like . . .  well, like saying with H.T. Buckle that man 
mellows under the influence of civilization and becomes 
less bloodthirsty and less prone to war. He appears to be 
following logical reasoning in arriving at that conclusion. 
But men love abstract reasoning and neat systematiza­
tion so much that they think nothing of distorting the 
truth, closing their eyes and ears to contrary evidence 

108 
Notes from Underground 
to preserve their logical constructions. I'd say the ex­
ample I've taken here is really too glaring. You have 
only to look around you and you'll see blood being 
spilled, and in the most playful way, just as if it were 
champagne. Look at the United States, that indissoluble 
union, plunged into civil war! Look at the Schleswig­
Holstein farce . . .  And what is it in us that is mellowed 
by civilization? Al it does, I'd say, is to develop in man 
a capacity to feel a greater variety of sensations. And 
nothing, absolutely nothing else. And through this de­
velopment, man will yet learn how to enjoy bloodshed. 
Why, it has already happened. Have you noticed, for in­
stance, that the most refined, bloodthirsty tyrants, com­
pared to whom the Attilas and Stenka Razins are mere 
choirboys, are often exquisitely civilized? In fact, if they 
are not overly conspicuous, it is because there are too 
many of them and they have become too familiar to us. 
Civilization has made man, if not always more blood­
thirsty, at least more viciously, more horribly blood­
thirsty. In the past, he saw justice in bloodshed and 
slaughtered without any pangs of conscience those he felt 
had to be slaughtered. Today, though we consider blood­
shed terrible, we still practice it-and on a much larger 
scale than ever before. It was said that Cleopatra­
please forgive me this example from ancient history­
enjoyed sticking golden pins into the breasts of her 
slaves, delighting in their screams and writhings. You 
may object that this happened in relatively barbarous 
times; or you may say that even now we live in barbarous 
times 
(also relatively) ,  that pins are still stuck into 
people, that even today, although man has learned to be 
more discerning than in ancient times, he has yet to 
learn how to follow his reason. 
Nevertheless, there's no doubt in your mind that he will 
learn as soon as he's rid of certain bad old habits and 
when common sense and science have completely re­
educated human nature and directed it along the proper 
channels. You seem certain that man himself will give 
up erring of his own free will and will stop opposing his 
will to his interests. You say, moreover, that science 

Notes from Underground 
109 
itself will teach man (although I say it's a luxury) that he 
has neither will nor whim-never had, as a matter of fact 
-that he is something like a piano key or an organ stop; 
that, on the other hand, there are natural laws in the 
universe, and whatever happens to him happens outside 
his will, as it were, by itself, in accordance with the laws 
of nature. Therefore, all there is left to do is to discover 
these laws and man will no longer be responsible for his 
acts. Life will be really easy for him then. All human 
acts will be listed in something like logarithm tables, say 
up to the number 108,000, and transferred to a time­
table. Or, better still, catalogues will appear, designed to 
help us in the way our dictionaries and encyclopedias do. 
They will carry detailed 
calculations and exact fore­
casts of everything to come, so that no adventure and 
no action will remain possible in this world. 
Then-it is still you talking-new economic relations 
will arise, relations ready-made and calculated in advance 
with mathematical precision, so that all possible ques­
tions instantaneously disappear because they receive all 
the possible answers. Then the utopian palace of crystal 
will be erected; then .
.
•
 well, then, those will be the days 
of bliss. 
Of course, you can't guarantee (it's me speaking now) 
that it won't be deadly boring (for what will there be to 
do when everything is predetermined by timetables? ) But, 
on the other hand, everything wil be planned very reason­
ably. 
But then, one might do anything 
out of boredom. 
Golden pins are stuck into people out of boredom. But 
that's nothing. What's really bad ( this is me speaking 
again ) is that the golden pins will be welcomed then. 
The trouble with man is that he's stupid. Phenomenally 
stupid. That is, even if he's not really stupid, he's so un­
grateful that another creature as ungrateful cannot be 
found. I, for one, wouldn't be the least surprised if, in 
that future age of reason, there suddenly appeared a 
gentleman with an ungrateful, or shall we say, retrogres­
sive smirk, who, arms akimbo, would say: 
"What do you say, folks, let's send all this reason to 

1 10 
Notes from Underground 
hell, just to get all these logarithm tables out from under 
our feet and go back to our own stupid ways." 
That isn't so annoying in itself; what's bad is that this 
gentleman would be sure to find followers. That's the 
way man is made. 
And the explanation for it is so simple that there 
hardly seems to be any need for it-namely, that a man, 
always and everywhere, prefers to act in the way he feels 
like acting and not in the way his reason and interest 
tell him, for it is very possible for a man to feel like 
acting against his interests and, in some instances, I say 
that he positively wants to act that · way-but that's my 
personal opinion. 
So one's own free, unrestrained choice, one's own 
whim, be it 
the 
wildest, one's own fancy, sometimes 
worked up to a frenzy-that is the most advantageous 
advantage that cannot be fitted into any table or scale 
and that causes every system and every theory to crumble 
into dust on contact. And where did these sages pick up 
the notion that man must have something that they feel is 
a normal and virtuous set of wishes; what makes them 
think that man's will must be reasonable and in ac­
cordance with his own interests? All man actually needs 
is independent will, at al costs and whatever the con­
sequences. 
Speaking of will, I'm damned if I--
V I I I  
"Ha-ha-ha! Strictly speaking there's no such thing as 
will!" you may interrupt me, guffawing. "Today, science 
has already succeeded in dissecting a man sufficiently to 
be able to tell that what we know as desire and free will 
are nothing but--" 
Hold on, hold on a moment! I was coming to that 
myself. I admit I was even frightened about it. I was 
about to say that will depended on hell knows what and 
perhaps we should thank God for that, but then I re­
membered about science, and that stopped me short. 

Notes from Underground 
1 1 1  
And it was at that point that you spoke up. Now, suppose 
one day they really find a formula at the root of all our 
wishes and whims that will tell us what they depend on, 
what laws they are subject to, how they develop, what 
they are aiming at in such and such a case, and so on 
and so forth-that is, a real mathematical equation? Well, 
chances are that man will then cease to feel desire. Al­
most surely. What joy will he get out of functioning ac­
cording to a timetable? Furthermore, he'll change from a 
man into an organ stop or something like that, for what 
is a man without will, wishes, and desires, if not an organ 
stop? 
Let's examine the probabilities then-whether or not 
it's likely to happen. Now, what do you say? 
"Hm . . .  
" you say, "our wishes are mostly misguided 
because of a mistaken evaluation of what's in our in­
terest. If we sometimes desire something that doesn't 
make sense, it is because, in our stupidity, we believe that 
it's the easiest way to attain a supposed advantage. But 
once al this has been explained to us and worked out on 
a sheet of paper (which is very possible, because it is 
contemptible and meaningless to maintain that there may 
exist laws of nature which man will never penetrate) ,  such 
desires will simply cease to exist. For when desire merges 
with reason, then we wil reason instead of desiring. It 
will be impossible to retain reason and desire something 
senseless, that is, harmful. And once all our desires and 
all our reasoning can be computed (for the day is bound 
to come when we'll understand what actually governs what 
we now describe as our free will) , then we may really 
have some sort of tables to guide our desires like every­
thing else. So, if a man sticks out his tongue at someone, 
it is because he cannot not stick it out and has to stick it out 
holding his head exactly at the angle he does. So what 
freedom is there left in him, especially if he's a learned 
man, a diploma-holding scientist? Why, he can plot his 
life thirty years in advance. Anyway, if it comes to that, 
we've no choice but to accept. We must keep repeating 
to ourselves that, at no time and in no place, will nature 
ever ask for our permission; that we must accept it as 

1 1 2 
Notes from Underground 
it is and not as we paint it in our imaginations; that if 
we're moving toward graphs, timetables, and even test 
tubes, well, we'll just have to take it all-including, of 
course, the test tube ! And if we do not wish to accept, 
nature itself will--" 
Yes, yes, I know, I know . . .  But there's a snag here, 
as far as I'm concerned. Y_ou must excuse me, ladies 
and gentlemen, if I get entangled in my own thoughts. 
You must make allowances for the fact that I've spent al 
the forty years of my life in a mousehole under the 
floor. So allow me to indulge my fancy. 
I will admit that reason is a good thing. No argument 
about that. But reason is only reason, and it only satisfies 
man's rational requirements. Desire, on the other hand, 
is the manifestation of life itself-of al of life-and it 
encompasses everything from reason down to scratching 
oneself. And although, when we're guided by our desires, 
life may often tum into a messy affair, it's still life and 
not a series of extractions of square roots. 
, 
I, for instance, instinctively want to live, to exercise 
all the aspects of life in me and not only reason, which 
amounts to perhaps one-twentieth of the whole. 
And what does reason know? It knows only what it 
has had time to learn. Many things will always remain 
unknown to it. That must be said even if there's nothing 
encouraging in it. 
Now, human nature is just the opposite. It acts as an 
entity, using everything it has, conscious and unconscious, 
and even if it deceives us, it lives. I suspect, ladies and 
gentlemen, that you're looking at me with pity, wondering 
how I can fail to understand that an enlightened, cultured 
man, such as the man of the future, could not deliberately 
wish to harm himself. It's sheer mathematics to you. I 
agree, it is mathematics. But let me repeat to you for the 
hundredth time that there is one instance when a man 
can wish upon himself, in full awareness, something harm­
ful, stupid, and even completely idiotic. He will do it in 
order to establish his right to wish for the most idiotic 
things and not to be obliged to have only sensible wishes. 
But what if a quite absurd whim, my friends, turns out to 

Notes from Underground 
1 1 3 
be the most advantageous thing on earth for us, as some­
times happens? Specifically, it may be more advantageous 
to us than any other advantages, even when it most 
obviously harms us and goes against all the sensible 
conclusions of our reason about our interest-because, 
whatever else, it leaves us our most important, most 
treasured possession : our individuality. 
Some people concede, for instance, that desire may 
be the thing man treasures most. Desire, of course, can, if 
it wishes, agree with reason, especially if one uses it 
sparingly, never going too far. Then desire is quite useful, 
even praiseworthy. 
But in reality, desire usually stubbornly disagrees with 
reason . . . and . . . and . . . let me tell you that this too 
is useful and praiseworthy. 
Let's assume, ladies and gentlemen, that man isn't stu­
pid. (For, indeed, if we say he is stupid, whom will we 
be able to call intelligent? ) But even if he isn't stupid, 
he is still monstrously ungrateful. Phenomenally so! I 
would even say that the best definition of man is : un­
grateful biped. But this is still not his main defect. His 
main defect is his chronic perversity, an affliction from 
which he has suffered throughout his history, from the 
Flood through the Schleswig-Holstein crisis. Perversity 
and, therefore, lack of common sense, since it is well 
known that perversity is due to a lack of good sense. 
Just have a look at the history of mankind and tell me 
what you see there. You find it grand? Maybe so. The 
Colossus 
of 
Rhodes 
is 
impressive 
enough 
to 
have· 
prompted Mr. Anayevsky to say that some consider it a 
work of man and others consider it a creation of nature. 
You find it colorful? Yes, I suppose there's plenty of 
color in human history. Think of all the military dress 
uniforms and the formal civilian outfits. This seems quite 
impressive in itself. And if we think of all the uniforms 
worn on semi-official occasions, there's so much color 
that any historian would be dazzled by it. You find it 
monotonous? Yes, you have a good point there. They 
fight and fight and fight; they are fighting now, they fought 

1 1 4 
Notes from Underground 
before, and they'll fight in the future. Yes, I must agree 
that it's a bit too monotonous. 
So you see, you can say anything about world history 
-anything and everything that the most morbid imagina­
tion can think up. Except one thing, that is. It cannot be 
said that world history is reasonable. The word sticks in 
one's throat. And here's what happens all the time : good 
and reasonable men, sages and humanitarians, try to live 
constantly good and sensible lives, serving, so to speak, 
as human torches to light the path for their neighbors, to 
prove to them that it can be done. And what comes of it? 
Sure enough, these lovers of mankind sooner or later give 
up, some in the midst of a scandal, and often quite an 
unseemly one too. 
Now, let me ask you something: what can one expect 
from man, considering he's such a strange creature? You 
can shower upon him al earthly blessings, drown him in 
happiness so that there'll be nothing to be seen but the 
bubbles rising to the surface of his bliss, give him such 
economic security that he won't have anything to do but 
sleep, nibble at cakes, and worry about keeping world 
history flowing-and even then, out of sheer spite and in­
gratitude, man will play a dirty trick on you. He'll even 
risk his cake for the sake of the most glaring stupidity, 
for the most economically unsound nonsense, just to in­
ject into all the soundness and sense surrounding him 
some of his own disastrous, lethal fancies. What he wants 
to preserve is precisely his noxious fancies and vulgar 
trivialities, if only to assure himself that men are still men 
(as if that were so important) and not piano keys simply 
responding to the laws of nature. Man is somehow averse 
to the idea of being unable to desire unless this desire 
happens to figure on his timetable at that moment. 
But even if man was nothing but a piano key, even if 
this could be demonstrated to him mathematically-even 
then, he wouldn't come to his senses but would pull some 
trick out of sheer ingratitude, just to make his point. 
And if he didn't have them on hand, he would devise 
the means of destruction, chaos, and all kinds of suffering 
to get his way. For instance, he'd swear loud enough for 

Notes from Underground 
1 1 5  
the whole world to hear-swearing is man's prerogative, 
setting him apart from the other animals-and maybe his 
swearing alone would get him what he wanted, that is, it'd 
prove to him that he's a man and not a piano key. 
Now, you may say that this too can be calculated in 
advance and entered on the timetable--chaos, swearing, 
and all-and that the very possibility of such a calcula­
tion would prevent it, so that sanity would prevail. Oh 
no! In that case man would go insane on purpose, just to 
be immune from reason. 
I believe this is so and I'm prepared to vouch for it, 
because it seems to me that the meaning of man's life 
consists in proving to himself every minute that he's a 
man and not a piano key. And man will keep proving it 
and paying for it with his own skin; he will tum into a 
troglodyte if need be. And, since this is so, I cannot help 
rejoicing that things are still the way they are and that, 
for the time being, nobody knows worth a damn what 
determines our desires. 
Now you scream that no one intends to deprive me of 
my free will, that they're only trying to arrange things so 
that my will coincides with what is in my own interest, 
the laws of nature, and arithmetic. 
Ah, ladies and gentlemen, don't talk to me of free will 
when it comes to timetables and arithmetic, when every­
thing will be deducible from twice two makes four! There's 
no need for free will to find that twice two is four. That's 
not what I call free will! 
I X  
Of course I'm joking, my friends, and I realize my 
jokes are weak. Still, everything can't be just laughed off. 
Perhaps I'm joking through clenched teeth. You see, I'm 
haunted by certain questions, and perhaps you'll allow 
me to ask them. 
Now, you, for instance-you want to cure man of his 
bad old habits and reshape his will according to the re­
quirements 
of science and common 
sense. 
But 
what 

1 1 6 
Notes from Underground 
makes you think that man either can or should be changed 
in this way? What leads you to the conclusion that it is 
absolutely necessary to change man's desires? How do you 
know that these corrections wil actually be to man's 
advantage? And, if you'll allow me to speak quite openly, 
what makes you so sure that abstention from acting con­
trary to one's interests, as determined by reason and 
arithmetic, is always to one's advantage and that this 
applies to mankind as a whole? 
So far, these are nothing but assumptions on your 
part. I'll grant you that they conform to the laws of 
logic. But are they in accordance with human law? In 
case you think I'm crazy, let me explain. I agree that 
man is a creative animal, doomed to strive consciously 
toward a goal, engaged in full-time engineering, as it were, 
busy building himself roads that lead somewhere-never 
mind where. And perhaps if he feels like straying now and 
then, it is just because he is doomed to build this road; 
even the man of action, however stupid he may be, must 
realize from time to time that his road always goes 
somewhere and that the main thing is not where it goes 
but keeping the well-meaning babe at his engineering 
chores, thus saving him from the deadly snares of idle­
ness, which, as is well known, is the mother of all vice. 
There's no disputing that man likes creating and building 
roads. But why does he also like chaos and disorder 
even into his old age? Explain that if you can! But wait, 
I myself would like to say a few words on this particular 
subject. I wonder if he doesn't like chaos and destruc­
tion so much just because he's instinctively afraid of reach­
ing the goal he's working for? How do you know, per­
haps he likes his objective only from a distance; perhaps 
he only likes to contemplate it and not to live in it, pre­
ferring to leave it, when it comes down to it, to animals 
such as ants, sheep, and such. Of course, ants are differ­
ent. They have a wonderful everlasting piece of engineer­
ing on which to work-the anthill. 
The worthy ants began with their anthill and wil most 
likely end with it, which is greatly to the credit of their 
single-mindedness and perseverance. But man is frivolous 

Notes from Underground 
1 17 
and unaccountable and perhaps, like a chess player, he 
enjoys the achieving rather than the goal itself. 
And who can tell, perhaps the purpose of man's life 
on earth consists precisely in this uninterrupted striv­
ing after a goal. That is to say, the purpose is life itself 
and not the goal which, of course, must be nothing but 
twice two makes four. And twice two, ladies and gentle­
men, is no longer life but the beginning of death. At 
least, man has always feared this twice two makes four, 
and it's what I'm afraid of now. 
Let's assume that man does nothing but search for this 
twice two, that he crosses oceans and sacrifices his life 
in this quest, while, all the time, he is really afraid of 
finding that it does make four. He feels that once he has 
discovered it, he'll have nothing left for which to search. 
The workers, at least, when they receive their money at 
the end of the week, go to a tavern and then, perhaps, 
land in a police station, so there's something to keep them 
busy. But otherwise, what is a man to do with himself 
when he achieves one of his objectives? In any case, there 
is a visible awkwardness in him every time he does. 
He loves the achieving, but does not particularly enjoy 
what he achieves. Funny, isn't it? Yes, man is a comical 
animal, and there's obviously a joke in all this. Still, 
I say that twice two is an unbearable notion, an arrogant 
imposition. This twice two image stands there, hands in 
pockets, in the middle of your road, and spits in your 
direction. Nevertheless, I'm willing to agree that twicť 
two-makes-four is a thing of beauty. But, if we're going to 
praise everything like that, then I say that twice-two­
makes-five is also a delightful little item now and then. 
And what makes you so cocksure, so positive that only 
the normal and the positive, that is, only what promotes 
man's welfare, is to his advantage? Can't reason also be 
wrong about what's an advantage? Why can't man like 
things other than his well-being? Maybe he likes suffer­
ing just as much. Maybe suffering is just as much to his 
advantage as well-being. In fact, man adores suffering. 
Passionately. It's a fact. For this, there's no need even to 
go to world history. Just ask yourself, if you've had any 

1 1 8  
Notes from Underground 
kind of experience of life. And, personally, I even feel 
that it's shameful to like just well-being by itself. Right or 
wrong, it's very pleasant to break something from time 
to time. 
Actually, I'm not advocating suffering any more than 
well-being. What I'm for is whim, and I want the right to 
use it whenever I want to. 
I know, for instance, that suffering is inadmissible in 
light stage plays. In the utopian crystal palace, it'd be 
inconceivable, for suffering means doubt and denial, and 
what kind of crystal palace would that be, if people had 
doubts about it? Nevertheless, I'm certain that man will 
never give up true suffering, that is, chaos and destruc­
tion. Why, suffering is the only cause of consciousness. 
And, although I declared at the beginning that con­
sciousness is man's greatest plague, I know that he likes it 
and won't exchange it for any advantage. Conscious­
ness, for instance, is of a much higher order than twice 
two. After twice two, we'll of course have nothing left 
either to do or to find out. All that'll be left for us will 
be to block off our five senses and plunge into con­
templation. With consciousness we have nothing much 
to do either, but we can at least lacerate ourselves from 
time to time, which does liven us up a bit. It may go 
against progress, but it's better than nothing. 
X 
So, you believe in an indestructible crystal palace 
in which you won't be able to stick out your tongue or 
blow raspberries even if you cover your mouth with 
your hand. But I'm afraid of such a palace precisely 
because it's indestructible and because I won't ever be 
allowed to stick my tongue out at it. 
Try to understand: if, instead of that palace, there were 
nothing but a chicken house, and if I had to crawl into it 
to get out of the rain, I wouldn't call it a palace just out of 
gratitude, because it kept me dry. You may laugh and 
say that for that purpose it makes no difference whether 

Notes from Underground 
1 19 
it is a chicken coop or a palace. I'd agree with you if 
the only purpose of life was keeping from getting wet. 
But suppose I decided that keeping dry is not the only 
reason for living and that, while we're at it, we'd better 
try and live in palaces? That's my wish and my choice. 
You'll change it only when you manage to change my 
preferences. By all means, do so if you can. But, in the 
meantime, allow me to distinguish between the chicken 
coop and the palace. 
Let's assume now that the crystal palace is nothing but 
a pipe dream, that the laws of nature don't provide for it, 
that I dreamed it up, 
in my stupidity, influenced by 
certain old, irrational habits of thought that are common 
among my generation. 
But I really don't give a damn whether the laws of 
nature provide for it or not. And what difference would 
it make, since it exists in my wish? Or, rather, it exists as 
long as my wishes exist. 
Are you laughing again? Go ahead, laugh, but I still 
won't say that my belly is full when I'm hungry; I still 
won't content myself with a compromise, with an infi­
nitely recurring zero just because it is allowed to recur 
by some law, just because it's there. I don't accept as the 
crowning of my dreams a big building for the poor, with 
apartments leased for one thousand years and a dentist's 
sign outside in case of emergency. 
But I'm prepared to follow you as soon as you have 
eradicated my desires, destroyed my ideals, and replaced 
them by something better. And if you ask why you should 
be bothered with me, I can say the same to you. I'm 
serious about the whole thing, but if you don't want to 
waste your time and attention on me, my heart won't be 
broken. I have my hole under the floor, remember? 
And, in the meantime, I'll go on living and desiring, 
and may my right arm wither if I contribute a single 
brick to that apartment building of yours! Disregard what 
I said before about rejecting the crystal-- palace because 
I wouldn't be allowed to stick my tongue out at it. I said 
that not because I love sticking out my tongue, but be­
cause I have yet to see a building of yours at which one 

120 
Notes from Underground 
could refrain from sticking out one's tongue. On the con­
trary, I'd be willing to have my tongue cut out in sheer 
gratitude if it could be _ arranged that I would never 
again feel like sticking it out. But what can I do if that 
cannot be arranged and I'm invited to accept, in the 
meantime, cheap apartments? Why have I been provided 
with all these desires? Was it only to reach the con­
clusion that they're nothing but a big swindle? Is that the 
goal of everything? I don't believe it. 
But, after all I've said now, shall I tell you something? 
I'm sure that mousehole dwellers like me should be 
kept out of the way. Their kind may spend forty years 
sitting under the floor somewhere, but once they escape, 
once they emerge from there, they'll talk and talk and 
talk; they'll talk your head off without stopping. 
X I  
And so, in the end, ladies and gentlemen, it's best to 
do nothing at all! Conscious inertia is the best! A toast to 
my hole under the floor! And, though I said that I was 
green with envy of the normal man, I still wouldn't take 
his place under present circumstances-although I'll go 
on envying him. No, no, my hole is better, whatever you 
may say! There, at least, it's possible-ah, there I go, 
lying again! I'm lying because I know, like twice-two­
makes four, that it's not the mousehole that's better, but 
something quite different-something I long for, but can­
not find. To hell with the mousehole! 
I'd feel better if I could only believe something of 
what I've written down here. But I swear I can't believe 
a single word of it. That is, I believe it in a way, but at 
the same time, I feel I'm lying like a son of a bitch. 
"Then why have you written all this?" you may ask me. 
Well, I wish I could stick you into a mousehole for 
forty years or so with nothing to do, and at the end of that 
time I'd like to see what kind of state you'd be in. Do 
you think it's permissible to leave a man alone for forty 
years without anything to do? 

Notes from Underground 
1 2 1  
"And what you're doing now-don't you think it's des­
picable?" you may say, perhaps shrugging contemptuous­
ly. "You say you're longing to live, and you try to solve 
the problems of life with tangled logic. And you're so in­
sistent, so arrogant, and at the same time, so afraid. 
You talk all sorts of rot, and yet you're pleased with it. 
You're insulting and yet, fearing the consequences, you 
keep apologizing. You try to convince us that you fear 
nothing, but we find you cringing. You tell us that you're 
raging and talking through clenched teeth, but all the 
time you're trying to be funny and make us laugh. You're 
aware that your jokes are not very funny, but you seem to 
find some literary merit in them. It's possible that you 
have had to suffer, but you don't seem to have any 
respect for your own suffering. There is some truth in 
you, all right, but there's no humility; and it is out of the 
pettiest vanity that you drag forth your truth, to ex­
hibit it, to offer it for sale, to disgrace it. You really 
have something to say, but you hide your final words, 
out of fear, because you really have no courage, only 
the 
impertinence 
of 
a 
coward. 
You 
were 
bragging 
about your consciousness, yet you can't grasp anything 
clearly because, though your head is quite lucid, your 
heart is murky as a result of debauchery, and real con­
sciousness is impossible without a pure heart. And you're 
so indiscreet, so pushy, and such a show-off! Ah, you tell 
nothing but lies, lies, and more lies . . . .  
" 
Of course, I've invented all your words myself. They 
too come from my hole. I've been listening to your words 
through a crack for forty years, while sitting in my hole 
under the floor. That was all I had to do. So, by now, I 
know them by heart, and it's no wonder I've been able to 
set them down like this, in literary form. 
But are you really so credulous as to imagine that I'll 
have all this published for you to read? And there's an­
other puzzle I'd like to solve : Why on earth do I keep 
calling you "ladies and gentlemen" and addressing you 
as if you were really my readers? The sort of confessions 
I'm about to make here don't get printed, nor does one 
give them to other people to read. I, at least, don't 

122 
Notes from Underground 
have sufficient determination to do so, nor do I feel 
there's any need for it. But, you see, I've taken a fancy 
into my head, and I want to realize it at any cost. 
What I mean is that there are things in every man's past 
that he won't admit except to his most intimate friends. 
There are other things that he won't admit even to his 
friends but only tQ himself-and only in strictest confi­
dence. But there are things, too, that a man won't dare to 
admit even to himself, and every decent man has quite 
an accumulation of such things. In fact, the more decent 
he is, the greater the accumulation he's bound to have. 
I have only recently dared to explore some of my past 
adventures which, until then, I had avoided with peculiar 
anxiety. But now that I have made myself remember them 
and have even dared to write them down, I want to make 
a test to see whether it is possible to be completely frank 
and unafraid of the whole truth. I would like to note here 
Heine's remark to the effect that sincere autobiographies 
are almost impossible and that a man is bound to lie 
about himself. In his view, Rousseau must have lied 
about himself deliberately and out of sheer vanity in his 
Confessions. I'm sure Heine is right. I realize that it is 
sometimes possible to pin full-fledged crimes on ourselves 
out of vanity. I can see that, al right. But Heine was 
passing judgment on a man confessing publicly. Now, 
in my case, I'm writing this just for myself, for even if I 
do address myself to imaginary readers, I do it only be­
cause it makes it easier for me to write. It's just a matter 
of form, nothing else, for as I said before, I'll never have 
any readers. 
I don't want to let considerations of literary composi­
tion get in my way. I won't bother with planning and 
arranging; I'll note down whatever comes to my mind. 
Now, of course, you may feel you've caught me and 
ask me why, if I really don't expect to have any readers, 
I bother to record all these explanations about writing 
without a plan, jotting down whatever comes to mind, 
and so on. What's the point of al these excuses and 
apologies then? 
My answer is-well, that's the way it is. 

Notes from Underground 
123 
There's a whole psychological explanation to it. Maybe 
it's because I'm a coward. Possibly, too, if I imagine an 
audience, my behavior will be more seemly while I'm 
writing this down. There may be thousands of reasons. 
Then there's something else. Why, one may ask, do 
I want to write at all? If it's not for the public, couldn't I 
just reminisce in my head, without putting things down on 
paper? That's a good question, but I feel that writing will 
lend dignity to it. There's something impressive about the 
written word; it is more conducive to self-examination, 
and my confession wil have more style. It is possible, 
too, that the very process of writing things down will 
relieve me somewhat. Today, for instance, I'm parti­
cularly oppressed by an old memory. It came back to me 
clearly a few days ago and, since then, it's been like an 
exasperating tune that I can't get out of my head. But I 
must get rid of it. I have hundreds of such memories, 
and from time to time, one of them detaches itself from 
the mass and starts tormenting me. I feel that if I write 
it down, I'll get rid of it. Why not try? 
Finally, I'm bored with constantly doing nothing. Writ­
ing things down is a bit like work and I've heard people 
say that work makes people good and honest! So there 
may be a chance for me too, after all. 
It's snowing today. A wet, yellow, murky snow is coming 
down. Yesterday it snowed too. And a few days ago, also. 
I believe that it was this wet snow that made me think of 
the incident I can't get out of my head. So this is a story 
connected with wet snow. 
PART Two 
Brought to Mind by a Fall of Wet Snow 
When my passionate, ardent plea, 
From a wilderness of sea, 
Rescued your poor soul at last; 
Plunged in anguish and torment, 

124 
Notes from Underground 
You wrung your hands in sad lament, 
Damning your ignoble past; 
Then with memories lashing, gory, 
Making sleeping conscience fret, 
You poured forth the awful story, 
Of your life before we met. 
Filled with shame that would not fade, 
Covering your weeping face, 
Bitter tears in wild cascade 
Marked your infinite disgrace 
.
•
•
 
etc., etc., etc. 
FROM THE POETRY OF N. A. NEKRASOV 
I 
I 
was twenty-four, but even then I led the gloomy, 
disorganized, solitary existence of a recluse. I stayed 
away from people, avoided even speaking to them, and 
kept more and more to my hole. At the office, I avoided 
looking at anyone; I realized that the others regarded 
me as eccentric and even-so, at least, I felt-viewed me 
with a sort of disgust Why, I wondered sometimes, did 
no one else feel that he was inspiring disgust in others? 
There was a clerk there with a repulsive, pockmarked 
face-in fact, he was quite sinister-looking. I wouldn't 
have had the courage to even show such a mug to any­
one. 
Another 
clerk's 
clothes 
were 
so dirty 
that 
he 
smelled. But neither clerk seemed in the least perturbed 
by his face, 
his clothes, 
or by-I 
don't know-any 
mental quirk he may have had. It didn't occur to either 
fellow that he might inspire loathing. 
And even if it 
had, neither of them would have given a damn-unless 
the loathing came from their superiors. Now, it is ab­
solutely clear to me that, because of an infinite vanity 
that caused me to set myself impossible standards, I re­
garded 
myself with furious disapproval, bordering on 
loathing, then ascribed my own feelings to everyone I 
came across. I hated my face. I found it odious and even 
suspected that there was something slimy in its expres-

Notes from Underground 
1 25 
sian, so, on arriving at the office, I always tried to assume 
a casual air and a dignified expression, so I wouldn't be 
suspected of cringing. 
"Let my face be plain," I thought, "as long as it's 
dignified, expressive, and above al, incredibly intelligent." 
I was painfully aware, however, that my facial ex­
pression could not possibly convey all these qualities. 
And worse yet-while I'd have settled for anything, as 
long as it looked intelligent, I found my face positively 
stupid. I'd even have accepted a depraved expression if, 
at the same time, everyone had agreed that I had a 
terribly intelligent face. 
I, of course, loathed and despised everyone in my 
office, although I was afraid of them at the same time. At 
times, I even considered them above me. I kept shifting 
from one extreme to the other for no apparent reason : 
one day I'd despise them, the next I'd feel they were my 
betters. 
A civilized, self-respecting man cannot be vain with­
out setting unattainably high standards for himself and 
despising himself at certain moments. But, when I came 
across anyone, whether I admired or despised him, I 
always lowered my eyes first. I even tested myself to 
see whether I could withstand the look of this or that 
person, but I was always the first to yield. This tormented 
me and drove me mad with rage. I also had a morbid 
fear of appearing ridiculous, so I slavishly adhered to 
all the external conventions. I stuck enthusiastically to 
the ordinary and abhorred al signs of eccentricity in me. 
But what chance did I have? I was painfully sensitive 
and complex, as a man of this age should be. The others, 
of course, were stupid and resembled one another like a 
flock of sheep. Perhaps I was the only one in the office 
to feel that I was a coward and a slave. I felt that because 
I was more highly developed than the others. But then it 
was not simply a feeling-! really was a coward and a 
slave. I say this without any shame. Every self-respecting 
man today must be a coward and a slave. That is now 
his normal state. I'm deeply convinced of it. That's how 
he's made. As a matter of fact, it's not only true of our 

126 
Notes from Underground 
age and isn't due to any particular set of circumstances­
it goes for all times: a self-respecting man is bound to be 
a coward and a slave. This is a natural law governing 
every self-respecting man. Even if he manages once in a 
while to show a little· courage, there's no need for him to 
be smug about it, for he's sure to lie down under the 
next blow. It is the age-old solution, the only way out. 
Only asses make a show of courage, and even then, only 
until they come up against the wall. But why bother about 
them anyway, since they are of no importance. 
Another thing worried me then: I was unlike everyone 
else, and everyone else was unlike me. 
"I'm all alone while there are a lot of them," I mused. 
This goes to show that I was still just a boy. 
Sometimes I went from one extreme to the other in my 
behavior. Sometimes I simply couldn't stand going to the 
office; I would return home from it completely sick and 
broken. Then, suddenly, I would go through a phase of 
cynical indifference (with me, everything happened in 
phases) ; I would laugh at my own finicky intolerance, 
teasing myself for my romantic notions. One day I'd 
refuse to talk to my colleagues at all; then, suddenly, I'd 
be tailing their heads off and even seeking their friend­
ship. All my disgust would just vanish for no apparent 
reason. But possibly I'd never really felt it in the first 
place and had simply been affecting something I'd picked 
up out of books. At one time I became really friendly with 
my co-workers; I began visiting them at their homes, 
played cards with them, drank vodka in their company, 
talked with them about promotions . . . But allow 
me to make a disgression at this point. 
In general, we Russians have never had the sort of 
stupid, starry-eyed romantics the Germans and especially 
the French have-people who would never learn any 
better even if the ground opened up under their feet or if 
the whole of France were to perish on its barricades. Even 
then they wouldn;t have the decency to change; they'd 
sing their starry-eyed songs going to their graves. This is 
because they are fools. Russia, as is well known, has no 
fools; this is what distinguishes us from other lands. Hence, 

Notes from Underground 
127 
we have no starry-eyed natures, at least in an undiluted 
state. Al our "affirmative" writers and critics, seeking to 
create paragons of efficiency, such as Kostanzhoglo and 
Uncle Peter Ivanitch, * because they imagine that they 
represent our ideal, have slighted our romantics, con­
fusing them with the starry-eyed Germans and French­
men. In fact, our romantics are just the opposite of the 
starry-eyed Europeans, and no European yardstick can 
measure them. (I hope you'll allow me to use the word 
"romantic," which is a good, old, respectable wordJamiliar 
to everyone. ) The hallmark of our romantics is their 
desire to understand everything, to see, to see every­
thing, and often to see it incomparably more clearly than 
do our most practical minds; never to take anyone or any­
thing for granted, but neither to reject them out of hand; 
to examine everything; to take everything into account; 
to be diplomatic with everyone; never to lose sight of the 
useful, practical goal (rent-free housing, pensions, dec­
orations ) ; to keep an eye on this goal through all the ex­
altations and slim volumes of lyric verse, while pre­
serving, to their dying hour, their allegiance to "the 
sublime and the beautiful," and while they are at it, pre­
serving themselves like jewels wrapped in cotton wool 
-again in the name of "the sublime and the beautiful." 
So, as you can see, our romantic is a man of impressive 
breadth of vision and, at the same time, a rogue. Be­
lieve me, I'm speaking from experience. Of course, al 
this only applies if the romantic in question is intelligent. 
But what am I saying! A romantic is, of course, always 
intelligent. I only wanted to note that, although we have 
had stupid romantics, they don't count, because, in their 
prime, they turned into Germans and, to assure their 
jewel-like preservation, settled in some place like Weimar 
or the Black Forest. 
I, for instance, sincerely loathed my office work, and if 
I didn't spit in anyone's eye, it was only because I couldn't 
afford to-1 was paid to sit there. The fact is, however, 
that in the final analysis, I didn't spit. Our romantic 
• "Positive" characters from Gogol and Goncharov--A.R.M. 

1 28 
Notes from Underground 
would sooner go out of his mind (which rarely happens, 
however) than spit, unless he has some other career in 
reserve. Anyway, they never throw him out unless it's to 
move him to a lunatic asylum in extreme cases of in­
sanity, when he claims to be the king of Spain or some­
thing like that. 
But then, only pale, puny people go crazy, while many, 
many romantics reach exalted positions later in life. What 
admirable versatility they have! What receptivity to the 
most incompatible feelings! This thought has always 
cheered me. This accounts for the number of people with a 
"broad outlook" among us, people who never lose their 
ideais even in the depths of degradation. And, although 
they wouldn't raise their little fingers to achieve their 
ideals, although they are arrant thieves and sharpers, 
the mere thought of those ideals brings tears to their eyes, 
and deep down somewhere, they are frightfully honest. 
Yes, sir, in our midst, the most incorrigible rogue can 
be perfectly and even heroically honest without ever 
ceasing to be a rogue. Why, again and again, we see our 
romantics turn out to be such shady dealers (I use this 
term lovingly) ,  displaying such a grasp of reality and such 
practical agility, that the authorities and the public can 
only stand by clicking their tongues and gaping at them 
in surprise. 
Yes, their versatility is really extraordinary. And one 
wonders what they may turn to in the future. Really sterling 
stuff, our romantics! And I'm not saying that out of jingo­
ism either. But you must think I'm pulling your leg again. 
On the other hand, you may think I really believe what I'm 
saying. Either way, ladies and gentlemen, your opinion 
greatly honors and pleases me. 
And now, forgive this digression; let's get on with the 
story. 
It goes without saying that my friendship with my office 
colleagues never lasted long. In no time I fell out with 
them, and being young and inexperienced, I even stopped 
saying good morning to them and cut them dead. Actually, 
I went that far only once. But, in general, I was alone 
almost all the time. 

Notes from Underground 
12Ǝ 
At home I mostly read. I had to drown out the clamor 
in me, and reading was the only available way. Reading, 
of course, was helpful; it stirred, delighted, and tormented 
me. Now and then, however, I grew terribly tired of it. I 
became restless and plunged, not into real debauchery, 
but into murky, sordid, petty dissipation. My petty pas­
sions stabbed and burned me, because I was already on 
edge. I suffered hysterical outbursts of tears and con­
vulsions. Aside from my reading, I had nothing to tum 
to, for there was nothing in my surroundings that I could 
look up to or that attracted me. I was sick of every­
thing and longed to contradict and oppose. So I abandoned 
myself to dissipation. But I haven't brought this up to 
justify myself at all-no, that's a lie. I was trying to 
justify myself, all right. I note that for myself, ladies and 
gentlemen. I've promised myself that I won't lie here. 
I indulged in vice at night, stealthily, fearfuly, sordidly; 
the feeling of shame was always present, and in the most 
unspeakable moments, it was like damnation itself. Even 
then I carried this hole in the floor in my heart. I was ter­
ribly afraid to be seen and recognized. And I went to the 
lowest haunts. 
Once, passing by a tavern, I saw some men fighting 
with billiard cues through a lighted window. One of them 
was tossed out of the window. At another time a scene 
like that would have made me sick, but this time I envied 
that ejected gentleman so much that I entered the tavern 
and stepped into the billiard room, thinking: "Maybe I 
could pick a fight too and be thrown out of the window." 
As a matter of fact, I wasn't drunk-that's how far 
despair can drive a man. But nothing came of it. I couldn't 
even manage to be tossed out of a window, and I left 
without picking a fight. 
An officer who happened to be there put me in my 
place immediately. I was standing by the billiard table, 
inadvertently blocking the officer's way. He grabbed me 
by the shoulders and, without a word, picked me up and, 
setting me down a bit further away, passed by as if I 
didn't exist. I could've forgiven anything, including a beat-

130 
Notes from Underground 
ing, but that was too much-to be brushed aside with­
out being noticed! 
I don't know what I wouldn't have given at that mo­
ment for a real quarrel, a decent one, something more 
literary, if you know what I mean. I'd been treated as one 
treats a fly. The officer was a husky six-footer, and I'm 
very small and thin. But it was still within my power to 
start trouble. All I had to do was make the smallest pro­
test and I'd have gone through the window. But I changed 
my mind and decided to merge, full of rage, into the 
background. 
I left the tavern ashamed and troubled and returned 
home. 
The following night, I went out to satisfy my petty 
vices; I moved even more furtively, was shier, sadder, 
more abject than before-but I went. 
Don't think, however, that I backed down before that 
officer out of cowardice. I've never been a coward at 
heart, although I've constantly acted like a coward when 
the chips were down. No, wait, don't laugh, I can ex­
plain-! have an explanation for everything, you may 
rest assured of that. 
Oh, if only that officer had been a duelist! But he ob­
viously was one of those who prefer to put their point 
across with a billiard cue (a species long extinct today) or 
by complaining to the authorities, like Gogol's Lieu­
tenant Pirogov. People like him won't fight duels with the 
likes of me. And, in general, they consider dueling as some 
inconceivable, free-thinking, French institution. But they 
feel no compunction about bullying people. Especially if 
they happen to be husky six-footers. 
So I backed out, not through cowardice, but through 
my boundless vanity. I was not taken aback by his size, 
nor by fear of physical punishment, nor because I might 
be flung out of the window. I'm quite sure that I had 
sufficient physical courage. It was moral courage that I 
lacked. I was afraid that not one of them, from the insolent 
lounge attendant to the miserable, pimply, evil-smelling 
government clerk hanging around there in his grubby 
shirt, would have understood me and that they just would 

Notes from Underground 
1 3 1  
have laughed at me when I spoke up in literary language 
-which I'd have had to use, because when it comes to a 
point d'honneur (not to be confused with honor) ,  one 
had no choice but to use literary language. No word for a 
point d'honneur exists in the vernacular. And I was sure 
(practical instinct, notwithstanding al the romanticism) 
that they'd have split their sides laughing and that the 
officer wouldn't have given me an innocent beating, but 
would've kicked me around the billiard table and only 
later might have taken pity on me and flung me out the 
window. Of course, this miserable little incident couldn't 
end like that as far as I was concerned. Later, I often 
passed that officer in the street, and I observed him very 
carefully. I'm not sure, though, that he recognized me. 
Judging by certain signs, he didn't. But I . . .  I looked at 
him with hatred and anger, and I went on like that for 
. . . several years. My anger grew stronger as the years 
went by. First, I started to gather information about the 
officer. It was a lot of trouble, for I didn't know anyone. 
But once someone called him by his last name from a 
distance as I was following him. So I learned his name. 
Another time, I trailed him to the house where he was 
billeted and, for a quarter, found out from his super­
intendent which floor he lived on, whether he lived alone, 
and al the things one can find out from superintendents. 
One morning, although I'd never gone in for literature 
before, I took it into my head to caricature this officer in 
a short story. I wrote it with exaltation. I exposed him, 
even slandered him. I changed his name in such a way 
that it could be guessed immediately. Later, however, on 
further thought, I invented a less obvious alias for him 
and sent the story to the National Journal. But at that 
time, exposes weren't in vogue yet, and my manuscript 
was rejected. I was very disappointed. There were mo­
ments when fury almost choked me. Finally, I decided to 
challenge him to a duel. I wrote him a beautiful letter 
pleading with him to apologize to me. And, in case he 
failed to comply, my letter hinted quite obviously at the 
possibility of a duel. The letter was written in such a way 
that, if the officer had had any idea of the "sublime and 

132 
Notes from Underground 
the beautiful," he'd have rushed to my place, thrown him­
self on my neck, and offered me his undying friendship. 
Ah, wouldn't that have been nice! Can you imagine 
how we'd have lived after that! Some of his dignity would've 
washed off onto me, and he would have gained from my 
superior education and sensitivity. Ah, the consequences 
could have been so pleasant. 
Note that two years had elapsed since his insults, so that 
my challenge was terribly out of date. But, thank God (I 
still, to this day, thank Him with tears in my eyes) , I 
never sent that letter. I get gooseflesh at the mere thought 
of what would've happened if I had sent it. 
And then, suddenly-suddenly I got my revenge in the 
simplest way. Through a real stroke of genius. Sometimes, 
on holidays, I went for a walk between three and four 
along the sunny side of Nevsky Avenue. Actually it was 
more torture, humiliation, and bilious irritation than a 
stroll, but apparently that was what I needed. I scurried 
along like a mouse in a most undignified way, skipping 
out of the path of important gentlemen, guards officers, 
and ladies. My heart vibrated convulsively and I felt 
hot all down my back at the mere thought of the sorry 
sight offered to the world by my scurrying, puny, seedy 
figure. I constantly tortured myself with the humiliating 
thought, which turned into a physical feeling, that, to the 
world, I was nothing but a dirty, pestiferous fly-more 
intelligent, sensitive and noble than the lot of them, of 
course-but nonetheless a fly that everybody scorned. Why 
I was willing to suffer such humiliation just for a stroll 
along Nevsky Avenue, I don't know; but something drew 
me there, and I went at every opportunity. 
At that time I was beginning to experience waves of 
the pleasure I mentioned earlier. After the incident with 
the officer, I was even more drawn to Nevsky Avenue, 
which was where I most often saw and admired him. He 
went there too, mostly on holidays. And, although he scur­
ried out of the way of high dignitaries and generals, as I 
did, he literally walked over people like me and even 
people who were quite a bit better, marching straight at 
them as if there were nothing but an empty space ahead of 

Notes from Underground 
133 
him, and never budging an inch off his course. I'd watch 
him coming at me, fascinated by my own hatred, and­
skip aside at the last moment. I was exasperated, because 
even there in the street, I couldn't feel I was on an equal 
footing with him. 
I woke up nights thinking about it. "Why must I always 
get out of his way?" I ranted in a hysterical rage. "Why 
always me rather than him? There's no law saying that 
that's the way it should be. Why can't it be fair, as it is 
when polite people meet--one moves aside a little and 
so does the other, and they pass respecting each other's 
dignity." 
But that wasn't the case here. I kept stepping aside 
without his even noticing it. And then I got the most 
amazing idea. 
"What would happen," I thought, "if I didn't move 
aside-didn't budge, even if it meant pushing him? What 
would come of it?" 
This bold idea took hold of me. I had no peace. I kept 
thinking of it; it drove me out onto Nevsky A venue 
again and again, to visualize more clearly how I'd do it 
when I decided to go through with it. I was in a state 
of elation. The idea seemed to grow more and more 
sensible and practical. 
"Of course, I won't really shove him," I thought, mel­
lowed in advance by happiness. "I just won't get out of 
his way, I'll butt into him--oh, not too hard; just bump 
him with my shoulder, well within the bounds of decent 
conduct. That way I'll push him as much as he pushes me." 
My mind was now made up. But the preparations took 
a long time. In the first place, I had to look decent for the 
collision. I had to decide what I'd wear on that occasion. 
"In case of a public scandal, I ought to be well dressed, 
for the public around there is very refined-princes, 
countesses, the whole literary world. Good clothes impress 
people and might put us on an equal footing in the eyes 
of society." 
With this in mind, I asked for an advance on my pay 
and bought myself a pair of black gloves and a pre­
sentable hat at Churkin's. I decided that black gloves 

134 
Notes from Underground 
were both more dignified and in better taste than the 
butter-colored ones that I'd contemplated buying at first. 
"Too loud," I decided. "It'd look as if I was trying 
to attract attention." 
I already had a fine shirt with a pair of nice bone 
cuff links. What held me back was my overcoat. Mine was 
warm, but it was quilted and had a raccoon collar, 
which, of course, is unthinkably common. I had to change 
that collar at all costs and get myself a beaver one like 
the officer's. I started looking around for one in the 
stores, and after some hesitation, decided to buy one of 
those cheap German beavers which, although they wear 
very badly and acquire a mangy look in no time, look 
impressive when new; I only needed it for this one oc­
casion anyway. I inquired about the price. Still quite 
expensive. After weighty deliberation, I decided to try to 
borrow from Anton Antonych, the head clerk in my office, 
a meek but serious and responsible man who never lent 
money but to whom I'd been specially recommended by a 
very important person who'd got me my job in the first 
place. I went through agonies. I felt it would be a dis­
grace to borrow money from Anton Antonych. I thought 
it monstrous. I even spent two or three sleepless nights 
thinking about it. Indeed, during that time I didn't sleep 
much anyway, as I was in a feverish state, with my heart 
either beating like mad or sinking altogether. 
Anton Antonych was at first surprised, then frowned, 
then thought for a while, and in the end decided to let me 
have the money. I signed an IOU giving him the right to 
pay himself back out of my salary in two weeks. 
So everything was ready. A beautiful piece of beaver 
replaced the vulgar raccoon collar. I set myself to make 
the final arrangements. I couldn't just go and do this 
hastily. Everything had to be thoroughly, gradually worked 
out. Gradualness was indeed very important. I must admit, 
however, that after several attempts, I began to despair: 
we seemed destined not to bump into each other. One 
would have thought I had done everything: I was de­
termined, everything was set, we were about to collide 
-but the next thing I knew, I had moved out of his 

Notes from Underground 
1 35 
way and he had passed without seeing me. I even prayed 
to God to give me determination as I approached him. 
Once, I was quite decided, but the net result was that I 
almost fell under his feet, for my courage failed me at 
the very last moment, when I was only two inches from 
him. He passed completely unperturbed while I bounced 
to one side like a bal. That night I was sick and delirious 
again. 
Everything ended quite unexpectedly and as well as 
could be hoped. During the night I decided to give it all 
up and forget my futile plan. So I decided to walk along 
Nevsky Avenue to see how it felt, having given up my 
plan. I saw him about three steps away from me. Sud­
denly I decided. I closed my eyes and we banged hard 
against each other, shoulder against shoulder. I didn't 
yield an inch and walked past him as an equal! He never 
even turned around, pretending not to have noticed a 
thing. But I know he was just pretending. I'm sure of it 
to this day. Of course, I got the worst of the collision, 
for he was much heavier. But I didn't care. What I cared 
about was that I had accomplished my goal and behaved 
with dignity; without yielding an inch, had put myself on an 
equal social footing with him in public. 
I returned home feeling compensated for everything. 
I was in a state of elation. In my triumph I sang arias 
from Italian operas. Naturaly, I won't describe what hap­
pened three days later. If you have read the first part 
of this narrative, you should be able to guess for your­
selves. The officer was later transferred somewhere. I 
haven't seen him for about fourteen years now. I wonder 
where my friend is now? I wonder whom he has been 
pushing around lately? 
I I  
The phase of petty dissipation was passing; a horrible 
nausea came over me. I had pangs of guilt, but I tried to 
stifle them, for they made me unbearably sick. Gradually, 
however, I got used to this state too. I could get used to 

136 
Notes from Underground 
anything-that is, I resigned myself, 
accepting things 
rather than really getting used to them. I had an escape 
that made everything bearable; I took refuge in "the 
sublime and the beautiful"-in my dreams, of course. 
I gave myself over entirely to dreaming--dreaming 
away for three months on end, huddled in my comer. And 
believe me, in my dreams, I had nothing in common with 
the fellow who, in his chicken-hearted panic, had sewn 
the beaver collar on his coat. I suddenly became a hero 
who wouldn't even have let my six-foot officer foe into 
his house. I couldn't even visualize him in my company. 
What my dreams consisted of and how I was able to con­
tent myself with them would be hard to explain today, 
but at the time, I managed to be content with them. And, 
in fact, even today, I have to content myself with much 
the same thing. My dreams were sweeter and stronger 
after my petty dissipations and were accompanied by 
remorse, tears, cursing, and ecstasy. I experienced mo­
ments of actual intoxication and, I swear, was happy 
without finding it in the least ridiculous. I had faith, hope, 
love. That's just it, I had blind faith that, by some 
miracle, some force would push aside the confining screen, 
opening up a wide horizon, on which would be a worth­
while life work, useful and sublime, and above all, all 
cut out and waiting for me (I didn't know what kind of 
work it should be, but it was essential that it should 
be there ready and waiting for me to perform it) . And I 
imagined that, at any moment, I'd step into the world arena, 
on a white steed, wearing a crown of laurels. I couldn't 
even conceive of being second best; that's why, in real 
life, I resigned myself so easily to being last. I had to 
either be a hero or wallow in the mud, and that's what 
turned out to be my undoing. For, while wallowing in 
the mud, I'd console myself that, at other times, I was a 
hero. This made it all right, for unlike an ordinary man, 
a hero couldn't be altogether defiled by mud, so why not 
wallow in it? 
It is noteworthy that I usually thought of "the sublime 
and the beautiful" during my dissipation, often just when 
I hit the rock-bottom of abjection. These thoughts came 

Notes from Underground 
1 37 
in little flashes, as if to remind me of the existence of 
"the sublime and the beautiful"; but they didn't interfere 
with my dissipation. Just the opposite, in fact. They seemed 
to spice it up by contrast and, like a good sauce, helped 
bring out the taste. This sauce, concocted of contradictions 
and suffering, contained painful self-analysis, and the 
resulting agonies and torments added piquancy and even 
meaning to my dissipation-in short, it was what a good 
sauce is meant to be. There was more to it, though, for 
without the sauce I could hardly have borne the prim­
itive, vulgar, uncomplicated dissipation of a petty govern­
ment employee and the soiled feeling it left. Could my 
vice have drawn me into the street at night otherwise? No. 
But then I had the sauce. 
But how much love-ah, how much-1 experienced 
in my dreams, when I escaped to "the sublime and the 
beautiful." Perhaps it was an imaginary love and maybe 
it was never directed toward another human being, but 
it was such an overflowing love that there was no need 
to direct it-that would've been an unnecessary luxury. 
Everything always ended safely in a leisurely, rapturous 
sliding into the domain of art, that is, into the beautiful 
lives of heroes stolen from the authors of novels and 
poems and adapted to the demands of the moment, what­
ever they might be. I, for instance, triumph over every­
one, and they, of course, are strewn in the dust, acknowl­
edging my superiority; I'm all-forgiving; I'm a great poet 
and court chamberlain; I fall in love; I inherit millions 
and donate them to human causes and take advantage of 
this opportunity to publicly confess my backslidings and 
disgrace which, of course, is no ordinary disgrace but 
contains much that is "sublime and beautiful" in it, some­
thing in the Manfred style. Everyone is weeping and 
kissing me (they could hardly be so thick-skinned as not 
to) ; then I leave, hungry and barefoot, to preach new 
ideas and rout the reactionaries at Austerlitz. Then, a 
triumphal march is played, an amnesty is declared, the 
Pope agrees to leave Rome for Brazil, there's a ball for 
all of Italy at the Villa Borghese on the shores of Lake 
Como, which lake, for this occasion, is moved to the 

138 
Notes from Underground 
vicinity of Rome. Then there's a scene in the bushes, 
and so on and so forth; see what I mean? 
You may say that it's base and in bad taste to drag my 
confessions out into the market place, after all the rap­
tures and tears I have admitted to. But why is it base? 
Do you think I'm ashamed of anything, or that my 
vagaries are more stupid than anything in your own lives? 
I can assure you that some of these daydreams were quite 
cleverly concocted. They didn't all take place on Lake 
Como, you know. But you're right, after all-there's 
plenty of baseness and bad taste in it all. And what's 
worse is that I'm trying to justify myself now. And worse 
yet is the remark I just made. But that's enough, or we'll 
never finish-there will always be something worse than 
what came before it. 
I could never take more than three months of dreaming 
at a time without getting an irresistible urge to rush out 
into the world. In this case, my venture amounted to a 
visit to my office chief, Anton Antonych. In all my life 
he was the only true acquaintance I ever had, which I find 
surprising. But I only went to see even him after I had 
attained such happiness in my dreams that I felt I had to 
throw myself on someone's neck and hug all mankind 
in the concrete person of someone. And since Anton 
Antonych received only on Tuesdays, I had to adjust my 
longing to embrace mankind so that it'd fall on a Tues­
day. Anton Antonych lived on the fourth floor in a house 
near Five Comers Square. He had four austere, yellowish 
rooms, low-ceilinged, each smaller than the next. He lived 
with his two daughters and their aunt, who poured the 
tea. The daughters were thirteen and fourteen, had little, 
turned-up noses, and kept whispering and giggling, which 
embarrassed me no end. The master of the house usually 
sat in his study on a leather couch, in the company of 
some gray-haired guest, a civil servant from some office, 
ours or another. I never found more than two or three 
guests there at any one time, and they were always the 
same. The conversation was always about excise duties, 
maneuvers in the Senate, salaries and promotions, the 
head of the department and ways of pleasing him, and so 

Notes from Underground 
139 
on and so forth. I sat patiently for four hours on end, 
like a fool, listening to these people, neither able nor 
daring to contribute to the conversation. My mind be­
came blank; again and again I 
felt I 
was 
sweating 
heavily; a sort of paralysis kept coming over me; but it 
was al very good for me. Back home, I could again lay 
aside, for a while, my eagerness to embrace the world. 
Ah yes, I had another acquaintance, a former school­
mate of mine called Simonov. True, I was bound to have 
many former schoolmates in Petersburg, but I had lost 
touch with them and we had even ceased to exchange 
greetings in the street. Perhaps I had asked for a transfer 
to another department in the service to avoid being with 
any of them-I wanted to cut off al links with my hate­
ful childhood. Damn school and those horrible years! 
Anyway, to cut it short, as soon as I was through there, 
I broke with my schoolmates once and for all, except for 
two or three fellows whom I still acknowledged in the 
street. Simonov was one of these. At school there hadn't 
been anything remarkable 
about 
him. 
He was even­
tempered and quiet, but I was able to discern a certain 
independence of character and, I'd even say, honesty in 
him. He was not even so very limited. I had spent some 
pleasant moments with him but they had never lasted, 
somehow or other always becoming overcast with gloom. 
His recollections of that time were apparently unpleasant, 
and he must have been afraid that I might fall back into 
my old tone with him. I suspected that I was abhorrent 
to him, but kept going to his place as long as I wasn't 
certain of it. 
So, one Thursday, unable to stand my loneliness and 
knowing that Anton Antonych didn't receive that day, I 
remembered Simonov. As I was walking upstairs to his 
fourth-floor apartment, I thought that my company might 
weigh on this man and that I really ought not to impose 
on him. But, as usual, these thoughts only spurred my 
desire to place myself in an equivocal position, and I 
went on. Almost a year had passed since I had last seen 
Simonov. 

140 
Notes from Underground 
I I I  
At Simonov's I found two other former schoolmates of 
mine. They seemed to be discussing something quite im­
portant, for they paid almost no attention to me. This 
was the more surprising in that we hadn't met for years. 
Apparently I was something like a housefly in their 
eyes. But even back at school they hadn't treated me like 
this, although everyone had hated me there. Of course, I 
realized that they were bound to despise me for my 
mediocre career in the service and for having let myself 
go so badly, what with my poor clothes and al that, which 
in their eyes was a seal of my limited abilities and general 
lack of importance. But still, I hadn't expected that much 
contempt. Simonov was even surprised to see me. Al­
though, now that I think of it, he always seemed rather 
surprised when I came. All this bothered me. I sat down 
and dejectedly listened to what they were saying. 
Gravely and heatedly, they were discussing a farewell 
dinner party they were giving the next day for a friend 
of theirs, an army officer named Zverkov who was being 
transferred to some remote province. Zverkov had been 
my classmate also. In the senior grades he was a special 
object of my hatred. In the elementary grades he was just 
a pretty, playful boy whom everyone liked-although I, 
of course, hated him even then, precisely because he was 
so pretty and cheerful. He was always a poor student, 
and became even poorer as he progressed. He managed 
to graduate, however, because he had the right connec­
tions. In his senior year he inherited an estate with two 
hundred serfs; since most of us in that school came 
from poor families, he started showing off. He was ter­
ribly vulgar, but there was no real malice in him, even 
when 
he 
swaggered. 
But the more 
arrogant Zverkov 
became, the more most of them fawned on him, despite 
their lip service to honor and dignity. They fawned on 
him because he had been favored by the gifts of nature, 
not to pursue any particular advantage. For some reason 

Notes from Underground 
141 
Zverkov was generally accepted among us as an arbiter 
of elegance and good manners, and that drove me mad. I 
hated his sharp, self-assured voice, his delight in his own 
jokes, which were usually hopelessly flat, although very 
bold; I hated his good-looking, stupid face (although I'd 
wilingly have exchanged it for my intelligent one) and his 
free and easy ways, which he imitated from the officers 
of that period, the eighteen forties. I hated his boasting 
about the amorous conquests he would make (he didn't 
dare have anything to do with women before he got his 
commission, for which he was waiting impatiently) and 
the duels he would fight. I remember that once, despite 
my taciturnity, I got into an argument with Zverkov when, 
during a recess, I heard him telling the other boys about 
his future exploits. He was as excited as a young puppy 
playing in the sun and declared finally that in exercising 
his droit du seigneur, he wouldn't leave a single virgin 
among the peasants on his estate without his attention. 
And if the peasants protested, he said, he'd have the 
bearded animals flogged and fined. Our stupid classmates 
clapped their hands in approval, so I attacked him-not 
at all out of sympathy for the village virgins, but because 
the boys were applauding such an insect. I got the better 
of him in the argument that time, but Zverkov, stupid as 
as he was, was cheerful and arrogant and managed to 
tum the argument into a joke, so that I wasn't really the 
winner-the laughter remained on his side. After that, 
he wrenched the upper hand from me several times in 
that way-without malice, jokingly, casually, laughing. 
My answers were loaded with scorn. After graduation, he 
made a friendly gesture toward me; I didn't push him 
away too obviously for I felt flattered. However, after 
that, we lost touch. 
Later, when he was a lieutenant, I heard about the wild 
life he was leading and about his conquests, which had al­
ready become a barracks-room legend. There were also 
rumors about the brilliant career he was making. 
He no longer seemed to recognize me in the street, and 
I suspected that he was afraid that exchanging greetings 
with an inconsequential man like me might compromise 

142 
Notes from Underground 
him. I saw him once in the theater with his officer's 
epaulets. He was paying his attentions to the daughters 
of some ancient general. In the three years or so since 
I had last seen him, he had gone to seed quite a bit, 
although he still was handsome and elegant. He was put­
ting on weight and had become rather flabby. One could 
see that, by the time he reached thirty, he'd be paunchy. 
So it was in honor of this man, who was at last leaving 
town, that my former schoolmates were giving the dinner 
party. It was obvious that they had continued to see him 
during these past three years, although I feel certain that, 
deep down, none of them felt on an equal footing with 
Zverkov. 
Of Simonov's two guests, one was a Russified German 
named Ferfichkin, a small man with a monkey face, a 
fool with a permanent sneer, my worst enemy from the 
lowest grades, a nasty, impudent little braggart who af­
fected a super-acute sense of honor, while he was really 
a coward at heart. He was one of Zverkov's retinue, who, 
while pretending to be his disinterested admirers, bor­
rowed money from him all the time. The other man was 
unremarkable. His name was Trudolubov. He was in the 
army, was tall, had a cold expression, was quite honest, 
admired success in all its forms, and talked only about 
promotion. He happened to be a distant relative of 
Zverkov's and, stupid though it may sound, that fact lent 
him a certain prestige among us. He considered me of 
no consequence whatever, but his behavior toward me 
was, if not really amiable, at least tolerable. 
"Well then," Trudolubov said, "if each of us contributes 
seven rubles, that'd make twenty-one rubles, and for that 
sum it's possible to dine decently. Zverkov, of course, 
won't have to pay." 
"Certainly not," Simonov said, "since we're inviting 
him." 
"Do you really imagine," Ferfichkin interjected caustic­
ally, with the ardor of a lackey proud of his master's 
titles, "that Zverkov will allow us to pay the whole bill? 
Even if he does accept, just not to offend us, he'll con­
tribute half a case of champagne, I'm sure." 

Notes from Underground 
143 
"What will we do, just the four of us, with half a case?" 
Trudolubov objected. Al that had struck him was the 
amount of champagne suggested by Ferfichkin. 
"So the three of us, plus Zverkov, makes f01,1r. Twenty­
one rubles 
. . . Hotel de Paris, tomorrow 
at five," 
Simonov, who was organizing the dinner, concluded. 
"Why twenty-one?" I said excitedly, perhaps even a 
little offended. "If you count me in, that'd make twenty­
eight rubles." 
I thought that to suddenly make such an offer would 
be very elegant and they'd be quite impressed and look 
upon me with respect. 
"Do you really want to contribute too?" Simonov said 
gloomily, avoiding my eyes. He knew me through and 
through, and that made me furious. 
"And why not? I'm his classmate too. I'm even rather 
slighted at your leaving me out," I spluttered. 
"And where were we supposed to look for you?" Fer­
fichkin asked rudely. 
"And then you never got along with Zverkov," Tru­
dolubov added, frowning. 
But I wouldn't let go now. 
"I don't think anyone has the right to decide that for 
me." 
My voice was trembling as if something horrible was 
happening. 
"Perhaps," I added, "it is precisely because I didn't 
get along with Zverkov that I wish to contribute now." 
"How can one ever understand you . . . with all these 
noble feelings," Trudolubov snorted. 
"Al right, we'll put you down," Simonov decided. "So, 
tomorrow at five-Hotel de Paris." 
"Let's see the money!" Ferfichkin snarled between his 
teeth, nodding at me. He wanted to say something more, 
but broke off. Even Simonov seemed embarrassed. 
"That's enough," Trudolubov said, getting up. "If he's 
that keen on coming, let him come along." 
"But I thought we'd have an intimate dinner party­
just ourselves," Ferfichkin muttered, fuming as he took 
his hat. "It isn't a formal gathering, you know," he 

144 
Notes from Underground 
added, turning toward me, "and it's possible that you're 
not really wanted." 
As they left, Trudolubov barely nodded in my direc­
tion, without really looking at me; Ferfichkin didn't even 
nod, Sirnonov, with whom I remained face to face, was 
in a state of irritated bewilderment and looked at me 
queerly. I didn't sit down, and he didn't invite me to. 
"Well, then .
.
.
 see you tomorrow then. And the 
money? Would you like to settle now? I was just won­
dering . . .  " he muttered. 
I flushed; at that moment, I remembered that I'd 
owed Simonov fifteen rubles for I don't know how long. 
As a matter of fact, I hadn't forgotten it, although I'd 
never made a gesture to pay him. 
"You must realize, Simonov, that coming here I 
couldn't possibly have known .
•
.
 I'm very sorry I forgot 
to bring . . .  
" 
"That's all right, perfectly all right. It doesn't make 
the slightest difference. You can pay tomorrow when we 
meet for dinner. I only mentioned it to make sure 
. 
• 
• 
You must understand, please . . .  " 
He stopped short and started pacing the room, looking 
even more irritated. As he paced, he came down harder 
and harder on his heels, until finally he was loudly 
stamping his feet as he walked. 
"I'm not keeping you from anything?" I asked him 
after a two-minute silence. 
"Oh no, not at all," he said, starting, "or . . .  that is 
. . .  to tell the truth, yes. You see, I have to go and see 
someone. . . . It's not far, though," he added in an 
apologetic voice, rather embarrassed. 
"Good God, why didn't you tell me!" 
I picked up my hat very nonchalantly. I have no 
idea where I had got all this nonchalance. 
"It's not far. . . . It's only a few steps from here," 
Sirnonov kept repeating fussily as he saw me off. He was 
not his usual self. "See you tomorrow at five sharp!" he 
shouted after me as I was going downstairs. 
He really sounded too pleased to be rid of me. I was 
stung. 

Notes from Underground 
145 
"What on earth made me do it?" I muttered through 
clenched teeth as I walked down the street. "A farewell 
party indeed! And for a nasty pig like Zverkov, too! Of 
course, I won't go; I have no obligations toward them. 
I don't give a damn anyhow! I'll send Simonov a note 
tomorrow to say I'm not coming." 
But what actually made me so furious was that I knew 
very well that I'd go--I'd go just to spite them, and the 
more wrong, the more tactless it was for me to go, the 
more certainly I'd do so. 
I even had a tangible reason for not going-I was 
broke. I had only nine rubles of which seven were due the 
very next day to my servant Apollon for his monthly 
wages, out of which he paid for his own board. Knowing 
what kind of a man Apollon was, it was unthinkable not 
to pay him. I'll have something to say some other time 
about that fiend, that thorn in my side. 
Stil, I knew I wouldn't pay him and that I would go 
to the dinner. 
That night I had the most hideous dreams. And no 
wonder since, before I fell 
asleep, memories of my 
miserable school years kept oppressing me; I couldn't 
shake them off even in my sleep. 
I had been sent to that school by some distant rela­
tives in whose charge I was-l've never heard of them 
since. I was an orphan and was already embittered by 
their nagging when they dumped me there. I was silent 
and 
brooding, 
and 
looked 
distrustfully 
at the 
world 
around me. My schoolmates took an immediate dislike to 
someone who was diferent from themselves and met me 
with cruel, merciless baiting. I couldn't lie down under 
their baiting; I couldn't take them in my stride as they 
took one another. I hated them from the first and with­
drew into my timid, wounded, cumbersome pride. Their 
coarseness revolted me. They laughed openly at my face 
and my puny figure, 
although their own faces were 
incredibly stupid. In that school, children's faces some­
how degenerated and turned stupid. Many boys who were 
attractive when they entered, after a few years, turned 
into revolting looking creatures. At sixteen, I was al-

146 
Notes from Underground 
ready grimly wondering at the pettiness of their thoughts, 
the inanity of their talk, their games and their preoc­
cupations. They couldn't understand the essential things 
and were not interested in the most thought-provoking 
subjects, so I came to consider them as inferiors. This was 
not due to my offended pride-and please don't come 
to me with nauseating cliches about how easy it is for 
me to talk, but while I was still dreaming, those boys 
were grasping the real meaning of life. They didn't grasp 
a damned thing, and certainly not the meaning of life­
and I swear that that's just what irritated me most about 
them. On the contrary, they mistook for fancy the most 
obvious reality in front of their noses and, even at that 
time, worshiped only success. Disregarding justice, they 
callously scorned everything that was helpless and op­
pressed. To them, position in life meant brains, and at 
sixteen, they were already discussing nice, secure little 
jobs. I must say, of course, that this attitude was largely 
due to the bad examples that they had had before their eyes 
from early childhood. 
They were incredibly depraved. Their depravity was, 
of course, rather superficial, mostly pseudocynical, and 
the freshness of youth occasionally flashed through it. But 
even that freshness had an unpleasant edge to it. 
I hated them violently, although I was probably even 
worse 
then 
they. 
They 
paid 
me 
back 
in 
kind, 
not 
bothering to conceal their loathing for me. But, by then, 
I didn't want them to like me; I wanted to humiliate them. 
To escape their jeers, I worked harder and became one 
of the best students. This impressed them. Besides, they 
began to realize that I was already reading books well 
beyond their understanding and was familiar with sub­
jects of which they had never heard (and that were not 
included in our curriculum) .  They leered at me in be­
wildered sarcasm but accepted my mental superiority, 
especially when the teachers began to single me out on 
that account. They stopped jeering, but they still disliked 
me. Cold, tense relations were established. 
In the end, I couldn't stand it myself. After so many 
years, 
I 
felt 
a 
need 
for 
human 
companionship and 

Notes from Underground 
1 47 
friends. I tried to approach some of my classmates, but 
my attempts were clumsy and contrived and came to 
nothing. I did make a friend once, but I was already a 
tyrant at heart and wanted to be the absolute ruler of his 
mind. I wanted to instill in him contempt for al those 
around us; I demanded that he break with his world. He 
was taken aback by my passionate friendship. I drove him 
to tears and fits of despair. He was a naive and yielding 
person, and when I felt I had full possession of him, I 
began to hate him and finally rejected him. It was as 
though I'd only wanted his total friendship just for the 
sake of winning it and making him submit to me. But I 
couldn't possibly conquer them all-the one I had con­
quered was a rare exception, unlike the rest. 
The first thing I did when I left school was to give up 
the special position which I had had in store, so I could 
break all ties with a past I loathed and send it to hell. 
. . . And I'll be damned if I know what drew me to that 
fellow Simonov! 
Early in the morning I jumped out of bed. I felt 
terribly excited, as if things were about to start happen­
ing. I felt that some radical break in my life would 
take place that day. But then, perhaps because so few 
things actually happened to me, I was always inclined to 
expect some radical break in my existence when some­
thing did happen. I went to my office as usual, but slipped 
away a couple of hours before quitting time. I had to 
prepare myself for that dinner. 
It was important, I thought, not to get there first, 
lest they think me too eager. But there were so many 
important considerations of this sort that I drove myself 
to the point of exhaustion. I had to polish my shoes my­
self, for Apollon would never have agreed to polish them 
twice in one day. He'd have considered that beyond the 
call of duty. To clean my shoes, I had to sneak the brushes 
from the lobby where they were kept, lest Apollon de­
spise me too much. Then I examined my clothes and 
found them worn and shabby. "I've been letting myself 
go too much," I thought. The jacket I'd worn to the of-

148 
Notes from Underground 
fice might look decent, but I really couldn't wear it to 
the party. My trousers were worse : there was a huge 
yellow spot on one knee. I felt that this spot alone would 
deprive me of nine-tenths of my dignity. I knew that 
it was despicable to think this way, but I decided that this 
was no time for thinking; I had to face reality now, and 
my heart sank. I knew that I was exaggerating the im­
portance of the party out of al proportion, but I couldn't 
help it. I was shaking as though I had a fever. I imagined 
despairingly how that nasty fool Zverkov would greet me; 
how the moronic Trudolubov would stare at me with un­
speakable scorn; how Ferfichkin, the beetle, would giggle 
L'lsolently at me, trying to please Zverkov; how Simonov 
would see through all that quite clearly and despise me 
both for my vanity and my abjectness-and, above al, 
how miserable the whole business would be. It was al 
like a piece of bad literature. 
Of course, it would have been best not to go at al. But 
that was out of the question. When something drew me, it 
really drew me, head first. Had I not gone, I'd have taunted 
myself for the rest of my life : 
"So you didn't have the guts to face reality, eh?" 
I wanted to show the lot of them that I wasn't the 
coward I myself thought I was. More than that, in the midst 
of a paroxysm of cowardice, I dreamed of triumphing, 
conquering, forcing them to love me for, let's say, the 
"loftiness of my thought and my incontestable wit." Then 
perhaps they'd drop Zverkov, and he'd sit al by himself 
in a comer, crushed and dejected. Later, I'd make it up 
with him and we'd drink to our eternal friendship. But 
the worst, the most depressing realization was that I al­
ready knew that I didn't really need any of it-I had no 
wish to crush, tame, or charm them, and the result wouldn't 
be worth a kopek to me once I'd achieved it. 
Ah, how I prayed to God for that day to be over quickly! 
I kept going to the window, opening the ventilating pane 
and, with inexpressible anguish, staring out at the wet 
snow falling. 
Finally my cheap wall clock hissed and delivered it­
self of five chimes. I grabbød my hat and, avoiding Apol-

Notes from Underground 
149 
Ion's look-he had been waiting for his wages since 
morning, but was too proud to mention it first-slipped 
past him and, jumping into a sleigh I had hired with 
my last half ruble, drove to the Hotel de Paris in grand 
style. 
I V  
I'd known from the start that I was going to b e  the 
first to arrive, but that didn't matter any more. Not one 
of them was there, and I even had some difficulty finding 
the room. They still hadn't finished setting the table. 
What could it mean? After complicated inquiries among 
the servants, I found out that dinner had been ordered for 
six o'clock and not five. This was confirmed at the bar 
downstairs; I felt too awkward to ask any more questions. 
It was only 5 : 25. If they had decided to change the hour, 
they should've let me know-that's what the post is for 
-and not humiliated me in my own eyes as well as be­
fore the servants. I sat down at the table. A servant con­
tinued setting it. I felt even more offended. A little before 
six, to supplement the lamps that were burning in the 
room, the servants brought in candles. It hadn't occurred 
to them to bring them in as soon as I arrived. In the 
room next door two gloomy-looking men were eating their 
dinner in silence. Noise was coming from a room further 
off. A group was dining there. They were laughing and 
shouting, and I caught some grating, French-sounding 
squeals. They were having a dinner party with ladies pres­
ent. Quite nauseating, in fact. 
I haven't often been more uncomfortable, so when, at 
about six, they all arrived together, I was terribly re­
lieved, viewing them as my liberators in a way, and thus 
forgetting that I was supposed to look offended. 
Zverkov came in first, as befitted a chieftain. He and the 
rest of them were laughing. Seeing me, Zverkov walked 
casually toward me, with a swaying swagger, and in a 
friendly but perfunctory way, gave me his hand, a little 

150 
Notes from Underground 
circumspectly, like a statesman who wishes to keep one 
amiably at a distance. 
I had imagined that as soon as he came in he'd break 
into his shrill, squeaky laugh and start subjecting us to 
his flat witticisms and stale jokes. I had been preparing 
myself for that ever since the previous day, but I hadn't at 
all expected to be treated like this, with condescending 
kindness. Did that mean that he now considered him­
self superior to me in every respect? "If," I thought, "he 
simply intends to offend me with his airs of superiority, I'll 
put him in his place yet. But suppose he really has got the 
idea into his stupid head that he's incomparably better 
than me and can't help looking down upon me with 
condescension?" The mere thought of it made me gasp. 
"I was rather surprised to hear of your desire to join 
us," Zverkov said, lisping and drawling, a thing I'd never 
heard him do before. "We haven't met for a long time. 
You seem to have been avoiding us. It's a pity. We aren't 
as horrible as we look. In any case, I'm delighted to 
renew . . .  
" 
He turned away casually and put his hat on the win­
dow sill. 
"Have you been waiting long?" Trudolubov asked me. 
"I came at five sharp, as I was told yesterday," I an­
swered loudly, with an irritation that promised an early 
explosion. 
"Didn't you tell him about the change in time?'' Tru­
dolubov asked Simonov. 
"I didn't, I forgot," Simonov said, not sounding in the 
least sorry, and without even bothering to apologize 
to me, he went to see about the drinks and appetizers. 
"So you've been waiting here for a whole hour, you 
poor fellow!" Zverkov exclaimed, laughing. 
It must have struck him as very funny indeed. Fer­
fichkin chimed in with his nasty, thin chuckle that re­
minded me of the yapping of a lap dog. He too found 
it al very funny and me ridiculous. 
"It isn't funny at al," I shouted at Ferfichkin, growing 
more and more irritated. "It was someone else's fault. 

Notes from Underground 
1 5 1  
I couldn't help it. No one bothered to tell me. This 
this . . .  is simply absurd." 
"It's not only absurd, it's worse," Trudolubov grum­
bled, naively siding with me. "It's plain bad manners. 
You're too polite about it. It's simply awful manners. 
Of course, no offense was meant but 
• 
• 
. How could 
Simonov-1 don't know!" 
"If anyone did that to me," Ferfichkin said, "I'd--" 
"Why," Zverkov interrupted, "you should have ordered 
yourself something or had dinner served without wait­
ing for us." 
"I hope you realize that I could've done so without 
waiting for anyone's permission," I replied. "If I elected 
to wait it was because-" 
"Let's sit down, gentlemen," Simonov shouted, com­
ing back into the room. "Everything's ready. I'm an­
swerable for the 
champagne-it's 
wonderfully chilled. 
You know, I didn't know your exact address," he said 
suddenly, turning toward me, without, however, looking 
at me. "How on earth do you think I could've found 
you?" 
Obviously he had something against me. Probably, 
since yesterday, he'd decided . . .  
Everyone sat down, including me. The table was round. 
On my left I had Trudolubov, on my right, Simonov; 
Zverkov 
was 
facing 
me; 
Ferfichkin installed himself 
between Zverkov and Trudolubov. 
''Tell me, are you working for the government?" Zverkov 
drawled, continuing to show an interest in me. Seeing 
that I was embarrassed, he'd decided seriously that he 
had to be nice to me and cheer me up. 
But, in my rage, I thought: "What's he trying to do? 
Make me throw that bottle in his face?'' I was probably 
so easily irritated because I'd lost the habit of being with 
people. Still, I informed him abruptly which government 
department I was working for, without taking my eyes 
off my plate. 
"And are you satisfied with it? Tell me, what made 
you leave the job you had before?" Zverkov drawled. 
"What made me leave the job I had before," I said, 

152 
Notes from Underground 
drawling my words out even more than he had done, "was 
the fact that I'd decided to leave it." I was almost 
losing al control. Ferfichkin snorted. Sirnonov looked 
at me sarcastically. Trudolubov stopped eating and stared 
at me curiously. Zverkov winced but tried not to show 
his feelings. 
"And how is the remuneration?" 
"What do you mean by remuneration?" 
"I mean the salary." 
"What is this, a cross-examination?" 
But I gave him the exact figure. I turned terribly red. 
"Not much, " Zverkov said ponderously. 
"Yes, you can hardly afford to dine in restaurants on 
that, " Ferfichkin commented insultingly. 
"It does sound inadequate to me," Trudolubov said 
seriously. 
"And 
you've 
grown 
so 
thin, 
you've 
changed 
so 
much ... . " Zverkov observed, with some venom now, 
examining me and my clothes with a sort of arrogant 
sympathy. 
"That's enough, stop embarrassing him! " Ferfichkin 
giggled. 
"I'd like you to know, my dear sir, that I'm not in the 
least embarrassed," I said, at the end of my tether. "Now 
you listen to me : I'm paying for my dinner in this res­
taurant myself, Mr. Ferfichkin; no one's treating me." 
Ferfichkin went crimson and, glaring furiously into my 
eyes, snapped: 
"What? Do you wish to imply that there's someone 
here who's not paying his way? You seem to-- " 
"That'll do, " I said, feeling I'd gone a bit too far, 
"and now, how about having a more intelligent conver­
sation? " 
"So you intend to show off your intelligence?" 
"Don't worry about that. It'd be wasted around here." 
"What's this all about, anyway? What's al the cack-
ling about? Where do you think you are? Remember, 
this isn't your miserable office." 
"That'll do, that'll do!" Zverkov shouted imperiously, 
"that's enough, fellows!" 

Notes from Underground 
153 
"It's all so stupid," Simonov grumbled. 
"It's really stupid," Trudolubov agreed. "We wanted 
to say good-by to a dear friend, and you bring in petty 
money matters," he added rudely, addressing me alone. 
"It was you who insisted on· joining us yesterday, so 
please don't spoil the friendly atmosphere." 
"Enough, enough, fellows!" Zverkov shouted. "Stop 
it, gentlemen. It's really out of place. Let me tell you 
instead how I just escaped getting married a couple of 
days ago . . . .  " 
And there followed a stupid story about how Zverkov 
had almost married. There was nothing much about mar­
riage in it, but plenty of names of colonels, generals, and 
even various people with court connections were dropped, 
with Zverkov outshining almost the whole lot of them. 
The 
others 
began 
to 
laugh 
approvingly; 
Ferfichkin 
yelped with delight. 
They forgot about me, and I sat there crushed and 
humiliated. 
"Good God, what kind of company are they for me!" 
I thought. "What a stupid light I've shown myself in! And 
I've let Ferfichkin get away with too much. These lumps 
think they're doing me a great honor, allowing me to 
sit down to dinner with them, whereas it's I who conde­
scend to dine with them! So I've grown thin and my 
clothes are shabby? Ah, the damned trousers! Zverkov 
probably noticed the yellow 
stain 
on the knee right 
away. Ah, why bother! I ought to get up right away, take 
my hat, and leave without saying a word. And tomorrow, 
I could challenge any of them to a duel. The miserable 
pigs! I don't have to stick it out to get my seven rubles' 
worth of food. They might think, though-damn it all! 
To hell with the seven rubles; I'm leaving right now!" 
It goes without saying that I didn't leave. 
Dejectedly I kept emptying sherry and Chateau Lafitte, 
glass after glass. I had little experience in drinking, so 
it quickly went to my head, and my rage grew. I suddenly 
felt a great desire to insult them all before leaving. I had 
to find an opportunity to show them. Let them think I 

154 
Notes from Underground 
was ridiculous, but there'd be no doubt about my supe­
rior intelligence and . . . and . . . to hell with them! 
I stared arrogantly at them with dilated eyes. Their 
party seemed to be noisy and gay. Zverkov was doing 
most of the talking. I listened. Zverkov was telling them 
how he had brought some society lady to a point where 
she couldn't help admitting her love for him (he was 
lying like a trooper, of course) and how he was helped 
in the romance by a friend of his, a prince who owned 
three thousand serfs, was an officer in the hussars and 
to whom Zverkov referred familiarly as Nick. 
"How is it," I butted in suddenly, "that this Nickie 
of yours--the 
one 
with 
the 
three 
thousand 
serfs­
is not attending your farewell dinner?" 
For a moment everyone fell silent. 
"You're drunk already," Trudolubov said, finally con­
senting to 
acknowledge my 
existence 
as he squinted 
scornfully in my direction. 
Zverkov examined me in silence as though I were a bug. 
I lowered my eyes. Simonov started hurriedly pouring 
champagne. 
Trudolubov raised his glass. All the others except me 
did the same. "Here's to your health and a pleasant 
journey!" Trudolubov shouted, "To our school years, 
gentlemen, and to the future! Bottoms up!" 
They emptied their glasses and hurried to embrace 
Zverkov. I didn't budge. My glass stood before me un­
touched. 
"What? Aren't you going to drink it up?" Trudolubov 
roared. He seemed to have lost patience and stared at me 
threateningly. 
"I want to make a speech of my own, then I'll drink 
it." 
"Nasty, spiteful creature," Simonov grumbled. 
I straightened myself in my chair, feverishly raised my 
glass, expecting something extraordinary to happen and 
not knowing myself what I was going to say. 
"Everybody quiet!" Ferfichkin shouted. "Watch out 
now for a display of intelligence!" 
"Lieutenant Zverkov," I began, "I wish to inform you 

Notes from Underground 
155 
that I can't stand big words, loud mouths, tight waists . 
. . . That's the first point I wanted to make. Now, the 
second." 
They all stirred uneasily. 
"I hate smut and those who talk smut. Especially the 
latter. Number three : I like truth, sincerity, and bonesty," 
I continued mechanically, growing cold and wondering 
in a panic how I could be saying those things. "I like 
thought, Zverkov; I like true friendship on an equal 
footing; I don't-but, why not, after all? I'm willing to 
drink to your health, and good luck to you-seduce 
young Circassian beauties, Lieutenant, kil the country's 
enemies, and . . .  and . . .  to your health, Monsieur Zver­
kov!" 
Zverkov got up, bowed to me, and said: 
"Thank you very much." 
He had turned pale. He was furious. 
"God damn it!" Trudolubov shouted, bringing his fist 
down on the table. 
"Oh no! For things like that people get punched in the 
face," Ferfichkin squeaked. 
"We ought to kick him out," Simonov mumbled. 
"Quiet, gentlemen, don't move!" Zverkov said solemnly, 
controlling the general indignation. "I very much ap­
preciate your reaction, but I assure you, I'm perfectly 
capable of showing him the value I place on his words 
myself." 
"Now, you, Mr. Ferfichkin, I'd like you to answer me 
tomorrow for what you said just now," I said in a loud 
voice. 
"You mean a duel? Very good then," he replied. But 
apparently I was so ridiculous in making this challenge, 
and it 
was 
so incongruous with 
my 
physique, 
that 
they all burst out laughing; 
finally Ferfichkin joined 
them too. 
"The best thing to do is leave 'im alone. He's com­
pletely drunk," Trudolubov said disgustedly. 
"I'll never forgive myself for letting him come," Simonov 
grumbled again. 
And I thought: "Wouldn't it be wonderful to hurl that 

156 
Notes from Underground 
bottle at them!" I seized the bottle and filed my glass. 
"I'd better," I thought, "stay to the end now. They'd 
be only too pleased if I left. Never. Just to spite them I'll 
sit here and drink to the very end-just to show 'em 
that I don't pay the slightest attention to their opinion 
of me. I'll drink here because it's a tavern and I've paid 
for my drinks. I'll sit and drink, because they are mere 
pawns, mere pieces of wood that don't count. I'll sit and 
drink and sing . . . .  Yes, I'll sing if I want to sing, because 
I've got a right to sing . . .  hmm .
.
.
•
 
" 
But I didn't sing. Al I did was try not to look at any 
of them. I affected a nonchalant air, waiting impatiently 
for them to address me first. But, alas, they didn't. 
Ah, how I longed to make up with them at that moment! 
The clock struck eight and finally nine. They moved from 
the table to the sofa. Zverkov sprawled out, putting a 
foot on a little table nearby. The wine was moved over 
there. Zverkov had ordered three bottles himself. He 
didn't ask me to join them, of course. The others sat 
around him on the sofa and listened to what he was 
saying with something bordering on reverence. It was 
obvious that he was a popular man. I wondered why 
they should like him so much. From time to time, in their 
drunken enthusiasm, they'd embrace each other. They 
spoke of the Caucasus; of what true passion meant; of 
card games; of jobs that paid well; of the income of some 
hussar called Podkharzhevsky, which came to such an 
impressive figure that they were delighted, although none 
of them knew him personally; about the unbelievable 
beauty and grace of a Princess D. whom, also, none of 
them knew or had even seen; and finally they reached the 
conclusion that Shakespeare was immortal. 
I smiled scornfully, pacing up and down by the wall op­
posite the sofa. I wanted terribly to show them that I 
could easily do without them, but at the same time, 
I was stamping my feet on purpose. But to no avail. 
They really paid no attention to me. I had the patience 
to pace the room in front of them like that, from the 
fireplace to the table and back, from eight o'clock til 
eleven, without ever swerving an inch from my course, 

Notes from Underground 
157 
repeating to myself: "No one can stop me from walking 
here so long as I feel like it." 
The waiter, who kept coming into the room, stopped 
several times and gaped at me. I was dizzy from the con­
stant turning. There were moments when I felt I was 
delirious. Within three hours, I managed to get soaked 
through with sweat and dry again three times. Now and 
then, with a stabbing, sickening pain, it occurred to me 
that ten, twenty, perhaps forty years might pass and I'd 
stil remember these, the most ridiculous and painful. 
minutes of my life, with horror and disgust. 
One could not have gone further out of one's way than 
I had to inflict upon oneself the cruelest of humiliations. 
I realized that, yet I continued pacing the room between 
the table and the fireplace. "Oh, if only they knew what 
thought and feeling I'm capable of and how sensitive 
and complex I am!" I thought, addressing myself silently 
to the sofa where my enemies were seated. But they 
behaved as though I weren't even in the room. Once­
only once-did they tum toward me: 
when Zverkov 
was speaking of Shakespeare and I burst into a scornful 
laugh. I snorted so afectedly and so nastily that they sud­
denly interrupted their conversation and, for two min­
utes, watched solemnly, in complete silence, as I walked, 
laughing, from the fireplace to the table and back without 
paying any attention to them. But nothing came of it. 
They resumed their conversation, and two minutes later 
I was forgotten again. Then it struck eleven. 
"Hey!" Zverkov shouted, rising from the sofa, "shall 
we go there now?" 
"Yes, yes, let's!" the others agreed eagerly. 
I turned sharply toward Zverkov. I was so exhausted, 
so broken, that I'd have cut my own throat just to put an 
end to it. I was feverish-my wet hair was stuck to my 
forehead and temples. 
"Zverkov," I said, with determination, in a shrill voice, 
"I want to ask you to forgive me. You too, Ferfichkin. 
And the others also-all whom I've offended." 
"I see!" Ferfichkin hissed with venom, "you'd rather 
do without the duel, would you?" 

158 
Notes from Underground 
That stab made me wince. 
"No, Ferfichkin, you're wrong. I'm not afraid of a duel. 
I'm prepared to fight you tomorrow if you wish. I even 
insist, and you can't refuse me. I want to prove to you 
that I'm not afraid of a duel. You can fire first, and I'll 
fire in the air." 
"He's playing a game with himself," Simonov remarked. 
"He's just wagging his tongue," Trudolubov declared. 
"Will you kindly let me pass?" Zverkov brushed me 
off scornfully. "Why are you standing in my way? What 
do you want?" 
They were al flushed and their eyes were glassy with 
drink. 
"I'd like to be your friend, Zverkov. I know I've 
offended you, but-" 
"Offended? You? M-ee? Do you know what, my dear 
man? You couldn't offend me under any circumstances!" 
"And that's enough from you; now out of the way!" 
Trudolubov concluded. "Let's go, fellows!" 
"But mind you, fellows, I'm reserving Olympia for 
myself," Zverkov shouted. "You won't forget, will you?" 
"All right, al right, we won't fight over it!" the others 
agreed, laughing. 
I stood there feeling as though they had al spat at me 
in tum. The party was noisily leaving the room. Trudo­
lubov intoned some stupid song. Simonov stayed behind 
for a minute to tip the waiters. To my own surprise, I 
walked over to him. 
"Simonov, 
lend 
me 
six 
rubles," 
I 
said 
with 
the 
determination of despair. 
He turned his drunken eyes on me in utter bewilder­
ment. 
"You don't imagine you're going there with us, do 
you?" 
"Yes, I'm coming!" 
"I have no money with me," he said scornfully. Then 
he snorted and started to leave the room. 
I clutched at his coat. It was a nightmare. 
"Simonov, I saw that you have money, so why do 
you refuse me? Do you think I'm that low? Please, 

Notes from Underground 
159 
think before you refuse me. My whole future depends on 
it, all my plans . . .  " 
Simonov took out the money and almost threw it at 
me. 
"Here, take it if you have no sense of decency," he 
said mercilessly, and hurried to catch up with the others. 
For one moment I was left alone. I glanced at the dis­
order, the remains of the diner-a broken glass on the 
floor, some spilled wine, cigarette ends . . .  My head was 
heavy with drink and delirium, and a horrible anguish 
was pressing on my heart. A waiter, who had seen and 
heard everything that had gone on, peered curiously into 
my eyes. 
"I'll go there!" I shouted. "And either they'll al get 
down on their knees and beg me for my friendship, or 
I'll slap Zverkov's face!" 
v 
"So this is reality," I mumbled, dashing downstairs, 
"finally I've met it head on. . . .  Yes, it's different from 
making the Pope leave Rome for Brazil or dancing at 
that ball on the shores of Lake Como. . . .  
"Pig!" the thought flashed through my head, "how can 
you sneer at that now? 
"I don't care!" I answered myself aloud. 
"Al is lost 
anyway!" 
There was no sign of them downstairs, but that didn't 
matter. I knew where they'd gone. 
There was a lone sleigh near the door of the restaurant. 
The driver wore a coarse peasant coat thickly covered 
with the wet, warm-looking snow. The street was steamy 
and stufy. The small, shaggy, piebald horse was also 
spattered with wet snow. It was coughing. I remember all 
that very clearly. As I lifted my foot to get into the 
sleigh, Simonov's gesture as he gave me the six rubles 
flashed through my mind, and I fell in a heap into the 
bottom of the sleigh. 
"No, I'll have to do a lot to make up for everything! But 

160 
Notes from Underground 
I'll do it or die this very night. Let's go!" I shouted to the 
driver. 
We set off. A whirlwind was raging inside my head. 
"They won't get down on their knees and beseech me 
to be their friend. That is self-delusion, a cheap, disgust­
ing mirage, a sentimental fancy-it's the ball on Lake 
Como again. So, I must slap Zverkov's face. I have to. 
So, it's decided-I'm rushing over there to slap him. 
"Hurry!" I said to the driver, and he flicked the reins. 
"I'll slap his face as soon as I get there. But shouldn't 
I saw a few words, to preface the slap, as it were? No, 
no need. I'll simply go in and slap his face. They'll al . 
be sitting in the large room, and he'll be with Olym­
pia on the sofa. That damned Olympia! Once she made 
some cracks about my face and wouldn't have me. I'll 
drag her by her hair and Zverkov by his ears-no, just 
one ear. I'll lead him by the ear all around the room. 
Maybe they'll al set upon me, beat me up, and throw 
me out. Yes, they're almost sure to do that. Let 'em! 
I'll still have slapped him first-and so the initiative will 
be mine and, according to the code of honor, that's all 
there is to it-he's branded, and no beatings they may 
inflict upon me will wash off that slap. Nothing but a duel. 
He'll have to fight. So let 'em beat me up now, the pigs. 
Trudolubov wil do most of the beating, he's so strong. 
Ferfichkin is sure to catch hold of me from the side and 
grab me by the hair. Let 'em, let 'em! I've allowed for 
that. Their fat heads are bound to see the tragic element 
in it al in the end. As they drag me to the door, I'll 
shout at them that they're not worth even my little fin­
ger . . . .  
"Hurry, hurry!" I shouted to the driver so wildly that 
even he started and whipped up the horse. 
"So we'll fight at dawn. It's agreed. I'm through with 
my office, of course. Ferfichkin was scornful about it. 
But where will I get a pistol? Nonsense, I'll ask for an 
advance on my salary and buy one. And amunition? 
Ah, that's the concern of the seconds. But how can all 
that be managed by dawn? And where wil I find a sec­
ond? I don't know anyone . . . .  Ah, rubbish!" I shouted, 

Notes from Underground 
161 
becoming more and more carried away. "The first man 
I come across in the street can no more decline to be 
my second than he can refuse to rescue a drowning man. 
Al sorts of things can happen. If I asked the director of 
my office himself, he'd have to consent, as a matter of 
chivalry; and he would have to agree to respect my secret. 
Now, Anton Antonych . . .  
" 
At that very minute, I realized more clearly and 
more graphically than anyone else in the world the pathet­
ic absurdity of my assumptions, and I saw the reverse 
side of the coin, but . . . 
"Come on, driver, get a move on, get a move on, damn 
you!" 
"Ah, sir . . .  " that representative of the laboring masses 
replied. 
An icy shiver suddenly ran down my back. 
"Wouldn't it be better-maybe-why-perhaps to tum 
back home, right now? Oh God, what made me insist 
yesterday on taking part in this dinner? But it's no longer 
possible! And that three-hour walk between the fireplace 
and the table! No, they, and no one else, will have to pay 
for that walk. They must wash away that disgrace! 
"Hey, driver, hurry, hurry!" I shouted. 
"And what'd happen if they took me to a police sta­
tion and lodged a complaint against me? They wouldn't 
dare! They'd be afraid of the scandal it'd cause! And 
what if Zverkov, out of contempt for me, refuses to fight 
a duel? That's most likely, in fact, but I'll prove to 
them . . .  I'll go to the station from which he's supposed 
to leave tomorrow and grab him by the leg as he gets into 
the carriage. I'll bite his arm, his hand-'Look, everyone, 
what a state a man can be driven into!' I'll shout. Let 
him hit me in the face, and the rest of them with him. I'll 
shout for all to hear : 'Look at that pig who's going to 
seduce Circassian girls with my 
spit 
shining on his 
face!' 
"After that, of course, everything will be over. My 
office wil have disappeared from the face of the earth; 
I'll be arrested, tried, dismissed from my government 
job, and deported to Siberia. But never mind! In fifteen 

162 
Notes from Underground 
years, after 
I've 
served my time, I'll trace 
Zverkov 
to some provincial town. He'll be happily married by 
then, with a big daughter. I'll tell him :  'Look, you mon­
ster-look at these sunken cheeks and tattered clothes! 
I've lost everything--career, happiness, art, science, the 
woman I loved-and all through your fault. Here are the 
pistols. I've come to unload my pistol and . . . and I 
forgive you.' Then I'll fire into the air and no one will 
hear of me again." 
This almost brought tears to my eyes, although I real­
ized that I'd taken it all from Pushkin's Pistol Shot or 
Lermontov's Masquerade. And suddenly I felt terribly 
ashamed. I felt so ashamed that I ordered the driver to 
stop and got out of the sleigh. I stepped out into the snow 
in the middle of the street. The driver sighed and looked 
at me, bewildered. 
What could I do? I couldn't go there because it 
made no sense, and I couldn't drop the matter because 
. . . "Oh, God, how can I drop it, after all this humilia­
tion? No!" I shouted, jumping back into the sleigh, 
"that's the way it has to be! Come on, hurry, let's go!" 
And, in my anxiety to get there, I slamed my fist into 
the driver's neck. 
"What's come over you! What're you fighting for?" the 
man shouted, but he whipped up his nag, and it started 
kicking with its hind legs. 
Wet snow was coming down in large flakes, but I didn't 
care; I unbuttoned my coat. I was unaware of anything else, 
because I had definitely decided that I was going to slap 
Zverkov's face; I felt horrified, as though it were just 
about to happen, now and inevitably, and that nothing 
on earth could stop it. Isolated street lamps flickered like 
funeral torches through the snowy haze. Snow got under 
my coat and collar and melted there. I didn't bother to 
close my coat-all was lost anyway. 
Finally we arrived, I jumped out. With my mind almost 
blank, I tore upstairs, and the next thing I knew, I 
was pounding and kicking on the door. My legs, espe­
cially 
my 
knees, 
felt 
terribly 
weak. 
The 
door 
was 
opened very quickly, as though I were expected. 

Notes from Underground 
163 
As a matter of fact, Simonov had warned them that 
"one more might come," for in that sort of place warnings 
and precautions in general were necessary. 
This was 
one of the "dress shops" long since closed down by police. 
During the day, it really functioned as a dress shop, but 
at night, if you were properly recommended, you could 
go there as a "guest." I quickly crossed the dark store 
and went into another room that I already knew. Only 
one 
candle 
was burning there, 
and 
I 
stopped, 
non­
plused: they weren't in there. 
"Where are they?" I asked someone. 
But, of course, they had left. 
The madam of the place, who knew me by sight, was 
there. She stared at me with a stupid smile. A minute 
or so later, another creature came in. 
Without paying any attention to anything, I walked up 
and down the room, talking to myself, I believe. I felt as 
though I had escaped death, and my whole body seemed 
to rejoice. I would've certainly slapped his face, no doubt 
about that. But, since they weren't here-it was quite 
different! I looked around me. I was still trying to figure 
it out. Unthinkingly, I glanced at the girl who'd just come 
in. She had a fresh, young face, rather pale, with straight, 
dark eyebrows and a serious, rather surprised expression. 
That suited me. I'd have hated it if she'd smiled. I 
examined her more attentively. I had to make an effort 
to do so, for my thoughts were still vague. There was 
something simple and kind in the face before me, but it 
struck me as uncannily grave. I was sure that that didn't 
help her in that place, that none of the other fools had 
noticed her. Anyway, she was no beauty, although she was 
tall, strong, and well-built. Something nasty made me 
cross over to her. 
By chance, I caught sight of myself in a mirror. My tor­
mented face struck me as unspeakably revolting. It was 
ashen, vicious, and abject. My hair was disheveled. 
"I don't give a damn. So much the better," I thought. 
"The more repulsive she finds me, the better I'll like 
it." 

164 
Notes from Underground 
V I  
Somewhere behind the partition, sounding as if some­
one was strangling it, a clock began wheezing. After an 
incredibly long wheeze, there was a thin, nasty, surpris­
ingly hurried chime that made me think of someone 
leaping suddenly forward. It struck two. I came to. Al­
though I hadn't been asleep, I had been in a stupor until 
then. 
The narrow, low-ceilinged room, cluttered with a huge 
wardrobe, cardboard boxes, and bits of clothing of every 
description, was quite dark. The stump of a candle on 
the little table at the other end of the room was about 
to go out and just flickered faintly from time to time. 
Within moments, it would be completely dark. 
It didn't take me long to regain my senses. Everything 
came back to me effortlessly, as if it had been waiting for 
a chance to pounce on me. In fact, all the time I had been 
in a stupor, there had remained a sort of glowing dot of 
consciousness which had never disappeared, around which 
dreamy shadows tramped heavily. But, strangely enough, 
everything that happened to me that night, now, after 
I had regained full consciousness, seemed like something 
out of the very distant past, something I had coped with 
very, very long ago. 
My head was full of fumes. Something was hovering 
over 
me, 
poking 
at 
me, 
exciting 
and 
taunting 
me. 
Anguish and spite were again accumulating inside me, 
searching for an outlet. At that moment, I noticed that 
right next to me, two wide-open eyes were examining me 
curiously and insistently. The eyes looked at me with a 
cold, unsympathetic, sullen detachment that made me 
feel uncomfortable. 
A grim thought sprang up in my brain and ran over 
my whole body with the nasty sensation one gets upon 
entering a dank, musty hole. There was something un­
natural in the fact that these eyes had only now decided 
to examine me. But I remembered that for two hours I 

Notes from Underground 
165 
hadn't exchanged a single word with this creature. I 
hadn't felt the slightest need for it. In fact, I'd rather 
liked it that way for some reason. Now I suddenly got a 
general picture of debauchery-inane and as revolting 
as a spider-that starts without feeling, coarsely and 
shamelessly, at the culmination point of real love. We 
looked into one another's eyes for a long time, but she 
didn't lower hers before mine. Finally I began to feel ill 
at ease. 
"What's your name?" I asked abruptly, to get out of 
the situation. 
"Liza," she answered rather coldly, in a whisper, and 
averted her eyes. 
I remained silent for a while. 
"Tonight, the weather . . . snow . . . disgusting!" I 
mumbled, almost talking to myself, placing one hand 
under my head and staring mournfully at the ceiling. 
She didn't answer. The whole thing was hideous. 
"Do you come from around here?'' I asked her a mo­
ment later, almost angrily, turning my head slightly to­
ward her. 
"No." 
"Where are you from?" 
"Riga," she said reluctantly. 
"You a German?" 
"No, I'm Russian." 
"Been here long?" 
"Where?" 
"In this house." 
"A couple of weeks." 
Her tone was more and more abrupt. The candle went 
out, and I could no longer see her face. 
"Do you still have your parents?" 
"Yes-they're alive." 
"Where are they?" 
"In Riga." 
"What do they do?" 
"Oh, just . . .  
" 
"Just what? What sort of people are they?" 
"Tradespeople." 

166 
Notes from Underground 
"You used to live with them?" 
"Yes." 
"How old are you?" 
"Twenty." 
"Why did you leave them?" 
"I just left." 
That "just" meant "let go of me, I'm fed up." We fell 
silent. 
God alone knows why I didn't leave. I myself was ɛ 
ginning to feel sick and dejected. Images from the pre­
ceding 
twenty-four 
hours 
kept 
flashing 
disjointedly 
through my mind, 
without the 
slightest 
participation 
of my wil. I suddenly remembered a scene I'd witnessed 
in the morning when, immersed in my preoccupations, 
I had been ambling to my office. 
"Today I saw some people carrying a coffin, and 
they almost dropped it," I suddenly said aloud, although 
I didn't feel at all like resuming the conversation. 
"A coffin?" 
"Yes, in the Haymarket. They were carrying it up from 
a basement." 
"From a basement?" 
"From a basement apartment, you know, in a dis­
orderly house . . . It was so muddy al around-eggshells, 
garbage-it smelled . . .  It was quite disgusting." 
Silence. 
"It was a bad day for a burial," I resumed, just to 
break the silence. 
"Bad? Why?" 
"The snow, the slush . . .  " I  yawned. 
"What's the difference?" she said after a while. 
"No, it's horrible." I yawned again. "The gravediggers 
must have been swearing because they were getting wet 
with that snow. And I'm sure the grave was ful of water." 
"Why 
should 
there 
be water in the 
grave?" 
she 
asked with strange curiosity, but tossing her words at me 
even more coldly and harshly than before. 
I was begining to enjoy this. 
"Why, I'd say there was at least half a foot of water 
in there. You can't dig a dry grave in Volk:ovo Cemetery." 

Notes from Underground 
167 
"Why not?" 
"What do 
you mean, 'Why not?' It's all swam,py 
over there. They just lower the coffins into the water. 
I've seen it myself .
.
.
 many times." 
I'd never seen anything of the sort. In fact, I'd never 
been to Volkovo. I'd only heard about it. 
"Is it possible that you don't care whether you live 
or die?" I said. 
"Why should I die?" she asked, sounding defensive. 
"You'll die al right, some day, and it'll be exactly 
like that woman I was talking about. She was young too, 
just like you. . . . She died of consumption." 
"A dame like that would've died in a hospital." 
She knows all about these things, I thought when she 
used the word "dame." 
"She owed money to the madam," I said, enjoying the 
argument more and more. "And she kept working to the 
very end, consumption or no consumption. The cabbies 
around there had spoken to some soldiers, and I heard it 
from them. They made fun of her. They even intended 
to have a party in her memory in a tavern." 
I had invented much of this. 
A dead silence followed. She didn't even stir. 
"And why is it better to die in a hospital?" I added. 
"Makes no difference where. Why should I die, any-
way?" she said irritatedly. 
"If not now, later . . • .  
" 
"Now or later, it won't make any diference." 
"No? 
Just think: 
Now you're 
young 
and pretty, 
and they value your services. But after a year or so of 
this life, you won't be the same; you'll fade--" 
"After a year?" 
"In any case, I can tell you that in a year your 
price wil go down," I went on with vicious zest. "Then 
you'll move from this establishment to a cheaper one. 
And, in another year, you'll be moved to a third, stil 
lower; and in about seven years, you'll wind up in a 
Haymarket basement. And that'll still be nothing. What 
will you do if they discover there's something wrong with 
your chest, say, or if you catch cold or something? With 

168 
Notes from Underground 
the kind of life you lead, it's hard to really get rid of an 
ilness--once you're caught, you won't get loose. That's 
how you're going to die." 
"So I'll die," she said, really angry now and making an 
abrupt movement in the dark. 
"Why, it's a shame." 
"Why's it a shame?" 
"It's a shame to lose one's life." 
Silence. 
"Have you ever been engaged to be married?" 
"What's that to you?" 
"Al right, al right, I'm not trying to cross-examine 
you. Don't get angry. I know it's none of my business. I 
realize you may have personal 
troubles. I was 
just 
talking . . . .  I'm sorry, that's all." 
"Sorry for what?" 
"You." 
"I'm al right," she whispered, hardly audibly, and again 
I heard her stirring. 
This irritated me no end. I was being so kind to her 
and she •
.
•
 
"So you think you're on the right path, do you?" I 
said. 
"I think nothing." 
"That's bad too-not to think. Wake up and get hold 
of yourself while there's still time. Because you do still 
have time, understand that! You're still young and not 
bad-looking. You could fal in love, marry, be happy--" 
"Marriage doesn't necessarily mean happiness," she 
interrupted me, resuming her harsh, terse tone. 
"Not necessarily, as you say, but it's still better to be 
maried than to be here. No comparison, believe me. 
With love, one can do very well without happiness. Life 
is good even in sorrow. It's nice to live in this world 
whatever your life is like. But here, in this place, there's 
nothing but foul air. Brrr . . . .  " 
I turned away in disgust. I was no longer detached. I 
was involved in what I was saying. In fact, I was getting 
excited. I was thirsting to lay before her the precious · 

Notes from Underground 
1 69 
little ideas I'd nurtured in my hole. Suddenly I had an 
aim. 
"Pay no attention to me. I'm here myself, so I can't tell 
you what to do. Maybe I'm worse than you," I said hur­
riedly, to justify myself. "But then, it's different for a 
man, for although I may defile and degrade myself, I'm 
still no one's slave. I come and go--I'm not stuck here. 
I brush it off me and I'm another man. But you-you've 
been a slave from the very begining. Yes, a slave! 
You've given up everything. You've given up your free­
dom, and even if you try breaking these chains one day, 
you won't be able to-you'll only get further entangled 
in them. I don't even want to mention other things, be­
cause you won't understand me, but tell me this : I'll bet 
you're already in debt to the madam, right? So you 
see," I went on, although she hadn't said anything, but 
simply lay there listening in silence with all her being, 
"that's the chain. You'll never buy yourself out. It's 
as though you'd sold your soul to the devil. Now I may 
be just as miserable as you; I may also be wallowing 
in filth out of dire misery. Some drink in their misery; 
my misery makes me come here. Now tell me, what's the 
point of it? We came in here without saying a word to 
each other, and afterward, you stared ßt me like a savage 
and I stared back at you. Is that the way to make love? 
Is that the way people are meant to come close to each 
other? It's hideous, that's what it is!" 
"Yes!" 
She said it harshly, hurriedly. I was particularly struck 
by the hurried, emphatic way she said "yes." Maybe she'd 
had the same thought when she was examining me before? 
So, she too was capable of thinking to some extent? Damn 
it, how amusing! Didn't that mean that we were alike 
in a way, the two of us? 
I almost rubbed my hands in joyful expectation. I 
didn't see how I could fail to cope with this young 
creature. And what appealed to me most was the chal­
lenge it presented. 
She brought her head closer to mine, supporting it in 
her hand, or at least that was the impression I got in the 

170 
Notes from Underground 
darkness. 
Maybe 
she 
was 
staring 
at 
me 
again. 
I 
would have liked so much to be able to see her eyes. 
I listened to her breathing deeply. 
"Why did you come to Petersburg?" I began with a 
certain authority. 
"I just came . . . .  " 
"But you were comfortable enough in your parents' 
home, weren't you? Warmth, freedom, your own cor­
ner--" 
"Suppose I tell you that it was worse than here?" 
"I must catch the right tone," the thought occurred to 
me. "I won't go far with her using sentimentality." 
But, in truth, that thought only flashed through my 
head. I swear, she really did interest me. Moreover, I 
felt weak and in the right mood, and besides, shaming 
so easily coexists with sincere feeling. 
"There's no telling," I hastened to reply. "One comes 
across all sorts of things. I'm quite sure you must've 
been wronged and that they're more guilty before you 
than you before them. Understand, I know nothing about 
you, but I feel somehow that a girl like you wouldn't 
land in a place of this sort of her own free wil." 
"A girl like what?" she whispered hardly audibly, but 
I heard her. 
Damn it, I was flattering her. It was disgusting! . . .  
On the other hand, perhaps it was the right thing to 
do . . . .  She said nothing. 
"Let me tell you something about myself. You know, 
Liza, if I had had a family when I was a child, I'd have 
turned out quite different from what I am today. I've given 
it a lot of thought. However bad things may be within 
a family, I stil say that a father and mother are part 
of you, not your enemies or just strangers. Be it only 
once a year, they'll still show you their love. Whatever 
else, you still have the feeling that it is your home. But 
I grew up without a family, and that's why I'm like this 
•
.
.
 you know, without feelings." 
I waited for a while. I didn't think she understood, 
and anyway, I was being ridiculous with this moralizing 
stuff. 

Notes from Underground 
171 
"If I'd been a father, I think I'd have loved my daugh­
ters more than my sons," I began, making an indirect 
approach as though embarking on something else, just 
to distract her. I admit I was blushing. 
"What's that got to do with it?" she asked. 
So she was listening! 
"Nothing really . . . .  I don't know, Liza. You see, I 
used to know a strict, stem man who'd go down on his 
knees before his daughter and kiss her hands and feet 
-he just couldn't admire her enough. She could spend the 
night dancing, and her father would stand in the same 
spot for five hours without taking his eyes off her. He 
was crazy about her, and I can understand that. At night, 
she'd get tired and fall asleep, and he'd go and kiss her 
in her sleep and make the sign of the cross over her. 
He himself went around in shabby, old clothes and was 
stingy with others, but he never hesitated to spend his 
last kopek on presents for her, the most expensive ones 
too, and he was incredibly happy if she liked them. 
A father always likes his daughters more than their 
mother does, and that makes it nice for many a girl at 
home. I don't think I'd even have allowed my daughter to 
marry." 
"Why is that?" she asked with a slight laugh. 
"I swear I'd have been jealous. I couldn't have borne 
the thought that she'd be kissing another man, that she'd 
love a stranger more than her own father. It's a painful 
thought. Of course, that's al nonsense, and everyone is 
bound to come to his senses in the end. But I believe that, 
before I allowed her to marry, I'd have found fault with 
all her suitors one after the other. Finally, I suppose, I'd 
have let her marry the one she really loved. But, of course, 
that one would be bound to please a father the least. 
That's the way it always is, and it often causes a lot of 
trouble in families." 
"But there are people who are willing to sell their 
daughters, let alone allow them to marry decently," she 
suddenly declared. 
So that was it. 
"That, Liza, happens in those wretched families where 

172 
Notes from Underground 
there's no God and no love," I went on zestfully. "And 
where there is no love, there's no reason either. It's true 
that such families exist, but I wasn't speaking of them. It 
looks as though you never were happy in your family; 
that's what makes you say things like that. You seem to 
be truly unhappy. Well, poverty has a lot to do with it." 
"Do you mean to say it's better among the well-to-do? 
People can be honest and live decently whether they're 
poor or not." 
"Well, I suppose you're right. But then too, Liza, man 
only notices his sorrows; he takes his happiness for grant­
ed. If he did take note of it, though, he'd find that he had 
his share of happiness also. Now imagine a family that has 
been lucky in everything: with God's help you marry a 
good husband, who loves you, looks after you, never 
leaves you, and all that. Life is good for such a family! 
Sometimes there may be sorrows too, but it's still good. 
For where is there no sorrow? When you marry, you'll 
find out for yourself. On the other hand, take the period 
just after marriage-sometimes there's really an incredi­
ble amount of happiness then. During that early period, 
even quarrels with your husband end happily. In fact, 
the more some women love, the more quarrels they start. 
I used to know a woman like that. 'You see,' she'd say, 
'I love you so, and it's because of my love that I torture 
you, so you just take it.' Did you know that one could 
deliberately torture a person out of love? Women are 
particularly prone to do that. And while they're torturing 
you, they think to themselves :  'I'll make it up to you 
later with love and tenderness, so torturing you now is 
not really a sin.' And everyone looks with joy upon the 
happy household--everything is so peaceful, friendly, and 
honest . . . .  
"Some women are jealous too. I used to know one like 
that. She couldn't stand it when her husband went out 
somewhere, and she'd follow him into the night to find 
out if he wasn't going to see some woman. That's bad, of 
course, and 
she knows it's bad, and her heart stops 
beating and she suffers, but it's all because of love. And 
how she likes to make it up after a quarrel and be 

Notes from Underground 
173 
sorry or forgive! Indeed, both of them are happy, as 
though they had just met, just fallen in love with each 
other 
and just married. And if a husband and 
wife 
love each other, it's no one's business what goes on be­
tween them. And whatever quarrels they may have, they 
mustn't allow even their own mothers to judge between 
them and must never talk about one another. They're 
their own judges. Love is a divine mystery, and must be 
hidden from the eyes of the world, as must whatever 
takes place between lovers. They have respect for each 
other, and much is based on that respect. And since love 
existed once, since they married out of love, why should 
love die? Is it really impossible to keep it alive? It's 
seldom impossible. If the husband is kind and decent, 
how can love die? It's true, of course, that the first honey­
moon feeling dies, but it's replaced by a better love. 
In that love their souls merge, they share everything and 
don't have any secrets from one another. And, when 
children arrive, even the greatest hardships seem like 
happiness, as long as there's love and courage. And the 
children love you later for having accepted these hard­
ships so it's as though you were bearing them for yourself 
to reap. While the children are growing up, you feel 
that you're an example to them, something they can rely 
upon; that, even after you're dead, they'll carry you in 
their thoughts and feelings al their lives, for they'll have 
been molded in your likeness. So it is a great human duty, 
and how can the father and mother fail to come close 
to one another in it? They say that it's hard to have 
children. Who says that? It's heavenly bliss, I say. Do 
you like children, Liza? I love them. Imagine a pink 
little 
boy 
suckling 
at 
your 
breast. 
What 
husband 
wouldn't be moved by such a sight! A little, rosy, chubby 
baby stretching his tiny arms and legs and snuggling up 
to you. His little hands with their tiny, clean nails are so 
soft, and he looks so funny, as though he could already 
understand. And when he begins teething, he may take 
a good bite at his mother's breast, squinting at her as 
if to say 'See, I bit you!' Ah, Liza, isn't it all happiness 
when the three of them-the mother, the child, and the 

1 74 
Notes from Underground 
father-are together? To experience those moments, one 
should be willing to go through much suffering. No, Liza, 
we must first learn to live ourselves before we begin to 
accuse others!" 
Those were the right pictures to get through to her, I 
thought, although I swear I said those things with feeling. 
I suddenly felt I was blushing. What if she suddenly burst 
out laughing? Where would I hide myself? This thought 
made me furious. By the time I came to the end of my 
speech, I was sincerely excited, and now my pride began 
to suffer. The silence continued. I even felt like nudging 
her. 
"Why, you . . .  " she started, but cut herself off. 
But I understood. There was something different in her 
voice, some new quiver; it was no longer harsh, coarse 
and resigned, but soft, shy, and ashamed, so that I myself 
felt ashamed and guilty. 
"What?" I asked with tender curiosity. 
"Why, you . . . " 
"What?" 
"Why you're . . . just like a book," she said, and I 
thought I caught a sarcastic note in her voice again. 
That pinched me painfuly. It wasn't what I was expect­
ing. 
I didn't understand that sarcasm is a screen-the last 
refuge of shy, pure persons against those who rudely and 
insistently try to break into their hearts. Until the last 
moment, her pride prevented her from saying openly 
what she felt. I should've guessed that, if only from the 
timid hesitation she had to overcome to make her de­
fensive, sarcastic remark. But I didn't understand, and a 
nasty feeling pervaded me. 
"Wait," I said to myself, "I'll show you." 
V I I  
"Ah, Liza, why should I sound like a book when all this 
makes me 
sick 
just looking at it from the 
outside. 
Actually, I'm not completely outside. It has stirred some-

Notes from Underground 
175 
thing, awakened something, in me. Now tell me, is it 
really possible that you yourself aren't sick of being here? 
Well, I suppose one can get accustomed to anything. 
Habit can do things to people, I'm sure. But do you really 
think you'll never grow old, that you'll always be attrac­
tive, that they'll keep you here as long as you live? I'm 
not even talking about what a horrible place this is in 
its own right. No, wait, let me tell you something about 
your present existence too. Although you're stil young 
and pretty and nice and have a heart and feelings and 
all that, I tell you, when I came to just now and found 
myself here with you, I felt sick. As a matter of fact, peo­
ple only come here when they're drunk. But if I'd met you 
somewhere else, and you'd led a decent life, I'd have 
trailed after you and probably fallen in love with you too. 
Not even a word but a simple look from you would've 
been enough to make me feel happy; I'd have waited for 
you near your house, knelt before you, looked upon you 
as my bride-to-be, and felt greatly honored to be allowed 
to look upon you like that. I'd never have dared to have 
an impure thought about you then, while now I know 
that all I have to do is whistle and, whether you want to 
or not, you have to come with me. I don't have to obey 
your wil, but you do have to obey mine. Even the most 
miserable peasant who hires himself out as a laborer 
doesn't lose his freedom completely; he knows there's a 
time limit to his bondage. But you-where's your time 
limit? Just ask yourself what you're surrendering here, 
what you're selling into bondage. It's your soul you're 
selling, your soul, over which you have no power. You're 
selling it along with your body. You offer your love to the 
first drunkard who comes along, to tramp upon. Love! 
But it's everything, it's a jewel, it's a woman's dearest 
possession! Why, to earn that love, someone might give 
all his thought, even his entire life. But what's your love 
worth today? You've been sold, all of you, so why should 
anyone try to win your love, since everything's possible 
without it. There's nothing more insulting for a woman. 
You know, I've heard that they allow you poor idiots to 
have your own lovers for your pleasure. But, of course, 

176 
Notes from Underground 
that's 
nothing 
but 
make-believe-a 
mockery. 
They 
laugh at you, and you take it seriously. Do you really 
imagine that your 'free' lover is in love with you? I don't 
believe he can be. How can he be when he knows that at 
any moment, perhaps when you're with him, someone 
may whistle for you. He'd be too low for words if he did 
love you. Does he have the least respect for you? What is 
there in common between you? He just mocks you and 
robs you, and that's all there is to it. You're lucky if he 
doesn't beat you-or does he? If you have someone like 
that, try asking him to marry you. He'll laugh in your 
face, if he doesn't spit in your eye and give you a beating. 
He himself probably isn't worth more than a crooked 
kopek. So in the name of what have you ruined your 
life here? For the meals, perhaps including coffee, that 
you're given? Why do they feed you, do you think? A 
decent woman wouldn't be able to swallow a mouth­
ful at the thought of why they give her her food. You're 
in debt to them, and you'll remain in debt till the end­
till the time when the customers refuse to use you. And 
that's not as far off as you think, for you'd be wrong to 
rely too much upon your youth. Time moves very rast 
indeed here. They'll kick you out soon enough. And they 
won't kick you out just like that; they'll start by nagging 
you, heap reproaches and insults upon you as though, 
instead of giving them your health, your youth, and your 
soul, you'd ruined them and stolen what was theirs. And 
don't expect any support from the other women-they'll 
go for you too, if only to please the madam, because in 
this place everything has been mortgaged, and conscience 
and pity have 
long 
ago 
disappeared. 
These 
women 
have sunk too low too, and there's nothing filthier and 
lower than the insults they'll heap on you. You'll lose 
everything here; everything 
will go without retum­
yo
.
uth, 
health, 
hopes-and 
at twenty-two you'll 
look 
thuty-five, and you'll even have to pray to God that you 
don't catch a disease. And if you tell yourself that at 
least you don't have to work and have nothing to do but 
eat and drink, let me tell you that there's never been any 
harder, more painful work in the world than this work 

Notes from Underground 
177 
that makes your whole heart dissolve into tears. And 
when they chase you out of here, you won't dare say a 
word nor make a sound in protest; you'll slink away as 
though you were guilty. You'll go to another establish­
ment, then to another and another yet, and finally you'll 
land in the Haymarket. And there they'll start beating 
you in no time, for the customers there don't know how 
to make love without beating. You don't believe it's all 
that horrible there? Go and have a look around some 
time, and perhaps you'll see it with your own eyes. Once 
-it was on a New Year's morning-! saw a woman there 
by the door of a house. Her own colleagues had pushed 
her out as a practical joke-to cool her off for a while 
because she was bawling-then they decided to lock the 
door on her. 
So, 
at 
nine in the morning, 
there she 
was, completely drunk, unkempt, half-naked, badly beaten. 
There was a thick layer of powder on her face still, black 
bruises under both her eyes, and blood streaming from 
her nose and mouth. Some cabby had just dealt with her, 
it seems. She sat on the doorstep bewailing her "miseries" 
at the top of her voice, striking the steps with a salt 
herring she held in her hand, as a bunch of drunken 
soldiers and cabbies gathered around her and taunted 
her. You don't believe that you'll become like that one 
day too? I wish you were right, but how do you know 
that ten, or only eight, years before, that woman with 
the herring didn't arrive in this city fresh and innocent as 
a little angel, ignorant of evil and full of blushes? Maybe 
she was just like you-proud, queenlike, quick to take 
offense, different from the others, sure that she could give 
happiness to a man if she loved him and he loved her. 
And you see how it al finished? Well, perhaps that drunk­
en, disheveled woman whipping at the filthy steps with 
her fish was at that very moment remembering her by­
gone, innocent years when she lived with her parents, 
when the neighbor's son waited for her on her way home 
from school and assured her that he'd love her as long 
as he lived, that she was the most important thing he had, 
and then they decided to love one another for ever and 
ever and to marry as soon as they were grown up. 

178 
Notes from Underground 
"It'd be lucky for you, Liza, if you died quickly of 
consumption in some basement, like the woman in the 
coffin I told you about. You mentioned the hospital. You'd 
be very lucky if they took you there. But suppose madam 
thinks she can still use you? Consumption is a peculiar 
disease. It's not like a fever, you know. A consumptive 
keeps hoping and cheering himself up till the very last 
minute, saying that he's al right. And that works to 
madam's advantage. Believe me, that's the way it is. 
You've sold yourself to her and, furthermore, you're in 
debt to her. So you can't open your mouth. And when 
you're about to die, they'll all tum their backs on you, 
for what could they get out of you at that point? They'll 
even reproach you for taking too much time to die and 
not vacating your comer quickly enough. When you 
beg them for a glass of water, they'll swear at you 
before they give it to you. 'When,' they'll say, 
'wil you 
croak at last, you slut? It's impossible to sleep with your 
damned moaning, and it puts the customers off too!' It's 
true, you know. I myself have overheard things like that. 
They'll stow you somewhere in the dirtiest comer of the 
basement. And as you lie dying in the dank darkness, 
what wil you think about in your loneliness? And when 
you're 
dead, 
strange hands wil lay you out, grum­
bling impatiently. No one wil pray for you; no one wil 
be sorry for you-they'll only be concerned with getting 
you out of the way. They'll buy you a cheap coffin and 
carry you out just the way they carried out that other 
miserable creature, then they'll go to the tavern and 
have a drink to your memory. The grave will be ful of 
mud and slush, and they won't want to take too much 
trouble with you. 'Lower her in, Ivan. She's out of luck 
again, the slut, even on her last trip. Come on, take up 
the slack on your rope, you clod! That's fine now, let's 
leave it as it is.' 'What do you mean, fine? Don't you see 
she's on her side. She was a human being after all, wasn't 
she? Ah well, al right, fil it up.' And they won't quarrel 
over it, believe me. They'll fil up the grave with wet, 
gray clay and be off to have a drink at the tavern. 
"And that'll be all-you'll be forgotten on earth. Chil-

Notes from Underground 
179 
dren, fathers, husbands come to the graves of other 
women . . . but no one wil come to your grave, there'll 
be not a tear, not a sigh, not a prayer over you; nobody 
wil ever come, and your name wil be erased from the 
face of the earth; it'll be as if you'd never even existed. 
There'll be nothing but a mire of mud around you, and it 
won't help you to knock on the lid of your coffin like 
the dead do when they rise at night. You'll moan in vain: 
'Let me out; let me back into the world, kind people. My 
life was no life. It was spent between being used as a door­
mat and drinking in taverns. Give me one more chance, 
kind people, to live.' " 
I had worked myself up into such a state that there was 
a lump in my throat, and I had to abruptly cut myself 
short. I raised myself on my elbows and listened in ap­
prehension, my head bent forward and my heart beat­
ing wildly. And there was good reason for my confusion. 
For some time, I'd felt that I was turning her soul 
inside out and breaking her heart, and the more convinced 
I was of it, the more eager I was to finish what I had set 
out to do. It was a game I was playing, and I was alto­
gether absorbed in it-although, perhaps, it wasn't only 
the game. 
I knew that what I was saying was contrived, even 
"literary" stuff, but then, that was the only way I knew 
how to speak-"like a book," as she had put it. But 
that didn't worry me as long as I was sure I was getting 
my point across. In fact, my artificial style may have 
made the message more effective as far as she was con­
cerned. But now, having attained the effect I sought, I 
suddenly found I had no stomach for it. The fact is, I'd 
never, never witnessed such despair. She lay prone on 
the bed, 
her 
arms 
around the pillow 
and her face 
buried in it. Her breast was heaving spasmodically and 
al her young body was writhing. The sobs compressed in 
her chest were choking her as they tried to break out. 
Then suddenly they broke through in horrifying wails as 
she clasped the pillow even harder, not wanting anyone 
alive to see her tears and her suffering. She bit the pillow, 
bit her hand till she drew blood (I saw it later) ,  then 

180 
Notes from Underground 
clutched at her tangled hair with her fingers, holding her 
breath and clenching her teeth. I wanted to say some­
thing to her, soothe her, but I didn't dare. Then, in a 
sort of panic, all ashiver, I began groping for my clothes, 
for I wanted to get out of there as fast as I could. But 
I couldn't get dressed quickly in the darkness, so I felt 
around for a box of matches on the night table, where 
my hand also found a new candle. As soon as the can­
dle lighted up the room, she jumped up. Her face was 
strangely distorted by an inane, almost mad smile. She 
looked at me. I sat down next to her and took her hands. 
She made a movement as if to fling herself toward me, 
was about to throw her arms round my neck, but didn't 
dare and lowered her head. 
"Forgive me, Liza, I shouldn't have . . .  
" I began, but 
her fingers clutched my hands so hard that I realized I 
was saying the wrong thing, stopped, and said instead: 
"Here's my address, Liza, come and see me." 
"I'll come," she whispered determinedly, without raising 
her head. 
"And now I 
have to 
go. 
Good-by .
.
.
•
 See you 
soon." 
I got up and so did she. Suddenly she blushed, grabbed 
a shawl from the chair, and threw it around her shoul­
ders, covering herself up to her chin with it. Then she 
gave me a strange look, and a tortured smile appeared 
on her lips. The whole thing was very painful for me. I 
was in a hurry to get away. 
"Wait a minute," she said, catching hold of my over­
coat. We were already in the entrance hal. She put down 
the candle she was holding to light my way and dashed off. 
Apparently there was something she wanted to show me. 
When she ran off, I saw that her eyes were shining, that 
she was flushed and smiling. What could it be? I had to 
wait. She came back a moment later, looking at me as 
though she were asking my forgiveness for something. In 
general, 
her face was no longer the 
same 
as when 
I'd seen her first-sullen, distrustful, and obstinate. Her 
eyes were beseeching now and trusting, tender and shy. 

Notes from Underground 
1 8 1  
She had beautiful, light-brown eyes, full of life--eyes that 
could express both love and sullen hatred. 
Without a word of explanation, as though I were some 
sort of higher being who could understand everything 
directly, she handed me a piece of paper. At that mo­
ment, her face was shining with a naive, almost child­
like triumph. I unfolded it. It was a letter addressed to 
her by, I'd guess, a medical student. It was a rather 
flowery and grandiloquent, but very respectful, declara­
tion of love. I can't recal the exact words now, but I 
remember that, under the highflown style, I sensed gen­
uine feeling. When I had read it, I met her ardent, curious 
glance, filled now with a sort of childish impatience. It was 
fixed on my face-she was impatient to find out what I'd 
have to say. Briefly, but radiantly, proudly, she told me 
that she had gone to a dancing party in a private house, 
"a very, very nice family who still know nothing, abso­
lutely nothing," for she'd only been in this place for a 
short while and certainly hadn't decided to stay; in fact, 
she'd leave as soon as she settled her debt. . . .  "Any­
way, that's where this student was." And the whole eve­
ning he'd danced with her and talked to her, and it 
turned out that they'd met back in Riga, when they were 
children, that they'd played together-although it was 
very long ago-that he'd even known her parents. But 
he had absolutely no idea about this thing-he didn't 
even suspect it. And, the day after that party (three 
days ago now ) ,  he'd sent her this letter through a lady 
friend of hers who'd been to the party too . . . .  "And 
•
.
.
 here we are." 
She bashfully lowered her sparkling eyes as she com­
pleted her explanation. 
Poor thing! She had kept the letter as a precious 
possession and had rushed to show me that sole posses­
sion of hers, not wishing me to leave without knowing 
that there was someone who loved her honestly and 
sincerely and addressed her with respect. Most certainly, 
this letter was doomed to remain lying in her box and 
would never lead to anything. But that changed nothing: 
I was sure that she would keep it all her life as a 

182 
Notes from Underground 
treasure, as her pride and justification. And now, she 
had thought of that letter and showed it to me with naive 
pride, to rehabilitate herself in my eyes, hoping that I 
would appreciate it and express my appreciation. 
But I just shook her hand and left. I was in a terrible 
hurry to go. I walked al the way home, although the wet 
snow was coming down in large flakes. I felt exhausted, 
broken, and confused. But behind my confusion, I could 
already make out the outline of the truth, a sordid, ob­
scene truth! 
V I I I  
But, in fact, it took me no time at all to accept that 
truth. When I woke up in the morning, after a few 
hours of leaden sleep, I reviewed all that had happened the 
night before and was, if anything, surprised at my senti­
mentality toward Liza, at all those sobs and commisera­
tions that we had shared. 
"What a disgusting outburst of nerves!" I decided. "I'm 
just like an old woman. And why the hell did I have to 
give her my address? What if she turns up? Ah, after al, 
let her tum up. We'll see . . . .  
" 
But obviously that was not what mattered. The main . 
consideration was to save my reputation in the eyes of · 
Zverkov and Simonov. Yes, that was of major importance. 
And there were so many things to preoccupy me that 
morning that Liza slipped my mind completely. 
To start with, I had to pay Simonov the money I had. 
borrowed from him the day before. I decided on a des­
perate measure: 
to borrow al of fifteen rubles from 
Anton Antonych. By chance, he was in an excellent 
mood and let me have the money as soon as I asked for 
it. I was so pleased that, while signing the IOU, I told 
him with a dissipated, nonchalant air that last night, "I 
had a terrific time at the Hotel de Paris, seeing off a former 
classmate, a childhood friend, an awful rake, terribly 
spoiled by life, of course, who comes from a distinguished j1 
family, quite wealthy, making a brilliant career for him-

Notes from Underground 
1 83 
self, witty, charming, a ladies' man, you understand. Of 
course, we had quite a bit to drink, maybe half a dozen 
bottles of champagne too much and . . . " And, believe 
me, all that slipped off my 
tongue 
quite easily 
and 
sounded self-confident and self-satisfied. 
As soon as I got home, I wrote to Simonov. 
To this day, I admire the gentlemanly, good-humored 
tone of that letter. Gracefully, smoothly, without any 
superfluous words, I took upon myself the full responsi­
bility for what had happened. I gave as an excuse, "if 
any excuse was admissible at al," the fact that I was 
unaccustomed to drink and got quite drunk after the 
very first glass which, I alleged, I had drunk while wait­
ing for them between five and six at the Hotel de Paris. 
My apologies were mainly addressed to Simonov himself, 
but I asked him to apologize to al the others for me, 
particularly Zverkov, whom, I wrote, "I remember having 
insulted, as it were, through the haze of a dream." I 
wrote that I'd have gone to see each one of them, but 
I had a horrible headache and felt too embarrassed to 
face them. 
I was particularly pleased with the casual, almost off­
hand undertone-oh, not in the least arrogant-that con­
veyed better than any explanations could that I viewed 
"the whole mess" with considerable detachment, that I 
certainly didn't feel anihilated by it, that in my opinion, 
it wasn't anything for which a young man should be 
judged too harshly. 
"Upon my word," I muttered with admiration, re-read­
ing the note, "there's even a certain aristocratic lightness 
to it! And al that because I'm a highly developed, civi­
lized man! Another in my place wouldn't have known 
how to get out of it, but I've disentangled myself and will 
continue to enjoy myself precisely because I'm a well­
educated, sophisticated man of my time. And the more I 
think of it, the more I believe that it really was my drink­
ing that was at the root of it all . . . .  Well, not really . 
. . . In reality, I didn't have any vodka or anything else 
while I was waiting for them. I just made that up for 
Simonov, and now it makes me feel ashamed .
.
.
.
 Ah, I 

1 84 
Notes from Underground 
still don't give a damn! What counts is that I've got out 
of it." 
I placed six rubles in an envelope with the letter and 
prevailed upon Apollon to take it to Simonov. When he 
realized that the letter contained money, Apollon became 
more polite and agreed to deliver it. 
Toward evening I decided to go out for a walk. I was 
still dizzy from the day before and my head still ached. 
The darker it became, the more confused became my im­
pressions and the thoughts growing out of them. There 
was something inside me that wouldn't die--that refused 
to die within my heart and conscience and manifested 
itself in a stabbing feeling of anguish. I kept to the busiest, 
most bustling streets, such as Traders' Row, Garden 
Square, and around Yusupov Park. I've always liked these 
streets at dusk, 
when they're filled with all sorts of 
people, workers, and tradesmen, their faces worried and 
contracted with irritation, on their way home after the 
day's work. What I liked was precisely this kopek's-worth 
bustle, the self-satisfied vulgarity of it al. But that par­
ticular evening, the noisy throng only irritated me. I 
couldn't get hold of myself that day. Something kept op­
pressing 
and tormenting 
me, 
and 
wouldn't 
leave me 
alone. I arrived home altogether depressed, feeling as if I 
had some horrible crime on my conscience. 
The idea that Liza might come worried me no end. I 
couldn't understand why, of al the previous day's im­
pressions, her image was the one that tormented me most, 
with a strange, special torment. Al the rest was forgotten 
by the evening. I'd dismissed it with a shrug and was stil 
very pleased over my letter to Simonov. But I wasn't at 
all pleased about the incident with Liza; I felt as though 
she alone had been the cause of all the trouble. "Suppose 
she comes?'' I kept thinking. "Well, so what, let her 
come! But, I don't like the idea of her seeing how I live. 
Last night I must have appeared as a kind of hero to 
her, and now she'll see . . .  Yes, that's bad, letting myself 
go like this. My place stinks of misery. How could I have 
gone out last night, dressed as I was? And that oilcloth­
covered couch of mine with the stuffing sticking out of it! 

Notes from Underground 
1 85 
And my ragged dressing gown that doesn't even keep me 
decent .
.
.
.
 Ah, she'll see everything-and she'll see 
Apollon too. I bet the dog'll be rude to her. He'll find 
some pretext, just to get back at me, and I won't have 
the stomach to put him in his place; instead, I'll smile, 
lie to her, and prance around, trying to keep my dressing 
gown in place. Brr . . .  how horrible! But that's not the 
worst of it. There's something even lower, even more loath­
some: to put on that lying mask again!" 
The mere thought made me flare up : 
"Why is it dishonest? I was sincere last night. I re­
member very well-there was sincerity in me too. I want­
ed to stir up honorable feelings in her, and if she cried, 
it must've done her good . . . .  
" 
Nevertheless, I couldn't calm down. 
Al that evening, even after I had returned home well 
after nine and felt Liza couldn't possibly come then, I 
couldn't get her out of my head and kept seeing her, al­
ways in the same position. One particular moment of the 
previous night kept returning to me with extraordinary 
vividness. It was when I lighted the match and saw her 
pale, twisted, martyrlike face. And what a pitiful, un­
natural, distorted smile she wore at that second! I didn't 
know then that fifteen years later I'd still be thinking of 
Liza smiling that pitiful, twisted, unappreciated smile. 
The following day, I was quite prepared to dismiss the 
whole incident as nonsense, overwrought nerves, and 
more than anything, exaggeration. I've always known 
of that weakness of mine and been very wary of it. "My 
tendency to exaggerate is like a deformity," I repeated 
to my-;clf every hour or so, but then I'd think in a rage : 
"She'll come, she'll come, she's sure to come!" I ran up 
and down the room shouting: "If not today, she'll be here 
tomorrow, she's sure to find me! Yes, that's only to be 
expected from these stupid, pure-hearted romantics! Ah, 
damn them, these filthy, stupid, rotten, sentimental souls! 
How could she have failed to see through it all?" 
But at this point I'd stop, aware of my own terrible 
confusion. 
"And how few words it took," I noted. "How little of 

186 
Notes from Underground 
an idyll--especially since it wasn't even a real idyll, but 
a literary contrivance-it took to turn a whole human 
soul upside down in less than a minute. That's girlish 
innocence for you! That's virgin soil!" 
Now and then, I'd think of going to see her myself, 
"telling her everything," and asking her not to come. This 
thought roiled me so inside that I think I'd have crushed 
that damned woman if she'd happened to be within my 
reach at that moment; I'd have insulted her, spat at her, 
struck her, and pushed her out. 
But another day, two, three, passed without a sign of 
her, and I became almost reassured. I especially felt bet­
ter after ten o'clock, by which time I was even liable to 
slip into rather pleasant daydreams in which I was Liza's 
savior. "She comes to me, and I talk to her . . .  educate her, 
teach her . . .  Finally I realize she's in love with me, pas­
sionately. I pretend I don't understand . . . .  " I don't really 
know why there had to be that pretense-just to make it 
prettier, I suppose. "Finally she comes, embarrassed and 
beautiful, shivering and sobbing, and throws herself at my 
feet, telling me I'm her savior and that she loves me above 
all else in the world. So I'm taken aback, but 'Liza,' I say 
to her, 'do you really imagine I haven't noticed your love? 
I saw and guessed everything, but I didn't dare force 
myself upon you first, because I know I have some in­
fluence upon you and was afraid you might try to force 
yourself to reciprocate my love out of sheer gratitude 
and generate within yourself a feeling of which I want 
no part because it is . . 
• well, it's a despotism of sorts. 
• 
. . It would be a lack of discretion. . . .' " At this 
juncture, I'd entangle myself in such European claptrap, 
permeated with the refinements so dear to George Sand, 
that I'd have to skip. " '  . . .  But now you're mine; you're 
my creation; you're pure and beautiful; you're my beauti­
ful wife. 
" 'Boldly and freely enter my house 
To be its mistress, my sweet spouse.' 
After that, we live happily ever after, go abroad, etc., 

Notes from Underground 
1 87 
etc." In brief, it'd make me sick finaly, and I'd stick my 
tongue out, taunting myself. 
"Ah, they won't even let the slut out," I thought. 
"They surely aren't allowed to go out for a little stroll 
when they feel like it, especialy not in the evening." I felt 
certain, for some reason, that she'd turn up in the eve­
ning, and what's more, at seven. "But then, she said they 
stil didn't have full control over her, that she stil had 
special rights. So, well . . . yes. 
. . . Ah, damn it, I'm 
sure she'll come!'' 
It was a good thing Apollon was around to take my 
mind off her. His rudeness stretched my patience to the 
limit. He was my ulcer, my plague, imposed upon me by 
fate. We'd been squabbling for years, and I hated him. I 
don't think in all my life I'd ever hated anyone as much 
as I loathed him, especially at certain moments. He was a 
middle-aged, ponderous man who also went in for part­
time tailoring. For some reason, he despised me beyond 
measure and was impossibly overbearing with me, al­
though I must say that he looked down upon everyone 
else, too. Just a look at his firm mouth compressed into a 
butterfly and his blondish, carefully brushed head, with its 
forelock fastidiously arranged and slicked down with 
vegetable oil, was enough to tell you that this creature 
had never had any doubts about himself. He was the 
most pedantic man I'd ever met and, on top of that, 
possessed a vanity that might perhaps have been excus­
able in Alexander the Great. He was in love with every 
button on his coat, every one of his fingernails-yes, he 
seemed to be madly in love with them! He treated me 
rather tyrannicaly and talked to me very little, and when 
he happened to look at me, it was always with a firm, 
supercilious, sarcastic expression that drove me mad. He 
performed his functions as my servant as though he were 
bestowing the 
greatest of favors 
upon me, 
although 
in fact, he hardly ever did anything for me, for he 
didn't feel that he was obliged to. There's no doubt that he 
considered me the greatest fool on earth, 
and if he 
refrained from firing me, it was only because he got his 
monthly wages from me. He was wiling to do nothing for 

188 
Notes from Underground 
me for seven rubles a month. I'm sure that many of my 
sins will be forgiven me because of what I put up with 
from him. At times, my loathing for him reached a point 
where the sound of his steps alone would throw me into 
convulsions. But what disgusted me most about him was 
his lisp. I believe his tongue was a little too long or 
something like that, and that gave him a lisp and a 
slobbery way of talking, of which, I believe, he was 
inordinately proud, fancying that it gave him an air of 
great distinction. Usually he spoke in quiet, measured 
tones, clasping his hands behind his back and looking at 
his feet. Another thing that infuriated me was his habit of 
reading a psalter aloud in his cubicle. I fought many a 
battle over it, but he relished his evening reading too 
much. His smooth, sing-song voice sounded as though he 
were chanting the psalms over the dead. Curiously enough, 
this is the way he wound up in the end : he now hires 
himself out to chant psalms at wakes. He also extermi­
nates rats and manufactures boot polish. 
But, at that time, I couldn't get rid of him; it was as 
though he were a chemical necessity for my existence. 
Anyway, he never would have agreed to leave then. I 
couldn't move to furnished rooms. My apartment was 
my private corner, my shell, my sheath, where I could 
hide from men. And I'll be damned if I can explain why, 
but Apollon just happened to be an integral part of it, 
and for seven whole years, I couldn't bring myself to 
remove him from there. 
It was unthinkable, for instance, to put off paying 
him his wages, even for a couple of days. He would 
make such a fuss about it that I wouldn't know where to 
hide. But now I was so angry with the whole world that I 
decided to punish Apollon anyway and not pay him his 
wages for another two weeks. I'd been toying with the 
idea of doing something like that for a long time, per­
haps two years, to prove to him that he had no reason 
to take himself so seriously and that, if the fancy took 
me, I could just withhold his pay. I promised myself 
not to talk to him about it and make him swallow his 
pride and be the first to approach me on the subject. 

Notes from Underground 
189 
Then I'd take seven rubles out of my drawer, show them 
to him to prove that I had them, and tell him I didn't 
wish to pay him, simply because I didn't want to, just 
because I didn't feel like it, because that was the way I 
wanted it, because I was the master, and because he was 
rude and insolent. But, if he asked me politely, I might 
relent and give it to him. Otherwise, he might have to 
wait another two or three weeks, and maybe a month . . . .  
But, angry though I was with him, it was he who won 
out in the end. I couldn't even hold out for four days. He 
acted just the way he usually did in such case_s-for I'd 
tried this before, so I knew his contemptible stratagems. 
He would fix his stem gaze on me for several minutes, 
especially when I went out or came in. If I managed to 
stand up to it, pretending not to notice the way he was 
looking at me, he turned to other ways of persecuting 
me. For instance, he would enter my room noiselessly, 
while I was pacing up and down or reading, stop by 
the door, and remain standing there with one foot thrust 
forward and one hand behind his back. On these occa­
sions, his gaze was no longer stem but outright contemp­
tuous. And if I asked him what he wanted, he wouldn't 
answer, but would stare at me for a few seconds more, 
pursing his lips, and his face would take on an indescrib­
able expression. Then he'd tum around and slowly shuf­
fle off to his cubicle. Two hours later, he'd emerge again 
and once more impose himself upon me in the same man­
ner. Sometimes, in my fury, I didn't even ask him what 
he wanted but instead turned sharply toward him, glar­
ing back at him haughtily. We'd stare into each other's 
eyes for a couple of minutes, then he'd slowly tum 
around and leave, only to reappear two hours later. 
If all that failed to subdue me, he resorted to his sigh­
ing trick : he'd suddenly look at me and sigh very deeply, 
measuring the extent of my moral degradation. In the 
end, it goes without saying, he always got his way. I 
ranted and raved and hollered at him, but I was forced 
to do as he wished. 
This time, however, he had no sooner started with his 
routine-first-phase "stem looks"-than I flew at him 

190 
Notes from Underground 
like a madman. I was already too irritated-! just couldn't 
stand it. 
"Stop!" I shouted at him, as he was turning slowly 
away, with one hand behind his back, ready to retire to 
his cubicle. "Stop, come back here, I tell you!" 
I must have really yelled, because he did stop, staring 
at me with something that could have passed for sur­
prise. But he still didn't speak, and that was what made 
me especially mad. 
"How dare you come in like that without permission 
and stare at me? Come on, answer me!" 
But he again just looked at me for half a minute or 
so without a word and then started turning away once 
more. 
"Stop!" I roared like a wild beast, rushing up to him. 
"Don't you dare move! Now then, will you tell me what 
you came here to stare at?" 
"If you wish to order me to do something, it is my 
duty to do it," he said, after another silence, quietly, 
evenly, lispingly, raising his eyebrows and bending his 
head first to one side then the other-and all that with 
murderous self-control. 
"That's not what I asked you, you vicious bully!" I 
screamed, shaking with rage. "So I'll tell you, you mur­
derer, why you came in here; it's because I haven't given 
you your wages. You think you're too good to ask for 
them, so you came here trying to punish me with your 
stupid stare, without even suspecting how stupid you 
are, how stupid you look-how stupid, stupid, stupid." 
He started to tum away in silence, but I caught hold 
of him. 
"Listen," I shouted, "here's the money, see?" I took 
the bils out of the desk drawer. "See? Seven rubles, right? 
But you won't get 'em! At least, not until you come to me 
and humbly apologize. Do you hear me?" 
"Impossible," he answered, with a sort of uncanny 
self -assurance. 
"I'll show you it's possible! I give you my word it 
. ,, 
IS. 
"I have nothing to apologize for," he said, ignoring 

Notes from Underground 
191 
my shouting. "On the contrary, I could complain to the 
police, because you called me a murderer, and that's an 
insult." 
"Go on! Complain!" I continue to holler. "Go there 
this very second! I stil say you're a murderer! Yes­
murderer, murderer, murderer!" 
But he only glanced at me and, no longer paying any 
attention to my shouting, glided toward his room without 
turning his head. 
"If it hadn't been for Liza," I muttered to myself, 
"none of this would've happened." I let a minute go by, 
then went gravely, solemnly, but with a wildly beating 
heart, to his room. 
"Apollon," I said with quiet dignity, despite the chok­
ing feeling I had, "go out and fetch me the police ser­
geant. At once!" 
He had installed himself at his table in the meantime, 
had put his glasses on, and was preparing to sew some­
thing. When he heard my order he gave a snort of sup­
pressed laughter. 
"Go! Go at once, or you can't imagine what'll happen!" 
"There must really be something the matter with you, 
sir," he said with his usual slow lisp, without raising his 
head and still trying to thread his needle. "Whoever heard 
of a man complaining against himself? As for your threats, 
sir, you're wasting your efforts, I dare say, for nothing wil 
ever come of them." 
"Go!" I screamed, grabbing him by the shoulder. I 
felt I was on the verge of hitting him. 
I hadn't heard the entrance door open, but someone 
had entered the apartment, seen us, and stopped in be­
wilderment. I looked up, 
almost died of shame, and 
rushed to my room where, clutching my hair with both 
hands, I leaned my head against the wall, remaining there 
motionless. 
A couple of minutes later, I heard Apollon's slow 
steps: 
"There's a person wants to see you," he said, staring at 
me with special severity. Then he stepped out of the 
way and let Liza in. 

192 
Notes from Underground 
It didn't look as if he intended to leave-he kept look­
ing us over with a sneer on his face. 
"Go on, go on, on your way!" I said, completely at a 
loss. 
Just then, the clock on the wall strained, wheezed, and 
struck seven. 
I X  
Boldly and freely enter my house 
To be its mistress, my sweet spouse. 
I stood in front of her, crushed, branded, sordidly over­
come 
with 
shame, 
and 
I 
think 
I 
smiled, 
trying 
to 
close my ragged, stuffing-shedding old dressing gown. . . .  
It had all happened exactly as I'd imagined it in my mo­
ments of depression. Apollon, having had his fil of look­
ing at us, left the room. But that didn't make me feel 
any better. Worse yet, she too suddenly became more 
embarrassed than I could have imagined. And it was 
looking at me that embarrassed her. 
"Sit down," I said mechanically, offering her the chair 
by the desk while I installed myself on the sofa. 
She sat down obediently, never taking her eyes off me. 
It looked as if she expected me to do something, and 
this naive 
expectation 
brought 
back my fury, 
but I 
controlled myself. She should've known better, pretend­
ed she hadn't noticed anything, that all was as usual, but 
instead she . . . And I felt, though still rather vaguely, 
that I'd make her pay dearly for everything. 
"You've found me, I'm afraid, in a rather strange 
predicament, Liza," I began lamely, well aware that it 
was the wrong way to start. "No, no, don't start imagin­
ing things!" I exclaimed, seeing that she was blushing. 
"I'm not ashamed of my poverty. In fact, I'm proud of it. 
I'm poor but honorable-it's possible to be poor and 
honorable at the same time," I went on mumbling, "but 
•
•
.
 perhaps you'd like some tea." 

Notes from Underground 
193 
"No 
• 
• 
. "  She started to say something, but I inter­
rupted her. 
"Wait." 
I leaped up and rushed to Apollon's cubicle. I felt I 
had to get out of her sight. 
"Here, Apollon," I whispered feverishly, throwing down 
on his table the seven rubles that I had kept in my fist 
al that time, "here's your money. You see, I'm letting you 
have it, but for that, you must save me-go and get me a 
pot of tea and a dozen cookies from the tea shop. If you 
refuse, you'll make me the unhappiest man in the world, 
for you have no idea what sort of a woman she is! That's 
al. Now, you may be imagining something, but 
.
•
•
 Ah, 
you have no idea who she is!" 
Apollon, who had put his glasses back on and re­
sumed his work, at first squinted at the money, without 
putting down his needle. Then, without answering or 
paying any attention to me, he went on trying to thread 
his needle. I stood waiting for three minutes or so, my 
arms folded on my chest in a Napoleonic pose. My 
temples were covered with sweat and I could myself feel 
how pale I had turned. But, thank God, he must have 
taken pity on me. When he was through fiddling with 
his needle and thread, he got up, slowly pushing back 
his chair, slowly removed his glasses, slowly counted 
the money, and finaly asked me over his shouulder if he 
should ask for a pot of tea for two. Then he slowly 
shu.fHed out. 
As I was going back to my room, where Liza was 
waiting, it occurred to me that I might run away, no 
matter where, just as I was, in my tattered dressing gown, 
and come what may. 
But I returned and sat down. She looked at me worried­
ly. For some moments we remained silent. 
"I'll kil him!" I shouted suddenly, banging the desk 
with my fist and splattering ink over the top. 
"But why, why?" she said, shivering. 
"I'll kil him, I'll kil him!" I screamed, pounding the 
desk with my fists in a fit of rage, but clearly realizing 
how stupid my fit was. "You can't imagine, Liza, what a 

194 
Notes from Underground 
murderous bully he is. He's torturing me, Liza. Now he's 
gone to get the cookies, he-" 
And suddenly I burst into uncontrollable sobs. Between 
my sobs, I was terribly ashamed, but I couldn't stop. 
"What's the matter, what's the matter?" Liza said in 
agitation. She was frightened. 
"Water! Get me some water .
.
•
.
 Over there!" I mum­
bled weakly, knowing very well that I could easily have 
done without the water and didn't really have to mumble 
like that. But, although my sobbing fit had been quite 
genuine, I had to play a part to save appearances. 
She handed me a glass qf water, looking at me at a 
loss. At that moment, Apollon returned with the tea. I 
suddenly felt that this ordinary, everyday tea would be 
quite inappropriate after what had happened. It made me 
tum red. Liza glanced fearfuly at Apollon, who left with­
out even glancing at us. 
"Do you despise me, Liza?" I asked her, trembling 
with impatience to know what she thought of me. 
She didn't know what to say, she was so embarrassed. 
"Drink your tea," I said irritatedly. 
I was furious with myself, but, of course, I took it out 
on her. Vicious resentment against her was rising in my 
breast. I believe I'd have killed her if I'd had a chance. To 
punish her, I swore to myself that I wouldn't address one 
single word to her. I had decided that it was al her fault. 
The silence had already lasted five minutes. Neither 
of us had touched the tea. I wouldn't touch mine just to 
make her feel even more embarrassed, and she felt too 
awkward to drink hers alone. Several times I caught 
her sad, perplexed glances. Stubbornly, I remained si­
lent. Of course, it was I who suffered most, because I 
realized how loathsome my perverse stupidity was, even 
though I couldn't help it. 
"I want," she began, feeling she had to break the silence 
somehow, "to leave . .
. _ that place . . .  for good . . .  
" 
Ah, poor, silly thing; that was the very last thing to 
say at such an inappropriate moment to a fool like me. 
Even my heart bled for her at this show of artlessness and 
unnecessary frankness. But something ugly inside me 

Notes from Underground 
195 
nipped in the bud any pity I may have had and even exac­
erbated my spite. Ah, to hell with everything! Another 
five minutes went by. 
"Maybe I'm disturbing you," she said, hardly audibly, 
and made a motion to get up. 
As soon as I recognized this first sign of resentment 
at the way I was treating her, I began shaking with anger 
and burst out: 
"I'd like to know the purpose of your coming here. 
What was it?" I began, gasping for breath, unable to 
care about getting my words in logical order. I was in 
such a hurry to blurt out everything that was pent up 
inside me that it made no difference to me where I started. 
"Why did you come? Answer me! Come on, answer 
me!" I shouted in a blind rage. "All right, my girl, I'll 
tell you why : you came because of all the 'touching' 
things I said the other night. But, for your information, I 
was laughing at you then, just as I'm laughing at you 
now. Why are you trembling? Yes, I say I was laugh­
ing. I had been insulted at a dinner party just before I 
came by the fellows who preceded me. I came to your 
place to take a punch at one of them, the officer, but 
I was too late. I had to vent my spite on someone else, and 
you 
happened 
to 
be 
around, 
so 
I 
poured 
my re­
sentment out on you and had a good laugh. I'd been in­
sulted, so I wanted to insult back; I'd been made a 
doormat, so I wanted to show my power and wipe 
my feet on someone else. That's all there was to it, and 
you imagined I came specially to save
· 
you, isn't that 
right? 
That's 
what 
you 
imagined, 
wasn't 
it? 
Wasn't 
it?" 
I knew she'd get confused and details would be wasted 
on her; however, I felt she couldn't miss the essence of 
what I was saying. And that's exactly what happened. 
She went ashen, pale as her kerchief; her lips twisted 
painfully, and she collapsed back in her chair as though 
felled by an axe. From that moment on, she remained 
there, 
shivering, 
eyes wide 
open, 
mouth 
agape, 
and 
listened to me. My cynicism had crushed her. 
"Save you, indeed!" I resumed, jumping up and tear-

196 
Notes from Underground 
ing back and forth across the room. "Save you from 
what, I'd like to know! Suppose I myself am lower than 
you? Why didn't you ask, when I was lecturing you on 
morals, what I was doing there myself, and whether I'd 
come especially to preach morals? What I was really after 
at that moment were power and a role to play, and your 
tears, your humiliation, and your hysterics. That's what 
I was after! But I couldn't keep it up because I'm garbage 
myself; I lacked the stomach for it and, I'll be damned if 
I know why, gave you my address. Even before I got 
home that night, I cursed myself for giving it to you; I 
hated you already because I'd lied to you. I can only 
play with words or dream inside my head; in real life, 
all I want is for you to vanish into the ground! I need 
peace. I'd give up the world like a kopek just to be left 
in peace. If given a choice between letting the world go 
to pot or going without my tea, I'd let the world go to pot 
so long as I could always have my tea. Were you aware of 
that or not? Well, I know that I'm no good, perverse, self­
ish, and lazy. I've been shaking with fear these last three 
days because I thought you might come. And shall I 
tell you what it was that worried me most? The thought 
that I had tried to pass myself off as a hero to you and 
you would come and find me in my lousy dressing gown, 
penniless 
and 
repulsive. 
I 
just 
told 
you 
I 
wasn't 
ashamed of my poverty. Well, I am ashamed of it-more 
ashamed of it than of anything else; I'm more afraid of 
it than of becoming a thief, and I'm as hypersensitive 
as if I'd had the skin peeled off me, so that contact 
with the very air hurts. Can you still fail to see that I'll 
never forgive you for catching me in my dressing gown 
just as I was snapping at Apollon like a vicious little 
lapdog? Your savior, your erstwhile hero, throws him­
Ëelf at his flunky like a lousy, mangy cur, and the flunky 
JUSt laughs in his face! Nor will I ever forgive you for 
the tears that I couldn't hold back in front of you just 
now, like a stupid woman put to shame. And the fact 
that I'm confessing all this to you now-that, I'll also 
never forgive you. Yes, you and you alone are responsible 
for everything because you happened to be at hand, 

Notes from Underground 
197 
because I'm a louse, because I'm the most disgusting, 
most laughable, pettiest, most stupid, and most envious of 
all the worms of the earth-which are in no way better 
than me, but which, hell knows why, never feel embar­
rassed. But me-all my life I've let all sorts of scum push 
me around-that's just like me! And do you think I care 
if you don't understand all this? What concern of mine 
are you? What concern is it of mine whether or not 
you rot in that house? Don't you realize that when I've 
finished telling you al this, I'll hate you just because you 
were here and listened to me? Why, a man only bares 
his soul like this once in a lifetime, and even then, only 
when he's in hysterics. What more do you want? Why 
do you still stay here after all this? Why are you pester­
ing me? Why don't you leave?" 
But, at this point, a very strange thing happened. 
I was so used to imagining everything happening the way 
it does in books and visualizing things falling somehow 
into the shape of my old daydreams that at first I didn't 
understand what was going on. What actually happened 
was that Liza, whom I had humiliated and crushed, under­
stood much more than I had thought. Out of all I had 
said, she had understood what a sincerely loving wom­
an would understand first-that I myself was unhappy. 
Her fright and resentment gave way, at first, to sor­
rowful surprise. Then, when I explained how base and 
despicable I was, with the tears flowing from my eyes 
(they flowed during my whole tirade) ,  her face started 
twitching convulsively. She wanted to get up and stop me, 
and when I was through, she wasn't struck by my cries of 
"Why are you pestering me? Why don't you leave!"; 
instead, she was concerned over the pain it must have 
caused me to say al that. And then, the poor thing had 
been so humiliated before and felt so much my inferior 
that it was beyond her to be angry or take offense. Sud­
denly she was standing, and in an irresistible impulse, 
with her whole being drawn toward me but too shy to take 
a step forward, she stretched her hands out to me. I 
couldn't stand it any longer . . . .  
Then she flung her arms around my neck and burst 

198 
Notes from Underground 
into tears, and I too lost al control and sobbed as I 
never had in my life before. 
"They don't let me . . .  I can't be good . . . .  
" I mum­
bled, stumbling to the couch. I threw myself on it, face 
down, and remained like that for at least a quarter of an 
hour, sobbing hysterically. She knelt near me, put her 
arms around my shoulders, and froze in this embrace. 
But the trouble was that these hysterics couldn't go 
on for ever. And so-for I'm writing down the truth in 
al its disgusting ugliness-as I lay on that couch of mine 
with my face buried in the greasy oilcloth cushion, I 
began to realize, at first distantly, that it would be 
terribly awkward for me to lift my head now and look 
Liza in the eyes. I'm not sure what I was ashamed of, 
but I was ashamed al right. The thought also flashed 
through the turmoil in my head that we had definitely 
changed places, Liza and I, that she now had the heroic 
role, and I was the beaten-down, crushed creature she 
had been that night over there. 
. . . Al this ocurred 
to me while I was still lying face down on my couch. 
Good God, was it possible that I envied her? 
I can't answer that to this day, and then, of course, 
I understood even less than I do now. I cannot live with­
out having someone to bully and order around. But, since 
nothing can be explained by reasoning, why reason? 
Anyway, I managed to overcome my feelings, and since 
I had to raise my head sooner or later, I raised it. And to 
this day I'm sure that, precisely because I was ashamed 
to look her in the eye, new feeling flashed in my heart 
-the need to dominate and possess. Passion burned in 
my eyes as I fiercely clasped her hands. Ah, how I hated 
her, and how furiously _I was drawn to her at that mo­
ment! And the one made the other stronger. This was like 
avenging myself! Her face expressed first bewilderment, 
perhaps even fear. But only for a moment. Then she threw 
herself at me in rapture. 

Notes from Underground 
1 99 
X 
A quarter of an hour later, I was darting impatiently 
up and down the room, again and again stopping by the 
screen and peeping at Liza through the slits. She was 
sitting on the floor crying, her head leaning against the edge 
of the bed. But she wasn't leaving, and that was what iri­
tated me. By now, she knew everything, for I had sub­
jected her to the ultimate insult, but . . .  no need to go into 
detail. She had guessed that my outburst of passion had 
actually been an act of revenge, a new effort to humil­
iate her, and that now, to my almost impersonal hatred, 
there was added a personal hatred for her. 
However, I'm not completely certain that she did un­
derstand everything clearly, beyond the fact that I was 
a loathsome creature and, most important, that I couldn't 
love her. 
I know they'll tell me that it's incredible for a person 
to be so spiteful and stupid; they might add that my 
failure to fal in love with her or at least appreciate her 
love is incredible too. But why is it incredible? In the 
first place, I couldn't fal in love because, for me, loving 
means bullying and dominating. I have never been able 
to imagine any other way of loving and have reached 
a point where, to me, love consists of a voluntary con­
cession by the object of my love of my right to bully it. 
Even dreaming in my mousehole, I never visualized 
love as anything but a struggle, starting with hatred and 
ending in the subjection of the loved object, after which 
I was unable to think up anything. And why is re­
proaching her for coming to see me just to hear my touch­
ing words--without it ever occurring to me that she'd 
really come, not for my lousy words but to love me-­
so incredible, since I had reached such a stage of moral 
disintegration, had so completely lost the habit of liv­
ing? For a woman, al resurrection, al salvation, from 
whatever perdition, lies in love; in fact, it is her only way 
to it. But, in truth, I didn't hate her so much as I 

200 
Notes from Underground 
darted around the room and peered at her through the 
cracks in the screen. Her presence there simply weighed 
on me heavily. I wanted her to vanish. I wanted peace; 
I wanted to be left alone in my mousehole. The whif 
of real life had overwhelmed me, and I couldn't breathe. 
But more minutes passed without her stirring, as though 
she were unconscious. I had the nerve to tap on the 
screģn to remind her. . . . She shuddered, jumped up, 
burned to take her shawl, her hat, her coat, anxious 
to get out of my sight, anywhere . . . .  
A couple of minutes later, she emerged from behind the 
screen, looking fixedly at me. I grinned viciously ( al­
though, in fact, I forced myself to grin like that for ap­
pearances' sake) ,  but I had to tum away from her stare. 
"Good-by," she said, walking toward the door. 
I 
rushed 
after 
her, 
caught 
her 
hand, 
opened 
it, 
slipped something in . . . then closed it again. Then, I 
turned away, tore over to the opposite comer of the 
room, so I wouldn't see, at least . . .  
I was about to lie just now and write that I did it ac­
cidentally, not knowing what I was doing, acting in a sort 
of daze. But I don't want to lie, so I say candidly that I 
opened her hand, and it was spite that made me put that 
into it .
.
•
.
 I got the idea while I was darting up and down 
the room and she was sitting behind the screen. But I can 
say one thing for myself: in doing this cruel thing, I wasn't 
prompted by my heart but by my stupid head. This cruelty 
was so contrived and such bad literature that I couldn't 
bear 
it 
myself 
and 
leaped 
away 
to 
a 
far 
comer 
of the room; after that, full of shame and despair, I 
rushed after Liza. I opened the front door and listened. 
"Liza, Liza!" I called down the staircase. But I kept my 
voice hushed. 
There was no answer. I thought I could hear footsteps 
downstairs. 
"Liza!" I shouted, louder this time. 
But no answer came. At the same moment, I heard 
the squeaking of the heavy glass door downstairs. Then 
it shut with a bang. 

Notes from Underground 
201 
She had left. I returned to my room deep in thought. 
I felt terribly sad. 
I stopped by the desk near the chair on which she had 
sat and stared blankly in front of me. A minute passed, 
then suddenly I saw on the table, right in front of my 
eyes . . . well, in short, I saw the crumpled five-ruble 
bill I had pushed into her hand. It was that bil. It couldn't 
be any other-there wasn't another one in the house. 
That meant that she'd managed to throw it on the desk at 
the moment I'd rushed to the opposite comer of the 
room. 
So? I might have expected her to do something of the 
sort. Really? Well-no. I was so egotistical, I despised 
people so much, that I'd never imagined she'd do it. It 
was too much. The next moment I was pulling on any 
clothes I could find and was off after her. She couldn't 
have gone more than about two hundred yards when 
I burst into the street. 
There was no wind, and the snow was coming down 
almost perpendicularly, piling a soft layer on the sidewalk 
and on the empty street. There were no people and not 
a sound to be heard. The street lamps twinkled sadly and 
pointlessly. I ran a couple of hundred yards or so and 
stopped. 
"Where is she going? Why am I runing after her?" 
I thought. 
"Why? To go down on my knees before her, to sob with 
remorse, to kiss her feet, to beg her to forgive me . . . . " 
I was longing to do it, my breast was' bursting, I never 
again thought of that moment without emotion. "But what 
for?" I thought. "Won't I hate her even more tomorrow, 
just because I've kissed her feet today? As though I could 
give her any sort of happiness! As though I hadn't found 
out today for the hundredth time what I'm really worth! 
As though I could prevent myself from torturing her!" 
I stood in the snow, staring into the blinding haze and 
thinking al that. 
"And isn't it much better," I mused later, back at home, 
trying to soothe the living pain with my fantasies, "for 
her to bear this humiliation as long as she lives, because 

202 
Notes from Underground 
humiliation is purification, because it causes the most 
corrosive, the most painful awareness? I'd have soiled her 
soul and tired her heart no later than tomorrow, but this 
insult and humiliation will never be extinguished in her; 
whatever filth surrounds her, my insult wil elevate her, 
purify her through 
. 
. 
. through hatred 
. 
. 
. well 
. . . maybe through forgiveness. 
. 
. 
• But wil it really 
be easier for her now?" 
No. But let me ask a question now on my own behalf: 
what's better-cheap happiness or lofty suffering? Well, 
tell me-which of the two is better? 
That was what I was musing about sitting at home that 
evening, hardly able to bear my sadness and despair. 
Never before had I gone through such anguish and remorse. 
But, when I rushed out of the house after Liza, had 
there ever been any doubt that I'd come back without 
catching her? I never met her again-never heard of 
her. I must also add that I was very pleased with my 
phrase about the beneficent effect of insult, humiliation, 
and hatred, although I myself, at that time, almost fell 
sick with despair. 
Even now, after all these years, this memory remains 
strangely vivid and unpleasant. I have many unpleasant 
memories, but . . . why not stop these notes right here? I 
feel it was a mistake to start writing them in the first 
place. However, I've at least felt ashamed all the time 
I've been writing this story, so it isn't literature, but a 
punishment and an expiation. Of course, spinning long 
yarns about how I poisoned my life through 
moral 
disintegration in my musty hole, lack of contact with 
other men, and spite and vanity is not very interesting. 
I swear it has no literary interest, because what a novel 
needs is a hero, whereas here I have collected, as if de­
liberately, al the features of an anti-hero. These notes 
are bound to produce an extremely unpleasant impres­
sion, because we've all lost touch with life and we're all 
cripples to some degree. We've lost touch to such an ex­
tent that we feel a disgust for life as it is really lived and 
cannot bear to be reminded of it. Why, we've reached 
a point where we consider real life as work-almost as 

Notes from Underground 
203 
painful labor-and we are secretly agreed that the way it 
is presented in literature is much better. And what's all 
this fuss about? What are we turning our noses up at? 
What are we demanding? We don't 
know ourselves. 
We would be the ones to suffer if our whimsical wishes 
were granted. Well, try it yourselves-ask for more 
independence. Take anyone and untie his hands, open up 
his field of activity, relax discipline, and .
.
.
 well, be­
lieve me, he'd immediately want that discipline clamped 
down on him again. I know that what I'm saying is 
liable to make you angry; that it may make you stamp 
your feet and scream : 
"Talk about yourself and about your own miseries 
in your stinking hole, but don't you dare say all of us." 
But listen to me for a moment. I'm not trying to justi­
fy myself by saying all of us. As for me, all I did was 
carry to the limit what you haven't dared to push even 
halfway-taking your cowardice for reasonableness, thus 
making yourselves feel better. So I may still tum out to 
be more alive than you in the end. Come on, have another 
look at it! Why, today we don't even know where real 
life is, what it is, or what it's called! Left alone without 
literature, we immediately become entangled and lost-we 
don't know what to join, what to keep up with; what to 
love, what to hate; what to respect, what to despise! 
We even find it painful to be men-real men of flesh and 
blood, with our own private bodies; we're ashamed of it, 
and we long to tum ourselves into something hypotheti­
cal called the average man. We're stillborn, and for a long 
time we've been brought into the world by parents who 
are dead themselves; and we like it better and better. We're 
developing a taste for it, so to speak. Soon we'll invent 
a way to be begotten by ideas altogether. But that's 
enough, I've had enough of writing these Notes from 
Underground. 
Actually the notes of this lover of paradoxes do not 
end here. He couldn't resist and went on writing. But we 
are of the opinion that one might just at well stop here. 

The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
A FANTASY 
I 
I
'm a ridiculous man. Now they call me a madman. 
That would be a promotion if I weren't just as ridi­
culous as before in their eyes. But it no longer makes 
me angry. I find them all nice now, even when they laugh 
at me-indeed, if they do, they're somehow particularly 
dear to me. I'd even laugh with them-not really at my­
self but out of sheer love for them-if looking at them 
didn't make me so sad. Sad, because they don't know 
the truth, while I do. Ah, it's so hard to be the only one 
to know the truth! But they won't understand it. No, they 
won't. 
And yet, looking ridiculous used to upset me very 
much. In fact, I didn't just look ridiculous-! was ridi­
culous. 
I've always been ridiculous, and I think I've 
known it from the day of my birth. Perhaps I became 
fully aware of it at the age of seven. I studied at 
school, then at the university, and the more I studied, the 
more I realized that I was ridiculous. For me, in the 
final analysis, higher learning amounted to explaining and 
proving my ridiculousness. And in life it was the same 
as in my studies : every year I became more conscious 
that 
I 
looked 
ridiculous- in every 
respect. 
Everyone 
bas always laughed at me, but no one has ever suspected 
that the one person in the world who knew just bow ri­
diculous I was was none other than myself. And that was 
what hurt me more than anything. But then, I bad only 
204 

The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
205 
myself to blame: I was proud, and never wanted to admit 
it to anyone. And my pride kept growing with the years. 
If I had admitted to anyone that I knew I was ridic­
ulous, I believe I'd have shattered my skull with a bullet 
that very night. Yes, I worried terribly during my adoles­
cence that I would break down one day and admit it to my 
schoolmates. But once I reached adulthood, although I 
found out more and more about this horrible peculiarity 
of mine, I somehow became more resigned to it. I say 
"somehow," because to this day, I cannot account for it. 
Maybe it was the result of the conviction that dawned upon 
me quite independently of my wil that nothing made any 
diference in this world. I had suspected this for a very 
long time, but I only became fully aware of it during this 
past year. I suddenly felt that it really made no difference 
to me whether or not the world existed. I began to feel 
with my whole being that nothing had happened while 
I'd been alive. At first I felt that, to make up for it, 
many things had happened before. Later, however, I 
realized that this was an illusion-nothing had hap­
pened before either. Little by little, I discovered that 
nothing wil ever happen. Then I stopped getting angry 
at people and almost stopped noticing them. This change 
manifested itself even in the smallest things. When I 
walked along the street, for instance, I would bump 
into people. I was certainly not absorbed in thought, 
for what did I have to think of by that time? I just 
didn't care about anything any more. If only I could've 
answered some of the many questions that tormented me, 
but I hadn't found a single answer. Then I became in­
diferent to everything, and all the questions faded away. 
It was only later that I learned the truth. I discovered 
it last November-November 3, to be 
precise; since 
then I remember every moment. It was a gloomy evening, 
as gloomy as they come. I was returning home at night, 
between ten and eleven, 
and I remember remarking 
that it was impossible to imagine a gloomier moment, 
even in its physical aspect. Rain was pouring down and 
it was the coldest, gloomiest rain possible. In fact, it was 
awesome. I remember that clearly; it was awesome and 

206 
The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
obviously hostile to man. And then, before eleven, the 
rain stopped and was replaced by a monstrous dampness 
that was even damper and colder than the rain had been. 
A strange steam bilowed from every object, from every 
stone, every sidestreet as one looked down it from the 
comer. I suddenly felt that if al the gaslights went out at 
once, everywhere, the picture would be more cheerful, 
because it was by gaslight that al these sad things could 
be seen. 
I hadn't dined that day. I had sat since early evening in 
the house of an engineer. Two of his friends were there 
too. I had been mostly silent, and I believe they were 
rather bored with me. They were discussing something 
that excited them, and at one point, their discussion be­
came heated. Yet, 
they 
didn't 
really care-they got 
excited for the pleasure of it. And I said so. 
"Good God," I said, "don't you realize that you your­
selves don't really care one way or the other!" 
They weren't offended. They just laughed at me. They 
laughed because I hadn't spoken reproachfuly but simply 
because everything was all the same to me. They saw 
that it was all the same to me and it made them laugh. 
When I had that idea about the gaslights in the street, 
I glanced at the sky. It was very dark, but I could make 
out tom clouds and bottomless black gaps between them. 
Suddenly I noticed a little star in one of those gaps. I 
looked at it intently. That star reminded me that I 
wanted to kil myself. I decided I would go through with 
it that very night. The idea of kiling myself had implanted 
itself firmly in my mind two months before and, poor 
though I was, I'd bought myself an excellent revolver and 
loaded it that first day. But two months passed, and 
the revolver was still lying in my desk drawer. Kiling 
myself was a matter of such indifference to me that I 
felt like waiting for a moment when it would make some 
difference. I can't tell you why I felt that way. Anyway, 
I kept waiting for the right moment. Now that star gave 
me the idea of going through with it that very night. With­
out fail. Why the star gave me that idea, I cannot say. 
But just as I was looking at the star, along came a little 

The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
207 
girl and grasped me by the elbow. The street was quite 
deserted. At a distance, a cabman was asleep on his box. 
The little girl was about eight. She had a scarf tied round 
her head and wore a ragged overcoat. She was all wet 
from the damp, but what struck me especially were her 
battered, wet shoes. I remember them to this day. She 
started tugging at my elbow, trying to make me pay at­
tention to her. She wasn't crying, but she was spasmodi­
cally shouting some indistinct words which she couldn't 
pronounce too clearly, as she was shivering with cold. 
Something must have frightened her, for she kept repeat­
ing, "Mumy, Mumy!" and there was terror in her 
voice. 
I just glanced at her and, without saying a word, 
started walking away. She ran after me, tugging at my 
sleeve. I discerned a note in her voice that indicates 
despair in badly frightened children. I know that note 
well. And, although she spoke indistinctly, I gathered that 
her mother was dying somewhere or that something 
had happened to her and she'd rushed out to get help. 
But I wouldn't follow her. In fact, I decided to chase her 
away. I started by telling her to go and find a policeman. 
But she clasped her little hands together and trotted 
along at my side, sobbing, trying to catch her breath. 
Finaly I stamped my foot and shouted at her. She whim­
pered, "Mister, mister .
.
.
 
" turned away, and darted 
across 
the 
street. 
Someone 
else 
had 
appeared 
there 
and she apparently had left me for him. 
I reached the fifth floor where I live. I have just one 
room. It's small and poor, and has only a semicircular 
skylight for a window. There's an oilcloth-covered sofa, 
a desk loaded with books, two straight chairs, and an 
old but very comfortable armchair. I lit a candle, sat 
down, and began to think. 
Behind the wall, in the room next door, there was bed­
lam. A retired army captain lived there. He had, as 
usual, -some half -dozen visitors drinking vodka and play­
ing cards with an old, greasy pack. The night before 
there had been a fight, and two of them had pulled each 
other's hair for a long time. The landlady had wanted 

208 
The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
to complain to the police, but she was too afraid of 
the captain. 
There's only one other tenant on this floor-a thin, 
smallish lady married to some army man. She came from 
out of town with her three children, who took il, here in 
the house, imediately upon their arrival. She and her 
children are also terribly afraid of the captain. Every night 
they shake with fear and cross themselves; the youngest 
child once even had a fit out of sheer terror. 
I know for certain that, from time to time, the captain 
stops people on Nevsky Avenue and begs them for a 
handout. He cannot get a job. Strangely enough (and 
that's why I'm telling all this ) ,  I haven't once felt any 
resentment for the captain during the month that he's 
lived here. Of course, I've avoided his company, and be­
sides, he got bored with me practically as soon as we met. 
But I don't mind all that racket behind the wal in the 
least-let them do what they want-it's al the same to 
me. I can sit up all night without hearing them, com­
pletely forgetting that they exist. I haven't gone to sleep 
before dawn for a year now; I just sit throughout the 
night in my armchair doing nothing. I read boks only 
during the day. At night I just sit without even thinking, 
just allowing shreds of thoughts to wander at their leisure. 
I use up a whole candle every night. 
I sat down quietly at the desk, took the revolver out of 
the drawer, and placed it in front of me. As I put it down, 
I remember asking myself, "Is this really it?" and answer­
ing categorically, "It is." That is-l'd shoot myself. I 
knew I'd shoot myself that night. I didn't know, however, 
how long I'd sit at my desk first. And there's no doubt that 
I would have shot myself had it not been for that 
little girl. 
I I  
You see, although I didn't care one way or the other, I 
still felt pain. I'd have felt physical pain if someone 
had hit me. And the same applies to mental pain. If 

The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
209 
I'd witnessed something sad, I'd have felt pity just as 
much as I would have before I ceased to care about any­
thing in this life. I felt pity that night, most certainly 
enough to help a child. Then why hadn't I helped that 
little girl? Well, I hadn't helped her because of a thought 
that occurred to me at that moment. It was a question I 
couldn't answer-an idle question, but it made me lose 
my temper. I grew angry because I'd come to the conclu­
sion that if I'd decided to end my life that night, then 
everything in this world should be, more than ever, a 
matter of complete indifference to me. Why then had I 
suddenly realized that it wasn't and felt sorry for the 
little girl? I remember how sorry I felt for her-so 
sorry that it hurt. And this was incredible in my state. I 
really don't know how to convey how I felt then, but the 
feeling persisted after I got home and sat down at my 
table. I was irritated, as I hadn't been for a long time. 
I reasoned: it seems obvious that if I am still a man and 
not a zero, then as long as I haven't turned into a zero, I 
am living; hence, I can suffer, get angry, and feel ashamed 
of my actions. That's so-but if I'm to kill myself in, 
say, two hours, what concern of mine can that little girl 
possibly be, and how can I care about notions like shame 
or, for that matter, anything else in the world? I'm about 
to be turned into an absolute zero; so how is it possible 
that the knowledge that I'm about to stop existing com­
pletely-and, therefore, that everything else will stop 
existing-did not diminish in the least my pity for the little 
girl or my shame over committing a despicable action? 
When I stamped my foot and shouted at the por child, 
it was as if I wanted to say: 
"Here, see! I don't feel any pity, and, what's more, 
even if I commit an unspeakable crime now, it wil be all 
right, because inside of two hours, everything will be 
extinguished." 
Can you believe that that was why I shouted? I'm al­
most certain of it. It seemed obvious to me that my life 
and, with it, the whole world were at the mercy of my 
whim. I could even put it this way: it looked as if the 
world had been made especially for me alone; if I shot 

210 
The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
myself, the world would stop existing, at least for me. 
To 
say nothing of the possibility that indeed there 
wouldn't be anything or anyone left after me, and as my 
consciousness sputtered out, the whole world would van­
ish like a phantom, like a mere figment of that conscious­
ness of mine. For it is possible that al the world and al 
the people are nothing but me. 
I remember that, as I sat and reasoned like that, I kept 
rephrasing and twisting al the questions, one after an­
other, that occurred to me. And in the end, quite new and 
unexpected considerations started cropping up. 
At one point, I wondered how it would be if, after 
living on the moon or Mars and committing some horribly 
shameful deed there that dishonored and disgraced me in 
a way that can be imagined only in a nightmare-if, 
after that, I were transported to earth and remained 
conscious of what I'd done on the other planet-to 
which I'd never return; would it then be all the same 
to me as I gazed at the moon from the Earth? Or wouldn't: 
it? Would I feel ashamed of the base act I'd committed: 
there or not? 
These questions were idle and useless since the gun: 
lay on the table in front of me, and every bone in me: 
knew that I was going to use it. Stil, they tormented me, . 
and that drove me mad. It was as if I could no longer die: 
without deciding something beforehand. In short, thatr 
girl saved me, because the questions she'd stirred up 
delayed the shot. 
Behind the wall, in the captain's room, things were. 
growing quieter. They had finished playing cards and 
were trying to settle down and drop off to sleep, lazily 
winding up their arguments and swearing drowsily at one 
another. 
It was then that I suddenly fell asleep, something that 
had never happened to me before while sitting in my arm-· 
chair at my desk. Sleep crept up on me and caught me 
completely unawares. 
A dream is a strange thing. Pictures appear with terri­
fying clarity, the minutest details engraved like pieces of 
jewelry, and yet, we leap unawares through huge abysses 

The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
21 1 
of time and space. Dreams seem to be controlled by wish 
rather than reason, the heart rather than the head­
and yet, what clever, tricky convolutions my 
reason 
sometimes makes while I'm asleep! Things quite beyond 
comprehension happen to reason in dreams! 
My brother, for instance, died five years ago. Some­
times I dream of him. He shares in all my worries and 
takes a great interest in everything, despite the fact 
that throughout my dream I'm fully aware that he is 
dead and buried. Why, then, doesn't it bother me that, 
although dead, he's stil worrying and busy by my side? 
How can my reason allow it? 
But enough of that. Now I'll speak of my dream. 
Yes, I had the dream on November 3. They tease me 
now, reminding me that it was nothing but a dream. 
But what difference does it make since the dream re­
vealed the truth to me? Once you've found Truth, you 
know it's the truth and that there isn't and can't be any 
other truth, whether you're asleep or awake. 
So let it be a dream. Yet that waking life that you 
praise so much-well, I was about to extinguish it by 
kiling myself when my dream, that 
dream of mine, 
revealed a new, great, regenerated, powerful life to me. 
Listen then! 
I I I  
I said I had slipped into sleep without noticing it, still 
juggling 
with 
the 
eternal 
questions. 
Suddenly 
I 
saw 
myself reach out for the revolver and, without getting 
up from my armchair, point it at my heart. Yes, at my 
heart and not at my head, despite the fact that I had 
resolved to shoot myself in the head, or to be more 
precise, in the right temple. So I pointed the revolver 
at my breast and waited like that for perhaps a couple of 
seconds. The candle, the table, and the wall started to 
sway before my eyes. I hurriedly pressed the trigger. 
In a dream, you may fall from a great height, you may 
be slashed or punched without ever feeling pain-unless 

212 
The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
you actually hurt yourself in your bed, in which case 
you'll experience pain and almost always wake up. So it 
was in my dream. I felt no pain, but I fancied that my 
shot shook everything around me. Then all light sput­
tered out, and it turned horribly black. It was as if I'd 
turned blind and mute. I was supine on something hard. 
I couldn't see or budge. Around me people were moving 
to and fro and shouting. I could make out the captain's 
deep voice and the screams of the landlady . . . Then 
there was a gap and I was carried off in a closed coffin. 
I felt the coffin swaying. Then I was suddenly struck by 
the thought that, after all, I was dead now--dead for 
good. There was no doubt about it in my mind. I could 
neither move nor see, but I still felt and I thought. 
Soon, as is usual in dreams, I began to accept things 
without question. 
Then they buried me. They left, and I was al alone. 
I didn't stir. Previously, when I had imagined how they'd 
bury me in my grave, I had always associated sensations 
of cold and damp with it. Now, indeed, I had an acute sen­
sation of cold, especially in the tips of my toes. But that was 
all I felt. 
I lay there, strangely enough, waiting for nothing, ac­
cepting as a matter of fact that a dead man has nothing 
for which to wait. But it was damp. I don't know how 
much time went by-an hour, a few days, or many days, 
but suddenly a drop of moisture that had seeped through 
the lid of my coffin fell on my left eye. Then, a minute 
later, a second drop fell, then, after another minute, a 
third, and so on and on, always at one-minute intervals. 
Unexpectedly, this made me terribly indignant, and I felt 
an acute pain in my heart. 
"It must be my wound," I decided; "the bullet must 
still be in there." 
And moisture stil dripped every minute on my closed 
left eye. Suddenly I called out to the Creator, who ordained : 
all that was happening to me, not with my voice, for I 
couldn't move my tongue, but with my whole being: 
"Whoever You are--if You do exist-if there is any­
thing more sensible than what's happening here, make it. 

The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
213 
happen. But if You are avenging Yourself for my unreason­
able suicide by inflicting upon me the inane disgrace of 
existence beyond life, be sure that no suffering inflicted 
upon me can equal the silent contempt that wil be in me 
throughout millions of years of martyrdom!" 
I made this appeal and fell silent. The dead silence 
lasted for almost a ful minute; another drop fell; but I 
knew-I had unshakable faith-that things were about 
to change. 
Then my grave opened. I couldn't tell whether it was 
dug open or what, but some dark, mysterious creature 
seized me-and then we were in. space. Suddenly I could 
see. It was dark al around, darker than I'd ever seen 
before! We were moving through space at a fantastic 
speed and were already quite far from Earth. I asked no 
questions of the creature that was carrying me off. I was 
too proud. I waited. I assured myself that I wasn't afraid, 
and the thought that I wasn't afraid made my heart 
vibrate with 
tremendous 
self-satisfaction. 
I 
don't 
re­
member how long we went on flying like that; I haven't 
the faintest idea. It was the way it always is in dreams 
-we leap over space, time, the laws of reason and exist­
ence, and stop only at points 
dear to our hearts. I 
remember suddenly seeing a little star in the darkness. 
"Is 'it Sirius?" I asked, forgetting I wasn't going to ask 
questions. 
"No, it is the star you saw in the gap between the 
clouds on your way home," the creature carrying me 
said. 
The creature bore a human resemblance. I didn't like 
it. I even felt a deep aversion for it. 
Having fired at my heart, I had expected to cease to be 
completely; instead, I had put myself in the hands of a 
creature that, although of course not human, still did 
exist. 
"Ah, so there is life beyond the grave!" I decided with 
the puzling light-heartedness of a dream, but it didn't 
change anything in me deep down. "If I must be again 
and live according to someone's omnipotent will," I 
thought, "I don't want to be vanquished and humiliated." 

214 
The Dream, of a Ridiculous Man 
"You know very well that I'm afraid of you, and that's 
why you despise me!" I said suddenly to my companion, 
unable to prevent myself from making this admission, 
and feeling a scorching humiliation. 
He didn't answer, but it suddenly dawned on me that I 
was not being despised or laughed at or even pitied, that 
our . journey 
had 
an 
unknown, 
mysterious 
purpose, 
concerning me alone. Fear mounted in me. My silent 
companion mutely communicated something that per­
meated the whole of me. We soared through dark, un­
known spaces. I had long since ceased to see any constel­
lations familiar to the eye. I knew that there were stars 
in the celestial spaces whose rays took millions of years to 
travel to the earth. But we had probably passed beyond 
them by now. I was waiting for something in terrible an­
guish; I was completely exhausted. 
Suddenly a familiar and unbelievably nostalgic feeling 
shook me : I saw our sun! I knew it couldn't be our 
sun, the sun that gave birth to our earth; I knew we were 
infinitely far from our sun, but somehow everything in­
side me knew that this sun was exactly the same as the 
other, its copy, its double. A delightful nostalgia filed me 
with rapture: light kindred to that which had given me 
birth warmed my heart and brought it back to life. And, 
for the first time since the grave, I felt alive. 
"But if this sun is exactly similar to our sun," I cried, 
"where is the earth?" 
My companion pointed to the little star twinkling with 
an emerald light in the darkness. We were flying straight 
toward it. 
"Are such duplications possible in the universe?" I 
asked. "Is this the law of nature? And if that star is earth, 
can it really be like our earth-wretched, yet eternally 
dear to the hearts of her most ungrateful children?" 
Overwhelming love for the earth I had left made me 
tremble. A vision of the -little girl I had wronged flashed 
before me. 
-
"You'll see!" my traveling companion said, and I de-
tected a note of sadness in its voice. 
' 
In the meantime we were rapidly approaching the 

The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
215 
planet. It grew before my eyes. I could already make out 
the oceans, the 
outline 
of Europe, when suddenly 
a 
strange, powerful, holy indignation exploded within me. 
"How can there be such a duplication, and what is its 
purpose? I love and can only love the earth I left be­
bind, the earth I stained with my blood when, ungrateful 
man that I was, I shot myself through the heart to snuff 
out my life. I never ceased to love that earth, not even 
the night I left it. In fact, my love for it then was prob­
ably more poignant than ever. 
"Is there any suffering on this new earth? On our old 
earth, we can truly love only with suffering and through 
suffering. We don't know how to love otherwise; we 
don't know any other love. I want to suffer so that I may 
love. I want-I'm longing this very minute to kiss the 
earth I left behind with tears streaming down my cheeks. 
I don't want any other earth. I won't- consent to live on 
any other planet! . . .  
" 
But my companion had already left me. I suddenly 
found myself standing on that other earth, wallowing in 
the bright, gorgeous sunlight of a day in Paradise. I be­
lieve I was on an island of the Greek archipelago or 
perhaps somewhere on the coast of the Greek mainland. 
Everything was exactly as it is on our earth, but there 
was a holiday air about, an aura of supreme triumph. A 
tender, emerald sea splashed quietly, kissing the shore 
with love that seemed almost conscious. Magnificent tall 
trees stood in the ful glory of their blooming, and I felt 
that their luxuriant, innumerable leaves were welcoming 
me with their gentle rustle, whispering words of love. 
Bright, fragrant flowers blazed in the lush grass. Flocks of 
birds flew through the air. They were not afraid of me and 
alighted on my shoulders and hands; I felt the joyful beat 
of their fluttering little wings against my body. 
Finaly I met the people of this happy earth. They 
came toward me, pressed around me, and embraced me. 
And, oh, how beautiful were these children of the sun­
their own sun, that is! I'd 
never 
come across 
such 
beauty in human beings on our earth. Only, perhaps, in 
children in their very first years would it have been pos-

2 1 6  
The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
sible to find a remote suggestion of that beauty. The eyes 
of these happy people were radiant and their faces were 
intelligent, expressing the serenity of those who have 
supremely fulfilled themselves. But there was also simple, 
childlike joy in their :aces and voices. Yes, after one 
glance at their faces, I understood everything! This earth 
hadn't been desecrated by the Fall of Man; its inhabitants 
still lived in a paradise such as that of Adam and Eve 
before they sinned. Only here paradise extended over the 
entire earth. 
These people laughed happily, thronged round me, 
and lavished kindness upon me. They took me to their 
homes. Each of them was anxious to make me happy. 
They didn't ask me any questions, appearing to know 
everything already. They were in a hurry to remove the 
signs of suffering from my features. 
IV 
All right, suppose it was nothing but a dream; still, the · 
sensation of love left in me by those pure and beauti­
ful people has stayed with me always. I still, to this day, . 
feel their love flying out to me. I saw them myself, I 
understood them, and I'm certain that I loved them, that . 
I suffered for them afterward. Of course, I realized even : 
then that many things in them were beyond my grasp. 
For instance, being a modem Russian believer in progress 
and a vulgar denizen of Petersburg, I couldn't see how 
they could know so much when there was no indication 
that they had any knowledge of the achievements of our 
modem science. But I soon realized that their knowledge. 
fed upon different revelations than ours and that their 
aspirations were quite different. They didn't want any­
thing and were absolutely serene; they didn't strive to 
find the meaning of life, _béause their own lives were full 
of meaning. Their understanding was of a higher order 
and deeper than that provided by our science. Science 
tries to explain what life is in order to teach us how we 
should live; they didn't need science to tell them how to 

The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
217 
live-they knew by themselves. I understood that, al­
though I couldn't account for their knowledge. They 
pointed at their trees, and I couldn't comprehend the 
intensity of the love with which they looked at them; it 
was as if they were communicating with beings like them­
selves. In fact, I don't think I'd be wroilg in saying that 
they talked to them! Yes-they'd found the language of 
the plants, and I'm sure they could understa.Iid them. 
And these people were like that with al nature. The 
animals lived in peace with them, never attacked them, 
loved them; they were subdued, as it were, by love. 
The people pointed out stars to me and spoke to me 
about them. I couldn't understand what they said, but 
I'm certain they had some sort of communion with the 
stars, a live, direct knowledge of them rather than a 
rational, scientific understanding. 
Those people never even tried to make me understand 
them. They loved me anyway. And I knew that they'd 
never understand me; that's why I hardly ever mentioned 
our earth to them. I simply kissed their soil in front of 
them and mutely adored them; they let me adore them 
without any embarrassment, for they themselves had-. so 
much love for me. They didn't suffer for me when, with 
tears in my eyes, I kissed their feet, for they knew the 
strength of the love in their hearts with which they re­
turned my love. I used to stop and wonder now and then 
why they never once caused me to feel offended and 
never aroused envy or jealousy in a man like me? Why 
did a braggart and a liar like me never once feel like 
parading my knowledge of science and philosophy, about 
which they obviously had no idea? I was never impelled 
to surprise them and teach them what I knew-not even 
out of love for them. 
They were as playful and gay as children. They strolled 
through their beautiful woods and meadows singing their 
sweet songs, gathering honey and the fragrant fruit of 
their forests, and sipping the milk of the friendly, loving 
animals. Obtaining food and clothing required little ef­
fort. 

218 
The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
They knew love and begot children, but I never detected 
among them those outbursts of cruel sensuality . that 
are so common on our earth and are almost the sole 
source of our sins. They rejoiced in their newborn children 
as new sharers of their bliss. They never had any quarrels 
and were never jealous of one another; they didn't even 
understand what jealousy meant. Their children were the 
children of all, for they were all one family. 
Ilness was almost completely unknown among them, 
although death existed. But their old people died peace­
fuly, as though falling asleep, surrounded by people tak­
ing leave of them, blessing those staying behind, smiling 
at them, and receiving their bright smiles in return. I 
never witnessed any sorrow or tears on these occasions 
-only love that reached the point Qf rapture, a sort of 
calm, contemplative rapture of fulfillment. 
One might have thought they maintained contact with 
their people after death, that the earthly link wasn't sev­
ered by it. They seemed puzzled when I asked them about 
eternal life, for apparently it was beyond al possible 
doubt to them. They didn't have any temples; instead 
they had a sort of tangible, live, and constant communion 
with the universal Whole. They had no faith, but had 
instead a firm knowledge that when their earthly happi­
ness was filled to the limit, there would come for the liv­
ing and the dead a day of even closer communion with 
the universal Whole. They waited for that day with joy, 
but 
without 
impatience, 
without 
longing, 
as 
though 
they had a foreknowledge of it that they shared with one 
another, in their hearts. 
In the evenings, before retiring, they formed magnifi­
cent, harmonious choirs, and in their songs they conveyed 
all the impressions of the departing day, praising it and 
bidding it farewell. They praised nature, earth, sea, and 
forests. They composed songs about one another and in 
them showered childlike praise upon their friends. Their 
songs were very simple, but they came straight from the 
heart and penetrated other hearts. 
And it wasn't only in their songs-they really spent 

The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
219 
their whole lives admiring one another, as though they 
were all in love with one another. Some of their rapturous 
and solemn songs were completely beyond my under­
standing. Even when I understood the words, I couldn't 
grasp their entire meaning. It was beyond my brain­
power. But my heart seemed to soak it in. I often told 
them that I'd had a presentiment of all this for years; 
that, while still on my original earth, I had experienced 
their joy and glory as a nostalgic feeling that at times 
reached a pitch of unendurable torment; that I'd sensed 
them in their glory in the visions of my heart and mind; 
that back on our earth I'd often been unable to look at 
the setting sun without tears; that my hatred for the peo­
ple of our earth had always contained a feeling of 
despair-why couldn't I hate them without loving them? 
As they listened to me I saw very well that they couldn't 
imagine what I was talking about. But I wasn't sorry that 
I had told them those things, for I knew that they felt 
through my words how terribly I yearned for al those 
I had left behind me. Yes, as they gazed at me with their 
eyes so ful of love, I felt I was becoming as pure and 
truthful as they were, and that it didn't matter whether 
I actually understood them or not. A feeling of the fullness 
of life seized me by the throat, and I adored them in 
silence. 
--
Now, of course, people laugh at me and assure me 
that I couldn't possibly have noted all those details in 
my dream, that I must've had some vague, feverish sen­
sation engendered by my own heart and that I invented 
al the intricacies only after I woke up; And when I sug­
gest to them that perhaps everything really did happen, 
you should hear them laugh! Yes, they laugh in my 
face. 
There's no doubt, of course, that I was completely 
overwhelmed by my dream and that the sensation it left
· 
lingered on in my tom, aching heart. But then, the 
actual images-that is, those I really did see during the 
hour while I was dreaming-were so harmonious, so over­
whelmingly enchanting, and so true that, when I awoke, 

220 
The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
I found words were too feeble to express them; and so 
they were bound to become blurred in my mind. Perhaps 
then, I was forced, without being aware of it, to invent 
details later, distorting them, of course, in my anxiety 
and hurry to communicate them 
somehow. 
But how 
could I help believing that everything had actually hap­
pened? Perhaps it was even thousands of times better, 
happier, more radiant than I could convey. 
Call it a dream, but it must've happened all the 
same. But, as I said, maybe it wasn't a dream at all. For 
something happened there, 
something so frighteningly 
real that it couldn't have been a dream image. Let's as­
sume that my heart generated the dream; how could my 
heart, 
after 
that, 
have 
generated the horrible things 
that happened? How could I have invented it or dreamed 
it up? How could my petty heart and my puny mind 
arrive at such a revelation of truth? Judge for yourself, 
for I'm going to tell you about that truth which, up to 
now, I've refused to reveal. 
The truth is that-well, that I ended up by corrupting 
them all . . . .  
v 
Yes, in the end, I corrupted the lot of them! How I 
managed to do it, I can't say; I don't remember too 
clearly. My dream flashed through eons, leaving in me 
only a general impression of the whole. Al I know is 
that 
I caused their fall 
from 
grace. 
Like 
a sinister 
trichina, like a plague germ contaminating whole kingdoms, 
I contaminated with my person that entire happy, sinless 
planet. They learned how to lie, they came to love it, 
and they grew to appriate the beauty of untruth. It 
may have started with a joke, innocently, playfully, with 
a flirtation, but the germ of the lie penetrated their hearts, 
and they took a fancy to it. 
Then came voluptuousness. And voluptuousness begot 

The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
221 
jealousy, and jealousy begot cruelty .
.
.
.
 Ah, I don't 
know how soon, but it wasn't long before the first blood 
was shed. Those people of the other earth were shocked 
and horrified and they started to break up and disperse. 
Alliances were formed only to be directed against other 
alliances. Recriminations and 
accusations flew to and 
fro. 
They learned about shame and they made a virtue of it. 
The concept of honor appeared, and each alliance hoisted 
its colors. They started to torture animals, and the ani­
mals escaped into the forests and became their enemies. 
They fought to secede, for independence, for individual 
advantages, for what's mine and what's 
yours. 
They 
ended 
speaking 
diferent 
languages; 
they 
experienced 
suffering, and came to love it; they declared that suffering 
was the only way to Truth. Then science spread among 
them. 
As they became evil, they talked about fraternity and 
humanitarianism and came to 
understand those con­
cepts; as they became criminal, they invented justice and 
drew up voluminous codes 
of laws to 
enforce their 
justice-and built a guillotine to enforce their laws. 
They only dimly recalled the things they had lost and 
refused to believe that there had been a time when they 
were pure and happy. They even dismissed as ridiculous 
all possibility of return to that lost bliss, branding it a 
pipe dream. They were unable to visualize or conceive 
of it. 
And a strange thing happened : while they ceased com­
pletely to believe in their lost bliss, dismissing it as a 
fairy tale, they longed so much to become happy and 
innocent once more that they capitulated to their own 
wishes and, like small children, proceeded to worship 
their longings. They built countless temples, deified their 
own wishful thought, and prayed to it. And although they 
were certain their wishes could never come true, they 
worshiped them with tears in their eyes. 
Probably, however, if they had been given a chance to 
regain their lost state of innocence and bliss, if someone 

222 
The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
had pointed it out to them and asked them whether they 
wanted to return to it-they'd have refused. They told 
me: 
"We are false, cruel, and unjust. We know it, we deplore 
it, and we torture ourselves because of it-punish our­
selves perhaps even more cruelly than the merciful Judge 
who wil sit in judgment over us and Whose name we do 
not know. But then, we have science, and with its 
help we shall discover Truth once more; then we shall 
accept it in full knowledge. Knowledge is of a higher 
order than feeling; awareness of life is of a higher order 
than life. Science will give us wisdom, wisdom wil reveal 
to us the laws of nature, and knowledge of the laws of 
nature wil confer upon us a happiness beyond happiness." 
That's what they said, and after these words, each of 
them began to love himself more than anyone or any­
thing else in the world. And how could it be otherwise? 
Each became so jealous of his individuality that he had 
to do his best to belittle and humble the individuality 
of others, seeing therein the purpose of his life. 
Slavery made its appearance, even voluntary slavery 
in which the weak submitted to the strong of their own 
free will, if only in order to gain their support to op­
press those who were even weaker than themselves. Saints 
came to those people and preached to them about their 
pride, their loss of a sense of proportion, their loss of 
shame. The saints were laughed at and stoned. The blood 
of the saints splattered the doors of the temples. 
Then came men who started to toy with ideas on how 
to reunite people. They tried to devise a society in which 
each individual, while continuing to love himself above 
everyone else, would at the same time abstain from inter­
fering with others. Thus, they imagined, men could live 
together in a harmonious society. 
Whole wars were fought over that idea. Those who 
fought firmly believed that science and wisdom and the 
instinct of self-preservation would finally force men to 
unite in a harmonious, reasonable society. And, in the 
meantime, these wise ones were in a hurry to exterminate 

The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
223 
the unwise who couldn't grasp their Idea, and thus pre­
vent them from hindering its triumph. 
The feeling of self-preservation began to give way; soon 
there arrived the proud and voluptuous, who wanted all 
or nothing. To obtain all, they didn't hesitate to com­
mit crime, and if that didn't work, they were prepared 
for suicide. 
Religions appeared worshiping the nonbeing and self­
annihilation for the sake of an eternal repose in nothing­
ness. 
Finally these people grew tired in their senseless efforts, 
and suffering appeared on their faces. Then they pro­
claimed that suffering is beautiful because suffering alone 
contains 
thought. 
So 
they 
praised 
suffering 
in their 
songs. 
I walked among them wringing my hands in 
despair and crying over them. I believe I loved them even 
more than before the suffering had appeared on their 
features, when they were still so pure and beautiful. I 
loved their degraded earth more than I had loved it 
when it was a Garden of Eden, if only because sorrow 
had made its appearance in it. Alas, though I've al­
ways welcomed sorrow and torment for myself, I was not 
happy to see them struck by it, and it made me cry. I 
stretched out my hands toward them, cursing and loath­
ing myself in my despair. I told them that I was responsi­
ble for everything that had happened to them-1 alone-­
that it was I who had introduced falsehood, contamina­
tion, and vice among them. I beseeched them to crucify 
me and explained how they should prepare the cross. I 
couldn't-! 
didn't 
have 
the 
strength 
to kil myself, 
but I longed to be martyred at their hands. I longed for 
martyrdom-! wanted them to shed my blood, drop 
by drop to the last drop. 
But they merely laughed at me and ended by taking me 
for a feeble-minded fool. They exonerated me, explaining 
that they had asked for whatever they had and that it 
had been bound to happen. Finally they warned me that 
I was becoming dangerous and that they would have to 
lock me up in a madhouse if I didn't shut up. 

224 
The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
That hurt me terribly. Sorrow compressed my heart, 
and I felt I would die, and then . . .  Well, then I woke 
up. 
It was morning alreadv. The sun hadn't risen, but it was 
after five. I found myself in my old armchair. My candle 
had completely burned out. Next door, in the captain's 
room, they were all asleep. Everything was very quiet, 
a very rare state in this house. 
I immediately jumped up. I was absolutely stunned, for 
nothing like that 
dream had ever happened to me­
l'd never even fallen asleep in my armchair before. As 
I stood there regaining my senses, my eyes fell upon the 
loaded gun lying ready on my desk. But I immediately 
pushed it away from me. Now I had a great thirst to 
live. I raised my hand to call out to eternal Truth-but I 
didn't call out. I began to weep instead. I was overcome 
by boundless rapture. Yes, I wanted to live and to preach. 
At 
that 
very 
instant, 
I 
decided 
to 
preach, 
and 
of 
course, I'll go on preaching as long as I live. I'll go from 
place to place preaching. I want to preach . . . I'll 
preach the Truth, for I've seen it with my own eyes, 
I've seen it in all its glory! 
And so, since then, I've been preaching. Moreover, 
I love everybody-those who laugh at me even more than 
the rest. Why, I don't know. I can't account for it, but so be 
it. They say that even now I don't make much sense; that 
in fact, I make less and less sense. They wonder where 
I wil end up. What they say is true. I'm becoming con­
fused, and things may get even worse. There's no doubt 
about it-I'll often get muddled up before I find the right 
words to preach and the right deeds to perform, because 
it's terribly dificult. Why, I'm very much aware of that 
at this very moment. But then, who doesn't get confused? 
Stil, we're striving for the same things; we're al, from 
the sage to the worst criminal, making our way toward 
the same objective. Only we're trying to get there by 
different roads. That's an old truth, but here's something 
that's new about it: I can never stray too far from my 
course. 

The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
225 
You see, I've seen the Truth. I've seen it, and I know 
that men can be happy and beautiful without losing the 
ability to live on earth. I cannot-I refuse to believe that 
wickedness is the normal sfate of men. And when they 
laugh at me, it is essentially at that belief of mine. But 
how can I not have faith, since I've seen Truth? I didn't 
arrive at it with my intellect; I saw it in its entirety, 
and it is inconceivable that it could not exist. So how can I 
lose my path? Of course, I may wander off it a few 
more times and speak in alien words perhaps, but it'll 
never be for long; the vivid picture of what I saw in my 
dream will always guide me and correct my course. Ah, 
I'm fresh and cheerful, and I can go on like this for 
another thousand years. 
You know, at first I wanted to conceal the fact that 
I'd corrupted them. But it was a mistake, it was the first 
mistake! And Truth whispered in my ear that I was guilty 
of deception and saved me and showed me my way. But I 
don't know how to organize a paradise on earth, because I 
cannot convey it in words. After my dream, I lost the words 
that could convey it. At least the most important, indis­
pensable ones. But never mind, I'll go and speak tirelessly, 
for I've seen it with my own eyes, although I'm unable 
to tell what it is I've seen. 
But here's something that those who laugh at me can­
not see. They say, "So he had a dream, a hallucination." 
Well, is that really such a wise objection? Why are they 
so proud of it? A dream. What's a dream? And what's 
our life if it isn't a dream? And I may say, moreover : "Al 
right, suppose it never happens, let's say paradise will 
never come about! I know myself it won't-yet I'll stil 
go on preaching." 
And, on the other hand, it would've been so simple . . . .  
In one day-in a single hour--everything could've been 
arranged. The key phrase is, "Love others as you love 
yourself." And that's all there is to it. Nothing else is 
required. That would settle everything. Yes, of course it's 
nothing but an old truth that has been repeated and re­
read millions of times-and still hasn't taken root. 
"Awareness of life is of a higher order than knowledge 

226 
The Dream of a Ridiculous Man 
of the laws of happiness." That's an adage that we must 
fight. 
And I shall fight it. 
And if everyone wanted it, everything could be ar­
ranged imediately. 

Afterword 
Dostoyevsk:y was a sick man. He was spiteful, intolerant 
and irritable. Turgenev once described him as the nastiest 
Christian he had ever met. 
He had plenty of provocation. His father, a staff phy­
sician at a Moscow charity hospital, was a cruel, hard­
drinking, and dissolute man. His mother died when he 
was sixteen. Fyodor Dostoyevsky, one of seven children, 
grew up in a cramped private apartment in a wing of 
the hospital and on a small country estate where, even­
tually, his father was murdered by his serfs. The serfs 
had been infuriated by his brutality and debauchery, 
which included the retention of a regular harem of 
peasant girls. The family did not report the. real cause of 
death to the authorities. Imprisonment of the serfs would 
have entailed too great a financial hardship. 
It would be reasonable to assume that Dostoyevsky's 
early sympathies went to the oppressed masses in reaction 
to paternal cruelty as well as out of compassion for 
the suffering of the humble he'd witnessed all around 
him. His early writings placed him politically and were 
greeted enthusiastically by Russian liberals. The ranking 
Russian critic, Belinsky, hailed his first novel, Poor Folk, 
which was ful of pity for the underdog, detecting even 
in this rather maudlin effort a great literary talent. 
His humanitarian feelings led Dostoyevsk:y to join a 
liberal circle of enthusiastic young men who met to dis­
cuss socialism, mostly of the utopian variety of Fourier. 
During one such meeting of the Petrashevsk:y group, 
Dostoyevsk:y and his companions were surprised by the 
police. They were imprisoned and sentenced to death. 
This sentence, however, was nothing but a gruesome farce, 
227 

228 
Aftenvord 
devised by the tsarist authorities for the edification of 
subversives. 
On December 21, 1 849, the prisoners were taken to 
a city square for public execution. The death sentence 
was read to them, they were given the cross to kiss, a 
sword was symbolically broken over their heads, and they 
were ordered to don special white shirts. They were to be 
shot three by three. The first three were bound to the 
execution posts. Dostoyevsky was the sixth in line, that is, 
he was to be executed in the second batch. . 
. 
. 
Suddenly the tsar's messenger appeared on a foaming 
horse and announced that the tsar was graciously mak­
ing them a present of their lives. There was a beating 
of drums. The retreat was sounded. The men already tied 
to the posts were untied and sent back to rejoin the 
others. Some prisoners fainted. Two went permanently 
insane. The effect on Dostoyevsky, too, was shattering. 
The epileptic fits to which he had been subject since his 
childhood became incomparably worse. 
He was sentenced to eight years in the Omsk peni­
tentiary in Siberia, a sentence which, again thanks to 
the tsar's magnanimity, was reduced to four years, fol­
lowed by a stretch in the army as an enlisted man and 
an interdiction against living in either Moscow or Peters­
burg. Dostoyevsky was twenty-eight at the time of his 
conviction. 
In Siberia, Dostoyevsky found 
himself among the 
"crowd." They were criminals, perhaps, but, above al, 
they were simple Russian people, such as up till then 
he had only been able to observe from, as it were, his 
middle-class balcony-not too high but still a balcony. 
Now he was among them, 
aware of 
their physical 
presence, of their smell. They fascinated him, and his 
concern for them was as great as ever. But his attitude had 
changed. Al liberalism had left him; he was no longer a 
revolutionary, nor even a _would-be reformer. 
It is possible to account quite reasonably for the politi­
cal change of heart that occurred in Dostoyevsky after 
his arrest. Sensitive, highly impressionable and delicate 
as he was, he must have reached the point of nervous 

Afterword 
229 
breakdown, a point which later was studied and clearly 
defined by another Russian, the physiologist Ivan Pavlov. 
Pavlov observed that after subjection to certain phys­
ical and mental stress, the animals upon which he was 
experimenting uniformly showed symptoms of nervous 
disintegration, reaching a state resembling that of hyp­
nosis. He soon realized that in this state the animals were 
highly receptive to suggestion. Subsequently these find­
ings have been applied, in various countries, to human 
beings. Men are brought to the breaking point, and 
those in command then impose upon them the notions they 
think fit. Today this technique, applied in full aware­
ness, is by and large referred to as "brainwashing." But 
it seems clear that the same results have been achieved, 
more haphazardly-stumbled 
upon, 
one 
might 
say­
throughout the ages. 
After the scene on the execution square, the shattered, 
broken prisoners were probably highly receptive to any 
further demonstration of the ruthless power of the tsarist 
regime and readily convinced of its invincibility and in­
evitability. At the same time, they were filed with abject 
gratitude for its magnanimity in sparing them. In any 
case, Dostoyevsky was. Although he always remained re­
sponsive to human suffering, he now felt that all resist­
ance to the order of things causing it was irremediably 
doomed to failure, and that the only course for man­
kind was Christian submission. 
His attitude was sarcastically described by Alexander 
Herzen, one of those with whom Dostoyevsky had pre­
viously shared his views: "Compassionate love may be 
very strong. It sobs, it bums, then it wipes away its 
tears-and it does nothing." 
When he had served his four years in the penitentiary, 
Dostoyevsky was sent to a small Siberian garrison town 
as a private in the army. There he married his first wife, 
a moody, passionate, consumptive woman with a pro­
nounced streak of cruelty in her. They had violent quar­
rels and he was often unfaithful, although he was really 
quite attached to her. 
Only in 1859 was Dostoyevsky fully pardoned and 

230 
Afterword 
allowed to return to Petersburg. He immediately resumed 
his writing, which now included a great deal of journalism 
on the reactionary side of the political argument. 
His poor health was a pretext that frequently sent him 
abroad to various spas: Medicine at the time subscribed 
most emphaticaly to a belief in the curative powers of 
various mineral springs. At these resorts, Dostoyevsky, 
always short of money and always under pressure from his 
publishers to deliver, took to gambling, which developed 
into a full-fledged passion and complicated his existence 
still further. 
In 1 864 Dostoyevsky suffered two new shocks, one 
after the other: First his wife died, and then his brother 
Mikhail, who was closer to him than anyone. 
A relieving break came in Dostoyevsky's life three 
years later when he married his young secretary, Anna 
Snitkina. She was a plain woman with "her nostrils too 
far apart" and not particularly brilliant, but she remained 
to the end a good and loving wife, bore him children, 
looked after his manuscripts and his interests. She was 
to survive him by almost forty years. After his death in 
1881, she lived quite comfortably off the royalties from 
his works, of which the major novels had been written 
while they were married. She died in misery, however, in 
1920. The Soviets had come to power and summarily 
dismissed Dostoyevsky as a "mouthpiece of reaction and 
obscurantism." 
Now they have once again recognized him as a "great 
Russian classic," although they say he was given to 
frequent 
errors 
because 
he 
couldn't 
help 
reflecting 
the tottering beliefs of a decaying class. 
Indeed, the regime would have found it hard not to 
rehabilitate him. Throughout the time he was banned, old, 
much-thumbed copies of Dostoyevsky's works were se­
cretly circulated and enthusiastically discussed by smal, 
clandestine groups. 
It is no wonder that Dostoyevsky should have been 
discussed in solemn secrecy during the period when he 
was under a cloud in the Soviet Union, somewhat as 

Afterword 
23 1 
he himself had discussed socialist utopias in his youth. 
For in the many things that have been said about him, 
one word has recurred again and again: "prophet." 
This word misled many who saw in Dostoyevsky a 
sort of spiritual Jules Verne. He was no expert on the 
"shape of things to come." But perhaps, in the Biblical 
sense, the word "prophet" is suitable. 
Often writing carelessly and hurriedly, borrowing de­
vices from Eugene Sue's romans feuilletons-the pre­
cursors of the thrillers-thinking nothing of contriving 
quite unlikely situations and coincidences, guilty of many 
lapses into maudlin, tear-jerking sentimentality, Dostoyev­
sky nevertheless managed to achieve peaks hardly ever 
equaled in Russian or, for that matter, in world fiction. 
His uncanny insight into human motivation, combined 
with a fearless wilingness to dig into the human soul, made 
many stop and gape. Among others, of course, it at­
tracted droves of zooming simplifiers, would-be metaphy­
sicians, philosophical poets, professors of literature and 
afirmers 
of various faiths. They got hold of tidbits 
from his writings, commented upon them, read intricate 
implications into any irritated grunt Dostoyevsky hap­
pened to make, and in their elaborate efforts, became 
deaf to his music. 
He was picked up by great specialists like Freud and 
Sartre, and by humble students of Russian literature who 
often 
owed 
their 
acquaintance 
with 
him 
to 
genteel 
Victorian renditions-sometimes quite unfortunately re­
vised by contemporary literary experts. They discovered 
that Dostoyevsky was an obvious case of parricidal tend­
encies, that he was a forerunner of today's existentialists, 
that his idea of death anticipated that of Andre Malraux, 
that it was very appropriate to compare The Brothers 
Karamazov and Hamlet, and so on and on, in suitably 
obscure language. This is not to say that all these links 
are necessarily totally false, but rather that they are 
often nothing more than an intricate elaboration of the 
fact that the author in question had read Dostoyevsky. 
Or, to put it diferently, that Dostoyevsky touched upon 

232 
Afterword 
many 
aspects 
of universal problems which have also 
concerned later writers. 
What has made it difficult to discuss in normal tones 
a writer who showed _ such piercing understanding of 
certain aspects of human psychology is that, on the 
strength of his great talent as a novelist, he has been 
quoted ad nauseam as a religious and even as a political 
prophet, and his political and metaphysical views have 
been taken . almost as revelations handed down by some­
one in a state of grace. 
There is even a special, 
scornful word in Russian 
for particularly cheap interpretations of Dostoyevsky's 
thoughts and feelings : dostoyevshchina. However, today, 
the sad fact is that the Soviets dismiss as dostoytNshchina 
just about anything said about Dostoyevsky that does not 
jibe with Marx, although, of course, they think Dostoyev­
sky had a point when he asserted that the Russians were 
the real Chosen People. 
And here, to return to that word "prophet." In his 
Aspects of the Novel, E. M. Forster, one of those apply­
ing this term to Dostoyevsky, is very careful to define 
it: 
Prophecy . . . is a tone of voice. It may imply any 
of the faiths that have haunted humanity-Christianity, 
Buddhism, dualism, Satanism, or the mere raising of 
human 
love 
and hatred to 
such 
a power that their 
normal receptacles no longer contain them; but what 
particular view of the universe is recommended-with 
that we are not directly concerned. 
Dostoyevsky's prophetic quality is precisely not what 
he says but the tone in which he says it, not his ability to 
solve metaphysical problems but his uncanny ability to 
convey the torments people go through in trying to solve 
them. 
It is impossible to make a philosophical system out of 
Dostoyevsky's world. It is full of contradictions, incon­
sistencies, absurdities. It is a universal projection of the 
human soul speaking in many clashing voices. 

Afterword 
233 
Dostoyevsky, after he had renounced the possibility of 
an ideal social organization, felt (it was a feeling rather 
than an idea ) that the whole point of life is redemption 
through suffering and love, which is a very Christian 
approach indeed. 
Of course he is fully aware of the cruel, vicious streak 
in man and of his desire to inflict suffering and to domi­
nate. But although he acknowledges the existence of these 
things-and, 
indeed, 
describes 
them in striking detail 
-he 
always 
disapproves. 
Nietzsche, 
who 
is 
often 
loosely associated with Dostoyevsky, was very scornful 
of this Christian stand and held Dostoyevsky in contempt 
for his "morbid moral tortures," his rejection of "proper 
pride." He accused him of "sinning to enjoy the luxury 
of confession," which Nietzsche considered a "degrading 
prostration." 
Dostoyevsky 
was, 
in Nietzsche's 
words, 
one of the victims of the "conscience-vivisection and self­
crucifixion of two thousand years" of Christianity. 
The vague linking of Dostoyevsky with Nietzsche il­
lustrates the way many people have hung their own the­
ories on any of the many convenient pegs in Dostoyev­
sky's writings and then labeled the peg Dostoyevsky him­
self. One finds, too, constantly reiterated suggestions and 
suspicions that he committed or came close to committing 
some of the misdeeds of his characters, perhaps the price 
of exceptional intuitive understanding of other people. 
Thus, having taken his Christian stand, having re­
nounced any attempt to alleviate the human condition 
through practical, 
man-made measures 
(he had tried 
and the tsarist authorities had taught him that there was 
nothing to 
be 
done in that 
direction) ,  Dostoyevsky 
preaches submission and the acceptance of suffering, rec­
ommending it as the way to redemption and salvation. 
As he does so, however, he is still trying to convince 
himself of the existence of God. This internal debate 
throbs like a pulse throughout his major novels, for he 
is painfully aware that without God, the acceptance of 
sufering in the name of the soul's redemption would 
not make much sense. Yet, if we add up the final score 
of these arguments, it must be said that the rational skep-

234 
Aftenvord 
tic winds up 
ahead 
with 
a comfortable margin, al­
though the author's sympathies are on the losing side. The 
surprising thing here is that it is not only a matter of 
Dostoyevsk:y's reason outarguing his deep feelings on the 
rational level-on that level reason is bound to win any­
way-it is that Dostoyevsk:y's doubting side also wins, as 
it were, artistically: his doubters are much more con­
vincing, and by far better artistic portrayals, than his 
believers. 
But does it really matter whether Dostoyevsk:y's tor­
mented characters use strong or quite inadequate argu­
ments in their discussions of universal themes? Whether 
Dostoyevsk:y's "prophecies" come true or not? Whether 
it is likely that the world at large can only be saved by the 
"God-bearing Russian people" inspired by the Russian 
Orthodox version of Christianity? What if some of these 
thoughts do sound just as silly today as Hegel's incar­
nation of the timeless Divine Absolute in the nineteenth­
century Prussian monarchy? 
Dostoyevsk:y's vision is 
so striking because of his 
ability to create a universe, a crazy, impossible universe, 
perhaps, but one in which the most incredible details, the 
strangest thoughts and feelings, are governed by certain 
universal laws which Dostoyevsky reveals to us through 
his art. 
Dostoyevsk:y's writings included in this volume belong 
to distinct periods of his life. White Nights was written 
before his political change of heart. The three excerpts 
from the The House of the Dead cover the period of 
transition. Notes from Underground is a passionate rejec­
tion of his former beliefs and an attack on his former 
political associates by another character of whom Dosto­
yevsk:y doesn't approve either. The Dream of the Ridic­
ulous Man, written toward the end of his life, is an inter­
nal .rligious dialogue in which Dostoyevsky gropes for a 
positive answer. 
These writings may give a general idea of Dostoyevsk:y's 
evolving outlook on man's fate, of which so much has 
been said with and without reason and under every pre-

Afterword 
235 
text. They also contain a fair sampling of human hearts 
that Dostoyevsky was able to probe to such surprising 
depths-a whole range from the primitive peasant, who 
kils without really understanding that he is extinguishing 
a life, to the hypersensitive neurotic who experiences a 
whole gamut of emotions, from elation to bottomless 
despair, over fluctuations of everyday life so minute that 
another would hardly notice them. 
The earliest of the stories, 
White Nights 
( 1 848), 
which in style (especially in the developed metaphors) 
shows the strong influence of Gogo!, was written before 
Dostoyevsky's arrest, sham execution . and exile. He stil 
hoped at the time that human society could be organized 
in a way that would alleviate the suffering of the humble 
and the weak. He hoped that some form of socialism would 
provide an answer. 
Actually, 
Dostoyevsky's 
White 
Nights-midsummer 
nights at the sixtieth latitude north-are not very white or 
very summery. The moon and stars are plainly visible. 
It often rains. But somehow the I is in a state of mid­
summer exaltation. His flimsy substitute world of fantasy 
shaken by the general summer exodus from Petersburg, 
he momentarily establishes contact with the real world 
when his city-bound eyes are filled with the beauty of the 
countryside in spring. Thus jolted awake, he is able to 
make friends with Nastenka. 
His meeting with this ethereal, lovelorn girl, herself 
trying to escape the plight of being pinned to her stem 
grandmother-a plight which, although it has a dream­
like, nightmare quality, is nevertheless a real one from 
which she makes a real escape-affords him moments 
of such exaltation that all his complex, heroic fancies ap­
pear by comparison bloodless and sterile. And so, al­
though his "romance" with the girl comes to nothing, he 
feels rewarded forever: even a fleeting contact with life 
means more than all his dream world. 
White Nights, then, despite the loneliness and sadness 
of the narrator, is an affirmation of life. It is also an 
affirmation of self-sacrifice and brotherly love, for it is the 
gentle I who 
saves 
the girl 
from despair, convincing 

236 
Afterword 
her that she must write to the man she loves, thereby giv­
ing up his own claims to her love. 
The three excepts from The House of the Dead 
( 1 859-1 861 )-a book based on the prison experiences 
that wrought such drastic changes in Dostoyevsky-deal 
with a side of man's nature that exerted an irresistible 
fascination upon the author: the violence and cruelty 
in man that come out both in murder and in the chastise­
ment of criminals. 
Although the two first-person accounts of murder are 
as diferent as the two murderers, both men seem in a way 
to glide into the kiling, watching it as it were from the 
outside, paying a terrible tribute to the Devil in his un­
ceasing struggle against God for the human heart. 
As to Dostoyevsky's brief study of the executioners, it 
seems especlally interesting in the light of the world's fur­
ther experimentation in the infliction of suffering during 
the twentieth century. 
Incidentally, Dostoyevsky himself is careful to note in 
the book that corporal punishment was abolished in Rus­
sia, along with serfdom, in 1 861, during the reign of 
Alexander II, the Liberator. 
Notes from Underground ( 1 864) ,  generally classified 
as a novel, whose Russian title would be more accurately 
if less dramatically translated as Notes from a Hole in 
the Floor, i.e., from a mousehole, is, by Dostoyevsky's 
standards, a relatively compact protest against the nine­
teenth century's oversimplified, optimistic visions of the 
future. It is hard to tell which irritated Dostoyevsky 
more: 
the 
Victorian 
representation 
of 
the 
universe 
as a sort of clockwork with all the implied optimism of 
the watchmakers, or the maudlin enthusiasm of the Rus­
sian followers (notably Chemyshevsky) of Fourier and 
other French utopian socialists whose views he had once 
shared and who now seemed so unbearably smug, neat 
and shallow to him. 
-
In Notes, the main argument is that man's desires are 
not reasonable 
and often make him act 
against his 
own interest and common sense, but they are what makes 
him human. In the second part of the book, this irrational 

Afterword 
237 
streak is shown in action. And it is interesting to note 
that 
while 
in 
White Nights we 
have 
a 
spontaneous 
"sacrifice" of self-interest, the I of the Notes sacrifices 
his secret longing for the woman's presence and affection 
to deal her one more blow. Even before the traumatic ex­
perience 
of his 
life 
Dostoyevsky 
was 
quite 
acutely 
aware of the complexity of human psychology. What 
changed was his angle of vision. 
In Notes from Underground, Dostoyevsky attacks the 
Crystal Palace, i.e., man-made, socialist utopia, on the 
grounds that man is a fickle, unreasonable animal who 
could never live in an edifice based on reason: man's 
whims and wishes are bound to clash with his enlightened 
self-interest. Thus, Dostoyevsky explains, man is unlike 
the ant which, as some might say today, is totaly in­
tegrated in its group-the anthill-and feels physically, 
and in whatever other way an ant feels, fulfiled in 
acting for the general good of the anthil. 
While the anthil is the ant's end in itself, to man its 
equivalent is only a never-attainable mirage, 
and the 
meaning of his life lies in building a road toward it. 
But being too lucid, the underground man knows this, 
and so can find no solace in road-building. 
For those who pretend to reach out for the Absolute 
through aesthetics by claiming to "devote their lives 
to the good and the beautiful," he has nothing but scorn. 
Here, while he is at it, Dostoyevsky takes a few side­
swipes at some of his contemporaries with whom he 
disagreed and who irritated him (the painter Gue, the 
critic Chemyshevsky, the writer Saltykov-Shchedrin, etc. ) 
but these appear only as incidental allusions in double 
references which have an overriding general import. 
In this translation, the general aspect has been rendered 
and here a word of explanation on the alusions may be 
helpful, although they are nothing but private references 
to the quarrels of the day. 
Two are contained in the following passage : 
Then I'd have turned everything under the sun into 
goodness and beauty. I'd have uncovered it in the most 
unmistakable piece of rubbish. Tears would have oozed 

238 
Afterword 
out of me like drops squeezed out of a sponge. An 
artist paints a picture of s-Ail right, let's immediately 
drink to the health of that artist, because I'm a lover 
of everything that's "good and beautiful." Some author 
writes something that will be to everybody's liking, so 
let me drink to everyone's health, because I stand for 
"the good and the beautiful!'' 
[My stress-A. MacA.] 
The first stressed sentence reads in Russian "an artist 
paints a picture of Ge." The Russian letter G is the first 
letter of the word whose equivalent in English is a four­
letter word meaning excrement. But there was also a 
painter named Gue 
(in Russian transliteration Ge) .  
Although syntactically and contextually it would make the 
sentence meaningless, it seems likely that Dostoyevsky 
was taking a passing dig at the artist, of whose work he 
disapproved. Similarly, in the second stressed sentence, 
the words "to everybody's liking" are italicized in the 
original, possibly a reference to an article of Saltykov's 
under that title, although what matters here is that Dos­
toyevsky has in mind hack writing, i.e., an "unmistaka­
ble piece of rubbish." 
Oddly enough, one rendition gives the sentence as 
"some author writes As You Like It," thus inferring that 
Dostoyevsky 
considered 
Shakespeare's play a typical 
example of rubbish-a source for scholarly speculation 
on Dostoyevsky's scorn for Shakespeare. 
Also a target of Dostoyevsky's sarcasm was Cherny­
shevsky, whose symbol for utopia, the London Crystal 
Palace, he uses throughout the Notes. 
In The Dream of a Ridiculous Man ( 1 877) ,  the last 
short story Dostoyevsky wrote, he again denounces a 
society in which, while continuing to love himself more 
than anyone else, man will nevertheless find a satisfactory 
modus vivendi, based on reason, with other self-loving 
men. Instead, he presents I! dream society based on love 
for others and an unquestionable, tacitly implied belief in 
God and eternal life. But, when one comes to think of it, 
the people in that dream world behave very much like 
the 
ants: 
they 
do 
everything 
for 
each 
other 
and 

Afterword 
239 
look collectively after the group's children. We may say 
they love one another in the Absolute or the Supreme 
Being, whichever way one looks at it, which is to them 
just what the anthill is to the ants. 
In The Dream, relations are based on love, the happy 
people know nothing about "science," they live in a 
world of the heart as opposed to the world of the head 
which Dostoyevsky had already repeatedly rejected. Is 
this then Dostoyevsky's answer to the woes of the world? 
Well, yes and no. 
Yes, in that the story reiterates again and again the im­
portance of heart over head. The narrator's rational de­
cision to commit suicide, based on his rational convic­
tion that life has no sense, fails to obliterate pity for 
the little girl in him, thus proving to him that the universe 
has a real, objective existence outside him and his logical 
constructions. He falls asleep, and in his dream, to his 
surprise, finds that he has shot himself in the heart in­
stead of the head as he had planned. Awake, he had con­
templated a rational suicide, while in his dream he knew 
it was his feelings he must kil. 
But the twist that follows shows that Dostoyevsky stil 
is not satisfied with the answer. It transpires that this 
paradise based on 
love 
is also 
impossible, 
for once 
realized, there would be nothing for man to reach out 
for, no meaning to life in the flesh if the soul is not to 
be purified through suffering. And indeed, it turns out 
that on that happy replica of earth, the ridiculous man, 
instead of being converted, corrupts the childlike, saintly 
people. In their earthly paradise, he plays, as it were, 
the role of Christ in reverse: dooming them, begging for 
crucifixion, which they refuse. 
Once back on our earth, however, the ridiculous man 
takes up the preaching of salvation through love, which 
is so simple, which is just around the comer and yet, he 
knows himself, never attainable. Nevertheless he goes on 
preaching because he has had a glimpse of the Absolute. 
And so, probably, had Dostoyevsky. 
-ANDREW R. MAcANDREW 

S E L E C T E D  B I B L I O G R A P H Y  
Other Works by Dostoyevsky 
Poor Folk, 1 846 
Novel 
The Double, 1 846 
Novel 
The Landlady, 1 847 
Story 
An Honest Thief, 1 848 
Story 
A Little Hero, 1 849 
Story 
Uncle's Dream, 1859 
Story 
The Friend of the Family, 1 859 
Novel 
The House of the Dead, 1 859-1861 
Stories and Essays 
The Insulted and the Injured, 1 862 
Novel 
Crime and Punishment, 1 866 
Novel (Signet Classic CT362) 
The Gambler, 1 867 
Novel 
The Idiot, 1 868-1869 
Novel 
The Eternal Husband, 1 870 
Novel 
The Possessed, 1871 
Novel (Signet Classic CY360) 
A Raw Youth, 1 875 
Novel 
A Diary of a Writer, 1 876-1 877; 1 880-1881 
The Brothers Karamazov, 1 880 
Novel 
(Signet CT33) 
Selected Biography and Criticism 
Berdyaev, Nicolas. Dostoyevsky. New York: Meridian Books, 
Inc., 1960. 
Carr, Edward Hallett. Dostoyevsky: 1821-1881. New York: 
The Macmilan Company; London : George Alen & Unwin, 
Ltd., 1949. 
Gide, Andre. Dostoyevsky. New York: New Directions, 1949. 
Ivanov, Vyacheslav. Freedom and the Tragic Life: A Study in 
Dostoyevsky. New York: The Noonday Press, 1 957. 
Jackson, R. L. Dostoyevsky's Underground Man in Russian 
Literature. New York: Humanities Press, Inc., 1959. 
Seduro, Vladimir. Dostoyevsky in Russian Literary Critcism: 
1846-1956. New York: Columbia University Press, 1 957. 
Simmons, E. J. Dostoyevsky: The Making of a Novelist. Lon­
don: Oxford University Press, 1940. 
Sloniru, Marc. The Epic of Russian Literature from its Origins 
through Tolstoy. New York: Oxford University Press, 1950. 
Steiner, George. Tolstoy or Dostoyevsky. New York: Alfred 
A. Knopf, Inc., 1959. 
Yarmolinsky, Avrahm. Dostoyevsky: His Life and Art. New 
York: Grove Press, Inc., 1960. 
Zweig, Stefan. Three Masters: Balzac, Dickens and Dostoyev­
sky. New York: Viking Press, Inc.; London: George Alen 
& Uwin, Ltd., 1 930. 


