
This page intentionally left blank

THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE
ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
This volume comprises a full and detailed catalogue of drawings by and after Michelangelo
in the Ashmolean Museum. The Ashmolean possesses the third largest collection in the
world of drawings by Michelangelo – after the Casa Buonarroti and the British Museum –
and a rich group of drawings by Michelangelo’s pupils and close associates, as well as a
number of contemporary copies after drawings by the master that have subsequently been
lost. It also houses a signiﬁcant number of copies, the majority of the sixteenth century,
after Michelangelo’s works in all media, that shed light on his reputation and inﬂuence
among his contemporaries and immediate successors.
The catalogue is preceded by two introductions. The ﬁrst provides the fullest account
yet published of the history and provenance of Michelangelo’s drawings; the second surveys
the various types of drawing that Michelangelo practised and gives a synoptic account of
his stylistic development as a draughtsman.
All the Ashmolean’s autograph drawings by Michelangelo, and most of the associated
drawings and the copies, came from the collection of Sir Thomas Lawrence, the greatest
collection of Old Master Drawings ever formed in Britain. This volume contains two
detailed appendices that endeavour to trace as exactly as possible the histories of all the
drawings by or after Michelangelo that Lawrence owned, both before he acquired them
and after they were dispersed.
Paul Joannides, Professor of Art History at the University of Cambridge, has published
widely on the painting, sculpture, architecture, and, in particular, the drawings of the
Italian Renaissance. Among his major publications in this area are his standard account The
Drawings of Raphael and his Inventaire of drawings by and after Michelangelo in the Louvre.
He has also written on topics in French painting of the later eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries.


The Drawingsof Michelangelo
and His Followersin the
Ashmolean Museum 
PAUL JOANNIDES

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
First published in print format
ISBN-13    978-0-521-55133-5
ISBN-13
978-0-511-28474-8
© Paul Joannides 2007
2007
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521551335
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of 
relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place 
without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
ISBN-10    0-511-28474-8
ISBN-10    0-521-55133-1
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of urls 
for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not 
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
hardback
eBook (EBL)
eBook (EBL)
hardback

To
Catherine Whistler
Jon Whiteley
Timothy Wilson
and
above all
Marianne Joannides



 contents
Preface
page ix
Acknowledgements
xiii
The Dispersal and Formation of Sir Thomas Lawrence’s Collection of
Drawings by Michelangelo
1
Michelangelo’s Drawings
45
the catalogue
Wholly or Partially Autograph Sheets (Cats. 1–57)
59
Copies of Lost and Partially Lost Drawings (Cats. 58–61)
281
Copies of Surviving Drawings (Cats. 62–67)
293
Studio Drawings and Drawings of Undetermined Status
(Cats. 68–80)
309
Copies of Sculptures (Cats. 81–85)
337
Copies After Paintings (Cats. 86–104)
347
Copies of Architecture (Cats. 105–106)
373
Miscellaneous (Cats. 107–114)
376
appendices
Appendix 1. Drawings by or Attributed to Michelangelo
in William Young Ottley’s Sales
397
Texts
397
Commentary
400
Appendix 2. Sir Thomas Lawrence’s Collection of Drawings
by and After Michelangelo
408
Texts
408
Commentary
431
List of Former Owners
451
Concordance to the Major Catalogues of Michelangelo’s Drawings
453
Concordance of Ashmolean Inventory Numbers with the Present Catalogue
457
vii

viii
CONTENTS
Bibliography
459
Index 1: Drawings by and after Michelangelo and his close associates in collections
other than that of the Ashmolean Museum; other works of art and architecture by
Michelangelo and works executed by other artists to his designs (excluding appendices)
475
Index 2: Works by artists other than Michelangelo and works not directly related to
him (excluding appendices)
488

 preface
The second volume of Sir Karl Parker’s comprehensive
catalogue of the drawings in the Ashmolean Museum,
devoted to the Italian schools, was published in 1956. It
remains an admirable and impressive work. Few schol-
ars then, and fewer now, could have undertaken such a
task single-handedly. But the treatment of the two most
important artists examined in it, Raphael and Michelan-
gelo, has certain limitations. Dealing with a collection of
Italian drawings that then numbered more than eleven
hundred sheets, Parker could not go into as much detail
as the works of these artists merited. And his catalogue
also came at a particular moment in art-historiography
that both nourished it and restricted it.
The Ashmolean’s collection of drawings by Michelan-
geo and Raphael had been the object of one of the most
signiﬁcant cataloguing efforts of the nineteenth century,
Sir John Charles Robinson’s A Critical Account of the Draw-
ings by Michel Angelo and Raffaello in the University Galleries
Oxford, published in 1870. Robinson’s study of the draw-
ings of both artists was informed by a practical considera-
tion of their purpose, a vast acquaintance with drawings of
all the European schools, and a profound knowledge of,
and insight into, the painting, sculpture, and applied arts
of the Italian Renaissance. In certain respects, his work
has not been surpassed. But Robinson, although criti-
cal of many of the attributions under which the draw-
ings had been acquired, and gifted with a ﬁne sense of
style and quality, tended to accept traditional views rather
than question them. And, in the area of Michelangelo
scholarship, he was a little unfortunate in that his book
was published ﬁve years before the quatrecentenary of
Michelangelo’s birth, in 1875, which intensiﬁed interest
in the artist and produced a number of major mono-
graphs, including one still important for Michelangelo
studies, the two-volume biography of the artist by Aure-
lio Gotti (1875). Knowledge of this book, and of those
issued under its stimulus by Springer (1878, 1883, 1895),
and Symonds (1893), would have enriched the factual and
historical context of the works that he discussed.
From the point of view of drawings scholarship proper,
Robinson’s work evinces no very speciﬁc approach. This
was to change, in the immediately succeeding period,
under the impulse of Morelli’s morphological method,
in which the study of minute forms was shown to be an
important indicator of authorship. Morelli’s own work
was only peripherally concerned with drawings, and his
attributions of drawings – nearly always demotions – are
among the weakest areas of his scholarship. But his rejec-
tion of all forms of evidence other than the visual was
extremely inﬂuential and led to a concentration on purely
visual taxonomy, which, directly or indirectly, stimulated
a massive expansion in the classiﬁcation of Renaissance
painting and an intense effort to attain greater precision
in attribution and dating. However, it is worth remark-
ing that Morelli’s “method,” the most readily assimilable
aspect of his work, functioned most effectively when
dealing with repetitive and, generally, relatively minor
artists. It was less equipped to deal with artists whose
styles changed rapidly and radically and, in the study of
drawings, insufﬁciently ﬂexible to accommodate the fact
that an artist might employ several media and make draw-
ings of several different types in preparation for the same
painting. It is interesting that perhaps the most effective
employment of the Morellian method was by Sir John
Beazley, in his groupings of Athenian vase painting, a
species of artistic production that is inevitably repetitive.
Of course, scholarship of Michelangelo, Raphael, and
their period had expanded enormously between 1870
and 1956, with the 1903 and 1938 editions of Berenson’s
Drawings of the Florentine Painters only the most obvious
monuments to increased attention to Renaissance draw-
ing. But Berenson, the single most important if not always
the dominant ﬁgure in the scholarship of Italian draw-
ings for the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, retained
throughout his life a commitment to a type of study that,
however qualiﬁed by his vast experience and penetrating
intelligence, was guided by the method of Morelli, with
its pretensions to scientiﬁc objectivity in distinguishing
ix

x
PREFACE
one hand from another. Berenson and other writers dis-
carded a good number of drawings in the Ashmolean’s
collection from Michelangelo’s oeuvre, and even though
many of Berenson’s insights as to both authorship and
dating were acute, his bent to the normative and to the
rejection of works that did not conform to a relatively lim-
ited number of criteria was in some respects regressive.
Despite Parker’s sophistication, independence of thought,
and clarity of judgement, his approach reﬂected these
attitudes, although by no means in the extreme form
found in the views of some scholars of the 1920s and
1930s, a period much preoccupied with what its pro-
ponents believed were scientiﬁc methods of attribution.
Thus, even though Parker was remarkably clear-sighted,
his catalogue registers, for example, some attributional
insecurities with regard to Michelangelo drawings that
had, in the view of most later scholars, already been put
to rest by Johannes Wilde.
In the catalogue of ﬁfteenth- and sixteenth-century
Italian drawings in the Royal Collection, undertaken in
collaboration with A. E. Popham, in which Wilde was
responsible for the drawings by Michelangelo and his fol-
lowers, and still more so in his catalogue of drawings by
Michelangelo in the British Museum of 1953, a work
still unequalled, Wilde had changed the nature of cat-
aloguing, and – for those alert enough to realise it –
of drawing connoisseurship. Before the Second World
War, Wilde’s work on Michelangelo drawings had shown
him to be a fairly orthodox follower of the “scientiﬁc”
school, severe in his judgements, and all-too-willing to
reject genuine drawings. Given the opportunity, during
the War, to study the corpus of drawings by Michelan-
gelo in Britain in a single location, he was compelled
to change his views. Receiving, one would imagine,
inspiration from Robinson’s work, Wilde’s approach was,
initially, archaeological. Drawings were objects, physical
things made for particular purposes – not that Parker did
not appreciate that, but he did not make it the basis of
his approach – and before judgement was to be passed
upon them as works of art, they should be interrogated
as to their purposes and the nature of the thought that
they embody. In place of the “scientiﬁc” method, which
all too often ignored medium, date, and purpose, and
which made little effort to determine the function of a
drawing within patterns establishable from the examina-
tion of other drawings and the ways in which paintings,
sculptures, and buildings must be planned, Wilde concen-
trated on what the drawing could tell its interrogator. The
deferral of aesthetic pronouncement in the interests of a
neutral investigation of a drawing’s purposes allows, once
this is accomplished, for enhanced aesthetic appreciation.
The nature of the Ashmolean’s collection of Michelan-
gelo drawings makes it particularly appropriate for the
exercise of Wilde’s approach, for the majority of its auto-
graph sheets are working ones, and there are relatively few
drawings made by Michelangelo as independent works of
art. To re-examine the work of Robinson and Parker in
the light of Wilde makes it clear that the Ashmolean’s
Michelangelos still have more to teach us.
Furthermore, Michelangelo scholarship has developed
substantially since 1956. For a body of illustrations of
Michelangelo’s drawings, critics had then to rely primar-
ily on Frey’s collection of plates, published in 1909. But
soon after Parker’s catalogue was published, the situation
began to change. In 1959 appeared Luitpold Dussler’s
very comprehensive catalogue of Michelangelo drawings,
a publication whose usefulness, even to those who did
not agree with the views expressed in it, was qualiﬁed
only by its limited number of illustrations. In 1962 came
Paola Barocchi’s comprehensive catalogue of drawings by
Michelangelo and his school held in the Casa Buonarroti
and the Ufﬁzi, which had not previously been fully illus-
trated. This catalogue made it much easier than before
to integrate drawings in the Ashmolean with those in
Florentine collections. Barocchi’s catalogue also prompt-
ed a review of fundamental importance by Michael
Hirst, which, in addition to restoring to Michelangelo
a number of drawings that Barocchi had allocated to
Michelangelo’s students and followers, provided a lapidary
statement of the principle by which Wilde had operated:
that the function of drawings tends to determine their
form. The publication of Hartt’s very extensive anthol-
ogy of Michelangelo’s drawings in 1975 continued the
process, which culminated in the appearance, between
1975 and 1980, of the magniﬁcent Corpus dei Disegni di
Michelangelo undertaken by Charles de Tolnay, who had
previously written a fundamental monograph on the artist
and many articles. De Tolnay’s Corpus again altered the
general picture, and it is now the standard work of refer-
ence. Sheets of drawings are reproduced in colour in their
original size and with rectos and versos orientated as in
the originals, few sheets of real signiﬁcance are omitted,
and de Tolnay endeavoured to include even sheets that
he himself felt unable to accept as autograph. This Corpus
has further extended our knowledge and has made it eas-
ier to see Michelangelo’s drawings en masse and to link
works in the Ashmolean with ones elsewhere. De Tolnay’s
achievement deserves especial praise since, in preparing
the Corpus, he was led to change many of his earlier nega-
tive views about the drawings he catalogued. For an aged
scholar – de Tolnay’s death followed by only a few weeks
the publication of the ﬁnal volume of the Corpus – such

PREFACE
xi
willingness to reconsider views formed many years pre-
viously demonstrated an openness, an honesty, and an
integrity that are wholly admirable.
In addition to these publications, and the clear and
helpful discussion of Michelangelo’s drawings by function
and type published by Hirst in 1988, and his comple-
mentary exhibition catalogue of 1988–9, detailed work
on Michelangelo has accelerated and expanded. Per-
haps the most productive area of focus is Michelangelo’s
architecture, study of which, although it had not been
ignored by earlier scholars, was given new impetus by
James Ackerman’s monograph and catalogue, ﬁrst pub-
lished in 1961. His lead has been followed by many oth-
ers, notably in the volume edited by Paolo Portoghesi
and Bruno Zevi of 1964, the monograph by Argan and
Contardi of 1990, and the studies by Henry Millon and
Craig Hugh Smyth (1976) of the fac¸ade of San Lorenzo
and Saint Peter’s, which have produced numerous articles
as well as an important exhibition of 1988. These and
other scholars have expanded and deepened awareness of
Michelangelo’s architectural work, particularly in his later
period.
Thus, the reader will ﬁnd here one or two novelties
of attribution – although few that concern Michelangelo
directly – but it is in the identiﬁcation of certain func-
tions, more closely delimited datings, and wider relation
with drawings elsewhere that the present work may be
found useful, even though much remains shadowy. In one
area, however, hitherto less fully exploited than it might
have been, that of copies of various kinds, this catalogue
may claim some pioneering value. Copies of lost drawings
can provide additional information about Michelangelo’s
projects and/or his thought processes, and copies of sur-
viving ones can enlighten us about contemporary and
later responses to the artist: The study of copies provides
a royal road to our knowledge of the diffusion of artis-
tic ideas, and an effort has been made here to examine
such drawings in rather more detail than has been cus-
tomary in the past, although much more work, inevitably,
remains to be done. In relation to the Ashmolean’s collec-
tions, much valuable material on the copies and on draw-
ings around Michelangelo can be found in the late Hugh
Macandrew’s supplement to Parker’s catalogue, published
in 1980, which included a group of drawings transferred
to the museum from the Taylor Institution in 1976.
The bibliographies of individual sheets are not intend-
ed to be exhaustive, although they are probably fuller
than most readers will require. They are intended to per-
form several functions simultaneously: to provide a short
critical history of the works treated, insight into the way
that scholarship has developed, and a guide to those who
may wish to examine these matters further. Summaries
of others’ views have been provided, but their accuracy
obviously depends on the concentration, intelligence, and
patience of the compiler and should not be taken as
gospel. The compiler can report only that he has done
his best and, before his undoubted omissions and errors
of interpretation are pounced upon, would remind crit-
ics that this attempt at doing justice to his predecessors,
however inadequately performed, is a task many other
cataloguers avoid. An advantage of providing such sum-
maries is that, particularly in cases where there is consen-
sus, they permit briefer catalogue entries. The compiler
is not sympathetic to entries that devote many pages to
the discussion of the views of other scholars and a few
lines only to the objects under consideration.
All old accumulations of drawings are arbitrary in their
composition, and to focus on a particular collection is a
way of re-shufﬂing the whole pack, forcing one to see
drawings elsewhere in relation to these. This different
angle of vision can sometimes reveal new alignments, or,
to put it another way, to think in depth about an arbitrary
selection can provide a means of escape from the nor-
mative and from the falsifying teleologies that frequently
attend totalising discourses.
The present catalogue was undertaken as a sequel to
one with similar objectives, dealing with the drawings by
and after Michelangelo in the Mus´ee du Louvre. The two
collections do not much overlap, but in a few cases more
or less the same points needed to be made. In these, the
compiler has freelycannibalised passages of his Inventaire in
the hope that self-plagiarism, however reprehensible, may
escape the ultimate sanction rightly incurred by plagia-
rism of others. Parts of the account of the formation and
dispersal of Sir Thomas Lawrence’s collection of drawings
by and after Michelangelo, dealing with what is known
or can be surmised of the history of Michelangelo’s draw-
ings, also overlap with that in the Louvre catalogue, but
the discussion begun there is here considerably extended
and, in some instances, corrected.


 acknowledgements
Even though the compiler’s most fundamental debt
is to the dedicatees, the support of Dr. Christopher
White, under whose directorship of the Ashmolean
Museum this catalogue was begun, and Dr. Christopher
Brown, under whose directorship it was completed,
should be gratefully acknowledged. The compiler also
remembers with great warmth those past members of
the Ashmolean’s staff who guided his early – and not
so early – steps in the print room: David Blayney
Brown, Kenneth Garlick, Christoper Lloyd, Ian Lowe,
the late Hugh Macandrew, Nicholas Penny, Gerald Taylor,
John de Witt. Another former member of the Ash-
molean’s staff, Shulla Jaques, kindly compiled around
half of the notes from which the comments on condi-
tion have been written, and a present member, Alexan-
dra Greathead, the remainder. Hugo Chapman and
Marianne Joannides read the whole typescript and
Willem Dreesmann, the introduction and that part of
the catalogue concerned with autograph drawings by
Michelangelo: All three, in addition to correcting numer-
ous errors, great and small, made many helpful and posi-
tive suggestions.
Although members of the D´epartement des Arts
Graphiques in the Louvre were not directly involved in
the present catalogue, it was their support, counsel, and
collegial generosity that helped form its foundations. It
would be otiose to repeat here the full list of acknowl-
edgements prefacing the compiler’s Inventaire of drawings
by and after Michelangelo in the Louvre’s collection, but
the compiler cannot resist reiterating his gratitude to, in
general, “Les amis du D´epartement” and, in particular, to
those predominantly occupied with Italian drawings: in
ﬁrst place, of course, to Franc¸oise Viatte and to Lizzie
Boubli, Dominique Cordellier, Catherine Loisel, and
Catherine Monbeig-Goguel.
To those colleagues and friends who in their different
ways helped the compiler’s work, his gratitude is pro-
found. He recalls with affection those who have left us:
Gianvittorio Dillon, Cecil Gould, Michael Jaff´e, Fab-
rizio Mancinelli, Myril and Philip Pouncey, Maurice
S´erullaz, and Charles de Tolnay – the last deserving spe-
cial mention for his kindness and generosity to the com-
piler when de Tolnay was Director of Casa Buonarroti.
And his sincere thanks are offered to: Heinz-Th. Schulze
Altkappenberg, Micha¨el Amy, Elisabetta Archi, Victoria
Avery, Piers Baker-Bates, Kathleen Weil-Garris Brandt,
Barbara and Arnold Brejon de Lavergn´ee, Sonja Brink,
Julian Brooks, Catherine Casley, Molly Carrott, Martin
Clayton, Philippe Costamagna, Janet Cox-Rearick,
Albert Elen, Gabriele Finaldi, Ursula Fischer Pace,
Daniel Godfrey, George Goldner, Margaret Morgan
Grasselli, William Griswold, Cord´elia Hattori, Wolf-
gang Holler, Carlton Hughes, Monique Kornell, Car-
oline Lanfranc de Panthou, Anne Lauder, Marcella
Marongiu, Hermann Mildenberger, Alfred Moir, Lucia
Monaci Moran, Alex Newson, Annamaria Petrioli
Tofani, Mark Pomeroy, Bernadette Py, Anthony Rad-
cliffe, Pina Ragionieri, Sheryl Reiss, Jane Low Roberts,
William Robinson, Andrew Robison, Simonetta Pros-
peri Valenti Rodin`o, Pierre Rosenberg, Raphael Rosen-
berg, Edward Saywell, William Schupbach, Nicolas
Schwed, Rick Scorza, Annie Scottez de Wambrechies,
David Scrase, Cinzia Sicca Bursill-Hall, Cynthia and
David Sommerlad, Jaqueline Thalmann, Cecilia Treves,
Letizia Treves, Nicholas Turner, William Wallace, Roger
Ward, Linda Wolk-Simon, Kurt Zeitler, and Lor´and
Zentai. The compiler also thanks Henrietta Ryan and
J. M. Dent and Company, a division of the Orion
Publishing Group, for permission to reprint the prose
translations of poems by Michelangelo on two of the
sheets catalogued here made by the late Professor
Christopher Ryan for his Michelangelo: The Poems, of
1996.
To his patient, understanding, and supportive publish-
ers, and in particular to Rose Shawe-Taylor for whom this
volume was begun and to Beatrice Rehl for whom it was
xiii

xiv
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
completed, the compiler can only offer his deepest thanks.
From initial negotiations to ﬁnal product, as deadlines
expired and bibliographies became pythonesque – in
both senses, as footnotes departed on forced marches and
appendices expanded to bursting-point, they remained
steadfast and stalwart. In preparing the volume for press,
the compiler beneﬁted greatly from the work of the
production editor, Camilla Knapp, and the copy edi-
tor, Sara Black. For help with the proofs he is indebted
to Kate Heard, Marianne Joannides, Catherine Whistler,
and Timothy Wilson.
The compiler never met Johannes Wilde, but when-
ever he returns to Wilde’s work, his admiration increases.
If, in a few instances, he has diverged from Wilde’s judge-
ments, it is in the conﬁdence that a scholar who so envi-
ably combined exhaustive knowledge, supreme analytical
clarity, and profound empathy for his subject would be
the last to desire slavish discipleship.

THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE
ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM


 the dispersal and formation of sir thomas
lawrence’s collection of drawings by
michelangelo
i. the dispersal
In 1846 the University of Oxford acquired, through the
generosity of a number of benefactors but supremely that
of Lord Eldon, a large number of drawings by, attributed
to, or associated with Michelangelo and Raphael. Put
on display in the University Galleries were ﬁfty-three
mountings of drawings associated with Michelangelo, and
137 by Raphael.1 Some of these mountings comprised
two or more drawings and the overall total of individual
drawings was somewhat larger.2 This exhibition and –
consequently – its catalogue included most, but not the
totality, of the drawings by these artists offered for sale
by subscription to the University of Oxford in 1842. In
the prospectus issued that year, the number of mountings
of drawings classed under Michelangelo’s name totalled
eighty-seven and those under Raphael’s 190.3 All the
works listed in 1842 were in fact acquired by Oxford,
but only a selection was exhibited four years later. To
the Raphael series, later curators have added by purchase
at least two autograph drawings and several copies and
studio works; to the Michelangelo series, only one fur-
ther drawing – an informative copy – has been added
by purchase; but some other interesting copies came to
the museum by transfer from the Bodleian Library in
1863 and a further group, from the Taylorian Institu-
tion, in 1976. Conversely, some drawings believed in 1846
to be by or associable with Michelangelo have been re-
attributed to other hands. Nevertheless, with ﬁfty-seven
sheets, the Ashmolean houses the third largest collection –
after Casa Buonarroti and the British Museum – of auto-
graph drawings by one of the greatest of all draughts-
men, and Oxford’s total is increased by four when the
Michelangelo drawings included in the 1765 bequest to
Christ Church by General Guise – at least one of which
came from Casa Buonarroti via Filippo Baldinucci4 – are
taken into account. The present catalogue, concerned
with drawings by, and copies after, Michelangelo, there-
fore deals with a group of works that – certain subtractions
from Michelangelo apart – in its essentials has not changed
since 1846, although one sheet of drawings hitherto
placed in the Raphael school is here included as a copy
after Michelangelo – an identiﬁcation, indeed, made in
1830 but subsequently overlooked.5
The two series that came to Oxford were the remains
of two much larger series of drawings, both owned by
the man who has clear claim to be the greatest of all
English collectors of Old Master Drawings: Sir Thomas
Lawrence. It is Lawrence’s collection that provided all
the drawings by, and most of those after, Michelangelo
now in the Ashmolean Museum. Lawrence, himself a
ﬁne draughtsman, whose precision and skill in this area
is not always visible in the painted portraits from which
he earned an income large enough to indulge his col-
lector’s passion, was a predatory and omnivorous – even
obsessional – collector of drawings.6 He attempted to
obtain every signiﬁcant work that came within his reach,
and he was particularly anxious to acquire drawings by
or believed to be by Michelangelo. When Lawrence died
in 1830, he left his collection of drawings to various rep-
resentatives of the nation at a very advantageous price,
£18,000, probably no more than half his expenditure.7
That offer was not accepted – a wounding rejection from
which the representation of Old Master Drawings in
Great Britain has never fully recovered – and the collec-
tion as a whole, comprising, according to the posthumous
inventory of 1830, around 4,300 sheets of drawings and
some seven albums – including the two precious volumes
containing over 500 drawings by Fra Bartolommeo, now
in the Boymans-van Beuningen Museum in Rotterdam –
reverted in 1834 to Lawrence’s executor, Archibald
Keightley. He ceded the drawings the same year to the
dealer Samuel Woodburn for £16,000. This price took
into account the fact that Woodburn was Lawrence’s prin-
cipal creditor, and the source from whom he had acquired
most of his drawings.8 It was at this time that the unobtru-
sive TL blind stamp was applied to the drawings, although
it seems that, in a very few cases, this was omitted.9
1

2
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
Samuel Woodburn, who must be recognised as one of
the greatest nineteenth-century experts on Old Master
Drawings, divided the Lawrence drawings into sequences
by author or presumed author and showed about a thou-
sand of them in a series of ten exhibitions during 1835 and
1836 in his galleries in St. Martin’s Lane. Each exhibition
contained a selection of one hundred drawings by one or
more masters, and each exhibition was accompanied by an
unillustrated and, if by modern standards fairly rudimen-
tary, nevertheless very informative, catalogue. It should be
noted that the dimensions of the drawings shown and the
descriptions of their media are, so far as can be judged,
trustworthy. It seems, from press reports, that a few addi-
tional drawings were occasionally included ex-catalogue,
and it may be that the selections were from time to time
refreshed – but that is no more than hypothesis.
The tenth exhibition, in July 1836, was devoted to one
hundred drawings by or attributed to Michelangelo – or
rather one hundred mountings, for a few of the mounts
contained more than one drawing. A transcription of this
catalogue is given in Appendix 2; to this, the sums – all
in guineas – asked by Woodburn for the drawings, which
provide a rough indication of his judgement of their qual-
ity and value, have been added from a priced copy of the
catalogue preserved in the National Gallery. As far as can
be judged today, Woodburn’s connoisseurship was reason-
ably accurate. Of the one hundred mountings in the exhi-
bition, the contents of ninety-ﬁve can today be identiﬁed
with reasonable security.10 Sixty-nine of these would
generally be considered to be by Michelangelo as a whole
or in part. However, it is worth noting that, knowledge-
able though Woodburn and Lawrence were, one or other
or both were capable of error. In at least one case, the mis-
take was glaring. A portrait drawing by Parmigianino of
Valerio Belli, in a mount by Vasari, now in the Boymans-
van Beuningen Museum, Rotterdam (Inv. 1392), had
appeared in the Dezallier d’Argenville sale of 18–28 Jan-
uary 1779, as part of either lot 107 or lot 496, under its
correct attribution. In 1836 it was shown by Woodburn
among the Michelangelo drawings as no. 39, described
as a portrait of Ariosto.11 Whether this was a mistake by
the collector Lawrence or the dealer Woodburn cannot
be ascertained; it does demonstrate however that some
misattributions of the drawings that passed from one to
the other were not necessarily the product of erroneous
tradition but were of recent introduction.
It is not fully clear how many drawings Sir Thomas
Lawrence owned that he believed to be by or after
Michelangelo, and it is likely that attributions – then
as now – ﬂuctuated. Some 145 mountings of drawings,
probably comprising around 170 individual sheets by
Michelangelo, are listed in the posthumous inventory
of 1830. But this inventory was evidently compiled in
haste and no doubt under fraught circumstances by
Woodburn – not by Ottley whom Lawrence had wished
to undertake the task – and although it maintains a rea-
sonable standard of accuracy, it certainly contains mistakes
that Woodburn later corrected at leisure. Nor is it always
possible to identify securely drawings listed in it with
those described in greater detail in subsequent catalogues.
Furthermore, it seems that at least a few Michelangelo
drawings that Lawrence owned were either overlooked
or not recorded for reasons about which we can only
speculate. We cannot be certain either of Woodburn’s
estimate of the Michelangelo drawings he had acquired,
although he was well aware that his run totalled consid-
erably more than the hundred drawings that he exhibited
in 1836. J. C. Robinson conjectured that Woodburn had
acquired about 150 altogether, but this total, which more
or less matches what can be inferred from Lawrence’s
inventory, certainly refers to mountings rather than indi-
vidual drawings.12 Of course, it included a number of
copies.
Woodburn hoped to sell Lawrence’s drawings in runs.
As he explained in the prefaces to some of his cat-
alogues, he believed in keeping the works of artists
together. He achieved this aim in some cases: the Earl of
Ellesmere acquired the Carracci and the Giulio Romano
sequences complete, and both series remained together
in his family – apart from a gift of a group of Carracci
drawings to the Ashmolean in 1853 – until they were dis-
persed at auction by Sotheby’s in 1972. But Woodburn
was unsuccessful with regard to the Michelangelos. It was
not until the beginning of 1838 that ﬁfty-nine drawings
from those exhibited in 1836 (plus a comparable number
by Raphael) were acquired from him by King William II
of Holland: A list of William II’s purchases, taken from
Woodburn’s invoice, is given in Appendix 2. However,
the invoice presented by Woodburn in February 1838 does
not tell the full story, for William II returned to make
further purchases. In August that year, he acquired from
Woodburn another drawing by Michelangelo from the
1836 exhibition, one of supreme importance, the Epifania
cartoon made for the abortive painting by Ascanio Con-
divi, plus a number of other drawings that had not been
displayed in 1836. At his death, William II owned some
nine further drawings by or after Michelangelo that must
have been acquired from Woodburn in August 1838 –
there is no evidence that the king acquired drawings from
any other dealer.

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
3
According to Robinson,
the knowledge and experience of the Royal amateur were
not on a par with his zeal. He evidently intended to select
all the most important specimens; but his choice fell almost
exclusively on the largest, most completely ﬁnished and
showy drawings; and thus, in great measure, he defeated
his own object; for although it must be admitted that the
ﬁnal selection did comprise some of the ﬁnest gems of the
Lawrence series, the great majority of the specimens chosen
were copies and drawings by scholars and followers of the
two great artists.13
Overall, Robinson calculated, about half of these were
genuine, but he was unduly critical: Of William’s pur-
chases from the 1836 exhibition that can now be traced
and identiﬁed – at present ﬁfty-four of the total of sixty –
fourteen are certainly copies and derivations, and most
were known to be such, since for these the king paid rel-
atively low prices.14 Even if the six drawings that remain
to be traced were all copies, the average is still respectable:
Forty of the sixty drawings, that is two-thirds of William’s
purchases, were autograph.15 If the total of sixty-seven
drawings in William’s posthumous sale catalogue listed
either under Michelangelo’s name or misattributed to
Sebastiano or Venusti is examined, of which a further
seven drawings elude identiﬁcation, it would seem that a
total of twenty-seven drawings were not by Michelangelo,
but most of these were minor works and were no doubt
known to be such.16 On the evidence, William deserves
to be rehabilitated as a judge of Michelangelo drawings –
and Old Master Drawings in general – for he obtained
a very signiﬁcant number of major masterpieces. Robin-
son’s depreciation of the king’s choice – in which he was
followed by many other scholars until a well-researched
account of William’s collecting was published in 1989 –
is hard to explain.17 Indeed, Robinson himself acquired,
directly or indirectly, a number of Michelangelo drawings
that had been owned by William II and that he then sold
to his own clients.
Either before or after the disposal to William II,
Woodburn seems to have reconciled himself to sell-
ing at least one drawing as a single item to an indi-
vidual purchaser.“The Repose,” that is The Rest on the
Flight into Egypt, no. 11, in Woodburn’s 1836 exhibi-
tion, in which it was marked at the very high price of
250 guineas, emerged from a then undisclosed British
source at Christie’s on 6 July 1993, lot 120, and was
acquired by the J. Paul Getty Museum, Los Angeles.18
It is unclear whether it had remained in the same fam-
ily collection since Woodburn sold it or whether it had
moved silently from owner to owner. The case of the
Annunciation, a modello made for Marcello Venusti and
now in the Pierpont Morgan Library in New York, may
be similar.19 Although this drawing was not included in
the 1836 exhibition, Woodburn considered it sufﬁciently
important to reproduce as Plate 2 in his Lawrence Gallery,
published in 1853, the single drawing in that publication
not displayed in 1836. It was not among the drawings sold
to William II and re-purchased at his sale. What hap-
pened to it between 1830 (it cannot speciﬁcally be identi-
ﬁed in Lawrence’s inventory) and 1860, when it appeared
in Woodburn’s posthumous sale of the remainder of the
Lawrence collection, can only be conjectured, but one
possible explanation is that it was sold by Woodburn
even before 1836 and was subsequently re-purchased
by him.
Apart from these instances, which may or may not
be isolated, following the disposal to William II, Wood-
burn returned to the public fray, campaigning to have
the remainder of the Michelangelos and Raphaels bought
for the Oxford University Galleries at preferential rates –
in this he seems to have been prompted and sustained
by the interest, enthusiasm, and protracted effort of the
Reverend Henry Wellesley. In 1842 Woodburn pro-
duced the prospectus of the drawings on offer, which
supplements the information provided in the 1836 cat-
alogue. His efforts were rewarded in 1846, and it is
worth reﬂecting that, but for the determination, persis-
tence, and public-spiritedness of a dealer, whose sense
of public responsibility outweighed his own desire for
gain, and the informed energy of a clergyman and aca-
demic, the Ashmolean Museum would not now have
one of the world’s greatest gatherings of drawings by
two of the greatest of High Renaissance masters. Of
the one hundred mountings of drawings by or attributed
to Michelangelo exhibited by Woodburn in London in
1836, forty (comprising forty-eight drawings) entered the
ownership of Oxford University.20 All these drawings are
identiﬁable in the Ashmolean’s collection. Forty-two fur-
ther mountings, certainly from Lawrence’s collection, but
not exhibited in 1836, comprising ﬁfty-three drawings
also came to the Oxford University Galleries. To these
were added ﬁve further mountings, comprising ﬁve draw-
ings, acquired by Woodburn in the interim from the col-
lection of Jeremiah Harman, which, according to Wood-
burn, Lawrence had coveted in vain. Together this made
up a grand total of eighty-seven mountings comprising
104 drawings then believed with more or less conviction
to be by Michelangelo, of which the present catalogue
retains ﬁfty-seven as substantially autograph and around

4
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
ﬁfteen by followers so close that they can reasonably
be considered as coming from Michelangelo’s studio.
Disinterested
though
Woodburn’s
motives
and
achievements largely were, it is clear that this sale did not
fully liquidate his holdings of Lawrence’s Michelangelo
drawings. We cannot be sure how many Woodburn
retained: It is, after all, uncertain how many drawings
by and attributed to Michelangelo Lawrence himself
owned and whether some attributions might have
changed between his death and Woodburn’s exhibition.
It would seem that most of the Michelangelo drawings
that remained in Woodburn’s hands were not deceitfully
withheld from Oxford; they were either slight or scrappy
drawings
or
architectural
sketches
that
Woodburn
probably considered to be of little interest – indeed, may
simply have forgotten about – or obvious copies that he
probably did not much value. He cannot be shown to
have retained for himself any Michelangelo drawing that
would then have been regarded as of real worth. It is
unclear how many drawings by and after Michelangelo
remained in his possession, and it is difﬁcult to calculate
this from Woodburn’s posthumous sale of 1860 because
some of the drawings in that – such as the Morgan
Library Annunciation – may have been sold to clients
other than William II of Holland and subsequently
bought back by Woodburn.
The Michelangelo drawings purchased from Wood-
burn by King William II of Holland were enjoyed by
their new owner for no more than a decade. With the
King’s death in 1850, they again came on the market.
The sale held in The Hague in August 1850 to dispose of
William II’s collections contained some eighty-two lots of
drawings by, associated with, or after Michelangelo. Many
of the most important of these were, as has long been
known, re-acquired by Woodburn. Robinson remarked
that Woodburn’s purchases at the William II sale “reunited
the great bulk of them to the residue of the Lawrence col-
lection still in his possession.”21 According to Robinson,
thirty-three of the Michelangelo drawings sold by Wood-
burn to the King were repurchased by Woodburn, but this
was an underestimate for, from a marked copy of the sale
catalogue preserved in the National Gallery, it appears that
Woodburn in fact acquired thirty-seven. Three others
were acquired by the Louvre – appropriately one of these
had earlier been owned by Pierre-Jean Mariette and, no
doubt, Pierre Crozat.22 A few more were reserved for the
Duke of Sachsen-Weimar, William II’s son-in-law, who
acquired drawings both for the Museum in Weimar and
for his family’s own collection: Most of these were copies.
Woodburn’s motives for buying back the drawings are
uncertain. He may have acquired them for stock, hoping
to disperse them piecemeal over the years to come, and
some he certainly sold. He may have wished to re-
constitute a nucleus of Lawrence’s best drawings, either
for his own pleasure or to sell again as a small choice col-
lection. The volume of thirty-one lithographic reproduc-
tions, comprising thirty drawings either by, or thought to
be by Michelangelo, plus a page of his poems, published
by Woodburn in 1853, just before his death, may have
been part of an effort to re-awaken interest in Lawrence’s
Michelangelos.23 The great allegorical drawing, the so-
called Dream of Human Life (London, Courtauld Institute),
the most expensive of the drawings Woodburn had sold
to William in 1839 and re-acquired for 1,200 guilders at
William’s sale (lot 125), was soon sold on to the Duke
of Sachsen-Weimar, who presumably regretted not hav-
ing reserved it. Several other drawings by or attributed
to Michelangelo went to the Reverend Henry Welles-
ley who – surprisingly – did not bequeath them to the
Ashmolean. They were included in his posthumous sale
of 1866.
Woodburn died in 1853, and it is unclear how many
of the Michelangelo drawings repurchased by him at
William II’s sale had been sold between then and his death.
Nor can it be considered certain, although it is probable,
that none was sold by his legatees between 1853 and 1860.
In 1854 that part of his collection of drawings that did not
stem from Lawrence was offered at Christie’s, but the sale
was not a success. This may have discouraged another
sale in the short term, and the drawings remained in the
possession of his sister, Miss Woodburn, until June 1860,
when, in an enormous sale running to 1,075 lots – many
of them comprising several drawings – the remainder of
the Lawrence collection was dispersed. The sale included
sixty-one lots of drawings by and after Michelangelo,
comprising 111 sheets, plus two letters, one by Michelan-
gelo himself, the other by Sebastiano del Piombo. A num-
ber of these drawings were explicitly described as copies,
and it is probable that those genuinely by Michelangelo –
or at that time honestly believed to be by him – numbered
some ﬁfty-three. However, there were some errors: A
double-sided sheet of Figure Studies certainly by Taddeo
Zuccaro, now in the Art Institute of Chicago, is to be
found as lot 1492 in William Young Ottley’s sale of 1814,
correctly given to Taddeo. In 1860 the sheet re-appeared
as lot 108, now given to Michelangelo.24 Of course, this
reattribution may not have been the responsibility either
of Lawrence or of Woodburn, but whether it was a mis-
take by the one or the other, or merely a later adminis-
trative error – quite understandable given such a mass of
material – it demonstrates the introduction of at least one
misattribution more recent than that of the Parmigianino

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
5
noted previously. From the 1860 sale, ten drawings by
Michelangelo were purchased for the British Museum,
all of which seem to have been owned by William II.
Others were acquired by John Charles Robinson, the ﬁrst
cataloguer of the Michelangelos and Raphaels in the Ash-
molean, both for his own collection and for that of John
Malcolm of Poltalloch.
John Malcolm assembled an extraordinary collection
of Old Master drawings in the years between 1860, when
he acquired the collection formed by J. C. Robinson,
and 1891, two years before his death, when he bought his
last drawing, a ﬁne pen-sketch by Raphael.25 Malcolm
was interested only in works of the highest quality and
obtained some of the greatest drawings to come onto
the market. He seems to have discarded even perfectly
genuine drawings if he felt they were too scrappy. Some
of these lesser drawings, including three by Michelangelo
and an interesting sheet often attributed to Jacomo del
Duca, who assisted Michelangelo in his late years, were
given by Malcolm to the family of his son-in-law, A. E.
Gathorne-Hardy; their holdings were liquidated at two
sales by Sotheby’s in London in 1976.26 Happily, most
of Malcolm’s collection was purchased from his heir in
1894 for the British Museum. So by indirect paths, the
greater part of Lawrence’s collection of Michelangelos was
reunited in British public collections. All told, the British
Museum now owns thirty-one of the drawings acquired
from Woodburn by the King of Holland.
Another purchaser at the 1860 sale was the obsessive
bibliophile, Sir Thomas Phillipps, who acquired several
group lots of lesser drawings, among them some ﬁne
early copies after Michelangelo. These descended to the
Phillipps-Fenwick family, whose collection of drawings
was catalogued by A. E. Popham in 1935 – Popham not-
ing that some of the parcels had remained unopened since
the sale of 1860. The Phillipps-Fenwick drawings, minus
a few sheets kept for his own collection, were acquired
and given to the British Museum in 1946 by an anony-
mous benefactor, revealed, after his death, to be Count
Antoine Seilern. It was Seilern, the most signiﬁcant col-
lector of Michelangelo drawings in the twentieth century,
who acquired the Dream of Human Life from the Sachsen-
Weimar family in 1950. This and four other drawings
by Michelangelo, including an important Christ on the
Cross also owned by Lawrence and lithographed for the
Lawrence Gallery in 1853, were, on the Count’s death in
1978, bequeathed by him to the Courtauld Institute of
London University, where they form part of the Prince’s
Gate Collection.
At the sale of William II’s collection, there were of
course other purchasers beside Woodburn. The majority,
probably, were dealers rather than collectors, and none
of them seems to have acquired drawings by Michelan-
gelo in large quantities. These drawings gradually ﬁltered
back onto the market, where a number were acquired for
his own collection by Robinson; most of these eventu-
ally migrated to public collections in the United States,
although Robinson also owned other drawings by or
attributed to the master, which have yet to reappear.
Apart from the purchase by the Louvre, France bene-
ﬁted further.27 In the great religious painter, portraitist,
and collector L´eon Bonnat, France found an equivalent
of both Lawrence and Robinson. Bonnat’s exceptional
discernment and large income allowed him to form a
collection of drawings of the highest quality, including
seven by Michelangelo, two of which had certainly passed
through the collections of Lawrence and William II. With
the exception of one sheet, given to the Louvre in 1912,
these were bequeathed to the museum of his native town,
Bayonne, in 1922.28
ii. the formation of sir thomas
lawrence’s collection of
michelangelo drawings
It is not fully clear when Lawrence began collecting draw-
ings seriously. By his own testimony, he always had great
enthusiasm for Old Master drawings and, in his youth,
copied prints after them with avidity. Having attained
great success by the early 1790s, he could have purchased
drawings in that decade, when, for example, Sir Joshua
Reynolds’ enormous collection came on to the market,
but he does not appear to have done so. The available evi-
dence suggests that Lawrence began collecting drawings
on a large scale only shortly before 1820.29
It is impossible to be certain of the provenance of all
of Lawrence’s drawings, but Woodburn’s exhibition cata-
logue of 1836 and his 1842 prospectus listing the drawings
on offer to the University Galleries provide useful leads. A
list of what the compiler has been able to ascertain or con-
jecture is provided in Appendix 2. Within the approxi-
mately 145 mountings of Michelangelo and Michelange-
lesque drawings owned by Lawrence, certain currents can
be distinguished.
A limited number of Lawrence’s Michelangelo draw-
ings came to him from British collections, mostly those of
artists. In general, it seems that throughout Europe, royal
and aristocratic collectors attempted to obtain drawings
that were highly ﬁnished and of display quality, and it was
left to artists to collect more sketchy and less obviously
elegant drawings.30 It is likely that many of the more

6
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
wealthy artists who formed collections owned one or
two slight drawings, or scraps, by Michelangelo, although
this can rarely be proved because provenances are usu-
ally difﬁcult to trace and rarely go back further than the
eighteenth century. The great collection of Sir Peter Lely
seems to have contained very few autograph drawings by
Michelangelo – or, at least, very few genuine Michelan-
gelo drawings bear his stamp.31 Thus, the Devonshire
collection, formed with virtually unlimited resources in
the early eighteenth century, and including many draw-
ings once owned by Lely, contained and contains no sin-
gle autograph sheet by Michelangelo. Whether Nicholas
Lanier owned any Michelangelos is conjectural: So far his
marks have been found only on copies. The painter and
collector Jonathan Richardson the Elder, however, cer-
tainly owned several genuine drawings by Michelangelo
including Cats. 33 and 43, W2/Corpus 16 and proba-
bly W11/Corpus 134 in the British Museum, and the
recently re-discovered Draped Woman, whose passages of
ownership after Richardson’s death are unknown.32 His
son, Jonathan Richardson the Younger, possessed at least
some scraps by Michelangelo, but it is unclear whether
he inherited these from his father or acquired them
independently.33 Whence Richardson the Elder obtained
his Michelangelo drawings is not known.
A few drawings by Michelangelo had been owned
by Sir Joshua Reynolds including Cats. 20 and 26. In
the 1794 exhibition of drawings from Reynolds’ col-
lection, it was claimed that forty-four drawings among
the 2,253 on sale were by Michelangelo.34 There is no
way of determining how many of these were genuine,
but it is a fair presumption that the majority were draw-
ings from Michelangelo’s circle or copies after him, rather
than originals. The sale of the remainder of the drawings
in Reynolds’ collection, which took place over eigh-
teen days from 5 March 1798, comprised 4,034 draw-
ings, divided into 836 lots, mostly undescribed. Drawings
unsold in 1794 may have been re-offered. Whether any
Michelangelos were among these is conjectural. Interest-
ingly, what was probably the most important Michelan-
gelo that Reynolds owned – if, indeed, he did own it
– the study for Adam in the Creation of Adam on the
Sistine ceiling, now in the British Museum, does not
bear his collection stamp, was not engraved or described
when in his collection, and was claimed to be from it
only by Ottley, who later owned it, in his Italian School of
Design.35 If Ottley was correct, then two possible expla-
nations occur for the absence of Reynolds’ stamp. Either
it was applied to a now-lost mount, not to the sheet,
or else the sheet has been trimmed in such a way as to
excise the stamp. Some support for the ﬁrst option is
offered by the fact that Ottley lists Jonathan Richardson
the Elder, whose stamp is also absent, as its owner before
Reynolds. When Richardson had a double-sided sheet,
he generally placed his stamp on the mount rather than
the sheet, and Reynolds’ executors may have followed
suit. Reynolds also owned a second drawing, believed to
be a study for the Adam by Michelangelo and included as
such in Woodburn’s 1836 exhibition, as no. 44, but this
beautiful drawing is by Jacopo Pontormo.36 The drawing
that Reynolds may have valued most highly, the Count
of Canossa, was accepted even by the most sceptical con-
noisseurs until the twentieth century and was shown to
be a copy only by Wilde in 1953.37
It is clear from this listing that relatively few Michelan-
gelo drawings were available in England in the seven-
teenth and the eighteenth centuries and that, of these,
Lawrence was the main beneﬁciary. However, some of the
drawings mentioned previously were probably acquired
via intermediaries or other collectors rather than directly
at sales. And a few items, which had been in earlier
British collections, escaped him – at least four fragmentary
drawings by Michelangelo once owned by the younger
Richardson went to Lawrence’s contemporary and prede-
cessor as President of the Royal Academy, Benjamin West,
and the track of another drawing, once in Lely’s posses-
sion and now at Princeton, is lost during this period.38
But, ﬁnally, when Lawrence’s autograph Michelangelos
are totalled, it is evident that not more than three or four
came from seventeenth- or eighteenth-century British
sources, although the number could probably be increased
threefold if drawings that Lawrence believed to be by
Michelangelo but that are no longer considered auto-
graph are taken into account.39
Lawrence’s collection also contained several drawings
from French sources. The greatest connoisseur of Old
Master Drawings of the eighteenth century – the French
dealer, print-maker, and art-historian, Pierre-Jean Mari-
ette – had been a friend of the banker and collector
Pierre Crozat, “le roi des collectioneurs,” and had cat-
alogued his vast collection for the posthumous sale of
1741.40 Mariette himself beneﬁted greatly from this sale,
and when he died, in 1774, his collection, sold in 1775–6,
included some forty sheets of drawings by or believed to
be by Michelangelo, divided into eight lots. The single
most signiﬁcant beneﬁciary from the Michelangelos in
the Mariette sale was the Prince de Ligne.41 Employ-
ing as an intermediary the painter and dealer Julien de
Parme, he acquired several superb sheets, as well as oth-
ers from French collections.42 The Prince was killed in
1792, and, at an auction held in 1794, most of his drawings
passed to Duke Albert Casimir August von Saxe-Teschen.

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
7
Saxe-Teschen’s holding, the nucleus of the Albertina,
named after him, eventually became the property of the
Austrian State in 1920. The group of Michelangelos pur-
chased by the Prince de Ligne forms virtually the whole
of the run of eight magniﬁcent sheets of drawings by
Michelangelo now in the Albertina.43
Lawrence’s ex-Mariette drawings seem to have come
to him via the banker, Thomas Dimsdale – his great-
est rival – and the Marquis de Lagoy, who had sold his
collection of 138 drawings to Woodburn in 1821; Wood-
burn in turn sold it to Dimsdale.44 Before Mariette, most
of these sheets had been owned by Pierre Crozat and
Everard Jabach, and at least two of them, Cat. 19 and
1836-13 (BM W4/Corpus 48), would have been among
those given by Michelangelo to his pupil Antonio Mini
and brought by him to France, for ﬁgures on both were
copied by Primaticcio.45 Lawrence also possessed at least
one Michelangelo drawing that had been owned by J.-D.
Lempereur, a purchaser at Mariette’s sale, but it is unlikely
that this drawing (1836-3/BM W1) had been owned by
Mariette.46
Probably in 1826, Lawrence acquired two and perhaps
more drawings by Michelangelo that had been in the
collection of Baron Dominique-Vivant Denon, who died
on 28 April 1825, but it is uncertain whether the earlier
provenance of these is French or Italian.47 Lawrence had
mentioned Denon’s collection in a letter of 14 April 1825
to Woodburn, who was in Paris to attend the posthumous
sale of Anne-Louis Girodet de Roussy Trioson.48 In an
undated letter to Woodburn, written a few weeks later,
he remarked
I am sincerely sorry for the death of M. Denon; he is a great
loss to the arts, and I promised myself much pleasure from an
intercourse with him in my next visit to Paris. Mr. Ford tells
me he had six Raphaels, two of them very ﬁne. He says his
nephew had no love for art, and would readily have parted
with drawings, separate from the rest, in his uncle’s life-time
could he have been permitted to do so; he thinks an effort
from you might be successful. It is most probable that he had
some Michael Angelos.49
During Lawrence’s own visit to Paris later in the year, he
was unable to see more than a few of Denon’s drawings.50
Obviously with Lawrence’s encouragement, Woodburn
returned to Paris in later 1825 or early 1826, and it was
no doubt on this visit to Paris that he also purchased
two of the Presentation Drawings that Michelangelo had
made for Vittoria Colonna, and that re-appeared in his
1836 exhibition with the provenance given as Brunet
and the King of Naples.51 Woodburn may well not have
known that these had appeared in 1794 at the sale of
the painter-dealer Julien de Parme.52 It was presumably
directly at this sale, or via some intermediary, that they
were acquired by Brunet, who is plausibly to be identiﬁed
with Louis-Charles Brunet (1746–1825), the brother-in-
law of Dominique-Vivant Denon, by whom he was pre-
sumably advised. Louis-Charles Brunet died in the same
year as Vivant Denon, and Woodburn no doubt acquired
the more important items from both Denon’s and Brunet’s
collections at the same time, from one of Brunet’s two
sons, Baron Dominique-Vivant Denon’s nephews, and
ﬁnal beneﬁciaries of his estate, as well – presumably –
as that of their own father. These brothers were Vivant-
Jean Brunet (1778–1866), a General of the Empire, and
Dominique-Vivant Brunet (1779–1846), who later took
the name Brunet-Denon in honour of his uncle.53
But these acquisitions were on a relatively small scale.
Lawrence’s Michelangelo drawings came primarily in two
groups. One was acquired directly from the collector and
writer William Young Ottley, the author of one of the
earliest and most important books on Italian drawing, The
Italian School of Design, arranged historically, and published
in instalments between 1808 and 1823. Ottley’s book con-
tains a large number of illustrations of drawings, including
many from his own collection, which he too had acquired
from different sources. Lawrence admired Ottley’s exper-
tise and, in an undated note, of which a copy is preserved
among his papers, planned to bequeath Ottley the large
sum of £500 to compile a catalogue of the collection.54
Woodburn stated that Lawrence acquired Ottley’s collec-
tion en bloc for the enormous sum of £10,000, and there
is no good reason to query this.55
Between 1803 and 1814, Ottley held four sales – the last
much the most important – which included a good num-
ber of Michelangelo drawings, many of which were later
found in Lawrence’s collection. It might seem reasonable
to suppose that Lawrence acquired drawings piecemeal
in those sales, but if so, it would be difﬁcult to explain
the apparently massive purchase. It is probable, therefore,
that many – indeed most – of the drawings by Michelan-
gelo and others in Ottley’s sales were bought in, subse-
quently to be sold to Lawrence. But this was not true of all.
William Roscoe certainly purchased a number of draw-
ings from Ottley’s 1814 sale, some of which re-appeared in
his own forced sale of 1816. Roscoe’s purchases included
at least one drawing catalogued as by Michelangelo in
1814, lot 1677, for on 15 October 1824 Roscoe wrote
about it to Lawrence, who replied that he did not believe
it to be by Michelangelo,56 which was a correct evalua-
tion. It is now in the British Museum ﬁrmly identiﬁed
as by Dosio.57 Such exceptions notwithstanding, there is
no good reason to doubt that Lawrence’s bulk purchase

8
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
took place in 1822 or 1823. Some support for this date is
provided by a note made by the executors of Lawrence’s
estate. Lawrence had painted a portrait of Ottley’s wife in
1822, which, for unknown reasons, was still in his studio
at his death.58 In listing it, his executors noted that it had
been “paid for in drawings.”
As for Michelangelo drawings acquired from other col-
lections, Lawrence’s major purchases were made between
1823 and 1825. In 1824 he bought for £500 one hundred
sheets, which may have included some by Michelangelo,
from a collection of 688 owned by the Viennese Count
von Fries. A year later, in 1825, he bought some sheets
from his old friend and colleague Conrad Metz, who
claimed to have at least three by Michelangelo. In a letter
to Metz, resident in Rome, of 24 April 1825, Lawrence
wrote: “I am now, from having the ﬁrst collection of
these two great Masters [i.e., Raphael and Michelangelo]
in Europe (this seems an arrogant assumption) so thor-
oughly acquainted with their hand, whether Pen or Wash,
at their different periods that at a glance I know them and
at a glance, reject all imitations of them.”59
The “ﬁrst collection” of which Lawrence was so proud
had been enriched magniﬁcently in 1823 when he pur-
chased another major group of Michelangelo drawings.
These had been acquired by Samuel Woodburn from the
French painter, former advisor to Napoleon’s art com-
missariat in Italy, and collector Jean-Baptiste Wicar, resi-
dent in Rome. Wicar wished to build a villa and decided
to sell part of his collection. It was this purchase that
formed the second main source of Lawrence’s Michelan-
gelo drawings. Lawrence was already in part acquainted
with Wicar’s collection for Wicar had shown him some of
it during his Roman sojourn of 1819. Indeed, Lawrence
asked Woodburn in a letter of 17 December 1822 to “Give
my compliments to Mr. Wicar, and my present thanks for
his past liberality in showing me his collections and his
work.”60
Woodburn’s negotiations with Wicar were evidently
not easy, but they were not protracted. In a letter to
Lawrence of 14 January 1823, Woodburn claimed that
Wicar had at ﬁrst tried to pass off some copies as originals,
but that he had made quite clear what he thought of them.
He obviously believed himself – no doubt rightly – to be
an effective and tough negotiator, for he added that had
he been in Rome earlier, he could have saved Sir George
Beaumont more than half the price of Michelangelo’s
Taddei Tondo.61 Woodburn prevailed, at a cost, accord-
ing to a later account, of 11,000 Roman scudi.62 Just
over a fortnight later, on 1 February 1823, Woodburn
announced that he had acquired Wicar’s Michelangelo
drawings; not only that, he adds that Wicar had then
decided he wanted them back and had offered Wood-
burn a proﬁt on the deal.63 Woodburn speciﬁed two of
the Michelangelo drawings: “Mr Lock has looked them
also over and is quite satisﬁed . . . one in red chalk a study
for the ﬁgure suspended of Haman in the Capell Sistine he
esteemed above all price . . . there is also a Drawing for the
Leda, which Mr Lock very handsomely gave the Cartoon
to the Academy, a Magniﬁcent Drawing.”64 Although
Lawrence was well aware that he was likely to be out-
done by Dimsdale, he replied to Woodburn on March
8, saying “I thank you, however, seriously and most sin-
cerely, for particularising those two drawings, the Haman
and the Leda.”65 On March 13, Woodburn provided fur-
ther details: “For M. Angelo I have various studies for his
Cruciﬁxion, the Leda, studies for the Piet`a in St. Peters,
a Sibyl not ﬁnished, the head of the celebrated Faun, the
ﬁgures of the small M. Venusti I sold to Mr Lock and sev-
eral others . . . the Leda also is valuable since it is doubtful
what became of the picture.”66
The Haman, of course, is the drawing now in the
British Museum (W13); the study for the Leda, which
cannot certainly be traced, may be the ﬁne copy after
the Night, here Cat. 83; at least one of the drawings
then connected with the St. Peter’s Piet`a is probably that
now in the Louvre (Inv. 716/J38/Corpus 92), made by
Michelangelo not in preparation for his famous early
sculptural group but for Sebastiano’s Ubeda Piet`a; the head
of the Faun is, with virtual certainty, Cat. 8 verso, and
the drawings connected with the Venusti may be those
now in the British Museum (W76–8/Corpus 385–7)
made for the Cleansing of the Temple, painted by Marcello
Venusti to Michelangelo’s design and now in the National
Gallery.67 Although Woodburn was corresponding with
Lawrence, he was acting mainly as an agent for Lawrence’s
not altogether friendly rival Thomas Dimsdale, who had
“a much heavier purse than Sir Thomas.”68 On Wood-
burn’s return, Dimsdale, who had earlier bought from
him the entire Lagoy collection, purchased the Raphaels
and Michelangelos acquired in Rome for 3,000 guineas.69
However, it seems that Dimsdale was not a monopolist
and that Lawrence “occasionally bought single selected
specimens”: Fisher remarks that eight of Dimsdale’s
Raphaels and Michelangelos passed to Lawrence in Dims-
dale’s lifetime. Dimsdale can have enjoyed the ex-Wicar
drawings only for a few days. He died on 18 April 1823,
and his collection was bought from his heirs by Wood-
burn, who had, after all, supplied most of it. And “Very
shortly after his [Dimsdale’s] death the entire Series of his
Italian drawings were purchased by Sir Thomas Lawrence
for the sum of ﬁve thousand, ﬁve hundred pounds.”70
Lawrence no doubt paid Woodburn in instalments.

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
9
Wicar, feeling that he had parted with his Michelan-
gelo drawings too cheaply, seems to have decided not to
sell further drawings: Woodburn told Lawrence that it
was useless to pursue his series of drawings by Raphael.
Wicar certainly acquired further drawings before his
death, including many of the group, among them a num-
ber by Raphael, which had been stolen from him in
1799, and which he re-possessed by subterfuge from the
painter-collector Antonio Fedi (1771–1843), who had
master-minded the theft.71 Lawrence, in the letter to
Metz quoted previously, wrote: “The Chevalier Wiens
[this must be a mis-transcription of Wicar] has lately I
understand been again collecting from these two great
men [i.e., Michelangelo and Raphael] but he will not
separate from his collection and the distance is too great,
and the value of it too uncertain, to justify my attempting
to possess it.” He continues: “Can you not in a letter send
me drawings from them?” In any case, whatever drawings
Wicar purchased between 1823 and 1830, few Michelan-
gelos were among them. His bequest to his home town
of Lille contained one of the greatest runs of drawings by
Raphael to be found anywhere. But it includes no more
than one authentic drawing by Michelangelo: a study of
around 1559 for the drum and dome of St. Peter’s, which
is very important historically but far from glamorous visu-
ally. A book of architectural sketches that Wicar believed
to be authentic and valued highly was long ago subtracted
from Michelangelo: It has recently been shown that it is
very largely by Raffaello da Montelupo.72
Lawrence continued to acquire drawings, both by pur-
chase and exchange, but little information has so far been
unearthed about his acquisitions in the later 1820s. How-
ever, some light is thrown upon his methods and his
interests by a correspondence conducted with Lavinia
Forster, the daughter of the eminent sculptor Thomas
Banks. Banks had built up a sizeable and varied collec-
tion of drawings, which she had inherited on his death
in 1805. Lawrence did not make a direct offer to pur-
chase drawings, and he was not overwhelmed with the
collection as a whole, but he did express strong inter-
est in certain sheets. He asked her to send over pack-
ages of drawings from Paris, where she lived, so that he
could examine them and have some of them reproduced
in tracings. Mrs. Forster does not seem to have wished to
sell her drawings, and ignored Lawrence’s hints, but she
did respond to his enthusiasm by giving him some sheets
attributed to D¨urer, and he responded by making a por-
trait drawing of her daughter – Lawrence’s own drawings
were very much valued at the period and were praised
by, for example, Franc¸ois G´erard, even above his paint-
ings. And Lawrence was also generous to her in raising
money to pay for the posthumous publication of her hus-
band’s writings. It is likely that numerous works of art
came to Lawrence through his combination of charm,
enthusiasm, and generosity. This correspondence – like
the letter to Metz – also alerts us to the fact that when he
could not acquire autograph drawings, Lawrence tried to
obtain copies or tracings of them – his interests were not
conﬁned to pursuit of originals: He behaved as a serious
scholar, eager to acquire the maximum information about
his favoured artists.73
iii. the michelangelo collections
of jean-baptiste wicar and william
young ottley
The run of drawings by Michelangelo – and other artists –
acquired from Wicar by Woodburn in 1823 was very
substantial, but it did not comprise all the drawings by
Michelangelo that Wicar had once owned. A pupil of
Jacques-Louis David, admired by his master as an excel-
lent draughtsman, Jean-Baptiste Wicar travelled to Rome
with David in 1784. He returned to Italy in 1787 and
between then and 1793 lived in Florence, executing draw-
ings for the series of engravings of paintings in the galleries
of the city, of which the ﬁrst volume was published in
1789. Although previously fairly penurious, Wicar seems
to have been well paid for this work, and he was no
doubt active as a portraitist. In any case, he seems to have
acquired a reasonable disposable income for in 1792 he
sent via David the large sum of six hundred livres towards
the reconstruction of his home town of Lille.
If Eug`ene Piot is to be believed, it would have been
well before the French invasion of Italy that Wicar “s’´etait
li´e d’amiti´e avec Philippe Buonarroti, et put alors acheter
et choisir un nombre de dessins assez considerable parmi
ceux qui avaient ´et´e conserv´e par la famille.”74 If this
is correct, then it would seem that Wicar’s collection of
drawings – and of Michelangelo drawings in particular –
was begun in the late 1780s because Filippo Buonarroti
spent very little time in Florence after c. 1789, and lived in
virtually permanent exile. A friendship with Wicar could
well have been formed in the late 1780s, but there would
have been fewer opportunities for it to have occurred
later.
It was this still-mysterious dispersal from the Buonar-
roti family collection in Casa Buonarroti, the fountain-
head of Michelangelo’s work, that radically changed
the availability of Michelangelo drawings. Piot’s account
would suggest that Wicar acquired his group of Michelan-
gelo drawings at a single moment, but whether or not this

10
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
is so is conjectural. Nevertheless, although Casa Buonar-
roti was certainly the main source of Wicar’s Michelan-
gelo drawings, it was not the only one and the fact that
Wicar once possessed a Michelangelo drawing does not
automatically prove that it came from Casa Buonarroti.
Wicar bought drawings from a range of collectors and
dealers, including the sculptor, restorer, and large-scale
art collector (and dealer) Bartolommeo Cavaceppi, who
certainly had drawings by Michelangelo in his stock.75
During the Italian wars of the mid–late 1790s, Wicar
became a commissioner for Napoleon, advising on the
sequestration of Italian works of art for the Mus´ee
Napol´eon. The commission concentrated on paintings
and sculptures, and few collections of drawings were
seized. But Wicar was believed to have used his pow-
ers as a commissioner to persuade owners to sell their
possessions to him and to have taken the opportunity to
form a large and important collection of drawings on
his own account. According to his lights, Wicar proba-
bly behaved honestly, but, whatever the speciﬁc details,
he certainly proﬁted from the revolutionary situation and
no doubt paid low prices and obtained remarkable bar-
gains. It seems unlikely, on the whole, that Wicar stole
or sequestered drawings for himself – as Vivant Denon
sometimes did – and he cannot be proved to have done
so. Thus, although Wicar has been held responsible by
some scholars for part of the depredation of the collec-
tions of the Duke of Modena, seized by a commission
under the instructions of Napoleon in 1796, and handed
to the Louvre, he was ofﬁcially appointed to the Com-
mission des Arts only in February 1797, and there is no
ﬁrm evidence linking him with Modena.76 The Mode-
na Collection of drawings, formed largely in the mid-
seventeenth century, was not rich in sixteenth-century
work. But two drawings were recorded, in 1771, then on
display, as attributed to Michelangelo.77 The Louvre’s part
of the Modena booty included no drawings by Michelan-
gelo and it seems that these two sheets escaped the general
seizure. They are, with virtual certainty, identical with
two drawings, one by Michelangelo, and the other then
stated to be by him, but probably by an associate, both
exhibited by Woodburn in 1836 with a provenance given
as from the Duke of Modena, as no. 18, now unlocated
and 33, here Cat. 32. But Wicar’s name was not attached
to their provenance, and it is uncertain whether he ever
owned either. The disruptions and uncertainties of this
period led to the breakup or partial dispersal of many great
Italian collections of paintings, and the same was true
of collections of drawings. These, of course, inevitably,
attracted less attention and are less documented. It is also
worth noting that dispersals from the Modena Collection
may well have occurred earlier and that one cannot be
certain that the two drawings attributed to Michelangelo
were not alienated before 1796.
By the end of the 1790s, Wicar had built up a very sig-
niﬁcant collection of Italian drawings. The most impor-
tant section of it was a run of drawings by Raphael, whose
exact number is unknown but which may have comprised
as many as eighty sheets.78 According to Robinson, this
collection – Wicar’s ﬁrst – was purloined from him (by
Antonio Fedi, who seems to have served with Wicar
on the Napoleonic commission): “He had . . . entrusted
a large and very valuable portion [N.B. but not all] of
them to a Friend in Florence who stole them and sold
them to William Young Ottley, a dealer and writer on art,
especially old master drawings, and his collection in turn
was eventually purchased in its entirety by Lawrence.”79
Wicar was soon informed by his friend the painter
Louis Gaufﬁer of the fraud perpetrated upon him and
learned – it is unclear how – that a number of his drawings
had been acquired by Ottley. On 24 March 1801, he wrote
a letter of protest to his friend Humbert de Superville,
also a friend and associate of Ottley, whom he asked to
intervene with Ottley on his behalf. In it he described
the affair. On September 19, he sent to Humbert an
´Etat listing some of the drawings he had lost.80 Ottley
is reported to have replied that he had acquired about
twenty of the stolen drawings – although he might have
underestimated – and would be prepared to return them
to Wicar, but required reimbursement. What ﬁnally tran-
spired is unknown for no further correspondence about
the matter has come to light, but an hypothesis is advanced
later.81
Over the twenty years following 1800, Wicar contin-
ued to collect drawings. He had certainly succeeded in
re-acquiring some of the drawings stolen from him even
before the coup of 1824 in which he bought some sev-
enteen of his Raphaels back from Fedi through an inter-
mediary, plus an unknown number of other Renaissance
and baroque drawings. Some minor Michelangelo draw-
ings may have been among these earlier retrievals. It is
unknown whether he could have continued to acquire
drawings by Michelangelo from Filippo Buonarroti;
Filippo may well not have disposed immediately of all the
drawings that he had taken from Casa Buonarroti, but he
could have sold them in small groups over the years as he
required funds. Only future documentary ﬁnds are likely
to clarify this. Wicar no doubt bought further Michelan-
gelo drawings from sources other than Filippo – thus,
he attempted to acquire Michelangelo’s Epifania cartoon
before that came formally onto the market in Rome in
1809. His collection was not inaccessible: J. D. Passavant,

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
11
in 1832, mentions drawings – then in the possession of
Lawrence’s executors – made by Michelangelo for Sebas-
tiano’s Raising of Lazarus (National Gallery), that he had
previously seen in Wicar’s house in Rome; the drawings
in question are no doubt those now divided between the
British Museum and the Mus´ee Bonnat.82 Sadly, Passa-
vant provides no further information. Whether the run
of Michelangelos that Wicar sold to Woodburn in 1823
represented acquisitions made after 1800, whether it com-
prised drawings that he had not lost to theft in 1799, or
whether it was a combination of both – the most likely
possibility – is not known. The question of how many
drawings by or attributed to Michelangelo Woodburn
acquired directly from Wicar is also addressed later.
As the passage quoted earlier from Robinson’s account
makes clear, it has generally been accepted that a good
number – if not all – of the Michelangelo drawings
in Lawrence’s collection with a provenance from Casa
Buonarroti and from Ottley had also come from Wicar
via his treacherous friends.83 It must therefore be asked
how many drawings by Michelangelo were stolen from
Wicar in 1799, and how many of them passed through
the hands of Ottley? To attempt to answer these questions,
it is necessary to say a few words about William Young
Ottley.
Ottley was in Italy from 1791 to 1799, overlapping
with Wicar. As a comfortably-off young man with artistic
ambitions and a reputation as a radical, Ottley curiously
parallels the convinced and committed French republican.
Ottley had access to at least some of the same sources as
Wicar, and he too certainly acquired drawings, including
some by Michelangelo, from Bartolommeo Cavaceppi.
Ottley spent time in Florence, as well as Rome, and, in
principle, might have bought drawings by Michelangelo
if not directly from Filippo Buonarroti, at least from some
intermediary to whom Filippo had sold them. It is by no
means to be assumed, therefore, that all the Michelan-
gelo drawings that came into Ottley’s hands from Casa
Buonarroti had necessarily passed through Wicar’s. It may
be added that, naturally for a young English artist at this
moment, deeply under the inﬂuence of Fuseli, Ottley was
fascinated by Michelangelo and copied his work. Several
of Ottley’s copy drawings are signed and dated: One, now
in the Vatican, after Duke Giuliano, is inscribed “Drawn
and ﬁnished from the original Florence. Feb 21, 1792”;
another, after a section of the Last Judgement, signed and
dated 1793 is inscribed “ab orig.”84 Ottley would have
needed no incentive to pursue drawings by Michelan-
gelo. It is not fully certain that Ottley acquired all his
drawings in Italy – one writer claimed that he purchased
the ex-Casa Buonarroti Michelangelos only in London
on his return – but it is probable that the bulk of what he
owned was obtained in Florence or Rome.85
For Wicar’s losses in 1799, the ´Etat that he sent to Hum-
bert de Superville is a vital source and apparently reliable
about the drawings that had been stolen from him. Of the
thirty-nine items included in it – comprising both single
sheets and groups of drawings – Wicar speciﬁed thirty-
three groups of drawings by Raphael and a few by other
artists. Some of the Raphaels are described so precisely –
if brieﬂy – that they can readily be identiﬁed, and it is
very clear that a proportion of these – at least twenty and
perhaps as many as thirty-six sheets86 – was acquired by
Ottley as, indeed, he admitted. But in the present con-
text, that of Michelangelo, the ´Etat is extremely puzzling.
By Michelangelo was speciﬁed only the book of architec-
tural sketches believed by Wicar to be autograph but now
known to be predominantly by Michelangelo’s associate
Raffaello da Montelupo.87 This did not pass to Ottley and
was among the items re-possessed from Fedi by Wicar in
1824. It appears, therefore, that although stolen drawings
by Raphael, the artist Wicar seems to have valued above
all others, had entered Ottley’s possession, Wicar did not
believe – or was not aware – that Ottley had acquired
stolen drawings by Michelangelo.
Nevertheless, this conclusion is hard to reconcile with
other evidence. Although Wicar did not include in his
´Etat any Michelangelo drawings among those works that
had been stolen from him and that he believed Ottley
had acquired, Ottley did own a number of drawings by
Michelangelo that later cataloguers have stated were pre-
viously owned by Wicar. Thus, Woodburn’s 1836 cata-
logue lists two drawings with the provenance Wicar and
Ottley: nos. 77 (the Dream of Human Life, now in the
Prince’s Gate Collection) and 80 (Cat. 29 here). His 1842
prospectus and Robinson’s catalogue list both the latter
(the former had been sold to William II in 1839) and one
other drawing not exhibited in 1836 with the provenance
Wicar and Ottley (respectively nos. 4 and 72). Combin-
ing the information in the catalogues of 1836 and 1842,
one would therefore conclude that only three drawings
in total passed in some manner from Wicar to Ottley, and
that all other drawings for which Wicar’s ownership is
listed were acquired directly from Wicar by Woodburn
in 1823. This would modify the conclusion reached from
examination of the ´Etat that no Michelangelo drawings
were among those stolen, but only to the extent that three
drawings by Michelangelo were purloined from Wicar
and passed to Ottley. It might be possible, in principle, to
accept that Wicar had simply forgotten about them when
he wrote to Humbert de Superville. It would, however,
be difﬁcult to believe that had Wicar lost to theft the

12
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
Dream of Human Life, one of Michelangelo’s most famous
and spectacular drawings, he would have failed to men-
tion it. One might therefore be tempted to suggest that
Ottley had purchased these drawings from Wicar at some
date subsequent to 1800. Although there is no record that
Wicar ever visited England, and although Ottley is not
known to have returned to Italy – although he did go to
France – purchase by correspondence is quite possible, as
Lawrence’s example amply demonstrates.
However, the situation is complicated further by
another body of evidence, the drawings attributed to
Michelangelo that appeared in William Young Ottley’s
sales. Four auctions have been identiﬁed, taking place
in 1803, 1804, 1807, and 1814.88 The information their
catalogues provide is patchy: Descriptions are perfunc-
tory, many lots contained more than one drawing,
and it is often unclear whether references to medium,
provenance, and even authorship apply to all the items in
multiple lots or only to one or two of them. Nevertheless,
despite such limitations, the catalogues are an invaluable
source, especially if what they say can be correlated with
information from other sources, including Ottley’s Italian
School of Design.
Ottley’s ﬁrst sale, beginning on 14 April 1803, con-
tained ten lots under the name of Michelangelo, compris-
ing twenty-one drawings in total. Of these, one single-
drawing lot (no. 26) was stated to be after Michelangelo;
another drawing – or possibly all three – in a three-
drawing lot (no. 19) was given to Marcello Venusti; and
a further two items in a four-drawing lot (no. 27) were
attributed to Kent, presumably William Kent, the British
painter-architect who trained in Rome for several years
at the beginning of the eighteenth century, rather than
the dealer of the same name, active later in the century.
These last two drawings are the only ones listed under
Michelangelo’s name in this sale that can today be
identiﬁed with some conﬁdence.89 One single-drawing
lot (no. 22) is speciﬁcally stated to have come from Sir
Peter Lely’s collection; another (lot 23), from that of
Thomas Hudson. It seems likely that the whole of lot 27,
in which William Kent’s two drawings were included,
with now-lost inscriptions on their versos taken from
Richardson and Wright, also came from English collec-
tions. One other, lot 26 – if it is correctly identiﬁed as
the copy once in the Koenigs collection and now in the
Museum Boymans-van Beuningen, by Carlo Dolci, after
Michelangelo’s portrait drawing of Andrea Quaratesi –
was probably acquired by Ottley on the London market;
it bears Reynolds’ stamp, and no doubt appeared in one of
his posthumous sales, probably that of 1798. It is unlikely
that any one of the drawings offered in 1803 had a recent
Italian provenance or was an autograph work by Miche-
langelo. Indeed, Gere suggested that Ottley did not own
the contents of this sale, but only acted as the expert.90
Ottley’s second sale, begining on 11 April 1804, was
larger and richer. Sixteen lots were included under
Michelangelo’s name, comprising sixty-two drawings in
total. Six lots comprising twenty-ﬁve drawings are listed
either as coming “from the family of the artist, still res-
ident in Florence” or “from the Buonarroti collection.”
One of these, lot 275, containing two drawings, reap-
peared in Ottley’s 1814 sale as lot 1504, and this time
the provenance was given as Cicciaporci, which is more
likely to be correct. It is not fully clear how many draw-
ings contained in the remaining ﬁve ex-Buonarroti lots
in 1804 really came from Michelangelo’s family. This is
because the reference to the Buonarroti Collection in lot
268, which contained ten drawings, may have applied not
to the entire contents of that lot but only to two draw-
ings – one described as “a monstrous animal, black chalk”
and probably identiﬁable with W50/Corpus 305 in the
British Museum (with a provenance from the Welles-
ley Collection) and the other with a sheet in the British
Library bearing a chalk sketch on one side and a poem
on the other, acquired at the sale of Samuel Rogers in
1856 (Corpus 217). The reason for doubting a Buonar-
roti provenance for the remaining eight drawings in lot
268 is because their description dovetails neatly with the
descriptions of four other lots, all of which are stated to
have come “from the Martelli collection, in Florence.” It
is uncertain therefore whether the Michelangelo draw-
ings with a Buonarroti provenance in this sale num-
bered twenty-ﬁve or seventeen. The lots originating with
Martelli would, correspondingly, have provided either
twenty-seven or – assuming that eight of the ten drawings
in lot 268 also came from the Martelli – thirty-six studies
of heads or body parts. The Martelli were a venerable
and famous Florentine family, with extensive holdings of
painting and sculpture of the highest quality, but noth-
ing seems to be known about their drawings.91 However,
given that large numbers of their drawings were sold in
single lot “bundles,” individual sheets cannot have been
highly prized.
Two further lots, each comprising a single drawing,
were stated to have come “from Count Geloso’s cabi-
net” (lot 276) and “from the Spada collection at Rome”
(lot 278). Only one lot (lot 272), containing a single
drawing, had an English provenance, from Sir Peter Lely.
This re-appeared as lot 1588 in the 1814 sale at which it
was no doubt acquired directly or indirectly by William
Esdaile: It can be identiﬁed with the autograph drawing
by Michelangelo now in Hamburg (21094/Corpus 35).

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
13
It is difﬁcult to be sure how many lots from the 1804
sale re-appeared in Ottley’s 1814 sale. Two have already
been mentioned: the ex-Lely drawing, lot 272 in 1804
which became lot 1588 in 1814, and 1804-275, contain-
ing two drawings, whose Buonarroti provenance given in
1804 was changed to Cicciaporci in 1814, lot 1504 (this
is no doubt identiﬁable with Cats. 45 and 48). A third
was 1804-274, containing two drawings stated as coming
from the Buonarroti Collection, which probably became
lot 1587 in 1814 (and whose contents are identiﬁable with
Cats. 50 and 36). The fourth drawing, 1804-278, claimed
as a study by Michelangelo for Sebastiano’s Viterbo Piet`a
coming from the Spada Collection, was lot 826 in 1814;
it cannot now be traced. Two further drawings from the
1804 sale, which do not seem to have re-appeared in 1814,
may nevertheless be identiﬁable. One of these – “a sheet
with two torsos – free pen” in lot 279, which comprised
three drawings (the other two were described as after
Michelangelo by Salviati) – might have been autograph
and, if so, may be identical with no. 2 in Woodburn’s
1842 prospectus, and with Cat. 2 here. In 1842 its prove-
nance was given solely as Wicar, without mention either
of Buonarroti or Ottley. A further lot (lot 264) for which
no provenance is indicated, is not traceable in 1814 but
is probably to be identiﬁed with Cat. 107, whose prove-
nance was given solely as Ottley in 1842. It has no claim
to be by Michelangelo.
Of the seventeen or twenty-ﬁve drawings given a
Buonarroti provenance in the sale of 1804, therefore, only
four drawings, the contents of lots 274 and 275, can be
identiﬁed with reasonable security. However, because lot
275 probably came from Cicciaporci rather than Casa
Buonarroti, this means that only two of the ex–Casa
Buonarroti drawings offered in 1804 can now be iden-
tiﬁed. Nevertheless, there is no reason to doubt the
autograph status of the remainder: In three cases it is
noted that the sheets contain inscriptions by Michelan-
gelo, “an account of money,” “some verses autograph,”
and “some of his writings” – and it is simply the skimpi-
ness of the descriptions that do not allow them to be
connected with drawings known either from Ottley’s
subsequent sale catalogues or the exhibition and sale
catalogues of Woodburn. Most of them were probably
relatively slight.
How many of the Michelangelos in the 1804 sale might
have been stolen from Wicar? Among the ﬁve putatively
identiﬁable drawings by Michelangelo (the contents of
lots 274 and 275, each containing two drawings, and one
of the three in lot 279), only one (lot 274 i) was given
a provenance including Wicar in Woodburn’s prospectus
of 1842 (no. 28) followed by later catalogues, although it
is probably safe to assume that this provenance was shared
by its companion then on the same mount (lot 274 ii) but
later separated. On the face of it, therefore, the total of
stolen drawings would seem to be three or four. Addi-
tional or changed information about provenances pro-
vided in 1836 and 1842 by Woodburn, whose accounts
are generally repeated verbatim by Robinson and Parker,
may modify this total. But, as we shall see, the later infor-
mation is not invariably more accurate than that to be
gleaned from Ottley’s sale catalogues, and the assumption
that a provenance revealed later was one concealed earlier
is not one that can be made with conﬁdence. Notwith-
standing this caveat, because it is certain that some of the
series of drawings by Raphael purloined from Wicar were
offered for sale by Ottley in 1804, it is obviously possible
that some of the Michelangelos had come the same way.
Ottley’s third sale, beginning on 6 July 1807, contained
only four lots ascribed to Michelangelo totalling ﬁve
drawings. Two lots were listed with English provenances:
one “from K. Cha. I cabinet” (i.e., the collection of King
Charles I; it probably bore one of the marks associated
with Nicholas or Jerome Lanier, then believed to be those
of the Collector-monarch92) and the other, lot 374, “a
study of three hands – masterly ﬁne pen” from Sir Peter
Lely. The latter may be identiﬁable with Bartolommeo
Passerotti’s drawing, Cat. 114. If so, then the provenance
given for this drawing in 1836-10 and 1842-85 as Buonar-
roti (in any case suspicious for a drawing by Passerotti) and
Wicar, with no mention of Lely or Ottley, was an error.
A third, a “Descent from the Cross, many ﬁgures” in
black chalk came from “Count Geloso’s cabinet” – it re-
appeared in 1814 as lot 1764. None of these drawings is
particularly plausible as an autograph Michelangelo, and
only the two drawings in lot 376, for which no prove-
nance is provided – a “ﬁght of cavaliers” in black chalk
and pen, described as “capital,” and “a group of ﬁve
ﬁgures, half length” in pen – sound possible candidates.
Neither can now be identiﬁed with certainty, but the
“ﬁght of cavaliers” might be that included in the 1814
sale as lot 1681, with the provenance given as Buonarroti;
in which case, it would probably be the same drawing
(Cat. 6) that appears in 1842 as no. 67; in that and subse-
quent catalogues its provenance given solely as Wicar and
Lawrence, with both Buonarroti and Ottley omitted. If
this identiﬁcation is correct, the total of ex-Wicar draw-
ings possessed by Ottley would rise to four or ﬁve (adding
the drawings offered in 1807 to those offered in 1804).
The most important of Ottley’s sales, and that with the
most informative catalogue, began on 6 June 1814 and
continued for ﬁfteen days. The drawings by or attributed
to Michelangelo were divided into six groups, each group

14
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
being sold on a different day. These groups comprised
forty-eight lots of drawings; a forty-ninth lot, 1762, was an
unbound ﬁrst edition of Michelangelo’s poems, coming
from the Buonarroti family. The forty-eight lots of draw-
ings contained a total of seventy sheets. From them must
be subtracted lot 1500, comprising two drawings that are
speciﬁcally stated to be copies. The forty-seven remain-
ing lots comprised sixty-eight drawings by or claimed
to be by Michelangelo. Even though this sale probably
included most of the drawings that Ottley considered to
be by Michelangelo, there is no reason to believe that
it exhausted his holdings completely. In total twenty-
six of the forty-eight lots are provided with provenances.
Nine lots (253, 254, 256, 260, 264, 265, 1679, 1681, 1758)
and part of a tenth (1587), comprising nineteen draw-
ings in total, were speciﬁcally listed as coming from the
Buonarroti collection, but it seems that – more probably
through oversight than deliberate concealment – other
lots originating from the Buonarroti collection were not
speciﬁcally indicated, and this total can be raised with
some conﬁdence by four lots: 257 (claimed to come
from Casa Buonarroti in Woodburn’s exhibition of 1836,
no. 7), 261 (probably 1842-72, claimed to come from Casa
Buonarroti, Wicar, and Ottley), 1759 (recognised as from
Casa Buonarroti by Parker, II, 294), and 1760 (1842-9,
claimed to come from Casa Buonarroti and Wicar). These
four lots contained ﬁve drawings in all. Thus, it might be
reasonable to conclude that some twenty-four drawings,
comprising the whole or part of fourteen lots in the 1814
sale, came from Casa Buonarroti.
Several other collections are listed in 1814 as provid-
ing drawings by Michelangelo. From the Cicciaporci-
Cavaceppi collection came seven lots (263, 823, 824, 825,
828, 1504, 1768), and part of an eighth (1587) in which
an ex-Cicciaporci drawing was placed with a drawing
from the Buonarroti collection. These seven and a half
lots comprised eleven drawings. It is likely that all save
one of these lots, no. 263 (Cat. 102), were autograph.
From the collection of Lamberto Gori came six other
single-drawing lots: 1501, 1502, 1503, 1590, 1761, 1765;
none of these was original.93 Count Geloso’s Descent from
the Cross (lot 1764) re-appeared from 1807, but nothing
from the Martelli Collection surfaced. The only other
sources listed – both English – were Lely, for lot 1588, “a
leaf of pen studies, head of a warrior etc, very ﬁne in his
early manner,” probably, as noted earlier, identical with
1804 lot 272, and with the drawing by Michelangelo now
in Hamburg, and lot 1766, the Three Figures in Conversa-
tion (Cat. 33), whose provenance from the collection of
Jonathan Richardson the Elder was noted, but not from
that of Lord Spencer.
There are some minor discrepancies in the information
in Ottley’s sales, but none that might not be explained by
haste or lack of attention. Thus, as noted previously, lot
1504 in 1814 was said in 1804, when it was lot 275, to
have come from the Buonarroti Collection, and whether
or not this is correct, it is probable that the change to Cic-
ciaporci in 1814 was a genuine correction, not an attempt
at a subterfuge. According to Ottley’s own writings, lot
262 (W29/Corpus 97) also came from the Cicciaporci-
Cavaceppi Collection, and the omission of this prove-
nance in 1814 was no doubt accidental: There can have
been no reason to conceal it. The same must be true of
lot 1680, now given to Raffaello da Montelupo (Cat. 77),
which, like lot 1766, came from Richardson, but whose
name is not mentioned by Ottley.
In none of Ottley’s sales is Wicar’s name included in the
provenance of a drawing. It is only in Woodburn’s 1836
exhibition catalogue and 1842 prospectus that Wicar, who
had, of course, died in 1834, is named. In 1836 Woodburn
acknowledged forty-nine of the one hundred mountings
of drawings on display to have come from Buonarroti
and Wicar.94 In only two of these cases did he include
the name of Ottley after that of Wicar in these prove-
nances. The ﬁrst of these, 1836-80 (Cat. 29), a red chalk
study of a man’s head “expressive of malevolence,” cannot
be identiﬁed in any of Ottley’s sales, and if he did own it –
which there is no particular reason to doubt – it either was
never offered at auction or was described so minimally
as to elude identiﬁcation. The second, 1836-77, is the
magniﬁcent Dream of Human Life, lot 1767 in 1814 (The
Prince’s Gate Collection of the Courtauld Institute). The
obvious presumption would be that Woodburn did not
mention Ottley’s ownership of a number of other draw-
ings that can be identiﬁed with items appearing in Ott-
ley’s 1814 sale because he wished to conceal that these had
been stolen from Wicar. It would be natural to conclude
that, save in the two cases in which Ottley’s name was
mentioned, Woodburn wished to convey the impression
that the drawings were among those that he himself had
bought directly from Wicar in 1823. For those drawings
shown in the 1836 exhibition that re-appeared in the 1842
prospectus, the provenance information is unchanged in
all save one case, of which more later. From the descrip-
tions of those drawings included in the 1842 prospectus
that had not been shown in 1836, a little more information
can be gleaned.
In 1842 Woodburn listed twenty-four mountings of
drawings with a Buonarroti-Wicar provenance.95 For two
of these, he extended the sequence of ownership to
Ottley. One of these, 1842-4, was the Head of a Man
“strongly expressive of malevolence” for which Ottley’s

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
15
name had already been given in 1836, no. 80; the other
was 1842-72 (“Three small studies on one mount”), not
shown in 1836. The Dream of Human Life, 1836-77, had
been sold on to the King of Holland in the interim and
so did not appear in the 1842 prospectus. The implica-
tion would seem to be, once again, that the remainder
had been acquired by Woodburn directly from Wicar.
When the works given a Buonarroti-Wicar provenance
in 1836 and 1842 that are common to both catalogues
are added to those that appear only in one or the other,
it would seem that Woodburn possessed a total of ﬁfty-
four mountings with a Buonarroti-Wicar provenance, of
which three (combining the information provided in the
1836 and 1842 catalogues) were acknowledged also to have
been owned by Ottley.
In addition, Woodburn in 1842 listed a further nine
mountings with Wicar as sole owner, presumably imply-
ing that they did not come from Casa Buonarroti.96
Thus, combining the ﬁgures of 1836 and 1842, a total
of sixty-three mountings would have come from Wicar.
Woodburn also listed fourteen mountings with Ott-
ley as sole owner.97 A further mounting was given the
unique (and probably erroneous) provenance Buonarroti-
Ottley.98 Finally the drawing on panel, Cat. 21, is stated
to have passed to Ottley from the King of Naples, and
two other drawings are said to have come to Ottley from
English collections.99 If these references are taken at face
value, it would imply that ﬁfty-ﬁve of the mountings
offered by Woodburn had come from Casa Buonarroti,
ﬁfty-four via Wicar, and one via Ottley. Which ones and
how many of the group of nine mountings of which
Wicar is listed as sole source, or the group of fourteen
of which Ottley is listed as sole source, might also have
come from Casa Buonarroti is a question that can be
answered in part. Of the nine “Wicar alone” drawings,
ﬁve are not by Michelangelo, and it is unlikely that any of
them came from Casa Buonarroti.100 It is probable that
all four of the autograph sheets came from Casa Buonar-
roti, but only one can be proved to have done so.101 Of
the ﬁfteen “Ottley alone” mountings, seven-and-a-half
are neither by Michelangelo nor from his studio, and it is
unlikely that any of them came from Casa Buonarroti.102
Of the remaining seven-and-a-half, it seems probable that
one (1842-32/Cat. 24), although autograph, had a non-
Buonarroti provenance (Cicciaporci is most likely), but
that the remainder, including one drawing by Antonio
Mini (1842-60/Cat. 74) and another given here to Pietro
d’Argenta (1842-63/Cat. 58), did indeed come from Casa
Buonarroti.103 If the four Wicar mountings and the seven-
and-a-half Ottley mountings are added to the ﬁfty-ﬁve,
we reach a total of sixty-six-and-a-half mountings by
Michelangelo and his immediate followers with a direct
provenance from Casa Buonarroti.
One example of which the provenance in 1842 is given
solely as Ottley is particularly instructive: This is 1842-47,
one of the two mountings of four sheets from Michelan-
gelo’s Sistine sketchbook (Cats. 9–16). Its pair, the other
gathering of four sheets, 1842-66, is speciﬁcally given
the provenance Casa Buonarroti and Wicar. However,
six years previously, in 1836, both mountings (1836-2 and
1836-50) had been listed as coming solely from Ottley’s
collection. Thus, the provenance of one had been revised
in the interim – the single change of provenance infor-
mation given for the same drawings between 1836 and
1842. One of these two mountings of four leaves each
can be traced further back: It had previously appeared
in Ottley’s 1814 sale, and then it was divided into two
mountings of two sheets apiece (1814-264 and 1814-265),
both described as coming from the Buonarroti Collec-
tion. One of these two mountings must have included
Cat. 11, of which Ottley had reproduced the recto in
his Italian School of Design. The other four sketchbook
sheets, however, cannot be found in the 1814 sale. How is
this to be interpreted? Did Ottley own the second group
of four or did he not? In his Italian School of Design, he
mentions possessing only four sheets, and there would
have been no good reason to conceal it had he owned
eight. It is probable, therefore, that Ottley did not possess
the second group. If so, and if the second group of four
really was acquired by Woodburn directly from Wicar,
it would imply that the provenance of both groups from
Ottley given by Woodburn in the 1836 catalogue was no
more than a typographical error, and that in 1842 Wood-
burn corrected this for the group that Ottley had not
owned. What possible reason could Woodburn have had
for ignoring the Casa Buonarroti provenance for at least
one of the groups in 1836 while in 1842 retaining the
provenance of one as Ottley, and giving the provenance
of the second as Buonarroti and Wicar, and excluding
Ottley? It is not as if in 1836 Woodburn was trying to
conceal any transfer Buonarroti-Wicar-Ottley, since he
had acknowledged this for two other drawings (1836-77
and 1836-80). And since a Buonarroti provenance had
been published for at least one of the two groups in
Ottley’s 1814 sale, what proﬁt was there in attempting
to hide it in 1836 and 1842? It is difﬁcult to elucidate any
consistent pattern in this, whether of openness or con-
cealment, and it is probably more reasonable – as well as
more charitable – to conclude that the discrepancies are
the result of confusion rather than conspiracy. Confusion
would also explain why the Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi prove-
nance given for two drawings in 1836 – nos. 63 and 84,

16
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
both sold by Woodburn to the King of Holland in 1839 –
was entirely ignored for the remaining drawings spring-
ing from this collection listed in the prospectus of 1842,
in which Cicciaporci and Cavaceppi are nowhere cited.
There was no reason whatsoever to have concealed this
provenance, which had, of course, been acknowledged in
Ottley’s 1814 sale catalogue, and presumably the origin of
this group of mostly late drawings by Michelangelo was
simply forgotten.
Correlating the provenances given in the listings of
1836 and 1842 with drawings offered at auction by Ott-
ley in 1814, it would seem on the face of the statements
made in the later catalogues that ﬁfteen lots and two part-
lots offered in 1814 – comprising seventeen drawings –
were among those abstracted from Casa Buonarroti by
Filippo Buonarroti, passed to Wicar and then stolen from
Wicar by Fedi.104 But, in fact, this correlation demon-
strates that the information provided in the 1836 and
1842 catalogues – and repeated subsequently – is not
fully trustworthy. It is unlikely that lot 259 in 1814 (“a
man’s head, proﬁle”) ever came from Casa Buonarroti;
Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi is a much more likely provenance,
and in the same sale of 1814 Cicciaporci was the stated
and entirely plausible previous owner of lots 263, 823,
824, and 825 and the part-lot 1587a. Lot 1502 is stated
in 1814 to have come from Gori’s collection. It is also
unlikely that lot 1767 in 1814, one of Michelangelo’s most
important and highly valued Presentation Drawings, had
either been owned by Wicar or come from Casa Buonar-
roti. Thus, of the ﬁfteen lots and two part-lots in Ott-
ley’s sale of 1814 that were stated in the 1836 and 1842
listings to have come from Casa Buonarroti, ﬁve lots cer-
tainly and probably seven, plus a part-lot, did not do so.
This means that between six and eight of the seventeen
drawings did not have a Buonarroti provenance. This is
a high rate of error, which also reduces the sixty-ﬁve
mountings with a Buonarroti provenance – obtained by
adding the information provided in 1836 and 1842, calcu-
lated previously – to between ﬁfty-seven and ﬁfty-nine.
Even though it cannot positively be proved that these
lots did not at some time pass through Wicar’s hands –
he, like Ottley, had bought directly from Cavaceppi and
might also have done so from Gori and others – it is
unlikely that they did so. It is more probable that in
1836 Woodburn, who includes a Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi
provenance for only two drawings (1836-63, the Isaiah
[BM W29/Corpus 97] which is 1814 lot 262, and the
study for the Last Judgement [BM W60/Corpus 350],
1836-84, which is 1814 lot 1768), was confused about the
provenances of a number of drawings and opted for what
seemed to him the most likely. He made other errors:
Thus, a Study of Hands 1842-86, by Passerotti, is given a
provenance from Wicar whereas this drawing (P. II, 453)
bears the stamp of Benjamin West and is unlikely ever to
have been owned by Wicar. Lot 1590 in 1814, is stated as
coming from Gori, but it becomes simply Ottley in 1842-
1 (Cat. 99). As Pouncey and Gere noted, lot 828 in 1814,
stated as coming from Cicciaporci, is given a provenance
from Richardson in 1836-51 – a glaring mistake. And at
least one error was made in the opposite sense: A drawing
given a Buonarroti provenance in 1814, lot 1758, is given
a provenance solely as Ottley in 1836, no. 55. Further-
more, the famous Epifania cartoon, now in the British
Museum (W75/Corpus 389), was stated in the 1836 cat-
alogue (no. 30) to have come from Casa Buonarroti. It
had not. Recorded in 1600 in the inventory of Fulvio
Orsini, who bequeathed his collection to the Farnese, it
had remained in their possession until, on the extinction
of the family, their collections passed to Charles of Bour-
bon, King of the Two Sicilies. The cartoon was given by
Charles, in 1753, to Cardinal Silvio Valenti.105 This mis-
take was not repeated in the Woodburn sale of 1860, in
which at least part of the true provenance was given.
Nevertheless, even once Woodburn’s errors are taken
into account, it would still appear that in 1814 Ottley
sold eight lots and one half-lot – comprising nine sheets
of drawings – by Michelangelo that had previously been
owned by Wicar and had come from Casa Buonarroti.
These drawings, like a number of the Raphaels offered
in the same sale, would therefore have been part of the
booty of Fedi. But, once again, we return to the question
of how this assumption can be squared with Wicar’s ´Etat
of 1801, in which, to recall, he had included details of well
over thirty drawings or groups of drawings by Raphael but
none by Michelangelo. If, to return to an obvious example,
Wicar had lost by theft a drawing of such outstanding
importance as Michelangelo’s Dream of Human Life, lot
1767 in Ottley’s sale of 1814 without any provenance,
but with the provenance given as Casa Buonarroti and
Wicar in 1836, it is inconceivable that he would not have
speciﬁed it. How should this situation be explained? It
may be signiﬁcant that, after the exchange between Wicar
and Ottley via Humbert de Superville in 1801, no more
is heard of the matter, and, as far as we know, Wicar
seems to have made no further attempt to recover the
drawings stolen from him that had been fenced to Ottley,
an inaction out of character for a man of his persistence,
nor does it seem that Ottley felt he was dealing in stolen
goods when he included drawings by Raphael that had
certainly been purloined from Wicar in his own sale of
1804. Perhaps Wicar and Ottley reached some kind of
accommodation, which involved sales made directly by

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
17
Wicar to Ottley – including Michelangelo drawings – at
a price that would, on the one hand, allow Ottley to feel
he had not paid excessively over the odds and, on the
other, enable Wicar to make up some of his losses. This
would also account for the fact that Ottley seems to have
felt no disquiet about reproducing some of the drawings
that had probably been owned by Wicar in the Italian
School of Design. To keep or even to sell stolen drawings,
objects inherently difﬁcult to trace, is one thing. But to
reproduce them in same-scale prints with Ottley’s own
address in the letter-press is entirely another and does
not suggest concealment. But, ﬁnally, it must be stressed
that the accommodation hypothesis is no more than that,
a provisional suggestion to be conﬁrmed or denied by
future research.
How many drawings or mountings of drawings by
Michelangelo came from Casa Buonarroti? It is impossi-
ble to be precise. The family does not seem to have placed
any mark on the drawings, although a stamp was applied
later – if inconsistently – probably before Casa Buonar-
roti was given to the City of Florence, so for information
about the losses we are largely reliant upon the various
catalogues produced by Ottley and Woodburn with their
lacunae and errors. A very rough guess would be that
shortly before 1790 some seventy-ﬁve pages or mount-
ings left Casa Buonarroti, comprising over one hundred
sheets of drawings, with Wicar the main, if not necessarily
the sole, beneﬁciary.
iv. the collections of casa
buonarroti: formation and dispersal
From the time of Michelangelo’s death until the later
eighteenth century, the collection of Michelangelo’s
drawings far outnumbering all others was that of Casa
Buonarroti. What was in Casa Buonarroti and how was its
collection formed? For the most part, the collection con-
sisted of relatively sketchy drawings. The most signiﬁcant
exceptions are the carefully elaborated architectural mod-
elli – the authenticity of which was often denied during
the twentieth century – and some of the late Cruciﬁxion
drawings, which, although unresolved, are in effect fully
satisfying and self-sufﬁcient statements. The majority of
the drawings in – or once in – Casa Buonarroti date from
before 1534 when Michelangelo transferred permanently
from Florence to Rome, and it is a reasonable assumption
that the predominant source was material abandoned or
overlooked in Michelangelo’s various workshops when
he left Florence for good. The family’s archive of let-
ters, contracts, and ricordi, together with drawings by
Michelangelo of no immediate aesthetic interest, such as
his sketches of blocks of marble ordered for the façade of
San Lorenzo and other projects, remained largely intact.
This was material that would never have passed out of
the family’s possession, and it is likely that this mass of
paper – it is one of the largest surviving archives of a
non-princely family – was accompanied by many sheets
of drawings. Among them would also have been draw-
ings by his students, occasional drawings by other artists
acquired by Michelangelo for one reason or another, and
strictly utilitarian drawings – such as ground plans – by
others that Michelangelo required for some purpose.
The Archivio Buonarroti contains letters both to and
from Michelangelo throughout his life, and it is evident
that, on the master’s death in 1564, part of his archive
that must have been housed in Rome – although it is not
recorded in Michelangelo’s posthumous inventory – was
returned to Florence by his nephew. This body of paper
too is likely to have contained numerous drawings made
on the same pages as poems or accounts. And there are
and were a sufﬁcient number of drawings in Casa Buonar-
roti made by Michelangelo after 1534 to make it clear
that the family also took possession of drawings made
by Michelangelo in Rome during the last thirty years
of his life. Some of these, one presumes, were recov-
ered from his Roman house after his death. It is other-
wise difﬁcult to explain why, for example, drawings made
for Saint Peter’s found their way to Casa Buonarroti in
Florence.
When Michelangelo died, his nephew Leonardo was
placed in a difﬁcult position. Throughout the last quar-
ter century of his life, Michelangelo, paying lip-service
to Cosimo’s regime, but at heart unreconciled with it,
trod a precarious line. He had a profound sense of family
and, with immensely valuable properties in the Floren-
tine hinterland, could not risk their being sequestered,
inevitable had he opposed Cosimo’s regime openly and
been declared a rebel. But he wished to distance himself
from the regime as far as possible and evaded all its more
pressing overtures. He never, for example, offered Cosimo
I a ﬁnished drawing of the type that he made for so many
of his friends, and indeed, in 1561, presumably realising
he would never get anything directly from Michelangelo,
Cosimo had to exert great pressure on Tommaso dei Cav-
alieri to extract from him one of these trophies. Tommaso
gave Cosimo the Cleopatra, made for him by Michelan-
gelo nearly thirty years earlier. Furthermore, Michelan-
gelo’s action in destroying, at the very end of his life,
many drawings (including ones made for various Flo-
rentine architectural projects) that Cosimo might legiti-
mately have considered should be made over to him, since

18
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
they concerned Medici projects, was an act of deﬁance
that angered Cosimo – rarely given to open admission of
emotion – sufﬁciently for him to say so in a letter to his
representative in Rome.106
Leonardo Buonarroti had to ﬁnd ways of placating the
ruler, evidence of whose irrational behaviour and mental
decline was becoming apparent. He presented to Cosimo
ﬁve statues that had been left in Michelangelo’s Floren-
tine workshop and that Cosimo had wished to purchase as
early as 1544: The Victory, nearly ﬁnished, which Cosimo
placed in the Salone of Palazzo Vecchio, and the rela-
tively unﬁnished four large prigioni, which, at Cosimo’s
command, were installed by Bernardo Buontalenti in the
grotto he constructed in the gardens of Palazzo Pitti. All
these ﬁgures, of course, had been made for the tomb
of Julius II and had no connection with the Medici. In
addition, Leonardo made an effort to ﬁnd further ﬁn-
ished drawings for Cosimo: He recovered – no doubt
with pressure – from Michelangelo’s pupil Jacomo del
Duca, to whom the master had presumably given them,
Michelangelo’s cartonetti of the Annunciation and the Agony
in the Garden, which Marcello Venusti had executed as
paintings but which he did not himself own. Leonardo
gave them to Cosimo, who seems to have put them on
display, no doubt framed and glazed. Both are now in
the Ufﬁzi, sadly damaged by over-exposure.107 Also in
1564, died the earliest recipient of Michelangelo’s Pre-
sentation Drawings, Gherardo Perini. He had owned at
least three ﬁnished drawings by the master, and these too
were acquired by Cosimo, also to be displayed and, con-
sequently, degraded.108 Ironically, these drawings, all of
which have a continuous provenance and the best possi-
ble claims to authenticity, were doubted in the twentieth
century by adherents of “scientiﬁc” criticism.
It
seems
likely,
under
such
circumstances,
that
Leonardo would not have risked retaining Presentation
Drawings by Michelangelo, but sketches, perhaps even
quite developed sketches, were another matter, and, as
far as is known, Cosimo evinced no interest in these. It
cannot be ruled out that such drawings, or some of them,
were presented to Cosimo and subsequently returned
to Casa Buonarroti by his grandson, but, on balance,
it seems more likely that they remained in Leonardo’s
house: Whether he attempted to supplement them is
unknown. Leonardo died in 1593, and Casa Buonar-
roti was then taken over by his son, Michelangelo the
Younger, Michelangelo’s great nephew and namesake.
Michelangelo the Younger was the man most responsible
for turning Casa Buonarroti into a museum and shrine
of his ancestor. He commissioned a series of paintings on
the biography of Michelangelo from some of the leading
contemporary Florentine painters and installed them in a
gallery. Michelangelo the Younger was a signiﬁcant poet
and litterateur, and he was also concerned to vaunt the
literary achievements of his ancestor, of whose poems he
published the ﬁrst edition in 1623.
Probably in connection with the planning of this edi-
tion, Michelangelo the Younger acquired either directly
from the architect Bernardo Buontalenti (1536–1608),
perhaps Michelangelo’s most intelligent and inventive
interpreter in architecture and decoration in the later six-
teenth century, or from Buontalenti’s heirs, an unknown
number of sheets of drawings by Michelangelo including
ﬁve that also contained poems, which he described with
sufﬁcient clarity to be identiﬁable.109 How and where
Buontalenti had obtained these sheets is unknown, but
at least one had belonged to the Irregular Numbering
Collector (to be discussed later), and it is likely that some
of the scrappier sketches had simply strayed in one man-
ner or another from Michelangelo’s studio and had been
acquired by Buontalenti piecemeal.
It is also worth noting that drawings arrived in Casa
Buonarroti from other sources. At least three drawings
seem to have come from the Irregular Numbering series
and another, smaller, group is also identiﬁable by the
roman numerals in red chalk to be found on some
sheets – mostly but not entirely containing architectural
drawings – most of which are still in Casa Buonarroti
but of which at least one – with a provenance from
Bernardo Buontalenti and Casa Buonarroti – is now in
the Ashmolean (Cat. 56). Because these roman numer-
als are found on drawings made by Michelangelo at very
different periods, it is probable that they were applied
only after his death in 1564. They were presumably due
neither to Buontalenti nor to a member of the Buonar-
roti family because they were not applied uniformly to
other drawings known to have been owned by Buontal-
enti or the Buonarroti. Perhaps they represent a group of
drawings, initially in possession of another owner, who
might be dubbed the Roman Numeral Collector, that
entered the collection of Bernardo Buontalenti and/or
Casa Buonarroti during the lifetime of Michelangelo the
Younger. If that is so, then all sheets so numbered must
have been acquired from the Roman Numeral Collec-
tor by Buontalenti and/or the Buonarroti, since none are
known for which any other provenance can be demon-
strated. The fact that the numbers are now discontinuous
may indicate no more than that other sheets have been
trimmed.
In addition to his efforts to put Michelangelo’s lit-
erary reputation on a ﬁrm footing, Michelangelo the
Younger was concerned to expand the family collection

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
19
of Michelangelo’s works. No doubt he also acquired
from Buontalenti drawings that contained no writing.
And it is tempting to suggest that it was Michelangelo
the Younger who was responsible for making a division
between pieces of paper whose primary interest was his-
torical, records of the most famous member of the family
and of Michelangelo’s transactions, and those whose pri-
mary interest was artistic. In a few cases, pages on which
the two kinds of interest were separable were divided,
and the drawings collections of Casa Buonarroti and the
Archivio Buonarroti proper contain several part-pages
that match each other.110 Although this division is not
certainly attributable to him, Michelangelo the Younger
would certainly have had the interest, acumen, and intel-
lectual conﬁdence to undertake such surgery.
Contributions came from other sources. In 1616-17
and perhaps again in the early 1620s, the current Duke of
Tuscany, Cosimo II, returned to Casa Buonarroti some
works by Michelangelo, including the low relief of the
Madonna of the Stairs, which had been given to Cosimo I
by Leonardo Buonarroti,111 and the Presentation Drawing
of Cleopatra, which Cosimo I had extorted from Cav-
alieri. The donation of the Cleopatra is signiﬁcant, for
this drawing was, of course, a gift to Tommaso Cava-
lieri, and had never been in Buonarroti possession. This
may be relevant to the fact that Woodburn both in 1836
and 1860 recorded two other very highly ﬁnished Presen-
tation Drawings by Michelangelo as coming from Casa
Buonarroti: the Dream of Human Life of c. 1530 and the
Madonna del Silenzio of c. 1540. Both were certainly given
by Michelangelo to friends and would not have remained
in his family. If Woodburn’s statement is correct, it must
be presumed that they were at some date either donated
to Casa Buonarroti by the heirs of the original recipients
or purchased in order to build up the museum conse-
crated to the Buonarrotis’ great ancestor. It is hard to
divine how systematically he bought, but it was, after all,
Michelangelo the Younger who acquired in Rome Con-
divi’s large panel of the Epifania, painted from Michelan-
gelo’s cartoon, under the mistaken impression that it was
by Michelangelo himself, and he considered purchasing,
though in the event did not do so, the unﬁnished ﬁrst
version of the Minerva Risen Christ, offered for sale in
Rome in 1607.112
The fact that some of the drawings in Casa Buonar-
roti’s collection were not inherited but were acquired by
purchase, as they appeared on the market, or as gifts from
artists or collectors persuaded that the rightful home for
their treasures was Michelangelo’s family house and shrine
means that one cannot be sure that all Michelangelo draw-
ings with a Casa Buonarroti provenance had come to the
Casa directly from Michelangelo himself. It is possible, for
example, that even great and entirely authentic drawings
acquired from the Casa may not always have been there.113
It also raises a more delicate issue. It would be a fair pre-
sumption that the great majority of drawings abandoned
by Michelangelo in Florence in 1534, or recovered from
his Roman house in 1564, were authentic, although even
this group is likely to have included some drawings by
pupils and associates. This would be much less sure in the
case of drawings acquired for Casa Buonarroti forty or
ﬁfty years after his death. Thus, the possibility is opened
that some of the drawings acquired later might have been
misattributed.
In the absence of written record, it is difﬁcult to be
sure how many drawings by Michelangelo were in Casa
Buonarroti and what they comprised, quite apart from
how and when they arrived there. However, two late
sixteenth- or early seventeenth-century visual sources
have not been fully exploited. These comprise two
series of copies after Michelangelo drawings; they are
complementary: one focuses on architectural drawings;
the other, on ﬁgure drawings. The ﬁrst, brought to schol-
arly attention by Sebregondi Fiorentini in 1986 and Mor-
rogh in 1992, is the more straightforward.114 Leonardo
Buonarroti’s youngest son, Francesco (1574–1630) was,
among his other activities, a competent amateur archi-
tect, who made a speciality of designing decorative forms
such as doors, tabernacles, and funeral plaques. Resident
for much of his life in Malta, he periodically returned
to Florence, where his architectural activity took place,
mainly, it seems, in the years 1600–1615. He left a sizable
body of graphic work, now in the Ufﬁzi, among which
are ten sheets of generally sketchy copies after surviving
architectural drawings by Michelangelo that, in all except
one case, noted later, are either in, or have direct prove-
nance from, Casa Buonarroti. This group also includes
some sketches for which no Michelangelesque source is
known, but which can reasonably be assumed to be after
drawings by Michelangelo now lost.115 It is an assumption,
but an assumption verging on certainty, that all the draw-
ings copied by Francesco were in Buonarroti possession
when he copied them.116
For ﬁgurative drawings, the situation is less clear-cut.
The evidence consists of a number of copies of drawings
by Michelangelo by the Florentine artist Andrea Com-
modi (1560–1638).117 Commodi’s copies divide, broadly,
into two groups. Some of them are more or less exact
replicas of known originals by Michelangelo, generally,
but not always, in the same medium. Commodi had a
considerable reputation as a copyist of paintings, and it is
evident that when he wished to reproduce accurately a

20
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
drawing by Michelangelo, he could do so. Most of those
he chose to copy precisely are relatively broad sketches of
ﬁgures or studies of details such as hands and legs. But in
addition to these, Commodi also made, in a sketchbook
with a page size of approximately 290 × 215 mm, a series
of quick and rough sketch copies, witty, vigorous, and
generally in media different from those of the originals,
after individual drawings.118 He frequently juxtaposed on
the same pages copies of drawings from different sheets
or different sides of the same sheets and included several
copies of drawings made not by Michelangelo himself but
by his students, notably Antonio Mini. The impression
these copies convey is of a deep, but self-conﬁdent inter-
est in Michelangelo, of a wish to acquire motifs, not to
absorb a ﬁgure style. The sketchbook has been disassem-
bled and its components survive as half-pages, individ-
ual pages, or as “double spreads” (approximately 290 ×
430 mm), which, in every case, were used as two pages, a
further indication that they were once bound. From the
layout of these sheets and the rough and ready nature of
the drawings upon them, it is a reasonable assumption
that the originals upon which Commodi focused were
together when he copied them. These sketches do not
give the impression of being made at different times and
in different places.
Andrea Commodi was a friend of Michelangelo the
Younger, and although he did not contribute to the series
of paintings devoted to Michelangelo’s biography installed
in the famous Galleria constructed in Casa Buonarroti, he
did present to his friend his Self-Portrait. It would seem
that Commodi had access to Casa Buonarroti and that he
copied the drawings there. Support for this conclusion is
provided by the fact that he also knew three models by
Michelangelo, all in Casa Buonarroti, including the clay
group of a Mature Man Overcoming a Young One, often
mistakenly connected with Michelangelo’s project for a
Hercules group to accompany his David in the Piazza della
Signoria but, in fact, made in preparation for a counter-
part to the marble Victory on the front of the Julius Tomb.
Commodi copied this model from different angles, in
three large and impressive drawings, and must have had
access to it for at least an hour.119 Still more signiﬁcant evi-
dence for Commodi’s access to the Buonarroti property
is that he also made a copy of the large charcoal drawing
of a Triton, of controversial attribution, preserved in the
Buonarroti house in Settignano: This suggests that he was
a family intimate, for the drawing remained on the wall
on which it was made until 1979.120
It is conjectural when Commodi’s copies were made.
His closest acquaintance with Michelangelo the Younger
seems to have come after 1600, but one cannot be sure
that they were not friends earlier. In any case, Com-
modi certainly knew Ludovico Buonarroti, Michelan-
gelo the Younger’s brother, who died in 1600; his series
of drawings in the Ufﬁzi includes the drafts of three let-
ters to Ludovico.121 This suggests an alternative avenue
of access to the Casa Buonarroti drawings, and it would
coincide with the opinion of the only scholar to discuss
these copies at length – and with that of the compiler –
that they date from the ﬁrst part of Commodi’s career,
before 1592.122 Commodi’s copies are the earliest records
of nearly sixty surviving sheets of drawings by Michelan-
gelo and his pupils and no doubt of several others who
cannot now be traced. There is, however, a caveat. It can-
not ﬁnally be proved that all the originals copied accu-
rately by Commodi – or even all the originals copied in
his “sketchbook” – were in Casa Buonarroti when the
copies were made.123 None of the drawings copied by
Commodi was also copied by Francesco Buonarroti, so
the two series do not corroborate each other. And because
Commodi’s drawing after the Settignano Triton is not part
of the sketchbook and is rather different from all his other
copies after Michelangelo, it cannot be used to certify
absolutely Buonarroti possession of the drawings. But
because most of the surviving drawings that Commodi
copied either remained in or have a clearly established
provenance from Casa Buonarroti, the presumption must
be that they were together there when Commodi copied
them. There are a few exceptions, but most present no
serious difﬁculties. Thus, Commodi copied twice a study
for the Last Judgement, now in the British Museum, which
was acquired in Italy in the 1820s by the Reverend Robert
Sandford from the Florentine sculptor Aristodemo Cos-
toli (1803–71), who would then have been quite a young
man.124 Costoli may have acquired it from – or acted as
an intermediary for – Fedi or Wicar, or another of the
Buonarroti heirs, for it is unlikely that the disposals of
the late eighteenth century and of 1859 were the only
ones. Sandford’s drawing, therefore, is not a major obsta-
cle. Similarly, Commodi seems to have known a drawing
now in Besanc¸on (D3117/Corpus 319), which, while not
by Michelangelo himself, must be an exact facsimile of a
lost drawing. The Besanc¸on sheet – or its original – might
well have been in Buonarroti possession in the 1580s, and
because it has no known provenance prior to its appear-
ance in Jean Gigoux’s bequest of 1894 to the Museum of
his home town, it too – or its original – could well have
been part of the dispersals of the 1790s.
The obstacles that stand in the way of our accepting that
Commodi’s copies record only drawings in Buonarroti
possession are three. The ﬁrst is that he made copies after
six sheets of rather scrappy drawings by Michelangelo that

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
21
are now in the Ufﬁzi. These cannot be shown to have a
Buonarroti provenance and might already have been in
Grand Ducal possession when Commodi copied them.125
But if Commodi had access to the Grand Ducal Collec-
tion, then it is strange that he should have chosen only
these slight sketches and ignored the famous Ideal Heads,
which were certainly in Medici possession by this time.
Another possibility is that they could have been part of a
different collection to which Commodi had access – per-
haps that of an artist friend – and only subsequently found
their way to the Ufﬁzi. However, in the compiler’s opin-
ion, the most likely explanation is that these six sheets of
drawings too were in Buonarroti possession when Com-
modi copied them, but that they were part of a batch that
at some point left the collection: They may, for example,
have been gifts to friends of the Buonarroti family, and
thence have entered the Ufﬁzi. Whatever the answer, it
is worth noting that the Ufﬁzi sheets after which Com-
modi’s copies were made were ones that did not retain
their identity and were restored to Michelangelo only
around 1900 by Ferri and Jacobsen.
Two other observations are relevant to this issue. On
one of the pages of his sketchbook, Commodi made a
slight copy of a mouth and a little dragon, which could
have come only from a drawing by Michelangelo now in
Hamburg. This drawing bears the stamp of Sir Peter Lely
and, therefore, if it was in Casa Buonarroti when Com-
modi copied it, it must have left there before Lely’s death
in 1680. But if it was in another collection, it too would
undermine the locational homogeneity of the sketchbook
copies. Second, on Ufﬁzi 18632F, Commodi copied, in
red chalk, Michelangelo’s black chalk sketch for the head
of the ignudo left above Isaiah on the Sistine ceiling, a
drawing now in the Louvre, which entered French Royal
possession with Jabach’s collection in 1671.126 Commodi’s
copy is approximately the same size as the original and is
careful in its handling. It does seem – although it is impos-
sible to be certain – to have been made directly from the
original and not from an intermediate copy. But because
Commodi’s copy was not part of his sketchbook, even
could it be proved that the original was in a collection
other than that of the Buonarroti, it would not, unlike
the copy of the ex-Lely drawing or the Ufﬁzi sketches,
affect our estimate of the source of the remainder of the
sketchbook copies. However, if the assumption that the
sheets now in the Ufﬁzi, Hamburg, and the Louvre were
all in Casa Buonarroti when Commodi copied them is
correct, it would open a different avenue of investigation,
for it would argue that they left Casa Buonarroti at some
time between, at the outside, c. 1590 and c. 1670, more
probably between 1620 and 1670, and that at least some
disposals were made during the seventeenth century from
the family collection.
In fact, it is not an unreasonable assumption that a few
drawings were exchanged for others or given to friends
or as diplomatic presents; others could have been sold,
or even stolen. There is, indeed, one certain instance
of a sheet of drawings that was in Buonarroti posses-
sion in the early 1620s subsequently passing out of it.
This double-sided sheet, which also bears a burlesque
poem, was referred to by Michelangelo the Younger,
who printed the poem, as having been acquired for Casa
Buonarroti from Buontalenti. By the 1750s, this sheet was
owned by the Baron Philipp von Stosch, a great collector
of, primarily, engraved gems, in whose collection it was
catalogued in 1758 by Winckelmann, a year after Stosch’s
death. It is now in the Louvre, RF.4112/J17/Corpus 25,
donated in1912 by L´eon Bonnat. Even though the pos-
sibility of theft cannot be ruled out, it seems more likely
that it was sold or gifted by a Buonarroti descendent, and
if this is so, it is unlikely to be an isolated case. Indeed,
some of the other drawings by or attributed to Michelan-
gelo described by Winckelmann in the Stosch Collection
were clearly working studies with “conti di cassa” on
their versos, which again strongly suggests – although does
not prove – a provenance from Casa Buonarroti. Further
support for the hypothesis of leakage from Casa Buonar-
roti is provided by the single-copy drawing by Francesco
Buonarroti (5406A [c]), which does not depend on a
known sheet by Michelangelo either still in, or with direct
recorded provenance from, Casa Buonarroti. This is his
copy after one of the sketches on the verso, preparing the
modello of a monumental altar on the recto, on a sheet
from the collection of Filippo Baldinucci bequeathed by
General John Guise to Christ Church in 1765. The obvi-
ous inference is that this sheet too left Casa Buonarroti
at some time between the date of Francesco’s sketch and
Guise’s acquisition; it was probably given by a member of
the Buonarroti family to Baldinucci.127
Commodi’s series of copies seems to be unique.
Although it might seem reasonable to suppose that access
to Casa Buonarroti was granted to artists and students
who wished to study the drawings, no groups of copies by
Florentine artists of the seventeenth or eighteenth century
have so far been identiﬁed. Rubens made a pair of copies
of the Battle of the Centaurs, probably during his sojourn
in Florence in late 1600, and as these show the relief lit
from opposite directions, he was presumably permitted to
manouevre an oil lamp before it.128 But Rubens was an
artist with the highest and most powerful social connec-
tions, an accomplished diplomat, and an extraordinarily
forceful and resourceful personality, and no copies even

22
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
by Rubens after Michelangelo drawings in Casa Buonar-
roti are known.129 And where Rubens might have gone,
not all could follow. The next recorded copy of the Cen-
taurs, by David’s pupil Jean-Germain Drouais, was made
in 1786.130
If Michelangelo’s relief of the Battle of the Centaurs,
which must always have been on display in the house,
was not well known, then access to the drawings may
not have been easy – although a black chalk drawing
on seventeenth-century paper by an unidentiﬁed artist in
the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh (RSA970),
made after Michelangelo’s anatomical pen sketch still
in Casa Buonarroti (CB11F/B73/Corpus 209; 172 ×
196 mm), demonstrates that they were not entirely con-
cealed from view. It must also be borne in mind that
Michelangelo was not generally a reference-point for
artists for most of the seventeenth and eighteenth cen-
turies, and that there may not have been much demand
for access to his drawings. What there was may have come
more from tourists and connoisseurs than artists: Edward
Wright was shown them in the 1720s, but others may have
been less fortunate. Pierre-Jean Mariette, in his letter to
Gori reproduced in the latter’s 1746 edition of Condivi’s
life of Michelangelo, remarked:
Je ne doute point que vous ne fassiez tout ce que depend de
vous pour avoir communication des Desseins que Monsieur
le Senateur Buonarroti avoit recueilli. Il y en avoit, `a ce qu’on
assure, de fort singuliers, et je crois avoir ouy dire a M. le
Senateur Buonarroti lui-mˆeme, qu’il avoit recueilli quelques
lettres et autres ´ecrits de son habile Ancˆetre. L’histoire de
toutes ces curiosit´es doit necessairement avoir sa place dans
vˆotre ouvrage.131
It would seem that Mariette had heard about the drawings
rather than seen them. Gori himself did see them. In his
introduction, he remarked that
Nella Galleria e Casa propria del medesimo Michelagnolo
Buonarroti si conservano due grossi Volume di Disegni, par
la maggior parte di Architettura, di Chiese, di Porte, di
Palazzi, di Scale, e di vari studi di Anatomia, e di altre opere,
da me con sommo piacere pi`u e pi`u volte veduti, ora posse-
duti dal Sig. Leonardo Buonarroti, ﬁgliuolo del dottissimo
e mio ottimo maestro Signor Filippo.132
It is notable that the drawings that Gori particularly
remembered, or was particularly impressed by, were those
of architecture. For it is in drawings of this class, and par-
ticularly of ﬁnished type, that Casa Buonarroti remains
supremely rich, and few of these seem to have left the
collection. This is another irony; it was ﬁnished archi-
tectural drawings that twentieth-century scholarship was
most reluctant to accept into Michelangelo’s graphic
oeuvre.
Casa Buonarroti certainly housed other drawings by
Michelangelo not placed in albums, his large modello for
the fac¸ade of San Lorenzo among them.133 Gori stated
further that he planned to produce a catalogue of all
Michelangelo’s authentic works, including the drawings,
but nothing seems to have come of the project. However,
reading between the lines, it appears that Casa Buonar-
roti’s collections were not perceived as being entirely
stable: Mariette, for example, had further enquired of
Gori:
Le fameux bas relief du combat de centaures, est il toujours
dans la maison de Messieurs Buonarroti, c’est de quoy je vous
exhorte de vous informer, et d’en donner une description
plus exacte que celles qui se trouve dans les auteurs qui ont
ecrit sa vie. C’est le premier morceau de reputation qu’il
ait fait et par consequent celuy qui merite davantage qu’on
conserve la memoire.134
This sounds as though he might have been aware of pos-
sible dispersals.
However, nothing substantial seems to have left Casa
Buonarroti at that time. In 1760 Bottari noted that housed
there were “due grossi tomi ben legati” of drawings by
Michelangelo, although whether he himself knew them
or was merely quoting Gori is uncertain.135 Interestingly,
in the edition of Vasari published in 1770–2, the editor,
Tommaso Gentili, as well as repeating this information –
“Il Senator Filippo Buonarroti lasci`o due grandi tomi ben
legati, avuti da’ suoi antenati, ma per lo pi`u erano studi
e pensieri indigesti” – added, apparently from his own
knowledge, “Lo stesso aveva due gran cartoni ridotti in
due quadri, che rappresentano due ﬁgure nude, credi per
eseguire nella volta della Sistina, ed erano pi`u grandi del
naturale,” but nothing further seems to be recorded about
these. Again, there is no evidence of losses on a serious
scale until the dispersals by Filippo Buonarroti of the late
1780s or early 1790s. But the circumstances of Filippo’s
disposals remain obscure, and no detailed account of what
happened has been published.
In an inventory of the collection of Casa Buonarroti
made after the death of Leonardo Buonarroti, in 1799,
it was noted of the two large albums of drawings by
Michelangelo, which had been recorded in an inven-
tory of c. 1684136 and had been mentioned in several
eighteenth-century accounts, that many pages of one
of them were missing. It is presumed that these were
removed by Filippo Buonarroti who, in disposing of
drawings from Casa Buonarroti, would seem to have been
in violation of the entail imposed upon the collections

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
23
and, on the face of it, to have been a thief. Whether Fil-
ippo raided the family collection surreptitiously or with
the connivance of his father – but that would be difﬁcult
to explain – it may be that he felt he was doing no more
than realising his legitimate inheritance. It seems unlikely,
given Filippo’s life-long history of lofty idealism and com-
mitment to the ideals of the French Revolution, that his
action was merely mercenary: Perhaps the sale was to help
ﬁnance revolutionary causes; it may have been encour-
aged by friendship for Wicar and shared political ideals.
How many drawings or mountings of drawings by
Michelangelo Filippo Buonarroti abstracted is unknown,
and it is impossible to be precise about the dispersals. As
noted previously, a very rough guess would be that some
seventy-ﬁve mountings of drawings left Casa Buonarroti,
comprising something over one hundred sheets of draw-
ings, with Wicar being the main, if not necessarily the
sole, beneﬁciary. As also remarked previously, it is impos-
sible to say whether Filippo sold the drawings in a single
batch or released them gradually over the years, as he
required funds. Given what can be inferred of the pattern
of Wicar’s collecting, the latter seems more likely, but fur-
ther information would be necessary to establish whether
or not this is so.
Some reparation was made by Filippo’s son, the Cav-
aliere Cosimo Buonarroti, who died in 1858. Reacting
strongly against his father’s politics, he inherited some-
thing of his public conscience, combined with strong loy-
alty to Florence. Lacking direct heirs, he bequeathed Casa
Buonarroti and its collections to a foundation controlled
by the City of Florence. Nevertheless, admirable and gen-
erous though his bequest was, his devotion to scholarship
left something to be desired, given that he was in the
habit of cutting up minor drawings – artistically speak-
ing – by Michelangelo, his order pages for marble blocks,
and giving the pieces to friends or even acquaintances.
One such example, which he presented to “Sig. Segret.
Gonnelli in segno di sincero riconoscenza” in 1827, is
in the Mus´ee Bonnat, Bayonne; another, which sold at
Christie’s, London, 1 July 1986, lot 40, was accompanied
by a note “L’Aul: Cosimo Buonarroti offriva/l’accluso
saggio del carattere del/suo illustro Antenato Michelan-
gelo/al Sig:r Dr: Bowring in segno di partiolare stima il di
3 9bre 1836”; and two similar fragments recently entered
the British Museum (Turner, 1999, nos. 353, 354). Cosimo
also gave away some Ricordi by Michelangelo.
Shortly after Cosimo’s death, his cousin, the Cavaliere
Michelangelo Buonarroti, removed some drawings and
manuscripts, claiming that they were his personal prop-
erty and had only been placed in Casa Buonarroti on
loan.137 He was the source of the second great dispersal
from the Casa Buonarroti, that of 1859; from this, the
British Museum was the beneﬁciary, acquiring thirty-six
sheets of drawings and a number of manuscripts. The
circumstances of this sale are not fully clear, but even
though there is no documentary evidence to prove that
these drawings had always been in Casa Buonarroti – they
were ﬁrst seen by Eastlake in 1858 in the Villa Buonar-
roti in Settignano – some of the sheets are en-suite with
those in Casa Buonarotti, and it can be taken as certain
that the drawings came from this source. Happily, a num-
ber of drawings and manuscripts were later returned by
the Cavaliere Michelangelo to the Casa. Nevertheless,
the depredations had been great. An indication of the
original strength of the collection is that at least ﬁfty-six
of the British Museum’s Michelangelo drawings, and at
least thirty-eight of those in the Ashmolean, were in Casa
Buonarroti until c. 1790.
v. other collections
Although Casa Buonarroti contained by far the largest
collection of Michelangelo’s drawings, it was not alone.
Michelangelo himself at some date gave one of the car-
toons for the Sistine ceiling to his friend, the Florentine
banker Bindo Altoviti. And it seems inevitable that if he
gave away cartoons, he would have given drawings also. As
late as 1560, he sent to Leone Leone, in gratitude for the
portrait medal of him that Leone had made, a wax model
of the Hercules and Antaeus that he had hoped to carve in
1524 – thus he had retained the model for thirty-ﬁve
years and had presumably transported it from Florence
to Rome – plus a number of drawings. A sheet in the
Albertina (BK4868/Corpus 408) carries an inscription
indicating that the sculptor had given it to the inscriber,
perhaps his pupil Jacomo del Duca, in 1560. And although
we have no certain knowledge of Michelangelo making
drawings speciﬁcally as gifts before the 1520s, when he is
recorded as giving highly ﬁnished drawings to his young
friend Gherardo Perini, there is no reason to suppose that
he had not done so. Indeed, the highly ﬁnished nature of
some of Michelangelo’s early copies after Masaccio sug-
gests that they too were Presentation Drawings and were
not done only as exercises – and none has an ascertainable
provenance from Casa Buonarroti. He continued to make
drawings as gifts in the 1530s, and 1540s, most notably to
Tommaso de’ Cavalieri and Vittoria Colonna, but other
friends were no doubt occasional recipients.138 However,
gifts of this type were probably less common than more
practical ones – drawings given to other artists to assist
them with compositions – such as Sebastiano del Piombo

24
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
and Pontormo. And Vasari tells us that Michelangelo’s
humbler artistic friends sometimes requested designs that
the master – always an enemy of pretension – cheerfully
fulﬁlled.139
The result of this generosity on Michelangelo’s part –
and there must have been many other cases of which we
have no record – is that there was some knowledge of
Michelangelo’s drawings fairly early on. Raphael copied
a pen drawing c. 1506, and the inﬂuence of Michelangelo’s
technique on Raphael’s drawings suggests that this was not
the only one that he knew.140 It seems certain too that
some of Michelangelo’s drawings were known to Andrea
del Sarto.141 Michelangelo’s pupils and assistants, although
most are shadowy ﬁgures, must have known, and proba-
bly possessed, groups of his drawings. Michelangelo was
a ﬂuent and impatient draughtsman, and it is inevitable
that, though some drawings would have been retained
carefully – he asked his father in 1506 to send to Rome
a bundle of drawings – odd sheets and fragments would
have strayed from his studio. Titian, by 1520, certainly
knew a Michelangelo design for a Slave, which survives
in drawings, and reproduced it in his Saint Sebastian for
the Averoldi Polyptych, under way in that year.142 The
sculptor Bartolommeo Bergamasco, active in Venice at
the same time, based his Saint Sebastian on the high altar of
San Rocco on a Michelangelo design – now known only
in a copy by Mini – for another slave.143 There was also
a theft. In 1530 the young Bartolommeo Ammanati and
his friend Nanni di Baccio Bigio broke into Michelan-
gelo’s studio in the via Mozza and took from it a number
of the master’s drawings and models, which, evidently,
were not all retained in one place. They were compelled
to return the drawings, but it is highly unlikely that they
did so before making copies of them. Nevertheless, by
this time, if not earlier, Michelangelo had become very
secretive, at least with powerful and exigent patrons, and
in 1527 it was remarked by a rare visitor to his studio that
Michelangelo “non mostra cosa alcuna ad alcuno.”
Michelangelo, as is well known, burned large quanti-
ties of his drawings at different times. One such episode
is documented as early as 1517 when he commanded his
friend Leonardo Sellaio to destroy a number of the car-
toons in his Roman workshop. Sellaio expressed reluc-
tance but told Michelangelo that it had been done. How-
ever, human nature being what it is, it seems unlikely that
he would not have succumbed to temptation and kept at
least a few of the more beautiful sheets for himself. In
any case, Michelangelo’s destructions were not total. And
although he may well have burned drawings before leav-
ing Florence ﬁnally in 1534, he undoubtedly took others
with him to Rome. Michelangelo sometimes re-used old
sheets, on occasion after as much as thirty years, which,
of course, is irrefutable proof that he preserved them.
Michelangelo also destroyed much of his Roman
graphic production shortly before he died, but a num-
ber of drawings survived. The few known studies for the
Last Judgement probably left his studio in chance ways, a
few architectural drawings, particularly of the late Roman
buildings, may have been spared from the ﬂames inten-
tionally, and the late Cruciﬁxion drawings were so inti-
mately bound with Michelangelo’s search for salvation
that they too were preserved. Because virtually all of the
architectural studies and some of the Cruciﬁxion drawings
went to Casa Buonarroti, it is likely that they were found
in his studio after his death. Although the posthumous
inventory was fairly full, not every scrap of paper was
recorded, and Michelangelo’s nephew Leonardo would
have retrieved such drawings with Michelangelo’s other
possessions. It is, of course, possible that some drawings
were liberated by others immediately after Michelangelo’s
death and only later entered Casa Buonarroti, and some of
those, such as the Cruciﬁxion drawings at Windsor, which
seem never to have been in Casa Buonarroti, may have
been given to friends and associates – or stolen – while
Michelangelo was still alive.
As we know, Michelangelo made presents of highly ﬁn-
ished drawings to his friends in both Florence and Rome,
and some of these were eagerly copied. We learn from a
letter from Tommaso de’ Cavalieri to Michelangelo of
September 1533, only a few months after Cavalieri had
received the three Presentation Drawings from Michelan-
gelo, that Cardinal Ippolito de’ Medici had borrowed one
to have a crystal engraved from it and wanted to do the
same with the others. It seems clear, therefore, that in
both cities Michelangelo’s Presentation Drawings were
eagerly copied, in some cases within weeks or months of
their reception. Francesco Salviati, for example, was com-
missioned by Cardinal Ippolito de’ Medici to produce
a now-lost coloured copy of the Fall of Phaeton, which
Michelangelo had given to Tommaso. Certain aspects of
Bronzino’s drawing style can probably be explained by
knowledge of Michelangelo’s highly ﬁnished drawings,
and some copies of the Presentation Drawings and other
ﬁnished drawings can safely be attributed to his pupil,
Alessandro Allori. Allori spent some ﬁve years in Rome
from 1555 to 1560, avidly copying Michelangelo’s works,
particularly the Last Judgement. He had personal contact
with the master, who was thanked for his kindness to the
young man in a letter of 12 February 1560 by Benedetto
Varchi.144 It is very likely that Alessandro had sight of
some of Michelangelo’s studies, for at least two of his
drawings, made shortly after his return to Florence, for

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
25
the Cleansing of the Temple in the Montauto Chapel in San-
tissima Annunziata, are hardly explicable without direct
knowledge of the black chalk style adopted by Michelan-
gelo in his preparatory drawings for the Last Judgement.145
Apart from Francesco Salviati, Giulio Clovio, and
Alessandro Allori, the identities of most copyists have
not yet positively been established. But in one case, a
copy at Windsor after the famous Presentation Drawing
the Archers, in the same collection, is inscribed on the
verso with the name of Bernardino Cesari, the younger
brother of the Cavaliere d’Arpino. From this it is evident
that copying continued at least until the beginning of the
sevententh century. But it is likely that the majority of
these copies, some of which are of extreme beauty and
precision and by artists of the highest level of compe-
tence, were made within Michelangelo’s lifetime. Nat-
urally, such copies, although not made with any intent
to deceive, were often believed by later collectors to be
originals and served to swell their possessions, including,
of course, those of Sir Thomas Lawrence.
At the artist’s death, the various recipients of his Pre-
sentation Drawings, most of whom outlived him, would
probably still have owned them. Most of the greatest
ended up in the Farnese Collection. The Farnese inher-
ited Giulio Clovio’s collection, which seems to have con-
tained several originals by Michelangelo, including some
Presentation Drawings whose initial recipients are not
known. After Tommaso de’ Cavalieri’s death in 1587, the
Farnese also acquired the famous drawings that Michelan-
gelo had given him. A record of the early seventeenth
century, perhaps by Sisto Badalocchio, is revealing:
Questo disegno [the Fall of Phaeton] `e in mano di Cardinal
Farnese che ha tutti i disegni di detto Messer Tommaso
compri per prezzo di scudi 500, e lo visto insieme col Sig.
Lodovico Cigoli [thus before 1613] pittore e architetto eccel-
lentissimo, e col Sig. Pietro Abati, e stupivamo a vedere la
diligenza usata da Michelagnolo nel ritratto di detto Messer
Tommaso fatto da matita nera, che pare di mano di un Angi-
olo, con quei begli occhi e bocca e naso, vestito all’antica, e
in mano tiene un ritratto, o medaglia che si sia, sbarbato, e
insomma da spaurire ogni gagliardo ingegno. Vedemmo anco
altri disegni come sopra.146
A further inﬂux into the Farnese Collection came with
the death in 1600 of their librarian, the erudite antiquary
Fulvio Orsini. He had acquired a number of Michelan-
gelo drawings: His posthumous inventory lists twenty,
including, perhaps, another autograph version of the Fall
of Phaeton, possibly that now in Venice; the cartoon frag-
ment for the Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter, now in Naples; and
the Epifania cartoon, now in the British Museum, which
had been retained at Michelangelo’s death in 1564 by the
notary charged with preparing the inventory, and which
must have passed in the interim to Orsini. It was the Far-
nese’s holdings that provided the most important single
source for the great run of Michelangelo’s drawings at
Windsor, the collection richest of all in his Presentation
Drawings. It is not known, however, how the drawings
passed from one collection to the other, and it is a matter
for speculation when this occurred. All that can be said
with some degree of security is that forty-one drawings
attributed to Michelangelo were recorded in a Farnese
inventory of 1641 together with forty-four by Raphael.147
The same inventory also grouped drawings by Michelan-
gelo and Raphael together, with a total of eighty-ﬁve:
This must represent a double count. In a later inventory
of 1653 and an undated one that must postdate 1662, the
drawings listed under Michelangelo’s name are reduced
to two, those given to Raphael are now twenty-one,
while the number listed under both their names totals
147. It is difﬁcult to understand these ﬁgures, but they
may register a re-organisation of the collection; they also
imply a substantial acquisition between 1641 and 1653.
Whatever the case, they do not suggest departures from
the collection and it does seem clear that the Farnese’s
holdings of drawings by Michelangelo remained more or
less intact until at least 1662.148 They, or most of them,
are next recorded in the British Royal Collection in the
reign of George III.149 It is generally assumed that they
were acquired in the 1760s or 1770s, when George III’s
agents were active in Italy, but they may have left the
Farnese Collection before then. A possible clue is pro-
vided by Michelangelo’s drawing of a Candelabrum in the
Cooper-Hewitt Museum in New York.150 This drawing –
seemingly not then recognised as by Michelangelo –
was probably acquired by Sir Andrew Fountaine in Italy
between 1714 and 1717, as part of a group of decorative
designs by Luzio Romano, who had also worked for the
Farnese. Because the Cooper-Hewitt drawing is the sin-
gle known study for a candelabrum by Michelangelo –
although, of course, he might have made others – it is
tempting to identify it with the second of the “Due di-
segni d’architettura di Michelangelo Bonarota, cio`e una
porta et un candeliere” recorded in a Farnese inventory
of 1626.151 If this identiﬁcation is correct, it would tend
to suggest that at least a portion of the Farnese Col-
lection came onto the market in the early eighteenth
century, and that at this time the Candelabrum became
separated from the rest of the Michelangelo sheets.
These might have come to Britain contemporaneously
or remained in Italy to be acquired later by George III’s
agents.

26
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
The drawings given to Gherardo Perini, as mentioned
earlier, joined the Florentine Grand Ducal Collections.
Some other Presentation Drawings, whose recipients are
not known, probably ended up either in aristocratic col-
lections or, by unknown paths, in Casa Buonarroti. Still
others were probably retained by the families of the indi-
viduals for whom they were made: Michelangelo’s great
portrait of his young friend Andrea Quaratesi (1512–85),
to whom he had given drawing lessons in the 1520s
(W59), was still in the possession of Andrea’s descendants
in the mid-seventeenth century.
Apart from these highly ﬁnished display pieces, other
drawings – lost, stolen, or strayed from Michelangelo’s
studio – and sketches given to artist friends would cer-
tainly have circulated.152 Individual sheets are difﬁcult to
trace in the absence of lucky evidential ﬁnds, but it does
seem that before the end of the sixteenth century there
existed several major caches of drawings by Michelangelo,
and a number of minor ones, which had never been in
Casa Buonarroti.153
Undoubtedly the most substantial cache was formed
in Michelangelo’s own lifetime, by gift. When his pupil
Antonio Mini (1506–33/34) decided to seek his fortune
in France in 1532, Michelangelo gave him his painting of
Leda and, according to Vasari, two boxes of models and
drawings. Mini died early, and even though some of the
cartoons that he had received from Michelangelo were
later returned to the master, and presumably later still
destroyed by him, there is no written record as to what
happened to the models or the drawings. But there is a
certain amount of visual evidence that suggests an answer.
Starting in the 1530s and continuing through until the
1570s, a number of drawings and paintings by Primatic-
cio and artists closely associated with him contain ﬁgures
copied from Michelangelo drawings. There can be no
doubt about this: The ﬁgures concerned are not found in
Michelangelo’s more public works. The borrowings are
often subtle and cunning, but once identiﬁed, they are
seen to be exact: In some cases the borrowed ﬁgures in
Primaticcio’s drawings are the same sizes as the ﬁgures in
the drawings by Michelangelo that they are copied from.
In every case except one, the originals of the drawings
referred to by Primaticcio have their starting provenance
in France, and in every case the original by Michelan-
gelo was drawn before 1531: It would seem difﬁcult to
deny that these drawings represent parts of Mini’s cache,
and it is probable that nearly all drawings by Michelan-
gelo datable before 1531 that have a starting provenance
in France (i.e., much of Jabach’s collection and that of
Crozat) came from Michelangelo’s gift to his pupil. At
least one has found its way to the Ashmolean Museum:
One of the ﬁgures on Cat. 18 recto was copied by Pri-
maticcio. And it is probable that Cat. 59, which contains,
among other copies, some after a drawing in the British
Museum (W4/Corpus 48) that was certainly in France,
was also made there. None of these drawings, of course,
was known to Commodi.
Because Primaticcio had such immediate access to
these originals, it is a reasonable presumption that he
owned them, probably acquiring them soon after Mini’s
death. It was the group of drawings putatively owned
by Primaticcio that probably provided the main source
of the great runs of Michelangelo’s drawings formed by
the fraternal collectors Isra¨el and Christophe Desneux
(and which largely passed to their nephew Franc¸ois de la
Nou¨e), who are said to have acquired their drawings from
the Fontainebleau workshops.154 It was from de la Nou¨e,
according to Mariette, that they were in turn acquired
by Jabach, probably not directly but after Franc¸ois de
la Nou¨e’s death in 1656, and perhaps in more than one
batch.155 Certainly, Jabach bought widely and from many
sources, but, with certain exceptions, it is likely that most
of his Michelangelo drawings were acquired in France.
One of these exceptions might have been the Michelan-
gelo drawings that had been owned by Sir Peter Paul
Rubens, whose collection was acquired en bloc at his
posthumous sale of 1657 by Canon Jan Philip Happart.
Happart seems to have sold drawings to Jabach in the
1660s, and some Michelangelos may have been among
them. However, Happart still owned twelve drawings
attributed to Michelangelo at his death in 1686, and if
these included the four bearing the initials of Rubens
that are now in the Albertina, then they were presum-
ably acquired in 1686 or later by a French collector, given
that their earliest certain provenance is Crozat.156 It is
not inconceivable that they too passed through Jabach’s
hands.
The four Michelangelo drawings with the initials of
Rubens are all of spectacular beauty. Three of these are
en-suite with drawings now in Haarlem, but they bear
neither the Bona Roti inscription nor Irregular Num-
bering (to be discussed later), and if they did belong to
that series, they must have been separated from it before
inscriptions or numbers were applied. On balance, how-
ever, it is more likely that the separation occurred within
Michelangelo’s lifetime. One of the drawings owned by
Rubens, Michelangelo’s pen study of a standing nude
from the rear (BK118/Corpus 22) was known in France
around 1570 when it was copied in La Natation one of
the drawings of the Suite d’Artemise, and it is marginally
more probable that Rubens purchased the four Michelan-
gelos – and perhaps others – in Paris in the 1620s than

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
27
that he acquired them during his Italian period. If this
deduction is correct, then these drawings too would have
been among the group brought to France by Mini. It
may be that Rubens acquired the ﬁrst fruits among the
Michelangelos in the Fontainebleau ateliers.
In 1671, part of Jabach’s ﬁrst collection was ceded –
at a price of 220,000 livres, not as disadvantageous as
Jabach himself claimed and later historians have gener-
ally accepted – to the French crown, and this forms
today the single most important source of the Louvre’s
holdings.157 But the 5,542 drawings included in this sale
did not constitute Jabach’s entire collection. This was
already stated, discreetly, by Mariette in his preface to the
1741 catalogue of the sale of Crozat’s collection: “Mon-
sieur Jabach . . . en vendant au roi ses tableaux et ses des-
seins, s’´etoit r´eserv´e une partie de desseins, et ce n’´etoient
pas certainement les moins beau.” What Mariette did
not say, however, although he hinted at it, is that the
precious sheets that Jabach retained for himself seem to
have been withheld from the crown in secret. And Jabach
was also cunning in his dealings. He certainly sold the
crown some drawings that he knew to be copies, keep-
ing the originals for himself. But on the credit side, it
might be adduced that although Jabach is often thought
to have mutilated some of his drawings, subdividing them
in order to isolate individual ﬁgures more effectively, it is
by no means certain that the fragmentary state of many
of the drawings that come from his collection is Jabach’s
own work. For example, a recently identiﬁed fragment
by Michelangelo, Inv. 8026/J15, once formed part of the
same sheet as Inv. 722/J14/Corpus 31. But whereas Inv.
722 retained its attribution to Michelangelo in Jabach’s
collection, Inv. 8026 seems never to have been connected
with the artist. Had Jabach himself divided the sheet, it is
unlikely that he would have failed to class the two draw-
ings under the same name and hardly credible that he
would have devalued Inv. 8026 by passing it to a less
prestigious one. It is more probable that the sheet was
divided before Jabach acquired it, and that he failed to
notice that the two fragments had once formed a single
whole.
Jabach’s ﬁrst collection was divided into two categories,
those that were fully mounted (what were called the
“dessins d’ordonnance” before recent research on his col-
lection showed that the term had been misused) and those
that were not, the so-called “rebut”. The versos of the
mounted drawings were inscribed in red chalk in a private
code of classiﬁcation, which referred to their dimensions
and their school. There are no such inscriptions on the
unmounted drawings. Nevertheless, all the drawings sold
by Jabach to the crown – that is all the drawings from
Jabach’s collection that are now in the Louvre – both
mounted and unmounted – bear the famous paraph in
ink (Lugt 2959). This is sometimes taken to be his collec-
tor’s mark, but it was in fact applied by Jabach personally
only to those drawings that he sold.
Following the sale of 1671, and when his fortunes had
been re-established, Jabach formed a second collection
of drawings, which at his death in 1696 numbered over
4,500, almost as large as the ﬁrst collection. Like the ﬁrst,
the second collection was also divided into two categories,
the fully mounted and unmounted. The mounted draw-
ings from the second collection, which are now found
in public collections, are mounted in precisely the same
way as those from the ﬁrst collection and bear similar
inscriptions on their versos, and although Jabach proba-
bly continued the same mounting and classifying system,
it is evident that some of these drawings were ones he
had already owned in 1671. Thus, in the Mus´ee Atger at
Montpellier (Inv. 377), there is a sheet of mounted draw-
ings, which bears on its verso Jabach’s inscription 128,
a number missing from the Jabach inventory of 1671.
However, none of Jabach’s “dessins d’ordonnance” now
in collections other than that of the Louvre bears the
famous paraph.
Jabach’s second collection also included drawings
by Michelangelo – indeed, some of the Michelangelo
drawings owned by Rubens and Happart may have
been among them. However, only eleven drawings
by Michelangelo are recorded speciﬁcally among the
mounted drawings in the posthumous inventory of his
second collection, drawn up in 1696. None of these
eleven can now be identiﬁed with certainty – although
it is possible that Cat. 66 by Raffaello da Montelupo was
among them – and how many of them were genuine
is debatable.158 This is puzzling because the collector and
artistic patron Pierre Crozat, “le roi des collectioneurs” in
Lugt’s phrase, possessed a remarkable group of Michelan-
gelo drawings, which, according to Mariette, came mostly
from Jabach: Directly after the passage quoted previously
he added, “Monsieur Crozat les acquit de ses (Jabach’s)
h´eritiers.” This purchase would have been made from
Jabach’s second collection. However, because so few
drawings by Michelangelo were individually recorded in
the 1696 inventory, Jabach had either disposed of them
before his death to a third party, from whom Crozat later
bought them – Crozat does not seem to have begun col-
lecting drawings on a large scale before 1696 – or else,
which seems much more probable, most of the Michelan-
gelo drawings that remained in Jabach’s hands at his death
were listed so vaguely among the unmounted drawings
that their true value was concealed. Portfolios that might

28
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
have contained the drawings by Michelangelo in question
are O, comprising “70 dessins de Rapha¨el, Michelangelo,
Paul V´eronese et autres excellents maˆıtres, R, 59 dessins
de Titien, Giulio Romano, Michelangelo, Paul V´eron`ese,
Guercin et autres, S, 216 dessins de grands maˆıtres” and
“T, 525 dessins de rebut.” The slim commentaries and
general absence of precise identiﬁcations of the 120 draw-
ings attributed to Michelangelo in the sale catalogue of
Crozat’s collection might indicate that Mariette did not
wish to draw undue attention to their provenance. Per-
haps Crozat obtained drawings from Jabach’s heirs on the
understanding that their provenance should be concealed
because, presumably, they would legally have been the
property of the crown. This hypothesis would account
for facts that otherwise remain difﬁcult to explain. Thus,
the group of Michelangelo drawings in the Albertina was
acquired almost entire at the posthumous sale of Mariette,
whose own collection did not contain, as far as is known,
any drawings by Michelangelo not previously owned by
Crozat. Because the Albertina group includes a number
of very ﬁne early pen drawings by Michelangelo, among
them BK118/Corpus 22, and because some are directly
en-suite with drawings sold by Jabach to Louis XIV in
1671, it is reasonable to infer that they came from the
same series and, therefore, from Jabach himself. But none
of these drawings bears any inscription to indicate Jabach’s
ownership, and none, of course, bears his paraph.
It is probable that Crozat acquired at least some of his
Michelangelo drawings from French vendors other than
Jabach and that not all the Michelangelo drawings that
Mini had owned had necessarily passed to Jabach.159
However, in all save one case, drawings known to Prima-
ticcio in the mid-sixteenth century have either remained
in France or have provenances that cannot be traced back
before their appearance in the collections either of Crozat
or of Mariette.160 And it is less likely that they travelled
out of France only to return, than that they remained
there. Of course, Jabach, Crozat, and Mariette acquired
drawings outside France, so there is no certainty about
what proportion of their collections descended directly
from Mini’s hoard, but, as already remarked, it is more
likely than not that those drawings by Michelangelo dat-
able before 1531, whose recorded provenances begin in
France, are the relics of the gift to Mini.
Mariette memorably described to A. F. Gori the col-
lection of Pierre Crozat:
Quant aux desseins de Michel-Ange, Monsieur Crozat
possedait presque tout ceux qui ´etaient en France. Il n’y en
a que cinq ou six de bons dans la collection du Roy. La
plus grande partie de ceux de Monsieur Crozat venaient de
M. Jabach qui les avoit eus luy-mˆeme d’un Monsieur De la
No¨ue, excellent curieux. Monsieur Crozat comptait avoir
120 desseins de M. Ange, mais il en avoit un grand nombre
parmy eux qui n’´etoient que des copies, ou qui n’´etoient que
des croquis peu considerable. Je crois que les vrais et bons
Desseins de M. Ange de sa Collection pouvoient se reduire
a une cinquantaine au plus; mais c’est encore beacoup, vˆu la
raret`e de ces Desseins. Je crois avoir fait choix de meilleurs,
qui sont au nombre de 36.
According to the sale catalogue compiled by Mariette,
Crozat’s collection of Michelangelo drawings did indeed
comprise 120 sheets, divided into thirteen lots (nos. 9–
21), so Mariette obtained over a quarter of his friend’s
holdings, mostly, in all probability, at the sale, although
it cannot be excluded that he purchased others later. But
he was not the sole purchaser of Crozat’s Michelangelos.
A Martyre de S. Etienne was the single drawing itemised
among the six included in lot 11 in Crozat’s sale. It reap-
peared in the sale of the collection of J. D. Lempereur
some thirty years later on 24 May 1773. These mentions
had aroused little attention, because the subject seemed
unlikely for Michelangelo. However, following the redis-
covery of this grand compositional study, it can now be
seen that both attribution and identiﬁcation of the sub-
ject were correct, and this raises the possibility that other
drawings listed in Crozat’s sale that are still missing might
yet come to light.161
Mariette’s own posthumous sale in 1775–6 included
some forty drawings by Michelangelo, but these too were
undescribed, surprising in that most of the other drawings
in the sale, by less important masters and of lesser value,
were described quite minutely. The Michelangelos were
sold in eight lots to a reserved clientele, and it may be that
these individuals were provided with personal manuscript
catalogues that have not survived. They fetched high
prices, and there was clearly no fraudulent intent, but
one suspects that their proﬁle was deliberately kept low.
The French Royal Collection proﬁted minimally from
the Mariette sale, at least as far as drawings by Michelan-
gelo are concerned, despite being advised by Lempereur.
The only major purchase was, ironically, a drawing not by
Michelangelo, which, still more ironically, Mariette had
valued above all others: the pen and ink study of a hand
(Inv. 717/J R2/Corpus 93; pen and ink, 180 × 286 mm,
by Bartolommeo Passerotti). As noted previously, some
of the most beautiful and important Michelangelo
drawings owned by Mariette found their way to the
Albertina and that group integrates neatly with that now
in the Louvre, which, of course, comes mostly from
Jabach and, probably, from Michelangelo’s gift to Mini.

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
29
So much for the drawings possessed for only a year
or two by Michelangelo’s unfortunate pupil. What other
groupings of Michelangelo drawings are likely to have
existed in the the sixteenth century? The recently discov-
ered inventory of a previously unknown collector, Anto-
nio Tronsarelli, who died in 1601, lists three drawings
as by Michelangelo. Tronsarelli could well have acquired
these in Michelangelo’s lifetime, and it is likely that all
were genuine: One of the three can be identiﬁed with
Cat. 17.162
There is no evidence of any direct connection between
Michelangelo and Tronsarelli. There was, however, a very
direct link between Michelangelo and the man who
no doubt possessed a much more signiﬁcant cache of
his drawings: Daniele da Volterra, Michelangelo’s closest
artist-friend in the last years of his life. Michelangelo made
some designs expressly for projects by Daniele during the
1550s and early 1560s and may have given him a num-
ber of other drawings. Daniele probably owned the two
remarkable and famous black chalk drawings for the Battle
of Cascina, now in Haarlem. He cited the ﬁgure of the sol-
dier fastening the armour of his comrade in his altarpiece
of the Baptism of Christ in the Ricci Chapel in San Pietro
in Montorio, one of his last works.163 However, although
Daniele clearly had close knowledge of Michelangelo’s
drawings (and, indeed, a copy by him of Michelangelo’s
Ganymede is recorded but is not now identiﬁed), he did
not try to imitate him. Daniele produced highly ﬁnished
drawings for his compositions, which attain almost the
level of Michelangelo’s Presentation Drawings, but his
handling of the chalk is more systematic and regular than
Michelangelo’s. It seems likely, indeed, that the drawings
with which Michelangelo expressly provided him were
not highly ﬁnished modelli, such as he sometimes made for
Marcello Venusti, but rather sketches laying out a compo-
sition or determining a pose. Daniele was a draughtsman
of the very highest ability and would not have required
the same degree of assistance as Venusti, or even Sebas-
tiano. But even though Michelangelo’s inﬂuence under-
lay the dense mode of drawing practiced by a number
of Roman artists and visitors in the second half of the
century in Rome, it is difﬁcult to chart precise knowl-
edge of his drawings among the major artists and some of
the Michelangelisti, Pellegrino Tibaldi for example, seem
to have derived as much from Daniele da Volterra and,
by example rather than association, Francesco Salviati, as
from Michelangelo directly. And those artists who may
have made a study of some of Michelangelo’s drawings,
Annibale and Agostino Carracci, were probably attracted
more to his early pen drawings and those of the Sistine
period than to his late works. But this is hypothetical given
that no Carracci copies after drawings by Michelangelo
have yet been identiﬁed. Nevertheless, drawings by all
these artists have at times been confused with those of
Michelangelo.
When Daniele died in 1566, only two years after
Michelangelo, his assistants Michele degli Alberti and
Feliciano di San Vito were, according to Vasari, be-
queathed all his artistic property. This presumably
included his own drawings as well as those that he pos-
sessed by other artists. Vasari does not mention Giacomo
Rocca, but Giacomo too seems to have been among
Daniele’s pupils and no doubt also obtained drawings.
Working together, Giacomo and Michele employed the
second black chalk study for Cascina now in Haarlem,
the famous Running Figure, in reverse but at full length,
in a fresco of a Roman Triumph in the corner room of
the Palazzo dei Conservatori, datable 1568-9. Although
this ﬁgure could have been known from other sources –
Salviati was aware of it too, and included a half-length
derivation from it in his fresco of the Defeat of Saul in
Palazzo Sacchetti in the early 1550s – it is likely that
the link was direct. It is not known when Giacomo and
Michele began to work separately, but it is a fair assump-
tion that they at some point parted company and, pre-
sumably, then divided their inheritance.
There are a few clues that point to drawings by
Michelangelo that Rocca might have owned. Michelan-
gelo’s pen study of a Seated Woman (Cat. 22), made for
an unknown purpose, was surely in Rocca’s possession
because he employed it in two frescoes executed for the
Cevoli family: in reverse for the Samian Sibyl in the gallery
of Palazzo Sacchetti and, in the true sense, as an uniden-
tiﬁed Sibyl in the Cevoli chapel in Santa Maria degli
Angeli. The gallery, incidentally, also includes a scene
based on the upper group in Michelangelo’s Brazen Ser-
pent drawing (Cat. 34), which Rocca might also have
owned.
The sequence Daniele da Volterra–Giacomo Rocca
can perhaps be extended. Baglione records that as a young
man, Giuseppe Cesari, the Cavaliere d’Arpino, worked
with Rocca, and speciﬁcally remarks that Cesari admired
the Michelangelo drawings then in Rocca’s possession.164
Since Baglione knew Cesari, there is every reason to
believe this to be accurate. It seems likely that Cesari
eventually acquired a portion of Giacomo Rocca’s col-
lection of drawings for himself: According to Baglione,
Rocca died during the pontiﬁcate of Clement VIII, that
is between 1592 and 1605.
The Cavaliere himself died in 1640, and although the
immediate fate of his collection is not known, Bottari,
in a note to the life of Michelangelo in the third volume

30
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
of his edition of Vasari, published in 1760, provides some
information:
Il Signor Filippo Cicciaporci, gentiluomo Fiorentino, ha una
copiossisima e singolar raccolta di disegni di vari, e tutti
d’insegni professori tanto antichi che moderni. Ella in gran
parte proviene da una collezione, che aveva fatta gi`a il cav-
alier Giuseppe Cesari d’Arpino, che egli poi `e andato sem-
pre aumentando. Tra essi ve ne sono circa 80 attribuiti a
Michelangelo, e molti professori, che gli hanno veduti, gli
credono originali terminati parte di lapis rosso o nero e parti
in penna, fatti con quella intelligenza, e bravura, ch’era pro-
prio di questo divino arteﬁce, sua insieme ﬁniti con molto
diligenza. Il detto gentiluomo di presente abita in Roma.
It is particularly signiﬁcant that this cache also included a
number of drawings by Daniele da Volterra.165
Filippo Cicciaporci’s collection seems to have been
dispersed – probably in Rome rather than Florence –
around 1765, shortly after Bottari published his edition of
Vasari. The main immediate beneﬁciary was no doubt the
Rome-based sculptor, restorer, and art-dealer, Bartolom-
meo Cavaceppi – listed by Ottley as the intermediate
owner of all the drawings said to come from Cicciaporci –
and a number of drawings with this provenance were
eventually acquired by William Young Ottley. Among
them were certainly some genuine drawings by Michelan-
gelo, including one in the British Museum (W29/Corpus
97), which is similar in pen style and approach to Cat. 22.
Cat. 22 itself was never owned by Ottley but was acquired
by Woodburn from Baron Dominique-Vivant Denon,
who may have been another beneﬁciary, via Cavaceppi,
from the dispersal of the Cicciaporci Collection when he
was in Italy in the 1780s and 1790s. Vivant Denon owned
the famous Dragon, Cat. 28, which is similar in style
to the Sybil and may also have been acquired in Italy –
although in this instance a strong argument can be made
for a French provenance.166
Much less is known about Daniele’s other major pupil,
Michele degli Alberti, who also presumably acquired a
portion of the drawings left by his master. But it would
be tempting to identify him – or the still more shadowy
Feliciano di San Vito – as the owner of a group of
Michelangelo drawings, including a few copies by close
followers, that has recently been partly reconstituted.167
These drawings can be identiﬁed by distinctive inscrip-
tions or by distinctive numberings or both. The inscrip-
tion usually reads di Michel Angelo Bona Roti or some close
variant and is often accompanied by a number, written
by a different hand. Both inscription and number seem
to be of the late sixteenth or early seventeenth century.
It is likely that the Bona Roti inscriptions precede the
numbers.168 The numbers rise as high as 96, and this
series probably ran to around 100 sheets; at least seven are
in the Ashmolean.169 However, because not all the draw-
ings carry both inscriptions and numbers, it is impossi-
ble to say whether those sheets that carry one and not
the other were separated before those that carry both, or
whether they are simply sheets that were later trimmed or
subdivided. It is also a matter for conjecture whether the
drawings that bear both inscriptions and numbers passed
through two collections successively or remained in a sin-
gle collection but were marked at different moments by
different hands. The compiler is inclined to favour the
latter explanation, but it is safer to treat them as though
they were owned by two collectors, to be dubbed, respec-
tively, the Bona Roti Collector and the Irregular Number-
ing Collector.
The largest group of such sheets is now in the Teyler
Museum in Haarlem. The Teyler’s holding of Michelan-
gelo drawings is the remains of a collection formed pri-
marily in Italy, between 1629 and 1637, probably from a
combination of single and group purchases, by the artist
and writer Joachim von Sandrart. Sandrart must have been
in touch with the owners of caches of Michelangelo draw-
ings, and virtually all those that are known today with a
secure provenance from his collection are of high quality.
In particular might be mentioned a group of extraordi-
narily beautiful drawings made for the Sistine ceiling. It
is in principle possible that Sandrart acquired some of
his drawings from the Cavaliere d’Arpino, but his sin-
gle most signiﬁcant source of Michelangelo drawings was
probably the owner of the Bona Roti/Irregular Number-
ing group. It is certain that the inscriptions and num-
berings were applied to these drawings before Sandrart
acquired them, and not after. One obvious reason for say-
ing this is that Sandrart possessed a number of drawings
by Raphael and his studio that are also now at Haar-
lem, and whose later provenance is identical with that
of the Michelangelos, and none of these drawings bears
comparable inscriptions or numbers.170 It is notable that
the Michelangelo drawings in the Teyler Museum include
both of the ﬁgure-studies for Cascina, which were known
in Rome in the 1550s and 1560, plus another sheet of
which both sides contain drawings executed by Michelan-
gelo speciﬁcally for Daniele, one made in preparation for
the statue of Saint Paul commissioned from Daniele for
the Ricci chapel in San Pietro in Montorio, for which he
ordered marble in 1556, and the other side for Daniele’s
Aeneas Commanded by Mercury to Relinquish Dido, a paint-
ing being prepared by Daniele for Giovanni della Casa
in 1555–6.171 It is tempting to conclude that the inscrip-
tions and the numbers are related to the group of sheets

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
31
putatively owned by Michele degli Alberti rather than
those owned by Giacomo Rocca, given that those that
were most probably Rocca’s and that passed though the
collections of the Cavaliere d’Arpino and the Ciccia-
porci family before eventually being dispersed from the
last, bear neither inscription nor number. As a work-
ing hypothesis, it may be submitted that Michele degli
Alberti and whoever obtained possession of the draw-
ings after Michele’s death might be identiﬁed as, respec-
tively, the Bona Roti collector and the Irregular Number-
ing Collector – or vice versa.172
Sandrart did not acquire the Bona Roti/Irregular
Numbering series in its entirety, and it is virtually certain
that some drawings had already been separated out and
purchased by other collectors. One of the Michelangelo
drawings so inscribed, now at Christ Church, was copied
in an etching in the Caraccesque publication, “La scuola
perfetta,” shortly after 1600 and may well have been on
the market at this time.173 And one of the sheets owned
by Bernardo Buontalenti, that now is in the British
Museum (W27/Corpus 185), also bears an irregular
number (No. 23). This sheet subsequently passed to Casa
Buonarroti together with Michelangelo the Younger’s
acquisition of a group of Michelangelo drawings once
owned by Buontalenti, where it joined at least one
drawing still bearing the Irregular Number, and another
which probably once did, which may have been acquired
by Michelangelo the Younger at the presumed dispersal
of the collection.174
There is also at least one case in which the Cava-
liere d’Arpino seems to have added a drawing from the
Bona Roti/Irregular Numbering series to those that we
may assume he had acquired from Giacomo Rocca. A
Michelangelo drawing in the Louvre, which bears on its
recto the Bona Roti inscription and the irregular number
21, carries on its verso the inscription Arpino, which –
whether it is taken as an indication of the inscriber’s view
of the drawing’s authorship or ownership – shows that it
was believed to have been in his possession.175 There is
also, as we shall see, a later moment at which some of the
Bona Roti/Irregular Numbering series could have come
onto the market. Indeed, partial dispersals from this series
or related ones could have occurred at various times.
It is likely that Sandrart acquired some drawings by
Michelangelo other than those that had formed part of
the Bona Roti/Irregular Numbering series. Thus, not
all the drawings in Haarlem bear either inscriptions or
numbers, and among these is the Running Man for the
Battle of Cascina already mentioned, the ﬁgure employed
by Michele degli Alberti and Giacomo Rocca in 1568.
Thus, it may be that some drawings putatively inher-
ited by Rocca did not follow the others into the Cava-
liere d’Arpino’s collection but were dispersed individually
and that, by the 1620s, a few drawings by Michelangelo
that had been together in Daniele da Volterra’s possession
some sixty years earlier and had subsequently been divided
between or among his pupils had drifted back onto the
market and had subsequently rejoined one another in col-
lections formed in early seicento Rome.
Sandrart’s collection was acquired, apparently in
tranches between 1645 and 1651, by Pieter Spiering van
Silfvercroon, the Swedish ambassador to Holland. Silf-
vercroon’s collection, in which a libro of drawings by
Michelangelo was speciﬁcally mentioned, was acquired
from Silfvercroon and his heirs by Queen Christina
between 1651 and 1653. Following her abdication in
1654, Christina’s collection of drawings travelled with
her to Italy: Whether she further augmented it there is
unknown. At her death in 1689, her various collections
were bequeathed to Cardinal Decio Azzolini. Azzolini
died shortly thereafter, and the drawings were subse-
quently sold by his nephew to the Duke of Bracciano,
Don Livio Odescalchi. Livio added a very large num-
ber of drawings to the collection, and, after his death in
1713, an inventory, which numbered 10,160 sheets and
ﬁve sketchbooks; was compiled. Among these is listed
an album of 23 pages – perhaps the libro referred to by
Silfvercroon – containing
in se carta ventitre, e tra questo una `e tagliata in mezzo, ed in
dette carte si trovano incollati parte, e parte staccati disegni
in tutto numero trenta-due tutti di Michelangelo Buona
Roto, detto Libro quantunque apparisca cartolato sino al
numero cento, restano nulladimeno solamente alle sudette
carte ventitre vedendonis tutte le altre tagliate et portate via.
Thus, from an album that had once contained one hun-
dred pages mounted with drawings by or attributed to
Michelangelo – a signiﬁcant total in relation to the irreg-
ular numberings – only twenty-three pages remained, on
which thirty-two drawings were either still fastened or
from which they had come loose. By this token, the whole
album would once have contained, presumably, about 150
drawings. It is odd that a collector so evidently passion-
ate as the Duke of Bracciano would have disposed of so
large a portion of his precious drawings, and it is open
to suspicion that the remaining sheets of the album had
either been pilfered between the death of the Duke and
the taking of the inventory, or, more likely, removed from
the album by Azzolini’s nephew before he sold the col-
lection to the Duke: If so, this would account for the fact
that other Michelangelo drawings bearing the Bona Roti

32
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
and Irregular Numbering inscriptions came onto the art
market in the eighteenth century. Two of these drawings,
both now in the Ashmolean, were owned by Sir Joshua
Reynolds (Cats. 20, 26).
In the inventory of the Duke of Bracciano, it is also
noted that there were 282 drawings of the “Capella Ses-
tina del Vaticano fatti di Michelangelo,” but it is evident
that most, if not all, of these were copies – sixty-eight,
after engravings after ﬁgures from the Sistine ceiling –
remain together at Haarlem.176 It is probable that the
album of autograph drawings by Michelangelo was that
made up by Sandrart, which had remained intact while
in Christina’s collection and which was only subsequently
dismembered. If so Sandrart would have owned one of
the largest – and best – collections ever formed of draw-
ings by Michelangelo. There is no evidence to suggest
when the remaining seventy-seven pages, probably con-
taining over one hundred sheets of drawings, were cut
from the album or where they went, but their number
may account for some of the other drawings that seem to
have become available in Rome in the late seventeenth
or early eighteenth century, such as the study for Libica,
now in the Metropolitan Museum, New York, which was
probably owned by Carlo Maratta.177 That this sheet once
formed part of the Sandrart-Christina group is suggested
by the Bona Roti inscription that it bears.
It seems that no further dispersals from this album
at least of Michelangelo drawings, were made between
whatever was presented to Crozat and its sale to the
trustees of the Teyler Museum in Haarlem in the 1790s
by Don Livio’s descendants. Although it is debatable
whether the Teyler Museum contains thirty-two auto-
graph sheets, the number comes close to that, and it is
likely that the Christina-Odescalchi album contained pre-
dominantly genuine drawings.
Pierre Crozat, who, from 1714 onward, negotiated the
sale of the Duke of Bracciano’s paintings to the Duke
d’Orl´eans, received as his fee one hundred drawings from
the Odescalchi collection. According to Mariette, some
sixty of these were of real value, and they may have
included a few by Michelangelo. But given the quality
of the drawings acquired by the Teyler Museum only
seventy years later, it seems evident that Crozat was not
offered the top of the range. In any case, no drawing with
an identiﬁable Crozat provenance bears either the Bona
Roti inscription or an Irregular Numbering.
Crozat did, nevertheless, obtain at least one major
Michelangelo in Italy. It was probably in 1714 that he
acquired numerous sheets – including some by Raphael –
from the heirs of the Cardinal of Santi Quattro, who
had formed his collection in the ﬁrst half of the sev-
enteenth century. Among these was a large drawing
by Michelangelo of Christ and the Samaritan Woman.
Recorded in Crozat’s posthumous sale of 1741, traceable
in further sales until 1807, it was then lost to sight until
1981 when it was rediscovered in the Bodmer Library in
Geneva; it was subsequently sold by Sotheby’s in New
York on 28 January 1998, lot 102.178 From the character-
istic inscription on its recto, it is certain that it had been
owned by the Cardinal.
Gori remarked that, apart from the Grand Ducal Col-
lections, there were other collections of drawings by
Michelangelo in Florence. Among these was that of
Filippo Cicciaporci, of which Bottari’s account has been
cited previously. Gori also refers to the collection of Sena-
tore Pandolfo Pandolﬁni, who had inherited the personal
collection formed by Filippo Baldinucci, comprising four
large volumes of drawings, arranged in historical order.
In his edition of Vasari, Bottari somewhat ampliﬁes this
information:
I ﬁgli Pandolﬁni eredi del Senator Pandolfo Pandolﬁni uomo
dotto, e dilettante delle belle arti, e promotore degli arteﬁci,
hanno molti disegni originali di Michelangelo, de’ quanti
alcuni sono in cornice col loro cristallo, e alcuni sono inser-
iti in 4 tomi di vari disegni, che si era formati per suo stu-
dio e diletto, il celebre Filippo Baldinucci, nel tempo che
egli ordino i 130 grossi volumi di disegni della immortal
regia Casa de’ Medici, per ordine del cardinale Leopoldo
della stessa famiglia. E siccome questi distribuigli per ordine
cronologico del tempo in cui ﬁorivano quelli arteﬁci, cosi
lui distribuili i detti quattro suoi tomi.179
These volumes were acquired for the Louvre in 1806,
but they contained no drawings now accepted as origi-
nal studies by Michelangelo. There seems to be no fur-
ther information about the framed and glazed drawings,
among which could well have been some originals, and
it may be that these were disposed of separately. It was the
disruptions in Florence of the late eighteenth century –
beginning with the dis-establishment of many religious
orders – that released a ﬂood of works of art onto the
market and accelerated the liquidation of the city’s artis-
tic capital. This, of course, was greatly increased by the
European wars of the 1790s. And it was from this situ-
ation, to return to our starting-point, that Sir Thomas
Lawrence proﬁted so comprehensively.180
notes
1. Woodburn, 1846. Although this catalogue was printed for
J. Fisher, it copies Woodburn, 1842, and is here classed under
Woodburn’s name.

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
33
2. As a comparison may be cited the Pompeo Leoni album of
drawings by Leonardo, re-discovered in the Royal Collection in the
eighteenth century: According to Charles Rogers, writing in 1778
when the album was still intact, “In it are contained 234 Leaves on
which are pasted 779 Drawings” (pp. 4–5).
3. Woodburn, 1842.
4. Byam Shaw, 1976, no. 64; see n. 127.
5. Cat. 81.
6. Lawrence was conscious – and proud – of his place in a col-
lecting genealogy: He wrote to Woodburn on 17 December 1822
(Williams, 1831, II, p. 232): “I am still the successor of Sir Peter
Lely, the Richardsons, Sir James Thornhill (the former possessor of
my Rubens), Hudson, Sir Joshua Reynolds, and Benjamin West.”
7. An abstract of Lawrence’s will is in Williams, 1831, II,
pp. 565–8.
8. A detailed discussion of Woodburn’s efforts to sell the
Lawrence Gallery to the Nation is the unpublished thesis by Denys
Sutton of 1938, of which the Ashmolean houses the copy referred
to by Parker in the introduction to his 1956 catalogue. Material on
Lawrence’s collecting can be found in Williams, 1831, although it
should be noted that he misdates some of Lawrence’s letters; further
information is in Lawrence’s letter-books, preserved in the library
of the Royal Academy. See also Robertson, 1963, pp. 52–3.
9. Thus, the famous study of a head, believed until Wilde, 1953a,
no. 57, to be that of St. Bartholomew in the Last Judgement, does
not bear the Lawrence dry stamp, although there is no doubt what-
soever that it was in his collection.
10. The compiler has been unable to locate the following
exhibits in the 1836 catalogue: 1836-18, 1836-19, 1836-34, 1836-70,
1836-78, 1836-99; all of these were sold to William II of Holland,
but 1836-18, at least, is recorded in Woodburn’s Lawrence Gallery of
1853 as plate 23.
11. Labb´e and Bicart-S´ee, 1996, p. 174.
12. Robinson, 1870, p. xx.
13. Ibid., p. xxiii.
14. 1836-18, 1836-20, 1836-43, 1836-44, 1836-48, 1836-56, 1836-
75, 1836-90, 1836-94, 1836-95, 1836-98, 1836-99, 1836-100. Of
these, seven either came from Michelangelo’s studio or are works
of such high standard that it would have been reasonable at that
time to consider them to be originals: 1836-18 (by Mini?), 1836-20
(by Salviati), 1836-43 (by Sebastiano), 1836-44 (by Pontormo),
1836-56, 1836-75 (accepted as an original until Wilde’s catalogue of
1953), 1836-100 (by Mini?).
15. The untraced exhibits are listed in n. 10.
16. 1850-126 and 1850-130 were wrongly given to Sebastiano;
1850-129, 1850-132, and 1850-133 were wrongly given to Venusti.
The seven further drawings not presently identiﬁable are 1850-114,
1850-150, 1850-160, 1850-161, 1850-165, 1850-237, and 1850-238.
17. Hinterding and Horsch, 1989.
18. Turner et al., 1997, no. 28; in that entry, the drawing’s prove-
nance is given as the Eustace Robb Collection, Oxfordshire.
19. Inv. IV.7/Corpus III, no. 399; black chalk, 383 × 296 mm.
20. 1836-2 and 1836-50 each comprised four drawings, and 1836-
82, three. All were separated post 1870 and are treated individually
both in 1956 and in the present catalogue.
21. Robinson, 1870, p. xxiii.
22. Louvre Inv. 714/J4/Corpus 19; pen and ink with traces of
black chalk, 262 × 185 mm.
23. This publication poses a problem. By 1853 ﬁve of the thirty
drawings reproduced in it had found permanent homes: Three were
among the drawings acquired by Oxford in 1846, and two others
had been bought by the Louvre at the sale of the King of Holland;
neither of these locations is given in the accompanying letter-press.
It seems likely that the volume was prepared for publication before
1838, not then issued, only to be revived in 1853. The companion
volume of facsimiles of drawings by Raphael, published in 1841,
speciﬁes those drawing that had been bought by William II.
24. McCullagh and Giles, 1997, no. 350.
25. For Malcolm and his collecting, see Coppel, 1996.
26. Sotheby’s, London, 28 April and 24 November 1976. The
drawings by Michelangelo comprised lots 14 and 16 on 28 April
and lot 28 on 24 November; that attributed to Jacomo del Duca
was lot 15 on 28 April. None of the autograph Michelangelos,
all of which were acquired by Malcolm from Robinson, bears a
Lawrence stamp – or, indeed, any other indication of their earlier
provenance. The best suggestion that the compiler can offer is that
they may have formed part of the Cicciaporci group, and were
purchased privately by Robinson, perhaps in Italy. The exception
is lot 15 on 28 April, which bears the marks of Lanier (L.2880) and
Cosway (L.628). This sheet, incidentally, seems to be a double-
sided facsimile of a lost sheet by Michelangelo, probably made in
his studio in his lifetime; for a comparable instance, see Cat. 55.
27. A magniﬁcent ﬁgure-study in pen presented to the Louvre
in 1881 by Edmond Gatteux (Inv. RF1068/J11/Corpus 21) bears
only Mariette’s stamp and probably did not come from Lawrence,
despite the temptation to identify it with lot 155 in the sale of
William of Holland, Etude d’homme, Superbe dessin `a la plume, bought
by Brondgeest for the high price of 400 guilders.
28. Catalogued by Bean, 1960, nos. 65–70, to which should be
added his no. 73 (for which see n. 146).
29. In a letter to Woodburn dated 29 June 1820 (Williams, 1831,
II, p. 280), Lawrence refers to “that ﬁne collection of drawings
which I owe to your judgment and vigilant attention.”
30. This may be the place to mention a letter written from
Naples at an uncertain date in the 1630s by Rev. William Petty,
who acted as an agent for the Duke of Arundel and who informed
the Duke’s son that he had secured for Arundel “500 of Michelan-
gelo (with the bathers and all).” This reference (see Springell, 1963,
p. 250) is mysterious. The fact that the letter was written from
Naples does not necessarily mean that the drawings were pur-
chased there, but that would be the obvious assumption. It is highly
improbable that the ﬁve hundred contained more than a small pro-
portion of drawings genuinely by Michelangelo, but there could
have been some originals among a host of copies. Even though they
did come to London (see Howarth, 1985, p. 134), there seems to
be no further trace of them. Whether any can be found among the
drawings owned by Everard Jabach, who seems to have acquired
the largest part of Arundel’s collection, is an open question.
31. Two autograph sheets owned by Lely are Princeton X 1947-
134 (discussed by Joannides, 1995a) and Hamburg 21094/Corpus
35.
32. Ongpin, 2001, passim.
33. Joannides, 1995b and 2003b.
34. On Reynolds’ collection of drawings, see Royalton-Kisch,
1978. An otherwise unpublished study of knees by Michelan-
gelo, bearing Reynolds’ stamp, was offered at Christie’s, London,
9 December 1982, lot 144, black chalk, 185 × 159 mm, and again at
Sotheby’s, London, 9 July 2003, lot 9. This drawing, like two other
slight sketches owned by Reynolds now in the British Museum
(W73/Corpus 398 and W79/Corpus 405) and the four David and

34
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
Goliath fragments in the Morgan Library (Inv. 132 i,ii,iii,iv, Cor-
pus 370–1; see Cat. 46a), may have come onto the market with
the dispersal of the Cicciaporci Collection. All were made late in
Michelangelo’s career.
35. Published in instalments between 1808 and 1823.
36. Acquired by William II, it was lot 106 in his sale. It was
purchased for the ducal collection at Weimar and was described
in that collection by Gotti, 1875, II, p. 210. No doubt sold by the
Sachsen-Weimar family in the twentieth century, it is now in the
National Gallery of Canada (Franklin, 2005).
37. Wilde, no. 87.
38. See ns. 31 and 34.
39. Taking the 1836 exhibition as a sample, one genuine draw-
ing came from Reynolds (1836-79), two from Richardson (1836-36,
1836-52; although his ownership is listed for 1836-51, this was prob-
ably an error), and one from Revil (1836-54). Among the drawings
wrongly given to Michelangelo two came from Reynolds (1836-
44, 1836-75), two from Richardson (1836-37, 1836-46), one from
Hudson (1836-78 – probably but not certainly a copy), and one
from Cosway (1836-92).
40. Taking the 1836 catalogue as a sample, genuine drawings by
Michelangelo coming from Mariette (and, in most cases, Crozat)
were 1836-13, 1836-31, 1836-59, 1836-81, and 1836-89. Drawings
wrongly ascribed to Michelangelo from Mariette’s collection were
1836-8, 1836-17, 1836-41, 1836-45, and 1836-61.
41. For the history of the Albertina’s collection, see Dossi, 1999–
2000.
42. For Julien de Parme, see P. Rosenberg, 1999. Julien also
acquired drawings for himself at the Mariette sale.
43. Birke and Kertesz, 1992–1997, I, nos. 102/Corpus 269,
103/Corpus 432, 116/Corpus 5, 118/Corpus 22, 120/Corpus 144,
123/Corpus 53, 132/Corpus 14; III, no. 4868/Corpus 408; the
sales of works of art made in the 1920s, the 1930s, and later by the
Archduke Frederick and his heirs included some 3,800 drawings,
but these seem to have been works acquired under Frederick’s own
auspices between 1895 and 1919, and not to have come from the
collection of drawings formed by Albert von Saxe-Teschen; see
Dossi, 1999, pp. 42, 166–7.
44. J. Fisher, 1865, p. 9.
45. See Joannides, 1994a.
46. Lempereur owned several drawings by Michelangelo,
including two now in the British Museum, W1/Corpus 6 and
W3/Corpus 36, the study for the Minerva Christ formerly in the
Brinsley Ford Collection, Corpus 94, and the Stoning of St. Stephen
now at the Chˆateau of Loppem. Only the last two now bear Mari-
ette’s mark, and only W1 was acquired by Lawrence.
47. For Vivant Denon’s drawing collection see Bicart-S´ee and
Dupuy, 1999–2000.
48. Williams, 1831, II, pp. 405–7.
49. Williams, 1831, II, pp. 418–20, mistakenly placed by Williams
later in the year. Because Lawrence refers to the opening of the
Royal Academy exhibition in this letter, it should no doubt be
dated in the ﬁrst half of May.
50. Lawrence, who was in Paris between August and October
1825, wrote to Woodburn on 1 September (Williams, 1831, II,
pp. 413–16): “Of Denon’s drawings I saw a few; but the owner
is now absent and does not return till after my departure which
will take place at the end of this month.” Woodburn went to Paris
shortly after.
51. 1836-22 and 1836-64.
52. The catalogue of Julien de Parme’s sale, known in a single
copy, is reproduced in P. Rosenberg et al., 1999–2000, pp. 26–31.
It contained four lots of drawings by Michelangelo (10–13).
53. For the Brunet-Denon family, see Dupuy, 1999–2000,
p. 494 ff.
54. Lawrence expressed in his will his wish that “my highly
intelligent friend William Young Ottley Esq.” (Williams, 1831, II,
p. 568) should be entrusted with cataloguing Lawrence’s collection
for sale. In an undated note to Keightley (Royal Academy, Lawrence
letter-books, II/228) Lawrence recommended that Ottley should
receive £500 for this employment.
55. Woodburn, 1836a, p. 1.
56. For Roscoe’s ﬁrst letter, see Royal Academy, Lawrence
letter-books, IV/253; from his letter of 5 January 1825 (ibid.,
IV/293), it is evident that Lawrence had reacted critically to the
drawing, although he did eventually buy it from Roscoe.
57. Gere and Pouncey, 1983, no. 95.
58. Garlick, 1989, no. 623.
59. Lawrence’s letter is published in Taggart et al., 1965,
pp. 8–9.
60. Williams, 1831, II, p. 285.
61. Royal Academy, Lawrence letter-books, IV/84. Beaumont
seems to have purchased the tondo from Wicar shortly before 19
May 1822, when he wrote about it to Lawrence (Lawrence letter-
books, IV/20, reference kindly supplied by Cecilia Treves); he is
thought to have paid £1,500, but there seems to be no certain
record of this.
62. Woodburn, 1836a, p. 2.
63. Royal Academy, Lawrence letter-books, IV/93.
64. Royal Academy, Lawrence letter-books, IV/86. The Leda
cartoon was given to the Royal Academy by William Lock the
Younger in 1821.
65. Williams, 1831, II, p. 291.
66. Michelangelo’s authorship of the Leda cartoon in the Royal
Academy is now universally rejected, but there is every reason to
think that it was accepted as his in the sixteenth century. According
to Vasari in 1568, “a Fiorenza `e ritornata poi il cartone della Leda,
che l’ha Bernardo Vecchietti . . . condotti da Benevenuto Cellini
scultore,” and it is also mentioned by Raffaello Borghini (1584,
p. 13) as in the Vecchietti Collection. It was still there in 1746
when Gori in his edition of Condivi wrote (p. 111: “Il cartone
di Leda fatto di Michelagnolo, si conserva sino di presente, bello,
intatto e fresco in Firenze nela Sala della Casa de’ Vecchietti; n`e
senza stupore e gran piacere pu`o osservarsi”). But Charles Rogers,
1778, I, p. 16 and n. 38, quoting Serie IV, degli homine i pi`u illustri
nella pittura etc, 1771, p. 48, writes, “The original Cartone of this
Leda with the Swan, mentioned by Vasari, Borghini, Bocchi and
others, is now at London in the valuable collection of William Lock
Esq., a great Lover of the Fine Arts and particularly of the works
of this inimitable master; by whom he has also a Hercules Killing
Cacus in terra-cotta, a basso-relievo of a Bacchanal, a Torso of a
man, and two models of an Aurora and of a St. Laurence, one of
which is in wax.” Furthermore, in Coltellini’s edition of Vasari, of
which volume 6 was published in 1772, it is stated on pp. 388–9
that the cartoon – and some sculptural models – was now owned
by William Lock. The alternative, that the cartoon acquired by
Lock is that recorded in France in Le Brun’s 1683 inventory of
the French Royal Collection and referred to in an annotation to
that inventory by Houasse datable 1691 as destined to be burned
(see Brejon de Lavergn´ee, 1987, no. 369, pp. 370–1; Michelangelo’s

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
35
painting is recorded as having been burned before 1642), can be
excluded, especially as the dimensions of the French example were
162 × 218 cm as opposed to the 171 × 249 cm of that in the Royal
Academy. Passavant, 1836, p. 76, also says that the Royal Academy
cartoon – which he did not believe to be autograph – was acquired
from Casa Vecchietti. It is now commonly attributed to Rosso,
but that attribution is hard to sustain. The drawing for the Leda to
which Woodburn refers cannot securely be identiﬁed. It might be
an error for the copy after the Night, here Cat. 83, or the untraced
drawing 1836-35.
67. Royal Academy, Lawrence letter-books, IV/86. There is
some doubt about the provenance of the Cleansing of the Temple,
now in the National Gallery. Recorded in the Borghese Collec-
tion in the mid-seventeenth century, it remained there until the
end of the eighteenth century, when it was acquired by Commis-
saire Reboul. It was bought from him by Woodburn. In his letter
to Lawrence of 13 March 1823, Woodburn stated that he had sold
the Venusti to Mr. Lock (i.e., William Lock the Younger), but in
Lawrence’s reply to Woodburn’s letter, of late March or early April
1823 (Williams, 1831, II, pp. 416–18, misdated to 1825) he remarks
of the drawings acquired by Woodburn from Wicar: “Mr. D. [his
usual way of referring to Dimsdale] will be delighted to possess the
studies for his own Marcello Venusti, which so exceedingly add
to the value of that beautiful work.” Whether a different paint-
ing is in question, or whether Lawrence or Woodburn made a
slip of the pen, is uncertain. After Dimsdale’s death, Lawrence
no doubt acquired the painting from his estate, via Woodburn.
After Lawrence’s death, the painting returned to Woodburn, who
is referred to as owning it in the Athenaeum’s review of the exhibi-
tion of Michelangelo’s drawings on 16 July 1836. It was presumably
sold by Woodburn to the Duke of Hamilton, from whose collection
it was bought by the National Gallery in 1885.
68. Woodburn, 1836a, p. 4. Lawrence’s feelings about Dimsdale
were expressed in a jocular – but telling – way to Woodburn in
a letter of 27 January 1823 (Williams, 1831, II, p. 287: “I have
never thought with common Christian charity of Mr. D. since the
dreadful moment when I ﬁrst saw my long dreamt of treasure [a
drawing Lawrence believed to be by Raphael] of the Peste [i.e., the
Plague], in his possession. What will be his end I know not; but
certainly it will not be a natural death. I never see him, determining
that the certain retribution may be the work of other hands, my
own being as yet bloodless and pure.”).
69. Woodburn, 1836a, p. 4.
70. J. Fisher, 1879, p. 11.
71. Wicar worked through an intermediary. A list of the Raphael
drawings in Fedi’s possession, all of them now in Lille, was given by
Longhena, 1829, pp. 718–19, as actual, evidently unaware they had
been re-possessed by Wicar ﬁve years before. Longhena similarly
records (pp. 726–7), as in Ottley’s collection, a group of drawings
that had passed to Lawrence in 1823. It is worth noting that since
Fedi presumably did not object to Longhena’s publishing the details
of his group of Raphael drawings, he can have felt no disquiet about
them; this suggests that, although he may have obtained them by
subterfuge, he felt that he had a right to them. He seems to have
served in some capacity with Wicar on the Napoleonic commis-
sions, and the “theft” may have been the result of a friendship
soured, or a deal that went wrong.
72. Established by Nesselrath, 1983; see the essay by F. Lemerle
in Brejon de Lavergn´ee, 1997, pp. 283–9.
73. Bell, 1938, p. 199 ff.
74. Piot, 1863, p. 145. The biography of Filippo Buonarroti by
Saitta, 1950–1, makes no mention of this episode.
75. It is unclear whether Ottley and Wicar acquired drawings
from Cavaceppi during his lifetime or from his heirs after his death.
76. Sueur, in Bentini, Loisel Legrand, et al., 1998, p. 24.
77. Bentini, 1989, p. 46; these drawings were in the appartamento
of the piano nobile. The Este Collection no doubt contained other
drawings by or attributed to Michelangelo either not on display or
on display elsewhere. The Coccapani Collection, much of which
entered Este ownership c. 1650, contained Un Christo in Croce di
Michel Angelo di lapis nero (ibid., p. 37) recorded again in an undated
inventory (ibid., p. 40); it would be tempting to identify this with
one of the copies of Michelangelo’s Cruciﬁed Christ made for Vitto-
ria Colonna (see Cat. 66) but none of those known to the compiler
bears an Este stamp. Another inventory, of 1751 (ibid., pp. 40 ff.),
records as no. 336, Una testa di carbone di Michelangelo con cornice (this
might be BM W57), and no. 412, Un Filosofo a lapis nero di Michel
Angelo con cornice. No. 353, Un altra testa a lapis rosso di Michel Angelo
suddetto, con cornice logorata, seems however to have been attributed
to Michel Ange da Caravaggio, to whom Una testa a lapis nero, no.
351, was certainly given.
78. Joannides, 2002–3a, p. 37.
79. Robinson, 1870, p. xv.
80. Scheller, 1971.
81. Further details in Joannides, 2002–3a, p. 40.
82. Passavant, 1836, p. 32. The drawings are W16/Corpus 76 and
W17/Corpus 77 in the British Museum and Bean 65 in the Mus´ee
Bonnat. They had been seen by Lawrence in Rome in 1819, for
in a letter to Woodburn of March or April 1823 (wrongly placed
among those of 1825 by Williams, 1831, II, pp. 416–18) Lawrence
wrote: “I well remember sebastian del piombo’s letter, respecting
the reception of his pictures, which at Rome I much wished to
secure, together with two, if not three, studies by Michael Angelo,
for the group of Lazarus in that ﬁne picture. I was so instrumental in
urging Mr. Angerstein to buy it, that of course I had the deepest
interest in looking at those sketches, which so conﬁrmed my
conviction of that ﬁgure being entirely his.”
83. Among these in the Ashmolean would be certainly Cats. 3,
19, 29, and 47, and probably 4, 5, 9–12, 24, 36, 37, 45, and 48.
In the British Museum, they would be W42/Corpus 316, and prob-
ably W34, W36/Corpus 528, 57/Corpus 220, and the copy W91.
84. For the former see Calbi, 1986, ﬁg. 91a; the latter, unpub-
lished, is in the National Gallery of Scotland, RSA 256.
85. Gere, 1953, p. 47.
86. See Joannides, 2002–3a, p. 40 for this calculation.
87. See n. 72.
88. Gere, 1953; the copies of the sale catalogues referred to by
Gere as in the Sutton Collection are now in the Print Room of
the British Museum.
89. Cats. 70 and 113.
90. Gere, 1953, p. 48.
91. However, see Appendix 1, Ottley sale of 1804, lot 269. The
type of numbering found on this drawing is also found on a number
of sheets by Gabbiani in the Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts, Lille: see Brejon
de Lavergn´ee, 1997, nos. 246–51, 252–7, and 259–60. It is identiﬁed
by Pouncey and Gere, 1962, no. 224, p. 129, as possibly that of
Lamberto Gori, but it seems instead to be that of the Martelli. For
ﬁve ex-Martelli drawings owned by Woodburn, offered in his 1804
sale and now in the Prado, see Turner and Joannides, 2003.
92. See Wood, 2003, passim.

36
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
93. Lot 1765, the Fall of Phaeton, is identiﬁable with the copy
by Alessandro Allori in the Woodner Collection of the National
Gallery of Art, Washington. It no longer bears the memo on
its back. However, Lamberto Gori did own interesting drawings:
According to Ottley (1808–23, p. 17) the Horsemen by Signorelli,
now in the British Museum (Popham and Pouncey, 1950, no. 237),
came from his collection, “together with a few other studies by
Signorelli.”
94. 1842 nos.: 1, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 32, 34, 35, 37, 38, 40, 42, 49, 53, 57, 60, 62, 65, 66, 67,
69, 72, 73, 77, 80, 83, 85, 86, 87, 88, 90, 94, 95, 97, 98, 99, and
100.
95. 1842 nos.: 4, 7, 9, 11, 13, 17, 26, 27, 28, 31, 35, 37, 38, 42,
43, 45, 50, 56, 58, 66, 70, 71, 72, and 78.
96. 1842 nos.: 2, 12, 24, 51, 54, 67, 76, 77, and 85.
97. 1842 nos.: 1, 10, 30, 32, 34, 47, 52, 60, 61, 63, 64, 69, 75, 80.
98. 1842 no. 50, Cat. 93, an uninspired copy after the Last Judge-
ment, which, if it ever was in Casa Buonarroti, can have been
acquired only for documentary purposes.
99. Respectively 1842, nos. 48 (from the King of Naples at
Capodimonte), 39 (from Revil and Ottley), and 44 (Richardson
Sr., Spencer and Ottley).
100. The following are not by Michelangelo: 1842 nos.: 12, 24,
51, 76, and 85 (this last probably did not come from Wicar).
101. The following are by Michelangelo: 1842-2, 1842-54,
1842-67, and 1842-77. 1842-67/Cat. 6, was copied by Commodi;
see n. 118, no. 12.
102. The following are neither by Michelangelo nor his studio:
1842-1, 1842-34, 1842-52, 1842-61, 1842-69, 1842-75i, and 1842-
80.
103. The following are either by Michelangelo or his studio:
1842-10, 1842-30, 1842-32, 1842-47, 1842-60 (Mini), 1842-63
(Piero d’Argenta?), 1842-64, 1842-69, and 1842-75ii.
104. These are 1814-253 (the Window, 1836-49/1842-42), 1814-
254 (the Door, 1836-1/1842-43), 1814-257 (1836-7), 1814-259
(1836-90), 1814-260b (1842-56), 1814-261 (1842-72), 1814-263
(1842-45), 1814-264 and 1814-265 (1836-2 or 1836-50), 1814-
823 (1842-35), 1814-824 (1836-82), 1814-825 (1836-82), 1814-1502
(1836-98), 1814-1504 (1836-82), 1814-1587a (1842-28), 1814-1681
(1842-67; Wicar alone mentioned), 1814-1760 (1842-9), 1814-1767
(questionable).
105. Valenti Rodin`o, 1996, pp. 137–8; the Epifania was acquired
at the posthumous sale of the collection of Cardinal Silvio Valenti’s
nephew, Cardinal Luigi Gonzaga, in 1809 by Guillaume Guillon-
Lethi`ere, who wrote about it to Vivant Denon on 5 May (Bicart-
S´ee and Dupuy, 1999–2000, p. 452, “J’ai achet´e `a la vente du Car-
dinal Valenti une chose fort rare, c’est un carton de Michel-Ange,
ﬁgures un peu plus fortes que nature, savoir un vieillard, un homme
mur une femme et deux enfants.” Denon replied that he “desiderait
bien de l’acquerir pour le mus´ee mais il n’a aucun fonds disponible
pour ses acquisitions. Cependent, comme il pr´esume que votre
intention est de l’envoyer a Paris, il vous invite `a la joindre `a la
fresque que vous expedirez et peut-etre s’arrangera-t-il avec vous
pour le joindre au precieux cabinet de dessins qu’il possede et que
vous connoissez.”). Wicar (see Beaucamp, 1939, pp. 558–60) had
been on the track of this cartoon earlier that year, but his efforts to
obtain it failed. The cartoon is next recorded in the collection of
Lucien Bonaparte, Prince of Canino.
106. See Ragionieri, 2000, p. 12.
107. Ufﬁzi 229F, 230F/Corpus 393 and 409.
108. Ufﬁzi 598E, 599E, 601E/Corpus 307, 308, and 306.
109. Guasti, 1863, pp. lxi–lxiii, transcribes, from Codex XV in
Casa Buonarroti a text by Michelangelo the Younger recording
sheets of drawings by Michelangelo that also bore autograph poems,
which he had obtained directly or indirectly from Bernardo Buon-
talenti. It reads as follows:
Da disegni di mano [i.e. in the possession of] Bernardo Buontalenti,
oggi miei: [1] Da un disegno a penna, d’una Femmina ritta, con un
putto a piedi, oggi venatomi in mano e fatto mio: Tu ha’ ’l viso pi`u
dolce che la sappa [Louvre RF 4112/J17/Corpus 25, which had left Casa
Buonarroti by 1758 when it was recorded in the collection of Philip
von Stosch]. [2] Da uno, dove sono due sepolcri insieme accoppiate,
con queste parole “La Fama tiene gli epitafﬁa giacere: non va n`e
innanzi n`e indietro, perche son morti, et loro opere e fermo [British
Museum W28/Corpus 189, part of the 1859 purchase]. [3] Da uno
dove sono certi Sepolcri simili a quel di sopra. “Di te ne’ veggo, e
di lontan mi chiamo” [British Museum W27/Corpus 185, part of the
1859 purchase]. [4] Da un altra carta, dove `e un gamba e altri schizzi,
“Sol’io ardendo all’ombra mi rimango” [British Museum W5/Corpus
46, part of the 1859 purchase]. [5] Nel frontespizio d’un Porto “Chi
non vuol delle foglie” [Ashmolean Museum, Cat. 56].
110. Some of these were noted by Joannides, 1978 and 1981b.
111. The 1684 inventory notes that before Leonardo Buonarroti
presented the Madonna of the Stairs to Cosimo I in 1565, he had it
cast in the bronze still in Casa Buonarroti.
112. The relevant correspondence between Francesco and
Michelangelo the Younger was published by Sebregondi Fiorentini,
1986.
113. An instance of this may be the famous study for Haman
(British Museum, W13/Corpus 163), whose provenance is unani-
mously given as Casa Buonarroti. The reason for raising the pos-
sibility that it might not have entered the Casa before the early
seventeenth century is convoluted but worth considering. The
Haman seems to be the only ex-Casa Buonarroti drawing of which
a precise early same-size, same-medium copy exists, that in the
Royal Collection at Windsor Castle (red chalk, 390 × 222 mm;
PW 450; Joannides, 1996–8, no. 40). If this copy were isolated,
it would present no serious problem to assume that the copyist
had access to the collections of Casa Buonarroti (a second copy of
the Haman drawing, in the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, red
chalk, 363 × 290 mm, probably derives from the Windsor copy
rather than the original). However, the Windsor copy seems to be
by the hand, perhaps that of a French artist, that also made copies of
two studies for the Sistine ceiling now in Haarlem (A27 and A20,
VT 48 and 49/Corpus 135 and 136; originally on a single sheet
of paper but divided into two by the time the Irregular Number-
ings 62 and 63 were applied to them) and on a second sheet in
the Royal Collection at Windsor (red chalk, 390 × 235 mm; PW
449; Joannides 1996–8, no. 46). A further copy, in Florence (Ufﬁzi
2318F/B268; red chalk 287 × 215 mm) of the study for Libica (New
York, Metropolitan Museum, Inv. 24. 197.2 recto/BT 131/Corpus
156; red chalk, 288 × 213 mm) seems, as Wilde, 1953a, p. 26, ﬁrst
suggested, to be by the same hand as the Windsor Haman copy. This
hand may also be responsible for a copy of two pages of drawings by
Michelangelo (Christ Church JBS. 62 verso/Corpus 86 verso; red
chalk, 291 × 211 mm [also copied in an etching made c. 1600: see
n. 173] and Boymans-van Beuningen Museum, Rotterdam, Inv. I.
513 recto/Corpus 121; black chalk, 206 × 193 mm) on a sheet now
in the British Museum (W86; red chalk, 306 × 202 mm, dated by

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
37
Wilde to “about 1600 or later”). Thus, to summarise the situa-
tion, we have four sheets of copies, reasonably attributable to the
same hand, of six sheets of drawings by Michelangelo made in part
for the Sistine ceiling, ﬁve of which have no recorded connection
with Casa Buonarroti. This would suggest – but not, of course,
prove – that c. 1600 the copyist had access to all six Michelangelo
sheets at the same time and, presumably, in the same collection, and
that while one of these autograph sheets (the Haman study) sub-
sequently entered Casa Buonarroti, the others (four of which bear
either the Bona Roti inscription, an Irregular Number, or both –
the Rotterdam sheet has been severely trimmed, and no inscrip-
tion now survives on it; see later in this chapter for discussion
of these inscriptions) arrived at their present locations by other
routes.
114. Sebregondi Fiorentini, 1986, and Morrogh, 1992, recog-
nised that this group of copies, classed in the Ufﬁzi under the
name of his friend Ludovico Cigoli, came from an album of
drawings by Francesco Buonarroti. The drawings were obviously
made for the draughtsman’s own reference, not with archaeological
intent.
115. Francesco’s copies are all in black chalk and are made on
one side only of sheets of paper measuring approximately 285 ×
415 mm, folded down the centre with each side used individually.
They are capricious in their juxtaposition of designs from different
periods of Michelangelo’s architectural activity, and even though
they include some same-size copies, they can vary, without apparent
reason, from inﬂated to diminished. It is, of course, only assump-
tion that the drawings for which no source can be identiﬁed depend
from originals by Michelangelo, but, failing evidence to the con-
trary, it may serve as a working hypothesis. The compiler has iden-
tiﬁed ten sheets of such copies, as follows (the lettering starts from
the upper left and moves down, and then up). Unless otherwise
indicated (> = right edge as base; < = left edge as base; ∧= top
edge as base), the sketches are arranged with the lower edge of the
sheet as base:
1. 5348A
Left side
a. Inaccurate sketch after CB 96A verso/B79/Corpus 551.
b. Loose sketch after BM W37 recto/Corpus 554.
c. Loose sketch after BM W37 verso/Corpus 554.
d. > Simpliﬁed copy of upper part of Cat. 55/P.II, 307/Corpus
605.
Right side
a. After CB97A verso/B167/Corpus 616, lower right.
b. After CB96A recto/B79/Corpus 551.
c. A loose sketch after the Campidoglio tabernacle design CB97A
recto/B167/Corpus 616.
2. 5350A
Left side
a. Small sketch of Cat. 54 recto/P.II, 333/Corpus 589.
b. A tabernacle with triangular pediment containing a symbolic?
sarcophagus: source unidentiﬁed. The original, if by Michelangelo,
probably datable c. 1520.
c. With the right edge as base. Abbreviated copy of the sarcophagus
on CB103A/B264 recto/Corpus 613.
Right side
a. Large sketch of a door or tabernacle ﬂanked by ﬂuted pilasters
or columns, probably after a lost original of the mid–late 1510s.
3. 5352A
Left side
a. Upper central section of Michelangelo’s modello for the Mag-
niﬁci Tomb (see Cat. 63 for discussion). No example of this much
reproduced design is now to be found in Casa Buonarroti, and it
is conjectural after which version this copy was made.
Right side
a. Partial same-size copy after Michelangelo’s drawing for the Mag-
niﬁci Tomb, British Museum, W26 recto/Corpus 180.
b. A sarcophagus from Michelangelo’s modello for the Magniﬁci
Tomb (see left side, a).
4. 5355A
Left side
a. After the study for the Porta Pia, CB73Abis verso/B164/Corpus
615.
Right side
a. After the sketch for the Magniﬁci Tomb, BM W26 recto/Corpus
180.
b. After the sketch for the Magniﬁci Tomb, BM W26 recto/Corpus
180.
c. > After the sketch for a single tomb, BM W26 verso/Corpus
180.
5. 5358A (reproduced by Morrogh, 1992, ﬁg. 11)
Left side
a. A free-standing monumental altar. Source unidentiﬁed; the lost
original, no doubt by Michelangelo, is probably datable c. 1520
(Morrogh interpreted this drawing as a study for a free-standing
Medici tomb, but the compiler thinks it is for a monumental altar).
Right side
a. A pedimented horizontally oriented window. Source unknown,
the original probably datable c. 1560.
b. A blind window for the Porta Pia, after CB106A verso/B169/
Corpus 619, upper drawing.
c. A blind window for the Porta Pia, after CB106A verso/B169/
Corpus 619, lower drawing.
6. 5390A
Left side
a. Loose variants of the three drawings for a lavabo, CB73A verso/
B97/Corpus 274, re-arranged.
Right side
a. Slightly enlarged copy of niched tabernacle, CB112A verso/
B100/Corpus 197.
7. 5394A
Left side
a. > Laterally compressed copy of the ciborium? CB40A recto/
B98/Corpus 177.
b. > Same size copy of Cat. 21 (d)/P.II, 307/Corpus 187.
Right side
a. > Slightly enlarged copy of throne design, CB72A recto/B63/
Corpus 199.
b. > A complex wall or ?fountain design articulated with ?female
herms; source unidentiﬁed. Michelangelo’s authorship of the orig-
inal is conjectural, but if by him, it is probably datable c. 1516. A
page that contains an early drawing for the San Lorenzo fac¸ade
(CB44A verso/B43/Corpus 498) includes a similar herm, and this
may not, as is usually thought, be related to the Julius Tomb.

38
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
8. 5400A
Left side
a. Proﬁle of a cornice, after CB62A recto/B84/Corpus 532, upper
right.
b. > A sarcophagus, after CB19F verso/B150/Corpus 368, centre.
c. >A sarcophagus, after CB19F verso/B150/Corpus 368, upper
centre.
d. Proﬁle of a cornice, after CB62A recto/B84/Corpus 532, middle
right.
e. Proﬁle of a cornice, after CB62A recto/B84/Corpus 532,
centre.
f. Proﬁle of a cornice, after CB62A recto/B84/Corpus 532, left.
g. Proﬁle of a cornice, after CB62A recto/B84/Corpus 532, right.
Right side
a. > Proﬁle labelled piedestallo; source unidentiﬁed.
b. A wall tomb, after CB114A verso/B37/Corpus 176, lower
right.
c. A sarcophagus, probably either an adapted copy of CB19F
verso/B150/Corpus 368, upper right, or after a variant of this now
excised from that sheet.
d. ∧Proﬁle labelled piedestallo; source unidentiﬁed.
e. A wall tomb after that on CB88A recto/B57/Corpus 181, lower
left.
f. A sarcophagus, interpreted after CB19F verso/B150/Corpus 368,
lower left.
9. 5403A
Left side
a. After the tomb design on BM W25recto/Corpus 184, upper
right.
b. After the tomb design on BM W25 recto/Corpus 184, lower
left.
c. > Cornice proﬁles, source unidentiﬁed.
d. > After the tomb design on CB71A recto/B58/Corpus 183.
e. ∧Cornice proﬁles, source unidentiﬁed.
Right side
a. Enlarged copy of the tomb design CB49A recto/B59/Corpus
182.
b. < Copy of the tomb design CB128A/B87/Corpus 279.
c. ?Medici ring with diamond, source unidentiﬁed.
d. Cornice proﬁles, source unidentiﬁed.
10. 5406A
Left side
a. Enlarged version of CB84A recto/B166/Corpus 614.
b. > Enlarged copy of a wall tomb design CB114A verso/B37/
Corpus 176.
c. > Enlarged copy of a wall tomb design CB114A verso/B37/
Corpus 176.
d. > Copy of the central section of CB52A/B258/Corpus 188.
Right side
a. Somewhat regularised and enlarged copy of the central section
of W38 recto/Corpus 561 (N.B.: Unlike the other originals in
the British Museum recorded in Francesco’s copies, this drawing
was not part of the 1859 purchase but entered the museum from
the collections of Lawrence, Samuel Woodburn [it was obviously
among those not offered to Oxford], his sale of 1860, and Phillips-
Fenwick).
b. Wall tomb, after CB114A verso/B37/Corpus 176.
c. Wall tomb, after JBS 64 verso/Corpus 280, study at lower right.
See note 60.
116. From a record of books and papers taken by Francesco to
Malta in 1607, Sebregondi Fiorentini, 1986, pp. 72–4, suggests
that at least two ﬁgurative drawings by Michelangelo – the Piet`a
(Corpus 426; black chalk, 295 × 195 mm [cut down]) now in
the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston, drawn for Vittoria
Colonna, and a Phaeton – as well as several architectural drawings –
travelled to Malta with Francesco. However, it is unclear from the
phrasing whether disegno means drawing or design, and because
the two identiﬁable ﬁgurative compositions were widely known in
engraving, and because there is no evidence that the Boston Piet`a
or any version of the Phaeton was ever in Buonarroti possession,
this suggestion must be treated with caution.
117. These groups of drawings are discussed with great insight
by Papi, 1989, pp. 35–6 and 1994, pp. 150–4, who illustrates and
analyses a selection of them.
118. The compiler is at present aware of twenty-seven sheets by
Commodi that certainly or probably contain copies after drawings
by Michelangelo or his studio, of which a summary listing follows.
Those sheets that certainly or probably formed part of the sketch-
book are indicated by an asterisk (∗). Some of the Michelangelesque
sources were noted on the copies by P. N. Ferri:
1. 18528F, red chalk, 234 × 185 mm (Illustrated Corpus, I, p. 118),
same-size copy of CB1F/B8/Corpus 158. (Recognised as by Com-
modi by Annamaria Petrioli Tofani, in an inscription on the
mount.)
2. 18535F, black chalk, 250 × 103 mm, Papi, 1994, D1
a. Same-size copy after the raised right hand on CB52F
recto/B227/Corpus 142.
b. Same-size copy after the leg on CB52F recto/B227/Corpus 142.
(Recognised as by Commodi by Annamaria Petrioli Tofani, in an
inscription on the mount.)
3. ∗18599F, 289 × 214 mm
Recto, pen and ink and wash over traces of black chalk (Papi, 1989,
ﬁg. 10a; 1994, D2, ﬁg. 48, with sources identiﬁed).
a. St. John Filling His Bowl, probably after CB19F recto/B150/
Corpus 368.
b. Head of a Man, after CB69F verso/B143/Corpus 91.
c. A clenched hand, probably abbreviated from CB 69F recto/
B143/Corpus 91.
d. The Virgin and Child, after BM W83/Corpus 391 (1859 pur-
chase).
Verso, pen and ink and wash
a. An upward reaching ﬁgure, after BM W33 verso/Corpus 236.
b. A striding nude man, after BM W48 recto/Corpus 208 verso
(this drawing is given by Wilde to a pupil of Michelangelo; the
other side of the sheet contains an autograph study for a reclining,
ﬁgure which is identiﬁed by Wilde as Leda but which the compiler
is inclined to think is the Night).
c. Hercules and Antaeus, after BM W33 recto/Corpus 236.
d. A reclining youth; source unidentiﬁed.
4. 18603F, red chalk, 106 × 148 mm
Same-size copy of the Bed of Polycleitus, CB53F recto/B174/
Corpus 229bis.
5. ∗18607F, 213 × 155 mm
Recto, black chalk
A nude standing ﬁgure, probably after a lost sketch for Christ in
the Last Judgement.
Verso, black chalk and pen
a. A face looking down, after CB47F/B22/Corpus 124 (pen).

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
39
b. After the Risen Christ, CB66F recto/B136/Corpus 262.
c. A face looking down, after CB47F/B22/Corpus 124 (pen).
d. A face looking down, after CB47F/B22/Corpus 124 (pen).
(a, c, and d identiﬁed in an annotation on the mount; it may be,
however, that c and d are based on a similar original, now lost.)
6. ∗18608F, 215 × 145 mm
Recto, pen and ink
a. The turning ﬁgure from the Bed of Polycleitus, CB53 recto/B174/
Corpus 229bis.
b. A skull in left proﬁle, after Cat. 30 verso/Corpus 237.
c. Hercules and Antaeus, adapted from CB53 recto/B174/Corpus
229bis.
d. A ﬁgure showing his bottom, after Cat. 30 verso/Corpus 237.
Verso, pen and ink over red chalk
a. A proﬁle after Ufﬁzi 18724 verso/B237/Corpus 317 (red chalk).
Source identiﬁed in a note on the mount.
b. A seated child, after one at the far right of the Infant Baccha-
nal, more probably after the engraving by Beatrizet (The Illustrated
Bartsch, 29, p. 297, no. 40) than Michelangelo’s drawing at Windsor,
PW431/Corpus 338.
7. ∗18609F, 213 × 293 mm, pen and ink, pen and ink over black
chalk, black chalk
Recto
a. A brooding ﬁgure, after AB, XII, fol. 46/B 360 probably by
Antonio Mini of c. 1528.
b. Proﬁle of an old woman, after Cat. 30 recto/Corpus 237.
c. A man on horseback, after Cat. 30 recto/Corpus 237.
d. A left hand, after CB37A verso/B83/Corpus 226.
Verso
a. Hercules and Antaeus, after Cat. 30 recto/Corpus 237, upper study.
b. A hand; source unidentiﬁed.
c. Hercules and Antaeus, after Cat. 30 recto/Corpus 237, lower
study.
8. ∗18610F, 214 × 293 mm
Recto, pen and black chalk
a. A left foot seen from the left; source unidentiﬁed.
b. A ﬁgure with arms and legs bent back over a board, after the
small sketch on CB42A recto/B78/Corpus 541.
c. Christ in Limbo, modiﬁed after CB35F/B135/Corpus 90.
d. A head after CB1F/B8/Corpus 158.
e. A male ﬁgure blowing a trumpet, perhaps after a variant of a ﬁg-
ure known in a small sketch, probably after rather than by Michelan-
gelo, in the British Library (BL) Department of Manuscripts, Add.
Ms. 21907, fol. 1 recto (not in W)/Corpus 217.
Verso
a. A ﬁgure seen from the left, left arm outstretched behind, head
turned left over shoulder, in pen; source unidentiﬁed.
b. A ﬁgure loosely based on the David, probably made after a draw-
ing by Antonio Mini offered at Bonham’s, London, 8 July 2002,
lot 69; pen and ink over red chalk, 208 × 172 mm.
9. ∗18611F, 214 × 293 mm, black chalk and pen
Recto
a. A turning ﬁgure seen from the front, after Cat. 73 recto, by
Antonio Mini.
b. Nude ﬁgure with a raised arm; source unidentiﬁed.
c. A kneeling male ﬁgure blowing a trumpet (see 18610F, verso (e)).
d. A left hand, after CB37A verso/B83/Corpus 226.
e. A putto, after the third from left in Infant Bacchanal, more likely
from the engraving by Beatrizet (The Illustrated Bartsch 29, p. 297,
no. 40) than Michelangelo’s drawing at Windsor, PW431/Corpus
338.
Verso, pen and ink and black chalk
a. A hawk perched on a wrist; source unidentiﬁed.
b. A ﬂeeing ﬁgure; source unidentiﬁed.
c. A left hand, perhaps modiﬁed after BM W7 recto/Corpus 119
(1859 purchase).
d. > A view of Day from the rear, same size after Cat. 73 recto, by
Antonio Mini.
10. 18614F, 153 × 162 mm, pen and ink
After the Settignano Triton, Corpus 11
11. ∗18619F, 294 × 434 mm, pen and ink with wash
Recto (Papi, 1994, D4, ﬁg. 49, with some sources identiﬁed)
Left side
a. A head and shoulder in outline; source unidentiﬁed.
b. A left hand resting on a ledge?; source unidentiﬁed.
c. Leda, after Ufﬁzi 18737F recto/B3/Corpus 44 (identiﬁed by
Ferri-Jacobsen 1905, p. 28).
d. A left hand resting on a ledge?; source unidentiﬁed.
e. A left hand resting on a ledge?; source unidentiﬁed.
f. The right leg of the Child, after CB23F/B9/Corpus 29.
g. The gesturing ﬁgure at table in the Haman pendentive (more
likely after a copy from the fresco than a lost original study
for it).
h. The legs of the Child, after CB23F/B9/Corpus 29.
i. A standing Apostle?, after BM W74/Corpus 403
Right side
j. A left hand; source unidentiﬁed.
k. A sprawling man, after Ufﬁzi 18721F recto/B175/Corpus 149
(probably by Mini after a lost sketch by Michelangelo).
l. The right hand of Ahasuerus from the Haman pendentive (as g).
m. A ﬁgure reeling back, after Ufﬁzi 18721 recto/B175/Corpus
149 (as k).
n. A right hand holding a baton?; source unidentiﬁed.
o. A head; source unidentiﬁed.
p. An antique cornice, after CB2A recto/B24/Corpus 517.
q. A? hand; source unidentiﬁed.
Verso, black chalk, pen, and pen and wash (Papi, 1989, ﬁg. 10b;
1994, D4, ﬁg. 50, with some sources identiﬁed).
Left side
a. St. Sebastian; source unidentiﬁed.
b. An ignudo, after CB75F/B15/Corpus 145, lower centre.
c. An ignudo, after CB75F/B15/Corpus 145, centre.
d. A head turned up in left proﬁle; source unidentiﬁed.
e. An ignudo, after CB75F/B15/Corpus 145, lower left.
Right side
f. A raised left hand, after the study for Adam, CB64F/B238/
Corpus 132.
g. A head turned up to right, developed from i.
h. A head turned up to right, developed from i.
i. A ﬁgure bending in a complex pose, after BM W8 verso/Corpus
135 (1859 purchase).
j. A right hand holding a strap; source unidentiﬁed.
k. A raised right hand after the study for Adam, CB64F/B238/
Corpus 132.
l. A face looking down, after CB47F/B22/Corpus 124.
m. A mouth, above which is a tiny dragon, after Hamburg 21094
recto/Corpus 35. (This drawing bears the mark of Sir Peter Lely;
it, therefore, must have left Casa Buonarroti before Lely’s death in
1680. In principle, it might have been in another collection when

40
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
Commodi copied it, but the layout of the present sheet makes this
unlikely.)
n. A right calf, seen from the front, source unidentiﬁed.
o. Indecipherable.
12. ∗18620F, 290 × 427 mm
Recto, pen and ink, with wash, black chalk (Papi, 1989, ﬁg. 11a;
1994, D5, ﬁg. 51; some sources identiﬁed)
Left side
a. A left hand seen from the left; source unidentiﬁed.
b. A left hand seen from the left, holding a strap?; source uniden-
tiﬁed.
c. A ﬂeeing man, after CB69F verso/B147/Corpus 91.
d. A right hand holding a strap?; source unidentiﬁed.
e. A horse with a rider hurling a javelin, after Cat. 6/Corpus 39.
f. A horse, after Cat. 6/Corpus 39.
Right side
g. A right hand; source unidentiﬁed.
h. An eye, after CB28F/B213/Corpus 126 (after Michelangelo).
i. A brow, after CB28F/B213/Corpus 126 (after Michelangelo).
j. A nose and mouth, after CB28F/B213/Corpus 126 (after
Michelangelo).
k. A right foot, seen from below; source unidentiﬁed.
l. A man carrying a bundle, perhaps after a lost copy by Mini of a
sketch by Michelangelo for the Sistine Flood. Black chalk.
m. A left foot, seen from below; source unidentiﬁed.
n. A right hand holding a handle?; source unidentiﬁed.
o. A left foot and calf, seen from below; source unidentiﬁed.
Verso (Papi, 1989, ﬁg. 11b; 1994, D5, ﬁg. 52; some sources iden-
tiﬁed)
Left side, black chalk
a. A left hand bent as though holding something, seen obliquely
from the front; source unidentiﬁed.
b. A left hand, after BM W10 verso/Corpus 154.
c. A mouth, after Besanc¸on D3117 (or the lost original of that
drawing)/Corpus 319.
d. A lower right leg; source unidentiﬁed.
e. A right calf, seen from the front; source unidentiﬁed.
f. A left ear, ?after Besanc¸on D3117 (or the lost original of that
drawing)/Corpus 319.
g. A man carrying another, after Ufﬁzi 617E/B212/Corpus 127
(after Michelangelo).
h. Part of a leg; source unidentiﬁed.
i. A man carrying another, perhaps after a lost copy by Mini of a
sketch by Michelangelo for the Sistine Flood.
j. A left leg; source unidentiﬁed.
k. A left hand after Ufﬁzi 18721F verso/B175/Corpus 149.
Right side; pen and ink and wash
l. A right hand; source unidentiﬁed.
m. A kneeling man with raised hands seen from the rear, after
CB54F recto/B146/Corpus 284.
n. A ﬂeeing ﬁgure; source unidentiﬁed.
o. A horseman throwing a javelin, after Cat. 6 recto/Corpus 39.
p. A man seen from the rear, sprawling in a complex pose; source
unidentiﬁed.
13. ∗18621F, 425 × 293 mm
Recto, black chalk, black chalk with wash, pen, and pen and wash
over black chalk
Left side
a. A left leg after CB52F recto/B227/Corpus 142.
b. A right leg, after CB52F/B227/Corpus 142.
c. After Cat. 51/Corpus 428?
d. The left hand of Adam, after Detroit 27.2 recto/Corpus 120.
(No provenance is recorded for this sheet before its appearance in
the Emile Wauters Collection.)
e. A right calf, after CB52F recto/B227/Corpus 142.
f. Ignudo sketch, after BM W8 verso/Corpus 139 (1859 purchase).
g. Ignudo sketch, after BM W8 verso/Corpus 139.
Right side
a. After CB8F/B20/Corpus 122.
b. A nude male ﬁgure seated in right proﬁle, his right hand under
his right thigh, his left arm raised with his left hand bent against
his face; source unidentiﬁed.
Verso
Left side, black chalk, pen, and pen and wash
a. A left calf seen from the front, after Ufﬁzi 18720F verso/
B19/Corpus 141.
b. ∧A left arm and hand, perhaps after a lost drawing for Adam in
the Creation.
c. A right arm and hand, after CB12F/B176/Corpus 159.
d. A sprawling or falling ﬁgure; source unidentiﬁed.
e. An ignudo, after Ufﬁzi 18720F recto/B19/Corpus 141.
Right side
a. St. John Filling His Bowl, after CB19F verso/B150/Corpus 368.
b. A left foot seen from below; source unidentiﬁed.
c. A face seen nearly full on, enlarged after BM W40 verso/Corpus
315, by Antonio Mini (1859 purchase).
d. A man reading, after CB 12F/B176/Corpus 159.
e. A right foot, from the front; source unidentiﬁed.
f. A right hand resting on something, perhaps a fusion of the two
drawings on Detroit 27.2 verso/Corpus 120.
14. ∗18622F, 429 × 292 mm pen
Recto
Left side
a. A cruciﬁed man, a same-size adaptation of the subsidiary ﬁgure
on BM W12/ Corpus 162 (1859 purchase).
b. A study for the Last Judgement, after BM 1980-10-11-46/Turner,
1999, no. 355 verso/Corpus 359 (acquired in Italy in the 1820s
from the Florentine sculptor Aristodemo Costoli by Rev. Robert
Sandford).
Right side
c. The hindquarters of a horse, same size, after Cat. 4 recto, lower
drawing/Corpus 102.
Verso
Left side
a. A cruciﬁed man, same size, after the main ﬁgure on
BMW12/Corpus 162 (1859 purchase).
b. The hindquarters of a horse, same size, after Cat. 4 recto, lower
drawing/Corpus 102.
Right side
c. A resting ﬁgure; source unidentiﬁed.
d. The horse, after Cat. 4 recto, upper drawing/Corpus 102.
e. The hindquarters of a horse, sketch after Cat. 4 recto, lower
drawing/Corpus 102.
15. 18625F, red chalk, 255 × 172 mm
A half-seated man? seen obliquely from the front with right
arm raised, slightly enlarged, after Ufﬁzi 18729F/B52/Corpus 294.
(Identiﬁed by Ferri.)

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
41
16. 18626F, red chalk, 252 × 172 mm (Papi, 1994, D6, ﬁg. 53)
A half-seated man? seen obliquely from the front with right
arm raised, slightly enlarged, after Ufﬁzi 18729F/B52/Corpus 294.
(Source identiﬁed in an inscription on the drawing.)
17. 18629F, black chalk 216 × 149 mm
The back of a statue of Venus, after CB16F/B69/Corpus 234.
18. 18632F, red chalk, 251 × 189 mm
Enlarged copy after the head of an ignudo on Louvre Inv. 860
recto/J19/Corpus 143.
19. 18633F, pen over red chalk, 260 × 189 mm
After CB43F recto/B239/Corpus 128, not by Michelangelo.
(Source noted by Ferri.)
20. 18634F, red chalk, 280 × 184 mm
Same size, after Ufﬁzi 233F recto/B1/Corpus 37. (Source noted
by Ferri.)
21. ∗18654, pen, 212 × 293 mm
Recto only
a. Sketch for an ?ignudo, facing left, adapted from Cat. 13, recto F
(inverted)/PII 303/Corpus 170.
b. Sketch for an ignudo, facing right, after Cat. 14 verso B/P.II
304/Corpus 171.
c. Sketch for an ancestor reading, after Cat. 9 verso C/P.II
299/Corpus 166.
22. 18655F, pen, 233 × 156 mm
Recto
A genre sketch by Commodi with no connection to Michelan-
gelo.
Verso
A same-size copy of the small standing ﬁgure at the lower left of
Ufﬁzi 233F recto/ B1/Corpus 37.
23. ∗18659F, pen, 295 × 425 mm
Recto (Papi, 1994, D7 ﬁg 54; sources identiﬁed)
Left side
Virgin and Child after CB72F/B203, probably by Niccol`o Tri-
bolo.
Right side
A Virtue striking downwards for the Last Judgement, after BM
1980-10-11-46/Turner, 1999, no. 355 recto/Corpus 359 (acquired
in Italy in the 1820s from the Florentine sculptor Aristodemo Cos-
toli by Rev. Robert Sandford).
Verso
A left hand resting on an unidentiﬁable form; source unidenti-
ﬁed.
24. ∗18660, pen and red chalk, 212 × 293 mm
Recto
a. A standing man adapted and enlarged from a ﬁgure at the left of
the roundel design on Ufﬁzi 18721F recto/B175/Corpus 149.
b. Probably after a lost drawing by Antonio Mini, similar to
CB74F/B177.
Verso
a. Two men moving left to right, one with hands bound behind
him, the other with his right arm raised; source unidentiﬁed.
25. ∗18661F, pen and black chalk, 209 × 295 mm
Recto
a. A half-length ﬁgure, seen frontally, with his left arm raised, in
pen; source unidentiﬁed.
b. The same as a, bust length, in black chalk.
c. A standing ﬁgure, left leg bent forward, in left proﬁle; source
unidentiﬁed.
d. A gesturing ﬁgure, adapted from CB61F verso/B137/Corpus
261.
e. A left leg, from the rear; source unidentiﬁed.
Verso
a. A stooping ﬁgure in left proﬁle, left hand reaching down, perhaps
an interpretation of the underdrawing of the Risen Christ, CB66F
recto/B136/Corpus 262.
b. Upper part of study for the Risen Christ, CB66F recto/B136/
Corpus 262.
26. ∗18662F, black chalk and pen, 215 × 294 mm
Recto
a. After Ufﬁzi 18729/B52/Corpus 294 (cf. 18626F), pen. (The
addition of the hammer, unclear in Michelangelo’s original and
Commodi’s chalk copy, is appropriate to the ﬁgure’s pose and per-
haps identiﬁes him as Vulcan.)
b. A standing youth, seen from the front, looking to his right, black
chalk; source unidentiﬁed but perhaps after a drawing by Antonio
Mini.
c. A small sketch of a male ﬁgure lying on his back, pen; source
unidentiﬁed.
27. 18675F, black chalk, 292 × 220 mm
Part of a torso, probably after a lost study by Michelangelo of
the 1520s.
119. Ufﬁzi 18524F (red chalk, 289 × 209 mm), 18665F (pen
and ink over red chalk, 440 × 292 mm), 18666F (pen and ink over
red chalk, 440 × 290 mm), all three reproduced by Ragionieri,
2000, pp. 44–5. A fourth and ﬁfth drawing (18538F, black chalk
with white body colour, 243 × 188 mm, and 18519F, black chalk,
175 × 320 mm), both given to Commodi by Annamaria Petrioli
Tofani, copy, respectively, the terracotta torso in Casa Buonarroti,
perhaps made in connection with the Dying Slave, and the wax
model variously identifed as for a River God or a Slave but more
probably for the latter (Inv. 191 and 542, Ragionieri, 2000, nos. 3
and 4, pp. 32–41; including illustrations of Commodi’s copies); a
sixth (18427BisF; pen and ink, 295 × 215 mm) is after the cruciﬁed
thief at the right hand of Christ in the bronze group designed by
Michelangelo.
120. Inv. 18614F. The Settignano Triton seems ﬁrst to have been
mentioned in print in 1746 by Gori, in his edition of Condivi,
p. 99; in 1760 Bottari provided a more circumstantial account (Ed.
Vasari, III, p. 349) “nella sua Villa di Settignano allato al camino `e
un Satiro disegnato sul muro col carbone di Michelangelo quando
stava scaldandosi. E disegnato meravigliosamente ad naturale, e con
la sua solita ﬁera, e terribil maniera.”
121. Ufﬁzi 17425A, an illustrated letter from Andrea to Ludovico
Buonarroti discussing heraldry, is dated “la vigilia di S, Lorenzo,
1596”; 18600F is the beginning of a draft letter to the same. Ferri
and Jacobsen, 1903, p. 87, who ﬁrst mentioned these drawings,
gave them to Ludovico himself on the strength of the inscription
on 18600F.
122. Papi, 1994, pp. 150–2.
123. Thus, it is possible, as Ragionieri 2000, pp. 12–14, remarks,
that these works were copied by Commodi while they were
(putatively) in Medici possession between 1565, when Leonardo
Buonarroti, under compulsion, presented to Cosimo I the con-
tents of Michelangelo’s via Mozza Studio, and 1617. However, it
seems unlikely that Cosimo I would have coveted scrappy drawings

42
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
without Medici connections, and the compiler is inclined to think
that these remained in the family and were copied by Commodi
in Casa Buonarroti. A negative argument in favour of this view
may be adduced: There are no known copies by Commodi after
drawings by Michelangelo that were certainly in Medici Grand
Ducal possession during Commodi’s lifetime. Thus, he did not
copy either precisely or sketchily masterpieces by Michelangelo
such as the Cleopatra made for Cavalieri, the two cartonetti prepared
for Marcello Venusti, or the three Presentation Drawings of Ideal
Heads given to Gherardo Perini, all of which, minus, of course, the
Cleopatra, remain in the Ufﬁzi. The most plausible explanation for
this absence is that Commodi did not have access to the Medici
Collection of drawings.
124. See n. 114 nos. 14 and 22.
125. 233F/B1/Corpus 37, 18720F/B19/Corpus 141, 18721F/
B175/Corpus 149, 18724F/B23/Corpus 317, 18729F/B52/Corpus
294, 18737F/B3/Corpus 44.
126. Inv. 860/J19/Corpus 143; black chalk, 305 × 210 mm
127. JBS 64 verso/Corpus 280; black chalk and pen and ink,
333 × 248 mm, on a Baldinucci mount.
128. These drawings, both in black chalk, brown wash, and
touches of white body colour (respectively, Paris, Fondation Custo-
dia Inv. 5422; 253 × 339 mm, and Rotterdam, Museum Boymans-
van Beuningen Inv. V.7; 240 × 346 mm) were recently discussed
by R. Rosenberg in Weil-Garris Brandt et al., 1999–2000, nos. 6a
and 6b; unlike Rosenberg, the compiler believes both drawings to
be autograph works by Rubens. A copy after the Rotterdam draw-
ing (known to the compiler only from an old photograph in the
Witt Library) is in the collection of the University of W¨urzburg;
it appears to be by Jacob Jordaens.
129. Signiﬁcantly, the copies after drawings by Michelangelo (or
of copies by Raffaello da Montelupo after drawings by Michelan-
gelo) either made or owned by Gabbiani, listed in Cat. 34 are, with
a single exception, after drawings now in the Ufﬁzi and presumably
always in Grand Ducal possession. Gabbiani seems to have made
(or owned) no copies after Casa Buonarroti drawings.
130. Rennes, Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts, Inv. 74.73.495; see
R. Rosenberg, 2000, NZ 167; and Ramade, 1985, no. 304; Drouais
led the way among Jacques-Louis David’s pupils in exploiting
Michelangelo’s works as a visual source.
131. Mariette, 1746, pp. 231–2.
132. Condivi-Gori, 1746, p. xviii; Wright, 1730, p. 422, had
already noted: “At the Palace of the Senator Buonarroti, we saw
two books ﬁlled with sketches of Architecture, designed by Mich.
Angelo, who was his Ancestor.”
133. CB 45A/B245/Corpus 497: This was recorded as hanging
in Stanza III in the description of the Gallery of 1684, together with
the Cleopatra and two other undescribed drawings by Michelangelo.
In Stanza III a “Madonna, disegno in matita di Michelangelo”
is mentioned, the famous cartoon still in Casa Buonarroti, CB
71F/B121/Corpus 239. (See Procacci, 1967, pp. 227–8.)
134. Mariette, 1746, pp. 231–2.
135. These are also recorded in 1684: “e vi sono due grossi
volumi, disegni di Michelangelo Buonarroti, ordinati e messi
al armadio accanto, per esser grandi.” There were also engrav-
ings in the Buonarroti Collection, no doubt including most
of those known after Michelangelo’s works (Procacci, 1967,
p. 228).
136. Reprinted in Procacci, 1967, pp. 219–30.
137. For this episode, see Thornton and Warren, 1998. Some
support for the Cavaliere Michelangelo’s claim is provided by an
inscription on the sheet that bears Michelangelo’s famous study
for the Last Judgement, CB65F recto/B142/Corpus 347: “Questo
disegno `e di propriet`a di Michel.o del fu Carlo Buonarroti lasciato
in custodia al cugino Cosimo, anno 1833.” If this inscription is
taken at face value, it would seem that there was before 1833 a
fraternal division of Michelangelo’s drawings.
138. Such as, for example, Ufﬁzi 603E/B187/Corpus 306 (Joan-
nides, 2002–3b, no. 184 [183 in the English-language edition])
and Ufﬁzi 251F/B243 and the copy after a developed version of
this design by Francesco Salviati, Ufﬁzi 14673F (Joannides, 2002a,
nos. 8 and 9).
139. Davis, 2002, argues that c. 1525 Michelangelo gave a sheet of
architectural designs now in the Centro Internazionale di Studi di
Architettura Andrea Palladio, Vicenza, to Sarto’s wayward pupil
Jacopo di Giovanni di Francesco, alias Jacone, who would be
responsible for the pen drawings on the verso, overlaying Michelan-
gelo’s indications in red chalk. Davis’s attribution was anticipated
by the late James Byam Shaw, who annotated a reproduction of
the drawing in the Witt Library with Jacone’s name. The sheet’s
history before its appearance in the sale of the Squire Collection,
Sotheby’s, 28 June 1979, lot 40, is unknown.
140. Metropolitan Museum of Art, 87.12.69/BT 211.
141. Melbourne, National Gallery of Victoria, no. 351/4.
142. Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Armand-Valton, no. 197A/Corpus
62 and Louvre Inv. 844/J50.
143. On a sheet subsequently used by Michelangelo for fortiﬁ-
cation drawings, CB27A recto/Barocchi 182/Corpus 567; various
media, 562 × 407 mm. Bartolommeo Bergamasco’s statue is illus-
trated in Schulz, 1991, ﬁg. 36. Mini’s copy was probably made from
a clay or wax model.
144. Carteggio, V, MCCCXVII.
145. Lille, Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts; Brejon de Lavergn´ee, 1997,
nos. 4 and 5.
146. Mus´ee Bonnat, Bayonne, Bean, no. 73. The compiler is
now inclined to think that this autograph – although much dam-
aged and retouched – drawing is the portrait of Tommaso de’ Cav-
alieri formerly in Farnese possession.
147. Riebesell, 1989, pp. 124–31, with a table on p. 127.
148. Perhaps further drawings attributed to Michelangelo
and/or Raphael were acquired from the estate of the Cavaliere
d’Arpino.
149. Clayton, 1996–8, p. 208.
150. Clifford, 2002, passim.
151. Riebesell, 1989, p. 201.
152. This may be true of Michelangelo’s Cooper-Hewitt Cande-
labrum, a highly ﬁnished modello of c. 1520, which many years later
he converted into a menorah by sketchy black chalk additions.
153. Thus, the sculptor Cristoforo Stati da Bracciano (1556–1619)
owned two sheets of drawings by Michelangelo, now lost, that also
contained poems (and perhaps others that did not). Guasti, 1863,
p. XI, cites the following notes by Michelangelo the Younger: “[1]
Da un carta di schizzi di Michelangelo in mano (i.e., in possession
of) di Cristoforo da Bracciano scultore eravi scritti questi Madrigale,
anzi ballata, pareva di mano di Michelagnolo stesso ‘Quanto sare
men doglia il morir presto’ [2] Nel rovescio di una carta dove son
certe modanature di Michelagnolo, in mano (i.e., in possession of)
al medesimo Bracciano ‘Com’ ar`o dunque ardire.’”

THE DISPERSAL AND FORMATION OF SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE’S COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
43
154. See Szanto, 2002.
155. Ibid, p. 56.
156. BK116/Corpus 5, 118/Corpus 22, 120/Corpus 144, 123/
Corpus 53.
157. Schnapper, 1994, pp. 267–80.
158. Py, 2001, nos. 368, 369, 764–9, 1129, [Portefeuille] P.
159. Thus, the Piet`a in the Albertina (BK103/Corpus 432; red
chalk 404 × 233 mm), which was probably owned by Crozat and
Mariette, bears a large pen and ink inscription at lower left: Michel
Ange. The compiler has noticed the same inscription on four other
sheets:
1. Nationalmuseum, Stockholm; Bjurstr¨om, Loisel, and Pilliod,
2002, no. 1110, as follower of Bandinelli; pen and ink, 264 ×
162 mm
2. Nationalmuseum, Stockholm; Bjurstr¨om Loisel, and Pilliod,
2002, no. 1201, as Domenico Beccafumi; pen and ink, 275 ×
164 mm
3. A copy after Michelangelo’s Morgan Library Annunciation, for-
merly in the Sir Robert Mond Collection (L.2813a; Borenius and
Wittkower, 1937, no. 156), sold Christie’s, London, 18 April 1989,
lot 7, as attributed to Giulio Clovio; black chalk, 318 × 248 mm
4. A studio copy after lost sketches by Michelangelo drawn on
the verso of a portion of an autograph letter by Michelangelo, for-
merly Brussels, E. Wauters Collection; pen and ink, 220 × 160 mm
(K. Frey, 1909–11, pl. 249).
The two Stockholm drawings were acquired as Michelangelos
by Tessin at the Crozat sale (1201 was part of lot 20), but the inscrip-
tion common to them and to the three other drawings implies that
all ﬁve were in the same French collection before Crozat acquired
them. Whether any one of these sheets was owned by Jabach, and
how those in Stockholm acquired the patently incorrect attribution
to Michelangelo, are matters for conjecture.
160. This exception is Haarlem A17/VT52/Corpus 130; it may
be that in this case Primaticcio knew not the original but a replica,
perhaps by Mini. Alternatively, it is possible that, as Van Tuyll
van Serooskerken suggests, this drawing could have returned to
Italy with the cartoons sent back to Michelangelo by Rustici.
If so, it would presumably have been given by Michelangelo to
Daniele.
161. Joannides, 2001.
162. For the inventory, see Lafranconi, 1998; for further discus-
sion, Lafranconi, 2003.
163. Haarlem A18/VT46/Corpus 51. Treves, 2001, who also
thought that Daniele may have owned the two Cascina draw-
ings, nevertheless argued that the Baptism was designed not by
Daniele but by Michele degli Alberti. As will be suggested later,
Michele degli Alberti may well have inherited this drawing, which
bears the Bona Roti inscription, after Daniele’s death. To the com-
piler, however, the sophistication with which drawings by Daniele
and Michelangelo, which had been generated for different pur-
poses, were combined in this panel suggests the mind of Daniele
himself.
164. Baglione, 1642, p. 66: “Giacomo Rocca . . . al quale lasci`o
Danielle bellissimi disegni non solo de’ suoi, ma anche di quelli
di Michelagnolo Buonarroti, li quali egli a tutti per maraviglia
mostrava. E dalla vista di questi grand’ utile apprese, e molto gusto
il Cavalier Giuseppe Cesari da Arpino, quando era giovane, & in
diversi lavori, che da Giacomo Rocca prendeva a fare, n’hebbe
aiuto.” In his commentary, R¨ottgen suggests that a Cruciﬁxion in
Galleria Borghese traditionally attributed to Cesari may have been
begun by Giacomo Rocca.
165. Vasari, 1759–60, III, p. 350. Bottari’s information came from
a letter received from Gaburri on 1 August 1741 (Fanfani, 1876,
pp. 97–8). This provides a little more information: “Una bellissima
collezione di disegni originali di Michelagnolo possede in Firenze il
Sig, Filipp. Cicciaporci, gentiluomo ﬁorentino, nella sua numerosa
collezione di eccellenti disegni tanto antichi che moderni. Questi
sono un gran parte della collezione che aveva gi`a fatta in Roma il
Cav. Giuseppe Cesare d’Arpino; e molti altri sono andati dispersi.
Oltre ai disegni di Michel-Angelo, i quali sono 80 originali di studi
terminati e conclusi, parte a lapis rosso e parte a lapis nero, e alcuni
toccata a penna con quella diligenza, bravura e intelligenza come era
suo costume. Vi sono altresi alcuni nudi di man di quel Brachettone
(i.e., Daniele da Volterra) che coperse le nudit`a di molte di quelle
ﬁgure che dipinse M. A. nella Capella Sistina; e questi sono gli
studi per adattarvi i panni.”
166. The dragon was drawn on a teaching sheet – indeed, it
submerges sketches by Mini – which might well have gone with
Mini to France but the situation is complicated rather than clariﬁed
by a copy in the Louvre (Inv. 693/J103), which bears inscriptions
both in Italian and French.
167. Clayton, 1996–8, pp. 208–9.
168. Ibid.
169. Cats. 1, 2, 5, 20, 26, 45, 57.
170. Van Tuyll van Serooskerken, nos. 228–43.
171. Noted by Treves, 2001, pp. 39–40. She further pointed
out that Casa Buonarroti 19F/B150/Corpus 368, with sketches for
Daniele’s St. John and for the Laurenziana staircase, also contains a
sketch for the Aeneas.
172. Feliciano di San Vito would also be a possibility for one
or the other of these owners, but because nothing is known about
him, and because Giacomo Rocca did make use of drawings by
Michelangelo, Rocca is a more likely candidate.
173. The study of a left leg, JBS 62/Corpus 86 verso; red chalk,
212 × 283 mm; see L. Donati, 2002, pp. 326–9. A page of drawings
in the British Museum, W86, red chalk, 306 × 202 mm, dated by
Wilde to “about 1600 or later,” contains a copy of the same left
leg made from the original, not the etching, plus a proﬁle view of
a right leg from a drawing by Michelangelo, now lost, which must
have been on the same or a companion sheet.
174. Cat. 57; BMW13/Corpus 63, the famous study for Haman,
bears neither a Bona Roti inscription nor an Irregular Number, but
the fact that it was copied together with members of the group
now in Haarlem (see n. 113) strongly suggests that it was part of
this collection but that it subsequently lost its number.
175. Louvre Inv. 727/J10/Corpus 34. Lamentably, the compiler
omitted to record the Arpino inscription in his entry on that sheet
and the provenance there suggested for that sheet is wrong. It should
probably run: Michelangelo; Daniele da Volterra; Michele degli
Alberti; the Cavaliere d’Arpino; unidentiﬁed French collector;
Cabinet du Roi.
176. Van Tuyll van Serooskerken, no. 71.
177. Metropolitan Museum of Art, 24.197.2/BT 131/Corpus
156.
178. Annesley and Hirst, 1981; see the catalogue of Sotheby’s
sale for further discussion.
179. Vasari, ed., Bottari, III, 1760, p. 350.

44
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
180. Nothing seems to be known about Jeremiah Harman’s
“Michelangelo” drawings, which Woodburn added to those from
Lawrence. Harman was active as a collector of paintings, and these
drawings, none of which has a traceable provenance prior to his
ownership, were probably a secondary interest. None of those
that came to Oxford (Cats. 60, 89, 98, 99) is of high quality,
although none is without interest. A ﬁfth drawing, then thought to
be by Michelangelo (1846–21) was subsequently given to Baccio
Bundimelli (P. II 77).
Attention may be drawn here to the very different interpretation
of much of the evidence treated in this chapter and in the appen-
dices, which was provided by Perrig, 1999, who proposes that the
majority of drawings generally believed to come from Casa Buonar-
roti are in fact minor drawings, mostly by Giulio Clovio, from the
collection of the King of Naples (the former Farnese Collection),
which Wicar would have obtained in the 1790s, and to which he
and Woodburn attached false provenances. Perrig further suggests
that other worthless Farnese drawings were dispersed c. 1600, and
that some of these then entered Casa Buonarroti, to be themselves
dispersed c. 1800, falsely as Michelangelos. This reconstruction of
events – perverse to the highest degree – is based only on negatives,
is unsupported by any positive evidence, assumes every mistaken
provenance supplied by Woodburn to reveal conspiracy, and, ﬁnally,
is prompted by, and rests on acceptance of, Perrig’s connoisseur-
ship, expressed in his demotion of most Michelangelo drawings to
the status of copies or imitations, or in his allocation of them to
other draughtsmen, reattributions nowhere supported by sustained
comparison with drawings genuinely by those other draughtsmen.
Perrig’s views remain isolated and are accepted by no serious stu-
dent of Michelangelo’s draughtsmanship. This is not the place for
an extended discussion of the article of 1999, nor would it be
worthwhile, but it might be useful to signal some of its more fun-
damental omissions: silence about the copies by Andrea Commodi
and Francesco Buonarroti, about the Cicciaporci Collection, and
about the sales by Ottley and the testimony provided in his sale
catalogues.

 michelangelo’s drawings
approaches
Any serious discussion of Michelangelo’s drawings must
start with the surviving body of his graphic work. It
might, of course, be possible to produce an idealist
account of Michelangelo’s drawings, by deduction from
his works in other media and taking no notice of those
drawings generally attributed to him, but whether such
a construct could have any value is doubtful. But it must
be admitted also that there is not and cannot be abso-
lute proof that any drawing generally believed to be by
Michelangelo is genuinely by him. This can be gener-
alised to the observation that there can be no absolute
proof that any drawing is by any artist to whom it may be
attributed. Any drawing can be dismissed by the icono-
clastically minded critic as a copy, a forgery, a pupil draw-
ing, or simply a drawing by another, unidentiﬁed, hand.
These constraints apply to all attempts to attribute draw-
ings of whatsoever type and period, but they are particu-
larly to be borne in mind in the case of graphic oeuvres
produced before the invention of photography; graphic
oeuvres that have been reassembled from scattered sur-
vivals on the basis of internal resemblance and/or relation
to documented or otherwise generally accepted works
in other media; and graphic oeuvres assembled with lit-
tle support from collateral evidence such as paper types,
collective provenances, or anecdotal testimony. In such
territory, the assertions of a connoisseurship that calls
itself scientiﬁc can acquire an apparent authority because
they seem to provide simple maps through difﬁcult ter-
rain. But all soi-disant “scientiﬁc” attempts to construct
corpora of drawings, quite apart from the fact that the
methods employed are never as scientiﬁc – in the terms
of the mathematical sciences – as their adherents claim,
are inevitably circular in that they start from a core of
“authentic” drawings, drawings against which others are
measured, whose composition itself is a matter not of
proof but of faith. The same critiques that the iconoclas-
tically minded critic direct to works that he or she rejects
can be applied also to those that he or she accepts. Such
“scientiﬁc” assertions invariably prove disastrous, whether
they be expansionist or contractionist (almost invariably
the latter), for they rest on the illusion that the eye of the
individual critic is an unchanging and impartial instru-
ment of analysis. The connoisseur who believes him-
or herself to be possessed of a supra-personal eye, able
to allocate authorship on the basis of pure visuality, is
suffering from self-delusion, and from this the descent
into solipsism is likely to be rapid. This is not to say that
the application of a few rigid visual criteria to a poorly
deﬁned oeuvre may not be useful in clearing perimeters
and pruning excrescences. But it is less effective in the
work of positive construction and is particularly ill-suited
to grasp variety, development, and change.
In practice, when attempting to deﬁne the graphic
oeuvre of an artist, one’s judgements – always provisional –
must rest on close analysis of individual drawings seen not
as isolated objects but within the context of the artist’s
work both in drawing and other media. Particular judge-
ments must be situated within an awareness as detailed and
profound as possible of the stylistic range and particular
traits of the artist being studied and of his or her chronol-
ogy. A knowledge of work by contemporaries and a gen-
eral experience of the ways in which artists work within
certain traditions will serve as helpful controls. But, ﬁnally,
such loose concepts as “the balance of probability” can-
not be avoided. It is also salutary to remember that, when
the complete or virtually complete graphic work of an
artist is known – a situation rare before the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries – the changes of drawing-style to
be found between one page of a sketchbook and another,
the variety of interests to be found over a few sheets of
studies for a single work, or the variety of techniques
exploited on a single page of drawings can be enormous.
Such experiences should alert the student to the fact that
major artists are always more various than their inter-
preters can conceive. And they should also remind the
student that time has severely edited the work of most
45

46
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
artists prior to the modern period, and especially severely
their drawings: fragile, uncared for – Annibale Carracci
reportedly used some of his most beautiful studies to clean
frying-pans – sometimes deliberately destroyed or discard-
ed by the hands that made them. Keeping in mind the
enormous losses suffered by, for example, Renaissance
drawings should make the student wary of relying on nor-
mative stylistic analysis, and still more hesitant in asserting
his or her views.Awareness of howmisleading the kinds of
analysis generally employed to reconstruct the oeuvres of
Renaissance artists would be were they applied to a major
twentieth-century artist, for example, should enjoin the
student to treat the possibilities of the past with extreme
caution. In principle, no type of evidence should be re-
jected per se. Any clue that the drawing – or, if mounted,
its mount – provides, of whatever sort – inscriptions,
numbers, types of paper, types of mount – can prove
valuable in attempting to answer the questions the student
might pose. A recent development that has, in the case of
Michelangelo, proved especially valuable, is the listing of
watermarks. Even though a watermark in a piece of paper
does not prove that the marks on that paper are made by
a speciﬁc hand, it can at least restrain wilder speculations,
and it provides also a valuable control for the dating of
what is on that paper.
the make-up of the corpus
Charles de Tolnay’s Corpus dei disegni di Michelangelo, pub-
lished in four volumes between 1975 and 1980, repro-
duces in facsimile the vast majority of those drawings that
have seriously been attributed to Michelangelo during the
twentieth century, including a number that Tolnay was
unable to accept but believed should be included. Some
further drawings were considered by him of insufﬁcient
importance to warrant facsimile reproduction, but were
included among the comparative and associated mate-
rial found in the catalogue sections of his volumes. De
Tolnay’s total of 633 sheets can, in the compiler’s view, be
reduced by about forty-three to obtain a total of 590 sheets
containing drawings that, however rudimentary, seem to
him attributable to Michelangelo. To this can be added
around twenty sheets, some overlooked by Tolnay and
some discovered only after the publication of the Corpus.
The total would arrive at around 610 sheets. However,
given the fact that, of the 610 items accepted by the com-
piler, some twenty are probably or certainly scraps cut
from larger sheets or fragments, the number falls to about
590. If one were to add sheets of drawings by Michelan-
gelo now known only in copies, it would again increase
the number by around ﬁfty. But it is probably best to con-
sider only autograph drawing here and easiest to work
with a total of 600.
Of the 600 sheets, 322 are either drawn on one side
only, or contain on one of their two sides drawings that,
in the compiler’s view, are not attributable to Michelan-
gelo. The remainder, 278, are drawn on both sides by
Michelangelo himself. If it is wished to total sides, which
for convenience here will be called pages, the total comes
to about 870. On these pages, of course, the types of
individual drawings might vary immensely, and the page
total gives an unclear idea of the numbers of actual draw-
ings, which may be deﬁned as visual indications intended
by the artist to be separate from one another or, at least,
drawn separately even if, as on many occasions, they are
overlaid. On a single page of ﬁrst ideas, concetti – such
as one of those in the Ashmolean for the Ancestors of
Christ in the Sistine ceiling – might be found in as many
as ten sketches (see Cats. 9–16). On another page, such
as that, also in the Ashmolean whose main ﬁgure is a
study for the genius accompanying Libica (Cat. 18), one
can ﬁnd a developed ﬁgure study, a close-up detail of
the Sibyl’s hand, a ﬁnely drawn architectural sketch, and
six small ricordi of prigioni. On another sheet, however,
might be found only a single modello (such as Corpus
188 or 206) or a ground plan (Corpus 559 and 560). On
some of Michelangelo’s more complicated sheets, concetti,
ﬁgure sketches, architectural studies, and pupil drawings
might be found (Cats. 25, 30, Corpus 596), and on occa-
sion, the edges of used sheets were cut to make tem-
plates for architectural mouldings (examples of this are
in Casa Buonarroti, Corpus 525 and 537). The project
of providing a total – retrievable by type, medium, and
date – of all surviving individual drawings by Michelan-
gelo is daunting, but it would certainly be possible with
computerisation.
drawing types
The surviving corpus demonstrates that Michelangelo,
like any draughtsman, made drawings for many different
purposes, and because he was active as painter, sculptor,
and architect, as well as an occasional designer of deco-
rative objects, his drawings are more varied than those of
most of his contemporaries in their functions and forms.
Broadly, however, they might be divided into two main
classes, ﬁgural and architectural/decorative, and further
sub-divided, crudely, into different types, according to
their function. However, it must be remembered that dif-
ferent types of drawings often overlap, and it should not

MICHELANGELO’S DRAWINGS
47
be imagined that the following classiﬁcation corresponds
to the way Michelangelo might have thought about his
work.
Figural
1. Concetti – drawings that embody the ﬁrst ideas, usually
roughly and on a small scale, of ﬁgural projects (Cats.
10, 13).
2. Loose sketches – somewhat more developed drawings
for a pose or a composition (Cat. 15).
3. Compositional draughts – laying out an arrangement
in some detail but not to the level of precision of a modello
(Cat. 5, Corpus 45 and 73).
4. Individual ﬁgure sketches – experimenting with poses
within an ensemble that is more or less determined (Cor-
pus 75 and 76).
5. Figure studies – bringing to a fairly ﬁnished and precise
level single or small groups of ﬁgures whose pose and
place in a composition is now determined (Cats. 1 recto,
7 recto, 17).
6. Studies of parts of ﬁgures, some of which might pre-
cede and some of which might follow 5 – such drawings
might be made to experiment with the most effective
solution for a particular movement or pose of part of the
body, a shoulder, a wrist, and so on (Cats. 18, 26).
7. Studies of drapery (Corpus 119 verso, 154 recto).
8. A modello – laying out the arrangement of individual
ﬁgures in detail and ﬁnalising the composition. Although
Michelangelo certainly made drawings of this type, it is
questionable whether any survive, although at least one
precise copy by Giulio Clovio of a lost drawing of this
type, made for Sebastiano del Piombo’s Flagellation, is
known (Windsor Royal Collection, PW 451).
9. The cartoon – a full-size version of, usually, a compo-
sition to be painted, from which points or lines are trans-
ferred to the surface of the support or, more likely, to an
intermediate cartoon which would actually be used for
this task, thus preserving the cartoon proper from damage
(Corpus 384 and 389).
10. A (primarily) outline drawing on a surface to be
painted (Cat. 21).
11. Close to and at times indistinguishable from 8 is
a category of drawings that, although not invented by
Michelangelo, was much exploited by him: the Presen-
tation Drawing, made as gifts for the artist’s friends and
considered by him and them as independent works of
art. They are usually elaborately ﬁnished, and some-
times planned as carefully as a painted composition, with
preparatory studies (Corpus 333 and 336). Slightly looser
types of drawing probably made as gifts also survive (Cats.
31, 35).
12. Anatomical drawings, made to extend the artist’s
knowledge of human anatomy and not speciﬁcally related
to any project (Corpus 111 and 112).
13. Copies after other artists, which can vary from
slight annotations to elaborately ﬁnished studies. Some
of these may have been made as gifts (Corpus 3, 4,
and 5).
14. Record drawings (ricordi) after the artist’s own three-
dimensional models or sculptures (Cat. 18 recto?; Corpus
57 recto)
15. Copies after the artist’s own models to establish the
most effective angle of vision, or to test the particular
emphasis required for lighting (reported by Vasari, but no
certain surviving examples, although Louvre Inv. 694 and
699/J49,48 may be copies of such exercise).
16. Teaching drawings (Cats. 28 verso, 30).
Architectural and/or Decorative Designs
1. Concetti – small drawings that adumbrate roughly archi-
tectural, decorative, or multi-media projects. In the case
of architecture these might be ground plans and elevations
(Cat. 54 verso).
2. More developed sketches plotting a project in some-
what more detail, with general articulation more
advanced (Cat. 39, Corpus 274).
3. Individual sketches of architectural membering or dec-
orative forms designed to be placed within an ensemble
that is more or less determined (Cat. 53 verso, Corpus
198 and 199).
4. Studies, bringing to a fairly ﬁnished level single or
groups of elements whose place within a project is now
determined (Corpus 202 recto and 554).
5. Studies of parts of members or decorative forms, for
example, capitals and the shapes of volutes, some of which
might precede and some of which might follow 4 (Corpus
530).
6. A modello, laying out the project in detail including all
the parts – or half in the case of symmetrical bi-axial com-
positions, both elevations and ground plans. This would
probably be followed by a three-dimensional model of
wood or clay (Cat. 38 recto, Corpus 608 and 610).
7. Diagrams of the dimensions of the elements required
for the wood or clay model for architectural schemes or
decorative objects determining the size and shape of the
individual units of which the ensembles are composed
(Corpus 504).
8. Block sketches, diagrams of the dimensions of the
blocks of marble required for the architectural or dec-
orative projects determining the size and shape of the
individual units of which the ensembles are composed
(Corpus 508 and 509).

48
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
9. The model template, a full-size version of the forms
to be carved or modelled in the models, which acts
as a guide for the transfer of the idea onto the
objects to be worked (Corpus 600, 612 verso, and 613
verso).
10. Templates proper. In the New Sacristy, some were
drawn on the walls of the Cappelletta (Corpus 536 and
539).
11. Ricordi of architectural work already carried out (puta-
tive, no surviving examples).
12. Copies of antique architectural forms designed to
familiarise the artist with their elements (Corpus 516 and
517).
13. Theoretical drawings, analysing or explaining the
principles to which work has been planned (Corpus 593
and 594).
rates of survival
Before essaying a chronological overview of Michelan-
gelo’s development as a draughtsman, it may be useful
to look at his surviving graphic oeuvre as a whole. To
repeat, it comprises some 600 sheets and 870 pages, and
it includes drawings of almost all the types listed previ-
ously. The drawings range from notations of a few lines
that would have taken no more than a second or two
to throw onto the paper to highly elaborate Presentation
Drawings that might have taken a day or more to execute.
But these are likely to be the temporal limits.
Leaving aside Presentation Drawings, copies of works
by other artists or architects made either for research
or recreation, anatomical drawings, drawings made for
educational purposes, and the like, it is instructive to
turn to drawings made for Michelangelo’s major projects.
But when the ﬁnal versions of projects for which draw-
ings survive are compared with the versions found in
those drawings, even quite developed ﬁgure-studies rarely
match precisely the ﬁnished works. This may in part be
due to Michelangelo’s making changes in the course of
execution – he certainly improvised to some extent on
the Sistine ceiling – but it strongly suggests that more –
perhaps many more – drawings were made between the
surviving ones and the executed works. Therefore, even
when relatively large numbers of drawings survive for a
project, these must still represent a small proportion of
those Michelangelo made.
Because no complete sequences of drawings survive
for any of Michelangelo’s projects, no analogies can be
drawn among them, and even if a complete sequence
had survived, there would be no guarantee that it was
representative. It is also evident that some projects and
some periods of Michelangelo’s life are likely to have
generated a greater quantity of drawings than others:
The Sistine ceiling, for example, would have required
a very large number. Michelangelo’s sculptural projects,
even massive ones like the Julius Tomb or the New
Sacristy, probably fewer comparatively, because much of
the individual statuary would have been worked out,
after preliminary drawings had been made, in models
of wax or clay; however, even in these cases one can-
not be categoric, for Michelangelo made multiple studies
of, for example, the shoulders of Day (Corpus 215 and
216).
The quantity of drawings made by Michelangeo would
also have varied with his age. In his formative years, to
attain his high level of proﬁciency in drawing, he must
have made practice sketches and studies in very large num-
bers. At the other end of his career, it was recounted,
by Tiberio Calcagni writing to Michelangelo’s nephew
Leonardo on 29 August 1561, that Michelangelo was still
capable of drawing for three hours at a time, and this
practice was probably not related to particular projects
of that time, but as exercise, to keep his hand in. From
his own advice to a pupil, “Disegnia Antonio, disegnia
Antonio, disegnia e non perdere tempo” (Corpus 240),
it is evident that Michelangelo held the act of draw-
ing in supreme regard and emphasised the importance
of continual practice. It is also worth remarking that no
contemporary testimony suggests that Michelangelo was
lazy.
It is immediately noticeable that the numbers of sur-
viving ﬁgure drawings fall off greatly after 1530. Accord-
ing to the compiler’s calculations, there are seventy-one
pages of drawings for the Sistine ceiling, a fresco that con-
tains a complement of some eighty substantial full-length
ﬁgures – comprising the ignudi, the Prophets and Sibyls,
and the Ancestors of Christ, plus many subsidiary deco-
rative ﬁgures, as well as large numbers in the vault his-
tories and the pendentives – but, in his view, only about
twenty-six pages of drawings survive for the Last Judge-
ment, whose overall complement of ﬁgures has been cal-
culated at some 390 – although, of course, many of these
are minor. However, a recent discovery (Turner and Joan-
nides, 2003) has shown that Michelangelo studied even
the limbs of fairly secondary ﬁgures with care. For nei-
ther the Sistine ceiling nor the Last Judgement is there a
single surviving cartoon fragment. Only two reasonably
secure preparatory drawings (Cat. 43 and Corpus 358)
plus a large fragment of the cartoon survive for the two
frescoes in the Pauline Chapel, which, taken together,
contain over seventy ﬁgures.

MICHELANGELO’S DRAWINGS
49
In architecture, the situation is in some ways similar but
in others different. Some twenty sheets of block sketches
are known for the fac¸ade of San Lorenzo and, proba-
bly, another dozen for the New Sacristy, but there are
none for the Laurentian Library or any of Michelangelo’s
later architectural projects. It is evident that very large
numbers of drawings must be lost, quite apart from those
that Michelangelo deliberately destroyed at at least two
moments in his career.
Finally, although one can do no more than conjecture
how many drawings Michelangelo might have made, it
may be helpful to move back and look at the matter in
large. Michelangelo’s active working career, one of the
longest on record, continued for a little more than three
quarters of a century. During most of that time, he was
a central ﬁgure, and for many years the central ﬁgure,
in the universe of Central Italian art. He was responsi-
ble for a sequence of massive, complex, and exception-
ally important projects, and he worked for the richest,
most powerful, and most sophisticated patrons that Flo-
rence and Rome had to offer. All his schemes – pictorial,
sculptural, and architectural – would have required exten-
sive and elaborate preparation, and his universally recog-
nised accomplishment as a draughtsman – by common
consent one of the greatest that Europe has produced –
can have been achieved only by constant exercise. The
existing total of his drawings provides an average of some
eight sheets or twelve pages of drawings – of all types –
per year, which further averages one sheet of draw-
ings every six weeks or one page per month. Because
Michelangelo was not a constipated draughtsman, or one
who found the act of drawing difﬁcult, it is quite feasi-
ble that an artist renowned for his hard and rapid work
might have averaged, over a working lifetime, one sheet
of drawings – regardless of type – per day. Because few
among all the drawings that survive would have taken
much more than an hour or two of concentrated work
to execute, then, over a lifetime, Michelangelo could
easily have made some 28,000 sheets of drawings. This
would mean that the surviving corpus of sheets contain-
ing autograph drawings would comprise no more than
about 2 percent of his total output. If an average of two
sheets of drawings a day were assumed, and on some days,
in the heat of work, Michelangelo could have made many
more, then the total would be some 56,000, of which the
surviving corpus would comprise about 1 percent. The
second is the sort of total to be found in an artist of com-
parable genius and comparable longevity, who was also a
great and ﬂuent draughtsman: Picasso. Whichever totals
are adopted, it is evident that only a minute fraction of
the drawings that Michelangelo made is now known.
the phases of michelangelo’s drawing
The earliest phase of Michelangelo’s drawings shows him
following in the footsteps of his master Ghirlandaio.
Although no drawings by Michelangelo can certainly be
dated before 1500, there is a general consensus – which
may be correct – that his copies after Giotto and Masaccio
(Corpus 3 and 4) were made during the early 1490s. Sig-
niﬁcantly, it was in the Brancacci chapel, where they were
drawing after Masaccio’s and Masolino’s frescoes, that
Torrigiano reportedly broke Michelangelo’s nose. And
Ghirlandaio was a key ﬁgure in the revival of interest in
Masaccio’s work that took place in the last third of the
quattrocento.
Ghirlandaio’s surviving drawings are in pen and in black
chalk. His pen drawings consist both of rapid composi-
tional sketches, and of fairly highly ﬁnished treatments of
drapery. Like most of his contemporaries, he used rela-
tively thinly applied black chalk for underdrawing, but he
also employed black chalk in an elaborated and system-
atic way to make drapery studies. However, this aspect
of his work seems little to have affected Michelangelo. It
is sometimes suggested that Michelangelo’s early use of
pen was affected by engravings. Although Michelangelo
was certainly interested in the engravings of Schongauer,
it was primarily for their iconography, and there is little
need to posit such an inﬂuence. Pen drawing was a par-
ticularly Florentine skill, much valued, and Donatello –
whom Michelangelo greatly admired – is reported to
have made many drawings in pen. Michelangelo would
have been aware of a much larger number of drawings
by Ghirlandaio and others than is now known, and he
no doubt found whatever inspiration he needed in them.
Some of Michelangelo’s early drawings show unmistak-
able links with Ghirlandaio’s sketchy style: The same for-
mula is employed for heads and faces, obviously inﬂu-
enced by the copying of lay-ﬁgures and small jointed
models, and Michelangelo incorporates similar features,
obtaining, more potently than Ghirlandaio, a sense of
power by the very distortion of his forms.
Better known are Michelangelo’s highly ﬁnished pen
drawings in which he brought cross-hatching to a pitch of
ﬂexibility and density not previously attained, and never
quite to be attained again. It was this type of drawing,
illustrated both in his studies of draped ﬁgures (Corpus 5)
and in his more detailed studies of the nude (Corpus 21
and 22), that was to provide the basic model for certain
drawings by Raphael and by Bandinelli and those artists
who followed him. In principle, it involved tighter or
more open weaves of lines according to areas of shadow of
light, but Michelangelo’s mesh was both richer and more

50
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
varied than Ghirlandaio’s. Risking illegibility by excessive
application of ink, he went down densely in the shadows
and created greater range and ﬂexibility in the mid-tones,
thereby imbuing his forms with more vitality and mobil-
ity than those of his master. Put thus, the process sounds
simple; in practice, it demanded extraordinary dexterity
and manual control. In one or two instances, Michelan-
gelo carried this technique to a pitch of extreme virtu-
osity, creating plastic form by the pure intersection of
hatching lines, without any bounding contours or inter-
nal guidelines, so that the forms emerge dream-like from
the paper (Corpus 35).
In a few instances, Michelangelo employed a form of
hatching somewhat different from that demonstrated in
his usual pen drawings (Corpus 34 and 35). In these, a
diagonal orientation of the strokes creates a sheen on the
forms, not unlike that sometimes found in Bandinelli’s
drawings, especially his studies for bronze statues. This,
however, probably related to speciﬁc commissions or spe-
ciﬁc effects and does not seem to have been a common
practice of Michelangelo’s.
Other artists who employed cross-hatched pen ap-
proached it in either a looser more sketchy way or else
a more systematic one, losing the vitality and substan-
tiality of Michelangelo’s stroke. Thus, Bandinelli creates
minimal textural variety within his ﬁgures, whereas in
Michelangelo’s there is great differentiation between ﬂesh
and drapery and different types of ﬂesh.
Because there is no guarantee that the survival of
drawings is proportional, it may be that the examples
of Michelangelo’s apparently characteristic type of pen
drawing are less representative than they seem. Neverthe-
less, although copies of lost drawings do not suggest that
any radical reassessment is required, it is wise to include
some caveats. For example, a group of drawings usually
distributed by art-historians over several years might in
fact all be for the same project and be drawn over a few
days, or weeks. Similarly it must be asked whether partic-
ular types of projects called for particular types of draw-
ings, and whether aspects of style considered to be essen-
tial were in fact contingent. Thus, one drawing, which
has been found to be particularly problematic, the study
for the Magdalen (Corpus 31) in the National Gallery
Entombment, is unusual in several ways. Its deﬁnition of
form differs from, and is, in certain respects, inferior to,
the modelling normally associated with Michelangelo;
and it is unique in his work in being drawn on rose-tinted
paper. If the dating of the Entombment project to 1501 is
correct, it could be argued that these features correspond
to an early drawing style of which no other examples
have yet been identiﬁed, and that drawings commonly
believed to antedate 1501 have been incorrectly placed.
On the other hand, it may be that Michelangelo con-
sciously drew in a particular way for a particular pur-
pose related to the tonal and colouristic qualities required
for painting rather than sculpture. The doubts that some
critics have had might therefore arise from a misappre-
hension of this drawing’s function and the application to
it of criteria derived from Michelangelo’s drawings for
sculpture.
A factor that contributes to uncertainty in this case
however is one of the key features of Michelangelo’s art,
his reference to one medium as inspiration for another. It
has been universally remarked – and it goes back to state-
ments by the artist himself – that Michelangelo’s painting
is intensely sculptural; it has been less commonly noted
that some of his sculpture, the St. Peter’s Piet`a, for exam-
ple, is intensely pictorial. His architecture too began with
a fundamentally pictorial bias, as the project for the fac¸ade
of San Lorenzo demonstrates, and only gradually matured
into a form of large-scale sculpture, increasingly shorn
of anything extraneous. Such cross-fertilisation among
media naturally makes a straightforwardly functionalist
approach hazardous. And while a supple functionalism
has proved most revealing and rewarding in the study of
Michelangelo’s drawings, it is necessary to be aware of a
possible pitfall: In attempting to ﬁx a purpose for a partic-
ular type of drawing one might merely be inferring too
much from chance – either of survival or handling.
In another aspect of pen drawing, Michelangelo prob-
ably gained inspiration from a different Florentine tra-
dition. Some concetti, or quick sketches, made in the
ﬁrst decade are in pure outline (Corpus 40 and 46).
Michelangelo employed stressed pen line, with breaks to
evoke the swell of muscles or bones, and his achieve-
ments in this respect are quite remarkable. Pollaiuolo and
Botticelli – with whom he was personally acquainted –
had made use of pure outline, but Michelangelo’s com-
mand of anatomy and capacity for suggestion meant that
he could evoke a fully plastic form with the most mini-
mal means. In this respect, the artist who may most have
inﬂuenced him was Leonardo, some of whose drawings
he surely knew, despite the enmity between them. This
interest extended to concetti, for although Michelangelo
produced very few of the “pentimento” drawings that
characterised Leonardo, he certainly developed some-
thing of Leonardo’s interest in movement and in char-
acterisation by movement.
The
earliest
chalk
drawings
that
survive
from
Michelangelo’s hand are in black chalk and are con-
nected with, or contemporary with, the cartoon for the
Battle of Cascina. Michelangelo probably made charcoal

MICHELANGELO’S DRAWINGS
51
drawings too, but none survive. Vasari describes the tech-
nique of the Cascina cartoon: “V’erano ancora molte ﬁg-
ure aggruppate et in varie maniere abbozzate, chi contor-
nato di carbone, chi disegnato di tratti e chi sfumato e con
biacca lumeggiatio,” from which it is evident that it was,
at least in the less deﬁned parts, softly drawn, with the
concentration on mass rather than on contour. Indeed,
this seems also to have been true of his preparatory draw-
ings. The most extensive surviving compositional sketch,
in the Ufﬁzi (Corpus 45), is drawn in soft black chalk
partly over stylus indentation, and Michelangelo seems to
have established his composition primarily in black chalk,
bringing some ﬁgure studies to a very high degree of ﬁn-
ish in the medium. Particularly signiﬁcant however is the
distinction that Michelangelo made according to the pur-
pose of the drawing. In two of the surviving chalk studies
for a background ﬁgure, the chalk is handled softly and
broadly, with the masses of the body as the primary focus
of attention (Corpus 54 and 53 verso). But in two studies
for foreground ﬁgures (Corpus 50 and 51), the medium,
again black chalk, is handled in a much harder manner,
with a sharp point and with strong emphasis on contours.
And certain ﬁgures upon which Michelangelo wished to
place special emphasis were worked up by him in pen
(Corpus 52 and 53 recto). Of course, accidents of survival
may convey an incorrect impression of Michelangelo’s
thought processes as they were expressed in the media
and the types of handling that he employed, but it is clear
from his paintings – notably the Doni Tondo and the Sistine
histories – that he differentiated focus and deﬁnition
between different spatial layers of his compositions.
Unlike Cascina, the very few concetti that survive for the
Sistine histories and the Prophets and Sibyls (Corpus 123
and 151–2), and the fairly numerous ones that survive for
the Ancestors (Cats. 9–16), are drawn in pen rather than
chalk. And a study for the drapery of Cumaea is a multi-
media drawing in pen, wash, and white-heightening
(Corpus 154). Further studies for ﬁgures were made in
black chalk, in much the same way as they were made for
Cascina, with very broadly handled drawings to establish
the basic masses of the ﬁgure, and then tighter studies
to ﬁx deployment of gesture and musculature. It seems
evident then that Michelangelo conceived the ceiling as
in a harder, more sculptural style than Cascina, and there
are a number of plausible reasons why he might have
done so. One, obviously, is that the shape of the ceil-
ing made it impossible to impose upon it any sort of
uniﬁed scheme. The design had to be an accumulation
of repeated arrangements comprising more or less dis-
crete forms, which could be individualised at will, but
whose basic conﬁgurations remained broadly constant:
The ignudi are obvious examples of this. Light, bright
tones and sculpturesque form may also have been encour-
aged by the difﬁculty of seeing the inadequately lit vault
from the ﬂoor of the chapel and by a desire to harmonise
the frescoes tonally and stylistically with those executed
on the walls of the chapel in the 1480s by, among others,
Ghirlandaio, Botticelli, and Signorelli. Of course, such
conclusions are based upon a very few survivals from the
thousands of drawings that Michelangelo must have made
for so complicated a project, and further discoveries may
modify them. But that a signiﬁcant alteration took place
in Michelangelo’s preparations for his frescoes in the sec-
ond half of the ceiling may be inferred from a change in
his use of media. For even though concetti for the histo-
ries, ignudi, and Ancestors painted in the second half of the
ceiling continued to be drawn in pen, the majority of the
further ﬁgure-studies were made in red chalk (Corpus 144
and 156). Red chalk was ﬁrst extensively employed in Italy
by Leonardo. This might have discouraged Michelangelo
from using it, but, signiﬁcantly, he seems to have exper-
imented with red chalk even in Florence, when prepar-
ing the formally Leonardesque Doni Tondo (Corpus 158).
Lighter in hue, red chalk also tends to take a sharper
point than most varieties of black chalk and is gener-
ally somewhat greasier in texture, allowing a smoother
and more ﬂowing line. Sharpened, it thus can approxi-
mate to a pen-line, although lacking the ﬂexibility of a
quill, and to a silver-point line as well. The latter was of
little interest to Michelangelo because, although one or
two lead-point drawings by him do exist (Corpus 141)
and although he occasionally, even as late as c. 1530, used
metal-point to block out a composition before working
over it in pen or chalk, he seems never to have been
interested in a medium that tended to work against the
liveliness that was so central to his drawings. But the legi-
bility of red chalk, its capacity, when fused or moistened,
to create passages of dark almost equivalent to black, and
to extend much more broadly in the mid and high tones
would have invigorated him. Red chalk allowed more
ﬂexible and elastic form than black, as well as in its obvi-
ous approximation to the colour of ﬂesh. Indeed, even
though it can hardly be put down merely to a change in
the medium employed to prepare them, it is clear that
some of the most beautiful and elastic nudes on the sec-
ond half of the Sistine ceiling were prepared in sanguine.
It is likely too that the change to red chalk also allowed
Michelangelo to economise in preparation: It was less
necessary to make loose studies in black chalk and then
to work them up in pen and wash. The whole procedure
could be undertaken on the same page. Certainly some
of the drawings made by Michelangelo at this stage are

52
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
among the most complete and evocative nude studies ever
produced.
After completing the Sistine ceiling, Michelangelo
returned to work on the Tomb of Julius II and simultane-
ously accepted a commission for the Risen Christ, planned
for the Roman church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva. His
single surviving study for the Christ (Corpus 94) was made
in tightly hatched pen, akin to his drawings of the ﬁrst
half-decade, and it has recently been shown that it must
be some four years later than previously assumed because
it was made for the second version of the statue, not the
ﬁrst. But in preparing the prigioni, although not abandon-
ing pen, he seems to have made more use than hitherto
of red chalk, establishing rich surface modelling (Cor-
pus 62). Red chalk was also used for some compositional
drawings (Corpus 73).
Increasingly, however, Michelangelo’s sculptural ide-
als changed in the course of the second decade. Instead
of polished surfaces and exquisitely detailed musculature,
the mode of the Belvedere Torso seems gradually to have
come to dominate his imagination. He had already reg-
istered its effect in the later ignudi of the Sistine ceiling,
in which contour plays a reduced role, and in which pre-
cise and crystalline modelling gives way to more massive,
less closely deﬁned, and more rubbery form. And, with
the passage of the third decade, Michelangelo increas-
ingly came to see this as a mode for his sculpture as well.
As a result, he seems to have changed his employment
of media once more. He continued to use pen, in an
analytical mode equivalent to ´ecorch´e studies in order to
establish the underlying structure of his ﬁgures (Corpus
209 and 224), and then he worked up the surfaces in black
chalk (Cats. 26, 27 recto), as if to avoid the ﬂesh-evoking
qualities of red chalk. Of course, no system was absolute,
but only one study in red chalk remains for a statue in
the New Sacristy, and this is speciﬁcally concerned with
establishing the qualities of the surface (Cat. 27 verso).
Throughout this time, Michelangelo frequently used
red chalk for architectural copies (Corpus 516, etc.),
grasping in a single stroke both line and texture, but he
employed pen and black chalk for laying out architectural
sketches, the former when it was a matter of establish-
ing the main lines and relations of architectural elements,
the latter when it was the overall pictorial effect that he
wished to establish (Cats. 39 recto, 25 recto). Architecture,
which, from the mid-1520s, came to occupy an increas-
ing amount of his time and imagination, was initially
for Michelangelo a support and frame for sculpture –
ﬁgures in the round and compositions in relief. For these
projects he continued to employ highly ﬁnished modelli
(Corpus 497) like those he had prepared for the Julius
Tomb (Corpus 55 and 489), following in this the lead of
his architectural master Giuliano da Sangallo.
Nevertheless, compared with those of Giuliano,
Michelangelo’s modelli are richer and more pictorial,
employing underdrawing in black chalk, generally used
with a ruler, ruled pen-lines, and chalk or pen out-
lines combined with wash and, sometimes, white height-
ening, to establish the forms of the statues and reliefs
envisaged for the project (Corpus 276 and 280 recto). It
is Michelangelo’s drawings of this type, particularly the
earlier more detailed modelli for architectural–sculptural
projects, where the detailing can appear ﬁnicky and the
dynamism and inventiveness of the ﬁgures is apparent only
after close study, that modern criticism has found hard-
est to accept; but with expanding study of Renaissance
architectural drawings, they are gradually coming to be
appreciated at their true value.
From the mid-1520s onwards, as Michelangelo became
more of a pure architect, reducing or even eliminating
ﬁgurative sculpture from his projects, drawings of this type
abandon the use of pen-lines, as the grander masses of the
architectural forms take precedence over details. Some of
his project drawings for doors and windows, employing
chalk, wash, and white heightening, are among the most
painterly drawings Michelangelo had produced up to that
time (Corpus 550 and 551). With characteristic ingenuity,
he saw the possibilities that the fusion of media created.
As the functional role of pen diminished, Michelan-
gelo used it in other ways. During the 1520s, he pro-
duced a number of drawings whose techniques, dense
cross-hatching or open parallel hatching, often combined
with rather rangy contour, look back to those of his
early pen-drawings. Some critics have indeed dated them
early, but they are coarser and more exaggerated both
in local modelling and in outline than the drawings of
the ﬁrst decade. Several sheets of this kind are in the
Ashmolean (Cats. 22, 23, 33), and none of them can
be connected with a work in another medium. They
have an emotional exasperation, combined with a cari-
catural, satirical edge rarely seen in Michelangelo’s draw-
ings of other periods. They relate neither formally nor in
mood to projects that Michelangelo had under way at the
time, hence the temptation of another group of critics
to give them to draughtsmen like Baccio Bandinelli or
even Bartolommeo Passerotti, both of whom specialised
in vehement and “expressive” pen styles. It is not impossi-
ble that Michelangelo was actually responding to the work
of Bandinelli, which he knew well, but these drawings
may also have represented a private need – of a type famil-
iar from Leonardo’s work – to indulge in the grotesque
and brutal as a counter-balance to the sublimely beautiful

MICHELANGELO’S DRAWINGS
53
forms that he was currently creating in the New Sacristy,
a project that, unlike the Sistine, allowed no room for
ugliness. In any case, whatever their motivation, it seems
that drawings of this type did not stay in Michelangelo’s
possession but were given to others, as may be inferred
from the fact that more early copies survive after them
than any other category of his ﬁgure drawings. Indeed,
sheets of this type strongly coloured later appreciations of
Michelangelo’s style.
If, as it seems, they are self-sufﬁcient drawings, then
they may also be seen as the shadow side, technically and
spiritually, of Michelangelo’s contemporary production of
idealised images, in the chalk Presentation Drawings that
he made in the 1520s. They may also relate to his practice
as a teacher, for at this time, with his assistant Antonio
Mini, and his young friends Andrea Quaratesi and, per-
haps, Gherardo Perini, Michelangelo seems to have been
more preoccupied with teaching than at any other period
of his life. And his teaching drawings often include ele-
ments of the grotesque (Cats. 28 verso, 30 verso).
With his deﬁnitive move to Rome in 1534, there is a
notable reduction in the survival rates of Michelangelo’s
drawings. As noted previously, compared with the num-
ber of drawings known for the Sistine ceiling, very few
preparatory drawings survive for the Last Judgement, and,
other than the magniﬁcent cartoon fragment (Corpus
384), almost nothing is extant for the Pauline Chapel
frescoes. Ironically, even though no cartoons or cartoon
fragments remain from his early period, a second car-
toon, of around 1550, for a panel painting by his pupil
and biographer Ascanio Condivi survives (Corpus 389).
Some compositional sketches but virtually no developed
drawings are known for sculpture (Cat. 47). In compensa-
tion, however, there are a few sketches and compositional
drawings made for other artists (Cats. 45, 46 recto) and
even three cartonetti (Corpus 393, 399, and 409).
Throughout most of the last thirty years of his
life, Michelangelo’s preferred medium was black chalk.
Increasingly, he avoided the voluptuousness that sanguine
could encourage, as he avoided sensuousness in ﬂesh-
painting. The massiveness of the ﬁnal group of prigioni
for the Julius Tomb had become the mode of the paint-
ing that he executed in the second half of the 1530s and
that was composed entirely of ﬁgures, the Last Judgement.
Although the overall effect of the fresco is rugged and
rough, with ﬁgures and groups at times appearing clumsy,
they were prepared with the most painstaking and elabo-
rate care. Michelangelo may have made even more studies
for the Last Judgement than for the Sistine ceiling, given
that the relation of ﬁgures to one another, quite apart from
their individual poses, was much more complicated. And
even though so few drawings survive, Michelangelo’s sys-
tem seems clear. As with Cascina, the earlier composition
whose structure, and therefore problems, resembled most
closely that of the Last Judgement, he began broadly and
gradually reﬁned. The composition was established with-
out pressure for neatness, but rather to achieve an agglom-
eration of expressive ﬁgures (Corpus 346 and 347). Indi-
vidual ﬁgures, or groups, were then studied in detail: A
sheet in the Royal Collection (Corpus 351), with repeated
studies of a soul being tugged between an angel and a
devil, shows Michelangelo’s determination to obtain the
most compelling possible forms. It is reasonable to sup-
pose that all the groups were studied with comparable
attention.
The next stage seems to have been very softly and
broadly handled ﬁgure-studies, to secure the basic masses.
These drawings, although their forms are more innately
deﬁned than the examples of twenty-ﬁve years earlier,
do not differ from them greatly in kind (Cat. 41). And
Michelangelo laid some ideas very lightly onto the sheets,
creating effects that are inherently pictorial (Corpus 354).
The succeeding drawings demonstrate a new, highly
self-conscious, and individual technique (Cat. 42 recto,
Corpus 352). Michelangelo seems to have returned in
some respects to an aspect of his pen drawing. The chalk
is employed with a sharp point and the form built up
in bracelet hatching, which simultaneously hardens and
makes volumetric the depicted physique. Over this hard
sub-structure, Michelangelo laid a surface sheen – in part,
apparently, by stumping – which was subordinate to the
underlying form. Michelangelo thus created a new range
of superhuman physical types, akin to those favoured by
body-builders, in which every muscle is given its maxi-
mum development but in which the form retains organic
coherence. It is as though, thirty years after it was made,
Michelangelo took Leonardo da Vinci’s criticism of the
anatomical style and made it the foundation of a new
ﬁgure style.
The purpose of this stylistic choice was twofold. In part
it was to create effects of unparalleled energy, appropri-
ate to the terrifying events of the Dies Irae. A conception
such as this, based rather on the Olympian subject of the
Fall of the Giants, could not adequately be treated using
“normal” ﬁgures. And, although criticisms of the ﬁgures’
nudity were not in the event averted, another feature of
the method was to de-sensualise the bodies depicted. The
types are so far removed from ordinary human experience,
and so far removed also from any possible concepts of
beauty – Michelangelo, for example, consistently coars-
ened and simpliﬁed all the facial types – that the spectator
engages in no erotic relation with the forms.

54
THE DRAWINGS OF MICHELANGELO AND HIS FOLLOWERS IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM
From around 1520, and probably considerably earlier,
Michelangelo made drawings as presents for friends. As
already remarked, the Presentation Drawing was not a
new genre; at least one drawing by Leonardo dating from
the 1470s, the Head of a Warrior in silver-point in the
British Museum, is explicable only as a virtuoso display
of technique, made for a patron or a friend, and Vasari
recounts that – probably shortly after 1500 – Leonardo
made a now-lost drawing of the Quos Ego for his friend
Antonio Segni. It is likely that drawings of this type sprang
from highly ﬁnished modelli, and Verrocchio’s studio was
probably their crucible. Perhaps some of Michelangelo’s
more elaborate early pen drawings, if not necessarily cre-
ated as gifts, were given away, for there is evidence for
early knowledge of some of them (Corpus 22 was known
to Raphael, whose lost sketch after it is known in a replica
in the Metropolitan Museum, 87.12.69/BT 211). And it
may be that Michelangelo made self-sufﬁcient drawings
in pen, as Bandinelli was to do. However, drawings cer-
tainly made by Michelangelo as gifts are either in black
or red chalk, and none are known either in the original
or in copies that can reasonably be dated before c. 1520.
But Michelangelo made a highly ﬁnished modello in chalk
for at least one of the paintings by his friend Sebastiano
(Windsor Royal Collection, PW 451), and it may well
have been from drawings of this type that his Presenta-
tion Drawings proper developed.
It is not known how many Presentation Drawings
Michelangelo made, but they fall broadly into two types:
ideal, emblematic heads and ﬁgurative compositions, gen-
erally of allegorical or mythological subjects. It seems
to have been the former that he initially drew most. A
series of three “Ideal Heads” were made for his friend
Gherardo Perini in the early 1520s (Corpus 306–308),
and others survive whose original recipients are uniden-
tiﬁed (Cat. 31, Corpus 321). Although Michelangelo may
have made them, no allegorical or mythological Presen-
tation Drawings survive that can certainly be dated before
c. 1530. In 1531 or 1532, however, Michelangelo became
deeply fond of the young Roman aristocrat Tommaso
de’Cavalieri and for him made a series of moralising
compositions in both red and black chalk, which rapidly
became famous (e.g., Corpus 338 and 342). Further draw-
ings of this type survive from the same period (Cat. 35),
no doubt made for other friends. And some of the more
highly ﬁnished drawings of the Resurrection, also made
by Michelangelo in the early 1530s, were probably also
intended as gifts for friends (Corpus 263 and 265).
There is some controversy over the technique of these
drawings. Michelangelo seems to have made them more
rapidly than one might suppose from their hyper-ﬁnished
appearance. In a note to Tommaso written on the ver-
sion of the Fall of Phaeton in the British Museum (Corpus
340), he says that if Tommaso likes it, he will make a com-
plete version the next day. If, as is generally assumed, this
second version is the very highly ﬁnished representation
of the subject in the Royal Collection at Windsor, then
Michelangelo’s speed was phenomenal.
In making highly ﬁnished drawings, Michelangelo had
to strike a compromise between elaboration and liveli-
ness. Too heavy an application and the surface would go
dead; too light a touch and the effect of polished marble or
bronze, or even the sheen of ﬂesh, would not be achieved.
In 1949, Wilde argued that these drawings were com-
posed by stippling, that Michelangelo had used a chalk
with a hard point and had built up the surface by a series
of touches, a very laborious system, approximating to
Seurat’s pointillism. This has been denied by other critics,
notably Rosand, who argue instead that Michelangelo in
fact used the chalk quite broadly, employing the “tooth”
of the paper to obtain textural variety. However, in no case
among surviving drawings does the support appear sufﬁ-
ciently rough to obtain such luminescent variety, and the
matter remains unresolved. In these drawings, Michelan-
gelo certainly used many different types of handling and
techniques, from simple outline, to broader, broken line-
work, to areas that appear to be created by stumping, to
ﬁne overlays of parallel lines to build up form, to some
stippling. It seems most likely indeed, that, although a
full programme was not employed, Michelangelo made
some use of stippling to obtain the effect of a surface cre-
ated, as it were, without signs of creation. And he may
have placed his paper against slightly roughened surfaces,
in order that their textural variety would come through:
like brass-rubbing. Interestingly, it was this very effect that
Seurat was to exploit.
After the mid-1530s, so far as we know, Michelan-
gelo ceased to make Presentation Drawings of secular
subjects. All his later ones are religious, and all save the
Madonna del Silenzio (Corpus 388), of c. 1540, are made in
black chalk, including his last series, dating from the ﬁrst
half of the 1540s, for Vittoria Colonna (Corpus 411 and
426).
Towards 1550, he also made two cartonetti for Annun-
ciations to be executed by his friend Marcello Venusti
and, a few years later, one of the Agony in the Garden
(Corpus 393, 399, and 409). In elaboration and detail,
these differ little from the Presentation Drawings proper,
although some areas are left blank for Marcello to incor-
porate motifs of his own. When Marcello had ﬁnished
with them, Michelangelo gave two to his pupil and asso-
ciate Jacopo del Duca, later to be obtained and displayed

MICHELANGELO’S DRAWINGS
55
by Cosimo I, Duke of Florence. In these drawings, con-
tinuity of form is greater than before, textural differences
are less, and Michelangelo has aimed at a minimalism cor-
responding to the surfaces of his late ﬁnished sculptures.
Only two reasonably secure preparatory drawings sur-
vive for the Pauline Chapel frescoes (Cat. 43, Corpus 358),
and no ﬁrm conclusions can be inferred from so small a
sample. What is most interesting – and surprising – is the
cartoon fragment for the Cruciﬁxion of Saint Peter (Cor-
pus 384). This is ﬁnished to a miniaturist level, with every
detail deﬁned and then pounced, a precision not found in
the fresco, where the forms are depicted relatively impre-
cisely. Although the present condition of the frescoes is
partly the result of over-cleaning – it seems likely that
in the Pauline Chapel Michelangelo made greater use
of a secco retouching than previously – it is evident that
his preparation was deliberately more exact than his exe-
cution and that he was reaching for a softer and more
painterly style in which the aggressive presence of plastic
form would play a diminished role in the generation of
meaning.
This pictorial style, making use of wavering contours
played against broadly evoked central body areas, seems
to have become the dominant mode of the 1550s. The
effect is ﬁnally to reduce the importance of contour and
expand that of mass (Cat. 50). And this development is
pursued both in the architectural and ﬁgurative drawings
that Michelangelo made in his last years, from the later
1550s until his death in 1564. In this period, Michelan-
gelo made use of multiple media (Corpus 435, Cats. 55,
56). This was natural for ground plans, in which wash
was frequently used in conjunction with line, and even
in the 1510s, Michelangelo had employed more than one
medium for modelli of architectural elements seen in ele-
vation, particularly windows and doors, as well, of course,
as tombs. But the pictorial effects of the late phase are sur-
prising, as though Michelangelo were anticipating “soft”
architecture (Corpus 612, 618, and 619).
The ﬁgure drawings of this phase are also remarkable.
The thickening and simpliﬁcation of forms seen in the
Pauline Chapel is extended. Preparatory studies of the
nude tend to be treated in the most diagrammatic man-
ner, and it is in draped ﬁgures where intensity of feeling
is most fully exploited: Bodies fuse with their draperies
to produce spectral forms anticipating the experiments
of proto-Romanticism (Cat. 53 recto). The draped ﬁgure
becomes the primary vehicle of Michelangelo’s expres-
sion, but in those elaborated compositions in which the
nude still plays a part – the late Cruciﬁxion scenes in which
the body of Christ is displayed in apparently inﬁnite per-
mutations of suffering – deﬁnition is deliberately reduced.
Michelangelo had always made use of soft drawings in
the primary stages of developing ﬁgural forms and the
Cruciﬁxion drawings are softened further by layers of wash
and white heightening to create images that seemingly
arise from another artistic culture, that of Venice, as seen
in the latest works of Titian (Corpus 417 and 418). It is
probable that, in part, the broad and soft handling reveals
Michelangelo’s failing eyesight as well as his shaking hand,
but such disabilities were paradoxically beneﬁcial in that
Michelangelo’s effort to overcome them produced an
internal calvary, opening for him a vision intensiﬁed
by the sacriﬁce of the forms that he had loved most
deeply.


The Catalogue 
Wholly or Partially Autograph Sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1–57
Copies of Lost or Partially Lost Drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58–61
Copies of Surviving Drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62–67
Studio Drawings and Drawings of Undetermined Status . . . . . . . . . 68–80
Copies of Sculptures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81–85
Copies After Paintings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86–104
Copies of Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105–106
Miscellaneous . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107–114


CATALOGUE 1
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
59
CATALOGUE 1
Recto: The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne
Verso: Figure Studies
1846.37; R.22; P.II 291; Corpus 17
Dimensions: 257×175 mm
Watermark: Robinson Appendix 19a. Roberts Cross C.
The single use of this paper in Michelangelo’s work. Not
recorded in Briquet.
Medium
Pen and iron gall ink.
Condition
There is a major pressed-out crease with ingrained dirt
running diagonally across the lower right corner. There
are major fractures where the ink has burned through
further to repaired areas and old museum repairs with in-
drawing. Other historic repairs are at the edges, where
there is thinning and a repaired hole. There is local stain-
ing, widespread discolouration, and show-through of the
ink on both the recto and the verso.
Inscriptions
Recto: Lower centre, in pen and ink: di Michel Angelo
(di) Buona Roti in a sixteenth-century? hand; below this,
inverted, in black chalk, 32; at lower right, in black
chalk, 7.
Verso: With the top edge as the base, obliquely at upper
left, cut by the edge of the sheet, no.
Lower centre: Robinson’s numbering in graphite: 22
Description
Recto
The Virgin, Child, and Saint Anne seated; a horizontal
pen-line runs across the full width of the sheet, some
7–9 mm above its lower edge.
Verso
A. Rear view of a standing youthful male, at three-
quarter length. He looks to his left, his left arm is held
away from his body, his right forearm is bent forward, and
his legs are braced apart.
B. Lower left corner, probably in the artist’s hand: . . . ro
amore.
C. Immediately to the right of B: lestare.
With the right edge as base
D. Outline of a female head facing right.
E. Another, similar head, further simpliﬁed.
F. A man’s head, in left proﬁle.
It is uncertain whether D, E, and F should be read as separate
studies or as three people engaged in discussion: conceivably a
mother and child with a male interlocutor.
G. The head of a middle-aged, bearded man, turned to
his right, seen in front three-quarter view.
H. The head, torso, and part of the upper thighs of a
seated youthful male, with long hair, facing left.
I. Below G: leardo.
Discussion
Recto
The group of the Virgin, Child, and Saint Anne on the
recto is obviously inspired, as all critics have emphasised,
by Leonardo’s famous experiments with closely integrated
three- and four-ﬁgure Holy Family groups, one of which
was displayed to the public in cartoon form at Santis-
sima Annunziata in April 1501. But it has been noted that
the present drawing is close in arrangement to Leonardo’s
National Gallery cartoon of the Virgin and Child with Saint
Anne and Saint John the Baptist (NG6337; charcoal, black
and white chalk, 1415×1046 mm) – which is not identical
with that shown in 1501 and whose date is disputed – and
closer still to Leonardo’s damaged drawing in the Louvre
(Inv. RF 460; pen and ink over black chalk, 120×100 mm)
and to another fragment of a sheet bearing a study for the
same group (Venice, Accademia, Inv. 230; pen and ink
over black chalk, 122×100 mm). No doubt there was
awareness in Florentine artistic circles of more variants of
the subject by Leonardo than are recorded. Wasserman
(1969) and Nathan (1992) have also argued that the
pose of the Virgin is inﬂuenced by one of Leonardo’s
designs for a kneeling Leda: Indeed, it is plausible that
Michelangelo absorbed ideas from a range of Leonardo’s
work before fusing them with his own interests to pro-
duce the present composition. The compiler is scepti-
cal of Nathan’s suggestion that the drawing was at ﬁrst
intended to represent a Leda with one of her children, but
Michelangelo might have considered treating that subject
at this period: a group sketched on a sheet in the Ufﬁzi
(18737 recto/B3/Corpus 44; black chalk, pen and ink,
242×211 mm) could as well represent Leda and the Swan
as – its usual identiﬁcation – The Abduction of Ganymede.
Whatever its debts to Leonardo, Michelangelo’s group
is more sculptural and block-like in conception than any
known work by his great rival, and he also experimented
with other such groups over several years: two drawings

60
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 1

CATALOGUE 1
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
61

62
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 1
of comparable complexity of arrangement (Paris, Lou-
vre, Inv. RF4112 recto/J17/Corpus 25; pen and ink,
392×284 mm; Inv. 685 recto/J16/Corpus 26; pen and
ink, 325×261 mm) are probably of c. 1506, contempo-
rary with the Doni Tondo. Thus, the undoubted relation
to Leonardo’s interests does not enjoin a speciﬁc dating.
In the compiler’s view the recto drawing could have been
made at any time between 1502 and 1506.
One of Michelangelo’s preoccupations here was in the
expressive organisation of drapery, comparable with that
seen in the Bruges Madonna, underway c. 1504. Although
it is difﬁcult to be certain, the ﬁgures seem ﬁrst to have
been outlined, although not modelled, in the nude, and
draperies were then stretched across them. Notable too in
this drawing is the simpliﬁcation of the heads to bean-like
shapes, and the employment of a wandering, partly bro-
ken, line to evoke the ﬁgures’ elaborate head coverings.
The Child’s pose is particularly complicated, with His
right arm raised and bent across behind His head, and His
left arm raised to clasp His right shoulder. But, surpris-
ingly in such a group, He is not the centre of attention.
Perched on the Virgin’s right hip, supported by her right
hand and the sling that passes over her left shoulder, He is
the object of neither the Virgin’s nor Saint Anne’s gaze.
The action’s focus is the Virgin’s outstretched left arm and
hand: reaching for something held under Saint Anne’s left
arm. Her pose, unexpectedly, bears a close resemblance to
a sketch probably for a Sistine ignudo, found on the verso
of a study for the Battle of Cascina in the British Museum
(W6 verso/Corpus 52; red chalk, 420×285 mm).
Despite its relatively precarious balance and the sense
of impending movement that it conveys – the weight on
Saint Anne’s right leg must be intolerable – this draw-
ing may well have been conceived for a sculptural group,
such as that executed c. 1510 by Andrea Sansovino for
the Roman church of San Agostino or that executed
around a decade later for the Florentine church of Orsan-
michele by Francesco da Sangallo, the son of Michelan-
gelo’s old friend Giuliano da Sangallo, who was close to
Michelangelo at that time and who had some access to
drawings by him. The inclusion of Saint Anne with the
Virgin and Child had a long tradition in Florence, where
the Virgin’s mother was particularly venerated: It was on
her day, July 26, that in 1343 the tyrant Duke of Athens
was expelled from the city.
For the verso drawings see Cat. 2.
History
(Casa Buonarroti) This provenance, given by Parker with
a ?, is probably incorrect. There is no evidence that
Pierre Crozat – according to Woodburn, the earliest
identiﬁed owner of this sheet – acquired drawings from
Casa Buonarroti, although, given the fact that leakages
occurred, it is not beyond the bounds of possibility that
he acquired drawings that had once been there. How-
ever, given the nature of the recto inscription and the
truncated numbering on the verso, the more proba-
ble sequence is the Bona Roti Collector; The Irregular
Numbering Collector; Joachim Sandrart; Pieter Spier-
ing Van Silfvercroon; Queen Christina; Dezzio Azzolini;
Livio Odescalchi, Duke of Bracciano; Pierre Crozat;
Pierre-Jean Mariette (no stamp, but his ownership is
attested by Woodburn); Marquis de Lagoy (no stamp);
Thomas Dimsdale (L.2226; at the lower left of the verso;
badly damaged and, apparently, cut away and then re-
attached); Samuel Woodburn; Sir Thomas Lawrence
(L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
The recto was etched in facsimile at an unknown date by
the Marquis de Lagoy. Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A.
Buonaroti Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-105] (“The Virgin,
Child and Saint. Elizabeth, on the reverse various inter-
esting studies. Fine pen.”). Woodburn, 1836b, no. 31 (“A
very spirited pen drawing of singular composition.”).
Woodburn, 1842, no. 18 (As 1836.). Fisher, 1852, p. 6,
no. 33 (Recto.). Woodburn, 1853, no. 5 (Recto repro-
duced.). Fisher, 1865, p. 20, no. XXIIIX. Robinson, 1870,
no. 22 (Michel Angelo. Recto and verso, c. 1504.). Fisher,
1872, I, p. 18, pl. 23 (As 1852.). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 22.
Gotti, 1875, II, p. 223. Fisher, 1879, p. 5, no. 14 (Prob-
ably the ﬁrst idea of a marble group.). Berenson, 1903,
I, pp. 211–12, no. 1561 (Recto: the type and drapery of
the Virgin recall the Rome Piet`a; perhaps registers hearsay
about Leonardo’s cartoon rather than direct knowledge, if
so, early 1501. Also looks forward to the Medici Madonna.
Verso: related to [Cat. 2] of c. 1505; “the model or the
type which Granacci, Franciabigio, Bacchiacca and even
Andrea and Pontormo used, or rather imitated.”). Colvin,
1904, II, no. 9A (Recto: “This is eminently a sculp-
tor’s drawing. The artist has conceived the general idea
of a group of the three ﬁgures thus seated and has sat
down pen in hand to block it into some kind of shape
while it was still half vague in his mind. As he works he
feels the forms as it were imperfectly emerging from the
marble; and with rough impetuous hatchings in whatever
direction expresses his feelings best, tries an arrangement
for the light and shade of his main masses, for the inclina-
tions of the heads and leading positions of the limbs, and
two or three principal motives for the action and reaction
of limbs against drapery. The sketch is of ﬁrst-rate interest,
both for its intrinsic quality and from the fact that it shows

CATALOGUE 1
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
63
Michelangelo inspired by a motive of Leonardo da Vinci.”
Relates more closely to Leonardo’s earlier version of the
subject in the Royal Academy cartoon, than the later one
in the Louvre painting, studies by “the sullen and jealous
young genius just back from his four years of success-
ful work in Rome.”); no. 9B (Verso: cites Berenson’s
view that it may be some years later than the recto.).
Thode, 1908, I, p. 114; II, p. 340 (1504–5. Recto: group
inﬂuenced by Leonardo. Verso: head of young man inﬂu-
enced by Leonardo, to whom leardo may refer. Sim-
ilarity of pose to BM W9/Corpus 138.). Justi, 1909,
pp. 173–4 (Recto: after Leonardo’s cartoon.). Thode,
1913, no. 406 (As 1908. Recto: cf. Louvre Inv. 685
recto/J16/Corpus 26. Verso: male studies probably for
Cascina, c. 1504.). Panofsky, 1922, p. 8 (1501–4. Recto:
free interpretation of Leonardo’s 1501 cartoon. Verso:
the male nude [Cat. 2, verso, C] to be compared with
Leonardo’s study of a male nude from the rear at Wind-
sor [12,596/CP p. 120] and the proﬁle of the head
of a young man also related to Leonardo’s types. The
pen technique shows similarities to Leonardo’s.). Popp,
1925b, p. 72 (With [Cat. 2] part of a sketchbook.). Popp,
1925–6, pp. 139–40 (Recto: inspired by Leonardo. Verso:
c. 1501.). Baumgart, 1935a, p. 351 (Recto: “L’essenza
della composizion a gruppo, gli rimane ancora estranea.
Ci`o che gli sembr`o importante era la comprehensione
della plasticit`a della ﬁgura e della composizione plas-
tica del gruppo che raggiunge, s`ı, une esteriore unit`a
formale priva per`o ancora dell’intimo compenetrarsi
ed equilibrarsi di singoli valori plastici.”). Baumgart,
1937, pp. 11–12 (Recto: drawn in response to Leonardo,
1501–2. Very different from Doni tondo.); pp. 36–7
(Verso: after Michelangelo; clear differences in quality
from the authentic Cat. 2.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1561 (As
1903.). Bertini, 1942, p. 41 (Recto: drawn in response to
Leonardo.). De Tolnay, 1943a, pp. 100, 180, no. 9 (Recto:
spring–summer of 1501, when Leonardo’s cartoon was
displayed, but rather resembles Leonardo’s Louvre draw-
ing, Inv. RF460. “[T]he ﬁgures are contained in an
oblong block set diagonally. Each ﬁgure acts indepen-
dently of the others – and indeed in opposition to them.
The whole is based on dissonances.”); pp. 101, 180–1,
no. 10 (Verso: inscription refers to Leonardo. [E] taken
up in Joseph of Doni tondo and [F] in background youth.
A inspired in pose by Leonardo’s drawing at Windsor,
12593/CP, p. 119.). Popham and Pouncey, 1950, pp. 67–8
(Recto and verso: c. 1505; the recto’s “compact sculp-
tural composition” based on that of Leonardo’s National
Gallery cartoon. Verso: connected with Cascina.). Gold-
scheider, 1951, no. 8 (Recto: a free copy of Leonardo’s
cartoon, c. 1501.); no. 7 (Verso: inscription should be
read as leardo [dappled] or Nardo, which would refer to
Michelangelo’s elder brother, Fra Leonardo.). De Tolnay,
1951, pp. 29, 291 (Recto and verso: as 1943/1947.).
Wilde, 1953a, pp. 3–4, 21 (one of a group of drawings,
perhaps leaves of the same sketchbook, which can be
dated with certainty in the period 1501–3. Recto: pose
of Virgin related to BM W9/Corpus 138, for Sistine.).
Wilde, 1953b, p. 66 (1501–3. The “short, ﬁrm, paral-
lel strokes partly following the curve of the form do not
occur in earlier drawings by Michelangelo and are charac-
teristic of all Leonardo’s pen studies of this period . . . by
giving an entirely eccentric place to the Infant Christ
he imparted tension to the structure. The study may
well have been intended for a statuary group, for the
outlines are as closed as the Piet`a and the group needs
no setting: it is completely isolated. The centre of the
greatly increased plastic life has now been lifted to the
upper half where the main points lie in the foremost
plane.”). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 12 (Recto: 1501–3; may
have been inspired by Leonardo.). Parker, 1956, II, no. 291
(With [Cat. 2] and Louvre Inv. 714/J4/Corpus 19, per-
haps from the same sketchbook. Datable 1501–2. The
recto inspired by Leonardo, but his inﬂuence on the
verso generally overstated. “[I]mprobable too that the
study of a man’s back has any real relation to the marble
David.”). Dussler, 1959, no. 193 (Recto: 1501. Inspired
by Leonardo but more plastic in conception. Verso: con-
temporary with recto. Types and motifs also inspired by
Leonardo. Inscription cannot read Leardo but Le(n)ardo.
Probably part of the same sketchbook as [Cat. 2].). Beren-
son, 1961, no. 1561 (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962, p. 4
(Michelangelo; compared with Ufﬁzi 233F/B1/Corpus
37.). Barocchi, 1964a (Recto: reaction to Leonardo, fol-
lowing 1501. Verso: contemporary with recto; connection
with AB II–III, 3 verso/B287/Corpus 15.). Brugnoli,
1964, no. 5 (1501–2; inﬂuence of Leonardo, but a new
energy of mass. “The pen strokes, longer and more widely
separated . . . summarize the modeling . . . rapid sketch-
ing of Madonna’s left foot characteristic.”). De Tolnay,
1964e, col. 873 (Paraphase of Leonardo’s St. Anne.).
Berti, 1965, pp. 392–4, 402 (Both sides contemporary,
c. 1501. Recto: inﬂuenced by Leonardo, but more ener-
getic and angular; pictorial rather than sculptural. Verso:
name read as Leonardo. Ephebic head reminiscent of
those in the Manchester Madonna.). Goldscheider, 1965,
no. 8 recto, no. 7 verso (Alternative readings dropped
and Leardo apparently accepted as Leonardo; “in parts
of the drawing even Leonardo’s left-handed hatching
lines are imitated.”). Weinberger, 1967, p. 104 (Recto:
c. 1502 “reﬂects the impression of Leonardo’s cartoon.”);
p. 87 (Verso: linked with [Cat. 2] verso and Louvre

64
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 1–2
Inv. 714/J4/Corpus 19 verso, c. 1502. Studies of “the
back of a young male model . . . not actually used in
the David, but the wonderfully sharp deﬁnition of their
anatomical structure aims at the same tactile values that
are emphasised in the rear view.”). Wasserman, 1969,
pp. 122–31 (Datable c. 1505. Recto: no direct connec-
tion with Leonardo’s lost cartoon, closer in arrange-
ment to his National Gallery cartoon. But the pose of
the Virgin is most similar to Leonardo’s crouching Leda
at Chatsworth [Inv. 717/Jaff´e, 1994 (3), no. 880]. Per-
haps drawn in response to an unknown commission for
a painting or a sculpture. Verso: bearded heads close in
type to that of Saint Matthew; probably of 1506.). Hartt,
1971, no. 9 (Recto: placing together of the Virgin’s
knees and the diagonal mantle strap over the left shoul-
der characteristic.); no. 16 (Verso: studied from same
model as Louvre Inv. 714 verso/J4/Corpus 19; this ﬁgure
drawn ﬁrst. The bearded head a self-portrait.). Mancusi-
Ungaro 1971 (Recto: after Leonardo.). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 12 (“[C]learly . . . inspired by Leonardo.”). Hib-
bard, 1975, p. 64 (Recto. “Leonardesque group . . . clearly
hatched, like a study for a sculpture . . . wholly unlike
Leonardo’s misty sfumato, which unites ﬁgures and their
surroundings.” Verso: bearded man “may be a sketch
of Leonardo himself.”). De Tolnay, 1974, p. 11 (Recto:
probably planned for a sculpture). Keller, 1975, no. 19
(Michelangelo, c. 1501, inspired by Leonardo.). de Tolnay,
1975, p. 15 (As 1951.). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 17
(Recto: second half of 1501; closest to Leonardo’s draw-
ing in the Louvre, Inv. RF460. Verso: pose of A close to
that of Leonardo’s drawing at Windsor, 12596/CP p. 120.
Heads, especially [F] also inspired by Leonardo, to whom
leardo might refer.). Macandrew, 1980 (Inscription cor-
rected.). Lamarche-Vadel, 1981, p. 16, no. 4 (1501–2.).
Liebert, 1983, pp. 94–5 (Verso: [F] is a self-portrait. [E]
“the model for the androgynous nude . . . is used for the
Madonna in . . . [Berlin 1363/Corpus 27], one of the Doni
tondo nudes, and the nude triton” [in Cat. 2].). Hirst,
1988, p. 26 (Recto: “the style . . . would not exclude a
dating of around 1504–6.”). Sisi, 1988, nos. 27, 28 (Inﬂu-
ence of Leonardo in technique “il volume . . . descritto
tende a complicarsi in un amalgama di luce e ombra lon-
tano dal ‘lume universale’ concreto e deﬁnitorio della
tradizione toscana. Questo‘aer bruno’rilevato dal Vasari
nelle opere di Leonardo, si addenso sopratutto intorno
al gruppo di ﬁgure sul recto . . . che ripete l’iconograﬁa
della Sant’Anna Metterza, soggetto pi`u volti sperimen-
tato da Leonardo.”). Perrig, 1991, pp. 26–7 (Verso: by
Cellini.). Bonsanti, 1992, p. 345 (Verso: link between tri-
tons here and on Cat. 2 with wall drawing from Buonar-
roti Villa at Settignano.”). Nathan, 1992, pp. 95–6 (Recto:
Michelangelo proceeded from left to right; “the sheet,
at some point in the drawing process, only contained
the infant and his mother . . . [and] . . . the composition
was extended to the right . . . through the addition of the
St. Anne. This suggests that . . . we are confronted with a
change in subject matter.” Notes that “the unusual man-
ner in which the Virgin holds her child . . . clearly cor-
responds to a follower’s version of Leonardo’s design for
a kneeling Leda” and cites example in Kassel, Staatliche
Gem¨aldgalerie. Concludes “that, before the St. Anne was
added, the mother and her infant were really intended to
represent a nude Leda with one of her children.”). Hirst,
1994–5, pp. 42–3, ﬁg. 32 (c. 1501–5; “the ﬁgure of the
Virgin reﬂects that in the Manchester Madonna.”). Bon-
santi, 1999–2000, p. 220 (Sketches of tritons on [Cats. 1
verso and 2 recto] support the authenticity of the Settig-
nano Triton.).
CATALOGUE 2
Recto: A Triton and Three Heads
Verso: Studies of a Back, a Left Arm, a Right Leg
1846.38; R.21; P.II 292; Corpus 18
Dimensions: 235×190 mm
Medium
Pen and iron gall ink.
Condition
There are additional narrow strips of paper at the left and
lower edges, with a number of pulp inﬁlls and repairs at
the edges, at the lower right corner, and in the image area
where the ink has fractured the paper. There is a repaired
tear with ingrained dirt and a small inﬁlled hole in the
lower quarter, and the paper is skinned in areas. There
are scattered discoloured accretions, local staining, and a
severe show-through of the ink to the verso. The ink is
worn in places with haloing in the heavily worked areas.
Inscriptions
Recto: Lower left, in pen and ink: Michel Angelo/di Buona
Roti; the words “Michel Angelo” were added above “di
Buona Roti,” which was written ﬁrst.
Description
Recto
A. A nude male ﬁgure seated facing left, his arms and legs
terminating in scroll-like ﬁns, wearing a helmet decorated
with wings.

CATALOGUE 2
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
65
With the left edge as base
B. A man’s head turned to his right seen in front three-
quarter view and slightly from below (this may be the
same head as C and D from which the beard is omitted).
C. A middle-aged man’s head, balding and bearded,
turned to his right seen in front three-quarter view and
slightly from below.
D. The same head as C, wearing a turban, seen in front
three-quarter view and slightly from below.

66
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 2
Verso
A. A very faint black chalk sketch in the lower left corner,
which seems to represent a right hand resting on a ﬂat
surface with the ﬁngers bent over its edge.
B. The left shoulder, upper back, and raised arm of a
young man, seen from behind.
C. The left arm pit and raised upper arm of a young man,
seen from the side.
D. The back of a young man, with the arms indicated as
lowered; he appears to be seated, since the buttocks are
compressed.
With the upper edge as base
E. The right thigh and knee of a young man, seen in left
three-quarter view.
Discussion
Cat. 1 verso and the recto and verso of the present sheet,
obviously closely connected in motif and technique,
are linked also with a third sheet in the Louvre (Inv.
714/J4/Corpus 19; pen and ink, 262×185 mm) and, a
little more distantly, a fourth in the Albertina (BK 132/
Corpus 14; pen and ink, 225×315 mm). It is not abso-
lutely necessary to suppose that all the drawings on the
four sheets were made at the same time, but there are no
good reasons for assuming otherwise.
None of the other drawings on these sheets is cer-
tainly connected with the group on the recto of Cat. 1,
although it is just possible that the two sketches of a female
head (B and C on its verso) may be. The studies of male
backs and shoulders found on the versos of both Cat. 1
and the present drawing – all probably from the same
model – are very similar to a study found on Louvre Inv.
714/J4/Corpus 19 verso and, somewhat less clearly, with
a study of a right shoulder and arm seen from the front,
on the recto of the same sheet. Two further half studies of
backs can be found on another drawing in the Louvre (Inv.
718/J9/Corpus 47 verso; pen and ink, 340×180 mm), of

CATALOGUE 2
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
67
which the recto is generally connected with the Battle of
Cascina, although the compiler is rather inclined to relate
it to an unrealised project for the Martyrdom of the Ten
Thousand. The study of the right thigh and knee on the
verso of the present sheet is also close in form to the right
thigh and knee of a ﬁgure on the verso of Louvre Inv. 714,
performing an action variously interpreted as digging or
impaling.
The studies of backs and shoulders on Cats. 1 and
2 are often thought to be for the marble David, begun
by Michelangelo in September 1501 and perhaps com-
pleted by mid-summer 1503 (Hirst, 2000), and the forms
of that statue’s back – in which Michelangelo’s freedom
of manouevre was limited by a shallow block – are obvi-
ously similar. However, while a link remains plausible,
it was doubted by Parker, and the connection is insuf-
ﬁciently precise for it to be taken as certain. The raised
left arm on the verso of Cat. 2, for example, cannot have
been intended for the David, and the pose of the ﬁgure
A on Cat. 1 verso is, when analysed, not like that of the
David. In that drawing, the legs braced wide apart sug-
gest that Michelangelo arranged his model in a variant of
the pose of Donatello’s Saint George and planned to dis-
tribute the ﬁgure’s weight evenly on both legs, not in the
contrapposto arrangement of the marble David as carved.
Indeed, the drawing looks forward in certain respects to
an invention by Rosso of c. 1526, engraved by Caraglio
(The Illustrated Bartsch 28, 38 (78), p. 115) of Hercules, legs
astride, seen from the rear, one of a series of niched clas-
sical gods. Michelangelo’s drawing may also have been
in part inspired by the torso of one of the Tyrannicides,
Aristogeiton and Harmodius, of which at least two ver-
sions were known in the Renaissance, both fragmentary
(see Bober and Rubinstein, 1986, pp. 162–3); Michelan-
gelo was not alone in looking at such a ﬁgure; a copy
after one of these attributed to the school of Raphael is
in the Ashmolean Museum, P.II, no. 622; pen and ink,
210×137 mm.
Reinforcement for the dating of these three sheets to
c. 1502 is generally thought to be provided by the sketch
on Louvre Inv. 714 recto/J4/Corpus 19, for a victorious
David, which is, with virtual certainty, connected with the
bronze commissioned from Michelangelo on 12 August
1502 for Pierre de Rohan, Mar´echal de Gi´e, cast by mid-
1503, and whose chasing was completed by Benedetto da
Rovezzano in 1508. This ﬁgure was certainly drawn after
the sketch of a right arm and shoulder seen from the front,
and its presence could therefore be used to date the latter
somewhat earlier and to connect it with the marble David,
begun in 1501. However, the sketch of the bronze David
is so fully realised that, rather than a preliminary concetto,
it probably dates from a moment when Michelangelo was
reﬁning details of his model, and, consequently, is datable
1503. If so, while Michelangelo could, in theory, have
reused this side of the sheet some two years after he had
ﬁrst drawn on it, this seems less likely than the alternative:
that the large study was not made for the marble David
but for some other purpose that we cannot determine.
Several different heads are drawn on these two sheets.
The bearded head with aquiline nose, seen from below,
which occurs four times, once with head-gear, was, in the
past, often identiﬁed as a portrait of Leonardo da Vinci,
an identiﬁcation that can be supported by the much-
discussed inscription, leardo. This could, in principle, refer
to Leonardo da Vinci – and such self-consciousness would
not be unknown from Michelangelo who inscribed his
leonardesque compositional drawing in the Louvre (Inv.
685 recto/J16/Corpus 26, pen and ink over black chalk,
325×261 mm) – Chi direi mai che sia di mia mano – and
it does not conﬂict with what may be conjectured of
Leonardo’s appearance shortly after 1500, at about 50.
Nevertheless, it is difﬁcult to believe that Michelangelo
would have made a portrait drawing of his detested rival,
and it is very far from certain that the inscription refers to
the bearded man; it might, for instance, refer to the young
man at the right of Cat. 1 recto; or it might be entirely
unrelated: Scattered notes of names appear frequently on
sheets by Michelangelo, and in no other instance is it
probable that the subject of a drawing is named. If the
head is to be seen as a portrait, it seems more likely that
it was a friend or relation of Michelangelo’s. His father,
Ludovico, is an obvious candidate or, if the inscription
is taken to refer to the name of the person portrayed,
his elder brother, Leonardo. It has also been identiﬁed
as a self-portrait of Michelangelo, but this seems to the
compiler wholly implausible physiognomically.
In any case, the low angle from which these heads are
drawn would not be appropriate for an image intended
as a portrait, and it may be that Michelangelo was here
experimenting with facial types for one or other of the
twelve Apostles he was commisioned to carve for the
Duomo in 1504, which would, of course, have been
seen from below. It is worth recalling Goldscheider’s
interpretation of leardo as dappled, for Michelangelo
might well have wished to make note of a dappled beard,
perhaps with the intention of translating a pictorial effect
into sculpture.
The male head in left proﬁle on Cat. 1 recto, loosely
executed in a virtuoso contour-mapping pen style, and
given a caricatural cast, was probably made from life. It
was not made from the same model as the bearded heads,
and it depicts a younger man with more hair. It is difﬁcult

68
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 2
to decide whether this head is intended to form part of the
same group as the two heads indicated in outline to the
lower left. These, however, do appear to be connected,
and they may represent the Virgin and Child seen at an
oblique angle: Although the head of the putative Child
seems unduly large, this is a feature of the Bruges Madonna.
If so, the male head could be that of Saint Joseph, but it
is hard to feel conﬁdent of this interpretation since the
characterisation is not wholly sympathetic.
Alternatively, this head may have been used in a mod-
iﬁed way in the Triton, A on Cat. 2 recto. The Triton is
clearly identiﬁed as such, and the younger ﬁgure on Cat. 1
verso, whose pose is very similar, is probably either a vari-
ant of the same ﬁgure or a companion: Both are based
very loosely on the Belvedere Torso, which Michelan-
gelo would have seen during his ﬁrst Roman sojourn.
The subject is speciﬁc, but no project is known for which
these ﬁgures might have been made. Their function might
have been as components of a decorative frieze, but none
such is known. It should also be noted that there may
be a link with a large charcoal drawing made directly
on a whitewashed wall of the Buonarroti Villa at Set-
tignano (Corpus 11; 940×1,335 mm) but now detached.
Although this controversial work was ﬁrst connected with
Michelangelo in print only in 1746, it was known to
Andrea Commodi who drew a copy of it (Ufﬁzi 18614F;
pen and ink, 153×159 mm) probably in the 1580s. The
attribution of the Settignano ﬁgure, variously identiﬁed
as a Satyr or a Triton, is disputed. Many scholars accept
it, but although it is of strongly Michelangelesque type, it
does not seem to the compiler to be autograph. It might
be by a pupil or associate working after Michelangelo’s
ideas: Commodi demonstrably copied pupil drawings as
well as originals by Michelangelo. Nevertheless, since the
Settignano drawing, whomever it is by, is both Michelan-
gelesque and drawn on property owned by his fam-
ily, it does support the idea that Michelangelo planned
some kind of aquatic composition, perhaps in emulation
of Mantegna’s famous print, the Battle of the Sea Gods.
Further – tenuous – evidence that Michelangelo may have
contemplated a composition of Tritons is provided by two
drawings attributed to Michelangelo recorded in Jabach’s
posthumous inventory of 1695: Quatre tritons, `a la plume,
lav´e sur papier bistr´e, long de 17 et haut de 8 2/3 pouces, and
Un triton mort et d’autres qui le plaignent, `a la plume, lav´e
sur papier bistr´e, long de 17 1/3 sur 8 1/2 pouces (Py, 2001,
nos. 765, 766). Trace of these drawings is lost after the
mid-eighteenth century, and while there is no means of
judging whether they were by, after, or entirely uncon-
nected with Michelangelo, the fact that such scenes were
associated with him should not be dismissed too lightly.
Winged headdresses are found again in works by
Michelangelo, notably in a drawing of c. 1505–6 in the
Louvre (Inv. 688 verso/J13/Corpus 20; pen and ink,
387×205 mm), and another of the 1520s in the Ufﬁzi
(251F verso/B243; black and red chalk, 279×133 mm),
which is closely connected with a sketch on Cat. 30
verso, K.
The back view on Cat. 2 verso and the two studies of
the raised left arm cannot be connected securely with any
work by Michelangelo. However, one reconstruction of
the bronze David suggests that its right arm was raised,
and although this was certainly not true of the statue
as executed, this drawing at least shows that Michelan-
gelo experimented with such a motif. Further comparable
studies of a right arm are found on the sheet of drawings in
the Albertina (BK 132/Corpus 14; pen and ink, 225×315
mm). And ﬁgures with raised left arms are represented in
drawings in the Albertina (BK 118 recto/Corpus 22; pen
and ink, 390×195 mm) and Rennes, Mus´ee des Beaux-
Arts (Inv. 794.1. 2913/Corpus 632; pen and ink, 350×
134 mm), a drawing which, although disputed, is in the
compiler’s view an autograph Michelangelo of c. 1504.
History
Given the nature of the recto inscription, in which
Michelangelo’s Christian name appears to have been
added as an afterthought, the provenance is proba-
bly the Bona Roti Collector; the Irregular Numbering
Collector; Joachim Sandrart; Pieter Van Silvfercroon;
Queen Christina; Dezzio Azzolini; Livio Odescalchi,
Duke of Bracciano; Pierre Crozat; Jean-Baptiste Wicar
(Wicar is the ﬁrst owner recorded by Woodburn, fol-
lowed by Robinson and Parker, but it is doubtful that this
is correct); William Young Ottley (the drawing may have
been part of lot 279 in Ottley’s sale of 1804, described as
“a sheet with two torsos, etc, free pen, and some of his
writing”); Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445 on the verso);
Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale?, 1804, part of lot 279 (“Three – a sheet
with two torsos, etc. free pen, and some of his writ-
ing, and two others by Salviati etc. after Michael Angelo,
one in red the other in black chalk.”). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 2. Robinson, 1870, no. 21 (Michel Angelo. Recto
and verso, c. 1504.). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 21. Gotti,
1875, II, p. 234. Berenson, 1903, no. 1560 (c. 1505.
Verso: A possibly for the ﬁgure lifting up his arm in the
Bathers.). Colvin, 1905, III, no. 5A (Recto: about the same
date, 1505, as the verso of Cat. 1.); no. 5B (Verso: pur-
pose of Triton drawing conjectural; no close precedent

CATALOGUES 2–3
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
69
for it.). Thode, 1913, no. 405 (c. 1504.). Popp, 1925b,
p. 72 (With Cat. 1 part of a sketchbook.). Popp, 1925–6,
pp. 140, 143 (Recto: not before 1501.). Baumgart, 1937,
pp. 36–7 (c. 1501. Recto: Michelangelo. Verso: after
Michelangelo?). Berenson, 1938, no. 1560 (As 1903.). De
Tolnay, 1943a, p. 181, nos. 11 (Verso: spring–summer
1501; similar study of a male back known in “a copy” [sic]
Louvre Inv. 718 verso/J9/Corpus 47 and Louvre Inv. 714
verso/J4/Corpus 19 stylistically identical with this and
[Cat. 1].); no. 12 (Recto: same date as verso; Triton’s hel-
met perhaps inspired by Leonardo.). Goldscheider, 1951,
no. 12 (Verso: c. 1501.); no. 11 (Recto: the main ﬁgure
“derives from an antique statue of Mercury . . . ﬁns were
an afterthought.”). De Tolnay, 1951, pp. 29, 290 (Verso:
spring–summer 1501; evidence of Michelangelo’s inter-
est in the art of Leonardo.). Wilde, 1953a, pp. 3–4 (One
of a group of sheets, perhaps leaves of same sketchbook,
that can be dated with certainty in the period 1501–3.).
Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 13 (Verso: “possibly connected with
the marble David.”). Parker, 1956, no. 292 (c. 1501–2).
Dussler, 1959, no. 192 (Recto: inextricably linked with
Cat. 2 and Louvre Inv. 714/J4/Corpus 19, datable 1501.
Copy drawings in Vienna and Montpellier based on orig-
inals of same period. Verso: Leonardesque, like [Cat. 1].).
Exh. London, 1960, no. 538. Berenson, 1961, no. 1560
(As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962, p. 6 (Michelangelo;
compared with CB59F/B2/Corpus 32.). Berti, 1965,
pp. 393, 401 (Recto: Triton resembles the Settignano
Triton. Verso: link with Louvre Inv. 714/J4/Corpus 19.).
Goldscheider, 1965, no. 12 verso; no. 11 recto (As 1951.).
Weinberger, 1967, p. 87 (Verso: see Cat. 2.). Hartt,
1971, no. 17 (Recto: 1501–2. Same model as [Cat. 1];
another self-portrait.); no. 18 (Verso: 1501–2. Study of
raised arm “suggests the later Dying Slave.”). LeBrooy,
1972, p. 99 (Verso: studies of back compared with a
terracotta model attributed by LeBrooy to Michelan-
gelo in a Montreal private collection.). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 13 (with [Cat. 1] “may have formed part
of the same sketchbook.”). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I,
no. 18 (Recto: mid-1501; the style of 1504–5 “appare
pi`u disciplinato.” [A] based, according to P. Meller,
on torso Belvedere. No immediate links with David
or Dying Slave. Heads at base recall Settignano Triton.
Verso: contemporary.). Liebert, 1983, pp. 94–5 (Recto:
“Michelangelo’s head [i.e., A] with its taut and depres-
sive set, moves sequentially from a position close to the
breasts of the Madonna in [Berlin 1363/Corpus 27] to
near the undersized penis of the triton. . . . This change
in placement suggests a renunciation of the breast and
women as sources of nurturance and a tentative move-
ment toward the penis and men as more reliable and
satisfying providers. . . . [T]he ﬁgure of the triton bears
striking similarities to the Silenus of the Medici [palace]
Dionysus tondo . . . [this] suggests . . . Michelangelo’s feel-
ing of kinship with Dionysus, but here in the con-
text of a clear emergence of sexual elements. . . . Perhaps
Michelangelo introduced . . . [the triton’s ﬁns] to divert
and even ridicule the homosexual implications in the
drawing.”). Bonsanti, 1992, p. 345 (Recto: link between
tritons here and on [Cat. 1 verso] with wall drawing from
Buonarroti villa at Settignano.”). Paoletti, 1992, p. 432
(Heads are self-portraits.). Bonsanti, 1999–2000, p. 220
(Sketches of tritons on Cats. 1 verso and 2 recto support
the authenticity of the Settignano Triton.).
CATALOGUE 3
A Standing Male Figure
1846.59; R.48.3; P.II 313; Corpus 249bis
Dimensions: 97×91 mm
Medium
Pen and ink.
Condition
There are repaired tears, skinning, edge nicks, and
ingrained dirt, with general discolouration, local stain-
ing, foxing, and surface dirt. The verso is not visible.
Description
This small drawing of a standing ﬁgure shows several
superimposed poses. At ﬁrst, the left leg was crossed over
the right leg at the ankle, the right arm was bent across
the chest and the ﬁgure was leaning on a support braced
under the left arm. The head seems to have been tilted
down. At this stage, it will be noted, the pose was similar
to that here proposed for Michelangelo’s lost early Hercules
(see Cat. 81). The left leg was then straightened, the arms
were raised and outstretched in a cruciform shape, the
head was raised and turned to the ﬁgure’s right.
To the left of the ﬁgure is the trace of a line, largely
erased, which runs down the page.
Discussion
The single serious hypothesis about the purpose of this
fragment, obviously cut from a larger sheet, is due to
Wilde, who thought that it was for a mourning ﬁgure in a
Calvary, such as that in the British Museum (W32/Corpus
87; red chalk, 394×281 mm), probably of the ﬁrst half of

70
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 3
the 1520s. There is certainly some similarity in the angular
gesturing, but three arguments may be advanced against
Wilde’s view. First, the present ﬁgure is isolated on the
paper with no trace of others around it: Nothing suggests
that it was intended as part of a crowd scene. Second,
the structure of this ﬁgure and those in W32 are unalike:
They are thin and geometrical because they are merely
blocked-out; this is thin and geometrical because
Michelangelo envisaged the ﬁgure thus. Third, Michelan-
gelo does not seem to have made many drawings of this
concetto type in pen in the 1520s, and those that exist display
more elastic outlines than this drawing. The apparently
squarish chest is in fact created by the fall of drapery, anal-
ogous to that of the unﬁnished statue of Saint Matthew.
In the compiler’s view, this drawing was most prob-
ably made for a statue, more likely niched than free-
standing. The ﬁgure as ﬁrst drawn, with its reminiscence
of Michelanglo’s lost Hercules, strongly suggests sculp-
ture, and even though the raised right arm and the ges-
ture might seem less appropriate to marble, they would
of course be perfectly plausible to any sculptor who
had studied Hellenistic work or, for that matter, Andrea
Sansovino’s Saint John the Baptist of 1504. Perhaps the
drawing was made to prepare one or more of the statues
of Apostles, commissioned for Santa Maria dei Fiore, the
cathedral of Florence, in 1504. Only one was executed,
the compact Saint Matthew, but autograph sketches exist
for at least two other ﬁgures (and copies survive in the
Louvre after what were probably more developed studies
for two further ﬁgures: Inv. 858/J64; black chalk over sty-
lus indications, 295×134 mm, and Inv. 702/J47; pen and
ink, 401×152 mm). The pen work of the present draw-
ing is closely similar to that of the concetto of a standing
nude male supported by a lectern at the lower left of a
sheet in Florence (Ufﬁzi 233F/B1/Corpus 37; pen and
ink and black chalk, 272×263 mm), whose dimensions
are virtually identical with those of the present ﬁgure and
which was no doubt drawn for another of the Apostles.
The ﬁrst idea in the present palimpsest might have been
for Saint James the Greater, holding the club with which
he was martyred; the version with raised arms for Saint
Andrew holding his X-shaped Cross.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar?; William Young
Ottley (his sale?, 11 April 1804, etc., part of lot 270,
“Five – various pen studies of ﬁgures and architecture –
some of his writing on the back of three – from the
Bonarroti collection.”); Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445);
Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale?, 11 April 1804, part of lot 270 (Five – vari-
ous pen studies of ﬁgures and architecture – some of his

CATALOGUES 4
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
71
writing on the back of three – from the Bonarroti col-
lection.”). Lawrence Inventory?, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti
Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-103] (“Architectural and other
studies – pen” [presumably with Cats. 19, 75, plus two
other unidentiﬁed drawings].). Woodburn, 1842, no. 72
(“Three small studies-upon one mount . . . with the auto-
graph of M. Angelo” with [Cats. 19, 75].). Robinson,
1870, no. 48.3 (Michel Angelo. “slight and unimpor-
tant pen study. . . . Neither the period of its execution
nor its intentions can be determined.”). Black, 1875,
p. 214, no. 43c. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 234. Berenson, 1903,
no. 1567.3 (“[P]robably, but not certainly, Michelan-
gelo’s.”). K. Frey, 1909–11, 138b (Autograph; uncertain
purpose.). Thode, 1913, no. 431 (Uncertain purpose,
but authentic.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1567.3 (As 1903.).
Wilde, 1953a, p. 65 (Mourning ﬁgure. Would ﬁt equally
well in BM W32/Corpus 87 [The Three Crosses], or
Haarlem A.34/VT 60/Corpus. 109 [The Deposition] both
of c. 1523.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 140C. Parker, 1956,
no. 313 (“[E]xtensive alterations in the position of the arms
and legs which produce a confusing effect . . . originally
the ﬁgure was leaning on a support under the arm pit
with the left arm hanging down and the right passed
across the front of the body. The left leg, originally crossed
behind the right, was afterwards straightened.” Perhaps “a
mere jotting, put to paper without any particular inten-
tion in mind.”). Dussler, 1959, no. 198 (Authentic, datable
c. 1518 by comparison with [Cat. 19].). Berenson, 1961,
no. 1567.3 (As 1903/1938.). Berti, 1965, pp. 433, 437.
Hartt, 1971, no. 166 (1517–18?. For Cruciﬁxion of Saints
Cosmas and Damian on San Lorenzo fac¸ade.). Gere and
Turner, 1975, no. 86 (Parker correct to doubt Wilde’s
interpretation.). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 249bis
(Michelangelo; accepts Wilde’s date of 1528 [sic].). Perrig,
1999, p. 247 (By a pupil of Michelangelo; from via Mozza
studio.).
CATALOGUE 4
Recto: Studies of a Horse and a Sketch of a Battle Scene
Verso: Five Drafts of Poems
1846.39; R.18; P.II 293; Corpus 102
Dimensions: 427×283 mm
Watermark: Robinson Appendix no. 19b. Roberts Fruit
D. The single use of this paper in Michelangelo’s work.
Not recorded in Briquet.
Medium
Pen and iron gall ink, which has corroded the paper.
Condition
There is widespread discolouration and local staining and
some undulation. An additional strip of paper has been
added to the left margin covering parts of the origi-
nal writing, which have been replaced in the writing of
Michelangelo the Younger. There is a major pressed-out
horizontal fold and crease, with other creasing and some
skinned areas. There are major pulp inﬁlls and toning and
major unsupported fractures where the ink has burned
through. There are some repaired edge tears.
Description and Transcriptions
The recto was used ﬁrst, as a full sheet, oriented vertically;
when Michelangelo subsequently employed the verso for
poetry, he folded the sheet at the half-way point and used
the two half-pages thus obtained for separate verses. On
the left-hand half sheet, he inscribed two poems, inverted
with respect to each other; on the right-hand page, he
inscribed three verses, each oriented differently.
Recto
A. The body and neck of a stallion, in right proﬁle.
B. The hind quarters of a stallion, seen from the right
rear.
C. The hind quarters of a stallion, in right proﬁle.
D. A combat between a cavalryman and foot soldiers.
E. An indecipherable form, perhaps a fallen infantryman.
Verso
The compiler has endeavoured to transcribe the words
as literally as possible – an effort in which he has
relied heavily on the work of others, notably Baroc-
chi, 1964c. These transcriptions are followed by the ver-
sions of the same poems given by Girardi in his stan-
dard editions of Michelangelo’s poetry of 1960 and 1967,
modiﬁed on occasion by those of Residori in Resi-
dori and Baratto, 1998. These clariﬁed texts are supple-
mented by the translations into English prose published
by Christopher Ryan in 1996, which make Michelan-
gelo’s thought immediately accessible to the anglophone
reader. In the compiler’s transcriptions an effort has been
made to indicate Michelangelo’s abbreviations typograph-
ically. Where appropriate signs are unavailable, normal
parentheses ( ) have been employed to signal abbrevia-
tions; { } to signal missing words or letters due to dam-
age to the paper, within which are inserted conjectural
readings.

72
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 4

CATALOGUE 4
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
73
1. With the left side as base, four lines, probably the
beginning of a sonnet.
Colui ch(e) ltucto fe, fece ogni parte
e poi deltucto la piu bella scelse
p(er) mostrar quivi le suo cose eccelse
Coma facto or cholla sua divinarte
Guasti, frammenti XVI; Frey, IV; Girardi, no. 9;
Residori, no. 9
Colui che ’il tutto fe’, fece ogni parte
e poi del tutto la pi`u bella scelse,
per mostrar quivi le suo cose eccelse,
com’ha fatto or colla sua divin’arte.
Ryan, no. 9
He who made all made every part and then from all chose
the most beautiful, to show forth here his sublime qualities,
as he has now done with his divine art.
2. With the left side as base.
The reading of this sonnet is particularly difﬁcult, as all schol-
ars have noted. Frey thought that some words had been
added and others altered by a later hand with a greyer ink
than the original, but his view may have been affected by
the condition of the sheet. The additions and variants seem
also to have been added in the same colour ink as the ﬁrst
draft, if more diluted, and by the same hand. Some of them,

74
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 4
however, make even less sense to the compiler than the ﬁrst
draft.
Gssngdo in[?]felice catuo p˜ugi˜eti seraﬁlis (above: feroci ma[li]; at
right: alle tuo veloci ali)
postargio ev˜ıgero mifus gia c˜ociessdin
or lasso, inlpecto nos bagni˜ado spesspio
ch˜otrari imie poglia essos qu˜ate permalios
E sse i dannosis e preteristi stralis
chelmie ˜ıdurato cor campo lui stesso [line cancelled]
palsegnios delmiu cor non fur mapressori
por puois acholpii v˜edichar te stessonior
dique begliochi eﬁe tucti mortali
Da quanti lacci amor [above: ancor] daqu˜ate rete
vagho uccelleto p(er) mal˜ıgnia sorte
champa molti anni p(er) morire po pgg{io}
tal di me donne amor chome vede{te}
p(er) darmi inquesta eta piu c{hrudel} m{or}te
champ{ato} ma molt’anni (cancelled; above: gran tempo)
c{home veggio}
Variants
pungienti sera felis
alla tuo veloci
per stare io e vinger io mi fus gia conciessdin
Amore evitar me fu gi`a concesso
Frey, II; Girardi, no. 3; Residori, no. 3
Grato e felice a’ tuo feroci mali
ostare e vincer mi fu gi`a concesso;
or, lasso, il petto vo bagnando spesso
contr’a mie voglia, e.sso quante tu vali.
E.sse i dannosi e preteriti strali
al segno del mie cor non fur ma’ presso
or puoi a colpi vendicar te stesso
di que’ begli occhi, e ﬁen tutti mortali.
Da quanti lacci ancor, da quante rete
vago uccelletto per maligna sorte
campa molt’ anni per morire po’ peggio
tal di me, donne, Amor, come vedete,
per darmi in questa et`a pi`u crudel morte,
campato m’ha gran tempo, come veggio.
Ryan, no. 3
To me, grateful and happy, it was once given to resist and
conquer your savage evils; now, alas, against my will I often
bathe my breast with tears, and I know your true power.
And if previously your fatal arrows never came close to my
heart, which was their target, now you can revenge yourself
through those beautiful eyes, whose every blow is fatal.
Just as for many years a little wandering bird may escape a
host of snares and nets only to die a worse death later through
evil fate.
So I, ladies, as you can see, have been allowed by Love to
escape for a long time only for him to give me at this age a
crueler death, as I can see.
3. With the right side as base, a sonnet (the ﬁrst two
lines and much of the top half of the third line are
replaced and made up in the hand of Michelangelo
Buonarroti the Younger).
Signor se vero `e alcun proverbio antico
questo `e ben quel, che chi pu`o mai non vuole
tuai creduto a’ favole e parole
e premiato chi e del ver nemico
Fui [e ss˜o; cancelled] io sono gia tuo bu˜o servo antico
acte s˜o dato come eraggi al sole
e delmio t˜epo n˜ot’incresce o duole
em˜eti pinico [?; usually transcribed as ’piaccio] se pi`u m’
[missing, usually transcribed as afatico]
Gia sperai asc˜eder per la tua altezza
el gusto peso e la pot˜ete spada
fussi albisiognio etn˜o la voce decho
Ma alcielo equel chogni virtu disprezza
locarla alm˜odo si vuol chaltri vada
a pr˜eder frutto dun arbor ch’ secco
Guasti, sonnetti II; Frey III; Girardi, no. 6; Residori,
no. 6
Signor, se vero `e alcun proverbio antico,
questo `e ben quel, che chi pu`o mai non vuole.
Tu hai creduto a favole e parole
e premiato chi `e del ver nimico.
I’ sono e fui gi`a tuo buon servo antico,
a.tte son dato come e’ raggi al sole,
e del mie tempo non ti incresce o dole,
e men ti piaccio se pi`u m’affatico.
Gi`a sperai ascender per la tua altezza,
e ’l giusto peso e.lla potente spada
fussi al bisogno, e non la voce d’ecco.
Ma ’l cielo `e quel c’ogni virt`u disprezza
locarla al mondo, se vuol c’altri vaa
a prender frutto d’un arbor ch’`e secco.
Ryan, no. 6
Lord, if any ancient proverb is true, it is surely this: he who
can never wants to. You have believed tales and talk, and
rewarded those who are the enemies of truth.
I am and ever was your good and faithful servant. I have
been as united to you as rays to the sun; and yet you do not
feel concern or compassion for the time I’ve given, and I
please you less the more hard work I do.
I once hoped to rise thanks to your high state. but what
I needed was the just scales and the powerful sword, not to
hear my own voice echo.

CATALOGUE 4
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
75
But it is heaven itself that disdains to ﬁnd a place on earth
for any virtue, it asks men to go and take fruit from a withered
tree.
4. With the right side as base, a madrigal (the ﬁrst three
lines and much of the top half of the fourth line are
lost and made up in the hand of Michelangelo Buonarroti
the Younger).
Come puo esser chio n˜o sia piu mio
Oddio oddio oddio
Chi m’ha tolto a me stesso (chi mi tolse `a me stesso)
Ch’`a me fusse piu presso
o piu di me che mi possere [poss’essere] io
o piu di me potessi ch’o possio [interline: o potessi di me]
o dio o dio o dio
come mi passa elcore
chi n˜o par che mitochi?
Ch’ cosa e questo amore
c’al Core entra per gli ochi (e s’avi˜eche trabo chi)
per poco spatio [as usually transcribed, but incomplete]
dentro par che cres [ca]
. . . foco . . . d’acquapar che ?[cancelled] nosca [below]
Michelangelo Buonarroti the Younger, p. 8; Guasti,
madrigali XXV; Frey, VI; Girardi, no. 8; Residori, no. 8
Come pu`o esser ch’io non sia pi`u mio?
O.dDio, o.dDio, o.dDio,
chi m’ha tolto a me stesso,
c’a me fusse pi`u presso
o pi`u di me potesse che poss’io?
O.dDio, o.dDio, o.dDio,
come mi passa el core
chi non par che mi tocchi?
Che cosa `e questo, Amore
c’al core entra per gli occhi,
per poco spazio dentro par che cresca
E s’avien che trabocchi?
Ryan, no. 8
How can it be that I am no longer mine? Oh God, oh God,
oh God, who has taken me from myself, that she might be
closer to me or have more power over me than I myself?
Oh God, oh God, oh God, how can someone penetrate my
heart without seeming even to touch me? What is this, Love,
that enters the heart through the eyes, and in the small space
within seems to grow? And if it should happen to overﬂow?
5. With the top edge as base, a madrigal
Chi e quel che ˜p forza acte mimena
oilme oilme oilme
legato e strecto e s˜o libero e sciolto
Se tu incateni altrui s˜eza catena
e senza mane o braccia mai [mi hai] racolto
chi mi difendera dal tuo bel volto
Michelangelo Buonarroti the Younger, p. 7; Guasti,
madrigali LIII; Frey, V; Girardi, no. 7; Residori,
no. 7
Chi `e quel che per forza a.tte mi mena,
oimm`e, oimm`e, oimm`e,
legato e stretto, e son libero e sciolto?
Se tu incateni altrui senza catena,
e senza mane o braccia m’hai raccolto,
chi mi difender`a dal tuo bel volto?
Ryan, no. 7
Who is this who by force of nature leads me to you, alas,
alas, alas, bound and fettered, though by nature free and
unconstrained? If you enchain people without a chain, and
without moving arm or hand have gathered me in, who will
defend me from your beautiful face?
Discussion
The studies of the body and rump of a horse presumably
fall into the category of practice drawings. As so often
in his studies of the male nude, Michelangelo has here
concentrated on the body and legs and has provided no
more than an outline indication of the head. This would
no doubt have been studied in a separate drawing.
It is doubtful if Michelangelo had frequently repre-
sented horses in his previous work – although in his
Battle of the Centaurs, the Centaurs of course have equine
bodies – and in these life-drawings he was no doubt
both refreshing his memory and establishing the type
of horse that he wished to portray. It is by no means
inconceivable that Michelangelo made wax models of
horses in preparation for his fresco, as did Leonardo, but
the compiler can see no justiﬁcation for Goldscheider’s
attribution to him of the wax formerly in the Volpi
Collection, which had previously been given, still less
plausibly, to Leonardo himself.
The small sketch of a combat was developed from
a drawing in London (BM W3 recto/Corpus 36; pen
and ink, 186×183 mm), which shows a clash between
two groups of cavalrymen. Michelangelo has separated
out part of this arrangement and turned it into a grim
account of a cavalryman assailed by a group of spear-
bearing infantry; this episode was developed in Cat. 4.
For further discussion see Cat. 5.
Verso
As noted previously, the poems on the verso certainly
post-date the recto drawings, but it is conjectural by how
much. In principle, it seems reasonable to think that the
sheet remained in Florence; if so, then assuming – as their
layout would suggest – that the poems were written over
a relatively short period, the summer and autumn of 1506,

76
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 4
when Michelangelo, having returned precipitately from
Rome to Florence, may again have taken up work on the
Battle of Cascina, is a plausible date for them. Otherwise a
date around 1516, at the beginning of Michelangelo’s long
sojourn in Florence would be most likely, although this
would be some years later than the dates usually given to
the poems. If, on the other hand, the sheet did accompany
Michelangelo to Rome, then the dates ranging between
1504 for “Grato e felice . . . ” and 1511 for “Signor, e vero
`e . . . ” given by Girardi and others, would be allowable,
although 1504 for the ﬁrst would probably be a little early.
Some clue may be given by the subject-matter. Three
of the poems, “Grato e felice . . . ,” “Che `e quel . . . ,”
and “Come pu`o esser . . . ” deal with the pains inﬂicted
by Love on one formerly immune to its charms. Whether
they reﬂect Michelangelo’s own experience of the help-
lessness of one suddenly and unexpectedly overcome by
love – as the compiler is inclined to think – or whether
they are simply poetic exercises, the emphasis on eyes has
obvious resonance with Michelangelo’s concentration on
them in his drawings, and the stress on physical beauty has
patent – if general – relation to his painting and sculpture.
More speciﬁc, perhaps, is the reference to chains and con-
straint in “Che `e quel . . . ,” which obviously links closely
with the theme of the prisoners on the Tomb of Julius II.
“Colui che ’l tutto fe . . .” is a more general medita-
tion on beauty and shows a train of thought akin to the
legend of Zeuxis, whch Michelangelo would certainly
have known, selecting the most beautiful forms out of
which to make his “divin’arte,” a process paralleled by
Michelangelo himself, who strove to idealise his ﬁgures.
It, is, however, a timeless meditation, and could apply to
any period in Michelangelo’s early career.
It is “Signor se vero `e . . . ” that seems most speciﬁc.
It has, from the time of Michelangelo the Younger, been
taken to refer to Michelangelo’s problems with Julius II,
and this is surely correct. The emphasis on the speaker’s
servitude, on the master’s power (but over the speaker’s
ambitions rather than his affections) but lack of concern,
the reference to the symbols of Justice – a fresco of which
was commissioned by Julius from Raphael – and above all
the reference to the tree (the scrub-oak, the rovere of Julius’
name) make this a virtual certainty. Indeed, in one of his
earliest projects for the Pope’s tomb of 1505, Michelangelo
had prominently portrayed the oak as a source of nour-
ishment (New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Inv.
62931/BT 132/Corpus 489; pen and ink over black chalk,
509×318 mm). This motif was reduced in later projects,
as it is in the Sistine ceiling, but it would have been very
much in Michelangelo’s mind in the period immediately
following his ﬂight from Rome, which would support a
date for that poem and the others of 1506.
Drawn Copies
A on the recto was copied c. 1580 by Andrea Commodi
on the recto of Ufﬁzi 18622F, and again, with B from the
recto, on the verso of the same sheet.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar?; William Young
Ottley (his sale, 6 June 1814, etc., lot 1758, “One – mas-
terly studies of horses; one a skirmish intended probably
for the cartoon of Pisa – one of Michel Angelo’s sonnets in
his own handwriting on the back. From the Buonarroti
collection.” £23.2.0.); Samuel Woodburn; Sir Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, etc., lot 1758 (“One – masterly
studies of horses; one a skirmish intended probably for
the cartoon of Pisa – one of Michel Angelo’s sonnets in
his own handwriting on the back. From the Buonarroti
collection.” £23.2.0.). Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A.
Buonaroti Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-99] (“A very singu-
lar sheet being studies for part of a Horse etc., on the
back is a Sonnet by M. Angelo.”). Woodburn, 1836b,
no. 55 (“[T]he horses are evidently drawn from life . . . at
the time he was undecided as to the subject for the
cartoon of Pisa.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 30 (As 1836.).
Woodburn, 1853, pl. 29 (Recto reproduced.); pl. 31
(Verso reproduced.). Fisher, 1862, p. 5, pl. 21 (Recto.).
Guasti, 1863, pp. 50, 90, 156, 280 (Poems transcribed
from a manuscript copy, Codex XV, by Michelangelo
the Younger preserved in Casa Buonarroti.). Fisher, 1865,
II, p. 24, pl. 21 (As 1862.). Robinson, 1870, pp. 325–6,
no. 18 and (Michel Angelo. Horse studies from nature,
made in preparation for Cascina; “The small ﬁghting
group is doubtless a sketch for a portion of the back-
ground of . . . [Cascina] representing the attack of the Pisan
horsemen on the unprepared Florentines,” depicted in
[Cat. 5]. Three poems transcribed.). Fisher, 1872, II,
p. 22, pl. 21 (As 1862.). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 18.
Gotti, 1875, II, p. 231. Fisher, 1879, p. 11, no. 13 (For
Cascina.). Portheim, 1889, p. 144 (Sketch of cavalryman
ﬁghting infantry very close to Leonardo’s chalk sketches
for Anghiari, and shows “dass es schwer wird . . . and die
Selbst¨andigkeit . . . [Michelangelo] zu glauben.”). K. Frey,
1897, pp. 2–5, 303–6, nos. II–IV (Poems transcribed;
dated early. Among the poems [2] is the ﬁrst and [1] the
last. The drawings were made for Cascina, by October
1504.). Berenson, 1903, I, pp. 177–8, no. 1558 (“I question
whether in the whole range of Italian art, not excepting
even Leonardo, we shall ﬁnd another horse so like to the
real animal, and so close to the horse as contemporary
art since G´ericault has represented him.” “[A]s free from
convention as a horse by Meissonier – nay by Degas.”).

CATALOGUES 4–5
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
77
Colvin, 1904, IV, no. 6 (Recto: probably of 1504 for
background incidents in Cascina; “Michelangelo’s com-
manding power of eye and hand as a pen-draughtsman in
his earlier years is scarcely anywhere better illustrated than
here.”). Thode, 1908, I, p. 101 (For Cascina.). K. Frey,
1909–11, no. 141 (Life studies in preparation for Cascina.
The small battle scene follows [Cat. 7] and prepares [Cat.
5].). Thode, 1913, no. 402 (As 1908. Battle sketch shows
technical inﬂuence of Leonardo.). Panofsky, 1921–2,
col. 52 (Second poem probably dates 1510–11, not 1506.).
Popp, 1922, pp. 159–62 (c. 1525–6. [D] a study for [Cat. 5];
both transformed by Michelangelo in the upper part of
[Cat. 34].). Zoff, 1923, pl. 18 (Recto.). It. exh., 1930,
no. 500. Popham, 1931, no. 209. De Tolnay, 1935, p. 43
(This and [Cat. 5] are, as “Popp has convincingly shown,
studies for the upper scene of . . . the Brazen Serpent”
[Cat. 34] [which] . . . are probably designs for the lunettes
above the Medici Tombs.”). Baumgart, 1937, pp. 3–5, 29–
30 (Horse studies support the view that a cavalry battle
was proposed for Cascina. D follows the right-hand half
of BM W3/Corpus 36 and prepares [Cat. 5]. Competi-
tion with Leonardo’s Anghiari.). Berenson, 1938, I, p. 193,
no. 1558 (As 1903.). Bertini, 1942 [ed. 1983], p. 54 (For
Cascina.). De Tolnay, 1948, pp. 49, 215, no. 96 ([D] “a ﬁrst
draft for” [Cat. 34]; c. 1525.). Goldscheider, 1951, nos. 44
recto, 45 verso (Not for Cascina. Datable in 1520s, per-
haps for a battle scene in the Sala di Costantino, which
Sebastiano was attempting to wrest from Raphael’s pupils;
sonnets probably connected with Clement VII.). Wilde,
1953a, p. 8 ([Cats. 4, 5] “more elaborate versions of the
right half” of W3/Corpus 36.). Wilde, 1953b, p. 74 ([D]
is “a more clearly deﬁned variant of the right half of the
battle-scene in” BM W3/Corpus 36.). Wilde, 1953 exh.,
no. 8 (c. 1506, probably for Cascina. Sketch links with
BM W3/Corpus 36 and [Cat. 5].). Parker, 1956, no. 293
(About 1505 for Cascina. Battle sketch relates to BM W3
recto/Corpus 36 and [Cat. 5]. Reports Goldscheider’s
connection of horse studies with a wax model of a horse
[ex-Volpi Collection] which he attributes to Michelan-
gelo.). Dussler, 1959, no. 191 (Recto: horse studies drawn
ﬁrst. Battle sketch connected with BM W3/Corpus 36
and [Cat. 5] for Cascina. Inﬂuence of Leonardo.). Girardi,
1960/1967, pp. 3–6 (Transcriptions of the poems.). Exh.
London, 1960, no. 531. Berenson, 1961, no. 1558 (As
1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962, p. 257. Gilbert, 1963/1970,
pp. 4, 6–8 (Verse translations of the poems.). Barocchi,
1964c, no. 14 (1505 seems most likely date. Transcrip-
tion of poems.). De Tolnay, 1964e, col. 878 (Sketches for
cavalry battles; “It may be deduced that at the beginning
he tried to harmonise his composition with Leonardo’s
Battle of Anghiari; but he seems to have realised he could
not compete in this ﬁeld, so he decided to conﬁne him-
self to the representation of nudes. . . . In the last version
there appear to have been no horsemen, or, if there were,
they must have been in the background.”). Berti, 1965,
pp. 408, 411 (Leonardesque in inspiration; for Cascina.).
Goldscheider, 1965, nos. 43, 44 recto, 45 verso (As 1951;
“no deﬁnite proof that Michelangelo made any stud-
ies of horses and cavalry battles for . . . [Cascina]. Studies
linked . . . sonnet refers to Cardinal Giulio and cancella-
tion of San Lorenzo fac¸ade.”). De Tolnay, 1965/1966,
pp. 506, 515 (Study of a horse perhaps made in preparation
for a bronze handle of an ink stand, designed for the Duke
of Urbino in 1537. The script of the poems on the verso
suggests a date of c. 1525 and that of the poetical fragments
in the margins, c. 1537. The drawing perhaps related to
the wax model formerly in the Volpi Collection.). Sut-
ton, 1970, no. 12 (Summary of divergent views.). Hartt,
1971, no. 30 (Recto: “quiet body of a horse is studied as if
it were a human nude.” Link with BMW3/Corpus 36.).
De Tolnay, 1972, pp. 70–1 (Battle scene not for Cascina
but related to a design by Michelangelo for a Conversion of
Saul, planned for the fac¸ade of San Lorenzo, c. 1518.). Gere
and Turner, 1975, no. 7 (The small battle scene connects
with BM W3/Corpus 36 and [Cat. 5]; the “static poses of
the larger-scale horses hardly suggest a connexion with
this spirited composition, unless they are studies made
from the life in preparation for representing horses in
movement.”). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 102 (Recto:
c. 1517, connected with project for fac¸ade of San Lorenzo.
Verso: right-hand column seems to be in handwriting of
c. 1506, the other writing c. 1515–20.). Macandrew, 1980,
p. 264 (“The principal study on the recto was copied
by Andrea Commodi on Ufﬁzi 18622F.”). Joannides,
1981b, p. 681 (For Cascina; inﬂuence of Leonardo.).
Hirst, 1988, p. 11 (“Michelangelo was here prepared to
follow Leonardo’s example in studying . . . [horses] from
life.”). Ryan, 1996, pp. 3–7 (Transcriptions, following
Girardi, and prose translations of the poems.); pp. 259–63
(Notes on the poems.). Ryan, 1998, pp. 43–5 (Discus-
sion of “Signor, se vero `e. . . . ”). Perrig, 1999, p. 247 (By
Michelangelo; from via Mozza studio.).
CATALOGUE 5
A Combat Between a Cavalryman and Six Infantrymen
1846.40; R.16; P.II 294; Corpus 103
Dimensions: 179×251 mm
Medium
Pen and iron gall ink, which has corroded the paper, with
and over black chalk; traces of stylus indentation.

78
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 5
Condition
The sheet is drummed by the four edges to the backboard
of the mount, and the verso is not visible. There are sev-
eral areas of loss with historic toned inﬁlls, and repairs
are visible, together with severe pressed-out creases.
There is uneven discolouration, local media staining,
and ingrained dirt. The medium is abraded, worn, and
faded.
Inscriptions
Lower centre, in pen and ink: Micchel Angelo Buonarota,
perhaps recording a previous inscription. The hand
responsible is identiﬁed by Parker as that of Michelan-
gelo’s great-nephew, Michelangelo the Younger, and this
is accepted by Barocchi, 1964c, but the handwriting does
not seem to the compiler close to that of the restoration of
the poems 3 and 4 on Cat. 4 verso, and it is hard to believe
that the Younger Michelangelo would have produced so
eccentric a spelling of his great uncle’s Christian name.
Indeed, the compiler is minded to reject this identiﬁca-
tion. If, however, it could be shown to be correct, and if
the inscription replaces an earlier one by the Buona Rota
Collector, as the truncated number of the Irregular Num-
bering Collector at the lower right edge would suggest,
then it would imply that this or these collection(s) was or
were dispersed as a whole or in part within the lifetime of
Michelangelo the Younger (1568–1647), giving him the
opportunity to acquire it.
Lower right edge, the irregular numbering: no. (cut by
the edge of the sheet).
Description
A cavalryman charging forward in pursuit of a ﬂeeing
man, with two others falling below the hoofs of his horse,
is assailed by pikemen at left and right.
Discussion
This drawing was clearly developed from the sketch on
Cat. 4, which, in turn, was developed from the right side
of the compositional drawing on W3/Corpus 36 (pen
and ink, 186×183 mm), in which the central element
is a collision of lance-bearing cavalrymen. A series of
drawings indicates that Michelangelo was planning a
battle between cavalrymen and between cavalrymen and
infantry at this time. It is probable that this was to be a sub-
sidiary part of the Battle of Cascina, although not all critics
have accepted this hypothesis, and it cannot positively be

CATALOGUE 5
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
79
proved. It might, for example, be argued that Michelan-
gelo volunteered to take over the Battle of Anghiari as
well when it became evident that Leonardo would not
proceed. Such an argument might be reinforced by
repeating the observation made by Clark (see Clark and
Pedretti, 1969, p. 34) that the foremost horse and rider
on the British Museum drawing – and indeed some
other sketches on Michelangelo’s sheet – is very similar
in form to a group on a drawing by Leonardo in the
Royal Collection at Windsor Castle (12340/CP p. 34; red
chalk, 168×240 mm). It could also be argued that these
drawings copy groups conceived by Leonardo, but this,
while not impossible, seems improbable. It could hardly
be denied, however, that the group reﬂects Leonardo’s
inﬂuence.
A dating of the British Museum sketch to around
1504 seems secure because it is surmounted by a drawing
intended for one of the Duomo Apostles – probably Saint
John the Evangelist – commissioned from him in April
1503. This sketch shows a clash between two sets of caval-
rymen, with two pairs on each side, a fallen man and horse
on the left, and several infantrymen attempting to engage
with the far right-hand horseman. This group, although
very lightly sketched, contains a ﬁgure running forward,
worked out more fully in Cat. 4 and the present draw-
ing, and re-used some twenty-ﬁve years later in Cat. 34
recto. The pose of the rider here, incidentally, may reﬂect
knowledge of the same antique to which Michelangelo
referred in Cat. 7: the Discobolus.
As in Cat. 4, the head of the horse is no more than out-
lined, but its terriﬁed twist to the right is clearly conveyed
and highly expressive, demonstrating Michelangelo’s
command of animal as well as human body-language.
Drawn Copies
1. A copy in black chalk and charcoal with touches of
red chalk, is in the Accademia, Venice (Inv. 78/Valenti
Rodin`o, 1989, no. 2; 210×228 mm). This bears on its
verso the number 1663 (probably an inventory number
rather than a date), and a nineteenth-century inscription,
probably by Bossi, Siciolante da Sermoneta, which is clearly
incorrect. Valenti Rodin`o suggests that it is by a sixteenth-
century artist not far from Naldini, which seems plausible
to the compiler. Some details of the ﬁgures are clearer in
the copy than they now are in the original, and it also
includes, at the right edge, the head of another horse not
(or not now) found in the original.
2. Two partial copies of sections of this composition were
made by Sir Edward Burne-Jones in 1866–7, on fols. 40
verso and 41 recto of his sketchbook in the Fitzwilliam
Museum, Cambridge, 1070-2 (see Østermark-Johansen,
1998, pp. 122, 124, ﬁg. 30).
History
Parker gives the provenance as Casa Buonarroti, pre-
sumably in the belief that the inscription was made by
Michelangelo the Younger, but no other evidence sub-
stantiates such a provenance, which is not followed by
any later writer. It is possible, but far from certain, that
this drawing is Un Viluppo de cavallini by Michelangelo,
recorded in the posthumous inventory of Antonio Tron-
sarelli in 1601 as A50, with no mention of medium. If
so, then 1601 would be either a terminus post quem for the
entry of the drawing into the collections of the Buona
Rota Collector and the Irregular Numbering Collector,
or a terminus ante quem for the dispersal of the collections
of the Buona Rota Collector and the Irregular Number-
ing Collector; William Young Ottley (his sale, 6 June
1814, etc., lot 1759, “One – a masterly pen sketch for
a battle or skirmish intended perhaps for the same car-
toon [as Cat. 7] – very ﬁne.” £9.9.0.) [In contrast with
the immediately preceding drawing lot 1958 [Cat. 4], no
provenance is given.]; Samuel Woodburn; Sir Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley, 1808–23, p. 27n (“There exists no doubt in my
mind as to the introduction of these groups [of cavalry-
men] in the background; though I consider them to have
been represented at a great distance, and consequently
in ﬁgures of very small dimensions. I possess, indeed,
two slight pen sketches which I have always been con-
vinced were made by Michelangiolo for this part of the
work. The one [Cat. 5]; the other [Cat. 7] a skirmish
between two small bodies of cavaliers.”). Ottley sale, 6
June 1814, etc., lot 1759 (“One – a masterly pen sketch
for a battle or skirmish intended perhaps for the same car-
toon [as Cat. 7] – very ﬁne”.£9.9.0.). Lawrence Inven-
tory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-106]
(“An idea for the Fighting of the Standard differently
composed to that of L. da Vinci.”?). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 10 (“Warriors ﬁghting, for the Cartoon . . . also the
Conversion of Saint Paul. . . . From the Collection of
W. Y. Ottley Esq.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 23 (As 1842.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 16 (Michel Angelo. Probably for
Cascina; linked with “the smaller and still more rudi-
mentary sketch of ﬁghting soldiers on [Cat. 4].).” Black,
1875, p. 213, no. 16. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 231. Fisher,
1879, p. 4, pl. 12 (Probably for Cascina.). K. Frey, 1897,
p. 305 (Cascina included cavalrymen; drawings done in
second half of 1504.). Berenson, 1903, I, p. 177, no. 1556

80
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 5
(“[O]ne of Michelangelo’s most spontaneous and brilliant
drawings . . . [impossible] without the impulse given by
Leonardo.” Probably for Cascina but possibly for a
Sistine medallion.). Thode, 1908, I, p. 101 (For Cascina.).
K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 132 (For Cascina; pyramidal compo-
sition characteristic of Florentine pictorial organisation.).
Thode, 1913, no. 400 (For Cascina, but uncertain where
it was to be placed; technical inﬂuence of Leonardo.).
Popp, 1922, pp. 98, 159–62 (c. 1530, follows from
[Cat. 4D]. “Aus dem Reiterangriff, den er ¨uber dem
Giuliano-grabmal geplant hatte, macht er einen Angriff
der Schlangen auf des israelitisiche Volk,” in upper sec-
tion of [Cat. 34].). Zoff, 1923, pl. 21. Baumgart, 1937,
pp. 5–6 (Follows the right-hand half of BM W3/Corpus
36 and [Cat. 4D]. These drawings raise the question of
how they were to be related to the Bathers.). Beren-
son, 1938, I, p. 193, no. 1556 (As 1903.). Bertini, 1942
[ed. 1983], pp. 42–3 (“la mischia confusa . . . in cui
il tratteggio a penna crea un effetto di sgorbio o di
macchia quasi informe, ma dall’informe massa erompe
l’impressione travolgente di un impeto vorticoso . . . `e
evidente il . . . stimolo leonardesco.”). De Tolnay, 1948,
p. 218, no. 106 (Developed from [Cat. 4], c. 1525. Related
in spirit to [Cat. 34], for Medici Chapel lunettes.). Gold-
scheider, 1951, no. 46 (Not for Cascina. Datable in 1520s,
perhaps for a battle in the Sala di Costantino, a commis-
sion Sebastiano was attempting to wrest from Raphael’s
pupils.). Wilde, 1953a, p. 8 (“[M]ore elaborate version of
the right half of BM W3/Corpus 36.”). Wilde, 1953b,
p. 74 (“Michelangelo’s nearest approach to the world
of forms contained in Leonardo’s Anghiari studies. The
rider and the two foot-soldiers on the right may have
been borrowed from them; the one fallen on his back
with his left leg stretched upwards is . . . found in three
variants on . . . Venice [Inv. 214; pen and ink over black
chalk, 87×152 mm]. . . . [T]he violence of the ﬁghting
is truly Leonardesque. In this and the fullness of plastic
effect the group equals the Fight for the Standard. Yet . . . the
arrangement of forms follows the principle . . . underlying
Michelangelo’s inventions: on the sides forms which are
close to an imaginary ground-plane; between them an
articulate mass of bulging but continuous convexity, with
a vertical axis or strong accent (the horse’s neck and head)
in the centre. The square block within which the limits of
which this extreme example of high relief has been con-
ceived is tangible.”). Wilde,1953 exh., no. 10 (c. 1506,
probably for Cascina.). Parker, 1956, II, no. 294 (For
Cascina; developed from the composition lightly sketched
on [Cat. 4].). Dussler, 1959, no. 190 (c. 1505. Linked with
BM W3/Corpus 36 and [Cat. 4], certainly for Cascina.
Disagrees with Popp’s dating, notes that she accepted
an early date for W3; disagrees also with Goldscheider’s
suggestion.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1556 (As 1903/1938.).
Barocchi, 1962, p. 18 (Similarities to CB23F/B9/Corpus
29, for Doni Tondo.). Brugnoli, 1964, no. 15 (For Cascina;
inspiration of Leonardo’s Battle of Anghiari.). Barocchi,
1964c, no. 13 (1505 seems most likely date. Inscription
in the hand of Michelangelo the Younger.). De Tolnay,
1964e, col. 878 (Sketches for cavalry battles; “It may be
deduced that at the beginning he tried to harmonise his
composition with Leonardo’s Battle of Anghiari; but he
seems to have realised he could not compete in this ﬁeld,
so he decided to conﬁne himself to the representation of
nudes. . . . In the last version there appear to have been
no horsemen, or, if there were, they must have been in
the background.”). Berti, 1965, pp. 408, 411 (For Cascina.
Follows from BM W3/Corpus 36.). Goldscheider, 1965,
no. 46 (As 1951.). Keller, 1966, II, p. 8 (For Cascina.). For-
lani Tempesti, 1970, no. XII (For Cascina.). Hartt, 1971,
no. 31 (1504. “One of the most powerful battle scenes
in Western art.” Probably for Cascina; developed from
W3/Corpus 36 and [Cat. 4].). De Tolnay, 1972, pp. 70–1
(Battle scene not for Cascina but related to a design by
Michelangelo for a Conversion of Saul, planned for the
fac¸ade of San Lorenzo, c. 1518.). Gere and Turner, 1975,
no. 9 (“Probably connected with . . . Cascina.”). Keller,
1975, no. 22 (For Cascina, shortly before November
1504.). De Tolnay, Corpus I, 1975, no. 103 (c. 1517: A Con-
version of Saint Paul or Expulsion of Heliodorus for the fac¸ade
of San Lorenzo.). Keller, 1976, ﬁg. 150 (For Cascina,
shortly before November 1504.). Joannides, 1981b, p. 681
(For Cascina; inﬂuence of Leonardo.). Lamarche-Vadel,
1981, p. 27, no. 27 (For Cascina, 1504.). De Vecchi, 1984,
pl. 10 (For Cascina.). Hirst, 1986a, p. 48 (“[U]n idea
per un elemento in distanza o di secondaria importanza
nelle scena; e i larghi tratti ‘astratti’ a penna, anticipano
le larghe pennellate della distante ﬁgura di Noe” [in the
Drunkenness of Noah].). Hirst, 1988, p. 45 (For Cascina.
“could have been made before he left Florence . . . in
the spring of 1505. . . . Or they may date from after his
return, nearly a year later.” This sheet “takes up a theme
sketched in . . . [Cat. 4].” “made for a part of the fresco
of secondary importance, for ﬁgures substantially distant
from the front plane . . . this fact explains its impression-
ist appearance.”). Hirst, 1988–9a, 1988–9b, no. 8 (As
1988. This episode was probably situated to the right.
Signiﬁcance of differential deﬁnition in Michelangelo’s
painting.). Perrig, 1999, p. 247 (By Michelangelo; from
via Mozza studio.). Franklin, 2001, p. 69 (“[C]learly
intended for a different part of the image – the artist’s
only formal concession to Leonardo relegated to the deep
background.”).

CATALOGUE 6
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
81
CATALOGUE 6
A Cavalryman on Horseback Throwing a Javelin and
Other Sketches
1846.41; R.17; P.II 295; Corpus 39
Dimensions: 190×258 mm
Watermark: Robinson Appendix no. 4. Roberts Cross
B. This watermark is no longer readily visible since the
sheet has been laid down. The same watermark is found
on Cat. 7.
Medium
Pen and brown ink with stylus indentation, soft black
chalk.
Condition
The upper edge is partially torn with an additional strip
repair and a repaired tear. The outer margins are wrinkled
and discoloured. There is some abrasion, foxing, and dis-
colouration, with black accretions and some surface dirt.
The verso is not visible.
Description and Transcriptions
A. A structural sketch of a man’s back, in pen. This might
be related to D or to H.
B. Above, covered by E: Amis, and, immediately below
this, ing(?)
C. Amis. ami sarebbe, in Michelangelo’s hand
D. A horseman charging from left to right, probably
throwing a javelin.
E. Outlines of an opposing cavalryman (in stylus, visible
only in raking light).
It is probable that D and E were the ﬁrst drawings to be made
on this page.
With the left edge as base
F(1). A horse, outlined in left proﬁle, its front legs rising,
the head turned back.
F(2). F(1) altered to convey a staggering movement.
G. Erased, above F, probably the sketch of a ﬁgure, seen
from back.
With the right edge as base

82
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 6
H. The right shoulder and upper arm of a man, seen from
the rear.
I. Indecipherable.
J. Traces of an erased and illegible inscription (just
below A).
With the upper edge as base
K. Traces of writing, probably the upper sections of an
inscription on an old mount, which overlapped it and
impinged on the drawing.
Discussion
The compiler can see no justiﬁcation for Parker’s view
that this page bears drawings by any hand other than
Michelangelo’s. The pen and stylus drawings and inscrip-
tions probably came ﬁrst. The charging horseman was
presumably made with a background group in the Battle
of Cascina in mind. Although the forms indicated by
Michelangelo at the lower right corner of the sheet can-
not clearly be deciphered, they seem to represent a mod-
iﬁed reversal of D, and it is probable that Michelangelo
was thinking of showing a battle of opposed cavalry-
men, no doubt inspired by Leonardo’s complementary
scheme. As noted previously, the rapid sketch of a com-
bat found on a drawing in the British Museum (W3
recto/Corpus 36) is an imaginative variant of Leonardo’s
design.
A further link with Leonardo is suggested by the black
chalk sketch of a horse, the ﬁrst version of which may
have been inspired by the rearing mount of Leonardo’s
leading Florentine cavalryman. Michelangelo overdrew
this sketch in order to convert it to a staggering, no doubt
wounded horse.
A page of sketches in the British Museum (1946-7-
13-635; pen and ink, 172×252 mm; see Joannides 2002b,
ﬁg. 11), classed with the unmounted drawings attributed
to Raffaello da Montelupo, but in the compiler’s view
not by him, contains two outline sketches of cavalry-
men in action, which are similar to – but not copied
from – A, plus a fallen horse, which may well be devel-
oped from F2 but which, once again, is not a copy of it.
It is likely that these drawings are same-size copies of lost
autograph sketches by Michelangelo, made at the same
time as those on the present sheet and in part developing
them. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that the
British Museum page also contains same-size copies of
the pen sketches of ﬁghting men on a sheet by Michelan-
gelo in Haarlem (Teyler Museum A28 verso/VT 31/
Corpus 108; pen and ink and red chalk, 285×207 mm);
even though the date of this drawing is debated, it seems
likely to be from around the middle of the ﬁrst decade.
The compiler is inclined to think that the structural
pen study of a back, A, was made for the cavalryman D. If
so, although it shows the back from an angle that would
not be seen in the ﬁnal image, it would demonstrate
Michelangelo’s concern to give his design full anatom-
ical accuracy. However, an alternative suggestion, made
to the compiler by W. Dreesmann (personal communica-
tion and with reference to the view of Hartt) is that the
study is connected with the leftmost nude ﬁgure in the
Bathers group, and the two are close enough to make
this plausible. Dr. Dreesmann further suggests that H was
also made with reference to this ﬁgure; as he notes, H
“displays the three peculiar rounded shapes for back mus-
cles, an indication of the triceps on the upper arm, and
the marked tip of the elbow. All . . . distinct features [that]
appear in the leftmost nude of the Holkham Cascina.” If
this interpretation is correct, then the fact that Michelan-
gelo made studies for this ﬁgure on the same page as
sketches for a cavalry clash may suggest that he thought
of the two as especially related. In the Holkham panel,
the leftmost ﬁgure turns his head towards his left: Perhaps
he was intended to be looking at a clash of cavalry in the
background.
Drawn Copies
D was copied by Andrea Commodi c. 1580 on both the
recto and the verso of Ufﬁzi 18620F, and F(1) was copied
on the recto.
History
Casa Buonarroti by c. 1580; Jean-Baptiste Wicar?;
William Young Ottley his sale?, 6–13 July 1807, part
of lot 376, “Two – a ﬁght of cavaliers, black chalk and
pen CAPITAL; and a group of ﬁve ﬁgures, half length,
pen and bistre, ﬁne”? bought in ?; his sale, 6 June 1814,
etc., lot 1681, “one – a man on horseback defending
himself – ﬁne pen – intended perhaps for the cartoon of
Pisa; – another horse in black chalk – from the Buonar-
roti collection – most spirited”; Sir Thomas Lawrence
(L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley (his sale?, 6–13 July 1807, part of lot 376 “a
ﬁght of cavaliers, black chalk and pen capital.”). Ott-
ley, 1808–23, p. 27n (“There exists no doubt in my
mind as to the introduction of these groups [of caval-
rymen] in the background; though I consider them to
have been represented at a great distance, and conse-
quently in ﬁgures of very small dimensions. I possess,
indeed, two slight pen sketches which I have always been
convinced were made by Michelangiolo for this part of
the work. The one represents a combat between two

CATALOGUES 6–7
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
83
cavalrymen; the other” [Cat. 5].). Ottley (his sale, 6 June
1814, etc., lot 1681, “one – a man on horseback defending
himself – ﬁne pen – intended perhaps for the cartoon of
Pisa; – another horse in black chalk – from the Buonarroti
collection – most spirited” £5.10.0.). Lawrence Inven-
tory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti, Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-112]
(“Sketches for the Battle of the Standard”?.). Woodburn,
1842, no. 67 (“Study of Horses etc. – for the Horse in
the great Fresco in the Sistine Chapel [sic] of the Conver-
sion of Saint. Paul.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 18 (As 1842.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 17 (Michel Angelo. “The charging
horseman is apparently one of the Pisan soldiers attacking
the bathing Florentines. The stumbling horse is very sim-
ilar to the horse in [Cat. 4] but it is turned in the contrary
direction.”). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 17. Gotti, 1875, II,
p. 226. Berenson, 1903, I, p. 178, no. 1557 ([D] prob-
ably for Cascina; the “scrawls in black chalk . . . do not
seem to be Michelangelo’s.”). Thode, 1908, I, p. 101
(For Cascina.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 142 ([D] authen-
tic for Cascina, perhaps linked with W3 recto/Corpus 36;
[F and H] doubtful; [A and E] by another hand; inscrip-
tions not autograph.). Thode, 1913, no. 401 (For Cascina;
all four sketches authentic. The fallen horse re-used later
in the BM Fall of Phaeton drawing/W55/Corpus 340.).
Baumgart, 1937, p. 31 (Not by Michelangelo; school of
Leonardo.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1557 (As 1903.). Wilde,
1953a, p. 8 ([Cat. 6] is a “variant of the left-hand rider”
in BM W3/Corpus 36. Also contains a sketch in lead
point, now hardly visible, for one of the bathers.). Wilde,
1953 exh., no. 5 (1503–4, probably for Cascina.). Parker,
1956, no. 295 (Drawing raises some difﬁcult points. That
two riders are tilting at one another argues against a con-
nection with Cascina, in which the combat was of cav-
alrymen against foot soldiers. The black chalk study of a
horse, which is probably not by Michelangelo, should be
seen with the top edge as base in which it becomes clear
that the hatching is left handed and perhaps by Montelupo
imitating a horse in Michelangleo’s Fall of Phaeton. But the
pen sketch is superior to Montelupo’s work.). Dussler,
1959, no. 603 (Rejected. Chalk sketches came ﬁrst.).
Berenson, 1961, no. 1557 (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi,
1962, p. 316 (Type of horse reﬂected in Ufﬁzi 605E
verso/B269 [given by Hirst, 1961, p. 239, to Salviati].).
Hartt, 1971, no. 34 (1504; probably “intended for the
scene at the upper left of the ﬁnal composition” of
Cascina; D for “the ﬁgure climbing out of the water”
in the Holkham panel.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 5
(“Probably connected with . . . Cascina”; Parker’s view of
chalk studies cited.). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 39
(Michelangelo, for Cascina. Inscriptions in Michelan-
gelo’s handwriting, c. 1504–5.). Sisi, 1988, no. 44. (For
Cascina.).
CATALOGUE 7
Recto: The Torso of a Bending Figure, Seen from the
Back
Verso: A Groom? Assisting a Cavalryman to Mount His
Horse
1846.42; R.19; P.II 296; Corpus 41
Dimensions: 262×173 mm, torn diagonally and made up
substantially at the upper left and lower right
Watermark: Roberts Cross B; not recorded in Briquet
(this watermark is found also on Cat. 6).
Medium
Recto: Pen and ink over black chalk, perhaps modiﬁed
in black chalk.
Verso: Black chalk over traces of stylus indentation.
Condition
There are many nicks and some tears on the edges, plus a
small hole and major historic toned inﬁlls. The sheet has
inherent creasing and other horizontal pressed-out folds
with ingrained dirt, running into the image. The paper is
fractured in the areas of heavier ink application. There is
discolouration, local staining, and ﬁbrous accretion; tissue
repairs are visible on the verso. There is severe show-
through to the verso of ink from the recto.
Inscriptions
Verso: Upper left: de micaelangno/e (?) and, below cliii?
Upper right: Michaelangilo/2.3 on a made-up section
Discussion
The verso drawing, certainly the original recto, in soft
black chalk, Michelangelo’s characteristic technique at
this period for the initial establishment of ﬁgures and
groups, was no doubt made before the recto. It shows
a man helping another to mount a horse and exempliﬁes
Michelangelo’s capacity to turn a minor anecdotal detail
into a profound statement about endeavour and assistance.
It is probable that this was one of the episodes in the Battle
of Cascina, but the fact that both ﬁgures are nude does not
prove the link because they might simply be studied in
the nude for subsequent draping.
Between this chalk drawing and the recto study, where
the back, shoulders, and buttocks of the supporting ﬁgure
are studied in detail, would have intervened a drawing
in the Casa Buonarroti (9F/B5/Corpus 40; pen and ink
over black chalk, 284×210 mm), where the structure of
this form, in the same pose, is analysed in rapidly penned
outline, close to an ´ecorch´e mode. It is possible that CB9F
and the present sheet might once have been one.

84
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 7

CATALOGUE 7
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
85

86
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 7
The recto, the original verso, of the present sheet is one
of the four surviving developed ﬁgure studies in pen that
Michelangelo certainly made for ﬁgures in the Cascina;
the three others are: Louvre Inv. 712 recto/J7/Corpus
42; pen and ink over black chalk, 248×95 mm; BM W6
recto/Corpus 52; pen and ink with white heightening
over black chalk, 420×285 mm; and Albertina BK123
recto/Corpus 53; pen and ink over black chalk, 266×
194 mm. These three are all studies for foreground or
pivotal ﬁgures in the central group of the Bathers as it is
known from the fullest and what seems to be the most
accurate surviving copy, that by Aristotile da Sangallo at
Holkham Hall. The other surviving ﬁgure drawings that
may certainly be connected with the scheme are in chalk.
This could be merely accident of survival, but it may be
that Michelangelo executed in pen those ﬁgures where
an emphatic plasticity was most necessary. Among the
developed ﬁgure-studies in pen, only the present one is
not found in the scheme as we know it, but the infer-
ence would be that this group, too, of a cavalryman being
assisted to mount, was part of, or near to, the foreground,
and it suggests that the composition was more elaborately
worked out to the left and the right of the central Bathers
group than is sometimes supposed. Indeed, the present
study provides the best evidence for this, given that the
other drawings associable with subsidiary parts of Cascina
are sketchier.
Both CB9F and the drawing on the recto of the present
sheet concentrate on the back of the torso of the assisting
ﬁgure, the former establishing the underlying structure
and the latter, the surface modulations. The pose shows
knowledge of some version of the antique Discobolus and
demonstrates Michelangelo’s alternation between study
of the antique and of life. Whether there is a direct con-
nection can only be conjectural, but the recto drawing
and CB9F bear a strong resemblance to the torso of the
murderer in Titian’s destroyed Assassination of Saint Peter
Martyr, a painting in which St. Peter’s ﬂeeing companion
is derived from Michelangelo’s Sistine Haman. Titian was
certainly aware of at least one drawing by Michelangelo,
and he might well have known others, in the original or
in copy.
Drawn Copies
A copy of the verso was made by Sir Edward Burne-
Jones in 1866-7, on fol. 39 recto of his sketchbook in the
Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, 1070-2.
History
That given by Woodburn and following him, Robin-
son and Parker includes Sir Peter Lely which, while not
impossible is unlikely. His stamp is not to be found on the
drawing. The inscription at the upper left of the verso is
very similar to that on the upper left of the verso of a draw-
ing in the Louvre, Inv. 706/J1/Corpus 3, once thought to
be that of P. Le Tessier de Montarsy, whose collection was
dispersed in 1712, but which, it now appears, was made by
an unidentiﬁed French collector of, no doubt, a some-
what earlier date. If so, this would have given William
Gibson, whose annotation and pricing code are found at
the upper right of the verso, the opportunity to acquire
it. Gibson’s inscription is on a made-up section of the
sheet; consequently, it must have been repaired – either by
himself or a previous owner – before he inscribed it. The
sheet’s provenance after Gibson is derived from Robin-
son and is presumably correct, but it should be noted that
Richardson’s stamp cannot now be found, which would
suggest either that the drawing has been trimmed or that
the stamp was placed on a now-lost mount: Jonathan
Richardson Senior; Benjamin West (L.419); Sir Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830 M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830-98] (“Study on [sic of?] the back of a
Figure, on the reverse is the same in small, with more
of the Composition.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 5 (Prove-
nance includes Sir Peter Lely.). Robinson, 1870, no. 19
(Michel Angelo. “Exact resemblance in style to” British
Museum W3/Corpus 36. Is a “study from nature for the
horse in this very composition. The group is obviously
one of those prepared for, and in all probability actually
introduced into, the background of the Cartoon: it rep-
resents a man-at-arms, assisted by his groom or esquire,
hurridly mounting his horse, naked as he had rushed out
of the river, and hastening to repel the sudden onslaught
of the Pisan forces.” For Cascina; linked with “the smaller
and still more rudimentary sketch of ﬁghting soldiers on”
[Cat. 4].). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 19. Gotti, 1875, II,
p. 234. Berenson, 1903, I, p. 178, no. 1559 (Probably
for Cascina. Recto: “rough and spirited.” Verso: “one
of Michelangelo’s best pen sketches.”). Colvin, 1906, V,
nos. 9A, 9B (Verso and recto: for background of Cascina.).
K¨ohler, 1907, pp. 142–3 (Sketch for one of the back-
ground groups; provides stylistic support for the ascription
to Michelangelo of Ufﬁzi 613E/B4/Corpus 45.). Thode,
1908, I, p. 101 (For Cascina.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 202
(Recto: study for the verso ﬁgure; inﬂuence of Roman
marbles. Overworked by a later hand in black chalk.);
no. 201a (Verso: for Cascina.). Thode, 1913, no. 403 (As
1908; sketch for CB 9F verso/B5/Corpus 40.). Panofsky,
1922, p. 8 (1504–5, studies for background episodes in
Cascina. Verso: the pose indebted to Myron’s Discobolus,
known c. 1500. Recto: moves away from antique under

CATALOGUES 7–8
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
87
the inﬂuence of nature.). Brinckmann, 1925, no. 7 (Verso:
Rejects Panofsky’s link with Discobolus.). Popp, 1925a,
p. 74 (Recto: “echt.” Verso: questionable; the horse type
is of the mid-sixteen century, various examples cited.).
It. exh., 1930, no. 519. Popham, 1931, no. 210 (Verso:
for Cascina.). Baumgart, 1937, p. 131 (Verso: Daniele da
Volterra.). Berenson, 1938, I, pp. 193–4, no. 1559 (As
1903; CB 9F verso/B5/Corpus 40 is a copy of torso.).
Delacre, 1938, p. 533. Bertini, 1942 [ed. 1983], p. 43
(Verso: typical of example of broader style “dal quale
resulta un effetto pi´u ﬂuido e morbido.”). De Tolnay,
1943, p. 188, nos. 27, 28 (Recto and verso: copies; cites
Panofsky on Discobolus motif.). Goldscheider, 1951, p. 29
(Recto and verso: copies after Michelangelo.). Wilde,
1953a, p. 8 (“[F]or a third group, representing the assem-
bly of the Florentine cavalry.”). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 11
(Verso scene no doubt for Cascina; “Cf. also the ﬁgure
in the back row of [the Holkham grisaille].”). Parker,
1956, no. 296 (Both sides authentic, for Cascina. CB 9F
verso/B5/Corpus 40 also autograph. Inscription identi-
ﬁed as Gibson’s.). Dussler, 1959, no. 344 (Verso: developed
from CB 9F verso/B5/Corpus 40. Questionable attribu-
tion but not by Daniele; uncertain which version of Dis-
cobolus Michelangelo might have seen.). Berenson, 1961,
no. 1559 (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962, p. 11 (Verso:
prepared by CB 9F verso/B5/Corpus 40.). Barocchi,
1964b, p. 8 (As 1962.). Berti, 1965, pp. 406, 410–11
(Both sides authentic, for Cascina. Verso: style developed
from CB 73F/B6/Corpus 49; relation to Discobolus noted
by Panofsky. Reminiscences of Battle of Centaurs.). Gold-
scheider, 1965, no. 23 (Verso: “I am convinced now that
my former doubts were not justiﬁed.” Recto: developed
from CB 9F/B5/Corpus 40.). Hartt, 1971, no. 35 (Recto:
1504, “apparently from a nude model but possibly after a
piece of ancient sculpture.”); no. 32 (Verso: 1504. Prob-
ably for the upper left side of Cascina.). Salvini, 1971,
p. 142. De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 41 (Recto: devel-
opment of CB 9F verso/B5/Corpus 40: Probably for
Cascina. Proportions of horse Uccellesque.). Lamarche-
Vadel, 1981, p. 27, no. 29 (For Cascina, 1504.). Sisi, 1988,
no. 43 (Recto: probably for the group of horsemen ready
to “ ‘cominciare la zuffa’ ricordato dal Vasari.”); no. 52
(Verso: developed from CB 9F/B5/Corpus 40.). Perrig,
1991, p. 147 (By Cellini.).
CATALOGUE 8
Recto [formerly verso]: Drapery Study; An Inscription
Verso [formerly recto]: Head of a Laughing Boy
1846.121; R.39; P.II 42 (recto) and 375 (verso); Corpus 7
Dimensions: 204×156 mm
Medium
Recto: Pen and ink.
Verso: Red chalk.
Condition
Double-sided solid museum mount.
Recto: There is vertical cockling. There are various
historic repairs such as ﬁlled losses, some of which have
been toned. There is brown-black staining along the left
edge.
Verso: There is skinning at the top and bottom edges,
and staining near the centre of the top edge. There is
a horizontal tear between the eyebrows. Show-through
from the recto is visible.
Inscription with the right edge as base
Recto: In Michelangelo’s hand [i]n se [ . . . ] ne duco
(?) in chasa circha sei d`ı in˜azi e navevo d(ato) [du]chati
e un terzo allodovicho assectigniano di grossi di ra[agione]
a mo(n)agniola sopra decta grossoni v˜eti nove p(er) ch˜oto di suo
salario
Discussion
This, among the most problematic sheets in the Ash-
molean’s run of drawings attributed to Michelangelo,
has elicited radically different opinions from the schol-
ars who have discussed it. What has not been doubted
is that the inscription on the recto is in Michelan-
gelo’s hand and is datable 1523–4. The provenance
from Casa Buonarroti, which there is no reason to
query, implies that the sheet remained in Michelangelo’s
possession.
Parker, followed in 1968 by Degenhart and Schmitt,
gave the drapery study in pen on the recto to Jacopo
della Quercia (1367–1438), a view questioned by Gardner,
1972. Very few pen drawings can plausibly be attributed to
Jacopo (for a survey of these, see Degenhart and Schmitt,
1968). The compiler is reluctant to discount the views
of scholars of such expertise, but he cannot see that it
is by the same hand as those, although he would admit
that it is not violently incompatible with them. In prin-
ciple, the recto drawing could be by another artist of
Jacopo’s generation; Michelangelo did on occasion use
old paper, as Louvre Inv. 685/J16/Corpus 26 (pen and
ink, corrected in black chalk, 324×260 mm) demon-
strates, but that was a century-old page from an account
book that had descended in his family. It was not a draw-
ing by a quattrocento master whose only plausible rea-
son for preservation was precisely that it was a drawing
by a quattrocento master and next to which, one hopes,
Michelangelo would not casually have jotted down an

88
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 8
account. Of course, Vasari and Condivi recount that in
his youth Michelangelo made replicas of earlier drawings,
artiﬁcially aged them, and returned them to their owners
as the originals; in principle, this drawing might be an
example of that practice. But such an explanation would
again presuppose that the style of the drawing is that of
the early quattrocento, and in the compiler’s view it seems
closer to the world of Ghirlandaio in its ﬂexible and quite
dense cross-hatching. Nevertheless, because the young
Michelangelo copied work by Masaccio and Giotto, and

CATALOGUE 8
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
89
because he was demonstrably inﬂuenced by Quercia – his
Creation of Eve on the Sistine ceiling is based on Quer-
cia’s treatment of the same subject on the fac¸ade of San
Petronio in Bologna – a link with that sculptor could be
maintained by arguing that the drawing is a copy by the
youthful Michelangelo after a lost relief carving of drapery
by Quercia.
However, if the drawing is a copy, the source, rather
than Quercia, might be Antonio Federighi, whose work
was of demonstrable interest to the circle of Michelangelo

90
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 8
(see the drawing, attributed by the compiler to Piero
d’Argenta, in the Louvre, Inv. 687/J44/Corpus 12).
Indeed, although the compiler has not found an exact
source, the movement of the drapery in the present draw-
ing does come close to certain motifs in Federighi’s ﬁg-
ures. But whether or not the drawing is a copy of an
earlier work – and on balance the compiler is inclined to
think it is not – he has, after considerable hesitation, come
to accept the attribution to Michelangelo maintained by
Wilde and Gardner. The handling, while employing a
ﬁner pen and a scratchier line than usually found in his
drapery studies, comes very close to certain passages in
the Standing Draped Woman (formerly at Castle Howard,
Yorkshire; sold at Sotheby’s London, 11 July 2001, lot 81;
pen and ink with white body colour, 260×164 mm; see
Ongpin, 2001) – a drawing famous in the sixteenth cen-
tury – which the compiler is inclined to date c. 1506.
Michelangelo seems to have been fascinated at this time
by complex organisations of drapery, a fascination that
would be productive when he came to fresco the Sis-
tine vault, and both the Standing Draped Woman and the
present drawing may have been connected with some
painting projected during the six months or so passed by
Michelangelo in Florence in 1506.
In any case, whatever is believed about the date and
authorship of the recto, of its startling difference from
the verso there can be no doubt, and no recent stu-
dent has believed both to be by the same hand. The last
to accept the verso as by Michelangelo seems to have
been Berenson. It has subsequently been attributed to
Florentine draughtsmen active in the second half of the
sixteenth century, namely Battista Naldini (1535–91) and
Francesco Morandini, called il Poppi (1545–97), attribu-
tions which – if the recto drawing were accepted as by
Jacopo della Quercia – would entail accepting that a sheet
ﬁrst used before 1440 subsequently passed into Michelan-
gelo’s hands to be annotated some three-quarters of a
century later, then migrated to one of two artists born
after Michelangelo left Florence permanently, and with
whom he is not known to have had any connection, to be
drawn upon once more, and that still later it returned to
Casa Buonarroti. Such a scenario is improbable. Even to
assume that a sheet passed from Michelangelo to Naldini
or Poppi – and was used by one or the other rather
than preserved as a precious relic – and then returned
to Buonarroti possession strains credulity.
Neither of the proposed attributions of the Faun’s
head – a derivation from some Hellenistic sculptural
model such as the Satyr in the so-called Invitation to the
Dance – to Naldini and Poppi has been argued in any
detail, and to the compiler neither seems convincing.
Much more is now known about the drawings of both
artists than in 1956, and neither of them handles chalk in
this manner. Of the two, Poppi’s work comes closest, and
he made many copies after antique and modern heads
and other body parts in red and black chalk. But Poppi’s
drawings of this type are generally arranged half a dozen
or more to a page, are highly self-conscious, and are of
a stony virtuosity of execution. In fact, the chalk style
of the present study, although softer than that employed
by Michelangelo in most of his drawings of comparable
type, is nevertheless not too distant from his: It comes
closest to his Ideal Head of a Woman in the Louvre (Inv.
12299/J28/Corpus 321; red chalk, 313×246 mm). Sim-
ilarly, even though the emotion does not seem imme-
diately Michelangelesque, parallels can be found in his
work for such smiling heads, such as the Faun accompa-
nying his 1497 Bacchus and the ignudo to the right above
Esaias on the Sistine ceiling, for which a study exists in
the Louvre (Inv. 860/J19/Corpus 143; black chalk with
touches of white heightening, 307×207 mm). The fact
that so sensitive a critic as Berenson could accept this head
as by Michelangelo is not without signiﬁcance. It would
obviously be tempting to see it as by a pupil, but it seems
too ﬁne to be by Mini and, furthermore, not in the style
associated with him even at his best. It might, in prin-
ciple, be by Pietro Urbano, according to Vasari – who
presumably got the information from Michelangelo – a
more accomplished pupil, but there is no good reason for
an attribution to him.
In the compiler’s opinion, the drawing is by Baccio
Bandinelli, c. 1516, but he would admit that no example
of Bandinelli’s undisputed draughtsmanship is sufﬁciently
close to prove the attribution. Part of the difﬁculty rests
on the fact that the present drawing is more subtle and
supple in its modelling, richer in its evocation of sur-
face texture, and more evanescent in its emotion than the
majority of Bandinelli’s comparable studies, which aim
for simpliﬁed planes and constructional ﬁxity. However,
such features are more characteristic of his later work
and it is clear from the drawings that he made during
his teens and early twenties that he was then an artist
more sensitive to mobility of form and expression than
is generally supposed. Thus, the present drawing shares
strongly Leonardesque formal qualities with Bandinelli’s
masterly pen and ink copy after Leonardo’s lost Annunci-
atory Angel (Christie’s, London, 1 July 1969, lot 119, pen
and ink, 356×265 mm; see Ward, 1988, Fig. 5) and a
surface treatment with Bandinelli’s red chalk portrait of
a woman (generally identiﬁed as his future wife Jacopa
Doni; Paris, Louvre, Inv. 81, 243×190 mm), in which
the description of the eyes is similar. The shading setting
off the head is a device found frequently in Bandinelli’s
drawings. The sculpturesque simpliﬁcation of the waves of

CATALOGUE 8
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
91
hair, particularly clear at the left side of the drawing, is
also found in Bandinelli’s drawings. It is instructive, fur-
thermore, to compare the present drawing with Jacopo
Pontormo’s study for the head of the Christ Child for
his San Michele Visdomini altarpiece of 1517 (Ufﬁzi
654E/Cox-Rearick 36; black chalk, 215×168 mm): The
similarity argues for approximate contemporaneity, and
Bandinelli was certainly acquainted with Pontormo. It
may also be recalled that Thode was reminded of Andrea
del Sarto.
It is often forgotten that Baccio Bandinelli was for a
period favoured by Michelangelo. He was preferred over
Jacopo Sansovino to assist Michelangelo on the fac¸ade of
San Lorenzo in 1516, a decision that earned Michelangelo
a bitter rebuke from the disappointed Jacopo. Around this
time, Bandinelli seems to have had privileged access to the
master’s studio. His copy of the Bearded Slave (Florence,
Ufﬁzi 6960F; red chalk, 360×98 mm), generally dated
late, seems to the compiler to be of c. 1520. As Micha¨el
Amy has pointed out, Bandinelli also knew a design by
Michelangelo, probably for one of the Duomo Apostles,
recorded in a copy in the Louvre (Inv. 858/J64; black
chalk over stylus indications, 295×134 mm), and it is
difﬁcult to imagine where he might have encountered
this other than in Michelangelo’s studio: Baccio made
use of it in his modello in the Accademia di Bellas Artes
di San Fernando, Madrid, of c. 1530 for a double tomb
for Popes Leo X and Clement VII (Inv. 163; pen and ink,
293×275 mm). Bandinelli also made a large drawing and,
from it, a painted portrait – dated 1522 – of Michelangelo
(both Paris, Louvre; for discussion see Cat. 107).
It is uncertain what sculptural tasks for the fac¸ade
Michelangelo allocated to Bandinelli, but it may be pos-
sible to advance an hypothesis. It seems to the compiler
likely that a sheet of drawings with C. Riley-Smith on
the London art market in 1999, whose attribution to
Bandinelli by the compiler was conﬁrmed by Dr. Roger
Ward, is also relevant. Its recto is a copy in red chalk over
traces of black chalk (282×160 mm) after the leftmost
Saint in Fra Bartolommeo’s Virgin and Child with Saint
Anne and Other Saints (Florence, Museo di San Marco)
painted for the Sala del Gran Consiglio and left unﬁnished
in 1512. Its verso carries what seems to be the offset of an
offset, in red chalk, of a broad sketch for an executioner
in a Martyrdom of Saint Lawrence. This ﬁgure’s pose corre-
sponds to one of the executioners in the relief of that sub-
ject placed above the left-hand doorway in Michelangelo’s
modello of 1516 for the San Lorenzo fac¸ade in Casa Buonar-
roti (CB 45A/B245/Corpus 497; pen and ink, brush and
wash, over black chalk, 724×870 mm). It seems reason-
able to suppose, therefore, that Michelangelo intended
Bandinelli to execute this relief. This initial encounter
with the subject may have encouraged Bandinelli to
return to it. In the mid-1520s, he designed but did
not in the event execute a highly ambitious multiﬁgure
Martyrdom of Saint Lawrence as a fresco in the choir of
San Lorenzo, a composition engraved by Marcantonio
Raimondi. Somewhat later, he also produced a more
modest version of the subject to be executed as a relief.
This second design, seen in a modello in the British
Museum (1895-9-15-548; pen and ink, over red chalk and
stylus, 313×344 mm) may be connected with some alter-
native project at San Lorenzo, or, perhaps more likely,
for the projected tomb of Clement VII (to be paired
with that of Leo X) for which Bandinelli was preparing
designs in the mid-1530s. This second design, like oth-
ers by Bandinelli, was known to Alessandro Allori who
reproduced it in a small painting on panel now in the
Ufﬁzi (Lecchini-Giovannoni, 1991, no. 37, ﬁg. 73).
In short, the compiler would propose that the verso
drawing was made by Bandinelli in Michelangelo’s studio
on a sheet on which Michelangelo had previously drawn,
and that the sheet remained with Michelangelo to be
employed a few years later to note down an account.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar; Samuel Wood-
burn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830-110] (“Study of the head of a Faun highly
ﬁnished red chalk, on the reverse is a slight sketch and his
writing.”). Woodburn, 1836b, no. 6 (Recto: “probably a
study for the head of the celebrated statue which he had
interred at Rome, in order to be discovered and taken
for antique workmanship. This head is perfectly in the
Greek taste.”). The Athenaeum, 16 July 1836 (“[A]ppro-
priate expression, modelling, and breadth of manner.”).
Woodburn, 1842, no. 26 (As 1836.). Fisher, 1862, p. 5,
pl. 22, right (Verso: as Woodburn.). Fisher, 1865, p. 24,
II, pl. 22, right (As 1862.). Robinson, 1870, no. 39 (Michel
Angelo. Recto: “probably after an antique marble of
indifferent Roman work.” Memorandum on verso sug-
gests a date c. 1518.). Fisher, 1872, II, p. 23, pl. 23 (As
1852.). Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 36. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 236.
Fisher, 1879, p. 32, no. 29 (Verso: as 1862.). Berenson,
1903, no. 1564 (Recto: “Carefully and elaborately mod-
elled in a way which suggests . . . that it must have been
done for execution in bronze.” Recalls drawings for Cav-
alieri and datable c. 1534. Verso: not Michelangelo, but
memorandum his.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 222 (Recto: not
Michelangelo; no certain antique source. Not by Mini
or Sebastiano, but verso proves that by someone close

92
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 8
to Michelangelo.); no. 223 (Verso: drapery study nei-
ther by Michelangelo nor the author of the recto. Ricordo
establishes date 1523–4.). Thode, 1913, no. 422 (Why
should recto not be by Michelangelo? The only other
Florentine artist that it recalls is Andrea del Sarto. Verso:
hard to judge, but inscriptions are autograph.). Berenson,
1938, no. 1565 (As 1903.). Kleiner, 1950, p. 25 (Recto:
school of Michelangelo, after head of Boy on a Dolphin.
Ricordo attaches sheet to his studio and demonstrates rel-
evance of recto for the ignudo left above Erythraea and for
the faun accompanying the Bacchus.). Wilde, 1953 exh.,
no. 131 (Verso: by Michelangelo: the drawing may be con-
siderably earlier than the inscription; purpose unknown.).
Parker, 1956, no. 375 (Recto: somewhat reworked. “The
elaborate modelling recalls the Cavalieri presentation
drawings, but it seems out of the question that Michelan-
gelo or indeed any of his close followers could have been
the draughtsman. P. M. R. Pouncey hesitates between
Naldini and Poppi.”); no. 42 (Verso: style of Jacopo della
Quercia “essentially ‘early’ and primitive in character . . . a
work of about 1430.” The ricordo is in Michelangelo’s
hand and of 1523–4.). Dussler, 1959, no. 618 (Recto: by a
follower of Michelangelo. Verso: by a quattrocento artist,
near Quercia.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1565 (As 1903/1938.).
Degenhart and Schmitt, 1968, I, 1, no. 116 (Verso: by
Jacopo della Quercia?.). Gardner, 1972, pp. 33–4 (“[W]e
are asked to imagine that Michelangelo was so cavalier
as to scrawl over the century-old drawing, while the
recto was later used for a study after the antique.” Com-
pares recto with Michelangelo’s Standing Prophet in the
BM, W1/Corpus 6.). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 7
(Verso: by Michelangelo, 1494–1500, after Quercia, per-
haps done in Bologna. Recto: by or after a dilettante stu-
dent of Michelangelo’s c. 1532.). Macandrew, 1980, p. 267
(Recto: “P. M. R. Pouncey is now convinced that this
is by Francesco Morandini.”). Sisi, 1988, no. 6 (Verso:
drapery study related to mantle of Madonna on Jacopo
della Quercia’s Bentivoglio Monument in San Giacomo
Maggiore, Bologna.). Perrig, 1999, p. 247 (By a pupil
of Michelangelo; from via Mozza studio.). Weil-Garris
Brandt et al., 1999–2000, p. 339 (Recto: attributed to
Jacopo della Quercia.).
GENERAL DISCUSSION
9–16
These eight sheets, which contain some sixty sketches,
were thoroughly and excellently analysed by Robinson
and Thode and, more recently, and still more exhaustively
by de Tolnay in the Corpus, supplemented and in places
corrected by Hirst in several closely observed contri-
butions. The attribution of these drawings to a pupil
ﬁrst made by Berenson and followed by several schol-
ars, including Baumgart, who considered them to be by
Daniele da Volterra, now seems obviously a misjudge-
ment, based largely on a misconception of these draw-
ings’ function: They are not developed studies but rough
and vigorous primi pensieri.
The drawings on these pages relate to the later sec-
tion of the Sistine vault, which was painted following
the interruption of the work in 1510–11. They prepare
ﬁgures found in the ninth and last narrative bay of the
crown of the vault, God the Father Separating Light from
Darkness, for one or more of the ignudi surrounding this
episode, for the ﬁnal Prophet to be painted, Ionas, and
perhaps for Libica, and for a number of the Ancestors of
Christ in the lunettes (but not those in the severies). The
drawings for Ancestors are by far the most numerous and
those with which the drawings can be connected are all
to be found below the second half of the vault, from the
Asa-Iosaphat lunette on the south wall of the chapel and
the Roboam-Abias lunette on the north wall, to the lost
lunettes on the altar wall, which were destroyed nearly
a quarter century after they were painted to make way
for the Last Judgement. This distribution of drawings, in
which the Ancestors of Christ receive so much atten-
tion, must in part be the result of an accident of survival.
No more than one of the drawings on these pages can
at all conﬁdently be connected with the pendentives of
Haman and the Brazen Serpent, which must have occupied
much of Michelangelo’s intellectual energies during the
last months of painting, and which must have required
many drawings. Nor can the very limited number con-
nected with the ignudi and the Prophets and Sibyls be at
all representative. However, although allowances must be
made for arbitrary survival – this sub-set itself is incom-
plete, as is demonstrated by the offset of a lost sketch vis-
ible on Cat. 9 recto – and even though accident may cre-
ate a distorted picture of Michelangelo’s design sequence,
the present sketchbook does suggest that the Ancestors
in the second half of the vault were mostly designed after
the histories and the majority of the ignudi in the crown
of the vault had already been planned.
The order in which Michelangelo painted the different
parts of the vault has been controversial. In the past many
scholars believed that the entire series of the Ancestors in
the lunettes – which occupy the tops of the walls rather
than the vault and are on ﬂat, vertical, surfaces – was
painted after all the work on the curved part of the vault
had been completed. Wilde, on the other hand, held that

CATALOGUE 8
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
93
the Ancestors in the lunettes were painted concurrently
with the frescoes above them on the curved part of
the vault. The restoration of the 1980s and consequent
close examination of the vault seems to have substantiated
this second view. However, some ﬂexibility is not to be
excluded. It need not be assumed that the sequence of
execution was an invariable series of north–south “slices”
across the upper part of the chapel, comprising the histo-
ries at the top of the vault, the ignudi around and below
them, the Prophets and Sibyls in the pendentives, the
Ancestor groups in the severies, and the Ancestors in the
lunettes. It may be that more than one lunette on either
side was executed at the same time, after work on the cor-
responding curved parts of the vault above them had been
completed. The present group of sketches could support
such an hypothesis; taken at face value, they would suggest
that the Ancestors in the lunettes at the west end of the
vault were conceived as a group following the preparation
of God the Father Separating Light from Darkness, the only
history to be found among them. And if this is so, then
the four lunettes at the end of the chapel – comprising the
two lost lunettes on the altar wall and those at the ends
of the north and south walls – might have been executed
as a group, following the completion of the curved part
of the vault.
It was characteristic of the artist to make the initial
designs for individual ﬁgures and compositions both in
painting and sculpture in small scale drawings, concetti. In
the ﬁrst part of his career, he generally made these in
pen, but examples also survive in chalk, which seems to
have taken over entirely from about 1530. The present
drawings do not differ greatly from the small sketches
made in preparation for the Madonna in Bruges (Ufﬁzi
233F recto/B1/Corpus 37; black chalk and pen and ink,
271×261 mm). Although they are much less ﬁnished,
they also bear some resemblance to ﬁgures found in
the slightly later modelli for the fac¸ade of San Lorenzo
(CB45A/B245/Corpus 497; pen and ink, brush and
wash over black chalk, 705×870 mm) or for an altar
(Oxford, Christ Church, JBS 64/Corpus 280; pen and
ink and brush and wash, 350×291 mm). In the major-
ity of the drawings on the present sheets, Michelangelo
drew angular, even jagged forms, suitable for ﬁgures
designed to make an impact from a distance. Indeed,
in their self-conscious roughness – which contrasts with
the more ﬂowing concetto style of the Cascina or even
the pen sketches for the Sistine Flood – Michelangelo
seems to have intended an effect of harshness: Supremely
capable, when he chose, of designing rhythmical and
close-knit groups, he aimed here at ruggedness. Indeed,
many of these sketches show Michelangelo moving from
more rhythmical to more severe, and from forms seen
at angles to forms seen strictly in proﬁle or strictly
frontally.
Michelangelo seems to have swivelled only two of these
pages, Cats. 12 recto and 13 recto, as he worked on them,
to pen a single ﬁgure. In every other instance, he retained
the base of the sheet as determinant. It would seem that
the paper he used was always approximately the present
size and that the sheets were not originally joined.
The sheets show Michelangelo mixing modes among
Ancestors, Prophets, ignudi, and even narratives, transfer-
ring ideas generated in one area to another, and they show
him habitually reversing ﬁgures. As was already pointed
out by Ottley, it seems that the larger sketches both in
pen and in black chalk found on some of the pages were
executed from life as were, no doubt, those studies of ﬁg-
ural details, whereas the initial concetti would have been
the product of Michelangelo’s imagination.
These eight sheets also contain drawings that do not
seem to have been made expressly for the vault, such
as Cat. 14 recto, as well as others where Michelangelo’s
imagination clearly took wing and he developed ideas
in directions that the project at hand did not require.
In some cases, such sketches anticipate later work by
him.
History
Casa Buonarroti; the sketches on Cats. 9 verso, 13 recto,
and 14 verso were copied by Andrea Commodi when
these sheets were in Casa Buonarroti, and although this
does not prove that all the drawings in this sequence were
then there and remained there, any other reconstruction
of events would entail too many complexities to be plau-
sible. It is therefore probable that the sequence remained
together in Casa Buonarroti until the 1790s. At this point,
it seems likely that they were split up, and that one group
of four leaves was acquired by Ottley, was discussed in
his Italian School of Design, and was offered by him in his
sale 6 June 1814, and following days, lot 264, “One –
a sheet with two leaves of his sketch book containing
pen studies on both sides, for the vault of the Capella
Sistina – most interesting. From the Buonarroti collec-
tion.” £5.5.0, and lot 265, “One – a sheet with two
ditto, for ditto, ditto.” £5.5.0; pencil annotation Clark,
£10.0.0. The other group of four leaves was presumably
acquired by Wicar, was among the drawings bought from
him by Woodburn in 1823, and rejoined the four that
had been owned by Ottley in Lawrence’s collection. Sir
Thomas Lawrence (L.2445 on Cats. 11, 14, 15); Samuel
Woodburn.

94
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 8
General References
Ottley, 1808–23, p. 29 (“[A] fragment, in my pos-
session, of four leaves of a small pocket sketch-
book, . . . containing the ﬁrst thoughts for many of the
ﬁgures which we admire in the vault of the Sistine Chapel;
some of them hints taken hastily from nature in the streets
of Rome.”). Ottley sale, 1814, lot 264 (“One – a sheet
with two leaves of his sketch book containing pen stud-
ies on both sides, for the vault of the Capella Sistina –
most interesting. From the Buonarroti collection.”) and
lot 265 (“One – a sheet with two ditto, for ditto, ditto.”).
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti, Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830-53i, ii, iii, iv] (“A very interesting sheet
composed of Four Sheets from his Sketch Book con-
taining studies for the Sistine Chapel.”) [and 61 a,b,c,d]
(“A Sheet of four leaves of his Sketch Book contain-
ing designs for the Sistine Chapel and some words writ-
ten by himself.”). Woodburn, 1836b, no. 2 (“Four leaves
of his pocket book – pasted together; on which he has
drawn several small ﬁgures, which have served for his
grand works in the Sistine Chapel. These ﬁrst thoughts
are particularly interesting; they show the progress of his
method of art; slightly sketched from nature, merely as
atttitudes.”); no. 50 (“These ﬁnely executed sketches are
particularly interesting, as shewing from what triﬂing ori-
gin the ﬁnest work in the pictorial art was imagined.”).
The Athenaeum, 16 July 1836 (“‘Leaves from M. A.’s
Pocket Book’ for the cognoscenti.”). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 47 (As 1836, no. 2.); no. 66 (As 1836, no. 50.).
Fisher, 1852, p. 1, pls. 1–9. Fisher, 1865, pp. 15–16, I,
pls. 1–9. Robinson, 1870, pp. 28–31 (For details, see
individual entries.). Fisher, 1872, I, pp. 13–14, pls. 2–10
(As 1852.). Black, 1875, p. 214, nos. 24, 25. Gotti, 1875,
II, p. 222. Springer, 1878, pp. 115–16 (“Fragmente eines
Skizzenbuches. Acht kleine Bl¨attchen.”). Fisher, 1879,
XVI–XVII. Springer, 1883, I, p. 159 (As 1878.). Portheim,
1889, p. 145 (Demonstrates that at this period Michelan-
gelo used pen for “die ersten entw¨urfe oder f¨ur die Bewe-
gung der einzelnen Figuren.”). Berenson, 1903, I, p. 249
(“That they ever could have been attributed to the great
master, witnesses to a sad state of ignorance regarding his
manner and style as a draughtsman.”); nos. 1702, 1703
(“These sketches are positively not Michelangelo’s, but
by some pupil who naturally took up the master’s man-
nerisms and tricks of shorthand. It is conceivable that
some of these scrawls were made after Michelangelo’s own
sketches which would of course have been accessible to
the pupil . . . [but] the author may have entered Michelan-
gelo’s service just when the ceiling was ﬁnished, and, after
attaining to a certain mastery, been put for practice in
rapid dawing to make these hasty notes after the fres-
coes. The sketch book . . . must have been given to his
apprentice by Michelangelo himself, for” there are two
inscriptions in his hand. The pupil may have been Sil-
vio Falconi, mentioned on [Cat. 11 recto].). Steinmann,
1905, II, pp. 603–4 (Notes Berenson’s rejection; chalk
work by Michelangelo, penwork by a pupil.). K. Frey,
1909–11, under nos. 151–4, p. 74 (“Von Michelangelo
nun k¨onnen diese Zeichnungen nicht stammen; daf¨ur
sind sie zu geringwertig.” But “stehen die skizzen in
unmittelbarer Beziehung zu Michelangiolo, schon der
Schrift halber.” Done by an associate after whatever
drawings by Michelangelo lay before him. Perhaps, but
not certainly Silvio Falconi.). Thode, 1913, pp. 184–9
(Opposes Berenson’s dismissal and Frey’s doubts. All are
autograph sketches by Michelangelo, primarily for the
lunettes. “Die Skizzen verrathen in keinerlei Weise di
Hand eines unge¨ubten Sch¨ulers . . . sondern die eines
sehr geistreichen, mit wenigsten Strichen Bewegungsmo-
tive charackteristisch verdeutlichenden K¨unstlers, eine
Meisterhand.”). Popp, 1925a, p. 27 (Probably by Silvio
Falconi, who is also responsible for the ex-Wauters draw-
ing [K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 249a recto; pen and ink,
220×160 mm], and the verso of the study for the
Minerva Christ/Corpus 94.). Baumgart, 1935a, p. 349
(All by Daniele da Volterra.). Berenson, 1938, I, p. 252,
nos. 1702, 1703 (As 1903.). Delacre, 1938, 121–4 (Cri-
tique of the dismissal of these drawings by Berenson and
Frey. Obervations on their qualities and the differences
between them and the frescoes. “La grandeur d’un dessin
ne se juge pas `a sa dimension et ces . . . croquis micro-
scopique sont r´eellement grands.”). De Tolnay, 1945,
pp. 214–15, no. 28A (The inscriptions by Michelangelo
are in his handwriting of the 1520s; that on [Cat. 11
recto] is by a pupil, probably Silvio Falconi who joined
Michelangelo only after the completion of the Sistine
ceiling. Two different hands discernible but even the
drawings of higher quality – those in chalk – are copies
after, not studies for the lunettes.). Wilde, 1953 exh.,
nos. 19, 22 (“All [these sheets] contain studies for ﬁg-
ures in the Sistine ceiling.”). Dussler, 1959, pp. 276–7
(All rejected. No logic to organisation of drawings: “es
fehlt ihm eine bestimmte Vorstellung der K¨orperstruktur,
der plastischen Formierung, er ist unsicher im Propor-
tionalen und in den Verk¨urzungen.” Done in Michelan-
gelo’s workshop and with annotations by him, but no
corrections “die Skizzen stammen von einer Hand.” Sil-
vio Falconi a possibility, but disagrees with Popp’s and
Baumgart’s suggestions.). Berenson, 1961, nos. 1702,
1703 (As 1903, 1938, but with detailed account of the

CATALOGUES 8–9
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
95
drawings.). Barocchi, 1962, p. 292 (“povert`a di fattura del
tutto simile” to CB 24F/B242/Corpus 160 [attributed
by Hirst, 1963, to Michelangelo].). Levie, 1962, p. 162
(Attributed to Daniele.). Berti, 1965, p. 421 (Copies of
the lunettes, but with geometrical qualities akin to those
of Ufﬁzi 17379-80F/Barocchi 13, 14/Corpus 151, 152.).
Hartt, 1971, p. 87 (1511. “[p]robably deriving from a
single large sheet of paper folded three times to make
an octavo signature. . . . All but one of sixteen pages
relate to the Sistine Chapel, but not all the sketches
are by Michelangelo’s hand . . . some sketches appear to
be by a pupil, apparently Silvio Falconi . . . majority of
the drawings make sense only as Michelangelo’s origi-
nal sketches.” Greatest concentration of sketches relates
to the destroyed lunettes formerly above the altar, and
to those in the immediately adjacent bays.). Gere and
Turner, 1975, p. 34 (“Great majority of these sketches
are connected with the Ancestors of Christ.”). Wilde,
1978, p. 73 (“The riches of Michelangelo’s notebook
seem to be inexaustible . . . eight leaves of a small sketch-
book which he used when he started preparing the
second half of the Ceiling . . . they contain more ideas
for Antenati than he could dispose of in the eight
lunettes still to be painted.”). Barolsky, 1979, p. 149
(Notes Baumgart’s attribution to Daniele.). Hirst, 1986a,
pp. 208–17 (Detailed discussion of sketchbook; the indi-
vidual observations listed later.). Hirst, 1988, pp. 35–
7 (“Answering . . . closely to Vasari’s category of ‘primi
schizzi’. . . . Fifteen of the sixteen pages contain studies
devoted to the inventing or developing ﬁgure motives
for the decoration. Michelangelo made these inven-
tion drawings only very shortly before he resumed
work in the Chapel in the early autumn of 1511 . . . he
never made his designs until he had to. . . . [T]he little
studies . . . display a spontaneity of invention and speed
of execution difﬁcult to match among Michelangelo’s
other ﬁgurative drawings.”). Hirst, 1988–9a, under no. 12
(As 1988.).
CATALOGUE 9
Recto: Sketches for Parts of the Sistine Ceiling and
Lunettes
Verso: Sketches for Parts of the Sistine Ceiling and
Lunettes
1846.45; R.24.1; P.II 299; Corpus 166
Dimensions: 140×132 mm
Medium
Recto: Pen and ink with traces of an offset in black chalk.
Verso: Pen and ink and black chalk.
Condition
There is a pressed-out horizontal fold, about 4.5 cm from
the top, skinned edges with numerous nicks, discoloura-
tion and local media stains, and a show-through of ink.
Repair tissue of small inﬁlled holes is visible.
Description/Discussion
Recto
A. Inscription in Michelangelo’s hand: di quidici di sectebre;
a horizontal line crossed by three short diagonals
The year is not given but it is presumably 1511, when painting
seems to have recommenced, following an interruption.
B. A draped seated ﬁgure in right proﬁle, slumped for-
ward, in pen.
This must be a ﬁrst idea for the ﬁgure at the right of the Roboam-
Abias lunette; it was pursued on Cat. 10 verso D and Cat. 12
recto A.
C. A nude seated ﬁgure in right proﬁle with the left leg
bent under him, writing in a large book whilst looking
inwards, in pen.
This powerful ﬁgure seems much more likely to be a sketch for
a Prophet than an Ancestor, although there are some similarities
with Cat. 10 recto D. Michelangelo did not pursue this design,
and it is conjectural which ﬁgure he was planning.
D. A seated ﬁgure in right proﬁle, with legs crossed at the
calves?, looking outwards, in pen.
This ﬁgure might be a ﬁrst idea for an ignudo, either that right
above Daniel or that left above Hieremias.
E. An upright seated ﬁgure, facing half left, with legs
crossed at the knee, in pen.
This ﬁgure might be an early idea for an ignudo. Michelangelo
did not pursue this design, and it is conjectural which ﬁgure he
may have been thinking about.
F. A nude seated ﬁgure facing half right, his left leg raised
and his hands folded across this knee, leaning forward on
his hands in a pensive pose, in pen.
Michelangelo did not pursue this design, and it is conjectural
which ﬁgure he may have been considering.
G. Offset of a seated ﬁgure in left (originally right) proﬁle
leaning forward, in black chalk.
The original of this sketch is lost; the ﬁgure may be related to
Cat. 12 verso D.
Verso
The sketches in black chalk were no doubt drawn before
those in pen.

96
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 9
A. A seated ﬁgure in left proﬁle, in pen.
This ﬁgure was no doubt conceived for an Ancestor; it seems to
have been pursued further on the verso of the study for the Libica
in the Metropolitan Museum (Inv. 24.197.2 verso/Corpus 156;
black chalk, 288×213 mm).
B. A ﬁgure walking forward from right to left, in black
chalk, intersected by a pen line.
This sketch, which could well be for a narrative composi-
tion, might prepare the ﬁgure moving through the door in
the Haman.
C. A seated ﬁgure seen from the front, studying a book,
his left leg slightly raised above his right leg, in pen. This
is probably a revision of Cat. 14 verso D.
D. A forward-facing ﬁgure seated on the ground, lean-
ing against a vertical element to his/her right, turn-
ing and extending his/her hand to his/her left, in
pen.
Perhaps a preliminary idea for the ﬁgure seated in the doorway
in the Haman.
E. A standing ﬁgure seen frontally, with both arms raised
to shoulder height and his right leg bent as though moving
forward, in black chalk.
Perhaps a ﬁrst idea for the telamon putto below Persicha.
F. A standing ﬁgure, in left? proﬁle, in black chalk; per-
haps another version of B.
G. A seated ﬁgure on a block seen frontally, with his right
leg raised, reading, in pen. This version was no doubt
drawn before C and H, which reduce its vigour. It is
difﬁcult to know whether this sketch was intended for a
Prophet or an Ancestor, since the curved line to the left
could indicate either the proﬁle of a pendentive or the
arch of a window, in which case the vertical that intersects
it would be the name board. On balance the compiler is
inclined to think it a sketch for a Prophet. This ﬁgure was
tried again on Cat. 14 verso D.
H. A three-quarter length, seated ﬁgure seen frontally,
reading, in pen. Probably a revision of G.

CATALOGUE 9
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
97
Copy
C on the verso was copied in pen c. 1580 by Andrea
Commodi on Ufﬁzi 18654F recto.
References
Ottley, 1808-23, p. 29 (“Upon the top of one of the
pages is this date, written by Buonaroti’s own hand: ’il
quidici disectebre, followed by a horizontal stroke of the
pen, which is intersected by three perpendicular strokes,
followed by a fourth which reaches only to the top of
the horizontal line; . . . a memorandum doubtless made
on the day speciﬁed, and, perhaps, relating to some small
debt incurred by him for an article of housekeeping.”).
Woodburn, 1836b, included in no. 50. Fisher, 1852, p. 1,
pl. 6, left (Recto); pl. 7, right (Verso). Fisher, 1865, p. 16,
I, pl. 6, left (Recto); pl. 7, right (Verso). Robinson, 1870,
no. 24.1 (Michel Angelo. Recto: for window lunettes.
Verso: principal ﬁgure [G] “may have been a ﬁrst idea
for . . . Ioel. . . . Two other slight sketches of the same ﬁg-
ure seem to show that it was intended to be further
developed.”). Fisher, 1872, I, p. 14, pl. 6 left (Recto);
pl. 7, right (Verso) (As 1852.). Fisher, 1879, XVI.1/13
left (Recto); XVI.1a/14 right (Verso). Justi, 1900, p. 132
([C, G, and H] preliminary ideas for Ioel.). Steinmann,
1905, II, pp. 424–5, 604, no. 61A, left (Recto: date
must refer to 1511. Five sketches for the lunettes; inscrip-
tion in Michelangelo’s hand.); no. 61B, right (Verso:
sketches for lunettes including seated man at right of
Roboam lunette.). Thode, 1908, I, p. 270 (Michelan-
gelo. Recto and verso: no speciﬁc connections can be
established with executed ﬁgures.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no.
151.2 (Verso [now recto]: inscription autograph. Resem-
blance to lunette ﬁgures but no links speciﬁed.); no. 152.5
(Recto [now verso]: analogous ﬁgures in Aminadab

98
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 9–10
and Naason lunettes; no connection with Ioel.); Thode,
1913, no. 408 (Verso [now recto]: Robinson incorrect
to link [G] with Ioel; framing lines demonstrate that
it was prepared for an ancestor. Recto [now verso]:
as 1908). Delacre, 1938, p. 123 (Michelangelo. Man
reading could not be after Ioel.). De Tolnay, 1945
p. 214, no. 28A (Verso: “sketches . . . of a better qual-
ity but also seem to be only copies after the lunettes
and not studies for them.” D “perhaps for a slave
on the Julius tomb . . . seems to have been made by
Michelangelo.”). Parker, 1956, no. 299 (Recto: [B]
resembles ﬁgure on right of Roboam-Abia lunette; notes
offset [G]. Verso: ﬁgures suggestive of Prophets.). Dussler,
1959, no. 604 (Recto and verso: description only, no
links suggested.). Berenson, 1961, 1702 a (School of
Michelangelo. Recto: B resembles the sleeping woman
in the Roboam-Abias lunette.). Hartt, 1971, no. 121
(Recto: writing in Michelangelo’s hand, possibly the date
when he began composing the lunettes. Sketches for
Roboam-Abias [A], Azor and his mother? [lower left];
possibly Josaphat [left centre] and possibly Sadoc [lower
right]); no. 117 (Verso: perhaps for Naason. Two coarse
chalk sketches perhaps by Falconi.). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 24 (Recto: inscription in Michelangelo’s hand.).
De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 166 (Recto: [B] a
primo pensiero for the the woman at the right of the
Roboam-Abias lunette; taken up on [Cat. 10 verso D] and
again on [Cat. 12 recto A]. [C] probably for a prophet.
[D] Some similarity with woman at left of Zorobabel-
Abiud-Eliachim lunette and to a barely legible sketch on
Haarlem A20 verso/VT49/Corpus 135. [E] not used;
similarity with ﬁgure at right of Eleazar-Matham lunette.
[F] probably for a prophet, but not used; the motif
ﬁrst appears in drawings by Leonardo, Paris, Louvre,
Inv. 1978 verso, 2258 recto. [G] is the offset of a lost
drawing linked by G. Bonsanti with the motif of the
verso ﬁgure [A], thus for the woman in the Manasses-
Amon lunette. Verso: [A] perhaps for the woman in the
Manasses-Amon lunette. [C] probably for a prophet but
adapted for the Aminadab lunette. [G, H], restudies of
[C], perhaps related to Daniel. [D], perhaps related to
Brazen Serpent pendentive. [E, F], perhaps for a telamon
putto.). Hirst, 1986a, pp. 212, 213 (Recto: offset of a lost
chalk study; “the seated ﬁgure reading [C, G, H] studied
also on [Cat. 14 verso D], may have been intended for
one of the altar-wall lunettes; in the event the motif of
the ﬁgure holding the book with both hands appears in
a part of the decoration for which no preparatory mate-
rial appears in the sketch book, in the corner spandrel
of the Cruciﬁxion of Haman, and then in a subordinate
role.”).
CATALOGUE 10
Recto: Sketches for Parts of the Sistine Ceiling and
Lunettes
Verso: Sketches for Parts of the Sistine Ceiling and
Lunettes
1846.46; R.24.2; P.II 300; Corpus 167
Dimensions: 135×145 mm
Medium
Pen and ink.
Condition
There is a pressed-out horizontal fold, about 4.5 cm from
the top with ingrained dirt. The edges are abraded, there is
some skinning, and there are small holes with ink burn-
through. Fractures are repaired at the fold and heavily
inked areas; there is localised staining.
Description/Discussion
Recto
A. A left arm holding a staff, detailed study for D.
B. A right hand, detailed study for D.
C. A Seated ﬁgure facing front, holding a child?.
This ﬁgure is loosely reminiscent of the severely frontal left-
hand ﬁgure in the Aminadab lunette, but it seems to be female
rather than male. The curve to the left suggests that this ﬁgure
was at ﬁrst envisaged as on the right-hand side of a lunette rather
than the left. As painted, the relation of C (if it is connected
with the Aminadab lunette) and D are reversed.
D. An elderly man seated in right proﬁle holding a staff.
This is a preliminary sketch for the ﬁgure on the right of the
Booz lunette. The pose becomes more angular in the larger
sketches A and B, probably from life, which focus upon his right
hand and left forearm and hand. Developed in Cat. 12 recto B.
Verso
A. Torso of seated ﬁgure in right proﬁle, head turned in
and slumped on left hand; right arm hangs down.
This drawing, which obviously modiﬁes D, seems to be an
abbreviated life sketch. It straightens the back and makes the
form more angular.
B. A Seated ﬁgure facing half right, accompanied by two
putti.
This was presumably drawn with a Sibyl or Prophet in view, but
it bears little resemblance to any executed. It might, at a guess,
be a ﬁrst idea for Ionas: The curved line presumably indicates
the proﬁle of a pendentive.
C. A ﬁgure seated in right proﬁle, leaning forwards, per-
haps reading (the curved line presumably doubles as the
lunette frame).

CATALOGUE 10
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
99
D. A seated ﬁgure in right proﬁle, head turned in and
slumped on left hand and right knee, which is raised;
right arm hangs down.
This was obviously drawn for the right-hand ﬁgure in the
Roboam-Abias lunette; see also Cat. 9 recto B.
E. Seated female ﬁgure seen from front, leaning to her
left, with child.
This was certainly drawn for the left-hand ﬁgure in the Salmon-
Booz-Obeth lunette; because the frescoed ﬁgure corresponding
to D is on the right and the frescoed ﬁgure corresponding to
E is on the left of their respective lunettes, the positioning of
the ﬁgures in the ceiling is close to that seen here. This suggests
that Michelangelo was thinking about the ﬁgures in relation to
each other.
F. The torso for ﬁgure in right proﬁle who seems to be
striking something below him.
This seems to be for a ﬁgure in a scene of action and the only
suggestion that the compiler can make is that it might be a
preliminary idea for Abraham in a Sacriﬁce of Isaac, a composi-
tion found in the simulated bronze roundel directly above the
Libica, although the scene as painted is represented much more
stifﬂy.
References
Ottley, 1808-23, p. 29. Woodburn, 1836b, included in
no. 50. Fisher, 1852, p. 1, pl. 6, right (Recto); pl. 7,
left (Verso.). Fisher, 1865, p. 16, I, pl. 6, right (Recto.);
pl. 7, left (Verso.). Robinson, 1870, no. 24.2 (Michel
Angelo. Recto: one ﬁgure [D] immediately recognis-
able as Patriarch Boaz; the other [C] probably for Ami-
nadab. Verso: sketches for Persicha [B], Roboam-Abias
[D], and Salmon-Booz-Obeth [E]. “The three are dis-
posed in the sketch in the same positions relative to
each other, which they occupy in the fresco.”). Fisher,
1872, p. 14, pl. 6, right (Recto.); pl. 7, left (Verso.) (As
1852.). Fisher, 1879, XVI.2/13 right (Recto); XIV.2a/14
left (Verso.). Steinmann, 1905, II, p. 604, no. 61A, right
(Studies for Aminadab and Salmon-Booz-Obeth.); no. 61B,

100
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 10
left (Verso: studies for Roboam-Abias lunette.). Thode,
1908, I, p. 269 (Michelangelo. Verso [now recto]: man
with staff and woman with child, for Salmon-Booz-Obeth
lunette. Other ﬁgures cannot be connected with executed
painting; Recto [now verso]: sleeping man sketched in
two positions for Roboam-Abias lunette.). K. Frey, 1909–
11, 152.6 (Verso [now recto]: weak drawings; [C] related
to Aminadab and [D] to Salmon-Booz-Obeth lunettes; [A
and B] after the fresco.); 151.1 (Recto [now verso]: [A and
D] related to man in right half of Roboam-Abias lunette;
woman [E] related to that in Salmon-Booz-Obeth lunette.).
Thode, 1913, no. 409 (Verso [now recto]: [A, B, C] for old
man in Salmon-Booz-Obeth lunette; [D] for man in Ami-
nadab lunette; two putti not included. Recto [now verso]:
[A, D] for Roboam, [E] for Salmon-Booz-Obeth lunette; [B]
for an unexecuted lunette ﬁgure, not Persicha, as Robin-
son thought.) Delacre, 1938, p. 123 (Verso: [A] could in
principle be a copy after the Roboam lunette ﬁgure, but [E]
could not be after mother and child in Salmon-Booz-Obeth
lunette.). De Tolnay, 1945, p. 214, under no. 28a, ﬁgs. 248
detail, 250 detail (Recto and verso: “sketches . . . of a bet-
ter quality but also seem to be only copies after the lunettes
and not studies for them.”). Parker, 1956, no. 300 (Recto:
[C, A, B] for the ﬁgure on the right of the Salmon-Booz-
Obeth lunette; [D] corresponds with ﬁgure on left of
Aminadab, but segment of circle suggests that it was to
be placed on right.” Verso: [D and A] resemble ﬁgure on
right of Roboam-Abias lunette; [E] resembles woman on
left of Salmon-Booz-Obeth lunette; [B] is reminsicent of
Persicha.). Dussler, 1959, no. 605 (Recto: links with Ami-
nadab and Salmon-Booz-Obeth lunettes. Verso: links with
Salmon-Booz-Obeth and and Roboam lunettes.). Berenson,
1961, 1702 b (School of Michelangelo. Recto: [D] resem-
bles ﬁgure in Salmon-Booz-Obeth lunette; [C] resembles
ﬁgure at left of Aminadab lunette. Verso: [B] resembles
Persicha; [A, D] resemble ﬁgure at right of Roboam-Abias
lunette.). Hartt, 1971, no. 119 (Recto: for Aminadab with
attendant ﬁgures later eliminated [lower left] and Boaz
[lower right] plus sketches for Boaz’s hands); no. 122
(Verso: for Abiah and probably for Abiud [upper right]

CATALOGUES 10–11
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
101
and Joram and his mother [lower right].). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 25 (Recto.). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 167
(Recto: [D, A, B] for ﬁgure on right of Salmon-Booz-
Obeth lunette; [C] for Aminadab. Verso: [A, D] for ﬁgure
at right of Roboam-Abias lunette also studied on [Cat. 9
recto, B] and [Cat. 12 recto A]; [E] for woman at left in the
Salmon-Booz-Obeth lunette; [C] perhaps for bronze nude
above Salmon-Booz-Obeth severy; [F] perhaps for the Spirit
Moving over the Waters; [B] for a Prophet.). Hirst, 1986a,
pp. 214, 215–16 (Recto: [D] for ﬁgure on right of Salmon-
Booz-Obeth lunette, developed from [Cat. 13, recto H],
but “now in the direction of the painted ﬁgure.” On
both the recto and verso of the present sheet, Michelan-
gelo elaborates on a larger scale motifs ﬁrst sketched in
small. On the recto [A, B] develop [D]; on the verso [A]
develops [C]; Michelangelo returns to this design on [Cat.
12 recto A]. The larger studies probably made from life
and the contrast between these and the smaller sketches,
which show the ﬁgures clothed “is particularly striking
on” the verso of the present sheet.). Hirst, 1988, p. 36
(Recto: [A, B, D] life studies for bent “pilgrim” on right
of Salmon-Booz-Obeth lunette. Verso: [D] for slumped
woman at right of Roboam-Abias lunette drawn ﬁrst, then
studied nude in [A]; Michelangelo returns to this motif
[in Cat. 12 recto A].).
CATALOGUE 11
Recto: Sketches for Parts of the Sistine Ceiling and
Lunettes
Verso: Sketches for Parts of the Sistine Ceiling and
Lunettes
1846.47; R.24.3; P.II 301; Corpus 168
Dimensions: 140×142 mm

102
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 11
Medium
Recto: Pen, faint offset traces in black chalk.
Verso: Pen and ink and black chalk.
Condition
There is a repaired tear; the edges are discoloured, bruised,
and nicked. The surface is disturbed and is fracturing.
There is a strong vertical crease and skinning, small inden-
tations, and ﬁbrous accretions. Discolouration and stain-
ing are visible, particularly at the lower right and right
edge, and there is some ink show-through. The recto of
this page has suffered more than the others in this series
from over-exposure to light.
Description/Discussion
Recto
A. M . . . fer (Messer?) roma Silvio ˜ı roma falconi da magliano
silvio di mesfere . . . ma Damagliano in roma
The inscription is given to Michelangelo by some students and
not by others. The compiler tends to think it is not autograph.
B. A seated ﬁgure in right proﬁle (very faint).
C. A seated ﬁgure in right proﬁle with the right arm
outstretched.
This may be a ﬁrst idea for the woman at the right of the Iesse-
David-Salmon lunette; in the fresco, however, it is her left arm
that is stretched forward. This ﬁgure seems to have been drawn
after D; it is revised in G.
D. God the Father Separating Light from Darkness.
Michelangelo does not seem to have turned the sheet to
draw this ﬁgure. Robinson’s remark deserves quotation: “This
majestic impersonation was very little altered in the fresco,
and the difference which exists is perhaps to the disadvan-
tage of the latter; for it was impossible to surpass, or even
to retain, in a ﬁnished work, the fervent energy displayed in
every touch or rather scratch of the pen in this admirable
sketch.”
E. Seated nude ﬁgure facing forward, his right leg bent
up, his left stretched down.

CATALOGUE 11
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
103
This seems to have been drawn in preparation for an ignudo,
but it was not used in a recognisably connected form on the
vault. It does, however, possess the energy of the later ignudi. It
appears to have been drawn after H.
F. Seated ﬁgure seen frontally, turning round to his left.
This might have been drawn in preparation for an ignudo, but it
could also be a ﬁrst idea for the ﬁgure at the left of the Phares-
Esron-Aram studied on a larger scale, and probably from life, on
Cat. 16 recto.
G. A seated ﬁgure in right proﬁle with the left arm
stretched out
This is presumably a revision of C.
H. God the Father Separating Light from Darkness, upper
torso.
I. God the Father separating Light from Darkness, upper
torso, more lightly sketched.
It seems probable that the three sketches for God the Father Sep-
arating Light from Darkness were made before the other drawings
on this page.
Verso
A. A reclining nude ﬁgure, in foreshortening, turned to
right and reaching upwards and backwards, in pen.
The purpose of this ﬁgure is uncertain. Seen in strong foreshort-
ening and in a complex, sensuous, pose, it is immediately remi-
niscent of Eve in the Fall. However, the Fall was part of the ﬁrst
campaign, and no other sketch in this series of drawings ante-
dates the second campaign, so this ﬁgure presumably reprises
rather than prepares the Eve. Robinson and others thought of
it either as a sketch for the God the Father Separating Light from
Darkness or as God the Father Moving Above the Waters, but nei-
ther view appears tenable to the compiler. The pose also seems
improbable for an Ancestor or for a Sibyl – although it is identi-
ﬁed by Hirst as a sketch for Libica – and, if it must be connected
with an executed fresco, it is more likely to be for one of the
stricken in the Brazen Serpent, which does contain female ﬁgures
in complex poses.
B. Perhaps a modiﬁcation of the head position of D,
in pen.
C. (Located immediately below B.) Detail of the head
and upper arm of A, in pen.
D. Seated ﬁgure seen frontally, with legs spread, leaning
backwards to his right, in pen.
This is clearly an idea for Ionas, the ﬁgure in the vault brought
into closest proximity with God the Father in the God the Father
Separating Light from Darkness.
E. Seated ﬁgure in right proﬁle, left leg raised and bent
at the knee and left arm brought across chest, in pen.
This ﬁgure is probably a ﬁrst idea for an ignudo, which was
not pursued further on the vault. It anticipates, in reverse, the
reclining youth in the Dream of Human Life, datable c. 1530. It
is interpreted by Winner, 1994, as a ﬁrst idea for Ionas, but the
compiler does not ﬁnd this convincing.
F. Seated ﬁgure seen from the front, leaning to his left
with head resting on his hands, in black chalk.
This large sketch, which was no doubt the ﬁrst to be made on
this side of the sheet, clearly prepares the Ancestor at the left of
the Phares-Esron-Aram lunette, the left-hand lunette on the altar
wall, destroyed in the 1530s to make way for the Last Judgement
and known from engravings. It was developed in reverse from
the sketch on Cat. 13 verso D, which was further developed, in
the same direction, on Cat. 15 recto A.
G. A nude ﬁgure in proﬁle to left, his right leg raised and
bent at the knee, and his back turned inwards, in pen.
This ﬁgure, which is clearly standing rather than seated, may
nevertheless be a preliminary idea for the ignudo to the right
above Libica. This sketch or, more likely, a drawing devel-
oped from it, seems to have inspired, in reverse, a draw-
ing by Bandinelli in the British Museum (1946-7-13-268
recto/Ward, 1988, no. 35 recto; red chalk 404×277 mm).
Although placed by Ward in the 1540s, the compiler is inclined
to think that Bandinelli’s sketch was made shortly after the
time of his closest association with Michelangelo, in the
1520s.
H. (Located to the right of G.) A light sketch of the upper
part of G, in pen.
I. (Located immediately below and to the right of G.) A
light sketch of the upper part of G, in pen.
J. A seated nude ﬁgure in proﬁle to the right, turned
outwards toward the viewer, his right leg folded over his
left knee.
This may be a preliminary idea for the ignudo to the right above
Hieremias. Alternatively, it may prepare an Ancestor.
K. Standing ﬁgure seen frontally (lightly outlined); this
may have been intended for a ﬁgure in the Haman pen-
dentive.
Copies
The recto was etched in facsimile in Ottley, 1808–23,
p. 30, 148×153 mm. This etching is undated and un-
signed.
References
Ottley, 1808–23, pp. 29–30 (Recto etched in facsimile.
“[T]hree sketches for the outline representation of the
Almighty disentangling Chaos, and two design for the
admired ﬁgure of the female winding thread [one of them
as executed in the fresco] which is painted in the com-
partment under . . . Daniel.”). Woodburn, 1836b, included
in no. 50. Fisher, 1852, p. 1, pl. 8, left (Recto.); pl. 9,
right (Verso.). Fisher, 1865, p. 16, I, pl. 8, left (Recto.);
pl. 9, right (Verso.). Robinson, 1870, no. 24.3 (Michel
Angelo. Recto: same identiﬁcations as Ottley: [D, H, I]
for “the Almighty disentangling chaos.” [C] for the Jesse
lunette. Verso: larger sketch [F] for ﬁgure now destroyed
painted under Ionas; two of the others [D and E?] “seem
to be very rudimentary sketches for . . . Ionas” [A] “in all

104
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 11
probability . . . for the foreshortened ﬂying ﬁgure of the
Almighty dividing light from darkness.”). Fisher, 1872, I,
p. 14, pl. 8, left (Recto.); pl. 9, right (Verso.) (As 1852.).
Springer, 1878, p. 116, pp. 501–2 (“Das Wunderbarste
d¨urfte die Darstellung Gott Vaters, der das Licht von
der Finstererniss scheidet sein. Trotz aller Kleinheit der
Verh¨altnisse erkennt man die majest¨atische Kraft Jehovas,
der wie in Sturme das Chaos durchsaut.” Reproduction
of recto on p. 502.). Fisher, 1879, XVI.3/15 left (Recto);
XVI.3a/16 right (Verso.). Springer, 1883, I, pp. 159–60
(As 1878. Reproduction of recto on p. 159.). Justi, 1900,
p. 158 (Sketches for Ionas and God the Father Separat-
ing Light from Darkness.). Steinmann, 1905, II, p. 604,
no. 62A, left (Recto: studies for God the Father Separat-
ing Light from Darkness and for the Spinner at the left
of the Iesse lunette.); no. 62B, right (Verso: studies for
God the Father, Ionas, and Jacob in lost Phares-Esron-
Aram lunette.). Thode, 1908, I, p. 242 (Michelangelo.
Recto: sketches for the God the Father Separating Light
from Darkness “f¨ur ein Hochbild, nicht f¨ur ein Breitbild”;
[C and G] for woman with spindle in Iesse lunette. Verso:
[A] a small sketch perhaps for the Spirit Moving over the
Waters; [D and ?E] for Ionas; [F] for sleeping man in Phares-
Esron-Aram lunette, in reverse from [Cat. 15 recto D].). K.
Frey, 1909–11, no. 152.7 (Verso [now recto]: inscription
by Michelangelo. [D, H, I] after God the Father Separat-
ing Light from Darkness, Thode’s interpretation rejected;
[C and G] adapted from woman in Jesse lunette); no.
151.4 (Recto [now verso]: [F] from ﬁgure in Phares-
Esron-Aram lunette. Motif of [A] recalls Cascina cartoon,
no connection with the God the Father Separating Light
from Darkness; [D] relates to Ionas but [E] does not; ﬁgures
resemble motifs of the slaves and the ignudi, but no direct
links.). Thode, 1913, no. 410 (Verso: [now recto]: [D, H,
I] for the God the Father Separating Light from Darkness; it
is uncertain whether the ﬁgure should be interpreted as
horizontal or vertical. [C and G] for woman with spin-
del in Iesse lunette. Recto [now verso]: [F] for sleeping
ﬁgure in Phares-Esron-Aram lunette; [A] a link with God
the Father doubtful; [D] link with Ionas doubtful; [E] not
for Ionas; [G] perhaps for an ignudo; [H] for a lunette
ﬁgure or an ignudo.). Delacre, 1938, p. 123 (Michelan-
gelo. Verso: [E] “est pour Jonas. Il serait peut-ˆetre dif-
ﬁcile de nous d´esigner un artiste qui, d’un oeuvre qui
ne serait pas la sienne, puisse donner un croquis aussi
nerveux, aussi personnel et aussi diff´erent.”). Parker, 1956,
no. 301 (Recto: [C and G] correspond with woman on
right of Iesse lunette. [D, H, I] variants of God the Father
Separating Light from Darkness. Verso: [F] in reverse for
ﬁgure on left of Phares-Esron-Aram lunette. [D, E] per-
haps for Ionas; [A] perhaps linked to Separating.). Dussler,
1959, no. 606 (Recto: link with God the Father Separat-
ing Light from Darkness. Verso: links with Phares-Esron-
Aram lunette, Separating and Ionas.). Berenson, 1961,
no. 1702c (School of Michelangelo. Recto: [D, H, I] vari-
ants of the God the Father Separating Light from Darkness;
[C, G] correspond to woman on right of Iesse-Salmon
lunette. Verso: [F] for ﬁgure at left of Phares-Esron-Aram
lunette; four? sketches perhaps for Ionas; upper left three
weak sketches perhaps for God the Father Separating Light
from Darkness.). Hartt, 1971, p. 87 (Recto: mainly by
Falconi; two faint sketches by Michelangelo.); no. 114
(Verso: “Black chalk sketch for Phares-Esron-Aram lunette;
nudes in ink probably by Falconi.”). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 26 (Recto: inscription not in Michelangelo’s
hand.). Hartt, 1975, no. 110A (Recto now accepted.).
De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 168 (Recto: [D, H, I]
for the God the Father Separating Light from Darkness; [C]
certainly, [G] probably for woman at right of Iesse-David-
Salmon lunette; [F] probably for man at left of Iesse-David-
Salmon lunette. Verso: [A] probably for the God the Father
Separating Light from Darkness; [D, E] probably for Ionas,
also sketched on [Cat. 13 recto, A]; [G] perhaps point
of departure for nude to right above Libica; [H] perhaps
for ignudo left above Hieremias; [F] for ﬁgure in Phares-
Esron-Aram lunette, studied again in [Cats. 13 verso D
and 15 recto A].). Hirst, 1986a, p. 214 (Recto: [D, H, I]
for the God the Father Separating Light from Darkness: in
two of them God the Father is drawn vertically and the
hatching lines show that Michelangelo did not turn the
page: “the artist experimented with a ﬁgure drawn along
the axis of the chapel before establishing the ﬁnal lateral
design drawn at the upper right.” Verso: [E] developed
from [D] on [Cat. 13 verso] and [A] on [Cat. 15 recto].
Two studies for ignudi, one to the right of Libica ﬂanking
the ﬁrst Creation scene; a sketch for Ionas [D], devel-
oped further on [Cat. 13 recto A]; the study upper left
for Libica.). Hirst, 1988, p. 37 (Recto: [D] “an astonish-
ingly complete little draft for the mural scene as painted;
even the framing lines are drawn in.”). Mancinelli, 1992,
p. 45 (Recto: sketches for God the Father and Spinning
Woman in lunette immediately below.). Hirst, 1990, no. 4
(Recto: three sketches for old woman spinning thread
on the right of the Iesse-Salmon lunette; two studies for
the ignudo at the right above Hieremias; three studies for
God the Father. Direction of lower one suggests that
Michelangelo thought of arranging the ﬁgure longitudi-
nally. Sheet offers proof that all parts of the decoration
conceived simultaneously.). Hirst, 1992, p. 11 (Recto:
“the artist seems to have adopted this kind of small-scale
pensiero mostly for single-ﬁgure inventions.”). Winner,
1994, p. 196 (Verso: E a ﬁrst idea for Ionas; D shows Ionas

CATALOGUES 11–12
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
105
closer to ﬁnal form, but with the left leg still raised above
the right. The study F was made for a ﬁgure intended to
be seen in relation to Ionas.).
CATALOGUE 12
Recto: Sketches for Parts of the Sistine Ceiling and the
Lunettes
Verso: Sketches for Parts of the Sistine Ceiling and the
Lunettes
1846.48; R.24. 4; P.II 302; Corpus 169
Dimensions: 140×142 mm; a strip some 4 mm wide
made up at the left edge
Medium
Pen and ink.
Condition
A narrow additional strip is adhered along the length
of the left edge, with its left edge cut. There are three
pressed-out vertical folds with associated ingrained dirt;
there is skinning, a small hole, and edge abrasion. Uneven
discolouration, local staining, and embedded dirt are vis-
ible, with a show-through of ink.
Description/Discussion
Recto
A. The torso of a seated man in right proﬁle, leaning
forward, his head turned inwards supported on his hand
upon his knee.
Another study for the right-hand ﬁgure in the Roboam-Abias
lunette; developed from 9 recto B.
B. The legs of a seated man, in right proﬁle.
A study for the legs of the right-hand ﬁgure in Salmon-Booz-
Obeth lunette, developed from Cat. 10 recto D.

106
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 12
C. A right foot.
The right foot of B, re-studied.
D. A curved line rising from a horizontal.
Perhaps the indication of a window.
With the top edge as base
E. A seated man facing half left, his right leg raised and
bent at the knee, and writing.
Perhaps a preliminary idea for the left-hand ﬁgure in the Asa-
Iosaphat-Ioram lunette. It may be that Michelangelo inverted
the page in order to remind himself that this lunette was on the
opposite side of the vault from the Roboam-Abias lunette. This
ﬁgure was developed further on Cat. 17.
Verso
A. A seated ﬁgure in right proﬁle, resting against the
curve of the window, half turned inwards, looking at
something on his crossed legs.
Presumably an idea for an Ancestor that was not pursued.
B. A seated ﬁgure in right proﬁle bending forward.
Perhaps Michelangelo’s ﬁrst idea for the right-hand ﬁgure in
the Roboam-Abias lunette; developed further in Cat. 9 recto B
and in A on the recto of the present sheet.
C. A seated ﬁgure in right proﬁle, resting against the
curve of the window, the right leg drawn back.
Perhaps a sketch for the right-hand ﬁgure in the Salmon-Booz-
Obeth lunette.
D. A standing ﬁgure in left proﬁle, his right knee raised
on a block, reading a sheet of paper, facing into the curve
of the window.
Perhaps a preliminary idea, employed in reverse, for the standing
ﬁgure at the left facing inwards in the Naason lunette.
References
Ottley, 1808–23, p. 29. Woodburn, 1836b, included in
no. 50. Fisher, 1852, p. 1, pl. 8, right (Recto.); pl. 9,
left (Verso.). Fisher, 1865, p. 16, I, pl. 8, right (Recto.);
pl. 9, left (Verso.). Robinson, 1870, no. 24.4 (Michel

CATALOGUES 12–13
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
107
Angelo. Recto: [A] sketches for “the back and upper
part of right-hand ﬁgure in Roboam-Abias lunette . . . [B]
the legs of . . . Boaz [and] . . . [E] perhaps for King Joram.”
Verso: sketches for Boaz, Joram, and the Woman with a
winding-reel.). Fisher, 1872, I, p. 14, pl. 8, right (Recto);
pl. 9, left (Verso) (As 1852.). Fisher, 1879, XVI.4/15 right
(Recto); XVI.4a/16 left (Verso). Steinmann, 1905, II,
p. 604, no. 62A, right (Recto: sketches for the sleep-
ing man at the right of the Roboam lunette); no. 62B,
left (Verso: ﬂeeting sketches for lunettes.). Thode, 1908,
I, p. 266 (Michelangelo. Recto: [A] for sleeping man
in Roboam lunette; [B, C] for man with staff in Salmon
lunette; [E] two? small studies for writing man in Asa
lunette; other sketches cannot be connected with exist-
ing frescoes.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 152.8 (Verso [now
recto]: [A] related to Roboam lunette; [B, C] to Salmon;
[E] possibly to writing ﬁgure in Asa-Joram lunette.); no.
151.3 (Recto [now verso]: poorly drawn and unrelated to
frescoes.). Thode, 1913, no. 411 (Verso [now recto]: [A] as
1908; [B, C] as 1908; [E] for man in Asa lunette.). Parker,
1956, no. 302 (Recto: [A] for man on right of Roboam; [B,
C] for man at right of Salmon-Booz lunette; [E] resembles
man on left of Asa. Verso: no direct connections.). Dus-
sler, 1959, no. 607 (Recto: connection with Asa lunette.
Verso: description; unconnected.). Berenson, 1961, no.
1702d (School of Michelangelo. Recto: [A] for sleeping
man in Roboam-Abias lunette; [B] legs of man at right of
Salmon-Booz lunette; [E] for man at left in Asa-Josaphat
lunette. Verso: sketches for lunettes.). Hartt, 1971, no.
123 (Recto: for arm of Abiah and legs of Boaz; tiny
sketch for Josaphat [upside down].); no. 110 (Verso: sketch
for Boaz [lower centre]; probable sketches for Bathsheba
[upper left] and destroyed Jacob [lower centre].). Gere and
Turner, 1975, no. 27 (Recto). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I,
no. 169 (Recto: [A] for man at right of Roboam-Abias
lunette, previously sketched on [Cats. 9 recto B, 10 verso
A, D]; [B, C] for ﬁgure at right of Salmon-Booz lunette; [E,
inverted] perhaps for ﬁgure at right of Asa-Iosaphat-Ioram
lunette. Verso: [A] perhaps for woman at right of David-
Salmon lunette; [B] perhaps an embryonic sketch for man
at right of Roboam-Abias lunette; [C] taken up in reverse
from left-hand ﬁgure in Achim-Eliud lunette; [D] for a
Prophet or Ancestor? some relation to [Cat. 9 recto C].).
Hirst, 1988, p. 36 (Recto: [A] studied from life takes up
[Cat. 10 verso A, D, Cat. 13 verso D, Cat. 15 recto A].).
CATALOGUE 13
Recto: Sketches for Parts of the Sistine Ceiling and
Lunettes
Verso: Sketches for Parts of the Sistine Ceiling and
Lunettes
1846.49; R.25.1; P.II 303; Corpus 170
Dimensions: 138×143 mm
Medium
Pen and ink.
Condition
There is a major triangular pulp inﬁll, numerous skinned
patches with toned inﬁlls, and a minor torn hole. There
is widespread uneven discolouration and major staining.
There is skinning, a vertical score line, a major inherent
diagonal crease, and adhesive and paper remnants on the
edges. The medium is blurred.
Description/Discussion
Recto
A. A seated ﬁgure seen frontally and upright, apparently
within a pendentive, the legs spread wide, the right arm
raised across the torso and the head bent to the left,
accompanied by two putti.
An early idea for Ionas, perhaps antedating Cat. 11 verso D,
which is inclined to the viewer’s left, as in the fresco.
B. (Located immediately above and to the right of A.)
Indecipherable.
C. (Located immediately to the right of B.) This sketch
is difﬁcult to interpret, but it seems to show the lower
torso and legs of a ﬁgure in a seated pose. It is tempting
to think that it is a variant of A, but if so, it would have to
precede it, and the layout of the page does not support
this. It could be a sketch for an ignudo, but the pose is less
complex than those of the ignudi in the last two bays of
the ceiling, and it is more likely to have been made for
an Ancestor, not developed further.
D. A seated ﬁgure in left proﬁle, apparently reclining
against a shallow curved form.
This seems to be for an Ancestor, but it was not pursued.
E. (Located in the upper centre of the sheet.) A seated
woman, her legs angled to her right, facing forward, with
a partly visible child, perhaps developed further on 14
verso A.
F. (Drawn with the top of the sheet as the base.) A stand-
ing nude ﬁgure in left proﬁle, his left leg extended, his
right knee raised, his head supported in his right hand,
looking outwards or forward?.
This is perhaps a ﬁrst idea for the ignudo right above Libica; it is
drawn over G.
G. An inscription Dagli bere (Da gli bere) in Michelan-
gelo’s hand.
This no doubt refers to the action of E.

108
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 13
H. An elderly man seated in left proﬁle within a lunette,
his legs crossed, a bundle and a wide-brimmed hat slung
over his back, his right forearm tried in two positions,
bent across his lap and supporting his head.
Hirst 1986a suggests that this ﬁgure was further developed in
Cat. 10 recto D, which is in reverse; although there are similar-
ities between the ﬁgures, a direct linking seems doubtful to the
compiler.
I. A partly draped seated man seen from the front, turning
round to his right and reaching upwards.
This is perhaps a ﬁrst idea, in reverse, for the ﬁgure at the
left-hand side of the destroyed Abraam-Isaac-Iacob-Iudas lunette,
developed further, reversed and stiffened in Cat. 16 recto.
A very similar pose, reversed, was employed by Raphael
for the Adam in the Fall of the vault of the Stanza della
Segnatura.
J. A seated woman in left proﬁle, bending down towards
the base of a winding spool?, accompanied by an appar-
ently mature man and two children.
The curve to the right is the window. This drawing seems to
have been the inspiration for the woman on the right-hand
side of the Iesse-David-Salmon lunette. However, her pose is not
identical, and there she only works a spindle and is unaccom-
panied by children. Michelangelo may have felt that the pose
sketched here was too close to that in Cat. 10 verso C to be
pursued.
Verso
A. A seated ﬁgure seen frontally, his/her arms folded
across the torso, looking down to his/her right; the object
at the left side may be a cradle.
Aspects of the pose resemble that of the left-hand ﬁgure in the
Aminadab lunette, but there is no close correspondence, and the
ﬁgure is probably female. Perhaps pursued in Cat. 16 verso B.
B. A reclining ﬁgure seen from half left, with his/her left
knee raised and right leg hanging down, resting on the
left arm and looking out to his/her left.
It is conjectural for what purpose this ﬁgure was intended: The
obvious answer would be that it was drawn for one of the bronze
nudes in the interstices of the architecture, but this pose was not
used in any of them: It was recalled over a decade later in the
Dawn in the New Sacristy.

CATALOGUE 13
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
109
C. A seated ﬁgure in left proﬁle, tried in two positions:
the ﬁrst leaning back; the second upright and stiff.
The curved line above this ﬁgure to the right would suggest that
Michelangelo considered momentarily setting a ﬁgure against
the prevailing outward facing poses of the ancestors.
D. A seated nude male ﬁgure seen frontally, leaning to his
right against the curve of a window.
A ﬁrst idea for the sleeping ﬁgure on the left of the Phares-Esron-
Aram lunette, taken further in reverse on Cat. 11 verso F and
reversed again on Cat. 15 recto A to the original pose as here,
and as ﬁnally executed.
E. A standing nude ﬁgure in right proﬁle with legs crossed
at the calves, perhaps holding a cup, leaning against the
upper curve of the window.
Perhaps a ﬁrst idea for the female ﬁgure at the left of the
Naason lunette; developed further in a drawing in Florence
(CB24F/B 242/Corpus 160; black chalk, 150×122 mm; this
sheet, although similar in size to those of the present sketch-
book, did not form part of it; as noted by Hirst, 1986a, p. 216,
the paper texture and chain-lines differ) in which, however,
the ﬁgure is male. Another drawing in Florence (CB39F/B
234/Corpus 303; pen and ink over black chalk, 278×197 mm),
which represents a standing female ﬁgure in right proﬁle bend-
ing forward, was erroneously connected with this fresco by the
compiler, but it was no doubt made somewhat earlier for an
unidentiﬁed project and in part reprised in the Naason ﬁgure.
F. A lighter sketch of E.
Copy
F on the recto was copied in pen c. 1580 by Andrea Com-
modi on Ufﬁzi 18654F recto.
References
Ottley, 1808–23, p. 29. Woodburn, 1836b, included in
no. 2. Fisher, 1852, p. 1, pl. 2, left (Recto); pl. 3,
right (Verso). Fisher, 1865, p. 16, I, pl. 2, left (Recto);
pl. 3, right (Verso). Robinson, 1870, no. 25.1 (Michel
Angelo. Recto: only [A] a sketch for Ionas recognis-
able. Verso: one sketch [A] “seems to correspond with

110
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 13–14
Aminadab.”). Fisher, 1872, p. 13, pl. 2, left (Recto); pl.
3, right (Verso) (As 1852.). Fisher, 1879, XVII.1/17 left
(Recto); XVII.2a/18 right (Verso). Steinmann, 1905, II,
no. 59A, left (Recto: sketches for the Spinner and the
Old Man in the Salmon lunette.); no. 59B, right (Verso:
sketches for lunettes including the sleeping Jacob for the
lost Phares-Esron-Aram). Thode, 1908, I, pp. 263, 267,
269, 270, 271 (Michelangelo. Recto: J for woman with
spindle in Iesse lunette. Verso: [A] for ﬁgure in Aminadab
lunette; [B]? for the ignudo left above Hieremias, in reverse;
[D] for sleeping man in Phares-Esron-Aram lunette. The
remainder cannot securely be connected with existing
frescoes.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 153.9 (Recto: inscrip-
tion autograph; ﬁgures not speciﬁcally related to frescoes;
[A] not related to Ionas.); no. 154.14 (Verso: [A] related
to Aminadab; [D] related to Phares-Esron-Aram lunette.).
Thode, 1913, no. 412 (Recto: as 1908. Verso: as 1908.).
De Tolnay, 1945, p. 214, under no. 28a, ﬁg. 249 (Recto:
“sketches . . . of a better quality but also seem to be only
copies after the lunettes and not studies for them.”).
Parker, 1956, no. 303 (Recto: [A] reminiscent of Ionas;
[J] similar to woman on right of Iesse; [H] reminiscent
in reverse to man on right of Jesse. Dagli bere perhaps
relates to [E]. Verso: [D] for Phares-Esron-Aram; [A] sim-
ilar to ﬁgure on left of Aminadab; [B] vaguely compa-
rable to ignudo left above Hieremias.). Dussler, 1959, no.
608 (Recto: description; no relations noted. Dagli bere
must relate to sketch [E]. Verso: description; no relations
noted.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1703a (School of Michelan-
gelo. Recto: lunette ﬁgures. Verso: [D] the sleeping ﬁgure
in the Phares-Esron-Aram lunette.). Hartt, 1971, no. 120
(Recto: sketches of woman nursing, possibly for Ruth
[centre] “Michelangelo’s comment, Dagli bere [give him
to drink] recalls his ambivalent concern with the activ-
ity of nursing”; for Bathsheba, in reverse [lower centre]
and, possibly, for Boaz, in reverse [centre right].); no. 113
(Verso: nude related to ignudo left above Hieremias; also
for ﬁgure in Phares-Esron-Aram and wife of Naason.). Gere
and Turner, 1975, no. 28 (Recto; inscription in Michelan-
gelo’s hand.). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 170 (Recto:
[A] and perhaps [C] for Ionas; [E] perhaps for woman in
Manasses-Amon lunette, as is perhaps [D]; [F] perhaps for a
ﬁgure in Iosaphat-Ioram lunette; [G] not taken further but
recalled in the Penseroso of the New Sacristy; [I] sketch
in reverse for the left-hand ﬁgure in Abraham-Isaac-Iacob-
Iudas lunette, taken further in [Cat. 16 recto A]; [J] motif
of spindle appears on right in the David-Salomon lunette,
but the present group of ﬁgures is not retained. Verso:
[A] for Aminadab; [B] Parker’s linking perhaps correct,
but could also be for a bronze nude, such as that above
Ezechias; the pose anticipates the River Gods planned
for the New Sacristy; [C] proportions recall those of the
left-hand ﬁgure in the Azor-Sadoch lunette, but the pose
differs; [D] sketch for sleeping ﬁgure in Phares-Esron-Aram
lunette.). Hirst, 1986a, p. 215 (Verso: [D] light sketch for
sleeping ﬁgure in Phares-Esron-Aram lunette, taken up in
[Cat. 15 recto A] and, in the ﬁnal direction, in [Cat. 11
verso F]; [F], perhaps related to woman on right of Azor-
Sadoch lunette but abandoned [F] perhaps a sketch for [E],
as suggested by G. Bonsanti.). Hirst, 1988, p. 36 (Verso: [E,
F] for woman with mirror in Naason lunette; taken fur-
ther in [Cat. 15 verso].). Hirst, 1988–9a, no. 12 (Verso: [B]
“anticipates design of Medici chapel allegories. Only the
three lower sketches relate unmistakably to ﬁgures carried
out.” [D] for Phares-Esron-Aram lunette; [E, F] as 1988.).
Winner, 1994, p. 196 (Recto: A for Ionas, following from
Cat. 11 verso D; head shown in three positions. Verso:
D another study for the sleeping Ancestor, respecting the
ﬁnal direction of the fresco.).
CATALOGUE 14
Recto: An Old Man
Verso: Sketches for Parts of the Sistine Ceiling and the
Lunettes
1846.50; R.25. 2; P.II 304; Corpus 171
Dimensions: 135×148 mm. This sheet appears to have
been made up at the bottom.
Medium
Recto: Soft black chalk.
Verso: Pen and ink and black chalk (rather than lead-point
as Parker thought); traces of offsetting in black chalk.
Condition
There is a major darker-toned inﬁll, several smaller inﬁlls,
widespread skinning and fractures, a number of small
holes and punctures, and ink burn-through. The sheet
displays uneven discolouration, paper remnants, nicks
with ingrained dirt, minor tears and skinning, particu-
larly around the edges, and general foxing.
Description/Discussion
Recto
An old man in right proﬁle, bent forward, supporting
himelf on a stick, accompanied by a dog who barks at a
ﬁgure facing him who seems to be offering him some-
thing.

CATALOGUE 14
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
111
This small scene does not occur on the Sistine ceil-
ing, but it is related in broad terms to the ﬁgure on
the right of the Salmon-Booz-Obeth lunette. There is a
curved line running across the sheet parallel to the ﬁg-
ure’s bent back, which reinforces the connection with a
lunette. Michelangelo seems to have recalled the form of
the bent old man in the early 1520s in a sketch of an elderly
man carrying an infant on his shoulders (Florence, Ufﬁzi,
621E recto/B131/Corpus 70; black chalk and pen and ink,
238×214 mm; the other drawing on this sheet, of a putto
urinating into a cup, was probably prepared for the Baccha-
nal commissioned from Michelangelo by Alfonso d’Este
of Ferrara but never executed; it inspired a ﬁgure in the
Infant Bacchanal at Windsor [see Cat. 66] drawn in 1533).
Michelangelo adapted the recto again in 1560–1 for the re-
verse of the portrait medal struck of him by Leone Leoni.
Verso
A. A seated woman in left proﬁle in two slightly varied
positions, notably in the head and right leg, looking at a
child lying across her lap, in pen; perhaps a more devel-
oped version of Cat. 13 verso E.
It has been suggested that this sketch is a ﬁrst idea for the woman
on the right of the Ezechias-Manasses-Amon lunette, which, if
correct, would imply that this lunette was executed during the
second campaign, but this view is rejected by Hirst 1986a, no
doubt correctly.
B. A seated or standing ﬁgure turned half right, his right
leg raised and bent at the knee, his left arm bent forward
across his chest, looking forward, in pen.
This virile, dramatic ﬁgure does not seem a likely preparation
for one of the Ancestors, but it may be an early unused idea for
one of the ignudi.
C. A lighter sketch, probably related to B, with the ﬁg-
ure’s right leg lowered, in black chalk.
D. A seated ﬁgure, seen frontally, reading a book opened
across his chest, in pen.
This is another version of the ﬁgure sketched on Cat. 9 verso
G; these sketches presumably prepare a Prophet.
E. A seated ﬁgure in right proﬁle, his right leg bent over
his left knee, his ankle held by his right hand, looking out

112
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 14
to his right; the right leg also tried in a kneeling pose, in
pen.
This is probably a ﬁrst idea for an ignudo; it bears some
relation to that to the left above Hieremias.
F. Indecipherable offset traces from a black chalk drawing.
Copy
B on the verso was copied in pen c. 1580 by Andrea
Commodi on Ufﬁzi 18654F recto.
References
Ottley, 1808–23, p. 29. Woodburn, 1836b, included in
no. 2. Fisher, 1852, p. 1, pl. 2, right (Recto); pl. 3, left
(Verso). Fisher, 1865, p. 16, I, pl. 2, right (Recto); pl. 3,
left (Verso). Robinson, 1870, no. 25.2 (Michel Angelo.
Recto: “has considerable resemblance to the well-known
ﬁgure, on the reverse of the medal of Michel Angelo
in his eighty-eighth year, executed by Leone Leoni of
Arezzo, upwards of ﬁfty years after the probable date of
the present drawing.” Verso: [A] “apparently . . . for the
lunette ﬁgure on the right side, beneath . . . Cumaea.”).
Fisher, 1872, I, p. 13, pl. 2, right (Recto); pl. 3, left
(Verso) (As 1852.). Fisher, 1879, XVII.2/17 right (Recto);
XVII.2a/18 left (Verso). Steinmann, 1905, II, pp. 450,
604, no. 59A, right (Recto: reading man perhaps a ﬁrst
idea of Naason, later switched to proﬁle view; the old man
in the Salmon lunette, standing.); no. 59B, left (Sketches
for lunettes including sleeping Jacob from lost Phares-
Esron-Aram lunette.). Thode, 1908, I, pp. 266, 267, 271
(Michelangelo. Verso: [A] woman with child on her knee
for Ezechias lunette; [B] the woman with the mirror for
the Naason lunette, in reverse; other sketches cannot be
precisely related to frescoes.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 153.10
(Recto: “f¨ur Michelagniolo viel zu swach gezeichnet.”);
no. 154.13 (Verso: [A] related to Ezechias lunette; if [B]
is related to woman in Naason lunette, it is in reverse.).
Thode, 1913, no. 413 (Michelangelo. Recto: old beggar;
verso: as 1908.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1703, note (Recto
corresponds in design to the reverse of Leoni’s medal of
1561. Is “this sketch . . . the copy of a drawing from his

CATALOGUES 14–15
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
113
earlier years that Michelangelo had kept for 40 years and
then gave to Leone?.”). Parker, 1956, no. 304 (Recto: an
anomaly; the only drawing “unconnected with . . . motifs
occurring in the Sistine ceiling.” Any link with the reverse
of Leoni’s medal “may safely be dismissed.” Verso: [A]
resembles ﬁgure on left of Ezechias lunette; [D] similar to
Cat. 10 verso [C].). Dussler, 1959, no. 609 (Recto: link
with reverse of Leone’s Portrait medal rejected. Verso:
description; no links noted.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1703b
(School of Michelangelo. Recto: as 1938. Verso: [A]
resembles woman in Ezechias-Manasses lunette.). Hartt,
1971, no. 118 (Verso: for Manasses-Amon lunette [upper
left]; possibly for Naason [lower right] “the same read-
ing ﬁgure as in no. 117” [Cat. 9].); p. 390 (Recto:
rejected.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 29 (Recto: link
with the reverse of Leone’s medal; exceptionally not con-
nected obviously with the ceiling; but the wife of Naason
is shown standing, with her back to the curve of the
lunette.). Hartt, 1975, no. 123A (Recto accepted.). De
Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 171 (Recto: contrast of age
and youth; curve of back perhaps employed in Salmon-
Booz-Obeth lunette; recalled in Michelangelo’s design for
the reverse of Leone Leoni’s portrait medal. Verso: [A]
resembles woman in Ezechias-Manasses lunette. [B] per-
haps a ﬁrst idea for the ﬁgure at right of Phares-Esron-
Aram lunette. [D]: sketch for a Prophet; three other
versions on [Cat. 9 verso]. [E]: ﬁrst position of legs
found in right-hand ﬁgure in Eleazar-Matham lunette,
but the torso and right arm are different.). Hirst, 1986a,
p. 216 (Recto: relation to Salmon-Booz-Obeth lunette can
“scarcely be coincidental”; agrees with Ottley that it was
sketched from life.); pp. 212–13 (Verso: linking of [A]
with Ezechias . . . lunette “unconvincing, for the draw-
ing shows a ﬁgure turned towards us, not away in proﬁl
perdu, the action of the left arm is different and pentimenti
in the drawing have been misinterpreted as the sleeping
child. . . . This little sketch, in fact, was never employed in
the painted programme.”). Hirst, 1988, pp. 10, 36 (Recto:
“a piece of observation committed to paper in the street.
But even this brief, Rembrandt-like vignette of outdoor
life seems to have been made with the purpose of tran-
scribing it into a monumental ﬁgure.”).
CATALOGUE 15
Recto: Sketches for Parts of the Sistine Ceiling and the
Lunettes
Verso: Sketches for Parts of the Sistine Ceiling and the
Lunettes
1846.51; R.25.3; P.II 305; Corpus 172
Dimensions: 135×148 mm
Medium
Recto: Soft black chalk and pen and ink.
Verso: Soft black chalk.
Condition
There are minor repairs, an unevenly discoloured margin,
small nicks, ingrained dirt, skinning, and ﬁbrous accre-
tions around the edges. There is a small indent, a skinned
hole, a horizontal scratch across the centre, and two punc-
tures. The sheet displays uneven discolouration, extensive
foxing, and local staining.
Description/Discussion
Recto
A. A seated man, facing forward, his legs drawn together
at the ankles, leaning sideways to his right, in black chalk.
A is a project for the Phares-Esron-Aram lunette, developed from
Cat. 13 verso D and, in reverse, from Cat. 11 verso F.
B. (Located against the right edge of the sheet.) Appar-
ently drawn with the left edge as the base, a lightly
sketched ﬁgure probably for the God the Father Separating
Light from Darkness, in pen.
C. Illegible scribble in pen.
D. A ﬁgure in a contorted pose, in pen.
Perhaps a ﬁrst idea for a ﬁgure in the Brazen Serpent.
Verso
A standing draped female ﬁgure in right proﬁle leaning
forward into the lunette with a child facing her reclining
on the curve of the window. No doubt an idea for the
Naason lunette. A faint offset of this ﬁgure is on Cat. 16
verso C.
References
Ottley, 1808–23, p. 29. Woodburn, 1836b, included in
no. 2. Fisher, 1852, p. 1, pl. 4, left (Recto); pl. 5, right
(Verso). Fisher, 1865, p. 16, I, pl. 4, left (Recto); pl. 5,
right (Verso). Robinson, 1870, no. 25.3 (Michel Angelo.
Recto: [A] “study for destroyed lunette ﬁgure.” Verso:
“This ﬁgure, although greatly changed in the working
out, is evidently one of those ultimately executed in the
lunette under the triangular space containing the Brazen
Serpents.”). Fisher, 1872, I, p. 14, pl. 4, left (Recto);
pl. 5, right (Verso) (As 1852.). Fisher, 1879, XVII.3/19
left (Recto); XVII.3a/20 right (Verso). Steinmann, 1905,
II, pp. 455, 603, no. 60A, left (Recto: sketch for sleeping
Jacob in lost Phares-Esron-Aram lunette.); no. 60B, right

114
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 15
(Verso: study of standing woman with two children, for
left of Naason lunette.). Thode, 1908, I, p. 266 (Michelan-
gelo. Recto: [A] for Phares-Esron-Aram lunette. Verso:
woman with two children linked with Naason lunette.).
K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 153.11 (Recto: [A] related to sleeper
in Phares-Esron-Aram lunette.); no. 154.16 (Verso: similari-
ties with woman in Naason lunette.). Thode, 1913, no. 414
(As 1908.). Parker, 1956, no. 305 (Recto: [A] for Phares-
Esron-Aram lunette. Verso: woman resembles ﬁgure on
left of Naason lunette, but children there are omitted.).
Dussler, 1959, no. 610 (Recto: link with Phares-Esron-
Aram lunette. Verso: link with Naason lunette.). Berenson,
1961, 1703 c (School of Michelangelo. Recto: [A] resem-
bles left-hand ﬁgure in Phares-Esron-Aram lunette. Verso:
resembles woman in Naason lunette.). Hartt, 1971, no. 115
(Recto: “powerful” for Phares-Esron-Aram; sketches after
God the Father Separating Light from Darkness probably
by Falconi.); no. 116 (Verso: for Naason’s wife with
attendant ﬁgures later eliminated.). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 30 (Recto). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no.
172 (Recto: [A] for left-hand ﬁgure in Phares-Esron-
Aram lunette; in reverse like [Cat. 13 verso D] but unlike
[Cat. 11 verso F], which must be later. [B, C, D] sketches
for the God the Father Separating Light from Darkness,
probably made before those on [Cat. 11]. Verso: for
woman in Naason lunette; light comes from the oppo-
site direction in the fresco; children omitted in fresco.).
Hirst, 1986a, p. 212 (Notes that [Cat. 15] verso orig-
inally faced [Cat. 16] verso.); pp. 214–15 (Recto: [B,
C, D] “seemingly inchoate jottings for the God the
Father Separating Light from Darkness, preceding those on
[Cat. 11]; [A] lit from right.); p. 216 (Verso: idea for
Naason lunette, developed further on CB24F/Corpus
160 which, although similar in size, was never a leaf

CATALOGUES 15–16
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
115
from this sketchbook. “[S]triking resemblance . . .” to
ﬁgure of Melpomene from a muse sarcophagus in the
Louvre.). Hirst, 1988, p. 36 (Verso: follows from [13
verso E, F] for woman in Naason lunette; “the self-
contemplative pose has been established and the mirror
already included.”).
CATALOGUE 16
Recto: Sketch for the Left-Hand Figure in the Abraam-
Isaac-Iacob-Iudas Lunette
Verso: Sketches for the Sistine Lunettes?
1846.52; R.25.4; P.II 306; Corpus 173
Dimensions: 140×145 mm
Medium
Soft black chalk and pen.
Condition
There is a repaired tear, skinning with some repair, abra-
sion, two small punctures, some edge creasing, and ﬁbrous
accretions. The sheet displays uneven discolouration,
local staining, foxing, ingrained surface dirt, and medium
offset.
Description/Discussion
Recto
A. A nude male seated, turning to his left to study a book;
his left leg sketched again in abbreviated form further to
his left.
A study for the ﬁgure at the left of the Abraaham-Iacob-
Iudas lunette, executed draped in the fresco.

116
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 16
B. (Located in upper right corner.) An indecipherable
form, pehaps a number, in pen and ink.
Verso
A. A seated headless male ﬁgure seen from the front, the
left leg raised on a step or block, the right leg extended.
B. A ﬁgure in outline seen from the front, his/her arms
folded across his/her chest.
Perhaps another version of the ﬁgure Cat. 13 verso A.
C. An offset from Cat. 15 verso.
References
Ottley, 1808–23, p. 29. Woodburn, 1836b, included in
no. 2. Fisher, 1852, p. 1, pl. 4, right (Recto); pl. 5, left
(Verso). Fisher, 1865, p. 16, I, pl. 4, right (Recto); pl. 5, left
(Verso). Robinson, 1870, no. 25.4 (Michel Angelo.
Recto: study for another destroyed lunette ﬁgure. Verso:
“not recognisable.”). Fisher, 1872, I, p. 14, pl. 4, right
(Recto); pl. 5, left (Verso) (As 1852.). Fisher, 1879,
XVII.4/19 right (Recto); XVII.4a/20 left (Verso). Stein-
mann, 1905, II, pp. 455, 604, no. 60A, right (Recto:
study for man holding book in lost Abraam lunette.); no.
60B, left (Verso: two studies, not taken further.). Thode,
1908, I, pp. 263, 268 (Michelangelo. Recto: study for
ﬁgure holding book in destroyed lunette fresco. Verso:
[A] perhaps for the ignudo right above Hieremias.). K.
Frey, 1909–11, no. 153.12 (Recto: related to ﬁgure in
Abraam lunette. “Swache, in den Extremit¨aten fehlerhafte
Studie nach der Gestalt im Fresko.”); no. 154.15 (Verso:
no direct links; too vague to link with a slave.). Thode,
1913, no. 415 (As 1908.). Parker, 1956, no. 306 (Recto:
for man on left in Abraam lunette. Verso: no relations)
Dussler, 1959, no. 611 (Recto: link with Abraam lunette.
Verso: description, no relations.). Berenson, 1961, 1703d
(School of Michelangelo. Recto: resembles left-hand

CATALOGUES 16–17
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
117
ﬁgure in Abraam lunette.). Hartt, 1971, no. 112 (Recto:
for Iacob.); no. 111 (Verso: probably for arms and legs of
Iacob [left] and Aram [right].). Gere and Turner, 1975, no.
31 (Recto). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 173 (Recto:
sketch for the left-hand ﬁgure in the lost Abraam-Isaac-
Iacob-Iudas lunette, also studied in [Cat. 13 recto H]. Verso:
[A], motif reappears, reversed, in [Cat. 9 verso H]; [B] per-
haps a ﬁrst idea for ﬁgure with staff in Phares-Esron-Aram
lunette.). Hirst, 1986a, p. 212 (Notes that [Cat. 16] verso
was once a recto, originally facing [Cat. 15] verso.).
CATALOGUE 17
Study for the Left-Hand Figure in the Lunette of
Asa-Iosaphat-Ioram (Sixth Bay)
1846.44; R.27; P.II 298; Corpus 161
Dimensions
205×212 mm
Watermark: A bird perched on a mount within a qua-
trefoil; Robinson Appendix, no. 6; very close to Briquet
12252 (Bologna, 1512–36); not in Roberts.
Medium
Red chalk.
Condition
There is inherent creasing, a hole repair, and edge dis-
ruption. Edge nicks and ingrained dirt are visible. Shiny
spattered deposits, possibly wax, can be seen in raking
light. There is uneven discolouration, a dirty stain and
skinning, and in-drawing in places.

118
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 17
Discussion
This ﬁgure, probably Josaphat, was drawn quite quickly.
He was ﬁrst depicted reading and then, by the addi-
tion of two feathery strokes of the chalk to place a
pen between the thumb and foreﬁnger of his right
hand, writing, the action adopted in the fresco. The
change may have been motivated by Michelangelo’s
desire to introduce a link between the preceding Sibyl,
Cumaea, who is reading, and the succeeding Prophet,
Daniel, who writes in one codex a commentary on
another. Michelangelo also considered lifting Josaphat’s
head, in a hair-line pentimento drawn across the tur-
ban and behind the rear of the head, and extending the
jaw downwards, but in the event decided against these
changes.
In the fresco, the forms of the drapery are somewhat
simpliﬁed and given a rectilinear emphasis, the extended
left leg is set at a slightly steeper angle, the right thigh
protrudes at a lower – but equally improbable – angle
from the body, and the right calf is somewhat elongated.
The shape of the parchment, which rests on the knee, is
also altered.
Despite the differences from the fresco and the clear
evidence of creativity, this drawing has frequently been
questioned. It is similar in this respect to a drawing in
Florence (CB 24F/B242/Corpus 160, black chalk,

CATALOGUE 17
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
119
150×122 mm), for the standing woman at the left of
the Naason lunette, also often doubted. That drawing,
whose authenticity was strongly defended by Hirst, 1963,
although looser and rougher than the present sheet in
handling, shares with it the employment of hair-line pen-
timents. The facial type here may also be compared with
that of the head study for Cumaea in the Biblioteca Reale,
Turin (Inv. 15627 recto/Corpus 155; black chalk and white
heightening, 230×315 mm) and of those of the two stud-
ies for female Ancestors on the verso of the same sheet.
The treatment of red chalk in this drawing is unusual in
Michelangelo’s work. Different types of rapid hatching –
long regular strokes, thinner strokes at sharper angles, and
thicker vertical strokes, are overlaid to establish the varying
depths of shadow and varying tones of colour in the drap-
ery. The head is established broadly and roughly, whereas
the breeches are smoothly treated, the chalk stumped, to
emphasise the long ridged folds, a feature Michelangelo
would exploit greatly in his later work and which would
appeal to artists of the generation of Fuseli and Ottley.
Aspects of this type of drawing affected Andrea del
Sarto, who seems to have been on friendly – if not inti-
mate – terms with Michelangelo. It is clear that Andrea
knew some drawings by the master and his handling of
red chalk bears considerable similarities to the manner
adopted by Michelangelo here. It might be remarked that
a drawing in the Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts, Lille (Brejon de
Lavergn´ee, 832 recto, red chalk, 179×113 mm) attributed
to Andrea by the compiler, which copies the two putti in
the left throne-arm of Libica, can have been made only in
close proximity to the fresco or from a drawing for or after
it, and its handling suggests awareness of such drawings
by Michelangelo as the present study.
Lafranconi (1998 and 2003) has identiﬁed this draw-
ing with that recorded as A48 by Michelangelo in the
1601 post-mortem inventory of the collection of Antonio
Tronsarelli and has established ﬁrmly that much of Tron-
sarelli’s collection eventually passed into that of the
Borghese. The present drawing would therefore have one
of the earliest recorded starting provenances outside Casa
Buonarroti.
Copy
The version of this ﬁgure reproduced by Ottley (1808-
23), plate following p. 32, etched by Thomas Vivares,
dated 1819, 272×223 mm, is stated by Ottley to have
been “formerly in the collection of Richardson and . . . at
present the property of Samuel Rogers Esq.” This draw-
ing, which was no doubt made after the fresco rather than
Cat. 17, appeared in Samuel Rogers’ posthumous sale at
Christie’s on 28 April 1854 and following days, as lot 954,
“m. angelo. a man in a cloak, seated, reading – black
chalk. A noble design; engraved in Ottley’s School of Design.”
Its present wherabouts are unknown to the compiler.
History
Antonio Tronsarelli in 1601, A 48; Prince Borghese; Sir
Thomas Lawrence (no stamp); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1836b, no. 4 (“This ﬁne study is evidently
from nature . . . and has served . . . for the King Joram.”
Provenance given as Prince Borghese, Rome.). The
Athenaeum, 16 July 1836 (“this study for the King Joram
is much nearer nature than that given in Ottley, which
has been idealised to its present state of noble abstrac-
tion on the Sistine vault. Michael’s spirit, however intol-
erant of meanness, is manifest even here, giving some-
what of monarchical grandeur to every fold and trait
in the mendicant sitter before him.”). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 83 (As 1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 47 (As 1842.).
Fisher, 1852, p. 2, pl. 18 (Michelangelo.). Fisher, 1865,
p. 17, I, pl. 18 (Michelangelo.). Robinson, 1870, no.
27 (Michel Angelo. “Another study in black chalk for
this same ﬁgure, formerly in the collection of the poet
Rogers, is engraved in facsimile in Ottley’s Italian Schools
of Design.”). Fisher, 1872, p. 15, pl. 18 (Michelangelo.).
Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 27. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 221.
Fisher, 1879, XIX/22. Berenson, 1903, I, p. 184; no.
1563 (“[A]lmost an Andrea del Sarto in quality and han-
dling.” “[I]n the fresco, scarcely executed by Michelan-
gelo himself, the ﬁgure has lost much of its dignity and
reﬁnement, and the action has undergone the very slight
change from reading to writing.”). Steinmann, 1905,
II, p. 603, no. 54 (Michelangelo.). Borough Johnson,
1908, p. 10, pl. XLII (Michelangelo.). Thode, 1908, I,
p. 267 (Michelangelo.). Thode, 1913, no. 416 (Differ-
ences from fresco noted.). Berenson, 1938, I, p. 199;
no. 1563 (“[C]uriously like Andrea del Sarto in touch.”).
Delacre, 1938, pp. 447–8 (Michelangelo?. Perhaps over-
detailed.). Wilde, 1953a, p. 30 (Michelangelo.). Wilde,
1953 exh., no. 26 (c. 1510–12). Parker, 1956, no. 298
(“An element of doubt remains” about the authorship.).
Dussler, 1959, no. 612 (Rejected.). Berenson, 1961, no.
1563 (As 1938.). Berti, 1965, p. 420 (Doubtful authen-
ticity.). Hartt, 1971, p. 390 (Rejected.). Joannides, 1975,
pp. 261–2 (By Michelangelo; queries the omission of this
drawing from the 1975 exhibition.). De Tolnay, 1975,
Corpus I, no. 161 (Probably a copy of a lost orig-
inal.). Joannides, 1981b, p. 682 (Michelangelo; notes
pentiments; inﬂuence of this type of drawing on Sarto.).
Hirst, 1986a, p. 217 (Reproduced as by Michelangelo,

120
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 17–18
but remarks: “Doubts have been raised that this drawing
is in fact autograph.”). Lafranconi, 1998, p. 544 (Identi-
ﬁed with the drawing recorded in the Tronsarelli inven-
tory in 1601 as A48.). Lafranconi, 2003, p. 99 (As 1998;
demonstration that much of the Tronsarelli Collection
was subsequently acquired by the Borghese.).
CATALOGUE 18
Study for the Sistine Ceiling and Sketches for the Julius
Tomb
1846.43; R.23; P.II 297; Corpus 157
Dimensions: 286×194 mm
Medium
Recto: Red chalk and pen.
Verso: Pen and ink and black chalk.
Condition
A major pressed-out horizontal fold, just below the cen-
tre, is supported by tissue on the recto. Fractures and
minor vertical tears run across the horizontal fold, and a
major vertical tear is repaired. There is creasing along the
upper edge, a small hole, and some edge abrasion. The
sheet has uneven discolouration and local staining, with
show-through and bleeding of some of the ink.
Description
Recto
A. One of the putti accompanying Libica.
B. The right hand of Libica.
C. A prigione seen in left proﬁle, attached to a herm
pilaster, his arms bound behind his back, his right leg
raised and supported on a helmet?, a cuirass behind his
legs, his head turned to his left. This ﬁgure is obviously
related to the Rebellious Slave, but there are substantial
differences from the ﬁgure as executed.
D. A standing prigione seen frontally, attached to a herm
pilaster, his arms folded across his chest, his head turned
left, his legs crossed at the calves and bound.
E. A standing prigione seen frontally attached to a tapering
herm pilaster, the right arm bound by his side, the left
folded behind his head, his legs crossed at the ankles and
bound.
F. A prigione in half right view, with his head turned back
to his right; both arms are raised (bound?) above his head,
his legs are crossed at the knees.
G. The counterpart of F, but not a mirror-image.
H. A standing prigione seen frontally, his hands bound
behind his neck, his head bent forward, his legs crossed
at the calves.
With the left side of the sheet as the base
I. A section of a highly decorated cornice.
Verso
A. A left knee and part of a thigh, seen frontally.
With the right side of the sheet as the base
B. A left knee and foot; while the foot is seen frontally,
the knee seems to be seen in left proﬁle, which creates an
(exaggerated) effect of strain.
Discussion
It has been suggested by de Tolnay and others that the
present sheet originally formed one with that in the
Metropolitan Museum, on whose recto is Michelan-
gelo’s famous drawing for Libica (Inv. 24. 197.2 recto/BT
131/Corpus 156; red chalk, 288×213 mm). This sug-
gestion is supported by the fact that a study of Libica’s
right hand, very like the study of the left hand on the
Metropolitan page, is found on the present sheet, but it
cannot be regarded as certain. In any case, if the two
sheets were once joined, they were probably divided by
the artist himself. The verso drawings are quite discontin-
uous, and the fold that runs across the present sheet, but
not across that in the Metropolitan, could well have been
made by Michelangelo when he came to use the verso
of the present sheet for two studies, placed with differ-
ent orientations and separated from one another precisely
by the fold. By the time Biagio Pupini saw the present
sheet (or a copy of it; see following discussion), it was
undoubtedly separate from the other. The provenances of
the two sheets are also very different, and when, around
or before c. 1600, an unidentiﬁed draughtsman made a
same-size copy of the Metropolitan recto, the two may
not even have been in the same collection because the
copyist made no reference to any of the drawings on the
present sheet. (The copy in question, Ufﬁzi 2318F/B268;
red chalk, 287×215 mm, is in detail a near facsimile of
Michelangelo’s original, but the individual drawings are
re-arranged on the page, there are some omissions, and
it contains a study of Libica’s right foot, not found on the
Metropolitan recto, which was no doubt copied from a
fragment of that sheet now lost; for further discussion of
this copy, see the Introduction, n. 113).

CATALOGUE 18
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
121

122
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 18
The difference in precision and deﬁnition between
this and the Metropolitan study for Libica exempliﬁes
Michelangelo’s extreme sensitivity to depth of ﬁeld in his
paintings, establishing even at the stage of the preparatory
drawing the different levels of deﬁnition that he intended
to incorporate in the fresco.
The pen studies of six prigioni and, at a different angle,
of a richly decorated cornice were certainly placed on
the page after the red chalk drawings had been made.
They illustrate Michelangelo’s habit of crowding his pages
and making new, smaller, drawings, often in a differ-
ent medium, around a pre-existing larger central one.
Perhaps he was stimulated by the constraint of adjusting
his new drawings to an apparent obstacle. Furthermore,
Michelangelo frequently planned more than one project
in more than one medium on the same page: Thus, here
are found studies for painting, sculpture, and architecture.
Even though the sketches of prigioni are clearly prepara-
tory for those Michelangelo planned to carve for the
Tomb of Julius II, to the compiler they do not appear
to be preliminary concetti generated on the page. Even
a draughtsman of Michelangelo’s genius could hardly be
expected to devise half-a-dozen nude ﬁgures in compli-
cated poses and get them all right at the ﬁrst attempt.
It seems most likely that these drawings, which display
mimimal pentimenti, are worked up versions of less tidy
sketches, perhaps intended to provide patterns for trans-
fer. The transfer might be to an autograph modello, such as

CATALOGUE 18
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
123
the sadly ruined example in Berlin (Inv. 15305/Corpus 55
recto; pen and ink and brush and wash over stylus inden-
tation and black chalk, 525×343 mm) or that in quite
good condition in Florence (Ufﬁzi 608E/B244/Corpus
56; pen and ink, brush and wash over black chalk,
290×361 mm). There is, in fact, a direct link between
the verso of the present sheet and the verso of that in
Berlin: The study of a right knee on the present sheet
re-works part of the study of a right leg on that in Berlin.
This leg seems to be for the so-called Dying Slave, but the
connection need not, in the last analysis, indicate more
than that the various drawings made by Michelangelo
in connection with the Julius Tomb were ﬁled together.
Alternatively, the sketches of prigioni on the present sheet
might well have been made in connection with the waxes
that were no doubt added to a wooden model of the tomb
constructed in 1513.
None of the prigioni seen here recurs elsewhere in pre-
cisely the same form. A larger study, which reprises much
of the pose of the topmost prigione [D], is in the Royal
Collection (PW 421 verso/Corpus 61; red chalk over
stylus, 266×130 mm), but the function of that draw-
ing, which would seem to be datable about 1516, is
uncertain: The ﬁgure shows no obvious indications of
physical restraint. The prigione immediately below it to
the left [C] is, as has always been recognised, a sketch
for the so-called Rebellious Slave, on which Michelan-
gelo was working in 1514. The torsion of the pose here,
however, is somewhat less dynamic than that of the exe-
cuted statue, and in the statue the right arm is tied against
the right side rather than behind the back as here, which
adds to the ﬁgure’s constraint. It is evident that Michelan-
gelo’s ideas underwent development between this drawing
and the statue. This was iconographic as well as formal:
The present drawing shows the ﬁgure with a foot rest-
ing on what is probably a helmet, and standing before
a cuirass; both are common attributes of ﬁgures of van-
quished opponents and of trophies in Roman art and
were studied by Michelangelo himself around 1505 in a
drawing in Casa Buonarroti (CB42F/B241/Corpus 59;
pen and ink, 197×114 mm), probably made directly after
a Roman relief. These features identify the ﬁgure as a
military captive, and it presumably responds to a moment
of optimism at the end of the reign of Julius II, when
foreign forces had brieﬂy been expelled from Italy. The
cuirass and helmet are omitted from the statue as carved
– which probably indicates both a less conﬁdent political
situation and Michelangelo’s usual tendency to simplify
his forms as work proceeded. This drawing is also notable
in that a face is indicated on the herm to which the pris-
oner is attached; the other two herms found on this sheet
are drawn in more abbreviated fashion.
The ﬁgure at the far right [E] seems to be a counterpart,
in reverse, of one drawn by Michelangelo some years ear-
lier, probably in 1505, on a sheet in the Louvre (Inv. 688
verso/J13/Corpus 20; pen, 387×205 mm). This ﬁgure
has his left arm attached behind his head, and although it
is quite possible that what is seen here is a simple revision
of that form, it may be that here Michelangelo was con-
sidering a pendant to it, as he did with the two ﬁgures at
the lower left [F and G]. These ﬁgures, self-evidently con-
ceived as a slightly modiﬁed pair, are the most energetic of
the drawings here and those that most obviously anticipate
the second group of prigioni, those now in the Accademia
in Florence, begun by Michelangelo after mid-1516.
The ﬁgure at the lower right [H] is generally linked
with the so-called Dying Slave. This ﬁgure has both arms
clasped over his head, which is bent forward, and his
ankles are crossed like those of D, but without a visible
tie. In the Berlin and Ufﬁzi modelli (in which the prigioni
although very similar are not identical), the arms and head
are raised, but the ankles remain crossed; in the statue as
carved, the torso and arms are close to those in the mod-
elli, but the ankles are now uncrossed. In that case, this
ﬁgure would seem to be the ﬁrst of a sequence of draw-
ings leading to the Dying Slave and thus preparatory to
the Berlin and Ufﬁzi modelli. However, although this has
often been assumed – by the compiler among others – it
seems unlikely that this is the case.
The development of the Julius Tomb and the many
stages of its history is an extraordinarily complex issue that
cannot here be addressed in detail. Sufﬁce it to say, how-
ever, that to the compiler it seems obvious that the present
drawings post-date rather than antedate the Berlin and
Ufﬁzi modelli – a view considered by Echinger-Maurach
but rejected. The compiler has elsewhere attempted to
argue that the scheme represented in those modelli was
arrived at before the beginning of work on the Sistine
ceiling, and that the contracts for the tomb of April and
July 1513 represent a ratiﬁcation of a change previously
decided, not a new development of that year. The pri-
gioni here are in more developed and energetic poses than
the ﬁgures on the modelli, and it does not seem remotely
credible to the compiler that the modelli could succeed
them. As the development of the ignudi on the Sistine
ceiling and that of the prigioni between the Louvre and
the Accademia statues makes clear, Michelangelo’s nude
ﬁgures consistently expanded in scale and energy, and
to postulate a temporary reversal of this pattern in 1513
seems perverse. Nor, unlike the present ﬁgures or the two
Louvre slaves largely carved by Michelangelo in 1513–
14, do the modelli reveal the experience of the Sistine
ceiling. If the compiler’s view is correct, the present
drawings would represent, not preparations for the ﬁgural

124
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 18
elements of the modelli but later modiﬁcations of them.
Thus, the Rebellious Slave as seen here [C] is not found
at all on the modelli, but the present drawing is similar to
the ﬁgure as carved. The case of H, which resembles the
Dying Slave, is different again. The Dying Slave as carved
is closer to the ﬁgure on the Berlin and Ufﬁzi modelli than
it is to the present ﬁgure, but the present ﬁgure is more
compact and expressive than the corresponding ﬁgure on
the modelli. It thus seems more likely that it is an indepen-
dent variant of both the ﬁgure in the modelli and of the
statue as carved, rather than a sketch made in preparation
for either the one or the other. It is interesting that Laux
(1943) speciﬁcally discussed two of these sketches in rela-
tion to the Accademia prigioni, for some features of those
ﬁgures are anticipated here.
The cornice is of exceptional richness and may well
have been intended for the tomb. It is, however, much
more complicated – and beautiful – either than that seen
in the modelli or that actually carved by Antonio da Pon-
teassieve from July 1513 onwards and may represent no
more than a fantasy on Michelangelo’s part. Although not
derived, so far as the compiler is aware, precisely from any
antique type, it does seem to respond to the most deco-
rated type of Hellenistic architecture.
De Tolnay used these drawings to reconstruct Michel-
angelo’s intended placing of the prigioni on the front face
lower story of the tomb, but the compiler ﬁnds his views
difﬁcult to accept. However, because the front face was
to contain only four prigioni, the additional two were pre-
sumably intended for the side faces. Obviously, the two
lower ﬁgures [F and G] form a pair and might well have
been placed at either end; the Rebellious Slave [C], whose
main view is clearly indicated here to be proﬁle, was prob-
ably at the near end of the right side of the tomb, but the
positioning of the others is even more conjectural. At the
time this drawing was made, Michelangelo needed to pre-
pare twelve prigioni for the lower story; his ideas were no
doubt in ﬂux, and what may initially have been planned as
a symmetrical layout could have ended as something very
different, as with the Sistine ignudi. Certainly, symmetry
had been abandoned by the time he came to work on the
Accademia prigioni. Thus, any attempt to argue placing
from the present sketches requires great caution, as Laux
prudently remarked.
Verso
These pen studies were probably made in connection with
the advanced preparation for carving the prigioni; they
concentrate on surface modelling. The study of the knee
is no doubt related, as noted previously, to the left leg of
the Dying Slave; the slightly awkward sketch of a left calf
and foot may have some relation to that of the Rebellious
Slave.
Copies
1. Windsor Castle, Royal Collection, by Biagio Pupini,
PW 785 verso/Joannides, 1996–8, no. 30; pen and ink
with white heightening and yellow pastel, 290×202 mm.
This copies loosely the putto and study of Libica’s right
hand from the recto. It includes two other unrelated
ﬁgures, which might be copies after lost drawings by
Michelangelo. Pupini’s pen work and formal interpre-
tation have a Parmigianinesque ﬂavour, which suggests
that here his copies may have been indirect. In any case,
it is evident that the present sheet was very early available
to other artists.
2. Primaticcio employed the pose of the prigione H on
the recto in his draped Atlante (Paris, Mus´ee du Louvre,
RF 53029 red and white chalk, 240×110 mm) of c. 1550;
it is probable that the present sheet entered his possession
after Mini’s death.
History
Antonio Mini?; Francesco Primaticcio?; Everard Jabach?;
Pierre Crozat, his number, 63, at lower right; Pierre-
Jean Mariette (L.1852), his sale, beginning 15 November
1775, no doubt included in one of the lots of Michelan-
gelo drawings; Marquis de Lagoy (L.1710); Sir Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Mariette, 1746, I, p. 218–19 (“J’ai une premi`ere pens´ee
pour la statue de Moyse peu diff´erente, pour la disposition
g´en´erale, de ce qui a ´et´e ex´ecut´e, et sur la mˆeme feuille,
plusieurs petites esquisses pour les attitudes des ﬁgures
d’esclaves.”). Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti
Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830–54] (“A sheet of studies in pen and
red chalk, on the reverse studies of a Leg.”). Woodburn,
1836b, no. 89 (“[P]art of the male subject and a hand are
admirably executed in red chalk, and several small ﬁgures
are sketched with great spirit with the pen.”). Woodburn,
1842, no. 21 (“A sheet of studies.”). Woodburn, 1846, no.
51 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1862, p. 5, pl. 21 [sic: pl. 16] (Recto:
as Woodburn.). Fisher, 1865, II, p. 24, pl. 16 (As 1862.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 23 (Michel Angelo, c. 1506. “[S]tudy
in red chalk) . . . drawn from the living model . . . one of
the preparatory drawings for the tomb of Julius II. Two
of the small sketches of slaves . . . [are] . . . ﬁrst thoughts for
the two celebrated marble statues in the Louvre.”). Fisher,
1872, II, p. 22, pl. 16 (As 1862.). Black, 1875, p. 214, no.
23. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 230. Springer, 1878, pp. 238–9, 507

CATALOGUE 18
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
125
(Pen sketches prepare the Louvre Slaves. Red chalk sketch
interpreted as a study for a ﬁgure on the platform of the
tomb. Pen sketches reproduced on p. 507.). Fisher, 1879,
XV/12 (Studies for Julius Tomb, c. 1506.). Springer, 1883,
II, pp. 25–7 (As 1878; pen sketches reproduced on p. 25.).
Portheim, 1889, p. 148 (“Ausgangspunkt zur Erkennt-
niss des Echten und zweifellos Entw¨urfe des Meisters.”).
Morelli, 1891–2, col. 544 (Ech.). Justi, 1900, p. 224 (Slave
motifs more energetic in contrast with Florence drawing;
[C] and [G] related to Louvre Slaves.). Berenson, 1903, I,
pp. 183–4, 187, no. 1562 (Recto: may “bear witness to
a suspension of work on the Ceiling at the moment
that Libica was to be painted” when Michelangelo turned
back to the tomb. “Originally . . . [the slaves] perhaps had
no allegorical intentions” and “in 1505 . . . [they] would
have been less restless . . . less charged.” The Slave draw-
ings demonstrate the inauthenticity of the full herms on
the “wretched drawings” in Berlin [15305 recto/Corpus
55 and Florence 608E recto/B244/Corpus 56] but that
these “knob-heads” should be introduced “on pilasters
is an ingenuity of bad taste, of which I should be will-
ing to accuse Michelangelo only on convincing proof.”).
Colvin, 1903, I, no. 6 (Recto: life study for the putto
accompaning Libica and her right hand, no doubt of 1510–
11; the small-scale sketches for slaves probably made at
the same period, during the break in work on the ceil-
ing.). Steinmann, 1905, II, pp. 419, 601, no. 44 (Recto:
Michelangelo, for left hand of Libica [B] and accompany-
ing putto [A]; pen studies for Julius Tomb.). Mackowsky,
1908 (and subsequent editions), pp. 248–9 (Recto: pen
sketches for slaves “Hier sieht man den Keim, aus dem sich
das m¨achtige Gew¨achs seiner marmorstatuen entwick-
elt hat.” Red chalk study demonstrates “neue malerische
Art des Zeichens.” Importance of Leonardo’s inﬂuence.).
Thode, 1908, I, pp. 151–2, no. 254 (Recto: [A] for putto
next to Libica; [C] for Rebellious Slave, [G] resembles slave
second from right on Berlin modello; [H] resembles slave
second from left on Berlin modello. These sketches con-
tradict Berenson’s conviction that Michelangelo would
not have placed ﬁgures before herm pilasters.). K. Frey,
1909–11, no. 3 (Recto: intimately related to Metropoli-
tan drawing, 24.197.2/BT 131/Corpus 156, done shortly
before the fresco. The slave studies placed last on the
paper important for the development of the Julius Tomb.
They relate to the 1513 project but only [C] certainly for
an executed statue: the Rebellious Slave.); no. 156 (Verso:
[B] for the Rebellious Slave, [A] for the same ﬁgure as
recto [H].). Thode, 1913, no. 407 (Recto: as 1908. Verso:
[B] for the legs of the Rebellious Slave, [A] for the Dying
Slave.). Zoff, 1923, pl. 29 (Recto). Brinckmann, 1925,
no. 33 (Linked with MMA 24.197.2/Corpus 156; pen
sketches somewhat later.). Burroughs, 1925, pp. 10–12
(Recto: main study and MMA 24.197.2/BT 131/Corpus
156 probably “done at one sitting.”). Venturi, 1926, p. 56,
pl. CLXIV. De Tolnay, 1928a, pp. 78–80 (Recto: three
pairs of slaves. [C and H] for, respectively, the left and
right pilasters of the front face of the tomb. [D and G]
for, respectively, the nearest pilasters to the front on the
left and right side faces of the tomb. [E and F] for, respec-
tively, the pilasters abutting the church wall of, respec-
tively, the left and right side faces of the tomb.). Popham,
1930b, pl. 7 (Recto: main study must have been drawn
at the same time as MMA 24.197.2/BT 131/Corpus 156;
but subsidiary drawings probably were drawn some years
later.). Popham, 1930a, no. 511. Popham, 1931, no. 213.
Berenson, 1938, I, pp. 198, 200–1, no. 1562 (Slaves shown
here were probably quieter in 1505; modiﬁes strictures of
1903 on the herm-pilasters.). Delacre, 1938, pp. 328–9,
482–3 (“Magniﬁque dessin” for the putto accompanying
Libica; and Julius Tomb slaves and cornice.). Bertini, 1942
[ed. 1983], p. 110. Laux, 1943, pp. 43, 73–4, 77, 80, 415
(Slave sketches must antedate modello in Berlin. Difﬁculty
of attaching them to speciﬁc positions on the tomb. [E]
only apparently similar to Young Slave in the Accademia;
embryonic conception of Awakening Slave found in [G],
which also leads to the New Sacristy Day. Some similari-
ties suggested between sketches and the early ignudi on the
Sistine ceiling.). De Tolnay, 1945, pp. 61–2, 204–5, no. 47
(Michelangelo made a careful study of a slender tall mus-
cular youth, which he transformed into the ﬂeshy body of
a child. To emphasize Libica the artist was constrained to
reduce the rhythm in the spiritello.). Popham and Wilde,
1949, no. 785 (Pupini copy identiﬁed.). Goldscheider,
1951, no. 32 (Recto: whole drawing may date from 1512.).
De Tolnay, 1951, pp. 110, 295 (1512–13; slave sketches, as
1929.). Janson, 1952, pp. 319–20 (“Michelangelo may well
have considered . . . converting the ‘Slaves’ into subdued
provinces . . . ; this would explain why . . . [C] . . . shows a
ﬁgure [presumably the Rebellious Slave] wearing a hel-
met and accompanied by a piece of armour. . . . [T]hese
sketches must have been made either shortly before or
shortly after the death of the Pontiff. In any event, the
notion of adding trophies in the form of armour to
the ‘Slaves’ seems to have been purely a tentative one,
for the other ‘Slaves’ on . . . [Cat. 18] are simple nudes
without attributes of any sort.”). Wilde, 1953a, pp. 7, 28
(Slave studies, 1513.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 18 (1511–12.
Hand for the left hand of Libica; pen drawings for cor-
nice and slaves of Julius Tomb, [C] corresponds closely
to Rebellious Slave.). De Tolnay, 1954, p. 34 (Slaves much
developed from the “relatively calm and delicate slaves of
1505.” All intended for the six corner pilasters of the 1513

126
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 18–19
project. They form three pairs. As 1929.). Wilde, 1954,
p. 10 (Presence of trophy in [C] supports Condivi’s inter-
pretation of the slaves as allegories of the arts.) Parker,
1956, no. 297 (Recto: 1512–13, no great interval between
chalk and pen sketches. Figures identiﬁed. Sketches sup-
port view that slaves were tethered to herms, not columns.
Verso: knee perhaps for Dying Slave; leg for Rebellious
Slave.). Dussler, 1959, no. 194 (Chalk sketches ﬁrst, then
pen. Link with MMA 24.197.2/BT 131/Corpus 156.
De Tolnay’s positioning of prigioni possible, but uncer-
tain. Verso: studies not for prigioni as executed but for
recto ﬁgures.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1562 (As 1903/1938.).
Barocchi, 1962, p. 23 (Prigioni sketches compared with
Ufﬁzi 17379F and 17380F/B13, 14/Corpus 151, 152.).
Barbieri and Puppi, 1964a, p. 1001. Barocchi, 1964c,
no. 25 (Recto: the red chalk studies were made ﬁrst; those
in pen are connected with the 1513 phase of the Julius
Tomb. The cornice was perhaps made after the antique.
Verso: linked with Louvre Slaves.). Brugnoli, 1964, no. 25
(Recto: not necessary to assume that pen sketches added
later.). Berti, 1965, pp. 417, 424 (Recto: prigioni stud-
ies subsequent to putto. Verso: perhaps for a prigione.).
De Tolnay, 1964e, col. 889 (“All these [slave] sketches
are for corner ﬁgures.”). Goldscheider, 1965, no. 40 (As
1951.). Coughlan, 1966, pp. 98–9 (Architecture and ﬁg-
ures for the Julius Tomb and a ﬁgure for the Sistine on
the same sheet.). Weinberger, 1967, p. 145 (“[T]he helmet
and cuirass seen at the side of . . . [C] deﬁne him as a cap-
tive warrior.”). Hartt, 1971, no. 89 (Recto: 1511 and 1513.
“chalk drawings must have been done during the same
days as MMA 24.197.2/BT 131/Corpus 156; pen sketches
for slaves added later.”); no. 54 (Verso: 1505. For left leg
of Rebellious Slave.). LeBrooy, 1972, p. 93 (Detail repro-
duced in comparison with a terra-cotta model where-
abouts unknown, attributed by LeBrooy to Michelangelo
and identiﬁed as a study for a slave.) Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 19 (Recto). Hibbard, 1975, p. 149. Keller,
1975, no. 29 (Study for the putto accompanying Libica,
c. 1510; sketches for the Julius Tomb, c. 1513.). de Tolnay,
1975, pp. 81–2 (As 1951.). De Tolnay, Corpus I, 1975,
no. 157 (Once part of same sheet as MMA 24.197.2/BT
131/Corpus 156. Recto: as 1928, 1954. Verso: both stud-
ies for the Rebellious Slave.). Keller, 1976, ﬁg. 153 (As
1975.). Wilde, 1978, pp. 97–8 (Slave sketches drawn
on a sheet used for studies for Libica a few months
earlier “six sketches, more than were needed for the
front fac¸ade then in preparation. . . . [T]he second from
the left . . . seems to conﬁrm Condivi’s interpretation
of the ﬁgures as allegories of the arts; there is a tro-
phy at the foot . . . and this can only mean the Art of
War. In the execution . . . this trophy has been changed
into a . . . block to be used as a capital . . . [changing]
the ﬁgure . . . [into] an allegory of Sculpture or Archi-
tecture.”). Murray, 1980, p. 97. Lamarche-Vadel, 1981,
p. 51, no. 66. Perrig, 1982, p. 18 (Recto: Michelangelo.).
Balas, 1983, p. 668 (Slave sketches demonstrate inclu-
sion of herm-pilasters.). Balas, 1984a, p. 674 (Sketches
show that slaves were not intended as atlantes.). Guazzoni,
1984, pl. 50 (Studies for prigioni.). Hirst, 1988, pp. 25, 37
(Slave sketches added “a few months later . . . less cur-
sory [in] style” than the Sistine concetti. “[T]he degree
of modelling achieved . . . without recourse to any hatch-
ing, is remarkable.”). Echinger-Maurach, 1991, pp. 239–
46, 267–70 (Detailed visual analysis of the prigioni: Notes
resemblance of [C] to Michelangelo’s drawing for the
bronze David [Louvre Inv. 714/J4/Corpus 19]; notes that
the ﬁgures are more energetic and complex than those
on the Berlin and Ufﬁzi modelli [and attributes the latter
to Aristotile da Sangallo] but considers that these post-
date the present sketches.). Perrig, 1991, pp. 21–4, 50–
1 (Recto: Michelangelo.); pp. 58, 134 (Verso: Cellini.).
Joannides, 1994a, p. 20 (Figure [F] employed by Primat-
iccio in Louvre RF 53029).Wallace, 1998, p. 90 (Studies
for the Sistine chapel; sketches for the Julius Tomb pri-
gioni.).
CATALOGUE 19
Recto: Elevation and Plan of an Ambo
Verso: A Fragment of a Letter
1846.58; R.48.2; P.II 312; Corpus 522
Dimensions: 147×168 mm. The sheet has been divided
and subsequently rejoined. The left half and the upper
right-hand quarter were originally part of the same sheet,
although they were rejoined with a loss of some 10 mm.
Nothing essential is missing, as can be seen from the letter
fragment on the verso.
Watermark: Fragmentary and unidentiﬁable.
Medium
Pen and ink.
Condition
Imperfections in pulp are visible, with local cockling and
repairs. There is a supported central join and a pressed-out
horizontal fold. There is skinning, paper remnants, and
adhesive discolouration around the edges. There are sev-
eral supported areas where the ink has burned through,
with severe show-through. Overall discolouration, fox-
ing, and extensive staining are visible.

CATALOGUE 19
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
127
Description and Transcription
Recto
A. A seated ﬁgure turning round and raising his arm.
B. With the right edge as base, two faces of an ambo seen
obliquely.
C. With the right edge as base, three faces above pedestal
level of an ambo seen frontally, diagrammatically and
lightly sketched, with an arch in the central panel.
D. The plan of an octagonal ambo, with two long sides.
E. A pedestal in foreshortening.
F. With the left edge as base, two faces of an ambo, above
pedestal level. They are diagrammatically and lightly
sketched.
Verso
Ave(n)d io ma(n)dato chosta p(er) u[n cha]napo, sono avisato
chome [n’ave]te uno facto. Se e dugie(n)[to br]accia e della
grossezza [che] . . . sara segniata i(n) questa [carta] lo
pigliero qua(n)do sia ben f[acto] e di buo(n) ﬁlo. P(er)che e
qua(n)[do n]o(n) sia chosi buono ne a grosse[zza) chome e
decto, fate ne [un alt]ro che io l’abbi sabato cho[me] avete
promesso e fate [che s]ia cosa octima. E e danar[i] io .faro
pagare chosta a [Sal]viati o qua a chi mi aviser(ete)
(Wilde’s transcription, partly modiﬁed by Barocchi-
Ristori, reconstructing the portions lost in the middle
and ends of the lines.)
A translation due to a Professor de Fiveli is included in
the extra-illustrated copy of Robinson’s catalogue
preserved in the Print Room of the Ashmolean:
Having sent for the rope I am informed that you have one
ready made. If that is 200 braccia long and the thickness
marked on this paper, I shall take it provided that it is sound

128
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 19
and made of good thread, and being so good and thick as
said make some more and let me have it on Saturday as you
promised and make it excellent and I shall cause the money
to be paid to you through Donato there or to any one here
as you will advise.
Discussion
It is universally recognised that the present draw-
ing is intimately connected with one in the British
Museum, acquired from the Buonarroti Collection in
1859 (W24/Corpus 521; pen and ink, 146×171 mm).
It is unclear when the present sheet was cut apart and
reassembled, and it is also uncertain whether or not this
sheet once formed a single whole with that in the British
Museum. If not, they probably formed successive pages
of a sketchbook that Michelangelo used both for draw-
ings and for rough draughts of letters. The draught of the
letter was written by Michelangelo when he was in Ser-
ravezza and concerned obtaining strong ropes for hauling
marble. It is datable, as established by Wilde, to 10–12
August 1518 (although it seems to have been intended for
Crocco Pizzicagnolo in Pisa rather than Francesco Peri,
as Wilde thought), and although the letter does not prove
that the recto drawings are contemporary (cf. Cat. 24),
this date seems plausible.
Wilde suggested that the drawings planned a pair of
ambi or pulpits, and this seems correct. The placing of the
candlesticks on the edge of the parapet is similar to that
found in many pulpits. The idea was criticised by Kurz,
but he was mistaken in assuming that paired pulpits were
no longer current in Michelangelo’s time. Those incor-
porated into the choir screen in the Frari, constructed in
the 1470s, which Michelangelo would have seen when he
was in Venice in 1494, and those by Donatello, sculpted
in the 1460s but erected in San Lorenzo only in the sec-
ond decade of the cinquecento, are sufﬁcient to refute
this opinion.
A plausible project was identiﬁed by Morselli. In 1517,
the Opera del Duomo was interested in rebuilding the
choir, and even though there is no direct documentary
evidence that Michelangelo was consulted, it is hardly
credible that he would not have been, given that he had
been allocated the commission for the statues of Apostles
to be placed in the Duomo only a dozen years ear-
lier. The rather simpliﬁed and linear style of the draw-
ings is similar to that which he employed in studies that
are usually dated at about the same time and are associ-
ated with drawings by Michelangelo generally identiﬁed
as projects for the articulation of the drum of the same
church.
It seems unlikely that the ambis were intended to
have integral ﬁgural decoration, such as reliefs, but the
small ﬁgure sketch, A, might be a ﬁrst idea for a
cherub to be executed in bronze, like the spiritelli by
Donatello (Paris, Mus´ee Jacquemart-Andr´e), which were

CATALOGUES 19–20
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
129
no doubt planned to be placed upon the Choir Gallery
of Luca della Robbia. Such a ﬁgure as sketched by
Michelangelo might have been intended to support a
lectern – but such a suggestion can be no more than
conjecture.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar; William Young
Ottley? his sale 11 April 1804 and days following, part of
lot 270; “Five – various pen studies of ﬁgures and archi-
tecture – some of his writing on the back of three – from
the Bonarroti collection.” bought in?; his sale, 6 June 1814
and days following, part of lot 261? “Two – an architec-
tural design and a pieta [see Cat. 75], both pen. His writ-
ing on the back of one.” £1.11.6; Sir Thomas Lawrence
(L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale?, 11 April 1804, part of lot 270 (“Five – vari-
ous pen studies of ﬁgures and architecture – some of his
writing on the back of three – from the Bonarroti collec-
tion.”). Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, etc., lot 261 (“Two – an
architectural design and a pieta [see Cat. 75], both pen.
His writing on the back of one.”)?. Lawrence Inventory,
1830, M. A. Buonaroti, Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-103]
(“Architectural and other studies – pen” [with Cats. 3
and 75]. Woodburn, 1842, no. 72 (“Three small studies-
upon one mount . . . with the autograph of M. Angelo”
with [Cats. 3 and 75].). Fisher, 1852, p. 5, pl. 20 (Hand-
writing of Michael Angelo.). Fisher, 1865, II, p. 24, pl. 20
(As 1852.). Robinson, 1870, no. 48.2 (Michel Angelo.
“rudimentary designs for a small isolated structure.”).
Fisher, 1872, II, p. 22, pl. 20 (As 1852.). Black, 1875,
p. 214, no. 43b. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 234. Fisher, 1879,
XXXIII/35 (Verso letter only.). Fagan, 1883, p. 139 (Con-
nected with BM W24/Corpus 521.). Berenson, 1903,
no. 1567.2 (The ﬁgure “not unlike the Ceiling decorative
nudes.”). Geym¨uller, 1904, p. 36 (Connected with a plan
of 1505 for the choir of St Peter’s.). K. Frey, 1909–11,
138c (Recto: Michelangelo. Sheet divided then rejoined;
wall architecture, not free standing. Rejects Geym¨uller’s
hypothesis. Linked with BM W24/Corpus 521. Verso:
transcription.). Thode, 1913, no. 430 (Unknown purpose;
no connection with Barbazza Tomb; rejects Geym¨uller’s
hypothesis.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1567.2 (Verso: writing
indicates a date later than the ceiling.). Venturi, 1939,
(Storia XI/2), p. 177 (For the bronze ciborium executed
by Jacomo del Duca.). Wilde, 1953a, p. 46 (Probable that
the three sections of this sheet and W24/Corpus 521 all
parts of same sheet. Design for an ambo. New transcrip-
tion of letter, datable 10–12 August 1518.). Wilde, 1953
exh., no. 140b. Kurz, 1953, p. 310 (Cannot be an ambo,
for they had disappeared from liturgical use by Michelan-
gelo’s time.). Parker, 1956, no. 312 (“[I]ndubitably orig-
inal but of very uncertain purpose.”). Dussler, 1959,
no. 197 (Wilde probably correct to see this as part of
BM W24/Corpus 521. Purpose controversial. Datable
by verso.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1567.2 (As 1903/1938.).
Barbieri and Puppi, 1964a, p. 1010 (Purpose of this
and BM W24/Corpus 521 controversial.). Berti, 1965,
pp. 433, 437 (A pulpit?.). Barocchi and Ristori, 1967,
no. CCCXIX, p. 51 (Revised transcription of letter.).
Hartt, 1971, no. 196 (Recto: before 1518. Developed on
BM W24/Corpus 521. Purpose unknown.). Gere and
Turner, 1975, no. 75 (Writing datable 1518; uncertain
purpose: an ambo “by the sixteenth century . . . would
have been a liturgical anachronism.”). De Tolnay, 1980,
Corpus IV, no. 522 (1518. Recto: with BM W24/Corpus
521, for a reliquary surmounted by display platform in
San Lorenzo?. Verso: 10–12 August 1518.). Morselli, 1981,
pp. 122–9 (Drawings document renewed interest in ambi
in the early sixteenth century; notes that both Bandinelli
and Cellini planned two octagonal ambi for the Duomo.
Discusses the probable inspiration from Nicola Pisano’s
ambo in Pisa Baptistry. Michelangelo’s drawings proba-
bly planned for a pulpit in Florence Cathedral, done at a
period when he was closely involved with the Opera del
Duomo. The Choir was being remodelled at precisely
this period. Plan would have been particularly suitable
for the octagonal crossing, and dugento inspiration would
have been appropriate to Duomo. Notes presence of two
candelabra.). Contardi, 1990, p. 172 (With W24/Corpus
521, probably for a pulpit; Morselli’s hypothesis undoc-
umented.). Perrig, 1999, p. 247 (By Michelangelo; from
via Mozza studio.).
CATALOGUE 20
Recto: Sections of a Figure
Verso: A Torso
1846.60; R.8; P.II 314; Corpus 295
Dimensions: 220×170 mm
Watermark: Robinson Appendix 2. Roberts Fruit A.
Medium
Red chalk.

130
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 20
Condition
There is uneven pulp and local cockling. The sheet
has major tear repairs and toned inﬁll, some abrasion,
skinning, wrinkles, and discolouration on the edges.
There is general discolouration, local staining accretions,
and adhesive residues, with paper tape remnants on the
verso edges.
Numbering
Verso: The Irregular Numbering Collector’s numeration:
n◦.46
Description
Recto
A. A left leg seen at an angle from the right.
With the upper edge of the sheet as base
B. A male torso, in right proﬁle with the right arm raised
C. A section of a triglyph? The orientation of the sheet
when this was made is uncertain.
Verso
A male torso, seen from the lower right.
Three broken lines in red chalk at the left edge.

CATALOGUE 20
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
131
Discussion
The ﬁgure studies on the recto and verso are generally
thought, rightly in the compiler’s view, to be preparatory
for one of the prigioni conceived between 1516 and 1520 for
the phase of work on the Julius Tomb that Michelangelo
undertook in Florence after his return to supervise work
on the fac¸ade of San Lorenzo. This produced the four
massively dynamic ﬁgures now in the Accademia and the
Victory in Palazzo Vecchio. Michelangelo seems to have
employed both red and black chalk in the drawings made
in their preparation. A study for one of the prigioni, in the
Louvre (Inv. 686 recto/J24/Corpus 193; 382×235 mm)
is in black chalk, and another in the Ecole Nationale
Sup´erieure des Beaux Arts, Paris (197 recto/Corpus 62;
327×200 mm) is in red. The style of the present drawing
ﬁts reasonably well with that in the Ecole des Beaux-
Arts. However, it seems that during this phase of work
Michelangelo’s prigioni soon outgrew in dimensions the
limits conceived for them in the contract of July 1516, and
which are roughly maintained in ENSBA 197. The new,
enlarged, prigioni would have entailed the replacement of
the lower-storey front-face of the tomb already carved,
largely by Antonio da Ponteassieve, and, perhaps, the
two ﬁgures in the Louvre, which Michelangelo had him-
self executed and brought near completion. The present
drawing was probably made a little later than ENSBA 197,
perhaps c. 1518, when the process of enlargement may be
presumed to have gathered momentum. It may have been

132
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 20–21
made in preparation for the Bearded Slave, but the forms
are not sufﬁciently close to any of the four prigioni now
in the Accademia in Florence for a precise connection to
be afﬁrmed.
In 1520, following the cancellation of the San Lorenzo
fac¸ade project, Michelangelo was again diverted from the
Julius Tomb to work on the New Sacristy for Cardinal
Giulio dei Medici, but he may have continued carving
the prigioni while awaiting deliveries of marble for that
project, especially in 1522–3, during the pontiﬁcate of
Adrian VI, when little was done on the New Sacristy.
The geometrical sketch on the recto, difﬁcult to
interpret with conﬁdence, might represent an abbrevi-
ated triglyph. Michelangelo considered the inclusion of
triglyphs in an early design for the Magniﬁci Tomb,
which survives in a copy by Raffaello da Montelupo in
Florence (Ufﬁzi 607E; pen and ink, 200×136 mm), itself
much replicated (see Cat. 34). The original of the design
copied by Raffaello must have been made by Michelan-
gelo in 1519–20, and he may then have taken up a sheet
drawn on a little earlier to sketch out architectural fea-
tures. Alternatively, assuming that he was simultaneously
working on the prigioni, it might be possible to date the
recto drawing also to this moment.
History
The Bona Roti Collector?; The Irregular Numbering
Collector; Sir Joshua Reynolds (L.2364); Sir Thomas
Lawrence (no stamp); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti, Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830–91] (“Anatomical Studies in red chalk.”).
Woodburn, 1842, no. 79 (“Anatomical study of a leg
etc . . . – very ﬁne.”). Robinson, 1870, no. 8 (Michel
Angelo. “[A]pparently of the early period of the master
circa AD 1500.”). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 8. Berenson,
1903, I, p. 184, no. 1550 (Recto: “possibly for the man
sustaining the expiring youth in the Deluge.” Verso: “for
the ﬁgure clinging to the tree.”). Thode, 1908, I, pp. 247,
258 (Recto: perhaps, but not certainly, for father carry-
ing son in the Flood. Verso: for ignudo right above Esa-
ias.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 193 (Recto: link with Sistine
Flood.); no. 194 (Verso: as recto.). Thode, 1913, no. 392
(As 1908, but less sure of these identiﬁcations.). Beren-
son, 1938, I, p. 199, no. 1550 (As 1903.). Wilde, 1953 exh.,
no. 121 (c. 1520, probably made in connection with the
Bearded Slave.). Parker, 1956, no. 314 (Studies probably
connect with Bearded Slave of c. 1520.). Dussler, 1959,
no. 340 (Michelangelo?. Early 1520s.). Berenson, 1961,
no. 1550 (As 1903/1938.). Hartt, 1971, no. 294 (Recto:
1527–39: for the Bearded Captive.); no. 295 (Verso: 1527–
30: probably for the Youthful Captive.). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 35 (c. 1520, probably made in connexion with
the Bearded Slave.). De Tolnay, 1976, Corpus II, no. 295
(Recto: probably for Bearded Slave. Verso: Hartt’s view
cited.).
CATALOGUE 21
Return of the Holy Family from Egypt?
1846.309; R.76. Lloyd, 1977, A66C
Dimensions: 650×535 mm
Medium
Apparently in a thin wash of brown oil on a lead-white
ground prepared in terra verde, on panel (Robinson gives
the support as chestnut wood.)
Description
The group, advancing frontally with perhaps a slight tack
to the viewer’s left, consists of two adults and two children,
all represented nude save for the female ﬁgure who is given
the outline of a costume. A form at the upper right is not
decipherable with any conﬁdence but might be the head
of an animal such as a donkey.
Discussion
This panel has provoked a good deal of discussion, and
the situation in 1977 is thoroughly and clearly laid out in
Christopher Lloyd’s catalogue of that date, from which
much of what follows depends.
The subject of the panel has not been much disputed.
Berenson did hint at the possibility that it might be pagan,
but did not pursue this idea with any conviction, and there
seems to be little doubt that the central ﬁgure is the Virgin
and that the children are Christ and St. John. Although
de Tolnay suggested that the male ﬁgure on the left might
be the prophet Isaiah, there is no good reason for seeing
him as anyone other than Joseph, the only mature man
who might be permitted to touch the Christ Child while
simultaneously, it would seem, placing a protective arm
behind the Virgin.
The design is clearly Michelangelesque and, as all stu-
dents of Michelangelo have noted, relates most obvi-
ously to his Epifania cartoon of c. 1553, made for his
pupil Ascanio Condivi, and now in the British Museum
(W75/Corpus 389; black chalk, 2327×1656 mm). As a
consequence, and perhaps also inﬂuenced by their shared

CATALOGUE 21
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
133

134
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 21
provenance from the King of Naples, the present panel,
whether or not it is given to Michelangelo, is often placed
close to the Epifania in date. The narrative appears to be
similar, and the four most important actors are presum-
ably identical in both, although the young man on the left
side of the Epifania and the subsidiary ﬁgures of whom
only the heads are visible behind the foreground group,
are not included here. However, even though the style of
the Epifania is exceptionally heavy, with the ﬁgural forms
ﬂattening out as they approach the front plane, like forms
pressed against glass, as Wilde observed, the ﬁgure-style
of the present panel is much less inﬂated; furthermore, the
ﬁgures are clearly advancing, unlike the ambiguous sta-
sis of those in the Epifania. Although its individual forms
differ from those in early pictorial designs by Michelan-
gelo, the Epifania looks back, in its relief-like organisation,
avoidance of depth, and stress on surface, with several
vertically aligned ﬁgures placed side by side, to paint-
ings such as the Manchester Madonna, probably of the
early 1490s, and the Entombment, probably of shortly after
1500, both now in the National Gallery, London (respec-
tively NG809; tempera on wood, 104.5×77 cm, and
NG790; oil on wood, 161.7×149.9 cm). Michelangelo,
that is to say, was throughout his life consistent in his com-
mitment to a similar manner of treating certain types of
sacred themes. This treatment also informs the present
panel, and it seems more appropriate to consider this
as demonstrating Michelangelo’s continuity of approach
rather than seeing all works in which it appears as neces-
sarily contemporary. As noted by Lloyd, a weak drawing
in the Bloxam Collection of Rugby School, A Woman
Leading Two Children with One Held by the Hand (Inv. 19;
black chalk, 270×199 mm, ex-collection of Sir Thomas
Lawrence, purchased by Bloxam at Woodburn’s posthu-
mous sale of 1860, lot 106 for the far from princely sum
of £2.0.0) shows a similar motif and, although it can-
not be attributed to an identiﬁable associate of the master
(we have no knowledge of the drawing style of Ascanio
Condivi, who is an obvious candidate), still less to
Michelangelo himself, it presumably reﬂects once again
his interest in this motif and may even copy a lost sketch
by him of the 1550s.
There is further visual evidence that the basic arrange-
ment and central ﬁgural complement of the Epifania were
not new to Michelangelo c. 1553. The recto of a large,
now dismembered, drawing of which two fragments sur-
vive in the Louvre (Inv. 710 and 725/J22 and 23/Corpus
235 and 230; black chalk, respectively 375×130 mm and
223×123 mm; this sheet must originally have measured
at least 500×350 mm) showed a woman walking forward
holding a child in each hand. Her identity, and those of
the children, of whom only parts survive, cannot be deter-
mined with certainty, but they are in all probability, the
Virgin, the Child, and St. John. This drawing, which is
generally dated c. 1520, indicates that at least some of the
central visual ideas of the Epifania were established some
thirty years before that was conceived. Like the Virgin
in the present panel, the woman in the Louvre drawing
is drawn nude, with a similar garment riding high under
her breasts, lightly indicated over her.
It is impossible to say whether the Louvre drawing
once contained further ﬁgures, such as the Joseph seen
at the left in the present panel, but the types of the ﬁg-
ures and their arrangement in both are close enough to
suggest that the relation of the two works is tighter than
the simple sharing of a motif. The ﬁgures in the Louvre
drawing before it was dismembered were larger than those
in almost all surviving drawings by Michelangelo save his
cartoons, and although they do not match the size of
the present ﬁgures, they are not much smaller. The rela-
tion provides support for the view that the present panel
is datable at about the same time as the Louvre draw-
ing, c. 1520. And such a dating is reinforced by the ﬁg-
ural types. The proportions of the ﬁgure of the Virgin
here are similar to those of Christ in Michelangelo’s
preparatory drawing of c. 1516 in the British Museum
for the Flagellation to be painted by his friend Sebas-
tiano in the Borgherini chapel of San Pietro in Montorio
in Rome (BM W15/Corpus 73; red chalk over sty-
lus indications, 235×236 mm). Among female ﬁgures
drawn by Michelangelo, she may be compared with the
mourning ﬁgures of Heaven and Earth ﬂanking the seated
Duke, in Michelangelo’s autograph modello of 1520–21,
also in the Louvre, for the tomb of Duke Giuliano (Inv.
838/J27/Corpus 186; brush and brown wash over black
chalk and stylus work, 321×203 mm), and her elon-
gated and sinuous body, which could easily be that of
a Venus, is comparable to those of two female nudes
drawn by Michelangelo around the middle of the 1520s
one in the Casa Buonarroti (CB53F recto/B174/Corpus
229bis; red chalk; 353×242 mm) and the other in the
Ufﬁzi (251F/B243; red and black chalk with pen and ink,
273×133 mm). Both of the drawings in Florence probably
represent Venus; the ﬁrst was perhaps made in preparation
of a statue, the second is a sketch for a now-lost Presen-
tation Drawing recorded in a copy by Francesco Salviati
(Ufﬁzi 14673F, red chalk, 355×243 mm). The similarity
of these two ﬁgures to the Virgin in the present panel
demonstrates the overlapping of the divine and the erotic
in Michelangelo’s work of this time.
The
relatively
thick-waisted
proportions
of
the
Joseph – tenderly attentive to the Child’s tentative

CATALOGUE 21
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
135
ambulation – are similar, if less pronouncedly muscular,
to those of the ﬁrst of the group of slaves that Michelan-
gelo carved during his third Florentine period, the Young
Slave and the Bearded Slave. These relations too suggest a
date of around 1520. Sir John Pope-Hennessy, reviewing
Lloyd’s catalogue, remarked that the forms of the chil-
dren were “totally un-Michelangelesque,” and although
this is something of an exaggeration, it must be acknowl-
edged that no close parallel can be found at least for the
form of the Child in Michelangelo’s work. Neverthe-
less, the nature of the action – the Child is obviously
being taught to walk – is not one that Michelangelo illus-
trated elsewhere in painting or drawing (although His ﬁrst
independent steps – and their inevitable consequence –
are a central conceit in the Bruges Madonna), and the
Child’s forms do not seem to the compiler to consti-
tute a strong argument against Michelangelo’s authorship.
Indeed, although Michelangelo’s responsibility cannot be
afﬁrmed with certainty, it is clear that virtually every
aspect of this painting links more closely with his work
than with that of any other artist and, if it were removed
from him, would have to be given to a pupil following
his design. No known pupil, however, was capable of so
imposing and conﬁdent a formulation.
The technique of this underdrawing, with the ﬁgures
ﬁrst indicated nude with a fairly broad brush, and then the
outlines of the Virgin’s garment superimposed in darker
wash, with a more incisive line, are similar to Michelan-
gelo’s method in some of his black chalk drawings of
c. 1520, such as those in the Louvre and Casa Buonarroti
as mentioned earlier, but it obviously cannot be paral-
leled in any of Michelangelo’s surviving paintings. The
only two unﬁnished panel paintings generally accepted as
his, the Manchester Madonna and the Entombment, display
different kinds of lower layers, and the unﬁnished Epifania
painted by Condivi to Michelangelo’s design (Florence,
Casa Buonarroti) is different again. Nor is any of these
panels prepared with so rough a surface as the present
one, which would have created a disturbing effect had
pigment been applied directly over it. Michelangelo was
no doubt employing a transposed fresco technique: He
was treating the rough layer as an arriccio, on which the
composition is laid out like the sinopia of a fresco, and he
intended to cover this with a smoother layer, correspond-
ing to the intonaco of a fresco, on which he would work up
the ﬁnal surface. Once again, this technical eccentricity
(Mr. Martin Wyld of the National Gallery, who kindly
examined this panel on behalf of the Ashmolean Museum,
remarked that he had never seen anything precisely like
it) counts in favour of Michelangelo’s authorship rather
than against it.
If it is accepted as by Michelangelo, the purpose of this
panel is entirely conjectural. However, Michelangelo was
frequently asked for works by his friends and acquain-
tances, and as pointed out by Wilde (1953a, p. 64), three
such requests are documented in 1522–3 alone. It seems
that Michelangelo rarely satisﬁed them but sometimes at
least considered doing so: It may be that the present work
is the relic of some such response.
It is necessary to address another issue, the panel’s
provenance. Although it has not been traced in any inven-
tory, there is no reason to doubt that it was in the collec-
tion of the King of Naples in the mid-eighteenth century.
The remains of the Farnese collection of drawings were
there as were the cartoons by Michelangelo once owned
by Paolo Orsini, in particular the famous Epifania. But
it is surprising if, as the compiler has sustained, there
is only a thematic link between the present panel and
the Epifania cartoon, that both should have been in the
same collection. Taken at face value, the common proven-
ance could well be taken as indicating that the panel and
the Epifania cartoon are roughly contemporary, and that
the compiler is wrong in his dating of the present panel to
c. 1520. A related – but not dependent – issue is the panel’s
place of origin. If it could be dated c. 1516 or earlier, or
c. 1532 or later, it could have been executed in Rome
rather than Florence, and if so, this would at least provide
a common geographical origin for the two works. But
Michelangelo did sometimes transport works from one
city to the other, and even if the panel was painted in
Florence, as the compiler thinks, there is no insuperable
barrier to its having migrated to Rome. In sum, although
the compiler would acknowledge that there are obstacles
to his views, he would continue to sustain that the panel
was laid in by Michelangelo in Florence c. 1520.
It is further surprising, even disconcerting, that another
sketch on panel, but one whose grounding is much
smoother than the present one, has also been claimed to
have been in the collection of the King of Naples. This
is Christ and the Woman of Samaria, now in the Walker
Art Gallery Liverpool (Inv. 2789; brown oil wash on
a grey-green gesso ground, on poplar, 777×692 mm).
This panel was exhibited at an imprecise date, but prob-
ably early in 1801, at 118 Pall Mall (the Milton Gallery)
as no. 52, when its provenance was said to be uncertain.
It appeared at Ottley’s sale in London on 16 May 1801, as
lot 7, as ascribed to Michelangelo, and was described as
follows:
‘The Samaritan Woman at the Well’. The preparation for
a picture perhaps intended to be ﬁnished by himself. M.
Angelo is generally believed to have painted only two or

136
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 21
three pictures in oil: those small ones that we so frequently
see ascribed to him, are all painted by his scholars, from his
designs; many have been painted from his drawings, which
formerly had a place in the collection of the King of Naples,
at Capi di Monte. 1 ft 11 inches×2 ft 7 inches on panel.
This statement has subsequently been interpreted as indi-
cating that the Christ and the Woman of Samaria came from
the collection of the King of Naples, but that is not in
fact what Ottley says. It seems likely, therefore, that a
Neapolitan provenance can be discounted and that there
need be no historical connection between the Liverpool
panel and the present one.
Of course, whatever its history, the Liverpool panel
could, in principle, be an autograph work, but no recent
scholar has attempted seriously to sustain this view, nor
does it appear viable to the compiler. The forms of Christ,
the slackness of the drawing, the pedantry of detail and the
lack of breadth, indicate quite clearly that it is a copy, and
more probably the underpainting of one intended to be
coloured rather than a self-sufﬁcient grisaille. Many artists
could have been responsible for such a work, but with vir-
tual certainty the more obvious painters in Michelangelo’s
circle – Giulio Clovio, Marcello Venusti, or Daniele da
Volterra – can be ruled out because the Liverpool panel’s
style corresponds to nothing in the work of any of them.
There is, of course, no warrant whatsoever for the belief
that Michelangelo actually produced a painting of the
subject: His gifts to Vittoria Colonna seem to have been
conﬁned to drawings. Nor is it remotely likely, even had
Michelangelo decided to produce a painted version, that
he would have copied his own design exactly.
The Liverpool Christ and the Woman of Samaria was
sold – or rather bought in – for 28 guineas in 1801, a
price that, while not derisory, is well below what even an
unﬁnished panel believed to be by Michelangelo would
have fetched. It seems to have remained with Ottley and at
its two reappearances in 1811 fetched less than 10 pounds.
However, it must be acknowledged that when it reap-
peared for a ﬁnal time at William Roscoe’s sale, it fetched
the much healthier sum of £52.10.0 (see Morris and
Hopkinson, 1977).
History
King of Naples; William Young Ottley; Sir Thomas
Lawrence; Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley, 1808–23, p. 31 (The “return of the holy family
from Egypt (a sketch made by him on board, formerly in
the collection of the King of Naples at Capo di Monte,
and now in my Possession)”; together with “the annun-
ciation, the holy family, Christ and the Samaritan woman
at the well; Christ praying in the garden, the cruciﬁxion;
and the Pieta, of which he gave a version to the Marchesa
of Pescara,” “and the resurrection of Christ” part of a
series of designs preparing frescoes the side walls of the
Sistine chapel. The martyrdom of St. Peter and the con-
version of St. Paul were perhaps also originally intended
to be painted in the Sistine chapel.). Lawrence Inventory,
1830, no. 12 [1830-2] (“A grisaille in black and white in
oil, female with two children, etc.”). Woodburn, 1836b,
no. 71 (“the return of the holy family from egypt – a
slight sketch in oil on board, highly interesting, as it shews
his progress of work, he has drawn the ﬁgures unclothed,
and has marked in some parts of the drapery over the
naked ﬁgures. This curious and indisputable grisaille is
probably unique. Size, 26 inches by 21 inches. From the Col-
lection of the King of Naples, at the Capo di Monti, and W. Y.
Ottley, Esq., it is mentioned in the Italian School of Design,
page 31.”). The Athenaeum, 16 July 1836 (“[T]he curious
oil sketch.”). Fisher, 1852, p. 5, pl. 27 (“[A] sketch in oil
on board, very instructive as showing his mode of work-
ing.”). Fisher, 1865, p. 5, pl. 27 (As 1852.). Robinson,
1870, no. 76 (It “should be ascribed to the later period
of Michelangelo’s career.” No indications in the work of
the role that Ottley suggests.). Fisher, 1872, I, p. 17, pl. 27
(As 1852.). Black, 1875, p. 215, no. 65 (The Return from
Egypt.). Fisher, 1879, XLVII/pl. 49 (“Joseph, following,
seems to be guiding the tottering steps of the infant. The
head of the ass is faintly indicated in the background at the
opposite side. The Virgin is clad in a tunic with a girdle
round her waist, but her ﬁgure, like the rest, was origi-
nally drawn in the nude, the outlines being discernible.”).
Berenson, 1938, no. 1725a, p. 239 (“It is tempting to
give this sketch to M. himself in a phase between the
Cavalieri compositions and the Last Judgement. . . . It is
probably not by the great master himself,” but it can-
not be given to a speciﬁc follower. Obviously related
to the Epifania cartoon, but “the forms are much more
elegant. . . . If done before the BM cartoon, we must grant
that it is either M’s own, which is unlikely, or a fairly accu-
rate transcript of a drawing by him.” Subject enigmatic
“perhaps it develops the subject of Raphael’s Madonna
del Passeggio.”). Berenson, 1961, no. 1725a, pp. 399–400
(As 1938.). Hartt, 1964, p. 55. Lloyd, 1977, pp. 116–19
(Full account; cites different opinions.). Pope-Hennessy,
1977, p. 319 (“[W]hat appears to be the correct interpre-
tation of the subject is found in a footnote . . . the types
of the two children are totally un-Michelangelesque.”).
De Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III, p. 53 (Return from Egypt; by
an anonymous follower of Michelangelo, inspired by the

CATALOGUES 21–22
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
137
Epifania. “L’accento di questa composizione per`o non `e
pi`u quello sacrale del cartone michelangelesco ma pi`u
intimo e domestico.” Redates panel to 1500–5.). Mor-
ris and Hopkinson, 1977, p. 124 (Similar provenance to
the Liverpool painting. The Ashmolean painting “how-
ever, unlike [Liverpool] 2789, could be intepreted as
an under-drawing for a painting.”). Joannides, 1981b,
p. 684 (Maintains date of c. 1515–20 suggested to
Lloyd. Remarks “unnerving that this panel shares a
provenance with the similarly sketched-in but qual-
itatively much inferior panel in Liverpool.”). Perrig,
1991, pp. 90–1 (By Condivi, like the Epifania car-
toon.). Perrig, 1999, pp. 239–40 (As 1991; from Farnese
Collection.).
CATALOGUE 22
A Sibyl?
1846.71; R.30; P.II 325; Corpus 98
Dimensions: 265×199 mm
Medium
Pen and ink with some later retouchings, linked to the
repairs and patching to the sheet.
Condition
Extensive damage to the primary support by ink burn
has been restored. There is a horizontal pressed-out fold,
other creases, local staining, accretions, considerable dis-
colouration, and bleeding from the ink. The restored sup-
port is inlaid and possibly drummed to the backboard of
the mount; the verso is not visible.
Description
It is clear that this drawing was made over a pre-existing
drawing or drawings, also in pen and ink, many lines of
which are visible under the surface. As far as the compiler
can make them out, the lines appear to represent drapery
of some kind; the best suggestion that he can make is that
they indicate the fold structure of a turban. If this is cor-
rect, the most likely possibility is that the underdrawing is
an unﬁnished copy by Antonio Mini after a lost draw-
ing by Michelangelo, upon which Michelangelo then
imposed the Sibyl. An analogous case is found in a famous
drawing in the Louvre, Inv. 684 recto/J29/Corpus 95;
pen and ink over red chalk, 275×211 mm, although
there Michelangelo superimposed a drawing in pen over
his pupil’s red chalk copy of one of his own chalk
drawings.
Discussion
In its loose and rough handling of the pen, this drawing
is comparable to Cat. 23, but it is still more forceful. It
is difﬁcult to know if the snake-like forms drawn with
thicker lines at the upper left and upper centre of the
sheet represent some threatening force to which the ﬁgure
reacts, or whether her expression of alarm was justiﬁed by
the – presumably – retrospective addition of these forms.
That aspect of Michelangelo’s drawing style repre-
sented in the present drawing exerted some inﬂuence on
Bandinelli but still more strongly inﬂuenced Bartolom-
meo Passerotti and, through him, Agostino Carracci.
Such extreme drawings look even further forward to
aspects of Fuseli and Barry. The wild and grotesque side
of Michelangelo, for which he employs a handling of
pen distinctively different from his early manner, is seen
also in drawings in London (BM W29 recto/Corpus
97; pen and ink, 414×281 mm) and Paris (Louvre, Inv.
684/J29/Corpus 95; pen over red chalk, 277×213 mm).
The pen strokes tend to be thicker, longer, and directed
less to modelling the form than to producing heavy sim-
pliﬁcations. Nevertheless, it seems clear, both here and
in other drawings in the Ashmolean and elsewhere, that
Michelangelo was looking back to his own earlier draw-
ings and, to an extent, taking them as a starting point.
Indeed, de Tolnay dated several drawings of this type to
Michelangelo’s early years, and although his views have
not been followed by other scholars, and are unaccept-
able to the compiler, they are nevertheless understand-
able. Perhaps it was the effort of teaching during the
1520s, when Michelangelo seems to have set for Mini
exercises such as he himself had carried out in his youth,
that encouraged Michelangelo to consider and re-work
some of his earlier techniques and motifs: BM W29,
of the same period, as Wilde noted, develops the pose
of the Sistine Isaiah of 1508–9, and the present drawing
recalls, as he also observed, the seated Virgin in Louvre,
Inv. 685/J16/Corpus 26 of c. 1505–6.
The purpose of the present drawing is entirely conjec-
tural. Wilde pointed out its close similarity with W29, and
it may be that both were intended as companion ﬁgures in
some painted scheme, perhaps in a temporary decorative
structure planned around 1520, to be executed by some
other artist to Michelangelo’s designs. That it may have
been made as a gift, or at least that it was given to another
artist, is suggested by its employment some ﬁfty years later.
As Wilde was also ﬁrst to point out, the ﬁgure occurs in
reverse, labelled as Samia, in a fresco scheme in the Gal-
leria of Palazzo Sacchetti in the via Giulia in Rome. The
Galleria contains a series of frescoes representing Prophets
and Sibyls in simulated rectangular niches located above

138
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 22

CATALOGUE 22
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
139
door level. Most of these ﬁgures are taken from those by
Michelangelo on the Sistine ceiling, but because they are
given different identities from the originals, no trust can
be put in the label Samia. Thus, Michelangelo’s Delphica
in the same scheme is labelled Tiburtina, following the
erroneous inscription on the engraving by Adamo Ghisi,
Zacherias is labelled Osea, and Ioel is labelled Zacharias. It
seems evident that whatever the criterion of the selection
of Prophets and Sibyls to be represented, Michelangelo’s
ﬁgures were taken over casually, without attention to their
identities. The series of Prophets and Sibyls also includes
Ioram, taken from a drawing by Daniele da Volterra of
an unidentiﬁed king (Mus´ee du Louvre, Inv. 1525; black
chalk, 486×322 mm), probably made for the Sala Regia
but either never executed as a painting or destroyed. Three
other ﬁgures, Salomon, Roboam, and Ezechias might be
after designs by either Daniele or Girolamo Muziano.
Nevertheless, even if the present ﬁgure’s employment in
such a context reveals nothing of Michelangelo’s original
conception, the ﬁgure was at least not felt to be incom-
patible with those borrowed from the Sistine.
Above the Prophets and Sibyls, a frescoed frieze
extends around the Galleria. In this are represented some
of Michelangelo’s narrative scenes from the Sistine ceil-
ing plus copies after the David and Goliath by Daniele da
Volterra, now at Fontainebleau (see Cat. 46a), Raphael’s
Judgement of Solomon from the vault of the Stanza della Seg-
natura and the upper group from Michelangelo’s drawing
of the Attack of and Salvation from the Serpents, Cat. 34.
These scenes are adapted to ﬁt the horizontal spaces, and
some of them include additional ﬁgures taken from other
sources: In the Sacchetti Sacriﬁce of Noah, for example, are
found two bystanders borrowed from Michelangelo’s Last
Judgement.
Although the construction of the Galleria was proba-
bly completed in 1573 (Haslam, 1996) this series of fres-
coes was painted for the Cevoli family, who acquired
the palace only in 1576 after the death of Cardinal Gio-
vanni Ricci of Montepulciano, the previous owner. The
scheme was, with virtual certainty, executed by Daniele
da Volterra’s pupil, Giacomo Rocca, and its attribution
to him is due to Salerno (1973, p. 304) who points
out that while Rocca is not documented as their exe-
cutant, his authorship may be inferred from the infor-
mation provided by Baglione (1642, p. 66), who states
“per li Signori Cevoli nel lor palagio di strada Giulio
oper`o tutte le facciate, che guardano verso il Tevere lavo-
rate con grand numero di ﬁgure, ma vi si scorge la sua
maniera, benche si prevalesse delli disegni di Danielle,
et d’altri, e in questi lavori metesse in opera diversi pit-
tori, poich`e da se stesso poco atto a farli si scorgeva.”
Although, as Salerno admits, Baglione’s reference is to
now-lost exterior frescoes, he points out that the attri-
bution is supported by what Baglione tells us about Gia-
como’s collection of drawings. Baglione says that Rocca
inherited the drawings of his master when Daniele died
in 1566, and the borrowing of Ioram from Daniele would
also support this linking. Baglione adds that Rocca inher-
ited from Daniele a number of drawings by Michelangelo,
which would suggest that the present drawing was once
owned by Daniele. These precise relations provide signiﬁ-
cant support for Salerno’s attribution. It has not previously
been noted that the ﬁgure in the present drawing recurs –
in its true direction – in a secure work by Rocca, the
unnamed Sibyl in the Cevoli chapel in Santa Maria degli
Angeli (listed by Baglione and reproduced in Pugliatti,
1984, ﬁg. 337). Giacomo Rocca was a relatively minor
artist about whom little is known, but he produced a
number of paintings in the 1560s and 1570s in Roman
churches.
The Palazzo Sacchetti copies of the Prophets and
Sibyls, which place Michelangelo’s ﬁgures within rect-
angular frames, are reasonably accurate renderings of the
originals both in form and colour. They seem, indeed,
of higher quality than much of Rocca’s surviving work
as reproduced in the study by Pugliatti (1984). How-
ever, it is worth noting, as well as remarking, that Rocca
set other painters to work in Palazzo Sacchetti. Baglione
also informs us that, as a youth, Giuseppe Cesari, the
Cavaliere d’Arpino, worked for Rocca and was much
impressed with his employer’s collection of Michelangelo
drawings. It may be, therefore, that the young Giuseppe
was involved in the execution of the Galleria.
Painted Copies
1. Rome Palazzo Sacchetti, Galleria, included, in reverse,
labelled Samia. Probably painted by Giacomo Rocca,
1570s, for the Cevoli family who then owned the palace.
2. Santa Maria degli Angeli, Cevoli chapel, lunette, also
by Giacomo Rocca (listed as his by Baglione; reproduced
Pugliatti, 1984, ﬁg. 337).
History
Daniele
da
Volterra?;
Giacomo
Rocca?;
Giuseppe
Cesari, the Cavaliere d’Arpino?; the Cicciaporci family
and Filippo Cicciaporci?; Bartolommeo Cavaceppi?;
Dominique-Vivant
Denon
(L.779);
Sir
Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti, Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830-115] (“The Delphic Sibyl, bold pen,

140
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 22–23
very ﬁne.”). Woodburn, 1836b, no. 16 (“[A] noble study
for one of the ﬁgures in the Sistine Chapel.”). Wood-
burn, 1842, no. 41 (As 1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 15
(As 1842.). Fisher, 1852, p. 5, pl. 21 (“[F]or one of the
ﬁgures in the Sistine Chapel.”). Woodburn, 1853, no.
20 (Reproduced.). Fisher, 1865, I, p. 18, pl. 21 (As
1852.). Robinson, 1870, no. 30 (Michel Angelo. Some
similarity to Delphica. “Not improbably . . . prepared for
the Sistine, but . . . ultimately discarded.”). Fisher, 1872,
I, p. 16, pl. 21 (As 1852.). Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 30
(“A draped female ﬁgure resembling” Delphica.). Gotti,
1875, II, p. 222. Fisher, 1879, XXI/23 (“[I]n the style
of the ﬁgures in the ceiling.”). Springer, 1883, I, p. 192
(For an unexecuted Sistine Sibyl.). Wickhoff, 1891,
p. ccviii (Passerotti.). Berenson, 1903, I, p. 266, no. 1704
(Passerotti. “[A] forgery so brilliant and of so ancient a
date that until the other day it had never aroused the
slightest suspicion.”). Colvin, 1905, III, no. 9 (Imita-
tor of Michelangelo, probably Bartolommeo Passerotti.
Stands or falls with [Cat. 23], “a production, not of
the great master himself, but of the most effective and
most specious of his imitators in pen-work.”). Stein-
mann, 1905, II, pp. 601, no. 45, 651 (By Passerotti; free
copy of Delphica; reproduced.). Jacobsen, 1907, p. 492
(Copy.). Thode, 1908, I, p. 255 (Study for a Sibyl; pos-
sibly a copy.). Thode, 1913, no. 418 (Not autograph;
probably a copy after a lost original.). De Tolnay, 1928a,
p. 70 (Rejected.). Berenson, 1935, p. 264 (By Andrea di
Michelangelo who may be Stefano di Tommaso Lunetti.).
Berenson, 1938, I, pp. 266, 362, no. 1704 (As 1935.).
Delacre, 1938, pp. 79, 108 (Michelangelo, not Passerotti;
“puissante ´etude.”). Wilde, 1953a, p. 60 (Michelangelo
c. 1525; cf. BM W29 recto/Corpus 97. Employed for
Samia in the painted ceiling of the Palazzo Sacchetti.).
Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 38 (“one of Michelangelo’s most
brilliant studies.” Contemporary with BM. W.29, c.
1520–4.). Parker, 1956, no. 325 (Michelangelo. Cer-
tainly connected with Palazzo Sacchetti Samia.). Dus-
sler, 1959, no. 613 (Rejected. By same routine hand as
[Cat. 23] and the verso of drawing in [Prince’s Gate Col-
lection/Corpus 101]; not to be linked with BM W29
recto/Corpus 97, as Wilde claims.). Berenson, 1961, no.
1704 (As 1903/1938.). Weinberger, 1967, p. 341 (Imita-
tor of Michelangelo, but not Passerotti.). Hartt, 1971, no.
160 (1517–18?. St. Reparata, perhaps for right return of the
mezzanine on the San Lorenzo fac¸ade.). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 99 (“one of Michelangelo’s most brilliant stud-
ies.” Contemporary with BM W29 recto/Corpus 97.).
De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 98 (Michelangelo, 1515–
20, probably for the 1516 project of the Julius Tomb.).
Perrig, 1982, pp. 14–20 (By Antonio Mini, reﬂecting
Michelangelo’s early drawing style. Mini also responsible
for the hatching on Louvre 685 recto/J16/Corpus 95.).
Perrig, 1999, p. 282 (As 1982.).
CATALOGUE 23
An Old Woman? and a Child
1846.70; R.31; P.II 324; Corpus 83bis (inadvertently
omitted)
Dimensions: 329×192 mm
Medium
Pen and ink, black chalk.
Condition
The primary support is lined. There is a vertical crease, a
major toned inﬁll, minor repairs, fractures from ink burn-
through, abrasion, and some skinning, together with
widespread discolouration.
Description
There are a number of apparently connected pen lines
under the right forearm and the attached drapery of this
ﬁgure, which are covered by the ﬁgure, but the compiler
is unable to decipher these. Partly crossing the head of
the child, and then rising at an angle of about 45◦are two
lines that terminate in a two-pronged form that seems to
be supporting a round object seen in proﬁle, on a level
with the aged person’s hand. If the compiler’s reading is
correct, this might indicate a right arm and hand holding
a mirror.
The lines and areas of black chalk appear to be over
rather than under the pen lines. It was not unknown for
Michelangelo to correct pen drawings in soft black chalk,
but it is uncertain whether what is seen here is correction,
or simply the marks of an offset from another drawing.
Discussion
The purpose of this drawing is unknown, and the sex
of the main ﬁgure is disputed: It is indeed difﬁcult to
be sure whether it is male or female, although the com-
piler would, on balance, opt for female. The drawing
obviously revives Michelangelo’s early interest in the
forms of Masaccio in its grand fall of draperies, but
the characterisation gives the ﬁgure a humorous, per-
haps sinister, edge. The hatching is less tight and deli-
cate than that of Michelangelo’s early exercises in cross-
hatched pen, and it was this bolder manner that younger

CATALOGUE 23
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
141

142
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 23
contemporaries such as Bandinelli and, still more obvi-
ously, Bartolommeo Passerotti, found attractive. It was
also a type of drawing much appreciated by later-
eighteenth-century artists, who took it as licence for
exaggerated effect. Although, in general, nineteenth-
century painters and sculptors focused more on the clas-
sicising forms of Michelangelo’s art, and his expressive
poses and gestures, it was predominantly Michelangelo’s
drawings of the ideal and the grotesque, especially heads,
that captured the imagination of writers until quite late
in the nineteenth century.
Around the time that this drawing was made – c. 1520 –
Michelangelo made a somewhat grotesque proﬁle draw-
ing of an old woman, which was once part of the same
sheet as a study of a younger woman seen from the back
(both Paris, Louvre, Inv. 710 recto and 725 recto/J22
and 23/Corpus 235 and 230; black chalk, respectively
375×130 mm and 232×123 mm). The original recto
of this large sheet, now the verso (which must origi-
nally have measured at least 500×350 mm), contained
a now fragmentary drawing of a walking woman with
two children. (For further discussion of this group, see
Cat. 21.) It is not clear whether the two ﬁgures on the
original verso were separate studies or were intended to
co-exist in the same composition. But in any case, taken
as a group, these drawings show Michelangelo’s interest in
representing contrasting female types around 1520. This
interest might have been stimulated by the reliefs repre-
senting Orpheus Singing and the Nymphs in the Garden of
the Hesperides, on an early and discarded project for the
tomb of the Magniﬁci in the New Sacristy (the clearest
copy is that by Raffaello da Montelupo on Ufﬁzi 607E;
pen and ink, 220×136 mm).
Of course, such an interest also continues that in semi-
grotesque types seen in the Ancestors of Christ on the
Sistine vault. There is a particularly close relation between
the old person in the present drawing and the old man
on the right of the Salmon-Booz-Obeth lunette and the
link extends further in that both ﬁgures stare at carved
faces on staffs that they hold before them. The witch-like
characteristics of the ﬁgure here were remarked on by sev-
eral earlier commentators and even though it may seem
unlikely, it is not to be excluded a priori that Michelan-
gelo might have planned to represent some scene of
witchcraft. That such subjects were in circulation at this
time in Central Italy (as well as in Germany, where they
were common) is shown by a famous engraving of a
Witches Sabbath by Agostino Veneziano (The Illustrated
Bartsch 27, p. 114, no. 426-1), whose design is sometimes
attributed to Raphael.
Berenson suggested that Bacchiacca employed this
drawing for the ﬁgure of an old woman in his panel (often
called a birth-plate, a function difﬁcult to reconcile with
the subject), Ghismonda with the Heart of Guiscardo, Coral
Gables, Florida, Joe and Emily Lowe Art Gallery; Kress
Collection, K.308. However, as pointed out by Abbate,
1969, the source of that ﬁgure is more likely one of the
Sistine Ancestors, Obeth. But the standing female ﬁgure
second from right in Bacchiacca’s panel does seem to show
awareness of a drawing by Michelangelo now known only
in copies, for example one in Windsor, PW263.
Drawn Copies
1. Lille, Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts, Brejon de Lavergn´ee,
no. 1098; pen and ink, 332×164 mm. This copy is on
a slightly larger scale than the original. Attributed by
Morelli to Baccio Bandinelli, it might be by Battista
Franco.
2. Formerly
Springell
Collection,
sold
Sotheby’s,
London, 18 February 1991, lot 159; pen and ink, 334×164
mm, torn and made up at lower right. From the collec-
tions of Nathaniel Hone, Sir Joshua Reynolds (L.2364),
and Sir Thomas Lawrence. The pen style of this copy
resembles that of Baccio Bandinelli. This is no doubt the
copy referred to by Lawrence in the note to Ottley pub-
lished by Williams, 1831, II, pp. 356–7 (see mention in
References).
3. British Museum, unmounted series, Cracherode Ff
1–4; pen and ink, 212×129 mm, on paper bearing a
watermark of a ﬂower with a narrow, arrow-shaped bud
ﬂanked by two clover-like leaves (cf. Cat. 60). The mount
bears the initials of William Young Ottley and the number
4. Like the present drawing, it may have been owned by
Ottley who, in that case, would have sold it to Cracherode
shortly before the latter’s death and the bequest of his col-
lection to the British Museum. However, after he became
Keeper of Prints and Drawings in the British Museum,
Ottley inventoried parts of the collection, in the process
applying his initials to the mounts of many drawings, so
their appearance on a drawing’s mount does not prove
that it had been in his possession.
It is evident that this draughtsman had access to further
drawings by Michelangelo: On the verso are two ground
plans of what appears to be a large private house and a
partial sketch of a door (or a window) with a segmen-
tal pediment and ﬂat pilasters with raised edges, both of
which could well be after lost drawings by Michelan-
gelo. The plan might ﬁt three studies connected by de
Tolnay with the initial planning of what is now the
Casa Buonarroti (AB XI, fol. 722 verso/B347/Corpus
584; CB 33A/B41/Corpus 585; and CB 119A/B156/
Corpus 588), and whether or not Tolnay’s interpreta-
tion of their function is correct, the date is certainly
appropriate because the recto of AB XI, fol. 722 bears a

CATALOGUES 23–24
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
143
letter to Michelangelo dated 27 April 1518. The door
appears to be of the New Sacristy phase. These con-
junctions would tend to support a date for Cat. 23 of
c. 1520.
The British Museum drawing is a good free copy, not
a replica, and is smaller than the original. It would be
tempting, in principle, to give it to Battista Franco, but
the compiler can ﬁnd nothing sufﬁciently close to it in
his work to sustain such an attribution.
History
Revil; William Young Ottley; Sir Thomas Lawrence (the
remains of a stamp at lower left?); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830-51i] (“A female probably intended for
a witch with a boy, bold pen with a copy” [probably
copy 2].). Williams, 1831, II, pp. 356–7 (“About the year
1810, Mr. Ottley had picked up an old drawing that had
belonged to Sir Joshua Reynolds, who had written under
it the name of Donatello, in indication of his attributing
it to the pencil of that artist. . . . Mr. Ottley, however, an
undisputed judge, of the ﬁnest discrimination, was inti-
mately acquainted with the style and works of Michael
Angelo, the god of Sir Joshua’s idolatry; and he wrote
under the drawing in pencil, ‘a presso Michael Angelo.’
Being at Paris in 1820, Mr. Ottley by chance saw in a
shop the original drawing, and immediately became its
purchaser. The subject was an old Sorceress or Prophetess;
one of the ﬁnest of Michael Angelo’s productions. On his
return to England Mr. Ottley presented it to Sir Thomas
Lawrence, who wrote to him the following note, upon
the spur of the moment of its arrival: . . . ‘My Dear Sir,
The Beauty is arrived. The copy is tolerably accurate;
but it is just in what it differs that the superior grandeur
of the original consists.’”). Woodburn, 1836b, no. 54
(“[F]ull of expression; it is probably from life, but has
a witch-like character.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 39 (As
1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 7 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1852,
p. 5, pl. 22 (“[P]robably from life.”). Fisher, 1865, I, p. 18,
pl. 22 (As 1852.). Woodburn, 1853, no. 25 (Reproduced.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 31 (Michel Angelo “in the same
powerful style as many of the pen studies for the Sis-
tine ceiling.”). Fisher, 1872, I, p. 16, pl. 21 (As 1852.).
Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 31. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 239. Fisher,
1879, XXII/24 (“[G]randly draped.”). Morelli, 1891–2,
col. 377, no. 36 (Lille version by Bandinelli.). Wickhoff,
1891, p. ccviii (Passerotti.). Justi, 1900, p. 160 (Possibly
Ruth and Obeth.). Berenson, 1903, I, p. 266, no. 1705
(Passerotti. Forgery based on drapery of God the Father
from the Creation of Eve and the Boaz on the Sistine ceil-
ing.). Colvin, 1905, III, no. 8 (Imitator of Michelangelo,
probably Bartolommeo Passerotti, author of “a number
of slashingly energetic and showy pen-drawings in which
he imitates and outdoes the looser followers of Michelan-
gelo, especially Baccio Bandinelli.”). K. Frey, 1907, p. 22
(Not Michelangelo; copy in Lille.). Thode, 1913, p. 210
(After the original in Lille.). Berenson, 1935, p. 264 (By
Andrea di Michelangelo who may be identical with Ste-
fano di Tommaso Lunetti.). Berenson, 1938, I, pp. 266,
362, no. 1705 (As 1935. Figure known to Bacchiacca
who used it in his Birth Plate [now in Coral Gables].).
Delacre, 1938, pp. 79, 98, 101–2, 108 (Michelangelo:
“cette tragique sorci`ere.” Neither this original nor Lille
copy are by Bandinelli or Passerotti.). Wilde, 1953 exh.,
no. 41 (Michelangelo, contemporary with Cat. 22 and
BM W29.). Parker, 1956, no. 324 (Michelangelo. Com-
pares with Christ Before Pilate of 1516–20. Unclear why it
should be dated c. 1520–4. Similar ﬁgure in Bacchiacca’s
desco da parte [now in Coral Gables], but no conclusions
can be drawn from that as to the signiﬁcance of this draw-
ing.). Dussler, 1959, no. 614 (Rejected. Strongly inﬂu-
enced by Michelangelo, early 1520s.). Berenson, 1961,
no. 1705 (As 1903/1938.). Weinberger, 1967, p. 341 (Imi-
tator of Michelangelo, but not Passerotti.). Hartt, 1971,
no. 155 (1517–18. Not a woman; St. Cosmas with one of
his brothers for a ground-ﬂoor niche in the left return
of the San Lorenzo fac¸ade.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no.
89 (Michelangelo, c. 1515–17. Relation to Cat. 14 recto
and to medal of Michelangelo by Leone Leoni. Perhaps,
like that, an illustration of Psalms 51:15.). Perrig, 1982,
pp. 14–20 (By Antonio Mini, reﬂecting Michelangelo’s
early drawing style. Mini responsible also for the hatching
on Louvre Inv. 685 recto/J16/Corpus 26.). Hirst, 1988,
p. 11 (Michelangelo; close to caricature.). Perrig, 1991,
pp. 9–11, 28, ﬁg. 54 (Mini.). Wind, 2000, p. 108 (Trans-
formation of the Sistine Boaz “into a frightening old hag”;
anonymous, reproduced as Michelangelo?.). Perrig, 1999,
pp. 250–1 (As 1991.).
CATALOGUE 24
Recto: Head of a Man
Verso: Two Standing Draped Figures
1846.73; R.2; P.II 327; Corpus 8
Dimensions: 270×180 mm. This sheet has been divided
to separate the verso ﬁgures and then rejoined.
Medium
Pen and ink; a smudge of black chalk at the upper left of
the recto.

144
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 24

CATALOGUE 24
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
145

146
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 24
Condition
The sheet is cut vertically down the centre with exten-
sive repairs, several punctures, an irregular edge-cut, a
number of handling creases, and local cockling. There
are major edge and corner inﬁlls, extensive skinning, and
numerous fractures and tears, some repaired. There is
considerable discolouration and staining from bleeding
of the ink, with show-through. The sheet is generally
discoloured.
Inscriptions
Recto: Upper left: effaced inscription in black chalk:
B . . . ?
Lower centre: mutilated inscription in pen, read by Parker
as B . . . roti but unclear to the compiler.
Lower right: Robinson’s numbering in graphite: 2.
Verso: A large number 69 in black chalk at the lower
centre; this does not correspond to anything in the known
history of this sheet.
Discussion
Recto
Like Cat. 33 this sheet of drawings was dated to c. 1500
by de Tolnay, and, once again, although this is not con-
vincing, it does indicate retrospection on Michelangelo’s
part. Indeed, the recto head has sometimes been consid-
ered to be a copy after a quattrocento fresco, perhaps by
an artist such as Castagno, and even though no precise
source has been found, this possibility cannot be ruled
out. Michelangelo certainly encouraged Antonio Mini
to follow a course of training similar to his own, copying
the old masters, and he may have returned to his own ear-
lier practices here as an example to his pupil. It could, in
principle, reﬂect a quattrocento portrait but, on balance,
it seems more likely to be an invention “in the manner
of ” than a copy.
It is worth recalling in connection with this drawing,
as with Cats. 22 and 33, that Michelangelo distinguished
among the high, medium, and low styles, and that his
drawings, and their actors, show his capacity for repre-
senting the low. In a letter of June 1520 to Cardinal Bib-
biena, he employed the simile of the pleasure of coarse
food after a surfeit of reﬁnement. When a head such as the
present one is compared with Cat. 31, one can appreciate
the contrast.
The swivelled eyes are seen frequently in the Ancestors
of Christ. The early identiﬁcation of this head as that of
Bartolommeo Colleoni is implausible – it bears no rela-
tion to the head of Colleoni in Verrocchio’s equestrian
statue – but it does indicate that at least some of Michelan-
gelo’s “ideal” heads were thought to be of speciﬁc individ-
uals. The suggestion of Colleoni may be an unconscious
acknowledgement of the place of such a drawing in the
tradition of Leonardo and his master Verrocchio.
Verso
The draped ﬁgures cannot be connected with a spe-
ciﬁc project, but they are close in form to some of the
bystanders at the upper left of the composition of the Mar-
tyrdom of Saint Lawrence, designed by Baccio Bandinelli
around 1525 in preparation for a fresco to be executed on
one of the side walls of the choir of San Lorenzo (fac-
ing another representing the Martyrdom of Saints Cosmas
and Damian, for which no drawings have been identiﬁed)
but never executed and known in an engraving by Mar-
cantono Raimondi. Perhaps this drawing was given or
shown to Bandinelli by Michelangelo whilst they were
still friendly.
Some previous owner cut the sheet to obtain two sep-
arate ﬁgure studies from the verso, but, happily, seems to
have repented of this vandalism and rejoined it.
Drawn Copies
1. Dresden, Kupferstich-Kabinett, Inv. no. C54; pen and
ink, 300×215 mm. A same-size copy of the verso, made
before the sheet was cut down, probably within the six-
teenth century. From the collections of Sir Peter Lely
(L.2092), Nathaniel Hone (L.2793), Sir Joshua Reynolds
(L.2364), and Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445). Lawrence’s
ownership of this copy was established by Prof. Dr. Wolf-
gang Holler, who also provided the information that it
was acquired by Dresden at or after the Woodburn sale
of 1860. It cannot be identiﬁed in the sale and was pre-
sumably included in one of the multiple lots.
2. Haarlem, Teyler Museum A∗11/VT 78; pen and ink
over traces of black chalk, 293×214 mm, the upper cor-
ners chamfered. A same-size copy of the verso, made
before the sheet was cut down. The inscription on this
copy indicates that it was owned by the Bona Roti Col-
lector, and that, therefore, it must be of the sixteenth
century.
Engraved Copies
Recto
1. Windsor, Royal Library, Inv. 809565, the recto
engraved in reverse by an unidentiﬁed engraver G.D.,
190×156 mm. Inscribed: Bartolomei Coleoni efﬁgieis `a
M. Ang. Bonaroto delineata. GD ead˜e lineam˜eta secutus inc.
1610. In his discussion of this rare print, known to him
in only one other example, Grifﬁths, 1993, no. 162,

CATALOGUE 25
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
147
emphasises that it “is of some interest in the history of
engraving as being one of the ﬁrst, if not the ﬁrst, attempts
to make an exact facsimile of a drawing.”
2. Published by Ottley, 1 May 1812, following p. 26 of
Ottley 1808–23, etched by F. C. Lewis, 177×133 mm.
Verso
3. Published by Ottley, 1 November 1808, facing p. 26 of
Ottley, 1808–23, etched by W. Y. Ottley, 296×193 mm.
History
William Young Ottley, his sale, 6 June 1814, etc., lot
1682 (“One – two draped ﬁgures, standing, bold pen –
engraved in Mr Ottley’s work – a head in proﬁle, full of
character, on the back” £35.0.0); Sir Thomas Lawrence
(no stamp); Samuel Woodburn.
References
GD, 1610 (Reduced and reversed engraving of recto.
The subject identiﬁed in the letterpress as Bartolommei
Colleoni.). Ottley, 1808–23, p. 26 and following plates
(Recto and verso: Michelangelo, early 1490s.). Ottley
sale, 6 June 1814, etc., lot 1682 (“One – two draped
ﬁgures, standing, bold pen – engraved in Mr Ottley’s
work – a head in proﬁle, full of character, on the back.”).
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti, Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830-104] (“Two Apostles largely Draped, on
the reverse a head full of expression, pen.”). Woodburn,
1836b, no. 91 (Verso alone catalogued.). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 32 (“[O]n the reverse is the head of a man in a cap.”).
Fisher, 1862, p. 5, pl. 18 [sic: pl. 19] (Recto and verso:
Michelangelo.). Fisher, 1865, II, p. 24, pl. 19 (As 1862.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 2 (Perhaps before 1500; classed with
Cats. 33, 58, and 113.). Fisher, 1872, II, p. 22, pl. 19 (As
1862.). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 2. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 237.
Fisher, 1879, II/2 (Recto; verso: “[A]quiline nose and
keen glancing eyes.”). Berenson, 1903, no. 1546 (Recto:
like [Cat. 33] and contemporary. Verso: “Powerful and
masterly.”). Thode, 1913, no. 388 (Same technique as
[Cat. 33]; engraved in 1610.). Panofsky, 1927–8, p. 241
(Mini.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1546 (As 1903.). Delacre,
1938, p. 90 (“[D]essin si particuli`erement vivant.”). Gold-
scheider, 1951, p. 179 and ﬁg. 200 (Recto: Battista
Franco.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 56 (Verso: usually dated
earlier but similar in style to [Cat. 28] and BM W29 dat-
able c. 1526.). Wilde, 1953a, p. 60 (“[A] variant of an ear-
lier invention of Michelangelo’s . . . the ﬁgure of the Vir-
gin” in Louvre 685 recto/J16/Corpus 26.). Parker, 1956,
no. 327 (Close connection with Cat. 33 and Haarlem
A22/VT 45/Corpus 10 recto and verso. “Though the
powerful study on the recto tips the balance to the side of
Michelangelo, it is undeniable that certain features com-
mon to the whole group are unusual, and that the attri-
bution to Franco deserves at least to be carefully consid-
ered.”). Dussler, 1959, no. 597 (Rejected; falls with Cat.
33. Not Mini. Link with Haarlem A22/VT 45/Corpus
10. Perhaps Battista Franco.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1546
(As 1903/1938.). Goldscheider, 1965, pl. Xb (As 1951.).
Weinberger, 1967, p. 342 (Recto: follower of Michelan-
gelo “an interpretation of a Castagno type and under
the direct inﬂuence of ” Louvre, Inv. 684/J29/Corpus
95.). Hartt, 1971, p. 390 (Recto and verso; rejected.).
De Tolnay, 1974, p. 15 (Recto: perhaps after Masac-
cio.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 103 (Verso: close in
style and handling to Cat. 33 and evidently dating from
the same period, c. 1526.). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I,
no. 8 (Recto: Michelangelo, 1504–5. Quattrocentesque
appearance. Reports Peter Meller’s suggestion that it may
reﬂect a head in Masolino’s Cruciﬁxion in San Clemente.
Verso: probably by Michelangelo, c. 1526, after sculp-
ture of the early quattrocento.). Sisi, 1988, no. 5 (Verso:
left-hand ﬁgure reproduces the ﬁgure at the right of
Jacopo della Quercia’s Circumcision on the door of San
Petronio. Right-hand ﬁgure a free interpretation of clas-
sical Sophocles type.); no. 21 (Recto: synthesis of var-
ious quattrocento types. Recalls proﬁle of Nicholas of
Tolentino by Andrea del Castagno and proﬁles by Uccello
on Duomo clock face.). Grifﬁths, 1993, p. 259 (Dis-
cussion of the engraving of the recto.). Van Tuyll van
Serooskerken, 2000, pp. 93–4 (This drawing and Cat. 33,
seem later and more developed than the sheet in Haar-
lem, A22/VT 45/Corpus 10.); p. 151, no. 78 (The Haar-
lem copy of the verso discussed; its inscription di Michel
Angelo buona Roti further supports the authenticity of the
Oxford sheet.).
CATALOGUE 25
Recto: Figure Sketches and a Study for a Wall Tomb
Verso: A Standing Figure
1846.53; R.42 (2); P.II 307; Corpus 187
Dimensions: 127×212 mm
Medium
Recto: Red chalk and black chalk with some use of ruler.
Verso: Red chalk.

148
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 25
Condition
Many inherent wrinkles run vertically through the sheet.
There are numerous edge nicks and some losses, repaired
tears, and toned inﬁlls are visible. There is edge abra-
sion, skinning, and adhesive residues, with a diagonal scuff
mark, general discolouration, and foxing. There are pulp
imperfections.
Description and Inscription
Recto
A. Probably in Michelangelo’s hand:
a di 16 di gugnio porta monagniola
. . . ve(n)tuno soldi al fornaio e chomi(n)cio taglie [nella
sagrestia?]
. . . nuova nel 1524
B. A three-bay two-story tomb with a sarcophagus below,
the central bay occupied by a seated ﬁgure in an act of
benediction and an indication in the right-hand bay of
a standing ﬁgure. At the upper centre, the lower section
of a rectangle is probably but not certainly part of the
structure.
Drawn with the right side of the sheet as the base
C. A bust, the arms perhaps attached behind, the head
turned slightly down to its right.
Drawn with the left side of the sheet as the base
D. A lightly indicated bust, the head turned in left proﬁle.
C and D seem to have been drawn after B.
Verso
A nude standing ﬁgure, seen from a low angle in left
proﬁle, the left leg bent, the left arm bent with the hand
supported on the waist, the right arm placed across the
body with the hand resting on the left knee, the head
turned to the left, looking down.
Discussion
Many different schemes and components were considered
during the planning stage of the Medici Tombs in the
New Sacristy of San Lorenzo, and new proposals inter-
vened even after a ﬁnal plan seemed to have been estab-
lished. Reassessment of the graphic material surviving
either in Michelangelo’s original drawings or in copies
has shown that complications were greater than had pre-
viously been assumed, and certain aspects of the project
remain obscure. However, the date and purpose of the
present drawing seem fairly clear.
The sheet is datable to 1524, as the inscription indicates,
but the drawing was probably made before the writing,
which allows for it. It seems to relate to a particular phase

CATALOGUE 25
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
149

150
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 25
and area of the project, as Wilde ﬁrst established. The
death of the Medici Pope Leo X – Michelangelo’s exact
contemporary – in December 1521, slowed work on the
New Sacristy, and even though components were deliv-
ered throughout the period, it seems that no work was
done on the tombs and sculpture until after the elec-
tion of Leo’s cousin, Cardinal Giulio dei Medici as Pope
Clement VII in November 1523. On 23 May 1524 and
again on May 29, Giovanni Francesco Fattucci wrote to
Michelangelo on behalf of Clement VII, taking up in a
new form a topic that had already concerned Clement,
then still a Cardinal, in 1520–1. Fattucci suggested that
to the monuments of the four Medici planned for the
chapel, that of Lorenzo the Magniﬁcent and his brother
Giuliano, and those of Giuliano, Duke of Urbino, and
Lorenzo, Duke of Nemours (respectively, the fathers and
the cousins of Leo X and Clement VII), should now be
added tombs for Leo and Clement. The New Sacristy
would now contain three double tombs rather than one
double and two single tombs. By June 7, Fattucci had
obviously received a reply from Michelangelo, now lost,
for on that day he wrote again. From his letter it may be
inferred that Michelangelo had stated that plans were too
far advanced to make it possible now to install three dou-
ble tombs and, indeed, that one of the ducal tombs had
nearly been built in. Instead, Michelangelo suggested one
of the small rooms either side of the choir, the so-called
lavamani, could be employed. In one of the corresponding
rooms in the Old Sacristy was placed Verrocchio’s mag-
niﬁcent wash basin, and this may have inspired Michelan-
gelo’s idea. It seems that Michelangelo had indicated that
both papal tombs would be placed in a single room – that
to the left of the choir – or, at any rate, that is how Fattucci
understood it because he, speaking on the Pope’s behalf,
responded that this seemed “un piccolo luogo per due
papi”; he also queried whether there would be sufﬁcient
illumination. By June 25, the date of Fattucci’s next let-
ter, Michelangelo had sent a drawing. It is not fully clear
whether he still intended to place both papal tombs in the
same lavamani, or whether he now planned to use both.
If the latter, which seems in principle the more likely, the
tombs would presumably have been placed on the inner
walls of each room. The present drawing was followed
up by Michelangelo with a slight sketch for a crown-
ing element for the tomb in Florence (Archivio Buonar-
roti XIII,160/B 350/Corpus 366; black chalk, 286×208
mm) and by a more elaborated but unﬁnished drawing
in the same collection (CB52A/ B256/Corpus 188; black
chalk and brush and wash, 337×228 mm) which is prob-
ably a draught of the drawing referred to by Fattucci
on June 25. This conﬁrms that the present drawing was
intended for a papal tomb for, in addition to performing
an act of benediction, the central seated ﬁgure also wears
a tiara.
The spaces of the lavamani are constrained. That on
the left is about 3.83 metres deep by 2.77 metres wide
(dimensions kindly checked by W. Dreesmann); that on
the right is also 3.85 metres deep but, at 3.34 a little
wider. That on the left has, against the exterior side wall,
a staircase descending to the crypt, so it was probably
the marginally larger room to the right of the cappelletta
in which Michelangelo initially considered placing the
tombs. As a consequence, Ackerman calculated, the sar-
cophagus to be included in the present project could be no
more than about 1.4 metres long. The small scale imposed
upon the tombs by the restricted dimensions of the lava-
mani does not invalidate the view that these designs were
planned for that location – Silvio Cosini had recently
executed the small but quite elaborate tomb of Antonio
Strozzi in Santa Maria Novella in which the sarcophagus
is symbolic – but such a scheme was inevitably modest,
and this site was soon rejected. In a letter of Fattucci’s
of July 25, Michelangelo’s attention was redirected to the
site of the choir of San Lorenzo.
A modello by Michelangelo in Christ Church ( JBS
65/Corpus 282; pen and ink and brush and wash over
black chalk, 191×255 mm) seems to represent a dou-
ble tomb, with two seated Popes, presumably Leo X and
Clement VII, on either side of a group of the Virgin and
Child; however, only the upper section of the modello sur-
vives, and the base of the structure and, presumably, the
sarcophagi are missing. It seems highly unlikely that this
project could have been conceived for one of the lavamani
because it would have entailed extreme miniaturisation of
the sarcophagi. Indeed, the Christ Church modello is dif-
ﬁcult to account for, and the only explanation that the
compiler can offer is that it was intended for the end wall
of the choir of San Lorenzo, before Michelangelo decided
upon facing single tombs on the choir’s side walls. How-
ever, the scheme it depicts is puzzlingly uninventive for
so late a date as July 1524, compared with that shown in
the present drawing (and Casa Buonarroti 52A), let alone
the highly innovatory facing tombs that Michelangelo
devised in 1525.
The ﬁgure on the verso of the present sheet, which is
not dissimilar in design to Michelangelo’s bronze David of
twenty years earlier, is probably for an attendant allegori-
cal ﬁgure to stand on the right of the central niche in the
recto drawing. It is sometimes identiﬁed as female but it
seems to the compiler to be male, unlike the standing alle-
gories ﬂanking the Dukes on the tombs in the main cham-
ber. There is a slight similarity in pose to Giambologna’s

CATALOGUE 25
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
151
Neptune in Bologna (1563–6), and it is not inconceiv-
able that the younger artist was aware of some variant
of this design. There are also links with other rounded
and mobile ﬁgures of this period, notably the sketch for
a Risen Christ of c. 1530, Cat. 38 verso.
Drawn Copies
Francesco Buonarroti copied the recto drawing at about
the same size, with the aid of a ruler, in Ufﬁzi 5394 A,
right side, a.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar; Samuel Wood-
burn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830 M. A. Buonaroti, Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830-101i] (“Two – . . . [with Cat. 69] and a
small Architectural Design of the tomb of the Medici.”).
Woodburn, 1836a, no. 9.2 (“On the same sheet is a very
slight memorandum . . . for a compartment of the Medici
Tombs.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 17 (As 1836.). Robin-
son, 1870, no. 42.2 (Michel Angelo. Two drawings on the
same mount. 2. Recto: “Slight sketch . . . for entire com-
position of one of the Medici tombs.” Verso: “undraped
female ﬁgure”; the ricordo probably supplies exact date.).
Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 43. Gotti, 1875, II, pp. 229, 239
(Wrongly as in pen.). Springer, 1878, p. 283 (Sketch for a
single Medici tomb; marks new stage in development of
tombs.) Springer, 1883, II, p. 219 (As 1878.). Berenson,
1903, I, pp. 205–6, no. 1709 (Recto: “certainly not his.”
Like Louvre, Inv. 686 verso/J24/Corpus 193, but by a dif-
ferent hand, perhaps Stefano di Tommaso Lunetti. The
duke “evidently Giuliano.”). Baum, 1908, p. 1115 (Recto:
a workshop drawing; novel type of tomb with sarcophagi
with angled lids; BM W27/Corpus 185, another version
of this.). Thode, 1908, I, pp. 86, 159 (Verso: similar to lost
bronze David, probably for a Julius Tomb Victory.); p. 473
(Recto: wrongly doubted by Berenson; 1524, study for
a papal tomb, linked with CB52A/B256/Corpus 188.).
K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 214a (Recto: two sketched ﬁgures
ﬁrst ideas for Giuliano and Lorenzo; the tomb study for a
ducal tomb.); no. 213a (Verso: not related to bronze David.
A female allegory for a side niche on one of the Medici
tombs. By Michelangelo.). Thode, 1913, no. 425 (Recto:
as 1908; not for the tomb of Giuliano but for a papal tomb.
Verso: perhaps as Frey suggests, for a ﬁgure to ﬂank one of
the dukes, but this is uncertain, as is Thode’s own hypoth-
esis of a Victory.). Popp, 1922, pp. 134–5 (Recto: a free
variation on a ducal tomb by Vincenzo Danti, comparable
with Louvre 686 verso/J24/Corpus 193; ﬁgure drawings
on both comparable. Inscription probably by Danti, and
the date is not trustworthy.). Brinckmann, 1925, no. 38
(Verso: preliminary project for a tomb statue.). Venturi,
1926, pp. 68–9 (Michelangelo, for a ducal tomb.). Fasolo,
1927, p. 455 (Design for a ducal tomb, after 1530; worked
up in CB52A/ B256/Corpus 188.). Berenson, 1938, I,
pp. 216–17, no. 1709 (“[T]he leaﬂet for the tomb is per-
haps not his”; the busts recall BM W28 recto.). Delacre,
1938, p. 335 (Verso: Michelangelo, for a Victory?.). Wilde,
1953a, p. 75 (Study for a tomb of a Pope to be placed in one
of the side rooms of the New Sacristy; a study for a detail
on Archivio Buonarroti XIII, 160/Corpus 366.). Parker,
1956, no. 307 (Recto: probably related to papal tombs but
exact purpose uncertain. Verso: female ﬁgure, purpose
conjectural.). Dussler, 1959, no. 621 (Recto: Michelan-
gelo studio, not Danti. Purpose controversial. Verso: by a
later hand; nothing known of Stefano di Tommaso’s draw-
ings.). Ackerman, 1961, II, p. 29 (Recto: the “proportions
are poorly suited to the . . . [lavamani of which] . . . the
longest wall . . . is only 3.85 m., which would make
the sarcophagus . . . [here] only 1.4 m. long.”). Beren-
son, 1961, no. 1709 (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962,
p. 306 (By Michelangelo; for a papal tomb for one of
the lavamani; CB52A/Corpus 188 developed from it by
a later hand.). Ackerman, II, 1964, p. 29 (Associated
with CB52A/Corpus 188 in which the ﬁgure “obvi-
ously a Pope” is “possibly autograph, the tomb probably
not.” “I can visualise . . . [CB52A] in the lavamani bet-
ter than . . . [the present drawing], where the sarcophagi
would have to be as little as 1.5 to 2 m. long if the whole
tomb has to ﬁt into the small chamber.”). Barbieri and
Puppi, 1964a, pp. 866, 1003 (Recto: heads at either side
and inscription not by Michelangelo.). Schwager, 1967,
p. 60 (By a pupil of Michelangelo for a papal tomb in one
of the lavamani of the Medici chapel. CB52A/Corpus 188
by Jacomo del Duca c. 1564, preparing tomb of Paul IV
in the Mattei chapel in Santa Maria sopra Minerva.). De
Angelis d’Ossat, 1965a, p. 310 (Recto: probably for a papal
tomb for the lavamani; developed further on school draw-
ing CB52A/Corpus 188.). Weinberger, 1967, pp. 303–4
(Recto: School of Michelangelo based on ideas for ducal
tomb: “some of the decorative detail used in the mid-
dle bay . . . was hardly developed before 1525 in the later
wall tabernacles and door of the ricetto.” Chalk sketches
probably by hand of same pupil. Contests Wilde’s con-
nection with lavamani project. Verso: “rather inferior” by
a different pupil.). Hartt, 1971, no. 219 (Recto: 1520-1.
Study for a ducal tomb; ricordo dated 1524.); no. 158 (1517–
18?. Verso: for St. Lawrence on San Lorenzo fac¸ade: “the
pose would make sense if the bent leg were intended as
a prop for the gridiron.”). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 53

152
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 25–26
(Recto: study for tomb of one of Medici Popes; elab-
orated in CB52A/Corpus 188.). De Tolnay, 1976, Cor-
pus II, no. 187 (Recto: Studio of Michelangelo, proba-
bly for a papal tomb; inscription not autograph. Verso:
probably autograph, female ﬁgure for a ﬂanking allegory
on a ducal tomb, pairing clay model in Casa Buonar-
roti.). Nova, 1984, pl. 23 (Studies for a tomb.). Ackerman
and Newman, 1986, p. 299 (As 1964.). Contardi, 1990,
p. 184 (Recto: Michelangelo: with CB52A/Corpus 188,
for a papal tomb in one of the lavamani.). Perrig, 1999,
p. 224 (By Michelangelo, 1520s, probably from via Mozza
studio.).
CATALOGUE 26
Recto: A Recumbent Male Figure in Proﬁle to Right
Verso: Partial Tracing of Recto Drawing (Unseen)
1846.56; R.7; P.II 310; Corpus 212
Dimensions: 176×270 mm
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
The upper and lower right corners are irregular and worn.
There is skinning, with some repair, extensive, uneven
discolouration, and patches of staining. The primary sup-
port is drummed by four edges to the backboard of the
mount, so the verso is not visible.
Inscriptions
Recto: With the right edge as the base: di Michel Angelo
b followed by other indecipherable letters (no doubt an
abbreviation of Buonarroti). The placing of this and the
Reynolds stamp suggest that the drawing was then inter-
preted as a kneeling ﬁgure.
Verso: Old numbering (by the Irregular Numbering
Collector?): n◦37.
Discussion
The outline of a head, drawn with the upper edge as base,
appears at the top right, probably by a pupil. This study, no
doubt made from a mature and muscular male model, was
drawn in preparation for the ﬁgure of Day, the ﬁrst of the
Allegories to be carved for the ducal tombs. It has often
been pointed out that the Day and Night on the tomb of
Duke Giuliano, unlike Dawn and Evening on that of Duke
Lorenzo, do not acknowledge the curve of the sarcoph-
agus on which they are placed, and various explanations
have been proposed for this. However, from the moment
he ﬁnalised the design of the ducal tombs in late 1520,
Michelangelo, as seen in his modello for the tomb of Giu-
liano in the Louvre (Inv. 838/J27/Corpus 186, brush and
wash over black chalk and stylus indentation, 321×205
mm), had planned the wrap-around effect. In the Louvre
modello, the forms of Day and Night are congruent with
those of Dawn and Evening and different from the ﬁgures
ﬁnally carved. Wilde (1954) provided a convincing expla-
nation of this difference. It seems that when the blocks
for these ﬁgures arrived in Florence in 1524, Michelan-
gelo found them unsatisfactory and, in order to avoid
further delays on the project, decided to employ blocks
not expressly excavated for the tomb. A ricordo survives
for the transport of a block from Michelangelo’s studio in
via Mozza to San Lorenzo on 27 October 1524, which
Michelangelo speciﬁcally noted would serve him for one
of the reclining ﬁgures, and it was probably from this
block, ordered for some other project, that either the
Day or the Night was carved. It is unclear whether the
block employed by Michelangelo had been excavated for
the Julius Tomb or for the fac¸ade of San Lorenzo.
Compelled to use shorter, more rectangular blocks
than he had envisaged, Michelangelo devised for them
an expressive range different from the smooth, sinuous
effect that he had planned. In the present drawing, and in
others that he made at the same time, he simultaneously
sketched out revised poses and created a more aggressively
plastic ﬁgure style, like that of the Accademia Prigioni.
Characteristic of these drawings is the indication of rub-
bery convexities of form, and the enlivening of the sur-
faces with vibrating strokes. Wilde suggests that this and
companion drawings both in pen and ink and chalk for
the Day and Night were made after the live model and
examination of them supports his view: Among the other
black chalk studies for the Day in this series are Cat. 27
and the following:
1. London, BM W46 verso/Corpus 214; 275×359 mm,
studies for the back of the Day.
2. Haarlem, Teyler Museum A36 recto/VT 57/Corpus
215; 162×266 mm, studies for the back and left arm of
Day.
3. Haarlem, Teyler Museum A30 recto/VT 56/Corpus
216; 192×257 mm, studies for the back and left arm of
Day (the study on the verso, in red chalk, may be for the
right shoulder of Day).
4. London, BL, Department of Manuscripts Add. Ms
21907, fol. 1 recto/Corpus 217 verso; 150×185 mm,
structural sketch for the left leg of the Day.

CATALOGUE 26
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
153
5. Haarlem, Teyler Museum A33 recto/VT 58/Corpus
218 recto; 207×247 mm, study for the left leg of Day
(until 1952 this sheet was mounted with the following;
both bear pen studies for the Laurentian ricetto on their
versos, and they were no doubt once parts of the same
sheet, which was at some time divided and then rejoined,
with the loss of at least 10 mm).
6. Haarlem, Teyler Museum A33b recto/VT 59/Corpus
219; 202×247 mm, studies for the left leg of Day.
No doubt the present sheet shared a provenance with
those now in Haarlem until the partial dispersal of the
Odescalchi Collection in the early sevententh century. It
is interesting to note that the placing both of the Bona
Rota inscription and of Reynolds’ stamp indicates that
the right edge of the sheet was believed to be its base,
despite the fact that this would entail the drawing having
been made by a left-handed draughtsman. It was probably
then thought to be a study for a standing Victory.
History
The Bona Roti Collector; the Irregular Numbering
Collector?; Joachim Sandrart, Pieter Spiering van Silf-
vercroon; Queen Christina; Dezzio Azzolini; Livio
Odescalchi, Duke of Bracciano; Pierre Crozat?; Sir
Joshua
Reynolds
(L.2364);
Sir
Thomas
Lawrence
(L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 73 (“Study of the body of a man.”).
Woodburn, 1846, no. 28 (As 1842.). Robinson, 1870,
no. 7 (“[N]ot easy to decide whether this masterly study
was made from nature, or from one of the master’s own
wax or clay models . . . considerable resemblance to il
Giorno, but the ‘technique’ seems to be of an earlier
period,” c. 1501.). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 7. Gotti, 1875,
II, p. 233. Berenson, 1903, I, p. 211, no. 1549 (For Day.).
Thode, 1908, I, p. 494 (Study for a River God not for
Day.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 218 (Doubtful; life study
reminiscent of Day.). Thode, 1913, no. 391 (After the
same model as [Cat. 26]; probably for Day; repudiates
view of 1908.). Popp, 1922 p. 144 (After Day by an infe-
rior artist.). Berenson, 1938, I, p. 221, no. 1549 (As 1903.).
Goldscheider, 1951, no. 59 (“[A]uthenticity . . . doubtful
[but] quality . . . high.”). Wilde, 1953a, p. 85 (For Day,
1524–6; together with [Cat. 27] associated with the series
of studies in the Ufﬁzi and the Teyler Museum.). Wilde,
1953, exh., no. 43. Wilde, 1954, pp. 15–16 (See [Cat. 27].).
Parker, 1956, no. 310 (Despite weakness, probably by
Michelangelo. A connexion with Day has to be assumed.).
Dussler, 1959, no. 599 (Rejected.). Berenson, 1961, no.

154
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 26–27
1549 (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962, p. 97, under no. 76
(Michelangelo, linked with Ufﬁzi 18719F/B76/Corpus
210
and
Teyler
Museum
A33/VT58/Corpus
218,
A30/VT56/Corpus 216 and A36/VT57/Corpus 215.).
Goldscheider, 1965, no. 63 (As 1951. Verso: some
unimportant sketches.”). Weinberger, 1967, pp. 312–
13 (Connected with Day but “done with a coarser
stroke than . . . [Cat. 27]. . . . Perhaps . . . a partial copy of
the statue.” This and Haarlem A.30/VT56/Corpus 216
“in the late seventeenth–early eighteenth century were
owned by the same collector, as the writing reveals.”).
Hartt, 1971, no. 227 (1520–1. For Day. “The muscles are
indicated in a new and unconventional technique. Broad
patches of very rough hatching are often quickly wiped
with the thumb or a ﬁnger to produce a system of ﬂick-
ering tones.”). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 60 (For Day.).
De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 212 (Study for Day.).
Guazzoni, 1984, pl. 81 (Study for Day.). O’Grody, 1999,
p. 149 (“[P]robably for Day.”).
CATALOGUE 27
Recto: A Recumbent Male Figure in Proﬁle to Right
Verso: Four Studies of a Bent Right Arm from Different
Angles
1846.55; R.6; P.II 309; Corpus 213
Dimensions: 258×332 mm
Watermark: Robinson Appendix no. 1. Roberts Eagle C.
Medium
Recto: Black chalk, some stylus indications.
Verso: Red chalk, one of the arms over black chalk.
Condition
There are many pulp imperfections, major tear repairs
with associated ingrained dirt, skinning, and score marks.

CATALOGUE 27
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
155
There is discolouration from adhesive residues, foxing,
and local staining.
Description
At the right edge are three short horizontal lines, two
of which are placed closely together just above half the
page’s height, while the third is near the upper edge.
Nearer the ﬁgure, running down the page, is a longer
irregularly curving line, terminated above by a short hor-
izontal, which corresponds in length to the ﬁgure’s right
calf: This is labelled coscia (thigh) in the artist’s handwrit-
ing. Nearer to the calf are two further short horizontals
and the inscription 5P (palmi) in the artist’s handwrit-
ing. These lines and inscriptions were clearly made by
Michelangelo with a view to determining the dimensions
of the marble block.
Discussion
The remarks made in Cat. 26 apply also to the drawing
on the recto of this sheet, which must be en-suite with
it and with those in Haarlem. Each of these drawings
emphasises slightly different effects. In the present draw-
ing, Michelangelo was concerned primarily to work out
the relation of the torso, established with rich modelling,

156
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 27
to the legs, decreasingly detailed as they approach the feet.
In this study from the model, Michelangelo was testing
the possibility, perhaps not previously envisaged for the
New Sacristy ﬁgures, of crossing the legs: He experi-
mented here with bringing the left leg across and over
the right leg, in an arrangement that closely preﬁgures the
extraordinary pose of the ﬁnal marble, unprecedented in
expressive complexity outside Michelangelo’s own work.
Indeed, it is clear from these drawings and from the ﬁg-
ure as executed that, in the Day, Michelangelo reworked
some of his ideas for the Accademia Prigioni.
The lines at the right are probably reminders of the
shape of the block from which the ﬁgure was to be carved.
The drawing on the verso is different both in medium
and in style. The breadth and volumetric concern of the
recto drawing – and the others connected with it – has
given way to an interest in smoothness and surface pol-
ish. It has been connected by scholars with the right arms
of Day, Dawn, and Victory, but Hirst (1988–9a) demon-
strated that it was for the right arm of Night and further
suggested that it was made from a female model. Whether
or not this is so, the motif, which suggests delicacy and
fastidiousness, appealed to Michelangelo sufﬁciently for
him to re-use it in modiﬁed form in the Victory, on which
he probably worked in 1527–8, a further example of con-
ceptual intersection between the New Sacristy and the
Julius Tomb.
In the present drawing, Michelangelo studies the sur-
face effect of a smooth columnar arm. By the time he
made it, he must have determined the pose of Night and
may already have made progress with carving, as the indi-
cation of the plait of hair suggests. This drawing may
therefore have been made a little later than the recto study.
Fewer studies survive for the Night than the Day: They
are in black chalk:
1. Florence, Ufﬁzi 18719F/B76/Corpus 210; 280×
342 mm, drawn on recto and verso with studies for the
Night, including, on the recto, a drawing relating the ﬁgure
to the block.
2. London, BM W48 verso/Corpus 208 recto; 178×
296 mm, connected by Wilde with the Leda but in the
compiler’s view made for the Night and, although some-
what rubbed, stylistically inseparable from Cat. 26.
History
Casa
Buonarroti;
Jean-Baptiste
Wicar;
Samuel
Woodburn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel
Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1836b, no. 14 (Recto: “probably for one of
the ﬁgures in the Last Judgement.”). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 13 (As 1836.). Robinson, 1870, no. 6 (Michel Angelo.
“[P]ose . . . bears some resemblance to that of the man
putting on his hose, in the Cartoon of Pisa, but it is
turned in the opposite direction.” c. 1501.). Black, 1875,
p. 213, no. 6. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 237?. Berenson, 1903, I,
p. 211, no. 1548 (Recto: for Night, cf. [Cat. 26] “His way
of handling . . . [chalk] would suggest that he forgot that
he was not holding a pen.” Verso: not Michelangelo.).
Thode, 1908, I, p. 494 (Study for a River God, not the
Night.). K. Frey, 1909–11, nos. 216 (Recto: doubtful, life
study related to Day.); 217 (Verso: not Michelangelo “zu
swach und f¨ahrig.”). Thode, 1913, no. 390 (Recto: stud-
ies in preparation for one of the Times of Day; renounces
view that this is a study for a River God; verso: arm of
Dawn. Doubts about either side are unnecessary.). Popp,
1922 p. 144 (Recto: free copy of Day “Typische Kopis-
tenarbeit.” Verso: copy of the right arm of Night; the
draughtsman had the opportunity to see the statue from all
round.). Popham, 1930a, no. 502. Popham, 1931, no. 221.
Berenson, 1938, I, p. 221, no. 1548 (Verso: perhaps by
Michelangelo.). Wilde, 1953a, p. 85 (Recto: for Day.
Verso: studies for right arm of Night, 1524–6. Together
with [Cat. 26] associated with the series of studies in
the Ufﬁzi and the Teyler Museum.). Wilde, 1953 exh.,
no. 42. Wilde, 1954, pp. 15–16 (Recto: together with
[Cat. 26] and Haarlem A33 and 33/VT58 and 59/Corpus
218 and 219 “preparatory to, or accompanied the execu-
tion of . . . [the] Giorno [in] . . . 1524 or 1525. The partic-
ular concern of all of them is the effect of the muscles
on the surface. A living model was posed in a posi-
tion near enough to the intended one, and the study
of the movement of form was begun. Details are ren-
dered with a varying degree of sharpness. There is only
one centre of interest, the torso; the other parts are sub-
ordinated to it or vanish altogether. And in this cen-
tre the details are summed up into larger units which,
moreover, are parts of an almost regular whole. The
form clearly moves away from the accidents of natural
appearance, but without losing its organic character. The
use of chalk well serves this concentration on the life
of the surface. There are few parallel strokes and these
go in different directions; in most places the chalk is
handled like pastel, painting rather than drawing. Con-
tours are intermittent and in general almost neglected.”).
Parker, 1956, no. 309 (Despite weakness, probably by
Michelangelo; studies for Day and Night.). Dussler, 1959,
no. 598 (Recto and verso rejected; verso after the Night.).
Berenson, 1961, no. 1548 (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi,
1962, p. 97 (Michelangelo, linked with Ufﬁzi 18719F
and Teyler Museum A35, A336, A33.). Goldscheider
1965, p. 45 (The different opinions of Parker and Wilde
“show how difﬁcult it is to determine . . . for which statues

CATALOGUES 27–28
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
157
this and other drawings like [Cat. 26] were made.”).
Weinberger, 1967, pp. 312–13 (Recto: preparatory for
Day, from which it differs considerably in detail. Verso:
studies for right arm of Night.). Hartt, 1971, no. 228
(Recto: 1520–1. For Day. “The transparency of these
forms may indicate that the deﬁnitive pose was dawning
on Michelangelo as he drew.”); no. 293 (Verso: 1527?.
For the right arm of Victory, rather than the Night.).
Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 61 (Recto: for Day. Verso:
for right arm of Night.). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I,
no. 213 (Recto: study for Day, 1524. Verso: for the right
arm of Night, 1524–6). Hirst, 1988, pp. 62–3 (Recto:
early study for Day, “concerned with the anatomical
implications of the general disposition only. The model
has been studied from a signiﬁcantly further viewpoint
than . . . [Haarlem A33/VT58/Corpus 218]. This and a
fugitive notation of scale may indicate that Michelan-
gelo was occupied here also with calculating the height
of the block.” The Day not cut from an ad hoc block.
The drawing shows link of Michelangelo’s drawing and
carving practice “it is the main form only which is his
real concern. The neglect of the head in the . . . drawing
ﬁnds its parallel in the inchoate state of the head in the
unﬁnished statue.” Verso: for right arm of Night. “[O]ne
upper left . . . taken furthest, yet this is a view that the
visitor to the Chapel would never see.”). Hirst, 1988–9,
no. 29 (Verso: “in the lower left study . . . a long strand
of hair falls over the right shoulder” of a female model.).
Perrig, 1991, p. 23, ﬁg. 89 (Recto: by Giulio Clovio.).
Perrig, 1999, pp. 224 (As 1991; from Farnese group.).
CATALOGUE 28
Recto: A Dragon
Verso: Various Sketches
1846.69; R.13; P.II 323; Corpus 96
Dimensions: 254×338 mm
Medium
Recto: Pen and ink over establishing lines in black chalk;
red chalk.
Verso: Red and black chalk.

158
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 28
Condition
There are pulp imperfections, a major central tear repair,
and minor edge repairs. There is some abrasion, dis-
colouration, staining, foxing, ingrained dirt, and medium
show-through.
Description and Inscriptions
Recto
With the lower edge as the base
A. A dragon, drawn after the other drawings, in pen.
With the left edge as the base
B. A male head in right proﬁle bent slightly forward, in
red chalk, by Mini.
C. A diagrammatic treatment of a right eye in right pro-
ﬁle, in red chalk, by Mini.
With the right edge as the base
D. At upper left, a male head in left proﬁle, in pen, by
Mini.
E. At centre right, a male head in left proﬁle, in pen, by
Mini.
With the upper edge as the base
F. At right of centre, a male head in left proﬁle, in pen,
by Mini.
Verso
Top line
A. A left eye in left proﬁle, in red chalk; by Michelangelo.
B. A left eye in left proﬁle, in red chalk; copy of A; by
Mini?.
C. A left eye in left proﬁle, in black chalk; copy of A; by
Quaratesi?.
D. The head of a young man with long hair in left proﬁle,
in red chalk; by Michelangelo.
E. The head of a young man in left proﬁle, in red chalk;
diagrammatic partial copy after D; by Quaratesi?.
Second line
F. A left eye in left proﬁle, in red chalk; copy of A; by
Mini?.

CATALOGUE 28
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
159
G. A left eye in left proﬁle, in red chalk; copy of A; by
Quaratesi?.
Third line
H. A left eye and eyebrow in front view, in red chalk;
copy of I; by Mini?.
I. A left eye and eyebrow in front view, in red chalk; by
Michelangelo.
J. A left eye in front view, in red chalk; abbreviated copy
of I; by Quaratesi?.
K. At right edge, a left eye in left proﬁle, in red chalk,
similar to A in structure, but with the pupil turned sharply
and unnaturally to the left; by Quaratesi?.
Fourth line
L. A left eye and eyebrow in front view, in red chalk; copy
of I; by Quaratesi?.
M. A left eye and eyebrow in front view, in red chalk;
copy of I; by Mini?.
N. A left eye and eyebrow in front view, in red chalk;
copy of I; by Quaratesi?.
O. The head of a young man with long hair in left proﬁle,
in red chalk; copy of D; by Mini?.
P. At right edge, a variant of K, in red chalk; by
Quaratesi?.
Fifth line
Q. Diagrammatic sketch of a hanging lock of hair, in red
chalk; copied from R?; by Quaratesi?.
R. A hanging lock of hair, in red chalk, perhaps by
Michelangelo.
S. Two fused hanging locks of hair, in red chalk; two
overlapping copies of R?; by Mini?.
T. Diagrammatic sketch of curls of hair, in red chalk;
beginning of a copy of W; by Quaratesi?.
U. An upper eyelid and a portion of eyebrow, in red chalk;
probably another attempt at N, after I; by Quaratesi?.
Sixth line
V. A left eye in front view, in black chalk; copy of H, by
Quaratesi?.
W. Complex curls of hair, in red chalk; by Michelangelo.
X. Two? variant copies of W, in red chalk, fused, by
Mini?.
Y. Beginning of a variant copy of W, in red chalk; by
Quaratesi?.
Z. Beginning of a variant copy of W, in red chalk; by
Quaratesi?.
AA. Beginning of a variant copy of R?, in red chalk; by
Quaratesi?.
BB. The beginning of an outline of an ear, in red chalk;
probably copied from O rather than D; by Quaratesi?.
CC. An ear, in red chalk; copied from BB rather than D;
by Quaratesi?.
DD. Inscription in Michelangelo’s hand?, in red chalk:
Andra qua.
EE. Inscription in Mini’s hand?, in red chalk: Andrea qu.
Seventh line
FF. Several hatching lines.
GG. Hanging locks of hair, in red chalk; after W,
simpliﬁed; by Mini?.
HH. A miniature left eye in left proﬁle, in black chalk;
after A; by Quaratesi.
II. Part copy of D or O, in black chalk; by Quaratesi?.
JJ. Lower centre in graphite, no. 32.
KK. Inscription in Michelangelo’s hand, in black chalk:
andrea abbi patientia.
LL. Inscription in Mini’s hand?, in black chalk: ame me
c˜osol˜atione asai in part over MM.
MM. Inscription in Mini’s hand?, Andrea quar, in red
chalk.
NN. Inscription in Mini’s hand?, Andrea Quara . . . ? in
red chalk.
Discussion
Recto
The drawing of a dragon with two rather than four legs
and two wings – following a model established by Paolo
Uccello and others – overlaying several loose sketches of
a head by his pupil Antonio Mini, was probably made by
Michelangelo c. 1524–5. It is striking and exceptionally
accomplished, more detailed and subtle in its handling
than most of Michelangelo’s pen drawings of the 1520s,
and without the element of caricature – although distor-
tion of nature is inherent in the subject – which those
display. The density of the hatching is remarkable and
rich, and the drawing must have taken some time to exe-
cute. The fact that it is made over drawings by his inept
pupil suggests that it is a demonstration piece, but the level
of accomplishment is so high that it would have daunted
rather than encouraged a pupil.
Michelangelo seems to have been interested in draw-
ing imaginary animals during the 1520s and early 1530s.
A similar drawing of a dragon of the same period, now
lost, survives in a copy by an unidentiﬁed draughtsman
in Christ Church ( JBS 77; pen, 174×200 mm) and in
a second copy, whose attribution to Andrea del Sarto
originates with his pupil Giorgio Vasari, in the Louvre

160
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 28
(Inv. 1724/ J75; red chalk, 212×273 mm, irregular). From
these copies, it is clear that the lost drawing was a com-
panion to the present one and no doubt contemporary
with it. The second dragon, which also had two legs and
two wings, is shown energetically biting what may be a
serpent but what may also be its own tail.
As well as the probable Salamanders (see Cat. 36)
Michelangelo also drew a monstrous animal on the verso
of one of his Resurrection drawings, datable to the early
1530s (British Museum, Wilde 54/Corpus 263; black
chalk, 414×274 mm). Whether any of these creatures
was intended for some commission is impossible to say.
This dragon would have served admirably in a composi-
tion of Saint George and the Dragon, but there is no record
that Michelangelo planned one, and no complementary
studies are known.
The other hypotheses that have been advanced make
little sense. The monster’s forms do not seem appropriate
for a composition of Apollo Killing the Python (although
that was a subject that might well have occurred to
Michelangelo, whose statue in the Bargello is frequently
interpreted as Apollo) or a Perseus Rescuing Andromeda and
are too complicated to have been executed as a relief
carving on the base of a candelabra. The drawing may, in
the last analysis, have been no more than a jeu d’esprit on
Michelangelo’s part, perhaps warning his pupil(s) of what
might befall them if they failed to improve. Alternatively,
a possibility suggested to the compiler by H. Chapman
(personal communication), it might represent Michelan-
gelo mocking his own fearsome reputation, characterising
himself as a snarling dragon tying itself in knots; such a
concept would be very much in keeping with the master’s
bitter and ironic sense of humour.
Popp suggested that the proﬁle in red chalk to the right
of the Dragon was corrected by Michelangelo. The out-
lines were certainly reworked at a second moment with
a more emphatic touch, but to the compiler the quality
of this retouching does not seem to be at Michelangelo’s
level. This head bears considerable similarity to a drawing
reproduced in Woodburn’s Lawrence Gallery of 1853, as
plate 27, but now unlocated, which might also have been
by Mini.
Verso
In the compiler’s opinion, three different hands can be
distinguished on the verso: those of Michelangelo, Anto-
nio Mini, and Andrea Quaratesi. Parker suggests that the
reference to Andrea is no more than the beginning of a
letter, but it seems rather to be an exhortation: Andrea
abbi pazienza is more appropriately an address to a pupil
dissatisﬁed with his own efforts than the opening phrase
of a letter, and it can be paralleled by a similar exhortation
to Mini written on a sheet dated by various ricordi to 1524
in the British Museum (W31/Corpus 240; pen and ink
and red chalk, 396×270 mm). It would have been natural
for Michelangelo to have taught his young pupils in pairs,
and he perhaps wanted to encourage a friendly rivalry. It
is also worthy of note that in a number of instances Raf-
faello da Montelupo drew on sheets previously used by
Mini, and Michelangelo perhaps saw value in allowing
his pupils to work on sheets already used by other pupils,
to test their level. However, Antonio Mini, born in 1506,
was six years older than Andrea, born in 1512, so it is only
natural that the latter’s drawings should have been still
weaker than Mini’s. Wallace (1995) paints a plausible and
rather charming picture of Michelangelo and his pupils
passing a sheet to one another around a table.
It seems clear that Michelangelo sketched out a series
of simple graphic models for his pupils to copy, exercises
in how to represent hair, eyes, and the like. Such interests
seem more appropriate to Leonardo than Michelangelo,
but the patterns that can be inferred from other drawings,
such as Cat. 30 verso, show that they ﬁgured large among
his instructional concerns.
Phrases invoking consolation occur also on a drawing
by Antonio Mini in the Louvre (Inv. 696 verso/J51; pen
and ink, 317×211 mm), which probably dates from a little
earlier than the present sheet.
Drawn Copies
Recto
1. Paris, Louvre, Inv. 693/J103; pen and ink and brown
wash, 232×328 mm, a faithful same-size copy, but omit-
ting Antonio Mini’s chalk sketches. It is noticeable, how-
ever, that in areas of the original that are not fully resolved,
and in some subsidiary elements, the draughtsman loses
conﬁdence and produces lines lacking in control. To com-
pensate for the reduction in plasticity, the copyist silhou-
etted the dragon with a light wash. The compiler cannot
concur with Berenson’s (presumably verbal) attribution
of Inv. 693 to Battista Franco, which was reported by
Parker, 1956, p. 162; the view of F. Viatte (orally), who
sees similarities with the work of Toussaint Dubreuil and
believes the drawing to be French, seems more plausible.
A French origin for the copy – which does, however,
bear an inscription that seems to be by an Italian – is
also suggested by the pretentious inscription and coat of
arms on the verso, in the hand of a collector who seems to
have ﬂourished in France in the later seventeenth century
and whose attributions – so far as they are known – are

CATALOGUE 28
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
161
invariably wrong. The earliest recorded owner of the
original is Dominique-Vivant Denon, and it may have
been among the sheets given to Antonio Mini – who
had, after all, worked on it – brought by him to France
and left there at his death. But Vivant Denon acquired
drawings from many sources so this is far from certain.
2. Robinson and Parker drew attention to Woodburn’s
reference to another copy, attributed to A. Carracci – pre-
sumably Agostino – which was also owned by Lawrence,
but neither author knew it. The attribution to one of the
Carracci is unlikely to be correct if the present drawing
was part of Mini’s cache; if it is correct, then the original
was presumably in Italy when the copy was made. Noth-
ing further seems to be known about this copy, which
the compiler has been unable to identify in any of Wood-
burn’s sales.
History
Antonio
Mini?;
Baron
Dominique-Vivant
Denon
(L.779); Sir Thomas Lawrence (no stamp); Samuel
Woodburn.
References
Sir Thomas Lawrence, letter of 27 March 1829 to Penry
Williams (reprinted in Williams, 1831, II, pp. 244–5)
(“You have taken great pains with your principal ﬁg-
ure, and the eyes are as well drawn as the features of
her sweet countenance; but in the two boys . . . the eyes
are too dark and ill-formed; let this carelessness be soon
impossible to you. . . . Be at pains often to draw that fea-
ture, I can quote you high authority for it. I have a sheet
of eyes drawn by Michael Angelo for some young Penry
Williams, whose genius had excited the friendly effort.”).
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti, Case 1,
Drawer 1, no. 33 [1830-35] (“Design for a Chimera,
bold pen, on the reverse is a singular and interesting les-
son which M. Angelo has given to Andrea Mini with
Autograph Observations.”). Woodburn, 1836b, no. 96
(“[O]n the reverse are some studies of eyes and a head,
which appear to have been drawn by M. Angelo for his
scholar, Andrea [sic] Mini, who has copied them very
indifferently. . . . This curious drawing has been copied
by A. Carracci, and is placed by the original.”). Wood-
burn, 1842, no. 22 (As 1836.). Woodburn, 1853 no. 30
(Recto reproduced.). Robinson, 1870, no. 13 (A teach-
ing drawing. On the verso Michelangelo provided mod-
els in black chalk for a pupil to copy, which the master
then revised. On the recto, the dragon was drawn over
outline sketches that were probably made at the same
time as those on the verso. Seems to be no clue as to
which Andrea was intended. Datable no later than 1500.).
Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 13. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 235. Fisher,
1879, VIII/8 (Verso: “Drawn by Michelangelo as a lesson
for a pupil, Andrea.”), IX/p. 3 (Recto: “A Dragon or
Chimera.”). Berenson, 1903, I, p. 245, no. 1555 (Recto:
Michelangelo c. 1507, over sketches by his pupil Andrea.
Verso: drawing lessons by Andrea.). Colvin, 1905, III,
no. 6A (Recto: 1504–8; displays inﬂuence of Leonardo;
the proﬁle next to the dragon’s head by Michelangelo;
the other by a pupil.); no. 6B (Verso: “Pupil’s and mas-
ter’s work seem on this sheet somewhat mixed up”; upper
head [D] not by Michelangelo himself; the work of “one
fairly good [D] and one wretched [O] pupil.” “Of the
single eyes drawn as a lesson in proﬁle and full face one
or two seem to be the master’s work alone, one or two
pupil’s work alone and others pupil’s work retouched by
the master.”). Thode, 1908, II, p. 112 (Recto: linked with
New Sacristy candelabra.); p. 340 (Verso: [D] autograph;
[O] copy by Andrea.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 133 (Recto:
Michelangelo over sketches by Mini. c. 1530, not an early
work; perhaps some relation to Apollo and Python; end
of tail an addition.); no. 134 (Verso: Detailed consider-
ation of drawings; none by Michelangelo, although the
writing is his; all by a pupil: Antonio Mini, not Andrea
Quaratesi. Critique of Colvin, Robinson, and Thode.).
Thode, 1913, no. 398 (Recto: c. 1530, Michelangelo over
sketches of heads by Mini. Verso: references to Andrea
Quaratesi must be either part of a letter or a ricordo.
Michelangelo responsible for: [D, I, W]; [D] copied by
Mini in [O]. Criticism of Frey’s views.). Fischel, 1921, pl.
34 (Recto: related to Purgatorio, viii, 94.). Zoff, 1923, pl.
41 (Recto). Popp, 1925a, pp. 9, 13–14,18–19 (Recto: not
before summer 1523; dragon by Michelangelo over pro-
ﬁles by Mini; proﬁle to right of dragon [B] corrected by
Michelangelo. Verso: Mini, links with BM W40 verso/
Corpus 315, and Ufﬁzi 599E/B186/Corpus 308, also by
Mini.). Popp, 1925–6, p. 173 (Recto: as 1925.). Panofsky,
1927–8, pp. 230–6 (Verso: writing all by one hand, that
of Antonio Mini “mit Variationen in Minis nat¨urlichem
Schreibstil” because he is imitating the handwriting of
Michelangelo. Recto: Sketches by Mini under “der wun-
dervolle Drache Michelangelos.”). Popham, 1930a, no.
499. Popham, 1931, no. 218 (Recto: Michelangelo over
sketches by Mini; datable 1523–31. Verso: “the writing
has no reference whatever to the drawing.”). Berenson,
1935, pp. 264–9 (Recto: uncertain between Michelan-
gelo and Andrea di Michelangelo, who may be Stefano
di Tommaso Lunetti. Verso: Andrea.). Berenson, 1938, I,
pp. 250, 363, no. 1555 (As 1935. c. 1530. Recto: perhaps for
candelabra of New Sacristy.). Delacre, 1938, pp. 69–71,

162
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 28–29
80, 156, 379 (Recto: Michelangelo, a fantasy, not for a
speciﬁc project. Verso: Michelangelo? similarity of head
[D] to BM W40 verso/Corpus 315. Critique of Beren-
son’s reconstruction of “Andrea.”). Wilde, 1953a, pp. 60
(Recto: Michelangelo. c. 1525.); pp. 3, 77 (Verso: teach-
ing drawing c. 1525; [D] a variant of the head on BM
W40 verso/Corpus 315, of a type which also occurs as
early as 1501–3 on [Cats. 1 and 2]. [A, I, and W] by
Michelangelo; the other sketches are copies by a pupil
or pupils, including, probably Andrea Quaratesi.). Wilde,
1953 exh., no. 52 (Recto: dragon drawn over “some child-
ish proﬁles.”). Parker, 1956, no. 323 (Recto: Michelan-
gelo over sketches by Mini, c. 1525. Verso: a teaching
drawing. [D, I, and perhaps A and V] by Michelangelo,
the rest by Mini. The inscription not an exhortation but
the commencement of a draft of a letter.). Dussler, 1959,
no. 343 (Recto: Michelangelo over sketches by Mini, c.
1525. Rejects hypotheses of purpose of Frey, Fischel, and
Berenson. Verso: [A, C, and I] by Michelangelo; [D]
might be a pupil; the remainder by Mini.). Berenson,
1961, no. 1555 (As 1903/1938.). Brugnoli, 1964, no. 31
(Recto: cites Berenson’s hypothesis; proﬁle sketches by
a pupil.). Berti, 1965, pp. 452, 458 (Recto: records pro-
posed connection with candelabra in New Sacristy. Verso:
school drawing.). Goldscheider, 1965, no. 48 (Recto:
unlikely that it was drawn for a decorative project. Verso:
three or four sketches by Michelangelo, copied by a pupil,
usually identiﬁed with Antonio Mini; uncertainty over
authorship of inscriptions.). Weinberger, 1967, p. 341
(Recto: Michelangelo, 1520–5, over pupil sketches. Verso:
[D] autograph.). Hartt, 1971, no. 191 (Recto: 1517–18.
A salamander?. Probably for an ornamental ﬁgure for
San Lorenzo. Proﬁles by Mini.); no. 311 (Verso: 1525–
31. “Set of exercises in drawing.” By Michelangelo: “the
ﬁrst proﬁle eye in the upper left corner [A]; the sec-
ond from the left in the upper row of eyes shown in
full-face [I]; the ﬁrst rich group of locks from the left
[W]; the upper of the two shaded proﬁles [D]. . . . The
passage at lower right is the beginning of a draft of
a letter to . . . Andrea Quaratesi.”). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 106 (Recto: Berenson’s suggestion implausible.
Verso: studies by Michelangelo, copies by a pupil; inscrip-
tion probably draft of beginning of a letter.). de Tolnay,
1975, Corpus I, no. 96 (Recto: Michelangelo over pupil
sketches, 1515–19. Verso: sketches by Michelangelo and
copies by Andrea Quaratesi, c. 1525.). De Tolnay, 1976,
Corpus II, p. 94 (Verso: [D] and [O] reproduced beside
an antique cameo bust of Abundance.). Lamarche-Vadel,
1981, p. 4 (Recto: reproduced.). Hirst, 1988, pp. 13–14
(Verso: teaching drawing; upper proﬁle [D] and three left
eyes by Michelangelo, the rest by a pupil, “who may have
been Antonio Mini.”). Wallace, 1995, pp. 118–20 (Recto:
Michelangelo over proﬁles by Mini. “The dragon seems
to have been an impromptu invention that grew in size
and complexity as Michelangeo spontaneously created
it.” Verso: [A, D, and I] by Michelangelo, the remainder
copies by Mini. “It appears that Michelangelo drew the
exempla far apart and high on the page, leaving the rest of
the surface available for his pupil [Mini] to practice. . . . In
whatever manner one reconstructs the sequence of draw-
ings and writing on recto and verso, it is evident that the
sheet passed back and forth between master and pupil.”).
Perrig, 1999, p. 282 (Mini.).
CATALOGUE 29
Recto: The Head of a Young Man in Proﬁle
Verso: Hercules and the Erymanthian Boar?
1846.62; R.9; P.II 316; Corpus 328
Dimensions: 282×198 mm
Watermark:
Robinson
Appendix
no
3.
Roberts
“Char” A.
Medium
Red chalk.
Condition
There is uneven pulp, ingrained dirt in creases and tears,
much edge damage, and some toned inﬁlls. Also visible are
minor loss inﬁlls with edge dirt, minor abrasion, skinning,
a long superﬁcial diagonal surface scratch, and uneven
handling creases. A very unevenly discoloured sheet with
much local staining, some adhesive, some oil, and some
foxing.
Discussion
Although the recto drawing edges towards caricature, it is
probably an only slightly inﬂected portrait, one not par-
ticularly sympathetic to the sitter. Parker speaks of the
“disdainful expression,” and one senses that Michelan-
gelo has drawn a young man of equivocal character. He
experimented with a range of facial types at this period,
and it may be that some of the drawings were made for
the instruction – and the amusement – of his pupils. The
nature of this representation would provide a good les-
son in how a (presumably) slight exaggeration can affect
the viewer’s judgement of character. The nature of the
head gear is hard to determine; it seems at ﬁrst sight to

CATALOGUE 29
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
163

164
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 29

CATALOGUE 29
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
165
resemble a soft hood of a type familiar in quattrocento
painting, but it cannot be this because it it is clearly sepa-
rate from the other garment. It might be a soft beret-like
hat, perched on the far side of the sitter’s head, but in this
case the gap between the rim and the ﬁgure’s nose would
be hard to explain. It may, perhaps, best be interpreted
as a type of hat found in various portraits by Raphael
of the later 1510s, comprising a skull cap attached to a
discontinuous brim, like a soft mortar-board.
The verso seems to represent Hercules and the Ery-
manthian Boar. Parker, while noting that Hercules bears
none of his usual attributes, shrewdly observes that in this,
the third of Hercules’ labours, he carried back the boar
alive to Eurystheus, which seems to be indicated here.
Michelangelo was preoccupied in 1524–5 with attempt-
ing to regain the commission for the group of Hercules
and Antaeus (see Cat. 30), but there is no mention in
any of the sources of the present subject. Of course,
this sketch, which is quite broad, may have been made
to prepare a Presentation Drawing representing one or
more of Hercules’ labours, such as that in the Royal
Collection, Windsor (PW423/Corpus 335; red chalk,
272×422 mm), made for an unknown recipient, proba-
bly towards 1530. This sheet includes three of the labours,
but not that of the Erymanthian Boar; maybe Michelan-
gelo envisaged a companion sheet, representing further
labours.
Another possibility is that the present drawing was
made for a statuette, to be executed in bronze by another
artist. Giambologna later made a bronze of this subject,
although that bears only slight relation in pose to this
drawing.
Drawn Copies
Recto
A copy, unknown to the compiler, is recorded by Parker
as in the A. Wolmark Collection, London. With a prove-
nance from Jonathan Richardson Senior, Thomas Hud-
son, and Sir Joshua Reynolds, this copy must antedate
1720 and may well have been of the sixteenth century,
but further discussion must await its reappearance.
Parker states that Thode mentions copies of the recto
in the Ufﬁzi and the Louvre, but the compiler can locate
no such reference in Thode and no such copies in those
two collections.
Verso
A copy was made by Sir Edward Burne-Jones in 1866–
7, on fol. 26 recto of his sketchbook in the Fitzwilliam
Museum, Cambridge, 1070-2.
Printed Copy
Recto
Published by William Young Ottley, 1808–23, follow-
ing p. 32, dated 1 May 1818, etched by Thomas Vivares,
289×209 mm.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar; William Young
Ottley; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Wood-
burn.
References
Ottley, 1808–23, pp. 32–3 (Reproduced; “Finely expres-
sive of scornfulness and pride.”). Lawrence Inventory,
1830, M. A. Buonaroti, Case 3, Drawer 3, no. 3 [1830–3]
(“Head of a Man of a Saturnine expression, red chalk, very
ﬁne.”). Woodburn, 1836b, no. 80 (“[S]trongly expres-
sive of malevolence, evidently drawn from life.”). The
Athenaeum, 16 July 1836 (“[M]ore ﬁnished than the
last [1836–87], yet of similar freedom. The grandeur of
those lines about the breast, and feathering the hair, is
worth particular notice; no painter but one could give
the ﬁerce Satanic look of malevolent pride and vindic-
tiveness.”). The Literary Gazette, July 1836 (“[very like
Lord Brougham] . . . among the many productions in this
gallery which rivetted our attention.”). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 4 (As 1836.). Fisher, 1862, p. 4, pl. 12 (As Woodburn,
1842.). Fisher, 1865, II, p. 24, pl. 19 (As 1862.). Robin-
son, 1870, no. 9 (Perhaps c. 1500, but possibly later.).
Fisher, 1872, I, p. 21, pl. 12 (As 1862.). Ruskin, 1872,
pp. 98–9 (“Michael Angelo is always dwelling on this
satyric form of countenance; – sometimes violently car-
icatures it, but can never help drawing it . . . a celebrated
and entirely authentic drawing on which, I regret to say,
my own pencil comment in passing is merely ‘brutal lower
lip, and broken nose.’ ”). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 9. Fisher,
1879, IV/4 (Cites Ottley, 1808–23.). Poynter, 1879, p. 244
(“[T]he precise contrary to everything we imagine as
satyric; satanic is perhaps the word he [Ruskin] meant to
use.”). Springer, 1883, I, p. 310 (Inﬂuence of Leonardo.).
Berenson, 1903, I, p. 181, no. 1551 (c. 1509. Recto: “an
atrabilious, youngish man.” “He has a vehement, almost
ﬁerce look, exaggerated by the protruding lip and pro-
jecting nose. The columnar neck is magniﬁcent. It is a
masterpiece of design, exquisitely precise in the render-
ing of the surfaces, yet with a splendid largeness of han-
dling.” Comparable in type with [Cats. 33, 24 verso]. Use
of red chalk must have inspired envy in Andrea del Sarto.
Verso: “The action of the torso thrown back is superb.”).
Borough Johnson, 1908, pp. 10–11, pl. II (c. 1509; “keen
observation as regards construction and planes.”). Thode,

166
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 29–30
1908, I, p. 266 (Recto: contemporary with, but not
for, the Sistine.). Thode, 1913, no. 393 (Recto: as 1908.
Verso: not seen.). Popham, 1930a, no. 505. Popham, 1931,
no. 216. Berenson, 1938, I, p. 197, no. 1551 (Recto: Medici
chapel period. “[T]hrown off . . . while he was thinking
over the head of Duke Giuliano.”). Wilde, 1953 exh.,
no. 28 (1520–4. Recto: “The purpose of this magniﬁ-
cent head, with its slight tinge of caricature, is unknown.”
Verso: unpublished sketch of Hercules and the wild boar.).
Parker, 1956, no. 316 (Wilde’s date not entirely convinc-
ing. Verso probably but not certainly represents Her-
cules and Erymanthian Boar.). Dussler, 1959, no. 341
(Ascribed to Michelangelo. Recto: some unusual fea-
tures, but probably autograph. Verso: by same hand: sim-
ilarity with Bandinelli’s relief on base of his statue Gio-
vanni delle Bande Nere, suggesting that that relief may
derive from a Michelangelesque prototype.). De Tolnay,
1960, pp. 170–1, no. 153 (Recto: Michelangelo, c. 1525–
30. “[D]isdainful, almost demonic features . . . with pro-
truding forehead and lower lip and . . . curiously shaped
nose . . . possibly one of Michelangelo’s garzoni.”). Beren-
son, 1961, no. 1551 (Recto: Giuliano, duc de Nemours
as 1903/1938.). Brugnoli, 1964, no. 34 (Recto: “arrogant
vitality . . . underlined by the strong features. At the same
time it demonstrates, by the ironic line of the lip and the
wide-open eye, a pathetic knowledge of defeat.”). Berti,
1965, pp. 420, 427 (Sistine period. Recto: whimsical and
grotesque. Commodi, a visitor to the Casa Buonarroti,
derived inspiration from similar types. Verso: possibly an
allusion to Hercules.). Weinberger, 1967, p. 341 (Recto:
Michelangelo, close in style to female head [Cat. 31]. Light
traces of caricature.). Hartt, 1971, no. 161 (Recto: 1517–
8?. Head of an Evangelist, perhaps St. Luke, for second
storey of San Lorenzo fac¸ade.); no. 303 (Verso: 1517–20?.
Subject uncertain.). Van Regteren Altena, n.d. (1972),
pp. 68 ff. (Recto: study for a portrait of Lorenzo the
Magniﬁcent, for the proposed tomb.). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 85 (Recto: unduly grotesque for a portrait
of Lorenzo the Magniﬁcent.). De Tolnay, 1976, Cor-
pus II, no. 328 (Recto: possibly Lorenzo the Magniﬁ-
cent, 1528-30. Verso: Hercules with the boar.). de Tolnay
and Brizio, 1980, no. 3 (As 1976; c. 1530–2.). Lamarche-
Vadel, 1981, p. 107, no. 128 (Recto: head of an Evange-
list.). Paoletti, 1992, pp. 435–7 (Recto: probably conﬂates
images of Lorenzo the Magniﬁcent and Giuliano, Duke
of Nemours.). Perrig, 1999, p. 249 (Recto and verso: by
Antonio Mini; from via Mozza studio.).
CATALOGUE 30
Recto: Hercules and Antaeus and Other Sketches
Verso: Various Sketches; A Poem
1844.63; R.45; P.II 317; Corpus 237
Dimensions: 288×427 mm
Watermark: Robinson Appendix no. 11. Roberts Anchor
F. Briquet 527, Verona, 1558.
Medium
Recto: Red chalk; some light drawing in pen and ink.
Verso: Red chalk; the poem in pen and ink.
Condition
There are pulp imperfections, several pressed-out verti-
cal folds, and inherent creases. Minor tear repairs, toned
inﬁlls, nicks, skinning, and some ingrained dirt are visible.
There are black accretions and waxy deposits; some paper
tape remnants are on the verso. The sheet has widespread
uneven discolouration and foxing, with a slight medium
show-through.
Description and Transcription
Recto
A. Perspective diagram in elevation: projection of a plane;
probably by Antonio Mini.
B. Immediately below A, perspective diagram in plan:
angle of vision; probably by Antonio Mini.
C. A left leg seen frontally; by Antonio Mini, no doubt
after Michelangelo.
D. A left leg seen frontally with the bone structure
indicated; by Antonio Mini, no doubt after Michelan-
gelo.
E. Indecipherable form in pen and ink (overlapped by
D), perhaps studies of water; uncertain authorship.
F. Hercules and Antaeus, sketch (partly overlapping D); by
Michelangelo.
G. A face in proﬁle, apparently looking at itself in a
mirror; the alternative, that he is looking through a
drawing-grid, seems less likely because, in such a case,
he would presumably have been looking at a foreshort-
ened form rather than a full face; probably by Antonio
Mini.

CATALOGUE 30
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
167
H. These nearly indecipherable lines may represent a fee-
ble attempt to copy C or D; if this is correct, H may be
by Andrea Quaratesi.
I. Hercules and Antaeus sketch; by Michelangelo.
J. Head of an old woman in right proﬁle, lightly sketched
after K; by Antonio Mini.
K. Head of an old woman in right proﬁle; by Michelan-
gelo.
L. A small seated owl, placed as though on the hunched
back of the woman; adapted from M; by Antonio
Mini.
M. A seated owl; by Michelangelo.
N. Two eyes with the eye beams crossing, overlapping
M, on a small scale adapted from O; by Antonio Mini (or
Andrea Quaratesi?).
O. Two eyes with a cross-over of eye beams; by Antonio
Mini.
The two sketches for Hercules and Antaeus [F, I] seem the last
drawings to have been made on this side of the sheet.
Verso
With the lower edge as base
A. Indecipherable curling forms, overlapped by the
poem.
B. Immediately below A, indecipherable curling forms,
perhaps hanging hair, overlapped by the poem.
C. Immediately in front of D, indecipherable forms.
D. A male head in left proﬁle, wearing an elaborate head-
dress with a long peak and stiff formalised feathers; by
Michelangelo.
E. A female head seen from the front, slightly turned to
the right, wearing a winged headdress; by Michelangelo
(overdrawn with an apparently meaningless line).
F. A crab, seen from above; by Michelangelo.
G. A male head in left proﬁle, wearing an elaborate head-
dress, after D, by Antonio Mini.
H. A skull in left proﬁle; by Antonio Mini, perhaps re-
worked by Michelangelo.
Probably copied from a teaching sketch of a skull by Michelan-
gelo at the lower left of Ufﬁzi 598E verso/B185/Corpus 307;
black chalk, 357×251 mm. This side of the sheet also carries a
second copy by Mini of the skull.
I. Locks of hair; by Antonio Mini.
This closely resembles drawings by Mini, such as those on Cat.
28 verso S and X, suggesting that the two sheets were worked
on at around the same time.
J. A series of indecipherable lines.
K. A grasshopper in left proﬁle; by Michelangelo.
L. Immediately below K, indecipherable.

168
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 30
M. A horseman astride a rearing horse, in right proﬁle,
a cloak ﬂying out behind him; by Michelangelo.
N. A vase with a double handle (it is unclear if this is
supporting the horse; if so, it should be seen as continuous
with it); by Michelangelo.
If the vase does perform a supporting function, then M and N
must be taken as a unit; in which case, the most likely explana-
tion is that Michelangelo was planning an inkwell in the form
of a small bronze equestrian group.
O. A ﬁgure in an acrobatic pose, bending his legs over his
shoulders; by Michelangelo.
This may be, as Frey thought, a sketch for a hanging lamp.
With the right edge as base
P. An easel with a supporting prop; by Michelangelo?.
Q. A diagram of another, squatter, easel, with a support-
ing prop; by Antonio Mini.
R. An alternative diagram of an easel with a supporting
prop; by Antonio Mini (or Andrea Quaratesi?).
S. A left hand seen from the front in foreshortening hold-
ing an orb; by Antonio Mini.
T. A caricatural giraffe, in right proﬁle; by Michelangelo?
This sketch is interestingly analysed by Wallace who inter-
prets this “childlike scrawl” as “the purposeful creation
of a clever rather than incompetent draftsman . . . a parody
of . . . [his] . . . own giraffe on the same sheet and perhaps of
the whole ludicrous endeavour to teach someone like Antonio
Mini how to draw.”
With the upper edge as base
U. A left hand seen from the front in foreshortening hold-
ing an orb; by Andrea Quaratesi.
V. A giraffe, in left proﬁle; the ﬁgure sitting on its neck
seems to have been drawn with the right edge as base; by
Michelangelo.
This is connected by Wallace with the giraffe sent to Lorenzo
the Magniﬁcent in 1487, which Michelangelo would certainly
have seen.
Surprisingly, the poem was penned before the drawings
were made, as de Tolnay pointed out:
Oilme, Oilme, chio s˜o tradito
dagiorni mie fugaci e dallo spechio,
che ’l ver dice ac ciasc˜u, ch[e] ﬁso il guarda
Cosi n’avi˜e, chi troppo al ﬁn ritarda
Como factio chel tempo me fuggito
si truova come me n˜u giorno vechio
ne mi posso pentir ne mapparechio

CATALOGUE 30
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
169
ne mi consiglio c˜o la morte appresso
nemico di me stesso
inutilm˜ete ipianti e sospir verso
Ch[e] n˜o e danno pari al tempo p so
Oilme, oilme, pur reiterando
vo l mio passato tempo e n˜o ritruovo
in tucto un giorno ch(e) sie stato mio
le fallaci speranze e lv˜a desio
piangendo, amado, ardendo esospir˜ado
Cha affecto alc˜u mortal n˜o me piu nuovo
manno tenuto ondel conosco e pruovo
lont˜a certo dal vero
or comperiglio pero
Ch’l breve tempo me venuto m˜aco
ne sarie ancor, se sall˜ugassi, stanco
I’ vo lasso, ´olme, ne so ben dove
anzi temo chil veggi el tempo andato
me lmostra ne mi val ch[e] gliochi chiuda
or che ltempo la scorza cangia e muda
lamorte e lalma insieme ognior fan pruove
La prima e la sec˜oda del mie stato
E sie n˜o sono errato
Ch[e] diol voglia chi sia
L’ecterna pena mia
nel mal libero inteso oprato vero
vegg signior, ne so quel chio mi spero
Variants
Chil mi commesio
ne . . . scusa apresso addio mi parti
Michelangelo Buonarroti the Younger, pp. 60–1; Guasti,
canzoni III; Frey XLIX; Girardi, no. 51; Residori, no. 51
O¨ımm`e, o¨ımm`e, ch’i’ son tradito
da’ giorni mie fugaci e dallo spechio,
che ’l ver dice a.cciascun, che ﬁso ’l guarda!
Cos`ı n’avien, chi troppo al ﬁn ritarda,
com’ho fatt’io, che ’l tempo m’`e fuggito,
si trova come me ’n un giorno vecchio.
N´e mi posso pentir, n´e m’apparecchio
n´e mi consiglio con la morte appresso.
Nemico di me stesso,
inutilmente i pianti e’ sospir verso,
ch´e non `e danno pari al tempo perso.
O¨ımm`e, o¨ımm`e, pur riterando
vo ’l mio passato tempo, e non ritruovo
in tutto un giorno che sie stato mio!
Le fallaci speranze e ’l van desio,
piangendo, amando, ardendo e sospirando
(c’ affetto alcun mortal non m’`e pi`u nuovo)
m’ hanno tenuto, ond’i ’l conosco e pruovo,
lontan certo dal vero.
Or con periglio p`ero;
ch´e ’l breve tempo m’`e venuto manco,
n´e sarie ’ncor, se s’allungassi, stanco.
I’ vo lasso, oimm`e, n´e so ben dove;
anzi temo, ch’i’ ’l veggio, e ’l tempo andato
mel mostra, n´e mi val che gli occhi chiuda.
Or che ’l tempo la scorza cangia e muda,
la morte e l’alma insieme ognor fan pruove,
La prima e la seconda, del mie stato.
E s’io non sono errato,
(Che Dio ’l voglia, ch’io sia)
l’etterna pena mia
nel mal libero inteso oprato vero
veggio, Signior, n´e so quel ch’io mi spero.
Ryan, no. 51
Alas, alas, I have been betrayed by my ﬂeeting days and by
the mirror that tells the truth to everyone who looks steadily
into it! This is what happens to anyone who too long puts
off thinking about his end, as I have done, while time has
suddenly slipped me by: like me, he suddenly ﬁnds him-
self old. And I cannot repent, nor do I prepare myself, nor
reconsider my ways, even with death near. My own worst
enemy, I uselessly pour out tears and sighs, for there is no
harm to equal that of wasted time.
Alas, alas, though I keep going over my past life, I do not
ﬁnd a single day that has been my own! False hopes and vain
desire have kept me weeping, loving, burning and sighing
(for no mortal emotion is stranger to me now), as I well
know and daily prove again, far indeed from the true good.
Now in danger I perish: Time’s short passage has run out
for me, and even if it were to lengthen, I should not tire of
my ways.
I go wearily on, alas, yet without really knowing where;
or rather I fear I do, for I see where, and my past shows
this to me, and it does me no good to close my eyes. Now
that time is changing skin and moult, death and my soul
are locked in battle every hour, one against the other, for
my ﬁnal state. And if I am not mistaken (God grant that I
may be), I see the eternal punishment due for my having,
in freedom, badly understood and acted on the truth, Lord;
nor do I know what I may hope for.
Discussion
This sheet of drawings, which must have been worked
on c. 1524–5, is one of the most complicated produced
by Michelangelo and his pupils to survive. It is in part a
teaching drawing, and the sheet would have been passed
around from hand to hand over a table. As demonstrated
by Wallace, Michelangelo employed visual and verbal wit

170
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 30
to enliven his teaching and spark his young pupils. This
sheet is closely connected with two others:
1. London British Museum, W33/Corpus 236; red and
black chalk, 255×350 mm.
2. Frankfurt, Staedelsches Kunstinstitut, Inv. 392/Corpus
322; red chalk, 260×410 mm.
All three sheets, which share a provenance from Casa
Buonarroti, contain sketches by Michelangelo, his pupil
Antonio Mini, and probably a second pupil, Andrea
Quaratesi: Parker shrewdly and, in the compiler’s view,
correctly, distinguished two hands among the pupil draw-
ings on the present sheet. The British Museum sheet bears
on its recto three autograph studies of grotesque heads,
which were developed further by a pupil and Michelan-
gelo working together on the recto of the Frankfurt sheet.
The verso of the latter contains another version of the left
leg found on the recto of the present drawing, and it also
carries in red chalk at the upper right the roman number
XVII, which corresponds to numbering found on several
drawings in Casa Buonarroti and on Cat. 56.
The most signiﬁcant autograph drawings on the
present sheet are the two studies for a Hercules and Antaeus
group. The British Museum sheet carries a single study
about the same size as the smaller of the two on the present
sheet, but somewhat less developed, in which Antaeus is
seen from the rear. These drawings relate to a project very
close to Michelangelo’s heart.
Soon after Michelangelo had completed the David
for the Florentine Republic in 1504, the idea arose of
carving another statue to pair with it. By late 1506,
a large block had been excavated in Carrara and was
reserved for the Republic. Owing to Michelangelo’s pro-
tracted absences in Bologna and Rome between 1506
and 1512, nothing was then done, and with the return
of the Medici to Florence in 1512, and the consequent
exile of Piero Soderini, the project lapsed. Although
the evidence is not quite conclusive – the subject is
not mentioned in the contemporary correspondence –
it is virtually certain that Michelangelo initially planned
to carve a Hercules and Antaeus. Versions of the subject
had been executed in bronze in the quattrocento, most
notably by Antonio Pollaiuolo, but to execute an over-
life-size group in marble would have been a triumphant
demonstration of sculptural virt`u. One fragmentary auto-
graph drawing survives of Hercules and Antaeus (Wash-
ington, National Gallery of Art, O’Neal Collection,
1991.150.3; pen and ink, 79×36 mm) datable about 1505;
and the Louvre possesses a page of copies (Inv. 863/J68;
pen and ink, 201×137 mm) after lost pen sketches of
the subject by Michelangelo, probably executed by him
c. 1508.
It may be that Leo X considered commissioning a
statue or group representing Hercules shortly after he
ascended the papal throne in 1513, perhaps a Hercules and
Cacus. Indeed, Vasari ascribes the project to Leo, either
deliberately suppressing, or unaware of, Soderini’s role.
Nothing seems to have come of this scheme, although
a large plaster Hercules, standing with a shouldered club,
modelled by Baccio Bandinelli was erected in the Loggia
dei Lanzi in 1515 as part of Leo X’s celebratory entry into
Florence. The project for a two-ﬁgure marble group was
revived only in 1524 after Leo’s cousin Clement VII had
in his turn been elevated to the papal throne. Although
heavily occupied with the New Sacristy, Michelangelo
was eager for the commission and tried hard to recover
the block, certainly identical with that reserved for him
by Soderini. At this time, Michelangelo planned to
carve a Hercules and Antaeus: This is reported by Vasari
and conﬁrmed by the contemporary chronicler Gio-
vanni Cambi who speaks of “un Ercole che scopiassi
Anteo gigante.” This is the subject of the present sheet
of drawings and that in the British Museum. Both are
datable to 1524–5.
Michelangelo undoubtedly made further drawings of
the subject. The sale of the collection of Pierre Crozat
in 1741 included among the twenty drawings attributed
to Michelangelo contained in lot 21 a Hercule ´etouffant
Ant´ee: Its speciﬁc mention in a catalogue in which most of
Michelangelo’s drawings were undescribed suggests that
it was an impressive sheet. This drawing was probably
acquired by Pierre-Jean Mariette and is no doubt iden-
tical with that which appeared in the sale of Julien de
Parme (who had bought heavily at the Mariette sale of
1775–6), Paris, 21–22 February 1794, as part of lot 12:
Quatre Dessins & Etudes, dont Hercule qui ´etouffe Anth´ee,
dessin´ees au crayon rouge. As far as the compiler is aware, this
drawing has not re-appeared, but assuming the attribution
to be correct, it is likely that this was a more developed
treatment of the project, again drawn in 1524–5.
Michelangelo also made a plastic model of the subject.
According to Vasari, he gave to Leone Leoni, in appre-
ciation of his medallic portrait struck by Leoni in 1560, a
wax model of Hercules Crushing Antaeus, and although in
principle this could have been unrelated, it is likely that
this too was made for the revived project.
Other drawings are sometimes connected with this
project. There is a beautiful red chalk drawing of Two
Men Wrestling in the Louvre (Inv. 709 recto/J30/Corpus
267; red chalk, 237×195 mm), but it is doubtful whether
this was made for the Hercules and Antaeus group. An

CATALOGUE 30
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
171
autograph outline sketch on a small scale, more in the
nature of a ricordo – or perhaps a teaching drawing – than
a concetto, is found on a sheet in Casa Buonarroti (CB53F
recto/B174/Corpus 229 bis; red chalk, 353×242 mm).
And three pupil drawings no doubt reﬂect with greater
or lesser ﬁdelity Michelangelo’s ideas:
1. Casa Buonarroti CB 40A verso/B98/Corpus 177;
black chalk, 398×243 mm. By Antonio Mini, and datable
c. 1524.
2. British Museum W34; pen and ink, 162×145 mm,
reasonably attributed to Antonio Mini by Wilde, but
somewhat later than 1.
3. Lille, Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts, Brejon de Lavergn´ee, no.
808 recto; pen and ink, 210×138 mm. This drawing by
Raffaello da Montelupo, on fol. 91 recto of the sketch-
book executed jointly by Raffaello and Francesco da San-
gallo, seems to represent Antaeus on the point of expiry.
It is difﬁcult to determine whether it was made after a
prototype by Michelangelo dating from c. 1524, or after
an idea of c. 1508.
It was acutely noted by Wilde that one of Michelan-
gelo’s drawings or models of Hercules and Antaeus was
employed by his friend Giuliano Bugiardini for the cen-
tral group in the Rape of Dinah, a composition begun
by Fra Bartolommeo – another friend of Michelangelo –
but left unﬁnished at his death in 1517. The version of the
Rape of Dinah in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna
(oil on canvas, 158.5×183 cm), seems to be an autograph
version of the lost original, which had been completed by
1531, but there is every reason to believe that it is identical
with it in form, and Wilde’s observation seems convinc-
ing to the compiler. But it is unlikely to be coincidence
that about this time Michelangelo made a drawing, now
in Haarlem (A24/VT 63/Corpus 238; black chalk, 115×
95 mm), showing a man abducting a writhing ﬁgure who
is clearly female. Perhaps Michelangelo created this for
Bugiardini, but in the event his friend preferred an option
less violently dynamic.
Michelangelo was unsuccessful in his efforts to regain
the block which, in November 1525, Clement allocated to
Baccio Bandinelli. Some years earlier, in 1517, Bandinelli
had been favoured by Michelangelo, and the two men
no doubt remained on terms as late as 1522 (see Cat.
107). But his acceptance of this commission would have
eliminated whatever warmth remained. Bandinelli began
work in 1526 and made rapid progress on a Hercules and
Cacus, not a Hercules and Antaeus. On 22 August 1528,
however, following the expulsion of the Medici from
Florence and the re-installation of a Republican govern-
ment, Michelangelo was re-allocated the block by the
Signoria, and Bandinelli was compelled to relinquish it.
Michelangelo was given carte blanche to carve what he
wished. According to Vasari, what Bandinelli had done
in the interim prevented Michelangelo from realising his
original intentions, and he instead devised a new group,
of Samson Killing Two Philistines, to ﬁt the block’s changed
shape. Preoccupied with his work for the defence of
Florence, he did not begin carving this, although he did
produce a masterly model in wax or clay. This was later
cast, probably in the workshop of Daniele da Volterra,
who reproduced it in both versions of his painting of
the Massacre of the Innocents. It became very famous: Tin-
toretto and his pupils made numerous drawings after
it, and it was also copied by Naldini, among many
others.
With the fall of the last Republic in 1530 and the
deﬁnitive re-establishment of Medici rule, the block was
returned to Bandinelli, whose Hercules Victorious over
Cacus was completed in 1534 and set up, probably as
Soderini and Michelangelo had intended, beside the
David in Piazza della Signoria.
The other sketches on the recto and the verso of the
sheet are listed and described above with the compiler’s
views of their authorship appended. However, a few com-
ments follow on what seems to be the more interesting
of these.
Recto
Although the small sketch of a perched owl is unlikely to
have been made in preparation for the bird that accom-
panies Night, it was probably based on it, to facilitate a
pupil copy. The proﬁle head of the old woman is clearly
a teaching drawing, with a copy immediately beside it;
a similar juxtaposition, this time of the head of an old
man, is seen on the verso of Michelangelo’s famous draw-
ing of Zenobia in the Ufﬁzi (598E/B185/Corpus 307;
black chalk, 357×252 mm), made for his friend Gherardo
Perini about 1524. Michelangelo seems to have been
concerned to introduce his pupils to selective exag-
geration by the road of caricature. This proﬁle of an
old woman bears a resemblance, as W. Dreesmann has
pointed out (personal communication), to another pro-
ﬁle of an old woman in Florence (CB3F/B190/Corpus
309; black chalk, 163×120 mm); this drawing, although
often excluded from Michelangelo’s oeuvre, does seem
to be by him, as de Tolnay recognised. Its portrait-like
objectivity suggests that it may represent one of Michelan-
gelo’s servants, and it probably served him as the starting-
point for the more exaggerated proﬁle on the present
sheet.

172
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 30
Verso
The sketch of a rider recalls motifs generated by
Michelangelo for the Battle of Cascina; why he should
have reprised aspects of that scheme at this date is con-
jectural. However, if the vase below the horse’s front legs
is connected, then, as suggested previously, it may have
been a design for some small decorative piece in bronze,
perhaps an inkwell; around the same time Michelangelo
made a drawing for a bronze hanging lamp on the recto of
a sheet now in the Fogg Art Museum (1932-152/Corpus
438; black chalk, 157×156 mm).
The winged female head [K] is similar in reverse to a
head by Michelangelo on a truncated sheet in the Ufﬁzi
(251F verso/B243; red chalk, 279×133 mm; this side of
the sheet also carries some drawings apparently by Mini).
The recto of this sheet, in which Michelangelo has com-
bined red and black chalk, shows a standing Venus and
was probably made in preparation for a now-lost presen-
tation drawing known only in a later copy by Salviati,
also in the Ufﬁzi (14673F; red chalk, 355×243 mm). The
winged head – identiﬁed by Frey as that of Mercury but
by Thode simply as an imaginary form – might conjec-
turally be related to one of the standing allegories to be
placed on either side of the seated dukes in the New
Sacristy. However one would generally associate wings
with the element of air, and even though this would
be appropriate to one of the two ﬁgures ﬂanking Duke
Giuliano, representing Heaven and Earth, neither of them
as shown on Michelangelo’s modello for that tomb (Paris,
Louvre, Inv. 838/J27/Corpus 186) wears a winged head-
dress. The identities of the pair planned to ﬂank Lorenzo
are not known, but it is possible that one of them could
have worn a winged headdress; however, their most likely
identities are Fire and Water, and wings would not have
been appropriate for either.
The head in proﬁle with an Amerindian-style head-
dress is difﬁcult to account for, but it may be simply
one of Michelangelo’s experimental coiffures, a genre in
which he was exceptionally inventive. The sketches of a
grasshopper and a crab are also hard to explain, but a crab is
represented in Michelangelo’s later presentation drawing
of Tityus at Windsor (PW 429/Corpus 345; black chalk,
190×330 mm), and he may have considered employing
crustacean and insect forms in headdresses for his Ideal
Heads – no surviving drawing by him demonstrates such
a use, but at least one of the Ideal Heads by Jacomo Ligozzi
includes a locust (Paris, Louvre, Inv. 1704), and the idea
may have originated with Michelangelo. The relation of
the diagrammatic skull to those on the verso of Ufﬁzi
598E, one of the sheets given to Gherardo Perini, sug-
gests their probable contemporaneity.
The poem is dated c. 1530 by Girardi and others, but
given its priority over the drawings, it must be of c. 1525
or even a little earlier. The emphasis on a struggle between
death and the soul was to bear fruit in the lower areas of the
Last Judgement, and this connection may have suggested
the later dating. The mood of depression, if not despair,
seems more appropriate to a man older than about ﬁfty,
and one who was, in fact, to live almost another forty
years; but Michelangelo complained about his waning
strength on more than one occasion during the 1520s and
he was, in any case, always liable to depressions. In the
present case, his mood may have been exacerbated by his
anxiety over the Hercules and Antaeus, and his work on the
tombs in the New Sacristy would naturally have focused
his mind on the inevitability – and proximity – of death.
The watermark found on the present sheet also occurs
on Cats. 35 and 42, as Robinson noted.
Drawn Copies
c. 1580 Andrea Commodi copied:
D on the recto on Ufﬁzi 18609F verso.
F on the verso on Ufﬁzi 18609F recto.
H on the verso on Ufﬁzi 18608F recto.
M on the verso on Ufﬁzi 18609F recto.
History
Casa Buonarroti, by c. 1580?; Jean-Baptiste Wicar?;
William Young Ottley, his sale, 6 June 1814 and days
following, lot 1760; (“One – a leaf of masterly studies
in red chalk; Hercules and Antaeus, etc. on both sides
with one of his poems autograph. most interesting.
This poem is copied in facsimile in Mr Duppa’s Life
of Michael Angelo.” £33.12.0); Sir Thomas Lawrence
(L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale, 6 June 1814 etc., lot 1760 (“One – a leaf
of masterly studies in red chalk; Hercules and Antaeus,
etc. on both sides with one of his poems autograph.
most interesting. This poem is copied in facsimile
in Mr Duppa’s Life of Michael Angelo.”). Woodburn,
1842, no. 9 (“This study appears to have been a les-
son for a pupil.”). Guasti, 1863, pp. 347–9 (Transcrip-
tion of poem.). Robinson, 1870, no. 45 (Michel Angelo.
Recto: “Two sketches of a group, evidently for sculpture
in the round, of Hercules strangling Antaeus, the design
nearly similar but seen from two rather different points of
view; perhaps this is a sketch taken from a wax model
by himself . . . they are apparently connected with the
lines of a diagram which seems to indicate some problem

CATALOGUE 30
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
173
in perspective or optics.” Linked with British Museum,
W33/Corpus 236 and of the same date as that, 1524. “Very
likely” that they were made for the colossal marble group
taken over by Bandinelli. The “two slight sketches of an
owl . . . probably for La Notte.” Verso: “great diversity of
sketches . . . several repeated by a weaker hand, probably
that of a thoughtful scholar.” Lines of poetry “although
here written continuously without any break, have been
published as three separate madrigals.”). Ruskin, 1872,
p. 100 (“[T]the vile face,” i.e., [K].). Black, 1875, p. 214,
no. 42. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 234. Springer 1878, p. 387 (One
of three sketches for Hercules and Antaeus, which show
that this is the subject initially planned by Michelangelo.).
Springer, 1883, II, pp. 223–4 (As 1878.). K. Frey, 1897,
pp. 37–8, no. XXXVII; pp. 332–3 (Transcription of verso
poem; dates it 1532–3.). Berenson, 1903, I, pp. 214, 255,
261–2; no. 1712 (By Montelupo in Michelangelo’s stu-
dio, c. 1532, the date assigned by Frey to the verses. The
studies of Hercules and Antaeus are variations on Haarlem
A24/VT63/Corpus 238 and W33/Corpus 236. The
lighter sketches “for children’s toys.”). Thode, 1908, I,
p. 487; II, p. 294 (Verso [now recto]: sketches for Her-
cules and Antaeus, 1524–5; sketches for the owl accom-
panying Night.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 145 (Verso [now
recto]: two hands, Michelangelo [F, I, and K]; the remain-
der by Mini, datable to period of Medici chapel. Hercules
and Antaeus for statue commission; poem shows state of
depression after the fall of Florence (no. 144); Recto [now
verso]: by Michelangelo the rider [M]?, [O] the acrobat,
probably a lamp, [H] the skull, [T] the giraffe; datable
c. 1524.). Thode, 1913, no. 428 (Verso [now recto]: all
sketches autograph, with the exception of the caricat-
ural head [J] by a pupil. Recto [now verso]: fourteen
sketches listed, eight of which are autograph: [E, M, N,
O, H, I, V, perhaps D]; [G] a repetition of [D] by Mini,
who is also responsible for the other sketches.). Popp,
1922, p. 143 (Recto: sketches of an owl, and Hercules
and Antaeus and the two heads lower left by Michelan-
gelo, 1524–5, but not the leg study.). Popp, 1925, p. 19
(Recto: Hercules sketches by Michelangelo. Proﬁle pos-
sibly copied after a drawing by Michelangelo. Verso: by
Mini; the old man, the vessel and the giraffe corrected
by Michelangelo.). Panofsky, 1927–8, p. 224 (Recto:
doubts about the authenticity of Windsor PW 423/Cor-
pus 335 do not affect these Hercules and Antaeus sketches.).
Popp, 1927–8, pp. 13–14 (Recto: sketches for Hercules and
Antaeus by Michelangelo, rest by Mini.). Berenson, 1935,
p. 275 (Not by Mini but “Andrea.”). Berenson, 1938, I,
pp. 224, 365, no. 1712 (As 1935.). Delacre, 1938, pp. 341–
2 (Recto: [F] – the owl – reproduced as Michelangelo.).
De Tolnay, 1948, p. 214, no. 92 (Recto: sketches of
Hercules and Antaeus by Michelangelo, remainder by a
pupil. 1525, linked with BM W33/Corpus 236). Wilde,
1949, p. 247 (Hercules and Antaeus sketches and those on
BM W33/Corpus 236 of 1524–5.). Wilde, 1953a, pp. 65,
67–8 (Recto: Hercules and Antaeus sketches related to
those on BM33 recto/Corpus 236. Verso: form of horse
[M] relates to BM W32/Corpus 87.). Wilde, 1953 exh.,
no. 30 (1524–5. Not all the drawings on the recto and
verso are autograph.). Parker, 1956, no. 317 (Recto: the
Hercules and Antaeus sketches [F, I] by Michelangelo for
the statue project of 1524; related studies in London,
BM W33/Corpus 236 and Haarlem, A24/VT63/Corpus
238. The two grotesque proﬁles [J, K] also autograph;
the leg [C] probably by a pupil. Verso: by Michelan-
gelo are the rider [M], the head of Mercury [K], the
proﬁle [D]. “But apart from Mini’s relatively competent
hand there are also scribbles by an utterly feeble one: the
small owl to left of the larger one . . . on the recto, the
two worthless paraphrases of the sketch of an easel to
right on the verso.”). Dussler, 1959, no. 196 (Recto: [F,
I] by Michelangelo for the Hercules and Antaeus group,
linked with BM W33/Corpus 236. The remainder by
Mini, mid-1520s; link with Frankfurt Inv. 392/Corpus
322.); no. 622 (Verso: by Mini.). Girardi, 1960, no. 51
(Transcription of poem.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1712 (As
1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962, p. 293, under no. 243 (Head
closely similar to verso [K] is also found on Ufﬁzi 251F
verso; perhaps by Mini.). Gilbert, 1963, pp. 30–1, no. 49
(Verse translation of poem.). Berti, 1965, pp. 450, 463
(Recto: Hercules and Antaeus sketches [F, I] and proﬁle
of an old woman [J] authentic; Mini probably involved as
well. Verso: weak, attributed to Mini.). Weinberger, 1967,
pp. 240, 342 (With BM W33/Corpus 236 [F, I] proves that
Michelangelo planned to carve a Hercules and Antaeus in
1525. [J] a caricatural drawing by Michelangelo, “copied
at left by draughtsman of verso.”). Hartt, 1971, no. 302
(Recto: 1524–5. Hercules and Antaeus [F, I] for projected
statue; “half-humorous sketches of an owl may be related
to the owl below Night. Proﬁle of an old woman exem-
pliﬁes vein of caricature in the artist’s drawings . . . ineptly
drawn leg and the diagrams made to show the optic
rays appear to be the work of Antonio Mini.”); no. 312
(Verso: 1525–31?. Humorous sketches by Michelangelo
and Mini.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 92 (Recto: Her-
cules and Antaeus [F, I] no doubt connected with group
projected in 1524–5 like BM W33/Corpus 236. Not
all the drawings are autograph.). Keller, 1975, pp. 30–1
(c. 1525; sketches by Mini and drawings by Michelangelo
for the group of Hercules and Antaeus [F, I] to accompany
his David.). De Tolnay, 1976, Corpus II, no. 237 (Recto:
[F, I] Michelangelo for Hercules and Antaeus group; [K]

174
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 30–31
also autograph, the remainder pupil copies. Verso: poem
written ﬁrst in Michelangelo’s writing of the 1520s. The
heads [D, E] and the crustaceans by Michelangelo, the
remainder in part by Mini, in part by Quaratesi.). de
Tolnay and Brizio, 1980, no. 66 (Recto: only Hercules
and Antaeus sketches discussed.). Guazzoni, 1984, pl. 94
(Hercules and Antaeus sketches [F, I] by Michelangelo.).
Wallace, 1995, pp. 115–18 (Verso: informal pedagogical
drawings, with Michelangelo and Mini handing the sheet
back and forth: the “childlike scrawl [of the giraffe, V] is
by Michelangelo . . . the purposeful creation of a clever
rather than incompetent draftsman” imitating a naive
drawing.). Ryan, 1996, no. 51, pp. 38–41 (Transcription
and prose translation of poem.); p. 278 (Commentary.).
Ryan, 1998, pp. 60–2 (Discussion of poem.).
CATALOGUE 31
An Idealised Bust
1846.61; R.10; P.II 315; Corpus 323
Dimensions: 205×165 mm
Medium
Red chalk.
Condition
There is uneven pulp, a pressed-out horizontal fold,
and another horizontal line of abrasion/crease. A major
repaired loss and skinned area, minor edge losses, nicks,
and skinning are visible. There are several scratches,
incised marks, and deeper, diagonal surface scratches,
abrasions, and accretions. The sheet is unevenly dis-
coloured with dark foxing and local staining.
Discussion
This drawing, of the head and shoulders of a subject
whose identity and sex are disputed, is generally con-
sidered to date from c. 1522. However, it may have been
made a little later given that the particular elegance of
the facial type and the delicacy of the pose have cer-
tain links with the ﬁgure of Victory, underway during the
later 1520s. The stylisation of the features, with a long
slightly ﬂeshy nose, and prominent chin, has something
in common with the female type seen in the drawing usu-
ally identiﬁed as the Virgin with Child and Angels in the
Accademia in Venice (Inv. 199/Corpus 244; black chalk,
370×250 mm; for a copy see Cat. 65). The present head
also recalls earlier work. The twist of the neck of the
ﬁgure – whose sex is also disputed – supporting the body
of Christ at the right of the Entombment in the National
Gallery (NG790; oil on wood, 161.7×149.9 cm) bears
a resemblance to that of the present head and because
the period towards 1530 seems to have been a period
of graphic retrospection in Michelangelo’s work, such a
link would also support a later date. The exotic head-
dress is presumably an invention by Michelangelo, whose
fascination for such adornments goes back at least to the
Entombment and is particularly notable among the Sistine
Ancestors of Christ.
From the drawing’s degree of ﬁnish and the self-
sufﬁcient nature of the image, it seems likely that it was
made as a Presentation Drawing, probably in Florence
rather than in Rome.
Unlike the three sheets of heads that Michelangelo
made for Gherardo Perini around 1524 (Florence, Ufﬁzi,
598E recto/B185/Corpus 307, 599E recto/B186/Corpus
308, 601E/B187/Corpus 306; all in black chalk, respec-
tively, 357×252 mm, 343×236 mm, and 298×205 mm),
which are dense in content and no doubt have didac-
tic intent – as do those made in the early 1530s for
Tommaso de’Cavalieri – the present head seems not to
embody any speciﬁc message, and rather to be a study in
character and temperament: perhaps melancholy. It was
copied (see next section) but not frequently. Therefore,
if Michelangelo gave it to a friend, it was probably not
made widely available by its owner. If the provenance from
Casa Buonarroti is correct, it was presumably acquired
for or presented to the Casa in the early seventeenth
century.
Drawn Copies
1. Florence, Ufﬁzi, 602E/B188/Petrioli Tofani, 1986,
p. 268; red chalk, 160×121 mm. The image size is iden-
tical with that of the original, and this copy was undoubt-
edly made directly from it, probably in the 1530s. Ufﬁzi
602E was attributed conﬁdently by Robinson to Battista
Franco; Parker, Barocchi, and others have given it to
Bacchiacca. But to the compiler, Ufﬁzi 602E displays the
characteristics of neither Franco nor Bacchiacca – who
does not seem to have employed this head in any of his
paintings – and he is inclined to think rather of an artist
in the circle of Bronzino.
2. Oxfordshire, Private Collection; black chalk, 176×
132 mm; from the collection of Carlo Prayer (Lugt,
2044). By Battista Franco; see Lauder, 2003, p. 96. Most
of Franco’s copies after drawings by Michelangelo are
indirect, made from copies of them by Raffaello da
Montelupo, but this seems likely to have been made from
the original.

CATALOGUE 31
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
175
3. Oxford, Ashmolean Museum; black chalk, 148×163
mm. An adapted copy, no doubt also by Battista Franco.
See Cat. 62.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar; Samuel Wood-
burn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3, no. 10 [1830-13] (“Proﬁle in red chalk of a
youth in a helmet, highly ﬁnished.”). Woodburn, 1836b,
no. 21 (“A Female Portrait – of very expressive coun-
tenance.”). The Literary Gazette, July 1836 (“[A]mong
the many productions in this gallery which rivetted our
attention.”). The Athenaeum, 16 July 1836 (“[A]nother
instance of the beautiful in this artist, not altogether so rare
with him as is commonly supposed. The profound senti-
ment which inspires it is much rarer with other artists.”).
The Court Journal, 23 July 1836 (“Did not the ‘Female’
[21] serve as a model for the Night or Sleep [which is it?]
on the Medicean Tomb? The ﬁne, yet haggard features,
and the gloomy expression, so terrible in the statue, have
a kindred resemblance to this woman’s face.”). Wood-
burn, 1842, no. 27 (As 1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no.
24 (As 1842.). Woodburn, 1853, no. 19 (Reproduced.).
Fisher, 1862, p. 4, pl. 13 (Vittoria Colonna.). Fisher, 1865,
p. 23, II, pl. 13 (As 1862.). Robinson, 1870, no. 10 (A
woman; “similar in character to the celebrated idealised

176
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 31–32
heads known as the Marchesa di Pescara and the Conte di
Canossa” and, like those “probably done in emulation
of Leonardo da Vinci.” Datable “shortly before 1500.”
Copies in Oxford [Cat. 62] and Ufﬁzi [602E], both by
Battista Franco.). Fisher, 1872, II, p. 21, pl. 13 (As 1862.).
Ruskin, 1872, p. 99 (“Passing, for the moment, by No.
10.”). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 10 (Reproduced in a photo-
graph f.p. 214.). Gotti, 1875, II, p. 239. Blanc, 1876, f.p. 26
(Reproduction.). Philostrate, 1878, p. 215 (“[A] sketch of
a woman’s head by Michael Angelo. It might be called a
study of reﬁnement. Nothing can be imagined more gen-
tle than that mouth; the lips seem to tremble as we look
at them; nothing could be sweeter than those clear-cut,
down-cast eyes, every line round which seems to speak a
subtle language of its own.”). Fisher, 1879, V/5 (“Head
or Bust, in proﬁle, of a Woman.”). Springer, 1883, I,
p. 310 (Inﬂuence of Leonardo.). W¨olfﬂin, 1891, pp. 64–6
(“[W]undervolle R¨othelzeichnung, darstellend ein Weib
mit fremdartiger Kopfbedeckung”; not early, reminiscent
of Night.). Berenson, 1903, I, p. 182, no. 1552 (“Bust of
a Youngish Woman.” Datable 1508.). Colvin, 1904, II,
no. 10 (“It belongs to the earlier period of the artist’s
employment on the Sistine ceiling and represents a type
of intellectual beauty which recurs often.”). Steinmann,
1905, II, p. 603, no. 55 (Study of a female head, employed
for the youth to the right of the Eleazar-Mathan lunette.).
Jacobsen, 1907, pp. 493–4 (Contests Steinmann’s view;
if connected with Sistine more likely related to woman
in Ezechias lunette.). Mackowsky, 1908 (and subsequent
editions), p. 250 (“Frauenkopf.” Inﬂuence of Leonardo’s
technique and fantasy.). Borough Johnson, 1908, p. 10,
pl. III (Early; “majestic expression.”). Thode, 1908, I,
p. 257; II, p. 337 (“Wundervolle Zeichnung”; for a Sibyl.).
K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 172 b (Head of a woman. Inﬂu-
ence of Leonardo. Painterly technique and type suggest
Sistine period: datable 1511–12. No relation to Venice
sheet, which is not by Michelangelo. Copies in the Ufﬁzi
[602E] and Oxford [Cat. 62].). Thode, 1913, no. 394 (All
agree this head of a woman to be contemporary with
the Sistine ceiling; direct relation to Sibyline Woman in
Michelangelo’s drawing in Venice, Inv. 199/Corpus 244.).
Zoff, 1923, pl. 31. Brinckmann, 1925, no. 30 (Head of
a Sibyl, c. 1511.). Popp, 1925, p. 21 (By “Carlo” who
is also the author of the London Entombment; the type
is close to head of ignudo left above Joel.). Popp, 1925b,
p. 74 (Not by Michelangelo.). Hekler, 1930, p. 216 (Com-
pared with a head in a Roman fresco from the Franc¸ois
tomb at Volci.). Popham, 1930a, no. 503. Popham, 1931,
no. 214 (Head of a Young Woman; c. 1508.). Berenson,
1938, I, p. 197, no. 1552 (“[T]en or more years later”
than 1508.). Delacre, 1938, pp. 87, 173–6, 373 (Michelan-
gelo not “Carlo” “Tˆete de femme avec Turban.” Rela-
tion to CB 7F. Ufﬁzi 602 perhaps also autograph.). De
Tolnay, 1945, pp. 209–10, no. 15a (By Bacchiaca.). Gold-
scheider, 1951, no. 65 (Michelangelo, but “manner more
mechanical” than in drawings for Perini; “model was a
young man.” c. 1528–30.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 34 (Ideal
head of a woman, c. 1516.). Parker, 1956, no. 315 (“The
features are young and somewhat epicene in character”;
that it could connect with and follow drawings made
for Gherardo Perini is at least stylistically admissible.).
Dussler, 1959, no. 342 (Autograph, c. 1520.). De Tolnay,
1960, p. 170, no. 152 (Head of a young woman; now
regards as genuine, c. 1520–5.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1552
(As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962, p. 278 (Copied by
Bacchiacca on Ufﬁzi 602E.). Brugnoli, 1964, no. 27
(Female head; perhaps a Presentation Drawing. c. 1520.).
Berti, 1965, pp. 456–7, 466 (Authentic, not Bacchi-
acca.). Goldscheider, 1965, no. 49 (Redated to c.
1522.). Hartt, 1971, no. 363 (1533–4. “The features
are clearly those of a youth, seized by some haunt-
ing and nameless melancholy. The female dress, proba-
bly added from imagination, gives the work a strange,
transvestite appearance . . . elusive delicacy of the surface
is . . . closely allied to the style of the presentation draw-
ings.”). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 112 (Datable 1512–
25; sex of head unclear; perhaps made for presenta-
tion.). Hibbard, 1975, p. 189. Keller, 1975 (Ideal female
head, in spirit of younger Sibyls of the Sistine; c. 1520.).
Keller, 1976, ﬁg. 164 (Ideal Head of an ancient heroine;
a Presentation Drawing.). De Tolnay, 1976, Corpus II,
no. 323 (Head of a woman, 1525–30.). Pignatti, 1977,
no. 20 (Head of a woman; survey of opinion on purpose
and dating.). Murray, 1980, p. 154 (1532–4?.). Lamarche-
Vadel, 1981, p. 136, no. 157 (1522–34.). Pignatti, 1981,
p. 110 (“[L]inked with the group of so-called ‘ﬁnished
drawings’, datable to around 1522.”). Hirst, 1988, p. 108
(Earlier than the drawings made for Perini.). Hirst, 1988–
9a, no. 23 (1518–20; represents a young man.). Perrig,
1991, pp. 77–8, 139–40, ﬁg. 65 (By Cavalieri.).
CATALOGUE 32
Recto: Head of a Bearded Man in Left Proﬁle
Verso: Various Studies
1846.68; R.11; P.II 322; Corpus 310
Dimensions: 155×125 mm. Severely cut down.
Watermark: An orb, with a crescent-shaped insert at the
top, with a line proceeding out of it; the lower part of the

CATALOGUE 32
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
177
orb inscribed, apparently with a letter which might be T,
and a convoluted shape, which might be a decorated L.
Not in Roberts.
Medium
Recto: Red chalk.
Verso: Pen and ink, red chalk, traces of black chalk.
Condition
There is a slightly sloping horizontal pressed-out fold and
a minor crease. Major vertical and edge tear repairs, frac-
tures, supported skinned holes, small “pin” holes, and
other repaired corner damage and toned inﬁlls are visi-
ble. There is general discolouration and ingrained dirt.
Description
Verso
Some of the drawings on the verso are difﬁcult to
interpret; this side of the sheet was no doubt ﬂattened
and abraded when it was laid down. However, it does
seem that the work in pen lies above that in red chalk.
Top line
A. Pen: a bust-length outline study of a nude woman
seen from the front, her head turned to her right, looking
down, with her right arm drawn across her body; perhaps
by Antonio Mini.
B. Pen: a sketch of a male ﬁgure seen from the front, with
his head turned slightly to his left. His right elbow may be

178
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 32
bent outwards, with the right hand resting on the right
hip; perhaps by Antonio Mini.
C. Red chalk: a series of scroll-like forms; perhaps by
Michelangelo.
Second line
D. Left edge, red chalk: a double scroll bracket in proﬁle;
perhaps by Michelangelo.
E. Centrally placed, very faint red chalk, perhaps an
offset: a female head seen from the front, turned to the
left?; perhaps by Antonio Mini.
Discussion
As Whistler observed, this drawing, which has been dras-
tically cut down, once showed two – possibly three – men
in conversation, probably at half length: “Immediately to
the left of the principal head is a fragment of another head
study, this time of a younger man turned slightly to the
left, whose hair, right eye, jawline, neck and collar can
be seen.” Like Cat. 29 the treatment is semi-caricatural.
Whether or not the drawing has a speciﬁc subject is con-
jectural, but Michelangelo certainly planned a contrast
between an angry old man and, it would seem, a calmer,
younger onlooker.
Woodburn thought that the drawing was made from
life. Michelangelo probably made quick jottings from
casual observation, and it has plausibly been suggested
that the old man on Cat. 14 recto was sketched from a
ﬁgure noted in the street. Michelangelo clearly looked
at vernacular facial types for the Ancestors of Christ.
However, although the irascible old man who domi-
nates the present composition may well be based on

CATALOGUE 32
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
179
observation, the planning of this sheet seems cogitated
rather than jotted down, and its execution more labori-
ous than that of a sketch.
As Whistler further notes, the expression, apparently
furious, inevitably recalls Leonardo’s shouting heads for
the Battle of Anghiari, one of which, planned in a drawing
now in Budapest (Inv. 1775 recto; black chalk, 191×188
mm) was the inspiration for Michelangelo’s famous Anima
Damnata (Ufﬁzi 601E/ B187/Corpus 306; black chalk,
288×205 mm), one of the sheets presented to Gherardo
Perini c. 1524. The present drawing also has links with
Leonardo in conception: Leonardo’s drawing in Wind-
sor, of a Caesarian bust surrounded by leering faces (CP
12495; pen and ink, 260×205 mm), shows his inter-
est in juxtaposing expressive heads at half-length, and
in this, and the grotesque emphasis, Michelangelo is
surely following in his footsteps. Too much is missing
from the present drawing for it to be reconstructed, but
like Leonardo, Michelangelo juxtaposed elderly and ugly
faces with idealised younger ones, as is demonstrated
by his drawing in Princeton (Gibbons 437; black chalk,
183×124 mm; see Joannides, 1995a), and this may have
been part of the message here.
Michelangelo made his drawing over other sketches.
Quite emphatic lines may be seen under the main char-
acter’s hat, which Whistler interpreted as studies of an
eye (cf. Cat. 28 verso) but which seem to the compiler
to be curls of hair; more softly drawn, a tubular form
protrudes upwards into the ﬁeld from the lower right
corner. These may well have been executed by his pupil
Antonio Mini, as Panofsky suggested. Michelangelo
probably began working on the sheet as a teaching exer-
cise, but it seems soon to have metamorphosed into a
Presentation Drawing. Whistler relates the present draw-
ing to a famous one in Florence, probably representing
the fourth-century Queen of Palmyra, Zenobia (Ufﬁzi
598Erecto/B185/Corpus 307; black chalk 357×251 mm),
another of Michelangelo’s gifts to Perini. In that, as in
the present drawing, the main head is executed densely
while the subsidiary forms are drawn more loosely. There
is also a similarity with another of Michelangelo’s Pre-
sentation Drawings of about the same period (Ufﬁzi
603E/B189; black chalk, 203×163 mm; rejected by many
critics and sometimes attributed to Bacchiacca, but cer-
tainly an autograph work by Michelangelo) in the relation
between the principal and subsidiary heads. However, the
compiler would date the present drawing a little later than
those, in the second half of the 1520s.
The verso, uncovered after 1992, contains a series
of sketches whose authorship is problematic. The two
red chalk sketches C and D might be by Michelangelo:
The latter would presumably have been made in con-
nection with one of his architectural projects. The pen
sketches A and B may be by Antonio Mini, but they
show a level of accomplishment higher than he generally
exhibits and, if by him, were presumably made towards
the end of his time with Michelangelo. In motif, two
of the drawings interestingly support the reminiscence
of Leonardo noted of the recto. A seems to be a loose
sketch, no doubt from memory, of Leonardo’s standing
Leda, executed as a painting during his period in Flo-
rence c. 1505, and now lost, though known from many
contemporary copies, of which the earliest is probably
Raphael’s drawing in the Royal Collection (PW789; pen
and ink over stylus, 308×192 mm) and innumerable later
ones.
The sketch B, if the compiler’s interpretation of it is
correct, seems to take up a familar Donatellesque pose.
More surprising is C, the intertwined scrolls, which
bears an unexpected resemblance to sections of the more
stylised of Leonardo’s drawings of Deluges in the Royal
Collection, Windsor Castle (CP 12377–12384; all in black
chalk, some with additions in pen and ink). The ﬁrmness
of the line work in this small sketch could be that of
Michelangelo. The larger form in the centre, E, might
be by Mini, but the compiler is far from conﬁdent of
this attribution, or that he has interpreted this drawing
accurately.
The present sheet came from the Dukes of Modena
and was perhaps one of the two drawings by Michelan-
gelo recorded on exhibition in 1771. Much of the
Modena collection was seized for the French state in
1796, perhaps advised by Wicar, through whose hands
this drawing may – but cannot be proved to – have
passed. Nothing seems to be known in detail about the
sources of the Modenese drawings collection, and this
provenance offers no clue to the present sheet’s original
recipient.
History
Duke of Modena; Jean-Baptiste Wicar?; Sir Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445, fragmentary); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1836b, no. 33 (“This beautiful drawing is evi-
dently from nature, and is highly interesting, from its
extreme ﬁnish and truth.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 6 (As
1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 53 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1862,
p. 4, pl. 11 (“[A]s if singing. . . . Evidently from nature.”).
Fisher, 1865, II, p. 23, pl. 11 (As 1862.). Robinson, 1870,
no. 11 (“[D]esign borders on caricature and recalls in some
degree the well-known grotesque heads of Leonardo da
Vinci” datable between 1500 and 1512.). Ruskin, 1872,
p. 99 (“Passing by.”). Fisher, 1872, II, p. 21, pl. 11 (As

180
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 32–33
1862.). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 11. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 239.
Fisher, 1879, VI/6 (“Singing.”). W¨olfﬂin, 1891, p. 66
(Michelangelo: Similarities to [Cats. 33, 31].). Berenson,
1903, no. 1553 (c. 1508; not inferior in quality to [Cats.
31 and 32].). Thode, 1908, I, p. 265 (Sistine period.).
Thode, 1913, no. 395 (Perhaps from same model as man
in Iosias group.). Popp, 1925, pp. 10, 13, 15 (Mini.). Panof-
sky, 1927–8, p. 229 (Mini, overworked by Michelan-
gelo.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1553 (Perhaps of Medici chapel
period.). Goldscheider, 1951, p. 179, ﬁg. 201 (Battista
Franco.). Wilde, 1953a, p. 79 (Michelangelo. May be
compared with humorous drawings on BM 42 verso of
c. 1525–8.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 11 (c. 1525.). Parker,
1956, no. 322 (Michelangelo.). Dussler, 1959, no. 600
(Rejected. Not Mini. Battista Franco possible. Reports
handwritten annotations, now lost and unrecorded else-
where, to Bandinelli by Wilde and to Franco by Parker.).
Berenson, 1961, no. 1553 (As 1903/1938.). Goldscheider,
1965, pl. Xc (As 1951.). Hartt, 1971, no. 156 (1517–18.
Study for the head of St. Damian, for the San Lorenzo
fac¸ade.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 93. De Tolnay, 1976,
Corpus II, no. 310 (Ironic self-portrait, shown in anger;
c. 1525, related to drawings for Perini.). De Tolnay, 1978,
Corpus III, pp. 211–14 (As 1976; reproduction of the
verso by transparency.). De Tolnay and Brizio, 1980,
no. 2 (As 1976.). Lamarche-Vadel, 1981, p. 107, no. 130
(For the head of St. Damian.). Paoletti, 1992, pp. 433–
4 (“[I]ronic proﬁle self-portrait.”). Whistler, 1992, no. 8
(c. 1525; “Anger is personiﬁed by this grotesque ﬁgure,
who shouts, beard quivering”; similarity to Shouting Man
in Leonardo’s Battle of Anghiari; similarities to a drawing
in the BM W42 verso/Corpus 316. Probably a teaching
drawing, pupil work discernable beneath Michelangelo’s
work. Fragmentary; drawing originally contained at least
two heads and possibly more.).
CATALOGUE 33
Recto: Three Men Disputing
Verso: Accounts
1846.72; R.1; P.II 326; Corpus 9
Dimensions: 377×250 mm
Medium
Recto and verso: Pen and ink.
Condition
There are numerous toned edge inﬁlls and tear repairs,
other repaired fractures from ink burn-through, numer-
ous skinned areas, some abrasion, a scratch, and numerous
handling creases. The sheet has widespread discoloura-
tion, ink show-through, and bleeding as well as local
staining.
Accounts and Inscriptions
et? I. 15
17
44 22
(According to Frey perhaps by Michelangelo.)
lbr (libbre) 2 ˜o(nce) 12
Da raffaello mazz (?Mazzinghi) per il saione le ed . . .
e chosteravj (?) overo
. . . aportatore per
E
t
(According to Frey not by Michelangelo; Dussler
suggests Mini.)
El tasecta dell
. . . el panno de
(According to Frey perhaps by Michelangelo.)

CATALOGUE 33
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
181

182
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 33
Discussion
This famous drawing shares features with some of the
other drawings catalogued here, and it too was dated by de
Tolnay to c. 1500. Although this is not acceptable, it is clear
why he thought so, since there are distinct similarities with
a drawing that probably is of that period, in Haarlem
(Teyler Museum A22/VT 45/Corpus 10; pen and ink,
269×194 mm).
It seems unlikely that the drawing was made with a
speciﬁc project in mind. Obviously, in the case of an
artist like Michelangelo, who frequently surprises, dog-
matism would be unwise. Thus, the ﬁgures, who seem
to be dressed in stylised uniforms might, in principle, be
bystanders in a multi-ﬁgure Cruciﬁxion, at least one exam-
ple of which Michelangelo designed in this period, but
they seem too caricatural to make such an idea plausible.
Indeed Robinson’s description is too acute not to quote:
“The group seems to represent a soldier, with a sympa-
thising companion leaning on his shoulder, disputing or
arguing some knotty point with a civilian, whose cring-
ing and obsequious attitude, at the same time expressive of
feigned astonishment, is in almost ludicrous contrast with
the erect bearing and earnest yet bewildered expression
of the soldier.”
The ﬁgures may have been drawn simply with satiri-
cal intent, sending up individuals Michelangelo disliked,
possibly during the siege of Florence, when troops were
very visible. Alternatively, they could have been made for
Antonio Mini, or another student, to demonstrate the
absurdity of some types of discourse. What the draw-
ing does show is that to Michelangelo’s highly developed
gift for verbal satire was added one for graphic satire, but
drawings of this type, in which he relaxed, were proba-
bly among the ﬁrst to be destroyed. The drawing’s car-
icatural qualities were well brought out by Robinson,
but it must be admitted that the employment of two
of these ﬁgures by Battista Franco in his painting of the
Battle of Montemurlo, would seem to counteract such an
interpretation.
As noted by Parker and others, the inscriptions are
mutilated and show that the sheet was once larger. They
date to 1526 and probably preceded the drawing. Frey, fol-
lowed by Dussler, placed the ricordi between others datable
between 23 June and 5 July 1526 on sheets now in the
British Library.
Battista Franco’s knowledge of this drawing was prob-
ably direct, and not through a copy by Raffaello da Mon-
telupo. The provenance, however, provides no clues as to
the ﬁrst owner of the drawing – only that it seems never
to have been in Casa Buonarroti.
Drawn Copies
1. Christie’s sale, New York, 25 January 2005, lot 32; pen
and ink, 364×239 mm, all four corners chamfered, the
lower left corner additionally cut and made up.
This drawing is identical with that owned and dis-
cussed by Jonathan Richardson Senior, who describes
the relation between it, which he believed to be by Bat-
tista Franco, and Michelangelo’s original which he also
owned (see following discussion). The sheet indeed bears
the stamp of the elder Richardson. On its reappearance,
its superiority to 2 was immediately evident, and it was
widely agreed to be by Battista Franco.
From the collections of Jonathan Richardson Senior,
John Barnard, Thomas Hudson, Sir Joshua Reynolds, Sir
Thomas Lawrence, and Samuel Woodburn. This version
was etched by J. Basire in 1763 in the same direction
and at precisely the same size as the original, inscribed:
Bat.a Franco del.t after Mic. Angelo. In the collection of Mr
Tho.s Hudson, Painter. J. Basire Sc.t, 1763, CR edid.t.
Republished by Rogers, 1778, I, facing p. 71 (Basire’s
etching shows the chamfered corners found both in this
version and 2, and the drawing is set on a Richardson-style
mount). Franco’s copy was evidently shown in Wood-
burn’s 1836 exhibition above the original.
2. Plymouth, City Art Gallery and Museum, Cottonian
Collection, CD98; pen and ink, 366×246 mm, all four
corners chamfered (illustrated by Dussler, 1959, ﬁg. 179),
acquired for the Cottonian Collection by the museum
in 1918. This drawing, whose mount bears a pencilled
inscription to Battista Franco, was, when it was purchased,
assumed to be identical with the copy by Franco described
by Jonathan Richardson Senior, later owned by Charles
Rogers and etched by Basire. This seems generally to
have been accepted until Parker pointed out that there
were numerous irreconcilable differences between the
Plymouth drawing – which bears no collectors’ marks –
and Basire’s etching and that it could not therefore be
the Richardson–Rogers version. The reappearance of 1
proved Parker correct. Given the fact that the corners of
the Plymouth sheet are chamfered in exactly the same
way as 1, it might seem reasonable to conclude that it is a
copy after it, made to deceive, at some time between 1836
and 1918, a period when 1 was lost to sight. However,
although, as Parker noted, the presence of a pentiment
in the chin of the central ﬁgure in the Plymouth draw-
ing – a pentiment not reproduced in Basire’s etching –
does suggest that the draughtsman knew Michelangelo’s
original, the penwork is otherwise sufﬁciently different
both from the original and Franco’s copy, 1 (or copies, 1
and 3) to make unlikely the possibility that it is a forgery.

CATALOGUE 33
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
183
The Plymouth drawing is more probably an indepen-
dent copy after Michelangelo’s original by an uniden-
tiﬁed sixteenth-century artist – perhaps from the circle
of Bandinelli – less concerned than Franco to reproduce
the master’s penwork. The sheet’s corners may have been
chamfered by an owner or dealer prior to 1918 to make
it conform with the then unlocated drawing by Battista
Franco, as it would have been known through Basire’s
etching.
3. Private Collection, France; pen and ink (and lead-
point for a small sketch of a face at the lower left of
the recto), 355×251 mm. This copy is on the recto of
a double-sided sheet, reproduced by de Tolnay, 1975,
Corpus I, p. 28, as (formerly?) in Norfolk, Virginia,
Payne-Ott Collection; it was previously in the Ludwig
Pollack collection, and bears his stamp (L.788b) at the
lower right of the recto.
The pen-work on both sides of this sheet, known to
the compiler in a laser-print more legible than the poor
reproduction in the Corpus, strongly suggests the author-
ship of Battista Franco. Although the recto is very faded,
enough of the handling is visible to support this attribu-
tion. The verso, a copy after a Dionisiac sarcophagus in
the Vatican, which is in better condition, also conforms
with Battista’s style. A somewhat weaker version of the
verso drawing exists in the Royal Collection at Windsor
Castle (8360; pen and ink over lead-point, 178×317 mm,
from the paper museum of Cassiano dal Pozzo; Blunt,
1971, no. 182 as attributed to Battista Franco) and this,
as de Tolnay also suggested, may well be by Girolamo da
Carpi, who was in contact with Battista Franco in Rome
in the mid-1550s and who seems to have copied some of
his drawings.
Other explanations are, of course, possible. It could be
argued that both sides of this sheet are copies after Battista
Franco by Girolamo da Carpi, which would relegate the
Windsor drawing to the status of a copy after Girolamo,
but on balance the compiler thinks it more likely that both
sides of 3 are by Battista. In further support of this may
be cited the small sketch, at the lower left of the recto, of
a Michelangelesque face seen from the front, tilted at an
angle of forty-ﬁve degrees to the vertical. This is radically
unlike anything in Girolamo’s work, but would readily ﬁt
with Battista’s. This face, which bears some relation to
facial studies by Mini, occurs on neither of the other two
copies. It could well reﬂect a drawing by Michelangelo,
such as the tilted faces on the recto and verso of a sheet
in the British Museum (W33/Corpus 236; red and black
chalk, 255×350 mm), both of which have been incised
for transfer.
Alternatively, it could be argued that 1, despite its dis-
tinguished pedigree, is merely a facsimile copy of the recto
of 3 by another hand. The attribution of 1 to Franco has
not been challenged, and it seems satisfactory to the com-
piler who ﬁnds no difﬁculty accepting that Franco made
more than one quasi-facsimile copy after Michelangelo’s
drawing. However, the additional head on the recto of 3
would suggest – although not prove – that it came before
1: It is more common for copies and second versions to
simplify than to complicate.
Painted Copies
1. Florence, Palazzo Pitti, The Battle of Montemurlo, by Bat-
tista Franco; oil on panel, 173×134 cm. This allegorical
painting, produced in 1538 to commemorate the victory
of the forces of the young Cosimo de’Medici over the
Florentine Republicans at the Battle of Montemurlo is
virtually an anthology of borrowings from Michelangelo,
to which are added at least one after a Raphael school
composition known from a drawing of a Tempest also in
the Ashmolean (P.II 577; pen and ink, 249×409 mm).
Two of the three ﬁgures from the present drawing, which
Franco would have had to hand in his own copy or copies,
are prominent in the left foreground.
Etched Copy
Published in aquatint by William Young Ottley, 1808–
23, following p. 32, executed by W. Long under Ottley’s
direction, 1 May 1818, 393×262 mm.
History
Henry Trench? [Richardson does not give the name of
the person from whom he acquired the drawing, but it is
tempting to think that the “one who had just brought it
from Abroad” was the painter and dealer Henry Trench,
who returned from Italy to London in 1718, and whose
version of Perino da Vinci’s Ugolino Richardson describes
enthusiastically in his Science of a Connoisseur on pp. 32–
5]; Jonathan Richardson Senior (L.2184); Lord Spencer
(L.1531) (his sale, 10 June 1811, etc., lot 475; “A conver-
sation of three ﬁgures – masterly pen – R – The original
from which Baptista Franco made that which is engraved in
Roger’s work of imitations.”); bought Champernowne, £5
15s; William Young Ottley (his sale, 6 June 1814, etc.,
lot 1766; “One – three ﬁgures in conversation – masterly
pen – R[ichardson]. The original from which Baptista
Franco made the copy, engraved in Mr Rogers’s work.
capital. See note on the back.” £20.0.0); Sir Thomas
Lawrence (no stamp); Samuel Woodburn.

184
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 33
References
Richardson, 1719, pp. 167–9 (“I have perhaps one of the
greatest Curiosities of This kind that can be seen, because
I have both the Coppy, and the Original; both are of Great
Masters, the Coppier was moreover the Disciple of him
he endeavour’d to Imitate, and had Accustom’d himself
to do so, for I have several Instances of it, which I am very
certain of tho’ I have not seen the Originals. Michelangelo
made That I am now speaking of, and which I Joyfully
purchased lately of one who had just brought it from
Abroad; ’tis a Drawing with a Pen upon a large half sheet,
and consists of 3 Standing Figures: the Coppy is of Battista
Franco, and which I have had for several years, and always
judg’d it to be what I Now ﬁnd it is. ’Tis an amazing thing
to see how Exactly the Measures are follow’d, for it does
not appear to have been done with any other help than
the Correctness of the Eye, if it has been trac’d off, or
measur’d throughout, it is strange that the Liberty should
be preserv’d that is seen in it; Battista has also been exact
in following every stroak, even what is purely Acciden-
tal, and without any meaning; so that one woud think
he endeavoured to make as just a Coppy as possible, both
as to the Freedom, and Exactness. But Himself is seen
thoughout most apparently: as great a Master as he was,
he could no more counterfeit the Vigorous, Blunt pen
of Michelangelo, and that Terrible Fire that is always seen
in Him, than he could have manag’d the club of Her-
cules.”). Ottley, 1808–23, p. 33 (cites Richardson; notes
that Franco’s copy is engraved in Rogers, adds “another
old copy is in my own possession; and I have seen others.”
Reproduced following p. 3.). Lord Spencer, his sale, 10
June 1811, etc., lot 475 (“A conversation of three ﬁgures –
masterly pen – R – The original from which Baptista Franco
made that which is engraved in Roger’s work of imitations”).
Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, etc., lot 1766 (“One – three
ﬁgures in conversation – masterly pen – R[ichardson].
The original from which Baptista Franco made the copy,
engraved in Mr Rogers’s work. capital. See note on
the back.”). Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti,
Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-68i] (“Two [sic] ﬁgures convers-
ing, pen, with a copy by B. Franco, very capital.”). Wood-
burn, 1836b, no. 52 (“[T]he copy by B. Franco is also in
this Cabinet, so that the comparison can still be readily
made.”). The Athenaeum, 16 July 1836 (“no. 53, ‘Figures
Disputing’. Battista Franco’s imitation overhead (not, bye
the bye, so faithful to the line as Richardson pronounces)
is the best evidence of that amazing vigour and boldness,
distinguishing the original.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 44
(“There is a copy of it by B. Franco which belonged to
Sir T. Lawrence.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 8 (As 1842.).
Fisher, 1852, p. 4, pl. 14 (“[I]nteresting . . . observations of
its former possessor.”). Fisher, 1865, I, p. 17, pl. 14 (As
1852.). Fisher, 1872, I, p. 15, pl. 14 (As 1852.). Robin-
son, 1870, no. 1 (Perhaps before 1500; like [Cats. 24,
58].). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 1. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 237.
Fisher, 1879, I/1 (“A soldier with a sympathizing com-
panion apparently debating some matter with a civil-
ian.”). W¨olfﬂin, 1891, p. 66 (Michelangelo: “Anfang
des zweiten r¨omischen Aufenthalts.”). Morelli, 1891–2,
col. 544 (“Cambiaso als Nachahmer des Michelangelo.”).
Berenson, 1903, I, p. 184, no. 1545 (“One of the most bril-
liant and, in some respects, one of the most troublesome
of Michelangelo’s drawings,” with close analysis of tech-
nique. Sistine period, perhaps for a medallion.). Thode,
1908, I, p. 264 (Michelangelo, perhaps for a Sistine medal-
lion.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 197 (Not Michelangelo.
Umbrian, near Signorelli, but verso inscription in part by
Michelangelo relating to concerns of 1526.). Thode, 1913,
no. 387 (“[D]es Feldherrn Auftrag”; has doubted it
but now accepts it; no longer believes it to be of the
Sistine period, but of the time of siege of Florence.).
Voss, 1920, I, p. 118 (p. 100 of English ed.), (Battista
Franco). Zoff, 1923, pl. 52. Berenson, 1935, pp. 263–
4. (By Andrea di Michelangelo who may be Stefano di
Tommaso Lunetti.). Berenson, 1938, I, p. 362, no. 1545
(As 1935.). Delacre, 1938, pp. 77–8 (Michelangelo: “par-
ticuli`erement fort et jamais contest´e” [sic]; critique of
Berenson’s reconstruction of “Andrea.”). Goldscheider,
1951, p. 179 and ﬁg. 203 (Battista Franco.). Wilde,
1953 exh., no. 49 (“[T]his brilliant if unusual draw-
ing . . . can be by no one but Michelangelo” c. 1526.
Copy by Battista Franco in Plymouth.). Parker, 1956,
no. 326 (“[I]nscriptions by Michelangelo and Bernardino
di Pietro Basso show that the sheet must have been
very much larger, and that the writing preceded the
drawing in date.” Attribution to Michelangelo “on bal-
ance of evidence remains preferable to any other yet
made” but an attribution to Battista Franco “not to be
lightly dismissed.” Link with [Cat. 24].). Dussler, 1959,
no. 596 (Rejected. Not Mini, perhaps Battista Franco.
Ricordi on verso by Michelangelo and Mini and dat-
able 23 June–5 July 1526.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1545 (As
1903/1938.). Goldscheider, 1965, pl. Xe (As 1951.). Hartt,
1971, p. 390 (Rejected.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 102
(“Wilde surely right in his emphatic acceptance of the
traditional attribution . . . superﬁcial resemblance of the
graphic technique to Franco’s can be accounted for by
his intense admiration for Michelangelo; . . . fully com-
patible with . . . Michelangelo’s rough pen sketches.”). De
Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. 9 (Michelangelo, c. 1526.
Position of legs of central ﬁgure derives, according to P.
Meller, from a Bacchic sarcophagus engraved by Battista

CATALOGUES 33–34
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
185
Franco, B.XIV, 134,45. Verso: inscriptions in two differ-
ent hands.). Hirst, 1988, p. 11 (Close to caricature.). Van
Tuyll van Serooskerken, 2000, pp. 93–4 (This drawing and
Cat. 24 recto seem later and more developed than the
sheet in Haarlem, A22/VT45/Corpus 10.). Lauder, 2003,
pp. 97–8, 111 (Discussion of the three copies.).
CATALOGUE 34
Recto: Stories of the Brazen Serpent
Verso: An Anatomical Sketch
1846.64; R.29; P.II 318; Corpus 266
Dimensions: 244×335 mm
Medium
Red chalk – in two different colours on the recto; an
indecipherable detail in pen and ink on the recto.
Condition
There is uneven pulp, and inherent wrinkles at the left
margin. There are a number of major tear and toned
inﬁll repairs, a deep diagonal scratch, skinning, and ﬁbrous
accretions at the edges. The sheet has extensive uneven
discolouration from adhesive residues, some foxing and a
vertical dark line.
Discussion
Although Parker contested it, the drawing on the recto
of this sheet clearly represents two distinct episodes in the
story of the Brazen Serpent, probably planned as a pair. The
upper group in a darker, liverish chalk, shows the attack of
the serpents; the lower, in a lighter, orange-tinged chalk,
shows the sufferers’ salvation as they worship the brazen
serpent raised by Moses on a cross – an episode taken as
a preﬁguration of Christ’s Cruciﬁxion.
The motif of biting serpents, initially inspired by the
Laocoon, reappears in Michelangelo’s work. The most
famous is the fresco of the Brazen Serpent on the Sistine
ceiling, but a snake also appears in the Last Judgement,
biting the penis of Minos, and Michelangelo represented

186
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 34
the episode of the serpents’ attack in two drawings, about
contemporary with the present one, now in D¨usseldorf
(see discussion that follows). The subject was also treated
by Antonio Mini (Ufﬁzi 18721F recto/B175/Corpus 149
and CB 37F/B170, both probably after lost drawings
by Michelangelo) and by direct followers of Michelan-
gelo working in his manner, as in a drawing in the
Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts, Lyon (Inv. 1971-115) attributed
to Clovio (see Costamagna, 1992, p. 171). The subject
was obviously ideal for Michelangelo, with ﬁgures strug-
gling against bonds, like the Slaves. The present page also
gave him the opportunity to revive ideas tried in stud-
ies for Cascina and associated projects around 1505. The
man running forward in the upper group reprises the
running ﬁgure from the combat between infantry and
cavalry, Cat. 5, and the man supported by two others
in the lower group develops a trio treated in somewhat
different form in drawings in the British Museum (W5
recto/Corpus 46; black chalk, 315×278 mm) and the
Louvre (Inv. 718 recto/J9/Corpus 47; black chalk over
stylus indentation, 334×174 mm). At least one of these
ﬁgures is anticipatory: The small ﬁgure seen from the back

CATALOGUE 34
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
187
at the lower left of the upper group was reprised for the
angel supporting the Column in the upper right lunette
of the Last Judgement.
As remarked by H. Chapman (personal communi-
cation) some of the serpents are winged, which, quite
apart from zoological insouciance on Michelangelo’s part,
suggests that he may have drawn tangential inspiration
from the assault of the Harpies as described in the
Aeneid.
The purpose of the present drawing is unknown. It
was argued by Popp that the two studies were made
in preparation for scenes to be painted in the lunettes
above the ducal tombs in the New Sacristy, and this view
has been followed by several scholars. It is now known
that these areas were to be ﬁlled with moulded sculp-
ture, not paintings, but Popp’s hypothesis has recently
cautiously been revived by Zentai, who points out that
copies of the present drawing made by Raffaello da
Montelupo are to be found on the same sheets as copies
by him after Michelangelo’s modello for the ducal tomb.
That Raffaello worked as a sculptor for Michelangelo in
1533 and 1534, and might have been delegated to make
reliefs for the lunettes, obviously adds weight to Zentai’s
view. It could be reinforced by noting that, as copied by
Raffaello, Michelangelo’s groups are made more com-
pact than in the present drawing and less unsuitable for
the spaces above the tombs. Nevertheless, the compiler
remains sceptical of this proposal. The designs, certainly
in the present drawing and even in Raffaello’s abbre-
viated versions, still seem too complex to carry at the
distance required. Futhermore, neither group, even in
Raffaello’s versions, is composed as a lunette, a shape
that would surely have been Michelangelo’s starting-point
for any composition planned to ﬁt them. If these draw-
ings were made in preparation for paintings or sculptures
to be executed by another artist, their speciﬁc purpose
remains unknown. However, it is also possible that they
were made in preparation for a Presentation Drawing.
Some Presentation Drawings were sufﬁciently compli-
cated to require graphic preparation: The Bacchanal of
Infants, for example, was prepared in an elaborate draw-
ing now in Bayonne (Inv. 650 verso/Bean 69/Corpus
337; black and red chalk, 195×300 mm). Two larger
red chalk drawings of the Brazen Serpent, in the Kunst
Palast, D¨usseldorf (F.P. 138, 250×265 mm, bearing a
watermark Briquet 7392, found on paper employed by
Michelangelo in the second half of the 1520s, and F.P.
139, 225×263 mm), attributed to Michelangelo by the
compiler (Joannides, 1996b), while unrelated formally to
the present groups, were probably done around the same
period. But these compositions, which would indeed
have made effective reliefs, are designed as rectangles, not
lunettes. Finally, two ﬁgures of spearmen on a sheet in
the British Museum (W33 verso/Corpus 236; red chalk,
255×350 mm) are, as Wilde remarked, similar to ﬁg-
ures in the present drawing, but not so close that one
can be certain that they were made for the same pur-
pose.
The date of the present sheet is likely to be of the
early 1530s. The copies listed later, formerly believed to
be by Francesco da Sangallo until Nesselrath observed
that they were by Raffaello da Montelupo, would pre-
sumably have been made while Raffaello was working
with Michelangelo in the second half of 1533 and the ﬁrst
three quarters of 1534 (see Cat. 66). The attribution to
Raffaello is reinforced, if that were needed, by the fact
that a number of these copies plus others after drawings by
Michelangelo (some of which do not survive in the “orig-
inal”) and works by other artists were in turn copied by
Raffaello da Montelupo’s pupil, Giovanni Antonio Dosio
(or re-copied by Raffaello himself ), in an album of 153
folios in the Biblioteca Estense, Modena (YZ. 2 2.; pen,
average page size 200×140 mm), which was probably
made in Rome in the 1560s or 1570s. Indeed, the upper
group of the present sheet was known in Rome in the
1570s, for it was employed in a fresco scheme in the frieze
of the Galleria of Palazzo Sacchetti in the via Giulia in
Rome, which has plausibly been attributed to Daniele da
Volterra’s pupil, Giacomo Rocca (for further comment
on this scheme see Cat. 22). This fact would suggest
that the present sheet had some circulation. Of course,
Giacomo Rocca’s knowledge of it – certainly via his mas-
ter Daniele da Volterra – could, in principle, have come
from a copy, but none of those now known – certainly
none of those by Raffaello – would have provided sufﬁ-
cient information for Giacomo. It is conjectural whether
Giacomo knew the original or a more precise copy of
its upper group than is now known. If the former, one
would have to assume that the present sheet was either
donated to or acquired by the Casa Buonarroti at some
later date and did not descend directly from Michelan-
gelo. Some support is given this idea by the fact that it was
not included among the copies made by Commodi, to
whom, one would have thought, such small active ﬁgures
would have appealed.
The slight anatomical sketch on the verso cannot ﬁrmly
be connected with any other drawing or project, but
the form suggests a date not far removed from 1530. As
a conjecture, it might have been made in connection
with the shoulders and neck of the Victory, an area of
the statue to which Michelangelo devoted considerable
graphic attention.

188
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 34
Drawn Copies
1. Ufﬁzi 606E recto/Petrioli Tofani, 1986, p. 269; pen
and ink, 202×139 mm. Abbreviated copy of the lower
episode of the Brazen Serpent. Attributed in the Ufﬁzi to
Aristotile da Sangallo but undoubtedly by Raffaello da
Montelupo, predominantly a left-handed draughtsman.
Raffaello on occasion collaborated with both Francesco
and Aristotile da Sangallo, which may explain the confu-
sion. The companion sheet, Ufﬁzi 607E/Petrioli Tofani,
1986, p. 270; pen, 200×136 mm, which contains sketches
after the whole (recto) and details (verso) of an early mod-
ello by Michelangelo for the Magniﬁci Tomb is also by
Raffaello. The page sizes of 606E and 607E are very
close to that of the 92 leaf sketchbook, 210×138 mm,
in the Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts, Lille (Brejon de Lavergn´ee,
717-808), which is predominantly by Raffaello but which
includes a few pages by Aristotile. The Lille sketchbook
largely comprises architectural drawings, and Raffaello
could have kept a second sketchbook devoted to copies
of sculptural projects. However, the ﬁnal page of the
Lille sketchbook contains a copy after a lost drawing by
Michelangelo for the Hercules and Antaeus project (see
Cat. 30) and it may be that it was followed by pages com-
prising primarily ﬁgure drawings, including Ufﬁzi 606E
and 607E, Budapest 1959, and the lost sheet formerly in
Dresden.
2. Budapest 1959, pen and ink, 192×141 mm. Formerly
attributed to Aristotile da Sangallo but now accepted as
by Raffaello da Montelupo (Zentai, 1998, no. 23) and
perhaps from the same sketchbook as Ufﬁzi 606E and
607E. The recto carries an abbreviated copy of the upper
episode of the Brazen Serpent. The verso bears a loose
copy of some of the ﬁgures on Michelangelo’s modello
for a ducal tomb, now in the Louvre, Inv. 837/J27 (see
Cat. 63 for some discussion of the companion sheet,
Inv. 838/J26). This has been taken to support the con-
nection of the recto group – and hence the present
sheet – with the New Sacristy. Zentai points out that
a lost sheet of drawings of unrecorded dimensions, for-
merly in Dresden (illustrated by de Tolnay, 1948, ﬁg. 230)
was probably en-suite with Ufﬁzi 606E and 607E and
Budapest 1959.
3. D¨usseldorf, Kunst Palast, F. P.151, pen and ink over
traces of black chalk, 230×160 mm. The recto, divided
into two levels, which are drawn in different colours
of ink, carries a copy of Ufﬁzi 606E recto (i.e., the
lower episode of the Brazen Serpent, above) and a copy
of Budapest 1959 recto (i.e., the upper episode of the
Brazen Serpent, below). It was presumably made by a right-
handed pupil or associate of Raffaello: It is attributed
at D¨usseldorf to Guglielmo della Porta, but Giovanni
Antonio Dosio is also a possible candidate. The upper part
of the verso of D¨usseldorf F. P.151 contains part copies
after Ufﬁzi 607 verso and the lower part a simpliﬁed
and more compact variant of the fac¸ade of San Silve-
stro al Quirinale as found on page 23 verso of the Lille
sketchbook. This conjunction implies that Ufﬁzi 607E,
Budapest 1959, and the Lille sketchbook were together
when the D¨usseldorf draughtsman copied them.
4. Ufﬁzi 6907F; pen and ink, brush and wash, 128×
259 mm (irregular). A partial copy of the upper episode,
probably indirect. Now classed as Clemente Bandinelli,
the sheet bears an old inscription to Baccio Bandinelli. It
seems to the compiler to have nothing to do with either
artist but rather to stem from the circle of Guglielmo della
Porta.
5. Ufﬁzi 17371F; black chalk, 174×265 mm. Copy in
outline of part of the upper episode of the Brazen Serpent,
attributed to an anonymous eighteenth-century artist.
This drawing, formerly given to Antonio Domenico
Gabbiani, 1652–1726, and illustrated as such by Stein-
mann, 1905, II, p. 636, was certainly not made from
Michelangelo’s original, but from an earlier copy, prob-
ably, but not certainly, 2. It thus provides no evidence
for the location of the original during the seventeenth or
eighteenth centuries. However, copies after Michelan-
gelo are uncommon in this period and reproductions of
his drawings, even indirect, are rare; in this context, it
is worth mentioning several relevant copies among the
Gabbiani drawings in the Ufﬁzi (although whether they
are by him is debatable; in the compiler’s view, it is more
likely that they simply formed part of his estate). They
are:
a. 14722F, pen and ink, 110×219 mm, copied after
Ufﬁzi 607E verso, upper reclining ﬁgure.
b. 14724F, pen and ink, 162×219 mm, copied after
Ufﬁzi 607E verso, lower reclining ﬁgure and relief
compositions.
These two copies were no doubt made on
the same sheet and subsequently divided: Taken
together they reproduce accurately the layout of
Ufﬁzi 607E verso.
c. 14723F, pen and ink, 167×198 mm, copied
after the two ﬁgures in Michelangelo’s fragmen-
tary drawing of an unidentiﬁed subject (Ufﬁzi
618E/B145/Corpus 355; pen and ink, 90×65 mm),
and the sketch of a ﬁgure carrying another on his
back from a copy after a lost drawing by Michelan-
gelo for the Sistine Flood (Ufﬁzi 617E/B212/Corpus
127; pen and ink, 149×212 mm).

CATALOGUE 34
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
189
d. 14766F, pen and ink, 427×261 mm, copied after
Raffaello da Montelupo’s copy of a lost Michelan-
gelo drawing of the legs of a seated ﬁgure, no doubt
for one of the Medici dukes (Ufﬁzi 622E/B205/
Corpus 223; pen and ink, 212×268 mm).
e. 14776F, pen and ink, 258×219 mm, copied after
Ufﬁzi 607E recto (identiﬁed by Annamaria Petri-
oli Tofani, inscription on mount). This drawing is
on paper bearing the watermark Roberts Cross B,
datable around 1500, implying that it, and presum-
ably the other copies in this series, are of sixteenth-
rather than eighteenth-century origin.
f. 16292F, pen and ink, 140×200 mm, copied after
Michelangelo’s two preliminary sketches, once
joined, of Prophets for the Sistine ceiling (Ufﬁzi
17379F and 17380F/B13 and B14/Corpus 151 and
152; pen and ink, both 108×62 mm).
6. Formerly Hugh Blaker Collection, from the collection
of Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445), red chalk, 130×194
mm. Exhibited Leicester Galleries Exhibition, no. 877,
March 1948, no. 41. A same-size copy of the lower group,
tentatively attributed by Parker to Giulio Clovio.
7. Copies of sections of both groups were made by
Sir Edward Burne-Jones in 1866–7, on fols. 9 recto,
16 recto, and 17 recto of his sketchbook in the
Fitzwilliam Museum, 1070-2 (see Østermark-Johansen,
1998, pp. 122, 125, ﬁg. 31).
Painted Copy
Rome, Palazzo Sacchetti, Galleria, fresco in the frieze,
which makes use, in modiﬁed form, of the upper group
from the present drawing, not the abbreviated version on
Ufﬁzi 606E. The frescoes in this room are undocumented
but were in all probability commissioned in the 1570s
for the Ceuli family who then owned the palace. They
were plausibly attributed by Luigi Salerno to Daniele da
Volterra’s pupil Giacomo Rocca (see Cat. 22).
History
A. Daniele da Volterra?; Giacomo Rocca?; Giuseppe
Cesari, Il Cavaliere d’Arpino?; the Cicciaporci family and
Filippo Cicciaporci?; Bartolommeo Cavaceppi?.
or
B. Casa
Buonarroti?;
Jean-Baptiste
Wicar;
Samuel
Woodburn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel
Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonarroti Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830-58] (“A Crowd of persons looking at
the Brazen Serpent, highly ﬁnished in red chalk, two
different studies on the same leaf.”). Woodburn, 1836b,
no. 32 (“It forms part of the vault of the Sistine Chapel”;
provenance given as M. Buonarroti and Wicar.). The
Athenaeum, 16 July 1836 (One of the “[S]triking proofs
of the ultimate degree to which Michael Angelo as well
as Raffael, Leonardo, and all the great artists, carried
elaboration; 32, in particular, is ﬁnished with a smooth-
ness that Vanderwerff could not surpass, yet with a great-
ness of style such as no Dutchman ever dreamt of.”).
Woodburn, 1842, no. 11 (As 1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no.
37 (As 1842.). Robinson, 1870, no. 29 (Michel Angelo.
“Although these admirable designs are entirely different
from the well-known fresco on the ceiling, the agreement
in the style of design render it highly probable that they
were executed at the same time.” Two separate episodes:
the attack of the serpents above and salvation sought from
the brazen serpent below. A “pen sketch of the two men
lifting up a third . . . [in the Ufﬁzi] . . . does not appear to
be an exact replica or copy of the group in the present
drawing.”). Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 29. Gotti, 1875, II,
p. 221. Springer, 1878, p. 501 (Variant of Sistine com-
position.). Springer, 1883, I, p. 192 (As 1878.). Berenson,
1903, I, pp. 184–5, no. 1564 (For the Sistine spandrel. “An
unsurpassed masterpiece of draughtsmanship . . . almost
an epitome of Michelangelo, for, while we are, on the
one hand, reminded of the juvenile Centaurs and Lapi-
thae, we are, on the other hand, shot forward as far as
the Last Judgement. Of parts of this late work there are
suggestions here . . . in the very touch of the more loosely
drawn ﬁgures. Indeed, had I but these ﬁgures alone, I
should scarcely have suspected their having been done
at so early a date.”). Ferri and Jacobsen, 1905, p. 32 (In
relation to Ufﬁzi 18721F/B175/Corpus 149 which shows
subject in a roundel. An incomplete copy of the present
drawing by Gabbiani in the Ufﬁzi, 17371F, was made
before it left the Buonarroti Collection.). Steinmann,
1905, II, pp. 296, 596, 635 (Studies for the pendentive
composition in the Sistine chapel, but very different from
it.); pp. 597, 636 (Gabbiani’s copy reproduced.). Jacobsen,
1907, p. 396 (Any connection with Sistine fresco doubt-
ful.). Thode, 1908, I, p. 251; II, p. 444 (Not for Sistine;
link with “Acrobat” group on BM W5 recto/Corpus 46
and Louvre Inv. 718/J9/Corpus 47, but this not made for
that. Datable to early 1530s, as Frey proposed. Notes Gab-
biani copy and D¨usseldorf FP 151. Connects subject with
drawings in Casa Buonarroti 37F/B170 and D¨usseldorf FP
138 and 139.). K. Frey, 1909–11, 51 (Not for Sistine; dat-
able to 1530s; mood reminiscent of drawings for Cavalieri;
some copies listed.). Thode, 1913, no. 417 (As 1908. For
the middle group Michelangelo made use of an earlier

190
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 34
drawing, Louvre Inv. 718/J9/Corpus 47.). Gantner, 1920,
p. 6 (Recto: for Sistine ceiling.). Panofsky, 1921–2, col.
36 (Not for Sistine; early 1530s.). Popp, 1922, pp. 159–62
(Two episodes, the Attack of the Serpents and the Appeal
to the Brazen Serpent; studies for frescoes in the lunettes
above the ducal tombs, developed from military scenes
initially planned for these spaces. The man supported by
two others in the centre of the lower scene developed
from BM W5 recto/Corpus 46. All the drawings dat-
able c. 1530. The upper scene developed from Cats. 4
and 5. It was originally planned to include military ﬁg-
ures – i.e., the dukes – in these scenes, but that project
changed after 1530.). Zoff, 1923, pl. 67. Brinckmann,
1925, no. 45 (c. 1532; two compositions; Popp’s hypothesis
apparently accepted.). Baumgart, 1937, p. 9 (For a fresco
in the New Sacristy.). Berenson, 1938, I, pp. 349–50,
no. 1564 (Rejects Popp’s hypothesis about the New Sac-
risty but she “may possibly be right about the dating”;
therefore, perhaps not for Sistine. Motif of two men lifting
another similar to BM W5 recto/Corpus 46.). Delacre,
1938, pp. 246–8 (Not for Sistine; debatable whether BM
W5 recto/Corpus 46 and Louvre Inv. 718/J9/Corpus 47
related. Ufﬁzi 606E of high quality.). De Tolnay, 1943,
p. 136 (Perhaps for lunettes of New Sacristy.). De Tolnay,
1948, pp. 49, 218, no. 107 (c. 1530. For New Sacristy.
Upper scene planned for lunette above Lorenzo, lower
one for that above Giuliano.). Goldscheider, 1951, no. 91
(Popp’s suggestion “stimulating but cannot be proved”;
“manner in which a mass of human ﬁgures . . . is com-
bined to form an entity of movement, was . . . entirely new
in Renaissance art . . . incunabulum of new manner, sub-
sequently developed by El Greco as far as . . . the Opening
of the Fifth Seal and by Rubens in his Fall of the Damned,” c.
1533). De Tolnay, 1951, p. 292 (Attack of serpent and the
healing by the Brazen Serpent, c. 1530–2.). Wilde, 1953a,
pp. 11, 28, 67 (c. 1528.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 98 (No
evidence of the purpose for which it was drawn.). Parker,
1956, no. 318 (Datable c. 1528–30. Upper group shows
attack, lower group the cure. “Little doubt that . . . they
were conceived . . . as one, and that together they were
to form the left-hand portion of a larger composition,
having presumably the cross with the brazen serpent in
the centre, and a right-hand portion adjoining it to cor-
respond with the present one. The fact that the scale
of the ﬁgures in the lower [nearer] group is somewhat
larger than in the upper [more distant] one is signiﬁ-
cant.” The link with ﬁgures in BM W5 recto/Corpus 46
“may be accidental.” No connection with Sistine com-
position. Popp’s theory “remains at best a specious con-
jecture, hinging, moreover, on the assumption, proba-
bly incorrect, that the two groups were conceived as
separate units.” Verso: a male thorax partly dissected at
shoulders and neck.). Dussler, 1959, no. 195 (Two sepa-
rate scenes. 1530–2. Purpose unknown; Popp’s hypothesis
implausible.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1564 (As 1903/1938.).
Barocchi, 1964a, p. 215 (CB 37F by Mini in part derived
from this.). Barocchi, 1964c, no. 25 (Recto: links back
to Cascina and forward to Resurrection drawings.). Brug-
noli, 1964, no. 36 (From Michelangelo’s last years in
Florence; reprise of ﬁgural motifs from Cascina; Popp’s
hypothesis unproven.). Berti, 1965, pp. 450, 463 (c. 1530.
Choral, dramatic quality.). Goldscheider, 1965, no. 88 (As
1951.). Hartt, 1971, no. 257 (Recto: 1520–5?. For the
lunettes above the ducal tombs; perhaps refers to “Luther-
ans attacking the faithful with poisonous doctrine.”);
no. 412 (Verso: 1545?. Close in style to [Cat. 49]. Study for
the impenitent thief?.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 105
(“[A]round 1530 . . . purpose unknown.”). Keller, 1975,
nos. 32–3 (c. 1530–2. Subject, shown at two moments,
preﬁgures the Cruciﬁxion; probably intended for the
lunettes above the ducal tombs, with? BM W52/Corpus
46 for the lunette above the Magniﬁci tomb.). De
Tolnay, 1975, ﬁg. 231 (As 1951, “possibly for lunettes in
the New Sacristy.”). Keller, 1976, ﬁg. 165 (As 1975.). De
Tolnay, 1976, Corpus II, no. 266 (Recto: as 1948;
reprise of motifs from Cascina noteworthy. Verso: c.1530.).
Pignatti, 1977, no. 21 (Two episodes represented; survey
of opinion on purpose and dating; emphasis on extraor-
dinary quality.). De Tolnay and Brizio, 1980, no. 65 (As
1975, but omits “possibly.”). Joannides, 1981b, p. 683
(Recalls motifs in Leonardesque manner from Cascina
studies.). De Vecchi, 1984, p. 121 (Cites Popp.). Hirst,
1986a, p. 44 (Reappearance of motif of a man being lifted
by two others from Louvre Inv. 718 recto/J9/Corpus 47.).
Perrig, 1991, pp. 31–2, 47, ﬁg. 29 (Recto: copy; work-
shop of Clovio. Verso: workshop of Clovio.). Joannides,
1996a, pp. 161–2 (Implausible as a project for a New Sac-
risty lunette; perhaps a preliminary sketch for a Presenta-
tion Drawing.). Zentai, 1998, pp. 64–8 (The appearance
of copies after different sections of the present drawing
together with copies after lost or surviving drawings by
Michelangelo for the Medici tombs on the sheets by or
after Raffaello da Montelupo in the Ufﬁzi, D¨usseldorf,
Dresden [formerly], and Lille reinforces Popp’s hypothe-
sis that the scenes of the Brazen Serpent were planned for
the lunettes of the New Sacristy.). Perrig, 1999, pp. 233–4,
277 (As 1991; from Farnese Collection. Identiﬁable with
a drawing described in Clovio’s posthumous inventory,
fol. 385v “Due Gruppi di Figurine piccole di Michelan-
gelo Fatti da Don Giulio.” This reference is missing
from the publication of the inventory by Steinmann and
Wittkower, 1927, pp. 433–4.).

CATALOGUE 35
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
191
CATALOGUE 35
Samson and Delilah
1846.65; R.55; P.II 319; Corpus 297
Dimensions: 272×395 mm
Watermark: Robinson Appendix no. 11. Roberts Anchor
F. Briquet 527, Verona, 1558.
Medium
Red chalk with subsequent? stylus indentation.
Condition
There is a central, vertical rope mark, a pressed-out hor-
izontal fold with ingrained dirt, and other creases. The
sheet has a tear repair, edge repairs, minor inﬁlls, a small
hole with skinning, accretions, ingrained dirt, local stain-
ing, and widespread foxing.
Numbering
Robinson’s numbering in graphite: 55.
Discussion
This drawing may have been made as a gift for one of
Michelangelo’s friends and, if so, was presumably acquired
later for the Casa Buonarroti. However, it is not brought
to the same degree of ﬁnish as most of his Presentation
Drawings, and it could also be seen as a design for a work
to be executed in relief sculpture or painting. It is sim-
ilar both in conception and composition to Michelan-
gelo’s design of c. 1532 for the painting of Venus and
Cupid to be executed by Pontormo for their common
friend Bartolommeo Bettini. In both, a smaller ﬁgure
clambers triumphantly over a larger one, but there is no
evidence that the two compositions were planned as a
pair. It is rather that the triumphal theme in the present
drawing was re-used, with a more complex pattern of
interaction between the two characters, in the Venus and
Cupid. It was again recalled, more straightforwardly, in
Michelangelo’s sketches of David and Goliath of the 1550s
(see Cat. 46a). The form of Samson also refers back to ear-
lier work by Michelangelo: There are close resemblances
between it and the conquered ﬁgures at the base of the
Victories in Michelangelo’s projects in Berlin (Inv. 15305
recto/Corpus 55; pen and ink with brush and wash over
stylus indications and traces of black chalk, 525×343 mm)

192
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 35
and Florence (Ufﬁzi 608E recto/B244/Corpus 56; pen
and ink with brush and wash over black chalk, 290×361
mm) for the Julius Tomb.
An odd feature of the present drawing is that Samson’s
thigh is visible through Delilah’s leg. Whether this was
no more than carelessness on the part of an artist who
was rarely careless, or whether Michelangelo was play-
fully acknowledging the artiﬁciality of his conception is
a matter for conjecture.
The drawing was presumably made c. 1530 and cer-
tainly before 1532 since it was copied by Antonio Mini –
who left Forence late in 1531 – in a truncated sketch on
the verso of a drawing by Michelangelo at Windsor (see
discussion that follows). Indeed, it would be tempting to
think that the subject of the drawing, sensual indulgence
leading to loss of strength, might have been planned as a
warning to Mini, who was involved in an unhappy love
affair at about this time. However, had that been the case,
one would have expected the drawing to have been taken
by Mini to France; there is no indication that he did so,
and the existence of sixteenth-century Italian copies after
the drawing counts against it.
Vasari records that the young Francesco Salviati, whilst
still in Florence, therefore before 1531, painted a Sam-
son and Delilah for Francesco Sertini. Salviati’s painting is
lost or unidentiﬁed and since it is not described by Vasari,
there is no way of knowing whether it reﬂected Michelan-
gelo’s inﬂuence, but, in principle, this is not unlikely.
The subject is not common in this period, but it is
treated, realistically rather than symbolically, in a ﬁne
drawing by Polidoro da Caravaggio (Paris, Louvre, Inv.
6093; red chalk, 120×176 mm), which must be roughly
contemporary with the present rendition.
The watermark found on the present sheet also occurs
on Cats. 30 and 42, as Robinson noted.
Drawn Copies
1. Royal Collection, Windsor Castle, PW 425 verso/
Corpus 236bis; red chalk, 248×119 mm. This copy, no
doubt made from the original, and with virtual certainty
by Antonio Mini, was truncated when some previous
owner of the sheet cut it down to frame the recto draw-
ing, a ﬁne study of a Grotesque Head.
2. London, British Museum, 1946-7-13-365: W90; red
chalk, outlines pricked, 275×383 mm. Early and prob-
ably made from the original and no doubt the basis for
further versions of the composition lost or unidentiﬁed.
Although the compiler would not feel conﬁdent in giving
this drawing to Salviati, such an attribution would not be
impossible.
3. Paris, Mus´ee du Louvre, Inv. 35433/J105; pen and ink
with brown wash, 274×389 mm. Attributed by C. Mon-
beig Goguel to Marco Marchetti da Faenza. Marco treats
the present drawing simply as an image and makes no
effort to evoke modelling or texture. But he may very
well have worked directly from Michelangelo’s original
since his version is identical in size, and he ﬁrst drew
Delilah’s right foot placed on Samson’s thigh, as in the
original, and then cancelled it.
4. Oxford, Christ Church, 0086/JBS S1528, as after
Baccio Bandinelli (?); pen and ink, 190×289 mm. This
is not a copy of the Ashmolean drawing but is sufﬁciently
close to it to warrant citing here. Byam Shaw is no doubt
correct to place it in Bandinelli’s circle.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar; Samuel Wood-
burn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Wood-
burn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3, no. 24 [1830-26i] (Samson and Delilah, in red
chalk. “A most splendid drawing.”). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 31 (“[A] superb drawing.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 27
(As 1842.). Fisher, 1862, p. 4, pl. 10 (“[A] superb draw-
ing, 1510–1512.”). Fisher, 1865, II, p. 23, pl. 10 (As 1862.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 55 (“[B]readth and gradation of light
and shade which recalls the style of Correggio. The design
appears to be essentially pictorial.” Windsor fragmentary
copy mentioned.). Fisher, 1872, II, p. 21, pl. 10 (As 1862.).
Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 50. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 221. Fisher,
1879, XXXVII/ 39 (“Probably produced between 1530
and 1540.”). Portheim, 1889, p. 148 (“Falsch”; reminis-
cent of Correggio.). Berenson, 1903, I, p. 254 (More like
Mini than Montelupo.); no. 1718 (Perhaps Raffaello da
Montelupo “after some slight sketch” by Michelangelo.).
Thode, 1908, II, p. 445 (Berenson’s attribution not to be
excluded, but the design is by Michelangelo; contempo-
rary with his Venus and Cupid, late 1520s–early 1530s.).
Thode, 1913, no. (434) (As 1908.). Popham, 1935b, p. 65
(“[T]he workmanship does not appear to be his.”). Beren-
son, 1938, I, p. 256, no. 1718 (If by Mini, late.). Wilde,
1949, p. 250 (Style corresponds to that of Labours of Her-
cules [Windsor, PW423]; truncated copy of Samson at
Windsor [PW425 verso] perhaps by Mini.). Goldscheider,
1951, no. 67 (1530. “This composition was the immediate
source of . . . a Venus and Cupid.” “Partial copy at Windsor
by Antonio Mini.”). Wilde, 1953a, p. 125 (c. 1528–30, of
the type of his presentation sheets.). Wilde, 1953 exh.,
no. 97. Parker, 1956, no. 319 (Michelangelo, c. 1530.

CATALOGUES 35–36
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
193
Handling relates to Windsor labours of Hercules. Com-
position the forerunner of the Venus and Cupid. BM and
Windsor copies listed.). Dussler, 1959, no. 624 (Copy.).
Berenson, 1961, no. 1718 (As 1903/1938.). Goldscheider,
1965, no. 72 (As 1951.). Hartt, 1971, no. 466 (1540?. “Per-
haps a presentation drawing.”). Gere and Turner, 1975,
no. 121 (Autograph, c. 1530.). De Tolnay, 1976, Cor-
pus II, no. 297 (c. 1530. The composition follows Venus
and Cupid and anticipates the Morgan Library David and
Goliath drawings.). Joannides, 2002a, p. 200 (Relation to
Michelangelo’s Venus and Cupid design of 1532.).
CATALOGUE 36
A Salamander Amid Flames?
1846.66; R.53a; P.II 320; Corpus 304
Dimensions: 133×210 mm
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
Undulation and distortion are visible within the centre
of the sheet. There are edge nicks toned in with graphite
on the backboard, corner, and edge; minor inﬁlls; some
abrasions; accretions; and a vertical incised line, possibly
a tear. There is general discolouration from foxing. The
primary support is drummed by four edges to the back-
board of the mount so the verso is not visible.
Discussion
The scene is clearly unitary and the mood allegorical,
although the recoiling ﬁgure and the zephyr were added
by Michelangelo after he drew the animal. De Tolnay’s
interpretation of this drawing, which sees it as an allegory
of love and relates it to a madrigal by Michelangelo seems
very reasonable.
Se ‘l foco dal tutto nuoce
et me arde et non cuoce,
non `e mia molta ne sua men virtute,
ch’io sol trove salute
ual salamandra, l`a dove altri muore;
n´e so chi in pace a tal martir m’ha volte.
However, while the zephyr on the left might well be fan-
ning the ﬂames, the recoiling ﬁgure cannot very plausibly
be seen as Orpheus.
Several scholars have suggested that there might be a
relation to Franc¸ois Ier: It was well known in Italy that
the salamander was one of his emblems, and Raphael
had included them in a design for an incense burner to

194
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 36
be sent to the French king, one well known through
Marcantonio Raimondi’s engraving after it. However, a
ﬁgure recoiling in fear from a salamander seems more
likely to have been planned with some kind of temporary
political signiﬁcance. Michelangelo noted in the autumn
of 1525 on a sheet in the British Museum (W35/Corpus
227; pen and ink, 137×209 mm) the (false) rumour that
Francis I had died whilst in captivity in Spain, and one
might conjecture – among other possibilities – that the
present drawing was made in response to this news.
The present drawing has generally, and surely rightly,
been linked with a sketch on a sheet in the British
Museum, which might have formed one with the present
sheet (W50/Corpus 305; black chalk, 127×92 mm). The
British Museum sketch, reproduced horizontally by all
scholars save Hartt, should, as he realised, be orientated
vertically with the left edge as base; it shows a fantas-
tic animal, with a greyhound’s body – like the present
drawing – and, apparently, a dragon-like head, sitting on
its haunches in right proﬁle, extending its right forepaw.
The drawing is assumed by Wilde also to represent a sala-
mander, which may be correct but is far from certain.
It is made in a style reminiscent of Pontormo’s loosest
sketches, which might suggest some stylistic exchange.
Wilde suggested that the present drawing might have
been done to assist Mini with potential commissions in
France, but there is no evidence that the present sheet was
ever part of Mini’s cache, which one might have expected
had that been so, and the presumed Casa Buonarroti
provenance would count against it. Furthermore, neither
of the animals resembles any of the sprightly salaman-
ders placed above the frescoes in the Grande Galerie at
Fontainebleau.
It seems likely that this drawing was part of lot 268 in
Ottley’s sale of 1804 and part of lot 1587 in 1814, in which
case Ottley would have remounted it in the interim.
History
Casa Buonarroti; William Young Ottley (his sale, 11 April
1804, part of lot 268 (“Ten – ditto [i.e., studies of legs and
thighs from the Martelli collection at Florence], and arms
etc. – 2 arms, one foot, red chalk, three arms and one leg
and thigh, in black chalk; an arm, pen; a horse’s head and
a monstrous animal in black chalk – from the Buonarroti
collection – on the back of one are some verses auto-
graph of this great artist”); his sale, 6 June 1814, etc;
part of lot 1587 (“Two black chalk studies on one leaf
[see Cat. 62] . . . and a dog lying in the midst of ﬂames,
an emblematic design. From the Buonarroti collection
at Florence”; £10.10.0); Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445);
Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale, 11 April 1804, part of lot 268 (“Ten – ditto
[i.e., studies of legs and thighs from the Martelli collec-
tion at Florence], and arms etc. – 2 arms, one foot, red
chalk, three arms and one leg and thigh, in black chalk; an
arm, pen; a horse’s head and a monstrous animal in black
chalk – from the Buonarroti collection – on the back
of one are some verses autograph of this great artist.”).
Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, etc., lot 1587 (“Two black chalk
studies on one leaf [see Cat. 62] . . . and a dog lying in the
midst of ﬂames, an emblematic design. From the Buonar-
roti collection at Florence.”). Lawrence Inventory, 1830,
M. A. Buonaroti Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-108i] (“Two
studies in black chalk, one [Cat. 62] the other a repre-
sentation of a Dog.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 75.2 (“Two
studies upon one mount . . . also for a dragon.”). Wood-
burn, 1846, no. 52 (As 1842.). Robinson, 1870, no. 53.1
(Michelangelo, c. 1530. “[P]ossibly . . . made with a view
to some work projected for King Francis I.”). Black, 1875,
p. 213, no. 48a. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 239. Berenson, 1903, no.
1568 (Probably by Michelangelo, c. 1530.). Thode, 1908,
II, p. 112 (For the candelabra of the New Sacristy altar.).
K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 178 (Perhaps an allegory; period of
Cavalieri drawings.). Thode, 1913, no. 433 (Linked with
BM W50; rejects Frey’s interpretation; doubtful whether
animal and ﬁgure connected. c. 1530.). Berenson, 1938,
no. 1568 (Perhaps done in connection with New Sac-
risty.). Wilde, 1953a, p. 86 (A Salamander, connected
with BM W50. Perhaps made for a colleague working
for Franc¸ois Ier, or for Mini, who hoped to do so.).
Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 124 (A salamander, c. 1531–3.
Similar animal decorates helmet of Count of Canossa.).
Parker, 1956, no. 320 (c. 1531. Relation to BM W50. Idea
that they link with device of Franc¸ois Ier and Mini’s trip
to France has “much to recommend it” but “the fact
remains however that the animal bears very little resem-
blance to the salamander as it was normally represented.”
Any relation to ﬁgures either side “is rather doubtful.”).
Dussler, 1959, no. 346 (Ascribed. Unlikely to be con-
nected with Franc¸ois Ier. Similarities with BM W50 and
device of Count Canossa.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1568
(As 1903/1938.). Berti, 1965, p. 465 (Salamander, linked
with BM W50; perhaps related to work for Franc¸ois Ier.).
Hartt, 1971, no. 188 (1517–8?. A salamander. The sub-
sidiary ﬁgures could hardly have been intended as an addi-
tion to the design. Probably [together with BM W50]
for an ornamental ﬁgure to go on the bases of the six
great columns of the lower storey of the San Lorenzo
fac¸ade.). De Tolnay, 1973, p. 4 (c. 1530. Salamander of
Franc¸ois Ier taken over by the artist for a personal alle-
gory showing himself burning with the ﬂames of love.

CATALOGUES 36–37
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
195
The use of the salamander initiated by Petrarch and taken
up by Bembo and in Michelangelo’s own poetry, e.g.,
Girardi 1960, no. 122.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 107
(Connected with BM W50/Corpus 305, of c. 1530. “The
generally accepted identiﬁcation of the animal as a sala-
mander seems to be based on the fact that it is repre-
sented amid ﬂames. Otherwise one would have little hes-
itation in seeing it as a cringing hound. . . . The ﬁgures
on either side . . . seem certainly to be connected with
the central motif, in spite of the discrepancy of scale:
on the left a zephyr blowing on the ﬂames, and on the
right a ﬁgure apparently recoiling from them. Is this
perhaps some kind of complicated allegory in the
manner of Leonardo?”). De Tolnay, 1976, Corpus II,
no. 304 (As 1973.).
CATALOGUE 37
Three Figures in Violent Movement
1846.67; R. 71; P.II 321; Corpus (inadvertently omitted,
should be 83bis)
Dimensions: 103×105 mm
Medium
Pen and ink over lead point.
Condition
There is a very small square-cut loss, a minor repaired frac-
ture, an irregular score line, other faint lines with indenta-
tion, and abrasion with ingrained dirt. The sheet is exten-
sively foxed with edge discolouration, general uneven
discolouration, and local staining with skinning. The pri-
mary support is drummed by four edges to the backboard
of the mount, and the verso is not visible.
Discussion
This present drawing clearly shows Michelangelo’s ideas
developing on the page. The pen-line of the left-hand ﬁg-
ure follows fairly faithfully the underlying work in lead-
point, the pen drawing of the central ﬁgure diverges con-
siderably from the initial lead-point layout, and in the
right-hand ﬁgure underdrawing is virtually abandoned.
Even within such small conﬁnes, Michelangelo’s energies
expand. The drawings here are inseparable from a group
of seven lively sketches in the same media, six in Casa
Buonarroti, and one, in lead-point alone, in the British
Museum:
1. CB17F/B125/Corpus 79: 95×91 mm
2. CB18F/B127/Corpus 82: 88×104 mm
3. CB38F/B124/Corpus 83: 170×207 mm
4. CB58F/B129/Corpus 78: 101×110 mm
5. CB67F/B128/Corpus 80: 70×72 mm

196
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 37
6. CB68F/B130/Corpus 81: 110×92 mm
7. BM W51/Corpus 252bis: 91×40 mm (part of the 1859
Buonarroti purchase)
Of these drawings, 38F alone – in which three ﬁg-
ures are completed in pen while several other groups
on the page remain in lead-point only – may retain its
original dimensions. The others are clearly fragments of
one or more sheets of drawings. Six of the eight sheets,
including the present one, show three ﬁgures reacting
violently to some event taking place above them; the sev-
enth, CB 58F, clearly represents the Transﬁgured Christ
between Moses and Elijah. Because this last drawing is not
physically attached to any of the groups of three reacting
ﬁgures, and because the original layout of the sheet (or
sheets) cannot be reconstructed, it is impossible to be
certain that Michelangelo planned to situate the Transﬁg-
uration group above the reacting ﬁgures – presumably the
disciples. However, this was the traditional way of rep-
resenting the subject, and it is difﬁcult to imagine how
these ﬁgures could have been employed otherwise than
below Christ.
It may be presumed, therefore, that Michelangelo
planned a composition of the Transﬁguration, in which the
group of Christ and His Old Testament forerunners was
ﬁxed more or less at the outset, while the startled disciples
were tried in several variations. The vertical orientation
of the scheme rules out a connection, proposed by Hirst,
with the Transﬁguration frescoed by Michelangelo’s friend
Sebastiano del Piombo c. 1516 in the semi-dome of the
Borgherini chapel in San Pietro in Montorio. The area
available in the semi-dome demands the horizontally ori-
ented composition that Sebastiano supplied: Space was
lacking for a vertical layout. Furthermore, were such a
connection accepted, it would entail for this group of
sketches a date of c. 1516, and they seem to be several years
later than that: Wilde proposed that they were of 1531–2.
The ﬁgures in the present drawing and those in the
Casa Buonarroti, with the exception of the Transﬁgu-
ration drawing, were linked by Wilde with ﬁgures in
the foreground of Bugiardini’s vast Martyrdom of Saint
Catherine (Florence, Santa Maria Novella). Vasari stated
that Michelangelo helped his friend by drawing the fore-
ground ﬁgures, which were followed by Bugiardini as best
he could. But Vasari’s account implies that Michelangelo
sketched these ﬁgures directly on the panel, not that he
made preliminary drawings, although, of course, some
preparation cannot be ruled out. Vasari adds that Tri-
bolo subsequently made clay models after Michelangelo’s
ﬁgures, further to assist Bugiardini. Nevertheless, even
though there is some resemblance between the reacting
ﬁgures in the Casa Buonarotti–Ashmolean sequence and
those in Bugiardini’s painting, there seem to be no direct
links, and it is unlikely that they were made in that con-
nection. The approximate dating implied by Wilde’s pro-
posal, however, is very plausible.
It is not of course certain that the drawings on this sheet
are connected with those on the suite of fragments in Casa
Buonarroti and the British Mueum, and it is possible that
they are involved with some other project. But on balance,
the focus on three ﬁgures makes the connection likely.
The purpose of this and the other drawings remains
uncertain. There is no record that Michelangelo treated
the Transﬁguration, and none that Sebastiano was offered
a commission of that subject to be executed on a ver-
tically oriented ﬁeld. However, it is possible that after
Cardinal Giulio decided to retain Raphael’s great paint-
ing in Rome, he thought of offering the subject to Sebas-
tiano so that two altarpieces by the same hand could go
to Narbonne. If so, Sebastiano might well have asked
Michelangelo for a sketch. Finally, of course, a replica of
Raphael’s painting was commissioned from Penni but that
panel was not sent to Narbonne either, which received
only Sebastiano’s Raising of Lazarus. However, it must
be stressed that such a suggestion, which would prob-
ably entail a date for the drawings earlier than c. 1530,
remains entirely conjectural and, in the compiler’s view,
not very plausible. Michelangelo might, of course, have
made a design of the subject for execution by another of
his painter friends, but no evidence has been uncovered
to substantiate such an hypothesis.
One of the drawings linked by Wilde with this series,
Haarlem A31/VT61/Corpus 341; red chalk, 110×194
mm, is a study for one or other version of Michelan-
gelo’s Fall of Phaeton and not directly connected with the
sheets under discussion.
History
Casa Buonarroti?; Jean-Baptiste Wicar?; William Young
Ottley; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Wood-
burn
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 69 (“Three ﬁgures ﬁghting.”).
Woodburn, 1846, no. 19 (As 1842.). Robinson, 1870,
no. 71 (“[P]robably for the composition of Christ driv-
ing the money changers out of the Temple.” Related to
three black chalk drawings “of the later period of the
master” in the British Museum, W76–78.). Black, 1875,
p. 215, no. 61. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 228. Berenson, 1903,
I, p. 222, no. 1573 (Late, probably for the Expulsion of the
Money Changers. “Interesting as an example of the master’s

CATALOGUES 37–38
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
197
use of the pen in his last years. How little it has changed
in sixty years!”). Thode, 1908, II, pp. 80, 445 (Perhaps
for the Conversion of Paul but the Fall of the Rebel Angels or
Brazen Serpent also possible.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 279c
(Perhaps for a composition of the Brazen Serpent.). Thode,
1913, no. 445 (Connected with a group of drawings in
the Casa Buonarroti; probably for Bugiardini’s Martyrdom
of Saint Catherine.). Baumgart, 1935a, p. 345 (Daniele da
Volterra). Berenson, 1938, no. 1573 (Much earlier, per-
haps related to Brazen Serpent on ceiling.). Delacre, 1938,
pp. 402–4 (Links with Casa Buonarroti group including
a sketch of the Transﬁguration.). Wilde, 1953a, pp. 86–7
(Other drawings in group are the Casa Buonarroti group,
BM W51/Corpus 252bis and Haarlem A31/VT 61/Cor-
pus 341. Studies for an outline drawing made to help
Bugiardini with his Martyrdom of Saint Catherine, proba-
bly 1531–2.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 123. Parker, 1956, no.
321 (c. 1532; made for Bugiardini; connected with Casa
Buonarroti group, Haarlem A31/Corpus 341, and BM
W51/Corpus 252bis.). Dussler, 1959, no. 350 (Ascribed to
Michelangelo; link with Casa Buonarroti group.). Beren-
son, 1961, no. 1573 (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962,
pp. 155–60 (Grouped with CB17F, 18F, 38F, 67F, 68F,
and, probably, 58F. Purpose uncertain: Connection with
Bugiardini’s Martyrdom of Saint Catherine possible, but also
with Last Judgement and Brazen Serpent. c. 1531–2.). Berti,
1965, pp. 448–50 (Has been connected with Bugiardini’s
Martyrdom of Saint Catherine but this is uncertain; with
related sketches in Casa Buonarroti, forms a chain of
movements in the spirit of a ballet. Neither tragic or
dramatic but series of amusing variations.). Hartt, 1971,
no. 170 (1517–18?. Connected with group of drawings
in Casa Buonarroti, for a relief of the Martyrdom of Saint
Lawrence for the San Lorenzo fac¸ade.). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 110 (Connection with Bugiardini questionable;
“Figures of this kind would have been equally in place in a
Resurrection.”). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, no. IV, p. 135
(Omitted by error; one of the series of studies for the
Transﬁguration.). Barolsky, 1979, p. 149 (Notes Baumgart’s
attribution.).
CATALOGUE 38
Recto: Plan of the Interior Reliquary Platform of San
Lorenzo and the Unexecuted Exterior Balcony
Verso: A Standing Male Figure Seen from the Right
1846.57; R.49; P.II 311; Corpus 260
Dimensions: 258×332 mm
Watermark: Robinson Appendix no. 13, Roberts Lamb
C.
Medium
Recto: Pen, brush, and wash.
Verso: Black chalk; lightly squared in black chalk at
31 mm.

198
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 38
Condition
There are major tear repairs, with associated ingrained
dirt at the right and left edges, and toned repairs in the
image where the heavier application of the ink has burned
through. There is a minor hole, a pressed-out central,
vertical fold with associated creasing and dirt, and many
inherent wrinkles. There is severe adhesive discolouration
around the edges and some paper remnants. There is also
general discolouration, primarily from ink bleed, foxing,
and local staining.
Description and Inscription
Recto
The drawing bears labels by Michelangelo’s hand, iden-
tifying the different parts of the structure:
il vano delpergamo di fuora/muro/ilvano nella grossezza del
muro p[er] le reliquie/il vano del pergamo di
de[n]tro/balaustri.
Verso
A full length nude ﬁgure of the Risen Christ, standing on
a sarcophagus, seen from half left. His left arm is shown in
two different positions: (i) raised and pointing upwards;
(ii) bent, with the forearm across the upper chest. His right
hand holds a staff, no doubt that of a standard; His right
leg is bent, in two different positions and is supported
on the sarcophagus lid; His head is tried in three different
positions: (i) looking down to His right; (ii) looking up to
His left (this is very faint); (iii) looking slightly downwards
to His right in what seems to be the ﬁnal position in this
drawing; a fold of drapery sweeps down to the right.
At the right edge, two-pen lines meet; they presumably
indicate the corner of some object.
Discussion
Recto
On 14 October 1525, Pope Clement VII wrote to
Michelangelo requesting designs for an architectural
structure for San Lorenzo that could be used to display
the church’s collection of relics. As Ackerman elucidated,
three different sites and structures were considered in
the correspondence that continued until November 1526.
These comprised:
1. A ciborium to be placed as a canopy over the
altar – an interesting return to a type of structure
with strongly Roman associations, but one that was
gradually going out of fashion even in Rome by the
later quattrocento. Several drawings by Michelangelo
have been related to this project, which the Pope
preferred, but a structure above the altar would have
clashed visually with the tombs of the Leo X and
Clement VII planned for the side walls of the choir.
2. A site above the entrance door to the New Sacristy
was mentioned by the Pope in a letter of 29 November
1525 but that – probably for obvious reasons of space and
location – apparently had no sequel. There seem to be no
drawings that can be connected with this.
3. A balcony to be constructed on the interior fac¸ade of
the church, above the main door was the other project
mentioned in the letter of 29 November 1525.
The last was the location preferred by Michelangelo,
and even though the Pope was concerned that it might
be too high for the clear display of relics, it was that cho-
sen when the project was revived at the end of 1531. The
scheme, as far as the interior was concerned, was ﬁn-
ished by December 1533, when the relics were installed.
Michelangelo seems to have regarded the project as, essen-
tially, a structural issue. Choosing not to treat the tri-
bune as a vehicle for personal expression, he planned it to

CATALOGUE 38
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
199
conform with, rather than, as one might have expected,
to contrast with the pre-existing Brunelleschian archi-
tecture of the church’s interior. His stated admiration for
Brunelleschi may have inﬂuenced this decision. But while
the tribune shows little that is Michelangelesque in archi-
tectural detail, Wallace (1987b) showed that Michelan-
gelo was himself involved in carving the distinctive and
innovative “horse-head” coat of arms. And Wallace was
also able to demonstrate, by an analysis of documents,
that Michelangelo’s architectural inventiveness, somewhat
repressed in the tribune itself, ﬂowered in the tabernacle
frame of the door to the passage that leads to it. Wallace
showed that de Tolnay was correct in his belief, dismissed
by most scholars, that Michelangelo designed this portal,
which opens off the upper cloister of San Lorenzo. This
door type, developed from the tabernacles in the ricetto,
was evidently considered so successful by Michelangelo
that he re-used it virtually unchanged in the lower storey
of the Palazzo Conservatori.
The labelling on the present drawing suggests that it
was made for a client to read. The criticisms of the plan
made by the Pope certainly correspond to this plan, and
Ackerman’s contention, that it was the very drawing sent
to the Pope, is plausible. However, it is largely executed
free-hand, and Michelangelo might have got a pupil to
make a fair copy. If it was the sheet sent to the Pope, it
was certainly returned to Michelangelo, for he employed
the verso for an unrelated sketch. It seems likely that he
would, simultaneously, have provided an elevation draw-
ing, but if he did so, it is lost.
The plan is not identical with the project as put into
practice, and Ackerman accurately notes the differences.
The space at Michelangelo’s disposal was very limited,
but he does seem to have taken some advantage of it
to include in the chamber apsidal ends, before both of
which are two lightly sketched steps. It was no doubt
that in these apses the relics were to be stored and dis-
played, and Michelangelo seems to have envisaged for
them an altar-like approach. Barbieri and Puppi attribute
this idea to Michelangelo’s knowledge of Roman archi-
tecture, probably tomb chambers: An allusion to cata-
comb burials might even have been intended.
The plan also implies that some articulation of the exte-
rior was still planned. As Ackerman notes, Figiovanni in
a letter to Michelangelo of late October–early Novem-
ber 1531 (Carteggio, III, pp. 339–41; letter MCCCXXXII)
remarked that the exterior balcony should not be of pietra
serena, like that on the interior, but of “marmo per unirlo
con la facciata,” which suggests that a marble fac¸ade was
still envisaged. But no known drawing for the fac¸ade by
Michelangelo is compatible with a balcony, and because
nothing else is heard about a fac¸ade, it seems unlikely that
Michelangelo was re-designing one to accommodate a
balcony in 1531. Indeed, were it not for Figiovanni’s let-
ter, the inclusion of a balcony in the present drawing
would surely be taken to indicate that Michelangelo had
abandoned hope of any overall fac¸ade scheme. Failing
further evidence, the matter can only be left open but,
for whatever reason the exterior platform was never exe-
cuted, although, as Wallace notes, one of the two passages
to the fac¸ade was opened and then re-sealed.
The loosely drawn squares beneath the exterior plat-
form are puzzling. The fac¸ade was planned to be articu-
lated with columns, and these forms are smaller than the
columns supporting the interior which are clearly indi-
cated as such and provided with bases. Perhaps they were
no more than utilitarian consoles to support the balcony,
on which, strangely, Michelangelo did not, as in that of
the interior, indicate a balustrade.
Verso
The verso drawing, which clearly represents the Risen
Christ, is one of sixteen treatments of the subject drawn
by Michelangelo in the early years of the 1530s. There has
been virtual unanimity about the attribution and approx-
imate date of these drawings but little about their pur-
pose. Broadly speaking, the drawings divide into two
series. One comprises multiﬁgure compositions, in which
guards scatter in alarm as Christ rises from the tomb.
The second consists of single-ﬁgure – or primarily single-
ﬁgure – compositions, showing Christ at His moment of
triumph over death.
There exist two, arguably three, multi-ﬁgure Resurrec-
tion designs, all relatively fully worked-out:
Multi-ﬁgure 1. The Royal Collection, Windsor Cas-
tle, PW427 recto/Corpus 255 (black chalk, 240×
347 mm); this was prepared in a preliminary sketch
in the Louvre (Inv. 691bis/J37/Corpus 253; red chalk,
152×169 mm) and a single-ﬁgure study, for the guard
sprawled on the sarcophagus lid, in Florence (CB
32F/B139/Corpus 254; black chalk, 139×196 mm,
irregular). The Windsor composition is orientated hor-
izontally and lit from the left.
Multi-ﬁgure 2. British Museum, W52/Corpus 258 (black
chalk, 326×289 mm) is roughly square in composition
but could be seen as lunette-shaped. It is lit from the
right.
Multi-ﬁgure 3. British Museum, W53/Corpus 264 (black
chalk, 406×271 mm) is more problematic. It is orien-
tated vertically and lit from the left, but it is debat-
able whether it should be classed as a multi-ﬁgure
composition because the subsidiary ﬁgures are entirely

200
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 38
subordinate, and it might more legitimately be seen as
a modiﬁed single-ﬁgure design.
Various suggestions have been advanced as to the pur-
pose of these drawings and others representing the Resur-
rection. Popp suggested that multi-ﬁgures 1 and 2 were
alternative schemes for a fresco to be executed in the
lunette above the Magniﬁci Tomb in the New Sacristy;
de Tolnay and Hartt agreed with this view of some of
the drawings but detached others. Hartt, 1971 (entirely
improbably) considered multi-ﬁgure 3 to be for a relief
for the Julius Tomb in 1516, whereas de Tolnay thought it
was for an (equally improbable) altarpiece for the Sistine
Chapel of c. 1534. Hirst, in 1961 and subsequently, sug-
gested that Michelangelo made all these drawings to assist
his friend Sebastiano with his altarpiece of the Resurrection
for the Chigi Chapel in Santa Maria della Pace. First con-
tracted for in 1520, the commission was renewed in 1530,
and Sebastiano might well have requested Michelangelo’s
aid then, or some time thereafter, when Michelangelo
was in Rome, so that any such request would have left no
epistolary trace.
Given the diversities of format and illumination among
them, it seems to the compiler improbable that the two (or
three) multi-ﬁgure compositions can have been intended
for the same project. In his view, the design seen in multi-
ﬁgure 1 can be separated from the others, and for this he
ﬁnds most plausible the explanation of Gamba – generally
dismissed – that it was made in preparation for a fresco
of the Resurrection to be executed on the entrance wall
of the Sistine chapel, where the fresco of that subject by
Michelangelo’s master, Ghirlandaio, had been irrepara-
bly damaged in a fall of masonry on Christmas Eve 1522.
Subject, lighting-direction, and proportions are appro-
priate for the location and both the fresco that had to be
replaced and the fresco that ﬁnally replaced it are multi-
ﬁgure scenes.
Most of the other suggestions do not hold water. There
is no evidence that a relief of the Resurrection was planned
for the front face of the Julius Tomb whose iconogra-
phy, thoughout all its versions, is primarily Marian. The
assumption that a Resurrection might have been planned
as an altarpiece for the Sistine Chapel is based on the
misinterpretation of a letter of 2 March 1534 referring to
the risurezzione (the general resurrection of the dead) or
the Last Judgement, whose preparation was by then well
underway. The question of what subjects were planned
for the lunettes in the New Sacristy remains unresolved,
but it is certain that they were to be sculpted, and the
only design that might ﬁt into a lunette (but not readily)
is hardly appropriate for execution in sculpture. The most
reasonable hypothesis is that of Hirst, who connected the
drawings with the commission to Sebastiano to paint a
Resurrection as the altarpiece of the Chigi Chapel in Santa
Maria della Pace. However, once again, it is improbable
that all the Resurrection drawings can have been made for
this scheme since the ﬁeld available for the altarpiece in
Santa Maria della Pace was relatively small. Nevertheless,
Sebastiano was to receive 1,200 ducats for this commis-
sion, only 300 less than for the very large altarpiece in
the second Chigi Chapel in Santa Maria del Popolo, also
commissioned from him, so that although the sizes of the
altarpiece cannot have been comparable, it is likely that
the Pace painting was to be of some complexity.
The ﬁgures frescoed above the altar by Raphael c. 1512
are lit from the right, and the presumption is that the
altarpiece would also be (this, incidentally, was also the
planned direction of illumination in the Popolo Chapel).
The lighting of 2, therefore, ﬁts the Pace Chapel, but the
composition does not seem particularly appropriate to
the presumed shape of the altarpiece. When this drawing
was executed as a painting by Marcello Venusti (Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, Fogg Art Museum; oil on panel,
600×400 mm), he greatly increased the distance between
Christ and the guards. In composition, the most appro-
priate design for the Pace would be 3, but that is lit from
the left.
The Pace altarpiece also provides the most plausible
purpose for the single-ﬁgure series. There are four highly
worked variants of the single ﬁgure of Christ emerging
from the tomb:
Single-ﬁgure 1. The Royal Collection, Windsor Castle,
PW428 recto/ Corpus 265; black chalk, 372×220
mm.
Single-ﬁgure 2. British Museum, W54 recto/Corpus 263;
black chalk, 414×274 mm.
Single-ﬁgure 3. Casa Buonarroti CB65F verso/B142/
Corpus 347; black chalk, 420×297 mm; this, though
somewhat more loosely handled than the others,
counts among them.
Single-ﬁgure 4. A lost drawing known in two copies:
a. Rotterdam, Boymans Museum I.20 (Formerly
Dezallier D’Argenville and Sir Thomas Lawrence
[1836–56]; black chalk, 357×171 mm; attributed by
Wilde to Giulio Clovio.
b. Florence, Ufﬁzi 1450S; black chalk, 374×256 mm;
as Alessandro Allori. In support of the Pace location
is that all these ﬁgures are lit from the right.
In addition to the present drawing, there survive
six other rough sketches on ﬁve sheets all of which
concentrate on the single ﬁgure of Christ:
Sketch 1. Casa Buonarroti CB61F recto/B137/Corpus
261; black chalk, 380×252 mm.

CATALOGUE 38
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
201
Sketch 2. Casa Buonarroti CB61F verso/B137/Corpus
261; black chalk, 380×252 mm.
Sketch 3. Casa Buonarroti CB66F/B136/Corpus 262;
black chalk, 331×198 mm.
Sketch 4a. Windsor, PW429 verso, right side/Corpus
345; black chalk, 149×252 mm.
Sketch 4b. Windsor, PW429 verso, left side/Corpus 345;
black chalk, 149×252 mm.
Sketch 5. Archivio Buonarroti (now in Casa Buonarroti)
AB VI, fol. 24 verso/B346/Corpus 259; black chalk,
210×138 mm.
Sketch 6. Archivio Buonarroti (now in Casa Buonarroti)
AB XIII, fol. 148 verso/B367/Corpus 252; black chalk,
267×195 mm.
Sketches 1–4a probably prepare primarily single-ﬁg-
ure 2, although there are some similarities between the
upper part of the body in 4a and that of single-ﬁgure
1; sketches 4b and 5 primarily prepare single-ﬁgure 1,
although in the case of 4b this is evident mainly in the
legs and the upper part of the ﬁgure relates more closely
to single-ﬁgure 2. The present drawing, which is not
closely related to any of the others, presumably prepares a
different version of the subject, either never executed or
lost. Sketch 6, which seems to show Christ half-kneeling,
looking upwards and indicating the wound in His right
side was made for a radically different design. As far as
can be seen, all these ﬁgures are lit from the left.
It may be that the single-ﬁgure drawings, although
prompted by Sebastiano’s putative request, developed an
independent existence as Presentation Drawings as Wilde
suggested in 1953. The highly ﬁnished and exception-
ally beautiful single-ﬁgures 1 and 2, and the lost orig-
inal of that known in the two copies of single-ﬁgure
4, would have made splendid gifts. Some support is
given to this view by the fact that, in addition to the
copies by Alessandro Allori and Clovio of single-ﬁgure
4, facsimile copies after both single-ﬁgure 1 and single-
ﬁgure 2, also attributable to Allori, and no doubt con-
ceived as pendants, survive in, respectively, Paris (Louvre
Inv. 1505/J111; black chalk, 372×224 mm) and Frank-
furt (St¨adelesches Kunstinstitut, 3976; black chalk, 373×
221 mm).
The speciﬁc date of 1533 for the present drawing, a
year or so later than the recto, is supported by the draw-
ing of the Risen Christ, which most resembles it: that on
the verso of the Tityus, a Presentation Drawing sent by
Michelangelo in Florence to his young friend Tommaso
Cavalieri in Rome in, it seems, September 1533 (Wind-
sor, PW 429 verso/Corpus 345). The present study shows
Christ’s head in two positions, tilted slightly to His right,
the viewer’s left, looking round and down to His left, the
viewer’s right, and again higher up and closer to the ver-
tical. The arm is also shown in two positions, the upper
arm down and the forearm bent across the chest and then
raised with the hand pointing upwards – a pose more
usually associated with Saint John. This study is unusual,
although not unique, among Michelangelo’s drawings in
being squared – lightly, in black chalk, at about 150 mm –
which strongly suggests that he intended to carry the
design further.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar; Samuel Wood-
burn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445, damaged and difﬁ-
cult to descry); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830-74] (“A Figure Slightly sketched, on the
reverse a plan.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 77 (“Study of
female ﬁgure – in black chalk, with study at the back,
in pen and bistre, for the Laurentian Library at Flo-
rence [sic].”). Robinson, 1870, no. 49 (Michel Angelo.
Recto for reliquary chamber over the principal door at
the west end of San Lorenzo.). Black, 1875, p. 214, no.
44. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 232 (“Disegno, forse, per la piccola
camera fatta per conservare le reliquie, in San Lorenzo a
Firenze. . . . Al rovescio del foglio, una ﬁgura d’uomo.”).
Berenson, 1903, I, p. 255, no. 1713 (Recto: Michelan-
gelo for reliquary chamber. Verso: Montelupo, proved by
comparison with [Cat. 77].). Thode, 1908, II, pp. 106,
451 (Recto: Michelangelo, for Reliquary Tribune, 1531–
2; demonstrates that an exterior balcony was planned.
Verso: contemporary, for Risen Christ.). K. Frey, 1909–
11, no. 135 (Recto: designed to display relics both to the
interior and exterior. Not executed in this form and not
a deﬁnitive plan; could be before 1527 as well as 1530–
1.); no. 136 (Verso: for a Risen Christ; doubtful, per-
haps by Montelupo, 1531–2.). Thode, 1913, no. 432 (As
1908: recto plan probably that sent to the Pope.). Popp,
1925b, p. 75 (Not Michelangelo.). De Tolnay, 1928, p. 445
(Verso: original sketch for a Resurrection, but somewhat
re-worked.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1713 (As 1903; can-
not accept de Tolnay’s view.). De Tolnay, 1948, p. 219,
no. 112 (Verso: Ascension of Christ, c. 1531–2. Related to a
series of drawings preparing a fresco in the lunette above
the Magniﬁci Tomb. “The outlines have been retraced
so that it is difﬁcult to determine whether it was an
original or a copy. The pose is similar to the verso of
the Tityus drawing” [Windsor, PW429 verso].). Wilde,
1949, p. 251 (Verso datable 1532 by recto: one of series of
Resurrection drawings.). Wilde, 1953a, pp. 89–90 (Verso:

202
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 38–39
study for Risen Christ. Recto: datable ﬁrst half of Octo-
ber 1532.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 84 (Verso). Parker, 1956,
no. 311 (Recto: for reliquary chamber. Verso: related to
series of Resurrection drawings, closest to Windsor, PW
429 verso.). Dussler, 1959, no. 199 (Both sides authen-
tic. Verso, Risen Christ, perhaps drawn ﬁrst.). Berenson,
1961, no. 1713 (As 1903/1938.). Ackerman, 1961, II, p. 32
(Recto: “The design differs from the ﬁnal solution in that
the lateral doors are on axis with the supporting columns
and are framed by thin pilasters; there are fewer balus-
ters and they do not alternate with posts. The care with
which the drawing is ﬁnished and inscribed suggests that
it was prepared for the Pope. It was probably the project
accepted in the autumn of 1531, since the correspon-
dence mentions the exterior balcony; the terminus ante
is Figiovanni’s letter of 19 October 1532, which recom-
mends shifting the side doors from their position in the
drawing towards the centre, as in the executed structure.
The fact that a balcony was planned for the exterior as
well as the interior . . . and that Figiovanni assumed that ‘it
would be of marble to unify it with the fac¸ade’ is of inter-
est for the fac¸ade design, since the balcony could not be
integrated with any of Michelangelo’s fac¸ade projects.”).
Ackerman, 1964, II, p. 32 (As 1961.). Barocchi, 1964c,
no. 44 (Recto: for Reliquary Tribune. Verso: one of Res-
urrection series.). Barbieri and Puppi, 1964a, pp. 881,
1010 (Recto: the “sacrario, ricavato nello spessore del
muro; si conﬁgura come un lungo vano ad ardica,
indubbiamente derivato da reminiscenze archeologiche,
di forma eccezionale nell’artista.”). Barbieri and Puppi,
1964a, tav. 56 (“La planimetrica prevede un eventuale
sviluppo della tribuna all’esterno.”). De Angelis d’Ossat,
1965b, p. 315 (Recto: shows alignment of doorways and
columns criticised by Clement VII in October 1532.).
Hartt, 1971, no. 347 (Verso: 1532; for a fresco of the Res-
urrection, intended for the altar of the Sistine Chapel.);
under no. 347 and p. 390 (Recto: Michelangelo, for reli-
quary tribune erected in 1531–3.). Gere and Turner, 1975,
no. 43 (Verso: Risen Christ. Recto: datable 1532; rela-
tion to Windsor, PW 429 verso, datable to late 1532.).
De Tolnay, 1976, Corpus II, no. 260 (Recto: before Octo-
ber 1532. Verso: 1531–2, quality not as high as usual.).
Nova, 1984, pl. 44 (Recto: for the San Lorenzo tribune.).
Ackerman and Newman, 1986, p. 299 (As 1961/1964.).
Wallace, 1987b, pp. 56–7 (Recto: “reveals his inten-
tion to construct a balcony on the exterior fac¸ade of
San Lorenzo to complement that on the interior. This
unusual plan for interior and exterior balconies indicates
that Michelangelo was aware of the public role and cer-
emonial potential of the relics. . . . [T]he annual display
of the Medici relics was to be one of the most impor-
tant public ceremonies in Florence. . . . The exterior bal-
cony was never carried out although the left door of
the tribune opens into a blocked passageway that was
to have led to the exterior fac¸ade. Had this balcony
been built . . . it would have been the centrepiece of the
grandiose fac¸ade that Michelangelo had conceived years
earlier, and apparently still intended to carry out.”).
Contardi, 1990, p. 200 (Recto: Michelangelo 1531: sig-
niﬁcant differences from scheme as executed.). Perrig,
1991, pp. 76–7, ﬁg. 62 (Verso: by Cavalieri.). Pao-
letti, 2000, p. 76 (Verso: notes two divergent heads of
Christ.).
CATALOGUE 39
Recto: Studies for a Double Wall Tomb in Plan and
Elevation
Verso: Outline Sketch for the Ceiling of the Reading
Room of the Laurentian Library
1846.54; R.40; P.II 308; Corpus 191
Dimensions: 264×384 mm
Medium
Recto: Pen.
Verso: Black chalk.
Condition
There is a small central inﬁlled puncture, a minor indent
and a diagonal scratch or pulp fault across the upper
right corner. A shiny yellow deposit with black accre-
tions is visible. There is minor show-through from some
heavily inked areas, discolouration from adhesive residues,
localised staining, general foxing, and ingrained dirt.
Inscriptions
Verso, in pencil: Presumably made before the verso was
laid down, Robinson’s numbering: 40. In an unknown,
presumably Italian hand: Michelangiolo Buonaroti.
Description
Recto
Top line
A. The left-hand and central bays of the upper section of
a tomb; a seated ﬁgure raised on a podium in the cen-
tral bay and a seated ﬁgure placed somewhat lower at the
left. The side bays, which are widened at the expense of
the central one, are surmounted by rectangular panels,
while the central bay, framed internally by tall pilasters,
is open as far as the upper cornice of the structure. This

CATALOGUE 39
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
203
was no doubt drawn after B. In widening the side bays,
Michelangelo no doubt intended to produce a more ver-
tical alignment of sarcophagi and statues.
B. A three-bay double tomb, in elevation with the central
bay containing two stories and the side bays containing
three, on a common base against which are situated two
sarcophagi without surmounting efﬁgies. Two ﬁgures are
indicated in the upper two stories of the left-hand bay;
one, corresponding to the upper one on the left, is in
the right-hand bay. The central bay is surmounted by a
rectangular panel, perhaps intended to carry an inscrip-
tion. The central and side bays are framed by what seem
to be partially inset columns. This drawing makes it clear
that all the other drawings on this page represent only the
upper parts of double-wall tombs, omitting the common
base and sarcophagi.
Second line
C. A plan of A at base level.
Third line
D. A revised plan of the left-hand bay of A and C at a
higher level.
E. A plan of B, probably at base level.
Fourth line
F. An incomplete rectangle, no doubt the beginning of a
plan
G. The left and central bays of a three-bay structure with
a continuous cornice and an attic storey. The side attic
bay seems to be articulated with an incomplete roundel,
or oval, and it may be that Michelangelo has also sketched
a segmental pediment here.
H. The left-hand and central bay of a three-bay struc-
ture, in plan, with each bay framed by two columns set
one behind the other. The left-hand bay shows a pilaster
deep enough as to qualify as an attached pillar protruding
between the two columns so as partly to conceal the rear
column.
I. A three-bay structure in plan, with each bay framed by
two columns set in depth. Unlike H, the columns are not
separated. The outer bays show that each column faces a
pilaster deep enough to qualify as an attached pillar.
J. A section of a base with a column.
With the left edge of the sheet as the base
K. The left-hand and central bays of a three-bay struc-
ture. The side bays seem to contain a base, a rectangular

204
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 39
niche framed with at least three mouldings surmounted
by a powerful cornice, in turn surmounted by a roughly
square attic. The bay is closed at either side with two
inset columns or pillars that rise as far as the cornice of
the niche, and above this level by, apparently, inset colon-
nettes or smaller pillars. The central bay contains a high
base whose top edge is level with the lower edge of the
niche in the side bay and is topped by a shell head with a
ﬂat top that rises above the level of the cornice or the side
bay. Above the shell-head is a rectangular ﬁeld divided
into two emphatic horizontals. The cornice of the side
bays is registered in the central one by, apparently, a thin
moulding.
Verso
Outline sketch of the ceiling of the Laurentian Library,
compartmented approximately as executed.
Discussion
The recto is a controversial page, which has provoked a
number of different interpretations. It connects closely
with, and seems to be developed from, a drawing in
London (BM W38/Corpus 561; pen and ink, 427×258
mm). Wilde suggested that both drawings were made in
preparation for a double tomb of the Medici popes to
be placed against the end wall (the liturgical East) of the
choir of San Lorenzo. In Wilde’s view, this project came
before the ﬁnal project for the choir, which comprised
a large facing tomb of a single pope on each of its side
walls. In this ﬁnal scheme, Michelangelo was probably
inspired by that of the choir of Santa Maria del Popolo
in Rome, no doubt devised by Bramante, in which
two nearly identical tombs, sculpted by Andrea Sanso-
vino, face each other. Michelangelo produced a grandiose
project, which is known from a developed sketch in the
British Museum (W39/Corpus 192; pen and ink, 175 ×
182 mm) and two large drawings in Casa Buonarroti,
probably successive pages of the same album; a half eleva-
tion (CB128A/B95/Corpus 279; pen and ink, brush and
wash over black chalk, 399×274 mm); and a diagram-
matic analysis of the entire, highly inventive, columnar
structure (CB116A/B251/Corpus 190; black chalk 270 ×
385 mm), probably made with a view to ordering the mar-
ble for the architectural membering.
In favour of Wilde’s suggestion is the play made with
columns, which attaches the present sheet closely to the
ﬁnal design of facing single tombs shown in the two
Casa Buonarroti drawings, and the plastic force of the
design. Indeed, Fasolo in 1927 already made the same
connection, although he assumed that the Casa Buonar-
roti drawings were intended for the New Sacristy. How-
ever, W38 unmistakably shows the structure surmounted
by a lunette, whereas the lower storey of the end wall
of the choir of San Lorenzo is and always was delimited
by a straight entablature. In fact, the similarity of organ-
isation of, in particular, A and B on the present page to
Michelangelo’s design of 1521 for the tombs of the Mag-
niﬁci on the entrance wall of the New Sacristy (see Cats.
63 and 64) suggests rather that they and the other draw-
ings on this page are revised designs for the entrance wall,
probably made after the renewal of work in 1530 follow-
ing the four-year interruption caused by the collapse of
papal ﬁnances in 1526 and the expulsion of the Medici
from Florence in 1527. In favour of this view is, especially,
the drawing B, the most informative of those on this side
of the sheet. It includes two sarcophagi, the statue of a
seated ﬁgure in the central space, and two standing ones in
the upper levels of the side compartments, whose lower
sections too were presumably intended to house seated
ﬁgures. The complement of statues, and their arrange-
ment, is so close in basic design to Michelangelo’s project
of 1520–1 for the Magniﬁci Tombs that it is hard to avoid

CATALOGUE 39
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
205
the conclusion that it represents a simpliﬁed and more
plastic variant of it, designed after Michelangelo had dis-
covered for himself the sculptural effect of pure archi-
tecture in the ricetto of the Laurentian Library, a project
that, of course, also inﬂuenced his design of the columnar
tombs of the popes planned for the choir of San Lorenzo
in 1526. If this interpretation is correct, it strongly suggests
that shortly after 1530 Michelangelo re-planned the Mag-
niﬁci tombs with a reduced ﬁgural complement and more
emphatically plastic architecture. Like the projects for the
papal tombs in the choir of San Lorenzo, by which this
new design was strongly inﬂuenced, it became the proto-
type for a large number of later tombs. However, it must
be admitted that some of the drawings on this page do
seem to represent free developments of Michelangelo’s
ideas. It is hard to believe that a plan of the complexity
of H and J could ever have seriously been intended for
construction.
In a letter of 1546 to Cosimo I keeping him up to date
with Tribolo’s efforts to set the New Sacristy in order, Pier
Francesco Riccio mentions, in connection with what is
certainly the Magniﬁci Tomb, “li marmori e le colonne
lavorati in maggior parte” (Aschoff, 1967, p. 136), but he
does not provide further details or indicate how many
columns were involved.
The verso, uncovered only in 1953, is, as de Tolnay ﬁrst
pointed out, a sketch for the ceiling of the reading room
in the Laurentian Library. Although quickly and roughly
drawn, it shows a structure close to that of the ceiling
as executed, which was further prepared in a careful red-
chalk drawing in Casa Buonarroti (CB126A/B91/Corpus
542; 374×210 mm). Execution of the woodwork of the
ceiling seems to have been anticipated only in later 1533
and probably did not commence before Michelangelo left
Florence for good in late 1534. On ﬁrst publication, the
present sketch was dated to 1524; it and the Casa Buonar-
roti drawing are now generally dated to 1526. But it would
be highly unusual for Michelangelo to have retained the
same design more or less unaltered for some six years. The
situation is not entirely clear, but from correspondence
between Michelangelo and his patron Clement VII, it
would seem that as late as April 1526, it was still planned
to articulate the reading room with three corridors, one
in the centre, and one at either side, with two banks of
benches between them. There is no indication that the
ﬁnal scheme, in which the benches are butted against
the walls, with a single wide corridor in the centre of
the room, had then been determined, and it seems more
likely that this was ﬁnalised only after 1530. Thus, both
sides of the present sheet would have been drawn at about
the same time, that of the revival of Medicean works that
took place after the city returned to the family’s rule in
August 1530.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar; Samuel Wood-
burn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Wood-
burn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 70 (“Sheet of architectural studies –
of doors, windows etc.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 13 (As
1842.). Robinson, 1870, no. 40 (Michel Angelo: sketches
for the tombs of the Medici princes, c. 1520.). Black, 1875,
p. 214, no. 37. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 229. Berenson, 1903, no.
1566 (“The one with a large statue in the middle niche,
and a smaller one lower down at the side [A], may possibly
have been for the Tomb of Lorenzo the Magniﬁcent, the
larger statue representing the Madonna.”). Baum, 1908,
p. 1115 (Recto: most important drawing is [B], which
follows BM W28 verso. Followed by the school draw-
ings in the Louvre, Inv. 686 recto/J24/Corpus 193 and
Inv. 837 recto/J26/Corpus 194.). Thode, 1908, I, p. 455;
II, p. 218 (A–D for a double tomb at a moment when
Michelangelo considered two facing double tombs; [E–
G] and [I–K], perhaps for a reliquary chamber in San
Silvestro.). K. Frey, 1909–11, p. 143 (Michelangelo; for
Medici Chapel; criticism of Thode’s view.). Thode, 1913,
no. 423 (Admits error of 1908; all for the Magniﬁci
Tomb, following BM W28/Corpus 189 and preceding
Louvre Inv. 686/J24/ Corpus 193.). Popp, 1922 p. 131
(Not Michelangelo, but by an inferior artist aware of the
architecture of the Laurenziana.). Fasolo, 1927, pp. 445
([B] is a design for a double tomb – reconstructed graph-
ically by Fasolo in his ﬁg. 27 – to be placed in the
New Sacristy in response to the Pope’s request that the
scheme be changed to accommodate three double tombs
(one each for the Magniﬁci, the Dukes, and the Medici
Popes). This double tomb was generated from ideas for
a single tomb [A], reconstructed graphically by Fasolo in
his ﬁg. 26. Close relation of architectural composition
to the contemporary forms of the Laurentian Library.
Developed further in BM W39 recto/Corpus 192, and
Casa Buonarroti 128A/B95/Corpus 279.). Popp, 1927,
p. 405 (Not by Michelangelo; weak imitation of his
papal tomb projects for the choir of San Lorenzo; the
same applies to BM28/Corpus 189.). Berenson, 1938,
no. 1566 (As 1903.). H. W. Frey, 1951, pp. 68–70 (Recto:
Michelangelo, studies for the double tomb in the entrance
wall of the New Sacristy. The angular sarcophagi take
up ideas from BM [W28 verso/Corpus 189]. The side
bays of [A] widened from those of [B] to produce a

206
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 39–40
closer alignment with the sarcophagi. Stylistic relation
to studies for tombs of the Popes for the choir of San
Lorenzo.). Wilde, 1953a, pp. 75–6 (Made between BM
W38/Corpus 561 and W39/Corpus 192; study for dou-
ble tombs of the Popes to be placed in a recess in the
end wall of the choir of San Lorenzo.). Wilde, 1953
exh., no. 145 (c. 1525–6.). De Tolnay, 1955, pp. 237–
40 (Publication of the verso, uncovered in 1953: sketch
for ceiling of Laurentian reading room.). Parker, 1956,
no. 308 (Recto: essential genuineness . . . seems beyond
doubt, though architectural plans [C–E, H, I] “could
conceivably be by another hand.” The connecting link
between W38 recto/Corpus 561 and 39 recto/Corpus
192, for papal tombs either in the New Sacristy or Choir
of San Lorenzo. Verso: uncovered in 1953, for ceiling of
Laurentian reading room.). Dussler, 1959, no. 345 (Recto:
autograph; comparable with numerous other plans and
line drawings of the 1520s; precise purpose controver-
sial. Verso: for Laurenziana ceiling c. 1524). Ackerman,
1961, II, p. 29 (This and BM W38/Corpus 561 although
“related in style [to drawings for the Papal tombs in the
choir of San Lorenzo] . . . were not necessarily drawn for
the same project.”); p. 38 (Verso: “Indications of the wall
pilasters demonstrate co-ordination of wall and ceilings in
the same proportions as the ﬁnal solution.” Placed after
CB126/B91/Corpus 542 because of “its more mature
integration with the wall system.” Before August 1524.).
Berenson, 1961, no. 1566 (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi,
1962, p. 119 (Related to CB46A/B94/Corpus 277 for the
papal tombs in San Lorenzo.). Ackerman, 1964, II, p. 29
(Recto: as 1961.); p. 38 (Verso: as 1961. Before August
1524.). Barbieri and Puppi, 1964a, p. 1010 (Recto: for the
papal tombs in the choir of San Lorenzo; comes between
BM W38/Corpus 561 and CB128A/B95/Corpus 279.);
pp. 859–60, 1005 (Verso: summary sketch for reading-
room ceiling.). De Angelis d’Ossat, 1965b, pp. 310–1
(Recto: follows from BM W38/Corpus 561 and leads to
Casa Buonarroti, 128A/B95/Corpus 279, for the tombs
of the popes on the rear wall of the choir of San Lorenzo.).
Berti, 1965, pp. 433, 436 (Recto: relates to New Sac-
risty. Verso: for the ceiling of the Laurenziana reading
room.). De Tolnay, 1969a, p. 13 (Recto: sketch for Mag-
niﬁci Tomb, prior to ﬁnal design recorded in [Cat. 64],
etc.). De Tolnay, 1969b, p.80 (As 1969a.). Hartt, 1971,
no. 222 (Recto: 1520–1. Not for a papal tomb in the
choir of San Lorenzo; “clearly . . . for the double tomb of
Lorenzo and Giuliano the Magniﬁcent on the end wall of
the Medici chapel.”); no. 286 (Verso: 1524; early sketch
for Laurenziana ceiling.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 56
(Recto: c. 1525–6; for double tomb probably to be placed
in choir of San Lorenzo.). Joannides, 1975, p. 262 (Recto:
with BM W38/Corpus 561 perhaps a revised project for
the Magniﬁci Tomb, c. 1526.). De Tolnay, 1976, Corpus
II, no. 191 (Recto: 1524; [K] for the wall articulation of
the Laurentian reading room; the other drawings for the
Magniﬁci Tomb, and in direct relation with the upper
drawing on BM W38/Corpus 561, also for the Mag-
niﬁci Tomb. Verso: as 1955; datable April 1524, a sketch
for the plan sent to Clement VII.). Nova, 1984, pl. 24
(Plans and elevations for Medici tombs.). Ackerman and
Newman, 1986, p. 299 (Recto: as 1961/1964.); p. 302
(Verso: as 1961/1964.). Argan, 1990, p. 24 (Recto: sketch
of wall articulation for reading room of Laurentian Library
and studies for Medici tombs.). Contardi, 1990, p. 184
(Recto: Michelangelo: related to CB 128A/B95/ Corpus
279, CB116A/B251/ Corpus 190, BM W38/Corpus 561,
CB 46A/ B94/Corpus 267 recto, and AB V. 38, fol. 213
verso/B349/Corpus 278, for the projected papal tombs
in the choir of San Lorenzo; notes de Tolnay’s disagree-
ment. Close in style to Laurenziana articulation; should
be dated c. 1526.); p. 195 (Verso: Michelangelo: perhaps
a little earlier than April 1526, date of conﬁrmation of
plan of reading room ceiling.). Morrogh, 1993, pp. 588–
90 (Recto: revised project for Magniﬁci Tomb, datable
1524; elaborate analysis. Verso: for Laurenziana ceiling, c.
1524.). Joannides, 1996b, p. 152 (Recto: revised project for
Magniﬁci Tomb, probably datable 1532. Verso: probably
also datable 1532.).
CATALOGUE 40
The Descent from the Cross with Ten Figures
1846–88; R.37; P.II 342; Corpus 431
Dimensions: 375×280 mm; the upper right corner made
up
Medium
Red chalk in two shades on pre-prepared grey-washed
paper; some indications in stylus under the satyr-like ﬁg-
ure at the left. Possibly some water staining in the centre
of the sheet.
Condition
The sheet is fully lined; there are major tear repairs
and inﬁlled losses, some toned. There are many hor-
izontal creases and fractures, particularly at the lower
quadrant, and numerous creases of all the edges of the

CATALOGUE 40
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
207
primary support. There are numerous circular worm
holes, mostly unﬁlled but supported by the lining. Dark
lines with fracture indicate the brown ink inscription on
the verso. The sheet has small accretions, some abra-
sion, cross-hatched scratches, local stains, and discoloura-
tion. The lining has pressed-out creases, skinning, adhe-
sive residues, small rust spots, accretions, and uneven
discolouration.

208
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 40
Numbering
Verso: visible through the backing sheet an old numera-
tion in pen and ink: 396. R37, twice in graphite, in two
different hands on the old backing sheet, obviously reg-
istering Robinson’s numbering.
Discussion
It is often claimed that this drawing has been overworked
by a second hand, but the compiler can see no evidence
for this: however, it has clearly been brought to differ-
ent levels of ﬁnish, a common feature of Michelangelo’s
drawings.
The date is controversial. Assigned to the period of the
Cappella Paolina by de Tolnay, the drawing is placed still
later by Hirst. However, from his surviving oeuvre, it may
be inferred that Michelangelo rarely used red chalk after
the early 1530s. No drawings in the medium are known
for the Last Judgement, the Pauline Chapel frescoes, or any
of the late architectural projects. Only one Presentation
Drawing post-dating the series for Tommaso Cavalieri is
in red chalk: the Madonna del Silenzio, probably of c. 1540,
but apparently not made for Vittoria Colonna (Duke
of Portland Collection/Corpus 388; 322×285 mm);
the forms and handling of that drawing, incidentally, are
unlike those of the present study.
More speciﬁcally, the differentiated technique of
this drawing, with broad hatching and loose contour
work establishing the subsidiary ﬁgures, while smoothly
stumped modelling is employed for the main ones, seems
to the compiler to count against a date either in the 1540s
or the 1550s. This also seems true of the forms of the ﬁg-
ures. In all these features, the drawing is most similar to a
drawing of an eight-ﬁgure Lamentation in the Albertina,
Vienna (BK 102 recto/Corpus 269; red chalk, 320×251
mm), generally agreed to date from the early 1530s. The
complexity of the arrangement in both is remarkable. In
addition, the foreground motif of Christ’s dangling legs
in the present drawing is closely related to a drawing in
the Louvre (Inv. 704 verso/J36/Corpus 243; red chalk,
290×174 mm), also datable around 1530. In the present
design, this motif also recalls the Sistine Ionas.
It was suggested by Nagel (1996 and 2000) that the
present drawing was executed in two phases. In his view,
the composition was sketched-in in the early 1530s, but
the more ﬁnished central ﬁgures were elaborated in the
mid-1540s, when Michelangelo would have returned to
the sheet. However, even though this might explain the
advanced appearance of the densely worked ﬁgures that,
as Nagel noted, do resemble forms that Michelangelo
was to employ in the 1540s, close examination of the
drawing detects no signs of re-working in this area. The
dense ﬁgures do not overlay others more lightly sketched:
There are no lines beneath their surface resembling those
of the more lightly sketched ﬁgures around them. This,
if Nagel’s two-phase scheme of execution were to be
accepted, would entail Michelangelo’s having left a void
in the centre of his composition in the early 1530s, to be
ﬁlled in some ﬁfteen years later. There is, in principle, no
barrier to the hypothesis that Michelangelo re-worked
one of his own drawings; on occasion, he demonstrably
used the recto and the verso of the same sheet at different
dates, and in his very last years certainly re-worked some
earlier architectural drawings (see Cats. 55 and 56). But
the compiler ﬁnds it hard to accept that Michelangelo
would initially have omitted the centre of his design, and
then seamlessly have completed it a decade and a half later.
Such a procedure seems uncharacteristic of so imperious
an artistic personality.
Scholars from Thode onwards have been attracted by
the fact that the cartoon of a Piet`a containing nine ﬁgures
was recorded in Michelangelo’s studio after his death and
have considered that the present drawing might be a study
for it. But it contains ten ﬁgures, not nine, and because
Michelangelo returned to and reconsidered earlier mod-
els and themes in his later life, the relation need be no
more than generic. Furthermore, Michelangelo certainly
retained in his Roman workshop drawings made over sev-
eral decades, and that the Piet`a cartoon was a work from
his ﬁnal years is no more than assumption. It is also worth
noting that an alternative candidate exists for a preparatory
drawing for this lost cartoon in a drawing of c. 1550 in the
Teyler Museum, Haarlem (A35 verso/VT 65/Corpus 434;
black chalk, fragmentary, original dimensions approxi-
mately 300×305 mm). The condition of this drawing
does not allow a full reading, but traces of seven ﬁgures
are now visible, and it might well have contained more.
Although it is not a strong argument, the fact that
the earliest ascertained appearance both of the present
drawing and of Albertina 102, which bears Mariette’s
stamp, is French might suggest that both were given
by Michelangelo to Antonio Mini, who certainly took
Louvre 704 with him to France. The fact that the verso
of Albertina 102 carries a partial copy by a pupil or asso-
ciate – the qualitative level seems higher than usual for
Mini, but it might be by him at the very end of his stay
with Michelangelo – of a ﬁgure from Michelangelo’s early
drawing of clothed and nude variants of antique mod-
els (Chantilly, Mus´ee Cond´e; Lanfranc de Panthou 28
recto/Corpus 24; pen and ink, 261×386 mm) reinforces
the probability of such a provenance, at least for that

CATALOGUE 40
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
209
sheet. A further two-ﬁgure Piet`a in the Albertina (BK
103/Corpus 432; red chalk on paper in part washed in
grey, 404×233 mm), comparable with the present sheet
in size, medium, and, in the compiler’s view, date, also
has a French provenance. Finally, an unpublished draw-
ing in the Schlossmuseum, Weimar, KK 8797 recto (red
chalk, 390×239 mm), which may well be by Antonio
Mini, seems to be after a lost preparatory study – or a
plastic model – made by Michelangelo for a Piet`a with
ﬁve ﬁgures, a design that provided the germ of the later
Piet`a now in Florence. If the attribution to Mini of the
Weimar drawing is correct, it must antedate his depar-
ture for France and would establish that the basic scheme
of the Florence Piet`a was aready in Michelangelo’s mind
before 1532. The verso of Weimar KK8797 bears another
version of Cat. 75.
History
Baron
Dominique-Vivant
Denon
(L.779);
Samuel
Woodburn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel
Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1836b, no. 76 (“[A] very splendid compo-
sition, most important, as no picture is known of this
subject.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 28 (As 1836.). Wood-
burn, 1846, no. 34 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1862, p. 4, pl. 9 (As
Woodburn, 1842.). Fisher, 1865, II, p. 22, pl. 9 (As 1862.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 37 (Michel Angelo. “If intended
as the design for a ﬁnished work, the arrangement
of the ﬁgures suggests that it must have been for a
picture . . . certainly rather of the early than the later time
of the master.” c. 1511–c. 1520. Some parts of the drawing
much more precisely deﬁned than others.). Fisher, 1872,
II, p. 20, pl. 9 (As 1862.). Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 34. Gotti,
1875, II, p. 225. Springer, 1878, p. 455 (Similarity of theme
with National Gallery Entombment; implicitly dated to
Michelangelo’s third Florentine period.). Fisher, 1879,
XXVIII/30 (“[T]his particular rendering of the subject
is unique.”). Springer, 1883, II, pp. 310–11 (As 1878.).
Berenson, 1903, I, pp. 234–5, no. 2491 (Sebastiano,
1515–18.). Colvin, 1904, II, no. 13 (Lists “weaknesses”;
agrees
with
Berenson’s
attribution
to
Sebastiano.).
Borough Johnson, 1908, p. 10, pl. XLV (Michelangelo.).
D’Achiardi, 1908, p. 324 (Sebastiano.). Thode, 1908,
II, pp. 408–9, 499, 502 (Michelangelo, perhaps made
for Sebastiano: criticism of Berenson’s attribution of this
and Albertina BK 102/Corpus 269; link with Gathorne
Hardy drawing; relation to Piet`a with nine ﬁgures
recorded in Michelangelo’s posthumous inventory?.).
K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 150 (Michelangelo in conception,
save for the right-hand ﬁgure, but not in handling; per-
haps but not certainly by Sebastiano; datable before the
Last Judgement.). Thode, 1913, no. 420 (Michelangelo, in
1540s.). Brinckmann, 1925, no. 76 (Michelangelo, c. 1550.
Similar to Albertina BK 102/Corpus 269; linked with
Florence Piet`a.). Popp, 1925b, p. 75 (Not Michelangelo.).
Venturi, 1926, pl. CCXCI (Michelangelo.). Berenson,
1938, no. 2491 (As 1903; a reminiscence of female ﬁgure
in Rosso’s Volterra Deposition.). Delacre, 1938, pp. 20–1
(Michelangelo; similarities with BM W64/Corpus 270,
and Albertina BK 102/Corpus 269 and BK 103/Corpus
432; critique of Berenson’s and Colvin’s attribution to
Sebastiano.). Dussler, 1942, p. 194 (By neither Michelan-
gelo nor Sebastiano.). Pallucchini, 1944, p. 82 (“v’`e una
insistenza nella deﬁnizione plastica specialmente delle
masse di primo piano, che certo transcende le intenzione
stilistiche di Sebastiano.”). Goldscheider, 1951, no. 88 (c.
1542.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 95 (Michelangelo: Descent
from the Cross, c. 1555. “A large cartoon of a Piet`a with
nine unﬁnished ﬁgures is noted in the [posthumous]
inventory of Michelangelo’s possessions.”). Parker, 1956,
no. 342 (“There can be little doubt that the drawing
has been extensively reworked . . . perhaps not so late as
1555.”). Dussler, 1959, no. 616 (Not by Michelangelo
or Sebastiano. Link with Albertina BK 102/Corpus
269.). De Tolnay, 1960, pp. 217–18, no. 227 (Prefers to
leave attribution open. Queries Parker’s view that the
drawing is re-worked. Date uncertain. Albertina BK
102/Corpus 269 seems to be c. 1525–30.). Berenson,
1961, no. 2491 (As 1903/1938.). Clark, 1964, p. 443
(“[T]he central forms are modelled like bronze, but
the surrounding ﬁgures are indicated with a colouristic
freedom which might seem to argue a Venetian ori-
gin . . . date[s] from a period later than that of his close
connexion with . . . [Sebastiano].”). De Tolnay, 1967a,
p. 23 (Michelangelo, c. 1545–50.). Hartt, 1971, no. 456
(1550–5?. Composition linked with the Florence Piet`a.
“[S]tarted by Michelangelo, ﬁnished in small part . . . and
then completed by another hand, possibly many years
later. There are appalling passages, especially the head
of Christ and the completely misunderstood lines
superimposed on His chest.”). Mantura, 1973, p. 200
(Favours earlier rather than later date.). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 159 (Purpose unknown “unless it is a study for
the large unﬁnished cartoon of a Piet`a with nine ﬁgures
listed in the posthumous inventory of Michelangelo’s
effects.”). Pignatti, 1977, no. 22 (Survey of opinion
on attribution; datable in the 1550s.). De Tolnay, 1978,
Corpus III, no. 431 (Michelangelo, after 1550. Some

210
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 40–41
re-working especially in the centre. Link with Albertina
BK 102/Corpus 269 dated late.). Hirst, 1988, p. 7 (Late
use of red chalk.). Hirst, 1994–5, p. 139, no. 26 (After
1550.). Nagel, 1996, pp. 565–6 (“[T]he different parts of
the sheet were done not only in two different techniques
but at two different times. The hypothesis that the sheet
is a palimpsest helps to resolve some of the confusion
over the dating.” The drawing begun c. 1530–4; the
central three ﬁgures in the style of the Pauline Chapel
ﬁgures added in the 1540s.). Paoletti, 2000, p. 77 (“[T]he
somewhat satiric features of the turbaned male” resemble
Michelangelo’s. Notes similarity of head-covering to
that of the Louvre portrait drawing of Michelangelo,
Inv. 2715/J R27 [see Cat. 107].). Nagel, 2000, pp. 204–5
(As 1996.). Joannides, 2002–3b, p. 321, under no. 187
(Nagel’s hypothesis of execution at two different periods
not supported by the physical evidence.).
CATALOGUE 41
Recto: Studies of a Left Leg, a Steeply Raised Right Arm,
and a Raised Right Elbow
Verso: Two Studies of a Raised Right Arm
1846.75; R.67; P.II 329; Corpus 362
Dimensions: 240×145 mm
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
There are major repairs to edge tears, major and minor
losses inﬁlled, edges skinned, and some abrasion. There
is discolouration and local staining from the medium and
adhesive.
Description
Recto
A. The bent legs of a nude ﬁgure, perhaps kneeling; the
knee of the right leg is only brieﬂy indicated.
B. A raised right arm and hand.
C. It is disputed whether this drawing should be read in
the same sense as the others or with the right edge as the
base.
i. In the ﬁrst case (that sustained by the compiler), it
would seem to represent a very powerful right bicep,
elbow and upper forearm, bent at a right angle.
ii. In the second case (suggested by W. Dreesmann), it
would show part of the left thigh, the knee, and part
of the upper calf of a seated nude ﬁgure.
Verso
A. Upper drawing: a raised right arm, seen from the front.
B. Lower drawing: a left arm bent across the body, with
the hand raised.
An alternative view (found in Dussler, no. 629 and de
Tolnay, Corpus 362) that the page should be read with
the Oxford stamp in the upper left corner and that the
drawings represent a lowered left arm, seems to the com-
piler to be less likely, and it is countered by the direction
of the hatching.
Discussion
The sketches of a raised right arm and a right elbow
on the recto were probably made, as most scholars have
accepted, for the right arm of Christ in the Last Judgement.
His gesture is the focal point of the whole composition,
and it obviously preoccupied Michelangelo: Even when it
had been painted, he revised it, enlarging the dimensions
of the upper arm.
It is probable but not certain that the sketch of bent
legs was also made for Christ. None of the drawings
connected with the fresco shows Christ with a leg bent
quite so tautly, but in the largest surviving compositional
drawing (CB65F recto/B142/Corpus 347; black chalk,
420×297 mm), His left leg is quite strongly bent, and
the present drawing may register a stage in the design of
His ﬁgure for which no other evidence survives. How-
ever, this drawing of a leg also contains some similarities
to the study of two legs and a groin at the left side of
W61 verso/Corpus 352 (black chalk, 396×263 mm), a
sheet that contains exclusively studies for angels with the
Instruments of the Passion in the upper right lunette. It is
not, therefore, to be excluded that the present sheet might
be connected with these ﬁgures as well as with that of
Christ.
In any case, with their broad diagrammatic hatching
and swiftly drawn decisive contours, all the drawings on
this side of the sheet powerfully establish key expressive
units. Michelangelo must have made large numbers of
sketches of this type, but very few survive.
The upper of the two verso drawings also shows a right
arm, but one raised at a much shallower angle. It does not
seem to be for the gesture of Christ and probably rep-
resents a preliminary idea, not retained in execution, for
that of one of the angels in the upper right lunette. A pre-
liminary sketch for the same right arm is found on a draw-
ing in Florence (CB14A verso/B117/Corpus 577; black
chalk, 388×558 mm), which also contains three other

CATALOGUE 41
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
211
sketches related to the present sheet and to W61/Corpus
352. These are as follows:
1. A sketch of crossed arms for an angel, an arrangement
developed further at the lower right of W61/Corpus 352,
but not used in the fresco.
2. A raised right arm and forward-projecting forearm
with the hand facing forward, perhaps planned for the
ﬁgure shown on the verso of W61. Another drawing in
London (BM W80/Corpus 397; black chalk, 113×156
mm), dated by Wilde to the 1550s and connected with
one of the Annunciations designed by Michelangelo for
Marcello Venusti, is probably a detailed study for this ges-
ture, made for one of the angels in the Last Judgement.
3. A raised left arm, similar to the larger study on the
recto of the present sheet, in reverse, which was probably
also made in view of one of the angels.
If the compiler’s interpretation of the lower drawing on
the verso is correct, it shows a left arm bent across the chest
at a rising angle, with the hand raised as though warding
off a rebuke: The similarity with the left arm of Adam in

212
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 41
the Sistine Expulsion is evident, and Michelangelo might
well have intended to recall this gesture in modiﬁed form
in one of the Damned in the Last Judgement.
It is worth remarking that CB14A verso bears an
inscription by Michelangelo with the date 25 luglio, 1528.
This relates to the large drawing on the sheet’s recto,
which was made to prepare a defensive bastion planned
for Florence’s Porta del Prato. The juxtaposition demon-
strates Michelangelo’s casual use of the verso, four or
ﬁve years after he drew the recto, for an entirely unre-
lated project. The only connection between the two
might be of interest for the artist’s psyche: The bas-
tion was drawn for Florence’s defence against the forces
working to restore Medici rule; the verso was part of
the planning process of a fresco commissioned by the
man whose rule the siege of Florence was undertaken to
restore.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar?; William Young
Ottley (his sale?, 11 April 1804, part of lot 274, “One
ditto [i.e., One leaf] containing several studies of attitudes
for the Last Judgment, and a study for the Annunciation,
all in black chalk, from ditto [i.e., Casa Buonarroti]”; Sir
Thomas Lawrence (no stamp); Samuel Woodburn.

CATALOGUES 41–42
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
213
References
William Young Ottley (his sale? 11 April 1804, part of
lot 274, “One ditto [i.e., One leaf ] containing several
studies of attitudes for the Last Judgment, and a study
for the Annunciation, all in black chalk, from ditto [i.e.,
Casa Buonarroti]”.). Woodburn, 1842, no. 54 (“A pen-
timento of arms and leg – in black chalk.”). Robin-
son, 1870, no. 67 (“The writer is not able to iden-
tify them as for any particular work; in general style of
design, however, they seem to resemble the Last Judge-
ment study” [Cat. 42].). Black, 1875, p. 215, no. 57.
Gotti, 1875, II, p. 233. Berenson, 1903, no. 1570 (Recto:
“of small importance but may be Michelangelo’s.” Per-
haps for a Risen Christ, c. 1535.); no. 1724 (Verso: fol-
lower of Michelangelo.). K. Frey, 1909–11, nos. 195, 196
(Recto and verso authentic; period of Last Judgement.).
Thode, 1913, no. 440 (Recto and verso authentic; period
of Last Judgement.). Brinckmann, 1925, no. 27 (1509–
10, for God the Father Separating Light from Darkness.).
Popp, 1925b, p. 74 (Not Michelangelo.). Berenson, 1938,
no. 1570 (Recto.); no. 1724 (Verso.) (As 1903.). Wilde,
1953 exh., no. 122 (c. 1545–50). Parker, 1956, no. 329
(Later 1530s; 1545–50 “seems unaccountably late.”). Dus-
sler, 1959, no. 629 (Rejected. Recto and verso by the
same hand, perhaps a pupil making use of Michelan-
gelo’s drawings of the 1530s.). De Tolnay, 1960, pp. 198–9,
no. 204 (“[A]uthenticity . . . not . . . established.” If ori-
ginal, of Paolina period.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1570
(Recto: as 1903/1938.); no. 1724 (Verso: as 1903/1938.).
Hartt, 1971, no. 382 (Recto: 1534–5. The arm for the right
arm of Christ in the Last Judgement; “the thigh, but not the
lower leg, was utilised for the ﬁrst of the group of martyrs
seated at the extreme right.”); no. 71 (Verso: 1510?. Study
for the right arm of Adam in the Sistine Expulsion.). Gere
and Turner, 1975, no. 146 (Unconnected with a known
work.). De Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III, no. 362 (Recto:
Michelangelo, c. 1545. Verso: weaker than recto, but prob-
ably autograph and contemporary.). Perrig, 1999, pp. 224,
238 (Recto and verso: by Clovio; part of Farnese group.).
CATALOGUE 42
Recto: A Man Rising from the Tomb
Verso: Studies of Legs
1846.76; R.58; P.II 330; Corpus 361
Dimensions: 216×266 mm
Watermark: Robinson Appendix no. 11. Roberts Anchor
F. Briquet 527, Verona, 1558.
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
There is uneven pulp. An unevenly cut triangular strip is
at the left edge. There is a pressed-out horizontal fold with
associated abrasion and ingrained dirt. There are several
indents, tears and losses, abrasion, inﬁlls, and skinning.
The sheet has widespread discolouration, local foxing,
and surface dirt.
Inscription
Verso: Lower right: Robinson’s numbering in graphite:
58.
Description
Verso
A ﬁgure seen in foreshortening; traces of pouncing.
Discussion
The recto was made for the ﬁgure at the lower left of the
Last Judgement who forces himself up from the ground.
It is very close in form to the ﬁgure as executed and
was probably made shortly before the preparation of the
cartoon. Given Michelangelo’s habit of revising, it is likely
that this drawing was made only in the later stages of work,
probably not much before the end of the 1530s.
The artist has concentrated on the musculature of the
shoulders expressing the ﬁgure’s volition and self-help.
The head is no more than outlined, since it was only a
subsidiary instrument of expression, to act in adjunct to
the symphony of the body. This is very much the mode
of the resolved ﬁgure-studies for the Last Judgement, but
the drawings made in the ﬁnal stages of work such as
the present one and a companion in the British Museum
(W63/Corpus 360; black chalk, 293×233 mm) have a
weight and density, combined with clarity, which places
them among Michelangelo’s highest graphic achieve-
ments. It is worth noting that both contain a series of small
circles on the most convex parts of the ﬁgure. This feature
is also found on some earlier drawings, such as that for the
Haman in the British Museum (W13 recto/Corpus 163;
red chalk, 406×207 mm) as ﬁrst noted by Woodburn in
his catalogue entry of 1836 for that drawing (no. 36). Hirst
has suggested that it may have been one of Michelangelo’s
ways of reminding himself of those parts of his ﬁgures that
required particular plastic emphasis; alternatively, it may
indicate areas of greatest highlight.
The study of the ﬁgure’s right hand and wrist at
the bottom of the page shows a broader and more
emphatic form, which increases the ﬁgure’s power. This

214
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 42
subsidiary sketch emphasises once again Michelangelo’s
concentration on the expressive part of his forms: When it
is compared with his ﬁrst version of this detail, the greater
strength of this version becomes immediately evident.
The verso sketches are probably for another of the res-
urrected ﬁgures, who seems to be disentangling one leg
from another. But, as scholars have pointed out, the ﬁg-
ure cannot be found in the fresco nor in any of the other
preparatory drawings, and this seems to document an idea
that Michelangelo did not develop further. He eschewed
foreshortened poses for the ﬁgures of the Resurrected at
the lower left. The use of crossed legs, however, is retained
in the ﬁgure subjected to a tug of war between an angel
and a devil, immediately to the left of the mouth of Hell.
The traces of pouncing on the verso were no doubt
made by Michelangelo from another sheet but were not
pursued. Pouncing is not found elsewhere in his surviv-
ing drawings, but there is no reason not to accept that
he might have made use of the technique on occasion.
He certainly employed pouncing in some of his cartoons
as can be seen from the traces left in some areas of the
Sistine ceiling and, notably, in the famous cartoon frag-
ment for the Cruciﬁxion of Saint Peter in Naples, Museo
Nazionale di Capodimonte (Inv. 398/Corpus 384; black
chalk, 2630×1560 mm).
The watermark found on the present sheet also occurs
on Cats. 30 and 35, as Robinson noted.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar; Samuel Wood-
burn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830–62] (“Study in black chalk for one of
the ﬁgures in the Last Judgement, on the reverse study

CATALOGUE 42
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
215
of legs.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 78 (“A very ﬁne study
for one of the ﬁgures rising from the tomb – in the bot-
tom part of the Last Judgement.”). Robinson, 1870, no.
58 (For the lower part of the Last Judgement. The recto
“ﬁgure [is] drawn with consummate mastery.”). Black,
1875, p. 215, no. 53. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 227. Beren-
son, 1903, I, p. 263; II, no. 1721 (After the fresco by
Cungi, a “hard and dry but clever draughtsman” respon-
sible for several drawings believed to be preparatory.).
Thode, 1908, II, p. 13 (Authentic.). K. Frey, 1909–11,
no. 148 (Recto.); no. 149 (Verso: doubtful of authenticity
of this sheet; perhaps by a pupil overworked by Michelan-
gelo.). Thode, 1913, no. 435 (Authentic, for, not after, the
fresco.). Popp, 1922, pp. 144–5 (Recto: copy after the Last
Judgement. Verso: not after the Last Judgement but after
a model for a River God for the New Sacristy.). Zoff,
1923, pl. 55 (Verso.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1568A (For-
mer 1721; both sides good enough to be Michelangelo.).
Delacre, 1938, p. 113 (Attribution to Cungi incompre-
hensible.). Wilde, 1953a, p. 103 (Michelangelo.). Wilde,
1953 exh., no. 70 (For ﬁgure in extreme bottom left cor-
ner of Last Judgement.). Parker, 1956, no. 330 (Recto:
Michelangelo. “[P]lainly connected . . . with the ﬁgure on
the extreme lower left . . . of the Last Judgement. Verso:
divergent opinions; certain difference in style from recto.)
Dussler, 1959, no. 625 (Rejected. Both sides copies after
studies by Michelangelo.). De Tolnay, 1960, p. 191,
no. 187 (Recto: Michelangelo.); no. 186 (Verso: cites
Popp’s view that it was drawn after a River God model;
“difference in quality from the recto.”). Berenson, 1961,
no. 1568A (As 1938.). Sutton, 1970, no. 13 (Recto: for
lower left of Last Judgement.). Hartt, 1971, no. 380 (Recto:
1534–5.); no. 381 (Verso: probably for one of foreshort-
ened ﬁgures of damned.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 135
(Recto.). De Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III, no. 361 (Recto:
c. 1540. Verso: as 1960.). Lamarche-Vadel, 1981, p. 136,
no. 152 (1534–5.). Perrig, 1999, p. 236 (By Giulio Clovio
after the fresco; from the Farnese Collection.).

216
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 43
CATALOGUE 43
Recto: Study for the Cruciﬁxion of Saint Peter
Verso: Studies of Legs (laid down; formerly visible
through the backing)
1846.77; R.77; P.II 331; Corpus 383
Dimensions: 150×105 mm. The lower edge has been
torn raggedly and made up.
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
Small punctures are inﬁlled and retouched; there is
another toned patch. The sheet is unevenly discoloured.
Discussion
A difﬁcult page of drawings and not fully typical of
Michelangelo’s work in its rather precise deﬁnition of
the musculature and somewhat stringy ﬁgure-type. How-
ever, while admitting an element of doubt, the com-
piler is inclined to think the drawings autograph, as quick
sketches from the model. The only other name proposed,
that of Daniele da Volterra, is clearly untenable: His small
black chalk ﬁgure sketches are very different in handling.

CATALOGUE 43
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
217
The relation suggested by Berenson, with the nude ﬁg-
ures in contorted poses in the foreground of the compo-
sitional drawing for a Martyrdom of Saint Catherine (Rome,
Galleria Corsini, Inv. 125514/Berenson 1600; black chalk,
265×220 mm) is indicative because these ﬁgures cer-
tainly reﬂect knowledge of drawings by Michelangelo
of the same type as the present ones. Incidentally, it is
erroneous to connect the Corsini drawing with Bugiar-
dini’s Martyrdom of Saint Catherine in Santa Maria Novella:
The proportions of the picture-ﬁeld, the conception of
the action, and the ﬁgure-scale are radically different. The
Corsini drawing was made by Alessandro Allori in the
1550s (Valenti Rodin`o, 1998) for a treatment of the Mar-
tyrdom of Saint Catherine that either was not continued or
does not survive.
The two sketches on this page are generally linked with
the left-hand ﬁgures of the Cruciﬁxion of Saint Peter, the
second of Michelangelo’s frescoes in the Pauline Chapel.
This fresco was begun after the completion in 1545 of
the companion piece, the Conversion of Saul, and repre-
sented a change of plan, since Vasari in his 1550 edition,
substantially complete at the end of 1547, described the
subject as Christ Giving the Keys to Saint Peter. Vasari was
not at this stage an intimate of Michelangelo, and may
have been misinformed, but Michelangelo presumably
would not have wished false information to be published
about his work, and Vasari’s statement strongly suggests
that the new subject was not decided upon much before
the end of 1547, which would indicate a related date for
the present drawing.
It must have been one of many. The ﬁgures in this
group recur in the fragment of the cartoon now in Naples,
Museo di Capodimonte, much altered, thickened, and
aggrandised. The Oxford drawing must have come at an
early stage in the work. The single later study that is gener-
ally accepted to have been made for the fresco, that in the
British Museum (W70/Corpus 358; black chalk, 140 ×
180 mm) for the kneeling ﬁgure excavating the setting
for Peter’s cross, is broader in handling and expanded
in form.
It may be worth mentioning here a small drawing
of a nude man, seen from behind, his arms drawn over
to the left, in the British Museum (1895-09-15-512;
black chalk, 118×67 mm), which, although currently
ascribed to Pierino da Vinci (unconvincingly in the
compiler’s view), was given to Michelangelo when
in the Malcolm Collection (Robinson, no. 75). Even
though no modern scholar seems to have taken this
drawing seriously, its quality is high, and the compiler
is inclined to think that it too is by Michelangelo: It
bears a resemblance to the main ﬁgure on the present
sheet, although it is softer in handling, and it might also
have been made with the Cruciﬁxion of Saint Peter
in view.
History
Jonathan
Richardson
Senior
(L.2184);
Sir
Joshua
Reynolds (L.2364); Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445);
Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 55 (“Four ﬁgures of soldiers –
ascending steps, highly ﬁnished.”). Woodburn, 1846,
no. 36 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1852, p. 4, pl. 12 (As Wood-
burn, 1842.). Fisher, 1865, I, p. 16, pl. 12 (As 1852.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 77 (“Although the ﬁrm vigorous
style of drawing might perhaps be thought to denote an
earlier epoch than that of the execution of the Cappella
Paolina frescoes . . . the great resemblance of these ﬁg-
ures to some of those introduced into the composi-
tion of the Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter seems to denote that
they were preliminary sketches for that design.”). Fisher,
1872, I, p. 14, pl. 12 (As 1852.). Black, 1875, p. 215,
no. 66. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 237 (“probabilmente per
gli affreschi nella Cappella Paolina.”). Fisher, 1879,
XLVIII/50 (Changes of phrasing only.). Morelli, 1891–
2, col. 544 (“Echt.”). Berenson, 1903, I, p. 222, no.
1577 (Strong resemblance to ﬁgures in Cruciﬁxion of St.
Peter, but at least ten years earlier.). Thode, 1908, II,
p. 79 (Michelangelo, for Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter.). K. Frey,
1909–11, 200a (“vier meisterhaft erfundenen und geze-
ichneten Akte vorbereitenede Studien zu vier Kriegern
in Kreuzigung Petri,” 1541–2.). Thode, 1913, no. 450
(As 1908.). Zoff, 1923, pl. 57 (Michelangelo.). Mariani,
1932, pl. XI (Michelangelo.). Baumgart, 1934, p. 30 (Style
does not accord with Michelangelo’s either in 1541 or
1546. “il virtuosismo esteriore non s’accoppia una solida
e sicura struttura interno del corpo . . . Il disegno appar-
tiene a un imitatore di Michelangelo.” Not a copy of a
lost drawing, but a self-sufﬁcient work inspired by the
fresco. Nothing secure about authorship, but perhaps by
Daniele.). Baumgart, 1935a, p. 346 (Daniele da Volterra;
analogies to a Martyrdom of St. Catherine in the Galleria
Corsini, attributed by Baumgart to Daniele.). Berenson,
1938, I, p. 231, no. 1577 (Similarities with Michelan-
gelo’s design for Bugiardini, in Rome, Galleria Corsini,
125514/BB. 1600; black chalk, 265×220 mm. [Wilde,
1953a, p. 87, attributes the Corsini drawing to “some
younger Tuscan follower of Michelangelo” and notes in
it direct derivations from W35/Corpus 227 and Haarlem
A23/VT64/Corpus 357].). Goldscheider, 1951, ﬁg. 187
(Daniele da Volterra.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 94 (c. 1546,
for soldiers at the left of the Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter.).
Parker, 1956, no. 331 (“Though . . . not among the easiest

218
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 43
[drawings] to reconcile with Michelangelo, the connex-
ion with the Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter seems conclusive.”).
Dussler, 1959, no. 631 (Rejected; not in the monumental
style of the Pauline phase.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1577 (As
1903/1938.). Hartt, 1971, no. 400 (1545. “No reason to
doubt traditional explanation.”). Gere and Turner, 1975,
no. 147 (Probably for Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter.). De Tolnay,
1978, Corpus III, no. 383 (Copy of a lost drawing.). Barol-
sky, 1979, p. 149 (Notes Baumgart’s attribution.). Muzii,
1988, p. 16 (“`e ancor dubbio l’autograﬁa.”).

CATALOGUE 44
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
219
CATALOGUE 44
Recto: A Head
Verso: Architectural Details
1846.83; R.75; P.II 337; Corpus 402
Dimensions: 238×201 mm
Watermark: Robinson Appendix no. 18. Roberts, Flower
A. Zonghi 1507, datable 1559.
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
There is a major horizontal crease, a diagonal scored line,
a small “pin” mark, major repaired losses with severe
cockling. The sheet has edge abrasion and ingrained dirt,
widespread uneven discolouration, and some foxing.
Inscriptions
Verso: In pen and ink, very faded:
di Bona Roti
With the right edge as base, Robinson’s numbering in
graphite: 75.
Description
Verso
A. A capital with a fantastic head or skull. For a
tomb?.
B. A proﬁle of a cornice.
Discussion
The large head on the recto, which seems to be
female, cannot be connected with any speciﬁc project
by Michelangelo or any other known drawing. How-
ever, it is generically similar in form to heads in the
second of the Pauline Chapel frescoes, the Cruciﬁxion of
St. Peter, and those in the Epifania cartoon in London
(W75/Corpus 389; black chalk, 2,327×1,656 cm) made
for Ascanio Condivi, to which it is also comparable in

220
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 44
scale. It might in principle be a detailed study for a
head in one of the frescoes, which was subsequently
changed, but the likelihood is that it was drawn some-
what after 1550, as the watermark suggests. Although
it is not an auxiliary cartoon in the narrow sense of
the term – no traces of pouncing are visible in it –
it could have been made to study, with some varia-
tions, a head in a lost cartoon. It was presumably made
with a group composition in view, perhaps a Piet`a –
the subject of the cartoon with nine ﬁgures recorded
in Michelangelo’s posthumous inventory – in which this
head could be for one of the Virgin’s companions, gaz-
ing down at the body of Christ, but no suggestion about
its function can be more than speculative. The handling
is soft and unemphatic, apparently pictorial rather than
sculptural, yet the head emerges with a powerful sense of
volume.
Verso
Although reminiscent of capitals of Michelangelo’s Flo-
rentine period – in which critics have persistently dated
it – this is much later and was probably drawn after
the recto. The death’s head might, as Hartt noted, sug-
gest a project for a tomb or for the portal of a funer-
ary chapel, but the scroll-like horns or ears, a fusion of
architectural and human or animal forms, and the beads
that are strung between them perhaps imply a context
less serious. Whatever the case, Michelangelo designed a
number of tombs during his last Roman period, most of
which remained unexecuted: That for Cecchino Bracci
in the church of Santa Maria in Aracoeli, and, in all
probability, that of Cardinal Raffaello Riario in Santi
Apostoli, are rare exceptions, but neither includes skull
capitals, and both probably antedate the present drawing
by about a decade. Among drawings by Michelangelo
for tombs datable to the 1550s are CB19F/B150/Corpus
368 (black chalk, 199×197 mm, probably of the early
1550s and CB103A recto/B264/Corpus 613) black chalk,
348×200 mm, but none is drawn in great detail or, so far
as can be seen, includes a capital of this kind.
History
(More likely) Daniele da Volterra: the Bona Roti Col-
lector (than, as given by all scholars from Wood-
burn onwards, Casa Buonarroti); Jean-Baptiste Wicar?;
William Young Ottley, his sale, 1814, lot 257, “A man’s
head – black chalk,” £5.15.6 (also £5.5.0 in pencil in
opposite margin); Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel
Woodburn.
References
William Young Ottley, his sale, 1814, lot 257 “A man’s
head – black chalk,” £5.15.6 [also £5.5.0 in pencil
in opposite margin]. Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A.
Buonaroti Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-85] (“A young Man’s
head slightly sketched in Chalk, an anatomical [sic. archi-
tectural?] ornament on the reverse.”). Woodburn, 1836b,
no. 7 (“Full of expression and character. From the Collec-
tions of M. Buonarroti and the chevalier Vicar.”). Wood-
burn, 1842, no. 58 (As 1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 26
(As 1842.). Robinson, 1870, no. 75 (Recto: “[O]f Michel
Angelo’s late time, the style of execution coinciding
exactly with that of the studies for several compositions
of the Salutation of the Virgin. The head, which is that of
a young man or perhaps a female, may indeed have been
intended either for the Virgin or the announcing angel
in one of these designs.”). Black, 1875, p. 215, no. 64.
Gotti, 1875, II, p. 239. Berenson, 1903, no. 1576 (“Very
late.”). Thode, 1908, I, p. 500 (Verso: for New Sacristy.).
K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 225 (Recto: pupil or assistant; New
Sacristy period.); no. 226 (Verso: related in type to New
Sacristy, but not used there.). Thode, 1913, no. 449
(Recto: head of a woman, drawn later than the verso,
which is of period and style of Medici Tombs.). Berenson,
1938, no. 1576 (As 1903.). Delacre, 1938, pp. 375–6
(Recto: the same head as Windsor PW434/Corpus 325
and BM 1859-6-25-565 [not included by Wilde]; per-
haps that of a black man.); p. 389 (Verso: Michelangelo.).
Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 107 (Recto: after 1550.). Parker,
1956, no. 337 (Recto: probably a young man; purpose
indeterminate. Verso: earlier than recto.). Dussler, 1959,
no. 351 (Ascribed. Recto and verso contemporary, c.
1550.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1576 (As 1903/1938.). Barbieri
and Puppi, 1964a, p. 1004 (Verso: 1520–30.). Hartt, 1971,
no. 397 (Recto: 1534–5. Perhaps for an angel head in the
Last Judgement.); no. 289 (Verso: 1516–7. For upper storey
of tomb of Julius II. “The proﬁle is almost identical with
that of the upper cornice of the tomb as executed. The
relative timidity and conservatism of the shapes . . . place
this drawing . . . in the period of Michelangelo’s ﬁrst archi-
tectural experimentations. . . . A capital with a skull can be
related only to a tomb.”), Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 161
(Recto: perhaps after 1550; close resemblance, in reverse,
to Saint Dismas in the Last Judgement. Verso: generally
considered to be of the period of the New Sacristy.). De
Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III, no. 402 (Recto: c. 1547–50,
perhaps for the Virgin in an Annunciation. Verso: chrono-
logical disparity with recto; recalls drawings of c. 1525–6.).
Argan, 1990, p. 26 (Verso reproduced.). Perrig, 1999, pp.
239–40 (By Ascanio Condivi; from Farnese Collection.).

CATALOGUE 45
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
221
CATALOGUE 45
Recto: Two Studies of a Bending Nude Male Figure
Verso: Two Studies of the Legs of a Bending Nude Male
Figure
1846.84; R.70 (3); P.II 338; Corpus 369
Dimensions: 115×110 mm
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
The edges are particularly creased and bruised; there are
some tide marks, much skinning, some abrasions, small
indentations, a shallow diagonal score line, and a repaired
hole. There is overall uneven discolouration and edge
staining.
Inscriptions
Recto: In pen and grey ink at lower left: Mic: Ango:
Buonaroti.
Similar inscriptions are found on Cats. 47, 48, and
50, and on a study for the Last Judgement in the British
Museum, W60 recto/Corpus 350; the provenance of all
these drawings is from the Cicciaporci Collection, and
this kind of inscription seems exclusive to it.
Irregular numbering: no. 77 in pen and ink above right.
Verso: Robinson’s numbering in graphite upper centre: 3
and lower centre: 70
30
Lower left in graphite, Parker’s number: 338.
Discussion
Made by Michelangelo for Daniele da Volterra, in prepa-
ration for the latter’s painting of Saint John the Baptist in
the Wilderness (called by Vasari San Giovanni in penitenza),
executed for their common friend, Giovanni della Casa.
Versions of identical size, presumably made from the same
cartoon, survive in the Alte Pinakothek, Munich, Inv.
38 (oil on panel, 191×130 cm) and in the Capitoline
Museum in Rome, Inv. 360 (oil on canvas, 190×130
cm). Both are rejected by Barolsky, no. 18, but Treves
(2001) believes the Capitoline painting to be autograph.

222
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 45
Giovanni della Casa seems to have commissioned ﬁve
paintings from Daniele: The other four were
1. The double-sided David and Goliath, on slate, 133×172
cm, at Fontainebleau (see Cat. 46a).
2. The lost Aeneas Commanded by Mercury to Relinquish
Dido, on canvas, known in an unﬁnished reduction, on
panel (also lost but reproduced in an old photograph),
which may be identical with the version recorded in the
inventory of Paolo Orsini as an autograph work. Della
Casa planned to send the canvas as a gift to Henri II
of France: The commission may have been prompted
by Catherine de M´edicis, with the aim of recalling
the king’s mind to his duties and away from Diane de
Poitiers.
3. A Saint Jerome. This may be the composition found
in a drawing of Saint Jerome in Meditation attributed to
Marcello Venusti in Rotterdam (Boymans-van Beunin-
gen Museum, Inv. DN 124/21; black chalk 260×192
mm; see de Tolnay, 1960, p. 216), which could well be
a copy after a lost modello by Michelangelo. This com-
position is also recorded in two fairly crude engravings,
one of which, by Sebastiano da Reggio, is dated 1557,
and records Michelangelo as the inventor and Marcello
Venusti as the painter (de Tolnay, 1960, ﬁg. 252). This
engraving, and a very similar one by an anonymous Flem-
ish Master (de Tolnay, 1960, ﬁg. 253) were probably made
after the now-lost altarpiece of Saint Jerome in Medita-
tion which, according to Baglione, Marcello executed for
the Miganelli chapel in Santa Maria della Pace. The ﬁg-
ure was also engraved, in reverse, by Cherubino Alberti,
who set it in an extensive landscape (dated 1575; 531×344
mm; The Illustrated Bartsch 34, no. 54 [69]). It is per-
fectly plausible that a drawing made by Michelangelo for
Daniele da Volterra could have been used also by Marcello
Venusti.
4. An unknown The Dead Christ and the Three Maries.
It is argued both by Treves (2001) and Thomas (2001)
that all ﬁve paintings are likely to date from between June
1555 when della Casa returned to Rome, and November
1556, when he died, with the Aeneas, according to Vasari,
still unﬁnished. Support for this dating is provided by a
sheet in Casa Buonarroti (19F/B150/Corpus 368; black
chalk 199×197 mm). This contains three further studies
for the Saint John, two on the recto (one of them hard

CATALOGUE 45
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
223
to descry and covered by a design for an elaborate wall
tomb), the third on the verso. Treves, the ﬁrst to do so,
also noted on this verso a sketch of a moving man that
she plausibly considered to be related to the Aeneas, sup-
porting her suggested dating.
Further reinforcement for a dating of 1555–6 is pro-
vided by the other drawings on both the recto and the
verso of CB19F, a series of sketches of wall tombs and
sarcophagi, and three of staircases. The tomb designs,
which no doubt all prepare the same project, were for-
merly misleadingly connected with the tomb of Cecchino
Bracci in Santa Maria in Aracoeli, of c. 1542, but they are
considerably later in date and imply a much more sub-
stantial structure. More materially, one of the designs,
that on the lower left of the verso, leads directly to a
larger ruled drawing for a tomb found on the recto
of a sheet in Casa Buonarroti (CB103A/B264/Corpus
613; black chalk, 350×200 mm), which is probably no
earlier than 1557. Together with another sheet in Casa
Buonarroti (CB124A/B160/Corpus 612; black chalk
and 376×417 mm), it formed a large composite sheet
(726×417 mm maximum) the verso of which carried
a full-size modello in black chalk and wash for a win-
dow in the drum of the wooden model of St. Peter’s,
under preparation by Michelangelo in 1558 (see Cat.
54). The tomb on CB103A recto, apparently unexe-
cuted, was no doubt that of a cleric or aristocrat and,
given the coincidence of date, and the other drawings
on CB19F, it may well have been intended for della Casa
himself.
The sketches of a staircase are certainly not, as was
sometimes believed in the past, for that of the Palazzo
dei Senatori; nor, in the compiler’s present view, are
they for that of the Villa Belvedere, as ﬁrst suggested
by Wilde (1953a), followed by Hirst (1963) and, until
recently, by the compiler. Michelangelo was involved in
the design of the Villa Belvedere staircase in 1550–1 and
because the staircase sketches on CB19F overlay at least
some of the tombs, and because the tombs overlay at
least some of the ﬁgures, this would, if that identiﬁca-
tion were correct, entail a date for both Della Casa’s pan-
els of c. 1550. However, although the staircase sketches
do seem close to the Belvedere project in their appar-
ent form, the resemblance is deceptive. They are in fact
rough sketches made by Michelangelo in response to
Vasari’s enquiry, in late 1555, about his intentions for the
staircase of the ricetto of the Laurentian Library. This is
made clear by the verso drawing on CB19F, which shows
two ﬂights of some six to eight steps in proﬁle, lead-
ing up to a platform and three or four further stairs,
seen in plan (as noted elsewhere, it is characteristic of
the aged Michelangelo to draw forms perpendicular to
one another as though they are on the same plane), a
reprise of a scheme that he had considered for the ricetto
staircase in the 1520s (see CB92A/B89/Corpus 525; black
chalk and pen, 390×280 mm, maximum).
The Baptist Filling His Bowl had already been repre-
sented by Michelangelo within the ﬁrst decade of the
cinquecento, although in radically different form, stand-
ing, facing forward, and looking back to the spring from
which he ﬁlls his bowl (see Cat. 59). In the present
treatment, Michelangelo ignored this idea and reverted
to a still earlier conception, found in a painting in the
Walker Art Gallery Liverpool (Inv. 2783; oil on panel,
77.4×228.6 cm) of Episodes in the Early Life of Saint John
the Baptist in which the young Baptist ﬁlls his bowl at a
spring, posed similarly to the present drawing. The Liver-
pool painting, universally agreed to be by a close follower
of Ghirlandaio, seems to be by the same hand as another
depicting the Preaching of Saint John the Baptist (New York,
Metropolitan Museum of Art; oil on panel, 75.6×209.6
cm), which formed parts of the same scheme of spalliera
paintings as the Birth of Saint John the Baptist by Francesco
Granacci (also in the Metropolitan Museum). It has been
suggested by Fahy (reported by Treves, 1999–2000) that
the Preaching is by the young Michelangelo, in which case
so, presumably, would be the painting in Liverpool; but
this is not an attribution to which the compiler could
readily assent.
Treves perceptively suggested that the present sheet
remained with Daniele and his heirs, and this is borne out
by the presence on the sheet of a number by the Irregular
Numbering Collector and by the drawing’s reappearance
in the Ottley sale of 1814, in which the provenance, given
in the 1804 sale as Buonarroti, was corrected to Cic-
ciaporci. The companion sheet, CB 19F/B150/Corpus
368, seems however to have remained with Michelangelo
and his heirs: the Saint John on CB19F is among the
drawings copied by Andrea Commodi c. 1580 on Ufﬁzi
18599F recto. This sheet also contains copies after three
other drawings: W83/Corpus 391 and 33/Corpus 236,
both acquired by the British Museum from the Buonar-
roti Collection in 1859 and CB 69F/B143/Corpus 91,
still in Casa Buonarroti.
History
Daniele
da
Volterra?;
The
Bona
Roti
Collector?;
The Irregular Numbering Collector; The Cavaliere
d’Arpino?; The Cicciaporci family and Filippo Ciccia-
porci?; Bartolommeo Cavaceppi?; William Young Ottley,

224
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 45-46
his sale, 1804, lot 275 (“One ditto [i.e., One leaf ], con-
taining two studies in black chalk, one for the Last Judg-
ment, the other a man carried on the shoulders of three
naked ﬁgures, very ﬁne, from the same collection [i.e.,
the Buonarroti]”; his sale, 6 June, 1814, etc., lot 1504 i, ii
(“Two on one leaf – three naked ﬁgures carrying a dead
body – stumped – black chalk – ﬁne; and two sketches
of a ﬁgure for the last judgment – black chalk. From
the Cicciaporci collection”), assuming that the change of
provenance between 1804 and 1814 from Buonarroti to
Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi was the result of an error either in
1804 (more likely) or in 1814. Sir Thomas Lawrence (no
stamp); Samuel Woodburn.
References
William Young Ottley, his sale, 1804, lot 275 (“One ditto
[i.e., “One leaf ], containing two studies in black chalk,
one for the Last Judgment, the other a man carried on
the shoulders of three naked ﬁgures, very ﬁne, from the
same collection [i.e. the Buonarroti].”) William Young
Ottley, his sale, 1814, lot 1504 i, ii (“Two on one leaf –
three naked ﬁgures carrying a dead body – stumped –
black chalk – ﬁne; and two sketches of a ﬁgure for
the last judgment – black chalk. From the Cicciaporci
collection.”). From the Woodburn, 1836b, no. 82 (With
[Cats. 47 and 48] “admirably drawn in black chalk; they
are chieﬂy subjects from the New Testament . . . From the
Collection of W. Y. Ottley esquire.”). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 64 (As 1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 35 (As 1842.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 70.3 (“[A] man seated on a bank
reaching down with his right hand as if to get water from
a stream with a cup.”). Black, 1875, p. 215, no. 55? (Studies
for ﬁgures in the Last Judgement.). Gotti, 1875, II, p. 225.
Berenson, 1903, no. 1572B (“[R]reaching down from
a bank as if to get water in a stream.” c. 1540.). Thode,
1908, II, p. 12 (For the Last Judgement.). K. Frey, 1909–11,
no. 280b (Recto: connected with CB19F/Corpus 368
for the Last Judgement.). Thode, 1913, no. 444 (For the
Last Judgement; the same ﬁgure found on Casa Buonarroti
19F/Corpus 368.). Voss, 1913, p. 301 (For Daniele’s Saint
John the Baptist in the Desert, which exists in two versions:
Munich, Alte Pinakothek, Inv. 39 and Rome, Capitoline
Museum, Inv. 360.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1572B (Con-
nected with the Last Judgement.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no.
129 (c. 1550–2. “Apparently made for Daniele da Volterra
and used by him in his Saint John the Baptist in the Desert in
the Alte Pinakothek, Munich.” Notes second version of
the painting in the Capitoline Museum.). Parker, 1956,
no. 338 (Related to Daniele’s painting. Figure recurs on
CB 19F/Corpus 368, which contains studies for tomb of
Cecchino Bracci, who died in 1544.). Dussler, 1959, no.
203 (Recto and verso by Michelangelo, for Daniele,
c. 1545–50.). De Tolnay, 1960, pp. 200–1 (Recto and
verso: for Daniele together with CB19F/Corpus 368,
datable c. 1544 because it bears a sketch for the tomb of
Cecchino Bracci who died that year.). Berenson, 1961,
no. 1572B (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962, p. 189 (Same
ﬁgure found on CB19F/Corpus 368, probably for the
Last Judgement.). Hartt, 1971, no. 469 (Recto: 1556. For
Daniele’s Saint John the Baptist in the Desert.); no. 470
(Verso: as recto.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 165 (For
Daniele’s Saint John the Baptist in the Desert, c. 1555–6.).
De Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III, no. 369 (As 1960.). Liebert,
1983, p. 196 (c. 1550–6, for Daniele, whose “painting
increasingly took on the character of sculpture.”). Perrig,
1991, p. 103 (By Daniele da Volterra.). Perrig, 1999,
p. 279 (As 1991; from Farnese Collection.). Treves,
2001, passim (For Daniele’s Saint John the Baptist in the
Desert commissioned by Giovanni della Casa probably
between June 1555 and November 1556; the version in
the Capitoline Museum probably autograph.).
CATALOGUE 46A/46B
A
Recto: A Man Overcoming Another Man (David
and Goliath)
Verso: An Anatomical Sketch
B
Recto: Christ Cleansing the Temple
Verso: Two Light Sketches
1846.74; R.69; P.II 328; Corpus 374
Dimensions: 210×245 mm. Made up of a larger sheet
(A) into which a smaller one B (c. 100×125 mm) of
different weight and texture has been inset to make up
most of the upper right corner and to which a further
strip 98×11 mm has been added along the right edge to
complete the rectangle.
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
The main sheet has been folded into quarters and pressed
out; a crease has ingrained dirt, and there are other
inherent creases. All edges are skinned; there are adhesive
residues on the verso and other abrasions. There is local
discolouration and staining, overall foxing, and ingrained
dirt.

CATALOGUE 46
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
225
Inscriptions
Verso: In an eighteenth-century? hand:
[sch]izzo raro persinon esserci il cartone e si guarda . . . gruppo
nella gue(rra di?)
Pisa in concorenza di Lionardo da vinci che Rafaello e altri
gran maestri . . .
Description
46a Recto
First line
A. The group in right proﬁle (the pose of Goliath remi-
niscent of that of the Leda).
B. The group in left proﬁle.
Second line
C. The group from three-quarters right.
Third line
D. The group from three-quarters right on a larger scale –
Goliath’s right leg entangles with that of David (lightly
sketched).
Fourth line
E. The group from three-quarters right.
F. The group from three-quarters right on a still larger
scale.
G. The head, right arm, and left shoulder of Goliath from
D, tried in a slightly different pose.
46b Recto
A. Christ advancing, overturning a table, with a ﬁgure
moving away into depth to His left.
B. Christ advancing, a ﬁgure cowering before him.
C. A curved line rising diagonally across the fragment?.
46a Verso
A left leg, seen in proﬁle (probably for the leg of Christ
in the four-ﬁgure Piet`a now in Florence).
46b Verso
Perhaps a man seated at a table.
Discussion
The studies on the main part of this sheet (46a) are en-
suite with a group of four drawings in the Morgan Library
(Inv. 132a,b,c,d/Corpus 370–373; black chalk, respectively
70×111 mm, 51×82 mm, 50×68 mm, 72×87 mm).
These are fragments cut from a larger sheet that once
bore an architectural study on its verso. The compiler’s

226
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 46
attempts to reconstruct this study have been vain: too
much is now missing for a plausible linking of the surviv-
ing parts, although the design does seem to have included
a series of columns and might be part of a project for the
Palazzo dei Conservatori. The sheet was certainly subdi-
vided before – probably well before – the drawings were
sold from Sir Joshua Reynolds’ collection, since his stamp
is found on all four. Nothing is known of their earlier
provenance, but it might be conjectured that they came
from the Cicciaporci Collection.
The Morgan Library drawings relate most closely to the
three studies in the lower half of the present sheet. They
probably follow from the very lightly sketched group at
the far left and lead on to the two groups at the right, the
most developed drawings on the present sheet. In the
Morgan drawings, the sprawling pose of the defeated
ﬁgure is broadly established, but Michelangelo has not
ﬁnalised the pose of the victorious ﬁgure above him, who
seems to press down upon his opponent with both knees,
rather than standing astride him as in the ﬁnal version.
Even though it seems unlikely (although not impossi-
ble) that the Morgan sheet (in its original form) and the
present sheet were once parts of the same piece of paper,
the two must have been side by side on Michelangelo’s

CATALOGUE 46
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
227
table and the drawings made upon them within minutes
of each other.
In the course of developing his ideas, Michelangelo
referred back to his own earlier work. The defeated ﬁg-
ure in the group at upper left recalls his designs for the
Leda; the group immediately to the right is a reprise of the
two ﬁghting ﬁgures – perhaps Hercules and Cacus – rep-
resented in the epaulet of the lost Presentation Drawing
of the Count of Canossa (the best surviving copy is in the
British Museum, W87; black chalk, 410×263 mm), and
the group below this is reminiscent, although less closely,
of Michelangelo’s Samson and Delilah (Cat. 35). The most
developed drawings do not have such clear antecedents,
but in their ferocity, they are reminiscent of the strug-
gling men beneath the hooves of the horses in Leonardo’s
Battle of Anghiari. As that composition generated by-
products in the form of terracotta groups of ﬁghting ﬁg-
ures on horseback, so the most developed studies here
would have made excellent small sculptures, compact and
dynamic.
The combatants have been identiﬁed as Cain and Abel,
David and Goliath, Samson and a Philistine, and Hercules
and Cacus. Any of these pairs might be the subject, but
Michelangelo has taken no trouble to signal which: By
conventional standards of representation, the victorious
ﬁgure seems too large for David and insufﬁciently mature
for either Samson or Hercules. Nevertheless, although
one cannot be certain which of these pairs Michelan-
gelo intended to select, the overwhelming probability is
that the scene is that of David and Goliath with David
preparing to behead the stunned and ﬂoored, but still fee-
bly struggling Goliath, as in Michelangelo’s earlier treat-
ment of the subject on the Sistine ceiling. It is reasonable
to suppose that these drawings were made to assist his
friend and prot´eg´e, Daniele da Volterra, in the prepa-
ration of a double-sided painting of which both recto
and verso show David about to Behead Goliath, commis-
sioned from Daniele by Giovanni della Casa, and proba-
bly executed shortly before Giovanni’s death in Novem-
ber 1556 (Fontainebleau, Mus´ee du Chateau/Barolsky
no. 17; oil on slate, 133×172 cm; see Thomas, 2001, for
a discussion). Although neither the recto nor the verso
arrangement of Daniele’s painting corresponds exactly
to any of Michelangelo’s compositions – which would
also have made splendid sculptural groups in terracotta
or bronze – the similarities are sufﬁcient to make it
unnecessary to search for alternative purposes for the
sketches.
However, it is clear that Daniele’s paintings were
not made directly from Michelangelo’s drawings, and
the artist produced his own variants on Michelangelo’s
designs. There exists a small sketch by Daniele in the
British Museum (GP 90; black chalk, 154×112 mm),
which is probably an initial approach to the subject
and prior to any involvement by Michelangelo; and
there are three much larger, highly ﬁnished, but badly
damaged drawings, one in the Ufﬁzi (1496F; black
chalk, 300×400 mm) and two in the Louvre (Inv.
1512, 1513; both black chalk, respectively 380×380, and
375×455 mm). A fourth drawing, in the Vatican, also
highly ﬁnished (Inv. Vat. Lat 13619 fol. 2; black chalk,
338×408 mm) seems to the compiler to be a copy, prob-
ably by a member of Daniele’s studio, but it is accepted
as autograph by Thomas, who added a ﬁfth drawing,
also in the British Museum (GP230, as Prospero Orsi;
black chalk over stylus, 242×396 mm), which he plau-
sibly identiﬁed as a copy of a lost drawing by Daniele.
It seems reasonable to suppose that the larger drawings
were made to study the angles best suited to the paint-
ing, but their perfection of surface suggests that they were
intended also as works of art in their own right. The recto
and verso of the painting show the same action from dif-
ferent angles, but the fact that the conﬁgurations are not
identical implies that Daniele made at least two plastic
models, an implication that examination of the drawings
supports.
Daniele seems often to have made plastic models
for ﬁgures in his paintings, and this practice no doubt
was inspired by Michelangelo. Daniele may on occa-
sion have envisaged producing both sculptures and paint-
ings of the same groups. One bronze – perhaps cast by
Daniele himself – after a model for the reclining ﬁgure
of Dido in his Aeneas Commanded by Mercury to Relin-
quish Dido (a composition also designed by Michelan-
gelo) is known (Munich, Bayerisches Nationalmuseum,
64/24), and although the initial purpose of the model was
presumably to prepare the ﬁgure in that painting, it also
makes an impressive statuette in its own right. Daniele also
included representations of Michelangelo’s Samson and the
Two Philistines from two different angles in both versions
of his Massacre of the Innocents (the fresco in the Della
Rovere chapel of the Trinit`a al Monte and the slightly
varied painting in the Ufﬁzi, 1890.1429; oil on panel,
147×144 cm), and it is reasonable to suppose that some
of the bronzes of this subject were cast by Daniele.
The early inscription, which links this drawing with
the Battle of Cascina, is an interesting error. Leonardo’s
companion Battle of Anghiari certainly contained ﬁgures
ﬁghting on the ground, and this may have prompted the
connection made here. Furthermore, if the conjectures as
to the early provenance of this sheet advanced later in this
discussion are correct, the link may reveal the inscriber’s

228
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 46
knowledge that black chalk studies for Cascina had been
owned by Daniele da Volterra.
Verso
46a. The leg study is probably for the left leg of Christ
in the four-ﬁgure Florence Piet`a, which is now lost
but whose disposition is known from early copies of
Michelangelo’s design. If this is so, then the drawing may
be a little earlier than those on the recto, of the early
to mid-1550s. It is not entirely clear when Michelan-
gelo abandoned work on this group, which was certainly
underway in the 1540s, but because Michelangelo him-
self claimed that he had damaged it accidentally while
being pressured to complete it by his friend and servant
Urbino, this must have happened before the latter’s death.
It was presumably handed over to Calcagni in the later
1550s or early 1560s, and since Calcagni died within a year
of Michelangelo himself, his work on the group was no
doubt undertaken within Michelangelo’s lifetime.
Recto
46b. The inset fragment is clearly a sketch for the Cleans-
ing of the Temple, executed as a painting by Marcello
Venusti (London National Gallery, NG1194; oil on panel,
610×400 mm). It is unknown whether the composition
was designed expressly for Venusti or whether he exe-
cuted a design prepared by Michelangelo for some other
purpose; in favour of the second view is the fact that the
ﬁgures occupy only the lower quarter of his painting, and
had Michelangelo begun with a vertically oriented ﬁeld
in mind, it is likely that his drawings would respond to
this. It was suggested by Frommel (1964) that this com-
position was prepared for a fresco to be executed in the
lunette above the entrance of the Pauline Chapel. The
subject and the grandeur of arrangement are appropriate
for such a role, but the ﬁnal composition does not read-
ily conform to a lunette, and some of the other designs
considered by Michelangelo en route would be positively
out of place there. Nor is there compelling evidence that
Michelangelo was further concerned with the pictorial
decoration of the Pauline Chapel after he completed his
second fresco in 1550, although Frommel has shown that
Marcello Venusti was commissioned to work there.
The date of the Cleansing of the Temple is unknown, but
it is probably to be placed around 1555. It is the most elab-
orate multiﬁgure composition to survive by Michelan-
gelo from the post–Pauline Chapel period, and obviously
required time and trouble. Apart from the present frag-
ment, certainly excised from a larger sheet – quite likely by
Michelangelo himself – and later attached to the present
one, there are three other sheets of studies for the compo-
sition, all drawn on both recto and verso, usually in differ-
ent orientations and all now in the British Museum (W76,
77, 78/Corpus 385, 386, 387; all black chalk, respectively,
148×276 mm, 139×167 mm, 178×372 mm). Insight
into Michelangelo’s method of composing so complex a
group is provided by the third of these, which Venusti
employed – directly or indirectly – as the cartoon for
his panel. It is made up of six separate pieces of paper.
Michelangelo built up or modiﬁed his design as he drew
it, pasting together irrregularly cut pieces of paper of
unrelated weights and textures, some of which he had
previously used for studies of elements of the composi-
tion (three of whose versos also contain sketches of vari-
ous ﬁgures in the scene), to assemble the ﬁnal image (by
analogy, it may be that Michelangelo himself excised the
upper section of his David and Goliath study to use else-
where, although he would not have been responsible for
joining to it the present fragment).
Michelangelo seems to have considered two basic stag-
ings, probably sequentially rather than simultaneously.
The ﬁrst shows Christ in left proﬁle advancing right to
left across the picture surface. This is found on W76,
and in it the pose of Christ provides another example of
retrospection: It is closely similar to the Cascina study, Cat.
7 verso. On W77, Michelangelo seems for a moment to
have considered Christ moving left to right. But all the
other treatments show Christ centralised, advancing for-
ward towards the spectator.
It is difﬁcult to be sure whether the light curve that
can be descried on this fragment is a product of accident
or design. If the latter, it might register some moment of
Michelangelo’s thoughts about the curvature of the dome
of St. Peter’s.
The subject of the Cleansing of the Temple, has, of
course, a reformist dimension, and it would be interest-
ing to know for whom the composition was prepared, but
nothing is known of the whereabouts of Venusti’s paint-
ing prior to its ﬁrst recorded appearance in the Borghese
Collection in 1650. The painting does not seem to have
been engraved, nor is Venusti known to have produced
more than the single version; this is unusual and suggests
that it was reserved for a particular client and not part of
Venusti’s stock-in-trade. However, it was not unknown,
and it did have some effect. The various treatments of the
subject by El Greco, of which the earliest (Washington,
D.C., National Gallery of Art), was painted in Rome
c. 1570, and of which another version, in the Institute
of Fine Arts, Minneapolis, only marginally later, actually
includes a portrait of Michelangelo – together with those
of Raphael, Clovio, and Titian – can hardly have been

CATALOGUE 46
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
229
produced without knowledge of Michelangelo’s compo-
sition. And the treatment of the subject by Alessandro
Allori in the Montauto Chapel in Santissima Annunziata
in Florence, painted in 1560 immediately upon his return
from Rome, might also reﬂect knowledge of the phase of
Michelangelo’s design in which the action runs parallel
to the picture surface and does not strike out from it.
Verso
46b. It is hard to be sure whether the very slight sketch on
the verso of the fragment is drawn with the lower edge or
the left edge as the base. If the latter, then it might repre-
sent one of the money-changers quailing before Christ’s
advance; if the former, as the compiler is inclined to think,
it would be the ﬂoored Goliath, awaiting the coup de
grace.
History
The provenance is given by Woodburn 1836b as M.
Buonarroti; however, the inscription would imply that it
was not originally in Casa Buonarroti, for nothing like it
appears on any drawing still there or known to have been
there. Therefore, if Woodburn is correct, it must be pre-
sumed that this drawing was an acquisition by the Buonar-
roti made well after Michelangelo’s death. However, a
more likely provenance before Lawrence is: Daniele da
Volterra, Giacomo Rocca, Cavaliere d’Arpino; the Cic-
ciaporci family and Filippo Cicciaporci; Bartolommeo
Cavaceppi; William Young Ottley; Sir Thomas Lawrence
(L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830-102] (“A sheet of Studies for the David
and Goliath, black Chalk, highly ﬁnished, ﬁne.”). Wood-
burn, 1836b, no. 67 (“Various studies for Samson slay-
ing a Philistine.”). The Literary Gazette, July 1836
(“[A]mong the many productions in this gallery which
rivetted our attention.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 37 (As
1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 23 (As 1842.). Robinson,
1870, no. 69 (Michel Angelo. “Sampson [sic] slaying a
Philistine . . . variations and progressive emendations of
the same design . . . it may have been intended as a design
for a medal or a small circular relievo . . . made about
1534.” “The small leaf attached to it has no connec-
tion with it. It contains studies for Christ expelling the
Money-Changers for which other drawings are extant . . .
later than the Last Judgement.”). Black, 1875, p. 215,
no. 59. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 221. Berenson, 1903, I, p. 214,
no. 1571 ([46a]: Samson slaying a Philistine. [46b]: for
the cleansing of the Temple pasted on.). Ferri and Jacob-
sen, 1905, 36 (Relation to Ufﬁzi 18733F.). Colvin, 1904,
IV, no. 7 (Samson slaying a Philistine, c. 1535–45; added
sheet with studies for the Cleansing of the Temple.). Thode,
1908, II, pp. 377–8, 455 (Michelangelo. Studies on [46a
recto] related to the ﬁghting men in the Dream of Human
Life. Subsidiary study [46b]: for the Cleansing of the Tem-
ple.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 157.I (Recto: studies on [46a]
belong with Morgan Library series, representing Sam-
son and a Philistine. No connection with the Dream,
as suggested by Thode. 1530s.); no. 157.II (Recto: sub-
sidiary study attached by a later collector; for the Cleans-
ing of the Temple; link with BM drawings.); no. 158 (Verso:
not Michelangelo, perhaps modern.). Thode, 1913, no.
441(Recto [46a]: David and Goliath rather than Samson
and a Philistine; unconnected with Sistine. Repudiates
suggested connection with the Dream. Link with drawings
in Morgan Library. Subsidiary scene, for the Cleansing of
the Temple. Verso: probably not by Michelangelo.). Panof-
sky, 1921–2, col. 5 (Hercules and Cacus rather than a Sam-
son or a David and Goliath. E reproduced in relation to
Signorelli’s group of a devil beating a recumbent man from
the Brizio chapel in Orvieto.). Brinckmann, 1925, no. 44
(Main sheet c. 1525; studies for sculpture of Hercules and
Cacus, taken over by Bandinelli; similar sheet for Christ in
Last Judgement.). Popp, 1925b, p. 75 (Nothing to do with
Hercules and Antaeus; period of Pauline Chapel.). Beren-
son, 1938, no. 1571 (Recto: as 1903. Verso: not Michelan-
gelo.). Goldscheider, 1951, no. 105 (Recto: all sketches
datable c. 1538–40. The “smaller drawing was made ﬁrst
and then pasted on to the large sheet, and the battle
scenes were developed out of the sketches of Christ.” The
combat represents not an heroic feat but a murder: mod-
elled on Hans Sebald Beham’s Bible illustration of Cain
and Abel, of 1533. Verso: not by Michelangelo. Under
nos. 106, 107: Morgan Libary David and Goliath “devel-
oped out of battle scenes in Oxford drawing.”). Wilde,
1953a, p. 117 [46b] for the Cleansing of the Temple, “a frag-
ment now replacing the corner of another sheet which
had been cut away.”). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 102 (c. 1550–
2. 46a. Samson slaying Philistine, purpose unknown. 46b.
Insertion from another sheet of the Cleansing of the Tem-
ple.). Parker, 1956, no. 328 [46a]. Recto: Samson Slaying
the Philistine; Morgan Library drawings represent David
and Goliath; late 1530s. Verso: not Michelangelo, pos-
sibly Montelupo. [46b] Recto: Cleansing of the Temple
for Marcello Venusti; related to BM W76–8.). Dussler,
1959, no. 200 (Recto: battle scene, subject uncertain.
Linked with Morgan drawings, perhaps all c. 1550. [46b]
Linked with BM drawings for the Cleansing of the Temple);
no. 630 (Parker’s attribution to Montelupo correct.). De

230
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 47
Tolnay, 1960, pp. 201–2, no. 211 ([46a] Samson Slaying
the Philistine not David and Goliath, 1550-6. Preceded by
Morgan Library sketches. [46b] Cleansing of the Temple,
on a separate sheet. Verso: not Michelangelo.). Beren-
son, 1961, no. 1571 (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962,
p. 173 (Samson.). Barocchi, 1964c, no. 63 (Composed
from two pieces; all sketches after 1550.). Berti, 1965,
pp. 483, 491 (Recto: ﬁghting group, related to Mor-
gan Library drawings, represents Samson and a Philistine
not David and Goliath, although employed for a David by
Daniele da Volterra. Section upper right for the Cleans-
ing of the Temple. Verso: not Michelangelo.). Goldschei-
der, 1965, no. 118 (As 1951, but redated to c. 1550.).
Hartt, 1971, no. 473 (Recto: 1550–5?. Sketches for the
Cleansing of the Temple inserted into this sheet at a later
date. Main page shows Hercules and Cacus, club clearly
visible, but close to David and Goliath sketches.); p. 390
(Verso: rejected.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 164 (Linked
with Morgan Library studies for David and Goliath; pur-
pose unknown, c. 1550–5; sketches for the Cleansing of
the Temple inserted upper right, linked with BM draw-
ings.). Hartt, 1975, no. 456C (Verso: accepted. 1554?.).
De Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III, no. 374 (As 1960.). Perrig,
1991, pp. 105–7, ﬁg. 123 (Recto: by Daniele da Volterra;
represents David and Goliath.). Perrig, 1999, pp. 242–4
(Recto, as 1991. Verso: not Michelangelo, from Farnese
Collection.).
CATALOGUE 47
Studies of Sleeping Apostles
1846.86; R.70 (2); P.II 340; Corpus 404
Dimensions: 107×325 mm
A vertical cut has been made 118 mm from the right
edge, and the sheet has then been rejoined. The cut,
which divides a ﬁgure, is difﬁcult to explain unless it was
made by an owner or dealer to maximise the value of the
individual drawings. Nothing has been lost and the chain
lines in the paper run without break. It seems likely how-
ever, from the verso inscriptions, that the sheet remained
divided for a period because the Bona Roti inscription, on
the larger fragment, is made with the lower edge as the
base, and the Irregular Numbering, which was made on
the smaller fragment employed the left edge as the base.
However, one cannot be sure of this because the rela-
tion of the two inscriptions on undivided sheets is often
eccentric.
A further issue is whether this sheet and Cat. 48
were once joined, as some scholars believe. They were
mounted together and with Cat. 45 when in Lawrence’s
collection – but probably not when they were owned
by Ottley – and all three drawings are the same height
and seem to be made on the same type of thin paper.
Cat. 48 bears a watermark, part of which has been cut,
but the remaining part is not to be found on either the
present sheet or on Cat. 45, so proof of direct physcial
connection is lacking. It seems to the compiler clear that
all three drawings were made on the same batch of paper
and approximately at the same time. It may also be the case
that the present sheet and Cat. 45 were once physically
parts of the same larger sheet. But if this is so, it neverthe-
less seems probable, from the way in which both sheets are
used, that they were separated before Michelangelo began
to draw upon them. The consistency with which designs
for the same or closely related scenes spread across the
page in both suggests that the sheets had found approxi-
mately their present shape before Michelangelo set chalk
to paper. It would be highly uncharacteristic of him to
use a large sheet in two neat and discrete horizontal strips.

CATALOGUE 47
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
231
His sketches at all periods of his life scatter across his pages
in a wholly intuitive manner.
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
In addition to the vertical join, there is a pressed-out fold
or crease, a small abrasion with a “pin” prick hole, other
abrasions and minor repairs, and the edges are skinned
and creased. The sheet has uneven discolouration with a
local tidemark, some local staining, and general ingrained
dirt.
Inscriptions
Recto: Mic: Angelo: Buonaroti at lower right (cf. Cats. 45
[further discussion], 48, 50).
Verso: With the lower edge as base on the larger fragment:
Bona Roti. With the left edge as base on the smaller
fragment: no. 2.
Description
A. A sleeping ﬁgure, his left arm bent across his chest,
his right arm by his side, supported by another?, seen
frontally.
B. A sleeping ﬁgure, lying down, supported by another,
seen in foreshortening.
C. A sleeping ﬁgure seen from the front, his right arm
bent across his chest and supported by, perhaps, a book,
his left arm hanging down by his side, his head tilted
forward, his body sprawled sideways to the viewer’s right.
D. Very faint: a kneeling ﬁgure? seen from half left, his
left arm raised, turning away from a ﬁgure seated in left
proﬁle in front of him with his right arm outstretched?.
E. Two short zig-zag lines, presumably made to test the
chalk.
F. A sleeping ﬁgure in a compact pose, seen frontally.
G. A moving ﬁgure seen from the back who rises to his
feet, looks up to his left, and raises his arms.
H. A rising ﬁgure seen frontally, his knees bent to his left,
his arms gesturing to his right, as though ﬂeeing. This
ﬁgure, which is traversed by the division, is essentially a
variant of G.
I. A waking ﬁgure?, seen frontally, from the thighs
upwards, turning to his left, his left arm bent upwards
as though shielding his face, his right arm bent across
his chest and upwards as though duplicating the shielding
gesture.
J. Three sleeping ﬁgures.
Discussion
It has generally been accepted since Woodburn that this
page of studies was made in preparation for the three
sleeping disciples in Marcello Venusti’s painting of the
Agony in the Garden for which Michelangelo provided
the cartonetto (Florence, Ufﬁzi, 230F/ B198/Corpus 409;
black chalk, 360×600 mm). B on the present sheet is sim-
ilar in pose to that of the disciple on the far right of the
ﬁnal composition, and the curved lines found mainly in
the centre and at the right of the drawing no doubt indi-
cate the landscape setting. Other studies, which were ﬁrst
connected with this composition by Wilde, are a fragment
in the British Museum (W79 recto/Corpus 405; black
chalk, 66×101 mm) and two other sketches on pages
in Michelangelo’s Vatican Codex (Cod. Lat. Vat. 3211,
fols. 81 verso and 82 verso/Corpus 407 and 406; both
black chalk, respectively 205×143 mm, and 206×141
mm). However, the present drawing must represent an
early stage in Michelangelo’s development of the design
for Venusti’s painting, and the rising ﬁgure with lifted
arms gazing upwards in surprise [G] drawn in the cen-
tre of the sheet, does not obviously ﬁt an Agony in the
Garden, unless this were one conceived in upright format
with Christ descending from above to rebuke his disciples,
rather than entering from the left, as in the painted ver-
sion. It would also be unusually dramatic. If they could be
separated from the other studies, it might be that the two
moving ﬁgures on the present sheet [G and H] were made
for a different composition. Given Michelangelo’s often
surprising juxtapositions, this is by no means impossible,
but the compiler has been unable to ﬁnd a plausible loca-
tion for these ﬁgures in other compositions planned by
Michelangelo in the 1550s, which involved movement,
such as the Cleansing of the Temple or Aeneas Commanded
by Mercury to Relinquish Dido, and it is probably best to
accept that all the studies on this page refer to the Agony
in the Garden, but in a phase distant from the ﬁnal version.
The extreme horizontality of the format of the present
drawing need bear no relation to the proposed pictorial
ﬁeld, because the same ﬁgure is tried thrice at the top
left of the sheet and, probably, a fourth time in the lower
left-hand corner. It is only the three sleeping ﬁgures at
the right that would seem to indicate the type of group-
ing Michelangelo had in mind, and it is not fully clear
whether this was intended to include the loosely exe-
cuted moving ﬁgure immediately to the left, who may
or may not be a variant of the two moving ﬁgures in the
centre of the sheet.
The moving ﬁgure seen from the back [G] is a modiﬁed
reprise, in reverse, of a ﬁgure designed by Michelangelo
for the Last Judgement, the damned soul seen from the

232
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 47
rear immediately below Saint Sebastian (the compiler is
indebted to W. Dreesmann for this observation), and it
is probable that Michelangelo was here referring back to
one of his preparatory drawings for the fresco. The ﬁgure
is found again, in reverse to G in the present drawing but
in the same direction as that in the Last Judgement, in a
drawing in Florence attributed to Leonardo Cungi but, in
the compiler’s view, by Raffaello da Montelupo (Ufﬁzi
257F verso/B210; black chalk and pen, 424×275 mm;
the hatching on both sides of this sheet is left-handed).
The recto of this sheet contains, among other sketches, a
version of Christ and the ﬁgures immediately beside Him
in the Last Judgement, either inaccurately sketched after
the fresco or, more likely, taken from an unresolved lost
drawing by Michelangelo. The verso bears a copy after
Christ more or less as executed in the fresco, placed imme-
diately above the ﬁgure that concerns us here. It seems
unlikely that Raffaello himself would have had the imag-
ination to juxtapose two ﬁgures so separated in the fresco,
and he was presumably combining ﬁgures from different
drawings by Michelangelo, to which – as in other
instances – he would have had access. Some support
for this conjecture is found in a page of drawings by
Battista Franco in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool
(WAG1995.249/Brooke, 1998, no. 28; pen and ink,
188×267 mm), in which virtually the same ﬁgure occurs,
this time in the context of a series of studies for a Resurrec-
tion. This page dates from soon after the period in which
Franco worked with Raffaello.
The prime version of Marcello Venusti’s Agony in the
Garden seems to be that now in Galleria Doria Pam-
phili (oil on panel, 580×820 mm), but it exists in several
replicas, some autograph (one offered at Sotheby’s, Lon-
don, 14 December 2000, lot 186; oil on panel, 554×735
mm). It is not known for whom the panel was planned,
but it must have been for someone whom Michelangelo
valued, because he prepared a full-size cartonetto for the
ﬁgurative parts, now much damaged by over-exposure
to light (Florence, Ufﬁzi, 230F/B198/Corpus 409). This
cartonetto was not retained by Venusti. At Michelangelo’s
death, it was owned by his assistant and prot´eg´e Jacomo
del Duca, to whom Michelangelo seems to have given it,
together with the cartonetto for Venusti’s Lateran Annun-
ciation (Florence Ufﬁzi, 229F/B197/Corpus 393; black
chalk, 405×545 mm) and, no doubt, other drawings. This
gift would have been made in the spring of 1560, as noted
by Wilde. Both cartonetti were subsequently extracted
from Jacomo by Leonardo Buonarroti for presentation
to Duke Cosimo. This situation is comparable with that
of the cartoon of Venus and Cupid, which, after it had been
rendered in painting by Pontormo, was to be handed to
Antonio Mini.
The present sheet, the associated drawings and the car-
toon can be dated to the second half of the 1550s. As Wilde
noted, termini are established by the poems in the Vatican
Codex, dated by Frey to no earlier than 1555, and 1560, by
which time the cartoon had obviously been used, since it
was given to Jacomo del Duca. The Agony in the Garden
represents one of the clearest examples in the work of the
aged master of a conscious turning back to the artistic
modes of the turn of the thirteenth and fourteenth cen-
turies. Christ is shown twice, praying and rebuking His
disciples, as in the rendering of the subject by Duccio in
the Maest`a, and the block-like forms of the ﬁgures reﬂect
Michelangelo’s intense response to the massive ﬁgures of
Arnolfo di Cambio and Tino da Camaino, the sculptural
counterparts of Giotto.
A third drawing, in the Albertina (BK4868/Corpus
408; black chalk, 173×197 mm maximum dimensions,
irregular), which bears an owner’s inscription and the date
27 March 1560, was taken by Wilde to be a further study
for the Agony in the Garden and to provide an additional ter-
minus ante quem for the composition. However, although
it too may well have been among the drawings given to
Jacomo del Duca, it seems to the compiler that the studies
on this sheet – all of which show a nude sleeping ﬁgure
seen from the back, in a pose derived from classical gems –
are of a woman, and that they are unconnected with the
Agony in the Garden.
Parker emphasises that the writing on the recto of the
present sheet is of the eighteenth or nineteenth century:
It presumably replaces or repeats the earlier inscription,
found on the verso.
History
Daniele da Volterra or Marcello Venusti? the Bona Roti
Collector; the Irregular Numbering Collector; the Cic-
ciaporci family and Filippo Cicciaporci; Bartolommeo
Cavaceppi; William Young Ottley (his sale, 6 June 1814,
etc., lot 824, “One, of studies in black chalk for his
composition of Christ praying in the garden ditto.”
Lot 825 adds the information: “from the collection of
the Cicciaporci family of Florence to whom the con-
tents of the three above lots formerly belonged, men-
tioned in the preface to Condivi, Life of Michelangelo,
published in 1746, page xviii. This collection was sold
and dispersed about 1765, and with others purchased
of the Cav. Cavaceppi, 1792–3, by their present propri-
etor,” £4.0.0); Sir Thomas Lawrence (no stamp); Samuel
Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, etc., lot 824 (“One, of stud-
ies in black chalk for his composition of Christ praying

CATALOGUE 48
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
233
in the garden ditto”; [lot 825] adds the information:
“from the collection of the Cicciaporci family of Flo-
rence to whom the contents of the three above lots
formerly belonged, mentioned in the preface to Con-
divi, Life of Michelangelo, published in 1746, page xviii.
This collection was sold and dispersed about 1765, and
with others purchased of the Cav. Cavaceppi, 1792–3,
by their present proprietor.”). Woodburn, 1836b, no. 82
(With [Cats. 45 and 48] “admirably drawn in black chalk;
they are chieﬂy subjects from the New Testament. . . .
the disciples asleep on the mount.”). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 64 (As 1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 35 (As 1842.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 70.2 (“Christ in the Garden of
Gethsemane; related to drawing recorded by Vasari in
possession of Duke Cosimo and a developed composi-
tion of the subject known from a print.”). Gotti, 1875,
II, p. 225. Berenson, 1903, I, pp. 227–8, no. 1572a
(c. 1545 for lost cartoon, copied by Venusti in Ufﬁzi
230F/ B198/Corpus 409.). Thode, 1908, II, pp. 462–3
(For painting of Agony in the Garden.). K. Frey, 1909–11,
no. 240 (Related to design painted by Venusti; identical in
handling to [Cat. 48].). Thode, 1913, no. 443 (As 1908.).
De Tolnay, 1927, pp. 176–8 (c. 1556; notes links with two
sketches of c. 1546 in Codex Vaticanus, fol. 81 verso and
82 verso/Corpus 407, 406.). Berenson, 1938, I, p. 236;
no. 1572A (As 1903.). Wilde, 1953a, pp. 118–19 (1555–
60 for Marcello Venusti’s Agony in the Garden, in Galleria
Doria. Other studies on BM W79/Corpus 405, Albertina
BK4868/Corpus 408, Codex Vaticanus fols. 81 verso
and 82 verso/Corpus 407 and 406.). Wilde, 1953 exh.,
no. 81B. Parker, 1956, no. 340 (Late, for Venusti’s paint-
ing.). Dussler, 1959, no. 202 (Michelangelo, 1550–5.).
De Tolnay, 1960, pp. 209–10, p. 220, no. 227, (c. 1552.
Together with Codex. Vaticanus. fols. 81 verso and 82
verso/Corpus 407 and 406, and BM W79/Corpus 405
for Venusti’s Gethsemane composition in the Galleria
Doria. Once part of same sheet as [Cat. 48].). Berenson,
1961, no. 1572A (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962,
p. 247 (Michelangelo; Ufﬁzi 230F/ B198/Corpus 409 by
Venusti.). Barocchi, 1964c, no. 66 (For Venusti’s paint-
ing.). Berti, 1965, pp. 488, 492 (For Venusti, c. 1550–5.).
Hartt, 1971, no. 448 (1550–5.). Gere and Turner, 1975,
no. 170 (Presumably for Agony in the Garden executed
by Venusti, c. 1555–60.). De Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III,
no. 404 (As 1960.). Hirst, 1988, p. 40 (This is probably
the upper section of the sheet formed with [Cat. 48],
which was originally still larger. Prepares Michelangelo’s
cartoon Ufﬁzi 230F/ B198/Corpus 409 for Venusti, c.
1560.). Perrig, 1991, p. 49, ﬁg. 36 (Michelangelo, late;
part of same sheet as [Cat. 48].). Perrig, 1999, pp. 230–1
(As 1991; from the Farnese Collection.).
CATALOGUE 48
Studies for a Two-Figure Piet`a and a Three-Figure
Entombment
1846.85; R.70 (1); P.II 339; Corpus 433
Dimensions: 108×281 mm
A vertical cut 118 mm from the right edge was made
between two groups. The page has then been rejoined,
but the aligment is not exact and the chain lines do not
match precisely. Indeed, although it is probable that the
two fragments were once parts of the same sheet, it is not
possible to be certain of this. As with Cat. 47 – where
further discussion of this matter is to be found – it seems
that the two pieces led for some time separate existences,
as the lay-out of the inscriptions on the verso indicate.
It may be presumed that the sheet formerly extended
further to the left, because a further group at the left edge

234
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 48
is truncated. Whether it was originally the same width as
Cat. 47 is conjectural.
Watermark: Roberts Anchor A on the larger fragment.
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
There is an abraded vertical “score” line, minor edge nicks
and tears, minor skinning, abrasion, and ﬁbrous accre-
tions. The sheet has general discolouration and uneven
ingrained surface dirt, also uneven staining.
Inscriptions
Recto: In pen and brown ink at lower right: Mic: Angelo
Buonaroti (cf. Cats. 45 [further discussion], 47, 50).
Verso: On the smaller fragment: di Bona Roti and,
inverted, no. 6, orientated with the left and right edges of
this fragment before it was rejoined. On the larger frag-
ment no. 22, orientated with the left edge of this fragment
before it was rejoined.
Description
A. Truncated by the left edge: a small ﬁgure from a ver-
sion of B.
B. One ﬁgure supporting another, related to the Ron-
danini Piet`a, seen from half right. In this drawing, the
supporting ﬁgure seems to be looking upwards to his or
her left.
C. Just to the right of B: a small ﬁgure, too faint to elu-
cidate.
D. One ﬁgure supporting another, related to the Ron-
danini Piet`a, seen frontally.
E. Two ﬁgures supporting a third between them, seen
frontally.
F. Two ﬁgures supporting a third between them, seen
frontally, on a larger scale.
G. Another version of C.
Discussion
Although the drawings on this sheet have sometimes been
interpreted as a single sequence, in the view of the com-
piler, as of most other scholars, they represent two differ-
ent compositions. E and F, in which two ﬁgures support
the body of Christ in a “ﬁreman’s lift,” are presumably
for a Transport of Christ’s Body to the Tomb or Entomb-
ment. The other drawings show a two-ﬁgure Piet`a with
a standing ﬁgure supporting the upright body of Christ
from behind. The two-ﬁgure group, as all students have
noted, links closely with the Rondanini Piet`a, in which
Christ is supported by a ﬁgure who in the ﬁnal version of
the sculpture is no doubt the Virgin, but who may orig-
inally have been male (as remarked by Murray, 1980), in
an arrangement that recalls the simulated sculptures of
the Trinity – probably recording real ones – in paint-
ings by Robert Campin, Rogier van der Weyden, and
Jan van Eyck. In these, of course, the supporting ﬁgure is
God the Father, but the exposed left leg of the support-
ing ﬁgure in Michelangelo’s group, which would be even
more unusual for God the Father than for the Virgin, sug-
gests that a different ﬁgure was involved, perhaps Joseph
of Arimathea or Nicodemus. Michelangelo’s exploitation
of such archaic sources provides a further example of his
return to “primitive” forms at the end of his life.
The Rondanini Piet`a is, as has generally been acknowl-
edged, the result of at least two, or – in the compiler’s
view – at least three, distinct campaigns of work. It was
begun at an uncertain date, then, apparently, put to one
side, only to be taken up again, in Vasari’s account, after
Michelangelo had deﬁnitively abandoned the four-ﬁgure
Piet`a planned for his own tomb, now in the Museo del
Opera del Duomo in Florence. The four-ﬁgure group
was still an active project when Condivi’s life was pub-
lished in 1553; according to Vasari, it was the importu-
nity of his servant Urbino that provoked Michelangelo
accidentally to damage the block, and then to become
disgusted with it. If so, Urbino’s death in late 1555 would
be a terminus ante quem. At this point, it is generally pre-
sumed, Michelangelo returned to work on the Rondanini
Piet`a and no doubt continued to do so intermittently; he
was working on the sculpture until a few days before his
death, and it was probably only at the very end of his life
that he attacked the group to produce, for its upper part,
the present spectral forms. However, the legs and thighs
of Christ were not cut back as fully as the upper part of
the group, and these, together with the right arm of an
earlier version that was left in place, show at least one and
probably two of its previous states (as does the contro-
versial fragment of Christ’s torso published by Mantura,
1973).
How do these correspond with the forms indicated
here? The redundant right arm in the sculpted group is
ﬁnely ﬁnished and graceful. It may have been carved in
the mid-1550s, but it could well date earlier. It would
seem to demand that the head of Christ lolls upon it, as
indicated in the drawings B and D on the present sheet,
taking up an important motif of the four-ﬁgure Piet`a.
Thus, the present drawings would be studies for this ver-
sion. Further support for this can be adduced from de
Tolnay’s observation, that the Virgin’s face as it now is was
carved out of a larger head that was turned upwards to the

CATALOGUE 48
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
235
viewer’s right, as seen in B. However, if Vasari’s account is
believed – and there is no good reason not to believe it –
these drawings would not be initial studies for the group
but rather sketches in which Michelangelo was trying to
work out in what ways he might continue – and per-
haps revise – a group carved and put to one side some
years earlier. Thus, the outward lolling head of Christ
(as the group was reconstructed in 1935 by Arno Breker
[see Baumgart, 1935b], partly on the basis of B on the
present sheet) and the upturned head of the supporting
ﬁgure, would already have been present in the ﬁrst ver-
sion of the group, and Michelangelo’s primary purpose
in making the present sketches would rather be to recon-
sider the head position of the supporting ﬁgure. However,
there is a major obstacle to such a reconstruction. If the
damaged fragment of Christ’s torso is authentic, it is clear
that in the version of the group of which this fragment
formed part, as well as in the ﬁnal version, Christ’s head
bent inwards, and did not loll outwards. Hence, Man-
tura takes the present drawings to be of c. 1550, preced-
ing not only the second but also the ﬁrst state of the
group.
Even though this reconstruction of events is reason-
able in principle, the compiler ﬁnds it difﬁcult to accept.
He cannot convince himself that this sheet of sketches is
as early as c. 1550, the latest possible date for the incep-
tion of the ﬁrst version of the Rondanini group. The
sketches seem to him to be no earlier than the second
half of the 1550s (a dating supported by the similarity of
paper and organisation of the sketches to Cat. 47), and,
as remarked previously, they probably represent variant
ideas for a revision of the group. If this is correct, then the
torso fragment (if authentic) would post-date the present
drawings, perhaps by several years. It would come from
a second version of the group of which the ﬁrst version
showed an outward-lolling head, the drastically emaci-
ated ﬁnal – third – version would be a further reduction
of this second version.
However, it is important to appreciate that both solu-
tions – outward and inward – co-existed in Michelan-
gelo’s artistic and spiritual imagination in the last decade
of his life and had done do for some quarter century.
The motif of the outward lolling head, common to both
the four-ﬁgure Piet`a and the Palestrina Piet`a, is seen in a
not dissimilar form in Michelangelo’s design for Sebas-
tiano’s Ubeda Piet`a of around 1534 (Paris, Louvre, Inv.
716/J38/Corpus 92; black chalk, 254×319 mm). The
head bent inwards is found in a drawing in Vienna
(BK103/ Corpus 432; red chalk, 404×233 mm), which is
probably of 1531–2. Supplementing the autograph Vienna
drawing is another, little-noticed drawing of a two-ﬁgure
Piet`a, which is probably a copy of a lost original by
Michelangelo of about the same date (Ufﬁzi, 194S; red
chalk, 240×113 mm/Berenson, 1963, no. 2479a, ﬁg. 688,
as Sebastiano del Piombo). As Berenson remarked, this
composition re-works with some modiﬁcations part of
the group at the upper right of Michelangelo’s drawing of
the Deposition in Haarlem (Teyler Museum A25 recto/VT
60/Corpus 89; red chalk, 273×191 mm); this copyist may
also be responsible for the precise same-size copy of the
same detail in Paris (Louvre, Inv. 836/J110; red chalk,
94×63 mm). Thus, as his drawings demonstrate,
Michelangelo was certainly considering the theme of
two-ﬁgure as well as multi-ﬁgure Piet`as (see Cat. 40) dur-
ing the 1530s.
Even in the second and third versions of the Ron-
danini Piet`a therefore, as well as the putative ﬁrst version,
Michelangelo would have been reprising ideas tried in
the early 1530s. That said, it cannot be ruled out that the
Rondanini Piet`a may have even been begun in the 1530s
rather than in the 1540s. Certain aspects of its ﬁrst form
seem closer to those of the Last Judgement than of a later
period, and although its present appearance reﬂects the
moribund Michelangelo’s convulsive rejection of physical
beauty, the forms of the ﬁrst and second versions would
have been in his mind for many years.
The role of the three-ﬁgure groups on this sheet is also
conjectural. In their frontality and alignment across the
surface they recall Michelangelo’s Entombment (London,
National Gallery, NG790; oil on wood, 161.7×149.9 cm)
but in a more severe key: indeed, no other treatment of
the subject of such severity and frontality is known. It
is probable that Michelangelo was thinking of sculpture
rather than painting, but given the mutuality of these
media in Michelangelo’s work, this can hardly be taken
as certain. The obvious referent for such a group, of
two standing ﬁgures supporting the dead Christ, is the
Palestrina Piet`a, also severely frontal in its arrangement.
Michelangelo’s authorship of the Palestrina Piet`a is fre-
quently denied – notably, and most lucidly, by the late Sir
John Pope-Hennessy – and it was certainly reworked by
a later sculptor, but it is recorded as by Michelangelo as
early as 1618, and its stylistic peculiarity, the distension of
forms as they approach the front of the block as though,
as Wilde pointed out, pressed against glass, is wholly
Michelangelesque, wholly characteristic of his work of
the 1550s, appropriate to the present studies, and quite
unlike the work of any other Italian sculptor after Tino da
Camaino.
The Palestrina Piet`a is carved from a block that probably
once formed part of a Roman cornice. It is both wide and
shallow, encouraging a ﬂat presentational arrangement,

236
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 48
akin to high relief rather than free-standing sculpture.
Such a block would be eminently suitable for the scheme
tried on the present sheet, and it would be tempting
to think of it as a preliminary design for the Palestrina
Piet`a. However, on consideration this seems unlikely. The
Palestrina Piet`a is an overtly emotive work, making a direct
appeal to the spectator both in Christ’s lolling head and
the anguished gaze of the supporting ﬁgure. Further-
more, Michelangelo did not emphasise rectilinearity in
the Palestrina Piet`a – it was surely conceived in the same
span of years that produced the Epifania cartoon, in which
the massive forms still move in highly expressive ways, and
the design for the neo-trecentesque Agony in the Garden
(see Cat. 47). In the Piet`a, furthermore, the body of Christ
is supported by the Virgin, who stands directly behind
Him, so the three ﬁgures are not spread out as frontally as
in the present drawings. Indeed, in the compiler’s view,
the Palestrina Piet`a ﬁnds its best place in Michelangelo’s
work between the four-ﬁgure Piet`a and the ﬁnal stages
of the Rondanini Piet`a, and it is probably to be seen as
a project of the mid-1550s. The present drawings seem
to represent a still later conception, in which individ-
ual expression gives way to directness, severity, symme-
try, cohesiveness, and emotional restraint – on one level
it would hardly be possible to present the subject more
simply. Of course, the fact that such an arrangement co-
exists on this sheet with the more expressive sketches
related to the Rondanini Piet`a does emphasise that the
aged Michelangelo did not pursue a single stylistic or
emotional course.
The poses of the supporting ﬁgures on either side of
Christ are virtually mirror images, and a double-sided
sheet of drawings formerly in the Gathorne-Hardy Col-
lection and now in the National Gallery of Art in Wash-
ington, D.C. (Inv. 1991.217.2a-3b/Corpus 429; black
chalk, 233×100 mm) was probably made to develop this
idea. The Washington drawing has generally been inter-
preted as a bearer in a Piet`a or an Entombment, but it
has been connected – by the compiler among others –
with the ﬁve-ﬁgure Entombment known from two drawn
copies, including one sometimes attributed to Jacomo del
Duca (also formerly in the Gathorne-Hardy Collection;
see Cat. 51). However, the otherwise unaltered reversal
of the recto ﬁgure on the verso of the Washington sheet
probably indicates that Michelangelo intended to repro-
duce this supporting ﬁgure with exact symmetry, a feature
of the three-ﬁgure design on the present sheet, but not
found in any of the other known Piet`a or Entombment
designs; this, plus the sculpturesque simpliﬁcation of the
ﬁgures on the Washington sheet, argues that it was made
as a development of the present design.
History
The Bona Roti Collector; The Cavaliere d’Arpino?; The
Cicciaporci family and Filippo Cicciaporci; Bartolom-
meo Cavaceppi; William Young Ottley (his sale, 6 June
1814, etc., lot 825, “One, of studies for a Piet`a – in black
chalk. From the collection of the Cicciaporci family of
Florence to whom the contents of the three above lots
formerly belonged, mentioned in the preface to Condivi,
Life of Michelangelo, published in 1746, page xviii. This
collection was sold and dispersed about 1765, and with
others purchased of the Cav. Cavaceppi, 1792–3, by their
present proprietor,” £6.10.0). This drawing was probably
a fragment and was rejoined when in Lawrence’s collec-
tion with another fragment in Ottley’s 1814 sale, the ﬁrst
of the two items in 1504 (“Two on one leaf – three naked
ﬁgures carrying a dead body – stumped – black chalk –
ﬁne; and two sketches of a ﬁgure for the last judgment –
black chalk. From the Cicciaporci collection.”); Sir
Thomas Lawrence (no stamp); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, etc., lot 825 (“One, of stud-
ies for a Piet`a – in black chalk. From the collection of
the Cicciaporci family of Florence to whom the con-
tents of the three above lots formerly belonged, men-
tioned in the preface to Condivi, Life of Michelangelo,
published in 1746, page xviii. This collection was sold
and dispersed about 1765, and with others purchased of
the Cav. Cavaceppi, 1792–3, by their present propri-
etor,” £6.10.0) plus Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, etc., lot
1504i (“. . . three naked ﬁgures carrying a dead body –
stumped – black chalk – ﬁne . . . From the Cicciaporci
collection.”). Woodburn, 1836b, no. 82 (With [Cats. 45
and 47] “admirably drawn in black chalk; they are chieﬂy
subjects from the New Testament . . . the Virgin support-
ing the body of our Saviour etc.”). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 64 (As 1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 35 (As 1842.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 70.1 (Michel Angelo. Studies for a
Piet`a at that time “in the Palace on the Corso occupied by
the Russian legation,” i.e., the Rondanini Piet`a.). Black,
1875, p. 215, no. 60. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 225. Springer,
1878, p. 455 (Sketch for Piet`a mentioned by Robinson;
datable to 1540s, before Florence Piet`a.). Springer, 1883,
II, p. 311 (As 1878.). Berenson, 1903, I, p. 227, no. 1572
(c. 1542, related to the Rondanini Piet`a “in the action of
the legs, this as well as every other Christ for a ‘Piet`a’
that we have from Michelangelo’s hand harks back to the
picture in the National Gallery.” Leads towards the pupil
sketch in the Gathorne-Hardy Collection. The “slight
sketch on the far right [G] anticipates the motive of the
Florentine Piet`a”[sic].). Thode, 1908, II, pp. 497, 499

CATALOGUE 48
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
237
(Michelangelo: sketches for Rondanini Piet`a, and for an
Entombment, reworking the motif of National Gallery
Entombment.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 239 (Michelangelo’s
late period.). Thode, 1913, no. 442 (As 1908.). Brinck-
mann, 1925, no. 80 (Late 1550s. Two-ﬁgure composi-
tions for Rondanini Piet`a.). De Tolnay, 1934, pp. 150–2
(Three drawings for the Rondanini Piet`a, datable 1550–6,
in the order [D, G, B]; “the original version of the marble
group corresponded with [B] [and] was probably begun
soon afterwards.”). Baumgart, 1935b, pp. 46, 48, 53 (The
two three-ﬁgure groups probably drawn ﬁrst; sketches
at left and right for ﬁrst version of the Rondanini Piet`a,
late 1540s–early 1550s.). Berenson, 1938, I, pp. 235–6,
no. 1572 (As 1903.). Goldscheider, 1951, no. 111 (c. 1542.
Link with the Rondanini Piet`a explained by Michelan-
gelo’s habit of returning “time after time to the same
motive – especially to body motives.”). De Tolnay, 1951,
pp. 158, 293 (c. 1555; for the ﬁrst version of the Ron-
danini Piet`a.). Schiavo, 1953, ﬁgs. 9, 10 ([C] a study for
the Palestrina Piet`a.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no 81A (c. 1555;
probably connected with the Rondanini Piet`a.). D. Frey,
1956, pp. 210, 217–18 (Signiﬁcant for reconstructing the
stages of the Rondanini Piet`a. Accepts de Tolnay’s order-
ing of sketches. Only in [B] is the Virgin’s head tilted
upwards, which corresponds to the ﬁrst stage. The sheet
datable c. 1552. The three-ﬁgure groups, which refer back
to the Piet`a drawn for Vittoria Colonna, perhaps respond
to Cardinal Pole’s comparison of the body of Christ to the
state of the church, expressed in a letter of 1552.). Parker,
1956, no. 339 (Originally part of same sheet as [Cat. 47].
Piet`a sketches connected with Rondanini Piet`a; Deposi-
tion sketches show some afﬁnity with the Piet`a drawn for
Vittoria Colonna.). Dussler, 1959, no. 201 (Michelan-
gelo, 1550–5. The three-ﬁgure Entombments drawn ﬁrst.
The two-ﬁgure groups related to the Rondanini Piet`a.). De
Tolnay, 1960, pp. 219–20, no. 246 (Once formed part of
[Cat. 47], c. 1550–6. As 1934.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1572
(As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1964c, no. 65 ([C, D, G] for
Rondanini Piet`a; perhaps once part of [Cat. 47].). Brug-
noli, 1964, no. 57 (Late “whittling away of the plasticity
of the ﬁgure, to the point where it becomes an image of
purely spiritual value.”). De Tolnay, 1964c, col. 899 (The
“three sketches . . . permit the reconstruction of the ﬁrst
version” of the Rondanini Piet`a.). Berti, 1965, pp. 490, 494
(c. 1555. Linked with [Cat. 47]; two studies for a Deposi-
tion, three of a group which was to become the Rondanini
Piet`a.). Goldscheider, 1965, no. 123 (Redated to 1555–6;
[Cat. 47] originally part of same sheet, as Parker discov-
ered.). Keller, 1966, I, p. 15 (For the Rondanini Piet`a.).
Hartt, 1971, no. 459 (1550–5. For the Rondanini Piet`a.).
Mantura, 1973, p. 199 (Sketches [C, D, and G] rightly
related to the Rondanini Piet`a, “propongono un Cristo pi`u
strapiombante con il peso del torso e del corpo in fuori
e la Madonna che, nel sostenendo, gira la testa nel grave
sforzo.” In [C]-“in particolare, il problema del corpo della
Vergine interessa intensamente Michelangelo: lo presenta
in diverse posizione pi`u o meno alto, pi`u or meno girata
a sinistra or a destra.”). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 158
(For the Rondanini Piet`a; three ﬁgure groups “presum-
ably also for a sculptural group, and might have been the
germ of the Piet`a.”). Keller, 1975, no. 60 (1550–5; three
ﬁgure groups develop scheme of the Piet`a [in Boston]
for Vittoria Colonna; the other groups prepare the ﬁrst
version of the Rondanini Piet`a.). De Tolnay, 1975, p. 120
(As 1951.). Keller, 1976, ﬁg. 172 (As 1975.). De Tolnay,
1978, Corpus III, no. 433 (1550–5. Deposition drawings
reprise compositional scheme of Michelangelo’s National
Gallery Entombment. Piet`a groups; link with the Palestrina
Piet`a, probably by Tiberio Calcagni. [B, D] look back
to Northern Piet`as of the type painted by the Master
of Flemalle in Frankfurt. [B] shows movement from ﬁrst
to second versions of the Rondanini Piet`a.). Wilde, 1978,
pp. 184–7 (“Michelangelo . . . was experimenting with a
[three-ﬁgure] group of the Deposition which would con-
form to” the principles of the block from which the
Palestrina Piet`a was carved. “[T]hese drawings point to
the end of the sixth decade . . . and there are at least two
designs by Michelangelo dating from this period, but
only known in copies by pupils, which show proportions
such as these. . . . The other sketches . . . have usually been
connected with . . . the . . . Rondanini Piet`a . . . [which]
appears to be a palimpsest of several successive designs.
Vasari states that Michelangelo had begun working on
it before he started on the group of four ﬁgures . . . and
Daniele da Volterra . . . says that Michelangelo worked on
this group as late as six days before his death.”). Murray,
1980, pp. 201–2 (“The ﬁrst state of the Rondanini Piet`a
must represent a translation into marble of this two-ﬁgure
group, and the ﬁgure behind Christ must originally have
been intended as a man, since it is inconceivable that
the Virgin should ever have been represented with one
stalwart leg bare to the knee”). Liebert, 1983, pp. 410–
11 (“Tolnay has persuasively reasoned . . . [from E and
F] . . . which in chronology were the ﬁrst and second,
that the Rondanini group was originally intended to
be an Entombment.”). Guazzoni, 1984, pl. 114 (Stud-
ies for Palestrina Piet`a.). Hirst, 1988, p. 40 (With [Cat.
47] originally part of one sheet, which was still larger;
c. 1560. Piet`a sketches connected with the Rondanini
Piet`a; Entombment has some relation to Palestrina Piet`a,
and recalls a late invention known in a copy formerly in
the Gathorne-Hardy Collection.). Perrig, 1991, pp. 49,

238
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 48–49
56, 59 (Michelangelo, late; part of same sheet as [Cat. 47].
Shows development from a three-ﬁgure to a two-ﬁgure
group.). Fiorio, 1992, pp. 82–83 (“From an . . . idea for
a Deposition, seen in the central sketch and repeated in
the one immediately to the right, the group is reduced
to just two ﬁgures, the sketch of which on the left cor-
responds to the earlier version of the Rondanini Piet`a.”).
Hirst, 1994–5, pp. 69, 139, no. 26 (Three-ﬁgure group
echoes scheme of National Gallery Entombment; 1550s.).
Pos`eq, 1999, p. 96 (The central groups recall the Palestri-
na Piet`a; the others the Rondanini Piet`a. “[E]ach of these
latter drawings presents the pair as if from a different
viewing point, which evokes Michelangelo making rapid
notes of the as yet non-existent sculpture as he rotates
it in his mind.”). Nagel, 1996, pp. 568–70 (c. 1552–3;
three sketches related to the ﬁrst version of the Rondanini
Piet`a; the other two have been connected with the Palest-
rina Piet`a, but they seem rather to prepare an Entomb-
ment, elaborated on other lost drawings, known only in
copies, including the ex–Gathorne-Hardy sheet.). Per-
rig, 1999, pp.
232, 276 (Michelangelo; from Farnese
Collection.). Nagel, 2000, pp. 209–10 (As 1996.). Pao-
letti, 2000, pp. 55–6 (The three-ﬁgure groups show an
Entombment; the two-ﬁgure groups “give some indica-
tion” of the appearance of the ﬁrst version of the Ron-
danini Piet`a.).
CATALOGUE 49
Recto: A Male Torso with a Bent Left Arm; Part Studies
of Legs
Verso: Studies for Christ Cruciﬁed
1846.87; R.5; P.II 341; Corpus 381
Dimensions: 252×161 mm
Watermark
A spread eagle within a circle: Roberts B, C, or D?.
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
There is a major pressed-out central horizontal fold and
some edge damage with minor losses. Several diagonal
wrinkles are inherent in the sheet. There is skinning
around the edges and a number of small indents, but not
punctures. The sheet has general ingrained surface dirt
and discolouration around the edges.
Description and Inscriptions
Recto
With the lower edge as base
A. A male torso seen frontally, the left arm raised and
bent at the elbow and the wrist.
B. Two legs from hips to upper calf, seen frontally.
C. In Michelangelo’s hand, in pen: . . . ira or . . . ua
With right edge as base
D. In Michelangelo’s hand, in chalk: a (deleted?) di unidici
dagosto
Verso
A. A torso with outstretched arms, seen frontally, for a
Cruciﬁed Christ.
B. The left shoulder of A repeated, more diagramatically.
C. A curved line.
With the lower edge as base
D. A right knee (no doubt related to B on the recto).
Discussion
This sheet should be dated late in Michelangelo’s life, as
the character of the handwriting, ﬁrm and clear but obvi-
ously written slowly and with deliberation, is sufﬁcient
to conﬁrm.
The upper drawing on the recto is closely related to
another study of a torso formerly in the Gathorne-Hardy
Collection at Donnington Priory, later in a Swiss pri-
vate collection and then at Christie’s, New York, 24 Jan-
uary 2006, lot 18 (Corpus 382 recto; black chalk,
240×175 mm) in which the pose is very similar. Whereas
the present drawing establishes the arrangement of the
shoulders and upper torso, and lays out the saliences and
declivities of the collar bone and the musculature of the
right arm, the ex–Gathorne-Hardy drawing continues
the torso down to the hips, includes a summary head, and
develops the modelling of chest and shoulders more fully.
Even though it was the modelling of the shoulders that
most concerned Michelangelo – in the ex–Gathorne-
Hardy drawing the left shoulder is sketched again at the
lower right of the page, and the right shoulder is tried
twice at the lower left – he also focused on the rib-cage
and the abdomen. Whether the present drawing should be
seen as a preliminary sketch for the ex–Gathorne-Hardy
drawing, or whether both were drawn from a heavily
muscled model at the same session, with the pose slightly
modiﬁed from one moment to another – the viewpoint
in the ex–Gathorne-Hardy is shifted slightly to the right –
is debatable, but the compiler thinks that both drawings
are probably life studies and is inclined to the second

CATALOGUE 49
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
239
option. Hirst (1988) suggests that both were once parts
of a single sheet, a plausible hypothesis that could, how-
ever, only be veriﬁed by a comparison of both in the
ﬂesh. A third drawing, which is probably connected, is
the study of a right arm and shoulder seen from the front
on Cat. 55 verso; this would ﬁt readily enough with the
ex–Gathorne-Hardy drawing.
The obvious role for a torso such as this in Michelan-
gelo’s late work would be for that of Christ in a Piet`a, per-
haps one similar to the Ubeda Piet`a designed by Michelan-
gelo for Sebastiano del Piombo, with the left arm being
raised by an attendant ﬁgure. However, the legs sketched
lightly in the lower half of the page, which are presum-
ably for the same ﬁgure, indicate a standing pose. The
right knee, very faintly sketched and barely visible on
the recto, is studied again in more detail and much more
clearly on the verso, and the right thigh and its junction
with the groin is sketched again on the verso of the ex–
Gathorne-Hardy sheet. Furthermore, although the head
drawn on the recto of the latter is bent downwards to the
ﬁgure’s left, it does not loll, as it would on a corpse, and
it seems that the left arm is lifted by the ﬁgure’s own voli-
tion, not by an attendant as in the Lamentation in Haarlem
(A35 verso/VT65/Corpus 434; black chalk, c. 300×305
mm, fragmentary). Both drawings, therefore, would be
for a heavily muscled standing man, seen from the front,
supporting some burden with his left arm, probably an
attendant ﬁgure in a Deposition.
A possible qualiﬁcation is introduced, however, by
a fourth drawing, a torn fragment in Casa Buonarroti

240
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 49
(46F recto/B149/Corpus 378; black chalk, irregular
95×c.100 mm, maximum), which is very close indeed in
handling and treatment to the recto of the ex–Gathorne-
Hardy sheet. This is a study that, once again, focuses on
the shoulders and the upper arms. It is doubtful if it ever
showed more than the upper part of the chest, and that
no more than outlined. This drawing must have been
made at the same time as the other two, but the form is
seen, once again, from a slightly different and more ele-
vated angle. The head seems less animate than in the the
ex–Gathorne-Hardy study, and this study, by itself, could
well be taken as for the torso of the dead Christ. How-
ever, that Michelangelo intended to represent a live ﬁgure
seems on balance more likely, and a further piece of evi-
dence supporting this view is that the study on CB46F
was drawn over a lighter sketch that, although difﬁcult
to make out with precision, seems to be a study of the
same torso, bent forwards to the left, seen obliquely from
the ﬁgure’s right. In this last drawing, the ﬁgure’s right
forearm is visible, bent at right angles to the upper arm,
a detail not included, and probably not envisaged, either
in the present drawing or the ex–Gathorne-Hardy study.
De Tolnay connected both the drawings on the recto
of our sheet with attendant soldiers in the Cruciﬁxion of
St. Peter in the Pauline Chapel, thus entailing for them and
the associated studies a date before 1550. There are some
similarities of pose, but the ﬁgures de Tolnay cited are
more complex in torsion and more tense in musculature,
and, in any case, the style of all four associated drawings
seems to be of a later period. Indeed, de Tolnay accepted
for the drawings on the verso of the present sheet a date of
c. 1557. As he and all other scholars have noted, the main
study on the verso – which the compiler tends to think
is entirely by Michelangelo, without later additions –
is clearly for a Cruciﬁed Christ, seen severely frontally.
Michelangelo was preoccupied with the theme of the
Cruciﬁxion in his last years, but these drawings cannot be
connected closely with any of his other representations of
the theme, whether known from surviving drawings or
copies. However, one fragmentary drawing, in the Louvre
(Inv. 842 recto/J41/Corpus 422; black chalk, 242×132
mm), which shows Christ still alive on the Cross, arms
outstretched horizontally in a neo-dugentesque manner,
demonstrates that Michelangelo experimented with such
a scheme. The Louvre study, however, is probably a few
years later than the present drawings.
The detail and intensity of the plasticity indicated in
both drawings suggests that they were not made in prepa-
ration for a Presentation Drawing but for a work in
another medium, more likely sculpture than painting. We
know from letters that Michelangelo planned to carve a
Cruciﬁed Christ in wood late in 1562, and although the

CATALOGUES 49–50
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
241
present drawings cannot be as late as that, he may already
have considered doing so in the 1550s.
The fact that the purpose of the studies on the verso is
so clear invites us to consider the studies on the recto of
the present sheet and those in the Casa Buonarroti and
formerly Gathorne-Hardy in their light. The combina-
tion of powerful torso, full-length pose and a left arm
under strain suggests a supporting ﬁgure for the body of
Christ in either a Deposition or an Entombment. The latter,
as much as the Cruciﬁxion, was a theme that preoccu-
pied Michelangelo in his last years, and various drawings
either by or after him show that he tried different ver-
sions of it. The three drawings in question cannot ﬁrmly
be connected with any of them, but a subject of this kind
seems to be their most likely purpose. Some further sup-
port for this is given by the two fragmentary sketches,
one a mere outline, the other quite roundly modelled,
which appear on the verso of CB 46F/Corpus 378. Both
seem to be bending forward and supporting something,
and both could well come from either a Deposition or an
Entombment.
The ﬁnal drawing to be considered on the verso is the
curved line that separates the knee from the two studies
of the Cruciﬁed Christ and that was presumably drawn
ﬁrst. It is obviously fragmentary and obviously has an
architectural function, but it is conjectural whether it is
the fragment of a ground plan or a proﬁle. Given that in
1557 Michelangelo was thinking about the dome of St.
Peter’s, the latter seems the more likely.
It may be noted too that there are lightly drawn archi-
tectural sketches on the verso of the ex–Gathorne-Hardy
sheet (Corpus 382). These are difﬁcult to decipher but
seem to consist of a curved form, surmounted by a sub-
stantial roll-moulding, a base, and then (perhaps) a volute.
At risk of over-interpretation, this could be a preliminary
idea for the crown of the lantern of St. Peter’s.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar; Samuel Wood-
burn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonarroti Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830–80] (“Anatomical Studies on which
he has written Undici d’Augusto.”). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 71 (“Studies of the arm etc. . . . with the hand-writing
of M. Angelo.”). Robinson, 1870, no. 5 (The recto and
[D] on the verso for the marble David, datable 1501.).
Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 5. Gotti, 1875, II, pp. 228–9
(Linked with commission for marble David on 10 August
1501.). Berenson, 1903, no. 1547 (Feeble but probably
Michelangelo. Recto: unconnected with David. Verso:
possibly for a Cruciﬁed Christ.). Thode, 1908, I, p. 78
(Not for David.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 203 (Recto: not
for David, but datable c. 1501.); no. 201b (Verso: by a
later hand, not Michelangelo.). Thode, 1913, no. 389 (As
1908; of Medici Chapel period; similarities with Thode
390.). Panofsky, 1927–8, p. 243 (Drawing and inscrip-
tion by Mini: a conscious falsiﬁcation of Michelangelo.).
Berenson, 1938, no. 1547 (As 1903.). Wilde, 1953 exh.,
no. 120 (1555–60). Parker, 1956, no. 341 (Recto: late;
clear resemblance to David but reminiscences found fre-
quently in Michelangelo’s works. Verso: “There can be
little doubt that, as claimed by Frey, the indication of the
head and right arms in . . . [A] of the verso were added
later.). Dussler, 1959, no. 189 (Michelangelo, 1550s.). De
Tolnay, 1960, pp. 226–7, no. 261 (Late.). Berenson, 1961,
no. 1547 (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962, p. 11, under
no. 5 (CB 9 F/Corpus not related to [Cat. 49].). Berti,
1965, pp. 400, 403 (Both sides may be of c. 1504.).
Schmidt, 1965, p. 34 (“Die R¨otelzeichnungen [sic] eines
rechten und eines linken Knies . . . und die Studien zur
‘Schlacht bei Cascina’ . . . k¨onnen best¨atigen, wie sehr
Michelangelo die beugenden Kr¨afte dieses Muskels ver-
traut waren.”). Hartt, 1971, no. 401 (Recto: 1545; study
for soldier bearing a halberd in Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter.),
no. 411 (Verso: 1545; studies for a Cruciﬁxion. “Does the
arch have some relation to the dome of St. Peter’s?”). De
Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III, no. 381 (Recto: perhaps for a
ﬁgure in the Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter in the Cappella Paolina.
Verso: studies for a Cruciﬁed Christ, c. 1557.). Hirst, 1988,
p. 69 (This and the ex–Gathorne-Hardy drawings once
parts of the same sheet.). Perrig, 1999, pp. 224, 238 (By
Giulio Clovio; from Farnese Collection.).
CATALOGUE 50
Christ Appearing to the Virgin on the Morning of the
Resurrection
1846.91; R.74; P.II 345; Corpus 400
Dimensions: 221×200 mm
Watermark: Robinson Appendix no. 17. Not in Roberts.
Crossbow in a circle. Similar watermarks are found in
Briquet, all dating between the late ﬁfteenth and late
sixteenth centuries, but none is sufﬁciently close to the
present example to warrant citing.

242
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 50
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
There is a minor inﬁll and major abrasion. A signiﬁcant
ridge along the upper and lower margins, and less so at the
left and right edges, is from an old hinge (presumably) on
the verso. There is uneven discolouration and speckling
and a narrow band of adhesive residue at the left edge.
The secondary support is skinned and torn with adhesive
residues. It is hinged with white paper gum tape and
pendant hinges.
Inscriptions
In Michelangelo’s hand in black chalk
. . . (die)ci V al pictore per dio
. . . (an)dro a pasquino p mandare
a chasteldur˜ate
legnie

CATALOGUE 50
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
243
Lower right: Mic. Ang. Buonaroti in pen and grey ink (cf.
Cats. 45 [further discussion], 47, 48).
Discussion
The references to pictore and Pasquino and Casteldurante
make it clear that Michelangelo is thinking about Cor-
nelia, the widow of his servant and friend Francesco
d’Amadore, called Urbino, who had returned to her
home town of Casteldurante after the death of her hus-
band on 3 December 1555. Michelangelo maintained con-
tact with Cornelia, sometimes forwarding her sums of
money via the muleteer Pasquino. On 13 December 1557
Cornelia wrote to Michelangelo to tell him that she
had been pressured to make over as a gift to the Duke
of Urbino two paintings executed by Marcello Venusti
to Michelangelo’s designs. These had been painted for
her late husband as mementoes for their two sons (the
Duke may have felt some justiﬁcation for this shabby act
by his belief that Michelangelo had swindled the Della
Rovere family over the tomb of their great kinsman,
Pope Julius II). Cornelia begged Michelangelo to com-
mission for her repetitions of these paintings to be made
by “vostro messer Marcello.” The two paintings Cornelia
wanted replicated were, respectively, of a Cruciﬁxion and
an Annunciation. They followed Michelangelo’s designs.
The Cruciﬁxion was part new invention, part repetition:
It combined the famous Christ on the Cross that Michelan-
gelo had drawn for Vittoria Colonna c. 1540 (see Cat. 67),
with ﬁgures of the Virgin and Saint John at the Cross’s
foot, prepared in two drawings of c. 1555, in Paris (Louvre
Inv. 720 and 698/J39 and 40/Corpus 412 and 413; black
chalk, respectively 230×110 mm and 250×82 mm). This
addition was no doubt undertaken by Michelangelo as a
special favour to his beloved servant. The Annunciation
was a reduced version, without changes, of that painted
by Venusti to Michelangelo’s design on the commission
of Tommaso de’Cavalieri for St. John Lateran, and now
in the church’s sacristy.
The sequel to Cornelia’s request is not known, but it
may be that Michelangelo, instead of simple compliance,
considered designing a new work for her, showing Christ
Appearing to the Virgin on the Morning of the Resurrection,
an appropriate subject for a woman recently widowed.
Or he may simply have been prompted to reconsider
the subject of the Annunciation by her plea, at a period
when, as contemporaries reported, he was increasingly
preoccupied by death. Indeed the present drawing was
always interpreted as an Annunciation until Pfeiffer eluci-
dated its true subject. Another possibility is suggested by
the similarity between the present drawing and one in the
Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge (Inv. 3056/Corpus 401;
black chalk, 265×162 mm). The recto of the Fitzwilliam
sheet bears a study of Christ Taking Leave of His Mother, no
doubt a preparatory drawing for the cartoon of the sub-
ject recorded in Michelangelo’s house after his death. This
cartoon was begun, according to a note by Daniele da
Volterra, for Cardinal Morrone, but it is clear that, some
time before Michelangelo died, the project, presumably
for a single painting, had been shelved since Michelan-
gelo had offered the cartoon as a gift both to Vasari and
to Tommaso Cavalieri; the latter ﬁnally claimed it. The
drawing on the verso of the Fitzwilliam sheet, however,
rather than preparatory for the recto, as most scholars
believe, could well be a study for the present composi-
tion. If so, it would imply that Michelangelo thought of
the two as pendants. But whether or not the Fitzwilliam
verso is related to the present drawing, it need not affect
the possibility that the two subjects, which so well com-
plement each other, were intended either as a pair – or as
alternatives.
In the present drawing, the block-like form of the
Virgin, her angular pose, and the rhythmic compres-
sion of the relation between the two ﬁgures suggest that
Michelangelo was looking to trecento sources, in partic-
ular, perhaps, to the relief of the same scene on Andrea
Orcagna’s great tabernacle at Orsanmichele, which he
would have known from childhood. He had referred to
this earlier in the decade when he made a ﬁnished draw-
ing (New York, Morgan Library, IV, 7/Corpus 399; black
chalk, 383×296 mm) of the Annunciation for Marcello
Venusti to execute as the altarpiece of the Cesi Chapel in
Santa Maria della Pace, a painting now lost but known
in numerous autograph reductions and copies. The ﬁrst
position of the Virgin’s head, drawn back slightly and
looking up to her Son in wonder, would have been still
more “primitive” in effect.
In representing Christ Taking Leave of His Mother
and Christ Appearing to the Virgin on the Morning of the
Resurrection, subjects that are commoner in the north
than in Italy, and in turning to the art of the Flo-
rentine trecento for their visual vehicle, Michelangelo
demonstrates once again how deeply he was indebted
to his very earliest artistic interests in his effort to forge
a sacred style. Whether Michelangelo’s representation
of Christ Appearing to the Virgin on the Morning of the
Resurrection was known outside his immediate circle is
conjectural: The subject was treated by Pellegrino Tibaldi
in a fresco in the cloister of the Escorial, c. 1588, but
that has no immediate visual relation with the present
drawing.
The fact that this sheet is recorded by Ottley in his
sale catalogue of 1814 (correcting his statement in his
sale catalogue of 1804) as coming from the Cicciaporci
collection suggests that it was among the drawings by

244
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 50–51
Michelangelo owned by Daniele da Volterra. In Ottley’s
sale of 1804, this drawing seems to have been mounted
on the same sheet as Cat. 45, for which a Daniele da
Volterra–Cicciaporci provenance is very likely, in which
case this mounting would certainly antedate Ottley. In
1814, it had been remounted with Cat. 36, which prob-
ably came from Casa Buonarroti, and this remounting
must have been Ottley’s responsibility.
History
Daniele
da
Volterra?;
Giacomo
Rocca?;
Il
Cava-
liere d’Arpino?; the Cicciaporci family and Filippo
Cicciaporci?; Bartolommeo Cavaceppi?; William Young
Ottley (his sale, 11 April 1804, part of lot 274, “One
ditto [i.e., One leaf ] containing several studies of atti-
tudes for the Last Judgment [i.e., Cat. 45], and a study
for the Annunciation, all in black chalk, from ditto [i.e.,
Casa Buonarroti]; his sale, 6 June 1814, etc.; part of lot
1587, “Two black chalk studies on one leaf – the Annun-
ciation, with a specimen of his writing, from the Ciccia-
porci collection, and a dog lying in the midst of ﬂames
[i.e., Cat. 36], an emblematic design. From the Buonarroti
collection at Florence”; £10.10.0); Sir Thomas Lawrence
(L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale, 11 April 1804, part of lot 274 (“One ditto
[i.e., One leaf] containing several studies of attitudes for
the Last Judgment [i.e., Cat. 45], and a study for the
Annunciation, all in black chalk, from ditto [i.e., Casa
Buonarroti].”). Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, etc., part of
lot 1587 (“Two black chalk studies on one leaf – the
Annunciation, with a specimen of his writing, from
the Cicciaporci collection” and [Cat. 36].). Lawrence
Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3, Drawer 3
[1830-113] (“Study in black chalk for the Annunciation”
and [Cat. 36].). Woodburn, 1842, no. 28 (“The ﬁrst
idea for the subject of the Salutation – black chalk, with
the autograph of Michael Angelo.”). Woodburn, 1846,
no. 32 (As 1842.). Robinson, 1870, no. 74 (Connection
with two other drawings of the Annunciation [BM
W72/Corpus 395 and Morgan Library VIIr/Corpus
399]; the present drawing may have been a ﬁrst idea
for one of the two Annunciations executed by Marcello
Venusti to Michelangelo’s design.). Black, 1875, p. 215,
no. 63. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 222. Berenson, 1903, I,
p. 229, no. 1575 (“[P]robably the very last drawing from
Michelangelo’s hand that we possess.” c. 1556–7.). Thode,
1908, II, p. 461 (1556 at earliest; no direct connection
with Venusti’s Lateran and Pace Annunciations.). K. Frey,
1909–11, no. 140 (Last period, 1557–60. Unconnected
with Venusti’s Annunciations.). Thode, 1913, no. 448 (As
1908.). Panofsky, 1922, p. 12 (c. 1560 but certainly no
earlier than 1556–7.). Brinckmann, 1925, no. 79 (c. 1560.).
Popham, 1930a, no. 519. Popham, 1931, no. 227 (Proba-
bly 1560.). Berenson, 1938, I, p. 237, no. 1575 (As 1903.).
Goldscheider, 1951, no. 127 (“The visionary spirit of this
drawing and the complete dissolution of the forms are
reminiscent of the Rondanini Piet`a, on which Michelan-
gelo was working at the same time.”). De Tolnay, 1951,
pp. 154, 293 (1556–60). Wilde, 1953a, pp. 113 (c. 1560.
“[A] kind of synthesis of his earlier conceptions . . . shows
the aged artist’s increasing sympathy with the trecento.”).
Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 108. Parker, 1956, no. 345 (Annun-
ciation, 1559–60.). Dussler, 1959, no. 205 (Michelangelo,
1556–61. Links with Cruciﬁxion drawings and the standing
Madonna, BM W83.). De Tolnay, 1960, p. 228, no. 264
(1556–61.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1575 (As 1903/1938.).
Barocchi, 1964c, no. 67 (“una sottile e instancabile
rarefazione, che volge verso forme sempre pi`u corrose e
larvali.”). Berti, 1965, pp. 489, 493 (c. 1559–60.). Gold-
scheider, 1965, no. 124 (As 1951.). Pfeiffer, 1966, p. 227 ff.
(Not an Annunciation but Christ Appearing to the Virgin on
Easter Morning after His Resurrection.). Hartt, 1971, no. 435
(1560?.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 174 (The Risen Christ
Appearing to His Mother; “the right-hand ﬁgure is clearly a
man, naked but for the loose garment thrown around the
shoulders; the style is that of the late drawings.”). Keller,
1975, no. 62 (Annunciation, 1555–61.). De Tolnay, 1975,
p. 117 (Accepts Pfeiffer’s interpretation; composition
elaborated by Michelangelo over a representation of the
Annunciation.). De Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III, no. 400 (As
1975.). Hirst, 1988, p. 53 (Christ Appearing to His Mother.).
Joannides, 1992a, p. 250 (Subject more common in the
north than in Italy. Perhaps planned as a pendant to Christ
Taking Leave of the Virgin.). Hirst, 1988–9a, no. 61 (c.
1560). Perrig, 1991, pp. 72, 114–15, ﬁg. 37 (Michelangelo;
the ricordo presupposes late 1557 or early 1558.). Perrig,
1999, pp. 240–1 (As 1991; from Farnese Collection.).
CATALOGUE 51
A Nude Male Figure
1846–81; R.60 (2); P.II 335; Corpus 428
Dimensions: 181×87 mm
Medium
Black chalk.

CATALOGUE 51
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
245
Condition
The sheet has minor abrasions, ﬁbrous accretions, adhe-
sive staining, general uneven discolouration, and foxing.
The primary support is drummed by the four edges to
the backboard of the mount so the verso is not visible.
Discussion
The pose of this ﬁgure study is similar to those found on
two other sheets of drawings in the Ashmolean Museum,
Cats. 52 and 53 (the three were mounted together when
they entered the Museum), and a fourth, formerly in
the Gathorne-Hardy Collection at Donnington Priory,
now in the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.
(1991.217.2a-3b/Corpus 429; black chalk, drawn on
recto and verso, 233×100 mm). All the drawings, seven
in total, on these sheets, portray advancing male ﬁgures,
seen from the front, one shoulder advanced and the other
drawn back, with the forward arm curved down across the
body and the other held up, as though supporting some-
thing. All four sheets are obviously fragments of larger
ones, but it seems unlikely that any two came from the
same sheet: None of the three Ashmolean drawings is
made on the same paper.
It might nevertheless be the case that the drawings upon
these four sheets were made at the same time for the
same project. However, despite the resemblances among
them, this is probably not the case, and the drawings
are best treated separately. It is clear that in his last years
Michelangelo employed and re-employed a limited num-
ber of poses and that a repeated pose does not necessarily
indicate a repeated context.
The present sheet is drawn on one side only. The form
is nude, like that at the left side of Cat. 52, and the draw-
ings on both sides of the Washington, D.C., sheet, but the
internal movement of the body here receives somewhat
more emphasis than in those drawings, which might sug-
gest a slightly earlier date. The ﬁgure is most readily inter-
preted as supporting the body of Christ in an Entombment
or, more properly, a Transport of Christ’s Body to the Tomb.
In his late years, Michelangelo frequently returned to the
themes and forms of his youth and his late treatments of
the Entombment recall his painting in the National Gallery,
London, generally dated soon after 1500 (NG790; oil on
wood, 161.7×149.9 cm). Michelangelo’s late inventions
could have been intended as Presentation Drawings or as
models for paintings to be carried out by other artists –
it is improbable that he himself still considered execut-
ing paintings. Such designs for painting should probably
be distinguished from treatments of the same or related
subjects planned for sculpture, such as those in Cat. 48,
which are more simpliﬁed, but, ﬁnally, any distinctions
are tenuous since sculpture and painting (and, for that
matter, Presentation Drawings and modelli) easily merge
into one another in Michelangelo’s work.
Probably around 1550 or a little later, Michelangelo
planned an elaborate pictorial composition of the Lamen-
tation in the immediate aftermath of the Deposition in
a now-fragmentary autograph drawing in Haarlem (A35
verso /VT65/Corpus 434; black chalk, c. 300×305 mm).
This contains the traces of at least seven ﬁgures, and it
may have been a preparatory study for a lost cartoon of a
Piet`a containing nine ﬁgures, recorded in Michelangelo’s
posthumous inventory (see Cat. 40), about which nothing
further seems to be known. However, the Haarlem draw-
ing does not have supporting ﬁgures at either side in poses
like those of any of the drawings under present consider-
ation, and although no ﬁrm statement can be made about
the lost cartoon, it seems likely that this did not either.
The present drawing and the Washington, D.C., sheet
have also been connected with a ﬁve-ﬁgure composition –
in which all ﬁgures are entirely nude – of the Entombment.

246
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 51
While this composition does not survive in an autograph
version, it is known in two drawings, independent of, and
in reverse of, one another.
A. Formerly in the Gathorne-Hardy Collection at Don-
nington Priory, sold at Sotheby’s, London, 28 April 1976,
lot 15; and at Christie’s, New York, 23 January 2005, lot
26; black chalk, 325×221 mm (illustrated by de Tolnay,
1978, Corpus III, p. 77). The complete copy of the
Entombment is on the recto of this sheet, but the right-
hand supporting ﬁgure is tried at least twice more on the
verso, in part drawn over various ground-plans, which
either copy or reﬂect drawings made by Michelangelo
for San Giovanni dei Fiorentini. This sheet is sometimes
given to Jacomo del Duca, following a tentative attribu-
tion made by Dussler, who was no doubt inﬂuenced by
the fact that Jacomo employed this Entombment design in
a modiﬁed form in one of the eight reliefs on his great
bronze tabernacle, commissioned by the Farnese for the
high altar of Santa Maria degli Angeli in 1565, and now
in Naples, Museo Nazionale del Capodimonte. Although
this attribution cannot be ruled out, the sheet’s authorship
is less signiﬁcant than its status; it seems to be a double-
sided facsimile of a lost sheet of drawings by Michelangelo
himself, no doubt made in his studio in his lifetime. For
a comparable case, see Cat. 55.
B. Amsterdam, Amsterdam Historical Museum, A-18115;
black chalk, 377×271 mm; attributed to Giulio Clovio
(illustrated by de Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III, p. 79). This
drawing, which is quite highly ﬁnished, could well be
a same-size copy of a lost Presentation Drawing by
Michelangelo. It is perhaps by an artist in the circle of
Daniele da Volterra.
This composition, whose ﬁnal direction is probably
that seen in the Amsterdam drawing, centres on Christ’s
body, held upright as it is carried forward (in contrast to
the National Gallery Entombment in which the movement
is into depth). It has two bearers seen full-length in the
foreground and that on the right comes very close in
pose to the ﬁgure in the present drawing; furthermore,
their bodies are related by a common serpentine internal
movement.
History
The history of this sheet and of its companions, Cats. 52
and 53, with which it was still mounted, together with
Cats. 73 and 101, when it was catalogued by Robin-
son, is not fully clear. If this drawing together with Cats.
52 and 53 comprised the mounting of three drawings in
Ottley’s sale catalogue of 11 April 1804 as lot 273, “One
ditto [leaf ] containing three studies of ﬁgures, all in black
chalk, from the Buonarroti collection,” then they would
apparently have come from Casa Buonarroti, probably
but not certainly, via Wicar. However, in Ottley’s sale
beginning 6 June 1814, the only item corresponding to
such a mounting was lot 823, “Three on one leaf, studies
in black chalk – a ﬁgure on the back of one.” £6.6.0.
Lot 825 provides the information: “from the collection
of the Cicciaporci family of Florence to whom the con-
tents of the three above lots [i.e., including lot 823] for-
merly belonged.” This, therefore, would be a correction
of the earlier statement and should probably be trusted,
in which case the provenance prior to Ottley should
be Daniele da Volterra; Giacomo Rocca; The Cavaliere
d’Arpino; Filippo Cicciaporci; Bartolommeo Cavaceppi.
At Ottley’s 1814 sale this mounting was purchased by
William Roscoe; it reappeared at his sale of September
1816 as lot 59: “Three, Studies of a Figure, in black chalk;
another ﬁgure on the reverse of one of them. From the
same Collection” (as the previous lot, i.e., Mr. Ottley’s).
It was acquired by Watson, a pseudonym of the London
bookseller William Carey, for 15 s., and presumably then
passed to Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445) and Woodburn.
By the time of the 1842 prospectus, to complicate matters,
this mounting, no. 36, had acquired two further draw-
ings [Cats. 73, 101], which were probably added to it by
Lawrence or, less likely, by Woodburn himself. In 1842
Woodburn gave the provenance for the whole ensem-
ble as the Buonarroti family and the Chevalier Wicar. In
this he was followed by Parker and Robinson. However,
although this provenance probably is true of Cat. 73, it is
unlikely to be true, as we have seen, either of the trio com-
prised by the present drawing and Cats. 52 and 53, or of
Cat. 101. It seems likely that Woodburn simply transferred
the probable provenance of Cat. 73 to the whole group.
References
Ottley sale?, 11 April 1804, lot 273 (“One ditto [leaf] con-
taining three studies of ﬁgures, all in black chalk, from
the Buonarroti collection.”). Ottley sale, 6 June 1814,
etc. probably part of lot 823 (“Three on one leaf, stud-
ies in black chalk – a ﬁgure on the back of one” [Lot
825 adds the information: “from the collection of the
Cicciaporci family of Florence to whom the contents
of the three above lots formerly belonged, mentioned
in the preface to Condivi, Life of Michelangelo, pub-
lished in 1746, page xviii. This collection was sold and
dispersed about 1765, and with others purchased of the
Cav. Cavaceppi, 1792–3, by their present proprietor”]).
Woodburn, 1842, no. 35 (“Five very ﬁne studies on one
Mount, three of them in black chalk.”). Woodburn, 1846,

CATALOGUES 51–52
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
247
no. 40 (As 1842.). Robinson, 1870, no. 60.2 (Michel
Angelo. This drawing, and [Cats. 53 verso and 52 recto],
“of the later time of the master . . . apparently all studies
for the same work, of which nothing is known.”). Gotti,
1875, II, p. 227. Berenson, 1903, I, p. 222, no. 1569.2
(c. 1550. For same unknown purpose as [Cats. 52 and
53] and [Washington 1991.217.2a-3b]. This would sug-
gest an Entombment.). Thode, 1908, II, p. 80 (For a Cru-
ciﬁxion of St. Peter or a Deposition, with [Cats. 52 and
53].). Thode, 1913, no. 437 (For an Entombment, with
[Cats. 52 and 53].).Berenson, 1938, no. 1569.2 (As 1903.).
Wilde, 1953a, pp. 114, 116 (With [Cats. 52 and 53]. Not
before 1550). Wilde, exh. 1953, no. 127b (With [Cats.
52 and 53], resemblance to the Epifania cartoon, but not
certainly for it.). Parker, 1956, no. 335 (1550s; resembles
[Cats. 53 verso and 52 recto].). Dussler, 1959, no. 348
(Ascribed. c. 1550. Maybe for a Piet`a.). De Tolnay, 1960,
pp. 205–6, no. 218 (Doubts attribution. “If original, it
would be a preparatory sketch for [Cat. 51].”). Berenson,
1961, no. 1569.2 (As 1903 /1938.). Hartt, 1971, no. 508
(1546. Apostle for dome of St. Peter’s.). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 155 (Same period as Epifania, but not necessar-
ily connected.). Joannides, 1975, p. 262 (Together with
[Cats. 52 and 53], and Washington 1991.217.2a-3b, per-
haps for the Entombment recorded in the Gathorne-Hardy
copy drawing; the date may be c. 1560 since the archi-
tectural sketches on [Cat. 52] recall the Porta Pia.). De
Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III, no. 428 (With [Cats. 52 and
53 and Washington 1991.217.2a-3b] probably for a Piet`a
recorded in copies attributed to Jacomo del Duca, for-
merly Gathorne-Hardy Collection, and Giulio Clovio,
Amsterdam, Stedelijk Museum.). Perrig, 1991, p. 91, ﬁg.
92 (Condivi.). Perrig, 1999, pp. 239–40 (As 1991; from
Farnese Collection.).
CATALOGUE 52
Recto: Two Male Figures and Architectural Sketches
Verso: A Pedestal
1846.82; R.60 (3); P.II 336; Corpus 427
Dimensions: 202×120 mm
Watermark: Roberts Bird D.
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
There is a major edge repair, minor nicks, some inﬁlls, and
inherent pressed-in wrinkles and pressed-out creases. The
sheet has scored indentations, some skinning, and ﬁbrous
accretions, with general uneven discolouration and local
staining.
Description
Recto
A. A male ﬁgure moving forward, supporting something
to his left.
B. An abbreviated pediment or cornice, perhaps related
to the verso drawing or possibly of an unrelated window
or door.
C. A male ﬁgure moving forward, supporting something
to his right.
D. A fragmentary form.
E. A ground plan with a line through it?
F. Fragment of a rectangular ground plan with inset
columns?
Verso
Half of a pedestal with a console or scroll in proﬁle at
the right. In the lower moulding is a very faint and no
doubt partly erased inscription that the compiler cannot
decipher. It may be no more than Michelangelo’s name
added by a later cataloguer.
Discussion
Recto
Interpretation of the two ﬁgure drawings on the recto
of this sheet is uncertain. An obvious possibility is that
they are bearers in an Entombment, but there is no clear
indication of this, and the left-hand ﬁgure could well be
displaying something for the viewer’s attention: The line
that links the two hands could be interpreted as a scroll;
the draped ﬁgure on Cat. 53 recto could also be displaying
a scroll. On the other hand, the smaller ﬁgure would make
an effective counterpart to the ﬁgure on Cat. 53 verso.
The larger ﬁgure, on the right, might well be clothed
rather than nude – there seems to be some indication of
drapery around his ankles – and he too could be a Prophet
or a Saint, conceivably with an attribute of martyrdom.
Although we know of no project of Michelangelo’s own
during his last years in which statues of Prophets or Saints
were involved, he was certainly active in planning statuary
for others. He provided designs of Daniele da Volterra’s
statues of Peter and Paul in the Ricci Chapel of San Pietro
in Montorio, on which work seems to have begun in the
mid-1550s, he was involved in the planning of a mon-
umental gate for the Castel Sant’Angelo, which was to
be peopled with statues of the Apostles; it is even pos-
sible that he was consulted about the completion of the
set of twelve Apostles planned for the Florence Duomo,

248
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 52
which he himself had begun over half a century earlier,
and which was again the focus of activity towards 1560. It
is clear that some of the studies on the verso of Michelan-
gelo’s proﬁle of the dome of St. Peter’s in Haarlem (Teyler
Museum A29/VT 67/Corpus 596; black chalk, 397×232
mm) are for individual niched statues, and that Michelan-
gelo did make an attempt to indicate a scale for them,
although both the purpose of these drawings and the sig-
niﬁcance of the scale pricked beside them are debatable
and debated.
Interpretation of the architectural sketches is also prob-
lematic. The slight sketch in part cut by the right edge
could be a segmental pediment to surmount a door or a
window. During the later 1550s and early 1560s, Michelan-
gelo was considering pediments of different types for St.
Peter’s, for San Giovanni dei Fiorentini, for the Capitoline
Palaces, and, no doubt, other schemes, and the compiler
is unable to relate this slight sketch to a speciﬁc project.
Another, just below the right-hand ﬁgure, D, seems to
be an irregular rectangle with one small circle at each of
its corners. It is difﬁcult to be sure whether this is simply a
shakey drawing from an old man, and that it was intended
to be a normal rectangle, or whether what we see is what
was planned. If the latter, then the compiler can make no
guess as to what it represents. If the former, then taken
in conjunction with the bold line that divides the form
in two roughly equal parts (but which might simply be
adventitious) this might represent a door in plan, with
column-ﬂanked aedicules on either side. The third draw-
ing, at the lower right corner, E, again cut by the right
edge, could be a development of this with the inclu-
sion of a step. But it is also reminiscent of Michelangelo’s
plan of the thrones intended to surmount the attic of the
ducal tombs in the New Sacristy (CB72A/B63/Corpus
199; red chalk, 167×133 mm) so a throne of some kind is
also a possibility. Again by analogy with the New Sacristy,
whose altar has balusters set in its corners, it might also be
a project for an altar. However, more probable, and cer-
tainly more appropriate chronologically, is that there may
be a connection with the Sforza Chapel. There is a simi-
larity with the forms in one area of a drawing in the British
Museum (W84/Corpus 623; black chalk, 241×210 mm),

CATALOGUE 52
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
249
which is generally considered to be a preparatory study
for the ground plan of the Sforza chapel. This drawing
presents problems of reading and orientation, but one area
of it, probably an altar-compartment but not inconceiv-
ably a crypt, does show a Greek cross with very shallow
arms, with columns at the corners that presumably sup-
port a vault. The present drawing might be related to
that.
It is not immediately apparent whether any of these
architectural forms is related to those on Cat. 53 verso.
Verso
This drawing, for which Michelangelo has employed a
ruler with only the curves and the scroll drawn free-
hand, seems more likely to be the pedestal of a statue –
as suggested by the console or scroll in proﬁle – than
a column base. The scroll, if that is what it is, would
presumably carry an inscription. The only free-standing
statue bases known to have been designed in Michelan-
gelo’s Roman period are that for the equestrian ﬁgure of
Marcus Aurelius on the Capitoline Hill and that for the
equestrian ﬁgure of Henri II, executed by Michelangelo’s
prot´eg´e Daniele da Volterra at the master’s recommen-
dation – and in part under his supervision – from 1560
onwards. Surviving drawings demonstrate that Michelan-
gelo assisted Daniele both with the horse and with its
pedestal. Although the present drawing resembles more
closely the earlier project, it seems very unlikely that
it could be so early. Even the ruled lines are less ﬁrm
than one would expect from a Michelangelo drawing in
the 1530s. On balance, if the drawing is connected with
either of these projects, it seems more likely that it was
Daniele’s statue. Although it must be admitted that the
single drawing by Michelangelo securely made in prepa-
ration for the pedestal of Daniele’s statue (Amsterdam,
Rijksmuseum, Inv. 53:140/Corpus 435; black chalk and
white body colour, 125×124 mm) bears no relation to
the present drawing, it is nevertheless worth noting that
the pedestal of the statue as it was ﬁnally erected in Paris,
as it is recorded in an engraving by Nicolas van Aelst, does
bear some relation to the present drawing and, moreover,
seems to have carried inscribed scrolls at the front and rear.
History
The history of this sheet and of its companions, Cats. 51
and 53, with which it was still mounted, together with
Cats. 73 and 101, when it was catalogued by Robin-
son, is not fully clear. If this drawing together with Cats.
51 and 53 comprised the mounting of three drawings in
Ottley’s sale catalogue of 11 April 1804 as lot 273, “One
ditto [leaf] containing three studies of ﬁgures, all in black
chalk, from the Buonarroti collection,” then they would
apparently have come from Casa Buonarroti, probably but
not certainly, via Wicar. However in Ottley’s sale begin-
ning 6 June 1814, the only item corresponding to such
a mounting was lot 823, “Three on one leaf, studies in
black chalk – a ﬁgure on the back of one.” £6.6.0. And
lot 825 provides the information: “from the collection
of the Cicciaporci family of Florence to whom the con-
tents of the three above lots [i.e., including lot 823] for-
merly belonged.” This, therefore, would be a correction
of the earlier statement and should probably be trusted,
in which case the provenance prior to Ottley should
be Daniele da Volterra; Giacomo Rocca; The Cavaliere
d’Arpino; Filippo Cicciaporci; and Bartolommeo Cava-
ceppi. At Ottley’s 1814 sale, this mounting was purchased
by William Roscoe; it reappeared at his sale of September
1816 as lot 59: “Three, Studies of a Figure, in black chalk;
another ﬁgure on the reverse of one of them. From the
same Collection” (as the previous lot, i.e., Mr. Ottley’s).
It was acquired by Watson, a pseudonym of the London
bookseller William Carey, for 15 s., and presumably then
passed to Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445) and Woodburn.
By the time of the 1842 prospectus, to complicate matters,
this mounting, no. 36, had acquired two further draw-
ings [Cats. 73, 101], which were probably added to it by
Lawrence or, less likely, by Woodburn himself. In 1842
Woodburn gave the provenance for the whole ensem-
ble as the Buonarroti family and the Chevalier Wicar. In
this he was followed by Parker and Robinson. However,
while this provenance probably is true of Cat. 73, it is
unlikely to be true, as we have seen, either of the trio
comprised by the present drawing and Cats. 51 and 53, or
of Cat. 101. It seems likely that Woodburn simply trans-
ferred the probable provenance of Cat. 73 to the whole
group.
References
Ottley sale?, 11 April 1804, lot 273 (“One ditto [i.e., leaf]
containing three studies of ﬁgures, all in black chalk,
from the Buonarroti collection.”). Ottley sale, 6 June
1814, etc., probably part of lot 823 (“Three on one leaf,
studies in black chalk – a ﬁgure on the back of one.”
[Lot 825 adds the information: “from the collection of
the Cicciaporci family of Florence to whom the con-
tents of the three above lots formerly belonged, men-
tioned in the preface to Condivi, Life of Michelangelo,
published in 1746, page xviii. This collection was sold
and dispersed about 1765, and with others purchased
of the Cav. Cavaceppi, 1792–3, by their present pro-
prietor.”]). Woodburn, 1842, no. 35 (“Five very ﬁne
studies on one Mount, three of them in black chalk.”).

250
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 52–53
Woodburn, 1846, no. 40 (As 1842.). Robinson, 1870,
no. 60.3 (Michel Angelo. This drawing, and [Cats. 53
and 51], “of the later time of the master . . . apparently
all studies for the same work, of which nothing is
known.”). Gotti, 1875, II, p. 227. Berenson, 1903, I,
p. 222, no. 1569.3 (c. 1550. For same unknown purpose
as [Cats. 51 and 53 and Washington 1991.217.2a-3b].).
Thode, 1908, II, p. 80 (For a Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter or
a Deposition, with [Cats. 53 and 51].). Thode, 1913, no.
438 (For an Entombment, with [Cats. 53 and 51].). Beren-
son, 1938, no. 1569.3 (As 1903.). Wilde, 1953a, pp. 114,
116 (With [Cats. 53 and 51).]. Not before 1550.). Wilde,
1953 exh., no. 127c (With [Cats. 53 and 51], resemblance
to the Epifania cartoon, but not certainly for it.). Parker,
1956, no. 336 (1550s. “The larger ﬁgure resembles [Cat.
51]; the smaller is very like [Cat. 53 verso], and shows
afﬁnity also with” the ex–Gathorne-Hardy drawing.).
Dussler, 1959, no. 349 (Ascribed. c. 1550. Maybe for a
Piet`a.). De Tolnay, 1960, p. 205, no. 216 (Poses similar to
that of the Evangelist in the Epifania. With [Cats. 53 and
51 and Washington 1991.217.2a-3b] for same project.).
Berenson, 1961, no. 1569.3 (As 1903/1938.). Hartt, 1971,
no. 507 (Recto: 1546; Apostle for dome of St Peter’s;
sketches of socles and columns show through from laid-
down verso.). Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 157 (Same
period as Epifania, but not necessarily connected.). Joan-
nides, 1975, p. 262 (With [Cats. 53 and 51 and Washington
1991.217.2a-3b], perhaps for the Entombment recorded
in the Gathorne-Hardy copy drawing; the date may be
c. 1560 since the architectural sketches here recall the Porta
Pia.). De Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III, no. 427 (With [Cats.
53 and 51 and Washington 1991.217.2a-3b] probably for
a Piet`a recorded in copies attributed to Jacomo del Duca,
formerly Gathorne-Hardy Collection and Giulio Clovio,
Amsterdam, Stedelijk Museum.). Perrig, 1999, pp. 239–
40 (By Ascanio Condivi; from Farnese Collection.).
CATALOGUE 53
Recto: A Draped Male Figure Displaying a Scroll
Verso: A Partly Draped Figure; Architectural Sketches
1846.80; R.60 (1); P.II 334; Corpus 430
Dimensions: 200×120 mm
Medium
Recto: Black chalk with touches of white heightening,
now oxidised.
Verso: Black chalk.
Condition
There are minor tear repairs and skinning, ingrained dirt,
and accretions. The sheet has uneven discolouration, local
staining, and some foxing.
Description
Recto
A draped male ﬁgure walking forward while apparently
supporting something to his left. The white heightening
is largely conﬁned to the head, chest, and arms and was no
doubt applied to facilitate – or mask – pentiments. The
head is drawn in two positions, looking down frontally
and to the ﬁgure’s right.
Verso
A. A partially draped ﬁgure presumably but not certainly
male – it is difﬁcult to be sure that the pectoral muscles
are not in fact intended as breasts – walking forward while
apparently supporting something to his or her right. The
slightly curved line to the ﬁgure’s left might represent the
outline of a shield for a coat-of-arms, or a shroud.
With the left edge as the base
B. A partial ground plan of a rectangular structure, with
protruding apses or column bases.
C. The lower sections of two columns, ﬂanking a round-
headed niche with, above, the lower edge of a rectangular
panel?
Discussion
The recto ﬁgure, elaborately draped, the head tried in
at least two positions, poses many of the same problems
of interpretation as Cat. 52. He could be a bearer in an
Entombment, but he does not seem to register weight, and
his hands seem to be holding some ﬂexible form, rather
than supporting a body. This form might be a scroll, in
which case the ﬁgure is presumably a Prophet or, if the
context were secular (unlikely), a philosopher, in which
case the drawing might be a study for a statue. How-
ever, even though this is possible, the form seems more
mobile than one would expect from a statue at this stage
in Michelangelo’s career, and this ﬁgure’s role must, con-
sequently, remain unresolved.
The verso ﬁgure is also draped, but less fully than that
on the recto. The drapery starts at waist level, leaving
the torso exposed. It is a matter for debate whether the
ﬁgure is male or female, but the compiler is inclined to
think male. He supports something to his right. This is
not deﬁned, but the long curve, which presumably estab-
lishes its edge, seems inappropriately regular for a body

CATALOGUE 53
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
251
and too long for a scroll, and it may well be the side
of a coat of arms, in which case this ﬁgure would be
one of a pair of supporters. Such arrangements are com-
mon in Roman painting and sculpture of the 1550s and
1560s, and Michelangelo might have devised several: The
forms of coats-of-arms appealed to him and he devoted
much attention to those of the Medici placed below
the reliquary chamber in San Lorenzo, and to those of
the Farnese above the central window of the piano nobile
of their palace. In his last years, he was planning the
Porta Pia, which displays the centrally placed shield bear-
ing the arms of Pope Pius IV, supported by a pair of
angels. The shield, carved by Jacomo del Duca and one
Luca, no doubt from Michelangelo’s design, was paid for
in May 1562; the supporting angels were executed only
three years later, after Michelangelo’s death, by Nardo
de’Rossi, but they are sufﬁciently Michelangelesque in
type to make it plausible that they too reﬂect the master’s
ideas, and it seems plausible, if no more than conjec-
tural, that the ﬁgure drawing on the verso of the present
sheet could have been made in preparation for one of
them.
The architectural drawings, conﬁned to the verso, were
drawn over the ﬁgure study. The main one is obviously
fragmentary. It shows two columns or half-columns – the
treatment of the bases indicates toruses – ﬂanking a round-
topped shell-headed niche. Above the niche, truncated,
there seems to be a rectangular, perhaps square, panel.
In the later 1550s and early 1560s, Michelangelo was
engaged in planning several buildings and, in their var-
ious transformations – whose number no doubt much
exceeded those that we now know – some of these
included columns and others columns with niches.
Among those for which drawings survive are the Porta
Pia – the interior gate facing the new via Pia, situated
at the city side of a compound extending inwards from
the walls proper and intended to be complemented by an
exterior gate, actually set into the walls – but no com-
parable columns are indicated in any of the preparatory
drawings, and there are none in the structure as ﬁnally
built. The fac¸ade of the Palazzo dei Conservatori ﬁnally
included columns in a subsidiary role, but at one stage in
the preliminary process paired columns were planned to
be more important (see Cat. 56 verso); however, niches

252
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 53
do not appear. Columns with or without niches between
them appear in drawings of projects such as San Gio-
vanni dei Fiorentini, the Baths of Diocletian, which
Michelangelo was planning to transform into the church
of Santa Maria degli Angeli, and the Sforza Chapel.
Of the three, the forms seem most congruent with the
paired columns in the plan on CB123A/B157/Corpus
608 (pen and ink with brush and wash over black chalk,
173×279 mm), which is, with virtual certainty, the sin-
gle elaborated plan to survive by Michelangelo’s hand for
the Sforza Chapel, obviously developing the sketch on
CB104A/B162/Corpus 624. In addition, Michelangelo
was involved in planning a monumental gate for the Castel
Sant’Angelo about which nothing is known in detail, and
a great columnar porch for St. Peter’s which, of course,
was never built.
Despite this proliferation of architectural projects,
however, the forms indicated in the present drawing can-
not ﬁrmly be linked to any stage of any of them, either
as executed, or as known from drawings and models. An
apparent difﬁculty is that the ﬂoor of the niche is set
puzzlingly low in relation to the bases of the columns.
This would be inexplicable in any project of “normal”
scale in which the columns were set either directly on
the ﬂoor or on ordinary bases. This contradiction might
be accommodated in two ways. One explanation is that
the columns are set on high pedestals, now excised from
the present drawing; the second is that they are situated
on an upper storey, in which niches are habitually placed
lower in relation to the columns or pilasters ﬂanking them
than on lower storeys. In favour of one or the other of
these possibilities is that a faint and wavering but dis-
cernable horizontal line joins the two column bases. This
strongly indicates, at least, that the column bases were not
envisaged as standing directly on the ﬂoor.
Both alternatives – the pedestal and the upper-storey
solution – had been anticipated in earlier drawings by
Michelangelo. In a study for a monumental gate, datable
around the mid-1520s (Vicenza, Centro internazionale di
Studi di Architettura Andrea Palladio, raccolta graﬁca,
no. 1 recto/Corpus 630; red chalk, 287×277 mm),
Michelangelo planned an arrangement similar to that
shown here, in which a niche surmounted by a rectan-
gular panel, between two columns, ﬂanked a triumphal
arch on its front face. Such a scheme, of course, could
also have been repeated on the rear face of such an
arch, or on all four sides of an arcus quadrifrons. A similar
arrangement is also found in Michelangelo’s large modello
for an early project for the fac¸ade of San Lorenzo (CB
45A/B245/Corpus 497; pen and ink, brush and wash
over black chalk, 724×870 mm).
The San Lorenzo project also provides an example
of an upper-storey site. In the ﬁnal scheme for the
fac¸ade, as recorded in the wooden model, the upper
storey contained statuary niches between paired mem-
bers, and although these are pilasters rather than columns,
there would be no inherent difﬁculty in supposing
that Michelangelo planned a fac¸ade with two orders of
columns rather than a columnar order surmounted by a
pilaster order. If one of these hypotheses is correct, the
most likely function for this drawing would be for one
of the gates, either the Porta Pia or that of the Castel
Sant’Angelo, more probably the latter.
Nevertheless, notwithstanding the issues addressed, it is
worth testing a different hypothesis: that the architectural
drawing as we see it does represent Michelangelo’s inten-
tions. Thus, if we accept that it is not outside the bounds
of possibility that the columns really do stand directly on
the ground with what structure might they have been
connected? The only case the compiler can envisage in
which the base of a niche might not be proportionately
far above a column base situated on the ground would be
a building on a colossal scale, in which the column bases
would themselves rise to the head level of the spectator.
However, such a building would have to be truly enor-
mous, and the only plausible candidates seem to be the
porch of St. Peter’s, or the Baths of Diocletian. The difﬁ-
culty with the former is that although Duperac’s engrav-
ing does suggest that Michelangelo planned the porch
with columns without pedestals, it provides no indica-
tion of the articulation of the front wall of the church at
the rear of that porch, and niches there would surely have
been of the same form as the niches already established on
the exterior articulation of the building, from which these
differ. The other alternative, the conversion of the Baths
of Diocletian, is improbable: This project was intended
to be economical, and Michelangelo would hardly have
planned to excavate niches in the main hall.
The smaller architectural study, truncated at the bot-
tom and the left side, is difﬁcult to interpret. It might
be possible to see it as the ground plan of a structure of
which the columns and niche were to be a part, but the
scale of the protruberant arcs and the space between them
seems too unlike that of the elevation drawing to relate
to it. If one discounts the various discrepancies of level
and line as slippages of an old man’s hand and assumes the
structure to be symmetrical about an axis running from
the lower edge to the apparent niche that is set adjacent
to the ﬁgure’s right shoulder, then it might be assumed to
be the ground plan of the interior of a simple rectangu-
lar building, with an altar? at the end and two side altars
on each ﬂanking wall. The alternative view, that it is a

CATALOGUE 53
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
253
block-like structure of some kind with forms protruding
from it, seems less likely, and the compiler is unable to
conjecture what such a structure could be or what pur-
pose it could serve. If the ﬁrst interpretation is correct,
then the structure, which is clearly simple, is unlikely to be
free-standing and probably extends an existing building.
If so, two obvious possibilities present themselves. One is
the Sforza Chapel, the other the chancel of Santa Maria
degli Angeli. Of the two, the former, which is properly
to be described as an attachment, seems always to have
been conceived as a complex space, and it is doubtful if
Michelangelo ever considered a ground plan as plain as
this. But the latter, although planned as plain and simple,
is not, so far as it can be reconstructed – Michelangelo’s
scheme was destroyed in the eighteenth century? – con-
gruent with this in form.
History
The history of this sheet and of its companions, Cats. 51
and 52, with which it was still mounted, together with
Cats. 73 and 101, when it was catalogued by Robinson, is
not fully clear. If this drawing together with Cats. 51 and
52 comprised the mounting of three drawings in Ottley’s
sale catalogue of 11 April 1804 as lot 273, “One ditto
[i.e., leaf] containing three studies of ﬁgures, all in black
chalk, from the Buonarroti collection,” then they would
apparently have come from Casa Buonarroti, probably but
not certainly, via Wicar. However, in Ottley’s sale begin-
ning 6 June 1814, the only item corresponding to such
a mounting was lot 823, “Three on one leaf, studies in
black chalk – a ﬁgure on the back of one.” £6.6.0. And
lot 825 provides the information: “from the collection of
the Cicciaporci family of Florence to whom the contents
of the three above lots [i.e., including lot 823] formerly
belonged.” This, therefore, would be a correction of the
earlier statement and should probably be trusted, in which
case the provenance prior to Ottley should be Daniele da
Volterra; Giacomo Rocca; The Cavaliere d’Arpino; Fil-
ippo Cicciaporci; and Bartolommeo Cavaceppi. At Ott-
ley’s 1814 sale this mounting was purchased by William
Roscoe; it reappeared at his sale of September 1816 as lot
59: “Three, Studies of a Figure, in black chalk; another
ﬁgure on the reverse of one of them. From the same
Collection” (as the previous lot, i.e., Mr. Ottley’s). It was
acquired by Watson, a pseudonym of the London book-
seller William Carey, for 15 s., and presumably then passed
to Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445) and Woodburn. By
the time of the 1842 prospectus, to complicate matters,
this mounting, no. 36, had acquired two further drawings
[Cats. 73 and 101], which were probably added to it by
Lawrence or, less likely, by Woodburn himself. In 1842,
Woodburn gave the provenance for the whole ensem-
ble as the Buonarroti family and the Chevalier Wicar. In
this he was followed by Parker and Robinson. However,
while this provenance probably is true of Cat. 73, it is
unlikely to be true, as we have seen, either of the trio
comprised by the present drawing and Cats. 51 and 52, or
of Cat. 101. It seems likely that Woodburn simply trans-
ferred the probable provenance of Cat. 73 to the whole
group.
References
Ottley sale?, 11 April 1804, lot 273 (“One ditto [leaf] con-
taining three studies of ﬁgures, all in black chalk, from
the Buonarroti collection.”). Ottley sale, 6 June 1814,
etc. probably part of lot 823 (“Three on one leaf, studies
in black chalk – a ﬁgure on the back of one” [lot 825
adds the information: “from the collection of the Cic-
ciaporci family of Florence to whom the contents of the
three above lots formerly belonged, mentioned in the
preface to Condivi, Life of Michelangelo, published in
1746, page xviii. This collection was sold and dispersed
about 1765, and with others purchased of the Cav. Cava-
ceppi, 1792–3, by their present proprietor”].). Wood-
burn, 1842, no. 35 (“Five very ﬁne studies on one Mount,
three of them in black chalk.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 40
(As 1842.). Robinson, 1870, no. 60.1 (Michel Angelo.
This drawing, and [Cats. 51 and 52] “of the later time
of the master . . . apparently all studies for the same work,
of which nothing is known.”). Gotti, 1875, II, p. 232.
Berenson, 1903, I, p. 222, no. 1569.1 (For same purpose
as [Cats. 51 and 52] and Gathorne-Hardy drawing; per-
haps connected with Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter. Verso: ﬁg-
ure identiﬁed as female.). Thode, 1908, II, p. 80 (For a
Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter or a Deposition, with [Cats. 51 and
52].). Thode, 1913, no. 436 (For an Entombment, with
[Cats. 51, 52].). Berenson, 1938, I, no. 1569.1 (As 1903.).
Goldscheider, 1951, no. 121 (c. 1542. Resemblance
both to ﬁgure on left of [Cat. 52] and angel support-
ing right arm of Christ in Piet`a for Vittoria Colonna.).
Wilde, 1953a, pp. 114, 116 (With [Cats. 51 and 52]; not
before 1550.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 127A (With [Cats.
51 and 52]; resemblance to the Epifania cartoon, but not
certainly for it.). Parker, 1956, no. 334 (1550s, for the
same uncertain project as [Cats. 51 and 52]. Recto: ﬁg-
ure male. Verso: ﬁgure female.). Dussler, 1959, no. 347
(Ascribed. c. 1550. Maybe for a Piet`a.). De Tolnay, 1960,
p. 205, no. 217 (With [Cats. 51 and 52 and Washington
1991.217.2a-3b] for same project, perhaps the Epifania or
ﬁgures in fresco or mosaic in the interior of the dome of
St. Peter’s.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1569.1 (As 1903/1938.).
Hartt, 1971, no. 506 (Verso: 1546; female saint for the

254
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 53–54
dome of St. Peter’s; perhaps Mary Magdalen. Has also
been connected with an Entombment composition.); no.
505 (Recto: 1546; Apostle for dome of St. Peter’s.). Gere
and Turner, 1975, no. 154 (Same period as Epifania, but
not necessarily connected.). Joannides, 1975, p. 262 (With
[Cats. 51 and 52 and Washington 1991.217.2a-3b], per-
haps for the Entombment recorded in the ex–Gathorne-
Hardy copy drawing; the date may be c. 1560 because
the architectural sketches here recall the Porta Pia). De
Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III, no. 430 (Recto: with [Cats. 51
and 52 and Washington 1991.217.2a-3b], probably for a
Piet`a recorded in copies attributed to Jacomo del Duca,
formerly Gathorne-Hardy Collection and Giulio Clovio,
Amsterdam, Stedelijk Museum. Verso: lower quality, per-
haps by Jacomo del Duca.). Perrig, 1999, pp. 239–40 (By
Ascanio Condivi; from Farnese Collection.).
CATALOGUE 54
Recto: The Lantern and Cupola of St Peter’s; The Begin-
ning of a Letter
Verso: Architectural Ground Plans, Elevations, and
Sections
1846.90; R.82; P.II 344; Corpus 601
Dimensions: 250×402 mm; a vertical fold down the sheet
some 160 mm from the left edge was probably made by
the artist to isolate the recto drawing.
Medium
Recto: Black chalk; the fragment of the letter in pen and
ink; some offsetting at upper right, from an unidentiﬁed
source.
Verso: Black chalk.
Condition
There are three vertical pressed-out folds, minor tear
repairs, and several inﬁlled holes. There is a minor edge
repair inﬁll, unevenly skinned, and discoloured edge mar-
gins. Severe fractures from ink burn-through have been
supported on the verso; there is much bleeding of the
inscription. There are small ink splatters, accretions, some
skinning, and a small hole. The sheet has uneven dis-
colouration and offset.
Description and Transcription
Recto
With the right edge as base, in Michelangelo’s hand:
Messer francesco signior mio caro Circa almodello che s[i]a
/afare e mi pare che col cardinale si sia facto una ﬁgura/
se[n]za capo
With the lower edge as base
A section through the upper portion of the inner and
outer shells of the dome planned for St. Peter’s, showing
the oculus, the platform at the apex of the outer shell, and
the rough outline of a cylindrical lantern, perhaps articu-
lated by wide pilasters or columns, topped by a platform
matching that at its base and surmounted by a curved
cone. Different curvatures are shown for both outer and
inner shells, although it is uncertain whether at least two
of these might be interpreted as ribs. An interior gallery
may be indicated at the base of the oculus.
Verso
With the lower edge as base
Top row
A. The ground plan of two semi- or three-quarter-
circular chapels joined by a straight wall articulated with
columns at either corner, oriented vertically down the
sheet, overlapping D.
B. A development of A, drawn on a larger scale, oriented
horizontally across the top of the sheet, with, apparently,
columns on both sides of the corners, one of which is
bevelled. This partly overlaps C.
C. The plan of a circular building with eight three-
quarter-circular chapels contained within the circle,
revised to include four cross-axes and four chapels. The
chapels partly overlap one another.
Second row
D. A chapel in elevation up to cornice level. It contains
four tall round-topped niches and, above these, a large
rectangular panel, oriented horizontally. It seems to be
framed by paired giant pilasters supporting a heavy cor-
nice, which breaks forward above them.
E. A variant corner solution of B, in plan, showing
columns on either side with, possibly, seats at their
bases.
Third row
F. A rough plan of a Greek cross church, with slightly
longer horizontal arms, with apsidal ends.
Fourth row
G. A rough plan of a Greek cross church, with slightly
longer horizontal arms, with square ends and round
chapels situated between the arms.
Fifth row
H. A chapel in elevation up to dome level. It contains
three ﬂat-topped niches, a heavy wide cornice with a

CATALOGUE 54
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
255
lunette above, and a ribbed semi-dome. The beginning
of a plan of the adjacent chapel immediately to the right.
This juxtaposition illustrates Michelangelo’s willingness
to move from plan to elevation in the same drawing.
I. An arch in elevation up to cornice level ﬂanked by two
high columns.
With the top edge as the base
J. A chapel in elevation up to cornice level. It contains
three wide round-topped niches and a large rectangular
panel above these. Above this is a single architrave sur-
mounted by a small lunette and a simpliﬁed shell-ribbed
semi-dome. This is ﬂanked by two paired relatively short
columns carrying a very heavy cornice whose top is at
the level of the base of the shell semi-dome. In align-
ment with the columns, above the cornice, are paired
pilasters – or ribs – framing the semi-dome. It is not clear
whether the elements above the cornice represent a ver-
tical extension of these pilasters or ribs, or whether these
are pendentives supporting a ring at the base of the – pre-
sumed – drum, as K – which it slightly overlaps – would
suggest.
K. A cross section of a barrel-vaulted aisle with columns
on pedestals on either side, with a round-topped? niche
opening off that and another round-topped space? above
that, with a straight roof line above. The proﬁle of a pen-
dentive or a dome on the right.
L. A curving proﬁle supporting a cornice. It is not fully
clear to what this refers. It might indicate the shell semi-
dome in proﬁle, surmounted by a cornice. Alternatively,
it could be a section of the “ribs” carrying the ring of the
putative drum.
Discussion
Recto
This side of the sheet is of particular interest in the prepa-
ration of the dome of St. Peter’s because it also includes
a fragment of a commentary upon the project. Of the
hundreds of drawings that Michelangelo must have made
for St. Peter’s, an exceptionally complicated architectural
project that dominated the last seventeen years of his
life, very few survive. However, those that do provide
an invaluable guide to the transformations of the project
and to Michelangelo’s own uncertainties and changes of
mind, and they frequently reveal aspects of his work on
the project that could not be inferred from the docu-
ments alone. Furthermore, the present sheet demonstrates
a continuation of Michelangelo’s practice throughout his
career: his use of the same sheets for drawings relating

256
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 54
to more than one project. This is easy enough to dis-
cern in the case of sheets that contain studies for schemes
as different as, say, the Duomo Apostles and the Battle
of Cascina, which were under way concurrently, but it
is more difﬁcult when Michelangelo was addressing dif-
ferent examples of related types of architecture, such as
centrally planned churches. In the later 1550s and early
1560s, by which time Michelangelo’s work had become

CATALOGUE 54
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
257
principally architectural, St. Peter’s, which he envisaged
as a domed, centrally planned church, overlapped in his
thinking with three other ecclesiastical buildings: San
Giovanni dei Fiorentini, also planned as a centralised
domed building; the Sforza Chapel in the church of Santa
Maria Maggiore, also, in effect, centrally planned; as well
as the conversion of the huge central hall of the Baths of
Diocletian into the church of Santa Maria degli Angeli.
Michelangelo often made drawings for different
projects on the same side of the same sheet but in the
present case recto and verso seem to have been reserved
for different projects and the verso may have been drawn
a little later than the recto. The recto, which shows the
upper part of the dome and the lantern in section, like
the Haarlem drawing (AZ9 recto/VT67/Corpus 596;
black chalk over ruled stylus lines with compass work,
397×232 mm), was clearly left as a sketch and was not
developed. It, like the broken-off beginning of a letter that
accompanies it, refers to the outstanding problem faced by
Michelangelo in the last years of the 1550s: the shape of the
dome of St. Peter’s. This issue is extremely complicated
and can only be outlined here. Nevertheless, it seems clear
that, by 1557, much of the structure of the drum of St.
Peter’s had been determined, although not constructed,
and even though Michelangelo still had considerable
room for manoeuvre, it was now time to think about
the dome that was to surmount it. According to Vasari,
Michelangelo prevaricated for some months and then
made a small-scale model in clay, a medium that looks
back to his earliest years in the Medici garden and that he
also employed early in his preparation of the fac¸ade of San
Lorenzo, but that is not known to have been employed by
him for architectural projects in the intervening period.
No doubt Michelangelo chose clay because it permitted
him to mould and re-mould as he wanted. It is unlikely
that he made only one model of this type, and he may
also have employed wax. To employ clay was inevitably
to accept imprecision and Michelangelo’s concern at this
moment must have been to obtain a satisfactory over-
all shape. Subsequently, presumably, Michelangelo would
have made measured drawings elaborating and clarifying
his clay model in preparation for the very large wooden
model, now in the Vatican, which marked the next major
stage in the preparatory process. Payments for this wooden
model run from November 1558 until November 1561.
One of Michelangelo’s measured working drawings for it
survives in Florence (CB31A/B152/Corpus 600; pen and
brush and wash over black chalk, 388×555 mm), and the
dimensions of its forms are those of the corresponding
parts of the wooden model. In this drawing, Michelan-
gelo was repeating his procedure in preparing the large
wooden model of the fac¸ade of San Lorenzo, some forty
years earlier, for which he had also made same-size draw-
ings, in effect templates. As pointed out by Hirst (1988,
pp. 97, 103), an outline drawing now divided into three
portions housed in Florence and London (it is found on
the versos of CB71A/ B58/Corpus 183, CB49A/B59/
Corpus 182, and BM W25/Corpus 184, with a combined
dimension approximately 500×220 mm maximum) was
made as a template for the twelve columns by which the
lower storey of the model is articulated.
The wooden model for St. Peter’s includes both the
drum and the dome, and it is noteworthy that CB31A,
which speciﬁcally prepares a section of this model’s drum,
differs in certain signiﬁcant respects from the model as
executed. This requires emphasis because it is some-
times assumed that the structure of the drum was fully
determined by 1557. CB31A carries autograph explana-
tory inscriptions, presumably made for the carpenter,
and one of these speciﬁes it as having ochi (i.e., circu-
lar, not rectangular) windows. Circular windows are also
seen in Michelangelo’s elevation drawing of the drum
and dome in the Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts, Lille (Brejon
de Lavergn´ee 107/Corpus 595; black chalk over ruled
lines in stylus, with compass marks, 259×257 mm) (The
date of this drawing is much disputed but, among many
other features, the inscription on its verso referring to
the muleteer Pasquino, recorded in Michelangelo’s cor-
respondence only from mid-1557 onwards, and a small
sketch of the stairway joining the ricetto and reading room
of the Laurentian Library, a project under renewed con-
sideration in late 1558, strongly suggest a date of late 1558
for the whole sheet). The scheme in the Lille drawing,
with its drum containing circular windows, recalls the
drum of Brunelleschi’s Duomo in Florence. Although in
the wooden model for the drum and dome of St. Peter’s
as constructed, the drum is illuminated with upright rect-
angular pedimented windows on both interior and exte-
rior, it seems clear that as late as the beginning of work
on it in November 1558, Michelangeo was still uncer-
tain about the windows’ shape. They remained subject
to change: In the model the pediments surmounting the
windows are triangular on the exterior and segmental
on the interior; in the building there are alternating tri-
angular and segmental pediments on both interior and
exterior. A large drawing in Casa Buonarroti composed
of two sheets which Michelangelo ﬁrst joined and later
divided (CB124A verso and CB103A verso/B160 and
264/Corpus 612 and 613; brush and wash over black
chalk, combined dimensions 617×376 mm maximum),

258
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 54
shows a segmentally pedimented interior window of the
same size as those in the wooden model. This drawing
was presumably made to prepare a revision of the interior
windows of the drum model which, in the event, was
not undertaken because they were all constructed with
triangular pediments. It probably dates from c. 1559–60:
The recto of the larger of the two fragments (CB124A)
contains the most developed ground plan that survives
by Michelangelo’s own hand for the church of San Gio-
vanni dei Fiorentini, a plan datable between August and
December 1559 – the compiler would opt for a later rather
than an earlier date within this span. It was probably at this
moment that Michelangelo divided the sheet in two. A
revised version of this plan for San Giovanni dei Fiorentini
was that selected for execution. Tiberio Calcagni made
a fair copy of it generally identiﬁed with a drawing now
in the Ufﬁzi (3185A; pen and ink and grey wash over
black chalk and stylus work, 492×424 mm), which, if by
Calcagni (Fara, 1997, p. 24, gives it to an “anonimo del
primo Seicento”) would have been, in turn, the basis of
the lost wooden model for that building, also prepared by
Calcagni (see Cat. 105).
The wooden model for St. Peter’s is often silently
assumed to be homogeneous, but it is clear that the car-
penter completed the drum before he made the dome.
It is generally agreed that the dome, which now sur-
mounts the drum and has a steeply raised proﬁle is the
product of a major alteration to the model made over
a decade-and-a-half after Michelangelo’s death, around
1580, and that it deviates from his ﬁnal intentions. Yet it
is clear that Michelangelo retained the option of an ele-
vated dome – similar to that in the model as it now exists
and to the dome as ﬁnally constructed – until a very
late stage. Two solutions are shown in his drawings: an
hemispherical, smooth dome in that in Lille, and an ele-
vated, ribbed dome in that in Haarlem. The hemispher-
ical smooth dome would have co-existed well both with
oculi in the drum and with the smooth attic penetrated
by Diocletian windows, which was originally intended
to run around the church, and which was actually con-
structed on its south arm. The decision to install vertically
orientated windows in the drum, probably taken in early
1559, and to articulate the attic with coats-of-arms and
rectangular windows with shell-centred ﬂat pediments,
separated by short grouped pilaster-strips – construction
of which was underway by c. 1563 – signals the aban-
donment of the “smooth” scheme and speaks strongly in
favour of Michelangelo’s intention, by the early 1560s, to
build a high-proﬁle ribbed dome. This change is signalled
on Lille 107, which contains a small sketch of the revised
attic zone. Although it does appear that his ﬁnal choice –
a compromise – was once again to lower the dome’s pro-
ﬁle, while retaining the ribs and the decorated attic, this
was probably not determined until very shortly before his
death. This is the solution shown in the large engraving
by Etienne Duperac, which, although published only in
1568, was no doubt under preparation for several years
before then and which, in effect, constitutes Michelan-
gelo’s testament for St. Peter’s.
It is difﬁcult to know how much weight to give to the
present drawing, but it is clearly not worked out in detail,
and it seems rather to be an impressionistic sketch. The
series of lines shows Michelangelo experimenting with
different curvatures: They make it clear that Michelan-
gelo had not decided upon the dome’s proﬁle when they
were drawn. Indeed, even as late as early 1561 he was still
pondering the problem. A sketch in Florence (CB 84A
recto/B264/Corpus 614; black chalk, 111×80 mm, sheet
cut down to the main image) for the central gate of the
Porta Pia contains an overdrawn fragmentary indication
of the inner and outer shells of the dome of St. Peter’s,
with a stairway on the inner one, as in the Lille sheet.
The drawing also raises another issue, that of the form
of the lantern. The rather simple proﬁle suggests a lantern
of quite solid form, without a ring of columns and with-
out the elaborate relief of the ﬁnal lantern. From this
drawing, it would seem to be little more than a cylin-
der topped by a broad-based, curved, cone. The cone
rests on a high cornice whose form is not indicated in
any detail, and this matches a protruding ring at the
base of the lantern, which rises fairly abruptly from the
dome. Rather crudely sketched, within the cylinder of
the lantern, is a rectangle which presumably indicates its
interior. But it provides very little information, and it is
not clear whether the interior of the lantern proper is
or is not continuous with the interior of the lower sec-
tion of the lantern, that part between the inner and outer
shells of the cupola. However, this lower part is clearly
open below. These observations raise a further question
connected with the dome of St. Peter’s. Was the lantern
planned to transmit light to the dome – as it does in the
dome as built – or was it to be simply a decorative fea-
ture, surmounting the dome but not directly connected
with it? In which case the dome would have been lit only
from the windows of the drum and would have received
no light from above. Michelangelo seems to have con-
sidered both possibilities. Both the Lille and the Haar-
lem drawings seem to envision a dome interior that does
not open to a lantern. In the present case, it is clear that
the lower compartment is open to the dome interior,
and that, therefore, it must have been intended to illumi-
nate it. This does not necessarily mean that the lower

CATALOGUE 54
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
259
and upper interior compartments of the lantern were
continuous – the lower compartment could have been
sealed off from the upper and lit by portholes in the outer
skin of the dome – but it is probable that they were; in
which case, the solid ring at the base of the upper lantern
in the present drawing would be merely a matter of con-
venience in drawing, a mixing of section and exterior
view, rather than a representation of a solid ﬂoor. Further
representations of the lantern are found on CB117 verso/
B156/Corpus 587 (pen and black chalk, 252×351 mm),
partly drawn over a study for an interior window of the
drum of St. Peter’s but with a triangular rather than seg-
mental pediment and thus drawn after the completion of
that part of the wooden model. Apparently drawn over it
is a rough plan for the “Altopascio” building, to be con-
nected with a planned hospice in the eponymous Tuscan
town, rather than with the Palazzo Grifone in Florence,
as the compiler, among others, had previously thought.
These drawings, however, are concerned with the exte-
rior and the articulation of the lantern, not its relation to
the dome.
The recto drawing is usually placed in 1557, but there
is no precise evidence for the date. The broken-off frag-
ment of a letter, virtually certainly addressed to Michelan-
gelo’s friend, the banker Francesco Bandini, and probably
referring to Cardinal Rodolfo Pio da Carpi, mentioning
a model “sensa capo” could, of course, refer to a model of
the body of the building, without either drum or dome,
which would entail a date no later than the mid-1550s. But
because the delivery of building material for the drum was
underway by 1555, there must have been a model of it in
existence by then, even if aspects of its form were ﬂexible.
The letter could, of course, refer to the situation imme-
diately before the clay model was executed, but it seems
more likely that it was written when the large wooden
model of the drum was about to be begun, or was under-
way, but before that of the dome had been added to it.
The phrasing suggests that the model in question is that
to be, or being, made by a carpenter in wood rather than
the clay model that Michelangelo is himself recorded as
having made. This would imply a date of late 1558 or even
early 1559, which would square with the probable date of
the verso drawings.
Verso
Most of the drawings on the verso of this sheet relate to
the project for the church of San Giovanni dei Fiorentini
at the top of Via Giulia. A church dedicated to San Gio-
vanni, the patron saint of Florence, had been projected c.
1520 to serve the Florentine community in Rome, then
prospering under the rule of the Medici Pope Leo X,
whose baptismal name was Giovanni. At this time, Jacopo
Sansovino was to be the architect, but work languished,
and no more than the foundations were begun. Julius
III thought brieﬂy about reviving the project c. 1550,
and Michelangelo was consulted and prepared drawings
(one of which may survive in a copy in Dresden C.49
verso/Corpus 276, upper drawing, pen and ink with
green wash, silhouetted, 187×165 mm maximum; see
Fara, 1997, p. 6) but nothing then seems to have come
of the idea. Only after Duke Cosimo agreed to support
the project in 1559 was it again revived, and in October
that year the Duke speciﬁcally requested Michelangelo
to make designs for the church. Three carefully worked-
out autograph plans for centralised structures survive on
the rectos of three sheets in Casa Buonarroti (120A,121A,
124A/B159,158,160/Corpus 610, 609, and 612; all chalk,
stylus and brown wash, respectively 425×297 mm,
284×211 mm, 416×408 mm). It is CB124A that rep-
resents the most developed plan of the building by
Michelangelo’s hand. No comparably realised elevation
studies survive, but Michelangelo would certainly have
made them. There are also a number of sketches for dif-
ferent aspects of the different schemes, all in black chalk.
Michelangelo’s assistant Tiberio Calcagni travelled to Pisa
in April 1560 to show the plans to Cosimo, a date that
must mark the terminus ante quem of the three plans.
Sketch C, a circular building with apparently eight
radial chapels in part overlaid with entrances on the
cross axes, links both with CB121A, a circular building
with corner additions, and with CB124A, the design that
comes closest to the ﬁnal one and that contains four radial
chapels and four apsed entrances of chapels on the cross
axes. It seems to be based on the early Christian rotunda
of San Stefano, but it may also reﬂect Michelangelo’s
knowledge of earlier plans for the church by Giuliano
da Sangallo, Jacopo Sansovino, and Antonio da Sangallo
the younger. This scheme was tried again, on a larger
scale, just to the right, but it was not taken far. Over-
lapping C is a sketch plan, B, of what appear to be two
semi-circular chapels that are separated from one another
by a short wall; the corners of the chapels are articulated
by paired columns placed obliquely, as it were to bevel
the corner. This scheme, and that seen in A, in which
there is only one column at each corner, is probably an
attempt by Michelangelo to work out the relation of the
chapels of San Giovanni to one another.
The two loosely sketched crosses, one with apsidal
ends, F, from which the other, G, with circular forms
placed between the arms, seems to have been developed,
may also have a role in the formulation of the ﬁnal scheme,
which combined the ideas of roundness and cross-shaped

260
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 54
forms into a single plastic entity. On the other hand, these
sketches also relate to a drawing in the British Museum
(W84/Corpus 623; black chalk, 241×210 mm), which
is usually believed to be a project for the Sforza Chapel; a
connection with that project, however, is far from certain
because the building depicted in the BM drawing does
not seem to be attached to a larger structure. Any con-
nection with St. Peter’s, whose plan had long been deter-
mined when these sketches were made, seems entirely
misguided.
The elevation J (inverted), a variant of the part eleva-
tion D, seems to be that of the interior of one of the radi-
ating chapels. It is articulated on two levels with the top
probably seen as a shell semi-dome, like Bramante’s design
for the choir of Santa Maria del Popolo, an indication of
Michelangelo’s senescent reconsideration of his erstwhile
adversary’s work. The lower section of the chapel contains
three round-topped niches. This elevation [J] seems com-
pressed and plastic, its columns or pillars resting directly
on the ﬂoor, without pedestals. There is also a corre-
spondence between this elevation and what may be con-
jectured about the elevation of the sacristies in CB121A,
which would also have been ﬂanked by paired pilasters.
The compiler can see no plausible connection between
these and either Michelangelo’s design for the Duomo at
Padua or for the nicchione of the Belvedere.
The temptation to connect elevation J with the section
[K; also inverted] immediately to its right, should proba-
bly be resisted. The scales do not correspond and none of
the salient features seems to match. This drawing, moving
from right to left, seems to show the section of an annular
aisle of, presumably, a round structure – or conceivably a
lantern – with tall columns or pillars set on bases, with a
lower form, perhaps a chapel? opening off it. This chapel?
contains a lower curved form that might be intended to
represent a niche but that does not correspond to any
possible position of one. It could equally represent a sec-
ond passageway. At the far right rises a curved line, which
presumably indicates a dome, but without a drum. Were
it not for this, it would be very tempting to see the section
as representing an aisle of a Latin cross church with open
shallow interconnecting chapels in an arrangement famil-
iar in both Roman and Florentine quattrocento churches.
However, this temptation too must be resisted, since the
verso of a sketch made for the ground plan of CB124A
(CB 36A verso/B161/Corpus 611; black chalk, 142×177
mm maximum; see Fara, 1997, ﬁg. 29), is clearly an ele-
vation section corresponding to the ground plan on the
recto, and this employs a curved line of exactly the same
type to indicate the dome. It must be concluded, there-
fore, that this section, K, does represent an idea for San
Giovanni dei Fiorentini, but the compiler is unable to
interpret it coherently or to make a connection between
it and any of the other sketches on this side of the sheet,
or to any other drawings by Michelangelo.
The elevation H is quite similar to J but seems to be
higher. It shows an apse with three square-headed niches,
a stretch of unarticulated wall above them, surmounted
by a wide frieze, above which rises a pointed segment of
a semi-dome. In this project, Michelangelo seems to have
considered a building higher than in the other elevation,
and it remains possible that this is for the Sforza Chapel:
It is instructive to compare it with a view of one of the
“transepts” of the chapel.
Finally, the elevation of an arch I ﬂanked by pilasters
or pilaster strips and surmounted by an entablature does
not seem to connect with any of the other drawings on
this page. Nor does it bear any relation to the Porta Pia,
on which Michelangelo began to work early in 1561.
The single possibility that occurs to the compiler is that
it could be a preliminary project for the entrance to the
Sforza Chapel, opening from the left aisle of Santa Maria
Maggiore, but this is no more than conjecture.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar; William Young
Ottley, his sale 11 April 1804, part of lot 265? (“Three
[i.e., drawings] – two studies, in black chalk; and one
ditto, masterly pen – on the back of the last is an
account of money, in the writing of the celebrated artist –
bought from the family of the artist, still resident in
Florence.”); his sale, 6 June 1814, and following days,
lot 260, leaf 2iii? (“Two leaves of architectural designs,
etc from the Buonarroti Collection . . . the other for the
cupola of St Peter’s. A specimen of his handwriting
on one.”); Samuel Woodburn; Sir Thomas Lawrence
(L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale, 11 April 1804, part of lot 265? (“Three
[i.e., drawings] – two studies, in black chalk; and one
ditto, masterly pen – on the back of the last is an
account of money, in the writing of the celebrated artist –
bought from the family of the artist, still resident in Flo-
rence.”). Ottley, 6 June 1814, etc., lot 260, leaf 2iii? (“Two
leaves of architectural designs, etc from the Buonarroti
Collection . . . the other for the cupola of St Peter’s. A
specimen of his handwriting on one.”). Lawrence Inven-
tory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-95]
(“An interesting leaf of Studies for St. Peters Church
with an autograph of M. Angelo.”). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 56 (“A slight marking in of a design for the dome

CATALOGUE 54
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
261
of a church – a subject known to have engaged the
special attention of M. Angelo, when about to under-
take the Dome of St. Peter’s.”). Robinson, 1870, no. 82
(Michelangelo, made in preparation for the wooden
model of the cupola in 1558. Francesco may be Francesco
Bandini; the Cardinale perhaps the Cardinal de Carpi.).
Black, 1875, p. 215, no. 70. Gotti, 1875, II, pp. 232–3.
Berenson, 1903, II, p. 100 (Genuine.). Thode, 1908, II,
p. 162 (Michelangelo, 1556–7. Recto and verso for
St Peter’s.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 168 (Recto: link with
lantern of Santa Maria del Fiore. Late 1556, early 1557.);
no. 169 (Verso: related to St. Peter’s?.). Thode, 1913,
no. 454 (As 1908.). D. Frey, 1920, pp. 108–10 (Recto:
1557. Contests Frey’s interpretation “technisch unsinnig.”
Preliminary sketch for the lantern recorded in devel-
oped form in Duperac’s engraving. Addressee of letter
identiﬁed as Francesco Bandini.). De Tolnay, 1930, p. 8
(Recto: rightly linked by D. Frey with the model to
be made and dated shortly before 3 July 1557.). K¨orte,
1932, pp. 97–8 (Recto: Michelangelo concerned with
the plastic effect of the lantern, treated here with consid-
erable artistic freedom; details of the lower compartment
of the lantern reserved for Haarlem A29/VT 67/Cor-
pus 596.). Wittkower, 1933, pp. 357–8 (Michelangelo
still undecided about the proﬁle of the cupola in 1557;
the form of the lantern the most problematic aspect of
the cupola.). Berenson, 1938, II, p. 204 (As 1903.). De
Tolnay, 1951, pp. 184, 297 (Sketch probably in relation
to the terracotta model of the cupola recorded in July
1557.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 155 (Recto: c. 1557–8.).
Parker, 1956, no. 344 (Recto: c. 1557, for wooden model
of dome of St. Peter’s. Verso: sketches include two rough
ground plans of St. Peter’s.). Dussler, 1959, no. 207
(Michelangelo, 1556–7 for St. Peter’s. Verso: doubtful if
related to St. Peter’s.). Berenson, 1961, II, p. 348 (As
1903/1938.). Ackerman, 1961, II, p. 98 (Recto: “Rapid
sketch of crown of dome and lantern section, tenta-
tively dated 1557 by the fragment of a letter.”); pp. 98,
124 (Verso: “Plans, interior elevations, and a section of
a large central-plan church. A scheme for eight semi-
circular radiating chapels and a circular plan is considered
together with a Greek cross plan containing chapels in
the angles, basically the ﬁnal solution for San Giovanni.
The section (not in the plans) shows the dome sup-
ported on free-standing columns which are separated
from the ring of chapels by an ambulatory as in the
plan CB124A/Corpus 609 for San Giovanni. The chapels
in the elevations have low niches like those of San
Giovanni, but are semi-circular and have broad open-
ings.”). Ackerman, 1964, II, p. 100 (Recto: as 1961.);
pp. 100, 128 (Verso: As 1961.). Wittkower, 1962 (cited
in edition of 1964), pp. 46, 68 (Recto: demonstrates
“un ondeggiare tra diverse forme di lanterna e tra una
soluzione pi`u depressa ed un pi`u slanciata per la cupola,
negli anni di fase di preparazione.”). Barbieri and Puppi,
1964a, p. 1013 (Recto: “Studio dell’attacco della base
della lanterna alle due calotte della cupola” commonly
dated 1557.); pp. 972, 1017 (Verso: for the Sforza Chapel
“ma anche avvicinabili agli studi per San Giovanni dei
Fiorentini . . . richiama CB124A [appunto per San Gio-
vanni] ma con notevoli varianti.”). Barbieri and Puppi,
1964b, tav. 89 (Recto: “non `e comunque da escludersi un
suo referimento al modello ligneo del 1546–7.”). De Tol-
nay, 1964a, col. 908 (“[S]ketch of the lantern [1557–61]
with a small section of the top of the dome, still shows sev-
eral dome proﬁles and reveals that Michelangelo had not
yet deﬁnitely decided which to use.”). De Angelis d’Ossat
1965b, II, 348 [English ed. 344] (Recto: ante-dates Haar-
lem A29/Corpus 596.). Wittkower, 1970, p. 88 (Recto:
1557; demonstrates Michelangelo’s indecision about the
proﬁle of the dome. This drawing mostly concerned with
the lantern.). Hartt, 1971, no. 501 (Recto: 1557; “exact
proﬁle of dome had still not been determined.”); no. 519
(Verso: 1560?. Sketches for a central plan church.). Von
Einem, 1973, p. 225 (Datable 1556–7; “still shows a cer-
tain indecision but there is a clear tendency towards a
hemispherical form; above the dome, resting on a sub-
stantial circular canopy that crowns the interior lantern, is
a tall, hastily sketched outer lantern.”). Gere and Turner,
1975, no. 172 (Recto: study for model of 1558–61; shows
dome with lower proﬁle, closer to ﬁnal solution.). Saal-
man, 1975, p. 400 (Recto: “The roughly-drawn lantern
has approximately the same proportions as the lanterns
in the Lille and Haarlem drawings. . . . There would seem
no reason to date . . . [it] . . . later than the Lille drawing,
i.e. between c. 1547 and early 1554.”). De Tolnay, 1980,
Corpus IV, no. 601 (Recto: c. 1557: at this late stage
Michelangelo had still not decided on the curve of the
cupola. Verso: [F, G] plans for St. Peter’s. [H, I] for the
Cappella del Re, the southern apse of St. Peter’s. [D, J]
resemble the choir of the Padua duomo. [C] two super-
imposed plans for San Giovanni dei Fiorentini, the ﬁrst
with cross-axes, the second with eight radial chapels, ante-
dating ﬁnal plan. Inspiration of Brunelleschi’s Santa Maria
degli Angeli noted. [A, B] related to Sforza Chapel?. [K]
proﬁle of chapel, ambulatory column, and dome for San
Giovanni dei Fiorentini.). Nova, 1984, p. 191 (Recto:
c.1557; shape of cupola not yet determined.). Ackerman
and Newman, 1986, pp. 320, 324, 329 (Recto: as 1964.
Verso: plan and elevation of a chapel, related to Sforza
Chapel?.). Millon and Smyth, 1988, no. 30 (Recto: “The
principal study was drawn over an earlier drawing of the

262
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 54–55
exterior dome and lantern at a smaller scale (the ribs and
lantern base may be seen just above the platform of the
larger drawing). The principal study shows the proﬁles of
the exterior and interior domes as they near the oculus.
Although it is difﬁcult to be sure, the main lines may rep-
resent the upper portions of hemispherical domes. (The
other paired lines, apparently more elevated and ending
under the oculus, may be representations of successive
ribs beyond the section.) The wall thickness of the oculus
shown, as well as a window sill or balustrade, indicat-
ing openings from the space between the shells into the
space of the oculus. The platform above the oculus is sin-
gle and thick, resembling somewhat the platform of the
lantern in the central study of the sheet in Haarlem, but
with less space for an exterior walkway. The height of the
lantern and its heavy entablature suggest that if columns
or pilasters were intended for the lantern, they would have
rested directly in the platform and not on pedestals. The
width of the base of the cone atop the lantern suggests
that the lantern had only two stages, or was a three stage
lantern with a low second stage, as at the upper left of the
drawing in Haarlem.”). Contardi, 1990, p. 330 (Recto:
1557; “shows a hemispheric external cap.”); pp. 335, 349
(Verso: sketches for St. Peter’s and perhaps San Giovanni
dei Fiorentini; no reason to relate them to the Sforza
Chapel.). Carpiceci, 1991, pp. 67, 75 (Recto: analysis and
graphic analysis, ﬁg. 69; dated 1560–61.); pp. 96, 98–9
(Verso: drawn before the beginning of the letter on the
recto. Studies, datable 1559–60, for the Sforza Chapel
[elevations: A, J, H; plans: B, D] and for the Sforza Chapel
or San Giovanni dei Fiorentini [B, C, E?, F, G] and for San
Giovanni dei Fiorentini [K].). Millon and Lambugnani,
1994, no. 406 (As Millon and Smyth, 1988.). Fara, 1997,
p. 20 (Verso: “Michelangelo . . . insieme a studi plani-
metrici e di elevazione, ha delineato, anche se in maniera
non puntualmente referibile a San Giovanni dei Fioren-
tini, un proﬁle di cupola rialzato sostenuto da colonne
libere con un corridoio esterno che serve da contrafforte”
[i.e., K].).
CATALOGUE 55
Recto: Design for Window
Verso: Studies for the Drum of St. Peter’s and Other
Architectural Projects; A Right Arm and Shoulder Seen
from the Front
1846.79; R.81; P.II 333; Corpus 589
Dimensions: 419×277 mm
Medium
Recto: Wash and white heightening over black chalk,
employed both free hand and ruled; some later re-
drawing.
Verso: Black chalk.
Condition
There is an uneven horizontal crease and extensive repairs.
There are major edge tear repairs and inﬁlls, including
an inﬁll strip at the lower left corner. There is a minor
inﬁlled edge nick, abraded margins, and skinning. The
sheet has extensive uneven discolouration and ingrained
surface dirt.
Description
Recto
Window with very elaborate carving, modiﬁed into a
door.
Verso
A. A summary elevation of the drum of St. Peter’s in two
bays comprising a plinth, and a pedestal zone, an arch,
surmounted by a widow with a triangular pediment, sep-
arated by paired columns from another bay with a win-
dow with triangular pediment, surmounted by an attic
zone.
With the right edge as base
B. A right shoulder and arm, seen frontally.
C. Two curved chapels in plan separated by a straight
wall with two columns in front of it and one at either
side.
D. Directly below C, a curved wall, a short straight wall
with two columns indicated.
E. Directly above C, a curved wall, partly drawn over A.
With the top edge as base
Top line
F. A detailed study of the elevation of the attic zone of A
together with the plan for the double columns at entab-
lature zone shown on the same plane. The attic zone
is decorated with a simpliﬁed garland. The entablature
zone of the columns comprises two statue bases and two
balustrades.
Second line
G. A detail of F in proﬁle, with the balustrade, the statue
on its base and the pilaster of the attic zone.
H. A close up sketch of two pilasters of the attic zone of
A and F.

CATALOGUE 55
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
263

264
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 55

CATALOGUE 55
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
265
Third line
I. A staircase in elevation and section comprised appar-
ently of a curved – or perhaps semi-circular – central ﬂight
of four high steps with, at the left, a curving side ﬂight of
steps with lower risers whose number is not clear. At the
right of the sketch, the side ﬂight seems to be shown in
section and can be seen to comprise six steps.
J. An abbreviated staircase, related to I.
K. An ambiguous form. It could be (a) an abbreviated
garland, related to A; (b) a segmental pediment, an alter-
native to the triangular pediment in A; (c) a half step as
at the top of I.
The compiler is inclined to favour the last option, which would
also explain its proximity to J.
Fourth line
L. A plan of a curved chapel, fronted by paired columns,
on a small scale.
The alternative, that the paired columns belong to M, indicating
paired columns being tried on the curved part of the chapel wall,
rather than the single column indicated on the curved part in
M is also possible, but the columnar cluster that such a scheme
would entail seems unlikely for Michelangelo.
M. Partly intersecting L, two curved chapels in plan sep-
arated by a straight wall with two columns before it and
one at either side.
N. Part of the staircase I in section, showing four high
steps with the platform above. This seems more likely
than the alternative, that this is a half elevation of the
central staircase.
O. The right-side ﬂight of the staircase I in modiﬁed sec-
tion and partial elevation?. However, this seems to com-
prise only ﬁve steps, which would indicate a modiﬁcation
of I.
Discussion
The recto has been connected by most students with
the design of the second ﬂoor windows of the court-
yard of Palazzo Farnese, which all early sources attribute
to Michelangelo. It is hardly necessary to enumerate the
very close similarities between them. Once the design was
ﬁrmly established, of course, the execution and installa-
tion of the window frames would have been carried out
by the executing architect, Giacomo Vignola. The date
of Michelangelo’s designs is uncertain. Although any day-
to-day engagement with Palazzo Farnese may well have
ceased after 1550, as Ackerman claimed, there would be
no bar to Michelangelo’s having made drawings for vari-
ous details after this time.
The present sheet was probably prepared in CB
65A/B257/Corpus 548 (black chalk, 422×269 mm), as
the compiler suggested in 1978, dating it to c. 1550. De
Tolnay retained for CB 65A a dating in the 1520s, but
the page size, drawing style, and architectural forms indi-
cate a much later date, one supported by the watermark
(Roberts Crossbow B, found on paper used by Michelan-
gelo in the period c. 1555–60). Morrogh, 1994, pro-
posed a still later date for CB 65A, c. 1560, and sug-
gested that it was drawn for the aedicule in the vestibule
of the Conservatori; he also noted its design similari-
ties with the present drawing and Cat. 56. However, a
drawing by Michelangelo for this aedicule does exist (CB
97A recto/B167/Corpus 616; brush and wash over black
chalk, 283×255 mm), but it is simple and severe, and
there is no need to connect CB 65A with the Capitoline
scheme. Nor does CB 65A seem to the compiler to be as
late as c. 1560, although it is not easy to date the work of
Michelangelo’s last decade by style.
The recto drawing presents rich carving and the motifs
are of great delicacy. These facts afﬁrm that it was made for
a project that was lavishly funded and corresponds both
to the very elaborate cornice that Michelangelo designed
for Palazzo Farnese, of which a full-scale version in wood
was hoisted into place in July 1547, so that Pope Paul III
could judge its effect, and to the upper-storey courtyard
windows as carved, which are among the most elaborate
of the period. Although the present design was not taken
over fully for Palazzo Farnese, it has many features in com-
mon with these windows. However, because the present
sheet contains on its verso drawings datable to 1559–60,
and because its provenance is from Casa Buonarroti, it is
reasonable to assume that it was not given to Vignola –
the executive architect of Palazzo Farnese – to follow
and remained in Michelangelo’s possession. It would be,
therefore, one among presumably numerous drawings
that Michelangelo made for these window-frames, not
the ﬁnal design.
In 1965a, although agreeing that the drawing on the
recto of the present sheet was made for Palazzo Farnese,
De Angelis d’Ossat connected the recto of the com-
panion sheet, Cat. 56, with the Capitoline palaces. His
acute insights were developed in detail and with new
documentation by Morrogh, who demonstrated that the
ﬁnal design of Palazzo dei Conservatori was arrived at
by Michelangelo only at the very end of his life, rather
than in the late 1530s, as Ackerman had argued. Con-
struction of the Conservatori began only months before
Michelangelo’s death, and it would be contrary to his
habits to have busied himself with detailed designs many
years before they were required, or, had he done so, to
have stuck to them. Morrogh pointed out that forms very
close to those in the present drawing are found in the

266
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 55
aediculed niche on the ﬁrst landing of the Conservatori’s
stairway, and noted a faint ﬁgural outline in the central
aperture in the present drawing, suggesting that the niche
was planned for statuary. He concluded that it should be
dated to c. 1562–3.
Nevertheless, while Morrogh’s observations seem to
the compiler wholly accurate, his conclusion does not
necessarily follow. The reﬁned detail of the decoration,
fully appropriate to Palazzo Farnese, is quite alien to the
mode that Michelangelo adopted in the Conservatori,
where he employed broader and heavier forms. The style
of the chalk underdrawing, with ﬁrm thin lines ruled in
black chalk, with the ﬁne detail of masks, guttae, garlands,
etc., inserted in precise and fully controlled freehand
drawing, strongly suggests a date no later than c. 1550.
What seems to have happened is that a drawing made
in the late 1540s was re-worked – and simpliﬁed – by
Michelangelo shortly before his death, in order to serve
as a model for the tabernacle on the main staircase of the
palace (a conclusion also reached by Elam, 2001). As the
facsimile copy of the recto in the Fogg Museum shows,
this was originally drawn with a thin line and sharp chalk –
and, like CB 65A, without wash. Michelangelo then re-
worked the image with a thicker chalk, partly freehand,
partly roughly ruled, and added wash. This is particularly
evident at the base, where three parallel lines have been
extended across the drawing, and at the inner sides of the
niche, where he extended the elaborate moulding into a
ﬂat ﬂange, thin on the right and quite wide on the left.
This narrows the central aperture in relation to the axial
vertical, more so at left than right. At the left, the wider
inner ﬂange seems to break forward at capital level into a
rectangular undecorated block, quite close to the style of
CB 97A. At upper right he also sketched the outline of a
triangular pediment to cover the segmental one, a solu-
tion that looks back to the inner door of the reading room
of the Laurentian Library. Indeed, although this design
was initially made for a window frame and was ﬁnally
employed as a statuary niche, Michelangelo also consid-
ered employing it for a door, since he sketched steps at the
bottom. Furthermore, although it is not easy to descry, he
seems to have indicated two columns or pilasters, one on
either side, with bases. These were drawn after the new
framing and would further have simpliﬁed the forms. The
copyist who made the drawing now in the Fogg Museum
clearly indicated a column on the left side. Although the
draughtsman obviously had difﬁculty understanding fully
Michelangelo’s original, it was no doubt more legible
when he copied it than it is now.
The present drawing would not have been used for
constructing the tabernacle; a fair copy would have been
prepared under Michelangelo’s supervision by an assistant,
probably Tiberio Calcagni.
It is interesting to compare the present drawing with
one made in preparation for the aedicule in the entrance
hall of the Conservatori. This sheet, CB 97A, carries
on its recto sketches for the Porta Pia and, perhaps, the
revised attic of St Peter’s, which implies a terminus post
quem of early 1561. CB 97A verso for the aedicule, made
with a straight edge with minimal freehand re-working,
is precise and exact, with little indication of a shaking
hand. The technique is entirely Michelangelesque, and
there is no justiﬁcation for the commonly held view that
it is by an assistant. It seems improbable that it should have
been made more than a year or two before the beginning
of the construction of the Conservatori in June 1563
and, like some of the initial drawings for the Porta Pia,
it shows that when using a straight-edge, Michelangelo’s
handling exhibits fewer signs of his age. In contrast, in
the re-working of the present drawing, one senses that
manual command is departing. Concerned, in his last
months of life, to maintain control over the forms of his
building, now being erected, but ﬁnding new invention
hard if not impossible, Michelangelo re-worked old
designs, either unused, or used in modiﬁed form, rather
than creating new ones. Indeed, much of the architectural
detail of the Conservatori is backward-looking. Thus,
the doors that run along the front of the building are
virtual repetitions of that designed by Michelangelo
exactly thirty years earlier for the ﬁrst-storey cloister of
the monastery of San Lorenzo, through which the visitor
enters the corridor leading to the Reliquary Tribune in
the church (see Cat. 38), a beautiful invention but one
so relatively little known that Michelangelo probably felt
few qualms in re-using it.
Verso
The verso is complicated. Some of the sketches are for
St. Peter’s, as de Tolnay ﬁrst noted, others seem to have
been done in preparation for San Giovanni dei Fioren-
tini, and still others, for the staircase in the ricetto of the
Laurentian Library.
The difﬁculty of interpreting such abbreviated sketches
is exacerbated by the fact that forms planned to be perpen-
dicular to one another in reality were drawn by Michelan-
gelo as though they were in the same plane, and that he
drew curved forms as though they were straight (the last
is also a feature of his full-size constructional drawing for
the wooden model of the drum of St. Peter’s, CB31A; see
Cat. 56). The most important of the sketches is A, which
represents two bays of the drum in elevation: de Tolnay
did not recognise this, but Morrogh may have done so;

CATALOGUE 55
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
267
Carpiceci, whose interpretation of much of this verso
otherwise coincides with that of the compiler, thought it a
hasty memory sketch of the body of the basilica as already
executed. The elevation is divided into two storeys. The
lower storey is articulated by columns on high bases. At
the left is seen one column, at the right two, and the bay
at right seems to be wider than that at the left. It would be
easy to interpret this as a sketch of a palace fac¸ade com-
posed of rhythmic bays – if of an unusual kind – but the
explanation for the discrepancy in the number of columns
is that Michelangelo has drawn that on the left as though
it were in proﬁle view, not face-on, and it thus conceals
its companion. The apparent discrepancy in the width of
the bays also responds to the foreshortening of the bay on
the left, which notionally curves in depth away from the
viewer. The effect, in more diagrammatic rendering, is
similar to that of the Lille drawing (Brejon de Lavergn´ee
107/Corpus 595). Both bays of the main storey contain
a vertical window topped by a triangular pediment. In
the left-hand bay, however, this seems to be drawn over
curved lines. It is difﬁcult to be certain, but this sketch
would seem to show Michelangelo deciding, ﬁnally, to
substitute rectangular windows for the round windows
indicated on CB31A/Corpus 600 and shown on Lille 107.
Above the main storey is a lightly sketched attic, artic-
ulated with short pilasters, again with one on the left
and two in the centre. It is this attic that occupied
Michelangelo’s attention in the other drawings for St.
Peter’s on this page, all of them drawn with the sheet
inverted with respect to A. The most important is F. This
shows, in elevation, a section of the drum attic articu-
lated by two short pilasters at the left and decorated by a
garland, as seen in Lille 107. Below the two pilasters, the
form that seems to be pendent is, in fact, a plan of the
platform formed by the entablature of the giant buttress
columns. The rows of small circles represent balustrades
(cf. Cat. 38), and the ovals contained within rectangles at
the outer side, the plinths and bases of statues. A statue,
its plinth, a balustrade, and the pilaster at the rear are
seen in proﬁle elevation in G. The small sketch of paired
pilasters, H, was probably made to work out their form
more precisely. These drawings show Michelangelo try-
ing to establish the details within the composition of the
attic as seen in Lille 107, in which, despite the small scale,
platforms bearing large statues above the buttress-columns
can clearly be seen.
These St. Peter’s identiﬁcations are crucial for the date
of the present sequence of drawings. Because they seem
to show a transition from a drum perforated by ochi to one
perforated by windows, they were presumably drawn later
than the plan for the wooden model CB31A/Corpus 600.
This would suggest a date no earlier than the end of 1558,
and perhaps up to a year later.
There are also ﬁve sketches showing variants of curved
forms. These seem all to be related to the same project,
most clearly interpretable from C and M. These show two
large curves, more extensive than a semi-circle, joined by
a short straight section with two circles before it, and
two circles on each of the re-entrants, adjacent to the
straight section. This seems to be a ground plan of two
curved chapels, opening from a building that is probably
circular, but whose circularity is hardly discernible from
the way that Michelangelo has chosen to draw it. They
are obviously en-suite with the similar forms on Cat. 54
verso, and were no doubt made for San Giovanni dei
Fiorentini, thus datable 1559–60.
The four sketches of staircases [I, J, N, O] show vari-
ations of circular or oval ﬂights. I, a view from the front,
is the most informative. It shows three or four high steps
rising to a circular platform. At the right and left sides
are indicated further ﬂights, in proﬁle with, clearly, six
risers at the right. The implication seems to be that the
central form is primarily decorative, and that the route to
the platform is by the side ﬂight. N and O show, it seems,
the central and side ﬂights, the ﬁrst, apparently, with four
and the second with ﬁve risers, although the sketches are
not precise enough to be certain of this. J is too vague to
interpret. It seems likely that these drawings were made
in response to the request to provide a design for the stair-
case of the ricetto of the Laurentian Library. In the 1520s,
Michelangelo had experimented with curved steps, with
central steps with higher risers ﬂanked by steps with lower
risers (see CB92A recto and verso/B89/Corpus 525; red
and black chalk, pen and ink, 390×280 mm maximum),
and in each case the side steps contain either ﬁve or six
risers. The connection of the present sketches with the
San Lorenzo ricetto project appears to be ﬁrm, and the
date would again be congruent: late 1558–early 1559.
The sketch of a right shoulder seen from the front, B,
was certainly the ﬁrst drawing to be made on this side
of the sheet, probably some time before the others. It
cannot securely be connected with any other drawing
or project by Michelangelo, but it was, in all probability,
made to determine the surface forms of the right shoulder
of Christ in the Rondanini Piet`a, on which Michelangelo
worked ﬁtfully throughout the ﬁnal years of his life.
Drawn Copies
1. The recto was copied on a small scale by Francesco
Buonarroti on Ufﬁzi 5350A, left side, a.
2. The recto and the arm study on the verso were
copied on the recto and the verso of a sheet now in

268
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 55
the Fogg Museum of Art, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
1998.194; black chalk, 396×257 mm. This sheet is a
double-sided facsimile of Michelangelo’s sheet, made
before he re-worked the recto design and added wash
to it, and before he made the architectural sketches on
the verso. It must have been drawn in the master’s studio
between c. 1547 and c. 1560.
History
Bernardo Buontalenti? (the complementary sheet, Cat.
56, was certainly owned by Buontalenti before it was
acquired for Casa Buonarroti, so this sheet may also
have been in his possession); Casa Buonarroti; Jean-
Baptiste Wicar?; William Young Ottley (his sale, 6 June
1814, and following days, lot 253? “One, an architectural
design – a window from the Lorenziana library, studies
on the back in black chalk. From the Bonaroti collec-
tion at Florence.” £1.1.0); Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2554);
Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, lot 253? (“One, an architectural
design – a window from the Lorenziana library, studies on
the back in black chalk. From the Bonarroti collection at
Florence”?.). Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti
Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-66] (“An Architectural study for
a Window on the reverse studies for part of the Fig-
ure.”).Woodburn, 1836b, no. 1 (“A window . . . treated
with great simplicity and grandeur . . . on the reverse is an
arm, and some architecture.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 43
(As 1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 11 (As 1842.). Fisher,
1852, p. 6, pl. 31 (A Window.). Fisher, 1865, I, p. 19,
pl. 31 (As 1852.). Robinson, 1870, no. 81 (More ornate
than [Cat. 56] but of same period, after 1549. “Certain
features of resemblance with some details of the Campi-
doglio architecture, but there is perhaps more direct anal-
ogy with some of the windows of St Peter’s.”). Fisher,
1872, I, p. 17, pl. 31 (As 1852.). Black, 1875, p. 215, no. 68.
Gotti, 1875, II, p. 231. Fisher, 1879, L/52 (“Probably pro-
duced after 1548.”). Berenson, 1903, I, p. 100 (Genuine.).
Thode, 1908, II, p. 201 (Recto: for second ﬂoor court-
yard windows of Palazzo Farnese.). K. Frey, 1909–11,
no. 272 (Recto: for a window; by a pupil to Michelan-
gelo’s instructions reﬂecting his Florentine forms; related
to upper storey of Palazzo Farnese, c. 1546–7.); no. 273
(Verso: relation of staircase sketches to ricetto of Laurentian
Library but probably Roman and for Palazzo Farnese.).
Thode, 1913, no. 453 (Recto: as 1908. Verso: difﬁcult to
know which building they are connected with; has aban-
doned idea that they are for St Peter’s.). Berenson, 1938,
II, p. 204 (As 1903.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no. 154 (Recto: c.
1550, for a window for the upper storey of the courtyard
of Palazzo Farnese.). Parker, 1956, no. 333 (Recto: “cer-
tainly a design, drawn in about 1550, for the windows in
the upper storey of the courtyard of the Palazzo Farnese”;
simpliﬁed in execution. Verso: rejects Frey’s views; “The
purpose of all these scribbled sketches remains at present
obscure.”). Dussler, 1959, no. 634 (Recto: by a follower to
Michelangelo’s design.); no. 352 (Ascribed to Michelan-
gelo, 1550s. Architectural sketches of uncertain purpose.).
Ackerman, 1961, II, p. 77 (Recto: “reasonably close to
the ﬁnal version [of the windows on the upper level of
the Courtyard of Palazzo Farnese] and may be Michelan-
gelo’s sole surviving sketch for the palace.”); no. 60 (Verso:
[A] “the elevation of a palace fac¸ade with a colossal
order embracing arched apertures on the lower story
and pedimented windows on the upper. The system is
closer to that of the Campidoglio palaces than to other
Michelangelo projects, but the connection cannot be ver-
iﬁed.”). Berenson, 1961, II, p. 348 (As 1903/1938.). Ack-
erman, 1964, II, p. 79 (Recto: as 1961.); p. 62 (Verso:
as 1961.). Barbieri and Puppi, 1964a, pp. 887, 972, 1011
(Verso: [A] “l’alzato della facciata di un palazzo ad ordine
gigante . . . vicini ai palazzi del Campidoglio, anche se
mancano effettivi elementi per un sicuro agganciamento.”
Also sketches “anche avvicinabili agli studi per San Gio-
vanni dei Fiorentini . . . per`o probabilmente precedente
ai saggi sicuri per quella chiesa.”); pp. 904, 1015 (Recto:
for a window. “L’unico autografo superstite di Michelan-
giolo” for Palazzo Farnese.). Barbieri and Puppi, 1964b,
tav. 83 (Recto: for Palazzo Farnese.); tav. 63 (“Prospetto di
una facciata e schizzi di scala; . . . da porsi, sia pur con pru-
denza, col palazzi capitolini,” datable c. 1550.). De Angelis
d’Ossat, 1965b, II, pp. 356, 361 (Recto: for the second-
ﬂoor courtyard windows of the Palazzo Farnese.). Hartt,
1971, no. 495 (Recto: 1546, for window in Palazzo Far-
nese.); no. 483 (Verso: 1538–50?. “a giant order of pilasters
[A] embracing a second storey of pedimented windows
over a ﬁrst story of arches . . . seems to be related to the
Palazzo dei Conservatori . . . remaining . . . sketches even
harder to identify and date.”). Gere and Turner, 1975,
no. 149 (Recto: for windows in upper storey or Palazzo
Farnese, c. 1547–9.). De Tolnay, 1980, Corpus IV, no. 589
(Recto: for Palazzo Farnese, c. 1550. Verso: [A] ﬁrst to be
drawn on this side, later than the Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter.
[B] for the exterior of the Chapel of the King of France
of St. Peter’s. [F, G] for the attic of the drum of St. Peter’s.
[H] for the coupled columns of the drum. The staircase
designs recall those by Bramante for the nicchione of the
Belvedere, but are probably for the ricetto of San Lorenzo.

CATALOGUES 55–56
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
269
The curved plans probably for the Sforza Chapel.). Nova,
1984, pl. 99 (Recto: for window of Palazzo Farnese.).
Ackerman and Newman, 1986, pp. 186, 312, 316 (Recto:
“contains overlaid window designs; beneath a design for
the windows of the upper story of the Farnese Court is
a simpler one, apparently intended for the Conservatori
fac¸ade.” Verso: as 1964.). Contardi, 1990, pp. 261, 270
(Recto: identiﬁable with the window on the third ﬂoor of
Palazzo Farnese); pp. 261, 349 (Verso: has been connected
with Conservatori, no relation to the Sforza Chapel.).
Carpiceci, 1991, p. 83 (Recto: for the windows of the
third level of the Palazzo Farnese, at about 1/17 scale;
datable c. 1560.); pp. 37–8, 83–5 (Verso: [B], for Rondanini
Piet`a or, more likely, with ﬁgures linked by him with the
Riccio Chapel. [A] “un rilievo affrettato della fronte gi`a
eseguita.” [F, G, H] show the elevation, plan, and section
of the attic of the drum. [C, etc.] for the Sforza Chapel. [J,
etc.] for the staircase of the Laurenziana.). Morrogh, 1994,
pp. 151–5 (Recto: “not . . . leading towards the Farnese
windows, as making use of ideas . . . already . . . developed
there. Also a faintly drawn standing ﬁgure in the open-
ing suggests that the aedicule frames, not a window, but
a niche for statuary.” Like [Cat. 56 recto], it “should be
connected with the niche design used on the [Conser-
vatori] staircase.” Verso: sketches for attic and drum of
St. Peter’s which “would suggest a tentative terminus post
quem . . . of October 1559.”).Wallace, 1998, p. 244 (Recto:
study for the window of the Palazzo Farnese court-
yard.). Perrig, 1999, p. 238 (Recto: Michelangelo. Verso:
sketches by Giulio Clovio after Michelangelo’s Roman
architectural projects; recorded in Clovio’s posthumous
inventory as “Una ﬁnestra fatta da m. Michel-Angelo”
or as “Una porta fatta di mano propa di Michel Angelo.”
From Farnese Collection.). Elam, 2001, [unpaginated
but p. 10] (Recto: for the windows in the top level of
the courtyard of Palazzo Farnese, re-worked some years
later.).
CATALOGUE 56
Recto: Design for a Door
Verso: Architectural and Figure Studies
1846.78; R.80; P.II 332; Corpus 605
Dimensions: 412×259 mm
Watermark: Robinson Appendix no. 19. Roberts Ladder
C. Briquet 5923, Venice 1491.
Medium
Recto: Wash and white heightening over black chalk,
employed both free-hand and with a ruler.
Verso: Black chalk employed both free-hand and with a
ruler.
Condition
There are several edge tear repairs, and inﬁlls, several
abraded areas, some short diagonal scored lines, and a
small skinned hole. There are extensive repaired frac-
tures and skinning. Widespread uneven discolouration is
visible, and signiﬁcant major staining, apparently from a
spillage of light brown ink on the verso, shows through
to the recto. There is surface dirt and uneven blackening
of the white body colour.
Inscriptions
Verso: Roman numbering in red chalk: xi.
Nineteenth-century numbering in graphite: 80 (Robin-
son).
Nineteenth-century inscription in graphite: back not men-
tioned.
Description
Recto
The pedimental plaque inscribed, in Michelangelo’s
hand: chi no vuoldelle foglie/ no ci [venga di] maggio.
Guasti, epitafﬁIV; Frey, CXXXVIII; Girardi, no. 278;
Residori, no. 278.
With the lower edge as base
A. A ground plan with paired columns and spaces
between them, done on a small scale. (The version of
this on a still smaller scale descried by Carpiceci along
the lower edge is not visible to the compiler; a number of
lines are visible at this edge of the sheet, but the compiler
cannot reduce these to a coherent pattern.)
B. A variant of A, a ground plan with paired columns and
spaces between them, done on a larger scale and with apsi-
dal ended alcoves between them, fronted – presumably –
by windows. Autograph inscription porta on second bay
from left.
C. Detail of paired columns and corner element.
D. Three sets of lines ruled horizontally across the page,
comprising
i.
(top): three lines
ii. (middle): four lines, but differently spaced
iii. (bottom): two lines
E. Between Dii and Diii: two windows, one topped by
a segmental pediment, the other by a triangular one.

270
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 55–56

CATALOGUE 56
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
271
F. A loose circle about 90 mm in diameter whose purpose
is conjectural. A and C are drawn over this.
Drawn with the top edge as base.
G. A large double door, panelled, enframed, surmounted
by a balustrade above which is a ﬂat corniced window
with rusticated framing pilasters.
Discussion
Recto
This drawing and Cat. 55 have generally been considered
together. They share a history, are almost the same size,
and are very similar in technique. Like that, this drawing
has often been connected with the Palazzo Farnese and
dated c. 1550, although no door that resembles this one
exists in that building, and it is not to be excluded that it
was made in preparation for another architectural project
of the same period or, conceivably, simply for a detail in
a project by another architect.
The design clearly looks back to Michelangelo’s project
for the exterior portal of the reading room of the Lau-
rentian Library in which a rectangular tablet breaks
into the triangular pediment that surmounts the door.
In Michelangelo’s modello for this door (CB98A/B255/
Corpus 550; pen and ink with brush and wash, 346×239
mm), which was somewhat simpliﬁed in execution, two

272
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 56
half garlands tie the top corners of the tablet to the outer
sections of the pediment, which break forward slightly.
That motif is deconstructed and re-distributed here, tran-
formed into a garland that hangs above the tablet and two
volutes, one either side of the table, which act as support-
ers. Michelangelo modiﬁed his old design in other ways.
He included, rather faintly, a segmental pediment outside
the triangular one, a doubling that he had ﬁrst undertaken
in practice in the interior door of the Laurentian reading
room. Within this tablet, Michelangelo has written the
phrase “chi no[n] vuol delle foglie/ no[n] ci [venga di] maggio,”
a real or invented proverb that might loosely be translated
as: “If you don’t want leaves, don’t come here in May.”
This might suggest that the door was planned for a garden
but Morrogh ingeniously argued that the leaves are those
of books, and that the inscription refers to the contents
of a library or an archive, thus maintaining for this door
the same role as its Florentine prototype.
In relation to that prototype, the forms of the present
structure are heavier, the mouldings of the interior frame
are more elaborate, and the planar play of elements within
the pediment zone are much more complex. It would
seem that sometime after Michelangelo had made his
drawing, he re-worked it. The ﬁrst redaction would be
deﬁned by the sharply and very carefully ruled multiple
lines that mark the outer edges of the frame and the top
of the triangular pediment. It seems likely that, at this
ﬁrst stage, the drawing was made purely in line. If so,
then it was in a second stage that Michelangelo added
proﬁled consoles at the sides of the frame of the door
that matched frontal consoles within the frames and small
protrusions to the left and right near the base of the door,
where it would be set against, perhaps, a wainscotting.
All these elements seem to be drawn in a slightly broader
line technique than the ﬁrst stage, and in all of them,
wash plays an important role in deﬁning their volumes.
Comparison between, say, the inner triangular and the
outer segmental pediment makes it clear that the former
is sharply drawn and precisely deﬁned, but the latter is
outlined quite loosely, without concern for regularity, and
that wash is used to evoke its forms. All the additions,
which are deﬁned primarily in wash rather than line, are
likely to be a few years later than the main part of the
door. It may be that it was only during this re-working
that Michelangelo added wash.
If this suggestion is accurate, this re-worked drawing
was then re-worked a second time. The console seen in
elevation in the right-hand side of the frame, and perhaps
that on the left too, seems to have been eliminated with
areas of white body colour, presumably to simplify the
design. There seems to have been subsequent application
of wash and perhaps further body colour, now oxidised
and faded, over the table, and a series of six horizon-
tals was drawn across the upper part of the portal frame,
eliminating the upper protrusions and cutting across the
tablet, which was certainly to be eliminated. It would
seem, therefore, that the complexities of the upper sec-
tion and the carefully inscribed tablet were to be aban-
doned, and, in general, the forms were made heavier and
coarser.
This drawing was ﬁrst connected by De Angelis d’Ossat
with the Palazzo dei Conservatori and speciﬁcally with
the door to the Sala degli Orazi e Curazii. He implied
a date for the drawing, in line with the then currently
accepted views of progress on the Palace, of the late 1530s.
This linking was accepted by Ackerman and Newman
and maintained, with additional arguments, by Morrogh.
Morrogh, who ﬁrmly established that Michelangelo’s
ﬁnal designs for the palace were made only very late in
his life, drew the apparently logical conclusion, as with
Cat. 55 recto, that this drawing is also very late. However,
even though both Cat. 55 recto and the present draw-
ing certainly provided starting-points for elements in the
Conservatori, it seems that in both cases Michelangelo
himself re-worked his old drawings in order to achieve
a new effect, broadening the forms, reducing detail and
decoration (a conclusion reached independently by Elam,
2001). Indeed, the inscription alone, which was obscured
in the third redaction, is sufﬁcient to eliminate a date in
the 1560s, because its handwriting does not correspond
to Michelangelo’s at that period. In any case, it is surely
too witty actually to be carved at a library entrance. Fur-
ther supporting a date in the 1540s for the ﬁrst layer of
the recto is the watermark, which recurs on Michelan-
gelo’s Piet`a drawn for Vittoria Colonna (Isabella Stewart
Gardner Museum, Boston; Hadley, 1968, no. 7/Corpus
460; black chalk, 295×195 mm), which obviously ante-
dates her death in 1547.
Verso
The verso is one of the most complicated of the age-
ing Michelangelo’s pages of architectural sketches. It is
made more confusing by the fact that, as was his wont,
Michelangelo made superimposed drawings, so that con-
siderable effort is required to disentangle them: In this
case, however, he did provide the student with some help
because the three superimposed studies on this sheet are
drawn with the sheet turned different ways. Second, he
employed lines placed on the sheet with one function
to stand in as scaffolding for drawings made for different
purposes: This also creates difﬁculties. He had done this
much earlier in life, but this practice, combined with the
relatively soft handling of the forms on this page, means
that different projects are hard to differentiate.

CATALOGUE 56
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
273
Many efforts have been made to interpret this page
since it was ﬁrst revealed in 1953. Morrogh’s is the most
elaborate, most closely observed, and, to the compiler,
by far the most convincing, but it needs to be modiﬁed
in one or two particulars. And, furthermore, of the six
separable studies on this page – ignoring single lines – it
seems clear that not all were made for the same project.
The two plans, drawn ﬁrst on a small scale and then on
a larger one, are the only ones that we have by Michelan-
gelo’s own hand for the Conservatori and they fully sup-
port Morrogh’s late dating of the ﬁnal project. Because
they present a solution so very different from the project
as executed, and because they are obviously late drawings,
this demonstrates that the ﬁnal version was a realisation of
the close of the artist’s life. They alone should have pro-
vided a warning against Ackerman’s chronology. Drawn
ﬁrst, at the left, is a sequence of rectangles, each separated
from the next by two circles. There is a total of seven rect-
angles and six groups of two circles. Although there are a
few irregularities, with one circle seeming to stray inside
a rectangle, these seem to represent the plans of individual
compartments separated from one another by architraves
or beams that are carried by paired columns. Thus, in
embryo, the cell-like construction principle of the Con-
servatori, which has a seven-bay fac¸ade, is deﬁned.
This plan was then tried again, more fully worked out,
and on a larger scale, to the right. The sheet, which prob-
ably has not been cut down substantially, was never tall
enough to show all seven bays on the enlarged scale, but
because the system was repetitive, there was no need to do
so. Michelangelo has here drawn three rectangular com-
partments and half of a fourth. Each is again separated
from the next by paired columns. All the elements are
more precisely deﬁned. The columns are now shown to
stand on paired rectangular bases in a graphic formula like
that seen in Cat. 54 verso. The compartments now seem
to have windows or doors at the right side with strongly
accentuated corners, and they may themselves be subdi-
vided, with a small atrium area, if the apertures are doors,
or a window-seat area, if they are windows, plus the main
compartment. At the left, where Michelangelo has writ-
ten porta, they open into, presumably, the undescribed rear
of the building. The formula is, as De Angelis d’Ossat so
shrewdly realised, very like that sketched some thirty years
earlier by Michelangelo in a drawing in Florence (CB42A
recto/B78/Corpus 541; pen and black chalk, 209×294
mm). This famous drawing, which Wittkower – followed
by many other scholars – believed to be for the interior of
the Laurentian Library reading room, was rightly identi-
ﬁed by De Angelis d’Ossat as a design for the exterior of
a structure. It was suggested by the compiler (1981b) that
it is, in fact, a project of c. 1524 for the exterior of the
Laurentian Library, when it was considered brieﬂy as a
high two-storey structure, set in parallel with the church,
debouching eastwards into the Piazza di San Lorenzo,
from the north-east corner of the cloister. Such a structure
would have required an imposing exterior fac¸ade cross-
ing the Piazza di San Lorenzo. Although this hypothesis
was queried by Salmon, 1990, the compiler is inclined to
retain it.
In any case, there can be little doubt of the closeness of
CB 42A recto/Corpus 541to the project for the Palazzo
dei Conservatori as seen in the plans on the present page,
and the link conﬁrms that Michelangelo took as his start-
ing point discarded designs for the Laurentian Library.
Like CB42A recto/Corpus 541, in which the upper and
lower storey of the building were continuous, the fac¸ade
of the Conservatori as represented in the present plan
would have been ﬂat with no passage beneath an over-
hanging upper storey. Something of this is carried over
into the fac¸ade as built, in which, instead of the inviting
arcade of the traditional cloister, like the piazza of Santis-
sima Annunziata, also in Michelangelo’s mind when plan-
ning the Capitoline Hill, there is a tense contrast between
wall and space.
It is difﬁcult to work out in any detail what the ele-
vation corresponding to the plan on this page would
have looked like, but, once again, CB42A/Corpus 541
is probably the best guide. It is clear that at this moment,
Michelangelo did not envisage the giant pilasters that
now imbue the building with so powerful a combina-
tion of compactness, energy, and grandeur but thought
of a lower storey articulated by embedded columns and
wide pilaster strips, and, probably, a double cornice, again
like CB42A/Corpus 541.
The two plans run down the sheet. De Tolnay inter-
preted the free-hand line just to the right of the upper plan
and the loosely ruled line just behind the paired columns
of the larger plan, which converge slightly towards the top
of the page, as marking the edges of the ribs of a dome
(that of St. Peter’s) with some coffering indicated. In the
compiler’s view, the convergence, which is very slight, is
not intentional and has no function.
When we focus on the horizontal, a different situation
presents itself. There are three clusters of parallel lines
ruled, not very precisely, across the whole width of the
sheet: at the top, some 85 mm below the top, and again
some 95 mm below that. They were drawn before the
plans just described. These clusters, which are not identi-
cal in their make-up, cut across the paired columns in the
large plan and might at ﬁrst sight be thought to represent
the beams that the columns support. But because they
run all the way across the sheet, they cannot represent this
solely. And indeed, Michelangelo seems to have regarded

274
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 56
them as cornices or string courses of some description,
because between the lower and the middle clusters, he
drew two windows of original design and heavy form.
They are similar to a window on CB85A/B101/Corpus
620 (black chalk, 125×70 mm, fragmentary), an iso-
lated sketch that seems to be contemporary with the
Porta Pia. Here, the window on the left carries a tri-
angular pediment; that on the right, a segmental one.
Whether these were to alternate, or whether Michelan-
gelo intended one rather than the other is conjectural.
Carpiceci, making more precise a connection envisaged
by Parker and de Tolnay, interpreted these as sketches for
the interior drum windows of St. Peter’s, but the com-
piler ﬁnds this improbable: The windows sketched here
are considerably squatter than the windows of the drum,
and the relation of pediment and aperture is very different.
Another possibility, the windows of the Conservatori, is
also unlikely: As executed they all carry segmental pedi-
ments, and their forms are lighter – and less imaginative –
than these.
These three clusters of lines therefore would appear to
deﬁne the piano nobile and upper storeys of a fac¸ade. In
which case, if we assume this fac¸ade to be that of the Con-
servatori, it would have been planned as a three-storey
building. But although it is not impossible that Michelan-
gelo should have considered a three-storey fac¸ade, it is
highly unlikely because that would have diminished com-
paratively the Senatori, which was always the focus of the
piazza and which does have a three-storey fac¸ade. This
opens the question as to whether the present drawing
might have been made for the Senatori because whatever
plans Michelangelo had had for that fac¸ade a decade ear-
lier – work on it was abandoned c. 1550, save for the con-
struction of the staircase – would surely not have been left
unchanged. Above the rusticated dado, whose full height
is occupied by the great double staircase, the fac¸ade of
the Senatori is divided into two storeys of similar height.
Thus, in principle, the three clusters of lines on the present
page could deﬁne the upper two storeys of the Senatori.
However, no representation of Michelangelo’s design for
the fac¸ade of the Senatori – which was in any case never
carried out – shows it with windows shaped like these,
with alternating pediments, or with the storeys separated
by cornices or mouldings, and all show it articulated
vertically by giant pilasters, although these might have
been a last-minute decision. Therefore, tempting though
it might be to connect these line-clusters and window-
sketches with the Capitoline palaces and especially the
Senatori, any such linking must be treated with extreme
reserve.
The third element on this verso, not previously
observed, is found when the sheet is inverted. Employing
the clusters of lines that cross the page as horizontals,
and the ruled line that deﬁnes the inner wall of the
larger fac¸ade drawing and the free-hand line that deﬁnes
the outer wall of the smaller one, as framing verticals,
Michelangelo has drawn the elevation of a grand door,
with double, subdivided leaves. Above this, taking the
second group of horizontals as a storey-division, is a
balustraded balcony above which there seems to be a
great window, framed at each side by narrow rusticated
pilasters. There may be further forms sketched above
this, but these cannot be distinguished with clarity. Once
again, it would be tempting to connect this drawing with
the Capitoline, but, once again, the compiler can see no
ready way of doing so. The sequence of the double-leafed
door and the balcony has obvious similarities with the
Palazzo Farnese, but that is very different in form, and
Michelangelo’s contribution to that building had been
completed several years earlier. The rusticated pilasters on
the piano nobile might rather suggest a suburban setting,
and the Villa Giulia, with whose design Michelangelo
was heavily involved, might seem appropriate. But the
forms do not correspond, and, once more, the Villa Giu-
lia had been completed some years before this drawing
was made. One possibility that occurs to the compiler is
that the drawing might have been produced to assist Bar-
tolommeo Ammanati – whom Michelangelo liked and
respected and who ﬁnally executed the stairway of the
Laurentian Library – with his design for Palazzo Grifone
in Florence. However, the scheme shown in this drawing
differs so much from that of the palace’s doorway as built
that any connection must remain entirely conjectural.
Roman numerals in red chalk of the type found on the
verso of this sheet occurs on several other sheets either
in, or with a direct provenance from, Casa Buonarroti:
VIII: CB73Abis verso/B164/Corpus 615
XV: BM W37 verso/Corpus 554
XVII: Frankfurt 392 verso/Corpus 322
XVIII: CB17A recto/B113/Corpus 579
XX: CB7F recto/B122/Corpus 301
XXXI: CB79A recto/B87/Corpus 559
XXXII: CB20A recto/B118/Corpus 578
The signiﬁcance of these numerals eludes the compiler;
they were no doubt applied after Michelangelo’s death but
probably still within the sixteenth century.
Drawn Copies
The pedimental zone of the recto was copied in a simpli-
ﬁed form, which is understandable given the complexity
of the overlays, by Francesco Buonarroti on Ufﬁzi 5348A,
left side, d.

CATALOGUE 56
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
275
History
The Roman Numeral Collector; Bernardo Buonta-
lenti; Michelangelo Buonarroti the Younger by 1618,
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar?; William Young
Ottley (his sale, 6 June 1814, and following days, lot 254?
(“One a ditto, [i.e., architectural design] ditto [i.e., a win-
dow for the Lorenziana Library], from the same [i.e.,
Buonarroti] collection.” £3.3.0); Sir Thomas Lawrence
(L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Michelangelo the Younger, c. 1618 (Transcription. “Nel
frontispizio d’una porta”; from the group of drawings
owned by Bernardo Buontalenti). Ottley Sale, 6 June
1814, etc., lot 254?; (“One a ditto, [architectural design]
ditto [a window for the Lorenziana Library], from the
same [Buonarroti] collection.”). Lawrence Inventory,
1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-94] (“A
Design for a Window with some plans on the back.”).
Woodburn, 1836b, no. 49 (“A Door – a ﬁne architectural
study, with some writing.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 42 (As
1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 12 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1852,
p. 6, pl. 32 (A Door.). Guasti, 1863, p. lxxi (Transcrip-
tion of a note by Michelangelo the Younger implying
that the present sheet was previously owned by Bernardo
Buontalenti.); p. 14 (Transcription of inscription.). Fisher,
1865, I, p. 20, pl. 32 (As 1852.). Robinson, 1870, no. 80
(Michel Angelo. Design for a Window. With [Cat. 55
recto] “resemblances with some details of the Campi-
doglio architecture but . . . more direct analogy with some
of the windows of St Peter’s.” After 1549.). Fisher, 1872,
I, p. 18, pl. 32 (As 1852.). Black, 1875, p. 215, no. 69.
Fisher, 1879, XLIX/51 (Design for a window.). K. Frey,
1897, p. 485 (Transcription. Possible connection with St.
Peter’s.). Berenson, 1903, II, p. 100 (Genuine.). Thode,
1908, II, p. 201 (For a window of Palazzo Farnese; sim-
ilar to Laurenziana door.). K. Frey, 1909–11, 271 (By a
pupil to Michelangelo’s instructions. For a window, devel-
oped from the portal of the ricetto. Related to Palazzo
Farnese, c. 1546–7.). Thode, 1913, no. 452 (As 1908.).
Berenson, 1938, II, p. 204 (As 1903.). Wilde, 1953 exh.,
no. 156 (Recto: c. 1546–50, for a window, probably for
the Palazzo Farnese.). Parker, 1956, no. 332 (Recto: anal-
ogous to [Cat. 55 recto]; resembles Laurenziana door-
way, but later. Verso: confused, but [Di – Biii] with win-
dows show “part of the interior of a dome under whch
are windows with pediments alternatively triangular and
segmental . . . possible connections with St. Peter’s”; [B]
“a ground plan showing a fac¸ade with coupled columns
in rectangular recesses . . . connected by Tolnay with the
Palazzo dei Conservatori.”). De Tolnay, 1956, pp. 79–
80 (Recto: “probably an early version of the upper-ﬂoor
windows of the courtyard of Palazzo Farnese.” First pub-
lication of the verso: by Michelangelo; distinguishes ﬁve
partly superimposed projects: For St. Peter’s and Capi-
toline palaces.). Dussler, 1959, no. 633 (Recto: window
project, for upper level of Farnese Palace. Studio draw-
ing to Michelangelo’s design.); no. 206 (Verso: link with
St. Peter’s unlikely; Capitoline palaces plausible.). Ack-
erman, 1961, II, p. 77 (Recto: “probably . . . unrelated”
to Palazzo Farnese.); p. 60 (Verso: “contains plans and –
elevations? – of a corridor with encased paired columns
on the exterior and the note ‘porta’ on one of the inte-
rior openings. Tolnay interpreted the sheet as a group of
studies for the ground ﬂoor portico of the Conservatori
and for an interior elevation of the dome of St Peter’s;
though the proportions, the position of the ‘porta’ and
the number and vaulting type of the bays recommend the
identiﬁcation, the exterior apertures appear to be doors or
windows rather than the open bays of a portico.”). Beren-
son, 1961, II, p. 348 (As 1903, 1938.). Ackerman, 1964,
II, p. 79 (Recto: as 1961.); p. 62 (Verso: as 1961.). Barbi-
eri and Puppi, 1964a, p. 1015 (Recto: study of a window
for Palazzo Farnese, late 1540s.); pp. 887, 1011 (Verso: “la
pianta di un settore di portici, riferibile al Palazzo dei
Conservatori e, forse, un accenno al alzato.”). Barbieri
and Puppi, 1964b, tav. 82 (Recto: study of a window; cite
Ackerman’s denial of connection with Palazzo Farnese.);
tav. 65 (Section of a portico for the Palazzo dei Conser-
vatori.). De Angelis d’Ossat, 1965a, pp. 106–9 (Recto:
not for a window and unconnected with the Palazzo Far-
nese. The superimposed studies related to the niche on
the landing of the stairs of the Palazzo de Conservatori
and of the door of the palace’s archive.); p. 100 (Verso:
projects for the Palazzo dei Conservatori, inspired by
early ideas for the Laurentian vestibule and Michelangelo’s
study for a fac¸ade, CB 42A/Corpus 541. Michelangelo
“aveva ripreso e sviluppato lo stesso motivo, con tale ric-
chezza di spunti e tale forza di concentrazione da sembrar
impossibile fosse studiato per quell’interno [that of the
Laurentian reading room]. E un vero prospetto che possi-
amo collegare ed anteporre nella ricerca delle idee matrici
del Palazzo dei Conservatori.”). De Angelis d’Ossat,
1965b, p. 337 (English edition pp. 336–7) (Recto and
verso: as 1965a.). Hartt, 1971, no. 494 (Recto: 1546?. Per-
haps for window in Palazzo Farnese, alternative to [Cat. 55
recto], presented to the patron.); no. 482 (Verso: 1538-
50? “may possibly contain . . . an elevation of a portion
of the Palazzo dei Conservatori, with alternating gabled
and arched windows . . . drawn over at least two sketched
plans for a colonnade with coupled columns.”). Gere and
Turner, 1975, no. 148 (Design of a window; must date
from about the same time as [Cat. 55], but not necessarily
connected with the Palazzo Farnese.). De Tolnay, 1980,

276
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUES 56–57
Corpus IV, no. 605 (Recto: contemporary with [Cat. 56].
Generally connected with Palazzo Farnese but De Ange-
lis d’Ossat has drawn attention to relation to the aedicule
and the door of the library in Palazzo dei Conservatori.
Verso: horizontals [Di – Diii] and windows for the exte-
rior of the drum of St. Peter’s. Converging lines next to
plans for the ribs of the dome. [A, B] plans for Conserva-
tori. de Tolnay also sees an elevation of the portico based
on [B], which the compiler cannot decipher. [G]: herm-
pilasters supporting a cornice.). Ackerman and Newman,
1986, p. 312 (Recto: “design apparently for the niche on
the ﬁrst landing on the grand staircase of the Conser-
vatori.” Probably unrelated to Palazzo Farnese. Verso: as
1961/1964, with addition “the drum and base of.”). Con-
tardi, 1990, p. 261 (Recto: window design, probably for
Conservatori. Verso: ground plans and perhaps elevations
of a portico; perhaps for the Conservatori: The large plan
in the centre [B] shows three bays with pairs of embedded
columns recalling those in the vestibule of the Laurentian
Library, while the plan along the left edge indicates four-
teen free-standing columns in seven bays as they exist
today.). Carpiceci, 1991, pp. 45, 87 with graphic analysis
(Verso: identiﬁcation of plans uncertain, perhaps a ﬁrst
idea for the Palazzo dei Conservatori; notes relation to
Laurenziana vestibule. [E] a sketch of the interior of the
drum of St. Peter’s.). Morrogh, 1994, pp. 151–5 (Recto:
“supplied the designs both for the niches on the ﬁrst ﬂoor
landing of the [Palazzo dei] Conservatori staircase and for
the door to the Archive room on the piano nobile land-
ing.” The “Archive door is close, not only in design, but
also thematically, to the door that leads to the Laurentian
Reading Room” and the inscription punningly refers to
foglie [leaves] of books. Verso: “A row of rooms, isolated
from one another, runs up the sheet. On the right the
fac¸ade is shown with its inset coupled columns, while
on the left a door from each room leads to a series of
inner rooms. It is highly unusual to ﬁnd a row of small,
independently accessed rooms behind a richly columned
fac¸ade. . . . It is perhaps only in a major civic building that
small, bottega-like, rooms are likely to be set behind a
fac¸ade with columns. . . . We must suppose that the loggia
would have been closed up, allowing for small ante-rooms
in front of the guild rooms. Outside the coupled columns
recall those of the Laurentian Vestibule. Their scale sug-
gests that they would have embraced only one storey; so
they would not have formed a giant order. This is all very
different from the Conservatori that we see today.”). Per-
rig, 1999, p. 238 (Recto: Michelangelo. Verso: sketches by
Giulio Clovio after Michelangelo’s Roman architectural
projects; recorded in Clovio’s posthumous inventory as
“Una ﬁnestra fatta da m. Michel-Angelo,” or as “Una
porta fatta di mano propa di Michel Angelo.” From
Farnese Collection, not the Casa Buonarroti; Michelan-
gelo the Younger recorded verses by Michelangelo pre-
served in other collections.). Elam, 2001, [unpaginated
but p. 11] (Michelangelo; “shows evidence of erasures and
corrections . . . used after Michelangelo’s death to provide
both a door and a niche surround for the Palazzo dei
Conservatori.”).
CATALOGUE 57
Recto: Christ on the Cross with Two Attendant Figures
Verso: The Cruciﬁed Christ
1846.89; R.72; P.II 343; Corpus 415
Dimensions: 278×234 mm
Watermark: Robinson Appendix no. 16. Roberts Arrows
B. Briquet 6291, Rome, 1561–2.
Medium
Black chalk with some ruled lines, white heightening,
three indented horizontal stylus lines above Christ’s knees
and ankles, respectively, probably to establish the propor-
tions. Remains of framing line in black chalk.
Condition
There are three horizontal incised lines. The sheet has
a major pressed-out horizontal fold, inherent wrinkles,
small edge nicks and losses, minor surface abrasions, a
diagonal abraded streak, and ﬁbrous accretions on the
edges. There is uneven discolouration, local speckled
staining, and adhesive residues on the verso.
Inscriptions
Recto: In pen and ink, upper right, F 12 (?); no. 24 (?).
Verso: In pen and ink, lower left di Bona Roti; above this
the irregular number: no. 58.
Discussion
From the 1540s onwards, coinciding with and follow-
ing his gift to Vittoria Colonna (see Cat. 67), Michelan-
gelo made several – perhaps many – drawings of Christ on
the Cross, some of which are now known only in copies
and others of which are no doubt entirely lost. But the
sequence of surviving drawings of the Christ on the Cross
to which the present sheet is generally thought to belong
seems to be particularly closely connected. These draw-
ings form, in a sense, a series, although hardly a program-
matic one, and they were drawn late in Michelangelo’s life.
However, a caveat is in order. Even though the present
sheet is clearly related to the others in style and mood,

CATALOGUE 57
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
277
and no doubt date, its dimensions are sufﬁciently different
from those to suggest that it was not drawn at exactly the
same moment as those drawings, nor was fully en-suite
with them.
The others are
1. Paris, Louvre, Inv. 700/J42/Corpus 414; black chalk
with white heightening and pen and ink, 433×
290 mm.

278
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 57
2. British Museum, 1895-9-15-509/W 81/Corpus 417;
black chalk with white heightening, 413×286 mm.
3. British Museum, 1895-9-15-510/W 82/Corpus 419;
black chalk with white heightening, 412×279 mm.
4. Windsor, Royal Library, 12761/PW 437/Corpus 416;
black chalk, 405×208 mm.
5. Windsor, Royal Library 12775/PW 436/Corpus 418,
black chalk with white heightening, 382×210 mm.
Two drawings in the Louvre (Inv. 720 and 698/J39 and
J40/ Corpus 412 and 413; both black chalk, respectively,
230×110 mm and 250×82 mm), which show the Virgin
and St. John as they are placed at the foot of the Cross,
are not, as sometimes supposed, fragments of a seventh
version but were drawn by Michelangelo in the mid-1550s
to be added to the much-copied Christ on the Cross, the
original drawing of which Michelangelo had presented to
Vittoria Colonna c. 1540. These supplementary ﬁgures,
more solidly drawn than those in the present sheet and the
ﬁve companion drawings, were no doubt provided by the
artist at the request of his friend and servant Urbino, to
prepare a painting to be executed for Urbino by Marcello
Venusti (see Cat. 50).
One of the sheets, no. 4 (PW 437), provides some evi-
dence as to what might have prompted Michelangelo to
draw such a series. It carries on its verso a triangular out-
line encompassing the recto ﬁgure of Christ. De Tolnay,
who ﬁrst observed this, suggested that this represented a
marble block and indicated that Michelangelo planned to
sculpt a Cruciﬁx late in life. This opinion was strongly
opposed by Hirst, but he provided no alternative expla-
nation for the verso outline. It seems more likely, as de
Tolnay subsequently realised, that this block was intended
to be small and of wood, and that the drawing is con-
nected with a wooden Cruciﬁx, referred to in two let-
ters to Michelangelo’s nephew Leonardo Buonarroti, of

CATALOGUE 57
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
279
1 and 2 August 1562 from, respectively, Lorenzo Mar-
iottini and Cesare Bittino. They inform Leonardo that
Michelangelo planned to carve a Cruciﬁx in wood and
that he therefore wished Leonardo to forward to him
his wood-working tools. A wooden Cruciﬁx is obvi-
ously a more feasible project for a very old man than
one in marble. Thus, as ageing artists often return to
the interests of their youth, Michelangelo – who had
probably not executed wood carvings in the interven-
ing years, save, perhaps, for small models – reverted to
the conception of the Cruciﬁx in Santo Spirito, which
he had carved exactly seventy years earlier, in 1492. It
was probably in preparation for this that Michelangelo
whittled the small model, also in Casa Buonarroti, per-
ceptively revalued by de Tolnay in 1965. It is likely that
the outline on the verso of the Windsor drawing sim-
ply indicated the dimensions and shape of a small piece
of wood – which Michelangelo may or may not have
carved.
It seems that the scheme to carve a wooden Cruciﬁx
proceeded no further. Instead, Michelangelo continued
to labour ﬁtfully on the Rondanini Piet`a, which he had
had underway for some years, and on which he was still
working only a few days before his death on 18 February
1564. It is unlikely that all the Christ on the Cross drawings
were speciﬁcally made with a carving in mind, and it
is more likely that the idea of a carving provided the
impetus for what became a series of meditations. They
could be seen as a form of spiritual exercise, concentrating
the artist’s mind and spirit on the redemptive sacriﬁce; the
old man at the left of the present drawing might well be an
allusive self-portrait, like Michelangelo’s representation of
himself as Nicodemus in the Florence Piet`a.
But the theme of the Cruciﬁxion haunted Michelan-
gelo, and his visual ideas pursued the archaising path
that they had followed for some years. When writ-
ing about the Piet`a, another drawing that Michelangelo
had made for Vittoria Colonna, probably toward the
mid-1540s (Boston, Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum,
Hadley, 1968, no. 7/Corpus 460; black chalk, 295×195
mm, reduced at the top by about 50 mm), Condivi
remarked that the Y-shaped Cross under which the Vir-
gin was seated was that carried by the Bianchi during
the great plague of 1348. This can hardly have come
from Condivi’s own store of knowledge, and he undoubt-
edly learned of it from Michelangelo. Together with
the fact that in the Piet`a the cross’s upright bears a
quotation from Dante, it emphasises that Michelangelo
was turning consciously both to archaic sources and to
his own youth, for what is generally recognised as his
earliest drawing is a copy after Giotto. In the Wind-
sor drawing, the “Bianchi Cross” is used again, and
the sliding sideways movement of Christ’s body recalls
the painfully intense small-scale cruciﬁxes of Giovanni
Pisano.
Apart from the conjectural impetus provided by the
projected Cruciﬁx of 1562, there is no external evidence to
date these drawings. Most scholars place the series in the
mid-1550s, but it is likely that this is too early. The highly
pictorial style, and the technique, with successive appli-
cation of chalk, brown wash, and layers of white, come,
as Hirst has noted, closest to the style and technique of
Michelangelo’s drawings for the Porta Pia of c. 1560–1.
The compiler believes that the Porta Pia drawings are a
terminus post quem rather than a terminus ante quem for
the Christ on the Cross drawings, and that they were
made between 1562 and Michelangelo’s death in February
1564.
The identities of the ﬁgures beneath the Cross have
been much disputed. That at the right seems most likely
to be St. John, while that at the left might be the Cen-
turion, also present at the Cruciﬁxion and one of the
ﬁrst gentile converts. Of course, if Michelangelo was
creating a mystical rather than historical representation
of the subject, then the left-hand ﬁgure might be any
saint – or even non-saint – with whom he felt a strong
identity.
On the verso of the present sheet, the Cruciﬁed Christ
is found again, in a slightly more contorted and angular
form. Michelangelo presumably made this as a correction
to the ﬁgure on the recto but, as far as is known, did not
pursue this particular type.
Also on the verso are found the Bona Roti inscription
and the irregular numbering, one of the two occasions
when these – or one of them – occurs on a sheet claimed
to have a Casa Buonarroti provenance. If this claim is
correct, then a second sheet of drawings in addition to
that in the British Museum (W27/Corpus 185) owned
by the Bona Roti and Irregular Numbering Collectors
found its way into the Casa Buonarroti, probably, like
the British Museum sheet, as one of Michelangelo the
Younger’s acquisitions. It is worth noting that the forms
of the numbers at the upper right of the recto are, as
far as the compiler is aware, found only on this sheet,
which may indicate that it passed through the hands of
yet another collector after it left the Bona Roti/Irregular
Numbering Collection(s) and before it entered (if it did)
Casa Buonarroti.
History
The Bona Roti Collector; The Irregular Numbering
Collector; Unidentiﬁed Collector? Casa Buonarroti?;

280
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY AUTOGRAPH SHEETS
CATALOGUE 57
Jean-Baptiste Wicar; Samuel Woodburn; Sir Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830-50] (“Another design [of Our Lord on the
Cross], smaller, in which two ﬁgures are introduced.”).
Woodburn, 1836b, no. 23 (“[A] very noble study. . . . On
the reverse is a study for the Saviour.”). The Athenaeum,
16 July 1836 (“‘Cruciﬁxions;’ interesting to the student;
of some we cannot pronounce upon the authenticity, but
all displaying a style of design reprehended in Zeuxis, –
gross rather than grand.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 38 (As
1836.). Fisher, 1862, pp. 3–4, pl. 6 (As Woodburn, 1842.).
Fisher, 1865, II, p. 20, pl. 6 (As 1862.). Robinson, 1870,
no. 72 (Preliminary design for a Cruciﬁxion for Vitto-
ria Colonna; related to six other studies in various col-
lections, and one in Christ Church. “Michel Angelo’s
intention seems to have been to invest each separate essay
with some special and novel feature, and whilst conﬁning
himself strictly to the orthodox symmetrical ordonnance
of three ﬁgures only, to give to each composition a dis-
tinctive character of dramatic action and expression. In
the present design, it may be inferred from the droop-
ing head of our Saviour that He has just expired, and
the Virgin, seen directly in front and standing rigidly
erect, her head bowed down and the palms of her hands
pressed convulsively against her temples, may be sup-
posed to be uttering a wail of anguish. St John on the
opposite side . . . standing somewhat behind the cross,
steps forward on the instant and with the upper part
of his body bent forward, hands outspread, and eager
sympathetic countenance, directs his gaze towards the
stricken mother of our Lord. This is probably the most
naturalistic and touching of the several designs.”) Fisher,
1872, II, p. 20, pl. 6 (As 1852.). Black, 1875, p. 215,
no. 62. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 224. Fisher, 1879, XLV/47
(“This drawing exhibits many alterations, only partly
indicated in the plate.”). Berenson, 1903, I, p. 225, no.
1574 (With Virgin and St John. “The types are those we
encounter in the Cappella Paolina.”). Thode, 1908, II,
p. 472 (Late, one of a series: Mary at left, St. John at
right.). K. Frey, 1909-11, no. 180 (Mary on the right;
St John on the left. Linked with other Cruciﬁxion draw-
ings.). Thode, 1913, no. 446 (Inversion of Mary and
St. John seen by Robinson and Frey incorrect.). Panofsky,
1922, p. 12 (c. 1540 or later; related to Cruciﬁx drawn for
Vittoria Colonna. The St. John resembles the ﬁgure in the
right foreground of the Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter.). Baumgart,
1935b, p. 54 (Cruciﬁxion series probably of the late 1550s
or early 1560s; self-sufﬁcient works.). Berenson, 1938, I,
p. 234, no. 1574 (As 1903.). Wilde, 1949, p. 260 (One
of series of late Golgotha groups: “independent works
of graphic art.”). Goldscheider, 1951, no. 125 (“[M]uch
earlier than the series of late Cruciﬁxion drawings,”
c. 1546. St Peter on the left, St John on the right.).
De Tolnay, 1951, pp. 153, 293 (Recto: “la Vierge et
Saint Jean ont l’air de fuir avec horreur le lieu du sup-
plice.” c. 1545–50.). Wilde, 1953a, p. 120 (One of at
least seven known treatments.). Wilde, 1953 exh., no.
99 (c. 1557). Parker, 1956, no. 343 (Recto: one of a
group of late Cruciﬁxion drawings. Generally dated c.
1554. Identiﬁcation of ﬁgures uncertain. Verso: uncov-
ered in 1953. Essentially the same as recto ﬁgure.). Dus-
sler, 1959, no. 204 (Michelangelo, early 1550s. Recto
shows Christ on the Cross with the Virgin and John.
Verso: Michelangelo.). De Tolnay, 1960, pp. 223–4, no.
254 (c. 1550–6, one of a series of Cruciﬁxion drawings
done in preparation for a projected marble group. Recto:
ﬁgure on the right probably the centurion Stephaton,
that on the left Longinus.); no. 255 (Verso: not prepara-
tory for recto but “a fair copy made by Michelangelo
shortly after.”). Berenson, 1961, no. 1574 (As 1903/1938.).
Barocchi, 1964c, no. 69 (Identiﬁcation of lateral ﬁgures
uncertain.). Brugnoli, 1964, no. 58 (1550s; the Centu-
rion and Longinus, responding to the darkness that falls.).
Berti, 1965, pp. 480–1, 491 (Recto: elements that sug-
gest Gr¨unwald). Goldscheider, 1965, no. 124 (Redated
1553–6; de Tolnay’s identiﬁcations “much more plausi-
ble.”). Hartt, 1971, no. 426 (Recto: 1550–5. Virgin at the
right and St John at the left.); no. 427 (Verso: 1550–5.).
Gere and Turner, 1975, no. 182 (One of a series of late
drawings.). Keller, 1975, no. 63 (After 1550.). De Tol-
nay, 1975, p. 247 (“The two ﬁgures appear to bear all
the responsibility for the crime which has been commit-
ted.”). Keller, 1976, ﬁg. 173 (As 1975.). De Tolnay, 1978,
Corpus III, no. 415 (As 1960.). Liebert, 1983, pp. 409
(Recto: “the naked John and Mary march forward, drawn
like uncomprehending primeval beings.”). De Vecchi,
1984, pl. 118 (Michelangelo, late.). Hirst, 1988, p. 58
(The mourners “are male and female, but . . . clearly not
the Virgin and St. John.”). Joannides, 1992a, pp. 253–4
(Recto: pose of Christ based on Giotto’s Cruciﬁx in Santa
Maria Novella.). Perrig, 1991, pp. 94–8, ﬁg. 105 (Recto:
by Venusti.). Perrig, 1999, pp.
240–1 (As 1991; from
Farnese Collection.). Paoletti, 2000, pp. 58–9, 77 (The
clothed ﬁgure begun nude and then draped, ﬁrstly with a
short tunic exposing the lower legs, identifying the ﬁgure
as male, and then with a sash and trailing robe identifying
it as female – the Virgin. The features of the left-hand
ﬁgure “bear a distinct similarity to Michelangelo.”).

CATALOGUE 58
COPIES OF LOST OR PARTIALLY LOST DRAWINGS
281
CATALOGUE 58
attributed to piero d’argenta
Recto: Three Studies of an Antique Statue of Venus
attributedtoan unidentiﬁed late sixteenth-century
ﬂorentine artist
Verso: A Male Nude
1846.133; R.3; P.II 412
Dimensions: 201×240 mm
Medium
Recto: Pen and ink.
Verso: Red chalk.
Condition
Bevel inlay adhered to verso.
Recto: There is overall discolouration and surface dirt.
There are various tears and a tear repair at the top left

282
COPIES OF LOST OR PARTIALLY LOST DRAWINGS
CATALOGUE 58
edge. There is minor surface abrasion near the edges and
various inﬁlls, particuarly at the corners.
Verso: Overall surface dirt and various localised staining.
Description
This sheet is made up of two sheets of off-white hand-
made lightweight laid paper laminated together. The
chain lines of the recto sheet run vertically; those of the
verso sheet run horizontally. A watermark is visible at
the lower right of a cross above the linked monogram
I H S below which are initials, I R on a smaller scale. This
watermark, which is on the verso sheet (i.e., that bearing
the red chalk drawing) seems to be a later version of one
recorded by Briquet, no. 9461, in Reggio-Emilia, 1522.
This state of affairs presents various problems, for the
(most probable) interpretation of which the compiler is
much indebted to Drs. Catherine Whistler and Julian
Brooks. It may be best to introduce these problems by cit-
ing Robinson: “The study on the verso was hidden from
view by a backing paper, pasted over it but brought to
light by the writer on the occasion of his examination for
the present Catalogue.” Joseph Fisher’s drawn copy of this
red chalk drawing, included in his extra-illustrated copy of
Robinson’s catalogue preserved in the Ashmolean’s Print
Room, shows the ﬁgure, which Robinson thought of as
Narcissus, in reverse to its real direction. Robinson clearly
did not realise that what he took to be a single sheet, with
a pen drawing on the recto and a red chalk drawing on
the verso, was in reality made up of a laminate of two
very thin sheets; he thought he could see the red chalk
drawing of a ﬁgure directly, but he was in fact seeing it in
reverse, by transparency, through the back of the second
sheet. Thus, at some time, the ﬁrst “original” sheet with
the pen drawing was strengthened by another sheet bear-
ing a red chalk drawing. Incomprehensibly, this second
sheet was attached to the ﬁrst not by its blank side but
by that which had already been drawn upon. Thus, the
red chalk image appeared reversed because it could only
be seen from the verso of the now laminated sheet. Sub-
sequently, this side must have been backed by an opaque
or semi-opaque mount. This mount was no doubt that
removed by Robinson to reveal what he took to be a new
drawing by the young Michelangelo.
On this verso, Robinson seems to have inscribed, in
graphite as was his custom, the number that the sheet
was to take in his catalogue, 3, and his too is probably –
but not certainly – a further inscription, also in graphite,
Michelangiolo?/l’Antico. This numbering and inscription
remains visible, but only by transmitted light, since they
are on the verso of the backing sheet, which is now

CATALOGUE 58
COPIES OF LOST OR PARTIALLY LOST DRAWINGS
283
attached to the blank verso of the sheet on which the pen
drawing was made. This means that between the publi-
cation of Robinson’s catalogue in 1870, and Parker’s in
1956, the sheet must have undergone conservation treat-
ment, probably at the British Museum. At this time, it
was presumably realised that what Robinson had taken to
be a single piece of paper was in fact a laminate. The two
sheets must then have been detached from one another,
and the sheet bearing the red chalk drawing reattached to
that bearing the pen drawing, but now in its proper sense
with the side of the second sheet that carries the chalk
work exposed to view, so that the red chalk drawing now
appears the right way round, in the opposite direction to
Fisher’s drawing. In this process, the side of the second
sheet on which Robinson had made his inscriptions –
which were not erased – was concealed between the two
layers.
Discussion
Recto
Another version of the recto, in Florence (CB28F/
B213/Corpus 126; pen and ink, 303×274 mm, irreg-
ular) includes four studies after the same antique model.
Three are the same size, and arranged in the same order,
as those on the present sheet; the fourth study, not
found here, is of the same torso, seen from the back.
CB28, which is by a fairly feeble hand, and surely not by
Bartolommeo Passerotti, to whom it has sometimes been
attributed, includes a further study, of the head of a bald
man, looking down. The identical head, somewhat better
drawn, recurs on a sheet by a different artist, in the Ufﬁzi
(617E/B212/Corpus 127; pen and ink, 149×212 mm),
on which is also found what must be a facsimile copy of a
lost concetto by Michelangelo for the scene of the Flood on
the Sistine ceiling. The bald head is no doubt copied from
a lost drawing by Michelangelo, and Michelangelo’s orig-
inal was probably made after a sculptural model – perhaps
an antique – since other drawings after this head, made
from different angles, are known (see de Tolnay, 1975,
p. 102). A similar, but not identical, head does occur in
the Flood, and it could be that the originals of both the
head study and the quartet of nude studies on CB28F
and the trio on the present sheet were made in prepa-
ration for that fresco, in which several nude women are
represented.
However, on balance, this seems unlikely. The orig-
inals of the nude studies on the present sheet and on
CB28F were probably made as practice drawings, some-
what before 1508–9. There are close similarities with
female nudes studied on a sheet of drawings in the Mus´ee
Cond´e, Chantilly (Lanfranc de Panthou 38 recto/Corpus
24; pen and ink, 261×386 mm), which were no doubt
based on the same antique fragment. The ﬁgure on the
right of the present sheet, in left proﬁle, is very like
that on the right of that in Chantilly. Another draw-
ing by Michelangelo, probably of c. 1505, visible on the
laid-down verso of a sheet in the Mus´ee des Beaux-Art
in Rennes (Inv. 794.1.2913/Corpus 632; pen and ink,
250×138 mm), of the haunches of a female nude from
the rear, shows that Michelangelo continued to study the
female form as represented in the sculpture of classical
antiquity. Michelangelo was later to study a similar antique
fragment in a series of black chalk drawings made in the
early 1520s, when he was planning the female allegories
for the New Sacristy. His studies are now divided between
the Casa Buonarroti and the British Museum:
1. W43/Corpus 232; black chalk, 256×180 mm
2. W44/Corpus 233; black chalk, 202×110 mm
3. CB16F/B69/Corpus 234; black chalk, 147×100 mm
4. CB 41F/B70/Corpus 231; black chalk, 200×147 mm
As Wilde ﬁrst indicated, all four were no doubt once
parts of a single sheet. Michelangelo referred to the
same torso in a now fragmentary drawing of the same
period (Louvre, Inv.725 verso/J23/Corpus 230; black
chalk, 223×123 mm).
The attribution of the present drawing to Raffaello da
Montelupo is understandable but unconvincing. It con-
tains a good deal of hatching, which runs from lower right
to upper left, characteristic of a left-handed draughtsman,
but nearly as much hatching conforms to that of a right-
handed artist. In no known drawing does Raffaello copy
so precisely Michelangelo’s graphic style, and he generally
employs for his copies a medium different from that of the
original. Furthermore, he seems to have copied relatively
few drawings from phases of Michelangelo’s work prior
to that of the New Sacristy.
There exists a group of pen drawings made by an artist
working close to Michelangelo, which must date from late
in the ﬁfteenth or early in the sixteenth century. The com-
piler has conjecturally attributed this group to Michelan-
gelo’s friend and assistant Piero d’Argenta, who also seems
to be the most likely candidate for the authorship of the
present recto. The group includes the following:
1. London, British Museum, 1859-5-14-825, a nude
man, with head and shoulders missing, holding a cup and
a jug; pen and ink, some stylus indentation, 168×135 mm
(irregular, maximum dimensions). Currently ascribed
tentatively to Giovanni Antonio Sodoma, this unpub-
lished drawing was part of the Buonarroti purchase of

284
COPIES OF LOST OR PARTIALLY LOST DRAWINGS
CATALOGUE 58
1859 and is likely to have been made by an artist close to
Michelangelo. Its handling is close to that of the others
in the group.
2. Oxford, Christ Church, Byam Shaw 704 and 705, one
sheet now divided into two, containing studies of lions
on the recto and a sketch of a Piet`a on the verso; pen and
ink, 222×346 mm, maximum, combined.
3. Paris, Louvre, Inv. 701/J46; pen and ink, 378×208
mm, with a Bound Satyr on the recto and a female nude
similar to that left of centre in the Chantilly drawing on
the verso.
4. Paris, Louvre, Inv. 846/J45; pen and ink, 232×329
mm, after Michelangelo’s much-copied model in the Casa
Buonarroti, variously connected with the marble David
and the lost Hercules.
5. Paris, Louvre, Hercules and the Nemean Lion, Inv. 687/
J44/Corpus 12; pen and ink, 315×227 mm, sometimes
given to Michelangelo himself and displaying intimate
knowledge of his style.
6. Vienna Albertina, Birke-Kertesz 133/Corpus 13; pen
and ink, 275×385 mm.
These drawings are closely interrelated, and some may
adapt lost Michelangelo originals.
We know from correspondence that Piero d’Argenta,
named from his home town near Ferrara, was with
Michelangelo from at least 1498; he remained friendly
with the master and wrote warmly to him as late as 1530.
Hirst (1994-5) suggested that he might be the executant
of the paintings attributed to the Master of the Man-
chester Madonna – with the exception of the name
piece – and this hypothesis is supported by the fact (Agosti
and Hirst, 1996) that Pablo de Cespedes named Piero
as the painter of the lost Stigmatisation of Saint Francis,
designed by Michelangelo for the ﬁrst chapel on the left
in the church of San Pietro in Montorio in Rome, and in
situ until c.1590 when it was replaced by the extant fresco
by Giovanni de’Vecchi. All the “Manchester” paintings
would seem to depend on drawings by Michelangelo, and
the pronounced angularity and slimness of their ﬁgures
may be the result of a conscious effort on Michelangelo’s
part to conform to his friend’s Ferrarese aesthetic (Louvre
RF 4112 recto/J17/Corpus 25; pen and ink, 392×284
mm, might have been made by Michelangelo for Piero:
The type of the Child is close to those of the paint-
ings). Because the relation between the two men was
evidently close, it is inherently probable that Piero drew
in a Michelangelesque style.
The subjects of this group of drawings ﬁt well with
Michelangelo’s Roman work of the 1490s. The recto
of 2 and 6 depict virtually identical lions. The former,
which also carries a sketch of Michelangelo’s Bacchus,
bears an inscription “Sandro di Domenico,” perhaps the
same “alessandro” named on the verso of Louvre, Inv.
726/J2/Corpus 31. Drawing 2 carries on its verso a
rough sketch based on Michelangelo’s Piet`a in St. Peter’s,
plus a contemporary inscription which names “Baldassare
da Siena” (i.e., Baldassare Peruzzi), whom Michelangelo
could well have met when he visited Siena c. 1501 to sur-
vey the Piccolomini altar in the Duomo, the setting for
the statues he was contracted to carve. It may be signiﬁ-
cant that 5 links with another work in the same church:
the relief by Federighi of Hercules and the Nemean Lion.
Both drawings and inscriptions suggest that the draughts-
man knew the St. Peter’s Piet`a, travelled with Michelan-
gelo, and was acquainted with Baldassare Peruzzi: All
this would ﬁt well with what can be reconstructed of
Piero.
Verso
This drawing is certainly by a later draughtsman. No
scholar since Robinson has considered it to be an orig-
inal, nor can any link be adduced with a known work
by Michelangelo. Robinson connected it tentatively with
the marble ﬁgure in the Victoria and Albert Museum,
then believed to be the Cupid that Michelangelo carved
for Jacop Galli. But that work has long been transferred to
its true author, Valerio Cioli, and the recent rediscovery
of Michelangelo’s Cupid in the French Cultural Legation
in New York has eliminated any possible link with either
the statue or the present drawing. Taken by itself, it would
have been extremely difﬁcult to date. However, since the
watermark strongly suggests a sixteenth-century origin, it
is presumably because the drawing is made in so naive and
direct a style that it acquires a quasi neo-classical look. A
comparable instance in the Ashmolean’s collection is per-
haps Parker II, 593, whose date has been disputed between
the sixteenth and the eighteenth century.
Drawn Copy
A copy of the ﬁgure on the right of the recto was made
by Sir Edward Burne-Jones in 1866–7, on fol. 8 recto of
his sketchbook in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge,
1070-2.
History
William Young Ottley; Sir Thomas Lawrence (no stamp);
Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley, 1808–23, p. 25 (“I have lately had the good for-
tune to meet with a drawing, which I am strongly of

CATALOGUE 58–59
COPIES OF LOST OR PARTIALLY LOST DRAWINGS
285
opinion was made . . . by Michael Angelo in the garden
of Lorenzo de Medici. It represents an antique female
torso, naked, drawn in three different points of view
with a ﬁne pen, and in a style of execution exactly
resembling the drawing of two draped ﬁgures standing
[Cat. 24 verso].”). Lawrence Inventory, 1830 M. A.
Buonaroti Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830–86] (“Three studies
from the same female torso, pen.”). Woodburn, 1836b,
no. 5 (“[F]rom the antique, at the time Michael Angelo
was studying in the garden of Lorenzo de Medici.”).
Woodburn, 1842, no. 63 (As 1836.). Robinson, 1870,
no. 3 (Recto and verso both by Michelangelo; the verso
resembles the Youthful Cupid in the South Kensington
Museum, executed c. 1497 for Jacopo Galli.). Black, 1875,
p. 213, no. 3. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 236. Fagan, 1883, p. 136
(Probably from the same model as BM W43/Corpus 232
recto, and CB 28F/B. 213/Corpus 126 recto.). Beren-
son, 1903, I, p. 267, no. 1698 (Recto: probably Passerotti.
Verso: same hand.). Thode, 1908, I, p. 64 (Not auto-
graph, but side view similar to ﬁgure on Michelangelo’s
drawing at Chantilly 29/Corpus 24 recto.). Thode,
1913, no. 388a (As 1908. Connected with drawings
by Michelangelo at Chantilly 29/Corpus 24 recto, CB
28F/Corpus 126, and Louvre Inv. 725/J23/Corpus 230
recto.). Berenson, 1938, I, p. 267, no. 1698 (After origi-
nals by Michelangelo; the ﬁgure on the right copied from
Chantilly 29/Corpus 24 recto.). Delacre, 1938, pp. 360–1
(Copy?; related to CB 28F/Corpus 126 recto and Chan-
tilly 29/Corpus 24 recto). Goldscheider, 1951, under
no. 13 (After same antique as Michelangelo’s drawing at
Chantilly 29/Corpus 24 recto; same ﬁgure in four atti-
tudes recurs on Passerotti’s drawing, CB 28F/Corpus 126
recto. Another copy [sic] in Louvre Inv. 725/J23/Corpus
235 recto.). Wilde, 1953a, p. 80 (Female ﬁgure at right
of Chantilly 29/Corpus 24 recto probably derives from
a Cnidian Venus.). Parker, 1956, no. 412 (“The shad-
ing is to a large extent left-hand, and the attribution to
Montelupo, therefore, inherently probable.” The female
ﬁgure turned to the left on Chantilly 29/Corpus 24 recto
from the same antique, which recurs in BM W43/Corpus
232, 44/Corpus 233; CB 28F/Corpus 126 recto and
Inv. 725/Corpus 230 recto.). Dussler, 1959, no. 597a
(Rejected.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1698 (As 1903/1938.).
De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, p. 43 (Female nude of Chan-
tilly 29/Corpus 24 recto probably derives from central
nude in Siena Three Graces rather than a Cnidian Venus.
This drawing, by a pupil, probably inspired by the same
ﬁgure.). De Tolnay, 1976, Corpus II, p. 52 (Reproduced
in relation to BM W43/Corpus 232, derived from a
Capitoline Venus.). Lanfranc de Panthou, 1995, p. 38
(Atelier. de Tolnay’s hypothesis of the ﬁgure’s origin in
the Siena Graces is reasonable.). Joannides, 2003a, p. 187,
under no. 44 (Present recto conjecturally attributed to
Piero d’Argenta.).
CATALOGUE 59
A Beckoning Man and Other Sketches
1846.92; R.15; P.II 346
Dimensions: 310×182 mm
Medium
Pen and ink. A later framing line in pen and ink.
Condition
The sheet is lined and much of the upper right corner is
made up; it is extensively damaged with major toned and
in-drawn inﬁlls; some of the toning has blackened. There
are extensive toned inﬁlls at ink fractures and losses; major
tear repairs, numerous black accretions, and local stain-
ing, some from ink. The primary support, which is very
brittle, is drummed by the four edges to the backboard
of the mount, so the verso is not visible.
Numbering
Lower right: no. F5? in pen.
Description
A. Same-size copy of a ﬁgure on BM W4 recto/Corpus
48.
B. Same-size copy of a ﬁgure on BM W4 verso/Corpus
48.
C. Same-size copy of a ﬁgure on BM W4 verso/Corpus
48.
D. Same-size copy of a ﬁgure on BM W4 verso/Corpus
48.
E. Small pinioned? ﬁgure.
F. Small pinioned? ﬁgure.
G. F, seen from a different angle.
H. Seated ﬁgure, washing hands, or giving instructions.
I. Study of a left lower leg.
J. St. John the Baptist ﬁlling his bowl.
K. Figure in contorted pose.
Discussion
Four of the drawings on this page of copies [A–D]
are same-size replicas – probably tracings – of surviv-
ing drawings by Michelangelo, found on two sides of
a sheet datable c. 1505 now in the British Museum
(W4 recto/Corpus 48; pen and ink, 375×230 mm). No

286
COPIES OF LOST OR PARTIALLY LOST DRAWINGS
CATALOGUE 59
originals of any of the other drawings on the present page
are known, but there can be no doubt that they too are
replicas of drawings made by Michelangelo at about the
same time. With the exception of the leg study I, which
bears some resemblance to the right leg of the Rebellious
Slave, and which might copy a drawing made in prepa-
ration for the Julius Tomb, all the other drawings on this
page of which originals are not known are also found on
a page that passed through the London art market in the
early 1970s (Neerman, n.d. [c. 1972], no. 2; pen and ink,
318×221 mm; see Joannides 2002b) attributed, uncon-
vincingly, to Battista Franco. The ex-Neerman page con-
tains a further sketch that is known from a third sheet
of copies (formerly Brussels, Emile Wauters collection,
present whereabouts unknown; reproduced by K. Frey,
1909–11, no 249a; pen and ink, 220×165 mm; since
the verso of the ex-Wauters sheet bears a fragment of
a letter in Michelangelo’s hand, it evidently comes from
Michelangelo’s studio), as well as other drawings in the
same style, which are also obviously replicas of sketches
by Michelangelo, but of which no other versions survive.
The ex-Neerman page was certainly not copied from the
present one for the version of K that it bears is shown at
greater length.
It is possible that Michelangelo’s original sketches of
the three putti on the British Museum sheet were drawn
in connection with a scheme that included the Christ
Child and the infant Baptist. Another of the drawings on
W4 verso, not copied here, seems to have been used in
Michelangelo’s Taddei Tondo, now in the Royal Academy
London, whose date is probably c. 1504. The main ﬁgure
(copied here as A) is generally connected with the Battle
of Cascina and may have been drawn with that project in
view; but no ﬁgure resembling this appears in any other
known drawing connected with it, and the compiler’s
suggestion that it might have been made for a ﬁgure in a
Martyrdom of the Ten Thousand, for which Michelangelo
made numerous drawings c. 1506, remains an alternative.
An important piece of evidence for the project of a
Martyrdom of the Ten Thousand is the fact that the ﬁg-
ure in a contorted pose on the present page (K – more
clearly recorded on the ex-Neerman page) is found in
a drawing, known in three versions, that depicts seven
men cruciﬁed on trees. One of these is by Michelangelo’s
young acquaintance Alonso Berruguete; one, by an Ital-
ian hand of the early sixteenth century; and the third is a
later copy, but all of them must go back to a Michelan-
gelo original. Three of the other ﬁgures on the present
page, all of which recur, in a different relation, on the
ex-Neerman page, might also have been made for this
project. For a fuller discussion of this putative project, see
Joannides, 1994c and 2002b. An additional piece of evi-
dence in support of the view that Michelangelo designed
such a scheme is provided by a drawing attributed to him
and recorded in Jabach’s posthumous inventory of 1695
(Py, 2001, no. 769): Un empereur sur son trˆone, entour´e de
gens de guerre, qui fait assommer un homme devant lui, `a la
plume, lav´e sur papier bistr´e, long de 14 3/4 pouces sur 10 1/2
pouces.
The small ﬁgure in the lower centre of the present page,
Saint John the Baptist Filling his Bowl [J] – also found in the
ex-Neerman page – was obviously drawn in preparation
for a painting. Although this episode had been treated
earlier within Saint John cycles, it seems to have been
isolated as a self-sufﬁcient subject only in the late quattro-
cento. An intarsia panel at the left side of the Tornabuoni
Chapel in Santa Maria Novella, whose fresco scheme was
being executed when the adolescent Michelangelo was
in the studio of Ghirlandaio, shows Saint John the Bap-
tist Filling His Bowl in an exceptionally intense design
which has nothing to do with Ghirlandaio but seems to
be by Filippino Lippi. Michelangelo no doubt recalled
this when making his own drawing. Michelangelo may
have had some responsibility for the theme’s propagation:
Paintings of Saint John the Baptist Filling His Bowl became
quite popular in Florence after c. 1510; examples survive
by Bugiardini and Bacchiacca among others, although
no known examples reﬂect the present design, in which,
unlike most renderings of the subject, the Baptist is shown
not seated but standing, eager to begin his mission, a suc-
cessor of Moses. However, a painting of Saint John the Bap-
tist Filling His Bowl of c. 1517 by Raphael’s pupil Giovanni
Francesco Penni (London, formerly Pouncey Collection;
oil on panel, 648×485 mm; identiﬁed by Philip Pouncey;
published in Joannides, 1993), which shows the Saint
standing, may reﬂect some awareness of Michelangelo’s
idea.
Only one commission that could in principle have
some relevance to such a project is known: Cardinal Ali-
dosi wrote to Michelangelo on 3 May 1510 asking him
to execute a fresco of John baptising Christ in the chapel
of his Villa at La Magliana. Although the subject is not
the same, it could, in principle, have been planned as a
complementary episode. However, the Cardinal’s request
seems to have had no sequel, and because it is improbable
that the original of the present sketch could have been as
late as 1510, it is most likely that it was sketched c. 1505 for
some entirely independent project, perhaps for a friend.
The small seated ﬁgure, whose sex is unclear, turning
to what seems to be a receptacle on his or her right, is
difﬁcult to interpret. It too recurs on the ex-Neerman
page. There is some relation to the seated ﬁgures on the

287

288
COPIES OF LOST OR PARTIALLY LOST DRAWINGS
CATALOGUE 59
platform in the various drawings for the 1505 and 1513
phases of the Julius Tomb, but these are insufﬁcient to
connect it securely with that project. It might be a judging
ﬁgure in the Martyrdom of the Ten Thousand, but, unlike
two ﬁgures found on the ex-Neerman page, it is difﬁ-
cult to see how this ﬁgure would have ﬁtted into that
composition. The arrangement might also suggest Pilate
washing his hands, but Michelangelo was involved with
no known commission that might have included Pilate
until he came to sketch out ideas for the Borgherini
Chapel in San Pietro in Montorio for his friend Sebas-
tiano in 1516, and the present ﬁgure can hardly be
so late.
The ﬁgure K – clearer in the ex-Neerman page – was
employed by Primaticcio in the design of a Bacchanal, fres-
coed in a pendentive of the Salle de Bal at Fontainebleau
by Niccol`o dell’Abbate 1552–6. Another fresco in the Salle
de Bal, the Concert on the end wall, contains two putti bor-
rowed from the verso of the British Museum drawing.
The ﬁgure of Saint John [J] was also adapted by Primatic-
cio for the pose of Hercules in the scene of Ulysses Meeting
Hercules in Hades, the twenty-fourth in the series of nar-
ratives from the Odyssey frescoed in the Gal´erie d’Ulysse
at Fontainebleau. The ﬁgure [A] on BM W4, also has a
French linking: It was employed, clad in armour, for that
brandishing a severed head in Antoine Caron’s Massacres
of the Triumvirate of 1566 (Mus´ee du Louvre). It is reason-
able to conclude, therefore, that both W4, whose earliest
recorded provenance is French, and the original(s) of the
other sketches on the present and ex-Neerman pages,
were by c. 1550 in France and probably in the possession
of Primaticcio. It is likely that the present tracing was
made in France and was acquired there by Lanier; the
British Museum sheet remained in France at least until
the Mariette sale. At least two companion “anthology”
pages of copies of lost and surviving sheets of drawings
by Michelangelo, which were probably made in France
in the sixteenth century, are known:
1. Montpellier, Mus´ee Atger, Inv. 375; pen and ink,
300×200 mm.
2. Montpellier, Mus´ee Fabre, Inv. 864-2-195; pen and
ink over black chalk, 294×199 mm.
It would be tempting to add to these a third sheet, now
in Dublin (National Gallery of Ireland, Inv. 2666; pen and
ink, 405×251 mm, bearing the stamp of Sir Peter Lely),
but none of the originals copied on it can be placed in
France during the sixteenth century.
Drawn Copies
A copy of ﬁgure A from the present sheet was made by
Sir Edward Burne-Jones in 1866-7, on fol. 11 recto of
his sketchbook in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge,
1070-2 (see Østermark-Johansen, 1998, pp. 123 and 126,
ﬁg. 34, who thought that it was made after Michelangelo’s
original, W4, and dated it 1870–2).
History
Nicholas Lanier? (probably L.2885, but so smudged that
it is difﬁcult to be sure; for the stamps of the Lanier broth-
ers see Wood, 2003); Unidentiﬁed collector (unidentiﬁed
mark); Lord Hampden; William Young Ottley?, his sale
6–13 July, 1807 lot 377? (“One – the Fall of the Giants,
pen and bistre – capital – from K. Cha.I cabinet.”); Sir
Thomas Lawrence (L. 2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale, 6–13 July 1807, lot 377? (“One – the Fall
of the Giants, pen and bistre – capital– from K. Cha.I
cabinet.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 19 (“A beautiful sheet
of studies, for the David Conqueror of Goliath . . . From
the Collections of King Charles I, and Lord Hamp-
den.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 38 (As 1842). Fisher, 1852,
p. 3, pl. 10 (As Woodburn, 1842.). Fisher, 1865, I, p. 16,
pl. 10 (As 1852.). Robinson, 1870, no. 15 (Michel Angelo
“ancient tracings, on thick oiled paper” from recto and
verso of drawing in Vaughan Collection [BM W4/
Corpus 48] of c. 1500–1504 and other drawings no
longer extant.” Woodburn wrongly described main ﬁg-
ure in original as being connected with the marble David.
More probably executed in connection with Cascina.).
Fisher, 1872, I, p. 14, pl. 10 (As 1852.). Black, 1875,
p. 213, no. 15. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 221. Fisher, 1879,
XI/10 (Ancient tracing of drawing in Vaughan Collec-
tion [BM W4/Corpus 48].). Thode, 1908, I, pp. 101, 113
(Copies of BM W4/Corpus 48] etc.). K. Frey, 1909–11,
under no. 92 (After BM W4/Corpus 48 and other lost
originals.). Thode, 1913, no. 399 (Copies. Small ﬁgures
probably connected with Cascina but possibly with Sis-
tine ignudi.). De Tolnay, 1943a, p. 187 (Sixteenth-century
copy of BM W4/Corpus 48.). Goldscheider, 1951, under
no. 16 (Copy of BM W4/Corpus 48.). Parker, 1956,
no. 346 (Copies from BM W4/Corpus 48 and other
sketches.). Dussler, 1959, under no. 169 (Copies from
recto and verso of BM W4/Corpus 48.). Joannides,
1994a, p. 23 (Figure [J] employed by Primaticcio in his
design for the fresco of Ulysses Meeting Hercules in Hades
formerly at Fontainebleau.). Joannides, 1994c, pp. 6–7
(Figure [K] connected with composition of the Martyrdom
of the Ten Thousand, known in fragmentary copy drawings
in Madrid and Hamburg.). Joannides 2002b, pp. 8–10,
12–14 (Connection established with ex-Neerman sheet,
which is analysed in detail; discussion of the John the
Baptist composition.).

CATALOGUE 60
COPIES OF LOST OR PARTIALLY LOST DRAWINGS
289
CATALOGUE 60
Twelve Heads
1846.93; R.32; P.II 347
Dimensions: 383×270 mm
Watermark: A ﬂower, close to Briquet 6658, Florence,
1451.
Medium
Red chalk; a faint line in pen and ink. A later framing
line in pen and ink.
Condition
The sheet is lined. A number of edge repairs and inﬁlls
are visible, with some skinning, and it is possible that
some white toning has blackened. There are abrasions, a
vertical incised line, some small holes and a repaired hole
with a ﬂap. The primary support is drummed by the four

290
COPIES OF LOST OR PARTIALLY LOST DRAWINGS
CATALOGUE 60
edges to the backboard of the mount, and the verso is not
visible.
Inscription
Lower right, very faintly in ink: Michel Angelo? No. 55 in
graphite.
Description
A. A male head in right proﬁle with elaborate locks.
B. A small male head in right proﬁle, tilted down.
C. Immediately below B. A small male head facing right,
turned slightly upward and outward, perhaps related to
the head of Adam in the Creation of Adam.
D. A female head in right proﬁle; probably after an orig-
inal of the 1520s.
E. A female head in right proﬁle, with an expansive head-
covering; probably after an original of the 1520s; slightly
Pontormesque in ﬂavour.
F. A head copied at the same size as the original from
Michelangelo’s red chalk study of the head of the ignudo
left above Persica on the verso of his study for Adam in
the Creation of Adam in the British Museum, W11/Corpus
134.
G. A head of a man, looking downwards, his face tilted
slightly upwards. Probably after an original of the Last
Judgement period.
H. A female head with turban seen from front, tilted
upwards; perhaps another view of E. The type is not far
from that of the New Sacristy Dawn.
I. A male head copied at the same size as the original from
Michelangelo’s red chalk study of the head on a sheet in
the Ufﬁzi 14412F recto/B147/Corpus 379, perhaps made
in connection with the Last Judgement but in any case of
the early 1530s.
J. A head of a young man in right proﬁle.
K. An old satyr? in right proﬁle.
L. A young satyr in right proﬁle.
Discussion
It is certain that two of these heads, and probable that
all of them, are copies after drawings by Michelan-
gelo. F is copied from a Michelangelo drawing in the
British Museum (W11/Corpus 134 verso; red chalk,
193×259 mm) for the head of the ignudo to the left
above Persica, seated next to Adam in the Creation of
Adam. The ﬁgure of the recumbent Adam is studied on
the recto of this sheet. I is copied from a study drawn
by Michelangelo some twenty years later (Ufﬁzi 14412F
recto/B147/Corpus 379; red chalk and pen and ink,
272×282 mm). The head is similar to types devised by
Michelangelo for the Last Judgement, but it does not seem
to have been made with that fresco in mind and was prob-
ably drawn a little before the inception of that commis-
sion. Both these copies are the same size as the originals.
The other heads on the present sheet are probably after
lost originals by Michelangelo datable between these two
terms. A, for example, is quite similar in characterisa-
tion to a head by Michelangelo on a sheet in Princeton
(Gibbons, no. 437; black chalk, 183×124 mm) as well
as, in reverse, to the head drawing by Michelangelo on
Cat. 28 verso.
The heads second from right in the top row, D, and at
the right of the middle row, H, seem to be related to the
head of Dawn in the New Sacristy and may have been
made after preliminary drawings for it. There is some
relation with what was probably once a single sheet of
drawings in black chalk, now divided between Turin (Inv.
15716/6 D.C.; 101×60 mm) and the Louvre (Inv. 19 and
19 bis; respectively, 175×83 mm and 125×94 mm). The
Louvre drawings are given to Allori by Berenson and by
F. Viatte in annotations on the mount; that in Turin was
attributed to Rosso by S. B´eguin, 1990.
The obvious inference is that the present sheet was
made by an artist with access to a group of drawings
by Michelangelo. Woodburn afﬁrms that W11 was in
the collections of Jonathan Richardson the Elder and Sir
Joshua Reynolds, which indicates that it had left Italy
by the end of the seventeenth century, but nothing is
known of its whereabouts in the sixteenth century. Nev-
ertheless the inscription it bears relates it to a group of
drawings by Michelangelo that seems to have been in an
Italian – probably Roman – collection in the late six-
teenth or early seventeenth century and may not have
left Italy much before Richardson acquired it. There is a
sixteenth-century Italian copy of the recto of W11 in the
Louvre (RF 28961 recto/J96; red chalk, 217×291 mm),
and even though this could have been made as early as
1535, it is probable that it was made somewhat later. The
Louvre copy does not have a French provenance, and this
reinforces the view that the British Museum sheet was not
part of Mini’s cache, which would have been in France
from 1532. Ufﬁzi 14412F, partly torn, and carrying not
particularly attractive drawings, probably never left Italy.
Further support for this view is provided by the fact that
the lost original of E seems to have been copied by Andrea
Commodi on Ufﬁzi 18619F verso right side, which indi-
cates that, in all probability, it was in Casa Buonarroti
c. 1580.
This sheet of copies could have been made at any time
after Michelangelo drew the head now in the Ufﬁzi, but
the watermark supports an early date, and it was proba-
bly made shortly after 1530 in Michelangelo’s workshop,

CATALOGUE 60
COPIES OF LOST OR PARTIALLY LOST DRAWINGS
291
of which the draughtsman presumably had free run.
Although this is, in effect, an anthology sheet, the treat-
ment of the forms, shown merging with and emerg-
ing from each other, suggests that the copyist was aware
of Michelangelo’s own propensity for overlapping and
superimposition. In principle, therefore, it is possible that
the present drawing was made by Antonio Mini himself,
in which case it would constitute his highest achieve-
ment. However, the compiler would ﬁnd it hard to accept
this attribution and, since it may be assumed that Mini’s
own drawings and copies after Michelangelo went with
him to France, together with the originals given him by
Michelangelo, one would expect the provenance of the
present sheet to be French. However, although nothing
is known of its history prior to its appearance in the col-
lection of Jeremiah Harman, there is no suggestion that
it came from France.
Alternatively, the present sheet might have been made
by one of the other artists who collaborated with
Michelangelo in the early 1530s. The style does not imme-
diately suggest a speciﬁc candidate, but red chalk draw-
ings by Giovanni Montorsoli, Silvio Cosini, and Niccol`o
Tribolo are virtually unknown, and much remains to
be discovered about these sculptors’ graphic work. The
copyist is, in any case, likely to have been Florentine.
Because copies F and I are the same size as Michelan-
gelo’s originals, it is probable, but obviously not certain,
that the other drawings on the present sheet are also the
same size as the lost originals that they reproduce.
History
Jeremiah Harman; Samuel Woodburn (Parker’s insertion
of Sir Thomas Lawrence must be a slip).
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 81 (“A ﬁne sheet of studies of male
and female heads.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 42 (As 1842.).
Fisher, 1862, p. 4, pl. 16 (As Woodburn, 1842.). Fisher,
1865, II, p. 24, pl. 17 (As 1862.). Robinson, 1870, no. 32
(Michel Angelo. Datable c. 1511–12, perhaps made for
Tommaso Cavalieri. [F] developed from a head on British
Museum, W11/Corpus 134 verso, close to that of Adam.
“Several other of the heads . . . are, if not directly repro-
duced, probably only slightly altered from those of ﬁgures
to be found on the ceiling.” [A] “has something of the
characteristic typical expression of Leonardo da Vinci’s
youthful heads . . . whilst the outline sketch of a grinning
Satyr’s face in proﬁle [L] seems to have been inspired by
a head in one of Andrea Mantegna’s prints (the ‘Fight-
ing Tritons.’) . . . The style of design of these heads is of
inimitable power and perfection; the outlines are ﬁrmly
drawn, without any appearance of that uncertainty which
so often distinguishes Michel Angelo’s drawings at a later
period, and the shading is laid in in broad and simple
masses of graduated tint, as if with a brush: in fact they are
modelled up in precisely the same style as the heads in his
oil pictures and frescoes. The writer’s belief is, that Michel
Angelo, having been called upon for a sheet of studies to
serve as drawing copies, selected various heads from his
own works, previously executed; and copied them at once
on this paper, on a reduced scale from the Cartoons in his
studio”). Fisher, 1872, I, p. 15, pl. 17 (As 1862.). Ruskin,
1872, p. 100 (“[T]his sheet of Vasari’s ‘teste divine’ con-
tains, in fact, not a single drawing of high quality –
only one of moderate agreeableness, and two caricatured
heads, one of a satyr with hair like the fur of an animal, and
one of a monstrous and sensual face such as could only
have occurred to the sculptor in a fatigued dream, and
which in my own notes I have classed with the vile face
in No. 45 [presumably J or K on Cat. 30 recto].”). Black,
1875, p. 214, no. 32. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 239. Springer,
1878, pp. 32–3 (By Michelangelo, early, strongly inﬂu-
enced by Leonardo in types and drawing technique. Illus-
trated.). Fisher, 1879, p. 25, no. 33 (“A Sheet of Studies.”).
Springer, 1883, I, p. 43, ﬁg. 15 (As 1878.). Portheim,
1889, p. 145 (“[B]esonders der Lockerkopf links oben
sich wie eine nachahmung Lionardo’s ausnimmt.” Criti-
cism of Robinson’s view that Michelangelo copied either
Mantegna or his own work.). W¨olfﬂin, 1891, pp. 62, 85–7
(A forgery based in part on drawings by Michelan-
gelo. “Einen ¨achten Zug scheint der junge m¨annliche
Kopf in der Mitte links [F] zu besitzen. Er steht den
letzten sixtinischen K¨opfen nahe.”). Knackfuss, 1896,
p. 22 (Michelangelo, inﬂuenced by Leonardo.). Berenson,
1903, no. 1706 (“[W]retched imitations.” [F] after same
lost original copied on BM W11/Corpus 134 verso.).
Ferri and Jacobsen, 1905, p. 12 (Note that head [I]
copied after Ufﬁzi 14412F/Corpus 378.). Steinmann,
1905, II, p. 595 (One of heads copied after same drawing
also copied on BM W11/Corpus 134 verso.). Jacobsen,
1907, p. 393 ([F] after same lost original copied on BM
W11/Corpus 134 verso.). Thode, 1908, I, p. 262; II,
p. 337, 340 (Probably after drawings by Michelangelo of
Sistine period; [F] and BM W11/Corpus 134 verso copied
from ignudo left above Persica; [B] and [L] related; [A]
from an Ideal Head.). K. Frey, 1907, p. 89 (“un¨acht.”).
K. Frey, 1909–11, under no. 155a (Not Michelangelo;
by an artist from the second third of the cinquecento
aware of drawings by Michelangelo and Leonardo; links
with Cat. 1 verso and Louvre Inv. 684/J29/Corpus 95.).
Thode, 1913, no. 419 (Copies; [F] after BM W11/Corpus
134 verso; [I] after Ufﬁzi 14412F/Corpus 378.). Berenson,

292
COPIES OF LOST OR PARTIALLY LOST DRAWINGS
CATALOGUES 60–61
1938, no. 1706 (As 1903; perhaps by Heemskerck. [I] is
after Ufﬁzi 14412F/Corpus 378.). Delacre, 1938, pp. 362–
3 (Michelangelo?. Heads from Ufﬁzi 617E/B212/Corpus
127 and CB 28F/B213/Corpus 126 repeated twice in
different attitudes and expressions [sic]. [F] inverted [sic]
with respect to BM W11/Corpus 134 verso, and immea-
surably superior to it.) Wilde, 1953a, p. 24 (F is a
copy of verso of BM W11/Corpus 134, erroneously as
pen and ink.). Parker, 1956, no. 347 (Compilation of
copies. Rejects Robinson’s linking of [L] with Man-
tegna and Berenson’s attribution to Heemskerck.). Dus-
sler, 1959, no. 615 (Part copies after Michelangelo; dat-
able to the 1570s or 1580s.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1706
(As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962, p. 184 (Head on Ufﬁzi
14412F/Corpus 378 from which [I] is copied is datable to
Last Judgement period.). De Tolnay, 1976, Corpus II, p. 93.
CATALOGUE 61
A Dog Gnawing a Bone
1846.98; P.II 353; R. p. 308, 173
Dimensions: 144×110 mm, irregular.
Medium
Pen and ink over traces of black chalk.
Condition
The sheet is extensively foxed on the verso edges. There
are some accretions and dirty and discoloured edges.
There is uneven discolouration. The primary support
is drummed by the four edges to the backboard of the
mount, so the verso is not visible.
Discussion
This drawing was made after the dog that surmounts the
helmet of the Count of Canossa as seen in an elabo-
rate Presentation Drawing made by Michelangelo c. 1520.
The traditional identiﬁcation of the subject, questioned
by Wilde, was re-afﬁrmed by Gere and Turner (exh. Cat.
London, 1975, p. 96, under no. 115) on the basis, ﬁrst
remarked by Robinson (1870, p. 19), of the rebus of dog
and bone so prominently displayed on the man’s headgear
(cane + ossa = canossa). Michelangelo’s original is lost but
a ﬁne copy, often in the past identiﬁed as the original,
is in the British Museum. The present drawing, which
might have been made by an engraver, shows its forms at
the same size as those of the British Museum drawing.
Michelangelo believed himself related to the Count of
Canossa, and the current Count either accepted this or
humoured the artist by appearing to do so, and addressed
Michelangelo as his kinsman. Whether the drawing was
made for the Count is unknown, but it is an obvious pos-
sibility. In any case, it probably represents not an idealised
living person, but an imaginary portrait of the founder of
the Count’s (and, in Michelangelo’s belief, his own) line.
The Count of Canossa drawing was highly inﬂuential and
much copied. In 1613 it was etched by Antonio Tempesta
(The Illustrated Bartsch, 37, no. 1371; 202×146 mm) with
the inscription Canossiae familiae nobilissimo Stipiti Michae-
langelus Bonarotus delineabit. It was paired by Tempesta
with another etching (no. 1372; 202×146 mm) inscribed,
Michaelangelus Bonarotus inven., which was made after the
Ideal Head of a Woman, a drawing by Michelangelo now
in the British Museum (W42 recto/Corpus 316; black
chalk, 287×235 mm). Tempesta’s prints are crude and
were no doubt made after derivations from Michelan-
gelo’s drawings rather than the originals. The female
head cannot be the Marchesa of Pescara (i.e., Vittoria
Colonna), which, according to Wilde, is the traditional
identiﬁcation of the British Museum drawing, unless it is
an ideal portrait of her as she might have appeared in her
youth – but she may be an imaginary portrait of the
daughter of the ﬁrst Count of Canossa, Countess Matilda
of Tuscany.
Among drawn copies of Michelangelo’s lost original of
the Count of Canossa are:

CATALOGUES 61–62
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
293
1. London, British Museum 1895-9-15-492/W87 (but
see also discussion under W42); black chalk, 410×263
mm. By far the best surviving version, until 1953 generally
believed to be the original.
2. Sotheby’s sale, London, 9 July 1981, lot 11 as Alessan-
dro Allori; black chalk, 414×275 mm.
3. Christie’s sale, London, 26 November 1973, lot 339;
black chalk, 388×255 mm.
4. Paris, Mus´ee du Louvre, Inv. 10978/J71; black
chalk, 235×183 mm, fragmentary. Made on tracing
paper that has in part disintegrated; only the head
survives.
These copies are all on the same scale, no doubt that
of the original.
History
Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 154 (By Raphael.). Robinson, 1870,
p. 308, no. 172 (Copy from Michel Angelo. After helmet
of Count of Canossa; “probably by an engraver of the
sixteenth century.”). Parker, 1956, no. 353 (Timid copy
of a detail from Michelangelo’s lost drawing.). De Tolnay,
1973, p. 39 (Timid copy after a lost drawing for the head-
dress of the Count of Canossa; the head and neck antic-
ipate Cat. 36; for the hind legs, see BM W50/Corpus
305.). De Tolnay, 1976, Corpus II, no. 303 bis (As
1973.).
CATALOGUE 62
battista franco (c. 1510–1561)
An Ideal Head
1846.94; R.53(2); P.II 348
Dimensions: 148×163 mm, irregular, most of the top
edge and the lower right corner made up.
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
The sheet is tissue lined. There are major toned inﬁlls,
a diagonal pressed-out crease, and repaired tears, with
some skinning at repairs. The sheet has abrasions, ﬁbrous
accretions, general uneven discolouration and local
foxing.

294
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
CATALOGUES 62–63
Inscription
At lower right, in pen: n◦67; partially in Greek: δϵττω´ . . .
Mich: Buonti.
Discussion
To the compiler and to A. V. Lauder, the attribution by
Robinson and Thode of this somewhat varied copy after
Cat. 31 to Battista Franco, doubted by Parker, is convinc-
ing. The doubled contours are characteristic of his work
as are the slightly over-emphatic internal demarcations. It
may be compared, for example, with Franco’s Male Head
in the Museo Horne in Florence (Inv. 5749; black chalk,
208×181 mm; see Garofalo, 2000, no. 12).
Franco often – although not invariably – copied draw-
ings by other artists, including those by Michelangelo,
in a medium different from the original: Indeed, the
Ashmolean Museum owns his spendid pen and ink copy
(Parker, II, 236; 294×126 mm) after Rosso’s red chalk
Old Woman (perhaps a Sibyl) at Chatsworth (Inv. 712;
Jaff´e, 1994, no. 58; 274×136 mm).
The present copy is drawn freely and makes no
attempt to replicate the original. It was probably exe-
cuted shortly after 1540, when Franco was liberating
himself from Michelangelo’s spell. There exists another
copy of Michelangelo’s original, more exact than the
present drawing and probably made a little earlier, that
the compiler and A. V. Lauder also believe to be by
Battista Franco: Oxfordshire, Private Collection; black
chalk, 176×132 mm, from the collection of Carlo Prayer
(L.2044).
The early collector (see also Cat. 70) who inscribed
the drawing in Greek may have done so in imitation of
the practice of Vincenzo Borghini, but is, as the compiler
is assured by R. Scorza, distinct from him. A sheet of
studies in the British Museum as Raffaello da Montelupo
but not quite certainly by him (1946-7-13-374; pen and
ink, 146×202 mm) bears the same inscription and the
same number as the present sheet suggesting that the two
were once mounted together. Like Cat. 70, the British
Museum sheet bears the stamp of Sir Joshua Reynolds
and it was also owned by Sir Thomas Lawrence.
History
The Greek inscriber, presumably Florentine late sixteenth
century (see also Cat. 70); William Young Ottley; Sir
Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830-108i] (“Two studies in black chalk, one a
head in a Helmet, the other [Cat. 31].”). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 75.1 (“Two studies upon one mount – for a female
head.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 52 (As 1842.). Robin-
son, 1870, no. 53.2 (“[O]bviously an inferior copy” of
[Cat. 31]; “The peculiar unmeaning ﬂourish or ‘bravura’
style of execution seems to betray the hand of Battista
Franco; and it will be seen, that the noble features of
the original countenance are here distorted and carica-
tured, and a comparatively mean and vulgar expression
superinduced.”). Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 48b. Gotti, 1875,
II, p. 239. Berenson, 1903, under no. 1552 (“[E]xcellent
copy” of [Cat. 31]. Ufﬁzi 602E/B188 is “of no inter-
est, except that it impudently passes for an original.”).
Thode, 1908, II, p. 337 (Battista Franco.). K. Frey 1909–
11, under no. 172b (Attribution to Franco question-
able.). Thode, 1913, under no. 394 (As 1908.). Berenson,
1938, under no. 1552 (“[P]robably done by [Francesco]
Salviati.”). Delacre, 1938, pp. 173–5, 221 (Copy; attribu-
tion to Franco disconcerting but tempted to accept it.).
Goldscheider, 1951, p. 42 (“[A]ttributed to Salviati
or . . . Battista Franco.”). Parker, 1956, no. 348 (Neither by
Battista Franco nor Francesco Salviati; Ufﬁzi copy con-
ceivably by Bacchiacca.). Dussler, 1959, under no. 342
(Attributions recorded.). Berenson, 1961, under no. 1552
(As 1938.). Lauder, 2003, pp. 95–6 (Publication of a sec-
ond copy by Franco of Michelangelo’s drawing in an
Oxfordshire private collection.).
CATALOGUE 63
A Copy of Michelangelo’s Design for the Magniﬁci Tomb
1954.68; P.II 349
Dimensions: 384×244 mm
Watermark: Crossed arrows below a six-pointed star (very
close to Roberts Arrows B/Briquet 6291, Rome c. 1560).
Medium
Pen and ink with brown wash over black chalk, with
extensive employment of ruler and compasses.
Condition
There is a major horizontal score line and other small
indentations at the upper edge. A repaired tear, abrasion,
some pulp imperfections, accretions, and general uneven
discolouration are visible.
Discussion
This and Cat. 64 are same-size replicas of a double
tomb design by Michelangelo made in early 1521. There

295

296
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
CATALOGUE 63
are eleven others. These are, in alphabetical order of
location:
1. Florence, Ufﬁzi, 258F, sometimes attributed to Aris-
totile da Sangallo, but reminiscent of both Gherardi and
Naldini; pen and ink over black chalk, 400×260 mm.
This drawing is inscribed with the dimensions of the
tomb, 7 2
3 braccia in width and 10 1
2 braccia in height,
measured to the level of the base of the candelabra on the
cornice.
2. Formerly London, sale at Phillips son and Neale,
6 December 1995, lot no. 179, as Italian sixteenth-century
school after Michelangelo; brush and grey-brown wash
over black chalk, compass-work and stylus indentation,
with many measurements inscribed on the tomb and a
braccio scale at lower left, 390×255 mm. Ex-collection
Beurdeley (L.421) – like the present drawing – subse-
quently with R. S. Johnson, Chicago (Johnson, 1996); at
the time of writing (1997) in a U.S. private collection.
3. Munich, Graphische Sammlung, no. 4932, anony-
mous; pen and ink over black chalk, 382×244 mm.
4. Oxford, Christ Church, JBS 71, anonymous; pen and
brown ink with brown wash over black chalk, with exten-
sive use of ruler and compasses; badly damaged and torn,
with pieces missing from the right lower centre and the
upper right, 388×244 mm.
5. Oxford, Christ Church, JBS 72, studio assistant of
Michelangelo; pen and dark brown ink, extensive use of
ruler and compasses; badly damaged with pieces torn from
the centre and lower left, 407×289 mm. Watermark: A
crowned eagle close to Briquet 86 and 87, Pisa-Florence
c. 1500. This drawing, depicting the architectural mem-
bering in outline, was probably made in preparation for
ordering the marble.
6. Paris, Louvre, Inv. 837/J26/Corpus 194; brush and
wash over black chalk and stylus indentation, 379 ×
242 mm. In the compiler’s view, this is an autograph
modello by Michelangelo; it is technically and stylistically
inseparable from a series of elaborate modelli by Michelan-
gelo’s own hand.
7. Paris, Louvre, Inv. 789/J101, anonymous; pen and ink
over black chalk, brush and dark brown wash, extensive
use of ruler and compasses, 378×239 mm.
8. Paris, Louvre, Inv. 18359/J100, anonymous; pen and
ink over black chalk, brush and dark brown wash,
extensive use of ruler and compasses, 379×244 mm.
Extensively inscribed with measurements. Watermark:
Crossed arrows below a six-pointed star (Roberts Arrows
B/Briquet 6291, Rome c. 1560), the same as the present
drawing.
9. Vienna, Albertina, BT 112, anonymous; pen and
brown ink over black chalk, brush and brown wash,
extensive use of ruler and compasses, 390×257 mm. From
the collection of P.-J. Mariette who believed it to be
Michelangelo’s original (Abecedario, I, p. 208).
All these versions are virtually identical in external and
internal dimensions, although there are minor differences
among them in the representation of the ﬁgures, in ﬁnish,
and the employment of wash.
Two further copies are also recorded:
10. Berlin, Collection Dr. W. Kreis (formerly?); pen and
ink over black chalk without wash, dimensions unknown
(reproduced Laux, 1943, p. 327)
11. Vienna, Hofbibliothek, medium and dimensions
unknown. The right side of the composition only
(Thode, 1913, no. 531b).
In addition, several sketch copies of parts of this design
survive: Among these may be cited Ufﬁzi 607E, 3912A,
formerly attributed to Aristotile da Sangallo but now
agreed to be by Raffaello da Montelupo, and a number
of drawings in an album formerly given to Giovanni
Antonio Dosio in the Biblioteca Estense, Modena
(Luporini, 1957–8, pp. 442–67). This album, reat-
tributed to Raffaello da Montelupo by Nesselrath, 1986,
contains repetitions of his earlier? studies (cf. fols. 74
recto and verso of the Modena codex and Ufﬁzi 607E,
recto and verso).
Although Michelangelo’s authorship of this design has
frequently been doubted in the twentieth century, there
seems now to be fairly general agreement that it is his,
whether or not his authorship of Louvre 837 is accepted.
The number of replicas, which far outstrips any other
series of copies of a Michelangelo drawing, testiﬁes to
the design’s authority, one that no later pastiche could
claim. A preparatory sketch by Michelangelo of the whole
scheme in the Louvre (Inv. 686 verso/J24/Corpus 193;
black chalk, 235×382 mm), sometimes dismissed in deﬁ-
ance both of its components and its provenance, is patently
autograph and demonstrates that he conceived some-
thing very like the design displayed in the present draw-
ing. Also in the Louvre (Inv. 708 /J25/Corpus 228; red
chalk, 259×129 mm) is a study by Michelangelo for the
seated ﬁgure to the viewer’s left. Additionally, many of
the forms and features of this design can be paralleled
in others by Michelangelo datable to the 1520s or early
1530s. The Madonna, for example, is very close in form
to the female ﬁgure on a sheet in Paris (Louvre, Inv. 704
recto/J36/Corpus 243; red chalk, 290×174 mm), the
seated female ﬁgure on the cornice is re-employed in the
Dream of Human Life (Princes Gate Collection, Courtauld
Institute, London, Inv. no. 424/Corpus 333; black chalk,

CATALOGUE 63
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
297
396×280 mm), the right hand seated Saint is of a type
that recurs both in the Metropolitan Museum’s modello for
an early version of the Tomb of Julius II (Inv. 62931/Cor-
pus 489; pen and ink over black chalk, 509×318 mm)
and the Sistine ceiling. In addition, the two standing
ﬁgures of saints, probably Lorenzo and Giuliano, echo,
perhaps unconsciously, the early quattrocento forms of
Nanni di Banco’s Isaiah (Florence, Museo del Opera del
Duomo) and Masaccio’s shivering man in his Baptism of the
Neophites (Florence Santa Maria del Carmine, Brancacci
chapel) – both images that Michelangelo, with his interest
in the heroic phase of early quattrocento art, knew well.
However, the difﬁculties that this somewhat cluttered
design has caused are great. Even so clear-headed a critic
as Berenson, unable to accept that Michelangelo’s pref-
erences may not have coincided with his own, could be
driven to the absurd hypothesis that Louvre Inv. 686 was
drawn by Vincenzo Danti after Aristotile da Sangallo. A
superﬁcially more sophisticated view was advanced by
Wazbinski (1983 and 1987), who stated that this design
was devised only in the 1560s, when a project was under-
way to complete the chapel. But apart from ignoring
Michelangelo’s preparatory drawings and the close stylis-
tic links with other work by him of the 1520s, Wazbinski
also overlooked the fact that the Madonna and two saints
actually executed by Michelangelo and his assistants for
the Magniﬁci Tomb are radically different in form from
those shown in this design. Thus, this supposedly late
pastiche would ignore what had existed for some thirty
years in favour of Michelangelesque ﬁgures of different
and less-developed type.
The date of origin of the present design can be estab-
lished with some precision. The dimensions of the space
available for the Magniﬁci Tomb, like the ducal Tombs,
was ﬁxed by 21 April 1521 when the architrave was set in
place. This establishes a scale for the drawing of about 1:
1.8. The block from which the “Nostra Donna a sedere”
was to be carved was also ordered in April 1521. Because
the Madonna as executed is some 46 cm taller than the
ﬁgure shown in the modello, Michelangelo had either
modiﬁed the present design before that date, or did so
later, but before mid-1526 when Michelangelo referred to
the Madonna as one of the statues that had been begun.
Because work on the project ceased during the pontif-
icate of Adrian VI (December 1521–November 1523),
and because some of the marble ordered proved useless,
Michelangelo had an opportunity to revise details of his
plan in 1524, and the design of the architecture may have
been modiﬁed in certain respects at that date. However,
no work appears to have been undertaken on this tomb
before the expulsion of the Medici in 1527, and the work
seems, indeed, not to have been undertaken in earnest
until 1532–33. It is likely that there was a further and prob-
ably more fundamental revision of the design at this time
(see Cat. 39), but because no carving seems to have been
done on the architectural parts of this phase of the tomb
other than the columns, any attempts at reconstruction
could be based only on known designs by Michelangelo.
The replicas were probably made with archaeological
intent to prevent knowledge of even an out-of-date and
anomalous original being lost. Michelangelo’s reluctance
to tell anyone anything, illustrated by his ambiguity of
response to Ammanati’s enquiries about the form of the
Laurenzian staircase, quite apart from his action in burn-
ing drawings that he knew Cosimo wanted, is sufﬁcient
explanation for the production of posthumous replicas
of modelli that did exist, despite the fact that anyone
attempting to construct the Magniﬁci Tomb to this design
would have been utterly confused. A parallel example is
the replica in Berlin after Michelangelo’s modello also in
Berlin for the Julius Tomb (Inv. 15305/Corpus 55; pen
and ink with traces of wash over black chalk and sty-
lus indentation, 525×343 mm). It was made – accord-
ing to a later inscription – by Jacomo Rocchetti, whose
dates do not seem to be known, but who is mentioned
together with Jacomo del Duca in a document con-
cerning the Farnese Sacrament Tabernacle planned for
Santa Maria degli Angeli. Rocchetti presumably entered
Michelangelo’s circle at the very end of the master’s life,
and the modello that he replicated would then have been
obsolete by over half a century.
The design proposed by Michelangelo at this stage is
modelled on painting rather than sculpture. It is essen-
tially a tripytch with ﬂanking ﬁgures on two levels, and
smaller ﬁgures decorating the cornice above, a transposi-
tion into the terms of classical architecture of an ambitious
late trecento altarpiece. Considering that it was made
after Michelangelo had already planned immensely active
and vital ﬁgures, the restraint of individual ﬁgures here
must have been deliberate, an effort to achieve an overall
pictorialism in the chapel that was not to be disrupted
by unduly aggressive forms. As always in Michelangelo’s
projects, the ﬁgures grew in energy and dynamism as he
worked on them, entailing a corresponding simpliﬁca-
tion of their setting. Given that a similar process occurred
in the ducal Tombs, whose architecture was set in place
while the statuary was still being carved, it is unsurpris-
ing that with the Magniﬁci Tomb, the statuary that had
been begun may have encouraged Michelangelo radically
to simplify the setting. It is recorded in 1546 (Aschoff,
1967, p. 136; see Cat. 39) that columns had been exe-
cuted, but these either do not survive or have not been
identiﬁed, and we cannot, therefore, establish whether
they were made for the present project, of 1521, or for

298
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
CATALOGUES 63–64
what the compiler believes to be the ﬁnal one, developed
from Cat. 39, of around a decade later, or even for some
intermediate one.
The compiler ﬁnds certain similarities between the
present copy and drawings by Marco Marchetti da Faenza
(before 1553–88).
History
Carlo Prayer; Alfred Beurdeley, Paris sale, 31 May 1920,
from lot 110.
References
Parker, 1956, no. 349 (Related to projected double tomb
of Lorenzo the Magniﬁcent and Giuliano. Michelangelo’s
original design lost; this probably drawn in his studio.).
Dussler, 1959, no. 635 and under no. 699 (Copy; doc-
umentary value questionable.). Gere and Turner, 1975,
no. 52 (“[O]f good quality and seems at least to be a prod-
uct of the studio.”). Perrig, 1981, pp. 267, 282 (Copy after
Michelangelo.). Joannides, 2003a, p. 137 (Copy.).
CATALOGUE 64
A Copy of Michelangelo’s Design for the Magniﬁci Tomb
1846.95; R.41; P.II 350
Dimensions: 251×236 mm
Watermark: Briquet 6098, 1543–59.

CATALOGUES 64–65
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
299
Medium
Pen and ink with grey wash over black chalk, with exten-
sive use of ruler and compasses, parts reinforced with pen
and ink. Later framing lines in pen and ink.
Condition
The sheet is undulating uncomfortably. There is a major,
discoloured, inﬁll with in-drawing, a minor edge hole,
minor tear repairs with ingrained dirt, some abrasion, and
uneven discolouration. The primary support is drummed
by four edges to the backboard of the mount.
Discussion
Another early copy after Michelangelo’s design of late
1520 for the tomb of the Magniﬁci in the New Sacristy.
This copy was no doubt originally complete, but at some
point the entire lower storey was cut away. Robinson,
1870, p. 104, believed this drawing to be by the same
hand as Christ Church JBS 71 (version 4 in Cat. 63), an
opinion not shared by the compiler, who believes it rather
to be by the same hand as Mus´ee du Louvre, Inv. 18359
(version 9 in Cat. 63). For further discussion of this project
see Cat. 63.
Drawn Copy
A copy of the two putti ﬂanking the tondo and the seated
ﬁgure on the left side of the attic was made by Sir Edward
Burne-Jones in 1866–7, on fol. 40 recto of his sketchbook
in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, 1070-2.
History
Paignon-Dijonval;
Sir
Thomas
Lawrence
(L.2445);
Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 3 (A design for the tomb of the
Medici family.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 48 (As 1842.).
Fisher, 1852, p. 5, pl. 25 (As Woodburn, 1842.). Fisher,
1865, p. 18, pl. 25 (As 1852.). Robinson, 1870, no. 41
(Copy from Michel Angelo. “Design for a portion of
the wall-fac¸ade of one of the Medici tombs. . . . from a
lost original” made “perhaps as early as a.d. 1521.” “The
present example is perhaps the earliest and best rendering;
but it is less complete than the others.” Three other exam-
ples noted: in the Louvre, the Albertina, and the Ufﬁzi.
That in the Louvre engraved by Caylus.). Fisher, 1872, I,
p. 16, pl. 25 (As 1852.). Gotti, 1875, II, p. 229 (As in black
chalk.). Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 38. Springer, 1878, p. 382
(Copy of a study for a Medici double tomb.). Fisher, 1879,
XXX/32 (Copy.). Springer, 1883, II, p. 218 (As 1878.).
Portheim, 1889, pp. 149–50 (By same hand as Christ
Church [JBS 71] and drawings in Paris, Florence, and
Vienna; uncertain whether they are pastiches or whether
their weakness is the reﬂection of originals copied at
second or third hand.). Thode, 1908, I, p. 457 (Trun-
cated copy after Michelangelo’s lost deﬁnitive design for
Medici double tomb.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 265 (After
Michelangelo’s lost original.). Justi, 1909, p. 237 (One of
several copies.). Thode, 1913, no. 424 (As 1908.). Fasolo,
1927, pp. 452–4 (“[S]pecialmente studiati le disposizione
delle sculture nel complesso architettonico.” Design fol-
lows on from BM W28 and Louvre 686/J24 verso.).
Berenson, 1938, no. 1708A (Replica of upper section of
Louvre, Inv. 837/J26/Corpus 194.). Delacre, 1938, p. 340
(Copy.). Parker, 1956, no. 350 (Copy. Execution resembles
that of Louvre, Inv. 837/J26/Corpus 194.). Dussler, 1959,
no. 619 and under no. 699 (Copy; documentary value
questionable.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1708A (As 1938.).
Perrig, 1981, p. 282 (Copy after Michelangelo.). Joan-
nider, 2003a, p. 137 (Copy.).
CATALOGUE 65
giuseppe bossi (1777–1815)
The Virgin? and Child with Singing Angels
1846.96; R.14; P.II 351
Dimensions: 350×260 mm
Watermark: the letters F. G. A.
Medium
Black and white chalks.
Condition
There are handling creases, a small indentation/puncture
and some abrasion and foxing with slight general dis-
colouration.
Discussion
A same-size copy of Michelangelo’s drawing of c. 1530,
which is now in the Accademia in Venice (Inv. 199 recto/
Valenti Rodin`o, 1989, no. 2/Corpus 244; black chalk,
373×249 mm). The original entered the Accademia from
the collection of the artist and art historian Giuseppe
Bossi, and Bossi no doubt made the present copy as
a gift for his friend Leopoldo Cicognara. Cicognara
in turn seems to have presented it to Lawrence, who
liked to acquire copies of drawings that he could not
possess in the original. It would not be fully clear
from Lawrence’s letter to Woodburn, quoted later, that
Lawrence knew the drawing to be a copy, but he must

300
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
CATALOGUE 65
have done so because it is ascribed to Bossi in the 1830
inventory.
Unlike another same-size copy, which seems to be of
the sixteenth century, in the Louvre (Inv. 695/J109; black
chalk 376×245 mm, with a provenance from Everard
Jabach), the present drawing does not attempt to mimic
precisely the technique of the original but employs differ-
ent graphic means to create a similar general impression.
The subject of Michelangelo’s design is debated. It
is generally described as the Virgin and Child with
Angels, but the woman is older than the Virgin as she
is generally depicted in Michelangelo’s work, and she
may be St. Anne, coming for the Child in the Virgin’s
absence. Because St. Anne is sometimes identiﬁed with
the Prophetess Anna, who attends the presentation of the
Child in the temple, this might account for the prophetic
mood of the present composition.
A painted copy was reproduced by de Tolnay, 1975,
Corpus I, p. 60, as in the Frescobaldi Collection, Florence.
This appears to be approximately contemporary with the
original drawing and probably by a young Florentine
painter. More of Michelangelo’s designs were in circula-
tion in this period than is generally appreciated by modern
scholarship.
History
Giuseppe Bossi; Count Leopoldo Cicognara; Sir Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.

CATALOGUES 65–66
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
301
References
Sir Thomas Lawrence, letter to Samual Woodburn of
summer 1825 reprinted in Williams, 1831, II, pp. 418–
20 (With respect to the drawing of Michael Angelo, from
Bossi; “I was in correspondance with Count Cicagnaro
[sic], respecting Canova’s monument: and it was in inter-
change of letters on this subject that, learning from you
the drawing was his, I mentioned to him my wish to
possess it. Be assured of this, that I did not take advan-
tage of your information respecting the little Raphael,
to write about it, and procure its passage to this coun-
try, for that I should not have done without consult-
ing you.”). Lawrence Inventory, 1830, Varia, Case 7,
Drawer 1 [1830-137] (“A beautiful copy by M. Bossi
of Milan from a Drawing by M. Angelo.”). Woodburn,
1842, no. 20 (“A Highly ﬁnished composition for the
Holy Family.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 25 (As 1842.).
Fisher, 1852, p. 4, pl. 13 (As Woodburn, 1842.). Fisher,
1865, p. 16, I, pl. 13 (As 1852.). Robinson, 1870, no. 14
(Replica of the drawing in Venice; the original prob-
ably executed in Rome in 1499. Angels imitate those
by Luca della Robbia in his Cantoria.). Fisher, 1872,
I, p. 14, pl. 13 (As 1852.). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 14.
Gotti, 1875, II, p. 223. Fisher, 1879, X/9 (Replica of
drawing in Venice.). Berenson, 1903, no. 1700 (A copy
of the drawing in Venice, which is by Sebastiano.).
Steinmann, II, 1905, p. 416 (Venice drawing: Recto by
Sebastiano after Michelangelo; the original was proba-
bly begun as a Madonna and developed into a Sibyl,
related to the Libica.). D’Achiardi, 1908, p. 308 (A copy
of Sebastiano’s drawing in Venice.). Thode, 1908, II,
p. 411 (Venice Inv. 199 recto by Michelangelo; iden-
tiﬁed as a Sibyl.). Justi, 1909, p. 114 (One of three
copies; that in Venice Inv. 199 recto the best. Related
in concept to Manchester Madonna.). Thode, 1913,
under no. 394 (Copy of a drawing by Michelangelo in
Venice [Thode, no. 519], wrongly given by Wickhoff
and Berenson to Sebastiano, but probably preparatory
to the Libyan Sibyl.). Berenson, 1938, no. 2490A (For-
mer 1700; as 1903.). Delacre, 1938, pp. 158–68 (Repre-
sents a Sibylline Virgin; copy of Venice drawing. Detailed
discussion of the relation of the original, this drawing
and Louvre Inv. 695/J109.). Dussler, 1942, p. 92, and
no. 174 (The Venice drawing by Sebastiano.). Pallucchini,
1944, pp. 82, 179, 180 (A copy of Sebastiano’s drawing
in Venice.). Parker, 1956, no. 351 (“An old and rather
good copy of” the Venice drawing.). Dussler, 1959, under
no. 694 (A copy of Sebastiano’s Venice drawing.). Beren-
son, 1961, no. 2490c (As 1903/1938.). De Tolnay, 1976
Corpus II, under no. 244 (Copy.). Perrig, 1999, p. 274
(A falsiﬁcation by Bossi.). Joannides, 2003a, p. 254
(Ashmolean drawing by Bossi, as recorded in the
Lawrence inventory.).
CATALOGUE 66
raffaello da montelupo (1505?–1566)
Recto: Infant Bacchanal
Verso: Figure Studies
1846.131; R.52; P.II 410
Dimensions: 280×420 mm
Medium
Recto: Pen and ink and some black chalk; a later framing
line in pen and ink.
Verso: Pen and ink; two thin ruled lines in black chalk.
Condition
Double-sided solid museum mount.
Recto: There is overall discolouration and light foxing.
There are tear repairs near the top left corner and another
repair at the centre of the top edge. The medium has bled
at the bottom edge, and there is some darkening of the
densely inked areas.
Verso: The old repairs are more clearly visible on this side,
and minor show-through is visible.
Numbering
A fragmentary number in pen, perhaps 10, at the lower
right of the recto, perhaps the numbering of Pierre
Crozat.
Description
Verso
A. A standing nude man seen from the front, the head
ﬁrst turned to his right, then altered so that he looks to
his left. His left arm is held out from his side with the
hand outstretched and pointing downward; the right arm
was ﬁrst tried hanging by the right side and then bent up
to touch the head.
B. Various hatching lines; these may have been made to
test the pen; if they have some further purpose, it eludes
the compiler.
With the left edge as base
C. Two ruled lines in black chalk.
D. Sketch of the lower part of ﬁgure A.
E. Sketch of the left leg of D, slightly modiﬁed.

302
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
CATALOGUE 66
F. Sketch of the right leg of D, modiﬁed. The vertical
ruled line immediately to the right may indicate a revised
placement of the ﬁgure’s left leg.
G. Various hatching lines. The orientation of the sheet
when these were made is uncertain.
Discussion
The recto is a partial same-size copy after the famous
drawing now in the Royal Collection at Windsor Castle
(PW431/Corpus 338; red chalk, 274×388 mm), executed
by Michelangelo late in 1533 or early in 1534 for Tommaso
de’Cavalieri. It was the most elaborate of Michelangelo’s
gifts to his young friend. The drawing was engraved by
Enea Vico at an uncertain date (The Illustrated Bartsch
30, no. 48 (67) [XV, pp. 48, 305]; 286×405 mm) and
by Nicolas Beatrizet in 1546 (The Illustrated Bartsch 29,
no. 40 (297) [XV, 260, p. 40]; 284 × 402 mm) in reverse,
but, perhaps because of its complex composition and
opaque subject, did not enjoy the same popularity as
Michelangelo’s more straightforwardly narrative drawings
like the Ganymede and the Fall of Phaeton. Several part
copies are known, and individual ﬁgures were employed
by other artists, but apart from the present unﬁnished
copy, only one drawn replica of the full composition is
known to the compiler, Christie’s, London, 2 July 1996,
lot 88, attributed to Giulio Clovio, but in the compiler’s
view not by Clovio; red chalk, handled like metal point,
281×405 mm.
In his Infant Bacchanal, Michelangelo, at least in part,
cannibalised an earlier project, that of a Bacchanal for
Alfonso d’Este. A sheet in the Ufﬁzi (621E/B131/Corpus
70; pen and ink, 238×214 mm) carries a drawing by the
master of a putto urinating into a dish held by another
putto. This is sometimes taken to be a study for the
Infant Bacchanal but, as de Tolnay realised, it must be
at least a decade earlier, because the sheet also carries
drawings made by Antonio Mini soon after he entered
Michelangelo’s service, as well as a draft of a letter from
Michelangelo to his father Ludovico, who died in 1530.
Another sketch by Michelangelo on this sheet, a man
carrying a child on his back, was copied by Mini no
later than 1525 in a drawing in Casa Buonarroti (CB53F
verso/B174/ Corpus 229bis; red chalk, 353×242 mm).
Michelangelo’s memories of his abandoned project for
Alfonso d’Este would have been re-kindled by his visit

CATALOGUE 66
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
303
to Ferrara in 1529, when he promised the Duke the
Leda, probably the ﬁrst movable painting he had executed
for some years. It seems that Michelangelo responded
strongly to what he saw in Venice and Ferrara: Several of
his Presentation Drawings of the early 1530s seem to have
been conceived in dialogue with contemporary Vene-
tian art.
Raffaello da Montelupo began working with Michel-
angelo in 1533 and had some access to his drawings. The
original bears no signs of stylus indentation, so the present
copy may have been traced from it via a pane of glass. It
was probably from this copy that Battista Franco knew of
Michelangelo’s design – well in advance of the publication
of any prints – for he employed the sprawled ﬁgure at
lower left for the dead Christ in his Deposition (Lucca,
Villa Giunigi), datable to c. 1537.
Raffaello was clearly fascinated by Michelangelo’s Pre-
sentation Drawings for, in addition to the present copy,
he made a loose sketch in the Royal Collection, Wind-
sor Castle (PW787; pen and ink, 340×238 mm), after
the Fall of Phaeton, the original of which is also in
the Royal Collection, Windsor Castle (PW430/Corpus
343; black chalk, 413×234 mm), another of the draw-
ings given to Tommaso. Raffaello probably intended
to work up more fully the present drawing, like his
two elaborate copies, probably the same size as the lost

304
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
CATALOGUES 66–67
original, of Michelangelo’s so-called Allegory of Prudence
(?): Montelupo’s drawings are in the British Museum
(W89; pen and ink, 261×359 mm) and the Mus´ee
Cond´e, Chantilly (Lanfranc de Panthou 48; pen and ink,
251×197 mm, the composition divided between recto
and verso). In all these cases – with the possible exception
of the “Prudentia” copies – Raffaello made his copies in
a medium different from that of Michelangelo’s original.
Raffaello copied other drawings by Michelangelo. A
drawing by him (Christie’s, New York, 30 January 1997,
lot 1; pen and ink, 268×203 mm, probably of 1534)
records a lost sketch by Michelangelo made at a prelimi-
nary stage in the development of his design for Sebastiano
del Piombo’s Piet`a, painted for the Cobos family chapel
in San Salvador, Ubeda (now Madrid, Museo del Prado).
Raffaello’s sketchbook in the Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts Lille
(Brejon de Lavergn´ee 717–808), which contains mostly
architectural drawings, includes several after projects by
Michelangelo. Related sheets by Raffaello in Florence
and Budapest, which may once have formed part of the
same or a similar sketchbook, carry ﬁgural sketches fur-
ther demonstrating his interest in Michelangelo’s designs
(see Cat. 34).
Verso
The pose of A, modiﬁed for the lower part of the ﬁgure
in the sketches D, E, F, is loosely based on Michelangelo’s
marble David, a relation seen particularly clearly in the
arrangement of the right arm, and again in the supple-
mentary studies of the legs. The sketch was probably made
from memory and not directly from the statue, although
it is possible that it reﬂects a lost preparatory drawing for
it by Michelangelo. A sketch by Antonio Mini after a
preparatory drawing or a model for the statue was sold at
Bonhams, London, 8 July 2002, lot 69 (pen and ink over
red chalk, 208×172 mm); even though it bears no close
relation to the present sketches, it again demonstrates the
attention of Michelangelo’s pupils and associates to his
earlier work.
History
Pierre Crozat, a fragment of his numbering at lower right,
presumably part of his sale of 1741?; Gerhard Michael
Jabach, his sale, Amsterdam, 16 October 1753, lot 15?;
Pierre-Jean Mariette (L.1852); the Marquis de Lagoy
(no stamp); Thomas Dimsdale; Samuel Woodburn; Sir
Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3, no. 19 [1830-22] (“A magniﬁcent sheet of
Sporting Boys etc for a baccanalian subject, free pen
on both sides the paper.”). Woodburn, 1836b, no. 17
(“[C]hieﬂy of sporting boys; most admirably drawn with
the pen.”). The Athenaeum,16 July 1836 (“[F]or the
cognoscenti.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 16 (As 1836.).
Fisher, 1852, p. 5, pl. 24 (Recto: as Woodburn, 1842.).
Fisher, 1865, p. 18, I, pl. 24 (As 1852.). Robinson,
1870, no. 52 (Michelangelo, study for Windsor Bacchanal,
PW431/Corpus 338.). Fisher, 1872, I, p. 16, pl. 24 (As
1852.). Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 47. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 237.
Springer, 1878, p. 522 (Michelangelo; no mention of
Windsor version.). Fisher, 1879, XXXVI/38 (“[O]riginal
design for . . . Windsor drawing” PW431/Corpus 338.).
Springer, 1883, II, p. 389 (Sketch for Windsor draw-
ing, PW431/Corpus 338.). Berenson, 1903, I, pp. 255–
7, no. 1716 (Recto: Montelupo after Michelangelo’s
Windsor drawing, PW431/ Corpus 338; resemblance to
Montelupo’s Ufﬁzi 619E/B204. Verso: Montelupo.). K.
Frey, 1909–11, p. 91, under no. 187 (Recto: free copy
of Windsor PW431/Corpus 338.). Thode, 1913, p. 210
and under no. 543 (Copy of Windsor PW431/Corpus
338.). Berenson, 1935, p. 107 (Montelupo?. Resemblance
to Ufﬁzi 619E, inscribed by Baldinucci with Mon-
telupo’s name.). Berenson, 1938, I, pp. 257–8, no. 1716
(As 1903.). Delacre, 1938, pp. 410–12 (Surprising from
Montelupo; many differences from Windsor Bacchanal,
PW431/Corpus 338, and perhaps preparatory.). Wilde,
1949, p. 254 (Montelupo.). Parker, 1956, no. 410 (Free
copy by Montelupo after Michelangelo’s drawing at
Windsor, PW431/Corpus 338.). Dussler, 1959, under
no. 365 (Free copy of PW431/Corpus 338 by Montelupo,
summer 1533.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1716 (As 1903/1938.)
Barocchi, 1962, pp. 256, 258 (Similarity to Ufﬁzi 619E
supports its attribution to Montelupo.). Gatteschi, 1998,
pp. 54–5 (Recto: cites Berenson; probably drawn from
memory.). Py, 2001, p. 185 (Perhaps identical with lot 15
in the Gerhard Michael Jabach sale of 1753.).
CATALOGUE 67
giulio clovio? (1498–1578)
Christ on the Cross
1846.97; R.73; P.II 352
Dimensions: 370×250 mm, irregular, made up at the
lower left and most of the lower and right edges, and
the left upper corner.
Medium
Black chalk.

305

306
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
CATALOGUE 67
Condition
The sheet is extensively damaged and restored, and lined.
There are toned inﬁlls, major tear repairs, minor edge
inﬁlls, extensive abrasions, and some local staining. There
is a major horizontal score line and other small indenta-
tions at the upper edge. The primary support is drummed
by the four edges to the backboard of the mount, so the
verso is not visible.
Discussion
A same-size copy, somewhat trimmed, of Michelangelo’s
highly ﬁnished drawing presented to Vittoria Colonna,
now in the British Museum (W67/Corpus 411; black
chalk, 370×270 mm). Michelangelo’s preparation of the
drawing is referred to in several undated letters: In the
opinion of Perrig, 1997 (pp. 133–5), these suggest that it
was only at Vittoria’s prompting, and with some reluc-
tance, that he added the lamenting angels, at either side
of the cross, which she found very beautiful; however,
this interpretation is questionable. The drawing was prob-
ably made not long after 1540. During her lifetime,
Vittoria presumably permitted Michelangelo’s drawing
to be copied in preparation for engraving and no doubt
allowed serious artists access to it. It is not known what
happened to the original after Vittoria’s death in 1547, and
whether or not it remained accessible is conjectural. Of
the drawn copies known to the compiler, most seem plau-
sibly to be datable within the 1540s. Michelangelo’s inven-
tions were very quickly seized upon both by artists and
by sophisticated patrons. Drawings after the Last Judgement
were commissioned and sent by Nini Sernini in Rome
both to Giulio Romano and to Cardinal Ercole Gonzaga
in Mantua within a year of the fresco’s completion; more
signiﬁcant in the present context, copies of the three (or
three of the) drawings made by Michelangelo for Vittoria
Colonna, including the Christ on the Cross, were available
in Mantua by the end of the 1540s. In the case of the Christ
on the Cross, Cardinal Ercole would have been informed
about the drawing very early; one of Vittoria Colonna’s
undated letters to Michelangelo (Carteggio, IV, p. 101)
states that she wished to show it, even if unﬁnished, to the
“gentiluomini del Reverendissimo Cardinale di Mantua.”
Cardinale Ercole probably had all three of Michelangelo’s
drawings for Vittoria Colonna reproduced in paintings
(see Brown, 1991).
There are also many painted versions of Michelangelo’s
design, most of them with around the same dimensions
as the drawing. Some of these were executed within a
few years of the original, including several by Michelan-
gelo’s prot´eg´e Marcello Venusti. An indication of the
signiﬁcance of this design to Michelangelo and to his
immediate circle is that around the mid-1550s, he returned
to it, adding the Virgin and Saint John, for whom his
drawings survive in the Louvre (Inv. 720/J39/Corpus 412
and Inv. 698/J40/Corpus 413; both black chalk, respec-
tively 230×110 mm and 250×82 mm). This addition
was no doubt made at the request of his servant and
friend Francesco d’Amadore, called Urbino, for whom
the expanded design was executed as a painting by Mar-
cello Venusti (see Cat. 50). Venusti would have made a
preparatory cartonetto for the painting, in which the Christ
on the Cross for Vittoria Colonna and the two ﬁgures in
the Louvre were integrated.
The present copy, which is of good quality, is prob-
ably by Giulio Clovio, an attribution already proposed
in the Lawrence inventory. It seems to the compiler to
show Clovio’s deliberate and slightly uncertain handling
and, in the mourning angel, his characteristic facial types.
However, it must be admitted that here Giulio is more
successful than usual in establishing the volumes and plas-
ticity of the forms.
The present drawing is probably that owned by William
Young Ottley, and described in his Italian Schools of Design
on p. 34 as a “highly wrought drawing of Christ in Agony
on the Cross, in his own Collection, formerly belonging
to the King of Naples” and subsequently offered in his sale
of 1814. Ottley seems to have believed that he possessed
Michelangelo’s original, but he is not included among
the owners of the British Museum original by Samuel
Woodburn in the 1836 catalogue, no. 22: These are listed
as the King of Naples and Monsieur Brunet. There seems
to be no solid information about the partial dispersal of
the collections of the King of Naples, although it is cer-
tain, from remarks by Bottari in 1760, that at least some
drawings had by that date passed out of the collection:
He speciﬁcally mentions that Michelangelo’s Epifania car-
toon, now in the British Museum (W75/Corpus 389;
black chalk, 2327×1656 mm) was owned by Cardinal
Valenti, in whose family’s collection it remained until
the Valenti sale of 1809. It is highly unlikely that Brunet
acquired Michelangelo’s original in Italy. It was no doubt
purchased by him at the sale of the collection of the
painter and dealer Julien de Parme in Paris on 21–22
February 1794, in which it appeared as lot 11, “Un Christ
en Croix: deux Anges sont aux deux cˆot´es, & au bas
est une tˆete de mort, dessin´ee come le pr´ecedent” (i.e.,
“pr´ecieusement”). (This sale catalogue, which survives
in a single copy, was unknown to scholars before it was
published by P. Rosenberg, 1999–2000, pp. 26–31.) Of
course, it could be argued that the drawing owned by

CATALOGUE 67
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
307
Julien de Parme was a copy and that it was Ottley’s
drawing, acquired directly or indirectly from Wicar’s
collection, which was the original. One would then have
to argue, supplementarily, that from Ottley the original
passed to Lawrence – either directly or via Roscoe –
and that after Lawrence’s death its provenance became
confused with that of the copy. However, the price that
Ottley’s drawing attained in 1814 is much too low for
the original of so famous a design, and it seems clear
that the drawing owned by Roscoe (unless one assumes
he owned two drawings, the original and a copy) had a
different provenance (see following discussion, copy 2).
Alternatively it could be proposed, since the present
drawing is listed in Woodburn’s 1842 catalogue as com-
ing from Wicar, that Wicar, who was in Paris in 1794,
acquired a copy at the Julien de Parme sale, and that
the original, owned by Brunet, was acquired by Brunet
from some other source. However, this alternative also
seems unlikely because lot 10 at the Julien de Parme
sale – another of Michelangelo’s Presentation Drawings
for Vittoria Colonna, the Piet`a now in the Isabella Stewart
Gardner Museum in Boston – also appeared in Wood-
burn’s 1836 exhibition with its provenance given solely
as Brunet. It seems most probable that Brunet acquired
both drawings either directly at the 1794 sale or later
from some intermediary. Brunet is no doubt identical
with Louis-Charles Brunet (1746–1825), the brother-in-
law of Dominique-Vivant Denon, by whom he was pre-
sumably advised on his purchases. Brunet died in the same
year as Vivant Denon, and his collection seems to have
been acquired by Woodburn in Paris at around the same
time as he acquired drawings from the collection of Vivant
Denon himself, shortly after the latter’s death, on 28 April
1825.
Ottley may genuinely have believed that his version
of Christ on the Cross was that owned by the King of
Naples, but unless the King owned both the original and
a copy (not inconceivable – after all both the original
and the copy were later owned by Lawrence), it is more
likely that he was simply misinformed about the source
of his drawing. It is probable, therefore, that it was the
present drawing, not the original, that was owned by Ott-
ley, offered as lot 1591 in his sale of 1814, bought in, and
subsequently sold to Lawrence with the rest of Ottley’s
collection.
Other drawn copies of the Christ on the Cross drawn for
Vittoria Colonna of which the compiler is aware are:
1. Budapest, Museum of Fine Arts, Inv. K67.35; black
chalk, 410×270 mm. According to Dr. Lor´and Zentai
(letter of 30 January 2003) this is very similar to the Louvre
copy (7 in this list).
2. Cumberland, G. McKay Collection in 1955 (letter
and photograph in the ﬁles of the Ashmolean Museum);
black chalk, 394×267 mm. This drawing bears the stamp
of H. C. (“Dog”) Jennings (1731–1819) who, during a
sojourn in Rome between 1753 and 1761, acquired many
works of antique and modern art from the sculptor and
dealer Bartolomeo Cavaceppi. If the McKay drawing was
among these, it would thus have left Italy well before
the dispersals of the 1790s. It was subsequently owned
by William Roscoe, appearing in his sale of 1816, lot 75
“Christ on the Cross, a Figure in the clouds on each side
of him, in attitudes of Lamentation. Exquisitely ﬁnished
in black chalk and undoubtedly designed for the Mar-
chesa di Pescara. 15 1/2′′ h. 10 1/2′′ w. From the Col-
lection of C. Jennings, Esq. with the ancient Print by
Niccol`o Beatrizet after the same.”
3. Dresden, Staatliche Kunstsammlungen, Kupferstich-
kabinett, Inv. C 1989-106, G¨use and Perrig, 1997, no. 34;
black chalk, 362×250 mm. Acquired before 1756 from
the collection of Dr. Paul Ackermann, Dresden. It seems
to the compiler possible that this ﬁne copy is also by Giulio
Clovio, but he does not know it in the original.
4. Lockinge, Loyd Collection, Loyd, 1999, no. 105a;
black chalk, 413×267 mm. From the collection of Rev-
erend Gordon Kenworthy.
5. London, British Museum, W93; black chalk, 400×
276 mm. Cracherode bequest, from the collection of
Jonathan Richardson the Elder. In this copy, the two
lamenting angels are omitted; if Perrig’s reconstruction of
events is correct, this copy might have been made before
Michelangelo added the angels, or the copyist deliberately
omitted them to restore Michelangelo original intentions,
which would imply a copyist close to the master. How-
ever, it is more likely a consequence of the fact that
the drawing is unﬁnished. Daniel Godfrey has pointed
out to the compiler that the forms in this drawing are
also nearly ten percent larger than those of the original,
which implies a copying process that expanded the image.
The mount carries Richardson’s inscription Bartolommeo
Aretino, which, according to his explanatory annotation
on the rear, repeats an old attribution on the drawing’s
now-concealed verso.
6. London, formerly Mond Collection, Borenius and
Wittkower, no. 157; black chalk, pen and bistre wash,
381×260 mm. Later, presumably, in the Brackley Collec-
tion, Norfolk, where other ex-Mond drawings migrated
and where Perrig, 1991, p. 47, refers to a copy of
Michelangelo’s drawing. As far as the compiler is aware,

308
COPIES OF SURVIVING DRAWINGS
CATALOGUE 67
the Mond-Brackley copy last appeared at a sale at Chris-
tie’s, London, 12 April 1983, lot 209.
7. Paris, Louvre, Inv. 732/J121; black chalk, 381×262
mm. The attribution of this copy to Giulio Clovio, ﬁrst
suggested by Philip Pouncey, is widely accepted. How-
ever, in the compiler’s opinion, the drawing is by a
hand distinct from Clovio’s, one responsible for several
other highly ﬁnished copies after highly ﬁnished origi-
nals by Michelangelo, made in an individual chalk tech-
nique that closely resembles silverpoint. This hand would
be responsible for the following copies of drawings by
Michelangelo:
a. After Michelangelo’s Male Anatomy in the Royal
Collection at Windsor Castle (RL 12765/PW421;
red chalk, 289×180 mm); in the E. J. Poynter sale,
London, 24 April 1918, lot 82 (red chalk, 394×146
mm) as School of Michelangelo; present where-
abouts unknown. This copy is known to the com-
piler only from a photograph in the Witt Library; it
was assigned to Clovio by Wilde in his entry on the
original in the Windsor catalogue.
b. After Michelangelo’s Three Female Heads in the
Ufﬁzi
(599E/B186/Corpus
308;
black
chalk,
341×235 mm), in the Teyler Museum, Haarlem,
Inv. A13/VT 76; black chalk, 236×219 mm. This
copy was given to Clovio by C. Monbeig Goguel
in an annotation on the mount.
c. After Michelangelo’s Bacchanal of Infants in the Royal
Collection at Windsor Castle (RL 12777/PW431;
red chalk, 274×388 mm) in Christie’s sale, London,
2 July 1996, lot 88; red chalk, 281×405 mm, as
attributed to Giulio Clovio.
That all four drawings are by the same hand seems
likely, but the compiler sees no clear link between this
group and drawings certainly by Clovio and is inclined to
think that it is by a different, as yet unidentiﬁed, draughts-
man.
A further copy of the Christ on the Cross drawn for
Vittoria Colonna, which shows the expanded design pre-
pared by Michelangelo at the request of his servant and
friend Urbino, is in Liverpool, The Walker Art Gallery
(from the Ince-Blundell collection, WAG 1993.307; black
chalk, 455×303 mm). This drawing probably copies one
by Marcello Venusti, made in preparation for his paint-
ing. Like copy 2, this drawing was owned by William
Roscoe, appearing in his sale of 1816 as lot 76: “Christ on
the Cross, the same subject as the preceding [i.e., no. 2
above], but with the addition of the Virgin and Mary
Magdalen [sic] standing at the foot of the Cross in lamen-
tation. The Figures in the Clouds are in this drawing but
very lightly sketched in black chalk; very ﬁne. 18 h. 12
w. From the collection of Mons. Marchetti, Bishop of
Arezzo, afterwards of Lord Somers and since of Jonathan
Richardson; with remarks on the back in the hand
writing of Jon. Richardson the son. This drawing also
belonged to Mr. Barnard.” Bought Slater for Blundell,
£3.15.0.
History
Jean-Baptiste Wicar?; William Young Ottley, his sale, 6
June 1814, lot 1591? (“One – Christ on the cross, two
angels lamenting on each side of him in the clouds – a
highly ﬁnished design – black chalk. capital. Made by
him for the Marchesa di Pescara (See Vasari) formerly
in the King of Naples’ collection at Capo di Monti.”
£6.16.6); Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Wood-
burn.
References
Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, lot 1591? (“One – Christ on the
cross, two angels lamenting on each side of him in the
clouds – a highly ﬁnished design – black chalk. capital.
Made by him for the Marchesa di Pescara (see Vasari)
formerly in the King of Naples’ collection at Capo di
Monti.”). Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti
Case 3, Drawer 3, no. 18 [1830-21ii] (BM W67 “together
with a copy by Julio Clovio.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 24
(“A Careful drawing of our saviour on the Cross – as
presented by Marcello Venusti. . . . From the Collection
of the Chevalier Wicar.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 33 (As
1842.). Fisher, 1862, p. 4, pl. 7 (As Woodburn, 1842.).
Fisher, 1865, I, p. 22, pl. 7 (As 1862.). Robinson, 1870,
no. 73 (Copy after Michelangelo.). Fisher, 1872, II, p. 20,
pl. 7 (As 1862.). Gotti, 1875, II, p. 224. Springer, 1878,
pp. 452–3 (Drawing reproduced; the best copy.). Fisher,
1879, XLVI/48 (Copy.). Springer, 1883, II, pp. 307–
9 (As 1878.). Springer, 1895, II, pp. 308–11 (Copy;
illustrated.). Berenson, 1903, I, p. 223 (“[W]retched”
copy.). Steinmann, II, 1905, p. 502 (Copy, like BM
W67/Corpus 411.). Thode, 1908, II, p. 467 (Copy.). K.
Frey, 1909–11, no. 160 (Copy, like BM W67, of lost orig-
inal made for Vittoria Colonna.). Thode, 1913, no. 447
(Copy after Michelangelo’s original, BM W67/Corpus
411.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1724A (Copy.). Delacre, 1938,
p. 314 (Copy. BM W67/Corpus 411, which is probably
the original.). De Tolnay, 1951, p. 144 (Copy, like BM
W67/Corpus 411.). Wilde, 1953a, p. 107 (Copy.). Parker,
1956, no. 352 (After BM W67/Corpus 411.). Dussler,
1959, under no. 329 (Copy.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1724A
(As 1938.). Perrig, 1991, p. 47 (Copy, like BM W67/
Corpus 411.).

CATALOGUE 68
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
309
CATALOGUE 68
A Seated Nude Man
1846.116; R.12 (1); P.II 370
Dimensions: 78×52 mm, irregular.
Medium
Red chalk.
Condition
The sheet is probably lined. There is localised minor
foxing, uneven discolouration, and ingrained dirt. The
primary support is drummed by its four edges to the
backboard, so the verso is not visible.
Numbering
Lower
centre:
Robinson’s
numbering
in
graphite:
12.
Discussion
This is presumably a quick sketch for a model seated on
a stool, and obviously a fragment cut from a larger sheet.
Although the forms are quite similar to those found in
the Sistine sketchbook (see Cats. 9–16), and the creasing
of the abdomen is economically indicated, this ﬁgure is
more loosely constructed than the ﬁgures found there,
and the line-work is lacking in energy and decision. The
quality does not seem to be high, but even though the
compiler would prefer not to accept that this sketch is by
Michelangelo, he would not reject it out of hand. Were
it found on a page surrounded by sketches securely by
Michelangelo, it might be accepted without comment.
But, given that Michelangelo and his pupils occasionally
drew side by side on the same sheets, it could still have
been drawn by a pupil on a sheet that Michelangelo him-
self used. However, this fragment cannot be attached to a
known sheet.
The sketch was traditionally linked with the Sistine
ceiling and identiﬁed as being for a Prophet. Steinmann
thought of Ionas, but the ﬁgure is in fact closer to Ezechiel
as Justi noted. Michelangelo did begin work on the ceiling
with a Florentine crew, one of whom might, in theory,
have made such a sketch. However, the style of the present
sketch does not correspond with that of any of those artists
whose drawings have been identiﬁed. After Michelangelo
dismissed his Florentine assistants, he employed a pair of
minor Emilian painters to help him. But no drawings by
either are known.
The fact that the present sketch does not share a prove-
nance with the Sistine sketchbook also counts against it as
an autograph drawing; furthermore, Michelangelo does
not seem to have made concetti for the Sistine ceiling in
red chalk.
History
Sir Joshua Reynolds (no stamp); Sir Thomas Lawrence
(no stamp); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, Case 7, Drawer 1 [1830-
130i] (“Two small Studies in red Chalk, M. Angelo”
[with Cat. 71].). Woodburn, 1842, no. 57 (“Two stud-
ies on one mount – both in red chalk, the one a sit-
ting male ﬁgure.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 29 (As 1842.).
Fisher, 1852, p. 6, pl. 30, upper (As Woodburn, 1842.).
Fisher, 1865, I, p. 19, pl. 30 (As 1852.). Robinson,
1870, no. 12.1 (Michelangelo, c. 1518.). Fisher, 1872, I,
p. 17, pl. 30 (As 1852.). Ruskin, 1872, p. 100 (“Pass-
ing by.”). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 12a. Gotti, 1875, II,
p. 237. Justi, 1900, pp. 117–18 (First idea for Ezechiel.).
Fisher, 1879, VII/7, upper (“[A] naked sitting ﬁgure.”).
Berenson, 1903, no. 1554.1 (Michelangelo: for a dead
Christ; Sistine period.). Steinmann, II, 1905, pp. 381,
599, no. 37 (Michelangelo, for Ionas.). Jacobsen, 1907,
pp. 390–1 (Closer to Ioel; could also be for an Apostle

310
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUES 68–69
before the scheme was changed.). Thode, 1908, I, p. 253;
II, p. 491 (Not for Ionas, perhaps for a Piet`a.). K. Frey,
1909–11, no. 155a (Michelangelo: study for a Sistine
prophet, perhaps Ioel.). Thode, 1913, no. 396 (Neither for
Ionas nor a Piet`a.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1554.1 (As 1903.).
Parker, 1956, no. 370 (“[M]ore than doubtful whether
this very slight sketch is attributable to Michelangelo.”).
Dussler, 1959, no. 601 (School drawing; Sistine period.).
Berenson, 1961, no. 1554a (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi,
1962, p. 23 (Michelangelo.). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus
I, no. 150 (Attribution to Michelangelo doubtful.). Joan-
nides, 1981b, p. 682 (Not Michelangelo.). Perrig, 1991,
p. 146 (By a pupil of Daniele da Volterra.).
CATALOGUE 69
A Boy Struggling with an Unidentiﬁable Form
1846.114; R.42 (1); P.II 372
Dimensions: 163×129 mm
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
There is minor edge skinning, minor abrasion, local fox-
ing, and uneven discolouration.
Discussion
This drawing has generally not been accepted as being by
Michelangelo over the last century, and, despite its decent
quality, this view is surely correct.
The pose is based on a well-known Hellenistic pro-
totype of a boy wrestling with a goose, which exists
in numerous versions, and which was certainly known
to Michelangelo (Natali, 1985, p. 28, suggests that the
Child in the Doni tondo was inspired by such a ﬁgure.).
In the present drawing, however, the compiler is unable
to descry the boy’s opponent, and thus the subject. The
infant Hercules strangling the serpents is obviously one
possibility, and even though this victory was, in princi-
ple, achieved by a child seated or reclining in a cradle

CATALOGUES 69–70
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
311
rather than standing (cf. Cat. 80), it was shown in a form
not entirely dissimiliar to that of the present drawing
by Michelangelo’s pupil Antonio Mini in a drawing in
the Louvre (Inv. 35296/J53; red chalk, 285×172 mm).
Another possibility is that it could represent Ganymede
abducted by Jupiter, but the child’s form seems more mus-
cular and less pliant than one would usually expect in a
treatment of Ganymede.
The present treatment, however, does have suggestions
of a Michelangelesque force and energy and – despite
the unresolved lighting, with shadows cast by the left
leg both horizontally and angled into depth – it is not
inconceivable that it could be a copy of a lost drawing
by Michelangelo. The putto’s physique and movement are
considerably more vigorous, for example, than the deriva-
tion of the same prototype included in the scene of Putti
playing with Swans, one of the vault frescoes in the Villa
Madama designed by Giulio Romano or Gianfrancesco
Penni shortly after Raphael’s death.
Alternatively, the pentiments in the head – the boy
seems to have a third eye – and around the feet and legs
might suggest an original effort by an artist working in
a Michelangelesque manner. In either case, the compiler
thinks that this drawing might be by the same hand as one
in Frankfurt (Staedelsches Kunstinstitut, Inv. 393/Corpus
332; black chalk, 186×124 mm), with a provenance from
Casa Buonarroti and Wicar; this too seems not to be by
Michelangelo, but it reﬂects his models.
The same ﬁgure was also copied by Battista Franco
(Paris, Louvre, Inv. 4973; red chalk, 180×112 mm).
History
Casa Buonarroti?; Jean-Baptiste Wicar?; Samuel Wood-
burn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Wood-
burn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830-101i] (“Two – a Winged [sic] Cupid,
black chalk, highly ﬁnished and” [Cat. 25]). Woodburn,
1836b, no. 9.1 (“A Cupid – undraped; probably a design
for the celebrated statue which he made and buried, to be
dug up as an antique, and which deceived the antiquar-
ians of Rome, and established the reputation of Michael
Angelo. This beautiful drawing is highly ﬁnished in black
chalk; and is, in point of grace and classic feeling, equal
to the best of the Greek sculptors.”). The Athenaeum,
16 July 1836 (“‘A Cupid’; ﬁnished with the delicacy of a
Leonardo, the grace of a Raffael, and his own grandeur.”).
Woodburn, 1842, no. 17 (As 1836.). Fisher, 1862, p. 5,
pl. 23 [sic: pl. 22, left] (As Woodburn, 1842.). Fisher,
1865, II, p. 24, pl. 22, left (As 1862.). Robinson, 1870,
no. 42.1 (Michel Angelo. “apparently made from the
well-known antique marble group of an amorino strug-
gling with a goose; but a ﬂying drapery has been added,
and instead of the bird a slight indication of what appears
to be intended as the fore parts of a bounding panther is
substituted” c. 1510–20.). Fisher, 1872, II, p. 22, pl. 22
(As 1862.). Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 39a. Gotti, 1875,
II, pp. 238–9 (Wrongly described as in pen.). Fisher,
1879, XXXI/33 (Quotes Robinson, 1870.). Berenson,
1903, under no. 1709 (“[T]oo soft and pretty . . . to be
by Michelangelo; nor does it quite seem by Sebastiano,
although much closer to him.”). Thode, 1908, I, p. 64
(Michelangelo, based on boy struggling with goose.).
K. Frey, 1909–11, p. 104 under no. 214 (Too weak for
Michelangelo or Sebastiano.). Thode, 1913, no. 426 (As
1908.). Berenson, 1938, under no. 1709 (As 1903.). Parker,
1956, no. 372 (“[O]f indeterminate character and little
importance. Robinson was no doubt rightly reminded in
it of the Hellenistic ﬁgure of the Boy with the Goose.”).
Dussler, 1959, no. 620 (Neither Michelangelo nor Sebas-
tiano.). Berenson, 1961, under no. 1709 (As 1903/1938.).
Hartt, 1971, p. 390 (Listed without comment.). De Tol-
nay, 1975, Corpus II, p. 107 (Placed in relation to the
Infant Bacchanal.).
CATALOGUE 70
A Man in Violent Action
1846.119; R.66; P.II 373
Dimensions: 213×145 mm
Watermark: A spread eagle; Robinson Appendix no. 15.
Medium
Pen and ink over red chalk; a few lines in black chalk.
Condition
The sheet is probably lined. There are minor edge
losses and the impression of a central pressed-out hor-
izontal fold with some ingrained dirt. There are minor
edge and corner tear repairs, some inﬁlls where the ink
has burned through, and some inherent wrinkles. The
sheet has minor surface abrasion, edge dirt, and general

312
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUE 70
discolouration. The primary support is drummed by its
four edges to the backboard, so the verso is not visible.
Inscriptions
Lower left: in pen and ink, partially in Greek: δϵττ ´ω
Buonarr ωt.
Upper right: in pen and ink: 147: GB; about 15 mm
below this 47 (or 67?).
According to Robinson there was a now lost inscription
on the verso by Sir Joshua Reynolds:
Michel Angelo/
Study for restoring the Torso
Discussion
Although the thighs and torso are obviously inspired by
the Belvedere Torso, like so much of Michelangelo’s work,
this drawing can hardly be, as Reynolds thought, a project
for its restoration.
It may show one ﬁgure standing above another, about
to strike, following one of Michelangelo’s designs for a
group of Victory for the Julius Tomb, or, conceivably, his
planned Samson Slaying Two Philistines, but it cannot pre-
cisely be related to any known sculptural project. There
is also some relation to Christ in the Last Judgement, but
because that ﬁgure is developed from the same thematic
cluster, that is unsurprising.
The drawing’s authorship is conjectural. Parker, like
Berenson, was reminded of Montelupo; the compiler
thinks he can see some relation with the work of Battista
Franco, who worked with Montelupo. The ﬁgure type
and the way the drawing is structured, would suggest an
artist with knowledge of the Last Judgement and, perhaps,
of preparatory drawings by Michelangelo for that work.
This and Cat. 113 (for which see further discussion)
seem to be the drawings recorded in Ottley’s sale of 1803
as part of lot 27. This contained four drawings, two of
which, “in pen and bistre,” were “from M. Angelo’s
model for restoring the celebrated antique torso.” These
studies were attributed by Ottley to kent, by which he
presumably meant William Kent, the painter and, still
more famously, architect. If this attribution is correct,
they were no doubt copied by Kent after earlier drawings
because neither bears any obvious relation to his known
drawing style; nor do they resemble each other. But it is
much more likely that they were simply owned either by
Kent, or his homonym, the dealer, and ownership was
mistaken for authorship by Ottley – it is difﬁcult to credit
that either Kent would have inscribed the present drawing
in Greek.
Parker’s tentative suggestion of Bandinelli as the author
of the companion drawing, Cat. 113, may have been a slip
for this drawing and has not been taken up by later writers.
There is no similarity between that drawing and the one
that he cites as a comparison in the British Museum (1854-
6-28-1/Berenson, 1938, no. 1681, as Bandinelli; pen and
ink with wash, 400×210 mm), but there is a distinct
resemblance between the British Museum drawing and
the present one. However, whether this is sufﬁciently tight
to conﬁrm that they are both by the same hand is moot.
Nevertheless, both drawings are energetic and vital and
do seem to be by a draughtsman or draughtsmen of real
quality. As Berenson noted, the British Museum drawing
is a free variant upon the ignudo to the right above Joel,
while the present drawing is, as noted previously, a free
variant upon the Belvedere Torso.
The early collector who inscribed the drawing in inac-
curate Greek may have done so in imitation of the practice
of Vincenzo Borghini, but is, as the compiler is assured
by R. Scorza, distinct from him.
History
The
Greek
inscriber,
presumably
Florentine
late-
sixteenth-century (see also Cat. 62); Pierre Crozat? (a
trace of his numbering lower right?); Unidentiﬁed Col-
lector (lower right, stamp? L. 1418); Sir Joshua Reynolds

CATALOGUES 70–71
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
313
(L.2364); William Young Ottley, probably his sale of 1803,
part of lot 27 (“Four – two of studies, pen, and two draw-
ings in pen and bistre by kent, from M. Angelo’s model
for restoring the celebrated antique torso. See on the back,
quotations from Richardson and Wright.”); Sir Thomas
Lawrence (no stamp); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale, 1803, lot 27? (“Four – two of studies, pen,
and two drawings in pen and bistre by kent, from
M. Angelo’s model for restoring the celebrated antique
torso. See on the back, quotations from Richardson
and Wright.”).Woodburn, 1842, no. 74 (“Study for the
Restoration of the Torso – vigorous pen drawing.”).
Woodburn, 1846, no. 40 (As 1842.). Robinson, 1870,
no. 66 (Michel Angelo. “Sir Joshua Reynolds, to whom
this drawing formerly belonged, has written on the back
of it – ‘Michel Angelo/ Study for restoring the Torso.’”
But “Although there is a certain general resemblance to
the well-known antique fragment, the violent action or
movement of the ﬁgure is . . . different from that of its
supposed prototype. The exaggerated muscular develop-
ment, or rather the precise manner in which the superﬁ-
cial muscles are deﬁned, suggests, on the contrary, the idea
that this was a sketch for a projected anatomical model for
the use of artists.”). Black, 1875, p. 215, no. 56. Berenson,
1903, no. 1723 (Heemskerck’s sketches should remove
any doubt that it is a sketch for restoring the torso; prob-
ably by Montelupo?. A smoother black chalk version of
the same sketch is in the Ufﬁzi, perhaps by Daniele da
Volterra, but formerly ascribed to Michelangelo himself:
no. 1653.). Justi, 1909, p. 256 (Michelangelo: sketch for
restoring the Torso.). Berenson, 1938, I, pp. 257, 263,
no. 1723 (As 1903.). Delacre, 1938, pp. 453–4 (Repro-
duced as Michelangelo?. Related to drawing at Dres-
den formerly attributed to Michelangelo but rejected by
Morelli [1892, col. 54] and annotated Cambiaso.). Parker,
1956, no. 373 (Not Michelangelo. “A derivation from the
Torso of the Belvedere can hardly be doubted, and, even
if not by Montelupo, the drawing may well be the work
of some other contemporary sculptor.”). Berenson, 1961,
no. 1723 (As 1903/1938.).
CATALOGUE 71
A Caricatural Head
1846.120; R.12 (2); P.II 374
Dimensions: 118×85 mm
Medium
Red chalk.
Condition
The sheet is probably lined. There are extensive repairs
and major vertical and horizontal pressed-out folds. There
are some repaired fractures and tears with ingrained edge
dirt and toned inﬁlls, accretions, local staining and uneven
discolouration. The primary support is drummed by its
four edges to the backboard, so the verso is not visible.
Discussion
This sheet was at some time torn into four and then re-
assembled; the left edge also seems to have been cut away
and then restored.
The facial type is certainly related to those drawn
by Michelangelo, and, in the past, this drawing has fre-
quently been accepted as an autograph work, c. 1526.
The compiler would not exclude absolutely Michelan-
gelo’s authorship, but a lack of vivacity in the handling
and a dryness in the line-work suggest that it is less likely
to be by the master than to be a copy after him, by an
unidentiﬁed artist.
History
Sir Joshua Reynolds (L.2364, fragmentary); Sir Thomas
Lawrence (no stamp); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, Case 7, Drawer 1 [1830-130ii]
(“Two small Studies in red Chalk, M. Angelo” [with
Cat. 68]). Woodburn, 1842, no. 57 (“Two studies on
one mount – both in red chalk, . . . the other a grotesque
head of a man.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 29 (As 1842.).
Fisher, 1852, p. 6, pl. 30, lower (As Woodburn, 1842.).
Fisher, 1865, I, p. 19, pl. 30, lower (As 1852.). Robin-
son, 1870, no. 12.2 (Michelangelo, c. 1500.). Fisher,
1872, I, p. 17, pl. 30 (As 1852.). Black, 1875, p. 213,
no. 12b. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 237. Fisher, 1879, VII/7,
lower (“[A]pparently a caricature from life.”). Springer,
1883, I, p. 310 (Shows inﬂuence of Leonardo.). Beren-
son, 1903, no. 1554.2 (“[A]n amusing caricature, nearly
contemporary with” [Cats. 32, 31, 29].). K. Frey, 1909–
11, under no. 155a (Not Michelangelo. By an artist from
the second third of the cinquecento who knew draw-
ings by Michelangelo and Leonardo; links with [Cat. 31]
and Louvre Inv. 684 recto/J29/Corpus 95.). Justi, 1909,
p. 296 (Caricature of Alessandro dei Medici.). Thode,
1913, no. 397 (Frey wrong to dismiss this drawing; links
with Faun’s Head, Louvre Inv. 684 recto/J29/Corpus
95.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1554.2 (As 1903.). Parker, 1956,

314
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUES 71–72
no. 374 (Not by Michelangelo, but an original drawing,
not a copy.). Dussler, 1959, no. 602 (Second half sixteenth
century.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1554b (As 1903/1938.).
Hartt, 1971, p. 390 (Rejected.). De Tolnay, 1975,
Corpus I, no. 129 (Michelangelo, c. 1515–17?. Mistakenly
says accepted as an original by Parker.). Østermark-
Johansen, 1998, pp. 87, 91, ﬁg. 13 (Michelangelo.).
CATALOGUE 72
Golgotha
1846-122; R.38; P.II 376
Dimensions: 264×180 mm
Medium
Red chalk.
Condition
There are several areas of tissue repairs and inﬁlls and
major tear repairs. There is a skinned patch, local staining,
foxing and uneven discolouration. The primary support
is drummed by its four edges to the backboard, so the
verso is not visible.
Discussion
This drawing studies in detail a section of a Golgotha
composition of which a fuller rendering survives in the
Louvre (Inv. 839/J79; red chalk, 186×142 mm). The
Louvre sheet is smaller than the present one, and the
forms common to both are less precisely described than
here. The Paris version, which entered the Louvre with
Jabach’s sale of 1671, displays more signs of creativity, with
a small, unrelated ﬁgure sketched at the top right of the
sheet and subsequently covered. However, in the present
drawing, there are also signs of thought, if of a rather dull
kind: The feet and lower part of the drapery of the col-
lapsed Virgin is repeated at the bottom of the sheet, and

CATALOGUE 72
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
315

316
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUE 72
the angle at which the horizontal bar of the cross is seen
has been modiﬁed.
The obvious assumption would be that Louvre 839
represents a preparatory sketch for a Golgotha composi-
tion, and that the present drawing is a copy of a section
of a worked-up version of that, on a larger scale. It would
seem that the draughtsman of the present drawing did not
allow himself enough space to make his copy and that,
after copying the mourning group and laying in with
a ruler the upright of the cross of the bad thief at the
left, was compelled to insert the ﬁgure of the bad thief
directly above the Virgin and her companions. This anal-
ysis would imply that the two drawings are by different
hands, a contention that could be reinforced by noting
that it would be unlikely for one and the same artist to
create a composition and then to copy his own work inac-
curately. However, in the compiler’s view, there is little
to choose qualitatively between the two drawings, and he
tends to think that both probably are by the same hand.
If so, this would suggest that both drawings are copies of
a lost prototype: the Louvre drawing a sketch copy, the
present drawing a would-be same-size copy that the sheet
was too small to contain. Such an interpretation would
also reinforce the general assumption that both drawings
are copies after a lost composition by Michelangelo.
However, the compiler doubts whether this is the cor-
rect answer. Although the composition as laid out in
Louvre 839 shows numerous references to Michelan-
gelo’s drawings, it seems to be an assemblage of parts
from different Michelangelesque sources, rather than a
copy of any single composition. No parallel can be
found in Michelangelo’s work for the collision of the
crosses, nor for the grouping of the mourning ﬁgures,
where compositional coherence is slight, and the body
of the Virgin stiff and inexpressive. The same is true of
the details. The pose of Christ seems to derive from a
type with which Michelangelo experimented in a draw-
ing in Christ Church (JBS 63/Corpus 421; black chalk,
162×101 mm, perhaps the good thief, St. Dismas), and
the present artist has produced a version of this, elon-
gated in a way that anticipates El Greco. The right-hand
thief, with legs crossed, seems to show knowledge of stud-
ies for the Medici chapel Evening; the ﬁgure below with
raised hands is strongly reminiscent of the left-hand Heli-
ade in the British Museum version of the Fall of Phaeton
(W55/Corpus 340; black chalk, 313×217 mm); the ﬁg-
ure supporting the Virgin, with one arm bent across
her face, comes close to the left-hand seated Sibyl of
the Metropolitan Museum modello for the Julius Tomb
(Inv. 62931/Corpus 489; pen and ink and wash over
black chalk, 509×318 mm); the female ﬁgure advancing
from the left shows, in headdress and facial type, knowl-
edge of Presentation Drawings by Michelangelo such
as the Three Female Heads made for Gherardo Perini in
the Ufﬁzi (599E/B186/Corpus 308; black chalk, 343×
236 mm). Such a m´elange, plus the compositional infelic-
ity of the design as a whole, suggests that although it is the
work of an artist with access to Michelangelo’s drawings,
it does not record a composition by the master. Indeed, a
Cruciﬁxion shown obliquely is a conception more to be
expected from a Pordenone than a Michelangelo. Nev-
ertheless, given its close reﬂection of Michelangelesque
types, this drawing seems more appropriately included in
the section of copies after lost works by Michelangelo
than among the rejected drawings.
Compilations of this type were produced by Bacchi-
acca, but neither Louvre 839 nor the present drawing seem
to be by him, nor does anything similar survive among his
abundant painted production. A more likely possibility is
that both are the work of Giulio Clovio, which some of
the forms (such as the head of the left-hand female which
is close in type to that of the Virgin in Clovio’s Adora-
tion of the Magi in the Royal Collection (PW241; grey
chalk, 308×215 mm) would also indicate, as would the
miniaturist reﬁnement of execution; the lack of qualita-
tive discordance with the Louvre drawing, which suggests
an artist used to repetitive production; and the link with
El Greco, a prot´eg´e of Clovio’s in his late years.
It would still be difﬁcult to explain the fact that in the
present drawing the bad thief was drawn in an inappropri-
ate position, but this might be accounted for by hypothe-
sizing that the artist was producing a partial replica of his
own work, for cannibalisation elsewhere.
A copy of the Louvre version appeared at Sotheby’s,
London, 2 July 1999, lot 121; red chalk, 161×115 mm; it
is probable that this is identical with a drawing recorded
in Jabach’s 1695 inventory (Py, no. 764), which seems to
have been a same-size copy of the Louvre version and
might well have been cut down; the present version is
too large to correspond to Jabach’s drawing.
History
Paignon-Dijonval;
Sir
Thomas
Lawrence
(L.2445);
Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3, no. 9 [1830-12] (“Study for part of the Cru-
ciﬁxion, the Virgin fainting. – red chalk.”). Wood-
burn, 1842, no. 36 (“[A] very highly ﬁnished design.’).
Woodburn, 1846, no. 44 (As 1842.). Robinson, 1870,
no. 38 (Michel Angelo “doubtless intended to assume the

CATALOGUES 72–73
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
317
shape of a rather crowded pictorial composition of small
ﬁgures . . . It is probable that the foreshortened ﬁgure of
one of the thieves, seen in side view on the left, and
the beautiful group with the Virgin swooning . . . are
disconnected studies; i.e. meant for the same compo-
sition, but not arranged in their proper relative posi-
tion.” Analogies between this drawing and Michelan-
gelo’s studies for Sebastiano’s Flagellation, and his Three
Crosses in the British Museum, W32/Corpus 87.). Black,
1875, p. 214, no. 35. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 224. Fagan,
1883, p. 116 (“[A] study of the same subject [as BM
W32/Corpus 87], the principal group being of the Vir-
gin swooning. Daniele da Volterra has also represented
the group with more or less of identity in the Deposi-
tion in the church of the Trinit`a del Monte, Rome.”).
Thode, 1908, II, p. 476 (After a lost Michelangelo design,
like Louvre Inv. 839/J79.). Thode, 1913, no. 421 (As
1908.). Parker, 1956, no. 376 (This and Louvre Inv.
839/J79 are “copies of a common original . . . the work
of some follower of the master.”). Dussler, 1959, no. 617
(Doubtful if an original by Michelangelo existed.). Hartt,
1971, p. 391 (Rejected.). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I,
no. 88 (After a lost drawing by Michelangelo, c. 1524–
5.). Joannides, 1981b, p. 681 (“Assemblage of elements
derived from Michelangelo”; sources noted.). Joannides,
2003a, pp. 225–6 (Discussion of Louvre Inv. 839/J79.).
CATALOGUE 73
antonio mini (1506–c. 1534)
Recto: A Reclining Figure; A Fleeing Figure
Verso: A Fleeing Figure; A Column
1846.123; R.60.4; P.II 377
Dimensions: 148×340 mm
Medium
Recto: Red chalk.
Verso: Red chalk with touches of black chalk; pen
and ink, a ruled line in stylus down the centre of the
column.
Condition
Double-sided solid museum mount.
Recto: There are losses at the upper left and right cor-
ners and the lower left corner that have been repaired and
made-up with off-white laid paper. There is overall sur-
face dirt and discolouration. The sheet has various holes,
and there is patchy foxing.
Verso: In addition to the patchy foxing, there are various
stains in the leg area.
Inscription
Recto: Upper left in pen: di mano d’anto mini (in a
sixteenth-century hand).
Description
Recto
A. Study of a model? for the Day, from the rear.
B. A ﬁgure advancing from right to left while turning
around to his right. Generally described as an Archer, he
is, perhaps, running in fear.
C. Caricatural outline of a head, seen from the rear?. This
weak outline drawing might be by Andrea Quaratesi.
D. Outline of a left shoulder seen from the rear.

318
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUE 73
Verso
A. A larger version of B on the recto.
B. In pen and ink: a column with Corinthian capital.
Discussion
Both sides of this sheet, with the possible exception of C
on the recto, are no doubt by Antonio Mini as the old
inscription indicates.
The outline drawing of a column on the verso,
although not penned with Michelangelo’s precision, is
similar to studies by him for architectural projects. The
vertical lines are too exact to have been drawn free-hand,
and they were no doubt made with the aid of a curve.
It does not appear to be a practice drawing, intended
to familiarise Mini with classical architectural forms, and
because, as far as we are aware, Mini was not indepen-
dently active as an architect, it seems most probable that
this drawing was made as part of the preparation for a
project by Michelangelo. Perhaps Michelangelo felt that
a task of this kind could safely be delegated. Alternatively,
it might be a copy of a lost drawing by Michelangelo,
with Mini trying out his hand at an architectural form.
It is uncertain to what project the column may be
related, but it could have been the reliquary tribune of San
Lorenzo, on which Michelangelo began to work in late
1531, shortly before Mini undertook his ill-fated voyage to
France. The columns that support the reliquary tribune
are – uniquely in this period of Michelangelo’s work –
Corinthian, as in the drawing, and the proportions too
seem appropriate.
The view of Day from the back is unlikely to have
been drawn from the statue itself; as Wilde pointed out,
it was probably made from a small model. But because the
Day (and the Night) seems to have been re-designed in late
1524 when the marbles that Michelangelo had planned for
these ﬁgures failed to materialise, and because the present
drawing corresponds closely – although not exactly – with
the ﬁgure’s new state, 27 October 1524 – when Michelan-
gelo had marbles transferred to San Lorenzo from his own
stock in his Via Mozza workshop (Ricordo CXVIII) –
is a secure terminus post quem. However, the competence
of the drawing is greater than Mini would have seemed
capable of even in late 1524, and it too was probably made
a little later, perhaps in 1525 or 1526. It may be that the
model of the Day was one of the many that Michelangelo
gave to his pupil to assist him in his career in France.
The smaller drawing of the “Archer,” or ﬂeeing ﬁg-
ure, on the recto and its enlargement on the verso can-
not be connected securely with any project by Michelan-
gelo, and the purpose of this ﬁgure remains conjectural.
The pose does not seem to the compiler securely that
of an archer, but if this is the correct identiﬁcation, the
drawings might have been made in connection with a
Martyrdom of St. Sebastian, although none such is known
either by Michelangelo or by Mini. If ﬂeeing, he might
be a guard in a Resurrection, a subject treated frequently
by Michelangelo in the early 1530s. There are also some
similarities of pose with ﬁgures in an active composition
sketched by Mini on a sheet in Florence (CB 37F/B170;
red chalk, 203×248 mm), which seems to be a variant
(perhaps an independent one) of a Brazen Serpent design
by Michelangelo (see Cat. 78). They are also very simi-
lar to those on a double-sided sheet of red chalk draw-
ing (195×86 mm, clearly cut down from a larger sheet),
which appeared in the N. Rauch sale, Geneva, 13–15 June
1960, lot 261 (the recto alone illustrated) as by Michelan-
gelo, with a provenance from the collections of Prince
Argoutinsky-Dolgorougoff and H. de Marignane (p`ere);

CATALOGUES 73–74
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
319
it was presumably acquired, or bought in, at that sale by
H. de Marignane ﬁls, for it was included in the exhi-
bition of his collection held in Monte Carlo in 1966,
as no. 6, attributed to Michelangelo. The entry notes
that two (unnamed) specialists had considered it to be by
Mini, one of them believing it to have been retouched
by Michelangelo, a view held by Berenson of the present
drawing. The compiler agrees that the Marignane draw-
ing, which was once part of the collection formed by
Padre Resta for Monsignore Marchetti, is by Mini.
Drawn Copies
A on the verso was copied c. 1580 by Andrea Commodi
on Ufﬁzi 18611F recto.
History
Casa Buonarroti by c. 1580; Jean Baptiste Wicar; Samuel
Woodburn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (no stamp); Samuel
Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 35 (“Five very ﬁne studies on one
Mount . . . one in red [chalk] on which is written de
Mano di Anton Mini”; added to [Cats. 51–53], which
seem to have been mounted together from at least 1804
and no doubt earlier, and [Cat. 101].). Woodburn, 1846,
no. 40 (As 1842.). Robinson, 1870, no. 60.5 (Michel
Angelo. Recto: “a recumbent male ﬁgure, evidently done
from a cast or wax model, but in a broad and masterly
style. . . . If it be really the work of Mini, it shows how
completely he had mastered Michelangelo’s style, even in
the manner of his slightest sketches.”). Black, 1875, p. 215,
no. 55. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 227. Berenson, 1903, I, pp. 253–
4, no. 1722 (Mini.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 245 (Recto:
main ﬁgure Mini; smaller female one possibly Michelan-
gelo.); no. 246 (Verso: ﬁgure perhaps Michelangelo; also
possibly the column, related to those for San Lorenzo.).
Thode, 1913, no. 439 (Recto: the reclining ﬁgure proba-
bly by Mini; the ﬂeeing ﬁgure might be Michelangelo, but
the motif certainly his.). Popp, 1925a, p. 19 (Mini, 1525–
6. [A] a free copy after a model for Night [sic].). Beren-
son, 1935, p. 272 (Mini’s name probably added by Bald-
inucci. A weak drawing, well below anything assigned to
“Andrea.”). Berenson, 1938, I, pp. 256, 364, no. 1722 (As
1935; [A] “after some slight sketch for one of the recum-
bent ﬁgures in the Medici chapel, possibly for one of the
River Gods.”). Delacre, 1938, p. 91 (Doubtful of attribu-
tion to Mini.). Wilde, 1953a, p. 68 (By Mini after a model
for the Day. Another drawing by Mini inspired by Day
is BM W34.). Parker, 1956, no. 377 (Recto and verso by
Mini. [A] perhaps not after a model for Day but simply
a memory sketch.). Dussler, 1959, no. 628 (Both sides
by Mini. Recto: [A] from a model for Day.). Berenson,
1961, no. 1722 (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962, pp. 216–
17 (Similarities support attribution of CB34F to Mini.).
CATALOGUE 74
antonio mini (1506–c. 1534)
Recto: A Drunken Faun and Another Figure
Verso: Sketches of Limbs
1846.124. R.79; P.II 378
Dimensions: 335×238 mm
Medium
Red chalk.
Condition
Double-sided solid museum mount with thin perspex
applied to both sides; the hinges discoloured to yellow-
brown.
Recto: The support is undulating. There is overall dis-
colouration and surface dirt plus various pale brown stains
overall. A large section of paper is missing at the lower left
corner; there is also an irregular strip at the lower right
side and at the bottom edge, which have been made up in
thin toned paper. There is a vertical tear at the upper left
and many small vertical tears along the top edge. There
is one vertical fold line down the centre.
Verso: Six horizontal fold lines are particularly visible
from this side as are the tear repairs at the edge and the
lower part of the vertical central fold. There is overall dis-
colouration and surface dirt and the stains on the recto
are darker on this side.
Description
Recto
A. A drunken faun seen from the front.
B. A ﬁgure in a complex pose.
C. A very faint schematic form at lower right, possibly
part of a foot.
Verso
Top line
A. A face looking down, in right proﬁle.
B. A left leg, seen from the right.
C. Indecipherable; perhaps a bone.
D. A left hand, seen in right proﬁle.
E. A right leg, seen frontally.

320
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUE 74
Second line
F. A right arm, seen frontally.
G. The small and fourth ﬁngers of a right hand, seen from
above.
H. Right? part of torso and shoulder, seen frontally.
Third line
I. A left hand.
Discussion
It seems possible, though hardly provable, that there is a
connection between the large ﬁgure on the recto, which
seems to represent a drunken faun, and Michelangelo’s
design for a Bacchanal for Alfonso d’Este, for which
an autograph ﬁgure study survives in the Louvre
(Inv. 697/J21/Corpus 69; red chalk, 275 × 173 mm).
This is the only project by Michelangelo or a member of
his studio dating from the 1520s likely to have included
drunken fauns, although, of course, Michelangelo’s artis-
tic interest in the subject of inebriation goes back as far
as the Bacchus of 1496.
There are pentiments in both legs; this suggests possible
intervention by Michelangelo himself, improving upon
the version of his pupil Antonio Mini; however, the line-
work is not so emphatically superior to the rest for this
to be certain.

CATALOGUE 74
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
321
The smaller ﬁgure, which overlaps the Faun slightly,
is placed in a quite complex pose and must derive from
an invention by Michelangelo, but it cannot be linked
with any known project. One possible purpose, in the
compiler’s view, would be for a ﬁgure placed on a ladder,
helping to support the body of Christ as it is lowered from
the Cross: An example of such a scheme by Michelan-
gelo dating from this time is the Deposition in the Teyler
Museum, Haarlem (A25 recto/VT 60/Corpus 89; red
chalk 331×229 mm). However, the present ﬁgure cannot
be found in that drawing, and it might well have been
drawn with some other subject in mind.
The hatching on the legs is relatively ﬂuent and fast
and, again, could represent re-touching by Michelangelo
as could the contour of the ﬁgure’s right calf. It is, of
course, uncertain when this drawing was made, but, like
Cat. 73, it probably dates from a relatively developed stage
in Mini’s career in Michelangelo’s workshop.
Verso
These drawings might well be copies after sketches by
Michelangelo, either ones made with didactic purpose,
or simply studies retained in the studio, in which case
the models for these copies might well have antedated
them by two decades or more. Studies by Michelangelo
of legs seen from the front and of hands are sufﬁciently
common not to require itemising. H, which might rep-
resent the shoulder and a neck of a turning ﬁgure, is
loosely reminiscent of certain diagrammatic sketches by
Michelangelo, such as CB15F/B179/Corpus 326; black
chalk, 206×248 mm; probably of the later 1520s made in
preparation for the Victory. If so, then the present sheet

322
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUES 74–75
would probably have been made – at least in part – towards
the end of Mini’s time with Michelangelo, which would
help account for its somewhat higher quality than most
of his drawings.
History
William Young Ottley; Sir Thomas Lawrence (no stamp);
Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 60 (“[A]pparently from antique
bronzes, supposed to be drawn in the old age of M.
Angelo.”). Robinson, 1870, no. 79 (Michelangelo in
old age, but original inventions. Use of red chalk in
this period rare. Shortcomings in regard to propor-
tion are characteristic indications of senility.). Black,
1875, p. 215, no. 67. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 237. Berenson,
1903, I, p. 254, no. 1725 (Mini is “somewhat better
than I should expect of him.”). Thode, 1913, no. 451
(Seated ﬁgure perhaps by Michelangelo himself.). Beren-
son, 1935, p. 270 (Would now hesitate to give to Mini.).
Berenson, 1938, I, pp. 256, 364, no. 1725 (“Excellent
copies after originals of about 1530. . . . [T]oo good for
Mini, to whom I used to attribute them. . . . [Perhaps]
Mini or someone else in the studio began this draw-
ing then the torso and thighs of . . . [B recto] were ﬁn-
ished by Michelangelo himself.”). Parker, 1956, no. 378
(“Connection with Mini . . . uncertain.” Both the faun
and the seated ﬁgure “show a certain impressiveness.”).
Dussler, 1959, no. 623 (Mini’s authorship uncertain.
No direct link with Michelangelo.). Berenson, 1961,
no. 1725 (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi, 1962, pp. 215–
17, 225, 228 (This drawing supports Mini’s authorship
of CB37F/B170, CB34F/B171, CB53F/B174/Corpus
229bis, CB74F/B177, CB5F/B180/Corpus 137.). Perrig,
1999, p. 251 (Mini.).
CATALOGUE 75
antonio mini (1506-c. 1534)
Recto: A Piet`a (fragmentary)
Verso: Part of a Letter
1846.125; R.48.1; P.II 378∗
Dimensions: 83×72 mm, laid into a sheet 100×84 mm
Medium
Pen and ink.
Condition
The sheet is signiﬁcantly fractured and disﬁgured from
ink burn-through; it has been extensively restored with
lining and crude inﬁlls on the major losses. There is fur-
ther surface disruption from burn-through and general
discolouration from haloing. A repair is discoloured and
skinned. Repair patches seem to be adhered on what has
been designated the recto. The edges have uneven surface
residues and some small folds.
Numbering
In graphite: 7
Transcription
The verso, in Michelangelo’s handwriting, is transcribed
by Robinson and Wilde:
(ci)nqu˜ata? duchati
(v)e decto e facto dire . . . d
(c)homessione di darmela
ch(e) la decta provigione m . . .
papa ch(e) io n˜o fa senza
mini, ch(e) sta mecho, voi mi
mi daresti c˜e to e aretelo? ecu . . .
(s)i n˜o sapevi qu˜ad(o) papa si
(com) ˜ıciata o chom˜ıciassi, io vi
Schrivessi arroma e in
(fa) cessi . . .
Discussion
The present drawing is executed with wavering lines and
is very probably by Antonio Mini, although some earlier
writers gave it to Michelangelo himself. It is difﬁcult to
decipher, but it is clearly readable in Fisher’s pen copy in
his illustrated example of Robinson’s catalogue – it was
not included among his published etchings. It represents
a particularly dramatic and tormented Piet`a of a sort that
might at ﬁrst sight more readily be associated with a trans-
alpine artist such as Gr¨unewald, than with Michelangelo.
But it was certainly copied – or more probably traced –
from a pen drawing made by Michelangelo around 1505.
The copies of this group (in London and Weimar), occur
on sheets that include several other copies of Michelan-
gelo sketches both lost and surviving; the originals of
some seem to have been made for the Battle of Cascina
and others, perhaps, for the Martyrdom of the Ten Thou-
sand. The present drawing demonstrates that Michelan-
gelo’s pupils had access to, and copied, earlier works by the
master as well as his immediately contemporary projects.
Robinson thought that the present fragment formed
part of another fragmentary sheet in the British Museum

CATALOGUE 75
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
323
W34 (pen and ink, 162×145 mm), also with a provenance
from the Lawrence Collection. Wilde noted, however,
that although referring to the same matter, the letter on
the verso of the sheet in London is actually slightly later
than that on the verso of the present sheet. It is itself the
autograph copy of an important letter sent by Michelan-
gelo to Giovanni Spina on 18 October 1524. This probably
provides a terminus ante quem for the drawings because the
drawing on the present sheet and at least one of the two
on that in the British Museum appear to be tracings of
lost drawings by Michelangelo, and tracings would hardly
be made on sheets that already bore dense lines of writing
in ink. It is much more likely that Michelangelo took up
sheets that his pupil had already used to work out or copy
letters dealing with a matter that required clarity and pre-
cision. If this conclusion is correct, Mini’s drawings would
probably have been made around the middle of 1524. One
of those on BM W34 is after a lost drawing by Michelan-
gelo for the Hercules and Antaeus, developed from, but
more resolved than, those on Cat. 30; the second draw-
ing may – as Wilde suggested – have been “inspired by the
Day” or by a model for it and was not necessarily traced

324
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUE 75
after a lost sketch by Michelangelo. But in their
thin and wavering lines, the three drawings are to all
intents and purposes identical in style.
Nevertheless, the fact that the two drawings on W34
were made after immediately contemporary work by
Mini’s master might encourage one to think that the
original of the present drawing could also be dated to
the 1520s. However, the character of the pen copy of
the same lost drawing in the British Museum very much
supports the view that the original was made around the
middle of the ﬁrst decade. Thus it would seem that the
young Mini was set to – or permitted to – copy drawings
from different periods of his master’s work.
Drawn Copies
1. British Museum, 1946-7-13-635; pen and ink, 306 ×
460 mm; attributed to – but in the compiler’s view not
by – Raffaello da Montelupo. A copy of this group,
the same size as the present drawing and the presumed
original; this page (published by Joannides, 2002b, tav.
11) contains several other copies of lost Michelangelo
sketches probably made for the Battle of Cascina and a
part copy of the autograph studies on Haarlem A28
verso /VT 51/Corpus 108; pen and ink over red chalk,
285×207 mm.
2. Weimar, Kunstsammlung, KK8797 verso; 390×239
mm, black chalk. A copy of this group, probably the same
size as the present drawing and the presumed original;
this page also contains copies, laid out differently from
the original, of the autograph studies on Haarlem A28
verso /VT 51/Corpus 108; pen and ink over red chalk,
285×207 mm.
See Cat. 40 for a brief discussion of the recto of this
sheet.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar?; William Young
Ottley, his sale, 11 April 1804 and days following, part
of lot 270? (“Five – various pen studies of ﬁgures and
architecture – some of his writing on the back of three –
from the Bonarroti collection.”); his sale, 6 June 1814 and
days following, lot 261ii (“Two – an architectural design

CATALOGUES 75–76
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
325
[no doubt Cat. 19] and a pieta, both pen. His writing
on the back of one.” £1.11.6); Sir Thomas Lawrence
(L. 2445, not now visible); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale?, 11 April 1804, part of lot 270 (“Five –
various pen studies of ﬁgures and architecture – some of
his writing on the back of three – from the Bonarroti col-
lection.”). Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, etc., lot 261 (“Two –
an architectural design [no doubt Cat. 19] and a pieta,
both pen. His writing on the back of one.”). Lawrence
Inventory?, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3, Drawer 3
[1830-103] (“Architectural and other studies – pen” [with
Cats. 3 and 19].). Woodburn, 1842, no. 72 (“Three small
studies – upon one mount . . . with the autograph of M.
Angelo” with [Cats. 3 and 19].). Robinson, 1870, no. 48.1
(Michel Angelo. Probably part of BM W34 with dated
letter of 18 October 1524 on verso, or dealing with same
matter at the same time; the BM drawing is “precisely
similar in style to the sketch in the present sheet.”). Black,
1875, p. 214, no. 43a. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 234. Berenson,
1903, no. 1567.1 (Dead Christ supported on the knees of
a disciple, c. 1524.). K. Frey, 1909–11, no. 138a (Recto:
Piet`a sketch, similar to Michelangelo’s St. Peter’s group.
Verso: not a fragment of BM sheet with a letter, but of the
same time and dealing with the same subject, Michelan-
gelo’s salary from the Pope.). Thode, 1913, no. 429 (“[S]o
undeutlich, dass sie schwer zu beurtheilen ist”; verso letter
of 1524.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1567.1 (As 1903.). Wilde,
1953a, p. 68 (Sketch similar in style to W34 recto, by Mini
probably of October 1524. Fragment of a copy letter on
verso of that drawing deals with the same matter as that on
the verso of this drawing, at a slightly later stage.). Wilde,
1953 exh., no. 140a. Parker, 1956, no. 378∗(Closely con-
nected with BM W34. “[M]ight be due to the hand of
Mini.”). Dussler, 1959, no. 623 (Very probably by Mini.).
Berenson, 1961, no. 1567.1 (As 1903/1938.). Berti, 1965,
p. 458 (The Dead Christ resting on the knees of a disci-
ple.). Hartt, 1971, p. 391 (Rejected.). De Tolnay, 1980,
Corpus IV, p. 133 (Rejected.). Perrig, 1999, p. 247 (By a
pupil of Michelangelo; from via Mozza studio.).
CATALOGUE 76
raffaello da montelupo (c. 1505–1566)
Recto: Michelangelo’s Evening and Other Studies
Verso: Studies of a Man’s Leg and a Skeleton
1846-27; R.43; P.II 406

326
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUE 76
Dimensions: 282×432 mm
Watermark: Crossed Arrows with crescent. Robinson
Appendix no. 9.
Medium
Pen and ink, with black chalk and touches of red.
Condition
Recto: There are various creases, particularly near the top
edge, and a diagonal crease near the bottom in the centre.
There are old repairs on the tears along the central vertical
fold line and a large diagonal tear at the top left corner.
The losses at the bottom corners and the one at the top
edge have been ﬁlled. There are various minor tears and
patches of skinning at the edges. The ﬁgure left of centre
has suffered both abrasion and skinning.
Verso: The repairs are more visible on this side. There
is minor foxing and some show-through from the
recto.
Inscriptions
Recto: Small black chalk inscription below A: Michel
angelo; inscription in black chalk beside A: Du Tombeau des
M´edicis
Description
Recto
A. A copy after a model for or after the Evening.
B. A male torso with outstretched right arm, seen from
the back.
C. Immediately below B. Copy after a model for a seated
Duke?, nude, seen in left proﬁle.
With the left edge as base
D. A torso seen in left proﬁle slightly from below, prob-
ably after a reduction of the Belvedere Torso rather than
the original. Some heavy hatching at the base of the
ﬁgure.
E. A seated nude male seen in right proﬁle. Perhaps after
a lost drawing by Michelangelo for a Sistine ignudo.
F. A female head with a helmet in left proﬁle, in black
chalk.
G. A bearded head seen in three-quarter view.
Verso
The verso was evidently folded, probably by the artist,
and used in different directions, with the left half probably
used directly after the right half. This side of the sheet is
here treated as two successive pages.

CATALOGUE 76
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
327
Left side
With the lower edge as base
A. The thigh-bone of B.
B. A skeleton, seen from the front.
C. Immediately to the right of B. An indecipherable
form.
D. Immediately below C. An area of hatching, perhaps
indicating a knee.
E. Study of the bent left leg of a seated ﬁgure, seen in
right proﬁle.
F. Immediately below D. Study of the bent left leg of a
seated ﬁgure, seen from above.
Right Side
With the left edge as base
G. Study of the bent left leg and part of the abdomen and
upper right leg of a seated ﬁgure, seen from above.
H. Study of the bent left leg of a seated ﬁgure, seen from
above.
I. Three wavy pen lines.
With the right edge as base
J. Study of the bent left leg and part of the upper right
knee of a seated ﬁgure, seen in right proﬁle.
K. Study of the bent left leg of a seated ﬁgure, seen in
right proﬁle.
Discussion
Recto
The handling of pen on the recto of this sheet is looser and
wilder than is usual with Montelupo’s drawings, and it was
probably executed soon after he joined Michelangelo’s
team in 1533. It may have been made from memory or,
perhaps, in the case of the seated ﬁgure on the recto, from
a rough model for Duke Giuliano. It is likely that several
models were made for the dukes as Michelangelo worked
them out: There are, for example, a number of copies by
Tintoretto or members of his studio of a model of the
ﬁgure of Duke Giuliano in the nude.
As Berenson and Parker noted, the female head in
black chalk [F] is very reminiscent in style of Antonio
Mini (compare his proﬁle drawing in Florence, CB40A
verso/B98/Corpus 177; black chalk, 400×243 mm);
Raffaello was certainly aware of some drawings by Mini
and, indeed, sometimes drew on the other side of sheets
previously employed by Mini: It seems likely that he was
here copying a copy by Mini of a now-lost drawing by
Michelangelo.
Sketch B was pursued further by Raffaello on a sheet
of drawings in the British Museum, 1946-7-13-36; pen
and ink, 204×256 mm. This sheet also bears draw-
ings probably connected with the ﬁreplace design on
Cat. 79.
Verso
The skeleton on the verso is reminiscent of one found
on a sheet of drawings in the Wellcome Library, Lon-
don (Inv. 393461; pen and ink with brown wash over
black chalk, 371×285 mm), unattributed, but probably
also by Raffaello da Montelupo; this sheet, incidentally,
contains on its verso a sketch copy of the slave second
from the right in Michelangelo’s modelli for the tomb of
Julius II in Berlin (15305 recto/Corpus 55) and the Ufﬁzi
(608E recto/B244/Corpus 56). Montelupo was never
to become an accomplished anatomist, but no doubt
proximity to Michelangelo encouraged him to make the
attempt.
The series of leg studies display an accomplishment in
the rendering of form and an ease and ﬂuency of exe-
cution uncommon in Raffaello’s work. It seems likely
that they were made after lost drawings by Michelan-
gelo in either pen or black chalk or both for one of the
seated dukes in the New Sacristy, but at a more advanced
stage of development than the model copied on the recto.
Relevant drawings by Michelangelo are found at Haar-
lem A33a recto/VT58/Corpus 218; black chalk, 202×
247 mm, and in Casa Buonarroti, 10F/B71/Corpus 224;
pen and ink, 226×258 mm. Another rather rougher copy
by Raffaello da Montelupo (considered by some writers
to be an original) of a further lost page of leg studies by
Michelangelo is in the Ufﬁzi, 622E/B205/Corpus 223;
pen and ink, 210×268 mm. See also Cat. 78. Raffaello
may have recalled these leg studies when he designed the
urn-bearing ignudi seated at the sides of the monument
of Baldassare Turini in the Turini Chapel in the Duomo
at Pescia.
The present sheet is about the same size as that on
which Raffaello copied Michelangelo’s Infant Bacchanal
(see Cat. 66) and the two may have been pages of the same
sketchbook. The sketches on the present sheet are also
closely related to those on the verso of a sheet in the
Louvre (Inv. 715/J55; pen and ink, 367×250 mm), whose
recto contains one of Raffaello’s most ﬁnished and elegant
drawings, a copy of Michelangelo’s Virgin and Child in the
New Sacristy, seen from the right side. The three sheets
shared the same history until 1838, when King William
II of Holland purchased from Woodburn that now in the
Louvre.

328
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUES 76–77
History
Pierre Crozat; Pierre-Jean Mariette (L.1852); the Mar-
quis de Lagoy (no stamp); Samuel Woodburn; Thomas
Dimsdale; Samuel Woodburn; Sir Thomas Lawrence
(L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Details of the Evening and the ﬁgure resembling Giu-
liano etched by the Marquis de Lagoy at an uncertain
date. Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3, no. 23 [1830-25] (“Another Magniﬁcent Sheet
with a pen on both sides the paper – one of the tombs
of the Medici.”). Woodburn, 1836b, no. 41 (“A Magnif-
icent Sheet of Studies – for the Tombs of the Medicis,
admirably drawn . . . full of knowledge in the anatomy.”).
The Athenaeum, 16 July 1836 (“[F]or the cognoscenti.”).
Woodburn, 1842, nos. 14, 15 [The same drawing was
listed by Woodburn twice, in error, perhaps because it is
double-sided] (No. 14: “A magniﬁcent study for one of
the ﬁgures on the Tomb of the Medici . . . drawn with sur-
prising energy in the grandest style of the master . . . with
several ﬁne studies on the reverse. . . . It is engraved.” No.
15: “A sheet of studies for the Tomb of the Medicis,
admirably drawn with the pen and bistre showing the
exactest knowledge of anatomy. On the same side is a
study of J. de Medici, in a helmet, lightly drawn in black
chalk; on the reverse are several studies. This magniﬁ-
cent sheet is in his best style.” The provenances given
in both entries are identical.). Fisher, 1852, p. 5, pl. 23
(Recto: as Woodburn, 1842.). Woodburn, 1853, no. 28
(Recto: reproduced.). Fisher, 1865, p. 18, I, pl. 23 (As
1852.). Robinson, 1870, no. 43 (Michel Angelo. Recto:
studies for the Medici tombs. Verso: Studies of the left leg
of Lorenzo “drawn from a preparatory wax or clay model
on a small scale.” “[T]he evidence of this sheet, and of
others dating from the same period, goes to prove that his
hand no longer obeyed his mind with the unerring cer-
tainty of earlier years. Masterly and beautiful as is the tech-
nical style of these studies, there is indicated in them the
ﬁrst appearance of that comparatively vague and tremu-
lous touch, which became with advancing age more and
more apparent. A certain tendency to mannerism, rather
in the mechanical execution than in the design . . . may
also be here perceived.”). Fisher, 1872, I, p. 16, pl. 23
(As 1852.). Ruskin, 1872, p. 78 (“[T]he lowest ﬁgure is,
strictly speaking, neither a study nor a working drawing,
but has either been scrawled in the feverish languour of
exhaustion, which cannot escape its subject of thought;
or, at best, an idly experimental addition of part to part,
beginning with the head, and ﬁtting muscle after muscle,
and bone after bone, to it, thinking of their place only,
not of their proportion, till the head is only about one-
twentieth part of the height of the body; ﬁnally, some-
thing between a face and a mask is blotted in the upper
left-hand corner of the paper, indicative, in the weakness
and frightfulness of it, simply of mental disorder from
overwork.”). Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 40. Gotti, 1875, II,
p. 233. Fisher, 1879, XXXII/34 (Michelangelo.). Beren-
son, 1903, I, pp. 255, 257, no. 1710 (Montelupo.). Thode,
1913, p. 210 (Copy of the Evening.). Berenson, 1935, p. 275
(If the shading were not left-handed, the proﬁle head, [F],
might be attributable to “Andrea.”). Berenson, 1938, I,
pp. 257, 259, 262, 365, no. 1710 (As 1903/1935.). Parker,
1956, no. 406 (Montelupo. “The shading is character-
istically left-handed throughout, including the woman’s
head, which might otherwise be mistaken for the work
of Mini, and was evidently the ﬁrst study to have been
placed on the recto.” ). Berenson, 1961, no. 1710 (“Tutti
questi schizzi sono del Montelupo.”). Gatteschi, 1998,
pp. 56–8 (Cites Berenson; by Raffaello.).
CATALOGUE 77
raffaello da montelupo (c. 1505–1566)
Recto: Horses and Other Studies
Verso: Figure Studies
1846.126; R.20; P.II 405
Dimensions: 190×281 mm (the corners chamfered).
Watermark: Six pointed star within a circle; Robinson
Appendix no. 5. Not far from Briquet 6086.
Medium
Pen and ink over red chalk and red chalk used indepen-
dently.
Condition
Bevel inlay adhered to verso.
The sheet has overall surface dirt and discolouration.
There are a number of cleavages visible in transmitted
light, and many losses due to the breakdown of the
support by the medium. There are various historic ﬁlled
losses that have been toned. Show-through is visible on
both sides.
Description and Inscriptions
Recto
A. A ﬁgure on horseback striking down another rider,
who has fallen forward over his horse’s neck.
B. A horse trophy.
C. A head of a young man in right proﬁle.

CATALOGUE 77
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
329
D. Immediately below C. The top of a decorative console
in red chalk, pitched at an angle, superimposed over a
group of three groups of parallel curving lines, in pen.
With the left edge as base
E. Inscription: . . . ?. .vico.
F.
A series of loops and decorative lines.
G. At upper right corner. A console, in red chalk.
H. Inscription: Daparto . . . ?
I.
Immediately below H. Caro.
J.
To the right of H and I. Vico mio caro/io t’aviso come.
Verso
A. A proﬁle of a console?, in loose pen, perhaps carried
on a baluster.
B. Immediately below A. A small female ﬁgure in right
proﬁle, reaching upwards, perhaps supporting a vase on
her head.
C. A faint study in red chalk of a nude young man facing
forward, his head turned down to his right, within a rect-
angular frame, with central vertical axis and indications of
measurement along the lower horizontal. The compiler
is uncertain whether Parker is correct to see a cross.
With the right side as base
D. A proﬁle of a console?, in red chalk.
E. A proﬁle of a console?, in red chalk.
With the top edge as base
F. A proﬁle of a console?, in red chalk.
Discussion
Recto
The main drawing A does not seem to be linked with rep-
resentations of the Fall of Phaeton as has sometimes been
suggested: Phaeton should be shown driving Apollo’s
chariot and Jupiter fells him with a thunderbolt, not by
striking him directly. The drawing seems rather to be
preparatory for a scene of a cavalry battle. It may be that
there is some relation to terra cruda battle groups of a
type that seems to have circulated quite widely. These
are generally linked with Leonardo’s preparations for his
Battle of Anghiari and some of them have been attributed
to his friend Gianfrancesco Rustici, but it is likely that
treatments of such groups were also produced by Tri-
bolo, with whom Raffaello da Montelupo was associated
for a while in work in the New Sacristy. However, it is
clear that Michelangelo also planned to include episodes

330
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUE 77
of combat between cavalrymen and between cavalrymen
and pikemen, as demonstrated in Cats. 4, 5, and 6; fur-
thermore, several copies after lost sketches of cavalry com-
bats by Michelangelo dating from the period of Cascina
are found on a sheet in the British Museum (1946-7-13-
635; pen and ink, 306×460 mm; attributed to Raffaello
da Montelupo but in the compiler’s opinion not by him;
see Joannides, 2002b, tav. 11), and it may be that A here
also records a group planned for that project.
Berenson suggested that the main drawing was for a
decoration in relief – perhaps for the frieze of a ﬁre-
place – which is quite possible; but it could as well be
for a painting as a sculpture. The compiler would raise
the possibility that it could have been made for one of
the temporary projects on which Raffaello was heavily
engaged in the mid-1530s, perhaps for a simulated relief
in grisaille on a triumphal arch constructed for some for-
mal entry. Supporting the view that something of this
nature was intended is the equine trophy, which would
obviously be suitable for execution on the attic of a tem-
porary arch.
Verso
The largest study on the verso, C, probably the ﬁrst to
be drawn on this side of the sheet, would appear to be
for a statue standing in a niche. The scale indicated along

CATALOGUES 77–78
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
331
the lower horizontal covers half of the space to the left
of the axial line which divides the niche. It contains ﬁve
intervals. If the width of the niche up to the axial line is
interpreted as nine intervals, this means that the base of
the niche as a whole must be eighteen intervals wide. If
the intervals indicate palmi – braccie are hardly a possibil-
ity – this establishes a base of nearly four metres, and a
height for the statue of some twelve metres, a truly colos-
sal project. The only possibility for such a project that the
compiler can envisage, if this calculation is correct, is that
the ﬁgure was to decorate a huge temporary triumphal
arch. If the intervals are oncie, then the ﬁgure would be
around a metre high, probably the more likely dimension.
This ﬁgure is reﬂected in a drawing by Battista Franco in
the Albertina, BK125; pen over red chalk, 210×90 mm,
bearing the old inscription M. Angolo.
The small female ﬁgure, reaching upward, may be
related to one in an early and unexecuted project by
Michelangelo for the Magniﬁci Tomb, which was to con-
tain reliefs of the Lamenting Orpheus and the Garden of the
Hesperides. The latter scene included ﬁgures of nymphs
stretching on tiptoe to gather fruit: An original sketch for
one of these ﬁgures by Michelangelo is at the upper left on
the recto of a sheet of sketches in the Fogg Art Museum,
Inv. 1932-152/Corpus 438; black chalk, 157×157 mm.
The studies of a decorative architectural feature, inter-
preted here as a console, may in fact represent a detail of
some larger decorative feature.
History
Jonathan Richardson Senior (no stamp); William Young
Ottley, his sale, 1814, lot 1680 as Michelangelo (“One – a
design of horses etc. – free pen – a ﬁrst thought on the
back for the statue of Christ in the Minerva – red chalk –
very ﬁne.” £5 15.6); William Roscoe, his sale, September
1816, lot 60. “One, a study of Horses & c. free pen. A
Sketch on the back for the Statue of Christ in the Min-
erva. Red chalk, very Fine. Size 11 h. 71/2 w. From the
same Collection [i.e., Mr. Ottley’s].” Bought by Walker
17s; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2495); Samuel Woodburn.
References
William Young Ottley, sale, 1814, lot 1680 (Michelangelo,
“One – a design of horses etc. – free pen – a ﬁrst thought
on the back for the statue of Christ in the Minerva – red
chalk – very ﬁne.”). William Roscoe, his sale, September
1816, lot 60 (“One, a study of Horses & c. free pen. A
Sketch on the back for the Statue of Christ in the Mi-
nerva. Red chalk, very Fine. Size 11 h. 7 1
2 w. From the
same Collection [i.e., Mr. Ottley’s].”). Lawrence Inven-
tory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-
78] (“Various pen sketches among others a Horse, and
some slight sketches on the back.”). Woodburn, 1836b,
no. 47 (“Admirably drawn.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 46
(As 1836.). Robinson, 1870, no. 20 (Michel Angelo. “The
equestrian group so much resembles other sketches for
the Cartoon of Pisa, as to leave little doubt that it was
a ﬁrst thought for one of the groups of small ﬁgures
in the background of that composition.”). Black, 1875,
p. 213, no. 20. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 239. Berenson, 1903, I,
pp. 254–6, 260, no. 1701 (Montelupo. Sketch for horse
after bronze original; “motive of charioteer and his mad
horses . . . [may be] after a sketch by Michelangelo for an
otherwise unknown version of the Phaeton.” [A] occurs
in two versions of a Conversion of Saint Paul ascribed to
Pordenone, but in reality by Bonifazio de’ Pitati.). Thode,
1913, no. 404 (Phaeton scene?. Probably, but not cer-
tainly by Raffaello da Montelupo.). Berenson, 1938, I,
pp. 257–8, no. 1701 (As 1903.). Wilde, 1949, p. 308 (Head
of a youth occurs in almost identical form on Windsor
PW786 recto.). Parker, 1956, no. 405 (Montelupo’s “left
handedness is much in evidence.” The writing agrees
with his. Verso study probably for a Saint John the Baptist
Preaching.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1701 (As 1903/1938.).
CATALOGUE 78
raffaello da montelupo (c. 1505–1566)
Recto: Anatomical and Other Studies
Verso: Anatomical Studies; Groups of Prostrate Figures
1846.129; R.44; P. II 408
Dimensions: 198×293 mm
Medium
Recto: Black and red chalk.
Verso: Black chalk and pen and ink over black chalk.
Condition
Double-sided window mount; bevelled inlay adhered to
verso.
Recto: There is overall ingrained surface dirt and
patchy discolouration. The sheet has three vertical fold
lines, with tears in all the major folds, particularly at the
edges. Various repairs are visible. There is show-through
from verso. There seems to be some colour change in the
pen lines.
Verso: Repair patches are still more clearly visible.
There is some colour change in the ink lines, and the
red chalk is smudged at the right edge.
Accounts
Verso: series of numbers and sums by the artist.

332
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUE 78
Description
Recto
Three studies of a left leg in black chalk and one in red
chalk.
Verso
A. A right knee and lower leg, in right proﬁle, in black
chalk, in sequence with the four on the recto.
B. A right shoulder and upper arm, in right proﬁle, in
black chalk; perhaps for a ﬁgure with one arm raised.
C. Two groups of prostrate ﬁgures, ﬁve at the top, three at
the bottom, presumably from a single composition. Partly
truncated.
With the left edge as base
D. An outline sketch of a schematic head, in black chalk,
seen frontally.
Discussion
Recto
The three black chalk drawings – together with A on
the verso – are probably copied from lost anatomi-
cal sketches by Michelangelo, made in preparation for
the seated dukes. Another page, in the Ufﬁzi (Inv.
622E/B205/Corpus 223; pen and ink, 210×268 mm),
is largely drawn with left-handed strokes and is probably
also by Montelupo. The study of a leg at the left of the
Ufﬁzi page is very close indeed to those repeated here,
and the most reasonable explanation is that Montelupo
was trying his hand at copying a model by Michelangelo
in two different media, in pen on the Ufﬁzi page and in
black and red chalk on the present sheet. Michelangelo’s
original might have been made in any of the three media,
but pen or black chalk would be more likely for this series
of studies than red. It should be noted, however, that some
students of Michelangelo give Ufﬁzi 622E to the master
himself, an opinion that ﬁnds support in the fact that it
is drawn on the coarse paper that Michelangelo some-
times favoured in the mid-1520s. The compiler does not
agree with this attribution, but were it to prove correct,
it would probably entail accepting that the present studies
were made after that on the left of the Florentine sheet.
In the compiler’s view, therefore, the present drawings
and those in the Ufﬁzi are all by Montelupo and are near
facsimiles of lost drawings by Michelangelo. Although

CATALOGUE 78
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
333
Raffaello’s control of his medium is less secure than
Michelangelo’s, he has succeeded in the present draw-
ings in reproducing something of the shell-like whorls of
his master’s modelling of knees.
Verso
Although the sprawling ﬁgures might have been intended
to form part of a battle scene, of which another part is to
be found on Cat. 77, they are more probably related to a
project for a composition of the Brazen Serpent; there may
be a connection with two drawings that seem to represent
this subject by Antonio Mini, developing a theme from
Michelangelo, in Casa Buonarroti (37F/B170; red chalk,
203×248 mm, and 27A verso/B182/Corpus 567; black
and red chalk, 407×562 mm). Superimposed on the sec-
ond of these Michelangelo has begun drawing a plan of
a fortiﬁcation, one of several on which he was engaged
in 1529, which therefore provides a terminus ante quem for
this design. Very similar ﬁgures also occur on the verso of
a famous drawing in the British Museum (W57/Corpus
220; black chalk, 388×247 mm) the recto of which is
the Bearded Head in soft black chalk traditionally thought
to be a study for the head of Saint Bartholomew in the
Last Judgement, but convincingly reidentiﬁed by Wilde
as a study for the head of one of the two statues, of
Saints Cosmas and Damian, who ﬂank the Madonna on
the Magniﬁci Tomb, executed by, respectively, Giovanni
Montorsoli and Raffaello da Montelupo. The verso of
the British Museum sheet contains two studies of sprawl-
ing ﬁgures in black chalk, which are probably by Antonio
Mini, and which are very similar to, if not identical with,
those on the present verso. Superimposed upon these are
four studies that Wilde tentatively attributes to Michelan-
gelo. The ﬁrst of these, in black chalk, depicts a standing
ﬁgure from the front; two of the other three, all of which
are in red chalk, show a part of a torso and a raised right
arm. These last are reproduced, as Wilde again noted, in
B on the verso of the present sheet. This web of connec-
tions evokes once more the close relations that existed
among sheets used by Michelangelo, Antonio Mini, and
Raffaello da Montelupo in the late 1520s and early
1530s. D, indeed, might be after a diagrammatic sketch
by Mini.
The chalk drawing at the lower left, B, shows the
torso and raised right arm of a man who seems about

334
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUE 78
to strike downwards with his right arm. Even though
Michelangelo’s originals and other similar drawings now
lost might in principle have been made for the Last Judge-
ment – he would certainly have been thinking about the
fresco during his ﬁnal period in Florence, and Raffaello
could well have known drawings made in preparation
for it – it seems on balance more likely that they were
made for the Samson and the Two Philistines, on which
Michelangelo was working in 1528, a sculptural project
of unparalleled dynamism that would have fascinated
Raffaello.
History
Jonathan Richardson Senior (L.2184); Richard Cosway
(L.628); Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Wood-
burn.
References
Lawrence Inventory?, 1830, Case 3, Drawer 3 (Anatomi-
cal Studies of Arms, Legs. etc.). Woodburn, 1842, no. 53
(“A Pentimento of three legs-shewing the knee joints;
black chalk [sic].”). Robinson, 1870, no. 44 (Michel
Angelo: probably for one of the Medici Dukes; “it does
not seem quite clear whether these studies were drawn
from actual dissection or from the living model.”). Black,
1875, p. 214, no. 41. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 233. Berenson,
1903, I, pp. 255, 257, no. 1711 (Montelupo.). Thode,
1913, no. 427 (Not Michelangelo; agrees with Beren-
son.). Berenson, 1938, I, pp. 257, 259, no. 1711 (As
1903. Verso: “The prostrate ﬁgures may be copied from
a sketch for the Brazen Serpent by Michelangelo.”).
Wilde, 1953a, p. 94 (The torso and arm found in Mon-
telupo’s drawing, made at the beginning of his associ-
ation with Michelangelo in 1533, follow two sketches
by Michelangelo superimposed on pupil sketches, on
BM W57 verso/Corpus 220.). Parker, 1956, no. 408,
(“The shading is left-handed and the attribution to Mon-
telupo beyond question. . . . Similar studies of a leg bent
at the knee occur on. . . . Ufﬁzi Inv. 622E/Corpus 223.”).
Berenson, 1961, no. 1711 (As 1903/1938.). Barocchi,
1962, p. 257 (Montelupo.).

CATALOGUE 79
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
335
CATALOGUE 79
raffaello da montelupo (c. 1505–1566)
Recto:
Designs
for
a
Chimney-Piece
and
Other
Studies
Verso (now laid down): Figure Studies?
1846.132; R.54; P.II 411
Dimensions: 221×284 mm
Medium
Recto: Pen and ink.
Verso (laid down and not now visible): Black chalk.
Condition
Single-sided solid museum mount.
There is overall undulation, surface dirt, and dis-
colouration, with handling dirt visible at the edges and
there are various stains. There is an inﬁlled loss in the
centre. Some areas of the medium show signs of fading,
and there is darkening of some lines.
Inscriptions
Recto: lower left, Robinson’s numbering in graphite: 54.
Lower right, in pen and ink: Miche.
Description
Recto
A. The torso of a standing? woman, largely nude, seen
frontally.
B. A ﬁreplace, seen in elevation, with a concave central
section, surmounted by a cone?. Two large pedestal scrolls
support an entablature at either side, above which, at the
corners, are plinths for statuettes.
C. Drawn over D. A revised version of D, with a double
curved scroll replacing the pincer scroll of D, and the cor-
nice shown in proﬁle with a complex series of mouldings,
akin to those seen in E.
D. The right side of a ﬁreplace, seen in elevation with a
straight entablature, supported by a large pedestal scroll
surmounted by a small pincer scroll. The entablature car-
ries a double curved S-shaped scroll that runs between
a plinth placed centrally and a smaller rectangular plinth
carrying a sphere on a rod.
E. The arrangement of pedestal and pincer scrolls and the
entablature of D, seen in proﬁle, with the pincer scroll
decorated by leaf forms running left to right. A line rises
diagonally left from the entablature, presumably indicat-
ing a surmounting cone in proﬁle.
F. The arrangement of pedestal and pincer scrolls and the
entablature of D, seen in proﬁle. The leaf forms of the pin-
cer scroll now run left to right and additional curved chan-
nelling is added to the upper part of the pedestal scroll.

336
STUDIO DRAWINGS AND DRAWINGS OF UNDETERMINED STATUS
CATALOGUES 79–80
G. The arrangement of scrolls and consoles seen in pro-
ﬁle, on a slightly smaller scale and with modiﬁcations.
Verso
Parker refers to slight black chalk studies on the verso,
faint traces of which are visible on the old photograph
taken of this side before it was laid down.
Discussion
Even though these drawings are probably not derived
from speciﬁc projects by Michelangelo, they strongly
reﬂect his inﬂuence both in the architectural and the ﬁg-
ure design. The female torso shows awareness of the New
Sacristy Dawn, and the studies for a ﬁreplace obviously
employ motifs familiar from Michelangelo’s architectural
and decorative work of the 1520s.
Berenson suggested that the ﬁreplace might be con-
nected with designs by Raffaello da Montelupo for
the Castel Sant’Angelo, in which, according to Vasari,
“seguit`o assai la maniera di Michelagnolo, come ne fanno
fede i camini, le porte e le ﬁnestre che egli fece in detto
Castello.”
Two other sheets of drawings by Raffaello da Mon-
telupo contain studies that are probably connected with
this ﬁreplace:
1. London, British Museum, 1946-7-13-36; pen and ink,
204×256 mm. (This sheet also contains a ﬁgure study en-
suite with one on the recto of Cat. 76.)
2. Oslo,
Nasjionalgalleriet
B15252;
pen
and
ink,
231×207 mm.
History
Jean-Baptiste Wicar; Samuel Woodburn; Sir Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 76 (“Study architectural with
female head.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 10 (As 1842.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 54 (Michel Angelo; probably con-
temporary with work on the Medici Tombs.). Black,
1875, p. 214, no. 49. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 232. Berenson,
1903, I, pp. 255, 257, no. 1717 (Montelupo, perhaps for
a chimney-piece in Castel Sant’Angelo of which Vasari
makes special mention. B a sister to female ﬁgure on
Ufﬁzi 1231E.). Berenson, 1938, I, p. 257, no. 1717 (As
1903.) Parker, 1956, no. 411 (Montelupo.). Berenson,
1961, no. 1717 (As 1903, 1938.).
CATALOGUE 80
raffaello da montelupo (c. 1505–1566)
Recto: The Infant Hercules Strangling Serpents in His
Cradle
Verso: Various Calculations (on the secondary support)
1953.138; P.II 413
Dimensions: 192×225 mm
Watermark: Indecipherable.
Medium
Recto: Black chalk.
Verso: Pen and ink.
Condition
Single-sided solid museum mount with small cut-out on
verso to expose calculations on the secondary support.
There is overall patchy discolouration and a horizontal
stain across the centre of the sheet.
Numbering
In an old hand, in chalk, at lower right: No 2.
Discussion
Raffaello shows the infant Hercules in his cradle, stran-
gling the two serpents sent by Juno to kill him. His nurse
lies sleeping immediately to the right of the cradle, and a
startled female servant witnesses the scene from the right
edge.
The compiler can see no immediate relation to
Michelangelo, but that the subject was current in his cir-
cle in this period is indicated by a drawing in the Louvre,
which seems to be a work of c. 1530s by Antonio Mini
(Inv. 35296/J53; red chalk, 285×172 mm). The subject
was also treated in an engraving dated 1533 by Agostino
Veneziano (see The Illustrated Bartsch, vol. 26, no. 315).
This drawing may well have been made to prepare a
composition in rilievo schiaciato. There is some inﬂuence
from Rosso in the angularity of the forms and the ﬂat-
tened planes, and the handling of chalk is loosely remi-
niscent of some of Bandinelli’s drawings.
The provenance post-Daulby is that given by Parker.
The compiler has been unable to trace a Vernon sale in
1799.
History
Giorgio Vasari (traces of his mount); Jonathan Richardson
Senior (L.2184; his mount with his inscription, Pellegrino

CATALOGUES 80–81
COPIES OF SCULPTURES
337
Tibaldi; various shelf marks on verso); C. M. Cracherode
by 1763; John Barnard ( J. B. 1786-N◦1057); Daulby
(inscription on recto of mount: Daulby’s sale 47.3 and, on
verso 47/3); Vernon Sale, 16 August 1799, lot 47 (accord-
ing to Parker); Peart; Mrs. R. A. Ryall (Knight, Frank,
and Rutley, 2 October 1953, lot 5).
References
Jonathan Richardson Senior (Pellegrino Tibaldi, inscrip-
tion on mount.). Parker, 1956, no. 413 (Raffaello da
Montelupo.).
CATALOGUE 81
Recto: Hercules; A Candelabrum
Verso: The Gnudo della Paura and Other Studies
1846.259; R. Raphael, no. 151; P.II 624
Dimensions: 318 × 235 mm
Watermark: Briquet 5920 (Vienna? 1491/Florence 1494)
or 5922 (Augsburg 1506–10; Siena 1495–1520).
Medium
Pen and ink.
Condition
On a double-sided solid museum mount.
Recto: There is light overall surface dirt and staining
with a large stain to the left of the ﬁgure and handling dirt
in top right corner. There is a vertical tear at the top edge
near the left corner and an old repair in the bottom left
corner. There is a visible ﬂaw in the sheet, near the right
edge. There is show-through occurring on both recto and
verso.

338
COPIES OF SCULPTURES
CATALOGUE 81
Verso: There are abrasions that have resulted in losses
to the medium.
Description
Recto
The young Hercules, standing with his right leg crossed
over his left, supported under his right armpit by his club.
At the left, an elaborate ornament or trophy comprising
a triangular lion-footed base, with acanthus scrolls, sur-
mounted by a cushion on which is seated a putto holding
aloft a helmet.
Verso
Top line: a bearded male head, similar to that of Michelan-
gelo’s Moses.
Second line: a left leg seen from the front; the so-called
Gnudo della Paura seen from the rear; a left leg, slightly
bent, with the left hip and the lower section of the torso
more sketchily drawn, in left proﬁle.
Discussion
The main recto drawing reproduces a ﬁgure identiﬁed by
the compiler in 1977 as the Hercules carved by the young
Michelangelo, probably in 1493, following his recovery

CATALOGUE 81
COPIES OF SCULPTURES
339
from a depression caused by the death of his ﬁrst major
patron Lorenzo the Magniﬁcent in 1492. According to
Vasari and Condivi, this statue was not a commission
but was initiated by Michelangelo, although he may have
carved it intending to present or sell it to Piero de’Medici,
Lorenzo’s son. It was reclaimed by Michelangelo from
the Republican Government in 1495, which implies that
even though it may have been housed by the Medici, it
had not been purchased by the family (Cagliotti, 2000,
pp. 262–3). The statue was subsequently acquired by the
Strozzi and seems to have been in their possession by 1506
(see the comments by M. Hirst in Barocchi, Bramanti, and
Ristori, 1995, pp. 323–4). Exported to France in 1530, it
was sited at Fontainebleau. During the reign of Henri
IV, c. 1600, it was placed on a high pedestal in the Jardin
de l’Etang. It was shown in this position, with protective
bronze drapery added to its evidently vulnerable lower
half, by Israel Silvestre in 1649. The Hercules was lost to
sight after the demolition of the Jardin de l’Etang in the
early eighteenth century.
Various proposals for the appearance of Michelangelo’s
statue have been put forward, but that by the compiler is
alone compatible with the ﬁgure represented by Silvestre,
whose etching is the single piece of visual evidence indis-
putably connected with the known history of the statue.
If the compiler’s opinion is correct, then it is clear that the

340
COPIES OF SCULPTURES
CATALOGUE 81
statue was replicated at least ten times in bronze reduc-
tions and was copied, directly and indirectly, in numer-
ous drawings well before 1530. The ﬁrst precisely datable
visual reference to it is found in the Lamentation over the
Dead Christ, the predella of the altarpiece of Saints Cosmas
and Damian, executed by Fernando Llanos and Fernando
Ya˜nez between July and December 1506 for the Cathe-
dral of Valencia. In this panel, Michelangelo’s ﬁgure, seen
from the back, stands at the left edge. Llanos depicted the
ﬁgure again c. 1520, this time in frontal view, in his Adora-
tion of the Shepherds in the Museo Diocesano, Murcia. The
recto drawing was inventoried in 1830 as after Michelan-
gelo’s statue, perhaps on the basis of an annotation on a
now-lost mount, and this reference, ﬁrst published only
in 1997, provides further – and independent – support for
the compiler’s hypothesis. It also raises the possibility that
Ottley, the earliest recorded owner, acquired the sheet,
directly or indirectly, from a French source because only
a French owner is likely to have been able to make such
a linking with any conﬁdence.
It is unclear how the present sheet acquired the attri-
bution to Raphael that it already held in Lawrence’s
collection, and with whose name it has subsequently
been associated. Although it is not at all unlikely that
Raphael copied Michelangelo’s ﬁgure during his Floren-
tine sojourn, the drawings on this sheet bear little relation
to his pen style. The watermark suggests a date early in
the cinquecento, and the style seems plausibly Florentine
of the second or third decade. There are links with the
pen-work of Bandinelli – who also knew this ﬁgure and
employed it seen from a different angle in a drawing in
the Royal Collection at Windsor Castle (PW75; pen and
ink, 272 × 200 mm) – but the draughtsmanship of the
present drawing seems livelier than Bandinelli’s in contour
and less formulaic in hatching. Some similarity may also
be seen with Michelangelo’s own more energetic broad
pen style as practised in the period around 1520 – wit-
ness the doubled contours – but the work of the present
draughtsman is much less dynamic than that of Michelan-
gelo in modelling and line-work.
There is, of course, no good reason why a copy of
Michelangelo’s statue, or of one of the reductions of it,
should have been made by an artist in Michelangelo’s
orbit, but the motifs of some of the other drawings on
this sheet do suggest that the draughtsman had a close rela-
tion to the master. The ornament or trophy on the recto,
perhaps a ﬁre dog that incorporates a putto playing with
a helmet, is consonant with Michelangelo’s deployment
of putti, as in his so-called Allegory of Prudence, a drawing
now known only in copies (such as that by Raffaello da
Montelupo in the British Museum, W89; pen and ink,
261 × 359 mm) and with his decorative vocabulary, such
as the heavy candelabra sculpted for the altar and planned
for the attics of the ducal tombs in the New Sacristy.
The drawings on the verso suggest even more strongly
a close relation with Michelangelo. The left leg placed on
the left of the page, seen frontally, could well be copied
from a lost Michelangelo drawing; although no precise
model is known, it is obviously closely comparable to,
indeed might be thought to stand between, the sketchy
pen drawing of a left leg on BM W5 verso/Corpus
46 (pen and ink over black chalk, 315 × 278 mm), and
the more elaborate pen drawing of a left leg on the
verso of Berlin Inv. 15305/Corpus 55 (pen and ink,
343 × 525 mm). This leg is probably not another view of
the form studied on the right side of the sheet, the lower
part of a torso and left leg seen in left proﬁle. Similarly,
this study, although it might at ﬁrst sight be interpreted as
a proﬁle view, on a slightly larger scale, of the main ﬁgure
on this face of the sheet, seems to show the leg at a differ-
ent angle and with a different relation to the torso. It, too,
could well derive from a lost drawing by Michelangelo:
It is immediately reminiscent of a study such as that on
the left of the sheet of drawings for the Battle of Cascina
in the Albertina (BK123 recto/Corpus 53; pen and ink
corrected in black chalk, 266 × 194 mm).
At the upper left, the sketch of a bearded head is very
similar to that of Moses in Michelangelo’s famous statue,
underway from c. 1513: it may, indeed, be after a graphic or
plastic model for it. The Moses was not publicly displayed
until the mid-1540s, and until then it was known only to
a limited number of Michelangelo’s associates.
The main drawing on the verso, and the ﬁrst to be
executed, is a rear view of the so-called Gnudo della Paura,
among the most famous ﬁgures surviving from classical
antiquity, and one which, from the early quattrocento,
was frequently copied and alluded to both by painters
and sculptors, especially in Florence. It would come as
no surprise could it be shown that Michelangelo owned
a plaster cast of this ﬁgure.
On the basis of the fact that the Este collection in
Ferrara contained small bronzes of both the Hercules and
the Gnudo, Radcliffe suggested (in 1979–80) that the
drawing was made in that collection, but nothing about
the drawing style indicates Ferrara, and this hypothesis,
which Radcliffe subsequently withdrew, also leaves unex-
plained the other drawings on the sheet.
If the drawings were made by a Florentine artist close
to Michelangelo in the period c. 1515–25, who was he?
The most obvious candidate would be Michelangelo’s
pupil and assistant, Pietro Urbano, whom Vasari describes
as talented. While the present sheet does not bear any
close relation to drawings that might possibly be given
to him, such as two in Paris (Louvre, Inv. 694/J49 and

CATALOGUES 81–82
COPIES OF SCULPTURES
341
702/J47; both in pen and ink, respectively 329 × 166 mm,
401 × 157 mm), these themselves are no more than con-
jectural attributions, and the differences do not absolutely
rule out the possibility of Pietro’s authorship of the present
sheet. Alternatively, several of the sculptors who worked
with Michelangelo in the New Sacristy, such as Silvio
Cosini, are entirely unknown as pen draughtsmen. A can-
didate who occurs to the compiler as a possibility is Gio-
vanni Montorsoli, in that there is a certain resemblance
between the face of the Hercules and that of the seated
Apollo in his tomb of Jacopo Sannazaro, in Naples, Santa
Maria del Parto, carved in the mid-1530s. But only the
reappearance of further drawings by the same hand is
likely to throw light on this sheet’s authorship.
History
William Young Ottley; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445);
Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, Varia, Case 6, Drawer 1 [1830-
136] (“Four: . . . entombment by Raffaelle; the Statute
[sic] of Hercules at Fontainebleau.”). Woodburn, 1842,
Raphael, no. 39 (“Study of Hercules with His club – Pen
drawing with ﬁgures on the back. Size, 13 1
2 inches by
9 1
2 inches. From the Collection of W. Y. Ottley, Esq.”).
Robinson, 1870, Raphael, no. 151 (Ascribed to Raffaello.
“These studies are not by Raffaello nor do they seem to
have relation to any of his works.”). Parker, 1956, no. 624
(Hercules corresponds closely with a bronze statuette in
the Museo Estense, Modena; the verso ﬁgure from a
Marsyas Playing the Double Flute.). Radcliffe, 1979–80,
pp. 12–13 (Because statuettes of the Hercules and the Gnudo
della Paura are recorded in the Este Collection at Modena,
it is likely that the drawing was made there.). Radcliffe,
1994, p. 18 (“[T]he drawing is distinctly Florentine in
style and is more likely to have been made in Florence
[than Ferrara] where a version of the Gnudo della Paura was
in existence in the ﬁfteenth century.”). Joannides, 1996a,
pp. 31–2 (The drawing is Florentine in style, and all its
elements are Michelangelesque; the watermark suggests a
date c. 1520.). Joannides, 1997, p. 20 (Lawrence inventory
reference noted.).
CATALOGUE 82
Copy of the Julius Tomb
1963.22; Macandrew 355A
Dimensions: 487 × 388 mm
Watermark: Briquet no. 7111, Perugia 1544.
Medium
Pen, ink, and brown wash over some establishing ruled
lines in black chalk.
Condition
The sheet is undulating and generally uncomfortable.
There is a pressed-out central horizontal crease, other
minor corner creases, repaired holes, tears, and an inﬁll
with ingrained edge dirt. A worn pin hole with tear
and edge stains is visible, also some abrasion, accretions,
local stains, some with tide-marked edges, foxing, surface
dirt, and discolouration. The secondary support has some
abrasion and fading, with its verso discoloured. The pri-
mary support is hinged to the secondary support, which
is drummed by its four edges to the backboard. It is lifting
in the lower right corner.
Discussion
This drawing depicts the tomb of Julius II as it was set up
in San Pietro in Vincoli with its complement of statues in
1545 and as it remains. Its quality is not high: The ﬁgures
on the upper level are awkwardly drawn, although the
architecture, including the variety of grotesque carving,
is more sharply rendered. The accuracy with which the
architecture is depicted would suggest that the drawing
was made on site; the relative carelessness with which
the statues are drawn, especially those of the upper storey
(the heads that crown the herm-pilasters, for example, are
much prettiﬁed), would suggest the contrary, as would the
lack of underlying compass or stylus work. The copyist,
who may have been an architect rather than a sculptor,
was much concerned, like Michelangelo himself in his
modelli, to establish the structure’s varying depths of relief.
The watermark would suggest that the drawing was
made quite early, when there would have been widespread
interest in distributing knowledge of Michelangelo’s latest
and, as it transpired, ﬁnal public sculptural work.
The attribution to Antonio da Ponteassieve, the sculp-
tor subcontracted to carve the front face lower storey of
the tomb in July 1513, is without basis.
History
R. Bernal collection (inscription on mount); purchased
Eldon Fund, 1963.
References
Robertson, 1963, p. 43 (Cannot be assigned to a spe-
ciﬁc hand; once attributed to Antonio da Ponteassieve,
but no evidence to support this. The watermark sug-
gests that it was drawn at the time of the tomb’s comple-
tion in 1545. The draughtsmanship is of a higher standard
than that seen in the engraving published by Antonio

342
COPIES OF SCULPTURES
CATALOGUES 82–83
Salamanca.). De Tolnay, 1975, Corpus I, p. 65 (Anto-
nio da Ponteassieve?.). Macandrew, 1980, no. 355a (“[O]n
the evidence of the watermark, drawn at the time of the
tomb’s unveiling in 1545. . . . According to Tolnay. . . . [the
copyist] was not Antonio da Ponteassieve.”). Rosenberg,
2000, NZ19 (Italian mid-sixteenth century.).
CATALOGUE 83
Recto: Night
Verso: Grotesque Decorations from Room 36 in the
Golden House of Nero
WA.OA977; Blayney Brown, no. 1814
Dimensions: 170 × 262 mm, irregular
Medium
Recto: Black chalk, and brownish-yellow wash over black
chalk.
Verso: Pen and ink.
Condition
On a double-sided solid museum mount with bevel inlay
attached at verso.
Recto: There is overall surface dirt and various stains.
There is minor surface abrasion overall. There are vari-
ous black and brown accretions in the area between the
ﬁgure’s breasts. The sheet has a light vertical fold line left
of centre.
Verso: There is light overall discolouration and various
local stains and shiny accretions in the top left corner and
top centre. Also visible is an old tear repair at the top of
the fold.

CATALOGUE 83
COPIES OF SCULPTURES
343
Inscriptions
Recto:In pencil? upper centre: 23. In pen and ink at right
lower corner: Thornhill fecit and, at lower centre: sec d side.
Verso: In pencil (in the same hand?); From Mich Angelo
and, in pen and ink: M.
Discussion
Blayney Brown, cataloguing this sheet as by Sir James
Thornhill?, wrote that it “presents intriguing problems
of authorship, both because Thornhill himself was never
in Italy and because recto and verso seem neither to have
been drawn by the same hand nor at the same date; nor
is it at all certain that the inscription: Thornhill fecit is
by the artist himself. Nevertheless the old ascription of
the recto to Thornhill may be at least partly correct.
Thornhill could have studied the Night from one of the
small modelli in circulation in his day, or retouched another
artist’s sketch in emulation of the practice of Rubens
whose work he collected. . . . A third possibility is that
he worked from a complete drawing of the Night such
as the old and ﬁne copy in the Ashmolean in which the
right leg is also omitted (Cat. 84). Rubens’ study of Night
(Frits Lugt Collection in the Fondation Custodia, Paris
Inv. 5251; black chalk, pen and ink with body colour,
360 × 495 mm) was in England in Thornhill’s day and
provides tempting parallels in its use of yellowish wash in
the ﬁgure, but as it includes signiﬁcant variations from
the Michelangelo type, could not have served directly as
a model for Thornhill. . . . The study on the verso . . . is
surely not by Thornhill, but by a somewhat earlier hand,
probably Italian.”
The contrast between the two sides of the sheet is
such that it was reasonable for Blayney Brown to con-
sider recto and verso to be by different hands, but to
the compiler between drawings so diverse in type and
technique no legitimate comparison appears possible and
he would be inclined to think that both were made by
the same draughtsman, employing very different styles for
very different purposes. It seems to the compiler improb-
able that the recto – the only side for which Blayney
Brown tentatively retains Thornhill’s name – is by him,
and it is improbable that Thornhill would ever have
been connected with it, in the absence of the inscrip-
tion. It compares in no particular with any other draw-
ing by or ascribed to Thornhill known to the compiler,
and he would explain the inscription as a misattribu-
tion by some later owner, perhaps mistaking a sheet
with a provenance from Thornhill’s estate for one by
him.

344
COPIES OF SCULPTURES
CATALOGUE 83
The technique of the recto copy is certainly reminis-
cent of Rubens’ work, and it may well have been made
by one of the native draughtsmen studied by Rubens
when he was in Italy. To the compiler, it seems to be
by an Italian artist of the mid- to later sixteenth century.
The working up of the underlying black chalk draw-
ing both with ﬁne brushstrokes and broader washes is, in
the compiler’s view, unlikely to be by a different hand:
The absence of modelling in chalk on the body suggests
that the artist always intended to complete the ﬁgure in
another medium. Where the chalk is left uncovered, at
the lower right, it describes the form more fully than
elsewhere, and seems to have been planned to offset the
central part of the ﬁgure.
Blayney Brown notes that it could have been made
not from Michelangelo’s marble in the New Sacristy,
but from a reduction. Because accurate reductions of the
Times of Day from the New Sacristy were in circulation
from as early as the mid-1530s, it is generally difﬁcult and
often impossible to be sure whether a copy is direct or
indirect. The present sheet offers contrary indications. On
the recto, the sharp fall of light from the left that brings
out the statue’s volumes, suggests that the copy was made
in situ in the New Sacristy, from an elevated position.
On the other hand, the previously unidentiﬁed verso is
a copy of a detail from a now largely destroyed lunette
in room 36 of the Golden House of Nero. This does not
seem to have been engraved nor widely copied – the
single example reproduced by Dacos (1969, ﬁg. 58) is a
mid-sixteenth century drawing at Windsor (no. 9567) –
so although the present drawing could have been copied
from another drawing, it may well have been made in
situ. If so, then, rather than conclude that the artist made
studies in Florence and in Rome on the same sheet –
probably a sketchbook page – it would be more econom-
ical to propose that the recto was made after one of the
many reductions of the Night to be found in Rome or
that the verso was made after a drawing to be found in
Florence. Nevertheless, the possibility that the sheet trav-
elled between the two cities should not be ruled out:
Many artists spent long periods in both Florence and
Rome.
The style of the verso drawing is one associated with
Perino del Vaga and his immediate followers: Perino’s
shop in the 1540s was the leading producer of grotesque
frescoes. If the similarity is more than generic, it sug-
gests that the draughtsman moved in Perino’s orbit. A
drawing in the British Museum, catalogued by Pouncey
and Gere as by Perino del Vaga? (1962, no. 182; pen and
ink, brush and wash, 145 × 177 mm) but subsequently

CATALOGUES 83–84
COPIES OF SCULPTURES
345
transferred by them to his associate Luzio Romano, is
very similar in layout and is probably also after a lunette
in the Golden House. But the pen-line of that draw-
ing is lighter and more ﬂexible than that of the present
verso, which is heavier and more even, and is brought to
life by delicately applied wash, absent here. The verso
of Cat. 83 suggests a coarser but more forceful artist,
an impression borne out by the recto. This would link
well with a suggestion made by Nicholas Turner, that the
draughtsman might be one of the Bolognese artists active
in Rome (and perhaps Florence) around the mid-century,
among whom Tibaldi and Passerotti are the obvious can-
didates. The chalk work of the recto is indeed reminis-
cent of some of the more delicate drawings of the for-
mer, and the brushwork has links with the vigorous pen
style of the latter. In the present state of knowledge, it
seems to the compiler that the answer probably lies in this
area.
The layout of the verso suggests that the sheet has been
trimmed, but not by much.
History
Unrecorded.
References
Blayney Brown, 1982, no. 1814 (Sir James Thornhill?.).
CATALOGUE 84
ludovico ciardi, called il cigoli (1569–1613)?
Night
1846.99; R.47; P.II 354
Dimensions: 258 × 373 mm
Watermark: A Cardinal’s hat, very close to Briquet 3370,
Venice, Florence, 1560. Robinson Appendix no. 12.
Medium
Red chalk.
Condition
The sheet is lined; it is severely skinned, with minor
repaired tears, abrasion and ingrained dirt at the edges.
There are linear marks, possible ﬂattened creases, and
some foxing, local staining, and general discolouration.
The primary support is drummed by the four edges to
the backboard of the mount, so the verso is not visible.
Discussion
This accomplished and attractive drawing was made after
a modiﬁed and simpliﬁed reduction of Michelangelo’s

346
COPIES OF SCULPTURES
CATALOGUES 84–85
ﬁgure, not the original. It treats the ﬁgure as a relief. It
seems to be by a Florentine artist of the later cinque-
cento, perhaps, as the watermark would permit, work-
ing in the decade 1580–90. It was drawn broadly, with
the sharp lines that deﬁne the contours of the owl set
below the left knee and of the crescent moon in Night’s
head added after the main forms had been established.
There are some similarities with the simpliﬁed and dra-
matic chalk style of Boscoli, much inﬂuenced by Rosso
with its abruptly juxtaposed planes of light and shade,
but it lacks the airy openness that characterises Boscoli’s
drawings, and Dr. Julian Brooks (personal communica-
tion) does not believe it to be his.
To the compiler, a more likely candidate is Ludovico
Cardi, il Cigoli (1569–1613). A red chalk study (California,
C. Wright Collection in 1999) for, probably, the ﬁg-
ure of Christ in his Wedding Feast at Cana in the Pina-
coteca Nazionale in Bologna, published by M. Chappell
in Wright, 1999, no. 4, is very similar in handling to
the present drawing and shares with it applied outlin-
ing, employed to bring the contours into sharper focus.
Cigoli was certainly deeply interested in Michelangelo’s
work, even though his paintings and drawings rarely dis-
play its inﬂuence. Cigoli demonstrated his thoughts about
Michelangelo’s architecture, at least, in a drawing for the
fac¸ade of St. Peter’s in the Ufﬁzi 2636A, alongside which
he commented upon the purpose of the bell-towers.
Cigoli was a close friend of Galileo, himself an uncondi-
tional admirer of Michelangelo, and also became a friend
of Michelangelo the Younger.
It is tempting to hypothesise that this drawing is that
described by Woodburn in his letter to Lawrence of
1 February 1823 as a study for the Leda.
History
Parker gives the provenance as Casa Buonarroti?, but
this was no doubt caused by a confusion with no. 35 in
Woodburn’s exhibition of 1836 – a drawing in red chalk
with similar dimensions – which could not have been
included in the 1842 prospectus because it had been sold
to William II of Holland in 1839.
A possible candidate – but not a certain one – for 1836-
35 is a drawing that entered the British Museum with the
Collection of Henry Vaughan in 1900 (W102; red chalk,
340 × 262 mm) with a provenance recorded as from Casa
Buonarroti and Jean-Baptiste Wicar, although this was
doubted by Wilde. The dimensions are a little smaller
than those given by Woodburn, but the sheet might have
been trimmed between 1836 and 1900, which would also
explain the absence of Lawrence’s stamp. If this drawing,
ﬁrst attributed to Francesco Salviati by Professor Michael
Hirst and now generally accepted as his, was that sold
to William in 1839, then it would have been lot 120 in
William’s posthumous sale, at which it was purchased by
Brondgeest. It would presumably have been passed by him
to Woodburn and would have re-appeared in the latter’s
posthumous sale of 1860 as lot 142, acquired by Enson.
That the present drawing has no direct relation with
Michelangelo and was certainly made after his death
suggests either that the provenance did not include
Casa Buonarroti or, if it did, that it was one of those
drawings that entered the Buonarroti collection in the
early seventeenth century; the fact that Cigoli was a
friend of Michelangelo the Younger might well be
signiﬁcant.
Casa Buonarroti?; Jean-Baptiste Wicar; Samuel Wood-
burn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Wood-
burn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 12 (‘An elegant drawing . . . red
chalk. . . . Size 14 3
4 inches by 10 1
3 inches. From the Col-
lection of the Chev. Wicar.”). Robinson, 1870, no. 47
(Copy from Michel Angelo. “This masterly shaded draw-
ing was evidently made from the ﬁnished statue . . . not
long after the execution of the marble.”). Thode, 1913,
p. 210 (Copy.). Parker, 1956, no. 354 (Handling reminis-
cent of Rosso; of the ﬁrst half of the sixteenth century.
“Whether the differences in the left arm are merely due
to license on the part of the copyist or whether they have
some further signiﬁcance is a moot point.”). Rosenberg,
2000, NZ15 (Italian, ﬁrst half of the sixteenth century,
probably after a reduction.).
CATALOGUE 85
ludovico carbacci (1555–1619)?
Evening
1846.100; R.46; P.II 355
Dimensions: 386 × 248 mm, areas of loss, made up
Medium
Red and black chalk.
Condition
The support is lined. There is uneven pulp. The sheet has
major toned inﬁlls (particularly at the lower left edge and
just below the half-way line at the right edge), major tear
repairs, a minor surface scratch, a small hole, abrasions,

CATALOGUES 85–86
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
347
general uneven discolouration, and local staining in the
image area. The primary support is drummed by the four
edges to the backboard of the mount, so the verso is not
visible.
Discussion
This drawing was clearly made from a reduction of
Michelangelo’s ﬁgure, although it is equally clear that it
was a fairly large one, perhaps half the size of the orig-
inal. As all commentators have observed, the ﬁgure is
borne on a mobile chariot constructed of thin wooden
struts, too ﬂimsy to support anything heavier than a
plaster.
The drawing provides valuable insight into the employ-
ment of reductions of Michelangelo’s ﬁgures as studio
props. There is much evidence for this practise in the
worshop of Tintoretto, although none of his or his
pupils’ surviving drawings after Michelangelo indicates
how the plaster ﬁgures that they copied were supported;
the present drawing makes it easy to understand how a
copyist could obtain many different views of the Evening
with minimal effort.
In the compiler’s view, the drawing has close links
with the Carracci circle, more especially the work of
Ludovico than either of his cousins. The form of the
left hand and the simpliﬁcation of the ﬁngers is charac-
teristic. As established by Loisel, 2000, Ludovico seems
to have exploited the combination of black and red chalk
extensively in the early 1580s, following a stay in Florence
working in the circle of Federico Zuccaro – to whose
circle, incidentally, Cat. 85 is attributed by Rosenberg –
and the drawing might have been made by him around
that time. The Carracci were, of course, deeply inter-
ested in Venetian art and would have been well aware of
the Venetian route to Michelangelo through Tintoretto’s
obsessive copying of reductions of the New Sacristy
ﬁgures.
Ludovico Carracci, like his cousins, rejected the forced
Michelangelism prevalent in Bologna in the circle of
Passerotti, but, although critical of Michelangelo’s work,
the Carracci certainly were well aware of it and made
selective use of aspects of it, even during the 1580s, notably
in their fresco schemes in Palazzo Poggi and Palazzo
Magnani.
History
Sir Joshua Reynolds (L.2364); Sir Thomas Lawrence
(L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 87 (“Figure of a man-study from
life [sic] . . . sitting on a trestle.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 6
(As 1842.). Robinson, 1870, no. 46 (Copy from Michel
Angelo, “most likely made from a plaster cast.”). Thode,
1913, p. 210 (Copy.). Parker, 1956, no. 355 (Latter part
of sixteenth century, copied from a plaster cast, a stu-
dio property placed on a wheeled support.). Joannides,
1996-8, p. 24 (Carracci school.). Rosenberg, 2000, NZ21
(Italian, second half of the sixteenth century “aus dem
Umkreis Federico Zuccaros stammen d¨urfte.”).
CATALOGUE 86
The Whole Ceiling
1846.101; R.36; P.II 356
Watermark: an indecipherable watermark under the
Flood.
Dimensions: 536 × 265 mm

348
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
CATALOGUE 86

CATALOGUE 86
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
349
Medium
Pen and ink with wash and oxidised white body colour
over compass and stylus work.
Condition
The sheet is lined; it is uncomfortably undulating. All cor-
ners have small toned inﬁlled and/or in-drawn diagonal
losses. There are some repaired edge losses and tears, abra-
sions, some ﬁbrous accretions, a shiny ﬂat pressed “waxy”
accretion, and widespread local staining and uneven dis-
colouration. The primary support is drummed by the
four edges to the backboard of the mount, so the verso is
not visible.
Discussion
This incomplete copy after Michelangelo’s vault fresco
in the Sistine Chapel, like a very similar if much larger
one executed on four separate sheets at Windsor Castle
(Royal Collection, PW 465–468; pen and ink and brush
and wash, respectively, 410 × 563 mm, 420 × 556 mm,
263 × 372 mm, 268 × 372 mm), includes all the main
individual ﬁgures (the Windsor drawing omits Ezechiel)
but only three of the histories (The Flood, The Creation
of Eve, and The Spirit Moving Across the Waters). These
copies were not made directly after the frescoes. All the
Prophets and Sibyls seem to derive from the engravings
ﬁrst issued c. 1550, by Adamo Scultori or, in some cases,
from the drawings that presumably prepared them. To
the Prophets and Sibyls have been added the ﬁgures of
ancestors from the same series of engravings. There are
frequent errors in the subsidiary ﬁgures, in particular the
telamon putti, which suggests that they were added from
memory or were merely invented. The settings of the ﬁg-
ures are also greatly simpliﬁed. In the present drawing, the
Delphica is erroneously labelled Tiburtina, as in Adamo’s
engraving.
These two survey drawings are, in turn, closely related
to four series of copies after the separate ﬁgures, or, in
some cases, sections extracted from the narrative fres-
coes, of Michelangelo’s ceiling. One, comprising four-
teen drawings, is also in the Royal Collection at Windsor
Castle; the second and third series are in the Louvre,
comprising, respectively, nine drawings (Inv. 754–762/
J231 etc.; pen and ink and brown wash on yellow
washed paper, 278–280 × 203–205 mm), and thirty-six
of the thirty-eight drawings in an album once owned
by Anne-Marie de Bruyn (RF 6917/J191 etc.; pen and
ink and brown wash on brown washed paper, page size
generally 420 × 275 mm, with varying image sizes),
while a fourth, comprising sixty-eight items, is in the
Teyler Museum, Haarlem (Inv. N1∗–N68∗/VT71). The
Windsor series includes twelve of the ignudi (it may origi-
nally have included the full twenty; PW 469–480; pen and
ink and brown wash partly over black chalk, the dimen-
sions varying between 241–253 × 162–170 mm) and two
copies on a slightly larger scale after parts of the Flood (PW
481–482; pen and ink and brown wash partly over black
chalk, respectively, 257 × 197 mm and 252 × 182 mm).
These drawings show some signs of preparatory work, and
all the ignudi are squared. The Windsor ignudi were taken
by Wilde to be preparations for the series of engravings
after the ceiling issued by Adamo Ghisi (Adamo Scultori),
and he adduced in support of this view the fact that one
of them (PW 474) was drawn over a ﬁgure of Hercules,
which corresponds with the engraving after a design by
Giulio Romano also generally attributed to Adamo (The
Illustrated Bartsch 31, no. 15(167) [XV, 422]). However, it
seems to the compiler that the Windsor ignudi were made
after the engravings, or – in the case of the two sections
of the Flood, not known in engraved form – after draw-
ings made in the same atelier, and it may be that they and
the ﬁrst Louvre series (Inv. 754–762/J231 etc.), which
includes solely Prophets and Sibyls originally formed a
single sequence. Such a view would be reinforced by the
de Bruyn Album (RF 6917/J191, etc.), which seems to
depend on both the Louvre and the Windsor drawings.
It is worth remarking that the only two drawings in this
album not after Michelangelo are copies of engravings by
Adamo Ghisi after compositions by Giulio Romano.
In any case it seems quite clear that the present gen-
eral copy, and that in Windsor, plus the various sets of
details, were produced in close proximity, perhaps by the
same hand, in a mid-sixteenth-century Italian workshop,
which was probably that of Adamo himself. That these
drawings could be those by Leonardo Cungi referred to
by Vasari, which were apparently owned by Perino del
Vaga and were sold by his heirs after his death in 1547,
can be ruled out. Cungi’s graphic manner is completely
different; such close stylistic links with Giulio Romano
would be inappropriate for a Tuscan artist, and the water-
marks found in the de Bruyn album suggest a date after
1550.
D. Cordellier (personal communication) has suggested
that the draughtsman responsible for these drawings might
be French. Giorgio Ghisi worked in France and might
well have brought French assistants with him when he
returned to Italy; but if the draughtsman were French,
he was certainly working in Italy since the tight web of
connections with the work of Adamo Scultori would be
improbable for an artist outside Adamo’s studio.
The third (or fourth) set, the sixty-eight copies after
individual ﬁgures from the Sistine ceiling in the Teyler

350
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
CATALOGUES 86–87
Museum, Haarlem (Inv. N1∗–N68∗/VT 71), was also
once more extensive; some of the mounts carry a second
sequence of numbers, of which the highest is 73. This set,
which contains no copies after the histories, comprises
eighteen ignudi, nine Prophets and Sibyls, twenty-three
Ancestors from the spandrels (including one in duplicate),
six Ancestors from the triangles, and twelve of the bronze
nudes (including one in duplicate). The Haarlem draw-
ings are similar in technique to those in the other sets,
but come closest to the relatively less dense renderings in
the de Bruyn Album. Several of them are unﬁnished and
many display a black chalk underdrawing that differs dis-
tinctly from the ﬁnal image. They are undoubtedly from
the same workshop if not from the same hand as the other
sets, but they are on a smaller scale than those – measuring
between 110 and 115 mm in height and between 90 and
116 mm in width – and the ﬁgures are all rendered at a
more or less constant size. The workshop responsible for
these sets evidently produced series in different categories,
on different scales, and subdivided differently, presumably
in response to the demands of individual clients.
These sets of drawings provide an interesting commen-
tary on the difﬁculties – both of access to the chapel and
of the fresco’s position – that copying in the Sistine posed
to artists and of the importance of engravings in dissemi-
nating knowledge of Michelangelo’s ﬁgures. Drawings of
this type, insouciant in their disregard of accuracy, may
have been intended for sale to tourists, offering an appar-
ently – but deceptively – more immediate impression of
the Sistine vault than the engravings from which they
derive.
In all the instances in which she is represented in these
sets of drawings, Delphica is identiﬁed as Tiburtina.
History
Jonathan Richardson Senior (L.2184); William Young
Ottley; Samuel Woodburn; Sir Thomas Lawrence (no
stamp); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, Case 12, Drawer 4, Portfolio
H [1830-147] (“One an Elaborate Drawing of the whole
of the Ceiling of the Sistine Chapel from M. Angelo.”).
Woodburn, 1842, no. 52 (“By Julio Clovio.”). Woodburn,
1846, no. 3 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1862, p. 3, pl. 5 (By
Giulio Clovio.). Fisher, 1865, p. 22, II, pl. 5 (As 1862.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 36 (Copy from Michel Angelo.
Nothing “to render the attribution to Clovio other
than conjectural. It may with more likelihood be sup-
posed to be the work of some eminent engraver of
the ﬁrst half of the sixteenth century.” Includes lunette
compositions later destroyed by the Last Judgement.).
Fisher, 1872, II, p. 20, pl. 5 (As 1862.). Springer, 1878,
p. 115 (Copy made before the Last Judgement was painted.).
Fisher, 1879, XXVII/ 29 (“Probably the work of a con-
temporary student.”). Springer, 1883, I, 159 (As 1878.).
Justi, 1900, p. 168 (Ascribed to Clovio; shows destroyed
lunettes.). Steinmann, II, 1905, p. 245 (Copy.). Thode,
1913, p. 210 (Copy.). Parker, 1956, no. 356 (Presumably
early, since it shows the lunettes destroyed to make place
for the Last Judgement.). Nesselrath, 1990, no. 31 (Must
antedate beginning of Last Judgement; numerous differ-
ences between drawing and fresco: The small putto seen
from the rear between the end lunettes is unlike Ottley’s
engraving that shows the stemma of Sixtus IV; position
of Judith and Holofernes and David and Goliath inverted.
A nonexistent putto included under Zaccarias; Delphica
labelled Tiburtina.).
CATALOGUE 87
Recto: The Head of the Libica and a Study of a Right
Leg
Verso: Nude Torso of a Putto
1846.102; R.68; P.II 357
Dimensions: 219 × 150 mm
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
There is a pressed-out vertical central fold and numer-
ous smaller creases and possible fractures. The sheet has
a narrow margin of uneven skinning around all edges,
major abrasions in the image, local staining, and uneven
discolouration.
Inscription
Recto: In ink at the lower right edge: KM?.
Discussion
Although obviously derived from the bust of Libica, the
drawing on the recto of the present sheet does not show
her head covering and is not a direct copy of Michelan-
gelo’s ﬁgure. It might, in principle, have been made from
a preparatory drawing by Michelangelo, but it is more
likely that it is an adaptation by an independent artist.
The leg study seems, in the bulk and massiveness of
the forms, to reﬂect experience of the Last Judgement

CATALOGUE 87
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
351
or, more probably, the Pauline Chapel frescoes, but
any connection is one of style rather than motif: The
compiler cannot ﬁnd these forms in any of the three
frescoes in question or among the surviving prepara-
tory drawings for them. Nevertheless, such links, if this
observation is correct, would suggest a dating within
the period 1550–60. The hatching at the rear of the
thigh is coarse in its application, and falls below the
standard of draughtsmanship seen elsewhere in this
drawing.
The verso drawing, made with the sheet orientated
horizontally, has been drastically trimmed at top and bot-
tom to frame the recto image, losing both the head and the
feet of this ﬁgure. It depicts a lightly winged nude infant,
holding out a shield with his right arm in an attitude of
defence. The ﬁgure may have found a place within some
allegorical representation of a conﬂict between chaste and
sensual love.
The drawings on this sheet are of quite high quality,
densely and solidly modelled. They are probably by a
Florentine artist in the circle of Bronzino, whose work
after 1550 was heavily inﬂuenced by Michelangelo’s
Pauline Chapel phase. The compiler is unable to propose
a speciﬁc name with any conﬁdence, although he would
reject that of Alessandro Allori, in many ways the most
obvious candidate; he is, however, attracted by Dr. Julian
Brooks’ suggestion (personal communication) of Maso da
San Friano.

352
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
CATALOGUES 87–88
History
Sir Peter Lely (L.2092); Jonathan Richardson Senior
(L.2184); Richard Houlditch (L.2214); Sir Joshua Rey-
nolds (L.2364) (the stamps both of Lely and Reynolds are
now partially lost; it would seem that both were originally
applied overlapping a mount, now removed); Sir Thomas
Lawrence (no stamp); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3, [1830-59] (“A Female Head in proﬁle and
an Anatomical.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 68 (“Study of
a female head – and an anatomical study of a leg.”).
Fisher, 1862, p. 4, pl. 17 (Recto and verso: as Wood-
burn, 1842.). Fisher, 1865, II, p. 24; II, pl. 18 (As 1862.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 68 (Both sides doubtful as Michelan-
gelo. Recto head reminiscent of the woman in the fore-
ground of Raphael’s Transﬁguration.). Fisher, 1872, II,
p. 22, pl. 18 (As 1862.). Black, 1875, p. 215, no. 58
(Ascribed to Michelangelo.). Gotti, 1875, II, p. 239.
Fisher, 1879, XLIV/46 (Recto and verso: cites Robinson
of resemblance to Raphael.). Panofsky, 1927a, p. 57
(Not Michelangelo.). Parker, 1956, no. 357 (“Robinson is
mistaken in connecting the head with that of the kneeling
woman in Raphael’s Transﬁguration. In fact it follows the
Libyan Sibyl closely, though it does not include the front-
let covering the forehead. . . . The hand seems to be that
of some fairly proﬁcient mid-sixteenth century artist.”).
CATALOGUE 88
Adam from the Creation of Eve
1846.103; R.34; P. II 358
Dimensions: 134 × 236 mm, the lower right corner made
up.
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
The sheet is undulating severely. There is a major cor-
ner inﬁll/repair, other minor repairs, minor but extensive
abrasion, widespread foxing, and general uneven dis-
colouration. The primary support is drummed by the

CATALOGUES 88–89
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
353
four edges to the backboard of the mount, so the verso is
not visible.
Numbering
In pen and ink at the lower left corner, an old number 48.
Discussion
A copy of good quality, despite the slight awkwardness of
the foreshortening, datable around the middle of the six-
teenth century, but probably not made directly from the
fresco. No author has been suggested, and the drawing
does not seem to be by any of the identiﬁed copyists of
Michelangelo. However, Francesco Salviati made a num-
ber of precise red chalk copies after individual ﬁgures and
details from Michelangelo’s ceiling during the 1530s (and
later), some of which were themselves copied by other
artists, and the present drawing might prove to have been
copied from a lost drawing by Salviati. It does parallel
his habit of juxtaposing areas of high ﬁnish with areas of
simple outline. Vasari records that he and Salviati copied
one another’s copies – although the present drawing is
not likely to be by Vasari – and no doubt this practice was
widespread among young artists.
History
Sir Joshua Reynolds (L.2364); Sir Thomas Lawrence
(L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 23 (“Study for the Adam in
the Creation of Eve . . . careful drawing in black chalk.”).
Woodburn, 1846, no. 31 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1852, p. 4,
pl. 17 (As Woodburn, 1842.). Fisher, 1865, I, p. 17, pl. 17
(As 1852.). Robinson, 1870, no. 34 (Copy from Michel
Angelo, probably executed soon after the fresco’s comple-
tion.). Fisher, 1872, II, p. 22, pl. 17 (As 1852.). Gotti, 1875,
II, p. 221(“Studio per l’Adamo, nel fresco che rappresenta
la creazione di Eva. Un bel disegno.” Mistakenly located
in the collection of Frederick Locker in confusion with
the study for Adam now in the British Museum, W11.).
Fisher, 1879, XXV/27 (“Copy from the fresco.”). Thode,
1913, p. 210 (Copy.). Parker, 1956, no. 358 (Mid-sixteenth
century.).
CATALOGUE 89
The Prophet Ionas
1846.104; R.35; P.II 359
Dimensions: 402 × 281 mm
Medium
Black chalk. Later framing line in pen and ink.

354
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
CATALOGUE 89
Condition
The sheet is undulating severely. There are some inher-
ent diagonal wrinkles and some handling creases. There
are minor inﬁlled losses, a small edge nick with a
ﬂap of paper still attached, repaired edge tears with
ingrained dirt, abrasion, local staining, and smudging
of the medium. The sheet has some foxing and exten-
sive uneven discolouration with local staining in upper
corners. The primary support is drummed by the four
edges to the backboard of the mount, so the verso is not
visible.
Inscription
To the lower right in pen and ink: M.o Angelo fe. At the
base of the sheet in pen and ink, the letter D.
Discussion
The drawing contains the colour indications R(osso),
B(ianco), V(erde) in black chalk, perhaps by the artist.
It is closely linked with, perhaps even copied from, a
copy of the Ionas in the Louvre (Inv. 741/J264; black
chalk, 398 × 279 mm, without colour indications), which
seems to the compiler of slightly higher quality. The Lou-
vre drawing has been given both to Daniele da Volterra
and Giulio Clovio. In the compiler’s view, the attribu-
tion to Daniele is closer to the mark, and it may well be
by one of the artists working with him in the late 1540s
and in the 1550s, who included some of the most talented
painters of the younger generation, such as Marco Pino
and Pellegrino Tibaldi as well as the Spaniards Navarette
and Gaspar Becerra; drawings by Becerra in particular

CATALOGUES 89–90
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
355
have sometimes been attributed to Daniele himself. A
third copy of the Ionas, which may perhaps depend from
the present version, is in the Ufﬁzi (15092F; black chalk,
329 × 272 mm) as Daniele da Volterra, but bearing the
annotation Clovio? by Ph. Costamagna.
The letter D at the bottom, in pen and ink, suggests that
the present sheet was the fourth in a series of copies after
Michelangelo’s Prophets and Sibyls, but no companion
drawings are known to the compiler.
Comparable colour indications in pen (R,B,V) are
found upon a copy by an unidentiﬁed draughtsman after
the ﬁgures in the Ioram-Iosaphat lunette in Liverpool
(Walker Art Gallery, 1995, 204/Brooke, 1998–9, pp. 183–
4; black chalk, 266 × 425 mm); more elaborate ones, also
in pen, are on a drawing in the Ufﬁzi which, although fre-
quently doubted, may be an autograph study by Daniele
da Volterra for the upper part of his Assumption of the
Virgin in the Della Rovere Chapel in the Trinit`a dei Monti
(203S; black chalk, 269×285 mm).
History
Jeremiah Harman; Samuel Woodburn (Parker’s inclusion
of Sir Thomas Lawrence, whose blind stamp is not to be
found on the sheet, must be an error).
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 59 (“A highly ﬁnished study of the
Jonah for the Fresco in the Sistine Chapel.”). Woodburn,
1846, no. 17 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1852, p. 4, pl. 19 (As
Woodburn, 1842.). Fisher, 1865, I, p. 17, pl. 19 (As 1852.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 35 (Copy from Michel Angelo. It
“seems to reveal the hand of Giulio Clovio.”). Fisher,
1872, I, p. 15, pl. 19 (As 1852.). Fisher, 1879, XXVI/28
(“[A]n old and ﬁnished drawing from the fresco.”). Gotti,
1875, II, p. 221. Thode, 1913, p. 210 (Copy.). Parker, 1956,
no. 359 (“[C]learly old and betrays some skill” but nothing
to warrant attribution to Clovio. Another copy in the
Louvre Inv. 741/J264. Colour indications are presumably
B for bianco, V for verde, R for rosso.). Joannides, 2003a,
p. 327 (Discussion of Louvre Inv. 741/J264.).
CATALOGUE 90
The Woman at the Right of the Iesse-David-Salmon
Lunette
1846.105; R.26; P.II 360
Dimensions: 260×188 mm
Medium
Red chalk.
Condition
There are wrinkles in the lower right corner and what
appears to be a fracture. There are several areas of abra-
sion, a major area of skinning, accretions, local staining,
widespread foxing, and general uneven discolouration.
There is mould damage along the left edge. The primary
support is drummed by the four edges to the backboard
of the mount, so the verso is not visible.
Inscription
Lower left corner, in pen: michal agnolo preceded by muti-
lated and illegible letters.
Discussion
The provenance from Casa Buonarroti, if correct, opens
the possibility that this drawing might be by an artist who
worked with Michelangelo or one acquainted with him.
The changes of position of the ﬁngers of the right hand
might suggest that the present drawing was made not after
the fresco but after a lost study for it by Michelangelo;
alternatively it might arouse suspicions that this copy was
made to deceive. Neither inference is likely to be correct,
and it seems more probable that this minor pentimento
represents no more than the copyist’s self-correction.
The style suggests an early date, and there are some fea-
tures in common with works by Rosso, as indicated in the
subtle analysis of Nesselrath. However, the drawing lacks
the sharpness and intensity characteristic of Rosso and
the employment of loose, somewhat lack-lustre hatching,
seems alien to him. It may be by the same hand as a copy
of a section from the pendentive of the Brazen Serpent in
Paris (Louvre Inv. 769/J218; red chalk, 257×253 mm).
History
Casa Buonarroti? (the nature of the inscription rather sug-
gests provenance from a group of drawings that seems
to have been in the Cicciaporci Collection); Filippo
Cicciaporci?; Bartolommeo Cavaceppi?; Jean-Baptiste
Wicar;
Samuel
Woodburn;
Sir
Thomas
Lawrence
(L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1836b, no. 97 (“[E]vidently from nature;
treated in a grand style.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 7 (As
1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 14 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1862,
p. 4, pl. 15 (“[A] design for one of the Sibyls in the
Sistine Chapel. 1509.”). Fisher, 1865, I, p. 23, pl. 15 (As
1862.). Robinson, 1870, no. 26 (Michel Angelo; “in all

356
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
CATALOGUES 90–91
probability made from nature.” Mistakenly said to be
engraved by Ottley, in confusion with Cat. 91.). Fisher,
1872, I, p. 15, pl. 15 (As 1862.). Black, 1875, p. 214, no. 26.
Gotti, 1875, II, p. 222. Fisher, 1879, XVIII/21 (“Study
for one of the ﬁgures in the lunettes.”). Thode, 1913,
p. 210 (Copy.). Parker, 1956, no. 360 (“Correspondence
with the fresco is fairly close, though not in all details.”).
Nesselrath, 1990, no. 27 (“L’autore . . . cerca di imitare
la grandiosa maniera pittorica che Michelangelo dispiega
nelle sue lunette, tratteggiando ampie superﬁcie con
diversa intensit`a a seconda delle zone di ombra e lasciando
emergere semplicamente il fondo bianco del foglio per
rendere quelle illuminate; come nell’affresco, egli non
distribuisce le luci, ma piuttosto le ombre. . . . Questo
modo di disegnare, manieristico, che `e stato utilizzato
molto spesso dallo stesso Michelangelo, si svilupp`o
sotto il suo inﬂusso sopratutto nella cerchia di Rosso
Fiorentino e di Polidoro, e probabilmente il foglio . . . `e
nato in questo ambiente.”).
CATALOGUE 91
The Woman and Child at the Left-Hand Side of the
Eleazar-Mathan Lunette
1846.106; R.28; P.II 361
Dimensions: 170×133 mm
Medium
Black chalk with touches of white body colour.
Condition
The sheet is lined. There is a pressed-out vertical fold with
associated creasing, major toned corner inﬁlls, certainly
carried out before the sheet was acquired by Lawrence,
and a minor inﬁlled hole. There is local staining and fox-
ing and widespread uneven discolouration.

CATALOGUE 91
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
357
Discussion
This drawing was much admired by earlier critics and
was among those drawings from his collection that Ottley
chose to reproduce in his Italian School of Design. However,
all later scholars have concluded, rightly in the compiler’s
view, that it is not an original but simply a good copy
of one of the earliest of the lunettes to be painted in the
Sistine Chapel.
The drawing is attractive and appealing, accurate but
not slavish in its representation, and lively in its handling.
The forms are blocked in broadly and conﬁdently, and
it would seem to be by an accomplished draughtsman.
It is likely that it was made before 1520; it may be by a
Florentine artist inﬂuenced by Fra Bartolommeo, but a
Venetian hand is also a possibility.
Nothing is known of the drawing’s provenance prior
to Ottley, but although it bears no stamps, it may have
come from an English collection. This group was popular
with portraitists of Reynolds’ generation, employed by
Reynolds himself and by Tilly Kettle.
Printed Copy
Published by Ottley, 1808–1823, etched by F. C. Lewis
dated 1 May 1812, facing p. 31, 182×145 mm.
History
William Young Ottley, (his sale, 6 June 1814, etc., lot 829,
“One – a woman with a child on her knee – the original
design for one of the most celebrated groups in the vault
of the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican – black chalk on tinted
paper, heightened. Engraved in Mr Ottley’s Italian School
of Design.” £12.12.0); Sir Thomas Lawrence (no stamp);
Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley, 1808–1823, pp. 31–2 (Michelangelo; “This ad-
mirable group forms one of the series . . . intended to
represent the genealogy of Christ, and was, like many
of the others, evidently taken hastily from nature dur-
ing the artist’s rambles in the streets of Rome.” Lewis’s
etching included.). Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, etc., lot 829

358
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
CATALOGUES 91–92
(“One – a woman with a child on her knee – the orig-
inal design for one of the most celebrated groups in the
vault of the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican – black chalk
on tinted paper, heightened. Engraved in Mr Ottley’s
Italian School of Design.”). Lawrence Inventory, 1830,
M. A. Buonaroti Case 3, Drawer 3 [1830-57] (“A Woman
playing with a Child on her Knees, Black chalk.”). Wood-
burn, 1836b, no. 68 (“[E]vidently from life, and which
he has made use of in the grand work of the Sistine
Chapel.”). The Literary Gazette, July 1836 (“[A]mong
the many productions in this gallery which rivetted our
attention.”). The Athenaeum, 16 July 1836 (“[F]or a com-
partment of the Sistine; so lofty that its merits cannot be
understood without this drawing; Cunego mistook dust
for the embellishment of a beard, so graved the woman
as an old man!”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 34 (As 1836.).
Woodburn, 1846, no. 43 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1862, p. 3
(As Woodburn, 1842.). Fisher, 1865, p. 21 (As 1862.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 28 (Michel Angelo; “more altered
in execution than . . . [Cats. 17 and 89] . . . in the fresco
it is accompanied by a second seated ﬁgure in the back-
ground.”). Fisher, 1872, II, p. 19 (As 1862.). Black, 1875,
p. 214, no. 26. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 221. Fisher, 1879,
XX/p. 8 (Slight changes of phrasing.). Thode, 1913, p. 210
(Copy.). Parker, 1956, no. 361 (“[C]ertainly contemporary
and of some skill. . . . Correspondence is fairly close, but it
omits the head to the left of the woman’s proﬁle, modiﬁes
her features . . . and emphasizes the outline curve of her
back.”). Nesselrath, 1990, no. 28 (The fresco is one of the
most detailed of the series, but the author of this design
“schizzato con mano sicura . . . `e interressato prevalenta-
mente all posa della ﬁgura che ha isolato.”).
CATALOGUE 92
The Ignudo Left Above Esaias
1976.254; Macandrew A23
Dimensions: 295×202 mm
Medium
Brush and brown wash heightened with white, on mauv-
ish prepared paper.
Condition
The sheet has severe tears in the bottom left corner and
one at the top right corner. There are surface abrasions
overall, especially to the crests of cockling. There are stains
in the bottom left and right corners and near the tear. The
lead white heightening has begun to tarnish.
Inscription
Partly cancelled, lower right: Rymsdyck’s Museum
Discussion
A poor copy of this ignudo, probably made after an
engraving.
History
Rijmsdijk (L.2167), inscription Rymsdyck on verso;
‘C’ (L.474), identiﬁed conjecturally by Brooke, 1998–
9, as the stamp of the Comte de Caylus, a view
contested by Turner, 2001, who suggests that it may
rather be a JG in ligature and that the collector was
either an Englishman or resident in England; uniden-
tiﬁed eighteenth- or nineteenth-century sale, Lot 865,
in red ink. Finch bequest to the Taylorian Institu-
tion in 1830, transferred to the Ashmolean Museum in
1976.
References
Macandrew, 1980, A23 (Old but clumsy and faded.).

359

360
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
CATALOGUES 93–94
CATALOGUE 93
The Last Judgement
The Entire Composition
1846.107; R.65; P.II 362
Dimensions: 553×407 mm
Medium
Pen and ink with brown wash with a small area lower
centre in grey ink and wash. Some reinforcement of con-
tours.
Condition
The sheet has been previously restored; it is lined, and
the edge repairs at the lower and upper right are toned
additions. There is a horizontal central fold with what
appears to be a repaired tear with inﬁlled losses. There
are numerous toned inﬁlls and repairs, and many edge
losses are visible; there are also some horizontal cuts, a
number of small holes (several from ink burn-through),
and many abrasions. There is a local stain and widespread
discolouration.
Discussion
Recorded in the Lawrence inventory together with
another virtually identical copy, probably by the same
hand, now in the Mus´ee Cond´e, Chantilly (Lanfranc de
Panthou, 1995, no. 39; pen and ink over lead point, with
wash and white body colour, 595×435 mm). Like that
drawing, this is from the studio responsible for copies of
the Sistine ceiling in Windsor, the Louvre, and Haarlem
(see Cat. 86). A characteristic of these series of drawings
is that, without exception, they were not made directly
from Michelangelo’s works but, in most cases, from the
engravings of Adamo Scultori. The present copy and its
companion seem most likely to depend from the engrav-
ing of the Last Judgement by Martino Rota, published in
1569, in which “Charon” is shifted to the left and placed
directly below Christ. The condition of the present sheet
suggests that it may have been used in a studio as a model
for other copies.
The compiler can see no relation with the work of
Federico Zuccaro.
If the provenance from Casa Buonarroti is correct,
the drawing must be assumed to be a late entry to the
Buonarroti Collection.
History
Casa Buonarroti?; William Young Ottley; Sir Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3, no. 20 [1830-23i] (“A magniﬁcent draw-
ing highly ﬁnished of the Last Judgement executed
in bistre, a most capital work.”). Woodburn, 1842,
no. 50 (“The whole of the composition of the Last
Judgement. . . . From the Collections of the Casa Buonar-
roti, and W. Y. Ottley Esq.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 1
(As 1842.). Fisher, 1862, p. 3, pl. 2 (The whole com-
position. 1532.). Fisher, 1865, II, p. 21, pl. 2 (As
1862.). Robinson, 1870, no. 65 (Casa Buonarroti prove-
nance given with a question mark. “[A] very mas-
terly performance . . . probably made shortly after the
completion of the fresco. It is unfortunately much
injured by the fading of the pigment employed and
the having . . . been exposed to damp.”). Fisher, 1872,
II, p. 19, pl. 2 (As 1862.). Gotti, 1875, II, p. 227.
Philostrate, 1878, p. 215 (Michael Angelo.). Fisher, 1879,
XLIII/45 (Copy.). Thode, 1913, p. 210 (Copy.). Parker,
1956, no. 362 (Presumably made before ﬁgures were over-
painted. Shows peculiarity that Charon and his surround-
ings are executed in grey ink, and shifted to the left.).
Nesselrath, 1990, no. 148 (By Federico Zuccaro?, as
suggested by Winner. Differences between drawing and
fresco interpreted as a conscious modiﬁcation of origi-
nal. The manner corresponds to that of Federico’s ﬁrst
Roman period: Federico referred to the Last Judgement
in his designs for Paradiso in the Palazzo Ducale in Venice
in 1564–5.).
CATALOGUE 94
St. John
1863.769; Macandrew A24
Dimensions: 278×114 mm; irregular, cut down
Medium
Pen and ink.
Condition
Single-sided window mount.
The sheet has overall ingrained surface dirt and han-
dling dirt. There are various pale stains, particularly at the
bottom and to the right of the ﬁgure’s left leg as well as
small ink stains below the feet and brown stains to the
left of the head. There are losses at the bottom edge and
bottom right corner. Strips of paper have been added to
all the edges with losses to the middle and bottom of the

CATALOGUES 94–95
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
361
strip on the right and to the lower half of that on the left,
which also displays a small loss and stain and tears at the
centre. There are powdery particles on the left edge near
the lower loss. The medium has suffered from abrasion to
some areas, and there is a possible cleavage beginning in
the dense hatched area between the legs. The secondary
support is discoloured to blue-grey-brown.
Discussion
A weak copy, no doubt indirect. Probably of the sixteenth
century.
History
Reynolds (L.2364); unidentiﬁed eighteenth- or nine-
teenth-century sale, Lot 916, in red ink; Francis Douce
bequest to the Bodleian Library, 1834, transferred to the
Ashmolean in 1863.
References
Macandrew, 1980, A24 (Late sixteenth century.).
CATALOGUE 95
The Trumpeting Angels
1863.771; Macandrew A26
Dimensions: 400×633 mm
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
There is overall discolouration, plus numerous stains and
various small black accretions. The left and right edges
of the sheet are severely torn, and curling, losses, and
abrasions have occurred throughout these areas. There is
severe creasing, mostly horizontal. The left edge of the
sheet has an additional strip attached along its full length.
There are losses at the top left corner and along the top
edge and a ﬁlled loss at the bottom right corner.
Numbering
In pen and ink: 40 H or 401E.
Discussion
Although four volumes of drawings from the collection of
the writer, historian, art theorist, curator, and collector
Filippo Baldinucci were sold by his descendants to the
Louvre in 1806, dispersals from his collection occurred
well before this. Baldinucci’s attributions are often opti-
mistic, but whether or not he believed the present drawing
to be by Michelangelo is unknown. In any case, it seems
of reasonable quality and was probably made quite early,
before Daniele’s partial repainting of 1565.
It would be reasonable to assume that the present draw-
ing was part of the same very large copy of the Last
Judgement as Cat. 102: The scale is homogeneous and
the known provenance is identical. There are, however,
considerable differences between them in handling and
conception of form. It is not, of course, to be excluded
that two different draughtsman might be responsible for
different areas of the same copy. In the present state of
knowledge it seems best to catalogue them separately. See
Cat. 102 for further discussion.
History
Filippo Baldinucci; Francis Douce bequest to the
Bodleian Library, 1834, transferred to the Ashmolean in
1863.
References
Macandrew, 1980, A26 (As for A25.).

362
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
CATALOGUE 96
CATALOGUE 96
A Group of the Saved
1846.108; R.64; P.II 363
Dimensions: 236×352 mm
Medium
Red chalk, with some touches of oxidised white lead.
Condition
The sheet is lined. There are several central, vertical
pressed-out folds with associated ingrained dirt and abra-
sion. There are major tear repairs, with a minor loss and
a hole, which is not ﬁlled; there are also other repaired
edge tears and small abraded areas. There is extensive fox-
ing, many stains, including an oil stain, and widespread
discolouration. The primary support is drummed by its
four edges to the backboard of the mount, so the verso is
not visible.
Discussion
An early copy, drawn with some precision and, despite
the aridity remarked upon by Nesselrath, handled with
conﬁdence. This drawing was in all probability made
from the fresco, and not from an intermediate copy. The
draughtsman presumably stood on a step-ladder.
This drawing may well have been one element in a
mosaic of copies after the fresco and was perhaps made
with a print in view – although it does not appear to
have been used for one – but its sharpness and relative
impersonality could be no more than the result of the
copyist’s desire for accuracy. He does succeed in conveying
something of the weight of Michelangelo’s ﬁgures.
The drawing does not appear to be by a major creative
artist, and no attribution can be more than speculative,
but Marcello Venusti, who made his name as a copyist of
the Last Judgement, is a possibility; the facial types are not
unlike those found in his paintings.
History
Richard Cosway (L.628); Sir Thomas Lawrence (no
stamp); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 82 (“Study of several ﬁgures for the
bottom part of the Last Judgement.”). Woodburn, 1846,
no. 50 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1862, p. 3, pl. 3 (As Woodburn,
1842.). Fisher, 1865, II, p. 22, pl. 3 (As 1862.). Robinson,

CATALOGUES 96–97
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
363
1870, no. 64 (“[S]ixteenth century copy . . . it is not of
much merit and is probably the work of an engraver.”).
Fisher, 1872, II, p. 20, pl. 3 (As 1862.). Fisher, 1879,
XLII/44 (Copy.). Thode, 1913, p. 210 (Copy.). Parker,
1956, no. 363 (Old copy of no particular merit.).
Nesselrath, 1990, no. 141 (“[U]n lavoro particolarmente
arido”; the copyist seems to have known drawings by
Michelangelo as well as the fresco. The portion of the
painting depicted corresponds to several giornate. Close
connection with an engraving published by Antonio
Salamanca in 1545, but not securely preparatory for it.).
CATALOGUE 97
A Group of the Saved
1855.128; P.II 364
Dimensions: 158×211 mm, irregular.
Medium
Red chalk, with accents in black chalk added by another
hand.
Condition
The sheet is lined. There are several central, vertical
pressed-out folds with associated ingrained dirt and abra-
sion. There are minor repaired tears at the edges. There is
extensive foxing and black speckled accretions, together
with small abrasions and a larger blond/bald patch from
pulp imperfection. There is uneven discolouration with
other local stains, particularly around the edges. The sec-
ondary support shows some skinning, a diagonal inden-
tation, and local staining.
Inscriptions
On the verso in graphite, in the handwriting of C. F. Bell:
Pontormo School./Copy from the picture formerly in San
Lorenzo/at Florence.
Discussion
An early copy, no doubt indirect. The simpliﬁcation of
bulk and mass suggests a Bolognese artist, conceivably, but
far from certainly Denys Calvaert.
The later touches of black chalk verge on the play-
ful, notably in the addition of a faint moustache to the
principal ﬁgure.

364
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
CATALOGUES 97–98
History
Chambers Hall (L.551).
References
Parker, 1956, no. 364 (Early copy; traditionally associated
with Pontormo’s destroyed Resurrection in San Lorenzo.).
CATALOGUE 98
A Demon Carrying Off a Damned Soul
1846.109; R.62; P. II 365
Dimensions: 145×101 mm
Medium
Red chalk.
Condition
There is extensive uneven discolouration with some fox-
ing and ingrained dirt.
Discussion
An early drawing after this much copied group. The right
shoulder and arm of one of the damned is drawn below.
Although reasonably accomplished, the drawing is a little
bland. Another copy after a ﬁgure from the Last Judge-
ment, the seated nude with his back half-turned among
the group of the saved at the lower left corner, seen by
the compiler on the art market in London in July 2001
(red chalk, 169×170 mm, indecipherable inscription in
pen and ink at lower right and, above this, the number
27) seems to him to be by the same hand, one not too far
from that of Federico Zuccaro.
History
Jeremiah Harman; Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 25 (“Study from the Last Judge-
ment.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 45 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1852,
p. 4, pl. 16 (As Woodburn, 1842.). Fisher, 1865, I, p. 17,
pl. 16 (As 1852.). Robinson, 1870, no. 62 (Copy, “per-
haps of contemporary date.”). Fisher, 1872, I, p. 15, pl. 16
(As 1852.). Gotti, 1875, II, p. 227. Fisher, 1879, XL/42
(Copy.). Steinmann, 1905, II, p. 608 (Copy.). Thode,
1913, p. 210 (Copy.). Parker, 1956, no. 365 (An early copy
before the ﬁgure was draped.). Nesselrath, 1990, no. 142
(Done prior to the draping of the ﬁgures in 1565; relation
to ﬁgure below differs from that in fresco.).

CATALOGUE 99
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
365
CATALOGUE 99
bartolommeo passerotti (1529–1592)?
A Demon Biting the Leg of a Damned Soul
1846.110. R.61; P.II 366
Dimensions: 266×224 mm, the lower right corner made
up
Watermark: Indecipherable.
Medium
Red chalk.
Condition
There is uneven, uncomfortable undulation. The sheet
is probably lined: A small torn strip at the left edge
seems to indicate a support behind. There is a corner
inﬁll and a minor toned inﬁll in the image, some small
edge nicks, and a scattering of abraded spots with offset
chalk or dirt. The sheet has widespread foxing and general
discolouration. The primary support is drummed by its
four edges to the backboard, so the verso is not visible.
Discussion
Although this drawing does not make an attractive
impression, it is powerful and plastic and, unlike most
copies of the Last Judgement, conveys both the virtuos-
ity of ﬁgure drawing and the hard, polished surface of
Michelangelo’s fresco. It was probably made on site and
not from an intermediary drawing; although the handling
evokes speed and vigour, the areas of hatching are in fact
created by quite small and precise strokes. The outline
of the right elbow was changed; this alteration suggests
that the artist was adjusting his copy by reference to the
original.
Were this a pen-drawing, there would be an immediate
temptation to give it to Bartolommeo Passerotti, who
passed the ﬁrst half of the 1550s in Rome, made a number
of pen copies after the Last Judgement, and was strongly
inﬂuenced by certain aspects of it. Passerotti’s penchant

366
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
CATALOGUE 99
towards, directness and brutality of effect would ﬁt well
with the personality projected by this drawing, and
the date would also be appropriate. Passerotti is little
known as a draughtsman in chalk, and no attribution
to him of such can be more than conjectural. However,
the compiler (Joannides, 2000, p. 40) has attributed
to Passerotti two further sheets of drawings in red
chalk (although, unlike the present drawing, over stylus
indications) in the Ashmolean Museum (Parker, 1956, II,
p. 625, 240×401 mm; and l. 627, 415×283 mm, classed
as school of Raphael), both of which contain copies after
the antique, and the present drawing seems compatible
with those. A similar date is suggested by the fact that
Parker, 1956, II, p. 625 bears an uncommon watermark
found elsewhere – to the compiler’s knowledge – only
on a map printed in Rome in 1557.
History
Jeremiah Harman; Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 84 (“Study from the Last Judge-
ment.”). Woodburn, 1846, no. 9 (As 1842.). Fisher,
1852, p. 6, pl. 29 (As Woodburn, 1842.). Fisher, 1865,
I, p. 19, pl. 29 (As 1852.). Robinson, 1870, no. 61
(Copy, “the touch and general style of drawing . . . seem
to reveal the hand of Daniele da Volterra.”). Fisher,
1872, I, p. 17, pl. 29 (As 1852.). Gotti, 1875, II,
p. 227. Fisher, 1879, XXXIX/41 (Copy.). Steinmann,
1905, II, p. 608 (Copy.). Thode, 1913, p. 210 (Copy.).
Parker, 1956, no. 366 (Nothing to warrant attribution
to Daniele da Volterra “but . . . old and fairly accom-
plished.”).

CATALOGUES 100–101
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
367
CATALOGUE 100
One of the Saved
1846.112; R.63; P.II 367
Dimensions: 335×145 mm
Watermark: Anchor in circle.
Medium
Black chalk; various old stains including, perhaps, some
areas of oxidised white lead; a framing line in pen and
ink.
Condition
The sheet is undulating severely. There is horizontal creas-
ing, as well as some tears with ingrained dirt, small holes,
and extensive toned abrasions with uneven and blacken-
ing over-drawing. The primary support is drummed by
its four edges to the backboard, so the verso is not visible.
Discussion
An early copy of this much-copied ﬁgure, probably no
later than 1550. The quality seems reasonable, and an
attribution to a draughtsman in the circle of Bronzino –
but not Alessandro Allori – might be considered. Mar-
cello Venusti, famed as a copyist of the Last Judgement but
by whom very few drawings have been identiﬁed, is also
a possibility.
History
Lamberto Gori?; William Young Ottley (his sale, 1814,
lot 1590, “One, a back ﬁgure, naked, a study for one of
the devils in the Last Judgement – black chalk – very
ﬁne. From L. Gori’s Collection”?. £5.10.0); Sir Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, lot 1590 (“One, a back ﬁgure,
naked, a study for one of the devils in the Last Judgement –
black chalk – very ﬁne. From L. Gori’s Collection”?).
Woodburn, 1842, no. 1 (“[A]n admirable study; highly
ﬁnished in black chalk, and touched with surpris-
ing truth as to anatomical knowledge.”). Woodburn,
1846, no. 46 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1852, p. 4, pl. 15 (As
Woodburn, 1842.). Fisher, 1865, I, p. 17, pl. 15 (As 1852.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 63 (“[C]opy by a good hand.”).
Fisher, 1872, I, p. 15, pl. 15 (As 1852.). Fisher, 1879,
XLI/43 (“This copy was apparently made when the ﬁg-
ures were still represented nude.”). Steinmann, 1905, II,
p. 608 (Copy.). Thode, 1913, p. 210 (Copy.). Parker, 1956,
no. 367 (Old copy, made before drapery was added.).
CATALOGUE 101
alessandro allori (1535–1607)?
A Skeletal Head
1846.113; R.60 (4); P.II 368
Dimensions: 70×53 mm
Medium
Black chalk.

368
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
CATALOGUE 101
Condition
The sheet is probably lined. There are minor edge tears,
repaired, with ingrained dirt. The sheet has accretions,
local staining, and some foxing.
Discussion
Even were the provenance of this drawing from Casa
Buonarroti correct – which it probably is not because
there is no evidence that Moritz von Fries acquired ex-
Buonarroti drawings – it need not signify Michelangelo’s
authorship because several drawings still in that collec-
tion are obvious copies after his works, some of them
made after his death, and other later copies were cer-
tainly included in the mass dispersal of the late eighteenth
century. Although the present drawing was tentatively
accepted by de Tolnay in 1978, all other modern scholars
have judged it to be a copy after the death’s head in the
lower centre of Michelangelo’s fresco, and this view seems
to the compiler to be correct. The differences noted by
de Tolnay from the ﬁgure as painted seem to the com-
piler not to indicate a preparatory study but rather to
reveal the copyist’s own personality. Although no more
than a fragment, the drawing is clearly of considerable
accomplishment, precise and accurate in its delineation
and convincing, if a little bland, in its establishment of
volumes. The cutting of the drawing is clearly extreme,
but it would seem less so could it be shown to have been
excised from a sheet that contained a series of head studies
or that copied only single elements from the fresco.
The present drawing was attributed to Giulio Clovio
by Perrig, 1999, but to the compiler it lacks Clovio’s neat-
ness and thinness. It seems more likely to be by Alessandro
Allori, who studied closely Michelangelo’s Last Judgement
during his sojourn in Rome in the later 1550s; in 1560,
on his return to Florence, Alessandro painted an abbrevi-
ated and reduced variant of it in the Montauto Chapel in
Santissima Annunziata. A number of black chalk copies of
different ﬁgures in the Last Judgement made by Alessandro
survive – several of them in the Louvre – and the present
drawing is compatible with them. The soft but precise
handling is typical, as is the comparative lack of plas-
tic force. Personal contact between Allori and Michelan-
gelo is indicated by a letter of thanks on Allori’s behalf
from Benedetto Varchi to Michelangelo dated 12 Febru-
ary 1560, and Michelangelo seems to have been help-
ful to the young man who, apparently “non si sazia di
predicare le singularissime virt`u e unica cortesia” of the
master. Alessandro in appreciation, might well have pre-
sented Michelangelo with drawings, including a copy or
copies after parts of his work. It does in any case seem
certain that the young Alessandro knew at least some of
Michelangelo’s studies for the Last Judgement for two
studies by him in Lille (Brejon de Lavergn´ee, nos. 4,
5; both in black chalk, respectively, 402×241 mm and
410×265 mm) for the Cleansing of the Temple in the
Montauto chapel were long attributed to Michelangelo
himself, before they were identiﬁed as Allori’s by
Franc¸oise Viatte (unpublished thesis, 1963), and these can
hardly have been made without knowledge not merely of
Michelangelo’s fresco but of some of his drawings for it.
Thus, the qualities intuited by de Tolnay in the present
fragment may register the direct impression upon Allori
of Michelangelo’s own drawings.
History
Casa Buonarroti? (this is probably incorrect); Graf Moritz
von Fries (L.2903); Samuel Woodburn; Sir Thomas
Lawrence (no stamp); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1842, no. 35 (“Five very ﬁne studies on one
Mount, one of which is the Death’s Head in the Last
Judgement”; this drawing had been mounted together with
[Cats. 51–52], which had been together at least since
1804 and probably earlier, and [Cat. 73].). Woodburn,
1846, no. 40 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1862, p. 3, pl. 4 (Pen,

CATALOGUES 101–102
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
369
washed with grey.). Fisher, 1865, II, p. 22, pl. 4 (As 1862.).
Robinson, 1870, no. 60.4 (Michel Angelo. For the Last
Judgement, “a fragment cut from a larger sheet.”). Fisher,
1872, II, p. 20, pl. 4 (As 1862.). Black, 1875, p. 215,
no. 55. Gotti, 1875, II, p. 227. Fisher, 1879, XXXVIII/40
(For the Last Judgement.). Steinmann, 1905, II, p. 604
(Copy;
erroneously
located
in
Casa
Buonarroti.).
Thode, 1913, p. 210 (Copy.). Delacre, 1938, p. 389
(Reproduced as Michelangelo.). Parker, 1956, no. 367
(Early copy.). Dussler, 1959, no. 627 (Copy.). De Tolnay,
1978, Corpus III, no. 365 (Not copied from the fresco,
“data l’asimmetria pi`u marcata e la minor monumen-
talit`a. . . . Le cavit`a degli occhi sono qui pi`u irregolari
ed espressive, piu vicine ad una ﬁsionomia umana nella
metamorfosi della morte.”). Perrig, 1999, pp. 225–6,
274 (By Giulio Clovio, from the Farnese group, perhaps
acquired in Italy in 1785–7 by Joseph von Fries, Moritz’s
brother; the Casa Buonarroti provenance a falsiﬁcation by
Woodburn.).
CATALOGUE 102
The Damned in the Lower Right Corner
1863.770; Macandrew A25
Dimensions: 548×1160 mm
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
There is overall discolouration and surface dirt. The sheet
has suffered severe damage in the form of tears, losses,
creases, and abrasions to the surfaces both of the support
and of the medium. There are numerous losses with ﬁll-
ings of varying quality. There is insect damage, mostly
grazing, which is particularly obvious in the top right
edge.
Numbering
6 R on the back of the mount.
Discussion
If Macandrew’s view that this drawing was made in the
early seventeenth century is correct, the similarity that he
detected to the manner of Alessandro Allori, who copied
the Last Judgement extensively during his stay in Rome
in the ﬁrst half of the 1550s, might be explained by the
assumption that it was made by one of Allori’s many pupils
after an earlier copy by the master. A more economical
explanation, however, and one preferred by the compiler,
is that it is indeed a copy of the mid-sixteenth century,
made before Daniele da Volterra’s repainting of part of
the fresco in 1565. If, as one would imagine, this is a
fragment of a full copy, that would have been very large
indeed, some 2.8 m high by 2.5 m wide, larger in fact
than the painted copy of the Last Judgement by Marcello
Venusti, now in Capodimonte.
Whether or not the present drawing is by the same
hand as Cat. 93, to which it is linked by size, condition,

370
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
CATALOGUES 102–103
and provenance, is conjectural. The handling is sufﬁ-
ciently dissimilar as to make uncertain a connection,
which one would otherwise have taken for granted.
Any comment on the authorship or authorships of the
two drawings is hazardous. As Macandrew noted, there
are some similarities with the work of Alessandro Allori,
but the present drawing seems tighter in handling than
anything known by him, and Cat. 93 seems less secure. In
theory, Marcello Venusti is an obvious alternative. He was
an assiduous copyist of the Last Judgement, but he is little
known as a draughtsman – and entirely unknown on this
scale – and those drawings reasonably attributed to him do
not particularly resemble either Cat. 93 or the present one.
Many ambitious and competent young artists must have
made copies of the Last Judgement for their own use and
others would have been made to prepare the engravings
of the fresco that were published soon after its unveiling –
although, as far as the compiler can see, neither Cat. 93
nor the present drawing was reproduced in an engraving.
At present, the issue of authorship or authorships must
remain unresolved.
History
Filippo Baldinucci; Francis Douce bequest to the Bod-
leian Library, 1834, transferred to the Ashmolean in
1863.
References
Macandrew, 1980, A25 (Faithful but much damaged, by
an early seventeenth-century Florentine artist in the man-
ner of Alessandro Allori.).
CATALOGUE 103
pellegrino tibaldi (1527–1596)?
Detail from the Conversion of Saul
1846.115; R.78; P.II 369
Dimensions: 339×368 mm, irregular, much damaged,
with large areas of loss, notably at upper left, upper right
and lower centre, made up.
Medium
Black chalk underdrawing, with brown wash superim-
posed, and black chalk used again to emphasise the
contours; three unrelated lines in red chalk at lower
right.
Condition
A restored sheet, otherwise in fragments. There are major
tear repairs, extensive pressed-out creasing and abrasion,
many fractures, and small holes. There is extensive dis-
colouration, with media accretions and stains.
Discussion
There may be some relation of type to two copies after
parts of the ﬁrst fresco to be painted in the Pauline Chapel,
the Conversion of Saul, in the Royal Collection at Windsor
Castle (PW 504 and 505; both black chalk, respectively,
445×594 mm and 413×330 mm). Both of these are made
up of several separate pieces of paper attached together,
an unusual procedure that may have been caused by the
difﬁculty of copying a large fresco situated in a narrow
space. The artist was presumably compelled to study the
fresco part by part, perhaps from a mobile ladder or scaf-
folding, and he would then have joined his drawings in
an attempt to make a mosaic of the whole, perhaps with
the intention of using it as a cartoon for a reduced replica.
The style of the Windsor drawings shows some similari-
ties to that of Taddeo Zuccaro, who was deeply interested
in Michelangelo’s last frescoes, and the artist who made
them may have come from his circle. The present drawing
might also have been part of a “mosaic,” but no compan-
ions to it have been identiﬁed.
Although this drawing is in ruinous condition, close
examination reveals in it an unusual combination of
strength and delicacy. Even though the forms have a bru-
tality and force that come close to those of the original,
the modelling is achieved by the most reﬁned handling
of wash, in which virtually imperceptible changes of tone
produce precisely graded volumes. The technique and
level of skill seem characteristic of Pellegrino Tibaldi, as
does the ability to match Michelangelo’s strongest effects.
If this attribution is correct, the drawing was probably
made immediately following Michelangelo’s completion
of the Paolina, in 1550 or 1551.
The provenance would also support the view that this
drawing is by an artist associated with Daniele da Volterra,
as Pellegrino was for a period, because it seems to have
come from the Cicciaporci Collection. The fact that
Woodburn gave the provenance as Buonarroti and Wicar
is no doubt a slip rather than an attempt to mislead. He
also connected this drawing with the Battle of Cascina
rather than the Pauline Chapel.
History
(The
Buonarroti-Wicar
provenance
ﬁrst
given
by
Woodburn and followed by Robinson and by Parker

CATALOGUE 103
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
371
[the latter with a question mark] is certainly incorrect.)
Filippo Cicciaporci; Bartolommeo Cavaceppi; William
Young Ottley (his sale, 6 June 1814, etc., probably lot
263, “One – a study for his picture of the Conversion of
St. Paul [sic] in the Paoline Chapel, purchased of Sig-
nor Cavaceppi, formerly in the Cicciaporci collection –
black chalk and bistre.”); Samuel Woodburn; Sir Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale, 6 June 1814, etc., probably lot 263 (“One – a
study for his picture of the Conversion of St. Paul [sic] in the
Paoline Chapel, purchased of Signor Cavaceppi, formerly
in the Cicciaporci collection – black chalk and bistre.”).
Woodburn, 1836b, no. 53 (“A fragment of the cartoon
of Pisa – consisting of part of three of the ﬁgures in this
very celebrated work. [sic] This highly interesting study is
drawn in bistre and is unfortunately much damaged. Size,
14 1
4 by 13 1
2 inches. From the Collections of M. Buonaroti,
and the Chevalier Vicar.”). The Athenaeum, 16 July 1836.
(“‘Fragment of the Pisa Cartoon,’ or rather of the study
for it. Highly interesting, genuine or not.”). Woodburn,
1842, no. 45 (As 1836.). Woodburn, 1846, no. 41 (As
1842.). Robinson, 1870, no. 78 (From the Conversion of
St Paul. An “old but indifferent copy.”). Gotti, 1875, II,
p. 226. Springer, 1878, p. 521 (Study for the Conversion.).
Springer, 1883, II, p. 385 (As 1878.). Thode, 1913, p. 210
(Copy.). Parker, 1956, no. 369 (After Michelangelo; “so
overworked as to make it impossible to judge its former
quality.”).

372
COPIES AFTER PAINTINGS
CATALOGUE 104
CATALOGUE 104
circle of daniele da volterra
Two Executioners from the Cruciﬁxion of St. Peter
1863.657; P.II 368∗
Dimensions: 403×251 mm
Watermark: Large, possibly a shield with bars or chevrons.
Medium
Black chalk.
Condition
The sheet is lined. It appears to be toned, but streaks imply
adhesive discolouration from being lined. It is undulat-
ing severely and lifting slightly at the left edge. There is
a major horizontal pressed-out fold with ingrained dirt,
other creases, and inherent wrinkles. Major irregular tears
have been repaired, and the losses toned onto the sec-
ondary support. There are small abraded areas, accretions,
local staining, ingrained dirt, and uneven and widespread
discolouration. The secondary support has abraded
edge and corner patches, discoloured edges and some
creasing.
Inscriptions
Recto: In the handwriting of Padre Sebastiano Resta:
Si confronti con i rov
ersci del sepolcro di
Giulio 2◦nella ultima
pagina del tomo primo?
della mie serie, sebene
qtta fu fatta in giovent`u
pero il modo `e l’istesso.

CATALOGUES 104–105
COPIES OF ARCHITECTURE
373
Verso:In the handwriting of Jonathan Richardson
Junior, copying Padre Resta:
Nella Capella Paolina havera dipinto la croceﬁssione di S.
Pietro con un altra istoria di S. Paolo
Michel Angelo nella sua Vecchiaia.
Questo resta veramte `e scoretta (?), ma sia come si vuole non s`o
segurta p copia ne originale tiena la me(m)
moria della maniera grande, che e qtto che ti serve.
Per l’occasione della 40 hore s’attac`o il fuoco nella sudetta
Capella Paolina, e tutte la Pitture di Loren
zino di Bologna, di Fedco Zuccaro, e ci`o che pi`u importa q.te
istorie di M. Angelo si affumicarono e si p(e)
dettero affatto. Percio ti sia cara questa reliquia di memoria
ch’io crede di mano di Michelangelo, non
di Daniele da Volterra suo allievo. Va per`o in Stampa. P.
Resta.
In the handwriting of Jonathan Richardson Junior:
This was part of a book that was Father Resta’s, but was never
my Lord Somers’s being parted with bi/fore my Lord bought
that Collection. Remnants of annotations at the left
edge of the backing sheet: in . . . questa, om
Shelfmarks above the inscription: N.36 Zm.17 Th.30:
Zm.63
Discussion
The present drawing seems to have been made soon after
Michelangelo completed the fresco, probably in the early
1550s. The attribution to Michelangelo himself, suggested
by Robbins et al., and, apparently, by Hardy, seems to the
compiler entirely untenable, but it does register some-
thing of the drawing’s quality. The connection they pro-
pose between it and a privately owned panel painting of
the Cruciﬁxion of Saint Peter – which they, like Hardy,
believe to be by Michelangelo – would reinforce the pos-
sibility that the present drawing was made to prepare a
painted replica. To the compiler, the nature of the chalk
work, with quite widely spaced hatching lines and lim-
ited cross-hatching in some areas, would suggest an artist
in the circle of Daniele da Volterra, despite Padre Resta’s
denial of this. The verso inscription seems to indicate that
it was presented by Resta to an artist who had need to
refer to its “maniera grande”; if this interpretation is cor-
rect, this must be among the earliest instances of a revival
of artistic interest in Michelangelo’s ultima maniera.
An unexplained oddity is the sketch of the sole of a
right foot found at the right margin.
This drawing, minus the right foot, was copied on a
sheet now in Christ Church (0081/Byam-Shaw S1519;
black chalk, 414×268 mm).
History
Padre Resta; Jonathan Richardson Senior (no stamp);
Jonathan Richardson Junior (no stamp); Francis Douce
bequest to the Bodleian Library, 1834, transferred to the
Ashmolean in 1863.
References
Parker, 1956, no. 368∗. Hardy, 1992, p. 30 (“[U]seful
for the placement of the left hand upon the cross. In
the sketch and the modello the cross extends only three-
quarters of the way across the executioner’s back and the
ﬁngers of the Apostle are almost inchoate.”). Robbins
et al., 2000, p. 27 (By Michelangelo, made in prepara-
tion for a privately owned panel claimed by the authors
as Michelangelo’s modello for the fresco.).
CATALOGUE 105
Half Plan of San Giovanni dei Fiorentini
WA 1944. 102.7. Largest Talman album, Fol. 7
Dimensions: 413 × 278 mm, laid into a sheet 587 ×
450 mm.
Watermark: Fleur de lys in a circle surmounted by a B
close to but more regular than Briquet 7118 (Salerno 1595)
and 7119 (Salerno 1600).
Medium
Pen and ink with brown wash over stylus indentation and
compass holes.
Condition
Single-sided window mount. The sheet is undulating
overall. There are various creases at the top edge and a
diagonal crease across the top left corner.
Discussion
The version of Michelangelo’s design for San Giovanni
dei Fiorentini chosen by the commissioners of the project
was made under Michelangelo’s supervision in a wooden
model by his assistant Tiberio Calcagni. A drawn plan
generally attributed to Calcagni and thought to have
been used to prepare the model, is in the Ufﬁzi (3185A;
pen and ink and grey wash over black chalk and stylus
work, 492 × 424 mm; see Cat. 54). The wooden model
seems to have been destroyed in the eighteenth century,
but a number of records of its appearance survive. It was
engraved by Jacques Le Mercier in 1607 in a slightly tilted

374
COPIES OF ARCHITECTURE
CATALOGUE 105
elevation that also shows part of the plan. It was engraved
again in 1683 by Val´erian R´egnard both in strict elevation
(Ackerman, 1961, ﬁg. 71b) and in plan; a drawing in
Berlin (Kupferstichkabinett 20.976; pen and ink with
mauve wash, 156×170 mm; published by Noehles,
ﬁg. 56, and also illustrated in Argan and Contardi,
ﬁg. 474), corresponds closely with Regnard’s elevation
and may well have been its source. Another copy of
the model in plan is the drawing by Giovanni Vincenzo
Casale in the Biblioteca Nacional, Madrid (Album G. V.
Casale, fols. 374–5; Argan and Contardi, ﬁg. 477). It
displays some differences from the other plans that may
be no more than the result of inaccurate copying. How-
ever, the circular form in the centre of Casale’s plan
clearly represents the lantern that crowns the church’s
dome.
The present drawing, identiﬁed in an undated inscrip-
tion on the mount by Professor Ackerman, is close to Le
Mercier’s engraving of the plan. However, it shows the
entrance arm protruding a little further from the body
of the church than in Calcagni’s ground plan, and it also
contains other differences that should be noted. On the
right and upper arms, there are three entrances (and the
left arm was presumably planned to have a similar arrange-
ment), the main one in the centre and subsidiary narrower
entrances on either side. Another drawing, by Giovanni
Antonio Dosio (Modena, Biblioteca Estense, Mss. Cam-
pori App.1775, = a.Z.2.2, C.140 verso-141 recto; Argan
and Contardi, ﬁg. 478), of the model in section (minus the
lantern), also shows an entrance arm protruding further
than in the model and, apparently, containing three door-
ways. It may be, therefore, that the present drawing reﬂects
a phase in Michelangelo’s planning of the church, just
prior to the ﬁnal one, in which he brought the arms more
tightly into the main body of the church and reduced the
entrances to one per arm.
Also of interest is the circular, centrally placed form,
whose outer ring is larger in relation to the central space
than in the ﬁnal version recorded in Ufﬁzi 3185A but
whose two inner rings seem to correspond precisely. It
seems unlikely that these circles represent an altar, which
Michelangelo seems never to have thought of as circular,
and in both drawings it is presumably the lantern. The
outer ring in the present drawing no doubt indicates the
platform around the lantern, seen most clearly in Berlin
20.976 and R´egnard’s engraving.
The present drawing displays a further minor inconsis-
tency in the pilaster on the exterior just right of the choir
area, which is narrower than all the other comparable
pilasters, but it is unlikely that this has any signiﬁcance.
Another variant, in which the arms protrude still
further, and in which the entrance is articulated with
two deep lateral niches (similar to those seen in CB
124A/B160/Corpus 612) and with columns in the cor-
ners, a motif found in several studies by Michelangelo
of this period (such as BM W84/Corpus 623), is seen
in a fairly sketchy drawing – but containing some mea-
surements – of the plan by Oreste Vannocci Biringucci
in Siena (Biblioteca Communale, S.IV.1, fol. 42 recto;
Argan-Contardi, ﬁg. 473). This might also record a phase
in Michelangelo’s design process for which no autograph
drawings survive.
History
John Talman the younger, part of the Largest Talman
album (L.2462); Christie’s sale, 13 March 1942, lot 102,
H. Calmann, acquired in 1944.
References
Noehles, 1969, p. 66, ﬁg. 58 (First publication of plan;
after Calcagni’s wooden model.). Argan and Contardi,
1990, p. 347 (Plan that of Calcagni’s wooden model.).

CATALOGUES 105–106
COPIES OF ARCHITECTURE
375
Fara, 1997, p. 24 (After Michelangelo’s ﬁnal project for
the church.).
CATALOGUE 106
Interior Cornice of Main Crossing of St. Peter’s
WA 1942. 55.686. P.II Appendix A, p. 554, Larger Talman
album, Fol.174/68 of drawings
Dimensions: 206 × 263 mm, laid into an album page
507 × 355 mm.
Medium
Pen and ink.
Condition
There is overall discolouration and minor ingrained dirt.
There is a small tear in the bottom left corner and a minor
loss at the bottom edge. There is slight abrasion to the
medium and and various minor accretions.
Inscription
In pen, lower right: Cornicione della Cupola grande
di S o Pietro Vat no di dentro
M. A. Bonaroti
delin.
Discussion
After the structure as built and perhaps made within
Michelangelo’s lifetime. Parker attributed the drawing
to I. B. Mola (c. 1588–1665), the father of the painter
Pierfrancesco Mola, because the inscription seems to be
by the same hand as one on the verso of the preceding
page (fol. 173) – perhaps a signature – attributing that
to I. B. Mola, who was also responsible for the draw-
ing on the recto of page 173. Because both the drawings
on fol. 173 are of details from St. Peter’s, it was natural
for Parker to have made the connection, but it is clear
that the drawings are of very different types and by dif-
ferent hands. Those on fol. 173 are diagrammatic mea-
sured studies of details from the portico and the interior
pilasters, whereas the present drawing is a pictorial study,
which would have been suitable for engraving; indeed the
drawing style might well indicate the hand of an engraver.

376
MISCELLANEOUS
CATALOGUES 106–107
History
John Talman the younger, part of the Larger Talman
album (L.2462); Christie’s sale, 13 March 1942, lot 102,
H. Calmann, acquired in 1942.
References
Parker, 1956 (Appendix A, p. 554; attributed by inscrip-
tion to I. B. Mola [c. 1588–1665].).
CATALOGUE 107
bartolommeo passerotti (1529–1592) after baccio ban-
dinelli (1493–1560)
Portrait of Michelangelo
1944.133; P.II 90
Dimensions: 375 × 272 mm
Medium
Pen and ink.
Condition
Single-sided solid museum mount.
The sheet shows heavy vertical undulations. There is
severe discolouration and ingrained surface dirt overall,
plus various patches of black spots. Brown lines are seen
at the bottom edge and lower left edge. There are repaired
tears and losses at all edges, especially the bottom edge.
The top corners have been ﬁlled, and there is a patch in
the top edge near the centre. There is a heavy horizontal
fold line across the sheet, below the centre. The lightest
areas of the medium may be beginning to fade.
Discussion
The present drawing is a same-size copy of a drawing
in the Louvre (Inv. 2715/J R27/Corpus 118; pen and ink
over black chalk, 365 × 250 mm). This is widely attributed
to Michelangelo and, if accepted as such, would be a
self-portrait. The present drawing is free and vigorous in
handling and makes no attempt to reproduce the original
in every detail. It seems to the compiler very obviously
by Passerotti and may be compared with any number of
his studies of heads.
The Louvre original and the present drawing corre-
spond not to the image of Michelangelo presented in
four painted portraits by or after Michelangelo’s friend
Giuliano Bugiardini but to that presented in a ﬁfth por-
trait, which is also in the Louvre (Inv. 874; oil on panel,
490 × 364 mm). Indeed, the relation of the Louvre draw-
ing and the Louvre painting is closer than one of simple
similarity: The external and internal dimensions of the
head in both drawing and painting are identical, and Inv.
2715 or a replica of it, must have served as the cartoon for
the painting.
The Louvre painting may be identical with, an exact
replica of, or exactly replicated in, a painting formerly in
the collection of the Duc d’Orl´eans, ﬁrst catalogued in
that collection in 1728 by Du Bois de Saint-Gelais, who
gave it to Sebastiano del Piombo. The Orl´eans paint-
ing was engraved by Clairon Mondet in the Gal´erie du
Palais Royal in 1786, but it was not mentioned in the Etat
g´en´eral des tableaux appartenant `a S.A.R le duc d’Orl´eans
drawn up in 1788, and there seems to be no further
trace of it. When, in 1874, Fred´eric Villot catalogued
the Louvre painting, he made no mention of the Orl´eans
version and claimed that the Louvre painting came from
the collection of Louis XIV, and was identical with one
recorded at Fontainebleau by Bailly as “une copie du por-
trait de Michel-Ange.” However, although it is generally
accepted that the Louvre and Orl´eans paintings are dis-
tinct, only the discovery of an “Orl´eans” original could
prove that they are. Indeed, it seems to the compiler, as to
Garrault, more likely that the Orl´eans and Fontainebleau
paintings are in fact the same.
Villot gave the Louvre painting to Bugiardini rather
than Sebastiano. More recently, it has been attributed to
Daniele da Volterra and to Bandinelli. But although the
attribution to Sebastiano has long since been abandoned,
is ignored in recent literature on that artist, and clearly
cannot be sustained, it is nevertheless of interest in that
it registers a response to the geometrical simpliﬁcation of
the forms and the sense of weight that the portrait con-
veys. Daniele’s authorship has found a recent supporter
in Pagnotta, 1987, no. 118, p. 235, but this view seems
untenable to the compiler. Because Daniele came into
contact with Michelangelo only c. 1545, it would entail
accepting that he copied a portrait of the master made
some twenty or more years earlier, and it would still leave
open the question of who was responsible for the original
that he copied. Furthermore, Daniele’s portrait drawing
of Michelangelo (Haarlem, Teyler Museum, A6/VT 142;
black chalk and leadpoint, 295 × 218 mm) and his painted
version of this head in the Assumption of the Virgin in the
chapel of Lucrezia della Rovere in the Trinita del Monte
show a man who is older and more elegantly clad and
whose features are envisaged differently. However, the
attribution to Daniele does, once more, register some-
thing of the plastic force of the Louvre painting.
The authorship of the Louvre painting and that of the
Louvre drawing need not be identical but probably is.

CATALOGUE 107
MISCELLANEOUS
377

378
MISCELLANEOUS
CATALOGUE 107
The drawing, although close to Michelangelo in style,
and much more accomplished than any drawing by any
of Michelangelo’s known pupils in this period, is not, in
the opinion of the compiler, by Michelangelo himself.
The very long pen-lines seen on the turban, the use of a
rather thick pen, and the systematic handling of the hatch-
ing, all contrast with Michelangelo’s most immediately
comparable pen drawings – chronologically, stylistically,
and iconographically – such as another drawing in the
Louvre (Inv. 684/J29 recto/Corpus 95; pen and ink over
red chalk, 275 × 211 mm). Pouncey’s 1964 attribution
of both drawing and painting to Bandinelli – implicitly
anticipated as far as Louvre 2715 is concerned, by Parker’s
placing of the present drawing – has been little noticed,
in part, perhaps, because, when it was made, no imme-
diately comparable drawings by Bandinelli were known.
However, with the discovery of Bandinelli’s drawn copy
of Leonardo’s Annunciatory Angel (Christie’s, London, 1
July 1969, lot 119; pen and ink, 356 × 265 mm, present
wherabouts unknown; reproduced by Ward, 1988, ﬁg. 5),
it is clear that such a drawing as Inv. 2715 is within his
capacity qualitatively, quite apart from its stylistic congru-
ence with that sheet. Pouncey’s attribution of the painting
to Bandinelli has likewise received little attention, perhaps
because of the paucity of paintings certainly by Bandinelli.
But Thode’s unsurpassed characterisation of the painting’s
style (1908, II, pp. 546–7) – “Der inkarnat is brustig rot,
was die fast brutale Wirkung des Ganzen mitbestimmt.
Der Farbe nach am Ernsten von einem Schuler aus dem
Kreis des Andrea del Sarto, aber nicht auf der Hohe der
Kunst etwa eines Pontormo” – disregarded by subsequent
critics, ﬁts perfectly that of Bandinelli who, of course,
learned to paint with Andrea del Sarto. The establish-
ment of relief in masses formed of patches of light and
shade is appropriate to the work of a sculptor, appropri-
ate to a student of Sarto, and congruent with Bandinelli’s
own later Self-Portrait in the Isabella Stewart Gardner
Museum, Boston. The tendency, visible in the Louvre
portrait, to emphasise the planes of the face in a manner
that verges on faceting is also appropriate to the imagina-
tion of a sculptor, and speciﬁcally to one who had studied
closely the work of a painter and draughtsman known
greatly to have inﬂuenced Bandinelli: Giovanni Battista
Rosso.
Perhaps the well-known enmity between Bandinelli
and Michelangelo discouraged acceptance of Pouncey’s
attribution, but it should be remembered that in 1516–17
Michelangelo attempted to promote Bandinelli’s career,
at the cost of alienating Jacopo Sansovino, by recruiting
his aid with the sculpture for the fac¸ade of San Lorenzo
(an accidental offset of a drawing by Bandinelli which
shows knowledge of Michelangelo’s design for a relief of
the Martyrdom of St Lawrence is illustrated in Riley-Smith,
1998). At this time, the two men must have been close,
and hostility probably solidiﬁed only in 1524–5, when
Bandinelli took over the Hercules and Antaeus block that
Michelangelo considered his own. That Bandinelli should
have drawn a portrait of Michelangelo in 1522 is not
implausible; nor is it that he should have produced a
painted version of it, for it was precisely at this period that
he was attempting to enlarge his range to include paint-
ing. To the compiler, Pouncey’s attribution of the Louvre
painting and the Louvre drawing to Bandinelli seems self-
evidently correct. Given the subsequent hostility between
the two men, it is unsurprising that Michelangelo’s biog-
raphers omitted to mention his relatively brief friendship
with Bandinelli. In his autobiography, Bandinelli remarks
that his drawings were praised by Michelangelo, which, at
the very least, demonstrates that Michelangelo saw some
of them. For a drawing on a sheet with a provenance from
Michelangelo’s studio, which the compiler believes to be
by Bandinelli, see Cat. 8 verso.
Passerotti was, of course, fascinated by the art of
Michelangelo, after which he made numerous copies,
and he was also interested in the personality of the
master. In addition to Bandinelli’s portrait drawing, he
copied Daniele da Volterra’s bust of the aged Michelan-
gelo in at least two drawings. That from the collections
of Richard Cosway and Sir Thomas Lawrence and for-
merly in the Grand Ducal Collection at Weimar is repro-
duced by Steinmann, 1913, pl. 67A; in 1990 it was with
Thomas le Claire, Hamburg (advertisement in the Burling-
ton Magazine, January 1990, p. v). The other, somewhat
more vivaciously rendered, is in the Louvre (Inv. 8485;
pen and ink, 155 × 140 mm; reproduced Steinmann,
1913, pl. 67B). A further portrait head of Michelan-
gelo by Passerotti, whose source is uncertain, is in the
British Museum (1895-9-15-1025; pen and ink, 388 ×
261 mm). Other artists also occupied his attention: In his
famous drawing of Michelangelo’s Anatomy Lesson (Paris,
Louvre, Inv. 8472; pen and ink, brush and wash over lead
point? and black chalk, indented for engraving, 385 ×
498 mm), he included among the tributaries to the mas-
ter Raphael, Jacopo Sansovino and Baccio Bandinelli, of
whom he also made a portrait drawing (pen and ink,
420 × 275 mm), with Arnoldi-Livie, Munich, 2005. It
is clear that the graphic work of Bandinelli held particu-
lar fascination for him. Indeed, Passerotti’s style as a pen
draughtsman is more closely based on that of Bandinelli
than of any other artist, and it is a reasonable presump-
tion that the two men were acquainted. Support for this
contention is provided by the present drawing, for which

CATALOGUES 107–108
MISCELLANEOUS
379
Passerotti must have had access to Bandinelli’s original,
and also by some unremarked details in his drawing of
The Marriage Feast at Cana (Paris, Louvre, Inv. 5074; pen
and ink with brown wash over traces of black chalk,
348 × 478 mm; Faietti and Cordellier, 2001, no. 57),
which contains derivations from three separate drawings
by Bandinelli:
1. The male ﬁgure seen from the rear at the far left is
taken from Bandinelli’s study for a young man in the Birth
of the Virgin at D¨usseldorf, Museum Kunst Palast, Samm-
lung der Kunstakademie (KA (FP) 17; red chalk, 389 ×
238 mm/Ward, 1988, ﬁg. 11).
2. The nude man pouring wine in the left fore-
ground is based on Bandinelli’s drawing in London, the
British Museum (1946-7-13-268 recto; red chalk, 404 ×
277 mm/Ward, 1988, no. 35).
3. The standing serving woman just to the right of the
table is based on Bandinelli’s drawing in London, the
British Museum (1885-5-9-35 recto; red chalk, 328 ×
195 mm/Ward, 1988, no. 17).
A systematic search would no doubt reveal further rela-
tions of this kind between the drawings of Bandinelli and
those of Passerotti.
History
Purchased 1944, Hope Collection.
References
Parker, 1956, no. 90 (Style of Bandinelli; copy of Louvre
Inv. 2715/J R27/Corpus 118, often thought to be a
self-portrait.). Joannides, 2003a, pp. 398–400 (Discussion
of Louvre Inv. 2715/R27, by Bandinelli; attribution of
present drawing to Passerotti.).
CATALOGUE 108
unidentiﬁed ﬂorentine artist
A Standing Nude Man
1846.117; R.85; P.II 371
Dimensions: 312 × 153 mm, irregular.
Medium
Red chalk.
Condition
The sheet is probably lined. Several major edge losses
have been inﬁlled to make a complete sheet, especially
to the right of the ﬁgure’s head and at the lower left.
There are major edge tear repairs, abraded patches, local
staining, and uneven discolouration. The primary support
is drummed by its four edges to the backboard, so the
verso is not visible.
Numbering
The trace of a number? in pen and ink at the lower right
edge.

380
MISCELLANEOUS
CATALOGUES 108–109
Discussion
While the pose of this ﬁgure has generally been con-
nected with that of Michelangelo’s marble David, it is
closer to that of Apollo in Benvenuto Cellini’s stone
group of Apollo and Hyacinth of 1546–7 (Florence, Museo
Nazionale del Bargello). However, the present drawing
cannot be claimed to be a copy of Cellini’s ﬁgure, whose
pose is, in any case, not particularly original, and the
relation may be no more than coincidental. It does not
necessarily enjoin a date after 1547. The drawing may well
have been made from life, with the artist setting a model
in a familiar stance.
The handling of red chalk, with repeated strokes of
a sharp point, tight even contours, and local modelling
much suppressed, is reminiscent of that of Rosso, but the
draughtsman was clearly not at Rosso’s level. Cellini’s few
surviving drawings, none in chalk, would also seem to
identify him as a draughtsman of higher quality than the
artist responsible for the present drawing, although it is
not without elegance. It was presumably made in the 1530s
by a Florentine artist unconnected with Michelangelo
or his workshop, but one who may have worked with
Rosso.
History
William Young Ottley? (his sale, 11 April 1804 and fol-
lowing days, lot 264, “One – a naked youth standing, red
chalk, very ﬁne.”); William Roscoe (his sale, September
1816, lot 70, “One, Design of a Figure intended for the
Statue of David, afterwards executed by Michelangelo
with an alteration in one arm. Red chalk, highly ﬁn-
ished. Size, 12 1
2 h. 6 w.”); Bought by Watson (i.e., the
London bookseller William Carey) 10/6d; Sir Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Ottley sale?, 11 April 1804, lot 264 (“One – a naked
youth standing, red chalk, very ﬁne.”). William Roscoe,
his sale September 1816, lot 70 (“One, Design of a Figure
intended for the Statue of David, afterwards executed
by Michelagnolo with an alteration in one arm. Red
chalk, highly ﬁnished. Size, 12 1
2 h. 6 w.”). Woodburn,
1842, no. 61 (“A male ﬁgure – evidently a study from
the life for the Fresco [sic] of David with the sling, in
the Piazza Grand Duca at Florence.”). Woodburn, 1846,
no. 16 (As 1842.). Fisher, 1852, p. 4, pl. 11 (As Woodburn,
1842.). Fisher, 1865, I, p. 16, pl. 11 (As 1852.). Robinson,
1870, no. 85 (Not by Michelangelo, not improbably by
Bandinelli.). Fisher, 1872, I, p. 14, pl. 11 (As 1852.).
Fisher, 1879, LIII/54 (Erroneously ascribed to Michelan-
gelo.). Parker, 1956, no. 371 (“[N]o doubt of the six-
teenth century, but very indifferent, and certainly not by
Bandinelli.”).
CATALOGUE 109
battista franco (c. 1510–1561)
Recto: Jupiter and Mercury
Verso: Figure Studies
1846.128; R.57; P.II 407
Dimensions: 252 × 181 mm.
Medium
Recto: Pen and ink over red chalk.
Verso: Pen and ink.
Condition
Double-sided window mount. The sheet is undulating
slightly.
Recto: There is overall discolouration, ingrained sur-
face dirt, and various surface abrasions, particularly in the
bottom right corner. All losses have been ﬁlled, one of
which – in the shoulder area – has gold paint on it. There
is a crease in the bottom left corner and various horizontal
and vertical fold lines, which have led to loss of media.
Verso: Overall surface dirt.
Description
The recto is orientated vertically; the verso seems to have
been used ﬁrst horizontally and then vertically.
Verso
A. A full length male or female ﬁgure seen from the left,
moving to the left, the head turned to the viewer (over-
lapped by G and H).
B. The torso of a male ﬁgure bending forward, seen from
the right rear.
C. The torso of a bending male or female ﬁgure, turning
to his/her left, his/her head indicated in two positions,
seen from the left.
D. The torso of a male nude from the rear, his body
turned to his left, his head turned to his right. On a
larger scale than the other drawings.
E. Immediately below B and C, partly overlapped by I.
A left knee with a portion of thigh and calf, seen in left
proﬁle, no doubt a study for the knee of Jupiter on the
recto and perhaps the ﬁrst drawing to be made on this
side of the sheet.

381

382
MISCELLANEOUS
CATALOGUE 109
With the left edge as base
F. A grotesque head seen in left proﬁle with a goat-like
muzzle and pendulous jowls.
G. Immediately below F. A grotesque head seen in left
proﬁle with a pointed nose and jutting beard.
H. A grotesque head in right proﬁle.
I. Partly overlapping E. A grotesque head in left proﬁle
with a protruding forehead and compressed nose.
J. A grotesque head seen in left proﬁle with a goat-like
muzzle (variant of F).
With the top edge as base
K. A grotesque head seen from the front.
With the right edge as base
L. Fragment of a grotesque head seen in left proﬁle.
Discussion
The recto group, which represents Jupiter with Mercury
rather than with Ganymede, obviously parodies, in a
Rossesque spirit, Raphael’s Jupiter and Cupid from the
Psyche Loggia in the Villa Farnesina.
The present sheet is widely accepted as being by
Raffaello da Montelupo, but there is little left-handed
hatching to be found in it and, in the compiler’s view
(supported by A. V. Lauder), it is more likely to be an early
drawing by Battista Franco, who worked with Raffaello
in Rome in the mid-1530s, before moving to Florence.
Several of the drawings attributable to him in this period,
such as Cat. 110, are made in a wild style consonant with
that of this sheet, before he developed the ﬁne pen work
with which he is most commonly associated. But even
later in life he could sometimes revert to coarse handling
of the pen in initial sketches.
Support for the view that the present sheet was drawn
when Battista was working with Raffaello da Montelupo
is provided by the outline ﬁgures on the verso, some of
which are quite Michelangelesque; it seems likely to have
been copied from – or at least inspired by – Raffaello’s
own adaptations of Michelangelo’s drawings, such as those
found on the verso of his famous copy of Michelan-
gelo’s Medici Madonna in the Louvre (Inv. 715/J55; pen
and ink, 367 × 250 mm), a sheet once also owned by
Sir Thomas Lawrence. F and G particularly have an

CATALOGUES 109–110
MISCELLANEOUS
383
energy reminiscent of Michelangelo and might reﬂect
grotesque heads by him. B and C have an energy of
pose and movement that might also reﬂect lost sketches
by the master.
History
Sir
Joshua
Reynolds
(L.2364
on
verso);
William
Young Ottley; Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel
Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 5,
Drawer 2, no. 27 [1830-29] (“Jupiter with a Young
Mercury, with various studies on the back with the
pen, very ﬁne.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 80 (“Jupiter and
Ganymede.”). Robinson, 1870, no. 57 (“A certain anal-
ogy with Raffaelle’s mythological compositions in the
Farnesina will perhaps . . . be perceived. . . . The writer
desires . . . to leave open the question of the authen-
ticity of this drawing.”). Black, 1875, p. 215, no. 52
(Jupiter and Ganymede; “somewhat doubtful.”). Gotti,
1875, II, p. 236. Springer, 1883, II, p. 390 (“[H]at nichts
mit Michelangelo zu thun. D¨urfte eher Perin del Vaga
geh¨oren.”). Berenson, 1903, I, pp. 255, 262, no. 1720
(Montelupo.). Berenson, 1938, I, pp. 257, 263, no. 1720
(As 1903.). Delacre, 1938, pp. 390–1 (Recto: surprising
for Montelupo. Verso: implies Michelangelo’s author-
ship.). Parker, 1956, no. 407 (“[I]nstance of Montelupo’s
ambidextrousness, the recto being drawn with the right
hand, and the verso with the left.”). Berenson, 1961,
no. 1720 (As 1903/1938.). De Tolnay, 1978, Corpus III,
p. 40 (Attributed to Raffaello da Montelupo.).
CATALOGUE 110
battista franco? (c. 1510–1561)
Recto: Recumbent Nude Man
Verso: A Group of Three Nude Men
1846.33; R.87; P.II 237
Dimensions: 270 × 402 mm
Medium
Recto: Pen and ink and brown wash over red and black
chalks.
Verso: Pen and ink over black chalk.

384
MISCELLANEOUS
CATALOGUE 110
Condition
Double-sided solid museum mount with bevelled inlay
attached to verso.
Recto: There is overall ingrained surface dirt. There
is a large vertical tear that has been repaired from the
centre and several patches at the bottom and the top right
corner of the sheet. There are small spots visible, especially
in the washed areas at the right, which may be foxing.
The medium has suffered from abrasion and loss to the
heavily applied lines, and show-through of the medium
has occurred.
Verso: There is abrasion of the media overall. Particu-
larly visible on this side is that the darkest (i.e., the most
heavily applied) lines are beginning to halo and to break
down the primary support.
Description
Verso
Three nude men, with the possible indication of the head
of a fourth between the central ﬁgure and that on the left
and, perhaps, a further proﬁle at the far right.
Discussion
Parker, to whom the attribution is due, ﬁrst noted
the probable dependence of the recto ﬁgure from
Michelangelo’s design of Venus and Cupid, a cartoon
made for execution as a painting by Jacopo Pon-
tormo for Michelangelo’s friend Bartolommeo Bettini (a
painting generally identiﬁed with this work, on panel,
128 × 197 cm, is in the Accademia, Florence). This
project was under way in 1532–3, which implies that
the present sheet was made around the mid-1530s, at a
moment when Battista Franco would have been heavily
under the impress of Raffaello da Montelupo and eager
to absorb Michelangelo’s most recent Florentine work.
However, it cannot be excluded that the drawing was
in fact made in Rome. Bettini left Florence for Rome
in 1536 and (as suggested by Costamagna, 1995, p. 218)
probably took Michelangelo’s cartoon with him. There
are distinct similarities in style to Cat. 109.
The action of the verso drawing is difﬁcult to interpret
with any conﬁdence as is the relation between the chalk
underdrawing and the pen-work, which in places diverge
considerably from each other. The left-hand ﬁgure, seen
nearly in proﬁle, seems to be clasping his right knee with,
no doubt, both hands. The right-hand ﬁgure’s head is
also in proﬁle, but his torso is turned outward to the
viewer, while his legs are stretched out, one crossed over
the other, in front of those of his companion at the
left. His right arm is stretched out to rest on his right

CATALOGUES 110–111
MISCELLANEOUS
385
knee. The central ﬁgure, who faces forward toward the
viewer’s left, seems to be either sitting or kneeling. His
right forearm is bent across his chest, and the hand is
angled to rest on his left upper arm. Although there
is no direct connection between these ﬁgures and any-
thing known by Michelangelo, there is some relation
to the relief of reclining decorative ﬁgures devised by
Michelangelo to be placed at the lower centre of the front
lower storey of the Julius Tomb as seen in the modello in
the Metropolitan Museum, Inv. 62931/Corpus 489. It
may be that Battista Franco was aware of some related
drawing by Michelangelo that he took as his starting
point.
The purpose of the drawings on this sheet is entirely
conjectural. The recto study might be for a river god to
be placed in the left or right lower corner of some large-
scale religious or secular fresco: Decorative adjuncts of
this type became common during the 1530s and can be
seen, for example, in Franco’s own fresco of the Capture
of the Baptist in the Oratorio of San Giovanni Decol-
lato. The verso ﬁgures may also have served some such
function, but they seem to be involved in some common
experience and may participate in a narrative; in which
case the conﬁned arrangement and the mood of forebod-
ing might suggest the Ugolino and his sons conﬁned in
prison.
History
Pierre Crozat?; Pierre-Jean Mariette (L.1852); the Mar-
quis de Lagoy (L.1710); Thomas Dimsdale (L.2426); Sir
Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Woodburn, 1836b, no. 8 (“A Magniﬁcent Model – for
one of the ﬁgures on the Tombs of the Medici. This
splendid study is drawn with surprising energy, in the
grandest style of this great Master. It is executed with
the pen and bistre; and has several ﬁne studies on the
reverse, executed with the pen; engraved. Capital. Size 18
inches by 11 inches. From the Collections of M. Crozat,
M. Mariette, Marquis Legoy, and Thomas Dimsdale,
Esq.”). The Athenaeum, 16 July 1836 (“‘Figure for a
Tomb’; the drawing powerful beyond compare, with
that large-handedness about its contours which makes us
imagine the artist himself of colossal dimensions; never-
theless somewhat mannered and fantastic.”). The Court
Journal, 23 July 1836 (“[D]rawn with consummate learn-
ing and skilful freedom.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 14
(“A Magniﬁcent Study – for one of the ﬁgures on the
Tomb of the Medici at Florence, drawn with surprising
energy, in the grandest style of this Master, executed with
the pen and bistre; with several ﬁne studies on the reverse,
executed with the pen. It is engraved. See Landon’s M.
Angelo, pls. 17, 25, 26. Size 16 inches by 11 inches.
From the Collections of M. Crozat, M. Mariette, Mar-
quis Legoy, and Thomas Dimsdale, Esq.”). Fisher, 1852,
p. 5, pl. 26 (“Study – for one of the ﬁgures on the Tomb
of the Medici family at Florence, drawn with pen and
bistre in the grandest style of this Master.”). Fisher, 1865,
I, p. 19, pl. 26 (As 1852.). Robinson, 1870, no. 87 (Not
Michelangelo.). Fisher, 1872, I, p. 17, pl. 26 (As 1852.).
Fisher, 1879, LV/55 (“[N]ot to be ascribed to Michelan-
gelo.”). Parker, 1956, no. 237 (The recto ﬁgure shows
a debt to Pontormo’s Venus, designed by Michelangelo;
drawing “shows an absurdly exaggerated mannerism”
recalling Franco, but it is uncertain if it “is actually by
his hand.”).
CATALOGUE 111
battista franco? (c. 1510–1561)
Recto: Anatomical and Other Studies
Verso: Anatomical Studies
1846.130; R.51; P.II 409
Dimensions: 285 × 206 mm, small losses made up at
upper left and lower right
Medium
Pen and ink and red chalk, and red chalk over pen and
ink.
Condition
Double-sided window mount; bevelled inlay adhered to
verso.
Recto: There is overall patchy discolouration and
ingrained surface dirt with an “oily” stain at the top right
corner. There are three vertical fold lines with tears in all
the major folds, particularly at the edges. Various losses
have been ﬁlled. There is some show-through from the
verso.
Verso: The repair patches are clearly visible. There is
some colour change in the ink lines. The red chalk is
smudged at the right edge.
Description and Inscription
Recto
A. A grotesque ﬁgure, the torso merging into foliage.
B. A left leg, partially ´ecorch´e to show the bones and
muscles, seen frontally, in red chalk.
C. A grotesque head, in left proﬁle.

386
MISCELLANEOUS
CATALOGUE 111
D. Immediately below C. An elderly, long-bearded man
seen from the left.
E. The head of an elderly man, in left proﬁle.
F. Immediately below E. A sketch of a ﬂying God the
Father? seen frontally in foreshortening.
G. A standing female ﬁgure in a pose faintly reminiscent
of Leonardo’s Leda or Raphael’s Venus.
H. The same, abbreviated.
I. Lower centre, inscription: Al suo quanto fratello.
J. Right edge, inscription: Al suo (se)mpre?
Verso
A. A right eye in right proﬁle.
B. A right leg, partially ´ecorch´e to show the muscles, seen
frontally.
C. A right leg, partially ´ecorch´e to show the bones and
muscles, seen frontally (traced through from the recto).
Discussion
Although thought to be by Michelangelo as late as
Robinson’s catalogue, this double-sided sheet is certainly
by one of his followers. Berenson’s attribution to Raf-
faello da Montelupo has generally been accepted, but the
drawing does not display Raffaello’s characteristic left-
handed hatching, and the line-work seems more sinu-
ous and elegant than his. The way in which the bones
are drawn in pen and the muscles then inserted in red
chalk is also unusually neat for Raffaello. The compiler is
inclined to give this sheet to Battista Franco, who col-
laborated with Raffaello during the 1530s and copied
some of his drawings. However, this attribution must be
regarded as tentative, especially given our ignorance of
ﬁgure studies in pen by several of the artists who worked
closely with Michelangelo. Nor can any of the drawings
on this sheet ﬁrmly be connected with compositions by
Franco.
None of the drawings seem to derive directly from
surviving or lost drawings by Michelangelo. However,
the verso sketch of a right eye in proﬁle comes close to
such as those found on Cat. 28 verso and might, per-
haps, have been copied directly or indirectly from a lost
“teaching drawing” by Michelangelo. The style of the
anatomical studies is more linear and less substantial than

CATALOGUE 111
MISCELLANEOUS
387
Michelangelo’s anatomies in pen and can hardly be copied
from him, but the proportions of the leg are reminiscent
of Michelangelo’s work of the 1530s and 1540s when he
adopted thicker and heavier ﬁgure types. It is notable that
the draughtsman by tracing the forms of the left leg on
the recto, produced those of the right leg on the verso.
Such tracing was at times employed by Michelangelo,
but it was common enough practice for this not to be
signiﬁcant.
The grotesque proﬁles on the recto reﬂect an interest
common to Michelangelo and his pupils, but they can-
not be linked directly with any known drawings by them.
The well-characterised sketch of the elderly bearded
man – certainly not Michelangelo himself, as Robinson
surmised – is notable, but the compiler is unable to con-
nect it with other drawings.
History
Pierre Crozat; Pierre-Jean Mariette (L.1852); Graf Moritz
von Fries (L.2903); Marquis de Lagoy (no stamp); Sir
Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Vasari (Bottari, ed.), III, 1760, p. 240? (“Michelangelo,
quando doveva delineare una ﬁgura, cominciava dal farne
primo su una carta lo scheletro, e poi sopra un’ altra carta
disegnava la stessa ﬁgura rivestite di muscoli. . . . Signor
Mariette ha gli studi del Christo della Minerva fatti in
questa guisa.”). Marquis de Lagoy, etching of uncer-
tain date. Lawrence Inventory, 1830, no. 6 [1830-9] (“A
Curious leaf, on one side it is a portrait of M. Angelo.”).
Woodburn, 1836b, no. 45 (Recto: “Various studies – a
leg, of which the bones are drawn with surprising truth
to nature, and the sinews and ﬂesh marked in red chalk.
Also some heads of caricature, and an old man’s por-
trait, with a long beard. On the reverse are other studies.
Size, 11 1/4 inches by 8 1/4 inches. From the Collections
of M. Crozat, Mariette and the Count of Fries.”). The
Literary Gazette, July 1836 (“Nor ought the carefulness
with which this great man made his anatomical studies
to be lost upon the young artist. . . . So great, indeed,
was his solicitude in this respect, that he occasionally
drew the bones ﬁrst, with one material, and superinduced
the muscles with another. This practice is exempliﬁed in

388
MISCELLANEOUS
CATALOGUES 111–112
No. 45, ‘Various studies’, in which the bones of a leg
and thigh are drawn with ink and the sinews and ﬂesh
with red chalk; may we be daring enough to add, that
the form of the femur is not rendered with its natural
elegance?”). The Observer, 24 July 1836 ([H]is surprising
knowledge of anatomy.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 33 (As
1836.). Fisher, 1852, p. 6, pl. 28 (Recto and verso: “Var-
ious studies – a leg, of which the bones are drawn with
surprising truth to nature.”). Fisher, 1865, I, p. 19, pl. 28
(As 1852.). Robinson, 1870, no. 51 (Michel Angelo; the
bearded ﬁgure like Michelangelo; the inscription, not by
his hand, “may have reference to this likeness, and may be
construed to mean as like him as a brother.” Style “char-
acteristic of period of Medici tombs.”). Fisher, 1872, I,
p. 17, pl. 26 (As 1852.). Black, 1875, p. 213, no. 46. Gotti,
1875, II, p. 234. Fisher, 1879, XXXV/37a and b (Recto
and Verso: “a bust of a man with inscription below, said
to resemble Michelangelo himself.”). Berenson, 1903, I,
pp. 255, 262, no. 1715 (Montelupo.). Berenson, 1935,
p. 115 (Montelupo.). Berenson, 1938, pp. 257, 263,
no. 1715 (As 1903.). Parker, 1956, no. 409 (Montelupo.).
Berenson, 1961, no. 1715 (As 1903/1938.). Kornell, 1996,
pp. 115–16 (Raffaello da Montelupo; detailed discussion
of anatomy; Mariette may have thought that this sheet
was drawn in connection with the Minerva Christ.). Gat-
teschi, 1998, p. 58 (Raffaello da Montelupo; bearded man
is “il ritratto – inequivocabile e assai toccante – di un
Michelangelo in et`a avanzata”; probably datable to the
early 1540s.). Perrig, 1999, p. 226 (Attributed to Raf-
faello da Montelupo; one of only two drawings from the

CATALOGUES 111–112
MISCELLANEOUS
389
von Fries Collection to be exhibited as by Michelangelo
in 1836.).
CATALOGUE 112
girolamo muziano (1532–1592)
Recto: The Deposition
Verso: The Deposition Varied
1846.134. R.83; P.II 415
Dimensions: 262 × 161 mm
Medium
Red chalk.
Inscription
Verso: In pen and ink at lower centre: Michalangolo.
Discussion
The present drawing was probably given to Michelangelo
because of its broad compositional resemblance to the
master’s version of the subject in Haarlem (Teyler
Museum A25 recto/VT60/Corpus 89; red chalk, 273 ×
191 mm) and a close variant of that design, known from
a plaster cast in Casa Buonarroti and several plaques in
bronze. Girolamo Muziano’s authorship of the present
drawing was ﬁrst recognised by Pouncey. Even though
it has not securely been connected with a painting by
Muziano, it – and its companions – may represent early
ideas for a composition recorded in an engraving by
Cornelius Cort (The Illustrated Bartsch 52, 86-II).

390
MISCELLANEOUS
CATALOGUES 112–113
Three further studies are no doubt related:
1. Munich Graphische Sammlung, no. 2569 (red chalk,
247 × 185 mm), noted by Gere.
2. Ufﬁzi, 138E/198S (red chalk over stylus indentation,
427 × 285 mm), classed as Daniele da Volterra but trans-
ferred to Muziano by Hirst, 1967, p. 503.
3. Ufﬁzi, 12900F (red chalk, 158 × 101 mm), classed as
Titian but given to Muziano by Gere in an annotation
on the mount, accepted, in a subsequent annotation, by
Pouncey.
History
Jonathan Richardson Senior (L.2184); Thomas Hudson
(L.2432); Sir Joshua Reynolds (L.2364); Sir Thomas
Lawrence (no stamp); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 11,
Drawer 5 [1830–141 i,ii] (“Two: Study of a ﬁgure
M. Angelo and Taking down from cross from ditto.”).
Woodburn, 1836b, no. 46 (“[A]dmirably drawn in red
chalk.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 8 (As 1836.). Fisher, 1862,
p. 4, pl. 8 (“[A] Grand composition.”). Fisher, 1865,
II, p. 22, pl. 8 (As 1862.). Robinson, 1870, no. 83
(“Obviously the work of another artist. . . . This writer
believes . . . [it] is really from the hand of Jacopo Sanso-
vino” for the model in the Victoria and Albert Museum.).
Fisher, 1872, I, p. 20, pl. 8 (As 1862.). Fisher, 1879, LI/53
(“Formerly ascribed to Michelangelo.”). Thode, 1913,
no. 455 (Not Michelangelo.). Parker, 1956, no. 415 (As
Naldini. “J. Wilde’s attribution to Naldini seems proba-
bly correct. . . . According to P. M. R. Pouncey, No. 415
is certainly by Muziano.”). Gere, 1957, p. 161 (Endorses
Pouncey’s attribution to Muziano; notes similar study in
Graphische Sammlung, Munich, Inv. 2569.). Macandrew,
1980, p. 267 (Records Gere’s view.).
CATALOGUE 113
ﬂorentine draughtsman?
Nude Seated River God
1846.22; R.86; P.II 82
Dimensions: 178 × 110 mm, all corners chamfered.
Medium
Pen and ink with brush and brown wash.
Condition
Single-sided solid museum mount.
There is overall ingrained surface dirt and foxing.
There are various dark marks, which may be stains or
possibly show-through, which would suggest that there
may be marks, lines, or images on the laid-down verso.
There is a patch under the upper right edge and cleavage
at the upper right corner. There are spots of gold paint at
the top edge.
Inscription
An inscription in the hand of Jonathan Richardson the
Younger on the back of the now lost old mount, is pre-
served on the back of the present mount:
The Great Duke has a Model in Wax about the size of this
Figure made by Michelangelo to restore the torso, as this
Dr[awing]. was without doubt made for that Model.
That was a Present to the Great Duke by Franceschino
Vellazzano when he was very/ Old, & that it might be
preserv’d for ever as a Jewel. He had it from Vasari. J.R.
jun.
Shelfmarks: D.47/P. 65.G.

CATALOGUE 113
MISCELLANEOUS
391
Discussion
This and Cat. 70 – for which see further discussion – seem
to be the drawings recorded in Ottley’s sale of 1803 as part
of lot 27. This contained four drawings, two of which,
“in pen and bistre,” were “from M. Angelo’s model for
restoring the celebrated antique torso.” These studies were
attributed by Ottley to “KENT,” by which he presum-
ably meant William Kent, the painter and, still more
famously, architect. If this attribution could be proved
to be correct, they would no doubt have been copied by
Kent after earlier drawings because they bear no obvious
relation to his known drawing style. Alternatively – the
view prefered by the compiler – they may simply have
been owned either by Kent, or his homonym, the dealer,
and ownership was mistaken for authorship by Ottley.
Indeed, no previous writer seems to have expressed any
doubts that this drawing and Cat. 70 are genuinely of the
sixteenth century. William Kent the architect certainly
had contact with Jonathan Richardson the Younger as
well as the elder – he is referred to personally by the for-
mer in 1722 (p. 340) – and a drawing or drawings might
easily have passed between them. If the drawings are by
Kent, however, Parker’s inclusion of Lely? in the prove-
nance – a name not included by any other writer – would
have to be disregarded.
Parker’s tentative suggestion of Bandinelli as the author
of this drawing has not been taken up by later writers.
There is, however, a deﬁnite resemblance to the draw-
ing that he cites as a comparison (British Museum 1854-
6-28-1/Berenson 1681; pen and ink with wash, 366 ×
187 mm [maximum, irregular]), both in their style of
handling and in the fact that they are both strongly
inﬂuenced by Michelangelo’s Sistine ignudi. The present
drawing also seems to show knowledge of Michelan-
gelo’s New Sacristy ﬁgures, especially Day and Dawn.
Whether or not it does copy a model, believed in the
eighteenth century to have been made by Michelangelo
with the aim of restoring the Belvedere Torso, is a mat-
ter for conjecture. If so, the resemblance must be slight
because this ﬁgure has none of the muscular power of that
fragment.
The compiler is inclined to think that the present draw-
ing is of the 1530s or 1540s, and by a young sculptor
in Bandinelli’s circle, perhaps made to serve for a foun-
tain. This view is also that of an unidentiﬁed annota-
tor on the mount of the British Museum drawing, who
refers speciﬁcally to the present one. The British Museum
drawing, although on occasion in the past attributed to
Michelangelo or his school, is now given, rightly, in the
compiler’s view, to Baccio Bandinelli. However, it should
be noted that Nicholas Turner (in a personal communica-
tion) has suggested a radically different possibility: that the
present drawing is by the Lombard artist Daniele Crespi,
and the compiler can see sufﬁcient similarities with draw-
ings by Crespi to ﬁnd that idea intriguing.
Engraving
A facsimile was engraved by W. W. Ryland, signed and
dated 1762. This was included in Rogers, 1778, I, facing
p. 39.
History
Sir Peter Lely? (no stamp). Jonathan Richardson Senior
(L.2184); Jonathan Richardson Junior? (no stamp);
Uvedale Price?; Sir Joshua Reynolds (L.2364); William
Young Ottley? (probably his sale of 14 April 1803, part
of lot 27 (“Four – two of studies, pen, and two drawings
in pen and bistre by KENT, from M. Angelo’s model for
restoring the celebrated antique torso. See on the back,
quotations from Richardson and Wright” [the passage
from Wright, 1730, that Ottley refers to, and which – like
that of Richardson – is no longer attached to this draw-
ing, must be the following from his p. 268 “It is allow’d
by all to have been the Trunk of an Hercules and Some at
Rome suppose him to have been in the Act of Spinning;
but Mich. Angelo seem’d to have been of another Opin-
ion, according to a Model we saw at Florence, which he
made in order to restore it, as he was to have done had he
lived. In that Model, his right elbow rests upon his Thigh,
his Head is inclin’d as going to rest upon that hand, the
other Hand is lying loose upon the left Thigh. By this
it should be that Mich. Angelo’s Opinion was that it was
Hercules reposing himself, after his labours.”]); Sir Thomas
Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel Woodburn.
References
Richardson and Richardson, 1722, p. 75 (Seen in Florence
“The Model of Mich. Angelo for restoring the Torso; ’tis in
Wax, about the same Size as the Drawing for it which my
Father has. It was Vasari’s, afterwards Franceschino Volter-
rano had it; and when he was very Old he brought it to the
Great Duke as a Present, that it might be for ever preserv’d
in that Collection: ’tis in Perfection.”). Rogers, 1778, 1,
plate facing p. 39 (Michelangelo.). Ottley sale, 14 April
1803, part of lot 27? ( “Four – two of studies, pen, and two
drawings in pen and bistre by KENT, from M. Angelo’s
model for restoring the celebrated antique torso. See on
the back, quotations from Richardson and Wright.”).
Lawrence Inventory, 1830, M. A. Buonaroti Case 3,
Drawer 3 [1830–87] (“The Restoration of the Celebrated
Torso with a curious account at the back, annotated in
Roger [sic].”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 62 (“The restora-
tion of the Torso – pen and bistre wash. This Draw-
ing is copied in Mr Rogers’ imitations.”). Robinson,

392
MISCELLANEOUS
CATALOGUES 113–114
1870, no. 86 (Not Michelangelo.). Fisher, 1879, LIV/p. 17
(“Not considered authentic by Mr. Robinson.”). Parker,
1956, no. 82 (Attributed to Bandinelli; compared
with a drawing in the British Museum, 1854-6-28-1/
Berenson, 1903, no. 1681; pen and ink with wash, 400 ×
210 mm).
CATALOGUE 114
bartolommeo passerotti (1529–1592)
Recto: Study for Adam in a Composition of the Fall of
Man; Studies of Hands
Verso: Various Studies of a Right Hand; A Man Seen
from the Rear
1846.136; R.4; P. II 452
Dimensions: 410 × 263 mm
Medium
Pen and ink.
Condition
Double-sided solid museum mount with a bevelled inlay
attached to the verso.
Recto: There are many losses, all of which have been
ﬁlled and toned, no doubt at different times. There is
a heavy horizontal fold above the centre and a heavy

CATALOGUE 114
MISCELLANEOUS
393
horizontal crease across the centre. Various abrasions are
visible across the bottom edge, and various cleavages have
occurred in the medium (typical of iron gall ink deterio-
ration), most of which have been repaired on either the
recto or the verso with lens tissue.
Verso: There are brown-yellow areas of discolouration
or staining visible on the left edge and in various other
small areas, possibly the remnants of animal glue.
Inscription
Recto: In pen and ink at lower left: M.B.F. (i.e.,
Michelangelo Buonarroti Fecit).
Description
Recto
Top line
A. A seated ﬁgure, lit from the left.
B. The legs of A, lit from the left.
C. Slightly revised version of A, lit from the left.
D. A right leg, lit from the right.
E. A seen from the rear.
Second line
F. Part of E, repeated?.
G. Immediately below F. The foot and ankle of D, in
shadow.

394
MISCELLANEOUS
CATALOGUE 114
H. A right hand, lit from the left.
I. H, on a larger scale, lit from the left.
Third line
J. H, revised, lit from the left.
K. H, now shown holding an apple, lit from the left.
Verso (in the opposite sense from the recto)
A. The torso of a male nude seen from the rear, three-
quarters left.
B. A right hand, bent at the wrist, seen from the left.
C. A version of B, on a larger scale.
D. A version of B, more loosely drawn.
Discussion
The studies on the recto were presumably made for a
seated Adam in a composition of the Fall of Man, as K
clearly indicates. However, because this subject is not
recorded in painted or graphic form by Passerotti, either
it was not taken further or the ﬁnal work has been
lost.
The hand studies on the verso display more tension and
suggest a different pose and a different subject. Sleeves are
clearly indicated on all three studies, and these would
not, of course, be appropriate to The Fall. As noted by
H¨oper, hand studies of similar type are to be found in
D¨usseldorf (Museum Kunstpalast, FP 9445; pen and ink,
354 × 257 mm), Milan (Ambrosiana, F 265 Inf 67; pen and
ink, 400 × 276 mm), Munich (Graphische Sammlung,
Inv. 13.731; pen and ink, 370 × 214 mm), and Vienna
(Albertina, 2029; pen and ink, 388 × 270 mm) among
other collections. All these are broadly comparable in size
with the present sheet. It was remarked by Titus, 1975,
that the source of the hand is a plastic model, of which a
version is preserved in the Victoria and Albert Museum
(Pope-Hennessy, 1964, II, no. 461).
As H¨oper further notes, the study of a back, A, is closely
comparable in its pen-work with a page of ﬁgure draw-
ings in the Victoria and Albert Museum (Dyce 159/Ward-
Jackson 242; pen and ink, 419 × 260 mm). The ﬁgure of
which this is a detail, no doubt a model in wax or clay,
seems to have been of particular interest to Passerotti. It
was also represented by him at full-length in a drawing
offered at Christie’s, London, 11 July 2002, lot 6 (pen and
ink, 440 × 200 mm) and on both sides of a sheet in the
Sz´epm¨uv´eszeti M¨uzeum, Budapest, Inv. 1907 (pen and
ink, 416 × 216 mm). The Budapest sheet was attributed
to the ´equipe of Bertoja and Mirola by De Grazia, 1991,
D/2, but on balance Passerotti seems to the compiler to
be more likely. De Grazia notes the similarity of this ﬁg-
ure to Michelangelo’s marble David, and it is not to be
excluded that these drawings do indeed record a model
by Michelangelo that enjoyed great longevity as a studio
prop. An example can be seen at the lower left in the Por-
trait of an Artist from the circle of G´ericault in the Mus´ee
du Louvre, RF 1225.
It was suggested by Parker, followed by Dussler and
others, that this drawing was created by Passerotti in
a deliberate attempt to deceive. The compiler ﬁnds
this implausible. The drawing diverges in no way from
Passerotti’s distinctive style. Had Passerotti wished to fake
a drawing by Michelangelo, he would surely have imitated
a drawing by the master that he knew, and no surviving
drawing by Michelangelo resembles this, in pen-work,
layout, or the structures of the forms depicted. To the
compiler, the initials on the recto seem clearly a later
addition, designed to enhance the sheet’s value, and he
sees no justiﬁcation for the view that they are executed
in the same ink and by the same hand as the drawing.
If the provenance from Sir Peter Lely proposed below
is correct, it must be assumed that his stamp was lost from
the present verso of the sheet between 1807 and 1836
and that the Casa Buonarroti-Wicar provenance given by
Woodburn in 1836, modiﬁed to Wicar alone in 1842, was
an error.
History
Casa Buonarroti; Jean-Baptiste Wicar (this provenance
ﬁrst given by Woodburn in 1836, is probably incorrect;
Casa Buonarroti is omitted in 1842-85); more probable
is Sir Peter Lely; William Young Ottley (his sale of July
1807, lot 374, “One – a study of three hands – masterly
ﬁne pen – PL”); Sir Thomas Lawrence (L.2445); Samuel
Woodburn.
References
William Young Ottley? (his sale of July 1807, lot 374,
“One – a study of three hands – masterly ﬁne pen – PL.”).
Woodburn, 1836b, no. 10 (A Study of Three Hands –
and the back of a male ﬁgure. This noble drawing is exe-
cuted with the pen with the utmost skill and knowledge;
it far exceeds the very celebrated drawing of a similar
subject mentioned by Vasari which is now in the Louvre
[Inv. 717/J R2/Corpus 93]. On the reverse side, are other
models for the same hand, on a smaller scale, but equally
ﬁne. Capital. Size, 16 1
4 inches by 10 1
2 iches. From the Col-
lections of M. Buonarroti, and the Chevalier Wicar.”).
The Court Journal, 23 July 1836 (“[F]ull of life and motion
suspended.”). Woodburn, 1842, no. 85 (“A sheet of stud-
ies of hands – also the body of a man; powerfully drawn,
bistre pen. Size, 16 1
2 inches by 11 3
8 inches. From the Col-
lection of the Chevalier Wicar.”). Woodburn, 1853, no 26
(Verso reproduced.). Fisher 1862, p. 4, pl. 14 (Recto only:

CATALOGUE 114
MISCELLANEOUS
395
“Powerfully drawn.”). Fisher 1865, t. II, p. 23, pl. 14 (As
1862.). Robinson, 1870, no. 4 (“[I]ncontestably the work
of Michelangelo,” c. 1500. The studies of a hand probably
made from a plastic model by Michelangelo, which has
not survived; a comparable model of a left hand deriv-
ing from Michelangelo is in the Gherardini Collection of
the Victoria and Albert Museum; the seated ﬁgure “from
a bronze or wax model, probably from a Renaissance
imitation of an antique statuette of Mercury or Mars.”
Reference to Louvre Inv. 717/J R2/Corpus 93 whose
handling resembles “the coarser manner of Bandinelli.”).
Fisher, 1872, PII, p. 21, pl. 14 (As 1862.). Black, 1875,
p. 213, no. 4. Philostrate, 1878, p. 215 (Verso reproduced,
as by Michael Angelo.). Fisher 1879, PIII/3 (Verso only:
“Studies of Hands.”). Wickhoff, 1891, p. ccviii (Passerotti,
not Michelangelo.). Berenson 1903, no. 1699 (Passerotti.).
Delacre, 1938, pp. 105, 112, 532 (Close links with Louvre
Inv. 717/J R2/Corpus 93, accepted by Delacre as by
Michelangelo.). Berenson, 1938, no. 1699 (Passerotti.).
Parker, 1956, no. 452 (Passerotti; reference to Albertina
2029, inscribed Il Passarotti; “the inscription has every
appearance of being by the draughtsman’s own hand, and
its intention must therefore presumably have been fraud-
ulent.”). Dussler, 1959, p. 36 (Passerotti may himself have
added the inscription M.B.F.). Berenson, 1961, no. 1699
(Passerotti.). Barocchi, 1962, p. 266, under no. 213
(Passerotti.). Van Schaak, 1962, pp. 75–6 (Publishes Three
Studies of Hands [pen and ink, 417 × 198 mm] in a U.S.
private collection; suggests that this drawing like Cat. 114
“may have been intended by Passerotti to pass fraudulently
as an original by Michelangelo.”). Gregori, 1967, p. 48,
under no. 68 (Compared with Passerotti’s Female Head,
pen and ink, 372 × 261 mm, in the Meissner Collec-
tion.). Sutton, 1970, no. 35 (“The inscription . . . appears
to be from the draughtsman’s own hand and therefore
to have been of fraudulent intent.”). Titus, 1975, p. 43,
under no. 38 (“Passerotti seems to have attempted to pass
off the drawing as an original by Michelangelo. On the
same sheet one has evidence of Passerotti avidly copying
a small cast of a hand, traditionally known as the ‘Hand
of Michelangelo’ which is also copied on other sheets by
Passerotti. A version of this to be found in the Victoria
and Albert Museum.”). B´eguin and Giampaolo, 1979,
p. 33 (Some drawings by Passerotti, like Cat. 114, have
been given to Michelangelo because they bear the initials
M.B.F.). Scrase, 1981–2, p. 50 (A drawing by Passerotti
in the Fitzwilliam Museum [PD.122-1961] related to the
wax model in Casa Buonarroti, Inv. 521, also formerly
attributed to Michelangelo “even freer” in style.). Meijer
and Van Tuyll, 1983, p. 116, under no. 47 (Compared with
a study of four hands in the Teyler Museum, Haarlem,
A13 recto/VT 362; pen and ink, 251 × 215 mm). H¨oper,
1987, p. 175 (Passerotti; comparison with drawings in
other collections; summary of view.).


APPENDIX 1
 drawings by or attributed to michelangelo in
william young ottley’s sales
TEXTS
I
An Extensive Collection of Capital Drawings, 14 April 1803,
and seven days following, except Sunday. Thomas Philipe,
Warwick Street, Golden Square, London.
michael angelo buonaroti
18. Two – Sybils, one in bistre on blue paper, heightened;
two in red chalk, one pen; Judith with the head of
Holofernes, black chalk and bistre, heightened.
19. Three – The Brazen Serpent, in an angle, pen and
bistre; the Fall of Phaeton, pen and Indian ink; and a
composition in black chalk, by marcello venusti, great
design.
20. Four – The Annunciation, pen and bistre, two Holy
Families, pen; and a Pieta, pen and bistre.
21. Two – The Deluge, one a small ﬁne pen sketch, round;
the other the great composition in the capella sistina, mas-
terly pen and Indian ink, heightened.
22. One – A group in the Last Judgement, pen and bistre.
From Sir Peter Lely’s collection.
23. One – Pen sketch, on blue paper, most masterly. From
Hudson’s collection.
24. Two – The Descent from the Cross, masterly pen and
bistre, and Sarcophagus, pen and Indian ink.
25. One – Muscular ﬁgures on both sides, masterly ﬁne pen.
26. One – Bust of a young man, after Michael Angelo, black
chalk, see account at bottom.
27. Four – two of studies, pen, and two drawings in pen and
bistre, by kent, from M. Angelo’s model for restoring the
celebrated antique torso.
See on the back, quotations from Richardson and Wright.
sarto
587. One – A whole length portrait of Michael Angelo,
black chalk, on blue paper, heightened, from the Duke of
Argyll’s collection.
II
Capital Collection of Drawings of the Great Masters of all
the Schools. 11 April 1804 and three days following. Thomas
Philipe, Warwick Street, Golden Square, London.
michael angelo
264. One – a naked youth standing, red chalk, very ﬁne.
265. Three – two studies, in black chalk; and one ditto,
masterly pen – on the back of the last is an account of money,
in the writing of the celebrated artist – bought from the
family of the artist, still resident in Florence.
266. Six – studies of heads – three in black chalk, two in red
and one ﬁne pen – from the Martelli collection at Florence.
267. Nine – studies of legs and thighs – four in black, four
red chalk, and one pen, from the same collection.
268. Ten – ditto, and arms, etc. – 2 arms, one foot, red chalk,
three arms and one leg and thigh, in black chalk; an arm,
pen; a horse’s head and a monstrous animal, black chalk –
from the Bonarroti collection – on the back of one are some
verses autograph of this great artist.
269. Four – three proﬁle heads; and a military ﬁgure, on
one knee, all in red chalk; on the back of the latter is a pen
sketch – the heads are from the Martelli collection.
270. Five – various pen studies of ﬁgures and architecture –
some of his writing on the back of three – from the Bonarroti
collection.
271. One leaf containing nine capital studies, in black chalk,
two horses, ﬁve thighs, with legs, and two feet, from the
Martelli collection.
272. One ditto, containing two studies of heads, ears, archi-
tecture, etc., all masterly pen, from Lely’s collection.
397

398
APPENDIX 1. DRAWINGS IN WILLIAM YOUNG OTTLEY’S SALES
273. One ditto, containing three studies of ﬁgures, all in
black chalk, from the Bonarroti collection.
274. One ditto, containing several studies of attitudes for the
Last Judgment, and a study for the Annunciation, all in black
chalk, from ditto.
275. One ditto, containing two studies in black chalk, one
for the Last Judgment, the other a man carried on the shoul-
ders of three naked ﬁgures, very ﬁne, from the same collec-
tion.
276. One – a sheet of capital studies – red chalk on one
side; black chalk, with a little red on the other – from Count
Geloso’s cabinet.
277. One – a group of three ﬁgures in the Last Judgment, a
masterly sketch – black chalk and Indian ink.
278. One – the Pieta, a beautiful high-ﬁnished study, by
Michael Angelo, for the picture by Sebastiano del Piombo
for the church of St. Francis at Viterbo, black chalk,
stumped – see Vasari, tom. 2, p. 345 – from the Spada
collection at Rome.
279. Three – a sheet with two torsos, etc., free pen, and
some of his writing, and two others by Salviati etc. after
Michael Angelo, one in red, the other in black chalk.
III
Sale, London, 6–13 July 1807, 9 July (4th day); Thomas
Philipe, Warwick Street, Golden Square, London.
michelangelo
374. One – a study of three hands – masterly ﬁne pen – pl
(i.e., Sir Peter Lely).
375. One – Descent from the Cross, many ﬁgures – black
chalk, stumped, ﬁne, from Conde Geloso’s Cabinet.
376. Two – a ﬁght of cavaliers, black chalk and pen, capital;
and a group of ﬁve ﬁgures, half length, pen and bistre, ﬁne.
377. One – the Fall of the Giants, pen and bistre – capital –
from K. Cha. I cabinet.
IV
Ottley Sale, 6 June 1814 and ﬁfteen following days. Thomas
Philipe, Warwick Street, Golden Square, London.
buonarroti or bonarroti
(In this sale, the drawings were divided into six groups, sold
on different days.)
Third Day (p. 23)
253. One, an architectural design – a window, for the Loren-
ziana library, studies on the back in black chalk. From the
Bonarroti collection at Florence.
£1.1.0
254. One, a ditto, ditto from the same collection.
£3.3.0
255. Two studies of heads etc. – red chalk.
£3.3.0
256. Four pen studies, on one sheet, from the Bonarroti
collection. With specimens of his handwriting on the back
of two.
£3.5.0
257. A man’s head – black chalk.
£5.15.6 (also £5.5.0 in pencil in opposite margin)
258. Three – an eagle’s wing – red chalk; an eagle – pen
wash, and a study of eyes, etc., done when he was young –
pen.
£1.1.0
259. One – a man’s head, proﬁle, black chalk.
£1.1.0
260. Two leaves of architectural designs, etc., from the
Buonarroti Collection, one of them for the sacristy of St
Lorenzo, the other for the cupola of St Peter’s. A specimen
of his handwriting on one.
£6.6.0
261. Two – an architectural design; and a pieta, both pen.
His writing on the back of one.
£1.11.6
262. One – a study for the Prophet Isaiah, in the Capella
Sistina – free pen and bistre. most capital – pen studies on
the back.
263. One – a study for his picture of the Conversion of St
Paul, in the Paoline Chapel, purchased of Signor Cavaceppi,
formerly in the Cicciaporci collection – black chalk and
bistre.
£5.5.0
264. One – a sheet with two leaves of his sketch book con-
taining pen studies on both sides, for the vault of the Capella
Sistina – most interesting. From the Buonarroti collection.
£5.5.0
265. One – a sheet with two ditto, for ditto, ditto
£5.5.0 (pencil annotation: Clark £10.0.0)
Seventh Day (p. 74)
823. Three, on one leaf, studies in black chalk – a ﬁgure on
the back of one.
£6.0.0
824. One, of studies in black chalk for his composition of
Christ praying in the garden – ditto.
£4.0.0
825. One, of studies for a pieta – black chalk. From the
collection of the Cicciaporci family of Florence, to whom
the contents of the three above lots formerly belonged,

APPENDIX 1. DRAWINGS IN WILLIAM YOUNG OTTLEY’S SALES
399
mentioned in the preface to Condivi, Life of Michelangelo,
published in 1746, page xviii. This collection was sold and
dispersed about 1765, and with others purchased of the
Cav. Cavaceppi, 1792–3, by their present proprietor.
£6.10.0
826. One – a Pieta, a study by M. Angelo, for the pic-
ture painted by Sebastiano del Piombo, in the church of St
Francis, at Viterbo – black chalk. capital. See Vasari.
£11.0.0
827. One – a ﬁne study for the upper part of the holy family,
in the Palazzo Buonarroti at Florence – one of his last works –
free pen and wash. Engraved in the Etruria Pittrice.
£5.0.0
828. One – the ﬁgure of Christ naked for the ﬂagel-
lation painted by Sebastiano del Piombo – black chalk,
stumped and heightened – very ﬁne. From the Cicciaporci
collection.
£10.0.0
829. One – a woman with a child on her knee – the original
design for one of the most celebrated groups in the vault of
the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican – black chalk on tinted
paper, heightened. Engraved in Mr Ottley’s Italian School
of Design.
£12.12.0
Thirteenth Day (pp. 129–30)
1500. Two – a group in the Sistine Chapel, after Michael
Angelo, one a damned head, both red chalk, stumped.
£0.5.0
1501. One – naked females sitting, one holding a child, in
the same manner – very ﬁne. From Lamberto Gori’s collec-
tion at Florence.
£14.0.0
1502. One – the design for the ﬁgure of the Madonna in
the Last Judgement – black chalk. capital. From the same
collection.
£9.0.0
1503. One – the Virgin and Child with St. Elizabeth, sitting
by, a prodigiously ﬁne group, free pen and wash, heightened.
most capital. From the same collection.
£17.5.0
1504. Two, on one leaf – three naked ﬁgures carrying a
dead body – stumped – black chalk – ﬁne; and two sketches
of a ﬁgure for the last judgment – black chalk. From the
Cicciaporci collection.
£5.7.6
Fourteenth Day (p. 137)
1586. One – a Madonna and child – ﬁne pen – curious.
One of Michel Angelo’s earliest performances.
£0.10.6
1587. Two black chalk studies on one leaf – the Annun-
ciation, with a specimen of his writing, from the Ciccia-
porci collection, and a dog lying in the midst of ﬂames,
an emblematic design. From the Buonarroti collection at
Florence.
£10.10.0
1588. One – a leaf of pen studies – head of a warrior, etc.,
very ﬁne. P. L. – in his early manner.
£9.15.0
1589. One – a leaf containing four designs – a pen sketch
of a draped ﬁgure turning over the leaves of a book from
nature, which appears to have given him the idea for his sybil
erithraea in the Sistine chapel, and three small studies of
heads, two of them in pen, the other black chalk, two sitting
ﬁgures sketched from nature on the back – pen and wash.
£4.4.0
1590. One – a back ﬁgure, naked, a study for one of the
devils in the Last Judgment – black chalk – very ﬁne. From
L. Gori’s collection.
£5.10.0
1591. One – Christ on the cross, two angels lamenting on
each side of him in the clouds – a highly ﬁnished design –
black chalk. capital. Made by him for the Marchesa di
Pescara (See Vasari) formerly in the King of Naples col-
lection at Capo di Monti.
£6.16.6
1592. Two ﬁnely drawn male ﬁgures, standing, one of them
a ﬁrst thought for his colossal statue of David – mostly pen.
Fifteenth Day (p. 145)
1677. One, a dream of Michael Angelo, relating to the inqui-
etudes which he suffered in the latter years of his life from
those employed with him in the fabric of St Peter’s – it is
thus inscribed in his own hand: Sogni fatti a di 16 di Aprile
1560 la notte della domenica seconda doppo pasqua – six
ﬁgures in spirited pen – very curious.
£?
1678. One – a sketch for his own monument; at the bottom
the rivers Arno and Tyber, with the representations of the
Lorenzian library and the church of St Peter’s, his chief works
in architecture; the compartment in the centre represents
Michael Angelo, when a boy, received by the Arts into the
Garden of Lorenzo de Medici, where he began by designing
from the remains of ancient sculpture, on either side the
guardian genius of Buonarroti triumphing over Envy and
over Death; above his sarcophagus appears the ﬁgure of Fame
sounding his praises, with three trumpets, as a sculptor, a
painter and an architect – ﬁne pen. most interesting.
£6/0?.10.6
1679. Three, on one leaf – a ﬁrst thought for the Sybilla
Lybica in the Sistine Chapel – ﬁne pen; a beautiful head, red

400
APPENDIX 1. DRAWINGS IN WILLIAM YOUNG OTTLEY’S SALES
chalk on the back; and two pen sketches below – from the
Buonarroti collection.
£10.10.0
1680. One – a design of horses, etc. – free pen – a ﬁrst
thought on the back, for the statue of Christ in the Minerva –
red chalk – very ﬁne.
£5.15.6
1681. One – a man on horseback defending himself – ﬁne
pen – intended perhaps for the cartoon of Pisa; – another
horse in black chalk – from the Buonarroti collection – most
spirited.
£5.10.0
1682. One – two draped ﬁgures, standing, bold pen –
engraved in Mr. Ottley’s work – a head in proﬁle, full of
character, on the back.
£35.0.0
Sixteenth Day (pp. 152–3)
1758. One – masterly pen studies of horses; one a skirmish
intended probably for the cartoon of Pisa – one of Michel
Angelo’s sonnets in his own handwriting on the back. From
the Buonarroti collection.
£23.2.0
1759. One – a masterly pen sketch for a battle or skirmish,
intended perhaps for the same cartoon – very ﬁne.
£9.9.0
1760. One – a leaf of masterly sketches in red chalk; Her-
cules and Antaeus, etc. on both sides with one of his poems
autograph. most interesting. This poem is copied in fac-
simile in Mr Duppa’s Life of Michael Angelo.
£33.12.0
1761. One – a design for two groups of the Capella Sistina –
Charity etc. – a sketch of an arm on the back – black chalk.
capital. From the collection of Lamberto Gori.
£17.17.0
1762. The poems of michel angelo, the ﬁrst edition, pub-
lished by his nephew and printed by the giunti in 1623, in
sheets, complete and never stitched. From the Buonarroti
family – unique.
£6.6.0
1763. One – a study for the head of St Bartholomew, in the
last judgment, larger than life, black chalk; various studies,
black and red chalk on the back. most capital.
£42.0.0
1764. One, descent from the cross – black chalk, stumped –
capital. From the collection of Conde Geloso.
£5.15.6
1765. One – the fall of Phaeton, in the same manner, made
in 1559 for his friend Tomaso Cavalieri capital. The collec-
tion of Lamberto Gori. See Mem in Michel Angelo’s own
hand-writing on the back
£19.10.0
1766. One – three ﬁgures in conversation – masterly pen –
R. The original from which Baptista Franco made the copy,
engraved in Mr Rogers’s work. r. capital. See note on the
back.
£20.0.0.
1767. the famous dream of michael angelo, black chalk,
exquisitely ﬁnished – most capital. It differs in some
respects from the prints engraved from it.
£60.0.0
1768. One – a sketch of the group of the “the martyrs” and
“the seven mortal sins” in the last judgment, but very dif-
ferent from the ﬁnished picture – two ﬁne heads and other
sketches on the back – black chalk. capital. From the Cic-
ciaporci collection, engraved in Mr. Ottley’s work.
£54.12.0
1769. One – a bust of Cleopatra – a highly ﬁnished and
capital design – black chalk. Also engraved in Mr. Ottley’s
work.
£12.12.0
. . . The designs, therefore, which he had at different peri-
ods made for his friends, especially Tommaso Cavalieri, and
the Marchesa di Pescara and those he had left in Florence
were, perhaps, the only ones which escaped. Many of his
sketches were till lately preserved in his house, still belong-
ing to the Family at Florence. The Cicciaporci family, as is
mentioned by Baldinucci, had others. A large proportion of
those contained in the present catalogue are from the above
collections.
COMMENTARY
I
T. Philipe and Co., London. 14 April 1803 and seven days
following, except Sunday.
In this sale, ten lots (excluding lot 587) were classed as
by Michelangelo. They comprised twenty-one drawings of
which seventeen were claimed to be autograph. Identiﬁca-
tions can be proposed for only three drawings, that in lot 26
and two of the four in lot 27.
No Italian provenances are recorded. Drawings are listed
as from Sir Peter Lely (lot 22), Thomas Hudson (lot 23),
and no doubt Jonathan Richardson the Elder and Sir Joshua
Reynolds (lot 27).
It is unlikely that this sale contained any autograph draw-
ings by Michelangelo.
18 i,ii. Unidentiﬁed.

APPENDIX 1. DRAWINGS IN WILLIAM YOUNG OTTLEY’S SALES
401
19 i,ii,iii. Unidentiﬁed.
20 i,ii,iii,iv. Unidentiﬁed.
21 i. Unidentiﬁed.
ii. Perhaps acquired by William Roscoe and in his sale
September 1816, as part of lot 65: “a Group intended for
the Compartment of the Deluge, in the Cieling [sic] of the
Capella Sistina. Pen and bistre, heightened. Size 11 h 8 w.
From the Collection of P. H. Lanckinck,” bought Heber
15s. Untraced.
22. 1807-277?
23. Unidentiﬁed.
24 i,ii. Unidentiﬁed.
25. Unidentiﬁed.
26. This may be the copy of the portrait drawing of Andrea
Quaratesi in Rotterdam, the Boymans Museum, Inv. I 174,
black chalk, H.0,462; L.0,362. In the Boymans Museum it is
given to Jacopo Vignali, but it is probably by Carlo Dolci, like
the Louvre copy. Although this drawing’s certain provenance
is Sir Joshua Reynolds, Thomas Banks, and Sir Edward John
Poynter, Ottley might well have owned it between Reynolds
and Banks.
27 i,ii,iii,iv. The two studies ascribed to kent may be iden-
tical with two drawings now in the Ashmolean Museum:
i. 1842-62/R.86/P.II 82/Cat. 113.
ii. 1842-74/1846-49/R.66/P.II 373/Cat. 70.
It is uncertain whether the Kent referred to is the architect
and painter William Kent (1685–1748) or the dealer of the
same name, documented as active in Florence and Rome in
1758–1760, where he acquired both paintings and drawings.
Reynolds owned yet another drawing that he believed to be
by Michelangelo and which he annotated: “Study for restor-
ing the torso”; this is now in the British Museum, W104.
587. Unidentiﬁed.
II
Capital Collection of Drawings of the Great Masters of all
the Schools. 11 April 1804 and three days following.
The section of this sale that interests us contained six-
teen lots comprising sixty-two drawings, sixty of which are
attributed to Michelangelo; some fourteen of these seem to
be identiﬁable with varying degrees of security (see lots 264,
266, 267, 268, 269, 272, 274). It is uncertain whether the
drawings stated as coming from the Buonarroti Collection
(lots 265 [three drawings], 268 [two or ten? drawings], 270
[ﬁve drawings], 273 [three drawings], 274 [two drawings],
275 [two drawings]) comprise an overall total of seventeen or
twenty-ﬁve drawings since the general description of the ten
drawings in lot 268 seems so close to the description of those
in lot 267, which came from the Martelli Collection, that it
may be that only two drawings, the “monstrous animal,” and
the “leg and thigh” in that lot came from Casa Buonarroti. In
1814, Ottley explicitly included drawings originating from
different collections in the same lot, and he may already have
done so in 1804. He presumably mounted or re-mounted
together compatible drawings that he had acquired from dif-
ferent sources.
Four lots (266 [containing six drawings], 267 [contain-
ing nine drawings], 269 [containing four drawings], 271
[containing nine drawings]) comprise a total of twenty-eight
drawings of which twenty-seven are listed as coming from
the Martelli Collection, but if eight of the ten included in
lot 268 also came from the Martelli, then the total from
that source would rise to thirty-ﬁve. One drawing (lot 276)
came from Count “Geloso,” that is Count Genovesino, and
another one came from Sir Peter Lely (lot 272).
michael angelo
264. 1842-61/R.85/P.II 371 (all give the provenance solely
as Ottley)/Cat. 108.
265 i,ii,iii. It may be that this lot is identical with 1814-260,
which should be seen for further details.
266 i,ii,iii,iv,v,vi. Not securely identiﬁed. Perhaps the two
drawings in 1814-255 came from this group. A drawing
sold at Sotheby’s London, 11 June 1981, lot 239, red chalk,
130 × 65 mm, as ascribed to Michelangelo, and from the
collections of William Young Ottley and Thomas Banks
may also have come from this group: It represents a young
man in left proﬁle and bears a No. 32 whose form indi-
cates a provenance from a Florentine collection. A group of
drawings by Antonio Gabbiani (1652–1726), whose mem-
bers bear the same type of numbering, was owned by Wicar
and is now in Lille. This numbering, which presumably
post-dates Gabbiani’s death, was tentatively identiﬁed by
Pouncey and Gere, 1962, p. 129, no. 224 as that of Lam-
berto Gori, but it seems much more probable that it is that of
the Martelli Collection. A sheet of red chalk sketches in the
Prado, FD2522/Inv. D-1736, bearing the “Martelli” num-
ber 79, containing further sketches of proﬁles, a left eye, and
a schematic bending skeleton, may have been part of this
Michelangelesque group. For this sheet, and the others in
the Prado that are discussed later, see Turner and Joannides,
2003.
267 i,ii,iii,iv,v,vi,vii,viii,ix. Not securely identiﬁed. A
red chalk drawing in the Prado (FD 2335/Inv. D-1738) con-
taining three studies of a right leg, which appears to be a
copy of a lost sheet or sheets by Michelangelo of the early
1520s, may have been part of this lot. This also once bore
a “Martelli” number of the type discussed in the commen-
taries to lots 266 and 268, but it has been erased so thor-
oughly that no more than a trace now remains.

402
APPENDIX 1. DRAWINGS IN WILLIAM YOUNG OTTLEY’S SALES
268 i,ii,iii,iv,v,vi,vii,viii,ix,x. The “monstrous animal” is
probably BM W50, whose earliest provenance is given by
Wilde as H. Wellesley; a less likely alternative is 1842-
75/1846-52/R.53a/P. II 320/Cat. 36. The “leg and thigh,
in black chalk” probably refers to the sheet of which it is
noted “on the back of one are some verses autograph of this
great artist” because the description ﬁts very neatly a sheet
now in the British Library (Department of Manuscripts Add.
Ms. 21907, fol. 1/Corpus 217; black chalk and pen and ink,
150 × 185 mm), which has a study of a leg and thigh for the
New Sacristy Day on the verso and a sonnet by Michelan-
gelo on the recto. This sheet (which Hugo Chapman kindly
drew to the compiler’s attention) is on an Ottley mount
and it was acquired by the British Museum from the sale
of the poet Samuel Rogers, Christie’s, London, 28 April
1856, etc., as part of lot 1212, a group of eight drawings
listed under the name of Fuseli (this information comes
from an annotated copy of the Samuel Rogers sale cata-
logue, preserved in the Department of Prints and Draw-
ings of the British Museum). The sheet may have been
bought by Fuseli in 1804 and subsequently acquired by
Samuel Rogers, who would obviously have been interested
in owning a poem by Michelangelo. The poem on the sheet
was thought to be more signiﬁcant than the drawing, so it
was allocated to the Department of Manuscripts and is now
part of the collections of the British Library rather than the
British Museum; it was not included in Wilde’s catalogue
of 1953.
If the other drawings in lot 268 came from the Martelli
Collection rather than Casa Buonarroti, then two auto-
graph black chalk sketches by Michelangelo that entered
the Prado in 1930 may have formed part of it. One of these
(FD2515/Inv. 1732) is a loose study of a right arm; the other
(FD2464/Inv. 1733) prepares the right shoulder, upper arm
and part of the torso of the devil carrying a woman from
the Last Judgement. They bear respectively the “Martelli”
numbers 2 and 28.
269 i,ii,iii,iv. The “three proﬁle heads . . . in red chalk”
may be identical with a sheet in the Prado by an associate
of Michelangelo (FD53/Inv. D-1737); it bears the “Martelli”
number 3. A further drawing of a proﬁle, the now unlocated
drawing 1836-18, reproduced by Woodburn, 1853, no. 27,
may have been made by the same hand; however, it did not
bear a Martelli number and had a provenance from the Duke
of Modena, so it must have been separated from the others
at least by the mid-seventeenth century.
270 i,ii,iii,iv,v. Unidentiﬁed. It may be that four of the
ﬁve drawings in this lot re-appeared as 1814-256.
271. Unidentiﬁed.
272. This drawing reappeared as 1814-1588. It is probably
identical with a drawing by Michelangelo, now in Hamburg
(Inv. 21094/Corpus 35), bearing Sir Peter Lely’s stamp and
with a provenance from William Esdaile, who no doubt
acquired it at the 1814 sale.
273 i,ii,iii. 1814-823 i,ii,iii, but it must be assumed that the
change of provenance between the two sales was the result
of an error either in 1804 or in 1814. The probability that
Cat. 51 was copied by Andrea Commodi would support
a provenance for that drawing, and presumably the other
two on the same mounting, from Casa Buonarroti, as stated
in 1804. 1814-823 was acquired by William Roscoe; it reap-
peared at his sale of September 1816 as lot 59: “Three, Studies
of a Figure, in black chalk; another ﬁgure on the reverse of
one of them. From the same Collection” (as the previous lot,
i.e., Mr. Ottley’s). It was acquired by Watson, a pseudonym of
the London bookseller William Carey, for 15 s. and presum-
ably later entered Lawrence’s collection, 1830-Unidentiﬁed.
By 1842, these three fragments had been combined with
two others (P.II 368, 377/Cats. 101, 73) to make a
mounting of ﬁve sheets: 1842-35/1846-40/R.60 (1,2,3)/
P.II 334, 335, 336 (all these catalogues give the provenance as
Buonarroti, Wicar and Lawrence)/Cats. 53, 51, 52.
274. No single drawing answers this description, nor any
mounting that can now conﬁdently be reconstructed. But
it seems probable that this lot was a mounting of two black
chalk drawings subsequently disassembled and re-mounted
by Ottley. If this is correct then:
i. The “studies of attitudes” may be 1842-54/R.67/P.II
329 (all of which omit Cicciaporci)/Cat. 41.
ii. The Annunciation probably reappeared as one of the
two sheets in 1814-1587. In the entry for 1814-1587, the
provenance of the Annunciation is given as Cicciaporci
whereas its new companion is given as Buonarroti/1842-
28/1846-32/R.74/P.II 345 (all of which give the provenance
as Buonarroti, Wicar, and Lawrence, omitting Cicciaporci
and Ottley)/Cat. 50.
275 i,ii. This mounting of two drawings reappeared as 1814-
1504.
i. 1814-1504 ii (as from the Cicciaporci Collection)/Part
of 1831-81 i,ii,iii/1836-82 i,ii,iii/1842-64 i,ii,iii/1846-65
i,ii,iii/R.70(3)/P.II 338 (Cicciaporci omitted from the prove-
nance)/Cat. 45.
ii. 1814-1504 i (as from the Cicciaporci Collection)/Part
of 1831-81 i,ii,iii/1836-82 i,ii,iii/1842-64 i,ii,iii/1846-65
i,ii,iii/R.70(1)/P.II 339 (Cicciaporci omitted from the prove-
nance)/Cat. 48. See 1814-825 for further details.
276. Given the provenance, it would be natural to suppose
that this sheet reappeared as 1807-375 (and subsequently),
but the description of that lot is so different as to undermine
this supposition.
277. 1803-22? Not further identiﬁed.
278. 1814-826. Probably not part of 1830-5. Not otherwise
identiﬁed.

APPENDIX 1. DRAWINGS IN WILLIAM YOUNG OTTLEY’S SALES
403
279 i,ii,iii.
i. Perhaps identical with 1842-2/R.21/P.II 292 (all of
which give the provenance as Wicar and Lawrence, omitting
Ottley)/Cat. 2.
ii. Richardson/Sir J. Reynolds/1830-143i/Woodburn’s
seventh exhibition as Andrea Del Sarto, no. 79/1860-827,
bought Morant, £5.5s./The Marquess of Northampton,
Castle Ashby, Northampton; his sale at Christie’s London,
1 May 1959, lot 6, the commentary to which concluded
that the drawing was closer to Bandinelli than Sarto/P.&D.
Colnaghi, London/ N. Embiricos, London/Christie’s, New
York, 24 January 2001, lot 8, as Salviati, 2003 with Jean-Luc
Baroni, London; red chalk, 422 × 211 mm.
iii. Probably Richardson/Sir J. Reynolds?/1830-143ii/
1860-830ii as Andrea Del Sarto, bought Sir Robert Ker
£1.10s/By descent to Admiral Sir George King-Hall, 1930,
when recorded by A. E. Popham as “Identical with a copy
after the Soldier dressing himself, the same ﬁgure copied
by Agostino Veneziano, black chalk, 372 × 218 mm, with
a provenance from Sir Joshua Reynolds and Sir Thomas
Lawrence”/By descent to Mrs B. McLeod; sale property of
the late Richard Ker, Sotheby’s, London, 27 October, 1948,
lot 67 “Follower of Michelangelo. A Soldier fastening his
belt seen from the back . . . 143/8 × 81/2,” bought de Belle-
roche, £36/Untraced.
III
Sale, London, 6–13 July 1807, by Thomas Philipe (815 +
5 lots), 104 pp., 9 July (4th day).
michelangelo
Four lots comprising ﬁve drawings. One drawing each from
the collection of Sir Peter Lely (lot 374), Count Geloso [i.e.,
Genovesino] (lot 375) and Charles I (but in fact Nicholas
Lanier). Nothing is listed as coming from the Buonarroti
Collection, but it may be that lot 376 did come from that
source. None of these drawings is certainly identiﬁable but
plausible identiﬁcations may be proposed for lots 374 and
376(i) and a possible one for lot 377.
374. Probably 1830-31/1836-10/1842-85/R.4/P. II 452/Cat.
114, now universally accepted as by Bartolommeo Passerotti.
The obstacles to accepting the identity of Cat. 114 and this
lot are the absence of Sir Peter Lely’s mark and the fact that
in 1836 and subsequently, the provenance of Cat. 114 is given
as Buonarroti and Wicar, with no mention of Sir Peter Lely
or Ottley. However, that a drawing by Passerotti should have
come from Casa Buonarroti is unlikely. And because the PL
stamp was usually applied to the bottom corner of a drawing,
it can easily be lost in later trimming. On balance, it is more
likely than not that lot 374 is identical with Cat. 114.
375. 1814-1764, bought by Dimsdale?/1830-Not identiﬁed/
Not exhibited in 1836/August 1838 purchase of William II of
Holland?/1850-150, bought Brondgeest, 60 guilders/1860-
118, bought Enson, £8.18s.6d /Not further identiﬁed;
untraced. See 1860-118 for further details.
376 i,ii.
i. The “ﬁght of cavaliers” may be identical with 1814-
1681 (the provenance is given as Buonarroti) and, subse-
quently, with 1830-112/1842-67/1846-18/R.17/P. II 295 (all
of which give the provenance as Wicar and Lawrence, omit-
ting Ottley)/Cat. 6. A less likely possibility is BM W3, whose
provenance, from the Lempereur Collection, would proba-
bly not have been confused with one from Casa Buonarroti.
ii. Perhaps identical with 1814-827, no doubt a copy. Not
otherwise identiﬁed.
377. The compiler is aware of two possible candidates for
this drawing:
1. The page of copies after Michelangelo,1842-19/1846-
38/R.15/P.II 346/Cat. 59, the only drawing in the
Michelangelo series in the Ashmolean to bear the mark of
Nicholas Lanier, thought in the early nineteenth century
to be that of Charles I. Against this, however, is that the
description does not seem particularly appropriate.
2. The “Battle of Giants” sold at Christie’s, London, 1
July 1986, lot 40 as by an Associate of Michelangelo, pen
and ink, 432 × 287 mm, from the collections of Sir Joshua
Reynolds (L.2364), John Bowring, W. Russell (L.2648),
sold at Christie’s, London, 11 December 1884, lot 286 as
“Michelangelo – A Battle of Giants,” 12 s. to Haig. Against
this are the facts that the Lanier stamp is not to be found
on the drawing – although it has been trimmed at the lower
edge – and that Reynolds is not mentioned in the prove-
nance of 377.
IV
Ottley sale, 6 June 1814 and ﬁfteen following days.
buonarroti or bonarroti
(In this sale, the drawings were divided into six groups, sold
on different days.)
Third Day (p. 23)
253. 1830-94/1836-49/1842-42/1846-12/R.80/P.II 332 (all
of which include Wicar in the provenance but omit Ottley)/
Cat. 56.
254. 1830-66/1836-1/1842-43/1846-11/R.81/P.II 333 (all
of which include Wicar in the provenance but omit Ott-
ley)/ Cat. 55.
255 i,ii. Unidentiﬁed. Perhaps part of 1804-266.

404
APPENDIX 1. DRAWINGS IN WILLIAM YOUNG OTTLEY’S SALES
256 i,ii,iii,iv. Unidentiﬁed. Perhaps this is 1804-270 minus
one drawing.
257. 1830-85/1836-7/1842-58/1846-26/R.75/P.II 337 (all
of which include Casa Buonarroti and Wicar in the prove-
nance but omit Ottley)/Cat. 44.
258 i,ii,iii. Unidentiﬁed.
259. 1830-27?/1836-90/1838-54/1850-134/bought by Roos/
Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar Collection Private Collection,
Switzerland/Phillips, London, 11 December 1996, lot 239,
as follower of Daniele da Volterra, black chalk, 192 × 147
mm. See 1830-27 for further details.
260 i,ii. Perhaps 1804-265 i,ii,iii.
It seems likely that the two leaves speciﬁed in this lot in fact
comprised three drawings.
Leaf 1
i. 1860-149/Philipps-Fenwick/BM W38 (provenance
given by Wilde as Lawrence and Woodburn with Ottley
omitted).
ii. 1860-149/Philipps-Fenwick/BM W84 (provenance
given by Wilde as Lawrence and Woodburn with Ottley
omitted).
These two drawings were mounted together when they
entered the British Museum with the Philipps-Fenwick Col-
lection in 1946 and were later separated.
Leaf 2
iii. 1842-56/R.82/P.II 344 (provenance given as Wicar
and Lawrence with Ottley omitted)/Cat. 54.
261 i,ii.
i. Probably identiﬁable with 1842-72/R.48.2/P.II, 312/
Cat. 19.
ii. Probably
identiﬁable
with
1842-72/R.48.1/P.II,
378∗/Cat. 75.
All these catalogues include Casa Buonarroti, Wicar, and
Ottley in the provenance. The main obstacle to this iden-
tiﬁcation is that 1842-72 contained three drawings on one
mount rather than two (the third being P.II 313/Cat. 3). This
might be accounted for either by a post-1814 remounting to
include a third scrap, or by a misdescription of the present
lot.
262. Bought by William Roscoe, for £21.00 according
to an annotation in the sale catalogue; not in Roscoe’s
sale; presumably acquired either directly or indirectly from
Roscoe by Lawrence; 1830-52/1836-63/1838-34/1850-154,
misdescribed/1860-136, presented by Vaughan to the BM,
W29. According to Ottley, 1811-23, p. 32, this drawing
(reproduced on the facing page in an etching by G. Lewis
dated 1 August 1809) came from the Cicciaporci Collection
via Cavaceppi, and this provenance was repeated in 1836-63
and subsequently. See 1850-154 for further details.
263. 1830-Unidentiﬁed/1836-53/1842-45 (wrongly identi-
ﬁed as the Battle of Cascina)/1846-41 (subject wrongly iden-
tiﬁed)/R.78 (subject correctly identiﬁed)/P.II 369/(all of
which include Wicar in the provenance but omit Ottley.
This was presumably an error by Woodburn; a Cicciaporci
provenance is much more plausible than a Buonarroti prove-
nance for this drawing.)/Cat. 103.
264 i,ii. No doubt half of 1830-61/1836-2/1842-47/R.24/
P.II 299-302/Cat. 9–12.
265 i,ii. No doubt half of 1830-61/1836-2/1842-47/R.24/
P.II 299-302/Cat. 9–12.
These two lots (i.e., 264 and 265) are described as bearing
two double-sided sheets per mounting. It seems clear that
they were combined, or rejoined, in Lawrence’s collection
to form a mounting of four double-sided sheets. The other
four sheets of concetti for the Sistine ceiling (Cats. 13–16)
do not seem to have been owned by Ottley and came to
Lawrence’s collection via Wicar and Woodburn.
Seventh Day (p. 74)
823 i,ii,iii. Probably 1804-273 i,ii,iii. Bought by William
Roscoe, his sale of September 1816, lot 59/Bought by
Watson, a pseudonym of the London bookseller William
Carey, for 15 s/Sir Thomas Lawrence 1830-unidentiﬁed/
1842-35 (combined with two other fragments, P.II 368,
377/Cats. 101 and 73, to make a mounting of ﬁve sheets/
1846-40/R.60 (1,2,3)/P.II 334, 335, 336 (all these catalogues
give the provenance as Buonarroti, Wicar, and Lawrence,
the Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi provenance omitted)/Cats. 53,
51, 52. See 1804-273 for further details.
824. Part of 1830-81 i,ii,iii/1836-82 i,ii,iii/1842-64 i,ii,iii/
1846-35 i,ii,iii/R.70 (2)/P.II 340 (all of which give the prove-
nance solely as Ottley; the Cicciaporci–Cavaceppi prove-
nance omitted)/Cat. 47.
825. Part of 1830-81 i,ii,iii/1836-82 i,ii,iii/1842-64 i,ii,iii/
1846-35 i,ii,iii/R.70 (1)/P.II 339 (all of which give the prove-
nance solely as Ottley; the Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi prove-
nance omitted)/Cat. 48.
Lots 824 and 825 present a problem that needs to be
considered in relation to lot 1814-1504. It would seem,
from Woodburn’s description of his exhibit 1836-82, which
contained three leaves, that all four drawings (i.e., 1814-824,
1814-825, and the two drawings comprised in 1814-1504),
were mounted on these three leaves. This remounting was
presumably done by Lawrence since the brief description
provided in 1830-81 seems to tally with that provided in
1836-82. There would, of course, be nothing unusual in three
mountings carrying four drawings but against this in the
present case is that the number of individual drawings as

APPENDIX 1. DRAWINGS IN WILLIAM YOUNG OTTLEY’S SALES
405
described in 1836-82 would appear to total only three,
and this ﬁgure is conﬁrmed by 1842-64 and all subse-
quent catalogues. The difﬁculty therefore is to explain
how four drawings in Ottley’s collection (1814-824, 1814-
825, 1814-1504 i, ii) could have become three drawings
by 1830. This might be resolved by the conjecture that
the two drawings connected with a Piet`a (1814-825, 1814-
1504i) were in fact fragments of the same sheet (Cat. 48),
and that this was appreciated by Lawrence who rejoined
them.
826. 1803-278. Probably not part of 1830-5. Not otherwise
identiﬁed.
827. Perhaps identical with 1807-376 ii. Bought by William
Roscoe, it was in his September 1816 sale as lot 68: “One, a
Sketch for the upper part of the Picture of the Holy Family,
in the Palazzo Buonarotti at Florence, one of his last works.
Free pen and wash. Size 4 1/2 h. 6 w. The whole com-
position is engraved in the Etruria Pittrice, and the Print
accompanies the Drawing. From Mr. Ottley’s Collection.”
Bought by Watson (i.e., the London bookseller William
Carey) £1.6.0. . . . Not subsequently identiﬁed.
828. Probably 1830-71/1836-51 (with the provenance given
as Richardson)/1838-26/1850-179 bought Roos/ Leembru-
gen Sale, Amsterdam, 1866, lot 894/Malcolm 366/ BM PG
276.
829. 1830-57/1836-68/1842-34/1846-43/R.28/P.II
361/
Cat. 91.
Thirteenth Day (pp. 129–30)
1500 i,ii. Unidentiﬁed. Presumably both were copied after
the Last Judgement.
1501. Unidentiﬁed. It can be no more than conjectural
but from the description this might have been a red chalk
copy after Michelangelo’s pen drawing Louvre 689/J12
verso.
1502. Conjecturally part of 1830-139/1836-98 (with the
provenance given incorrectly as Buonarroti and Wicar,
that
from
Gori
omitted)/1838-57/1850-148
bought
Brondgeest/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar Collection/Phillips,
London, 7 July 1999, lot 119, black chalk, 393 × 229 mm,
as circle of Daniele da Volterra. See 1850-148 for further
details.
1503. Probably 1830-123, as Battista Franco.
The price realised indicates the high quality of the
drawing; nonetheless, it is probable that it was not an auto-
graph Michelangelo, but the highly Michelangelesque draw-
ing by Battista Franco, now in the British Museum (1895-
9-15-855/GP 133; 241 × 205 mm, pen and ink heightened
with white body-colour; the provenance given solely as
Lawrence), in which staging and technique correspond.
1504 i,ii.
i. 1804-275 ii (where said to be from the Buonarroti
Collection)/Part of 1831-81 i,ii,iii/1836-82 i,ii,iii/1842-64/
1846-35 i,ii,iii/R.70 (3)/P.II 338 (all of which give the prove-
nance as Ottley and Lawrence, that from Cicciaporci being
omitted)/Cat. 45.
ii. 1804-275 i (where said to be from the Buonarroti
Collection)/1836-82 i,ii,iii/1842-64 i,ii,iii/1846-35 i,ii,iii/
R.70 (2) /P.II 339 (all of which give the provenance as
Ottley and Lawrence, that from Cicciaporci being omitted)/
Cat. 48.
For discussion of the complex issue raised by this lot and
its probable combination with 1814-824 and 1814-825 see
1814-825.
It is quite understandable that P.II 338/Cat. 45 was thought
by Ottley to be a sketch for the Last Judgement, since the
ﬁgure is close in pose to one in that fresco, but it is in fact
a sketch for Daniele da Volterra’s St. John the Baptist in the
Wilderness.
Fourteenth Day (p. 137)
1586. Unidentiﬁed. The low price suggests that this was not
an autograph drawing.
1587 i,ii.
i. Probably identical with 1804-274 ii/then 1830-108 i/
1842-28/1846-32/R.74/P.II 345 (all of which give the
provenance as Buonarroti, Wicar, and Lawrence, Cicciaporci
and Ottley omitted)/Cat. 50.
ii. 1830-108 ii/1842-75/1846-52/R.53 (1)/P.II 320 (all of
which give the provenance solely as Ottley and Lawrence,
Buonarroti and Ottley omitted)/Cat. 36.
1588. Probably
identical
with
1804-272;
and
with
Michelangelo’s drawing in Hamburg (Inv. 21094/Corpus
35), which bears Sir Peter Lely’s stamp and has a provenance
from William Esdaile, who probably acquired this lot.
1589. Bought by William Roscoe, in his sale September
1816, lot 69: “One, Design of a Draped ﬁgure of a Prophet
sitting and turning over the Leaves of a Book, which was
afterwards adapted to a female character in the Sybilla
Erythraea in the Capella Sistina; a sketch with a free pen,
remarkable for its simplicity and grandeur. Size, 11 1/2 h. 9
w. reverse, two Sitting Figures ﬁnely draped. Pen and
washed. From the same Collection” (i.e., Mr. Ottley’s). Not
traced subsequently.
1590. The identiﬁcation of this drawing is uncertain. If a
good copy (as the price realised would suggest), it might be
the – misidentiﬁed – drawing 1842-1/1846-46 /R.63/P.II
367 (in all these catalogues the provenance is given solely as
Ottley, with no mention of Gori)/Cat. 100.

406
APPENDIX 1. DRAWINGS IN WILLIAM YOUNG OTTLEY’S SALES
1591. 1830-21 ii, as by Giulio Clovio/1842-24/1846-
33/R.73/ P.II 352 (in all these the provenance is given solely
as Wicar and Lawrence, with Ottley omitted)/Cat. 67.
It is virtually certain that Ottley was mistaken in believing
that the drawing that he owned was Michelangelo’s original
and mistaken also in thinking that it came from the King
of Naples (unless the king also owned a duplicate). Further-
more, the price realised by the present drawing is very low
for an original. The true Christ on the Cross was priced in the
1836 exhibition (1836-22) at £367, 10 shillings; in addition,
the 1836 catalogue does not include Ottley in the provenance
of the Christ on the Cross, whereas his name is included in
that of the Return from the Flight into Egypt [1836-71/Cat. 21],
which also came from the King of Naples. It is not certain
that Ottley possessed Cat. 67 (rather than one of the other
known copies), but it seems probable.
The history of Michelangelo’s original Christ on the
Cross, made for Vittoria Colonna and now in the British
Museum seems to be: The King of Naples/Julien de Parme,
his sale 21 and 22 February 1794, lot 21/Louis-Charles
Brunet (1746–1825), the brother-in-law of Dominique-
Vivant Denon, by whom he was presumably advised on
his purchases/Woodburn/1830-21i/1836-22, 1838-8/1850-
105/1860-114/Bought Enson/ Brooks/Malcolm 67/BM
W67.
1592. Unidentiﬁed.
Fifteenth Day (p. 145)
1677. Acquired by William Roscoe. In his sale September
1816, lot 78: “A Dream of Michelangelo, expressive of his
resentment against the persons employed under him in build-
ing the Church of St. Peter’s. A ﬁgure (marked Gio. Scultore)
representing his own Portrait, is seen issuing, in great wrath
from an Arcade; and ﬁve naked Figures, pursued by Ser-
pents, are making their escape by different ways. At the
bottom is written, in his own hand, ‘Sognio fatto adi 16 di
Aprile 1560, la notte della domenica seconda dopo pasqua’. Spir-
ited pen, very curious. 7h. 9.w. From Mr Ottley’s collec-
tion.” Bought Watson – i.e., the London bookseller William
Carey – £2.4.0. This drawing may in fact have been bought
in with Carey acting on Roscoe’s behalf since it is the subject
of a letter from Roscoe to Sir Thomas Lawrence of 1824, in
which he insists, against Lawrence’s better judgement, that it
is by Michelangelo. It must, nevertheless, have been acquired
by Lawrence since it appears in Woodburn’s posthumous sale
of drawings from the Lawrence collection, 1860, lot 978/Sir
Thomas Phillipps/Phillipps-Fenwick/BM GP95, as by
Giovanni Antonio Dosio. It is notable that the transcrip-
tion of the inscription given in 1814-1677 and 1816-78 is
incorrect: the date reads 1564.
1678. Acquired by William Roscoe; his sale September
1816, lot. 79: “A Design from the Collection of Mr.
Ottley . . . (entry quoted). v. Mr. Ottley’s Catalogue No. 1678.
9 h. 6w.; Notwithstanding the authority of so distinguished
a judge of works of art, it is presumed that this Drawing is
not by Michelangolo, but is the design for the principal front
of the Catafalco, erected in the Church of San Lorenzo in
Florence on the occasion of his funeral, which was attended
by the Grand Duke of Tuscany, and of which a very partic-
ular account is given by Vasari in his Life of Michelangolo;
from which it appears, that all the principal artists of Florence
united in honouring his memory, by erecting this immense,
though temporary, structure; and in particular that the ﬁg-
ure of the Tiber was executed in imitation of a Statue of
Marble by Giovanni Castello, and that of the Arno by Battista
di Benedetto; that the representation of Lorenzo de’ Medici
introducing Michelangelo when young into the Garden of
the Medici, was painted in Chiaro Scuro by Mirabello and
Girolamo del Crociﬁssajo; and that the ﬁgure of fame at the
top was executed larger than life, by Zanobi Lastricati, the
sculptor, who had the direction of the whole, and who, it is
not improbable, was the designer of the present sketch. It fur-
ther appears from Vasari, that the Catafalco was only suffered
to remain a few weeks after the funeral, for the inspection
of the public; so that this drawing is now probably the only
remaining representation of a work intended to confer the
highest honours on Michelangelo, and which employed the
talents of the ﬁrst artists of the time.” Bought Ford, £2.3.0.
In 2002 in the S. Stock Collection, London, attributed to
Vincenzo Borghini: see A. Bostr¨om, 2002–3, no. 134.
1679 i,ii,iii. Acquired by William Roscoe. In his sale
September 1816, lot 71: “One, a Design for the sybilla
libica in the Capella Sistina; a most elegant ﬁgure; ﬁne Pen
Sketch. Size 10 h. 6 1/2 w. reverse, a head in red chalk.
From the Bonarotti Collection; since Mr. Ottley’s.” Bought
by Hall £1.3.0. It must be assumed that Roscoe re-mounted
this, presumably the most signiﬁcant of the three drawings in
Ottley’s lot 1679, and that the “two pen sketches” were either
not offered in his sale, or were included in another lot. The
single drawing of the trio described in sufﬁcient detail to be
recognisable is, no doubt, the double-sided sheet by Battista
Franco in the British Museum, GP135, 243 × 163 mm, with
a pen drawing of Venus and Cupid on the recto and a female
head in red chalk on the verso. Its true authorship must have
been realised after 1816, probably while it was in Lawrence’s
collection, and it was correctly attributed to Franco when
it appeared as part of 1860-403. Acquired by Sir Thomas
Phillipps for 13s, it entered the British Museum with the
Phillipps-Fenwick Collection.
1680. Acquired by William Roscoe; his sale of September
1816, as lot 60, “One, a study of Horses &c. free pen. A
Sketch on the back for the Statue of Christ in the Minerva.

APPENDIX 1. DRAWINGS IN WILLIAM YOUNG OTTLEY’S SALES
407
Red chalk, very Fine. Size 11 h. 71/2 w. From the same
Collection (i.e., Mr. Ottley’s).” Bought by Walker 17 s.
Subsequently 1830-78/1836-47/1842-46/R.20/P.II 405 (all
of which give the provenance solely as Richardson, with
Ottley and Roscoe omitted)/Cat. 77.
1681. 1807-376 i?/1830-112?/1842-67/1846-18/R.17 /P.II
295 (all these give the provenance solely as Wicar, with
Ottley omitted)/Cat. 6.
1682. 1830-104/1836-91/1842-32/R.2/P.II
327
(all
of
which give the provenance solely as Ottley)/Cat. 24.
Sixteenth Day (pp. 152–3)
1758. 1830-99/1836-55/1842-30/R.18 (all of which give the
provenance solely as Ottley)/P.II 293 (Buonarroti and Ottley
included in the provenance)/Cat. 4.
1759. 1830-106/1842-10/1846-23/R.16 (all of which give
the provenance solely as Ottley)/P.II 294 (Buonarroti and
Ottley included in the provenance)/Cat. 5.
1760. 1830-Not identiﬁed/1842-9/R.45/P.II 317 (all of
which give the provenance as Buonarroti, Wicar, and
Lawrence with Ottley omitted)/Cat. 30.
1761. Bought by William Roscoe, his sale 1816, lot 66
“Two Designs on one sheet for Groups in the Capella
Sistina. A Charity &c. Black chalk. capital. Size 11 h. 17 w.
From the Collection of Lamberto Gori, afterwards Mr
Ottley’s”/Bought by Slater for £2.14.0. for Blundell/
Ince-Blundell/Liverpool, Walker Art Gallery, 1995.204;
Brooke, 1998–9, p. 183.
1762. Unidentiﬁed.
1763. 1830-55/1836-74/1838-42/1850-107/1860-134/J. C.
Robinson/Malcom 74/BM W57.
1764. Probably bought by Dimsdale. 1804-276?/1807-
375/1830-Not identiﬁed/Not exhibited in 1836/August
1838
purchase
of
William
II
of
Holland?/1850-150,
bought Brondgeest, 60 guilders/1860-118, bought Enson,
£8.18s.6d/Not further identiﬁed; untraced. See 1860-118
for further details.
1765. This is the copy of Michelangelo’s Fall of Phaeton in the
Royal Collection, now in the Woodner Collection, ascribed
by the compiler (Joannides, 1995–6, no. 54) to Alessandro
Allori. This drawing does not now bear an inscription, but
Allori was in Rome between 1555 and 1560 and during his
sojourn made copies after most – perhaps all – of Tom-
maso Cavalieri’s Michelangelo drawings. It seems likely that
as well as the famous drawings of allegories and mytholo-
gies, Michelangelo also made for Cavalieri drawings of
Christ’s Resurrection, which were also copied by Allori. The
Woodner drawing bears the date 1814 and the initials
of William Esdaile, who no doubt acquired this lot. It
later passed to Sir J. C. Robinson, who thought it an
original.
1766. 1830-68 i/1836-52/1842-44/1846-8/R.1/P.II 326 (all
with
the
provenance
given
as
Richardson/Spencer/
Ottley)/Cat. 33.
1767. 1830-8/1836-77 (with the provenance given as Buo-
narroti, Wicar, and Ottley)/1838-44/1850-125/Sachsen-
WeimarCollection/CountAntoineSeilern/London,Court-
auld Institute of Art, the Prince’s Gate Collection.
1768. 1830-60/1836-84 (with the provenance given as
Cicciaporci, Cavaceppi, and Ottley)/1838-49/1850-119/
1860-125/E. Galichon, his sale, May 1875, lot 10/Malcolm
80/BM W60.
1769. The nature of the inscription on this drawing
suggests that it formed part of the Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi
group. 1830-111/1836-48 (the provenance given solely
as
Ottley)/1838-25/1850-168/1860-140
bought
Gasc/
Vaughan/BM W91. The compiler is inclined to think that
this copy is early and that it might have been made by
Bachiacca.
Forty-nine lots containing seventy separate drawings.

APPENDIX 2
 the lawrence collection of drawings by and
after michelangelo
TEXTS
A
Inventory of the Collection of drawings by Old Masters
formed by Sir Thomas Lawrence, P.R.A., drawn up while
the collection was still in his house.
Transcribed by the Committee of the Burlington Fine
Arts Club from a MS in the Library of the Club, 1927
1. Drawings Framed and Glazed, Cartoons, etc.
1. 9. M. Angelo. One of the ﬁgures in the Last Judgment.
2. 12. M. Angelo. A Grisaille in black and white in oil,
female and two children &c.
2. Drawings Framed and Cartooned
3. 36. M. Angelo. A superb Cartoon representing the Holy
Family in black Chalk, formerly in the collection of Lucien
Bonaparte.
3. M. A. Buonaroti
Case 3, Drawer 3
4. 1. David, with some beautiful studies on the reverse, ﬁne
pen.
5. 2. Five drawings, one [published?] by Mr. Ottley for the
celebrated Pieta at Viterbo.
6. 3. Head of a Man of a Saturnine expression, red chalk,
very ﬁne.
7. 4. Superb Head looking upwards, on the reverse a Whole
Length of himself – pen, ﬁne.
8. 5. A Magniﬁcent Drawing representing The Dream of
M. Angelo.
9. 6. A Curious leaf, on one side it is a portrait of M. Angelo.
10. 7. A Capital Study for one of the Sybils in which the
drapery is highly ﬁnished.
11. 8. Study for the ﬁgure of our Lord in the Attitude of
ressurrection – black chalk.
12. 9. Study for Part of the Cruciﬁxion, The Virgin faint-
ing – red chalk.
13. 10. Proﬁle in red chalk of a youth in a helmet, highly
ﬁnished.
14. 11. A Design for the Figure of our Lord in the Ressur-
rection.
15. 12. The celebrated Anatomical drawing in which the
Candle is placed in the Body. Copied in D’Argencourt’s
work.
16. 13. A Magniﬁcent Model of our Lord for the Pieta, black
and white chalk, capital.
17. 14. Small subject highly ﬁnished for the Dream, black
chalk with some of his writing.
18. 15. One of the Figures in the lower part of the Last
Judgement, black chalk.
19. 16. A Magniﬁcent Head of Satan, free pen, very ﬁne.
20. 17. Our Lord Rising from the tomb, black chalk, very
ﬁne.
21. 18. The Celebrated Cruciﬁxion with the Angels weep-
ing, the Skull at the bottom together with a copy by Julio
Clovio.
22. 19. A magniﬁcent sheet of Sporting Boys etc. for a bac-
canalian subject, free pen on both sides the paper.
23. 20. A magniﬁcent drawing highly ﬁnished of the Last
Judgement executed in bistre, a most capital work. Another
similar.
24. 21. A Splendid Drawing of a repose in Egypt, on the
back some sketches of Children – capital.
22. No drawing listed.
25. 23. Another Magniﬁcent Sheet with a pen on both sides
the paper – one of the tombs of the Medici.
26. 24. Samson and Delilah, in red chalk. A most splendid
drawing. With a copy.
27. 25. Head of an Evangelist. Black chalk.
28. 26. Head in red chalk, great expression. Portrait of the
Poet Ariosto, red chalk, mounted by Zucchero.
408

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
409
Case 5, Drawer 2
29. 27. Jupiter with a Young Mercury with Various studies
on the back with the pen, very ﬁne.
30. 28. An Old Female whole length, pen, highly ﬁnished.
4. Michael Angelo Buonaroti
Case 1, Drawer 1
Case 2, Drawer 4
31. 29. Study of Figures and hand and heel on each side of
the paper, free pen and vigorously executed. Capital.
32. 30. Five Various from the Sistine Chapel. Sheet of Stud-
ies of Various and a small head.
Case 3, Drawer 3
33. 31. The Pieta in black Chalk by Julio Clovio.
34. 32. The Holy family which was engraved by Bonasone,
highly ﬁnished in red Chalk, a superb drawing.
35. 33. Design for a Chimera, bold pen, on the reverse is a
singular and interesting lesson which M. Angelo has given
to Andrea Mini with Autograph Observation.
36. 34. The Study for the famous Lazarus in the National
Gallery, red Chalk, very ﬁne.
37. 35. Magniﬁcent study for the Adam, on the reverse is a
head also in red Chalk.
38. 36. The taking down from the Cross with several ﬁgures
in red chalk, beautiful composition.
39. 37. Portrait of the Marchioness of Pesceiri, on the reverse
a study for a lesson.
40. 38. The famous Pieta which is engraved by J. Bonasone,
highly ﬁnished.
41. 39. The Virgin, Child, and St John or a Charity in black
chalk, full of expression and beauty.
42. 40. Study in red chalk for the celebrated Lazarus with
variations.
43. 41. A study on blue paper for the same picture in which
S. del Piombo has inserted the head of the Virgin.
44. 42. A most capital study for the Lazarus as it was adopted
in the celebrated picture. In red chalk.
45. 43. Our Lord’s ressurection with the Soldiers surround-
ing the tomb, black chalk, superb, with copy by Clovio.
46. 44. Cartoon for one of the ﬁgures in the Last Judgement
rising to life executed in black chalk.
47. 45. Our Lord on the Cross with the Virgin and a Saint,
black and white chalk. Capital.
48. 46. Another design for the same work in which the
ﬁgures are near the Cross.
49. 47. Our Lord on the Cross, a single ﬁgure very highly
ﬁnished black chalk on brown tinted paper, a splendid
Drawing.
50. Another design, smaller, in which two ﬁgures are intro-
duced.
51. A female probably intended for a witch with a Boy, bold
pen, with a copy.
52. A Magniﬁcent study for the Prophet copied in Mr. Ott-
ley’s Work.
53. A very interesting sheet composed of Four Sheets
from his Sketch Book containing studies for the Sistine
Chapel.
54. A sheet of studies in Pen and red chalk, on the reverse
studies of a Leg.
55. A Magniﬁcent study size of Life for the Head of St.
Bartholomew, very capital.
56. One of the Figures in the Last Judgement, black chalk.
57. A Woman playing with a Child on her Knees, Black
chalk.
58. A Crowd of persons looking at the Brazen Serpent,
highly ﬁnished in red chalk, two different studies on the
same leaf, very ﬁne.
59. A Female Head in proﬁle and an Anatomical.
60. A Magniﬁcent sheet of Studies for the last Judgement,
black chalk, annotated in Mr. Ottley’s.
61. A Sheet of Four leaves of his Sketch Book containing
designs of the Sistine Chapel and some words written by
himself.
62. Study in black chalk for one of the ﬁgures in the last
Judgement, on the reverse study of Legs.
63. A Magniﬁcent study of the Cruciﬁxion of Haman in
red chalk, highly ﬁnished, very ﬁne.
5. M. Angelo
Case 3, Drawer 3
64. Three designs for the Driving of Money changers out
of the Temple for the Picture in the Possession of Messrs.
Woodburn.
65. Study for one of the Figures in the Corner part of the
Last Judgment, black chalk with studies on the back. Capital.
66. An Architectural study for a Window on the reverse
studies for part of the Figure.
67. A sleeping Figure probably intended for Adam, a singular
Female Figure on the back.
68. Two Figures conversing, pen, with a copy by B. Franco,
very capital.

410
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
69. Study for the upper part of the Last Judgement, black
chalk, capital.
70. The Three Crosses, with a group of Figures below, red
chalk, a most noble composition.
71. The Study of Christ scourged in the Church of St. Peter
in the Montorio, black chalk.
72. Studies of Figures small – black chalk.
73. Study design for the Christ in the Picture of the Samar-
itan Woman, black chalk highly ﬁnished.
74. A Figure Slightly sketched, on the reverse a plan.
75. One of the Sybils in the Sistine Chapel. Copy,
beautiful.
76. Model, in red chalk for the celebrated scourging of our
Lord in St. Peters, Montorio, Rome.
77. The Upper part Torso of a Male ﬁgure, black chalk.
78. Various pen sketches among others a Horse, and some
slight sketches on the back.
79. Design for the Pieta, the Dead Christ on one side and
the Virgin on the other, red chalk.
80. Anatomical Studies on which he has written Undici
d’Augusto.
81. Three Sheets of small ﬁgures, groups &c., in black chalk
on the same leaf.
82. Two small red chalk Studies on the same sheet.
83. A beautiful proﬁle in red chalk of a young Man.
84. A magniﬁcent sheet of Studies with a pen on each side
the paper. Among others, the Virgin and Child.
85. A young Man’s head slightly sketched in chalk, an
anatomical ornament on the reverse.
86. Three studies from the same Female Torso, pen.
87. The Restoration of the Celebrated Torso with a curious
account at the back, anotated in Rogers.
88. Beautiful study of the Virgin in the Celebrated Picture
of the Annunciation, black chalk.
89. Another different for the same Picture in the same
manner.
90. Architectural studies for a House – pen.
91. Anatomical Studies in red chalk.
92. A pen study for the restitution of the Torso.
93. A Group for the lower part of the Cruciﬁxion, black
Chalk.
94. A Design for a Window with some plans on the
back.
95. An interesting leaf of Studies for St. Peters Church with
an Autograph of M. Angelo.
96. Anatomical Studies of Arms, Legs. etc.
97. Study for one of the Figures in the Cartoon of Pisa with
red chalk studies on the back.
98. Study on the back of a Figure, on the reverse is the same
in small, with more of the Composition.
99. A very singular sheet being studies for part of a Horse
etc., on the back is a Sonnet by M. Angelo.
100. Sheet of Anatomical Studies on the reverse some ideas
of ﬁgures for Dante, pen, very ﬁne.
101. Two, a Winged Cupid, black Chalk highly ﬁnished,
and a small Architectural Design of the tomb of the
Medici.
102. A sheet of Studies for the David and Goliath, black
chalk highly ﬁnished, ﬁne.
103. Architectural and other Studies – pen.
104. Two Apostles largely Draped, on the reverse a Head
full of expression, pen.
105. The Virgin, Child and St. Elizabeth, on the reverse
various interesting studies. Fine pen.
106. An idea for the Fighting of the Standard differently
composed to that of L. da Vinci.
107. A Beautiful sheet on which is the study for the David
treading on the Goliath.
108. Two studies in black Chalk, one a head in a Helmet,
the other a representation of a Dog.
109. Three leaves from his Sketch Book with his hand
writing.
110. Study of the head of a Faun highly ﬁnished red chalk,
on the reverse is a slight sketch and his writing.
111. The Head of Cleopatra, very highly ﬁnished in black
chalk. Capital.
112. Sketches for the Battle of the Standard.
113. Study in black chalk for the Annunciation.
114. Proﬁle of a Warrior in a Rich helmet with a magniﬁ-
cent Dress, highly ﬁnished black chalk, superb.
115. The Delphic Sybil, both [bold?] pen, very ﬁne.
116. A Magniﬁcent sheet of studies for the famous Cartoon
of Pisa, on the one side pen bistre heightened with white
on the reverse red chalk.
117. A splendid high ﬁnished Drawing in black chalk of the
fall of Phaeton with MS account.
118. Head of one of the Apostles, black chalk, on reverse
some other sketches.
Case 7, Drawer 3
119. Study of Part of the Last Judgment, black chalk.
120. The Almighty with Angels, Modern.

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
411
121. Portrait of the Angel [Michelangelo?] by Passarotti,
pen.
11. Julio Clovio
Case 5, Drawer 2
122. Two in black Chalk from M. Angelo, one a
Cruciﬁxion.
26. B. Franco
Case 5, Drawer 3
123. A Woman with a Child &c. ﬁne pen and wash, probably
from M. Angelo.
52. P. P. Rubens
Case 7, Drawer 2
124. 6. Two leaves pasted together from the celebrated Last
Judgment of M. Angelo.
56. P. P. Rubens
Case 5, Drawer 1
125. 22.27.
Ganymede
from
a
superb
Drawing
of
M. Angelo.
59. F. Parmiggiano
Case 1, Drawer 2
126. Study from M. Angelo of a Sibyl, pen and bistre.
81.
Case 7, Drawer 3
p. 68 of typescript
127. Four, M. Angelo, Bronzino &c.
p. 69 of typescript
128. Two M. Angelo, one in red and one in black Chalk.
129. Six. Julio Romano, M. Angelo &c.
82.
Case 7, Drawer 1
130. Two small Studies in red Chalk, M. Angelo.
131. An outline of the whole composition of the Cartoon
of Pisa from M. Angelo.
Varia
Case 7, Drawer 2
132. Fine [Five?] Various Stile of M. Angelo &c.
133. Five, M. Angelo and Raffaele.
83. Lud. Carrachi
Case 7, Drawer 1
134. A very curious Sheet of Anatomy and other subjects
by M. Angelo Buonaroti.
135. Figure from the Judgement from M. Angelo.
84. Varia
Case 6, Drawer 1
136. Four: entombment by Raffaelle the Statute [sic] of
Hercules at Fontainbleau.
Case 7, Drawer 1
137. A beautiful Copy by M. Bossi of Milan from a Drawing
by M. Angelo.
138. The Flagellation of our Lord from M. Angelo, by S.
del Piombo, bistre, superb.
139. Five: Various Studies in Red Chalk &c. M. Angelo.
140. Four: Ditto some in pen and bistre.
89.
Case 11, Drawer 5
141. Two Study of a Figure M. Angelo and taking down
from the Cross from Ditto.
91.
Case 11, Drawer 4
142. Three Studies from the Last Judgment &c. &c. Michael
Angelo.
Case 11, Drawer 3
143. Two Ditto [i.e., in red chalk and by Andrea del
Sarto] one of the Soldiers from the Cartoon of Pisa by
M. Angelo.
144. Four Ditto [i.e., by Bandinelli] one from Michael
Angelo.
Lower parts. Drawer 4, Case 1
portfolio g
145. Two Michael Angelo one in Chalk.
146. Seven F. Zucherro and School of Michael Angelo.
Case 12, Drawer 4
portfolio h
147. One an Elaborate Drawing of the whole of the Ceiling
of the Sistine Chapel from M. Angelo.
148. One an interesting Sheet of Studies by M. Angelo.
149. One The Annunciation a very curious and interesting
Drawing M. Angelo.
Case 6, Drawer 4
portfolio a
150. Two Julio Romano and Michael Angelo.
Case 12, Drawer 4
portfolio b
151. Seven copies from Michael Angelo.


412
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
B
A CATALOGUE
ETC. ETC.
Tenth Exhibition
MICHAEL ANGELO
1. a window – an architectural study, treated with great
simplicity and grandeur. This drawing is executed in black
chalk; and on the reverse is an arm, and some architecture.
Size, 16 1/2 inches by 11 inches. From the Collections of M.
Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£21
2. four leaves of his pocket book – pasted together;
on which he has drawn several small ﬁgures, which have
served for his grand works in the Sistine Chapel. These ﬁrst
thoughts are particularly interesting; they show the progress
of his method of art: slightly sketched from nature, merely
as attitudes, and are executed in pen and black chalk.
Size of the four, 11 1/4 inches by 11 inches. From the
Collection of W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£52.10
3. michael angelo buonaroti – represented in a large cloak,
formed in grand folds. He holds a globe in his hand, and has
on his head somewhat between a helmet and a pontiff’s cap.
This most curious drawing is highly ﬁnished with the pen
and bistre. He is at full length; and it is probably drawn at
the time he obtained the honourable place of architect to
St. Peter’s; his dress approaches that of the Cardinal’s, and
his holding the globe in his hand may signify that he had
obtained the extent of his wishes.
On the reverse is a head of a youth, executed in black
chalk, and admirably touched with the pen.
Size, 13 inches by 8 1/2 inches. From the Collections of
Lempereur, B. Constantine, and T. Dimsdale, Esq.
£105
4. a man reading a paper – he is represented seated, and
is dressed in a loose cloak and pantaloons. This ﬁne study
is evidently from nature; it is admirably drawn in red chalk,
and has served Michael Angelo for the King Joram, in the
vault of the Sistine Chapel. Capital.
Size, 8 1/4 inches by 8 inches. From the Collection of Prince
Borghese, at Rome.
£31.10
5. three female torsos – drawn with the pen from the
antique, at the time Michael Angelo was studying in the
garden of Lorenzo de Medici. This very interesting drawing
is mentioned in a note at p. 25 of the Italian School of Design.
Size, 9 1/2 inches by 8 1/4 inches. From the Collection of
W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£21
6. head of a young fawn, or cupid – probably a study
for the head of the celebrated statue which he had interred
at Rome, in order to be discovered, and taken for antique
workmanship. This head is perfectly in the Greek taste, and
is executed in red chalk; on the reverse is a study of drap-
ery, drawn with the pen, and also some of his handwriting
respecting his accounts.
Size, 8 inches by 6 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£63
7. the head of a man – looking down; slightly marked in
chalk, of a grey tone. Full of expression and character.
Size, 9 1/2 inches by 8 inches. From the Collections of
Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£21
8. a magniﬁcent model – for one of the ﬁgures on the
Tombs of the Medici. This splendid study is drawn with
surprizing energy, in the grandest style of his great Master.
It is executed with the pen and bistre; and has several ﬁne
studies on the reverse, executed with the pen: engraved.
Capital.
Size, 16 inches by 11 inches. From the Collections of
M. Crozat, M. Mariette, Marquis Legoy, and
Thomas Dimsdale, Esq.
£52.10
9. a cupid – undraped; probably a design for the celebrated
statue which he made and buried, to be dug up as an antique,
and which deceived the antiquarians of Rome, and estab-
lished the reputation of Michael Angelo.
This beautiful drawing is highly ﬁnished in black chalk;
and is, in point of grace and classic feeling, equal to the
best of the Greek sculptors. On the same sheet is a very

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
413
slight memorandum, in black chalk, for a compartment of
the Medici Tombs.
Size, 6 1/2 inches by 5 inches, – the other, 8 1/4 inches by
5 1/4 inches. From the Collections of M. Buonaroti, and the
Chevalier Vicar.
£52.10
10. a study of three hands – and the back of a male ﬁg-
ure. This noble drawing is executed with the pen, with the
utmost skill and knowledge; it far exceeds the very cele-
brated drawing of similar subject mentioned in Vasari, which
is now in the Louvre. On the reverse side, are other mod-
els for the same hand, on a smaller scale, but equally ﬁne.
capital.
Size, 16 1/4 inches by 10 1/2 inches. From the Collection of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£52.10
11. the repose – a noble composition of the Virgin, Infant
Christ, St. John, and other ﬁgures. This superb study has
some analogy with splendid basso relievo by Michael Angelo,
which was left to the Royal Academy by the late Sir George
Beaumont. It is executed in black and red chalk, and touched
with the pen; it has several pentimentos, and on the reverse
are many ﬁne studies of sporting boys, admirably drawn with
the pen. Superb.
Size, 15 1/2 inches by 11 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£262.10
12. study for drapery – probably for one of the ﬁgures
in the Sistine Chapel. The whole ﬁgure is slightly marked
in, and the drapery ﬁnished with the most laborious skill.
This noble study is executed with the pen and bistre; on the
reverse is a study for a sybil. Capital.
Size, 15 1/2 inches by 10 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£105
13. david – a noble study for the body of this statue, which
he executed at Florence, with the sling, in the act of throw-
ing the stone to slay Goliath. This capital model is drawn
with the pen and bistre; and on the reverse are several
admirable studies for infants, treated with a grace worthy of
Raffaelle.
Size, 14 1/2 inches by 9 inches. From the Collections of
M. Crozat, Mariette, and Thomas Dimsdale, Esq.
£105
14. study of a body of the male subject – probably
for one of the ﬁgures in the Last Judgment. This study is
drawn in black chalk, with great attention to the anatomy.
On the reverse are several studies for arms, &c. in red
chalk.
Size, 13 1/4 inches by 10 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£105
15. portrait of the marchioness de pescara – this matchless
drawing is of the greatest beauty, uniting the grandeur of M.
Angelo with the beauty and sweetness of Raffaelle and L.
da Vinci. She is represented in proﬁle, and her hair dressed
in the antique taste; it is carefully drawn in black chalk.
superb.
Size, 11 3/4 inches by 9 1/2 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£262.10
16. a sybil – a noble study for one of the ﬁgures in the
Sistine Chapel. This ﬁne drawing is executed with the pen,
and possesses all the energy and grandeur of this great Master.
Capital.
Size, 10 1/4 inches by 7 3/4 inches. From the Collection of the
Baron de Non.
£105
17. a sheet of studies – chieﬂy of sporting boys; most
admirably drawn with the pen. This capital design is exe-
cuted with great spirit; and on the reverse side are many
other studies in the same manner. capital.
Size, 15 1/2 inches by 11 inches. From the Collections of
M. Crozat, Mariette, the Marquis Legoy and
Thomas Dimsdale, Esq.
£157.10
18. proﬁle of a man’s head – cut off at chin. This admirable
drawing is of the best time of this Master; nothing can exceed
the grand character and expression of the whole. It is drawn
with red chalk, and is worthy to class with the best Greek
artists of sculpture.
Size, 5 3/4 inches by 3 3/4 inches. From the Collection of the
Duke of Modena.
£52.10
19. a male torso – probably for the Lazarus; most admirably
drawn with black chalk. Capital.
Size, 9 inches by 6 1/2 inches. From the Collection of
W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£21
20. study for the dead christ – in the celebrated picture
by Piombo, executed at Viterbo. This superb model is drawn

414
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
in red chalk; and on the reverse is a sketch for the ﬁgure of
the Virgin, which is in the centre of the picture.
Size, 11 1/4 inches by 7 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
J. Richardson, Esq. and Sir Joshua Reynolds.
£21
21. a female portrait – of very expressive countenance.
Her head is adorned with a singularly formed cap; she is in
proﬁle, looking down. This ﬁne drawing is executed in red
chalk.
Size, 8 1/4 inches by 6 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£84
22. the cruciﬁxion – the model for the renowned pic-
ture which he is said to have painted, now in the Collec-
tion of the king of Naples. This splendid drawing is ﬁn-
ished with surprising care; and the body of the Saviour is
probably the ﬁnest example existing of anatomy. Two angels
lamenting, are slightly marked in the sky; and a skull is
placed at the foot of the Cross. It is executed in black chalk.
superb.
Size, 14 3/4 inches by 10 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
the King of Naples at the Capo de Monte, and M. Brunet,
of Paris.
£367.10
23. the cruciﬁxion – a very noble study, representing our
Lord on the Cross, and two of the Apostles, one on each
side. On the reverse is a study for the Saviour. This draw-
ing is executed in black and white chalk, and has several
pentimentos. Capital.
Size, 11 inches by 9 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£105
24. our lord stepping from the tomb – this most admirable
drawing is executed in black chalk, and is highly ﬁnished,
with his usual attention to the anatomical parts of the body.
The soldiers are represented sleeping, and are very slightly
sketched in. superb.
Size, 15 3/4 inches by 10 1/2 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£157.10
25. the cruciﬁxion – a most sublime and beautiful compo-
sition of three ﬁgures, treated with the utmost grandeur, and
replete with pentimentos. This splendid drawing is executed
in black and white chalk. Capital.
Size, 16 1/4 inches by 11 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£267.10
26. our saviour rising from the tomb – an admirable study
of the ﬁgure only, without the surrounding soldiers. This
model is drawn in black chalk, with great care. superb.
Size, 16 1/4 inches by 11 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£157.10
27. the cruciﬁxion – a splendid design, in which the Cross
is of a singular form, which he no doubt had made for the
convenience of suspending his model. This subject, which
evidently engaged, more than any other, this illustrious Mas-
ter, as is proved by the great number of studies for it in
this Collection, is here treated with great grandeur, and is
remarkable for the curious pentimentos; the Virgin has three
arms and two heads; the arms being folded together, and the
head looking down, is an afterthought, and one of the most
sublime character. Superb.
Size, 16 1/4 inches by 11 1/2 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£210
28. the cruciﬁxion – this sublime subject is here treated
with the utmost grandeur, and appears to have been the
result of all his studies for this most solemn subject. The
Saviour is represented alone, in a barren rocky scene, with a
dark sky; his head droops. Over the Cross is the inscription
i.n.r.i. This superb drawing is highly ﬁnished in black chalk.
Capital.
Size, 16 3/4 inches by 11 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£267.10
29. the three crosses – a most superb study for a noble
composition of more than twenty ﬁgures, treated with the
utmost grandeur. The Crosses are represented much higher
than they are drawn by other artists, and gives a much more
affecting feeling of this awful subject. This capital drawing
is executed in red chalk; the Saviour and the two thieves are
highly ﬁnished, and the lower ﬁgures sketched with surpriz-
ing spirit and sentiment.
Size, 15 1/2 inches by 11 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£267.10
30. the holy family – and various other Saints; a most
noble Cartoon. The ﬁgures are the size of life, and the St.

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
415
Joseph is the portrait of Michael Angelo. This unique and
valuable Cartoon is executed in black chalk, on several sheets
of paper. The subject is executed in oil-colour, by one of the
disciples of M. Angelo, and is in the Casa Buonaroti, from
whence this magniﬁcent Cartoon was purchased by Lucien
Buonaparte.
Size, 7 feet 7 1/2 inches by 6 feet 1 inch. From the Collection
of the Prince of Canino.
31. the virgin, child, and st. elizabeth – a very spirited
pen drawing, of a singular composition. The Virgin and
Child are sitting on the knee of St. Elizabeth; on the reverse
are some anatomical studies, and three heads of great expres-
sion.
Size, 10 inches by 7 inches. From the Collections of
M. Crozat, the Marquis Legoy and
T. Dimsdale, Esq.
£36.15
32. two groups of many ﬁgures – being studies for a com-
position of the healing the Israelites by means of the brazen
serpent, which Moses erected to try their faith by. This beau-
tiful drawing is particularly interesting, on account of the
number of small ﬁgures introduced. It forms part of the
vault of the Sistine Chapel.
Size, 13 1/4 inches by 9 3/4 inches. From the Collection of M.
Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£105
33. head of a man – a sort of Phrygian cap, with his mouth
open, as if singing. The expression and character of this head
are truly surprising; it is drawn with red chalk, and his hand
holds his cloak together. This beautiful drawing is evidently
from nature, and is highly interesting, from its extreme ﬁnish
and truth.
Size, 6 inches by 5 inches. From the Collection of the Duke
of Modena.
£31.10
34. an old man’s head – in proﬁle. This very admirable
portrait is executed in black chalk, and is full of expression;
on the reverse are some anatomical studies, drawn with
the pen.
Size, 15 inches by 9 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£52.10
35. study of a sleeping female – a design for the celebrated
tombs of the Medici. This admirable model is drawn in the
grandest style of this illustrious master; it is executed in red
chalk, and is truly capital.
Size, 15 1/2 inches by 10 3/4 inches. From the Collection of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£52.10
36. satan – a most surprising head; the character full of
expression, and completely illustrative of his description by
our immortal poet, Milton:
“– Care
Sat on his faded cheek, but under brows
Of dauntless courage, and considerate pride
Waiting revenge: cruel his eye, but cast
Signs of remorse and passion, to behold
The fellows of his crime, the followers rather
(Far other once beheld in bliss,) condemn’d
For ever now to have their lot in pain.”
Admirably drawn with the pen; most interesting.
Size, 5 1/4 inches by 5 1/4 inches. From the Collection of
J. Richardson, Esq.
£31.10
37. the haman – in the vault of the Sistine Chapel. This is one
of the ﬁnest drawings in existence, by this illustrious Master.
It is evidently from the life and drawn with surprising truth,
in red chalk. It is very remarkable that M. Angelo has drawn
one of the legs over again, on which he has, by means of
small round marks, indicated the exact place for the principal
light. This admirable model is superb.
Size, 16 inches by 8 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£210
38. our lord reclining – as represented on the cup of the
Virgin, in the very splendid group in statuary, which he
executed in Rome.
Nothing can exceed the beauty and correctness with
which the torso is treated, in this capital drawing: it is of
his very ﬁnest time.
Size, 12 1/2 inches by 10 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£157.10
39. portrait of ariosto – this admirable head is of the
utmost beauty, perfectly in the antique Greek taste, and was
probably intended to be copied as a cameo. Nothing can
exceed the profound knowledge of the human form, in this
admirable and highly interesting drawing, which is ﬁnished
with great care, in red chalk. It formerly belonged to Vasari,

416
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
who has mounted it in his usual manner, and adorned it
with two whole-length ﬁgures in bistre. Superb.
Size, 10 3/4 inches by 9 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
G. Vasari, and M. Dargenville.
£105
40. studies – for ﬁgures in the Last Judgment. This capital
study is executed in black chalk, and is admirable for the
skill shown in the anatomy of ﬁgures, in the most difﬁcult
positions.
Size, 16 inches by 10 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£52.10
41. a magniﬁcent sheet of studies – for the Tombs of the
Medicis, admirably drawn with the pen and bistre; full of
knowledge in the anatomy. On the same side is a study of
J. de Medici, in a helmit, slightly drawn in black chalk; and
on the reverse are several studies. This capital sheet is of his
best time. Superb.
Size, 17 1/4 inches by 11 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
Crozat, Mariette, the Marquis Legoy, and
Thomas Dimsdale, Esq.
£157.10
42. one of the bathing ﬁgures in the cartoon of pisa –
this superb model is evidently drawn with great care, from
nature; it is of his best time, and for one of his most cele-
brated works, which he executed in rivality of L. da Vinci.
On the reverse are some studies of ﬁgures, in red chalk.
superb.
Size, 16 1/2 inches by 11 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£157.10
43. the mary – in the celebrated Raising of Lazarus, painted
by Sebastian del Piombo. This very interesting and valuable
drawing, in black chalk, on blue paper, illustrates, in a great
degree, the idea always entertained of the share M. Angelo
had in this grand picture. The present drawing has evidently
been executed by S. del Piombo, probably from some sketch
by M. Angelo, and has been shown him for his approval. He
has left the head as it was; but has enlarged the style of the
drapery, and sketched in, with wonderful energy, some heads
in the background. Highly interesting.
Size, 11 inches by 9 inches. From the Collection of
Sir Joshua Reynolds.
£52.10
44. a noble study for the adam – in the Sistine Chapel;
this drawing is executed in black chalk. Very capital.
Size, 15 inches by 10 inches. From the Collection of
Sir Joshua Reynolds.
£52.10
45. various studies – a leg, in which the bones are drawn
with surprising truth to nature, and the sinews and ﬂesh
marked in red chalk. Also some heads of caricature, and an
old man’s portrait, with a long beard, full of character. On
the reverse are other studies.
Size, 11 1/4 inches by 8 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Crozat, Mariette, and the Count de Fries.
£52.10
46. the taking down from the cross – a grand composition
of ten ﬁgures, admirably drawn in red chalk. Very capital.
Size, 10 1/2 inches by 6 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
J. Hudson, Esq., J. Richardson, Esq., and
Sir Joshua Reynolds.
£21
47. a sheet of studies – with horses and various trophies.
Admirably drawn with the pen; and on the reverse are studies
of architecture and ﬁgures.
Size, 11 inches by 7 1/2 inches. From the Collection of
J. Richardson, Esq.
£21
48. cleopatra with the asp – an admirable drawing, highly
ﬁnished in black chalk, probably a model to execute in mar-
ble. Engraved in the Italian School of Design.
Size, 9 3/4 inches by 6 3/4 inches. From the Collection of
W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£52.10
49. a door – a ﬁne architectural study, with some writing.
This drawing is executed in black chalk, and is washed with
bistre.
Size, 16 1/4 inches by 10 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£10.10
50. four leaves from his pocket book – pasted together;
on which he has sketched several small ﬁgures from nature,
as ﬁrst ideas for the prophets and sybils in the Sistine Chapel.
These ﬁnely executed sketches are particularly interesting,
as shewing from what triﬂing origin the ﬁnest work in the
pictorial art was imagined. They are drawn with the pen, on

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
417
each side of the paper; and on two of them are memoran-
dums.
Size of the four, 11 1/4 inches by 10 3/4 inches. From the
Collection of W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£52.10
51. christ fastened to the column – a study for the picture
painted by Sebastian del Piombo. This ﬁne model is drawn
in black chalk.
Size, 10 3/4 inches by 5 1/2 inches. From the Collection of
J. Richardson, Esq.
£21
52. three ﬁgures disputing – one a soldier. This capital
drawing is particularly interesting, from the observations of
its former possessor; and it is most fortunate that the copy
by B. Franco is also in this Cabinet, so that the comparison
can still be readily made. Engraved in the Italian School of
Design.
Size, 15 1/4 inches by 10 inches. From the Collections of
J. Richardson, Esq., Lord Spencer, and
W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£262.10
53. a fragment of the cartoon of pisa – consisting of part
of three of the ﬁgures in this very celebrated work. This
highly interesting study is drawn in bistre, and is unfortu-
nately much damaged.
Size, 14 1/4 inches by 13 1/2 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£52.10
54. an old woman and a child – she walks with a stick
with a large top, and her drapery is cast in grand folds; she
appears speaking with anger, and has the ﬁngers of her left
hand extended: this drawing is executed with a reed pen,
and is full of expression; it is probably from life, but has a
witch-like character. Capital.
Size, 13 inches by 8 1/2 inches. From the Collections of
M. Revil and W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£157.10
55. horses, and a small study for the ﬁghting for the
standard – this noble study is particularly interesting, the
horses are evidently drawn from the life, with great attention,
at the time he was undecided as to his subject for the cartoon
of Pisa; on the reverse of this drawing are several poetical
verses, in the handwriting of this illustrious master.
Size, 17 inches by 11 inches. From the Collection of
W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£105
56. christ rising from the tomb – a magniﬁcent design;
admirably drawn in black chalk.
Size, 14 inches by 6 3/4 inches. From the Collection of
M. Dargenville.
£52.10
57. our saviour fastened to the column to be scourged –
a ﬁrst thought for the magniﬁcent picture painted by Sebas-
tian del Piombo in Rome; this admirable study is executed
in red chalk; the Christ, and one or two of the surround-
ing ﬁgures, highly ﬁnished, and others in outline. A highly
interesting drawing.
Size, 9 1/4 inches by 9 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£157.10
58. a group – for the lower part of the cruciﬁxion, the
Virgin and the Maries lamenting: this very interesting Study
is treated with the utmost sublimity and grandeur, and is of
his highest style of art; it is drawn in black chalk. Capital.
Size, 8 1/2 inches by 5 1/2 inches. From the Collection of the
Count de Fries.
£105
59. the fall of phæton – a most admirable model for
the celebrated picture well known to the amateur from the
engraving by M. Beatricit. This splendid design is executed
in black chalk, and varies considerably from the engraving,
it appears to have been a present from Michael Angelo to
his friend Tommaso di Cavallieri, and he has written at the
bottom of the drawing the following inscription:
“Ser Tommaso si questo schizzo non vi piace, ditelo
a Urbino a cio ch io abbi tempo da averne facto un
altro . . . come vi promessi, e si vi piace, e vogliate, ch io
lo ﬁnisca.”
Size, 12 1/4 inches by 8 1/2 inches. From the Collections of
Crozat, Mariette, Marquis Legoy, and
T. Dimsdale, Esq.
£157.10
60. the virgin – in the celebrated picture representing the
Annunciation, which was painted by M.Venusti from his
design for the Borghese Family; this ﬁne drawing is executed
in black chalk, with great care, and has some slight studies
on the back.
Size, 13 3/4 inches by 8 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£105
61. the virgin and child – the Virgin is represented seated,
and the infant Saviour is on her knees, with his head turned

418
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
from the spectator; this capital drawing is treated with great
sublimity and is executed with the pen and bistre. Capital.
Size, 14 1/4 inches by 9 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Crozat, Mariette, De Claussen, and
T. Dimsdale, Esq.
£157.10
62. our lord ascending from the tomb – surrounded by a
group of affrighted soldiers: this most admirable drawing is
of the ﬁnest quality, the Saviour is elongated in the style of
Parmigiano, which gives a lightness to the body most judi-
ciously and classically chosen for this subject by this illustri-
ous master. superb.
Size, 12 3/4 inches by 11 1/4 inches. From the Collection of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£210
63. isaiah – the celebrated ﬁrst thought for the splendid
ﬁgure in the Sistine Chapel: this magniﬁcent study is one of
the ﬁnest drawings existing by this great master; it is executed
with the pen and bistre, and is engraved in the Italian School
of Design. superb.
Size, 16 3/4 inches by 11 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Cicciaporci, M. Cavaceppi, and W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£315
64. study – for the celebrated Pieta engraved by Julio
Bonasone; this most admirable drawing is of the ﬁrst qual-
ity – the Saviour is reclining at the feet of the Virgin after
his cruciﬁxion, a part of the cross is above the head of the
Virgin, and the arms of the Christ are supported by two
angels; this capital model is executed in black chalk, and is
full of character and expression. superb.
Size, 11 1/2 inches by 7 1/2 inches. From the Collection of
M. Brunet, of Paris.
£262.10
65. the virgin and the angel – a subject for the Annun-
ciation, which was painted, with considerable variations, by
Marcello Venusti, from the design of Michael Angelo: this
interesting drawing is executed in black chalk, and is very
capital.
Size, 11 inches by 7 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£105
66. our lord – at whole length; a study for the cele-
brated composition of Christ and the woman at the well:
this admirable drawing is most carefully ﬁnished in black
chalk, and on the reverse is another smaller study for the
same ﬁgure, and also some hands. Capital.
Size, 10 3/4 inches by 6 1/2 inches. From the Collection of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£105
67. various studies for a samson slaying a philistine –
tried in various attitudes; most admirably drawn in black
chalk: although the ﬁgures are small, yet the expression and
truth of the anatomy is perfect. Capital.
Size, 9 3/4 inches by 8 1/2 inches. From the Collection of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£157.10
68. a woman sitting playing with a child – who stands
on her knees; evidently from life, and which he has made
use of in the grand work of the Sistine Chapel; this drawing
is executed in black chalk, washed with bistre of a grey tone,
and is engraved in the Italian School of Design.
Size, 7 inches by 5 1/4 inches. From the Collection of
W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£84
69. a ﬁgure rising from the grave – in the foreground of
the ‘Last Judgment’; this most admirable study is of the ﬁnest
quality: the anatomy of the body, and the truth of the joints
of the elbows, are equal to the Elgin marbles; this splendid
drawing is executed in black chalk, and on the reverse are
some other studies of arms, &c.
Size, 11 1/2 inches by 9 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£105
70. one of the ﬁgures in the Last Judgment – an admirable
model; highly ﬁnished in black chalk, and touched with sur-
prising truth to anatomical knowledge. Highly interesting.
Size, 12 1/2 inches by 5 1/4 inches. From the Collection of
W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£52.10
71. the return of the holy family from egypt – a slight
sketch in oil on board, highly interesting, as it shews his
progress of work, he has drawn the ﬁgures unclothed, and has
marked in some parts of the drapery over the naked ﬁgures.
This curious and indisputable grisaille is probably unique.
Size, 26 inches by 21 inches. From the Collection of the
King of Naples, at the Capo di Monti, and
W. Y. Ottley, Esq., it is mentioned in
the Italian School of Design, page 31.
£105
72. the holy family – well known to the amateurs from the
pictures painted from it by M. Venusti: this splendid drawing

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
419
is one of the most important in this matchless collection; it
is executed, with the greatest care, in red chalk, and is full
of sublime character. superb.
Size, 15 1/2 inches by 11 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£525
73. the virgin, our lord, and st. john – this splendid
composition is highly valuable, as proving his power when
he executed works of an elegant description – the expression
and taste of this divine drawing is equal to any work of
Raffaelle or Correggio; it is executed in black chalk, highly
ﬁnished, and is one of the chief ornaments of this matchless
collection. Superb.
Size, 12 1/4 inches by 8 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, and the Chevalier Vicar.
£525
74. the celebrated head of st. bartholomew – in the Last
Judgment. Mr Ottley, in his description of this splendid draw-
ing, observes with truth, – that it possesses an energy and
sublimity of character and expression, which we shall in vain
look for in the works of other artists, and which, perhaps,
no one but he ever conceived. Most capital. On the reverse
are some studies.
Size, 15 1/4 inches by 9 3/4 inches. From the Collection of
W. Y. Ottley, Esq., and engraved in his School of Design.
£262.10
75. a noble head of a warrior – possibly an ideal portrait
of himself, as it bears some resemblance to his character: it is
very richly ornamented with an helmet of a singular form;
admirably drawn in black chalk. Superb.
Size, 16 inches by 10 1/2 inches. From the Collection of
Sir Joshua Reynolds, P.R.A.
£105
76. the taking down from the cross – a very splendid
composition, most important, as no picture is known of this
subject. This grand design is of the ﬁrst order; it is executed
in red chalk. Most capital.
Size, 14 3/4 inches by 11 inches. From the Collection of the
Baron de Non.
£157.10
77. michael angelo’s dream – a model for the celebrated
picture said to be at Dresden, and well known by the engrav-
ings from it: a most classic composition. A male ﬁgure, most
admirably drawn, sits on a square seat, from which a curtain
being drawn, shews a variety of masks; the ﬁgure rests on a
globe, with his head thrown back, and a winged angel, with
a trumpet, appears to sound in his ears, and shew him, in
several groupes of small ﬁgures, the various crimes and vices
of mankind. This drawing is executed in black chalk, and
is of such surprising excellence, that it may be ranked with
the ﬁnest Greek sculpture – it is one of the ﬁnest drawings
in the world.
Size, 15 3/4 inches by 11 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, Vicar, and W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£630
78. one of the ﬁgures on the foreground of the ‘last
judgment’ – this capital study is executed in black chalk;
highly ﬁnished.
Size, 6 3/4 inches by 6 inches. From the Collection of
J. Hudson, Esq.
£84
79. the adam – a most noble study for the celebrated work
in the Sistine Chapel. This most admirable drawing is one
of the ﬁnest examples existing of the surprising talents of
this illustrious master; it is worthy the best of the Greek
sculptors, and may compare with the Ilyssus in the British
Museum. This capital study is drawn with red chalk, and on
the reverse is a head of great character. Both these drawings
are engraved in the Italian School of Design. Superb.
Size, 10 1/2 inches by 7 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
J. Richardson, Esq., Sir J. Reynolds, and
W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£262.10
80. head of a man – strongly expressive of malevolence,
evidently drawn from life. This ﬁne drawing is executed in
red chalk, the face highly ﬁnished, and the cap and drapery
freely sketched. Capital. Engraved in the School of Design.
Size, 11 inches by 8 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti, Chevalier Vicar, and W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£105
81. studies for the david with the sling – this ﬁne drawing
is highly interesting, as it contains subjects on both sides the
paper, and also the following inscription: –
“Davicte cholla fromba e io chollarche.”
Which signiﬁes, – ‘David with his sling, and I with the
chisel.’ This very interesting drawing is executed with the
pen and bistre.
Size, 10 inches by 7 inches. From the Collections of
M. Crozat, Mariette, Marquis Legoy,
and T. Dimsdale, Esq.
£63

420
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
82. various small studies of ﬁgures – on three sheets
of paper; admirably drawn in black chalk; they are chieﬂy
for subjects from the New Testament, the disciples asleep
on the mount, and the Virgin supporting the body of our
Saviour, &c.
Size, 13 1/4 inches by 13 inches. From the Collection of
W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£52.10
83. the lazarus and another ﬁgure – a design of part of the
celebrated picture by Sebastian del Piombo, in the National
Gallery, below are some studies for the foot of the Lazarus,
one of which is marked through, as defective. This admirable
study is executed in red chalk, and is ﬁnished with the utmost
delicacy, with a profound knowledge of anatomy, and is most
interesting, as proving the interest Michael Angelo took in
the picture which was painted in rivality of the Transﬁguration
of Raffaelle.
Size, 10 inches by 4 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti and the Chevalier Vicar.
£157.10
84. a noble sheet of studies for the ‘last judgment’ –
this most valuable, and highly interesting study, is executed
in black chalk, it is engraved, and forms one of the principal
ornaments in the Italian School of Design.
Size, 15 inches by 10 inches. From the Collections of
M. Ciccaporci, M. Cavaceppi, and W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£210
85. the lazarus – two most interesting studies for the picture
in the National Gallery: in one he is represented sitting on
the tomb, in a different position to that which he adopted,
in the other, the leg is thrown up similar to the action of the
picture, but the idea of his pushing off the bandage of the
leg, seems as yet not to have occurred to him. These most
valuable and interesting studies are executed in red chalk;
on the second model is another study, in which the ﬁgure is
standing.
Size, 13 1/4 inches by 8 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti and the Chevalier Vicar.
£105
86. the upper part of the ‘last judgment’ – this admirable
study is most interesting, it is one of the very few designs
which exists for this stupendous work, and varies consider-
ably from the fresco; it is executed in black chalk. Superb.
Size, 13 3/4 inches by 11 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti and the Chevalier Vicar.
£157.10
87. the lazarus and two other ﬁgures – a study for the
ﬁnest portion of the celebrated picture by Sebastian del
Piombo, now in the National Gallery. This most valuable
and superb study is most interesting, as it proves the correct
judgement of the late Mr. Fuseli, in his opinion, that the
ﬁgure of Lazarus was the work of Michael Angelo; this ﬁne
drawing is executed in red chalk. Capital.
Size, 10 inches by 7 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti and the Chevalier Vicar.
£157.10
88. the driving the money changers from the temple –
which was painted by M. Venusti for the Borghese family.
These most interesting models are of the highest quality, and
are particularly important, as they are not engraved: it is very
remarkable, that the middle drawing is upon several bits of
paper pasted together.
Size, 18 1/4 inches by 14 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti and the Chevalier Vicar.
£210
89. various studies – executed in red chalk and the pen,
part of the male subject and a hand are admirably executed
in red chalk, and several small ﬁgures are sketched with great
spirit with the pen. This ﬁne drawing has some studies on
the reverse.
Size, 11 inches by 7 1/2 inches. From the Collections of
M. Crozat, Mariette, and T. Dimsdale, Esq.
£52.10
90. portrait of an aged man – of ﬁne expression, with a
beard; this ﬁne drawing is executed with black chalk. Capital.
Size, 7 3/4 inches by 5 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti and the Chevalier Vicar.
£31.10
91. two ﬁgures – in large cloaks, one in an attitude of
thought, with his head reclined; on the reverse is a head of a
man in a singular cap; both these drawings are executed with
the pen and bistre, and are engraved in the Italian School of
Design.
Size, 10 3/4 inches by 7 inches. From the Collection of
W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
£105
92. an aged female – probably a design for a witch or
sybil; very highly ﬁnished with the pen, and full of char-
acter. Engraved in the work of Mr. Metz.
Size, 13 1/2 inches by 5 1/4 inches. From the Collection of
Richard Cosway, Esq.
£21
93. michael angelo and his friend ant. della torre –
dissecting a human ﬁgure, which lays extended on a table,
the arms hang to the ground, and a lighted candle is ﬁxed

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
421
in the stomach of the body. This very curious drawing is
mentioned by several authors, and is executed with the pen
and bistre in a most spirited manner.
Size, 9 3/4 inches by 6 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Mariette, the Marquis Legoy, and T. Dimsdale, Esq.
£52.10
94. the tibertine sybil – in the vault of the Sistine Chapel;
this admirable model is highly ﬁnished in black chalk, and
is slightly washed in bistre in the shadow.
Size, 15 1/2 inches by 10 1/4 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti and the Chevalier Vicar.
£21
95. the libica sybil – in the vault of the Sistine Chapel; this
ﬁne model is highly ﬁnished in black chalk, slightly washed
with bistre.
Size, 15 1/2 inches by 10 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti and the Chevalier Vicar.
£21
96. a dragon or chimeræ – a winged monster; most
admirably drawn with the pen and bistre: on the reverse
are some studies of eyes and a head, which appear to have
been drawn by M. Angelo as a lesson for his scholar, Andrea
Mini, who has copied them very indifferently. M. Angelo
has written on this curious drawing his observation recom-
mending patience to his disciple. Highly interesting. This
curious drawing has been copied by A. Caracci, and is placed
by the original.
Size, 13 1/4 inches by 10 1/4 inches. From the Collection of
the Baron de Non.
£157.10
97. a female – seated: probably a design for one of the sybils;
drawn in red chalk, evidently from nature: treated in a grand
style.
Size, 10 1/4 inches by 7 1/2 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti and the Chevalier Vicar.
£52.10
98. the virgin – an admirable study for the Last Judgment;
slightly executed in black chalk, and in his grandest style.
Capital.
Size, 15 1/4 inches by 9 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti and the Chevalier Vicar.
£21
99. two of the principal ﬁgures in the ‘last judgment’ –
very highly ﬁnished in black chalk, and drawn with the
utmost anatomical skill. Very capital.
Size, 15 3/4 inches by 10 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti and the Chevalier Vicar.
£21
100. a reclining sleeping male ﬁgure – with a youth stand-
ing at his feet; probably a ﬁrst thought for the celebrated
dream. This beautiful drawing is executed in black chalk,
and is of surprising delicacy of ﬁnish, with a correctness
of anatomy which may class with the ﬁnest Greek Cameo;
above the ﬁgures are three lines of writing by this illustrious
artist.
Size, 7 1/2 inches by 5 inches. From the Collections of
M. Buonaroti and the Chevalier Vicar.
£52.10
Two other exhibitions held at the Lawrence Gallery con-
tained relevant drawings:
i. rubens
17. a prophet – A highly ﬁnished study from Michael
Angelo, one of the prophets from the Sistine Chapel. Red
chalk heightened with white.
Size, 13 1/4 inches by 8 3/4 inches. From the Collections of
Mariette and B. West P.R.A.
27. ganymede and the eagle – An exquisitely ﬁnished draw-
ing copied from Michael Angelo, black chalk and heightened
with white.
Size, 11 1/4 inches by 9 1/2 inches. From the Collection of
Mariette.
VII. Andrea del Sarto
79. a soldier dressing – A superb study of the ﬁgure in
Michael Angelo’s famous work of the Cartoon of Pisa, red
chalk highly ﬁnished.
Size, 16 1/2 inches by 8 1/2 inches. From the Collections of
Mr. Richardson and Sir Joshua Reynolds.
80. a soldier – From Michael Angelo’s Cartoon at Pisa, red
chalk highly ﬁnished. Very ﬁne.
Size, 16 1/2 inches by 11 1/4 inches. From the Collection of
the Prince Borghese.


422
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
C
Drawings Purchased by William II, February 1838
Michael Angelo
1. 1836-3
M. Angelo w L.
£105
2. 1836-12
Study of drapery
£105
3. 1836-13
David [sic].
£105
4. 1836-15
Marchioness of Pescara
£262.10
5. 1836-18
Man’s Head red chalk
£52.10
6. 1836-19
A Male torso
£21
7. 1836-20
Study for dead Christ
£21
8. 1836-22
Cruciﬁxion
£367.10
9. 1836-24
Our Lord rising
£157.10
10. 1836-25
Cruciﬁxion
£267.10
11. 1836-26
Our Lord rising
£157.10
12. 1836-27
Cruciﬁxion
£210
13. 1836-28
Ditto
£267.10
14. 1836-29
The Three Crosses
£267.10
15. 1836-34
Old Man’s head proﬁle
£ 52.10
16. 1836-35
Study Sleeping female
£52.10
17. 1836-36
Satan
£31.10
18. 1836-37
Haman
£210
19. 1836-38
Our Lord reclining
£157.10
20. 1836-39
Ariosto
£105
21. 1836-40
Study ﬁgure in last judgment
£52.10
22. 1836-42
Figure in Cartoon of Pisa
£157.10
23. 1836-43
The Mary in Lazarus by
Sebastiano
£52.10
24. 1836-44
The Adam
£52.10
25. 1836-48
Cleopatra
£52.10
26. 1836-51
Christ at the Column
£21
27. 1836-56
Christ rising
£52.10
28. 1836-57
Our Lord at the Column
£157.10
29. 1836-58
A group for Cruciﬁxion
£105
30. 1836-59
Fall of Phæton
£157.10
31. 1836-60
The Virgin
£105
32. 1836-61
Virgin and Child
£157.10
33. 1836-62
Our Lord Ascending
£210
34. 1836-63
The Isaiah Prophet superb
£315
35. 1836-64
The Pieta engraved
£262.10
36. 1836-65
The Virgin and Angel
£78
37. 1836-66
Our Lord whole length
£105
38. 1836-69
Figure rising from the grave
£105
39. 1836-70
One of the ﬁgures in Judgement £52.10
40. 1836-72
Holy Family red chalk
£525
41. 1836-73
Virgin Child and St. John
£525
42. 1836-74
St. Bartholomew superb
£262.10
43. 1836-75
Head of a Warrior
£105
44. 1836-77
M. Angelo’s dream
£630
45. 1836-78
Figure in Last Judgment
£84
46. 1836-79
The Adam superb
£262.10
47. 1836-81
David with the sling
£63
48. 1836-83
The Lazarus
£105
49. 1836-84
Studies for the Last Judgement
£210
50. 1836-85
The Lazarus
£105
51. 1836-86
Upper part of Judgement
£157.10
52. 1836-87
The Lazarus
£157.10
53. 1836-88
Driving Money Changers;
three drawings
£210
54. 1836-90
Portrait of an aged man
£31.10
55. 1836-94
The Tyburtine Sybil
£21
56. 1836-95
The Libaca Sybil
£21
57. 1836-98
The Virgin
£21
58. 1836-99
Two Apostles
£21
59. 1836-100
A sleeping ﬁgure
£52.10
Following this purchase in February 1838, William II
returned to Woodburn in August of the same year, and
bought forty additional drawings. Lists of these are not avail-
able, but Woodburn’s account, as published by Hinterding
and Horsch, does specify that one very important drawing by
Michelangelo was included among them: This is “the Large
Cartoon M. Angelo,” certainly 1836-41 the Epifania car-
toon, which reappeared in William’s sale in 1850 as lot 212.
William bought further sheets by or attributed to Michelan-
gelo on this occasion from among those not exhibited in
1836. What may have been two of the most important of
these were 1850-150 and 1850-153.

D
Catalogue des Tableaux Anciens et Modernes de Diverses
Ecoles, Dessins et Statues formant la Galerie de feu Sa
Majest´e Guillaume II, roi des Pays Bas. 12–20 August 1850
Dessins.
83. piombo (sebastien del).
La ﬂagellation de Notre Seigneur. Superb dessin d’un
grand ﬁni, lav´e au bistre, sur papier bleu.
Bought Woodburn, 100 guilders.
101. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
Tˆete de femme, vue de proﬁl.
Bought Woodburn, 70 guilders.
102. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
Tˆete de Satan. Dessin au bistre et `a la plume.
Bought Woodburn, 40 guilders.
103. michel-ange.
Esquisse `a la pierre d’Italie, pour le tableau repr´esentant
le jugement dernier.
Bought Woodburn, 770 guilders.

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
423
104. michel-ange?
Figure acad´emique `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 185 guilders.
105. michel-ange.
Christ cruciﬁ´e, beau dessin `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 240 guilders.
106. michel-ange.
Figure acad´emique, largement dessin´ee `a la pierre
d’Italie.
Bought Weimar, 200 guilders.
107. michel-ange.
Etude de tˆete d’homme, largement ex´ecut´ee `a la pierre
d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 850 guilders.
108. michel-ange (d’apr`es).
Dessin au bistre, d’apr`es la peinture `a fresque,
“le jugement dernier.”
Bought Enthoven, 210 guilders.
111. michel-ange.
Tˆete d’homme, vue de proﬁl, coif´ee d’un casque.
Dessin `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 160 guilders.
112. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
Une proph`etesse. Beau dessin `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Weimar, 55 guilders.
114. inconnu.
Etude de tˆete d’apr`es “le jugement dernier” de
Michel-Ange
Bought Weimar, 80 guilders.
117. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
Etude de Christ au tombeau; `a la sanguine.
Bought Roos, A., 40 guilders.
118. michel-ange.
Mˆeme sujet, `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Van Luyck, Paris, 510 guilders.
119. michel-ange.
Etude pour la peinture `a fresque, “le jugement
dernier” `a la pierre d’Italie; d’un faire superbe.
Bought Woodburn, 700 guilders.
120. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
Figure acad´emique d’une femme, `a la sanguine.
Bought Brondgeest, 225 guilders.
122. michel-ange.
La r´esurrection de J´esus Christ, superbe ´etude `a la
pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 750 guilders.
123. michel-ange.
Fragment d’´etudes, superbe page, ex´ecut´ee `a la pierre
d’Italie.
Bought Engelbert, 400 guilders.
124. michel-ange.
La mort de Phaeton, dessin superbe `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 910 guilders.
125. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
Le songe de Michel-Ange, ´etude du tableau de la
Galerie de Dresde.
Bought Woodburn, 1200 guilders.
126. piombo (sebastien del).
La ﬂagellation de Notre Seigneur, belle ´etude de
plusieurs ﬁgures, `a la sanguine.
Bought Roos, A., 340 guilders.
127. michel-ange.
Les trois croix, superbe page `a la sanguine.
Bought Woodburn, 350 guilders.
128. michel-ange.
Etude d’un torse d’homme, `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Brondgeest, N., 80 guilders.
129. venusti (marco).
J´esus-Christ
chassant
les
marchands
du
temple,
superbe dessin ex´ecut´ee d’une belle mani`ere `a la pierre
d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 530 guilders.
130. piombo (sebastien del).
La r´esurrection de St. Lazare, belle ´etude `a la sanguine,
pour le tableau qui se trouve au Mus´ee britannique.
Bought Woodburn, 160 guilders.
131. piombo (sebastien del).
Etude pour le mˆeme tableau, ´egalement trait´ee `a la
sanguine.
Bought Woodburn, 370 guilders.
132. venusti (marco).
Etude de la Vierge, d’un beau dessin, `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 130 guilders.
133. venusti (marco).
La Vierge et l’Ange, mˆeme conditions.
Bought Woodburn, 150 guilders.
134. michel-ange.
Portrait d’un homme ag´e; superbe ´etude `a la pierre
d’Italie.
Bought Roos, A., 180 guilders.
135. michel-ange.
Etude acad´emique pour la statue de David, trait´ee `a la
plume.
Bought Woodburn, 230 guilders.

424
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
141. michel-ange.
Belle ´etude de diverses ﬁgures, `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Enthoven, 200 guilders.
142. michel-ange.
Etude d’un torse et de divers fragments, `a la sanguine.
Bought Woodburn, 200 guilders.
143. michel-ange.
Etude acad´emique, `a la plume.
Bought Woodburn, 100 guilders.
144. michel-ange.
Mˆeme sujet, `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 330 guilders.
145. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
Le Christ en croix. Belle ´etude `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 450 guilders.
146. michel-ange.
Etude de tˆete, largement croqu´ee `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Brondgeest, 50 guilders.
147. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
Etude d’homme, prise du tableau “le jugement
dernier”.
Roos, A., 115 guilders.
148. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
Etude de Madonne, du mˆeme tableau.
Bought Brondgeest, N., 55 guilders.
149. michel-ange.
Etude de Christ. Belle page `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 50 guilders.
150. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
Descente de croix, superbe ´etude d’un grand ﬁni, `a la
pierre d’Italie.
Bought Brondgeest, N., 60 guilders.
151. michel-ange.
La Vierge; belle ´etude `a la pierre d’Italie, sur papier
bleu.
Bought Engelbert, P., 85 guilders.
152. michel-ange.
Le Christ en croix; ´etude `a la pierre d’Italie, sur papier
brun.
Bought Woodburn, 500 guilders.
153. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
L’enl`evement de Ganymede; belle ´etude `a la pierre
d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 150 guilders.
154. michel-ange.
La Vierge avec l’Enfant J´esus; cette superbe page est
dessin´ee `a la plume.
Bought Woodburn, 850 guilders.
155. michel-ange.
Etude d’homme. Superbe dessin `a la plume.
Bought Brondgeest, 400 guilders.
156. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
Deux ﬁgures acad´emiques. Dessin `a la pierre noire.
Bought Brondgeest, N., 59 guilders.
157. michel-ange.
Figure acad´emique d’homme. Dessin `a la plume et
d’un beau faire.
Bought Woodburn, 400 guilders.
158. michel-ange.
Madonne avec l’enfant J´esus et Saint Jean. Cette belle
page est vigoureusement trait´ee `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 1800 guilders.
159. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
Etude de ﬁgures acad´emiques, `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 200 guilders.
160. michel-ange (Attribu´e `a).
Etude de divers fragments, ´egalement `a la pierre
d’Italie.
Bought Brondgeest, 100 guilders.
161. michel-ange.
Madonne avec un enfant. Superbe dessin `a la sanguine
d’un faire pr´ecieux.
Bought Brondgeest, 50 guilders.
162. michel-ange.
Figures acad´emiques, et divers griffonnements. Belle
´etude `a la sanguine.
Bought Woodburn, 750 guilders.
163. michel-ange.
Etude `a la sanguine d’une tˆete de vieillard vue de proﬁl,
bien condition´ee.
Bought Woodburn, 110 guilders.
164. michel-ange.
Cette belle production repr´esente deux femmes, entre
lesquelles un m´edaillon avec le portrait en proﬁl de
l’Arioste. Ce beau dessin est en partie `a la sanguine et
en partie lav´e au bistre.
Bought ? ?guilders.
165. michel-ange.
Figure acad´emique. Dessin d’un grand ﬁni `a la pierre
d’Italie.
Bought Brondgeest, 75 guilders.

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
425
166. michel-ange.
Etude `a la plume de divers fragments; d’une belle con-
servation.
Bought Vanluyck, 100 guilders.
167. michel-ange.
Croquis `a la sanguine, pour le tableau de S´ebastien del
Piombo qui se trouve dans la galerie de Londres, d’un
fort belle conservation.
Bought Woodburn, 550 guilders.
168. michel-ange.
Cl´eopatre, le cou entour´e d’une vip`ere. Cette superbe
page est ex´ecut´ee `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 180 guilders.
169. michel-ange.
Sainte Famille. Dessin d’un faire pr´ecieux, `a la san-
guine.
Bought Woodburn, 1300 guilders.
170. michel-ange.
La r´esurrection de Notre Seigneur, dessin `a la pierre
d’Italie.
Bought Roos, A., 200 guilders.
171. michel-ange.
Le Christ en croix, avec la Ste Vierge et St Jean. Dessin
d’un faire superbe, `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 800 guilders.
172. michel-ange.
La Vierge avec l’enfant J´esus; belle ´etude `a la plume.
Bought Vanluyck, 625 guilders.
173. michel-ange.
Une sibille. Ce dessin, d’un ﬁni pr´ecieux, est `a la pierre
d’Italie.
Bought Weimar, 30 guilders.
179. michel-ange.
Etude d’un ﬁgure acad´emique, r´epresentant probable-
ment la ﬂagellation du Seigneur, `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Roos, A., 70 guilders.
180. michel-ange.
Le Christ et la Vierge; le Seigneur mort est support´e
par des anges. Beau dessin `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 850 guilders.
212. michel-ange.
Ste Famille; composition de plusieurs ﬁgures de
grandeur naturelle. Carton colossal `a la pierre d’Italie.
Bought Woodburn, 650 guilders.
237. michel-ange (d’apr`es).
Figure acad´emique, dessin `a la sanguine.
Bought Enthoven, 6 guilders.
238. michel-ange (d’apr`es).
Mˆeme sujet, `a la sanguine.
Bought Enthoven, 3 guilders.
241. passarotti.
Portrait de Michel-Ange, dessin `a la plume.
Bought Brondgeest, N., 4 guilders.
251. sarto (Mani`ere d’a del).
Sainte Famille, d’apr`es Michel-Ange. Dessin `a la san-
guine.
Bought Woodburn, 20 guilders.
257. piombo (d’apr`es seb. del).
Copie d’apr`es un de ses tableaux.
Bought Roos, A., 3 guilders.

E
WOODBURN SALE, CHRISTIE’S LONDON, 1860
The Valuable and Important Collection of Drawings by
the Old Masters formerly in the Collection of the late sir
thomas lawrence, pra, . . . Monday, June 4 1860, and fol-
lowing days.
MICHAEL ANGELO BUONAROTI
99. The Portrait of Michael Angelo. A ﬁne drawing, in
pen, by Passarotti.
1
Bought Colnaghi, £3. 15s
100. ADAM – A NOBLE STUDY FOR THE CELE-
BRATED WORK IN THE SISTINE CHAPEL. This
most admirable drawing is one of the ﬁnest examples
of the master. On the reverse is a man’s head, of great
character. Both in red chalk. Engraved in the italian
school of design. SUPERB. From the Collections of Richard-
son, Sir J. Reynolds, and Ottley.
1
Bought Tifﬁn £42
101. The Virgin, in the celebrated Picture of the Annun-
ciation, painted, with considerable variations, by Mar-
cello Venusti from the designs of Michael Angelo. On
the back are some slight sketches – black chalk. From the Collec-
tions of M. Buonaroti (a descendant of the Painter), and the Chev.
Vicar.
1
Bought Tifﬁn £6.10s

426
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
102. Another Study for the same Subject, treated dif-
ferently. This interesting drawing is in black chalk and very ﬁne.
From the same Collections as the last.
1
Bought Vaughan £7.10s
103. Another Study for the same Picture, more elabo-
rately carried out, and more in conformity, in design,
with the Painting – black chalk. Superb. From the Collection
of Charles I.
1
Bought Enson £8.15s
104. THE VIRGIN, THE INFANT CHRIST and ST
JOHN. This elegant Drawing has all the expression and
taste of Raffaelle and Correggio, and was always con-
sidered one of the chief ornaments, in the matchless
Collection of Sir Thomas Lawrence, of the Master. –
black chalk, heightened with white. From the Collections of M.
Buonaroti, and the Chev. Vicar.
1
Bought Tifﬁn £211.1s
105. THE HOLY FAMILY, the Infant sleeping in the lap
of the Virgin. This splendid drawing is one of the most
important of this Master. Executed with the greatest care in
red chalk. SUPERB. From the same Collections as the last.
1
Bought Tifﬁn £39.18s
106. The Virgin leading the Infant Jesus, with a ﬁgure
of St. John slightly indicated. An elegant composition in black
chalk.
1
Bought Bloxam £2
107. Our Lord, a Whole-length Figure. A study for the
subject of Christ and the woman at the well. On the reverse,
is another sudy for the same ﬁgure, and some hands. Black
chalk, heightened. Very ﬁne. From the Collections of Buonaroti
and Vicar.
1
Bought Roupell £4.15
108. A Sheet of Studies of various Scriptural Subjects –
in pen and bistre. In the centre, a draped female, in red chalk, of
grand character.
1
Bought Daniel £4.4s
109. Driving out the Money Changers from the Temple.
Four separate studies for the same subject, on three sheets,
with others on the backs. Very interesting. Drawn in black
chalk.
3
Bought Tifﬁn £13.10s
110. The Raising of Lazarus; two highly interesting
Studies on one sheet, for the subject by Sebastian del
Piombo, in the National Gallery, tending to conﬁrm
the opinion of Fuseli, that the Figure of Lazarus was
the work of Michael Angelo. Admirably drawn, in red chalk.
From the Collections of Buonaroti and the Chev. Vicar.
1
Bought Colnaghi £21
111. Another admirable Study for the same Subject,
with additional Figures. Boldly drawn, in red chalk. From
the same Collections as the last.
1
Bought Farrer £23.2s
112. Another Study for the Same, differing; with several
Models for the Feet: the Anatomical Proportions of
the Figure of Lazarus very carefully ﬁnished – red chalk.
From the same Collections.
1
Bought Farrer £33.12s
113. CHRIST ON THE CROSS: the Model for the
renowned Picture, in the Collection of the King of
Naples, which Michael Angelo is said to have painted.
Two Angels, lamenting, are slightly marked in the Sky.
In black chalk, ﬁnished with the utmost care. Superb. From the
Collections of the King of Naples, and M. Brunet.
1
Bought Enson £42
114. CHRIST ON THE CROSS. Treated with the
utmost grandeur, and most carefully ﬁnished. In black
chalk. From the Collections of M. Buonaroti and the Chev.
Vicar.
1
Bought Enson £18.18s
115. The Cruciﬁxion, with Figures of the Virgin and St.
John. The Cross is of a singular form, and the ﬁgures are remark-
able for curious pentimenti, the Virgin having three arms and two
heads – black chalk, heightened. From the same Collections.
1
Bought Colnaghi £25.4s
116. The Cruciﬁxion: a Composition of Three Fig-
ures – in black and white chalk. Very ﬁne. From the same
Collections.
1
Bought Colnaghi £16.5s.6d
117. THE THREE CROSSES: a superb Study for a Com-
position of above twenty Figures; the Crosses are of
high elevation, the Figures below sketched with great
spirit – red chalk. From the same Collections.
1
Bought Tifﬁn £26.5s
118. The Descent from the Cross: a Design of about
twenty Figures. Highly ﬁnished in black chalk. Capital. From
the Collections of Count Gelosi and Mr. Dimsdale.
1
Bought Enson £8.18s.6d
119. The Dead Body of Christ supported on the Knees of
the Virgin, at the foot of the Cross; two Angels sustain

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
427
the Arms. A subject known by the engraving by J. Bonasoni.
Black chalk, highly ﬁnished. Of the highest quality. From
the Collection of M. Brunet.
1
Bought Enson £52.10s
120. Study of a Group of the Virgin and Maries lament-
ing at the foot of the Cross. Black chalk. Very ﬁne. From
the Collection of the Count de Fries.
1
Bought Tifﬁn £20.9s. 6d
121. Our Lord Ascending from the Tomb. A group of
affrighted soldiers is admirably disposed. The ﬁgure of Christ
is very carefully and highly ﬁnished. Black chalk. From the
Collections of Buonaroti and Vicar.
1
Bought Tifﬁn £28.7s
122. Another Study of the same Subject, differently
treated. The ﬁgure of our Saviour is highly ﬁnished, while
the soldiers are but slightly sketched in. Black chalk. From the
same Collections as the last.
1
Bought Tifﬁn £7.7s
123. Our Saviour Rising from the Tomb. An admirable
study of the ﬁgure only, without the surrounding soldiers.
Drawn in black chalk, with great care. From the same Collec-
tions.
1
Bought Robinson £10.10s
124. David, in the act of Throwing a Stone from the
Sling, a noble study for the body of the statue, by Michael
Angelo, executed at Florence – pen and bistre; on the reverse are
several admirable studies of infants, also in pen. From the Collections
of Crozat, Mariette, and Dimsdale.
1
Bought Vaughan £45.3s
125. A SHEET OF STUDIES FOR FIGURES IN THE
LAST JUDGMENT. Beautifully Drawn, and of the
greatest interest – black chalk. Engraved in Ottley’s Ital-
ian School of Design. From the Collections of Ciccapocci,
Cavaceppi, and W. Y. Ottley.
1
Bought Clement £22.6s
126. The Upper Part of the Last Judgment. This
admirable Study is most interesting, as it Varies mate-
rially from the Fresco – black chalk. From the Collections of
Buonaroti and Vicar.
1
Bought Colnaghi £12.12s
127. A Figure Rising from the Grave in the Foreground
of the Last Judgment. A study of the ﬁnest quality – in black
chalk; on the reverse are some studies of arms, &c. From the same
Collections as the last.
1
Bought Tifﬁn £7.7s
128. A Sheet of Studies from the Last Judgment – black
chalk, on both sides.
1
Bought Gasc £7.17s. 6d
129. A Demon Dragging down a Man, and another Fig-
ure, a study for a group in the Last Judgment. Highly ﬁnished,
in red chalk.
1
Bought Roupell £3.15s
130. An admirable Study for Portions of the Last
Judgment; particularly a ﬁgure descending as in the act of
ﬂying. Very carefully ﬁnished, in black chalk.
1
Bought Tifﬁn £14.3s.6d
131. A Study of a Head in one of the Figures in the
Last Judgment. A drawing of wonderfully ﬁne character, highly
ﬁnished, in black chalk. Capital. From the Collections of Richard-
son, C. Rogers, and Hibbert.
1
Bought Clement £7.7s
132. A Head of Satan. Full of diabolic expression, and drawn
with great spirit, in pen and bistre. From the Collection of J.
Richardson.
1
Bought Robinson £4
133. Various studies of ﬁgures in the Last Judgment – pen
and chalk.
3
Bought Bloxam £1.5s
134. THE HEAD OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW, IN THE
LAST JUDGMENT. Engraved in the Italian School of Design,
where Mr. Ottley justly observes, that “it possesses an energy
and sublimity of character and expression which we shall in vain
look for in other artists, and which, perhaps, no one but he
ever conceived.” On the reverse are a few studies – black and
white chalk. Superb. From the Collection of W. Y. Ottley,
Esq.
1
Bought Evans £13.13s
135. One of the Prophets, Seated. A grand study for a ﬁg-
ure in the Sistine Chapel – black chalk. From the Collections of
J. Richardson and Sir J. Reynolds.
1
Bought Clement £9.19s.6d
136. THE PROPHET ISAIAH. The ﬁrst thought for
the magniﬁcent Figure in the Sistine Chapel. Executed
in pen and bistre, and engraved in the Italian School of Design.
Superb. From the Collections of Cicciapocci, Cavaceppi, and
W. Y. Ottley.
1
Bought Vaughan £44.2s
137. Jupiter, in the form of an Eagle, ascending with
Ganymede. Most highly ﬁnished with black chalk. In the

428
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
lower part the sheep and dogs of Ganymede are slightly indi-
cated. A Drawing of the highest quality.
1
Bought Enson £8.8s
138. THE FALL OF PHAETON. An admirable Study for
the celebrated Picture, known to the Amateur, from
the Engraving by N. Beatricit. From an inscription at bot-
tom, in the handwriting of Michael Angelo, it appears to have
been a present from the Artist to his friend Tomasso di Caval-
lieri. It is executed in black chalk, and varies considerably from the
engraving. From the Collections of Crozat, Marietti, Legoy, and
Dimsdale.
1
Bought Clement £45.3s
139. One of the Figures in the Cartoon of Pisa.
This superb model is drawn with great care, in pen and bistre,
of the Artist’s best time, and for one of his most celebrated
works. On the reverse are some studies of ﬁgures in red chalk.
Superb. From the Collections of M. Buonaroti and the Chev.
Vicar.
1
Bought Tifﬁn £10.10s
140. Cleopatra, with the Asp. A Beautiful Drawing,
highly ﬁnished, in Black Chalk. Engraved in the Italian
School of Design. From the Collection W. Y. Ottley, Esq.
1
Bought Gasc £16.16s
141. A Female Figure Reclining: a Model for the
Tomb of the Medici. Exquisitely ﬁnished in black chalk, and
of the highest quality. From the Collections of Buonaroti and
Vicar.
1
Bought Colnaghi £18.18s
142. Another Female Figure Reclining, but differently
disposed. Beautifully ﬁnished in red chalk, and equal to the pre-
ceding. From the same Collections.
1
Bought Enson £15.15s
143. A Noble Head of a Warrior, richly ornamented
with a Helmet of a singular form. Admirably drawn in
black chalk. Superb. From the Collection of Sir J. Reynolds.
1
Bought Whitehead £29.8s
144. Proﬁle of a Man’s Head, cut off at the Chin. A
drawing of great character, in red chalk. From the Collection of the
Duke of Modena.
1
Bought Campana £2.15
145. A Whole-Length Figure of a Man, bearing a resem-
blance to Michael Angelo. He is represented in a long
cloak, with a kind of helmet on his head, and holds a globe
in his hand – pen and bistre. On the back is the head of a young
man, in black chalk. From the Collections of Lempereur, B. Con-
stantine, and T. Dimsdale.
1
Bought Robinson £5.15s.6d
146. Study for the Haman in the Vault of the Sistine
Chapel. Drawn with surprising truth, in red chalk. Repetitions
of parts of the ﬁgure occur in different attitudes, also some slight
sketches on the back of the drawing. A Superb Example. From
the Collections of Buonaroti and Vicar.
1
Bought Robinson £11.11s
147. A Study for Drapery: a female ﬁgure slightly sketched in,
with the drapery of the lower part elaborately ﬁnished with the pen.
On the reverse is another ﬁgure, in black chalk. From the same
Collections as the last.
1
Bought Evans £5.5s
148. A Male Torso and a Leg. Admirably drawn, in red chalk
and pen. From the Collection of R. Cosway.
1
Bought Farrer £3
149. Architectural Fragments, with Inscriptions – pen,
curious.
12
Bought Brett £3.5s
150. A Portrait Resembling M. Angelo – in red chalk; and
other studies from the Last Judgment, &c.
4
Bought Thorpe £0.7s
151. Various, in the School of Michael Angelo
5
Bought Thorpe £0.8s
152. The Last Judgment: a large drawing of the whole sub-
ject, the size of the engraving by Julio Bonasoni, and per-
haps by him. Highly ﬁnished, in pen and bistre, heightened with
white.
1
Bought Colnaghi £4.4s
153. A portion of the Last Judgment, Drawn By W. Y.
Ottley; others from the same subject, &c. by various
artists.
9
Bought Thorpe £0.13s
154. The angel Gabriel; Samson and Delilah, &c., from the
subjects of M. Angelo.
7
Bought Gr¨uner £0.12s
155. Various drawings in the style of and copies from,
M. Angelo.
6
Bought Evans £0.10s
156. An architectural sketch; and various.
4
Bought Sir T.(homas) Phillipps £0.8

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
429
157. Studies of ﬁgures, in the school of M. Angelo.
3
Bought Gr¨uner £0.16s
158. Figures from the Last Judgment, &c.
4
Bought Bloxam £0.8s
159. The ﬁgure of a man rising from the grave, in the Last
Judgment. A cartoon, by Michael Angelo, the size of life, in
black chalk, on a brown ground.
1
Bought Ripp £1.15s
160. A Large Cartoon, by M. Angelo, representing the
Madonna and Child, with St. John and other saints, the
ﬁgures as large as life – black chalk, in oak frame, and plate
glass.
1
Bought Robinson £11.0s.6d
161. An Interesting Document in the Autograph of M.
Angelo. From the Collection of the Chev. Vicar, who obtained it
from M. Buonaroti, the descendant of the painter.
1
Bought Sir T.(homas) Phillipps £8.10s
162. A Long and Interesting Letter, addressed to M.
Angelo by Seb. del Piombo, “Rome the 29th December, 1519.”
Of great rarity and interest.
1
Bought? Boone £12.1s.6d
2nd day; Tuesday, June 5
270. Clovio (J.) – Our Saviour rising from the tomb, after
the composition by M. Angelo. Black chalk, delicately ﬁnished.
Bought Col(naghi). £2
2
403. Franco (B.) – Abraham’s sacriﬁce; the Virgin and
Child; and various studies of ﬁgures.
5
404. Franco (B.) – Two ﬁgures arguing, after the drawing
by M. Angelo engraved in the Italian School of Design –
pen; and a copy.
2
Bought ? (bought in?) £0.6.
3rd day; Wednesday, June 6
611. Piombo (Seb. del.) – The entombment of Christ –
black chalk, heightened. From the Collections of Crozat, Calviere,
Legoy, Dimsdale.
1
Bought Clement £2.
4th day; Thursday June 7
669. The cartoon of Pisa, after M. Angelo; others, after
Raffaelle, &c.
12
Bought Sir T(homas) P(hillips) £11.6
677. An apostle preaching, Amanati; St. John, Caracci, oth-
ers in the school of M. Angelo &c.
Bought Sir T(homas) P(hillips) £0
14
SIR P. P. RUBENS
789. Ganymede and the Eagle. Exquisitely ﬁnished, in black
chalk heightened with white, from the subject by M. Angelo. From
Mariette’s Collecion.
827. Sarto (A. del.) – The ﬁgure of a man fastening his
clothes, in the cartoon of Pisa, by M. Angelo – red chalk.
From the collections of Richardson and Sir. J. Reynolds.
1
Bought Morant £5.5
830. Sarto (A. del.) – A youth receiving baptism; and a
ﬁgure fastening his clothes, from M. Angelo’s cartoon of
Pisa – black chalk.
1
Bought Ker £1.10s

F
WOODBURN SALE, CHRISTIE’S LONDON, 1854
Comprising the entire collections with the exception of
the Lawrence Drawings. 16 June 1854 and nine following
days
3rd day; Monday, June 19
607. m. agnolo. A female head – heightened with white. Very
ﬁne.
Bought Tifﬁn, £1.10 (with 606)
4th day; Tuesday, June 20
853. M. Agnolo. Two ﬁgures – pencil, &c.
5
Bought Munro £0.8
866. M. Agnolo. A prophetess – pen. Very grand.
Bought Bromley or Major? £0.7
5th day; Wednesday, June 21
1069. M. Agnolo, school of: The dead Christ, &c.
7
Bought Donadieu or Hamilton? £0.5.6 or £0. 4.6
1070. M. Agnolo, after: Slight studies.
12
Bought Col(naghi) £1.5
1071. M. Agnolo, school of: Slight studies.
6
Bought Munro £0. 5.
1072. M. Agnolo, after: The prophets, &c. – small studies in
pencil.
15
Bought F. W. Mayor or Munro? £0.1.0

430
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
1073. M. Agnolo, school of: Studies.
8
Bought
d./-/
(written
in
–
Donadieu?).
Moon?
£0.12
8th day; Saturday, June 24
M. AGNOLO
1774. The council of the gods – bistre.
2
Bought Donadieu £0.10
1775. A study of part of the Last Judgment.
2
Bought in?
1776. Studies of heads – pen.
13
Bought in?
1777. Small studies of heads (cancelled).
Bought in?
1778. Small studies of ﬁgures.
4
Bought in?
1779. Two grand studies of ﬁgures – black chalk
2
Bought Munro £1
1780. Ganymede and the eagle – black chalk.
Bought Pinti £0.14
1781. no lot.
1782. Small sketches.
4
Bought Munro £0.7
1783. Two Titans – chalks.
Bought Col(naghi) £2.2
1784. Head of a Fury – black chalk. Fine.
Bought in? £0.15
1785. Anatomical Sketch of an arm. Fine.
Bought in? £0.16
1786. A faun carrying a satyr – red chalk.
Bought in? £0.5
1787. Prometheus – black chalk. Fine.
Bought in? £2.12.6
1788. A pieta – heightened with chalk, &c.
2
Bought in? £2. 12.6
(It seems that 1787 and 1788 cost £2.12.6 together.)
1789. Studies – in red chalk. From Sir J. Reynolds’s collec-
tion.
4
Bought in?
1790. A draped ﬁgure – pen.
2
Bought? £1.1
1791. Slight studies.
5
Bought Hall £0.17
Those drawings from Woodburn’s own collection which
remained on his legatee’s hands after the sales of 1854 were
disposed of following the sale of the Lawrence Collection in
1860: The Remaining Portion of the Collection of Draw-
ings of Samuel Woodburn, Christie’s London, 12 June, 1860,
and two following days, which form days 8, 9, and 10 of the
Lawrence sale.
June 12
1078. Others [i.e., various drawings] after M. Angelo, &c.
30
1084. Various, M. Angelo, Tintoretto and others
24
1145. Buonaroti (M. Angelo)-Jacob’s Dream – black chalk.
1
Bought Ker £3.3.0
1146. Buonaroti (M. A.) – The Virgin lamenting over the
body of Christ; two females with a child; and another – black
chalk.
3
Bought Evans £1.16.0
1147. Buonaroti (M. A.) – Prometheus with the Vulture
knawing his Liver – black chalk. Highly ﬁnished.
1
Bought Roupell £4.4.0
1148. Buonaroti (M. A.) – A man carrying a fawn on his
back – red chalk.
1
Bought Money £0.12.0
1149. Buonaroti (M. A.) – A study of a man’s arm, with
the corresponding skeleton – bistre pen. From Mariette’s Collec-
tion.
1
Bought Gasc £15.10.0
1150. Buonaroti (M. A.) – Two ﬁgures wrestling – pen, with
inscription at back: engraved in Ottley’s Italian School of Design;
and a ﬁgure, standing – pen.
2
Bought Gasc £4.0.0
1151. Buonaroti (M. A.) – The deposition from the cross –
red chalk. From Lempereur’s and Ottley’s Collection.
1
Bought Gasc £0.16.0

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
431
1152. Buonaroti (M. A.) – St. Mark and St. Luke – a study
in black chalk; a sheet of heads – pen, &c.
4
Bought Cockburn £0.13.0
1153. Buonaroti (M. A.) – Part of the Last Judgment; and
various, in the School of M. Angelo.
4
1154. Buonaroti (M. A.) – A ﬁgure of a faun with two
children, and two ﬁgures on the reverse – broad pen; and an
anatomical study – red chalk.
2
Bought Boone £2.4.0
COMMENTARY
A
The Lawrence Inventory
1. Drawings Framed and Glazed, Cartoons, etc.
1. 1842-51/1846-5/R.59/P.II 761 by Taddeo Zuccaro. Not
included in the present catalogue.
2. 1836-71/1842-48/1846-2/R.76; Lloyd, 1977, A66c/Cat.
21.
2. Drawings Framed and Cartooned
3. In Giovanni Bottari’s edition of Vasari, 1759–60, III,
p. 352, it is noted: “Il cartone di questo quadro [i.e., the
painting by Condivi in Casa Buonarroti] `e stato gran tempo
nel Palazzo Farnese, e ultimamente fu donato dal Re di
Napoli al su Cardinale Silvio Valente, ed `e certamente orig-
inale.” repeated verbatim in the edition of Vasari edited by
T. Gentili, 1767–75, VI, p. 381, n. 17. In the sale of Car-
dinal Valenti, Rome, April? 1809, acquired by Guillaume-
Lethi`ere, who wrote about it to Vivant Denon on 3 May
1809. Denon made a vague offer to purchase it, but nothing
seems to have come of this, and it was presumably sold by
Guillaume-Lethi`ere to Lucien Bonaparte, Prince of Canino.
His sale London, 6 February, 1815, lot 37 (unsold); London,
14–16 May 1816, lot 175 (unsold); Paris, 25 December–
10 January 1824, lot 1 (sold, 7200 francs, presumably to
Woodburn); 1836-30/part of August 1838 purchase/1850-
212/1860-160/Robinson/Malcolm 81/ BM W75.
3. M. A. Buonaroti
Case 3, Drawer 3
4. 1836-13/1838-3/1850-135/1860-124/BM W4.
5 i,ii,iii,iv,v.
The reference to Ottley as it stands is hard to accept
because it is highly unlikely that a copy drawing by Ott-
ley would have been included in this group of Michelangelo
drawings. It seems more likely that a word has been lost and
that the drawing referred to was one owned, reproduced, or
described by Ottley. It is tempting to connect the reference
to the Viterbo Piet`a with 1804-278 and 1814-826, but this
seems to have been an impressive – and probably large –
drawing, and it is unlikely that it would have been grouped
as one of ﬁve in the inventory.
6. 1836-80/1842-4/R.9/P.II 316/Cat. 29.
7. 1836-3/1838-1/1850-155?/1860-145/Malcolm 61/BM W1.
See 1850-155 for further details.
8. 1836-77/1838-44/1850-125 bought Woodburn/Weimar,
Sachsen-Weimar
Collection/Count
Antoine
Seilern/
London, The Courtauld Institute of Art, Prince’s Gate
Collection. See 1850-125 for further details.
9. Probably 1836-45/1842-33/R.51/P.II 409/Cat. 111.
10. 1836-12/1838-2/1850-143?/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
21/1860-147/Vaughan/BM W10.
11. 1836-26?/1838-11/1850 – Not securely identiﬁable, per-
haps 144/1860-123/J. C. Robinson/Malcolm 64 /BM
W54.
12. 1842-36/R.38/P.II 376/Cat. 72.
13. 1836-21 (where described as female)/1842-27/ R.10/
P.II 315/Cat. 31).
14. Probably 1836-56/1838-27/1850-170/Weimar, Sachsen
Weimar Collection (Gotti, 1875, II, p. 210, Ges`u Cristo
nell’atto di risorgere dalla tomba, con la mano sinistra alzata e la
destra appena indicata. Bello studio, traciato leggiermente a matita
nera, per una Resurrezione. Collezione di S. A. R. la Gran-
duchessa. Dalle Collezioni D’Argenville, Lawrence e Re dei Paesi
Bassi.)/Rotterdam, Boymans van Beuningen Museum, I.20,
as after Michelangelo, attributed by Wilde, 1953a, p. 89, to
Giulio Clovio; another candidate for the draughtsman would
be Alessandro Allori.
15. 1836-93/1842-40/R.50/P.II 480 as Polidoro da Car-
avaggio. Not included in the present catalogue.
16. 1836-38/1838-19/1850-118/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
19/Louvre Inv. 746/J38 (with incorrect reference to the 1836
exhibition).
17. 1836-100/1838-59/1850-123?, bought Engelbert/Frank-
furt, St¨adelsches Kunstinstitut, Inv. 393/Corpus 332.

432
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
18. 1836-69/1838-38/1850-104/1860-127/ J. P. Heseltine/
BM W63.
19. 1836-36/1838-17/1850-102/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
16/1860-132/Malcolm 58/BM W2.
20. 1836-24?/1838-9/1850-Not securely identiﬁable/1860-
122/ Vaughan/BM W53.
21.
i. This is probably identical with the drawing in the Julien
de Parme Sale, Paris, 21–22 February 1794, lot 11:
michel-ange buonarotti
Un Christ en Croix: deux anges sont aux deux cˆot´es, &
au bas une tˆete de mort, dessin´e comme le pr´ecedent, ie
precieusement `a la pierre noire.
Julien de Parme is not listed in the provenance for this draw-
ing in the 1836 catalogue, which is given as the King of
Naples and Brunet. Even though it is uncertain how this
information should be interpreted, in the compiler’s view the
most likely scenario is that the drawing had been acquired by
Julien de Parme directly or indirectly from the Royal House
of Naples, drawings from whose collection were evidently
being dispersed before 1770. It was presumably acquired
either directly or indirectly at his sale by Louis-Charles
Brunet (1746–1825), the brother-in-law of Dominique-
Vivant Denon, by whom he was presumably advised on his
purchases. Brunet died in the same year as Vivant Denon,
and his collection seems to have been acquired by Wood-
burn in Paris at around the same time as Woodburn acquired
drawings from the collection of Vivant Denon himself,
shortly after the latter’s death, on 28 April 1825. Woodburn
probably acquired it from one of Brunet’s two sons, Baron
Dominique-Vivant Denon’s nephews, occasional purchas-
ing agents and ﬁnal beneﬁciaries, as well as – presumably –
of their own father’s estate. These brothers were Vivant-
Jean Brunet (1778–1866), a General of the Empire, and
Dominique-Vivant Brunet (1779–1846), who later took the
name Brunet-Denon in honour of his uncle. 1836-22/1838-
8/1850-145/1860-113/BM W67.
ii. 1814-1591/1842-24/JCR 73/P.II 352/Cat. 67.
22. 1836-17/1842-14/R.52/P.II 410/Cat. 66.
23.
i. 1842-50/JCR65/P.II 362/Cat. 93.
ii. Not exhibited in 1836/part of August 1838 purchase?/
1850-108/1860-152/Chantilly, Mus´ee Cond´e; Lanfranc de
Panthou, 1995, no. 39.
24. 1836-11/J. Paul Getty Museum, Los Angeles.
25. 1836-41/1842-15/R.43/P.II 406/Cat. 76.
26.
i. 1842-31/R. 55/P.II 319/Cat. 35.
ii. 1860-1084/BM W90.
27. 1814-259?/1836-90/1838-54/1850-134 bought Roos/
Weimar, Sachsen Weimar Collection (Gotti, 1875, II, p. 209,
Testa di Vecchio con barba, volt`a di proﬁlo a destra. Weimar,
Collezione di S. A. R. il Granduca. Dalle Collezioni Buonar-
roti, Wicar, Lawrence e Re dei Paesi Bassi.)/Private Collection,
Switzerland/Phillips, London, Sale 11 December 1996, lot
239, black chalk, 192 × 147 mm, as follower of Daniele da
Volterra.
28. 1836-39/1838-20/1850-164/Weimar, Sachsen Weimar
Collection (Von Ritgen photograph, 1865, no. 26 as
Michelangelo; Gotti, 1875, II, p. 209: Testa virile con
barba appuntata, v`olta di proﬁle a sinistra. Creduto il Ritratto
dell’Ariosto. Bel disegno a matita rosso, dintornato in ovale
e incorniciato da un disegno con due ﬁgure, fatto da Giorgio
Vasari, al quale apparteneva. Collezione di S. A. R. la Gran-
duchessa. Dalle Collezioni Vasari, d’Argenville, Lawrence e Re
dei Paesi Bassi.)/Koenigs Collection/Rotterdam, Boymans
van Beuningen Museum, I.392 as Parmigianino.
Case 5, Drawer 2
29. 1842-80/R.57/P.II 407/Cat. 109.
30. 1836-92/1842-65/R.33/P.II 236; as by Battista Franco
after Rosso. Not included in the present catalogue.
4. Michael Angelo Buonaroti
Case 1, Drawer 1
Case 2, Drawer 4
31. 1807-374?/1836-10/1842-85/R.4/P.II 452/Cat. 114.
32 i,ii,iii,iv,v. Unidentiﬁed.
Case 3, Drawer 3
33. Cavaliere Genovesino (L.545)/1860-268, bought by
Ensen, £1.11s.6d/Malcolm 213/BM GP 70.
34. 1836-72/1838-40/1850-169/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 3/
1860-105/Duke of Portland Collection.
In 1836 it was stated that this drawing came from the
Buonarroti and Wicar Collections, and it was presum-
ably among those acquired by Woodburn from Wicar in
1823.
It is worth noting that what must be an otherwise
unrecorded copy of this drawing appeared in William
Roscoe’s sale of 1816 as lot 64: “One, the Holy Family
with St. John. The Child asleep on the knee of the Vir-
gin, St. John with his ﬁnger on his lips. Red chalk, highly
ﬁnished. Size, 11 h. 9 1/2 w. This design of Michlangeli is
well known both from the pictures and prints of it, in which
there are several slight variations. The subject is the same as
that of the celebrated Picture belonging to Mr. Dawson, of
Manchester.” It was bought by a Mr. Du? Piet for £1.7.0., a

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
433
low price which strongly suggests that it was recognised as a
copy.
35. 1836-96/1842-22/ R.13/P.II 323/Cat. 28.
36. 1836-83/1838-48/1850-130, as Sebastiano del Piombo/
1860-112/BM W16.
37. 1836-79/1838-46/1850-142?/1860-100 bought Tifﬁn/
Locker[-Lampson]/BM W11.
38. 1836-76/1842-28 [sic, for 29]/ R.37/P.II 342/Cat. 40.
39. 1836-15/1838-4/1850-101/BM W42.
40. This drawing is no doubt identical with that in the Julien
de Parme Sale of 21–22 February 1794, lot 10:
michel-ange buonarotti
Une Descente de Croix, composition de quatre ﬁgures pre-
ciusement dessin´ees `a la pierre noire; on y joindra l’estampe
grav´ee par Bonasone.
According to the 1836 catalogue, which does not men-
tion Julien de Parme, this drawing was subsequently owned
by Brunet (For discussion of the Brunet issue, see com-
mentary to 1830-21). 1836-64/1838-35/1850-180/1860-119,
bought by Enson, £52.10s/Brooks Collection/F. T. Pal-
grave Collection, sold Christie’s, 4 June 1886, bought by
J. C. Robinson/Agnews, London/Acquired by Mrs. Gard-
ner in 1902 for the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum,
Boston.
41. 1836-73/1838-41/1850-158/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 4/
1860-104/BM W58.
42. 1836-85/1838-50/1850-167/1860-110/Bayonne Mus´ee
Bonnat, Bean 65.
43. 1836-43/1838-23/1850-151, bought Engelbert/Frankfurt,
St¨adelsches Kunstinstitut, Inv. 399, by Sebastiano del
Piombo. Malke, 1980, no.
87, established
the
pre-
Richardson provenance of this sheet as Padre Resta whose
number k67 it bears.
44. 1836-87/1838-52/1850-130, as Sebastiano del Piombo/
Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 12/1860-111, bought Farrer/BM
W17.
45.
i. 1836-62/1838-33/1850-122/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
11/1860-121/BM W52.
ii. 1860-270/Probably Frankfurt, St¨adelsches Kunstinsti-
tut, Inv. 3975. Perhaps by Alessandro Allori rather than
Clovio.
46. This item is puzzling. It would be easy to assume that
it was a drawing made for the Last Judgement, but no other
instance can be found in the 1830 inventory of the word
“cartoon” used to describe a preparatory drawing. The
present work cannot be the Taddeo Zucaro cartoon, already
described as 1830-1. There remains the possibility that it may
be 1860-159, bought by Ripp for £1.15s. If so, the facts that
it did not appear in the 1836 exhibition, cannot be traced
in the collection of William II of Holland, and presumably
was not sold to him, and was not offered to Oxford, suggests
that it was soon judged to be much less signiﬁcant than its
1830 listing would suggest. This would also be borne out by
the low price that it realised in 1860.
47. Probably 1836-27/1838-12/1850-105/1860-115/Malcolm
73/BM W81.
48. 1836-25/1838-10/1850-171/1860-116/Malcolm 73/BM
W82.
49. 1836-28/1838-13/1850-152/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 9/
1860-114/Count Antoine Seilern/London, Courtauld Insti-
tute of Art, Prince’s Gate Collection.
50. 1836-23/1842-38/R.72/P.II 343/Cat. 57.
51.
i. 1836-54/1842-39/R.31/P.II 324/Cat. 23.
ii. Sotheby’s, 18 February 1991, lot 159.
52. Reproduced by Ottley, Italian School, f.p. 32/1814-
262, bought by Roscoe/1836-63/1838-34/1850-154 (the
subject misidentiﬁed as the Virgin and Child)/1860-136/
Vaughan/BM W29. See 1814-262 and 1850-154 for further
details.
53. i,ii,iii,iv. 1836-50/1842-66/R.25/P.II 303-306/Cats.
13–16.
54. 1836-89/1842-21/R.23/P.II 297/Cat. 18.
55. 1836-74/1838-42/1850-107/1860-134/BM W57.
56. Probably 1836-70/1838-39/1850-147, bought by Roos,
115 guilders/Weimar, Sachsen Weimar Collection (Von
Ritgen photograph, 1865, no. 6 as Michelangelo; Brinck-
mann, 1925, no. 97)/Present whereabouts unknown.
57. 1814-829/1836-68/1842-34/R.28/P.II 361/Cat. 91.
58. 1836-32/1842-11/R.29/P.II 318/Cat. 34.
59. 1842-68/R.68/P.II 357/Cat. 87.
60. Reproduced by Ottley, Italian School, f.p. 33/1814-1768/
1836-84/1838-49/1850-103/1860-125/E. Galichon, his sale,
May 1875, lot. 16/Malcolm 80/BM W60.
61 i,ii,iii,iv. 1814-264/1814-265/1836-2/1842-47/R.24/P.II
299-302/Cats. 9–12.
62. 1842-78/R.58/ P.II 330/Cat. 42.
63. 1836-37/1838-18/1850-162/1860-146/Robinson/Mal-
colm 60/BM W13.

434
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
5. M. Angelo
Case 3, Drawer 3
64 i,ii,iii. 1836-88/1838-53/1850-129, as Marcello Venusti/
Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 7/1860-109/BM W76-78.
65. 1836-78?/1838-45/1850-165?; bought Brondgeest, 75
guilders/Weimar, Sachsen Weimar Collection/Not further
identiﬁed; untraced.
66. 1814-254/1836-1/1842-43/1846-11/R.81/P.II 333 (all
these include Wicar in the provenance but omit Ottley)/
Cat. 55.
67. 1836-44/1838-24/1850-106/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar
Collection (Gotti, 1875, II, p. 210: Figura d’uomo nudo, seduto
in terra in atto di dormire, posando la testa sul braccio sinistro. A
matita nera. A tergo: Studio del corpo nudo di una donna, man-
cante della testa e del braccio sinistro. Collezione di S. A. R. il
Granduca. Dalle Collezioni Reynolds, Lawrence e re dei Paesi
Bassi.)/National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa (see Franklin,
2005)/By Jacopo Pontormo, c. 1540.
68.
i. 1814-1766/1836-52/1842-44/R.1/P.II 326/Cat. 33.
ii. 1860-404 [where accompanied by a second copy, more
likely that formerly in the Payne-Ott Collection than that
now in Portsmouth].
69. 1836-86/1838-51/1850-119/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 14/
1860-126/Thibaudeau/Bayonne, Mus´ee Bonnat, Bean 67.
70. 1836-29/1838-14/1850-127/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 8/
1860-117/BM W32.
71. Probably 1814-828 (with the provenance given as Cicci-
aporci)/1836-51 (with the provenance given as Richardson)/
1838-26/1850-179 bought by Roos/Leembruggen sale, 1865,
lot 894/Malcolm 366/BM not in Wilde, but later accepted
by him/PG 276, placed as W.15a.
72. Not identiﬁed.
73. 1836-66/1838-37/1850-149/1860-107/Clarke
Collec-
tion/Cambridge, Fitzwilliam Museum.
74. 1842-77/ R.49/P.II 311/Cat. 38.
75. 1836-94 or -95/1838-55 or -56/1850-112 or 1850-
173/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar Collection (Von Ritgen
photograph 1865, no. 2 or no. 50, both as Michelan-
gelo)/Phillips, London, 7 July 1999, lot 120; black chalk,
heightened with white, 395 × 256 mm, or lot 121; black
chalk, heightened with white, 398 × 261 mm, both as
Roman School, sixteenth century. See 1850-112 and 1850-
173 for further details.
76. 1836-57/1838-28/1850-126, as Sebastiano, bought by
Roos/Leembrugen sale 1866, lot 920, as Sebastiano/
Malcolm 63/BM W15.
77. 1836-19?/1838-6/1850-128?. Not identiﬁed, untraced.
78. 1814-1680/1836-47/1842-46/R.20/P.II 405/Cat. 77.
79. 1836-20 (although not recorded by Woodburn, this
sheet also bears the stamp of Sir Peter Lely on the recto
and Gibson’s inscription M.Angolo and his price code
8.3 on the verso)/1838-7/1850-117/Santa Barbara, Cali-
fornia, Alfred Moir Collection. See 1850-117 for further
details.
80. 1842-71/R.5/P.II 341/Cat. 49.
81 i,ii,iii. Probably a combination of 1814-824, 1814-
825, and 1804-275 i,ii/1814-1540 i,ii Subsequently 1836-
82 i,ii,iii/1842-64 i,ii,iii/1846-35 i,ii,iii/R.70 (1,2,3)/P.II
338,339,340 (all of which give the provenance as Buonarroti,
Wicar, and Lawrence, the Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi prove-
nance omitted)/Cats.45, 48, 47.
82 i,ii. 1842-57/R.12/P.II 370,374/Cats. 68, 71.
83. 1836-18/1838-5/1850-163/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 27/
1860-144/Untraced.
84. 1836-61/1838-32/1850-172/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
6/Paris, Louvre, Inv. 715/J55, as Raffaello da Montelupo.
85. 1814-257/1836-7/1842-58/R.75/P.II 337/Cat. 44.
86. 1836-5/1842-63/R.3/P.II 412/Cat. 58.
87. 1804-27 i/1842-62/R.86/P.II 82/Cat. 113.
88. 1836-60/1838-31/1850-132, as Venusti/1860-101/Miss
K. Radford/BM W71.
89. 1836-65 (the provenance is given in 1836 as Buonar-
roti and Wicar, but because the drawing bears the
Bona Roti inscription, it may not have come from Casa
Buonarroti)/1838-36/1850-133, as Marcello Venusti/ 1860-
102/BM W72.
90. Not identiﬁed.
91. 1842-79/R.8/P.II 314 /Cat. 20.
92. 1804-27 ii/1842-74/1846-49/R.66/P.II 373/Cat. 70.
93. Pierre Crozat?; his number? 396 at lower left/Count
Moritz von Fries (L.2903)/1836-58/1838-29/1850-141?,
bought Enthoven, 200 guilders/Lawrence Gallery, 1853,
pl. 10/1860-120/BM W69.
94. 1814-253/1836-49/1842-42/1846-12/R.80/P.II 332 (all
these include Wicar in the provenance but omit Ottley)/Cat.
56.
95. 1814-260, leaf 2, iii/1842-56/R.82/P.II 344/Cat. 54.
96. 1842-53/R.44/ P.II 408/Cat. 78.
97. ?1836-45/1842-33/R.51/P.II 409/Cat. 111.
98. 1842-5/R.19/P.II 296/Cat. 7.
99. 1814-1758/1836-55/1842-30/1846-40/Lawrence Gallery,
1853, pls. 29 and 31 /R.18/P.II 293/Cat. 4.
100. Not identiﬁed.

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
435
101.
i. 1836-9/1842-17/R.42/P.II 372/Cat. 69.
ii. 1836-9/1842-17/R.42/P.II 307/Cat. 25.
102. 1836-67/1842-37/R.69/P.II 328/Cat.46.
103. 1842-72/R.48.1,2,3 /P.II 312,313,378∗/Cats. 19, 3, 75.
104. 1814-1682/1836-91/1842-32/R.2/P.II 327/Cat. 24.
105. 1836-31/1842-18/R.22/P.II 291/Cat. 1.
106. 1842-10/R.16/P.II 294/Cat. 5.
107. 1836-81/1838-47/1850-166/Louvre Inv. 714/J4.
108.
i. 1842-75/R.53.2/P.II 348/Cat. 62.
ii. 1842-75/R.53.1/P.II 320/Cat. 36.
109 i,ii,iii. Not identiﬁed.
110. 1836-6/1842-26/R.39/P.II 42 and 375/Cat. 8.
111. 1814-1769; the nature of the inscription on this drawing
suggests that it came from the Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi group.
/1836-48 (the provenance given solely as Ottley)/1838-
25/1850-168/1860-140 bought Gasc/Vaughan/BM W91.
112. 1807-376i?/1814-1681/1842-67/1846-18/R.17/P.II
295 (all give the provenance solely as Wicar, with Ottley
omitted)/Cat. 6.
113. 1804-274ii/1814-1587ii/1842-28/R.74/P.II
345/Cat.
50.
114. 1836-75/1838-43/1850-111/1860-143/BM W87.
115. 1836-16/1842-41/R.30/P.II 325/Cat. 22.
116. 1836-42/1838-22/1850-157?/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
18/1860-139/Vaughan/BM W6.
117. Moselli Collection Verona before that of Pierre
Crozat/1836-59/ 1838-30/1850-124/Lawrence Gallery, 1853,
pl. 24/1860-138, bought by Clement/ Emile Galichon, his
sale, May 1875, lot 15/Malcolm 79/BM W55.
118. Perhaps 1836-34/1838-15/1850-146, bought by Brond-
geest,
50
guilders/1860-131?.
Not
further
identiﬁed;
untraced. See 1860-131 for further details.
Case 7, Drawer 3
119. Not exhibited in 1836/August 1838 purchase/1850-
unidentiﬁed/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar Collection/Phillips,
London, 7 July 1999, lot 122, 406 × 387 mm, as Roman
School, sixteenth century.
120. Not identiﬁed.
121. Not exhibited in 1836/part of August 1838 purchase of
William II of Holland?/1850-241? bought by Brondgeest,
4 guilders/1860-99?/ Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar Collec-
tion (Von Ritgen photograph, 1865, no. 39 as Passerotti);
Gotti, 1875, II, p. 209: Ritratto di Michelangelo Buonar-
roti. Bel disegno fatto a penna da B. Passarotti. Collezione di
S. A. R. il Granduca. Proveniente dalle Collezioni Cosway,
Lawrence e Re de’Paesi Bassi; reproduced by Steinmann, 1913,
pl. 67A)/With Thomas le Claire, Hamburg in 1990 (adver-
tisement in the Burlington Magazine January 1990, p. v). It is
not clear whether or not the ex-Weimar drawing is identical
with the present number (in which case Woodburn must
have acquired it from Brondgeest between 1850 and 1853)
and which would, therefore, presumably have been acquired
for the Sachsen-Weimar Collection directly or indirectly at
the 1860 sale. An alternative is that the ex-Weimar exam-
ple went directly to the Sachsen-Weimar Collection from
Brondgeest, from which it would follow that 1860-99 is a
second – but othewise unidentiﬁed – portrait drawing of
Michelangelo by Passerotti owned by Lawrence. Passerotti
made several drawn portraits of Michelangelo (see Cat. 107).
11. Julio Clovio
Case 5, Drawer 2
122.
i. It may be that the Cruciﬁxion was a second copy by
Clovio of that drawn for Vittoria Colonna (see the descrip-
tion at 1830-21 i), but none of those known to the compiler
bears the Lawrence dry stamp.
ii. Not identiﬁed.
26. B. Franco
Case 5, Drawer 3
123. Probably 1814-1503, as Michelangelo. Probably iden-
tical with the highly Michelangelesque drawing by Battista
Franco, now in the British Museum, GP 133; the provenance
given solely as Lawrence.
52. P. P. Rubens
Case 7, Drawer 2
124. P. H. Lankrink (L.2090)/Not exhibited in Wood-
burn’s
Rubens
exhibition
of
1835/Part
of
August
1838 purchase/1850-unidentiﬁed/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar
Collection (Von Ritgen photograph, 1865, no. 12 as
Rubens)/Phillips, London, 7 July 1999, lot 115, black and
red chalk, 467 × 690 mm.
56. P. P. Rubens
Case 5, Drawer 1
125. P.-J. Mariette (L.1852), his sale 1875, part of lot
1022/Woodburn’s 1835 Rubens exhibition, no. 27/1860-
789 bought by Farrer/E. Galichon, his sale Paris, 10–14
May 1875, lot 18, bought in/L. Galichon, his sale Paris,
4–9 March 1895, lot 12. Bequest of Jacques Petithory to
the Mus´ee Bonnat, Bayonne, Inv. CMNI 3147. The tech-
nique and dimensions as given in Woodburn’s 1835 Rubens

436
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
exhibition catalogue correspond precisely with those of the
drawing now in Bayonne: black chalk heightened with white
body colour, the contours reworked with pen and ink,
186 × 242 (enlarged to 285 × 242 mm).
59. F. Parmiggiano
Case, Drawer 2
126. Not identiﬁed.
81.
Case, Drawer 3
127. One of these four might be the variant in Edinburgh,
National Gallery of Scotland (Inv. RSA 981; black chalk and
brown wash, 258 × 200 mm) of Michelangelo’s Rest on the
Flight into Egypt in the J. Paul Getty Museum, attributed by
the compiler (Joannides, 1998) to Agnolo Bronzino.
128 i,ii. Not identiﬁed.
129. Not identiﬁed.
82.
Case 7, Drawer 1
130 i,ii. These are not to be confused with 82 i,ii.
131. This seems to have been retained by Woodburn; 1860-
669 (one of twelve in that lot) £1.11.6d to Sir Thomas
Phillipps/BM W85).
Varia
Case 7, Drawer 2
132. Not identiﬁed.
133 i,ii,ii,iv,v. All not identiﬁed.
Lud. Carrachi
Case 7. Drawer 1.
134. Not identiﬁed.
135. Not identiﬁed.
84. Varia
Case 6, Drawer 1
136 i,ii,iii,iv. The “Hercules at Fontainbleau” is presum-
ably 1842-39 (Raphael)/R.151/P.II 644/Cat. 81.
Case 7, Drawer 1
137. 1842-20/R.14/ P.II 351/Cat. 65.
138. Not exhibited in 1836/August 1838 purchase?/1850-
83? as Sebastiano; not further traced.
139 i,ii,iii,iv,v.
i. Perhaps 1814-1502, as from the collection of Lam-
berto Gori/1836-98 (with the provenance given incorrectly
as Buonarroti and Wicar, that from Gori omitted.)/1838-
57/1850-148 bought by Brondgeest/Weimar, Sachsen-
Weimar Collection/Phillips, London, 7 July 1999, lot 119,
black chalk, 393 × 229 mm, as circle of Daniele da Volterra.
See 1850-148 for further details.
ii. Perhaps part of 1860-153/Brussels, E. Wauters Col-
lection, red chalk, 270 × 190 mm (K. Frey, 1909–11,
pl. 250)/Sold Christie’s, London, 8 April 1986, lot 23/Seen
by the compiler in a French private collection c. 1992, bear-
ing the Lawrence dry stamp. See 1860-153 for further details.
It must be stressed that these two identiﬁcations are
entirely conjectural. No suggestion can be offered about the
remaining three drawings.
140 i,ii,iii,iv. Not identiﬁed.
89.
Case 11, Drawer 5
141.
i. Not identiﬁed.
ii. 1836-46/1842-8/R.83 as Jacopo Sansovino/P.II 415 as
Naldini/Cat. 112 as Muziano.
91.
Case 11, Drawer 4
142 i,ii,iii. Probably 1860-133 i,ii,iii, bought by Bloxam,
£1.5s. One of these copies must be the drawing after Adam
and Abel, black chalk, 250 × 403 mm, in Rugby School, Inv.
R/S II 18. The others are not currently identiﬁable.
Case 11, Drawer 3
143 i,ii. This entry probably included two copies after the
same ﬁgure, one in red chalk, the other in black.
i. Richardson/Sir J. Reynolds/William Young Ottley,
1804-279ii/Woodburn’s seventh exhibition as Andrea del
Sarto, no. 79/1860-827, bought by Morant, £5.5s/The
Marquess of Northampton, Castle Ashby, Northampton;
his sale at Christie’s London, 1 May 1959, lot 6/P.&D.
Colnaghi, London/N. Embiricos, London/Christie’s, New
York, 24 January 2001, lot 8, as Salviati; 2003 with Jean-Luc
Baroni, London; red chalk, 422 × 211 mm. See 1804-279ii
for further details.
ii. Probably Richardson/Sir J. Reynolds?/William Young
Ottley, 1804-279iii/1860-830ii as Andrea Del Sarto, bought
Sir Robert Ker £1.10s/Admiral Sir George King-Hall,
1930, Mrs B. McLeod; sale at Sotheby’s, London, 27 Octo-
ber 1948, lot 67/Bought by de Belleroche, £36/Untraced.
See 1804-279iii for further details.

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
437
144 i,ii,iii,iv. Not identiﬁed.
Lower parts. Drawer 4, Case 1
Portfolio G
145 i,ii. Not identiﬁed.
146 i,ii,iii,iv,v,vi,viii. Not identiﬁed.
Case 12, Drawer 4
Portfolio H
147. 1842-52/R.36/P.II 356/Cat. 86.
148. Not identiﬁed.
149. Lawrence Gallery, 1853, no. 2/1860-103 as from collec-
tion of Charles I/bought by Enson, £8. 15s/J. C. Robinson/
Morgan Library, IV.7, Corpus 399. See 1860-103 for further
details.
Case 6, Drawer 4
Portfolio A
150. i,ii. Not identiﬁed.
Case 12, Drawer 4
Portfolio B
151 i,ii,iii,iv,v,vi,vii. None identiﬁed.

B
Woodburn’s 1836 Exhibition
1. 1814-254/1830-66/1842-43/1846-11/R.81/P.II 333 (all
these include Wicar in the provenance but omit Ottley)/
Cat. 55.
2. 1814-264, 1814-265/1830-61 i,ii,iii,iv/1842-47/R.24/P.II
299-302/Cats. 9–12.
3. 1830-7?/1838-1/1850-155?/1860-145/Malcolm 61/BM W1.
See 1850-155 for further details.
4. 1830-Not identiﬁable/1842-83/1846-47/R.27/P.II 298/
Cat. 17.
5. 1830-86/1842-63/R.3/P.II 412/Cat. 58.
6. 1830-110/1842-26/R.39/P.II 42 and 375/Cat. 8.
7. 1814-257/1830-85/1842-58/1846-26/R.75/P.II 337/Cat.
44.
8. Probably 1842-14/R.87/P.II 237/Cat. 110.
9. 1830-101/1842-17/R.42/P.II 372/Cat. 69.
10. 1807-374?/1830-31/1842-85/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
28/R.4/ P.II 452/Cat. 114.
11. 1830-24/J. Paul Getty Museum, Los Angeles.
12. 1830-10/1838-2/1850-143?/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 21/
1860-147/Vaughan/BM W10.
13. 1830-4/1838-3/1850-135/1860-124/Vaughan/BM W4.
14. 1842-13/R.6/P.II 309/Cat. 27.
15. 1830-39/1838-4/1850-101/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 17/
Wellesley Sale, 1866, lot 2417/Malcolm 56/BM W42.
16. 1830-115/1842-41/1846-15/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
20/R.30/ P.II 325/ Cat. 22.
17. 1830-22/1842-14/R.52/P.II 410/Cat. 66.
18. 1830-83/1836-18/1838-5/1850-163/Lawrence Gallery, 1853,
pl. 27/1860-144. Untraced.
19. 1830-77?/1838-6/1850-128?. Not identiﬁed, untraced.
20. Although not recorded by Woodburn, this sheet also
bears the stamp of Sir Peter Lely on the recto and Gibson’s
inscription M. Angolo and his price code 8.3 on the
verso/1830-79/1838-7/1850-117 /Santa Barbara, California,
Alfred Moir Collection. See 1850-117 for further details.
21. 1830-13/1842-27/1846-24/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.19/
R.10/P.II 315/ Cat. 31.
22. 1830-21 (with further details)/1838-8/1850-145/1860-
113/Malcolm 67/ BM W67.
23. 1830-50/1842-38/R.72/P.II 343/Cat. 57.
24. 1830-20?/1838-9/1850-Not securely identiﬁable/1860-
122/Vaughan/BM W53.
25. 1830-48/1838-10/1850-171/1860-116/Malcolm
73/BM
W82.
26. 1830-11?/1838-11/1850-Not
securely
identiﬁable,
perhaps 144/1860-123/J. C. Robinson/Malcolm 64/BM
W54.
27. Probably 1830-47/1838-12/1850-105/1860-115/Malcolm
73/BM W81.
28. 1830-49/1838-13/1850-152/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 9/
1860-114/Count Antoine Seilern/London, Courtauld Insti-
tute of Art, Prince’s Gate Collection.
29. 1830-70/1838-14/1850-127/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 8/
1860-117/BM W32
30. 1830-3(with account of previous history)/1836-30/
August 1838 purchase/1850-212/ 1860-160/Robinson/Mal-
colm 81/BM W75.
31. 1830-105/1842-18/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 5/R.22/
P.II 291/Cat. 1.

438
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
32. 1830-58/1842-11/R.29/P.II 318/Cat. 34.
33. 1830-Not identiﬁable/1842-6/1846-53/R.11/P.II 322/
Cat. 32, £31.10s.
34. 1830-118?/1838-15/1850-146, bought by Brondgeest, 50
guilders/1860-131?. Not further identiﬁed; untraced. See
1860-131 for further details.
35. 1830-Not identiﬁed/1838-16/1850-120?, bought by
Brondgeest, 225 guilders/ 1860-142?/ bought by Enson/
Vaughan?/BM W102. See 1850-120 for further details.
36. 1830-19/1838-17/1850-102/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.16/
1860-132/Robinson/Malcom 58/BM W2.
37. 1830-63/1838-18/1850-162/1860-146/Robinson/Mal-
colm 60/BM W13.
38. 1830-16/1838-19/1850-118/Lawrence Gallery, 1853 pl. 19/
Louvre Inv. 746/J38 (with incorrect reference to the 1836
exhibition).
39. 1830-28/1838-20/1850-164/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar
Collection/Koenigs Collection/Rotterdam, Boymans van
Beuningen Museum, I.392 as Parmigianino. See 1830-28
for further details.
40. 1830-Not identiﬁed/1838-21/1850-159/1860-130/BM
W61.
41. 1830-25/1842-15/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 28/R.43
/P.II 406/ Cat. 76
42. 1830-116/1838-22/1850-157?/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
18/1860-139/Vaughan/BM W6.
43. 1830-43/1838-23/1850-151 bought by Engelbert/Frank-
furt, St¨adelsches Kunstinstitut, Inv. 399 as Sebastiano. Malke,
1980, no. 87, establishes the pre-Richardson provenance of
this sheet as Padre Resta whose number k67 it bears.
44. 1830-67/1838-24/1850-106/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar
Collection/National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa. By Jacopo
Pontormo, c. 1540. See 1830-67 for further details.
45. 1830-9?/1842-33/R.51/P.II 409/Cat. 111.
46. 1830-141ii/1842-8/R.83 as Jacopo Sansovino/P.II 415
as Naldini/ Cat. 112 as Muziano.
47. 1814-1680/1830-78/1842-46/R.20/P.II 405/Cat. 77.
See 1814-1680 for further details.
48. 1814-1769 (The nature of the inscription on this draw-
ing suggests that it came from the Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi
group.)/1830-111/1838-25/1850-168/1860-140 bought Gasc/
Vaughan/BM W91.
49. 1814-254/1830-94/1842-42/1846-12/R.80/P.II 332 (All
these include Wicar in the provenance but omit Ottley.)/
Cat. 56.
50. 1830-53 i, ii, iii, iv/1842-66/R.25/P.II 303-06/Cats. 13–
16.
51. Although the provenance is given here as Richardson,
this drawing is probably 1814-828 (with the provenance
given as Cicciaporci)/1830-71/1838-26/1850-179 bought by
Roos/Leembruggen sale, 1865, lot 894/Malcolm 366/BM
not in Wilde, 1953a, but later accepted by him/PG, no. 276,
placed as W.15a.
52. 1814-1766/1830-68 i/1842-44/1846-8/R.1/P.II 326/
Cat. 33.
53. 1842-45/1846-41/R.78/P.II 369/Cat. 103.
54. 1830-51i/1842-39/1846-7/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 25/
R.31/P.II 324/ Cat. 23.
55. 1814-1758/1830-99/1842-30/1842-30/1846-40/Lawrence
Gallery, 1853, pls. 29 and 31 /R.18/P.II 293/Cat. 4.
56. Probably 1830-14/1838-27/1850-170/Weimar, Sachsen-
Weimar Collection/Rotterdam, Boymans van Beunigen
Museum I.20, as after Michelangelo, attributed by Wilde,
1953a, p. 89 to Giulio Clovio; another candidate would be
Alessandro Allori. See 1830–14 for further details.
57. 1830-76/1838-28/1850-126, as Sebastiano, bought by
Roos/Leembrugen sale 1866, lot 920, as Sebastiano/
Malcolm 63/BM W15.
58. Pierre Crozat?; his number? 396 at lower left/Count
Moritz von Fries (L.2903)/1830-93/1838-29/1850-141?
bought by Enthoven, 200 guilders/Lawrence Gallery, 1853,
pl. 10/1860-120/BM W69.
59. Moselli Collection, Verona, before that of Pierre
Crozat/ 1830-117/1836-59/1838-30/1850-124/Lawrence Gal-
lery, 1853, pl. 24/1860-138 bought Clement/Emile Galichon,
his sale May 1875, lot 15/Malcolm 79/BM W55.
60. 1830-88/1838-31/1850-132, as Venusti/1860-101/Miss
K. Radford/BM W71.
61. 1830-84/1838-32/1850-172/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 6/
Paris, Louvre, Inv. 715/J55, as Raffaello da Montelupo.
62. 1830-45i/1838-33/1850-122/LawrenceGallery,1853,pl.11/
1860-121/BM W52.
63. Reproduced by Ottley, Italian School, f.p. 32/1814-
262, bought by Roscoe/1830-52/1838-34/1850-154 (the
subject misidentiﬁed as the Virgin and Child)/1860-136/
Vaughan/BM W29. See 1814-262 and 1850-154 for further
details.
64. 1830-40/1838-35/1850-180/1860-119, bought by Enson,
£52.10s/Brooks Collection/F. T. Palgrave Collection, sold
Christie’s 4 June 1886, bought by J. C. Robinson/Agnew’s,
London. Acquired by Mrs. Gardner in 1902 for the Isabella
Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston. See 1830-40 for further
details.
65. 1830-89/The provenance is given here as Buonar-
roti and Wicar, but because the drawing bears the
Bona Roti inscription, it may not have come from Casa
Buonarroti./1838-36/1850-133, as Marcello Venusti/1860-
102/BM W72.

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
439
66. 1830-73/1838-37/1850-149/1860-107/Clarke Collection/
Cambridge, Fitzwilliam Museum.
67. 1830-102/1842-37/1846-22/R.69/P.II 328/Cat. 46.
68. 1814-829/1830-57/1842-34/1846-43/R.28/P.II
361/
Cat. 91.
69. 1830-18/1838-38/1850-104/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 15/
1860-127/J. P. Heseltine/BM W63.
70. Probably 1830-56/1838-39/1850-147; bought by Roos,
115 guilders/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar Collection (Von Rit-
gen photograph, 1865, no. 6 as Michelangelo; Brinckmann,
1925, no. 97)/Present whereabouts unknown.
71. 1830-2/1842-48/R.76/Lloyd, 1977, A66c/Cat. 21.
72. 1830-34/1838-40/1850-169/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 3/
1860-105/Duke of Portland Collection. See 1830-34 for fur-
ther details.
73. 1830-41/1838-41/1850-158/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 4/
1860-104/BM W58.
74. 1830-55/1838-42/1850-107/1860-134/Malcolm 74 /BM
W57.
It should be noted that this sheet does not bear the Lawrence
dry stamp (L.2445), which was presumably inadvertently
omitted.
75. 1830-114/1838-43/1850-111/Lawrence Gallery,1853, pl. 22/
1860-143/BM W87.
76. 1830-38/1842-28 [sic for 29]/1846-34/R.37/P.II 342/
Cat. 40.
77. 1830-8/1838-44/1850-125, bought by Woodburn/Sach-
sen Weimar/Count Antoine Seilern/London, Courtauld
Institute of Art, Prince’s Gate Collection. See 1850-125 for
further details.
78. 1830-65?/1838-45/1850-165?, bought Brondgeest, 75
guilders/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar Collection/Not further
identiﬁed; untraced.
79. 1830-37/1838-46/1850-142?/1860-100/Gasc/Locker[-
Lampson] /BM W11.
80. 1830-6/1842-4/R.9/P.II 316/Cat. 29.
81. 1830-107/1838-47/1850-166/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
13/Paris, Mus´ee du Louvre, Inv. 714/J4.
82 i, ii, iii. Probably a combination of 1814-824, 1814-825,
and 1804-275 i,ii/1814-1540 i,ii. Subsequently 1830-81 i, ii,
iii/1842-64 i,ii,iii/1846-35 i,ii,iii/R.70 (1,2,3)/P.II 338, 339,
340 (all of which give the provenance as Buonarroti, Wicar,
and Lawrence, the Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi provenance omit-
ted)/Cats. 45, 48, 47.
83. 1830-36/1838-48/1850-130, as Sebastiano del Piombo/
1860-112/BM W16.
84. Reproduced by Ottley, Italian School, f.p. 33/1814-
1768/1830-60/1850-103/1860-125/E. Galichon, his sale,
May 1875, lot 16/Malcolm 80/BM W60.
85. 1830-42/1838-50/1850-167/1860-110/Bayonne, Mus´ee
Bonnat, Bean 65.
86. 1830-69/1838-51/1850-119/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 14/
1860-126/Thibaudeau/Bayonne, Mus´ee Bonnat, Bean 67.
87. 1830-44?/1838-52/1850-130, as Sebastiano del Piombo/
Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 12/1860-111 bought Farrer/BM
W17.
88. 1830-64 i,ii,iii/1838-53/1850-129, as Marcello Venusti/
Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 7/1860-109/BM W76-78.
89. 1842-21/1846-51/R.23/P.II 297/Cat. 18.
90. 1814-259?/1830-27/1838-54/1850-134/bought by Ross/
Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar Collection Private Collection,
Switzerland/Phillips, London, 11 December 1996, lot 239,
black chalk, 192 × 147 mm as follower of Daniele da
Volterra. See 1830-27 for further details.
91. 1814-1682/1830-104/1842-32/R.2/P.II 327/Cat. 24.
92. 1830-28/1842-65/R.33/P.II 236; as by Battista Franco
after Rosso. Not included in the present catalogue.
93. 1830-15/1842-40/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 23/R.50/
P.II 480 as Polidoro da Caravaggio. Not included in the
present catalogue.
94. 1830-75?/1838-55/1850-173/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar
Collection (Von Ritgen photograph 1865, no. 2 as
Michelangelo)/Phillips, London, 7 July 1999, lot 120; black
chalk, heightened with white, 395 × 256 mm, as Roman
School, sixteenth century. See 1850-173 for further details.
95. 1830-75?/1838-56/1850-112/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar
Collection (Von Ritgen photograph 1865, no. 50 as
Michelangelo)/Phillips, London, 7 July 1999, lot 121; black
chalk, heightened with white, 398 × 261 mm, as Roman
School, sixteenth century. See 1850-112 for further details.
96. 1830-35/1842-22/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 29/R.13/
P.II 323/ Cat. 28.
97. 1830-Not identiﬁed/1842-7/1846-14/R.26/P.II 360/
Cat. 90.
98. 1814-1502,
as
from
the
collection
of
Lamberto
Gori/part
of
1830-139?/1838-57/1850-148,
bought
by
Brondgeest/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar Collection/Phillips,
London, 7 July 1999, lot 119, black chalk, 393 × 229 mm,
as circle of Daniele da Volterra. See 1850-148 for further
details.
99. 1830-Not
identiﬁed/1838-58/1850-156,
bought
by
Brondgeest, 59 guilders. Not further identiﬁed; untraced.
The price asked in 1836 and that realised in 1850 suggest that
this was recognised as a copy.
100. 1830-17/1838-59/1850-123?, bought by Engelbert/
Frankfurt, St¨adelsches Kunstinstitut, Inv. 393/Corpus 332.
Of the one hundred drawings exhibited in 1836, four
cannot at present be identiﬁed (1836-19, 1836-34, 1836-78,
1836-99); one other, 1836-18, although illustrated in The
Lawrence Gallery of 1853 as plate 27, cannot now be be traced.
All ﬁve were among the drawings sold to William II of

440
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
Holland.
Two
other
exhibitions
of
selections
from
Lawrence’s collection contained relevant drawings:
I. Rubens
17. Not further identiﬁed.
27. P.-J. Mariette (L. 1852), his sale, 1775, part of lot
1022/1830-25/1860-789. Bought by Farrer/E. Galichon, his
sale, Paris, 10–14 May 1875, lot 18, bought in/L. Galichon,
his sale, Paris, 4–9 March 1895, lot 12. Bequest of Jacques
Petithory to the Mus´ee Bonnat, Bayonne, Inv. CMNI 3147.
See 1830-25 for further details.
VII. Andrea del Sarto
79. Richardson/Sir
J.
Reynolds/William
Young
Ott-
ley, 1804-279ii/1830-143i/1860-827, bought by Morant,
£5.5s/The Marquess of Northampton, Castle Ashby,
Northampton; his sale at Christie’s London, 1 May 1959,
lot 6/P. & D. Colnaghi, London/N. Embiricos, London/
Christie’s, New York, 24 January 2001, lot 8, as Salviati; 2003
with Jean-Luc Baroni, London; red chalk, 422 × 211 mm.
See 1804-279ii for further details.
80. Unidentiﬁed and untraced. Not to be confused with
the copy after this ﬁgure in black chalk: 1804-279iii/1830-
143ii/1860-830ii. See 1804-279iii for further details.

C
Drawings Purchased by William II, February 1838 Michael
Angelo
1. 1830-7/1836-3/1850-155?/1860-145/Malcolm 61/BM W1.
See 1850-155 for further details.
2. 1830-10/1836-12/1850-143?/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 21/
1860-147/Vaughan/BM W10.
3. 1830-4/1836-13/1850-135/1860-124/Vaughan/BM W4.
4. 1830-39/1836-15/1850-101/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 17/
Wellesley Sale, 1866, lot 2417/Malcolm 56/BM W42.
5. 1830-83/1836-18/1850-163/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 27/
1860-144. Untraced.
6. 1830-77?/1836-19/1850-128?. Unidentiﬁed, untraced.
7. 1830-79/1836-20 (although not recorded by Woodburn,
this sheet also bears the stamp of St. Peter Lely on the recto
and Gibson’s inscription M. Angolo and his price code 8.3 on
the verso)/1850-117/Santa Barbara, CA, Alfred Moir Col-
lection. See 1850-117 for further details.
8. 1830-21/1836-22/1850-145/1860-113/ Malcolm 67/ BM
W67. See 1839-21 for further details.
9. 1830-20?/1836-24/1850-Not securely identiﬁable/ 1860-
122/Vaughan/BM W53.
10. 1830-48/1836-25/1850-171/1860-116/Malcolm 73/BM
W82.
11. 1830-11?/1836-26/1850-Not securely identiﬁable, per-
haps
144/1860-123/J.
C.
Robinson/Malcolm
64/BM
W54.
12. Probably 1830-47/1836-27/1850-105/1860-115/Malcolm
73/BM W81.
13. 1830-49/1836-28/1850-152/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 9/
1860-114/Count Antoine Seilern/London, Courtauld Insti-
tute, Prince’s Gate Collection.
14. 1830-70/1836-29/1850-127/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 8/
1860-117/BM W32
15. Perhaps 1830-118/1836-34/1850-146, bought by Brond-
geest, 50 guilders/1860-131?. Not further identiﬁed; un-
traced. See 1860-131 for further details.
16. 1836-35/1850-120? bought by Brondgeest 225 guilders/?
1860-142/bought by Enson/Vaughan?/BM W102. See
1850-120 for further details.
17. 1830-19/1836-36/1850-102/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 16/
1860-132/Robinson/Malcom 58/BM W2.
18. 1830-63/1836-37/1850-162/1860-146/Robinson/Mal-
colm 60/BM W13.
19. 1830-16/1836-38/1850-118/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 19/
Louvre Inv. 746/ J38 (with incorrect reference to the 1836
exhibition).
20. 1830-28/1836-39/1850-164/Weimar, Sachsen Weimar
Collection/Koenigs Collection/Rotterdam, Boymans van
Beuningen Museum, I.392 as Parmigianino. See 1830-28
for further details.
21. 1830-Not identiﬁed/1836-40/1850-159/1860-130/BM
W61.
22. 1830-116/1836-42/1850-157?/Lawrence
Gallery,
1853,
Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 18/1860-139/Vaughan/BM W6.
23. 1836-43/1850-151 bought by Engelbert/Frankfurt, Stae-
delsches Kunstinstitut, Inv. 399, by Sebastiano del Piombo.
Malke, 1980, no. 87, established the pre-Richardson prove-
nance of this sheet as Padre Resta whose number k67 it
bears.
24. 1830-67/1836-44/1850-106/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar
Collection/National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa. By Jacopo
Pontormo, c. 1540. See 1830-67 for further details.
25. 1814-1769; the nature of the inscription on this draw-
ing suggests that it came from the Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
441
group. 1830-111/1836-48 (the provenance given solely as
Ottley)/1850-168/1860-140 bought by Gasc/Vaughan/ BM
W91.
26. Probably 1814-828 (with the provenance given as
Cicciaporci)/1830-71/1836-51 (with the provenance given
as Richardson)/1850-179 bought by Roos/Leembruggen
sale, 1865, lot 894/Malcolm 366/BM, not in Wilde, but
later accepted by him/PG 276, placed as W.15a.
27. Probably 1830-14/1836-56/1850-170/Weimar, Sachsen
Weimar Collection/Rotterdam, Boymans van Beunigen
Museum I.20, as after Michelangelo, attributed by Wilde,
1953a, p. 89, to Giulio Clovio; another candidate would
be Alessandro Allori. See 1830-14 for further details.
28. 1830-76/1836-57/1850-126, as Sebastiano, bought by
Roos/Leembrugen sale 1866, lot 920, as Sebastiano/Mal-
colm 63/BM W15.
29. Pierre Crozat?; his number? 396 at lower left/Count
Moritz von Fries (L.2903)/1830-93/1836-58/1850-141?,
bought by Enthoven, 200 guilders/Lawrence Gallery, 1853,
pl. 10/BM W69.
30. Moselli Collection, Verona, before that of Pierre
Crozat/1830-117/1836-59/1838-30/1850-124/Lawrence
Gallery, 1853, pl. 24/1860-138 bought by Clement/Emile
Galichon, his sale, May 1875, lot 15/Malcolm 79/BM W55.
31. 1830-88/1836-60/1850-132, as Venusti/1860-101/Miss
K. Radford/BM W71.
32. 1830-84/1836-61/1850-172/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
6/Paris, Louvre, Inv. 715/J55, as Raffaello da Montelupo.
33. 1830-45 i/1836-62/1850-122/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
11/1860-121/BM W52.
34. Reproduced by Ottley, Italian School, f.p. 32/1814-
262, bought by Roscoe/1830-52/1836-63/1850-154 (the
subject misidentiﬁed as the Virgin and Child)/1860-
136/Vaughan/BM W29. See 1814-262 and 1850-154 for fur-
ther details.
35. 1830-40/1836-64/1850-180/1860-119, bought by Enson,
£52.10s/ Brooks Collection/F. T Palgrave Collection, sold
Christie’s, 4 June, bought by J. C. Robinson/Agnew’s,
London. Acquired by Mrs. Gardner in 1902 for the Isabella
Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston. See 1830-40 for further
details.
36. 1830-89/1836-65/1850-133, as Marcello Venusti/1860-
102/BM W72.
37. 1830-73/1836-66/1850-149/1860-107/Clarke Collec-
tion/Cambridge, Fitzwilliam Museum.
38. 1830-65/1836-69/1850-104?/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
15/1860-127/J. P. Heseltine/BM W63.
39. Probably 1830-56/1836-70/1850-147; bought by Roos,
115 guilders/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar Collection (Von
Ritgen photograph, 1865, no. 6 as Michelangelo; Brinck-
mann, 1925, no. 97)/Present whereabouts unknown.
40. 1830-34/1836-72/1850-169/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 3/
1860-105/Duke of Portland Collection. See 1830-34 for fur-
ther details.
41. 1830-41/1836-73/1850-158/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 4/
1860-104/BM W58.
42. 1830-55/1836-74/1850-107/1860-134/Malcolm 74/BM
W57.
43. 1830-114/1836-75/1850-111/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 22/
1860-143/BM W87.
44. 1830-8/1836-77/1850-125, bought by Woodburn/Wei-
mar, Sachsen-Weimar Collection/Count Antoine Seilern/
London, The Courtauld Institute of Art, Prince’s Gate Col-
lection. See 1850-125 for further details.
45. 1830-65?/1836-78/1850-165?, bought by Brondgeest, 75
guilders/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar Collection/Not further
identiﬁed; untraced.
46. 1830-37/1836-79/1850-142?/1860-100 bought by Tif-
ﬁn/Locker[-Lampson]/BM W11.
47. 1830-107/1836-81/1850-166/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
13/Paris, Mus´ee du Louvre, Inv. 714/J4.
48. 1830-36/1836-83/1850-130, as Sebastiano del Piombo/
Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 12/1860-112/BM W16.
49. Reproduced by Ottley, Italian School, f.p. 33/1814-
1768/1830-60/1836-84/1838-49/1850-103/1860-125/E.
Galichon, his sale, May 1875, lot 16/Malcolm 80/BM W60.
50. 1830-42/1836-85/1850-167/1860-110/Bayonne, Mus´ee
Bonnat, Bean 65.
51. 1830-69/1836-86/1850-119/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
14/1860-126/Thibaudeau/Bayonne, Mus´ee Bonnat, Bean
67.
52. 1830-44/1836-87/1850-130, as Sebastiano del Piombo/
Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 12/1860-111, bought by Far-
rer/BM W17.
53. 1830-64 i,ii,iii/1836-88/1850-129, as Marcello Venusti/
Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 7/1860-109/BM W76–78. This
annotation establishes that all three drawings now in the BM
were included under the same number.
54. 1814-259?/1830-27/1836-90/1850-134 bought by Roos/
Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar Collection/Private Collection,
Switzerland/Phillips, London, Sale 11 December 1996, lot
239, black chalk, 192 × 147 mm, as follower of Daniele da
Volterra. See 1830-27 for further details.
55. 1830-75?/1836-94/1850-173/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar
Collection (Von Ritgen photograph, 1865, no. 2 as
Michelangelo)/Phillips, London, 7 July 1999, lot 120; black
chalk, heightened with white, 395 × 256 mm, as Roman
School, sixteenth century. See 1850-173 for further details.

442
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
56. 1830-75?/1836-95/1850-112/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar
Collection (Von Ritgen photograph, 1865, no. 50 as
Michelangelo; Delacre, 1938, p. 315)/Phillips, London, 7 July
1999, lot 121; black chalk, heightened with white, 398 ×
261 mm, as Roman School, sixteenth century. See 1850-112
for further details.
57. 1814-1502,
as
from
the
collection
of
Lamberto
Gori/part of 1830-139?/1836-98 (with the provenance given
incorrectly as Buonarroti and Wicar, that from Gori
omitted)/1850-148 bought by Brondgeest/Weimar Sachsen-
Weimar Collection/Phillips, London, 7 July 1999, lot 119,
black chalk, 393 × 229 mm, as circle of Daniele da Volterra.
See 1850-148 for further details.
58. 1830-119?/1836-99/1850-156, bought by Brondgeest, 59
guilders. Not further identiﬁed; untraced.
59. 1830-17/1836-100/1838-59/1850-123?, bought by Engel-
bert/Frankfurt, St¨adelsches Kunstinstitut, Inv. 393/ Corpus
332.
Two of these drawings 1836-24/1838-9 and 1836-26/1838-
51 cannot be identiﬁed in William II’s posthumous sale of
1850.
The August 1838 Purchase
Following this purchase of February 1838, William II
returned to Woodburn in August of the same year and
bought an additional forty drawings by various artists. Lists
of these are not available, but Woodburn’s account of this
transaction, as published by Hinterding and Horsch (1989),
does specify that one very important drawing by Michelan-
gelo was included among them: this is “the Large Cartoon
M. Angelo,” the Epifania cartoon (1836-30), which appeared
in William’s sale in 1850 as lot 212. It is likely that William
bought further drawings by or attributed to Michelangelo
on this occasion, although none of the remaining draw-
ings exhibited in 1836 were among them. Ten further draw-
ings by or after Michelangelo in William’s sale cannot
be connected with the 1836 exhibition. What may have
been two of the most important of these were 1850-150,
1850-153.
The Sale to Oxford University
At the end of 1838 therefore forty of the one hundred draw-
ings included in the 1836 catalogue remained in Woodburn’s
hands: of these one, the Repose (1836-11) must have been
sold to an unidentiﬁed client between 1838 and 1842, leaving
thirty-nine: 1836-1, 1836-2, 1836-4, 1836-5, 1836-6, 1836-7,
1836-8, 1836-9, 1836-10, 1836-14, 1836-16, 1836-17, 1836-21,
1836-23, 1836-31, 1836-32, 1836-33, 1836-41, 1836-45, 1836-
46, 1836-47, 1836-49, 1836-50, 1836-52, 1836-53, 1836-54,
1836-55, 1836-67, 1836-68, 1836-71, 1836-76, 1836-80, 1836-
82, 1836-89, 1836-91, 1836-92, 1836-93, 1836-96, 1836-97.
All of these were in the group sold to Oxford.
However, Oxford actually received eight-seven plus one,
that is eighty-eight mountings (several of which bore more
than one drawing) of drawings attributed to Michelangelo.
The 1842 prospectus in fact listed eighty-seven mountings,
but one must be added since two were given the same num-
ber, no. 28, to make eighty-eight. Five of these eighty-eight
came from Jeremiah Harman’s collection and had never
formed part of Lawrence’s series. The remaining eighty-
three mountings of drawings given to Michelangelo there-
fore contained thirty-nine mountings that had been exhib-
ited in 1836 and forty-four that had been owned by Lawrence
but had not been exhibited.

D
Catalogue des Tableaux Anciens et Modernes de Diverses
Ecoles, Dessins et Statues formant la Galerie de feu Sa
Majest´e Guillaume II, roi des Pays Bas, 12–20 August 1850
Dessins
83. 1830-138/Not exhibited in 1836/August 1838 pur-
chase?/Untraced.
101. 1830-39/1836-15/1838-4/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 17/
Wellesley Sale, 1866, lot 2417/Malcolm 56/BM W42.
102. 1830-19/1836-36/1838-17/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
16/1860-132/Robinson/Malcolm 58/BM W2.
103. Reproduced by Ottley, Italian School, f.p. 33/1814-
1768/1830-60/1836-84/1838-49/1860-125/E. Galichon, his
sale, May 1875, lot 16/Malcolm 80/BM W60.
104. Probably 1830-65/1836-69/1838-38/1860-127/J. P.
Heseltine/ BM W63.
105. Probably 1830-47/1836-27/1838-12/1860-115/Malcolm
73/BM W81.
106. 1830-67/1836-44/1839-24/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar
Collection/National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa. By Jacopo
Pontormo, c. 1540. See 1830-67 for further details.
107. 1830-55/1836-74/1838-42/1860-134/Malcolm 74/BM
W57.
108. 1830-23 i/Not exhibited in 1836/part of August 1838
purchase?/1860-152/Chantilly, Mus´ee Cond´e; Lanfranc de
Panthou, 1995, no. 39.
111. 1830-111/1836-75/1838-43/1860-143/J. C. Robinson/
Malcolm 55/BM W87.

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
443
112. 1830-75?/1836-95/1838-56/Weimar, Sachsen Weimar
Collection (Von Ritgen photograph 1865, no. 50 as
Michelangelo; Gotti, 1875, II, p. 210: La Sibilla Libica,
accompagnata da due Angeli. Disegno di sorprendente belleza,
accuratamente condotto a matita nera e acquerello leggerissimo,
tratto dall’affresco della Sistine. Potrebbe essere che sotto il ﬁnito
della matita esistesse gi`a un leggiro schizzo originale del Buonar-
roti. Collezione di S. A. R. il Granduca. Dalle Collezioni
Buonarroti, Wicar, Lawrence e Re de’Paesi Bassi. Delacre, 1938,
p. 315)/Phillips, London, 7 July 1999, lot 121; black chalk,
heightened with white, 398 × 261 mm, as Roman School,
sixteenth century.
114. Perhaps part of 1830-135/Not exhibited in 1836/August
1838 purchase?/Not further identiﬁed; untraced.
117. 1830-79/1836-20 (although not recorded by Wood-
burn, this sheet also bears the stamp of Sir Peter Lely on the
recto and Gibson’s inscription M. Angolo and his price code
8.3 on the verso)/1838-7. It later appeared in a sale, Handze-
ichnungen des XV bis XVIII Jahrhunderts, 9–10 May 1930,
C. G. Boerner, Leipzig, lot 331, recto illustrated pl. XXXIV,
as by Sebastiano, recto: Study for Christ in the Viterbo Piet`a;
verso: half-length ﬁgure of the Virgin. Red chalk, 192 ×
285 mm, with the provenance given as Lely, Richardson Sr.,
Reynolds, Liphart, and Hasse but omitting Lawrence; Santa
Barbara, California, Alfred Moir Collection, attributed to
Francesco Salviati by A. Moir and N. Turner, a view shared
by the compiler.
118. 1830-16/1836-38/1838-19/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 19/
Louvre, Inv. 746/J38 (with incorrect reference to the 1836
exhibition).
119. Probably 1830-69/1836-86/1838-51/Lawrence Gallery,
1853, pl. 14/1860-126/Thibaudeau/Bayonne, Mus´ee Bon-
nat, Bean 67.
120. 1830-Not identiﬁed / 1836-35 /1838-16 /1860-142? /
bought by Enson/Vaughan?/BM W102.
This sequence presents two problems. It supposes that the
drawing acquired by Brondgeest in 1850 passed to Wood-
burn before the latter’s death in 1853 and that the sheet now
in the BM, which does not bear the Lawrence stamp, has
been trimmed at the bottom by some 50 mm. On the other
hand, the price paid by Brondgeest implies that the drawing
was of high quality, which is certainly true of W102. It was
ﬁrst attributed to Francesco Salviati by M. Hirst, 1961, a
judgement accepted by most critics, including the compiler.
122. 1830-45 i/1836-62/1838-33/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
11/1860-121/BM W52.
123. Probably 1830-17/1836-100/1838-59, bought by Engel-
bert/Frankfurt, Staedelsches Kunstinstitut, Inv. 393/ Corpus
332.
The high price reached by this drawing is surprising and
might throw the identiﬁcation in doubt. But Engelbert
seems to have acquired exclusively for Frankfurt in this sale,
and the compiler is aware of no alternative candidate.
124. Moselli Collection Verona before that of Pierre
Crozat/1830-117/1836-59/1838-30/Lawrence Gallery, 1853,
pl. 24/1860-138 bought by Clement/Emile Galichon, his
sale, May 1875, lot 15/Malcolm 79/BM W55.
125. 1830-8/1836-77/1838-44/Weimar,Sachsen-Weimar Col-
lection (Gotti, 1875, II, p. 210: Il Sogno della Vita umana.
Disegno maestrevolmente condotto a matita nera. La ﬁgura centrale
dormente `e molta ﬁnita. Collezione di S. A. R. la Granduchessa.
Dalle Collezione Lawrence e Re dei Paesi Bassi.)/Count
Antoine Seilern/London, Courtauld Institute of Art,
Prince’s Gate Collection.
126. 1830-76/1836-57/1838-28/Leembrugen sale 1866, lot
920, as Sebastiano/Malcolm 63/BM W15.
127. 1830-70/1836-29/1838-14/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 8/
1860-117/BM W32.
128. 1830-77?/1836-19?/1838-6. Unidentiﬁed, untraced.
129. 1830-64 i,ii,iii/1836-88/1838-53/Lawrence Gallery, 1853,
pl. 7/1860-109/BM W76–78.
130. 1830-44/1836-87/1838-52/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 12/
1860-111, bought by Farrer/BM W17.
131. 1830-36/1836-83/1838-48/1860-112/BM W16.
132. 1830-88/1836-60/1860-101/Miss K. Radford/BM W71.
133. 1830-89/1836-65 (the provenance is given in 1836 as
Buonarroti and Wicar, but because the drawing bears the
Bona Roti inscription, it probably did not come from Casa
Buonarroti)/1838-36/1850-133, as Marcello Venusti/1860-
102/BM W72.
134. 1814-259?/1830-27/1836-90/1838-54/Weimar, Sach-
sen Weimar Collection/Private Collection, Switzerland/
Phillips, London, Sale 11 December 1996, lot 239, black
chalk, 192 × 147 mm, as follower of Daniele da Volterra.
See 1830-27 for further details.
135. 1830-4/1836-13/1838-3/1860-124/BM W4.
141. Perhaps: Pierre Crozat?; his number? 396 at lower
left/Count
Moritz
Von
Fries
(L.2903)/1836-58/1838-
29/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 10/1860-120/BM W69.
If the identiﬁcation suggested here is correct, the drawing
would have passed from Enthoven to Woodburn between
1850 and 1853.
142. Probably 1830-37/1836-79/1838-46/1860-100 bought
by Tifﬁn/Locker[-Lampson]/BM W11.
143. Probably 1830-10/1836-12/1838-2/Lawrence Gallery,
1853, pl. 21/1860-147/Vaughan/BM W10.
144. Perhaps 1830-11?/1836-26/1838-11/1860-123/J. C.
Robinson/Malcolm 64/BM W54.

444
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
145. 1830-21 (with further details)/1836-22/1838-8/1860-
113/Malcolm 67/BM W67.
146. Perhaps
1830-118/1836-34/1838-15/1860-131?.
Not
further identiﬁed; untraced. See 1860-131 for further details.
147. 1830-56?/1836-70/1838-39/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar
Collection (Von Ritgen photograph, 1865, no. 6 as
Michelangelo; Brinckmann, 1925, no. 97)/Present where-
abouts unknown.
148. 1814-1502, as from the collection of Lamberto
Gori/part of 1830-139?/1836-98 (with the provenance given
incorrectly as Buonarroti and Wicar, that from Gori omit-
ted.)/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar Collection (Gotti, 1875,
II,
p.
210:
Schizzo,
a
matita
nera,
della
ﬁgura
della
Vergine nell’affresco del Giudizio ﬁnale. Attribuito a Michelan-
gelo.)/Phillips, London, 7 July 1999, lot 119, black chalk,
393 × 229 mm, as circle of Daniele da Volterra.
149. 1830-73/1836-66/1838-37/1860-107/Clarke Collection/
Cambridge, Fitzwilliam Museum.
150. Probably 1807-375/1814-1764/bought by Dimsdale?/
1830-Not identiﬁed /Not exhibited in 1836/August 1838
purchase?/1860-118; untraced.
If this drawing is identical with 1860-118 as seems likely, it
would have to be assumed that it passed from Brondgeest to
Woodburn between 1850 and 1853. See 1860-118 for further
datails.
151. 1836-43/1838-23/Frankfurt, St¨adelsches Kunstinstitut,
Inv. 399, by Sebastiano del Piombo. Malke, 1980, no. 87,
established the pre-Richardson provenance of this sheet as
Padre Resta whose number k67 it bears.
152. 1830-49/1836-28/1838-13/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 9/
1860-114/Count Antoine Seilern/London, Courtauld Insti-
tute of Art, Prince’s Gate Collection.
153. 1830-Not identiﬁed/not exhibited in 1836/August
1838 purchase?/1860-137/J. C. Robinson/Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts, Fogg Museum of Art, Inv. 1955-75.
It is surprising that this drawing should not be found
in the 1830 inventory and was not exhibited in 1836:
As a Presentation Drawing of a famous design, it should
in principle have been among Woodburn’s more valu-
able drawings. Since Rubens’ copy of the Ganymede was
shown as no. 27 of the Rubens series in 1835, the
putative original can hardly have been concealed from
prudery.
The Fogg Ganymede (black chalk, 361 × 275 mm) was
attributed to Michelangelo by M. Hirst, 1975, a view
accepted by many scholars; after much uncertainty, the com-
piler is inclined to think it a copy – a thought comforted by
the prices it realised in 1850 (150 guilders, 30 guilders less
than the Cleopatra copy, no. 168) and 1860 (8 guineas, half
that of the Cleopatra copy).
Another Ganymede and the Eagle in black chalk was no.
1780 in Woodburn’s posthumous sale of non-Lawrence
drawings in June 16 and following days in 1854.
154. Reproduced by Ottley, Italian School, f.p. 32/1814-262,
bought
by
Roscoe/1830-52/1836-63/1838-34/1860-136/
Vaughan/BM W29. See 1814-262 for further details.
Although the subject is misidentiﬁed as the Virgin and
Child in the 1850 sale, there can be no doubt that it is the
Isaiah, the only pen drawing in the sale sufﬁciently dramatic
and famous to have attained so high a price.
155. Perhaps 1830-7/1836-3/1838-1/1860-145/Malcolm 61/
BM W1.
Although this drawing is not clearly described, it may
be the study of a draped man, BM W1, obviously superbe
and likely to realise a high price. This drawing was certainly
acquired by William II, and because it cannot be found else-
where in the 1850 sale catalogue, lot 155 is the best can-
didate for it. The fact that it was bought by Brondgeest
in principle counts against it being the same drawing that
appeared in Woodburn’s posthumous sale of 1860, but sev-
eral other drawings in the 1850 sale that were acquired
by Brondgeest seem to reappear in Woodburn’s posses-
sion, and some transaction may have occurred between
them following the sale. Perhaps Woodburn exchanged the
Dream (lot 125) against several lesser drawings acquired by
Brondgeest.
156. 1830-119?/1836-99/1838-58. Not further identiﬁed;
untraced. The price asked in 1836 and that realised in this
sale indicate a copy.
157. Probably 1830-116/1836-42/1838-22/Lawrence Gallery,
1853, pl. 18/1860-139/Vaughan/BM W6.
158. 1830-41/1838-41/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 4/1860-
104/BM W58.
This lot fetched by far the highest price among the
Michelangelo drawings in this sale.
159. Probably 1836-40/1838-21/1860-130/BM W61.
160. Unidentiﬁed in the 1830 inventory/Not exhibited
in 1836/August 1838 purchase?/Not further identiﬁed;
untraced.
161. Unidentiﬁed in the 1830 inventory/Not exhibited
in 1836/August 1838 purchase?/Not further identiﬁed;
untraced.
162. 1836-37/1838-18/1860-146/Robinson/ Malcolm 60/
BM W13.
163. 1830-83/1836-18/1838-5/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 27/
1860-144/Untraced.
164. 1830-28/1836-39/1838-20/Weimar, Sachsen Weimar
Collection/Koenigs Collection/Rotterdam, Boymans-van
Beuningen Museum, I.392 as Parmigianino. See 1830-28
for further details.

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
445
165. 1830-65?/1836-78/1838-45/Weimar, Sachsen Weimar
Collection/Not further identiﬁed; untraced.
166. 1830-107/1836-81/1838-47/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
13/Paris, Mus´ee du Louvre, Inv. 714/J4.
167. 1830-42/1836-85/1838-50/1860-110/Bayonne, Mus´ee
Bonnat, Bean 65.
168. 1814-1769; the nature of the inscription on this draw-
ing suggests that it came from the Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi
group./1830-111/1836-48 (the provenance given solely as
Ottley)/1838-25/1860-140 bought by Gasc/Vaughan/ BM
W91.
169. 1830-34/1836-72/1838-40/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 3/
1860-105/Duke of Portland Collection. See 1830-34 for fur-
ther details.
170. Probably 1830-14/1836-56/1838-27/Weimar, Sachsen-
Weimar Collection/Rotterdam, Boymans-van Beuningen
Museum I.20, as after Michelangelo, attributed by Wilde,
1953a, p. 89, to Giulio Clovio but perhaps by Alessandro
Allori. See 1830-14 for further details.
171. 1830-48/1836-25/1838-10/1860-116/Malcolm 73/BM
W82.
172. 1830-84/1836-61/1838-32/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.6/
Paris, Louvre, Inv. 715/J55, as Raffaello da Montelupo.
173. 1830-75?/1836-94/1838-55/Weimar, Sachsen Weimar
Collection (Von Ritgen photograph, 1865, no. 2 as
Michelangelo; Gotti, 1975, II, p. 210: La Sibilla Delﬁca,
senza gli angioli. Dall’affresco del Giudizio [sic]. Disegno ﬁnito
a matita nera Collezione di S. A. R. il Granduca.)/ Phillips,
London, 7 July 1999, lot 121; black chalk, heightened
with white, 398 × 261 mm, as Roman School, sixteenth
century.
179. Probably 1814-828 (with the provenance given as
Cicciaporci)/1830-71/1836-51 (with the provenance given
as Richardson)/Leembruggen sale, 1865, lot 894/Malcolm
366/BM not in Wilde, but later accepted by him/PG no.
276, placed as W15a.
180. 1830-40/1836-64/1838-35/1860-119, bought by Enson,
£52.10s/Brooks Collection/F. T Palgrave Collection, sold
Christie’s, 4 June 1886, bought by J. C. Robinson/Agnew’s,
London. Acquired by Mrs. Gardner in 1902 for the Isabella
Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston. See 1830-40 for further
details.
212. 1830-3/1836-30/August 1838 purchase/1860-160/J. C.
Robinson/Malcolm 81/BM W75.
237. Not identiﬁed in 1830 inventory/Not exhibited in
1836/August, 1838 purchase?/Not further identiﬁed.
238. Not identiﬁed in 1830 inventory/Not exhibited in
1836/August, 1838 purchase?/Not further identiﬁed.
241. 1830-121?/Not exhibited in 1836/August 1838 pur-
chase?/1860-99?/Weimar, Sachsen Weimar Collection/
With Thomas le Claire, Hamburg in 1990 (advertisement
in the Burlington Magazine, January 1990, p. v). See 1830-
121 for further details.
251. Not identiﬁed in 1830 inventory/Not exhibited
in 1836/August 1838 purchase?/Not identiﬁed in 1860
sale/Possibly J. C. Robinson/Malcolm 102/BM W94, after
the composition of the triangle of the Zorobabel-Abiud-
Eliachim ancestor group?
257. Not identiﬁed in 1830 inventory/Not exhibited in
1836/August
1838
purchase?/Not
further
identiﬁed;
untraced.
Ten of the drawings by or attributed to Michelangelo in
this sale do not seem to have been among those exhibited
in 1836. These are 1850-108, 1850-114, 1850-150, 1850-153,
1850-160, 1850-161, 1850-165, 1850-237, 1850-238, 1850-
251. An eleventh, 1850-128, may have been shown in 1836,
but the identiﬁcation is uncertain.
Of the ﬁfty-nine drawings by or attributed to Michelan-
gelo from the 1836 exhibition acquired from Woodburn by
William II in February 1838, to which must be added the
Epifania acquired in August 1838, to total sixty, two cannot
securely be identiﬁed in the 1850 sale. These are 1836-24,
and 1836-26. Given the sparse and sometime demonstrably
inaccurate descriptions in the 1850 sale catalogue, the iden-
tiﬁcation of several others must be approximate.

E
WOODBURN SALE, CHRISTIE’S, LONDON, 1860
The Valuable and Important Collection of Drawings by
Old Masters formerly in the Collection of the late SIR
THOMAS LAWRENCE, PRA, Monday, June 1860, and
following days.
Ist day: Monday June 4
MICHAEL ANGELO BUONAROTI
99. 1830-121?/Not exhibited in 1836/part of August,
1838
purchase
of
William
II
of
Holland?/1850-241?
bought by Brondgeest, 4 guilders/Weimar, Sachsen-Weimar
Collection/With Thomas le Claire, Hamburg in 1990

446
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
(advertisement in the Burlington Magazine, January 1990, p.
v). See 1830-121 for further details.
100. 1830-37/1836-79/1838-46/1850-142?/Locker
[-Lampson]/BM W11
101. 1830-88/1836-60/1838-31/1850-132, as Venusti/Miss K.
Radford/BM W71.
102. 1830-89/1836-65 (the provenance is given in 1836
as Buonarroti and Wicar, but because the drawing bears
the Bona Roti inscription, it probably did not come from
Casa Buonarroti)/1838-36/1850-133, as Marcello Venusti/BM
W72.
103. 1830-149?/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, no. 2/J. C. Robin-
son/Morgan Library, IV.7; Corpus 399.
The highly ﬁnished Morgan Annunciation presents a prob-
lem. It is probable but not certain that it is identical with
no. 149 in the Inventory of 1830, but it is puzzling that so
important a drawing was not exhibited in 1836. Nor does
it appear to have been among the drawings sold to William
of Holland, although he certainly purchased the two associ-
ated sketches now in the British Museum, W71 and W72.
The Morgan drawing was illustrated as plate 2 in Wood-
burn’s Lawrence Gallery of 1853, and seems to be alone among
the thirty drawings included in that publication not to have
been exhibited in 1836, which is again puzzling. Whether
it was a drawing that Woodburn retained, or sold privately
and subsequently re-purchased, or whether it passed through
William’s hands but somehow escaped separate identiﬁcation
in his sale catalogue is conjectural.
The price that this drawing realised in 1860 suggests that
it was not believed to be autograph. It was re-attributed
to Michelangelo by Wilde, 1959, and his view has been
followed by most later scholars, including the compiler.
104. 1830-41/1836-73/1838-41/1850-158/Lawrence Gallery,
1853, pl. 4/BM W58.
105. 1830-34/1836-72/1838-40/1850-169/Lawrence Gallery,
1853, pl. 3/Duke of Portland Collection.
106. Not identiﬁed in the 1830 inventory/Not exhib-
ited in 1836/Not sold to William II of Holland/William
Bloxam/His gift to Rugby School, Inv. R/S II 13; black
chalk, 199 × 278 mm.
107. 1830-73/1836-66/1838-37/1850-149/Clarke Collection/
Cambridge, Fitzwilliam Museum.
108. Taddeo Zuccaro. Ottley sale, 1814-1492 as Taddeo
Zuccaro/Sir Thomas Lawrence/1830-Not identiﬁed/Chic-
ago, Art Institute of Chicago, 1928-196 (McCullagh and
Giles, 1997, no. 350).
109. 1830-64 i,ii,iii/1836-88/1838-53/1850-129, as Marcello
Venusti/ Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 7/BM W76-78.
110. 1830-42/1836-85/1838-50/1850-167/Bayonne, Bean
65.
111. 1830-44/1836-87/1838-52/1850-130, as Sebastiano del
Piombo/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl. 12/BM W17.
112. 1830-36/1836-83/1838-48/1850-130, as Sebastiano del
Piombo/1860-112/BM W16.
113. 1830-21 (with further details)/1836-22/1838-8/1850-
145/ Brooks/Malcolm 67/ BM W67.
114. 1830-49/1836-28/1838-13/1850-152/Lawrence Gallery,
1853, pl. 9/Count Antoine Seilern/London, Courtauld
Institute of Art, Prince’s Gate Collection.
115. 1830-47/probably 1836-27/1838-12/1850-105/Malcolm
73/BM W81.
116. 1830-48/1836-25/1838-10/1850-171/Malcolm 73/BM
W82.
117. 1830-70/1836-29/1838-14/1850-127/Lawrence Gallery,
1853, pl .8/1860-117/BM W32.
118. 1807-375/1814-1764, bought by Dimsdale?/1830-Not
identiﬁed/Not exhibited in 1836/part of August, 1838 pur-
chase of William II of Holland?/1850-150, bought by
Brondgeest, 60 guilders/Untraced.
If this drawing is identical with 1850-150 as seems likely,
it would have to be assumed that it passed from Brondgeest
to Woodburn between 1850 and 1853. Perhaps it was a black
chalk copy of Michelangelo’s red chalk Deposition in Haar-
lem, Teyler Museum, VT60/Corpus 89.
119. 1830-40/1836-64/1838-35/1850-180/bought by Enson,
£52.10s/Brooks Collection/F. T. Palgrave Collection, sold
at Christie’s, 4 June 1886, bought by J. C. Robinson/
Agnew’s, London. Acquired by Mrs. Gardner in 1902 for
the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, Boston. See 1830-40
for further details.
120. Pierre Crozat?; his number? 396 at lower left/Count
Moritz von Fries (L.2903)/1830-93/1836-58/1838-29/1850-
141?, bought by Enthoven, 200 guilders/Lawrence Gallery,
1853, pl. 10/BM W69.
121. 1830-45 i/1836-62/1838-33/1850-122/Lawrence Gallery,
1853, pl. 11/BM W52.
122. 1830-20/Probably 1836-24/1838-9/1850-Not identi-
ﬁed/Vaughan/BM W53.
123. 1830-11?/1836-26/1838-11/1850-not securely identiﬁ-
able, perhaps 144/J. C. Robinson/Malcolm 64/BM W54.
124. 1830-4/1836-13/1838-3/1850-135/BM W4.
125. Reproduced by Ottley, Italian School, f.p. 33/1814-
1768/1836-84/1838-49/1850-103/E. Galichon, his sale, May
1875, lot 16/Malcolm 80/BM W60.
126. 1830-69/1836-86/1838-51/1850-119/Lawrence Gallery,
1853, pl. 14/Thibaudeau/Bayonne, Mus´ee Bonnat, Bean
67.

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
447
127. 1830-18/1838-38/1850-104?/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
15/J. P. Heseltine/BM W63.
128. Not identiﬁed.
129. Not identiﬁed.
130. 1830-Not identiﬁed/1836-40/1838-21/1850-159/BM
W61.
131. Perhaps 1830-118/1836-34/1838-15/1850-146, bought
Brondgeest, 50 guilders. Not further identiﬁed; un-
traced.
The relatively low price asked for this drawing in 1836
and realised in the sales of 1850 and 1860 suggests it was not
autograph. If the identity of this drawing and 1850-146 is
accepted, it must have passed from Brondgeest to Woodburn
between 1850 and 1853.
132. 1830-19/1838-17/1850-102/Lawrence Gallery, 1853, pl.
16/ Malcolm 58/BM W2.
133. i,ii,iii. Perhaps 1830-142 i,ii,iii. One of these copies
must be the drawing after Adam and Abel, black chalk, 250 ×
403 mm, at Rugby School, Inv. R/S II 18. The others are
not currently identiﬁable.
134. 1830-55/1836-74/1838-42/1850-107/1860-134/BM
W57.
135. Not identiﬁed; untraced.
136. Reproduced by Ottley, Italian School, j.p. 32/1814-
262, bought by Roscoe/1830-52/1836-63/1838-34/1850-
154 (the subject misidentiﬁed as the Virgin and Child)/
Vaughan/BM W29. See 1814-262 and 1850-154 further
details.
137. 1830-Not identiﬁed/not exhibited in 1836/part of
August 1838 purchase of William II?/1850-153/J. C. Robin-
son/Cambridge, Massachusetts, Fogg Museum of Art, Inv.
1955-75. See 1850-153 for further details.
138. Moselli Collection Verona before that of Pierre Crozat/
1830-117/1836-59/1838-30/1850-124/Lawrence Gallery, 1853,
pl. 24/ Emile Galichon, his sale, May 1875, lot 15/Malcolm
79/BM W55
139. 1830-116/1836-42/1838-22/1850-157?/ Lawrence Gallery,
1853, pl. 18/Vaughan/BM W6.
140. 1814-1769; the nature of the inscription on this draw-
ing suggests that it came from the Cicciaporci-Cavaceppi
group. /1830-111/1836-48 (the provenance given solely as
Ottley)/1838-25/1850-168/Vaughan/ BMW91.
141. Perhaps identical with a ﬁne copy of Michelangelo’s
Dawn that appeared in a sale at Christie’s, New York, 30
January 1997, lot 16, black chalk, 197 × 296 mm. However,
no Lawrence dry stamp is recorded on that sheet.
142. 1830-Not identiﬁed/1836-35/1838-16/?1850-120 bought
by Brondgeest 225 guilders/Vaughan?/BM W102. See 1850-
120 for further details.
143. 1830-114/1836-75/1838-43/1850-111/J. C. Robinson/
Malcolm 55/BM W87.
144. 1830-83/1836-18/1838-5/1850-163/ Lawrence Gallery,
pl. 27/Untraced.
145. 1830-7/1838-1/1850-155?/ Malcolm 61/BM W1. See
1850-155 for further details.
146. 1830-63/1836-37/1838-18/1850-162/1860-146/Mal-
colm 60/ BM W13.
147. 1830-10/1836-12/1838-2/1850-143?/Lawrence Gallery,
1853, pl. 21/1860-147/Vaughan/BM W10.
148. Not identiﬁed.
149. 1814-260 i,ii/Phillipps-Fenwick/BM W38 and W84.
Presumably these two drawings were regarded by Wood-
burn as scraps and so were not offered to Oxford. There is
no indication of what other drawings might have been in
this lot of twelve items
150. Not identiﬁed.
151. Not identiﬁed.
152. Not exhibited in 1836/part of August 1838 pur-
chase?/1850-108 bought by Enthoven, 200 guilders/1860-
152/Chantilly, Mus´ee Cond´e; Lanfranc de Panthou, 1995,
no. 39.
153. Among these may have been 1830-139ii. Subsequently
Brussels, Wauters Collection (Lees, 1917, pp. 24-5, Fig. 32
as Michelangelo; red chalk, 265 × 188 mm)/Sold Christie’s
London, 8 April, 1986, lot 23/Seen by the compiler in a
French private collection c. 1992, bearing the Lawrence dry
stamp.
The three drawings carried by this page – studies of a head,
a left foot, and a left arm – are inspired by the Cross-bearing
ﬁgure in the Last Judgement, but they do not copy them
exactly. The page does not seem to the compiler plausible
as a copy of a lost page by Michelangelo, and it is probably
a suite of variants upon this ﬁgure by an artist working in
Rome c. 1550. It might be by Passerotti.
154. The Samson and Delilah may be Phillipps-Fenwick
(Popham, 1935b, p. 65, no. 3)/BM W90; however, Wilde
identiﬁes this as part of lot 1860-1084.
155. Not identiﬁed.
156. Not identiﬁed.
157. Not identiﬁed.
158. Not identiﬁed.
159. 1830-46?. See 1830-46 for further details.
160. 1830-3 (with account of previous history)/1836-30/
part of August 1838 purchase/1850-212/1860-160/Malcolm
81/BM W75.

448
APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
161. Not identiﬁed.
162. BM Add Ms. 23744, C. I. Carteggio CDXLVIII.
2nd day; Tuesday, June 5
270. 1830-45ii/Probably Frankfurt, St¨adelsches Kunstinsti-
tut, Inv. 3975. Perhaps by Alessandro Allori rather than
Clovio.
403. Among these was 1814-1679i/ bought by William
Roscoe; his sale, September 1816, lot 71/Sir Thomas
Phillipps-Fenwick-BM GP 135 as Battista Franco. See 1814-
1679i for further details.
404. These are presumably:
i. 1830-68 ii.
ii. A second copy, more likely that formerly in the Payne-
Ott Collection, than that now in Portsmouth.
3rd day; Wednesday, June 6
611. Not identiﬁed.
4th day; Thursday, June 7
669. The copy after Cascina: Phillipps-Fenwick Collection
(Popham, 1935b, p. 65, no. 2)/BM W85.
677. Not identiﬁed.
789. P.-J. Mariette (L.1852), his sale, 1775, part of lot
1022/1830-125/Woodburn’s Rubens exhibition, 1835, no.
27/bought by Farrer/E. Galichon, his sale, Paris, 10–14 May
1875, lot 18, bought in/L. Galichon, his sale, Paris 4–9 March
1895, lot 12. Bequest of Jacques Petithory to the Mus´ee
Bonnat, Bayonne, Inv. CMNI 3147. See 1830-25 for further
details.
827. Richardson/Sir J. Reynolds/William Young Ottley,
1804-279ii/Woodburn’s seventh exhibition as Andrea Del
Sarto, no. 79/The Marquess of Northampton, Castle
Ashby, Northampton; his sale at Christie’s London, 1 May
1959, lot 6/P. & D. Colnaghi, London/N. Embiricos,
London/Christie’s, New York, 24 January 2001, lot 8, as
Salviati; 2003 with Jean-Luc Baroni, London; red chalk,
422 × 211 mm. See 1804-279ii for further details.
830.
i. Not identiﬁed.
ii. Probably Richardson/Sir J. Reynolds?/William Young
Ottley, 1804-279iii/1830-143ii/ bought by Sir Robert
Ker £1.10s/Admiral Sir George King-Hall, 1930/Mrs B.
McLeod; sale at Sotheby’s, London, 27 October, 1948, lot
67/bought by de Belleroche, £36/Untraced. See 1804-
279iii for further details.

F
WOODBURN SALE, CHRISTIE’S LONDON, 1854
Comprising the entire collections with the exception of the
Lawrence Drawings. 16 June 1854 and nine following days.
3rd day; Monday, June 19
607. Not identiﬁed.
4th day; Tuesday, June 20
853. Not identiﬁed.
866. Not identiﬁed.
5th day; Wednesday, June 21
1069. Not identiﬁed.
1070. Not identiﬁed.
1071. Not identiﬁed.
1072. Not identiﬁed.
1073. Not identiﬁed.
8th day; Saturday, June 24
m. agnolo
1774. Not identiﬁed.
1775. Not identiﬁed.
1776. Not identiﬁed.
1777. Not identiﬁed.
1778. Not identiﬁed.
1779. Not identiﬁed.
1780. Not identiﬁed.
1781. Absent.
1782. Not identiﬁed.
1783. Not identiﬁed.
1784. Not identiﬁed. Presumably a copy after Michelan-
gelo’s Presentation Drawing for Gherardo Perini, Ufﬁzi
601E/B187/Corpus 306.
1785. 1860-1149?. The discrepancy in price between 1854
and 1860 is surprising if the two items are identical.
1786. 1860-1148.
1787. 1860-1147/Perhaps identical with the copy of the
Tityus, sold Christie’s, London, 18 April 1967, lot 109 and
again on 8 April 1986, lot 6 as by a Follower of Michelangelo,

APPENDIX 2. THE LAWRENCE COLLECTION OF DRAWINGS
449
black chalk, 190 × 220 mm, from the collections of N.
Lanier (L.2886), Sir Joshua Reynolds (L.2364), Unknown
French? collector (L.1729), and Victor Koch.
1788. 1860-1146.
It seems that 1787 and 1788 cost £2.12.6. together.
1789. Not identiﬁed.
1790. Not identiﬁed.
1791. Not identiﬁed.
Those drawings from Woodburn’s own collection remain-
ing with his legatee after the sales of 1854 were disposed of
following the sale of the Lawrence Collection in 1860: The
Remaining Portion of the Collection of Drawings of Samuel
Woodburn, Christie’s, London, 12 June 1860, and two fol-
lowing days, which form days 8, 9, and 10 of the Lawrence
sale.
June 12
1078. Not identiﬁed.
1084. Not identiﬁed.
1145. A puzzling reference; Michelangelo is not known to
have treated this subject.
1146. 1854-1788?
1147. 1854-1787. See 1854-1787 for further details.
1148. 1854-1786.
1149. 1854-1785?. From the price realised, this must have
been an impressive sheet. The discrepancy in price between
1854 and 1860 is surprising if the two items are identical.
1150. Ottley, Italian School, plate facing p. 27/Unidentiﬁed
in the 1830 inventory/ Unexhibited in 1836/J. C. Robin-
son/Malcolm 66/BM W34.
Because this drawing does not bear Lawrence’s stamp, can-
not be identiﬁed in the 1830 inventory, was unexhibited in
1836, and cannot be traced in the King of Holland’s collec-
tion, it is one of very few drawings by Michelangelo or his
studio owned by Ottley that did not pass to Lawrence. It
was presumably acquired by Woodburn directly or indirectly
from whomever acquired it from Ottley.
1151. Not identiﬁed.
1152. Not identiﬁed.
1153. Not identiﬁed.
1154. Not identiﬁed.


 list of former owners
References are to catalogue numbers
Dezzio Azzolini, 1623–1689: 1?, 2?,
26.
John Barnard, 1709–1784: 80.
Filippo Baldinucci, 1625–1696: 95, 102.
Ralph Bernal, ﬂ. twentieth century?: 82.
Alfred Beurdeley, 1847–1919 (L.421): 63.
The Bona Roti Collector, late sixteenth
century: 1?, 2, 5, 20?, 26, 44, 45, 47, 57.
The Borghese Family: 17.
Giuseppe Bossi, 1777–1815: 65.
The Buonarroti Family: 1?, 3, 4, 5?, 6, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 25, 27, 29,
30, 31, 34?, 35, 36, 37?, 38, 39, 41, 42, 49,
54, 55, 56, 57?, 69?, 73, 75, 84?, 90?, 93?,
101?, 114?.
Bernardo Buontalenti, c. 1531–1608: 55,
56.
Hans Calmann, 1899–1982: 105, 106.
William Carey(pseudonym Watson), ﬂ. c.
1820: 51, 52, 53, 108.
Bartolommeo Cavaceppi, 1716–1799: 22?,
34?, 45?, 46?, 47, 48, 50?, 51?, 52?, 53?,
90?, 103.
Pseudo-Caylus (L.474): 92.
Giuseppe Cesari, called Il Cavaliere
d‘Arpino, 1568–1640: 22?, 34?, 45?, 46?,
48?, 50?, 51?, 52?, 53?.
Arthur Harington Champernowne,
1769–1819: 33.
Queen Christina of Sweden, 1626–1689:
1?, 2?, 26.
Filippo Cicciaporci, ﬂ. mid eighteenth
century: 22?, 34?, 45?, 46?, 47, 48, 50?,
51?, 52?, 90?, 103.
Count Leopoldo Cicognara, 1767–1834:
65.
Richard Cosway, 1740–1821 (L.628): 78,
96.
C. M. Cracherode, 1730–1799: 80.
Pierre Crozat, 1665–1740 (no stamp; but his
drawings often bear an inventory number):
1, 2, 18, 26?, 66?, 70?, 76, 110?, 111.
D. Daulby, late eighteenth century (L.736a)
(without stamp): 80.
Baron Dominique-Vivant Denon,
1747–1825 (L.779): 22, 28, 40.
Thomas Dimsdale, 1758–1823 (L.2426): 1,
66, 76, 110.
Francis Douce, 1757–1834 (L.689): 94, 95,
102, 104.
Rev. Robert Finch, 1783–1830: 92.
Graf Moritz von Fries (le comte de Fries),
1777–1826 (L.2903): 101, 111.
William Gibson, ?–1703: 7.
Lamberto Gori, 1730–1801: 100?
The Greek Inscriber, ﬂ. later sixteenth
century: 62, 70.
Chambers Hall, 1786–1855 (L.551): 97.
Lord Hampden, 1749–1824 (L.2837):
59.
Jeremiah Harman, 1764–1844 (no stamp):
60, 89, 98, 99.
F. W. Hope, 1797–1862 (L.Supp.1266b):
107.
Richard Houlditch, ?–1736 (L.2214): 87.
Thomas Hudson, 1701–1779 (L.2432):
112.
The Irregular Numbering Collector, ﬂ.
later sixteenth century?: 1?, 2?, 5?, 20, 26?,
45, 57.
Everard Jabach, 1610–1695: 18?, 66?
Gerhard Michael Jabach, ?–1751: 66?
William Kent, 1685–1746 (or William
Kent), ﬂ. 1742–1761: 70, 113.
Le Marquis de Lagoy, 1764–1829 (L.1710):
18, 110. Without stamp: 1, 66, 76, 111.
Nicholas Lanier, 1588–1666 (L.2885):
59?.
Sir Thomas Lawrence, PRA, 1769–1830
(L.2445): 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 22, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30,
31, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44,
46, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59,
61, 62, 64, 65, 66, 67, 69, 72, 75, 77, 78,
79, 81, 84, 85, 86, 88, 90, 100, 103, 108,
109, 110, 111, 113, 114. Without stamp: 17,
20, 21, 23, 24, 28, 33, 41, 45, 47, 58, 68,
70, 71, 73, 74, 76, 87, 91, 93, 96, 101, 112.
Sir Peter Lely, 1618–1680 (L.2092): 87;
without stamps: 7?, 113?, 114?.
Pierre-Jean Mariette, 1694–1774 (L.1852):
1, 18, 66, 76, 110, 111.
Antonio Mini, 1506–1533/34: 18?, 28?
The Dukes of Modena: 32.
The King of Naples: 21.
Don Livio Odescalchi, Duke of
Bracciano, 1657–1713: 1, 2?, 26.
William Young Ottley, 1771–1836: 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 21,
23, 24, 29, 30, 33, 36, 37, 41, 44, 45, 46,
47, 48, 50, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58, 59?, 62,
67, 70, 74, 75, 77, 81, 86, 91, 93, 100, 103,
108?, 109, 113?, 114?
Paignon-Dijonval, 1708–1792: 64, 72.
Dr E. Peart, 1756/8–1824: 80.
Carlo Prayer, 1826–1900: 63.
Francesco Primaticcio, 1504–1570: 18?
Uvedale Price, 1747–1829: 113.
Padre Sebastiano Resta, 1635–1714: 104.
Narcisse Revil, ?–1844 (L.2138): 23.
Sir Joshua Reynolds, PRA, 1723–1792
(L.2364): 20, 26, 43, 70, 71, 85, 87, 88, 94,
109, 112, 113. Without stamp: 68.
Daniele Ricciarelli, called Daniele da
Volterra, 1511–1566: 22?, 34?, 44?, 45?,
46?, 47?, 50?, 51?, 52?, 53?
Jonathan Richardson, Senior, 1665–1745
(L.2183): 78, 112. (L.2184): 33, 43, 80, 86,
87, 113. Without stamp: 7, 77, 104.
Jonathan Richardson, Junior, 1694–1771,
Without stamp: 104, 113?.
J. van Rijmsdijk, ﬂ. c. 1770 (L.2167): 92.
Giacomo Rocca, ﬂ. c. 1560–c. 1595: 22?,
34?, 46?, 50?, 51?, 52?, 53?.
The Roman Numeral Collector: ﬂ. late
sixteenth century: 56.
William Roscoe, 1753–1831: 51, 52, 53, 77,
108.
Mrs. R. A. Ryall, ﬂ. mid-twentieth
century: 80.
Joachim Sandrart, 1606–1688: 1?, 2?, 26.
Pieter Spiering van Silfvercroon, ? –1653:
1, 2, 26.
John, Second Earl Spenser, 1734–1783
(L.1531): 33.
John Talman, 1677–1726 (L.2462): 105,
106.
Henry Trench 1685–1726: 33?
Antonio Tronsarelli, 1520s-1601: 5?, 17.
Unidentiﬁed Collector (L.1418): 70.
Unidentiﬁed Collectors: 57, 59, 92, 94.
Unrecorded: 83.
451

452
LIST OF FORMER OWNERS
Giorgio Vasari, 1511–1572: 80.
Marcello Venusti, 1512–1579: 47?
Lord Vernon, ﬂ. later eighteenth century?:
80.
? Walker, ﬂ. c. 1820: 77.
Benjamin West, PRA, 1738–1820 (L.419):
7.
Jean-Baptiste Wicar, 1762–1834: 2?, 3?, 4?,
6, 8, 19, 25, 27, 29, 30?, 31, 34, 35, 37?, 38,
39, 41?, 42, 44?, 49, 54, 55?, 56?, 57, 69?,
73, 75?, 79, 84, 90, 114?.
Samuel Woodburn, 1786–1853: 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40,
41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51,
52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62,
64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74,
75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 81, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88,
89, 90, 91, 93, 96, 98, 99, 100, 101, 103,
108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114.

 concordance to the major catalogues
of michelangelo’s drawings
Parker II
Robinson
Berenson
Frey
Thode
Dussler
Hartt
Tolnay
Cat.
42
39
1565
223b
44
—
—
7
8
82
86
—
—
—
—
—
—
113
90
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
107
237
87
—
—
—
—
—
—
110
291
22
1561
—
406
193
9/16
17
1
292
21
1560
—
405
192
17/18
18
2
293
18
1558
141
402
191
30
102
4
294
16
1556
132
400
190
31
103
5
295
17
1557
142
401
603
34
39
6
296
19
1559
201/2
403
344
35/32
41
7
297
23
1562
3/156
407
194
89/54
157
18
298
27
1563
—
416
612
—
161
17
299
24
1702
151/2
408
604
121/117
166
9
300
24
1702
151/2
409
605
119/122
167
10
301
24
1702
151/2
410
606
110A/114
168
11
302
24
1702
151/2
411
607
123/110
169
12
303
25
1703
153/4
412
608
120/113
170
13
304
25
1703
153/4
413
609
118/123A
171
14
305
25
1703
153/4
414
610
115/116
172
15
306
25
1703
153/4
415
611
111/112
173
16
307
42.2
1709
213a/4a
425
621
158/219
187
25
308
40
1566
143
423
345
222/286
191
39
309
6
1548
216/7
390
598
228/293
213
27
310
7
1549
218
391
599
227
212
26
311
49
1713
135/6
432
199
347
260
38
312
48.2
1567
138c
430
197
196
522
19
313
48.3
1567
138b
431
198
166
249b
3
314
8
1550
193/4
392
340
294/295
295
20
315
10
1552
172b
394
342
363
323
31
316
9
1551
—
393
341
161/303
328
29
317
45
1712
144/5
428
196/622
302/312
237
30
318
29
1564
51
417
195
257/412
266
34
319
55
1718
—
(434)
624
466
297
35
320
53.1
1568
178
433
346
188
304
36
321
71
1573
279c
445
350
170
83b
37
322
11
1553
—
395
600
310
310
32
323
13
1555
133/4
398
343
191/311
96
28
324
31
1705
—
p. 210
614
155
100
23
325
30
1704
—
418
613
160
98
22
326
1
1545
197
387
596
—
9
33
327
2
1546
—
388
597
—
8
24
328
69
1571
157/8
441
200/630
456C/473
374
46
453

454
CONCORDANCE TO THE MAJOR CATALOGUES OF MICHELANGELO’S DRAWINGS
Parker II
Robinson
Berenson
Frey
Thode
Dussler
Hartt
Tolnay
Cat.
329
67
1570/1724
195/6
440
629
382/71
362
41
330
58
1568A
148/9
435
625
380/381
361
42
331
77
1577
200a
450
631
400
383
43
332
80
II, p. 204 n. 2
271
452
633
382/494
605
56
333
81
II, p. 204 n. 2
272/3
453
634/352
495/483
589
55
334
60.1
1569/1
—
436
347
505/506
430
53
335
60.2
1569/2
—
437
348
508
428
51
336
60.3
1569/3
—
438
349
507
427
52
337
75
1576
225/6
449
351
289/397
402
44
338
70.3
1572B
—
444
203
469/470
369
45
339
70.1
1572
239
442
201
459
433
48
340
70.2
1572A
240
443
202
448
404
47
341
5
1547
201b/203
389
189
401/411
381
49
342
37
2491
150
420
616
456
431
40
343
72
1574
180
446
204
426/427
415
57
344
82
II, p. 204 n. 2
168/9
454
207
501/519
601
54
345
74
1575
140
448
205
435
400
50
346
15
—
—
—
—
—
—
59
347
32
1706
—
(419)
—
—
—
60
348
53.2
—
—
sub394
—
—
—
62
349
—
—
—
424)
—
—
—
63
350
41
1708A
—
(424)
—
—
—
64
351
14
2490A
—
—
—
—
—
65
352
73
1724A
—
(447)
—
—
—
67
353
172
—
—
—
158
—
303b
61
354
47
—
—
—
—
—
—
84
355
46
—
—
—
—
—
—
85
356
36
—
—
—
—
—
—
86
357
68
—
—
—
—
—
—
87
358
34
—
—
—
—
—
—
88
359
35
—
—
—
—
—
—
89
360
26
—
—
—
—
—
—
90
361
28
—
—
—
—
—
—
91
362
65
—
—
—
—
—
—
93
363
64
—
—
—
—
—
—
96
364
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
97
365
62
—
—
—
—
—
—
98
366
61
—
—
—
—
—
—
99
367
63
—
—
—
—
—
—
100
368
60.4
—
—
—
627
—
365
101
368∗
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
104
369
78
—
—
—
—
—
—
103
370
12.1
1554a
155a
396
601
—
150
68
371
85
—
—
—
—
—
—
108
372
42.1
Sub1709
p. 104
426
620
—
—
69
373
66
1723
—
—
—
—
—
70
374
12.2
1554b
—
397
602
—
129
71
375
39
1565
222
422
618
—
7
8
376
38
—
—
(421)
617
—
88
72
377
60.5
1722
—
(439)
—
—
—
73
378
79
1725
138a
(451)
623
—
—
74
378∗
48.1
1567/1
—
429
—
—
—
75
405
20
1701
—
—
—
—
—
77
406
43
1710
—
—
—
—
—
76
407
57
1720
—
—
—
—
—
109

CONCORDANCE TO THE MAJOR CATALOGUES OF MICHELANGELO’S DRAWINGS
455
Parker II
Robinson
Berenson
Frey
Thode
Dussler
Hartt
Tolnay
Cat.
408
44
1711
—
—
—
—
—
78
409
51
1715
—
—
—
—
—
111
410
52
1618
—
—
—
—
—
66
411
54
1717
—
—
—
—
—
79
412
3
—
—
(388A)
—
—
—
58
413
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
80
415
83
—
—
(455)
—
—
—
112
452
4
1699
—
—
—
—
—
114
624
151Raph.
—
—
—
—
—
—
81
App. A,
fol.
7
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
105
App. A,
fol.
174/68
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
106
Macandrew
A23
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
90
A24
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
94
A25
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
102
A26
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
95
355A
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
82
Blayney Brown
1814
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
83
Lloyd
A66C
76
1725A
—
—
—
—
389b
21


 concordance of ashmolean inventory numbers
with the present catalogue
Inventory
Cat.
Inventory
Cat.
Inventory
Cat.
1846.22
113
1846.77
43
1846.121
8
1846.33
110
1846.78
56
1846.122
72
1846.37
1
1846.79
55
1846.123
73
1846.38
2
1846.80
53
1846.124
74
1846.39
4
1846.81
51
1846.125
75
1846.40
5
1846.82
52
1846.126
77
1846.41
6
1846.83
44
1863.127
76
1846.42
7
1846.84
45
1846.128
109
1846.43
18
1846.85
48
1863.129
78
1846.44
17
1846.86
47
1863.130
111
1846.45
9
1846.87
49
1846.131
66
1846.46
10
1846.88
40
1846.132
79
1846.47
11
1846.89
57
1846.133
58
1846.48
12
1846.90
54
1846.134
112
1846.49
13
1846.91
50
1846.136
114
1846.50
14
1846.92
59
1846.259
81
1846.51
15
1846.93
60
1846.309
21
1846.52
16
1846.94
62
1855.128
97
1846.53
25
1846.95
64
1863.657
104
1846.54
39
1846.96
65
1863.769
94
1846.55
27
1846.97
67
1863.770
102
1846.56
26
1846.98
61
1863.771
95
1846.57
38
1846.99
84
WA 1942.55.686 106
1846.58
19
1846.100
85
WA 1944.102.7
105
1846.59
3
1846.101
86
1944.133
107
1846.60
20
1846.102
87
1953.138
80
1846.61
31
1846.103
88
1954.68
68
1846.62
29
1846.104
89
1963.22
82
1846.63
30
1846.105
90
1976.254
92
1846.64
34
1846.106
91
WA OA977
83
1846.65
35
1846.107
93
1846.66
36
1846.108
96
1846.67
37
1846.109
98
1846.68
32
1846.110
99
1846.69
28
1846.112
100
1846.70
23
1846.113
101
1846.71
22
1846.114
69
1846.72
33
1846.115
103
1846.73
24
1846.116
68
1846.74
46a,b
1846.117
108
1846.75
41
1846.119
70
1846.76
42
1846.120
71
457


 bibliography
abbate, 1965
F. Abbate, “L’attivit`a giovanile del Bachi-
acca ﬁno al viaggio romano del 1524–25,”
Paragone, 189, 1965, pp. 24–49.
ackerman, 1956
J. Ackerman, “Herbert Siebenhuener, Das
Kapitol in Rom, Idee und Gestalt,” The
Art Bulletin, XXXVIII, 1, March 1956,
pp. 53–7.
ackerman, 1961
J. Ackerman, The Architecture of Michelan-
gelo, 2 vols. (text and catalogue), London,
1961.
ackerman, 1964
J. Ackerman, The Architecture of Michelangelo,
Catalogue, 2nd ed., London, 1964.
ackerman and newman, 1970
J. Ackerman and J. Newman, The Archi-
tecture of Michelangelo with a Catalogue
of Michelangelo’s Works, Harmondsworth,
1970.
ackerman and newman, 1986
J. Ackerman and J. Newman, The Archi-
tecture of Michelangelo with a Catalogue of
Michelangelo’s Works, 2nd ed., Harmonds-
worth, 1986.
agosti and hirst, 1996
G. Agosti and M. Hirst, “Michelangelo,
Pietro d’Argenta and the ‘Stigmatisation
of St. Francis,’” The Burlington Maga-
zine, CXXXVII, 1123, October 1996,
pp. 683–4.
ames-lewis and joannides, 2003
F. Ames-Lewis and P. Joannides, eds., Reac-
tions to the Master, Michelangelo’s Effect on Art
and Artists in the Sixteenth Century, Alder-
shot, 2003.
androsov and baldini, 2000
S.
Androsov
and
U.
Baldini,
exhibi-
tion catalogue, L’Adolescente dell’Ermitage
e la Sagrestia Nuova di Michelangelo, Flo-
rence, Casa Buonarroti, 9 May–10 July
2000.
annesley and hirst, 1981
N. Annesley and M. Hirst, “‘Christ and the
Woman of Samaria,’ by Michelangelo,” The
Burlington Magazine, CXXIII, 943, October
1981, pp. 608–14.
argan, 1990
G. C. Argan, “Michelangelo architetto,” in
argan and contardi, 1990, pp. 6–35.
argan and contardi, 1990
G. C. Argan and B. Contardi, Michelangelo
Architetto, Milan, 1990.
aschoff, 1976
W. Aschoff, Studien zu Niccol`o Tribolo.
Inaugural-Dissertation zur Erlangen des
Doktorgrades der Johann-Wolfgang-Goe-
the-Universit¨at
Frankfurt/Main,
Berlin,
1967.
the athenaeum, 1836
Anonymous, “Review of the Exhibition
of Drawings by Michelangelo at Messrs.
Woodburns’ Gallery,” The Athenaeum, 16
July 1836 (cited from the reprint issued by
Woodburn as an unpaginated supplement
to his catalogues of the Lawrence Gallery).
bacou, 1981
R. Bacou, The Famous Italian Drawings from
the Mariette Collection at the Louvre in Paris,
Milan, 1981.
bacou and viatte, 1975
R. Bacou and F. Viatte, exhibition cata-
logue, Le petit Journal des grandes Expositions –
Michel-Ange au Louvre – les dessins, Expo-
sition LIX du Cabinet des Dessins, Paris,
Mus´ee du Louvre, 1975.
bacou et al., 1967
R. Bacou et al., exhibition catalogue, Le
Cabinet d’un Grand Amateur, P. J. Mari-
ette, 1694–1774, Paris, Mus´ee du Louvre,
1967.
bacou et al., 1978
R. Bacou, J.-C. Boyer, C. Monbeig Goguel,
F. Viatte et al., Mus´ee du Louvre, Cabinet des
Dessins, Repertoire systematique des fonds. Col-
lections I: Dessins de la collection Everard Jabach
acquis en 1671 pour la collection royale, Paris,
1978.
baglione, 1642
G. Baglione, Le vite de’ pittori, scultori ed
architetti. Dal Pontiﬁcato di Gregorio XIII
del 1572. In ﬁno ai tempi di Papa Urbano
Ottavo nel 1642, Rome, 1642. Reprinted
with commentary by hess and r¨ottgen,
1995.
baker, elam, and warwick, 2003
C. Baker, C. Elam, and G. Warwick eds.,
Collecting Prints and Drawings in Europe, c.
1500–1750, Aldershot, 2003.
balas, 1983
E. Balas, “Michelangelo’s Florentine‘Slaves,’
and the San Lorenzo Fac¸ade,” The Art Bul-
letin, LXV, 4, December 1983, pp. 665–
71.
balas, 1984a
E. Balas, “Michelangelo’s Slaves,” The Art
Bulletin, LXVI, 4, Winter 1984, pp. 673–8.
balas, 1984b
E. Balas, “A Hypothesis on Michelangelo’s
1505 Project of the Tomb of Julius II,”
Gazette des Beaux-Arts, 6e p´eriode, CIV,
1389, October 1984, pp. 109–12.
barbieri and puppi, 1964a
F. Barbieri and L. Puppi, Catalogo delle opere
architettoniche di Michelangiolo, pp. 813–973,
and Indice delle illustrazioni, pp. 999–1019, in
portoghesi and zevi, 1964.
barbieri and puppi, 1964b
F. Barbieri and L. Puppi, Tutta l’architettura
di Michelangelo, Milan, 1964.
p. barocchi, 1950
P. Barocchi, Il Rosso Fiorentino, Rome, 1950.
barocchi, 1961–2
P. Barocchi, exhibition catalogue, Mostra
di disegni di Michelangelo, exhibition XIII,
Gabinetto Disegni e Stampe degli Ufﬁzi,
Florence, 1961–2.
barocchi, 1962b
P. Barocchi, Michelangelo e la sua scuola,
i disegni di Casa Buonarrati e degli Ufﬁzi,
Florence, 1962.
barocchi, 1964a
P. Barocchi, Michelangelo e la sua scuola, i dis-
egni dell’Archivio Buonarroti, Florence, 1964.
barocchi, 1964b
P. Barocchi, exhibition catalogue, Michelan-
gelo, mostra di disegni, manoscritti e documenti,
Firenze, Casa Buonarroti-Biblioteca Lau-
renziana, Florence, 1964.
barocchi, 1964c
P. Barocchi, catalogue entries in salmi, de
tolnay, and barocchi, 1964.
459

460
BIBLIOGRAPHY
barocchi and ristori, 1967 (carteggio)
P. Barocchi and R. Ristori (edizione pos-
tuma di Giovanni Poggi), Il Carteggio di
Michelangelo, II, Florence, 1967.
barocchi, bramanti, and ristori, 1995
P. Barocchi, K. L. Bramanti, and R. Ris-
tori, Il carteggio indiretto di Michelangelo, II,
Florence, 1995.
barolsky, 1979
P. Barolsky, Daniele da Volterra. A catalogue
raisonn´e, New York and London, 1979.
baum, 1908
J. Baum, “Studien zu den Medicigr¨abern,”
Monatshefte f¨ur Kunstwissenschaft, I, 2, 1908,
pp. 1115–17.
baumgart, 1934
F. Baumgart, “Gli affreschi di Michelangelo,
parte storica e critica,” in baumgart and
biagetti, 1934, pp. 15–38.
baumgart, 1935a
F. Baumgart, “Contribuiti a Michelangelo,”
Bolletino d’Arte, XXVIII, series II, 1934–5,
February 1935, pp. 344–56.
baumgart, 1935b
F. Baumgart, “Die Piet`a Rondanini. Ein
Beitrage zu Erkenntnis des Altersstiles
Michelangelos mit einen Rekonstruktion
von Arno Brecker,” Jahrbuch der Preuszischen
Kunstsammlungen, LVI, 1935, pp. 44–56.
baumgart, 1937
F. Baumgart, “Die Jugendzeichungen Mic-
helangelos bis 1506,” Marburger Jahrbuch f¨ur
Kunstwisssenschaft, X, 1937, pp. 1–54.
baumgart and biagetti, 1934
F. Baumgart and B. Biagetti, Gli affreschi di
Michelangelo e di L. Sabbatini e F. Zuccari nella
Cappella Paolina in Vaticano, Vatican City,
1934.
bean, 1960 (bean)
J. Bean, Inventaire g´en´eral des dessins des
Mus´ees de Province. 4. Bayonne, Mus´ee Bon-
nat. Les dessins italiens de la collection Bonnat,
Paris, 1960.
bean and turcic, 1982 (bt)
J. Bean and L. Turˇci´c, 15th and 16th Century
Italian Drawings in the Metropolitan Museum
of Art, New York, 1982.
beaucamp, 1939
F. Beaucamp, Le peintre lillois Jean-Baptiste
Wicar (1762–1834). Son oeuvre et son temps, 2
vols., Lille, 1939.
b´eguin, 1990
S. B´eguin, No. 24: “Rosso Fiorentino:
A Woman’s Head in Proﬁle,” in sciolla,
1990, pp. 70–1.
b´eguin and giampaolo, 1979
S. B´eguin and M. Di Giampaolo, Maestri
Emiliana del Secondo Cinquecento, Biblioteca
di Disegni, XII, Florence, 1979.
bell, 1938
C. F. Bell, Annals of Thomas Banks, Sculptor,
Royal Academician. With Some Letters from Sir
Thomas Lawrence P. R. A. to Banks’s Daughter,
Cambridge, 1938.
bentini, 1989
J. Bentini, Disegni della Galleria Estense di
Modena, Modena, 1989.
bentini, 1998
J. Bentini, “La collezione di disegni dei
duchi d’Este a Modena,” in bentini, loisel
legrand et al., 1998, pp. 12–15.
bentini, loisel legrand, et al., 1998
J. Bentini, C. Loisel Legrand et al., exhi-
bition catalogue, Disegni da una Grande
Collezione. Antiche raccolte estensi dal Louvre
e dalla Galleria di Modena, Sassuolo, Palazzo
Ducale,
12
September–29
November
1998.
berenson, 1903
B. Berenson, The Drawings of the Florentine
Painters, 2 vols., London, 1903.
berenson, 1935
B. Berenson, “Andrea di Michelangelo e
Antonio Mini,” L’Arte, 1935, XXXVIII,
pp. 243–83 (reprinted in English in beren-
son, 1938, appendix XV).
berenson, 1938
B. Berenson, The Drawings of the Florentin
Painters, 3 vols., 2nd ed., Chicago, 1938.
berenson, 1961
B. Berenson, I Disegni dei Pittori Fiorentini,
3 vols., 3rd ed., Milan, 1961.
berti, 1965
L. Berti, “I Disegni,” in salmi et al., 1965,
pp. 389–507.
berti, cecchi, and natali, 1985
L. Berti, A. Cecchi, and A. Natali, Michelan-
gelo, I Disegni di Casa Buonarroti, Florence,
1985.
bertini, 1942
A. Bertini, Michelangelo ﬁno alla Sistina,
Turin, 1942.
bicart-see and dupuy, 1999–2000
L. Bicart-S´ee and M.-A. Dupuy, “Vivant
Denon Collectionneur. Dessins des diverses
Ecoles,” in p. rosenberg et al., 1999–2000,
pp. 451–69.
birke and kertesz, 1992–7 (bk)
V. Birke and J. Kertesz, Die Italienischen
Zeichnungen der Albertina. Generalverzeichnis,
4 vols., Vienna-Cologne-Weimar 1992–7.
Band I. Inventar 1–1200, 1992; Band II. Inven-
tar 1201–2400, 1994; Band III. Inventar 2401–
14325, 1995; Band IV. Inventar 14326–42255,
1997.
bjurstr¨om, loisel, and pilliod, 2002
P. Bjurstr¨om, C. Loisel, and E. Pilliod,
Drawings in Swedish Public Collections, 8.
Italian Drawings, Florence, Siena, Modena,
Bologna, Stockholm, 2002.
black, 1875
C. C. Black, Michael Angelo Buonarroti,
Sculptor, Painter, Architect. The Story of his Life
and Labours, London, 1875.
blanc, 1876
C. Blanc, ed., L’œuvre et la vie de Michel-
Ange, dessinateur – sculpteur – peintre – archi-
tecte et po`ete, Paris, 1876.
blayney brown, 1982
D. Blayney Brown, Ashmolean Museum
Oxford. Catalogue of the Collection of Draw-
ings, Volume IV. The Earlier British Drawings:
British Artists and Foreigners Working in Britain
Born Before c. 1775, Oxford, 1982.
blunt, 1971
A. Blunt, “Supplements to the Catalogues
of Italian and French Drawings with a His-
tory of the Royal Collection of Drawings,”
in schilling and blunt, 1971
bober, 1963
P. Bober, “The Census of Antique Works
of Art Known to Renaissance Artists,” The
Renaissance and Mannerism. Studies in West-
ern Art. Acts of the Twentieth International
Congress of the History of Art, 3 vols., Prince-
ton, 1963, II, pp. 82–9.
bober and rubinstein, 1986
P. Bober and R. Rubinstein, Renaissance
Artists and Antique Sculpture: A Handbook of
Sources, London, 1986.
bonsanti, 1992
G. Bonsanti, “Michelangelo as a Painter
before the Sistine Ceiling,” in marani,
1992, pp. 279–305.
bonsanti, 1999–2000
G. Bonsanti, “The Settignano Triton,” no.
12 in weil-garris brandt et al., 1999–2000,
pp. 220–1.
borenius and wittkower, 1937
T. Borenius and R. Wittkower, Catalogue of
the Collection of Drawings by the Old Masters
Formed by Sir Robert Mond, London, 1937.
borghini, 1584
R. Borghini, Il Riposo, Florence, 1584.
borland, 1961
P. Borland, “A Copy by Venusti after
Michelangelo,” The Burlington Magazine,
CIII, 703, October 1961, pp. 433–4.
borough johnson, 1908
E. Borough Johnson, The Drawings of
Michelangelo, London, 1908.
borsi et al., 1976
F. Borsi, C. Acidini, F. M. Pisani, and
G. Morolli, Giovanni Antonio Dosio, Roma
Antica e i Disegni di Architettura agli Ufﬁzi,
Rome, 1976.
bostr¨om, 2002–3
A. Bostr¨om, entry 134, in chiarini, darr,
and giannini, 2002–3, p. 293.
braun and cie, 1923
Braun and Cie, Choix de cinquante dessins de
Michel-Angelo, Paris, 1923.
brejon de lavergn´ee, 1987
A. Brejon de Lavergn´ee, L’inventaire Le Brun
de 1683. La collection des tableaux de Louis XIV,
Paris, 1987.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
461
brejon de lavergn´ee, 1997
B. Brejon de Lavergn´ee, Catalogue des dessins
italiens. Collections du Palais de Beaux-Arts de
Lille, Paris, 1997.
brinckmann, 1925
A. E. Brinckmann, Michelangelo Zeichnun-
gen, Munich, 1925.
briquet, 1907
C. M. Briquet, Les Fligranes, 4 vol., Paris,
1907.
brooke, 1998–9
X. Brooke, exhibition catalogue and inven-
tory, Mantegna to Rubens. The Weld-Blundell
Drawings Collection, Liverpool, Walker Art
Gallery and London, British Museum,
1998–9.
brown, 1991
C. M. Brown, “Paintings in the Collec-
tion of Cardinal Ercole Gonzaga: After
Michelangelo’s Vittoria Colonna Draw-
ings, and by Bronzino, Giulio Romano,
Fermo Ghisoni, Parmigianino, Sofonisba
Anguissola, Titian and Tintoretto,” Giulio
Romano. Atti del convegno Internazionale di
studi su “Giulio Romano e l’espansione europea
del Rinascimento,” Mantua, Palazzo Ducale,
Teatro scientiﬁco del Bibiena, 1–5 October 1989,
Mantua, 1991, pp. 203–26.
brugnoli, 1964
M. V. Brugnoli, I grandi Maestri del disegni:
Michelangelo, Milan, 1964.
brugnoli pace, 1967
M. V. Brugnoli Pace, “Un modello antico
e dei disegni attribui a Michelangelo,”
Essays in the History of Art Presented to
Rudolf Wittkower, D. Fraser, H. Hubbard
and M. J. Lewine, eds., London, 1967, pp.
104–9.
burroughs, 1925
B. Burroughs, “Drawings by Michelan-
gelo for the Libyan Sibyl,” Bulletin of the
Metropolitan Museum of Art, XX, 1, January
1925, pp. 6–14.
buscaroli, 1959
R. Buscaroli, Michelangelo, Bologna, 1959.
bush (1967) 1976
V. Bush, The Colossal Sculpture of the Cin-
quecento, PhD thesis presented at Columbia
University,
1967,
New
York-London,
1976.
byam shaw, 1976 (jbs)
J. Byam Shaw, Drawings by Old Masters at
Christ Church, Oxford, Oxford, 1976.
cagliotti, 2000
F. Cagliotti, Donatello e i Medici. Storia del
David e della Giuditta, 2 vols., Florence,
2000.
calbi, 1986
E. Calbi, “A proposito di alcuni disegni per
la Storia dell’Arte di Seroux d’Agincourt,”
Paragone, XXXVII, 431–3, January–March
1986, pp. 121–6.
carli, 1942
E. Carli, Michelangelo, Bergamo, 1942 (2nd
ed., 1946).
carpiceci, 1991
A. C. Carpiceci, “Progetti di Michelangiolo
per la Basilica Vaticana,” Bollettino d’Arte,
LXXVI, serie VI, 68–9, July–October
1991 (published October 1992), pp. 23–
106.
carroll (1964) 1976
E. A. Carroll, The Drawings of Rosso
Fiorentino, PhD thesis presented at Harvard
University, January 1964, New York and
London, 1976.
cazort et al., 1996
M. Cazort et al., exhibition catalogue, The
Ingenious Machine of Nature. Four Centuries of
Art and Anatomy, The National Gallery of
Canada, Ottawa, 1996.
chˆatelet-lange, 1972
L. Chˆatelet-Lange, “Michelangelo’s Herku-
les in Fontainebleau,” Pantheon, XXX,
1972, pp. 455–68.
chˆatelet-lange, 1977
L. Chˆatelet-Lange, “Noch einmal zu Mich-
elangelos Herkules,” Pantheon, XXXV, 1,
January–March 1977, pp. 14–17.
chiarini, darr, and giannini, 2002–3
M. Chiarini, A. Darr, and C. Giannini,
exhibition catalogue, L’ombra del Genio,
Michelangelo e l’arte a Firenze, 1537–1631/
The Medici, Michelangelo and the Art of
Late Renaissance Florence, Florence, Palazzo
Strozzi, 13 June–29 September 2002; Chi-
cago, The Art Institute of Chicago, 9
November 2002–2 February, 2003; Detroit,
The Detroit Institute of Arts, 16 March–8
June 2003.
cionini-visani and gamulin, 1980
M. Cionini-Visani and G. Gamulin, Giorgio
Clovio, Miniaturist of the Renaissance, New
York, 1980.
clark, 1964
K. Clark, “Michelangelo Pittore,” Apollo,
LXXX, n.s. 34, December 1964, pp. 436–
45.
clark and balniel, 1930
K. Clark and D. Balniel, eds., exhibition cat-
alogue, Exhibition of Italian Art at Burlington
House, London, 1930.
clark and pedretti, 1969 (cp)
K. Clark and C. Pedretti, The Drawings of
Leonardo da Vinci in the Collection of Her
Majesty the Queen at Windsor Castle, 2nd ed.,
London, 1969.
clayton, 1996–8
M. Clayton, “The Provenance of the Draw-
ings by Michelangelo at Windsor Castle,” in
joannides, 1996–8, pp. 205–9.
clements, 1961
R. J. Clements, Michelangelo’s Theory of Art,
New York, 1961.
clements, 1963
R. J. Clements, Michelangelo: A Self-Portrait,
New Jersey, 1963.
clements, 1965
R. J. Clements, The Poetry of Michelangelo,
New York, 1965.
clifford, 2002
T. Clifford, “A Candelabrum by Michelan-
gelo. A Discovery at the Cooper-Hewitt,
National Design Museum in New York,”
Apollo, CLVI, n.s. 487, September 2002,
pp. 30–40.
clifford, grifﬁths, and royalton-kisch,
1978
T. Clifford, A. Grifﬁths, and M. Royalton-
Kisch, exhibition catalogue, Gainsborough
and Reynolds in the British Museum, The
Department of Prints and Drawings in the
British Museum, 1978.
colvin, 1903–7
S. Colvin, Selected Drawings from Old Masters
in the University Galleries and in the Library at
Christ Church at Oxford, Parts I–V, Oxford,
1903–7.
condivi-gori, 1746
A. Condivi, ed. A. F. Gori, Vita di Michelan-
gelo Buonarroti Pittore scultore architetto e gen-
tiluomo ﬁorentino . . . Seconda edizione corretta
ed accresciuta di varie annotazioni . . . Florence,
1746 [this prints on pp. 65–79 Mariette’s
letter to Gori with an account of the
Michelangelo drawings in France; see mari-
ette, 1851–62].
contardi, 1990
B. Contardi, “Catalogue entries,” in argan
and contardi, 1990.
coppel, 1996
S. Coppel, “Introduction, John Malcolm of
Poltalloch,” in royalton-kisch, chapman,
and coppel, 1996, pp. 7–20.
cordellier, 1986–7
D. Cordellier, exhibition catalogue, Hom-
mage `a Andrea del Sarto, exposition 88 du
Cabinet des Dessins. Paris, Mus´ee du Lou-
vre, 1986–7.
cordellier, 1988–9
D. Cordellier, “Le Peintre and le Po`ete,” in
exhibition catalogue, De Niccol`o dell ’Abate
`a Nicolas Poussin: aux sources du Classicisme,
1550–1650, Meaux, Mus´ee Bossuet, 1988–9
(2nd ed., 1989), pp. 34–46.
cordellier, 1991
D. Cordellier,
“Fragments de jeunesse:
deux dessins in´edites de Michel-Ange au
Louvre,” Revue du Louvre and des Mus´ees
de France, XLI, 2, May 1991, pp. 43–
55.
cordellier and py, 1992
D. Cordellier and B. Py, Mus´ee du Louvre,
D´epartement des Arts Graphiques: Inventaire
G´en´eral des Dessins Italiens, V. Rapha¨el, son
atelier, ses copistes, Paris, 1992.

462
BIBLIOGRAPHY
costamagna, 1990
Ph. Costamagna, cat. no. 22, pp. 56–7, in
ramade, 1990.
costamagna, 1991
Ph.
Costamagna,
“L’´etude
d’apr`es
les
maˆıtres et le rˆole de la copie dans la forma-
tion des artistes `a Florence au XVIe si`ecle,”
in ramade, 1991, pp. 51–9.
costamagna, 1992
Ph. Costamagna, “A propos du s´ejour ﬂo-
rentin de Giulio Clovio,” Kunst des Cin-
quecento in der Toskana (actes du congr`es en
l’honneur de Sylvie B´eguin, Florence, 24–27
Octobre 1989), Munich, 1992, pp. 168–75.
costamagna, 1995
P. Costamagna, Pontormo, Paris, 1995.
coughlan, 1964
R. Coughlan, The World of Michelangelo,
New York, 1964.
the court journal, 1836
Anonymous, “Review of the Exhibition
of Drawings by Michelangelo at Messrs.
Woodburns’ Gallery,” The Court Journal,
23, July 1836 (cited from the reprint by
Woodburn issued as an unpaginated sup-
plement to his catalogues of the Lawrence
Gallery).
coutts, 1990
H. Coutts, “A Copy of a Lost Drawing
by Michelangelo,” The Burlington Maga-
zine, CXXXII, no. 1044, March 1990, p.
215.
cox-rearick, 1964
J. Cox-Rearick, The Drawings of Pontormo,
Cambridge, Mass., 1964 (2nd ed., 1981).
cox-rearick, 1995
J. Cox-Rearick, The Collection of Francis I:
Royal Treasures, New York, 1995.
cropper, 1994
E. Cropper, ed., Florentine Drawing at the
Time of Lorenzo the Magniﬁcent. Papers from
a Colloquium Held at the Villa Spelman, Flo-
rence, 1992, Bologna, 1994.
cuzin and dupuy, 1993
J.-P. Cuzin and M.-A. Dupuy, exhibition
catalogue, Copier Cr´eer, Paris, Mus´ee du
Louvre, 26 April–26 July 1993.
d’achiardi, 1908
R.
D’Achiardi,
Sebastiano
del
Piombo,
Rome, 1908.
dacos, 1969
N. Dacos, La D´ecouverte de la Domus Aurea
et la Formation des Grotesques `a la Renaissance,
London-Leiden, 1969.
davies, 1998
H. Davies, “John Charles Robinson’s Work
at the South Kensington Museum, Part I.
The Creation of the Collection of Ital-
ian Renaissance Objects of the Museum of
Ornamental Art at the South Kensington
Museum, 1853–62,” Journal of the History of
Collections, 10, 2, 1998, pp. 169–88.
davies, 1999
H. Davies, “John Charles Robinson’s Work
at the South Kensington Museum, Part
II. From 1863 to 1867, Consolidation and
Conﬂict,” Journal of the History of Collections,
11, 1, 1999, pp. 95–118.
davies, 2001
H. Davies, “Sir John Charles Robinson and
John Malcolm of Poltalloch. Collecting Ital-
ian Old Master Drawings in Nineteenth-
Century England,” Apollo, CLIII, n.s. 469,
March 2001, pp. 35–42.
davis, 2002
C. Davis, “Michelangelo, Jacone and the
Confraternity of the Virgin Annunciate,
called ‘dell’Oriuolo’,” Apollo, CLVI, n.s.
487, September 2002, pp. 22–9.
de angelis d’ossat, 1965a
G. De Angelis d’Ossat, “L’opera Michelan-
giolesca,” in de angelis d’ossat and
pietrangeli, 1965, pp. 23–112.
de angelis d’ossat, 1965b
G. De Angelis d’Ossat, “L’Architettura
di Michelangelo,” in salmi et al., 1965,
pp. 277–388.
de angelis d’ossat and pietrangeli, 1965
G. De Angelis d’Ossat and C. Pietrangeli,
Il
Campidoglio
di
Michelangelo,
Milan,
1965.
degenhart and schmitt, 1968
B. Degenhart and A. Schmitt, Corpus der
Italienischen Zeichnungen, Teil I, Sud- und
Mittelitalien, 4 vols., Berlin, 1968.
delacre, 1935
M. Delacre, “Some Michelangelo draw-
ings,” The Burlington Magazine, LXVI, 387,
June 1935, pp. 278–84.
delacre, 1938
M. Delacre, Le Dessin de Michel-Ange, Brus-
sels, 1938.
de tolnay, 1927
C. de Tolnay (K. Tolnai), “Die Hand-
zeichnungen Michelangelos im Codex Vat-
icanus,” Repertorium f¨ur Kunstwissenschaft,
XLVIII, 3, 1927, pp. 157–205.
de tolnay, 1928a
C. de Tolnay (K. Tolnai), “Eine Sklaven-
skizze Michelangelos,” M¨unchner Jahrbuch
der Bildenden Kunst, NF, V, 1, 1928, pp. 70–
84.
de tolnay, 1928b
C. de Tolnay (K. Tolnai), “Die Handzeich-
nungen Michelangelos in Archivio Buonar-
roti,” M¨unchner Jahrbuch der Bildenden Kunst,
NF, V, 4, 1928, pp. 377–476.
de tolnay, 1930
C. de Tolnay (K. Tolnai), “Beitr¨age zu
den Sp¨aten Architektonischen Projeck-
ten Michelangelos,” Jahrbuch der Preussis-
chen Kunstsammlungen, LI, 1, 1930, pp.
1–48.
de tolnay, 1934
C. de Tolnay (C. Tolnay), “The Rondanini
Piet`a,” The Burlington Magazine, LXV, 379,
October 1934, pp. 146–57.
de tolnay, 1935
C. de Tolnay
(C. Tolnay), “Notes on
Drawings:
Michelangelo,”
Old
Master
Drawings, X, December 1935, p. 43.
de tolnay, 1943
C. de Tolnay, The Youth of Michelangelo,
Princeton, 1943 (2nd ed., 1947).
de tolnay, 1945
C. de Tolnay,
Michelangelo II: The Sistine
Chapel, Princeton, 1945.
de tolnay, 1948
C. de Tolnay, Michelangelo III: The Medici
Chapel, Princeton, 1948.
de tolnay, 1951
C. de Tolnay, Michel-Ange, Paris, 1951.
de tolnay, 1954
C. de Tolnay, Michelangelo IV: The Tomb of
Julius II, Princeton, 1954.
de tolnay, 1955
C. de Tolnay, “Un ‘Pensiero’ nuovo di
Michelangelo per il sofﬁtto della Libreria
Laurenziana,” Critica d’Arte, II, 9, May 1955,
pp. 237–40.
de tolnay, 1956
C. de Tolnay, “Unknown Sketches by
Michelangelo,” The Burlington Magazine,
XCVIII, 643, October 1956, pp. 379–80.
de tolnay, 1960
C. de Tolnay, Michelangelo V: The Final
Period, Princeton, 1960.
de tolnay, 1964a
C. de Tolnay, “L’ Hercule de Michel-Ange
a Fontainebleau,” Gazette des Beaux-Arts,
6e p´eriode, LXIV, 1148, September 1964,
pp. 125–40.
de tolnay, 1964b
C. de Tolnay,
“Morte e Resurezzione
in Michelangelo,” Commentari, 1964, XV,
pp. 43–7.
de tolnay, 1964c
C. de Tolnay, “Michelangelo,” Encyclopaedia
of World Art, IX, cols. 861–914, New York-
London-Toronto, 1964.
de tolnay, 1965
C. de Tolnay, “Minor Works,” in salmi
et al., 1965 (English ed., 1966), pp. 497–515.
de tolnay, 1966
C. de Tolnay, “Michelangelo a Firenze,” in
gronchi, 1966, pp. 3–22.
de tolnay, 1967a
C. de Tolnay, “La deposizione di Cristo, dis-
egno attribuito a Michelangelo a Haarlem,”
Pantheon, XXV, 1967, pp. 20–6.
de tolnay, 1967b
C. de Tolnay, “Sur des Venus desine´es par
Michel-Ange; `a propos d’un dessin oubli´e
du Mus´ee du Louvre,” Gazette des Beaux-
Arts, 6e p´eriode, LXIX, 1179, April 1967,
pp. 193–200.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
463
de tolnay, 1967c
C. de Tolnay, “Il tabernacolo per il Cristo
della Minerva,” Commentari, XVIII, 1,
1967, pp. 43–7.
de tolnay, 1967d
C. de Tolnay, catalogue entry in bacou et al.,
1967, pp. 74–5.
de tolnay, 1967e
C. de Tolnay, “Newly Discovered Draw-
ings Related to Michelangelo: The Scholz
Scrapbook in the Metropolitan Museum
of Art,” Stil und ¨Uberlieferung in der Kunst
des Abendlandes (Akten des 21. Internationalen
Kongresses der Kunstgeschichte, Bonn, 1964), II,
Berlin, 1967, pp. 64–8.
de tolnay, 1968a
C. de Tolnay, “Une composition de la
jeunesse de Michel-Ange, Hercule ´etouf-
fant le lion de N´em´ee, dessin au Mus´ee du
Louvre,” Gazette des Beaux Arts, 6e p´eriode,
LXXII, 1191, April 1968, pp. 205–12.
de tolnay, 1968b
C. de Tolnay, “Le Madonne di Michelan-
gelo. A proposito di due disegni della
Vergine col Bambino al Louvre,” Mitteilun-
gen des Kunsthistorischen Instituts in Florenz,
XIII, 1968, pp. 343–66.
de tolnay, 1968c
C. de Tolnay, “Le Madonne di Michelan-
gelo. Nuove ricerche sui disegni,” Accademia
Nazionali dei Lincei, Roma, Anno CCCLXV.
Problemi attuali di scienza e di cultura,
Quaderno 117 (Lecture of 9 February 1968)
Rome, 1968 (version of de tolnay 1968b
with slight changes).
de tolnay, 1969a
C. de Tolnay,
“Nuove osservazioni sulla
Cappella Medicea,” Accademia Nazionali dei
Lincei, Roma, Anno CCCLXVI. Problemi
attuali di scienza e di cultura, Quaderno 130,
Rome, 1969 (Italian version of 1969b).
de tolnay, 1969b
C. de Tolnay, “Nouvelles remarques sur la
chapelle M´edicis,” Gazette des Beaux Arts,
6e p´eriode, LXXIII, 1201, February 1969,
pp. 65–80 (French version of 1969a, with
slight changes).
de tolnay, 1971
C. de Tolnay, “Alcune Recenti Scoperte
e Risultati negli studi Michelangeleschi,”
Accademia Nazionali dei Lincei, Roma, Anno
CCCLXVIII. Problemi attuali di scienza e di
cultura, Quaderno 153, Rome, 1971.
de tolnay, 1972
C. de Tolnay, “I progetti di Michelangelo
per la facciata di S. Lorenzo a Firenze.
Nuove Ricerche,” Commentari, XXIII, 1–
11, January–June 1972, pp. 53–72.
de tolnay, 1973
C. de Tolnay, “La salamandra di Michelan-
gelo,” Antichit`a Viva, XII, 2, March–April
1973, pp. 3–5.
de tolnay, 1974
C. de Tolnay, “I disegni della giovent`u
di Michelangelo e un suo disegno ined-
ito nella Farnesina,” Accademia Nazionali
dei Lincei, Roma, Anno CCCLXXI. Prob-
lemi attuali di scienza e di cultura, Quaderno
193 (Lecture of 28 November 1973), Rome,
1974.
de tolnay, 1975
C. de Tolnay, Michelangelo, Princeton, 1975.
de tolnay, 1975–6
C. de Tolnay, exhibition catalogue, I dis-
egni di Michelangelo nelle Collezioni italiani,
Casa Buonarroti and Galleria degli Ufﬁzi,
Florence, 1975–6.
de tolnay, 1975–80 (corpus)
C. de Tolnay, Corpus dei disegni di Michelan-
gelo, 4 vols., Novara, 1975–80; I, 1975; II,
1976; III, 1978; IV, 1980.
de tolnay and brizio, 1980
C. de Tolnay and P. S. Brizio, exhibition
catalogue, Michelangelo e i Medici, Florence,
Casa Buonarroti, 15 March–15 May 1980.
de vecchi, 1984
P. de Vecchi, Michelangelo Pittore, Milan,
1984.
di stefano, 1980
R. Di Stefano, La Cupola di San Pietro, 2nd
ed., Naples, 1980.
l. donati, 2002
L. Donati, “Proposte per una datazione della
Scuola perfetta: la serie incisorie nelle rac-
colte romane,” Rivista dell’istituto nazionale
d’archeologia e storia dell’arte, III series, XXV,
57, 2002, pp. 323–44.
v. donati, 1989
V. Donati, Pietre Dure e Medaglie del Rinasci-
mento, Giovanni da Castel Bolognese, Ferrara,
1989.
dossi, 1999
B. Dossi, Albertina. The History of the Collec-
tion and Its Masterpieces, Munich-London-
New York, 1999.
dunkelman, 1980
M. Dunkelman, “Michelangelo’s earliest
drawing style,” Drawing, I, 6, March–April
1980, pp. 121–6.
dupuy, 1999–2000
M.-A. Dupuy, “Chronologie,” in p. rosen-
berg et al., 1999–2000, pp. 494–507.
dussler, 1942
L. Dussler, Sebastiano del Piombo, Basle,
1942.
dussler, 1959
L. Dussler, Die Zeichnungen des Michelangelo,
Kritischer Katalog, Berlin, 1959.
dussler, 1974
L. Dussler, Michelangelo – Bibliographie 1927–
1970, Weisbaden, 1974.
echinger-maurach, 1991
C. Echinger-Maurach, Studien zu Michelan-
gelos
Juliusgrabmal,
Hildesheim-Zurich-
New York, 1991.
echinger-maurach, 2000
C. Echinger-Maurach, “‘Gli occhi ﬁssi
nella
somma
bellezza
del
Figliuolo.’
Michelangelo im Wettstreit mit Leonardos
Madonna concetti der zweite Florentiner
Periode,” in rohlmann and thielemann,
2000, pp. 113–50.
edeline-badie, 1997
B. Edeline-Badie, La collection des tableaux
de Lucien Bonaparte, prince de Canino, Paris,
1997.
eisler, n.d. (c. 1980)
C. Eisler, exhibition catalogue, Sculptors’
Drawings over Six Centuries, New York,
Drawing Centre, n.d., c. 1980.
elam, 2001
C. Elam, exhibition catalogue, Design into
Architecture, Oxford, Christ Church Picture
Gallery, 2001.
fagan, 1883
L. Fagan, The Art of Michelangelo as Illus-
trated in the Various Collections in the British
Museum, London, 1883.
faietti and cordellier, 2001
M. Faietti and D. Cordellier, exhibition cata-
logue, Un si`ecle de dessin `a Bologne, 1480–1580.
De la Renaissance `a la r´eforme tridentine, Paris,
Mus´ee du Louvre, 3 March–2 July 2001.
falletti and nelson, 2002
F. Falletti and J. K. Nelson, exhibition cata-
logue, Venere e Amore. Michelangelo e la nuova
bellezza ideale/Venus and Love. Michelangelo
and the new ideal of beauty, Florence, Galleria
dell’Accademia, 26 June 2002–3 November
2002.
fanfani, 1876
P. Fanfani, Spigolatura Michelangiolesca, Pis-
toia, 1876.
fara, 1997
A. Fara,“La Chiesa di San Giovanni dei
Fiorentini a Rome nell’architettura di
Michelangelo,” Dialoghi, 4/5, December
1997, pp. 34–59.
fasolo, 1927
V. Fasolo, “Disegni architettonici di Michel-
angelo,” Architettura e arti decorative, VI, 9
and 10, May and June 1927, part 1, pp. 385–
401; part 2, pp. 433–56.
ferri and jacobsen, 1903
P.N. FerriandE. Jacobsen,“Disegniscono-
sciuti di Michelangelo,” Miscellanea d’Arte,
I, 1903, pp. 73–87.
ferri and jacobsen, 1905
P. N. Ferri and E. Jacobsen, Dessins Incon-
nus de Michel-Ange, r´ecemment d´ecouverts aux
Ofﬁces de Florence, Leipzig, 1905.
ﬁorio, 1992
M. T. Fiorio, “Broken Sculpture: Michelan-
gelo and the Aesthetics of the Fragment,”
in marani et al., 1992, pp. 69–84.
ﬁschel, 1921
O. Fischel, Dante und der K¨unstler, Berlin,
1921.

464
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ﬁsher, 1852
J. Fisher, Seventy Etched Fac-Similes on a
Reduced Scale after the Original Studies by
Michael Angelo and Raffaelle in the University
Galleries, Oxford, Oxford, 1852.
ﬁsher, 1862
J. Fisher, Eighty-Four Etched Fac-Similes on
a Reduced Scale after the Original Studies by
Michael Angelo and Raffaelle in the University
Galleries, Oxford, Oxford, 1862.
ﬁsher, 1865
J. Fisher,
Facsimiles of Original Studies by
Michael Angelo in the University Galleries,
Oxford. Etched by Joseph Fisher, London,
1865.
ﬁsher, 1872
J. Fisher,
Facsimiles of Original Studies by
Michael Angelo in the University Galleries,
Oxford. Etched by Joseph Fisher, London,
1872.
ﬁsher, 1879
J. Fisher, Drawings and Studies by Michelan-
gelo in the University Galleries, Oxford. New
Edition, revised and enlarged, London, 1879.
forlani tempesti, 1970
A. Forlani Tempesti, I Disegni di Maestri 1:
Capolavori del Rinascimento, il primo cinque-
cento toscano, Milan, 1970.
forlani tempesti, 1984
A. Forlani Tempesti, exhibition catalogue,
Raffaello e Michelangelo, Florence, Casa
Buonarroti, 21 January–30 April 1984.
forlani tempesti, 1992
A. Forlani Tempesti, “Avvio a Giovanni
Antonio Lappoli disegnatore,” in sciolla,
1992, pp. 94–105.
franklin, 2001
D. Franklin, Painting in Renaissance Florence,
1500–1550, New Haven and London, 2001.
franklin, 2005
D. Franklin, “A newly discovered draw-
ing by Pontormo,” The Burlington Magazine,
CXLVII, 1224, March 2005, pp. 180–2.
freedberg, 1971
S. J. Freedberg, Painting in Italy 1500–1600,
Harmondsworth, 1971.
d. frey, 1920
D. Frey, Michelangelo-Studien, Vienna, 1920.
d. frey, 1956
D. Frey, “Die Piet`a Rondanini und Rem-
brandts, ‘Drei Kreuze,’” Kunstgeschichtliche
Studien f¨ur H. Kaufmann, Berlin, 1956, pp.
208–32.
h. w. frey, 1951
H. W. Frey, “Zur Entstehungsgeschichte
des Statuenschmuckes der Medici-Kapelle
in Florenz. Eine Erl¨auterung des Briefes
Michelangelos vom 17. Juni 1526,” Zeitsch-
rift f¨ur Kunstgeschichte, XIV, 1951, pp. 40–
96.
k. frey, 1897
K. Frey, Die Dichtungen des Michelangiolo
Buonarroti, Berlin, 1897.
k. frey, 1907
K. Frey,
Michelagniolo Buonarroti, Quellen
und Forschungen zu seinen Gechichte und
Kunst. I, Michelangelos Jugendjahre, Berlin,
1907.
k. frey, 1909–11
K. Frey, Die Handzeichnungen Michelagniolos
Buonarroti. Herausgegeben und mit kritischem
Apparate, Berlin, 1909–11.
frommel, 1964
C. L. Frommel, “Antonio da Sangallos
Cappella Paolina. Ein Beitrag zur Bauge-
schichte des Vatikanichen Palasts,” Zeitschrift
f¨ur Kunstgeschichte, XXVII, 1964, pp. 1–
42.
frommel, 1979
C. L. Frommel, Michelangelo und Tommaso
de’ Cavalieri, Amsterdam, 1979.
gamba, 1945
C.
Gamba,
La
pittura
di
Michelangelo,
Novara, 1945.
gantner, 1920
J. Gantner, Michelangelo, die Beurteilung seiner
Kunst von Lionardo bis Goethe, dissertation,
Munich, 1920.
gardner, 1972
J. Gardner, “Review of Degenhart and
Schmitt, 1968,” The Burlington Magazine,
CXIV, January 1972, pp. 32–4.
garlick, 1989
K. Garlick, Sir Thomas Lawrence. A Complete
Catalogue of the Oil Paintings, Oxford, 1989.
garolfalo, 2000
C. Garofolo, exhibition catalogue, Da Raf-
faello a Rubens. Disegni della Fondazione
Horne, Florence, Museo Horne, 2000.
gatteschi, 1998
R. Gatteschi, Vita di Raffaello da Montelupo,
Florence, 1998.
gere, 1953
J. Gere, “William Young Ottley as a Collec-
tor of Drawings,” The British Museum Quar-
terly, XVIII, 1953, pp. 44–53.
gere, 1957
J. A. Gere, “Review of Parker, 1956,” The
Burlington Magazine, XCIX, 650, May 1957,
pp. 159–62.
gere and pouncey, 1983 (gp)
J. A. Gere and P. Pouncey, Italian Drawings
in the Department of Prints and Drawings in
the British Museum. Artists working in Rome,
c. 1550 to c. 1640, London, 1983.
gere and turner, 1975
J. A. Gere and N. Turner, exhibition cata-
logue, Drawings by Michelangelo in the Col-
lection of Her Majesty the Queen at Wind-
sor Castle, the Ashmolean Museum, the British
Museum and other English Collections, Lon-
don, the British Museum, 1975.
gere and turner, 1979
J. A. Gere and N. Turner, exhibition cata-
logue, Drawings by Michelangelo, New York,
Pierpont Morgan Library, 1979.
geym¨uller, 1904
H. von Geym¨uller, Michelangelo als Architekt,
Munich, 1904.
gibson-wood, 2000
C. Gibson-Wood, Jonathan Richardson, Art
Theorist of the English Enlightenment, New
Haven-London, 2000.
giglioli, 1938
O.
Giglioli,
“Un
Ritratto
di
Andrea
Quaratesi attribuito a Michelangelo,” Riv-
ista d’Arte, XX, serie II, X, 1938, pp. 174–81.
gilbert, 1963 and 1970
C. Gilbert, trans., Complete Poems and
Selected Letters of Michelangelo, New York,
1963 (cited in 2nd ed., 1970).
girardi, 1960 and 1967
E. N. Girardi, ed., Michelangiolo Buonarroti,
Rime, Bari, 1960 (cited in 2nd ed., 1967).
goldring, 1951.
D. Goldring, Regency Portrait Painter. The Life
of Sir Thomas Lawrence, P. R. A., London,
1951.
goldscheider, 1951
L.
Goldscheider,
Michelangelo
Drawings,
London, 1951.
goldscheider, 1965
L. Goldscheider, Michelangelo Drawings, 2nd
ed., London 1965.
gotti, 1875
A. Gotti, Vita di Michelangelo Buonarroti nar-
rata con l’aiuto di nuovi documenti, 2 vols., Flo-
rence, 1875.
gould, 1974
C. Gould, “Michelangelo’s ‘Entombment.’
A Further Addendum,” The Burlington Mag-
azine, CXVI, 880, January 1974, pp. 31–2.
gould, 1975
C. Gould, National Gallery Catalogues. The
Sixteenth Century Italian Schools, London,
1975.
grasselli, 1995–96
M. M. Grasselli, ed., exhibition catalogue,
The Touch of the Artist, Master Drawings from
the Woodner Collection, Washington, DC,
The National Gallery of Art, 1 October
1995–28 January 1996.
grassi, 1966
L. Grassi, “Due proposte per l’esordio di
Michelangelo,” Paragone, XVII, 197/17,
July 1966, pp. 56–62.
gregori, 1967
M. Gregori, “Italienische Meister,” in
sumowski et al., 1967, pp. 43–68.
grifﬁths, 1993
A. Grifﬁths, “Cassiano dal Pozzo’s Print
Collection,” in F. Haskell et al., The Paper
Museum of Cassiano dal Pozzo, catalogue of
an exhibition in the Prints and Drawings
Gallery of the British Museum, 14 May–30
August 1993, pp. 243–60.
griswold and wolk-simon, 1994
W. Griswold and L. Wolk-Simon, exhi-
bition catalogue, Sixteenth Century Italian

BIBLIOGRAPHY
465
Drawings in New York Collections, New York,
Metropolitan Museum of Art, 11 January–
27 March 1994.
gronau, 1919
G. Gronau, “Uber die Entstehungszeit eines
Studienblatts von Michelangelo,” Mitteilun-
gen des Kunsthistorischen Instituts in Florenz,
III, 1919, pp. 38–49.
gronchi, 1966
G. Gronchi, ed., Atti del Convegno di
Studi Michelangioleschi, Firenze – Roma 1964,
Rome, 1966.
gr¨unewald, 1907–9
A.
Gr¨unewald,
“Uber
einige
werke
Michelangelos in ihrem Verh¨altnisse zur
Antike,”
Jahrbuch
der
Kunsthistorischen
Sammlungen des Allerh¨ochsten Kaiserhauses,
XXVII, 1907–9, pp. 125–53.
guasti, 1863
C. Guasti, ed., Le Rime di Michelangelo
Buonarroti, Florence, 1863.
guazzoni, 1984
V. Guazzoni, Michelangelo scultore, Milan,
1984.
g¨use and perrig, 1997
E.-G. G¨use and A. Perrig, eds., exhibition
catalogue, Zeichnungen aus der Toskana: Das
Zeitalter Michelangelos, Saarbr¨ucken, Saar-
land Museum, 28 September–23 November
1997.
hadley, 1968
R. van Hadley, Drawings. The Isabella Stewart
Gardner Museum, Boston, 1968.
hardy, 1992
C. Hardy, Michelangelo and the Pauline
Modello: Art, Document and Odyssey, New
York, 1992.
harprath, 1976
R. Harprath, Maestri a Roma nel cinquecento,
Biblioteca di Disegni XV, Florence, 1976.
hartt, 1964
F. Hartt, Michelangelo Buonarroti. Paintings,
New York, 1964.
hartt, 1971
F. Hartt, The Drawings of Michelangelo,
London, 1971.
hartt, 1975
F. Hartt, Handlist of Newly Accepted Drawings
by Michelangelo, London, 1975.
haslam, 1996
R. Haslam, “Palazzo Sacchetti, Roma,”
Country Life, CXC, 27, 4 July 1996,
pp. 60–4.
hattori, 2003
C. Hattori, “The Drawings Collection of
Pierre Crozat, (1665–1740),” in baker, elam
and warwick, 2003, pp. 173–82.
haussherr, 1971
R. Haussherr, Michelangelos Kruziﬁxus f¨ur
Vittoria Colonna, Opladen, 1971.
haverkamp-begemann and logan, 1988
E. Haverkamp-Begemann and C. Logan,
exhibition catalogue, Creative Copies. Inter-
pretative Drawings from Michelangelo to Picasso,
New York, The Drawing Center, 9 April–
23 July 1988.
hekler, 1930
A. Hekler, “Michelangelo und die Antike,”
Wiener Jahrbuch f¨ur Kunstgeschichte, VII,
1930, pp. 201–23.
hess and r¨ottgen, 1995
J. Hess and H. R¨ottgen, eds., Giovanni
Baglione, Le Vite . . . , Ristampa Anastatica,
Variante-Postilli-Commenti, 3 vols., Vatican
City, 1995.
hibbard, 1975
H. Hibbard, Michelangelo, Harmondsworth,
1975.
hinterding and horsch, 1989
E. Hinterding and F. Horsch, “‘A Small
but Choice Collection’: The Art Gallery
of King Willem II of the Netherlands
(1792–1849),” Simiolus, XIX, 1/2, 1989,
pp. 5–122.
hirst, 1961
M. Hirst, “Francesco Salviati’s ‘Visitation,’”
The Burlington Magazine, CIII, 699, June
1961, pp. 236–40.
hirst, 1963
M. Hirst, “Michelangelo Drawings in Flor-
ence,” The Burlington Magazine, CV, 721,
April 1963, pp. 166–71.
hirst, 1967
M. Hirst, “Daniele da Volterra and the
Orsini Chapel. I. The Chronology and
the Altar-Piece,” The Burlington Magazine,
CIX, 774, September 1967, pp. 498–509.
hirst, 1975
M. Hirst, “A Drawing of ‘The Rape of
Ganymede’ by Michelangelo,” The Burling-
ton Magazine, CXVII, 864, March 1975,
p. 166.
hirst, 1981
M. Hirst,Sebastiano del Piombo, Oxford,
1981.
hirst, 1986a
M. Hirst, “‘Il modo degli attitudini,’
Michelangelo’s Oxford Sketchbook for the
Ceiling,” in pietrangeli et al., 1986,
pp. 208–17.
hirst, 1986b
M. Hirst, “I disegni di Michelangelo per La
Battaglia di Cascina,” in E.Borsook and F. S.
Gioffredi eds., Tecnica e Stile Chapel: esempi di
pittura murale del Rinascimento italiano, Milan,
1986, pp. 43–58.
hirst, 1988
M. Hirst, Michelangelo and His Drawings,
London, 1988.
hirst, 1988–9a
M. Hirst, exhibition catalogue, Michelan-
gelo Draftsman, Washington, D.C., National
Gallery of Art, 1988.
hirst, 1988–9b
M. Hirst, exhibition catalogue, Michel-Ange
Dessinateur, Paris, Mus´ee du Louvre, 1989
(French version of hirst 1998–9a, with a
supplement).
hirst, 1990
M. Hirst, catalogue entries in pietrangeli
et al., 1990.
hirst, 1992
M. Hirst, “Observations on Drawings for
the Sistine Ceiling,” in pietrangeli et al.,
1992, pp. 8–25.
hirst, 1994–5
M. Hirst, “The Artist in Rome 1496–
1501,” in exhibition catalogue, Making and
Meaning: The Young Michelangelo, The Na-
tional Gallery London, 19 October 1994–15
January 1995, pp. 13–82.
hirst, 2000
M.
Hirst,
“Michelangelo
in
Florence:
‘David’ in 1503 and ‘Hercules’ in 1506,” The
Burlington Magazine, CXLII, 1169, August
2000, pp. 487–92.
h¨oper, 1987
C. H¨oper, Bartolomeo Passerotti, 1529–1592, 2
vols., Worms, 1987.
howarth, 1985
D. Howarth, Lord Arundel and His Circle,
New Haven-London, 1985.
jacobsen, 1907
E. Jacobsen, “Die Handzeichnungen Mi-
chelangelos zu den Sixtina-Fresken. Kri-
tische Bemerkungen zum ersten anhang
von Steinmann, Die Sixtinsiche Kapelle
II,” Repertorium f¨ur Kunstwissenschaft, XXX,
1907, pp. 388–98, 490–500.
jaff´e, 1994
M. Jaff´e, The Devonshire Collection of Ital-
ian Drawings, Roman and Neapolitan Schools,
London, 1994.
janson, 1952
H. W. Janson, Apes and Ape Lore in the Middle
Ages and the Renaissance, London, 1952.
joannides, 1972
P. Joannides, “Michelangelo’s Medici Chap-
el, Some New Suggestions,” The Burling-
ton Magazine, CXIV, 833, August 1972,
pp. 541–51.
joannides, 1975
P. Joannides, “Michelangelo Drawings in
the British Museum,” The Burlington Mag-
azine, CXVII, 865, April 1975, pp. 257–
62.
joannides, 1977
P. Joannides, “Michelangelo’s Lost Hercu-
les,” The Burlington Magazine, CXIX, 893,
August 1977, pp. 550–5.
joannides, 1978
P. Joannides, “Review of de tolnay, 1975–
6,” The Art Bulletin, LVIII, 1, March 1978,
pp. 174–7.
joannides, 1981a
P. Joannides, “A Supplement to Michel-
angelo’s Lost Hercules,” The Burlington Mag-
azine, CXXIII, 934, January 1981, pp. 20–
3.

466
BIBLIOGRAPHY
joannides, 1981b
P. Joannides, “Review of de tolnay, 1975–
80,’” Art Bulletin, LXIII, 4, October 1981,
pp. 679–87.
joannides, 1991
P. Joannides, “A Newly Unveiled Drawing
by Michelangelo and the Early Iconography
of the Magniﬁci Tomb,” Master Drawings,
XXIX, 3, Autumn 1991, pp. 255–62.
joannides, 1992a
P. Joannides, “‘Primitivism’ in the Late
Drawings of Michelangelo,” in smyth,
1992, pp. 245–61.
joannides, 1992b
P. Joannides, “La Chronologie du Tombeau
de Jules II `a propos d’un dessin de Michel-
Ange d´ecouvert,” Revue du Louvre, XLI, 2,
May 1992, pp. 32–42.
joannides, 1993
P. Joannides, “Raphael, his studio and his
copyists,” Paragone, XLIV, 523–5, n.s. 41–
2, September–November 1993, pp. 3–29;
March 1978, pp. 174–7.
joannides, 1994a
P. Joannides, “A Propos d’une sanguine no-
uvellement attribu´ee `a Michel Ange (1475–
1564). La connaissance des dessins de l’artiste
en France au XVIe si`ecle,” Revue du Louvre,
XLIII, 3, June 1994, pp. 15–29.
joannides, 1994b
P.
Joannides,
“Drawings
by
Francesco
Salviati and Daniele da Volterra: Additions
and Subtractions,” Master Drawings, 32, 3,
Autumn 1994, pp. 230–51.
joannides, 1994c
P. Joannides, “Bodies in the Trees: A Mass
Martyrdom
by
Michelangelo,”
Apollo,
CXL, n.s. 393, November 1994, pp. 3–14.
joannides, 1995a
P. Joannides, “On the recto and on the
verso of a Michelangelo Drawing at Prince-
ton,” The Record of the Art Museum, Princeton
University, 54, 2, Spring 1995, pp. 2–11.
joannides, 1995b
P. Joannides, “Tesserae in a Vast Mosaic:
Two Fragmentary Drawings by Michelan-
gelo,” Apollo, CXLII, n.s. 405, November
1995, pp. 7–9.
joannides, 1995–6
P. Joannides, “‘The Fall of Phaeton’ af-
ter Michelangelo,” in grasselli, 1995–6,
pp. 214–16.
joannides, 1996a
P. Joannides, “Michelangelo and the Medici
Garden,” in R. Fubini, ed., Atti del con-
vegno su Lorenzo il Magniﬁco, Florence, 1996,
pp. 23–36.
joannides, 1996b
P. Joannides, “Michelangelo: the Magniﬁci
Tomb and the Brazen Serpent,” Master
Drawings, XXIV, 2, Summer 1996, pp. 148–
67.
joannides, 1996–8
P. Joannides, exhibition catalogue, Miche-
langelo and His Inﬂuence; Drawings from the
Royal Collection, Windsor Castle, Washing-
ton, D.C., National Gallery of Art; Fort
Worth, Kimbell Art Museum; Chicago, Art
Institute; Cambridge, Fitzwilliam Museum;
London,
the
Queen’s
Gallery,
1996–
8.
joannides, 1997
P. Joannides, “Michelangelo Bronzista: Re-
lections on his Mettle,” Apollo, CXLV, n.s.
424, June 1997, pp. 11–20.
joannides, 1998
P. Joannides, “An Adaptation of a Drawing
by Michelangelo Attributable to Bronzino,”
in liebenwein and tempestini, 1998, pp.
200–6.
joannides, 2000a
P. Joannides, “Raphael and His Circle,”
Paragone, LI, 601, terza serie 30, March
2000, pp. 3–42.
joannides, 2000b
P.
Joannides,
catalogue
entries
in
androsov and baldini, catalogue, L’Adole-
scente dell’Ermitage e la Sagrestia Nouva di
Michelangelo, Florence, Casa Buonarroti, 9
May–10 July 2000.
joannides, 2001
P. Joannides, “On Michelangelo’s ‘Stoning
of St Stephen,’” Master Drawings, XXXIX,
1, Winter 2001, pp. 3–11.
joannides, 2002a
P. Joannides, catalogue entries in falletti
and nelson, 2002.
joannides, 2002b
P. Joannides, “‘Unconsidered Triﬂes’; Co-
pies after Lost Drawings by Michelangelo,”
Paragone, LIII, 633, terza serie 46, Novem-
ber 2002, pp. 3–17.
joannides, 2002–3a
P. Joannides, exhibition catalogue, Raphael
and His Age. Drawings from the Palais des
Beaux-Arts,
Lille/Rapha¨el
et
son
temps.
Dessins du Palais de Beaux-Arts, Lille, Cleve-
land Museum of Art, 23 August –27 Octo-
ber 2002; Lille, Palais des Beaux-Arts, 16
May–21 July 2003.
joannides, 2002–3b
P. Joannides, catalogue entries in chiarini,
darr, and giannini, 2002–3.
joannides, 2003a (j)
P. Joannides, Michel-Ange, ´El`eves et Copistes,
Paris, 2003.
joannides, 2003b
P. Joannides, “Two Drawings Connected
with Michelangelo’s ‘Hercules and Anta-
eus,’” Master Drawings, XXXXI, 2, Sum-
mer 2003, pp. 105–18.
johnson, 1996
R. S. Johnson, exhibition catalogue, Old
Master Prints and Drawings, Chicago, 1996.
justi, 1900
C. Justi, Michelangelo, Beitr¨age zur Erkl¨arung
der
Werke
und
des
Menschen,
Leipzig,
1900.
justi, 1909
C. Justi, Michelangelo, Neue Beitr¨age zur
Erkl¨arung seiner Werke, Berlin, 1909.
keller, 1966
H. Keller, Michelangelo. I. Plastik. Architektur.
II. Gem¨alde, Stuttgart, 1966.
keller, 1975
H. Keller, Michelangelo, Zeichnungen und
Dichtungen, Frankfurt, 1975.
keller, 1976
H. Keller, Michelangelo, Bildhauer-Maler-
Architekt, Frankfurt, 1976.
kieslinger, 1928
F. Kieslinger, “Ein Unbekanntes Werk
des Michelangelo,” Jahrbuch der Preussischen
Kunstsammlungen, XLIX, 1928, pp. 50–4.
kirschenbaum, 1951
B. D. Kirschenbaum, “Reﬂections on
Michelangelo’s Drawings for Cavalieri,”
Gazette
des
Beaux-Arts,
VIe
p´eriode,
XXXVIII, 998, March–April 1951, pp. 99–
110.
kleiner, 1950
G. Kleiner, Die Begegnung Michelangelos mit
der Antike, Berlin, 1950.
knackfuss, 1896
H.
Knackfuss,
Michelangelo
(Kunstler-
Monographien IV), Krefeld and Leipzig,
1896.
knapp, 1925
F. Knapp, “A. E. Brinckmann, Michelan-
gelo Zeichnungen,” Zeitschrift f¨ur Bildende
Kunst, Beitrage, Die K¨unstliteratur, 4/5, July–
August 1925, p. 42.
k¨ohler, 1907
W. K¨ohler, “Michelangelos Schlachtkar-
ton,” Kunstgechichtliches Jahrbuch der k.k.
Zentral-Kommission f¨ur Erforschung und Erhal-
tung der Kunst- und historischen Denkmale, I,
1907, pp. 115–72.
kornell, 1996
M. Kornell, catalogue entry, in cazort et
al., 1996, p. 115.
kornell, 2000
M. Kornell, “Illustrations from the Well-
come Library: Vesalius’s Method of Artic-
ulating the Skeleton and a Drawing in
the Collection of the Wellcome Library,”
Medical History, 2000, XLIV, pp. 97–
110.
k¨orte, 1932
W. K¨orte, “Zur Peterskuppel des Michelan-
gelo,” Jahrbuch der Preussischen Kunstsamm-
lungen, LIII, 2/3, 1932, pp. 91–112.
kurz, 1953
O. Kurz, “Michelangelo at the British
Museum,” The Burlington Magazine, XCV,
606, September 1953, p. 310.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
467
labb´e and bicart s´ee, 1996
J. Labb´e and L. Bicart S´ee, La collection de
dessins d’Antoine-Joseph D´ezallier d’Argenville,
Paris, 1996.
lafranconi, 1998
M. Lafranconi, “Antonio Tronsarelli: A
Roman Collector of the Late Sixteenth
Century. Documents for the History of
Collecting:
26,”
The
Burlington
Maga-
zine, CXL, 1145, August 1998, pp. 537–
50.
lafranconi, 2003
M. Lafranconi, “A Roman Collector of
the Late Sixteenth Century: Antonio Tron-
sarelli,” in baker, elam, and warwick,
2003, pp. 55–78.
lamarche-vadel, 1981
B. Lamarche-Vadel, Michelangelo di Buonar-
roti, Paris, 1981.
landon, 1803–5
C. P. Landon, Vies and oeuvres des peintres
les plus c´el`ebres de toutes les ´ecoles, Ecole Flo-
rentine. Vie and Oeuvre compl`ete de Michel-
Ange Buonarroti, Paris-Strasbourg, 1803–5
(2nd ed., 1824).
lanfranc de panthou, 1995
C. Lanfranc de Panthou, “Dessins par et
d’apr`es Michel-Ange,” in lanfranc de pan-
thou and perronet, 1995–6.
lanfranc de panthou and perronet,
1995–6
C. Lanfranc de Panthou and B. Perronet,
exhibition catalogue, Dessins italiens du
mus´ee Cond´e `a Chantilly, I. Autour de P´erugin,
Filippino Lippi and Michel-Ange, Chantilly,
Mus´ee Cond´e, 4 October 1995–8 January
1996.
lauder, 2003
A. V. Lauder, “Absorption and Inter-
pretation: Michelangelo through the eyes
of a Venetian follower, Battista Franco,” in
ames-lewis and joannides, 2003, pp. 93–
113.
laux, 1943
K. A. Laux, Michelangelos Juliusmonument.
Ein Beitrag zur Ph¨anomenologie des Genies,
Berlin, 1943.
lawrence inventory, 1830
Inventory of the Collection of Drawings by Old
Masters Formed by Sir Thomas Lawrence, P.
R. A., Drawn Up While the Collection Was
Still in His House. Transcribed by the Com-
mittee of the Burlington Fine Arts Club
from a MS in the library of the Club, 1927
(Typescript; copies in the Print Room of
the Ashmolean Museum and in the Depart-
ment of Prints and Drawings in the British
Museum).
lebrooy, 1972
P. J. LeBrooy, Michelangelo Models formerly
in the Paul von Praun Collection, Vancouver,
1972.
lees, 1917
F. Lees, The Art of the Great Masters as
Exempliﬁed by Drawings in the Collection of
Emile Wauters, membre de l’Acad´emie Royale de
Belgique, London, 1917.
liebenwein and tempestini, 1998
W. Liebenwein and A. Tempestini eds.,
Gedenkschrift f¨ur Richard Harprath, Munich-
Berlin, 1998.
liebert, 1983
R. S. Liebert, Michelangelo. A Psychoanalytic
Study of His Life and Images, New Haven-
London, 1983.
the literary gazette, 1836
Anonymous, “Review of the Exhibition
of Drawings by Michelangelo at Messrs.
Woodburns’ Gallery,” The Literary Gazette,
July 1836 (cited from the reprint by Wood-
burn issued as an unpaginated supplement
to his catalogues of the Lawrence Gallery).
llewellyn and romalli, 1992
E. Llewellyn and C. Romalli, exhibition
catalogue, Drawing in Bologna 1500–1600,
London, Courtauld Institute Galleries, 18
June–31 August 1992.
lloyd, 1997
C. Lloyd, A Catalogue of the Earlier Italian
Paintings in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford,
1977.
loisel, 2000
C. Loisel, “A Portrait by Ludovico Car-
racci at Christ Church, Oxford. His Early
Chronology Reconsidered,” Apollo, CLI,
n.s. 457, March 2000, pp. 22–7.
longhena, 1829
F. Longhena, Istoria della vita e delle opere di
Raffaello Sanzio da Urbino del Signor Qua-
trem`ere de Quincy voltata in italiano, corretta,
illustrata ed ampliata per cura di Francesco
Longhena, Milan, 1829.
loyd, 1999
C. Loyd,The Loyd Collection,Lockinge, 1999.
lugt, 1921, 1956 (l.)
F.
Lugt,
Les
marques
de
collections
de
dessins d’estampes, Amsterdam, 1921, and
Suppl´ement, The Hague, 1956.
luporini, 1957–8
E. Luporini, “Un libro di disegni di Gio-
vanni Antonio Dosio,” Critica d’arte, 24,
November–December 1957, pp. 442–67,
and 25–6, January–April 1958, pp. 43–72.
macandrew, 1980
H. Macandrew, Ashmolean Museum, Oxford,
Catalogue of the Collection of Drawings, Vol.
III, Italian Schools Supplement, Oxford, 1980.
mackowsky, 1908
H. Mackowsky, Michelangelo, Berlin, 1908
(and subsequent editions).
mccullagh and giles, 1997
S. F. McCullagh and L. M. Giles, Italian
Drawings before 1600 in the Art Institute of
Chicago, Chicago, 1997.
malke, 1980
L. Malke, exhibition catalogue, St¨adel.
Italienische Zeichnungen des 15. und 16.
Jahrhunderts aus eigenen Best¨anden, Frankfurt
am Main, St¨adelsches Kunstinstitut und
St¨adtische Galerie, 4 July–31 August 1980.
mancinelli, 1992
F. Mancinelli, “La progettazione della volta
della Cappella Sistina di Michelangelo,” in
smyth, 1992, pp. 43–56.
mancusi-ungaro, 1971
H. R. Mancusi-Ungaro, Jr., Michelangelo.
The Bruges Madonna and the Piccolomini Altar,
New Haven-London, 1971.
manilli, 1650
J. Manilli, Villa Borghese Fuori di Porta Pin-
ciana, Rome, 1650.
mantura, 1973
B. Mantura, “Il primo Cristo della Piet`a
Rondanini,” Bollettino d’arte, serie V, LVIII,
4, October–December 1973, pp. 199–
201.
marani, 1992
P. C. Marani ed., exhibition catalogue, The
Genius of the Sculptor in Michelangelo’s Work.
Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, 12 June–13
September 1992.
mariani, 1932
V. Mariani, Gli affreschi di Michelangelo nella
Cappella Paolina, Rome, 1932.
mariette, 1741
P.-J.
Mariette,
Description
sommayre
des
dessins des grands Maystres d’Italie, des Pays
Bas and de France du Cabinet de feu M. Crozat,
avec des r´eﬂexions sur la mani`ere de dessiner des
principaux peintres, Paris, 1741.
mariette, 1851–62
P.-J. Mariette (Ph. de Chennevi`eres and
A. de Montaiglon eds.), Abecedario, 6 vols.,
Paris, 1851–62. (Vol. 1 includes Mariette’s
letter to A. F. Gori about Michelangelo’s
drawings.)
marignane, 1966
H. de Marignane, exhibition catalogue,
Dessins Italiens du XVe au XVIIIe si`ecles
de la collection H. de Marignane, Monte-
Carlo, Palais de Congr`es, 29 May–4 June
1966.
meder, 1923
J. Meder, Die Handzeichnungen, 2nd ed.,
Vienna, 1923.
meijer, 1988
B. W. Meijer, I grandi disegni italiani del Teylers
Museum di Haarlem, Milan, 1988
meijer and van tuyll, 1983–4
B. W. Meijer and C. van Tuyll, exhibi-
tion catalogue, Disegni italiani del Teylers
Museum Haarlem provenienti dalle collezioni
di Cristina di Svezia e dei principi Odescalchi,
Florence, Istituto Universitario Olandese di
Storia dell’Arte, 29 October–18 Decem-
ber 1983, and Rome, Istituto Nazionale

468
BIBLIOGRAPHY
per la Graﬁca, Gabinetto Nazionale delle
Stampe, 10 January–20 February 1983–4.
millon and lambugnani, 1994
H. Millon and V. Lambugnani eds., exhi-
bition
catalogue,
The
Renaissance
from
Brunelleschi to Michelangelo, the Representation
of Architecture, Venice, Palazzo Grassi, 1994;
London-Milan, 1994.
millon and smyth, 1976
H. Millon and C. H. Smyth, “Michelangelo
and St Peters: Observations on the Interior
of the Apses, a Model of the Apse Vault
and related Drawings,” R¨omisches Jahrbuch
f¨ur Kunstgeschichte, XVI, 1976, pp. 137–206.
millon and smyth, 1988
H. Millon and C. H. Smyth, exhibition
catalogue, Michelangelo Architect. The Fac¸ade
of San Lorenzo and the Drum and Dome of
St. Peter’s, Washington, D.C., The National
Gallery of Art, 1988.
monbeig goguel, 1972
C. Monbeig Goguel, Vasari et son temps,
Paris, 1972.
monbeig goguel, 1977–8
C. Monbeig Goguel, in bacou et al.,
1977–8.
monbeig goguel, 1988
C. Monbeig Goguel, “Giulio Clovio ‘nou-
veau petit Michel-Ange.’ A propos des
dessins du Louvre,” Revue de l’Art, 80, 1988,
pp. 37–47.
monbeig goguel, 1994
C. Monbeig Goguel, “A Propos des dessins
du ‘Maˆıtre de la femme voil´ee assise du Lou-
vre,’ R´eﬂexion m´ethodologique en faveur
du ‘Maˆıtre de Santo Spirito’ (Agnolo et/ou
Donnino di Domenico del Mazziere?),” in
cropper, 1994, pp. 111–29.
morelli, 1891–2
G. Morelli (E. Habich, ed.), “Hand-
zeichnungen Italienischen Meister in Pho-
tographischen Aufnahmen von Braun &
Co. in Dornach” (Morelli’s opinions were
expressed in 1886), Kunstchronik, n.s., III,
1891–2, part 2, no. 22, 21 April 1892, cols.
373–8; part 7, no. 31, 21 July 1891, cols.
543–7; Kunstchronik, n.s., IV, 1892–3, cols.
53–6.
the morning chronicle, 1836
Anonymous, “Review of the Exhibition
of Drawings by Michelangelo at Messrs.
Woodburns’ Gallery,” The Morning Chron-
icle, 11 July 1836 (cited from the reprint by
Woodburn issued as an unpaginated sup-
plement to his catalogues of the Lawrence
Gallery).
the morning herald, 1836
Anonymous, “Review of the Exhibition
of Drawings by Michelangelo at Messrs.
Woodburns’ Gallery,” The Morning Her-
ald, 9 July 1836 (cited from the reprint
by Woodburn issued as an unpaginated
supplement
to
his
catalogues
of
the
Lawrence Gallery).
morris and hopkinson, 1977
E. Morris and M. Hopkinson, Walker Art
Gallery, Liverpool. Foreign Schools, Liverpool,
1977.
morrogh, 1992
A. Morrogh, “The Medici Chapel: The
Designs for the Central Tomb,” in smyth,
1992, pp. 143–61.
morrogh, 1993
A. Morrogh, “The Magniﬁci Tomb: A
Key Project in Michelangelo’s Architectural
Career,” Art Bulletin, LXXIV, 4, December
1993, pp. 567–98.
morrogh, 1994
A. Morrogh, “The Palace of the Roman
People: Michelangelo at the Palazzo dei
Conservatori,” R¨omishces Jahrbuch der Bib-
lioteca Hertziana, XXIX, 1994, pp. 129–
86.
morselli, 1981
P. Morselli, “A Project by Michelangelo for
the Ambo(s) of Santa Maria del Fiore, Flo-
rence,” Journal of the Society of Architectural
Historians, XL, 2, 1981, pp. 122–9.
motzkin, 1993
E. Motzkin, “Michelangelo’s Slaves in the
Louvre,” Gazette des Beaux-Arts, 6e p´eriode,
CXXII, 1087, December 1993, pp. 207–28.
murray, 1980
L. Murray, Michelangelo, London, 1980.
murray, 1984
L. Murray, Michelangelo, His Life, Work and
Times, London, 1984.
muzii, 1988
R. Muzii, “Michelangelo a Capodimonte:
storia e vicende di un restauro,” N.
Spinosa et al., Michelangelo a Capodimonte.
Il restauro del cartone per gli affreschi della Cap-
pella Paolina a Roma, exhibition catalogue,
Naples, Museo e Gallerie Nazionale di
Capodimonte, 15 July–25 September 1988,
pp. 9–22.
nagel, 1996
A. Nagel, “Observations on Michelan-
gelo’s late Piet`a Drawings and Sculptures,”
Zeitschrift f¨ur Kunstgeschichte, LIX, 1996,
pp. 548–72.
nagel, 2000
A. Nagel, Michelangelo and the Reform of Art,
Cambridge, 2000.
natali, 1985
A.
Natali,
“L’Antico,
le
Scritture
e
l’occasione. Ipotesi sul Tondo Doni,” in
berti, cecchi, and natali, 1985, pp. 21–37.
nathan, 1992
J. Nathan, “Some Drawing Practices of
Leonardo da Vinci: New Light on the
St. Anne,” Mitteilungen des Kunsthistorisches
Instituts in Florenz, XXXVI, 1/2, 1992,
pp. 85–102.
nava, 1935–6
A. Nava, “Sui disegni architettonici per San
Giovanni dei Fiorentini in Roma,” Critica
d’arte, I, 1935–6, pp. 102–8.
neerman, n.d. (c. 1972)
A. Neerman, italian Old Master Drawings
from the Sixteenth to the Eighteenth Century,
catalogue of an exhibition at 96 Mount
Street, London, n.d., c. 1972.
nesselrath, 1983
A. Nesselrath, “Das Lille ‘Michelangelo-
Skizzenbuch,’” Kunstchronik, 36, January
1983, pp. 46–7.
nesselrath, 1986
A. Nesselrath, “I libri di disegni di antichit`a.
Tentativo di una tipologia,” in settis, 1986.
nesselrath, 1990
A. Nesselrath, catalogue entries 27, 28, 31,
141, 142, and 148, in pietrangeli et al.,
1990.
noehles, 1969
K. Noehles, La Chiesa dei Santi Luca e Mar-
tina nell’opera di Pietro da Cortona, Rome,
1969.
nova, 1984
A. Nova, Michelangelo Architetto, Milan,
1984.
oberhuber, 1984
K. Oberhuber, “A Drawing by Raphael
Mistakenly Attributed to Bandinelli,” Mas-
ter Drawings, II, 4, Winter 1984, pp. 398–
401.
the observer, 1836
Anonymous, “Review of the Exhibition
of Drawings by Michelangelo at Messrs.
Woodburns’ Gallery,” The Observer, 24 July
1836 (cited from the reprint by Woodburn
issued as an unpaginated supplement to his
catalogues of the Lawrence Gallery).
o’grody, 1999
J. A. O’Grody, “Un semplice Modello”:
Michelangelo
and
his
Three-Dimensional
Preparatory Works, unpublished PhD thesis,
Ann Arbor, 1999.
ongpin, 2001
S. Ongpin, Michelangelo, A Masterpiece Redis-
covered/Un
capolavoro
ritrovato,
Florence,
2001.
østermark-johansen, 1998
L.
Østermark-Johansen,
Sweetness
and
Strength. The Reception of Michelangelo in Late
Victorian England, Aldershot, 1998.
ottley, 1808–23
W. Y. Ottley, The Italian School of Design;
being a Series of Fac-similes of Original Draw-
ings, by the most Eminent Painters and Sculptors
of Italy: with Biographical notices of the Artists,
and observations on their works, London,
1808–23.
pagnotta, 1987
L. Pagnotta, Guiliano Bugiardini, Turin,
1987.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
469
pallucchini, 1944
R. Pallucchini, Sebastiano Viniziano, Milan,
1944.
panofsky, 1921–2
E. Panofsky, “Die Michelangelo – Litera-
tur seit 1914,” Jahrbuch f¨ur Kunstgeschichte,
Wien, I, 15, 1921–2, Buchbesprechung,
cols. 2–63.
panofsky, 1922
E. Panofsky, Handzeichnungen Michelangelos,
Leipzig, 1922.
panofsky, 1927a
E. Panofsky, “Bermerkungen zu den Neu-
herausgabe der Haarlemer Michelangelo
Zeichnungen durch Fr. Knapp,” Reperto-
rium f¨ur Kunstwissenschaft, XLVIII, 1, 1927,
pp. 25–58.
panofsky, 1927b
E. Panofsky, “Die Piet`a von Ubeda. Ein
Kleiner Beitrag zur L¨osung der Sebas-
tianofrage,” in A. Weixlg¨artner and L.
Planiscig eds., Festschrift f¨ur Julius Schlosser-
Zum 60 Geburtstag, Zurich-Leipzig-Vienna,
1927, pp. 150–61.
panofsky, 1927–8
E. Panofsky, “Kopie oder Falschung? Ein
Beitrag zur Kritik einiger Zeichnungen aus
den Werkstatt Michelangelos,” Zeitschrift
f¨ur Bildende Kunst, NF, LXI, 6, 1927–8,
pp. 221–44.
panofsky, 1928
E. Panofsky, “Erkl¨arung,” Repertorium f¨ur
Kunstwissenschaft, XLIX, 1, 1928, pp. 37–8.
paoletti, 1992
J. T. Paoletti, “Michelangelo’s Masks,” The
Art Bulletin, LXXIV, 3, September 1992,
pp. 423–40.
paoletti, 2000
J. T. Paoletti, “The Rondanini Piet`a: Ambi-
guity Maintained Through the Palimpsest,”
Artibus et Historiae, XXI, 42, 2000, pp. 53–
80.
papi, 1989
G. Papi, “Per Andrea Commodi,” Paragone,
469, March 1989, pp. 30–67.
papi, 1994
G. Papi, Andrea Commodi, Florence, 1994.
parker, 1956 (p. ii)
K. T. Parker, Catalogue of the Collection of
Drawings in the Ashmolean Museum, II, The
Italian Schools, Oxford, 1956.
passavant, 1836
J. D Passavant, Tour of a German Artist in
England, London, 1836.
perrig, 1975
A. Perrig, Michelangelo Studien IV: Die
“Michelangelo”
–
Zeichnungen
Benvenuto
Cellinis, Frankfurt-Bern, 1975.
perrig, 1976a
A. Perrig, Michelangelo Studien I: Michelan-
gelo und die Zeichnungswissenschaft – Ein
methodologischen Versuch, Frankfurt-Bern,
1976.
perrig, 1976b
A. Perrig,
Michelangelo Studien II: Das
J¨ungste
Gericht
und
seine
Vorgeschichte,
Frankfurt-Bern, 1976.
perrig, 1980
A. Perrig, “On the Corpus of ‘Michelan-
gelo’ Drawings,” Drawing, I, 6, March–
April 1980, pp. 127–32.
perrig, 1981
A. Perrig,
“Die Konzeption der Wand-
grabsa¨ulen der Medici-Kapelle,” Staedel-
Jahrbuch, N.F., VIII, 1981, pp. 247–87.
perrig, 1982
A. Perrig,
“Das M¨unchener Blatt mit
der
Kopie
nach
Masaccios
‘Zinsgro-
schen’– Fresko und die Methoden der
Michelangelo-Forschung,” Kritische Beri-
chte, X, 3, 1982, pp. 3–35.
perrig, 1991
A. Perrig, Michelangelo’s Drawings, the Sci-
ence of Attribution, New Haven-London,
1991.
perrig, 1997
A. Perrig, Introduction and catalogue en-
tries in guse and perrig, 1997.
perrig, 1999
A. Perrig, “R¨auber, Proﬁteure, ‘Michelan-
gelos’ und die Kunst der Provenienzen-
Erﬁndung,” Staedel-Jahrbuch, N.F., XVII,
1999, pp. 209–86.
petrioli tofani, 1986
A. Petrioli Tofani, Gabinetto disegni e stampe
degli Ufﬁzi. Inventario 1. Disegni esposti, Flo-
rence, 1986.
petrioli tofani, 1987
A. Petrioli Tofani, Gabinetto disegni e stampe
degli Ufﬁzi. Inventario. Disegni di ﬁgura. 1,
Florence, 1991.
petrioli tofani, 1991
A. Petrioli Tofani, Gabinetto disegni e stampe
degli Ufﬁzi. Inventario Disegni di ﬁgura. 2, Flo-
rence, 1986.
petrioli tofani, 1992
A. Petrioli Tofani, ed., exhibition catalo-
gue, Il Disegno Fiorentino del Tempo di
Lorenzo il Magniﬁco, Florence, Gabinetto
Disegni e Stampe degli Ufﬁzi, April–July
1992.
pfeiffer, 1966
H. Pfeiffer, “On the meaning of a late
Michelangelo drawing,” The Art Bulletin,
XLVIII, 2, June 1966, p. 227.
philostrate, 1878
Philostrate, “The University Galleries at
Oxford,” The Magazine of Art, I, 8, Decem-
ber 1878, pp. 214–17.
pietrangeli et al., 1986
C. Pietrangeli et al., The Sistine Chapel, A
Glorious Restoration, London, 1986.
pietrangeli, 1990
C.
Pietrangeli,
exhibition
catalogue,
Michelangelo e la Sistine, La Technica, il
restauro, il mito, Vatican City, 1990.
pietrangeli et al., 1992
C. Pietrangeli et al., The Sistine Chapel
Rediscovered, London, 1992.
pignatti, 1977
T. Pignatti, I Grandi Disegni Italiani nelle
Collezione di Oxford. Ashmolean Museum e
Christ Church Picture Gallery, Milan, 1977.
pignatti, 1981
T. Pignatti, II Disegno da Altamira a Picasso,
Milan, 1981.
piot, 1863
E. Piot, Le Cabinet de l’Amateur, 1861 et 1862,
Paris, 1863.
pope-hennessy, 1963
J. Pope-Hennessy, Italian High Renaissance
and Baroque Sculpture, 3 vols., London, 1963.
pope-hennessy, 1964
J. Pope-Hennessy, assisted by R. Light-
bown, Catalogue of Italian Sculpture in the Vic-
toria and Albert Museum, 3 vols., London,
1964.
pope-hennessy, 1977
J.
Pope-Hennessy,
“Review
of
Lloyd,
1977,” Apollo, CVI, n.s., 188, October
1977, p. 319.
popham, 1930a
A. E. Popham, catalogue entries in clark
and balniel, 1930.
popham, 1930b
A.
E.
Popham,
Michelangelo
(Master
Draughtsman No. 1), London and New
York, 1930.
popham, 1931
A. E. Popham, Italian Drawings Exhibited at
the Royal Academy, Burlington House London,
1930, Oxford, 1931.
popham, 1935a
A. E. Popham,
“Some Michelange-
lesque Drawings,” The Burlington Magazine,
LXVII, 388, July 1935, pp. 44–5.
popham, 1935b
A. E. Popham,
Catalogue of Drawings in
the Collection Formed by Sir Thomas Phillipps,
Bart., F.R.S., Now in the Possession of His
Grandson T. Fitzroy Phillipps Fenwick of
Thirlestaine House Cheltenham, London?,
1935.
popham and pouncey, 1950
A. E. Popham and P. Pouncey, Italian Draw-
ings in the Department of Prints and Drawings
in the British Museum. The Fourteenth and Fif-
teenth Centuries, London, 1950.
popham and wilde, 1949 (pw)
A. E. Popham and J. Wilde, The Italian
Drawings of the XV and XVI Centuries in the
Collection of His Majesty the King at Windsor
Castle, London, 1949.
popp, 1922
A. E. Popp, Die Medici-Kapelle Michelangelos,
Munich, 1922.
popp, 1925a
A. E. Popp, “Garzoni Michelangelos,”
Belvedere, VIII, 7, August 1925, pp. 6–28.

470
BIBLIOGRAPHY
popp, 1925b
A. E. Popp, “A. E. Brinckmann, Michelan-
gelo Zeichnungen,” Belvedere Forum, VIII,
9, October 1925, pp. 72–5.
popp, 1925–6
A. E. Popp,
“Bermerkungen zu Einigen
Zeichnungen Michelangelos,” Zeitschrift f¨ur
bildende Kunst, LIX, 1925–6, I, pp. 134–46;
II, pp. 169–74.
popp, 1927
A. E. Popp, “Unbeachtete Projekte Miche-
langelos,” M¨unchner Jahrbuch der bildenden
Kunst, IV, 1927, pp. 390–477.
popp, 1927–8
A.
E.
Popp,
“F¨alschlich
Michelangelo
zugeschreiben Zeichnungen,” Zeitschrift f¨ur
bildende
Kunst,
LIX,
1927–8,
pp.
8–
17.
popp, 1928–9
A. E. Popp, “Kopie oder F¨alschung. Zu dem
Aufsatz von Erwin Panofsky,” Zeitschrift
f¨ur bildende Kunst, LXII, 1928–9, pp. 54–
67.
popp, 1936
A. E. Popp, “Two Torsi by Michelangelo,”
The Burlington Magazine, LXIX, no. 404,
November 1936, pp. 202–13.
portheim, 1889
F. Portheim, “Beitrage zu den Werken
Michelangelo’s,”
Repertorium
f¨ur
Kunst-
wissenschaft, XII, 1889, pp. 140–58.
portoghesi and zevi, 1964
P. Portoghesi and B. Zevi, eds., Michelangiolo
Architetto, Turin, 1964.
pos`eque, 1999
A. G. Pos`eque, “Aspects of laterality in
Michelangelo,” Artibus et Historiae, 40,
1999, pp. 89–112.
pouncey, 1964
P. Pouncey, “Review of berenson, 1961,”
Master Drawings, II, 2, Spring 1964, pp. 278–
93.
pouncey and gere, 1962 (pg)
P. Pouncey and J. A. Gere, Italian Drawings
in the Department of Prints and Drawings in
the British Museum. Raphael and His Circle,
London, 1962.
poynter, 1879
E. J. Poynter, Ten Lectures on Art, London,
1879.
preiss, 1976
P. Preiss, Michel-Ange: fusain, pierre noire, san-
guine, plume, Paris, 1976.
price amerson, 1975
L. Price Amerson, Jr., ed., exhibition cata-
logue, The Fortuna of Michelangelo. Prints and
Drawings from California Collections, Sacra-
mento, 1975.
procacci, 1967
U. Procacci, La Casa Buonarroti a Firenze,
Milan, 1967.
pugliatti, 1984
T. Pugliatti, Giulio Mazzoni e la decorazione
a Roma nella cerchia di Daniele da Volterra,
Rome, 1984.
py, 2001
B. Py, Everhard Jabach Collectionneur (1618–
1695). Les Dessins de l’Inventaire de 1695, Paris,
2001.
quatrem`ere de quincy, 1835
Quatrem`ere de Quincy, Histoire de la vie and
des ouvrages de Michel-Ange Buonarroti, Paris,
1835.
radcliffe, 1979–80
A. Radcliffe, exhibition catalogue, Sculpture
from the David Daniels Collection, exhibition
at the Minneapolis Institute of Arts, Octo-
ber 1979–January 1980.
radcliffe, 1994
A. Radcliffe, The Robert H. Smith Collection,
Bronzes 1500–1650, London, 1994.
ragionieri, 2000
P. Ragionieri et al., I bozzetti michelangio-
leschi della Casa Buonarroti, Florence, 2000.
ramade, 1985
P. Ramade, exhibition catalogue, Jean-
Germain Drouais, 1763–1788, Rennes, Mus´ee
des Beaux-Arts, 1985.
ramade, 1990
P. Ramade, exhibition catalogue, Disegno,
les Dessins Italiens du Mus´ee de Rennes,
Galleria Estense Modena 27 May–29 July
1990; Rennes, Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts,
November–December 1990.
ramade, 1991
P. Ramade ed., Disegno. Actes du Congr`es,
Rennes, 9–10 Octobre 1990, Rennes, 1991.
rasponi, 1978
S. Rasponi, Michelangelo, Milan, 1978.
redig de campos, 1967
D. Redig de Campos, “Das Kruciﬁx
Michelangelos f¨ur Vittoria Colonna,” in
Stil und uberlieferung in Kunst des Abendlan-
des. Akten des 21 Internationalen Kongresses f¨ur
Kunstgeschichte in Bonn 1964, II, Michelan-
gelo, Berlin, 1967.
rehm and diepolder, 1952
W. Rehm and H. Diepolder eds., Johann
Joachim Winckelmann Briefe, I, 1742–1759,
Berlin, 1952.
reiset, 1853
F. Reiset, “Un bronze de Michel-Ange,”
Athenaeum franc¸ais, 1853, pp. 488–91, 516–
19, 559–61.
reiset, 1866
F. Reiset, exhibition catalogue, Notice des
dessins, cartons, pastels miniatures and ´emaux
expos´es dans les Salle du Ier ´etage au Mus´ee
Imp´erial du Louvre. Ier partie: Ecoles d’Italie,
Ecoles Allemande, Flamande and Hollandaise,
Paris, 1866.
reiset, 1878
F. Reiset, exhibition catalogue, Notice des
dessins, cartons, pastels miniatures and ´emaux
expos´es dans les Salle du Ier and du 2e ´etage
au Mus´ee National du Louvre. Ier partie: Ecoles
d’Italie, Ecoles Allemande, Flamande and Hol-
landaise, 2nd ed., Paris, 1878.
reiss, 1987
S. Reiss, “A Medieval Source for Michelan-
gelo’s Medici Madonna,” Zeitschrift f¨ur
Kunstgeschichte, L, 3, 1987, pp. 394–400.
r`epaci-courtois, 1976
G. R`epaci-Courtois, “A propos du David
en bronze de Michel-Ange,” Revue du
Louvre, 1976, IV, pp. 250–4.
r`epaci-courtois, 1990
G. R`epaci-Courtois, “Michel-Ange et les
´ecrivains franc¸ais de la Renaissance: Grˆace
et disgrˆace et un itin´eraire critique,” Nou-
velle Revue du Seizi`eme Si`ecle, no. 8, 1990,
pp. 63–81.
residori and baratto, 1998
M. Residori and M. Baratto, Michelangelo,
Rime, Milan, 1998.
reymond, 1908
M. Reymond, “L’architecture des Tombe-
aux des M´edicis,” Gazette des Beaux-Arts, 3e
p´eriode, XXX, 607, January 1908, pp. 17–
34.
richardson, 1719
J.
Richardson
Senior,
Two
Discourses,
London, 1719.
richardson and richardson, 1722
J. Richardson Senior and J. Richardson
Junior, An Account of Some of the Statues, Bas-
reliefs, Drawings and Pictures in Italy, etc., with
Remarks, London, 1722.
riebesell, 1989
C. Riebesell, Die Sammlung des Kardinal
Alessandro Farnese. Ein “studio” f¨ur K¨unstler
und Gelehrte, Weinheim, 1989.
riley-smith, 1998
C.
Riley-Smith,
exhibition
catalogue,
Old Master Drawings. Recent Acquisitions,
London, 1998.
robbins, wetzner, and marini, 2000
A. H. Robbins, S. M. Wetzner, and
M. Marini, “Radiological Evaluation of a
Renaissance Painting,” American Journal of
Radiology, 159, July 2000, pp. 23–8.
roberts, 1988
J.
Roberts,
(Roberts)
A
Dictionary
of
Michelangelo’s Watermarks, Milan, 1988.
robertson, 1963
I. G. Robertson, “Report of the Keeper of
the Department of Western Art for the year
1963,” Ashmolean Museum, Report of the Vis-
itors, 1963, pp. 24–54.
robinson, 1870
J. C. Robinson, A Critical Account of the
Drawings by Michel Angelo and Raffaello
in the University Galleries, Oxford, Oxford,
1870.
robinson, 1876
J. C. Robinson, A Descriptive Catalogue of
Drawings by the Old Masters, Forming the
Collection of John Malcolm of Polltallock Esq,
London, 1876.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
471
rogers, 1778
C. Rogers, A Collection of Prints in Imitation
of Drawings, to Which Are Annexed Lives of
Their Authors and Explanatory Notes, 2 vols.,
London, 1778.
rohlmann and thielemann, 2000
M. Rohlmann and A. Thielemann, eds.,
Michelangelo
Neue
Beitrage.
Akten
des
Michelangelo-Kolloquium
veranstaltet
von
Kunsthistorischen Institut der Universit¨at zu
K¨oln im Italienischen Kult¨urinstitut K¨oln, 7–8
November 1996, Berlin, 2000.
p. rosenberg, 1999–2000
P. Rosenberg, exhibition catalogue, Julien de
Parme, 1736–1799, Rancante and Mamiano
di Traversetolo (Parma), 1999–2000.
p. rosenberg et al., 1999–2000
P. Rosenberg et al., exhibition catalogue,
Dominique-Vivant Denon, L’oeil de Napol´eon,
Paris, Mus´ee du Louvre, 1999–2000.
r. rosenberg, 2000
R. Rosenberg, Beschreibungen und Nach-
zeichnungen der Skulpturen Michelangelos. Eine
Geschichte der Kunstbetrachtung, Munich,
2000.
royalton-kisch, 1978
M. Royalton-Kisch, “Reynolds as a Collec-
tor,” in clifford, grifﬁths, and royalton-
kisch, 1978, pp. 61–75.
royalton-kisch, chapman, and coppel,
1996
M. Royalton-Kisch, H. Chapman, and S.
Coppel, exhibition catalogue, Old Mas-
ter Drawings from the Malcolm Collection,
London, British Museum, 1996.
rubin, 1995
P. L. Rubin, Giorgio Vasari, Art and History,
New Haven-London, 1995
ruskin, 1872
J. Ruskin, The Relation between Michael
Angelo and Tintoret, London, 1872 (cited in
E. T. Cook and A. Wedderburn, eds., The
Works of John Ruskin, XXII, London, 1906,
pp. 77–110).
ryan, 1996
C. Ryan, ed. and trans., Michelangelo: The
Poems, London, 1996.
ryan, 1998
C. Ryan, The Poetry of Michelangelo, an Intro-
duction, London, 1998.
saalman, 1975
H. Saalman, “Michelangelo: S. Maria del
Fiore and St. Peter’s,” The Art Bulletin, LVII,
3, September 1975, pp. 374–409.
saitta, 1951–2
A. Saitta, Filippo Buonarroti, 2 vols., Rome,
1951–2.
sala, 1995
C. Sala, Michel-Ange, Sculpteur, Peintre, Archi-
tecte, Paris, 1995.
salerno, 1973
L. Salerno, “Palazzo Sacchetti,” in L.
Salerno, L. Spezzaferro, and M. Tafuri, Via
Giulio, una utopia urbanistica del ’500, Rome,
1973, pp. 288–313.
salmi et al., 1965
M. Salmi et al., Michelangelo – Artista –
Pensatore – Scrittore, 2 vols., Novara, 1965
(English ed., London, 1966).
salmi, de tolnay, and barocchi, 1964
M. Salmi, C. de Tolnay, and P. Barocchi,
Disegni di Michelangelo. 103 disegni in facsimile,
Milan, 1964.
salmon, 1990
F. Salmon, “The Site of Michelangelo’s
Laurentian Library,” Journal of the Society
of Architectural Historians, XLIX, December
1990, pp. 407–29.
salvini, 1971
R. Salvini, “La ‘Battaglia di Cascina.’ Sag-
gio di critica delle varianti,” Studi di Storia
dell’Arte in onore di Valerio Mariani, Naples,
1971, pp. 131–46.
sander, 1989
J. Sander, “The Acquisition of Paintings and
Drawings at the King Willem II Auction by
the St¨adel Kunstinstitut, Frankfurt,” Simio-
lus, XIX, 1/2, 1989, pp. 123–35.
saslow, 1991
J. M. Saslow, The Poetry of Michelangelo, New
Haven-London, 1991.
scalini, 1985
M. Scalini, catalogue entries in sisi, 1985.
scheller, 1973
R. W. Scheller, “The Case of the Stolen
Raphael Drawings,” Master Drawings, XI,
3, Summer 1973, pp. 119–37.
schiavo, 1953
A. Schiavo, La Vita e le opere architettoniche di
Michelangelo, Rome, 1953.
schiavo, 1990
A. Schiavo, Michelangelo nel complesso delle sue
Opere, 2 vols., Rome, 1990.
schilling and blunt, 1971
E. Schilling, The German Drawings in the
Collection of Her Majesty the Queen at Wind-
sor Castle and Supplements to the Catalogues of
Italian and French Drawings with a History of
the Royal Collection of Drawings by Anthony
Blunt, London, 1971.
schmidt, 1965
D. Schmidt, Michelangelo Handzeichnungen,
Frankfurt, 1965.
schnapper, 1994
A. Schnapper, Curieux du Grand Si`ecle. Col-
lections et collectioneurs dan la France au XVIIIe
si`ecle, Paris, 1994.
schulz, 1991
A. M. Schulz, Giambattista and Lorenzo
Bregno. Venetian Sculpture in the High Renais-
sance, Cambridge, 1991.
schwager, 1967
K. Schwager, “Unbekannte Zeichnun-
gen
Jacopo
del
Duca’s.
Ein
Beitrag
zur
Michelangelo-Nachfolge,”
Stil
und
¨Uberlieferung in der Kunst des Abendlandes,
Akten des 21 Internationalen Kongreses f¨ur
Kunstgeschichte in Bonn, 1964, II, Michelan-
gelo, Berlin, 1967, pp. 56–64.
sciolla, 1990
G. C Sciolla, ed., From Leonardo to Rem-
brandt. Drawings from the Royal Library of
Turin, exhibiton catalogue, Turin, 1990.
sciolla, 1992
G. C Sciolla, ed., Nuove ricerche in margine
alla mostra da Leonardo a Rembrandt, Dis-
egni della Biblioteca Reale di Torino, Villa da
Madama Reale, 24–25 Ottobre 1990, Turin,
1992.
scrase, 1981–2
D. Scrase, Drawings from the Collection of Louis
C. G. Clarke, LL.D., 1881–1960. An Exhibi-
tion in the Fitzwilliam Museum, University of
Cambridge, 20 October 1981–31 January 1982,
Cambridge, 1981–2.
sebregondi ﬁorentini, 1986
L. Sebregondi Fiorentini, “Francesco Buo-
narroti,
Cavaliere
Gerosolimitano
e
Architetto
dilettante,”
Rivista
d’Arte,
XXXVIII, 4th series, II, 1986, pp. 48–
86.
s´erullaz et al., 1965
M. S´erullaz et al., exhibition catalogue, Le
Seizi`eme Si`ecle Europ´een. Dessins du Lou-
vre, Paris, Mus´ee du Louvre, October–
December 1965.
settis, 1986
S. Settis, ed., Memoria dell’antico nell’arte
italiana, III, Dalla tradizione all’archeologia,
Turin, 1986.
seymour, 1967
C. Seymour, Michelangelo’s David. A Search
for Identity, Pittsburgh, 1967.
shearman, 1987
J. Shearman, “Alfonso d’Este’s Camerino,”
Il se rendit en Italie, Etudes offertes `a Andr´e
Chastel, Rome, 1987, pp. 209–30.
shell, 1992
J. Shell, catalogue entries, in marani et al.,
1992.
siebenh¨uner, 1956
H. Siebenh¨uner, “San Giovanni dei Fioren-
tini in Rom,” in W. Braunfels, ed., Kunst-
geschichtliche Studien f¨ur Hans Kauffmann,
Berlin, 1956, pp. 72–91.
sindona, 1979
E. Sindona, Michelangelo, La Pittura Com-
pleta, Milan, 1979.
sisi, 1985
C. Sisi, exhibition catalogue, Michelangelo
e i Maestri del Quattrocento, Florence, Casa
Buonarroti, Florence, 20 June–20 Novem-
ber 1985.
smyth, 1992
C. H. Smyth, ed., Michelangelo Drawings,
Studies in the History of Art, no. 33 (proceed-
ings of the symposium held in the National
Gallery of Art, Washington in 1988),
Washington, D.C., 1992.

472
BIBLIOGRAPHY
springer, 1878
A. Springer, Raffael und Michelangelo, Leip-
zig, 1878.
springer, 1883
A. Springer, Raffael und Michelangelo, 2 vols.,
2nd ed., Leipzig, 1883.
springer, 1895
A. Springer, Raffael und Michelangelo, 2 vols.,
3rd ed., Leipzig, 1895.
steinberg, 1975
L. Steinberg, Michelangelo’s Last Paintings,
London, 1975.
steinmann, 1903–5
E. Steinmann, Die Sixtinische Kapelle, 2 vols.,
Munich, 1903–5.
steinmann, 1907
E. Steinmann, Das Geheimnis den Medici-
graeber Michel Angelos, Leipzig, 1907.
steinmann, 1913
E. Steinmann, Die Portraitdarstellungen des
Michelangelo, Leipzig, 1913.
steinmann and wittkower, 1927
E. Steinmann and R. Wittkower, Michelan-
gelo Bibliographie I, 1510–1926, Leipzig, 1927.
sueur, 1998
H. Sueur, “Per la storia e la fortuna della
collezione di disegni dei duchi d’Este,”
in bentini, loisel legrand et al., 1998,
pp. 20–9.
sumowski et al., 1967
W.
Sumowski
et
al.,
eds.,
exhibition
catalogue, Handzeichnungen Alter Meister
aus Schweizer Privatbesitz, Bremen-Zurich,
1967.
sutherland, 1964
A. B. Sutherland, “A New Michelangelo
Drawing in the Louvre,” The Burlington
Magazine, CVI, 741, December 1964, pp.
572–5.
sutton, 1938
D. Sutton, Studies in the History of the Collect-
ing of Drawings in England, unpublished PhD
thesis at the University of London, 1938.
sutton, 1970
D. Sutton,
Italian Drawings from the Ash-
molean Museum, Oxford, exhibition cat-
alogue, London, 18 February–21 March
1970.
symonds, 1893
J. A. Symonds, The Life of Michelangelo
Buonarroti Based on Studies in the Archives
of the Buonarroti Family at Florence, 2 vols.,
London, 1893.
szanto, 2002
M. Szanto, “Du cabinet des fr`eres Isra¨el
et Christophe Desneux aux collections de
Franc¸ois de la Nou¨e, mise au point sur
l’historique des dessins “Desneux De la
Nou¨e,,” Revue du Louvre, LII, 4, October
2002, pp. 50–9.
taggart et al., 1965
R. Taggart et al., The Drawings Collection of
Milton McGreevy. The Nelson Gallery and
Atkins Museum Bulletin, IV, 6, 1965.
thode, 1902–13
H. Thode, Michelangelo und das Ende der Re-
naissance. Michelangelo Kritische Untersuchnu-
ngen ¨uber seine werke, 6 vols., Berlin, 1902–13.
thode, 1907
H. Thode,
“E. Steinmann, Die Sixtinis-
che Kapelle, II,” Repertorium f¨ur Kunst-
wissenschaft, XXX, 1907, pp. 69–88.
thode, 1908
H. Thode, Michelangelo Kritische Untersuch-
ungen ¨uber seine werke, vols. I and II, Berlin,
1908 (vols. IV and V of thode, 1902–13).
thode, 1912
H. Thode,
Michelangelo und das Ende der
Renaissance, vol. III, Berlin, 1912.
thode, 1913
H. Thode, Michelangelo Kritische Untersuch-
ungen ¨uber seine werke, vol. III, Verzeichnis
der Zeichnungen, Kartons und Modelle. Berlin,
1913 (vol. VI of thode, 1902–13).
thomas, 2001
B. Thomas, “‘The Lantern of Painting.’
Michelangelo, Daniele da Volterra and the
paragone,” Apollo, CLIV, n.s. 474, August
2001, pp. 46–53.
thornton and warren, 1998
D. Thornton and J. Warren, “The British
Museum’s Michelangelo Acquisitions and
the Casa Buonarroti,” Journal of the History
of Collections, X, 1, 1998, pp. 9–29.
tibal, 1911
A. Tibal, Inventaire des manuscrits de Winckel-
mann `a la Biblioth`eque Nationale, Paris, 1911.
tietze and tietze-conrat, 1944
H. Tietze and E. Tietze-Conrat, The Draw-
ings of the Venetian Painters in the 15th and 16th
Centuries, New York, 1944.
the times, 1836
Anonymous, “Review of the Exhibition
of Drawings by Michelangelo at Messrs.
Woodburns’ Gallery,” The Times, 11 July
1836 (cited from the reprint by Woodburn
issued as an unpaginated supplement to his
catalogues of the Lawrence Gallery).
titus, 1975
A. Titus, “Bartolommeo Passerotti,” no. 38,
in price amerson, 1975.
toesca, 1934
P. Toesca, “Michelangelo,” Enciclopedia Ital-
iana, XXIII, 1934, pp. 165–91.
treves, 1999–2000
L. Treves, “Le tentazione di sant’Antonio,”
in weil-garris brandt et al., 1999–2000,
pp. 129–33.
treves, 2001
L.
Treves,
“Daniele
da
Volterra
and
Michelangelo. A Collaborative Relation-
ship,” Apollo, CLIV, n.s. 474, August 2001,
pp. 36–45.
turner, 1986
N. Turner, exhibition catalogue, Florentine
Drawings of the Sixteenth Century, London,
British Museum, 1986.
turner, 1990
N. Turner, “A Drawing attributed to Gia-
como Rocca,” Master Drawings, XXVIII, 3,
Autumn 1990, pp. 268–74.
turner, 1999
N. Turner with the assistance of R. Eitel-
Porter, Italian Drawings in the Department of
Prints and Drawings in the British Museum.
Roman Baroque Drawings, c. 1620 to c. 1700,
London, 1999.
turner, 2001
N. Turner, catalogue entry no. 2 in R. Day
and J. Faber, exhibition catalogue, European
Drawings, 1570–1870, London, 2001.
turner and joannides, 2003
N. Turner and P. Joannides, “Some Draw-
ings by Michelangelo and His Circle in the
Prado,” Bolet´ın del Museo del Prado, XXI, 39,
2003, pp. 8–23.
turner et al., 1997
N. Turner, L. Hendrix, and C. Plazzotta,
The J. Paul Getty Museum, Los Angeles. Cat-
alogue of the Collections. European Drawings 3,
Los Angeles, 1997.
valenti rodin`o, 1978
S. P. Valenti Rodin`o, “Le lettere del Mari-
ette a Giovanni Gaetano Bottari nella Bib-
lioteca Corsiniana,” Paragone, XXIX, 339,
May 1978, pp. 35–62, 79–132.
valenti rodin`o, 1989
S. P. Valenti Rodin`o, Gallerie dell Accademia
di Venezia: Disegni Romani, Toscani el Napoli-
tani, Milan, 1989.
valenti rodin`o, 1996
S. P. Valenti Rodi`o, “La collezione di graﬁca
del Cardinale Silvio Valenti Gonzaga,” Studi
sul Settecento Romano, 12, 1996, pp. 131–77.
valenti rodin`o, 1998
S. P. Valenti Rodin`o, “Due disegni di
Alessandro Allori e un ipotesi per il
Bronzino,” in liebenwein and tempestini,
1998, pp. 361–8.
van regteren altena, 1966
J. Q. van Regteren Altena, Les dessins ital-
iens de la reine Christine de Su`ede, Stockholm,
1966.
van regteren altena, n.d. (c. 1972)
J. Q. van Regteren Altena, “Tre disegni di
ritratti ﬁorentini,” Studi di Storia dell’arte
in onore di Antonio Morassi, Venice, n.d.,
c. 1972, pp. 68–74.
van schaack, 1962
E. van Schaack, exhibition catalogue, Master
Drawings from Private Collections, New York,
1962.
van tuyll van serooskerken, 2000 (vt)
C. Van Tuyll van Serooskerken, The Italian
Drawings of the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Cen-
turies in the Teyler Museum, Haarlem-Ghent-
Doornspijk, 2000.
vasari, 1767–75
G. Vasari (T. Gentili, ed.), Le Vite de pi`u
eccelenti pittori, scultori ed architetti, 7 vols.,
Florence-Livorno, 1767–75.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
473
vasari, 1791–4
G. Vasari (G. Delle Valle, ed.), Le Vite de pi`u
eccelenti pittori, scultori ed architetti, 11 vols.,
Siena, 1791–4.
vasari, 1807–11
G. Vasari (G. delle Valle, ed.), Le Vite de pi`u
eccelenti pittori, scultori ed architetti, 16 vols.,
Milan, 1807–11.
venturi, 1921
A. Venturi, “Disegni inediti di Michelan-
gelo,” l’Arte, XXIV, 1921, pp. 224–7.
venturi, 1925
A. Venturi, Storia dell’Arte Italiana, IX, Parte
1, La Pittura del Cinquecento, Milan, 1925.
venturi, 1926
A. Venturi, Michelangelo, Rome, 1926.
venturi, 1939
A. Venturi, Storia dell’Arte Italiana, XI, Parte
2, L’architettura del Cinquecento, Milan, 1939.
vicioso, 1992
J. Vicioso, “La basilica di San Giovanni
dei Fiorentini in Roma: individuazione
delle vicende progettuali,” Bolletino d’Arte,
LXXII,
serie
VI,
March–April
1992,
pp. 73–114.
von einem, 1973
M. von Einem, Michelangelo, 2nd ed., Lon-
don, 1973.
von holst, 1971
C. von Holst, “Florentiner Gem¨alde und
Zeichnungen aus der Zeit von 1480 bis
1580. Kleine Beobachtungen und Erg¨an-
zungen, Mitteilungen des Kunsthistorisches
Institutes in Florenz, XV, 1971, pp. 1–64.
von holst, 1974
C. von Holst, Francesco Granacci, Munich,
1974.
von ritgen, 1865
H. von Ritgen, F¨unfzig Photographien nach
Handzeichnungen
¨Alterer
Meister
aus
der
Sammlung SR. K¨onigl. Hoheit des Grossh-
erzogs Karl Alexander von Sachsen, Leipzig,
1865.
voss, 1913
H. Voss, “ ¨Uber einige Gem¨alde und Zeich-
nungen von Meistern aus dem Kreise
Michelangelos,” Jahrbuch der k¨onigliche Pre-
ussischen Kunstsammlungen, XXXIV, 1913,
pp. 297–320.
voss, 1920
H. Voss, Die malerei der Sp¨atrenaissance in
Rom und Florenz, 2 vols., Berlin, 1920
(translated as Painting of the Late Renaissance
in Rome and Florence, 2 vols., San Francisco,
1997).
wallace, 1987a
W. Wallace, “Two Presentation Draw-
ings for Michelangelo’s Medici Chapel,”
Master Drawings, XXV, 3, Autumn 1987,
pp. 242–59.
wallace, 1987b
W. Wallace, “Michelangelo’s project for a
reliquary tribune in San Lorenzo,” Architec-
tura, 1987, pp. 45–57.
wallace, 1995
W. Wallace, “Instruction and Originality
in Michelangelo’s Drawings,” in A. Ladis
and C. Wood, eds., The Craft of Art: Orig-
inality and Industry in the Italian Renaissance
and Baroque Workshop, Athens, Georgia, and
London, 1995, pp. 113–33
wallace, 1998
W. Wallace, Michelangelo. The Complete
Sculpture, Painting, Architecture, New York,
1998.
wallace, 2000
W. Wallace, “Michelangelo, Tiberio Cal-
cagni and the Florentine Piet`a,” Artibus et
Historiae, XXI, 42, 2000, pp. 81–100.
ward, 1982
R. Ward, Baccio Bandinelli as a Draughts-
man, thesis submitted for the PhD degree,
London,
Courtauld
Institute
of
Art,
1982.
ward, 1988
R.Ward, exhibition catalogue, Baccio Bandi-
nelli as a Draughtsman, Cambridge, The
Fitzwilliam Museum, 3 May–3 July 1988.
warwick, 2000
G. Warwick, The Arts of Collecting. Padre
Sebastiano Resta and the Market for Draw-
ings in Early Modern Europe, Cambridge,
2000.
wasserman, 1969
J. Wasserman, “Michelangelo’s Virgin and
Child with St Anne at Oxford,” The Burling-
ton Magazine, CXI, 794, May 1969, pp. 122–
31.
wazbinski, 1983
Z. Wazbinski, “La Cappella dei Medici
e l’origine dell’ Accademia del Disegno,”
Firenze e la Toscana del Medici nell’Europa del
’500, Florence, 1983, pp. 55–69.
wazbinski, 1987
Z. Wazbinski, L’Accademia Medicea del Dis-
egno a Firenze nel Cinquecento, Idea e Isti-
tuzione, 2 vols., Florence, 1987.
weber, 1969
G. Weber, “Bemerkungen zu Michelange-
los Christus in S. Maria sopra Minerva,”
Wiener Jahrbuch f¨ur Kunstgeschichte, XXII,
1969, pp. 201–3.
weigel, 1865
R. Weigel, Die Werke der Maler in ihren
Handzeichnungen. Beschreibendes Verzeichnis
der
in
K¨upfer
gestochenen,
lithographirten
und photograﬁerten Facsimiles von Original-
zeichnungen grossen Meister, 2 vols., Leipzig,
1865.
weil-garris brandt et al., 1999–2000
K. Weil-Garris Brandt et al., exhibition cat-
alogue, Giovinezza di Michelangelo, Palazzo
Vecchio Florence, 1999–2000.
weil-garris posner, 1973
K. Weil-Garris Posner, “Comments on the
Medici Chapel and Pontormo’s Lunette at
Poggio a Caiano,” The Burlington Magazine,
CXV, 847, October 1973, pp. 641–5.
weinberger, 1945
M. Weinberger, “C. de Tolnay: The Youth
of Michelangelo,” The Art Bulletin, XXVII,
1, March 1945, pp. 69–74.
weinberger, 1952
M. Weinberger,
“A Bronze Statuette in
the Frick Collection and Its Connection
with Michelangelo,” Gazette des Beaux-Arts,
VIe p´eriode, XXXIX, 999, February 1952,
pp. 103–14.
weinberger, 1967
M. Weinberger, Michelangelo the Sculptor, 2
vols., London, 1967.
whistler, 1992
C. Whistler, in white, whistler, and
harrison, 1992, no. 8, p. 38.
white, whistler, and harrison, 1992
C. White, C. Whistler, and C. Harrison,
exhibition catalogue, Old Master Drawings
from the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, 1992.
wickhoff, 1891
F. Wickhoff, “Die Italienischen Hand-
zeichnungen der Albertina. I Theil: Die
venezianische, die lombardische und die
bolognesische Schule,” Jahrbuch der Kunst-
historischen
Sammlungen
des
Allerh¨ochsten
Kaiserhauses, XII, 2, 1891, pp. ccv–cccxiv.
wickhoff, 1892
F. Wickhoff,
“Die Italienischen Handze-
ichnungen der Albertina. II Theil: Die
r¨omische Schule,” Jahrbuch der Kunsthis-
torischen Sammlungen des Allerhˆochsten Kaiser-
hauses, XIII, 2, 1892, pp. clxxv–cclxxxiii.
wickhoff, 1899
F. Wickhoff,
“ ¨Uber einige italienischen
Zeichnungen im British Museum,” Jahrbuch
der K¨oniglisch Preussischen Kunstsammlungen,
XX, 1899, pp. 202–15.
wiemers, 2000
M. Wiemers, “‘Und wo bleibt meine
Zeichnung.’ Zur Werkegenese im bild-
hauerischen Oeuvre des Michelangelo-
Rivalen Baccio Bandinelli,” in rohlmann
and thielemann, 2000, pp. 235–64.
wilde, 1927
J. Wilde, “Zur Kritik der Haarlemer
Michelangelo-Zeichnungen,” Belvedere, XI,
59, 1927, pp. 142–7.
wilde, 1928
J. Wilde, “Due Modelli di Michelangelo
ricomposti,” Dedalo, VIII, April 1928, pp.
653–71.
wilde, 1932–34
J.
Wilde,
“Eine
Studie
Michelangelos
nach der Antike,” Mitteilungen des Kunsthis-
torisches Instituts in Florenz, IV, 1932–4, pp.
41–64.
wilde, 1949
J. Wilde, catalogue entries on Michelangelo
in popham and wilde, 1949.
wilde, 1953a (w)
J. Wilde, Italian Drawings in the Department
of Prints and Drawings in the British Museum.
Michelangelo and his Studio, London, 1953.

474
BIBLIOGRAPHY
wilde, 1953b
J. Wilde,
“Michelangelo and Leonardo,”
The Burlington Magazine, XCV, 600, March
1953, pp. 65–77.
wilde, 1953 (Exh.)
J. Wilde, exhibition catalogue, A Summary
Catalogue of an Exhibition of Drawings by
Michelangelo, London, The British Museum,
1953.
wilde, 1954
J. Wilde, Michelangelo, the Group of Victory,
Oxford, 1954.
wilde, 1959
J.
Wilde, “‘Cartonetti’
by
Michelan-
gelo,” The Burlington Magazine, CI, 680,
November 1959, pp. 37–381.
wilde, 1978
J. Wilde, Michelangelo, Six Lectures, Oxford,
1978.
williams, 1831
D. E. Williams, The Life and Correspondence
of Sir Thomas Lawrence, Kt., President of the
Royal Academy . . . , 2 vols., London, 1831.
wind, 2000
E. Wind (E. Sears, ed.), The Religious Sym-
bolism of Michelangelo. The Sistine Ceiling,
Oxford, 2000.
winner, 1994
M. Winner, “Il linguaggio del corpo di
Giona,” in K. Weil-Garris Brandt, ed.,
Michelangelo. La Caprella Sistina, Atti del
Convegno Internazionale di Studi, Roma,
marzo 1990, Novara, 1994, pp. 195–200.
wittkower, 1933
R. Wittkower, “Zur Peterskuppel Miche-
langelos,” Zeitschrift f¨ur Kunstgeschichte, II,
1933, pp. 348–70.
wittkower, 1937–8
R. Wittkower,
“Physiognomical Experi-
ments by Michelangelo and His Pupils,”
Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes,
I, 1937–8, pp. 183–4.
wittkower, 1962
R. Wittkower,
“La cupola di San Pietro
di Michelangelo. Riesame critico delle tes-
timonianze contemporanee,” Arte Antica e
moderna, V, 1962, pp. 390–437.
wittkower, 1964
R. Wittkower, “La cupola di San Pietro di
Michelangelo. Riesame critico delle testi-
monianze contemporanee,” Florence, 1964
(edition in book form of wittkower,
1962).
wittkower, 1970
R. Wittkower, “Michelangelo’s Dome of
St. Peter’s,” lecture of 1970 ﬁrst printed in
wittkower 1978, pp. 72–89.
wittkower, 1978
R. Wittkower, Idea and Image, Studies in the
Italian Renaissance, London, 1978.
w¨olfﬂin, 1891
H. W¨olfﬂin, Die Jugendwerke des Michelan-
gelo, Munich, 1891.
wood, 1994
J. Wood, “Rubens’s Collection of Draw-
ings: His Attributions and Inscriptions,”
Wallraf-Richartz-Jahrbuch, LV, 1994, pp.
333–51.
wood, 2003
J. Wood, “Nicholas Lanier (1588–1666) and
the Origins of Drawings Collecting in Stu-
art England,” in baker, elam, and warwick,
2003, pp. 85–122.
woodburn, 1835
S. Woodburn, The Lawrence Gallery. First
Exhibition, May 1835. A Catalogue of One
Hundred Original Drawings by Sir P. P.
Rubens Collected by Sir Thomas Lawrence,
Late President of the Royal Academy, London,
1835.
woodburn, 1836a
S. Woodburn, Some Account of the Drawings
by Raffaelle Sanzio of Urbino in the Lawrence
Gallery [individually paginated supplement
to] The Lawrence Gallery. Ninth Exhibition,
June 1836. A Catalogue of One Hundred Orig-
inal Drawings by RAFFAELLE Collected by Sir
Thomas Lawrence, Late President of the Royal
Academy), London, 1836.
woodburn, 1836b
S.
Woodburn,
The
Lawrence
Gallery.
Tenth
Exhibition,
July
1836.
A
Cata-
logue of One Hundred Original Drawings
by MICHAEL ANGELO collected by Sir Thomas
Lawrence, Late President of the Royal Academy,
London, 1836.
woodburn, 1836c
S. Woodburn, The Lawrence Gallery. Sev-
enth Exhibition, April 1836. A Catalogue of
One Hundred Original Drawings by Zuc-
chero, Andrea del Sarto, Polidore da Caravaggio
and Fra Bartolomeo Collected by Sir Thomas
Lawrence, Late President of the Royal Academy,
London, 1836.
woodburn, 1842
(S. Woodburn), Catalogues of Original De-
signs by Michael Angelo and Raffaelle, Proposed
to Be Purchased by Subscription and Exhibited
in the New University Galleries, Oxford, 1842
[by Woodburn, but unsigned].
woodburn, 1846
(S.
Woodburn),
Catalogues
of
Original
Designs by Michael Angelo and Raffaelle in
the New University Galleries, Oxford, 1846
[Printed for J. Fisher but in fact copying
Woodburn, 1842].
woodburn, 1853
(S. Woodburn), The Lawrence Gallery. A
Series of Fac-similes of Original Drawings
by M. Angelo Buonarroti Selected from the
Matchless Collection Formed by Sir Thomas
Lawrence, Late President of the Royal Academy,
London, London, 1853 [by Woodburn but
unsigned].
wright, 1730
E. Wright, Some Observations Made Travelling
through France, Italy, etc., in the years 1720,
1721, and 1722, London, 1730.
wright, 1999
T. D. Wright, exhibition catalogue, Master
Drawings, Los Angeles, 1999.
zentai, 1998
L. Zentai, exhibition catalogue, Sixteenth-
Century Central Italian Drawings, an Exhibi-
tion from the Museum’s Collection, Budapest,
Sz´epm¨uv´eszeti M´uzeum, 17 September–8
November 1998.
zoff, 1923
O. Zoff, Die Handzeichnungen des Michelan-
gelo Buonarotti in Auswahl Herausgegeben,
Potsdam, 1923.

INDEX 1
 drawings by and after michelangelo and his close
associates in collections other than that of the
ashmolean museum; other works of art and architecture
by michelangelo and works executed by other artists to
his designs (excluding appendices)
The numbers in bold type refer to catalogue entries, the others refer to pages
Lost works
David in bronze, last recorded in 1795 at the
Chˆateau de Villeroy
2, 25
The Fall of Phaeton (coloured copy after
Michelangelo by Francesco Salviati)
24
Ganymede (copy after Michelangelo by
Daniele da Volterra).
29
Hercules (statue in marble carved in 1493; last
recorded at Fontainebleau in the eighteenth
century)
3
Hercules and Antaeus (wax model presented by
Michelangelo to Leone Leoni)
23
Leda (painting taken to France by Antonio
Mini and destroyed in the seventeenth
century)
8, 26
AMSTERDAM
Historical Museum
A18115: The Entombment with Five Figures (by
an unidentiﬁed draughtsman, perhaps from
the circle of Daniele da Volterra, probably
after a lost drawing by Michelangelo)
51
Rijksmuseum
53:140/Corpus 435: Study for the Equestrian
Statue of Henri II and Its Base
55, 52
AREZZO
Casa Vasari
Cod.12, cap. 22/Corpus 593: First Diagram of
the Vault Construction of the Cappella del Re de
Francia in St. Peter’s
48
Cod.12, cap. 24/Corpus 594: Second Diagram
of the Vault Construction of the Cappella del Re
de Francia in St. Peter’s
48
BASSANO ROMANO
San Vincenzo Martire
The Risen Christ (ﬁrst version of
Michelangelo’s The Risen Christ in Santa
Maria sopra Minerva, re-worked by another
hand)
19
BAYONNE
Mus´ee Bonnat
Inv. 650 verso/Bean 69/Corpus 337:
Study for the Bacchanal of Infants
34
Inv. 680/Bean 65/Corpus 75: Sketches for the
Raising of Lazarus for Sebastiano del
Piombo
35, 47
Inv. 1216/Bean 70: Fragment of an Order Sheet
for Marble Blocks
23
Inv. 1217/Bean 67/Corpus 346: Compositional
Sketch for the Last Judgement
53
Inv. 595/Bean 73: Portrait of a Young Man
(Tommaso de’ Cavalieri?)
33, 42
BERLIN
Kupferstichkabinett
Inv. 1363/Corpus 27: Various Sketches and a
Study for the Head of a Madonna
1
Inv. 15305 recto/Corpus 55: Modello for the
Tomb of Pope Julius II
52, 18, 35, 63, 76
Inv. 15305 verso/Corpus 55: Studies of Legs
18, 81
Inv. 20976: The ground plan of San Giovanni
dei Fiorentini (After Michelangelo’s lost model
by an unidentiﬁed seventeenth-century?
draughtman)
105
Collection Dr. W. Kreis (Formerly)
Modello for the Tomb of the Magniﬁci (Indirect
copy after Paris, Louvre 837/J26/Corpus
194 by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman)
63
BESANC¸ ON
Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts
D3117/Corpus 319: Studies of Facial Details
(after Michelangelo by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
20, 40
BOSTON
Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum
Hadley no. 7/Corpus 426:
Piet`a
7, 38, 54, 56, 57
Hadley p. 67: Copy of Michelangelo’s Study for
Haman (BM W13/Corpus 163; Perhaps
indirect, after Windsor PW 450)
36
BRUGES
Notre Dame
Madonna
1, 2, 21
BRUSSELS
Emile Wauters Collection (Formerly)
Frey 1909–11, 249a recto: Figure Sketches
(after Michelangelo by an unidentiﬁed
associate or pupil)
43, 59
Frey 1909–11, 249a recto:
A Letter
43, 59
BUDAPEST
Museum of Fine Arts
Inv. 1959 recto: The Brazen Serpent (copy of
upper episode on Cat. 34 by Raffaello da
Montelupo)
34
Inv. 1959 verso: Figures from Michelangelo’s
Modello for a Ducal Tomb (partial, after Louvre
Inv. 837/J27/Corpus 186 by Raffaello da
Montelupo)
34
Inv. K67.35: Christ on the Cross (After British
Museum W67/Corpus 411, by an
unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman)
67
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
The Fogg Art Museum
Paintings
The Resurrection (painting by Marcello Venusti
after Michelangelo’s drawing BM
W52/Corpus 258)
38
Drawings
1932-152 recto/Corpus 438: Design for a
Hanging Lamp and Other Studies
30, 77
1998-194: A Window for Palazzo Farnese
(Copy of Cat. 55 recto, by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
55
CAMBRIDGE, UK
The Fitzwilliam Museum
3056 recto/Corpus 401: Christ Taking Leave of
His Mother
50
475

476
INDEX 1
3056 verso/Corpus 401: Christ Appearing to
His Mother on the Morning of the Resurrection?
or Christ Taking Leave of His Mother
50
1070-2, fol. 8 recto: An Antique Statue of
Venus (part copy of Cat. 58 by Sir Edward
Burne-Jones)
58
1070-2, fol. 9 recto: The Brazen Serpent
(part copy of Cat. 34 by Sir Edward
Burne-Jones)
34
1070-2, fol. 11 recto: A Beckoning Nude Man
(part copy of Cat. 59 by Sir Edward
Burne-Jones)
59
1070-2, fol. 16 recto: The Brazen Serpent
(part copy of Cat. 34 by Sir Edward
Burne-Jones)
34
1070-2, fol. 17 recto: The Brazen Serpent
(part copy of Cat. 34 by Sir Edward
Burne-Jones)
34
1070-2, fol. 26 recto: Hercules and the
Erymanthian Boar (copy after Cat. 29 verso
by Sir Edward Burne-Jones)
29
1070-2, fol. 39 recto: A Groom Assisting a
Cavalryman to Mount a Horse (copy after Cat.
7 verso by Sir Edward Burne-Jones)
7
1070-2, fol. 40 recto: Details from the tomb of
the Magniﬁci (part copy of Cat. 64)
64
1070-2, fol. 40 verso: Partial copy of Cat. 5, by
Sir Edward Burne-Jones
5
1070–2, fol. 41 recto: Partial copy of Cat. 5, by
Sir Edward Burne-Jones
5
PD 122-1961: A Standing Male nude in Left
Proﬁle (adapted from the wax model Casa
Buonarroti Inv. 521 after Michelangelo, by
Bartolommeo Passerotti)
114
CHANTILLY
Mus´ee Cond´e
Lanfranc de Panthou 28 recto/Corpus 24:
Studies of Nude and Draped Figures, in Part
After the Antique
40, 58
Lanfranc de Panthou 39: Copy after the Last
Judgement (indirect copy, by a draughtman in
the circle of Adamo Scultori)
93
Lanfranc de Panthou 48 recto and verso:
“Prudentia” (copy of a lost drawing by
Michelangelo, by Raffaello da Montelupo)
66
CUMBERLAND
G. McKay Collection (in 1955)
Christ on the Cross (after British Museum
W67/Corpus 411, by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
67
DETROIT
Detroit Institute of Arts
27.2 recto/Corpus 120: Sketch for the Layout
of the Sistine Ceiling and for Figural Details
40
27.2 verso/Corpus 120: Studies of Seated
Figures and Arms
40
DONNINGTON PRIORY
Gathorne-Hardy Collection (formerly)
Corpus 382 recto: Study of a Torso
33, 49
Corpus 382 verso: Architectural Sketches
49
See Christie’s, New York, 24 January 2006,
lot 18
Unnumbered recto: The Entombment with
Five Figures (by an unidentiﬁed draughtsman
[sometimes attributed to Jacomo del Duca]
probably a facsimile of a lost drawing by
Michelangelo)
33, 51
Unnumbered verso: Ground plans of several
buildings, some perhaps related to San Giovanni
dei Fiorentini (by an unidentiﬁed draughtsman
[sometimes attributed to Jacomo del Duca]
probably a facsimile of a lost drawing by
Michelangelo). See Christie’s, New York,
25 January 2005, lot 26
33, 51
See also Washington 1991-217
DRESDEN
Staatliche Kunstsammlungen,
Kupferstichkabinett
C.49 recto/Corpus 276: Modello for a
Monumental Altar?
52
C.49 verso/Corpus 276: Ground Plan for San
Giovanni dei Fiorentini (after a lost drawing by
Michelangelo by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-
century draughtsman)
54
1989-106, Christ on the Cross (after British
Museum W67/Corpus 411, perhaps by
Giulio Clovio)
67
C.54 Copy of Two Standing Men (After Cat. 24
verso by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman)
24
DUBLIN
National Gallery of Ireland
Inv. 2666: Various Copies After Lost and
Surviving Drawings by Michelangelo
(by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman)
59
DUSSELDORF
Museum Kunst Palast
FP 138: Attack of the Serpents
34
FP 139: Attack of the Serpents
34
FP 151 recto: The Brazen Serpent (indirect
copy of upper episode on Cat. 34 via Ufﬁzi
606E recto, by Raffaello da Montelupo; by
Guglielmo della Porta or Giovanni Antonio
Dosio)
34
FP 151 verso: Figures from a Lost Drawing by
Michelangelo for the Magniﬁci Tomb (indirect
copy after Ufﬁzi 607E by Raffaello da
Montelupo; by Guglielmo della Porta or
Giovanni Antonio Dosio)
34
EDINBURGH
National Gallery of Scotland
Department of Drawings
RSA256: Copy of a Section of the Last
Judgement (by William Young Ottley)
11
RSA970: Copy after CB11F/B73/
Corpus 209 (by an unidentiﬁed
seventeenth-century draughtsman)
22, 35
FLORENCE
Museums and Galleries
Galleria dell’Accademia
Sculpture
David
2, 3, 108
Saint Matthew
1, 3
The Four Prigioni
18
Comprising The Young Slave
20
The Bearded Slave
8, 20
The Atlas
20
The Awakening Slave
20
The Palestrina Piet`a
48
Painting
Venus and Cupid (painting after
Michelangelo’s design by Jacopo
Pontormo)
110
Museo Nazionale del Bargello
Bacchus
8, 74
Apollo?
28
Archivio Buonarroti (now housed in Casa
Buonarroti)
II-III, fol. 3 verso/B287/Corpus 15: Sketches
of a Male Nude
1
V, 66 fol. 239 verso/B353/Corpus 200:
Sketches of Pilasters,
38
VI, 24 verso/B346/Corpus 259: Sketch for the
Risen Christ
38
XI, fol. 722 verso/B347/Corpus 584: The
Ground Plan of a House
23
XII, fol. 46/B360: Bending Figure in Left
Proﬁle (probably by Antonio Mini)
39
XIII, fol. 127/B339/Corpus 539: Template for
the Frame of the Door between the Vestibule and
the Reading-Room of the Laurentian Library
48
XIII, fol. 148/B367/Corpus 252: Sketch for
the Risen Christ
38
XIII, fol. 158–159/B336/Corpus 536: Template
for a Cornice
48
XIII, fol. 160/B350/Corpus 366: Crowning
Element for a Papal Tomb
25
Casa Buonarroti
Painting
The Epifania (unﬁnished painting by Ascanio
Condivi prepared in 1895-9-15-518
∗/W75/
Corpus 389)
19
Sculpture
The Battle of the Lapiths and Centaurs
4, 7
The Madonna of the Stairs
19, 36
Inv. 191: A Male Torso (terracotta model,
probably for a prigiono)
41
Inv. 192: A Mature Man Overcoming a Young
Man (model in clay for a group on the Tomb
of Julius II)
20, 41
Inv. 195: Model for a Cruciﬁx (model in carved
wood)
57
Inv. 521: A Standing Male Nude (wax model
probably cast from a lost clay model by
Michelangelo)
114

INDEX 1
477
Disegni di archittetura
2A recto/B24/Corpus 517: Studies After
Details of Roman Architecture
39, 48
7A/B262/Corpus 530: Sketches of Architectural
Proﬁles for the Vestibule of the Laurentian
Library
47
9A recto/B62/Corpus 202: Sketches for
Pilaster Bases
47
14A recto/B117/Corpus 577: Plan for the
Defences of the Porta al Prato
41
14A verso/B117/Corpus 577: Studies for
ﬁgures in the Last Judgement
41
17A recto/B113/Corpus 579: Sketches for
Bastions
56
20A recto/B118/Corpus 578: Fortiﬁcations for
the Porta al Prato
56
27A verso/B182: The Ground-Plan of a Bastion
(by Michelangelo); The Brazen Serpent; A
Standing Prigione (variants on
Michelangelesque motives by Antonio
Mini)
24, 42, 78
31A/B152/Corpus 600: Template for a
Section of the Wooden Model for the Drum of
St. Peter’s
48, 54, 55
33A verso/B4/Corpus 585: The Ground
Plan of a House
23
36A recto/B161/Corpus 611: Ground Plan
for San Giovanni dei Fiorentini
54
36A verso/B161/Corpus 611: Sketch
for an Interior Elevation of San Giovanni dei
Fiorentini
54
37A verso/B83/Corpus 226: Studies for the
Vestibule of the Laurentian Library; A Hand
39
40A recto/B98/Corpus 177: Sketch for a
Ciborium?
37
40A verso/B98/Corpus 177: Two
Men Wrestling [Hercules and Antaeus?]; A
Male Proﬁle (variations on Michelangelesque
motives by Antonio Mini)
30, 76
42A recto/B78/Corpus 541: Study for the
Fac¸ade of an Early Project for the Laurentian
Library
39, 56
44A verso/B43/Corpus 498: Sketches
for the Fac¸ade of San Lorenzo and the Tomb
of Julius II
37
45A/B245/Corpus 497: Modello for the Fac¸ade
of San Lorenzo
42, 52, Introduction to
9–16, 53
46A recto/B94/Corpus 277: Sketch for a
Papal Tomb in San Lorenzo
39
49A recto/B59/Corpus 182: Studies for Wall
Tombs and for a Free-Standing Tomb
38
49A verso/B59/Corpus 182: Fragment of the
Template of a Column for the Wooden Model for
the Fac¸ade of San Lorenzo
54
51A/B246/Corpus 504: Section Diagram for
the Wooden Model for the Fac¸ade of San
Lorenzo
47
52A/B256/Corpus 188: Unﬁnished Modello for
the Tomb of a Pope for One of the lavamani in the
New Sacristy
38, 46, 25
60A/B92/Corpus 537: Template for a Cornice,
Perhaps for the Vestibule of the Laurentian
Library
46
62A recto/B84/Corpus 532: Proﬁles of
Cornices
38
64A/B46/Corpus 508: Column Section for the
Fac¸ade of San Lorenzo
47
65A/B257/Corpus 548: Sketch for a Window
of Palazzo Farnese
55
71A recto/B58/Corpus 153: Sketches for a
Free-Standing Tomb for the New Sacristy
38
71A verso/B58/Corpus 153: Fragment of the
Template of a Column for the Wooden Model for
the Fac¸ade of San Lorenzo
54
72A recto/B63/Corpus 199: Sketch for a
Throne for the Attic of a Ducal Tomb 37, 47, 52
73A verso/B97/Corpus 274: Study for a
Lavabo
37, 47
73Abis verso/B164/Corpus 615: Study for the
Porta Pia
56
78A/B86/Corpus 509: Elevation and Plan for a
Block for a Capital for the Fac¸ade of San
Lorenzo
47
79A recto/B87/Corpus 559: Sketch Ground
Plan of the Piccola Librereria Secreta of the
Laurentian Library
46, 56
80A/B88/Corpus 560: Plan of the Piccola
Librereria Secreta of the Laurentian Library
46
84A recto/B166/Corpus 614: Elevation for the
Porta Pia; Fragments of Proﬁles for the Dome of
St. Peter’s
38, 54
85A/B101/Corpus 620: Sketch of a Window
56
88A recto/B57/Corpus 181: Sketches for Wall
Tombs
38
92A recto/B89/Corpus 525: Studies of the
Staircase of the Laurentian Library
46, 55
92A verso/B89/Corpus 525: Studies of the
Staircase of the Laurentian Library
46, 45, 55
96A recto/B79/Corpus 551: Modello for a
Door
37
96A verso/B79/Corpus 551: Studies for Doors,
Windows, and Niches
37, 52
97A recto/B167/Corpus 616: Study for a
Tabernacle in the Vestibule of the Palazzo dei
Conservatori
37, 55
97A verso/B167/Corpus 616: Sketches for the
Porta Pia
37, 52, 55
98A/B255/Corpus 550: Modello for the
Exterior Door of the Reading Room of the
Laurentian Library
56
102A recto/B168/Corpus 618: Study for the
Porta Pia
55
103A recto/B264/Corpus 613: Studies for a
Wall Tomb
37, 44, 45
103A verso/B264/Corpus 613: The Lower
Section of a Template for a Model for an Interior
Window for the Drum of St. Peter’s
48, 45, 54
104A/B162/Corpus 624: Sketch for the
Ground Plan of the Sforza Chapel
53
106A verso/B169/Corpus 619: Sketches for the
Porta Pia and the Equestrian Momument to
Henri II
37, 55
112A verso/B100/Corpus 197: Study for a
Tabernacle Niche
37
114A verso/B37/Corpus 176: Sketches for
Wall-Tombs
38
116A/B251/Corpus 190: Analysis of the
Columnar Structure of a Papal Tomb in the Choir
of San Lorenzo
39
117A recto/B156/Corpus 587: Ground Plan
for a Hospice at Altopascio; Half of the Beginning
of a Ground Plan for San Giovanni dei
Fiorentini?
54
117A verso/B156/Corpus 587: Elevation
of the Lantern of St. Peter’s; Ground Plan for a
Hospice at Altopascio; Half of the Beginning
of a Ground Plan for San Giovanni dei
Fiorentini?
54
119A recto/B156/Corpus 588: The Ground
Plan of a House
23
120A/B159/Corpus 610: Ground Plan for San
Giovanni dei Fiorentini
54
121A/B156/Corpus 607: Ground Plan for San
Giovanni dei Fiorentini
54
123A/B157/Corpus 608: Ground Plan for the
Sforza Chapel
47, 53
124A recto/B160/Corpus 612: Ground-Plan
for San Giovanni dei Fiorentini
55, 54, 105
124A verso/B160/Corpus 612: The Upper
Section of a Template for a Model for an Interior
Window for the Drum of St. Peter’s
48, 45, 54
126A/B91/Corpus 542: Design for the
ceiling of the Reading Room of the Biblioteca
Laurenziana
39
127A/B259/Corpus 206: Modello for the
Decoration of the Cupola of the New Sacristy 47
128A/B95/Corpus 279: Half Elevation of a
Papal Tomb in the Choir of San
Lorenzo
38, 46, 39
Disegni di Figura
1F/B8/Corpus 158: Study for the head of the
Virgin in the Doni Tondo
38, 39, 51
2F recto/B133/Corpus 327: Cleopatra
17, 19
3F/B190/Corpus 309: Head of a Old Woman
in Left Proﬁle
30
5F/B180/Corpus 137: Diagrammatic Head of
Man
74
7F recto/B122/Corpus 301: Study for the
Head of the Leda
56
8F/B20/Corpus 122: Study of a Right
Arm
40
9F/B5/Corpus 40: Outline Study of the Torso
of a Man Helping Another to Mount a
Horse
50, 7
10F/B71/Corpus 224: Studies for the Body and
Legs of a Seated Figure (for one of the Dukes
in the New Sacristy)
52, 76
11F/B73/Corpus 209: Studies of Legs for a
Figure in the New Sacristy
22, 52
12F/B176/Corpus 159: The Reading Man in
the Haman Pendentive and Hand and Arm
Studies
40
15F/B179/Corpus 326: Studies for the Head of
Victory
74
16F/B69/Corpus 234: Study after a Nude
Torso of Venus
41, 58
17F/B125/Corpus 79: Three Figures in Violent
Motion
37

478
INDEX 1
18F/B127/Corpus 82: Three Figures in Violent
Motion
37
19F recto/B150/Corpus 318: Studies for
Daniele’s Saint John in the Wilderness, the
Staircase of the Laurentian Library, and a Wall
Tomb
38, 43, 44, 45
19F verso/B150/Corpus 318: Studies for
Daniele’s Saint John in the Wilderness, the
Staircase of the Laurentian Library, and a Wall
Tomb
38, 40, 44, 45
23F/B9/Corpus 29: Study for the Leg of the
Christ Child for the Doni Tondo
39
24F/B242/Corpus 160: Study for the Figure at
the Left of the Naason Lunette?
13, 17
28F/B213/Corpus 126: Studies After a Nude
Statue of Venus and a Male Head (after a lost
drawing by Michelangelo by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
40, 58
32F/B139/Corpus 254: A Reclining Guard in
the Resurrection (ﬁgure study for PW427
recto/Corpus 255)
38
34F/B171: Figure Studies (by Antonio
Mini)
74
35F/B135/Corpus 90: Christ in Limbo
39
37F/B170: Figure Studies; An Episode of the
Brazen Serpents (variant on Michelangelesque
motives, by Antonio
Mini)
34, 73, 74, 78
38F/B124/Corpus 83: Three Figures in Violent
Motion
37
39F/B234/Corpus 303: A Standing Female?
Figure in Right Proﬁle
13
41F/B70/Corpus 231: Study After a Nude
Torso of Venus
58
42F/B241/Corpus 59: Sketches of a Roman
Trophy
18
43F recto/B239/Corpus 128: A Shouting Man
Wearing a Turban (by an unidentiﬁed
draughtsman)
41
46F recto/B149/Corpus 378: A Torso, for the
Dead Christ?
49
47F/B22/Corpus 124: A Male Head Looking
Downwards
38, 39
52F recto/B227/Corpus 142; Sketches for
Body Parts of Ignudi
38, 40
53F recto/B174/Corpus 229bis: A Standing
Female Nude (Venus?); The Bed of Polycleitus,
Hercules and Antaeus, and Other
Sketches
38, 39, 21, 30, 74
53F verso/B174/Corpus 229bis: The Head of a
Satyr, a Man Carrying a Child on His Shoulders
(partial copy after Ufﬁzi 621E/B131/Corpus
70, by Antoni Mini)
66, 74
54F recto/B146/Corpus 284: Kneeling Man
Seen from Rear
40
58F/B129/Corpus 78: Christ Transﬁgured
Between Moses and Elijah
37
59F/B2/Corpus 32: Head of a Man with an
Elaborate Headdress
2
61F recto/B137/Corpus 261: Sketch for the
Risen Christ
41, 38
61F verso/B137/Corpus 261: Sketch for the
Risen Christ
38
64F/B238/Corpus 132: Sketches for the
Expulsion from Paradise on the Sistine
Ceiling
39
65F recto/B142/Corpus 347: Compositional
study for the Last Judgement
39, 42, 53, 41
65F verso/B142/Corpus 347: Sketch for the
Resurrection of Christ
38
66F recto/B136/Corpus 262: Sketch for the
Risen Christ
3, 9, 41, 38
67F/B128/Corpus 80: Three Figures in Violent
Motion
37
68F/B130/Corpus 81: Three Figures in Violent
Motion
37
69F recto/B143/Corpus 91: Sketch for
Sebastiano del Piombo’s Ubeda Piet`a
38, 45
69F verso/B143/Corpus 91: Studies for the
Last Judgement
39, 40
71F/B121/Corpus 239: The Virgin and
Child
42
72F/B203: Virgin and Child (probably by
Niccol`o Tribolo)
42
73F/B6/Corpus 49: Studies for the Battle of
Cascina
7
74F/B177: Figure Studies (by Antonio
Mini)
74
75F/B15/Corpus 145: Sketches for Sistine
Ignudi
3, 9, 41, 74
Museo dell’Opera del Duomo
The Piet`a with Four Figures
48
Gallerie degli Ufﬁzi
Dipartimento della pittura
The Doni Tondo
51, 1
Gabinetto disegni e stampe
Disegni di Architettura
3185A: Ground Plan for San Giovanni dei
Fiorentini (fair copy by Tiberio Calacagni of a
lost drawing by Michelangelo)
54, 105
3912A: Details of the Modello for the Tomb of the
Magniﬁci (direct? copy after Inv. 837/J26/
Corpus 194, by Raffaello da Montelupo
[previously attributed to Aristotile da
Sangallo])
63
5348A, left side: Copies After: CB96A verso/
B79/Corpus 551; BM W37 recto/Corpus 554;
Cat. 55 (by Francesco Buonarroti)
37
5348A, right side: Copies After CB97A recto
and verso/B167/Corpus 616; CB96A recto/
B79/Corpus 551 (by Francesco
Buonarroti)
37, 56
5350A, left side: Copies After Cat. 55 recto;
CB103A verso/B264/Corpus 613 and Lost
Drawings? (by Francesco Buonarroti)
37, 55
5350A, right side: Copies After Lost Drawings
by Michelangelo (by Francesco Buonarroti) 37
5352A, left side: Copy After a Version of Cat.
63 (by Francesco Buonarroti)
37
5352A, right side: Copies After BMW26
recto/Corpus 180 and a Version of Cat. 63 (by
Francesco Buonarroti)
37
5355A left side: Copy After CB73Abis
verso/B164/Corpus 615 (by Francesco
Buonarroti)
37
5355A, right side: Copy After the recto and verso
of BM W26/Corpus 180 (by Francesco
Buonarroti)
37
5358A left side: Copy After a Lost Drawing
Variously Interpreted as a Free-Standing Tomb or
a Monumental Altar (by Francesco
Buonarroti)
37
5358A right side: Copies After the Recto and
Verso of CB 106A/B169 /Corpus 619 (by
Francesco Buonarroti)
37
5390A left side: Copy-Variant After
CB73A/B97/Corpus 274
37
5390A right side: Copy After
CB112A/B100/Corpus 197
37
5394A left side: Modiﬁed Copy After
CB40A/B98/Corpus 177 and Copy After Cat.
25 (by Francesco Buonarroti)
37, 25
5394A right side: Copy After CB72A/B63/
Corpus 199 and Copy After a Complex Wall or
Fountain Design, Perhaps by Michelangelo
(by Francesco Buonarroti)
37
5400A left side: Copies After CB19F
verso/B150/Corpus 368 and 62A
recto/B84/Corpus 532 (by Francesco
Buonarroti)
38
5400A right side: Copies After CB114A/B37/
Corpus 176 and CB19F verso/B150/Corpus 368
(by Francesco Buonarroti)
38
5403A left side: Copies After BM W25/Corpus
184 and CB71A/B58/Corpus 183 (by Francesco
Buonarroti)
38
5403A right side: Copies After
CB49A/B59/Corpus 182, 128A/ B87/Corpus
279 and Lost or Unidentiﬁed Drawings (by
Francesco Buonarroti)
38
5406A left side: Copies after CB84A
recto/B166/Corpus 614, CB52A/B258/Corpus
188 and CB114A recto/B37/ Corpus 176 (by
Francesco Buonarroti)
38
5406A right side: Copies and Adaptations After
CB 114A recto/B37/Corpus 176; W38/Corpus
561 and Christ Church JBS 64 verso/Corpus 280
(by Francesco Buonarroti)
21, 38
Disegni Esposti
598E recto/B185/Corpus 307: Zenobia
36, 54, 31, 32
598E verso/B185/Corpus 307: Sketches of a
Skull and the Head of an Old Man in Left Proﬁle
(partly by Michelangelo, partly by Antonio
Mini)
30
599E recto/B186/Corpus 308: Three Female
Heads
36, 54, 28, 31, 32, 67, 72
601E /B187/Corpus 306: Il
Dannato
36, 54, 31
602E/B188: Ideal Head (of a Woman?) (Copy
of Cat. 31, attributed to Bacchiacca)
31, 62
603E/B189: Ideal Head of a
Woman
42, 32

INDEX 1
479
605E recto/B269: A Seated Sibyl (by
Francesco Salviati adapted from
Michelangelo)
6
605E verso/B269: A Prancing Horse (by
Francesco Salviati)
6
606E recto/Petrioli Tofani, pp. 269–70: The
Brazen Serpent, After the Lower Group on Cat.
34 (copy by Raffaello da Montelupo)
34
607E recto/Petrioli Tofani, p. 270: Details of
the Modello for the Tomb of the Magniﬁci (direct?
copy after Inv. 837/J26/Corpus 194, by
Raffaello da Montelupo [previously
attributed to Aristotile da Sangallo])
34, 63
607E verso/Petrioli Tofani, p. 270: A Study
for an Early Version of the Magniﬁci Tomb (copy
of a lost drawing by Michelangelo, by
Raffaello da Montelupo)
20
608E recto/Corpus 56: Modello for the Tomb of
Pope Julius II
18, 35, 76
613E recto/B4/Corpus 45: Compositional
Sketch for the Battle of Cascina
47, 51, 7
617E/B212/Corpus 127: Studies of a Nude
Statue of Venus and a Man Carrying Another on
His Back (after a lost drawing or drawings
including one for the Sistine Flood by
Michelangelo, by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-
century draughtsman)
40, 34, 58
618E/B145/Corpus 355: Sketches of Two Nude
Figures in Complex Poses
34
619E recto/B204: Various Sketches; An Infant
Bacchanal (by Raffaello da Montelupo)
66
619E verso/B204: Figure Sketches (by
Raffaello da Montelupo)
66
621E recto/B131/Corpus 70: An Elderly
Man Carrying a Child; A Child Urinating into
a Dish
14, 66
622E /B205/Corpus 223: The Legs of a Seated
Figure: Study for One of the Dukes (After a lost
drawing by Michelangelo by Raffaello da
Montelupo; sometimes attributed to
Michelangelo himself )
34, 76, 78
Disegni di Figura
229F/B197/Corpus 393: The Annunciation,
cartonetto for Marcello Venusti 18, 36, 53, 54, 47
230F/B198/Corpus 409: The Agony in the
Garden, cartonetto for Marcello
Venusti
18, 36, 53, 54, 47
233F recto/B1/Corpus 37: Various
Sketches
41, 42, 1, Introduction to 9–16
251F recto/B243: A Standing Female Nude
(Venus?)
21, 30
251F verso/B243: Various Sketches Including the
Head of a Woman Wearing a Winged Headdress
(there are also sketches by Antonio Mini on
this side of the sheet)
2, 30
257F/B210 recto: Architectural Studies and
Figures in the Last Judgement (by Raffaello da
Montelupo in part after lost drawings by
Michelangelo)
47
257F/B210 verso: Christ and Another Figure
(Reversed) in the Last Judgement (by Raffaello
da Montelupo after lost drawings by
Michelangelo)
47
258F/Petrioli Tofani, p. 115: The Magniﬁci
Tomb (indirect? copy after Michelangelo’s
modello, Paris, Louvre, Inv. 37/J26/Corpus
194; attributed to Aristotile da Sangallo,
but reminiscent of both Gherardi and
Naldini)
63
2318F/B268: Copy after Michelangelo’s Study for
Libica in the Metropolitan Museum of Art,
24.197/Corpus 156 (by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
36, 18
6907F: The Brazen Serpent (after the upper
episode on Cat. 34, probably indirect, from
the circle of Guglielmo dell Porta?)
34
6960F: The Bearded Slave (after Michelangelo,
by Baccio Bandinelli)
8
14412F/B147/Corpus 379: A Male Head
Perhaps for the Last Judgement and Other
Sketches
60
14673F: Venus and Cupid (after a lost
drawing by Michelangelo, by Francesco
Salviati)
42, 21, 30
14722F: A Figure for the Magniﬁci Tomb from a
Lost Early Study by Michelangelo (indirect copy
after 607E verso by Raffello da Montelupo,
by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman; formerly attributed to Antonio
Domenico Gabbiani)
34
14723F: Copies After Ufﬁzi 618E/B145/
Corpus 355 and Ufﬁzi 617E/B212/Corpus 127
(probably indirect copies by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman; formerly
attributed to Antonio Domenico
Gabbiani)
34
14724F: A Figure for the Magniﬁci Tomb from a
Lost Early Study by Michelangelo (indirect copy
after 607E verso by Raffello da Montelupo;
by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman formerly attributed to Antonio
Domenico Gabbiani)
34
14766F: The Legs of a Seated Figure: Study for
One of the Dukes (copy of 622E recto/B205/
Corpus 223 after Michelangelo by Raffaello
da Montelupo, by a unidentiﬁed sixteenth-
century draughtsman; formerly attributed to
Antonio Domenico Gabbiani)
34
14776F: Copy after 607E recto/Petrioli Tofani,
p. 270 (by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman formerly attributed to Antonio
Domenico Gabbiani)
34
15092F: Ionas (after Michelangelo by a
draughtsman in the circle of Daniele da
Volterra; Giulio Clovio?)
89
16292F: Two Seated Figures (copy of 17379F
and 17380F by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-
century draughtsman; formerly attributed to
Antonio Domenico Gabbiani)
34
17371F: The Brazen Serpent (copy after the
upper episode on Cat. 34, probably indirect,
by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman; formerly attributed to Antonio
Domenico Gabbiani)
34
17379F/B13/Corpus 151: A Seated Figure,
Study for a Sistine Prophet
51, 18, 34
17380F/B14/Corpus 152: A Seated Figure,
Study for a Sistine Prophet
51, 18, 34
17381F/B12/Corpus 123: Concetti for the
Deluge
51
17425F: Illustrated Letter of 1596 to Ludovico
Buonarroti from Andrea Commodi
20, 41
18427BisF: Copy After a Lost Model by
Michelangelo for a Cruciﬁed Thief (by Andrea
Commodi)
41
18519F: Copy after Michelangelo’s Model for a
Slave? (CB Inv. 542) (by Andrea Commodi) 41
18524F: Copy After Michelangelo’s Model for a
Group of Victory (CB Inv. 192) (by Andrea
Commodi)
41
18528F: Copy after CB1F/B8/Corpus 158 (by
Andrea Commodi)
38
18535F: Copies After CB52F recto/B227/
Corpus 142 (by Andrea Commodi)
38
18538F: Copy After Michelangelo’s Model of a
Torso (CB Inv. 191) (by Andrea Commodi) 41
18599F recto: Sketch Copies After CB19F
recto/B150/Corpus 368; CB69F
verso/B143/Corpus 91 and BM W83/Corpus
391 (by Andrea Commodi)
38
18599F verso: Sketch Copies after BM W33
verso/Corpus 236 and BMW48 recto/Corpus 208
verso (by Andrea Commodi)
38, 45
18600F: Draught of a Letter to Ludovico
Buonarroti (by Andrea Commodi)
41
18603F: Copy After CB53 recto/B174/ Corpus
229 bis (detail) (by Andrea Commodi)
38
18607F recto: After an Unidentiﬁed Drawing by
Michelangelo? (by Andrea Commodi)
38
18607F verso: Copies after CB47F/B22/Corpus
124 and CB66F/ B136/Corpus 262 (by Andrea
Commodi)
38
18608F recto: Copies After Details on Cat. 30
recto; CB53F recto/ B174/Corpus 229bis and
Ufﬁzi 18724F verso/B237/Corpus 317 (by
Andrea Commodi)
39, 30
18608F verso: Copies after Ufﬁzi 18724
verso/B237/Corpus 317 and (indirectly) Windsor
PW431/Corpus 338
39
18609F recto: Copies of parts of Cat. 30 verso,
CB37A verso/B83/Corpus 226 and AB, XII,
fol. 46/B360 [probably by Antonio Mini] (by
Andrea Commodi)
39, 30
18609F verso: Copies of Parts of Cat. 30
recto
39, 30
18610F recto: Copies of Parts of CB42A
recto/B78/Corpus 541, CB1F/ B8/Corpus 158,
CB35F/B135/ Corpus 90 and Adapted from BL
Add. Ms. 21907, fol. 1 recto/Corpus 217 (by
Andrea Commodi)
39
18610F verso: Copies? After Unidentiﬁed
Models, Perhaps Including a Variant of the David
by Antonio Mini (by Andrea Commodi)
39
18611F recto: Partial Sketch Copies of Cat. 73
verso by Andrea Mini; Add. Ms. 21907, fol. 1
recto/Corpus 217 (adapted); CB37A verso/
B83/Corpus 226 and Windsor PW431/Corpus

480
INDEX 1
338, probably indirect (by Andrea
Commodi)
39, 73
18611F verso: Sketch Copies of Cat. 73 recto and
BM W7 recto/Corpus 119
39
18614F: Copy After the Settignano Triton/
Corpus 11 (after Michelangelo?) (by Andrea
Commodi)
39, 41, 2
18619F recto (left side): Copies After Ufﬁzi
18737 recto/B3/Corpus 44, CB 23F/B9/Corpus
29 and BM W74/Corpus 403
39
18619F recto (right side): Copies After Ufﬁzi
18721F recto/B175/Corpus 149 [probably by
Antonio Mini], CB2A recto/B24/Corpus 517
and Other Unidentiﬁed Models (by Andrea
Commodi)
39
18619F verso (left side): Copies After CB75F/
B15/Corpus 145 (by Andrea Commodi)
39
18619F verso (right side): Copies After
CB64F/B238/Corpus 132, CB7/B22/Corpus
1332, BM W8 verso/Corpus 139, Hamburg 21094
recto/Corpus 35 and of the Lost Original of E on
Cat. 60
39, 60
18620F recto (left side): Sketch Copies After
CB 69F verso/B147/Corpus 91 and Cat. 6 (by
Andrea Commodi)
40, 6
18620F recto (right side): Sketch Copies After
CB 28F/B213/Corpus 126 (after Michelangelo)
and Unidentiﬁed Models (by Andrea
Commodi)
40
18620F verso (left side): Sketch Copies After
BM W10 verso/Corpus 154, Besanc¸on D3117/
Corpus 319 (or the original), Ufﬁzi
617E/B212/Corpus 127, Ufﬁzi 18721
verso/B175/Corpus 149 and Unidentiﬁed Models
(by Andrea Commodi)
40
18620F verso (right side): Sketch Copies
After CB54F recto/B146/Corpus 284, Cat. 6
recto and Unidentiﬁed Models (by Andrea
Commodi)
40, 6
18621F recto (left side): Sketch Copies After
CB52F/B227/Corpus 142; BM W8 verso/
Corpus 139, Cat. 51? and Detroit 27.2/Corpus
120 (by Andrea Commodi)
40
18621F recto (right side): Sketch Copies After
CB 8F/B20/Corpus 122 and an Unidentiﬁed
Source (by Andrea Commodi)
40
18621F verso (left side): Sketch Copies After
Ufﬁzi 18720F verso/B19/Corpus 141;
CB12F/B176/Corpus 159; CB19F verso/B150/
Corpus 368; BM W40 verso/Corpus 315 (by
Antonio Mini) (by Andrea Commodi)
40
18621F verso (right side): Sketch Copies After
CB19F verso/B150/Corpus 368; CB
12F/B176/Corpus 159 and Unidentiﬁed Models
(by Andrea Commodi)
40
18622F recto (left side): Copies After BM
1980-10-11-46 verso/Turner, 1999, no.
355/Corpus 359 and Adaptation of BM
W12/Corpus 162 (by Andrea Commodi)
40
18622F recto (left side): Copies After BM
1980-10-11-46 verso/Turner, 1999, no.
355/Corpus 359 and Adaptation of BM
W12/Corpus 162 (by Andrea Commodi)
40
18622F verso (right side); Copy of Part of Cat.
4 recto
40, 4
18622F verso (left side): Copies After Parts of
BM W12/Corpus 162 and Cat. 4 recto (by
Andrea Commodi)
40, 4
18622F verso (right side): Copies After Parts of
Cat. 4 recto
40, 4
18625F: Copy After Ufﬁzi 18729/B52/Corpus
294 (by Andrea Commodi)
18626F: Copy After Ufﬁzi 18729/B52/Corpus
294 (by Andrea Commodi)
41
18629F: Copy After CB16F/B69/Corpus 234
(by Andrea Commodi)
41
18632F: Copy After Louvre Inv. 860 recto/
J19/Corpus 143
21
18633F: Copy After CB43F recto/B239/ Corpus
128 [by an unidentiﬁed draughtsman] (by
Andrea Commodi)
41
18634F: Copy After Parts of Ufﬁzi 233F
recto/B1/Corpus 37 (by Andrea Commodi) 41
18654F: Copy After Figures on Cats.
9 verso, 13 recto and 14 verso (by Andrea
Commodi)
41, 9, 13, 14
18655F verso: Copy After a Detail on Ufﬁzi
233F recto/B1/Corpus 37 (by Andrea
Commodi)
41
18659F recto (left side): Copy After CB72F/
B203 [probably by Niccol`o Tribolo] (by Andrea
Commodi)
41
18659F recto (right side): Copy After BM (by
Andrea Commodi.) 1980-10-11-46 recto/Turner
355/Corpus 359
41
18660F recto: Adaptation of a Figure on Ufﬁzi
18721F/B175/Corpus 133 and a Probable Copy
After a Lost Drawing by Antonio Mini Similar
to CB74F/B177 (by Andrea
Commodi)
41
18661F recto: Adaptations After CB61F verso/
B137/Corpus 261 and Unidentiﬁed Models (by
Andrea Commodi)
41
18661F verso: Adaptations After CB66F
recto/B136/Corpus 262 (by Andrea
Commodi)
41
18662F: Copy of Ufﬁzi 18729/B52/ Corpus 294
(by Andrea Commodi)
41
18665F recto: Copy After Michelangelo’s Model
for a Group of Victory (CB Inv. 192) (by
Andrea Commodi)
41
18666F: Copy After Michelangelo’s Model for a
Group of Victory (CB Inv. 192) (by Andrea
Commodi)
41
18675F: After a Lost Study by Michelangelo? (by
Andrea Commodi)
41
18719F recto and verso/B76/Corpus 210:
Studies for Night
26, 27
18720F recto/B19/Corpus 141: Sketches for
Sistine Ignudi
40, 51
18720F verso/B19/Corpus 141: Sketches for
the Feet and Legs of Sistine Ignudi
40, 42, 51
18721F recto/B175/Corpus 149: A Roundel
of the Brazen Serpent? and a Standing Prigione
(by Antonio Mini after lost drawings by
Michelangelo)
39, 41, 42, 34
18721F verso/B175/Corpus 149: A Left Arm
(by Antonio Mini)
40, 42
18724F verso/B237/Corpus 317: Male Proﬁles
(by Michelangelo and Antonio Mini)
39, 42
18729F/B52/Corpus 294: Seated Man in an
Energetic Pose (Vulcan?)
40, 41, 42
18735F/B144/Corpus 354: Figure Sketch for
the Last Judgement
53
18737F recto/B3/Corpus 44: Leda and the
Swan or Ganymede and the Eagle
39, 42, 1
Collezione Santarelli
194S: The Virgin Supporting Christ’s Body
(after a lost drawing by Michelangelo, by an
unidentiﬁed draughtsman)
48
1450S: The Resurrection (after a lost drawing
by Michelangelo, by Alessando Allori)
38
Churches
San Lorenzo
New Sacristy (The Medici Chapel)
Night/Notte
26, 27
Day/Giorno
26, 27
Evening/Crepusculo
26
Dawn/Aurora
26
Public Buildings
The Laurentian Library (designed by
Michelangelo)
The Reading Room
39
The Vestibule (“il ricetto”) (designed by
Michelangelo)
45
Palazzo Vecchio
Victory (Marble sculpture by Michelangelo)
18, 20, 27, 31, 74
Private Collections
Frescobaldi Collection (Formerly?)
The Virgin? and Child with Singing Angels
(painted copy of Venice, Accademia Inv.199
recto/Valenti-Rodin`o 1989 no. 2/Corpus
244, by an unidentiﬁed artist)
65
FRANCE
Private Collection
Recto: Three Men Disputing (after Cat. 33
recto, by Battista Franco)
33
H. de Marignane Collection (Formerly?)
Figure Sketches (by Antonio Mini)
73
FRANKFURT
Staedelsches Kunstinstitut
Inv. 392/Corpus 322: Grotesque Heads; A
Teaching Drawing
30, 56
Inv. 393/Corpus 332: A Reclining Man and
Another Figure (by an associate of
Michelangelo?)
69
Inv. 3976: The Resurrection (after BMW54
recto/Corpus 263 by Michelangelo, by
Alessando Allori)
38

INDEX 1
481
GENEVA
The Bodner Library (Formerly)
Christ and the Samaritan Woman
32
HAARLEM
Teyler Museum
A∗11/VT78: Two Standing Draped Figures
(copy of Cat. 24 verso by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
24
A13/VT 76: Three Female Heads (after Ufﬁzi
599E/B186/Corpus 308 by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
67
A17 recto/VT52/Corpus 130: A Woman
Bending Forward in Left Proﬁle
43
A18 recto/VT46/Corpus 51: Running Figure
for the Battle of Cascina
29, 31, 43, 51
A19 recto/VT47/Corpus 50: A Man Helping
Another to Don His Armour, for the Battle of
Cascina
29, 51
A20 recto and verso/VT48/Corpus 135:
Figure Studies for the Sistine Ceiling
A22/VT 45/Corpus 10: Figure
Studies
24, 33
A23 recto/VT64/Corpus 357: Figure Study for
the Last Judgement
43
A24/VT 63/Corpus 238: A Man Abducting a
Woman
30
A25 recto/VT60/Corpus 89: The Deposition
48, 74, 112
A27 recto and verso/VT49/Corpus 136:
Figure Studies for the Sistine Ceiling
36
A28 verso/VT 31/Corpus 108: Fighting Men
and Men Being Tormented
36, 6, 75
A29 recto/VT67/Corpus 596: A Proﬁle of the
Dome of St. Peter’s
46, 52, 54
A29 verso/VT67/Corpus 596: Standing
Figures, Perhaps Apostles
52
A30 recto/VT56/Corpus 216: Studies for the
Back and Left Arm of Day
48, 26
A31/VT61/Corpus 341: Study for the Fall of
Phaeton
37
A33a recto/VT58/Corpus 218: Studies for the
Left Leg of Day
26, 27, 76
A33b recto/VT58/Corpus 219: Studies for the
Left Leg of Day
26, 27
A34/VT60/Corpus 109: The Deposition
3
A35 verso/VT65/Corpus 434: The
Lamentation (fragmentary)
40, 49, 51
A36 recto/VT57/Corpus 215: Studies for the
Back and Left Arm of Day
48, 26
A39/VT53/Corpus 111: Anatomical
Studies
47
N1∗-N68∗/VT71: Sixty-Eight Figures from the
Sistine Ceiling (indirect copies after
Michelangelo by a draughtsman in the circle
of Adamo Scultori)
43, 86
HAMBURG
Kunsthalle
Inv. 21094/Corpus 35: Proﬁle of a Man
Wearing a Helmet, Facial Features, and Other
Sketches
12, 21, 33, 50
HOLKHAM, NORFOLK, UK
Holkham Hall
Copy of the Battle of Cascina (painting by
Aristotile da Sangallo after Michelangelo)
7
LILLE
Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts
Cabinet des dessins
Brejon de Lavergn´ee, 103 recto/Corpus 595:
Proﬁle for the Dome of St. Peter’s
9, 54, 55
Brejon de Lavergn´ee 717–808: Sketchbook
(by Raffaello da Montelupo containing a
number of copies after drawings by
Michelangelo)
9, 34, 66
Brejon de Lavergn´ee, 808 fol. 91 recto:
Hercules and Antaeus (after a lost drawing
by Michelangelo by Raffaello da Montelupo)
30, 34
Brejon de Lavergn´ee 832 recto: Copy After the
Putti in the Left-Hand Throne Arm of Libica
(drawing by Andrea del Sarto)
17
Brejon de Lavergn´ee 1098: An Old Woman?
(copy of Cat. 23 by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman, perhaps
Battista Franco)
23
LIVERPOOL
Walker Art Gallery
Paintings
Inv. 2789: Christ and the Woman of Samaria
(the lay-in for a painting after a lost drawing
by Michelangelo by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century artist)
21
Drawings
WAG 1995.2o4/Brooke, 1998, p. 184: The
Asa-Iosaphat-Ioram Lunette (after
Michelangelo by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
89
WAG 1995.249/Brooke, 1998, no. 28: A
Figure in a Resurrection? (in part after a lost
drawing by Michelangelo, by Battista Franco,
perhaps indirect after a copy by Raffaello da
Montelupo)
47
WAG 1993.307/Brooke, 1998, p.184: Christ
on the Cross with the Virgin and Saint John
(after the expanded version prepared by
Michelangelo to be painted by Marcello
Venusti for Urbino, by a sixteenth-century
draughtsman, conceivably Marcello
Venusti)
67
LOCKINGE
Loyd Collection, no. 105a: Christ on the Cross
(after British Museum W67/Corpus 411, by
an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman)
67
LONDON
British Library
Department of Manuscripts
Add. Ms21907, fol. 1 recto/Corpus 217:
Study for the Left Leg of Day
12, 26
Add. Ms21907, fol. 1 verso/Corpus 217: A
Figure Blowing a Trumpet
12, 39
British Museum
Department of Prints and Drawings
Ff.1–4: An Old Woman? and Other Sketches
(Copy of Cat. 23 by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman, not far from
Battista Franco)
23
Ff.1–5 recto/W89: “Prudentia”? (copy of a
lost drawing by Michelangelo by Raffaello da
Montelupo)
66, 81
Ff. 1–7/W93: Christ on the Cross (After
British Museum W67/Corpus 411, by
Bartolommeo Aretino?)
67
1856-5-10-1173/W80/Corpus 347: A Right
Arm, Crooked, Seen from the Front, probably for
the Last Judgement
41
1859-5-14-818 recto/W31/Corpus 240:
Studies for a Madonna
48, 28
1859-5-14-822 recto/W26/Corpus 180:
Study for a Double Tomb
37
1859-5-14-822 verso/W26/Corpus 180:
Studies for a Double and a Single Tomb
37
1859-5-14-823 recto/W27/Corpus 185:
Study for a Ducal Tomb
31, 36, 25, 57
1859-5-14-824 recto/W23/Corpus 57:
Diagram of the Lower Storey of the Julius Tomb
and Block Sketches
47
1859-5-14-825: A Nude Man Holding a Jug
(attributed to Piero d’Argenta)
58
1859-6-25-543/W28/Corpus 189: Studies for
a Double Tomb
36, 25, 39, 64
1859-6-25-544/recto/W35/Corpus 227:
Outline Study for a River God for the New
Sacristy
43
1859-6-25-544 verso/W35/Corpus 227: Note
of Rumour of Death of Franc¸ois Ier
36
1859-6-25-545 recto/W25/Corpus 184:
Sketches for a Free-Standing Tomb for the New
Sacristy
38
1859-6-25-545 verso/W25/Corpus 184:
Fragment of the Template of a Column for the
Wooden Model for the Fac¸ade of San Lorenzo 54
1859-6-25-546/W24/Corpus 521: Design for
an Ambo
19
1859-6-25-550 recto/W37/Corpus 554: Study
for the Exterior Door to the Laurentian Library
Reading-Room
37, 47
1859-6-25-550 verso/W37/Corpus 554:
Sketches of Doors for the Laurentian
Library
37, 47, 56
1859-6-25-551/W51/Corpus 252bis: Three
Figures in Violent Motion
37
1859-6-25-554/W30/Corpus 198: Sketches of
Figures and a Vase
47
1859-6-25-555/W12/Corpus 162: Two
Cruciﬁed Men
40
1859-6-25-557 recto/W33/Corpus 236:
Hercules and Antaeus; Teaching Drawings and
Other Sketches
38, 33, 45

482
INDEX 1
1859-6-25-557 verso/W33/Corpus 336:
Two Men with Spears Looking
Upwards
38, 33, 34
1859-6-25-558/W9/Corpus 138: Sketch for a
Sistine Ignudo?
1
1859-6-25-560/W18/Corpus 516: Copies
After Details of Antique Architecture
48, 52
1859-6-25-561 verso/W40/Corpus 315: A
Man’s Face from the Front (by Antonio
Mini)
40, 28
1859-6-25-562/W83/Corpus 391: The
Standing Virgin with the Child
38, 45
1859-6-25-564 recto/W5/Corpus 46: A
Group of Three Nude Men Etc.
36, 34
1859-6-25-564 verso/W5/Corpus 46: Various
Studies
50, 81
1859-6-25-565/Not in W: A Male Head (not
by Michelangelo)
44
1859-6-25-566 verso/W46/Corpus 214:
Studies for the Back of Day
26
1859-6-25-567 recto/W7/Corpus 119: Sketch
for the Layout of the Sistine Ceiling; Four Studies
of Arms
39
1859-6-25-567 verso/W7/Corpus 119: A
Seated Figure; Sketches of Drapery
47
1859-6-25-568 verso/W8/Corpus 139:
Sketches for Ignudi
39, 40
1859-6-25-569 recto/W48/Corpus 208
verso: A Striding Man
38
1859-6-25-569 verso/W48/Corpus 208
recto: Studies for Night
27
1859-6-25-570/W43/Corpus 232: Study After
a Nude Antique Torso of Venus Seen from the
Front
58
1859-6-25-571/W44/Corpus 233: Study After
a Nude Antique Torso of Venus Seen from the
Back
58
1860-6-16-2/1 recto/W77/Corpus 385:
Study for Marcello Venusti’s Painting The
Cleansing of the Temple
8, 46
1860-6-16-2/1 verso/W77/Corpus 385:
Sketches for Marcello Venusti’s Painting The
Cleansing of the Temple
8, 46
1860-6-16-2/2 recto/W76/Corpus 386:
Drawing for Marcello Venusti’s Painting The
Cleansing of the Temple
8, 47, 46
1860-6-16-2/2 verso/W76/Corpus 386:
Study for Marcello Venusti’s Painting The
Cleansing of the Temple
8, 46
1860-6-16-2/3 recto/W78/Corpus 387:
Cartonetto? for Marcello Venusti’s Painting The
Cleansing of the Temple
8, 46
1860-6-16-2/3 verso/W78/Corpus 387:
Sketches for Marcello Venusti’s Painting The
Cleansing of the Temple
8, 46
1860-6-16-3/W32/Corpus 87: The Three
Crosses
3, 72
1860-6-16-5 recto/W61/Corpus 352: Studies
for Angels in the Last Judgement
53, 41
1860-6-16-133/W52/Corpus 258: The
Resurrection
38
1860-7-14-1/W17/Corpus 77: Study for the
Raising of Lazarus for Sebastiano
35
1860-7-14-2/W16/Corpus 76: Study for the
Raising of Lazarus for Sebastiano del
Piombo
35
1885-5-9-1893/W73/Corpus 398: Nude Man
in Violent Motion
33
1885-5-9-1894/W79/Corpus 405: Sketch for
a Sleeping Figure in the Agony in the
Garden
33, 47
1886-5-13-5 recto/W63/Corpus 460: Study
for a Man Rising from the Tomb, for the Last
Judgement
42
1887-5-2-115 recto/W29/Corpus 97: A
Prophet
14, 16, 30, 22, 23
1887-5-2-116 verso/W6/Corpus 52: Study for
the Battle of Cascina
51, 1, 7
1887-5-2-117 recto/W4/Corpus 45: A
Beckoning Figure
7, 26, 48, 59
1887-5-2-117 verso/W4/Corpus 45: Sketches
of Putti
59
1887-5-2-118 recto: Study for the Drapery of
Cumaea
51
1887-5-2-118 verso/W10/Corpus 154: Study
for a Seated Figure; A Left Hand
40, 47
1887-5-2-119/W53/Corpus 264: The
Resurrection
38
1887-5-2-120/W91: Cleopatra (after CB
2F/B133/Corpus 327, by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
35, 38
1895-9-15-492/W87: The Count of Canossa
(copy after Michelangelo by an unidentiﬁed
draughtsman)
6, 34, 46, 61
1895-9-15-493 recto/W42/Corpus 311: Ideal
Head of a Woman
61
1895-9-15-493 verso/W42/Corpus 311:
Sketches of Heads and Figures
32
1895-9-15-495/W2/Corpus 16: Head of a
Satyr
1895-9-15-496 recto/W3/Corpus 36: A
Battle Scene Etc.
34, 4, 5, 6, 7
1895-9-15-497 recto/W13/Corpus 163:
Study for Haman
8, 36, 42, 42
1895-9-15-498 recto/W1/Corpus 6: A
Philosopher
7, 34, 8
1895-9-15-500/W15/Corpus 73: The
Flagellation of Christ for Sebastiano del Piombo’s
mural in San Pietro in
Montorio
47, 52, 21, 72
1895-9-15-501 recto/W54/Corpus 263: The
Risen Christ
54, 38
1895-9-15-501 verso/W54/Corpus 263: A
Fantastic Animal
28
1895-9-15-502 recto/W70/Corpus 358: A
Kneeling Man for the Cruciﬁxion of Saint
Peter
48, 55, 43
1895-9-15-503 recto/W34: Two Men
Wrestling [Hercules and Antaeus?]
(copy? after Michelangelo by Antonio Mini)
35, 30, 75
1895-9-15-504/W67/Corpus 411: Christ on
the Cross (for Vittoria Colonna) 7, 54, 50, 67
1895-9-15-507 recto/W39/Corpus 192:
Sketch for a Papal Tomb in the Choir of San
Lorenzo
39
1895-9-15-508 recto/W36/Corpus 528:
Studies for the Laurentian Library Vestibule
35
1895-9-15-508 verso/W36/Corpus 528:
Studies for the Laurentian Library Vestibule
35
1895-9-15-509/W 81/Corpus 417:
Cruciﬁxion with Two Figures
55, 57
1895-9-15-510/W 82/Corpus 419:
Cruciﬁxion with Two Figures
57
1895-9-15-511 recto/W57/Corpus 220: The
Head of a Bearded Man
33, 35, 78
1895-9-15-511 verso/W57/Corpus 220:
Studies of Arms and Legs (by Michelangelo and
Antonio Mini)
78
1895-9-15-512: A Man Seen from the Back
(ascribed to Pierino da Vinci but probably by
Michelangelo)
43
1895-9-15-513/W74/Corpus 403: A Standing
Man
39
1895-9-15-514/W50/Corpus 305: A Fantastic
Animal
12, 36, 61
1895-9-15-517/W55/Corpus 340: The Fall of
Phaeton
54, 6, 72
1895-9-15-518 recto/W60/Corpus 350:
Studies for the Last Judgement
16, 45
1895-9-15-518∗/W75/Corpus 389: The
Epifania 10, 16, 25, 36, 47, 53, 21, 44, 53, 67
1895-9-15-519/W59/Corpus 329: Andrea
Quaratesi
1895-9-15-813/W15a-PG 276/Corpus 74:
Study for Christ at the Column in Sebastiano del
Piombo’s Flagellation in San Pietro in Montorio.
1896-7-10-1 recto/W64/Corpus 270: The
Piet`a
40
1900-8-24-118/W102: Michelangelo’s Dawn
(drawing by Francesco Salviati)
84
1926-10-9-1 recto/W11/Corpus 134: Study
for Adam in the Creation of
Adam
6, 60
1926-10-9-1 verso/W11/Corpus 134: Head of
the ignudo left above Persica
60
1946-7-13-33 recto/W38: Outline Sketch for
the Magniﬁci Tomb
38, 39
1946-7-13-33a/W84: Ground Plan for the
Sforza Chapel
52, 54, 105
1946-7-13-365/W90: Samson and Delilah
(Copy of Cat. 35 by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
35
1946-7-13-635: Copies After Sketches by
Michelangelo for the Battle of Cascina, for a
Piet`a and Other Schemes, Including Some After
Haarlem A28 verso/ VT51/Corpus 108 (by an
unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century draughtsman,
wrongly attributed to Raffaello da
Montelupo)
6, 75, 77
1950-7-22-6/W86: Two Legs and a Right Arm
(copy after Christ Church JBS 62 verso/
Corpus 86 and Rotterdam I. 513 recto/
Corpus 121, by an unidentiﬁed
draughtsman, perhaps a Northerner,
c. 1600)
36, 43
1980-10-11-46 recto/Turner, 1999,
355/Corpus 359: Study for a Virtue Striking
Downwards in the Last Judgement
20, 40, 41

INDEX 1
483
1980-10-11-46 verso/Turner, 1999,
355/Corpus 359: Study for the Figure of Lust in
the Last Judgement
20
1993-4-3-10/Turner, 1999, 353: Fragment of
an Order Sheet for Marble Blocks
23
1993-4-3-11/Turner, 1999, 354: Fragment of
an Order Sheet for Marble Blocks
23
The Courtauld Institute
Princes Gate Collection
Inv. 424/Corpus 333: The Dream of Human
Life
4, 5, 11, 14, 16, 19, 47, 63
Inv. no.423/Corpus 410: Christ on the Cross 5
The National Gallery
Inv. 809: The Manchester Madonna
21
Inv. 790: The Entombment 21, 31, 40, 48, 51
Inv. 1194: The Cleansing of the Temple
(painting by Marcello Venusti after a design
by Michelangelo)
8, 35, 46
The Royal Academy
The Taddei Tondo (marble sculpture by
Michelangelo)
8, 59
Leda and the Swan (cartoon after a lost work
by Michelangelo by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
8, 34
The Wellcome Institute
Library
Inv. 393461 recto: A Skeleton (drawing by
Raffaello da Montelupo)
76
Inv. 393461 verso: Parts of a Skeleton; Copy
After the Prisoner Second from Left in
Michelangelo’s Modelli for the Tomb of Julius II
(Berlin 15305 recto/Corpus 55 and Ufﬁzi
608E recto/B244/Corpus 56; Drawing by
Raffaello da Montelupo)
76
Private Collectors and Dealers
Jean-Luc Baroni, 2003
A Figure in the Battle of Cascina (after
Michelangelo by Francesco Salviati)
13
Hugh Blaker (Formerly)
The Brazen Serpent (copy after the lower
group on Cat. 34, attributed to Giulio
Clovio)
34
Sir Brinsley Ford (Formerly)
Corpus 94 recto: Study for the Minerva
Christ
34, 52
Corpus 94 verso: Study for the Minerva
Christ
34, 52
Sir Robert Mond Collection (Formerly)
Borenius and Wittkower, no. 156: The
Annunciation (after Morgan Library
IV,7/Corpus 399, by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman: Sold
Christie’s, London, 18 April 1989, lot 7, as
attributed to Giulio Clovio)
43
Borenius and Wittkower no. 157: Christ on
the Cross (After British Museum W67/
Corpus 411, by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-
century draughtsman; subsequently in the
Brackley Collection, Norfolk; sold at
Christie’s, London, 12 April 1983, lot 209) 67
Armando Neerman (Formerly)
c. 1972, no. 2: Figure Sketches (after
Michelangelo by an unidentiﬁed
sixtenth-century draughtsman)
59
A. Wolmark (Formerly?)
The Head of a Young Man? (copy of Cat. 29 by
an unidentiﬁed draughtsman)
29
Sir E. J. Poynter (Formerly)
A Male Anatomy (after PW421 recto/Corpus
421, at Windsor Castle, by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman; in the Sir
Edward J. Poynter sale, Christie’s London,
24 April 1918, lot 82)
67
Art Market, July 2001
A Seated Nude, His Back Half-Turned, Among
the Group of the Saved at the Lower Left Corner
of the Last Judgement (after Michelangelo by
an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman from the circle of Federico
Zuccaro)
98
Auction Houses
Bonham’s (Formerly)
8 July 2002, lot 69: A Model or Drawing for the
Marble David (after a lost model or drawing
by Michelangelo, by Antonio Mini)
39, 66
Christie’s (Formerly)
26 November 1973, lot 339: The Count of
Canossa (after a lost drawing by
Michelangelo; by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth
century draughtsman)
61
9 December 1982, lot 144: Sketches of Knees 33
1 July 1986, lot 40: Fragment of an Order Sheet
for Marble Blocks
23
18 April 1989, lot 7: See Sir Robert Mond
Collection (Formerly)
2 July 1996, lot 88: Bacchanal of Infants
(after PW431/Corpus 338 at Windsor,
by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman)
66, 67
Phillipps, Son and Neale (Formerly)
6 December 1995, lot no. 179 (subsequently
R. S. Johnson, Chicago and a US private
collection): The Magniﬁci Tomb (direct? copy
after Michelangelo’s modello, Paris, Louvre,
Inv. 837/J26 /Corpus 194; by an unidentiﬁed
associate? of Michelangelo)
63
Sotheby’s (Formerly)
Paintings 14 December 2000, lot 186: The
Agony in the Garden (painting after a design by
Michelangelo by Marcello Venusti)
47, 48
9 July 1981, lot 11: The Count of Canossa
(after a lost drawing by Michelangelo;
attributed to Alessandro Allori)
61
29 January 1998, lot 102 recto: Christ and the
Woman of Samaria
18 February 1991, lot 159: An Old Woman
(copy of Cat. 23 by an unidentiﬁed
draughtsman)
23
2 July 1999, lot 121: Golgotha (After Louvre
Inv. 839/J79, probably by Giulio Clovio)
72
11 July 2001, lot 81: See Yorkshire, Castle
Howard (Formerly)
8
9 July 2003, lot 9: Sketches of Knees
33
LOPPEM
Chˆateau
The Stoning of Saint Stephen
28, 34
LOS ANGELES
J. Paul Getty Museum
93.GB.51 recto: The Rest on the Flight into
Egypt
3, 33
MADRID
Biblioteca Nacional
Album G. V. Casale, fols. 374–375: The
Ground Plan of Michelangelo’s Lost Model for
San Giovanni dei Fiorentini (drawing by
Giovanni Vincenzo Casale)
105
MILAN
Castello Sforzesco
The Rondanini Piet`a
48
MODENA
Biblioteca Estense
Mss. Campori App.1775, = a.Z.2.2, C.140
verso–141 recto: Michelangelo’s Lost Model? for
San Giovanni dei Fiorentini, in Section (drawing
by Giovani Antonio Dosio)
105
MONTPELLIER
Mus´ee Atger
Inv. 375: Copies After Lost and Surviving
Drawings by Michelangelo (by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
59
Mus´ee Fabre
Inv. 864-2-11: Copies After Lost and Surviving
Drawings by Michelangelo (by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
59
MUNICH
Graphische Sammlung
Inv. 2191/Corpus 4 recto: Copy After Saint
Peter in Masaccio’s Tribute Money
47, 49
Inv. 4932: The Magniﬁci Tomb (indirect? copy
after Michelangelo’s modello, Paris, Louvre,
Inv. 837/J26/Corpus 194; by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
63

484
INDEX 1
NAPLES
Museo Nazionale di Capodimonte
Paintings
The Last Judgement (after Michelangelo by
Marcello Venusti)
102
Drawings
Inv. 398/Corpus 384: Fragment of the Cartoon
for the Cruciﬁxion of Saint
Peter
25, 47, 53, 55, 42
NEW YORK
Cooper-Hewitt, National Design
Museum, Smithsonian Institute
Inv. 1942-36-4: Modello for a
Candelabrum
25, 42
Metropolitan Museum of Art
Department of Drawings
Inv. 24.197.2 recto/BT131/Corpus 156: Study
for Libica
32, 36, 51, 18
Inv. 24.197.2 verso/BT131/Corpus 156:
Sketch of an Ancestor
9
Inv. 87.12.69/BT211: Copy by an Unidentiﬁed
Draughtsman After a Lost Copy by Raphael After
Albertina BK118 recto
24, 42, 54
Inv. 62931/BT132/Corpus 489: Modello for a
1505 Project of the Tomb of Julius II
52, 41, 63, 72, 110
The Morgan Library
IV,7/Corpus 399: The
Annunciation
3, 33, 53, 54, 50
132 a,b,c,d/Corpus 370–373: David and
Goliath
33, 46
The Woodner Collections (Diane and
Andrea Woodner)
The Fall of Phaeton (after Windsor
PW430/Corpus 343, by Alessandro
Allori)
36
Christie’s (Formerly)
30 January 1997, lot 1: The Torso of Christ
(after a lost drawing by Michelangelo for
Sebastiano del Piombo’s Ubeda Piet`a, by
Raffaello da Montelupo)
66
25 January 2005, lot 26 recto and verso:
See donnington priory, unnumbered
51
25 January 2005, lot 32: Three Men
Disputing (Copy of Cat. 33 recto by
Battista Franco)
33
24 January 2006, lot 18: See donnington
priory, Corpus
382
Sotheby’s (Formerly)
28 January 1998, lot 102: Christ and the
Samaritan Woman, ex- GENEVA, Bodner
Library
49
OXFORD
Christ Church
JBS 62 recto/Corpus 86: The Holy Family?
JBS 62 verso/Corpus 86: Study of a Left Leg
and Part of a Torso
36, 43
JBS 63/Corpus 421: Christ on the Cross
72
JBS 64 recto/Corpus 280: Modello for a
Monumental Altar
21, 33, Introduction to
9–16
JBS 64 verso/Corpus 280: Sketches for a
Monumental Altar
38, 42, 52, Introduction
to 9–16
JBS 65 Corpus 282: Modello for a Double
Tomb
25
JBS 71:The Magniﬁci Tomb (direct? copy after
Michelangelo’s modello, Paris, Louvre, Inv.
837/J26/Corpus 194; by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
63, 64
JBS 72: The Magniﬁci Tomb (direct? copy after
Michelangelo’s modello, Paris, Louvre, Inv.
837/J26/Corpus 194; by an unidentiﬁed
assistant of Michelangelo)
63
JBS 77: A Dragon Biting a Serpent? (copy after
a lost drawing by Michelangelo by an
unidentiﬁed draughtsman)
28
JBS 704 recto: Sketches of Lions (attributed to
Piero d’Argenta)
58
JBS 704 verso: A Section of a Piet`a (attributed
to Piero d’Argenta)
58
JBS 705 recto: Sketches of Lions (attributed to
Piero d’Argenta)
58
JBS 705 verso: A Section of a Piet`a (attributed
to Piero d’Argenta)
58
(JBS 704 and 705 were originally one sheet,
now divided into two)
JBS S1519: Part of the Cruciﬁxion of Saint
Peter (indirectly after Michelangelo, after
Cat. 104, by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
104
JBS S1528: Samson and Delilah (Variant of
Cat. 35 by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman in the circle of Baccio
Bandinelli)
35
OXFORDSHIRE
Private Collection
Ideal Head (of a Woman?) (Copy of Cat. 31, by
Battista Franco)
31, 62
PARIS
Ecole Nationale des Beaux-Arts
Inv. Armand-Valton 197A recto/Corpus 62:
Study for a Prigione
42, 52, 20
Mus´ee du Louvre
D´epartement des Sculptures
“The Dying Slave”
2, 18
“The Rebellious Slave”
18
D´epartement des Arts Graphiques
Inv. 684 recto/J29/Corpus 95: Head of
a Satyr
22, 24, 71, 107
Inv. 685 recto/J16/Corpus 26: The Virgin,
Child, and Saint Anne
1, 2, 8, 22, 24
Inv. 686 recto/J24/Corpus 193: Study for a
Prigione
20
Inv. 686 verso/J24/Corpus 193: Sketch for the
Tomb of the Magniﬁci (preparing Inv. 837/J26/
Corpus 194)
25, 63, 64
Inv. 687/J44/Corpus 12: Hercules and the
Nemean Lion (attributed to
Piero d’Argenta)
8, 58
Inv. 688 verso/J13/Corpus 20: Various
Studies
2, 18
Inv. 691bis/J37/Corpus 253: The Resurrection
(compositional study for PW427 recto/
Corpus 255)
38
Inv. 693/J103: A Dragon (copy after Cat. 28
by an unidentiﬁed draughtsman)
43, 28
Inv. 694 recto/J49: Standing Nude Man,
Perhaps a Victory (drawing after a lost
model by Michelangelo, perhaps by Pietro
Urbano)
47, 81
Inv. 694 verso/J49: Standing Nude Man,
Perhaps a Victory (drawing after a lost
model by Michelangelo, perhaps by Pietro
Urbano)
47, 81
Inv. 695/J109: The Virgin? and Child with
Singing Angels (after Venice Inv. 199 recto/
Valenti Rodin`o, 1989, no. 2/Corpus 244, by
an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century?
draughtsman)
65
Inv. 696 verso/J51: Various Studies in
Part after Michelangelo (by Antonio Mini)
28
Inv. 697/J21/Corpus 69: Dancing Faun
74
Inv. 698/J40/Corpus 412: Saint John at the
Foot of the Cross
50, 57, 67
Inv. 699/J48: A Prigione (a copy of a lost
study by Michelangelo after one of his own
plastic models?)
47
Inv. 700/J42/Corpus 414: The Cruciﬁxion
with the Virgin and Saint John?
57
Inv. 701 recto/J46: A Bound Satyr (after
Michelangelo? attributed to Piero d’
Argenta)
58
Inv. 701 verso/J46: A Female Nude Seen from
the Rear (after Michelangelo? attributed to
Piero d’Argenta)
58
Inv. 702/J47: An Apostle (after Michelangelo,
by Pietro Urbano?)
3, 81
Inv. 704 recto/J36/Corpus 243: A Seated
Woman (The Virgin?)
63
Inv. 704 verso/J36/Corpus 243: The Transport
of Christ’s? Body
40
Inv. 706 recto/J1/Corpus 3: Copy After Two
Figures from Giotto’s Ascension of Saint
John in the Peruzzi Chapel of Santa
Croce
47, 49, 7
Inv. 708/J25/Corpus 228: Sketch for the
Figure Seated at the Left in Inv. 837/J26/
Corpus 194
63
Inv. 709 recto/J30/Corpus 267: Two Men
Wrestling
30
Inv. 710 recto/J22/Corpus 235: Woman
Walking Forward Holding the Hands of Two
Children, larger fragment
21
Inv. 710 verso/J22/Corpus 235: An Old
Woman Standing in Left Proﬁle, Holding a viol
da braccia
23

INDEX 1
485
Inv. 712/J7/Corpus 42: Study for the Battle of
Cascina
7
Inv. 713 recto/J6/Corpus 54: Nude
Man Seen from the Rear for the Battle of
Cascina
51
Inv. 714 recto/J4/Corpus 19: Sketch for the
Bronze David and Other Drawings
33, 2, 18
Inv. 715 recto: Copy of Michelangelo’s Medici
Madonna (drawing by Raffaello da
Montelupo)
76, 109
Inv. 715 verso: Figure Studies (variations on
Michelangelesque motives by Raffaello da
Montelupo)
76
Inv. 716/J38/Corpus 92: Study for Sebastiano
del Piombo’s Ubeda Piet`a
8, 48
Inv. 718 recto/J9/Corpus 47: A Group of
Three Nude Men
2, 34
Inv. 720 recto/J39/Corpus 412: The Virgin at
the Foot of the Cross
50, 57, 67
Inv. 722 recto/J.14/Corpus 31: A Seated Man
(sketch for Metropolitan Museum Inv.
62931/Corpus 489)
27
Inv. 725 recto/J23/Corpus 230: Woman
Walking Forward Holding the Hands of Two
Children (smaller fragment)
21
Inv. 725 verso/J23/Corpus 230: Woman Seen
from the Back; Adaptation of an Antique Torso of
Venus
23, 58
Inv. 726 recto/J2/Corpus 31: Nude Study for
the Magdalen in the National Gallery
Entombment
50
Inv. 726 verso/J2/Corpus 31: Sketches for the
Battle of Cascina
58
Inv. 727 recto/J10/Corpus 34: A Nude Man
Seen from Rear and Sketches of
Helmets
31, 43, 50
Inv. 732/J121: Christ on the Cross (after
British Museum W67/Corpus 411, by an
unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman)
67
Inv. 741/J264: Ionas (after Michelangelo
by a draughtsman in the circle of Daniele da
Volterra)
89
Inv. 754–762/J231 etc.: Nine Prophets and
Sibyls from the Sistine Ceiling (indirect copies
after Michelangelo by a draughtsman in the
circle of Adamo
Scultori)
86
Inv. 769/J218: Part of the Sistine Composition
of the Brazen Serpent (after Michelangelo
by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman)
90
Inv. 789/J101: Modello for the Tomb of the
Magniﬁci (direct copy after Paris, Louvre
837/J26/Corpus 194, by an unidentiﬁed
associate of Michelangelo)
63
Inv. 836/J110: The Deposition (part copy after
Haarlem A25/VT60/ Corpus 89 by an
unidentiﬁed draughtsman)
48
Inv. 837/J26/Corpus 194: Modello for the
Tomb of the Magniﬁci
34, 63, 64
Inv. 838/J27/Corpus 186: Modello for the Tomb
of Duke Giuliano
21, 26, 30, 34
Inv. 839/J79: Golgotha (pastiche of
Michelangelo, probably by Giulio
Clovio)
72
Inv. 842 recto/J41/Corpus 422: Christ on the
Cross
49
Inv. 844 recto/J50: Study for a Prigione
(Variant of E.B.A. Armand-Valton 197A
recto, by an associate of Michelangelo)
42
Inv. 846/J45: Michelangelo’s Casa Buonarroti
Model (copy, attributed to Piero d’Argenta)
58
Inv. 858/J64: An Apostle (by Pietro Urbano?
after Michelangelo)
3, 8
Inv. 860 recto /J19/Corpus 143: Study for the
Head of the Ignudo Left Above
Esaias
21, 41, 42, 8
Inv. 863/J68: Hercules and Antaeus (copies
after lost sketches by Michelangelo by an
unidentiﬁed draughtsman)
30
Inv. 1505/J111: The Resurrection (after
Windsor PW428/Corpus 265 by
Michelangelo, by Alessando Allori)
38
Inv. 1724/J75: A Dragon Biting a Serpent?
(copy after a lost drawing by Michelangelo by
Andrea del Sarto)
28
Inv. 8026 recto/J14: A Man Moving Forward,
Seen from the Rear
27, 29
Inv. 10978/J71: The Count of Canossa
(fragmentary, after a lost drawing by
Michelangelo, by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-
century draughtsman)
61
Inv. 12299/J28/Corpus 321: Ideal Head of a
Woman
54, 8
Inv. 18359/J100: Modello for the Tomb of the
Magniﬁci (direct? copy after Paris, Louvre
837/J26/Corpus 194 by an unidentiﬁed
sixteenth-century draughtsman)
63, 64
Inv. 35296/J53: The Infant Hercules Strangling
the Serpents (drawing by Antonio Mini)
69, 80
Inv. 35433/J105: Samson and Delilah
(copy of Cat. 35 by Marco Marchetti da
Faenza)
35
RF1068 recto/J11/Corpus 21: A Male
Nude
33, 49
RF 4112 recto/J17/Corpus 25: The Virgin,
Child, and Saint John
21, 30, 1, 58, 106
RF 6917/J191 etc: Thirty-Six Figures and
Details from the Sistine Ceiling (indirect copies
after Michelangelo by a draughtsman in the
circle of Adamo Scultori)
86
RF 28961 recto/J96: Copy of BM W11/
Corpus 134: Study for Adam . . . (by an
unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman)
60
Fondation Custodia
Inv. 5251: Michelangelo’s Night (drawing by
Sir Peter Paul Rubens)
83
Inv. 5422: The Battle of the Lapiths and
Centaurs (after Michelangelo’s relief in
Casa Buonarroti, by Sir Peter Paul
Rubens)
21, 42
Pierre Crozat and Julien de Parme
(Formerly; Present Whereabouts
Unknown)
Hercules and Antaeus
30
PLYMOUTH
City Art Gallery and Museum
CD98: Three Men Disputing (after Cat. 33
recto by an unidentiﬁed draughtsman)
33
PRINCETON
Art Museum
1947-134/Gibbons 437: Idealised and Grotesque
Proﬁles
33, 32, 60
RENNES
Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts
Inv. 794.2913 recto/Corpus 632: Male Figure
Seen from the Back with a Raised Arm
2
Inv. 794.2913 verso/Corpus 632: The
Haunches of a Nude Woman
58
Inv. 74.73.495: The Battle of the Lapiths and
Centaurs (after Michelangelo by
Jean-Germain Drouais)
22, 42
ROME
Churches
Santissimi Apostoli
Tomb of Cardinal Raffaello Riario (perhaps
designed by Michelangelo)
44
San Giovanni dei Fiorentini
Preliminary Designs
53
Santa Maria degli Angeli
Converted from the Baths of Diocletian to
Michelangelo’s Design
53
Cevoli Chapel
A Sibyl (fresco by Giacomo Rocca, based on
Cat. 22 by Michelangelo)
29, 22
Santa Maria in Aracoeli
The Tomb of Cecchino Bracci (designed by
Michelangelo)
44, 45
Santa Maria Maggiore
The Sforza Chapel (designed by
Michelangelo)
53, 54
Santa Maria della Pace
Cesi Chapel (Formerly)
The Annununciation (painting to
Michelangelo’s design by Marcello
Venusti)
50
Miganelli Chapel (Formerly)
St. Jerome (painting to Michelangelo’s design
by Marcello Venusti)
45
Santa Maria sopra Minerva
The Risen Christ
19

486
INDEX 1
San Pietro in Montorio (Formerly)
The Stigmatisation of Saint Francis
(painting to Michelangelo’s design by
Piero d’Argenta)
58
San Pietro in Montorio
Borgherini Chapel
Wall paintings of the Flagellation, the
Transﬁguration, and Prophets by Sebastiano
del Piombo (in part to Michelangelo’s
design)
21, 37
Ricci Chapel
Sculpture of the Tomb of Cardinal Ricci of
Montepulciano, Statues of Ss. Peter and Paul, and
an Altarpiece of the Baptism of Christ (by
Daniele da Volterra and assistants, in part to
Michelangelo’s design)
29, 52
Private Collections
Galleria Doria-Pamphili
The Agony in the Garden (painting after
a design by Michelangelo by Marcello
Venusti)
47
Public Places
The Capitoline Hill
Palazzo dei Conservatori (Michelangelo’s
design)
53, 56
Palazzo dei Senatori (remodelled in part to
Michelangelo’s design)
45
The Porta Pia
Executed in part to Michelangelo’s design 53
Vatican City
The Pauline Chapel
The Conversion of Saint Paul
43, 103
The Cruciﬁxion of Saint Peter
43, 49, 104
The Sistine Chapel
The Last Judgement
41, 42,
70, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102
Villa Belvedere
The Staircase (re-designed by Michelangelo)
45
Library
Cod. Lat.Vat. 3211 fol. 81 verso/ Corpus
407: Sketches for Marcello Venusti’s Agony in
the Garden?
47
Cod. Lat.Vat. 3211 fol. 82 verso/ Corpus
406: Sketches for Marcello Venusti’s Agony in
the Garden?
47
ROTTERDAM
Boymans-Van Beuningen Museum
I.20: The Resurrection (after a lost drawing by
Michelangelo, generally attributed to Giulio
Clovio but perhaps by Alessandro Allori)
38
DN 124/21: St. Jerome (after a lost drawing
by Michelangelo, perhaps by Marcello
Venusti)
45
I.174: Andrea Quaratesi (after BM
1895-9-15-519/W59/Corpus 329, by Carlo
Dolci)
12
I.513 recto/Corpus 121: A Right Arm
36
V.7: The Battle of the Lapiths and Centaurs
(after Michelangelo’s relief in Casa
Buonarroti, by Sir Peter Paul Rubens) 21, 42
RUGBY
Rugby School
Bloxam Collection Inv. 19: A Woman
Leading Two Children by the Hand (perhaps
after Michelangelo, by an unidentiﬁed
draughtsman, possibly Ascanio Condivi)
21
SETTIGNANO
Villa Buonarroti
Corpus 11: A Triton? (authorship
disputed)
20, 39, 1, 2
SIENA
Biblioteca Communale
S.IV.1, fol. 42 recto: The Ground Plan of
Michelangelo’s Lost Wooden Model for San
Giovanni dei Fiorentini (drawing by Oreste
Vannocci Biringucci)
105
TURIN
Biblioteca Reale
15627 recto/Corpus 155: Study for the Head of
Cumaea
17
15627 verso/Corpus 155: Sketches for Seated
Ancestors
17
UNITED KINGDOM
Duke of Portland Collection
Corpus 388: The Madonna del
Silenzio
19, 54, 40
VENICE
Galleria dell’Accademia
Gabinetto dei Disegni
Inv. 78/Valenti-Rodin`o 1989, no. 3: A
Combat Between a Cavalryman and Six
Infantrymen (after Cat. 5 by an unidentiﬁed
draughtsman)
5
Inv. 177 recto/Valenti-Rodin`o, 1989, no. 1/
Corpus 342: The Fall of Phaeton
25, 54
Inv. 199 recto/Valenti-Rodin`o, 1989, no. 2/
Corpus 244: The Virgin and Child? with
Singing Angels
31, 65
VICENZA
Centro Internazionale di Studi di
Archittetura Andrea Pallladio
Unnumbered Recto: Design for a Temporary
Gate for a Triumphal Entry?
42, 53
Unnumbered Verso: The Upper Part of a
Ceremonial Gate (pen-work by Jacone over
red chalk underdrawing by Michelangelo) 42
VIENNA
Albertina
BK102/Corpus 264: The Lamentation with
Eight Figures
34, 40
BK103/Corpus 432: The Piet`a with Two
Figures
34, 43, 40, 48
BK112: Modello for the Tomb of the Magniﬁci
(direct copy after Paris, Louvre 837/J26/
Corpus 194 by an unidentiﬁed associate of
Michelangelo)
63
BK116 recto/Corpus 5: Partial Copy of
Masaccio’s Sagra
34, 47, 49
BK116 verso/Corpus 5: Partial Copy of
Masaccio’s Sagra
34, 47
BK118 recto/Corpus 22: Male Figure Seen
from the Back with a Raised
Arm
26, 28, 34, 49, 52, 2
BK120 recto/Corpus 144: Study for the
Ignudo Left Above Persica
34
BK120 recto/Corpus 144: Study for the Arms
of the Virgin in Sebastiano del Piombo’s Viterbo
Piet`a
34, 51
BK123 recto/Corpus 53: Studies for the Battle
of Cascina
34, 51, 7, 81
BK123 verso/Corpus 53: Study for the Battle
Cascina
34, 51, 81
BK132/Corpus 14: Studies of Arms
34, 2
BK133/Corpus 13: Lions and Other Sketches
(by Piero D’Argenta?)
34, 58
BK4868/Corpus 408: Figure
Studies
23, 34, 47
Hofbibliothek
Modello for the Tomb of the Magniﬁci (indirect
copy after Paris, Louvre, 837/J26/Corpus 194
by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman)
63
WASHINGTON
National Gallery of Art
Department of Prints and Drawings
1991.150.3: Hercules and Antaeus
30
1991-217.2a-3b/Corpus 429: Figure Study for
an Entombment?
48, 51
See also NEW YORK, the Woodner
Collections
WEIMAR
Schlossmuseum
KK8797 recto: A Lamentation (after a lost
drawing by Michelangelo, by Antonio Mini)
40
KK8797 verso: Copies After Sketches by
Michelangelo for a Piet`a and Other Schemes,
Including Some After Haarlem A28 verso/
VT51/Corpus 108 (by Antonio Mini)
40, 75
WINDSOR CASTLE
The Royal Library
PW263: A Draped Female Figure Standing in
Right Proﬁle (copy after a lost drawing by
Michelangelo of c. 1525; attributed by Wilde

INDEX 1
487
to Daniele da Volterra but perhaps by
Francesco Salviati)
23
PW421 recto/Corpus 61: Figure Study with
Proportions Indicated
67
PW421 verso/Corpus 61: Figure Study
18
PW423/Corpus 335: Three Labours of
Hercules
29
PW424/Corpus 336: The Archers
47
PW425 verso/Corpus 236bis: Samson and
Delilah (truncated copy of Cat. 35 by Antonio
Mini)
35
PW427 recto/Corpus 255:
The Resurrection
38
PW428 recto/Corpus 265: The Risen
Christ
54, 38
PW429 recto/Corpus 345: Tityus
30, 38
PW429 verso/Corpus 345: Sketch for the Risen
Christ
38
PW430/Corpus 343: The Fall of
Phaeton
25, 66
PW431/Corpus 338: The Infant
Bacchanal
39, 54, 14, 66, 67
PW432 recto/Corpus 351: Concetti for Figures
in the Lower Part of the Last Judgement
53
PW 434 recto/Corpus 325: The Head of a
Young Woman
44
PW436/Corpus 418: The Cruciﬁxion with Two
Figures
55, 57
PW437/Corpus 416: The Crucﬁxion with Two
Figures
57
PW439/Corpus 112: Anatomical Studies
47
PW 449: Figure Studies for the Sistine Ceiling
(copies after Michelangelo’s drawings
Haarlem A29 and A27/VT 48 and 49/
Corpus 136 and 136 by an unidentiﬁed
draughtsman, perhaps a Northerner,
c. 1600)
36
PW 450: Study for Haman (copy after
Michelangelo’s drawing in the British
Museum W13/Corpus 163 by an
unidentiﬁed draughtsman, perhaps a
Northerner, c. 1600)
36
PW 451: The Flagellation (copy after a lost
modello by Michelangelo for Sebastiano del
Piombo’s Flagellation in San Pietro in
Montorio, by Giulio Clovio)
47, 54
PW456: The Archers (after PW424/Corpus
336 by Bernardino Cesari)
25
PW465–468: The Sistine Ceiling in Four
Sections (indirect copy after Michelangelo by
a draughtsman in the circle of Adamo
Scultori)
86
PW469–480: Twelve Ignudi from the Sistine
Ceiling (indirect copies after Michelangelo by
a draughtsman in the circle of Adamo
Scultori)
86
PW481–482: Two Sections of the Flood
(indirect copies after Michelangelo by a
draughtsman in the circle of Adamo
Scultori)
86
PW504: Fragmentary Copy of the Conversion
of Saul (after Michelangelo by an
unidentiﬁed draughtsman from the circle of
Taddeo Zuccaro)
103
PW505: Fragmentary Copy of the Conversion
of Saul (after Michelangelo by an
unidentiﬁed draughtsman from the circle of
Taddeo Zuccaro)
103
PW785 verso: A Putto Accompanying Libica
(partial copy after Cat. 18 recto, by Biagio
Pupini)
18
PW787: The Fall of Phaeton (after
PW430/Corpus 343 by Raffaello da
Montelupo)
66
WURZBURG
University Library
The Battle of the Centaurs (copy of a drawing
by Sir Peter Paul Rubens after Michelangelo
probably by Jacob Jordaens)
42
YORKSHIRE
Castle Howard (Formerly)
Standing Draped Woman
6, 8

INDEX 2
 works by artists other than michelangelo
and works that are not directly related to him
(excluding appendices)
BOLOGNA
Piazza Nettuno
Neptune (bronze fountain statue by
Giambologna)
25
BRESCIA
Ss. Nazaro e Celso
The Averoldi Polyptych (painting by Titian) 24
BUDAPEST
Sz´epm¨uv´eszeti M¨uzeum
Inv. 1775: Shouting Head for the Battle of
Anghiari (drawing by Leonardo da Vinci) 32
Inv. 1907 recto: Standing Man Seen from the
Back (drawing by Bartolommeo Passerotti)114
Inv. 1907 verso: Standing Man Seen from the
Back (drawing by Bartolommeo Passerotti)114
CALIFORNIA
C. Wright Collection (Formerly?)
Study for Christ in the Wedding Feast at Cana
(drawing by Ludovico Cigoli)
84
CHATSWORTH, DERBYSHIRE
The Devonshire Collection
Inv. 712/Jaff´e, Tuscan and Umbrian Schools,
no. 58: An Old Woman (drawing by Rosso
Fiorentino)
62
Inv. 717/Jaff´e, Venetian and North Italian
Schools, no 880: Leda (drawing by Leonardo
da Vinci)
1
CHICAGO
Art Institute
Inv. 1928.296/McCullagh and Giles no. 350:
Figure Studies (drawing by Taddeo
Zuccaro)
4, 33
CORAL GABLES, FLORIDA
The Joe and Emily Lowe Art Gallery
Kress Collection K308: Ghismonda with the
Heart of Guiscardo (painting by Francesco
Bacchiacca)
23
THE ESCORIAL
Cloister
Christ Appearing to His Mother on the Morning
of the Resurrection (fresco by Pellegrino
Tibaldi)
50
DUSSELDORF
Museum Kunst Palast
FP 17: Study of a Young Man (drawing by
Baccio Bandinelli)
107
FP 9445: Studies of a Hand (drawing by
Bartolommeo Passerotti)
114
FLORENCE
Churches
The Baptistery
St. John Baptising Christ (marble sculpture by
Andrea Sansovino)
3
Orsanmichele
The Virgin, Child, and Saint Anne (marble
sculpture by Francesco da Sangallo)
1
Santa Croce
Peruzzi Chapel
The Assumption of St. John the Evangelist
(fresco by Giotto)
47, 49, 7
Santa Maria del Carmine
The Brancacci Chapel
The Baptism of the Neophytes (fresco by
Masaccio)
63
The Tribute Money (fresco by Masaccio) 47, 49
Cloister (Formerly)
The Consecration of Santa Maria del Carmine,
the “Sagra” (lost fresco by Masaccio)37, 47, 49
Santa Maria Novella
The Martyrdom of Saint Catherine (painting by
Giulio Bugiardini)
37, 43
The Tomb of Antonio Strozzi (marble
monument by Silvio Cosini)
25
Santissima Annunziata
The Montauto Chapel (by Alessandro
Allori)
25, 42, 101
Museums
Museo Nazionale del Bargello
St. George (marble sculpture by Donatello)
2
Apollo and Hyacinth of 1546–7 (stone
sculpture by Benevenuto Cellini)
108
Casa Buonarroti
Painting
Inv. 1896.314: Self Portrait (by Andrea
Commodi):
20
Museo del Opera del Duomo
Choir Gallery (marble sculpture by Luca della
Robbia)
19
Isaiah (marble statue by Nanni di Banco)
63
Museo Horne
Inv. 5749: Head of a Man (drawing by Battista
Franco)
62
Gallerie degli Ufﬁzi
Dipartimento della Pittura
Inv. 1890–1464: The Martyrdom of Saint
Lawrence (painting by Alessandro Allori after a
drawing by Baccio Bandinelli)
8
Inv. 1890–1429: The Massacre of the Innocents
(painting by Daniele da Volterra)
46
Gabinetto Disegni e Stampe
Disegni esposti
654E: A Child’s Head; Study for the San
Michele Visdomini Altarpiece (drawing by
Jacopo Pontormo)
8
Disegni di ﬁgura
1496F: David and Goliath (drawing by
Daniele da Volterra)
46
12900F: The Deposition (by Girolamo
Muziano)
112
Disegni di architettura
2636A: The Fac¸ade of St. Peter’s (drawing by
Ludovico Cigoli)
84
Collezione Santarelli
198S: The Deposition (drawing by Girolamo
Muziano)
112
203S: Study for the Assumption of the Virgin
for the Della Rovere Chapel in Trinit`a dei Monti
(drawing by Daniele da Volterra?)
89
Palazzo Pitti
The Battle of Montemurlo (by Battista
Franco)
33
488

INDEX 2
489
Public Places
Piazza dell Signoria
Hercules and Cacus (marble sculpture by
Baccio Bandinelli)
30
FONTAINEBLEAU
Chˆateau
Salle de Bal
Bacchanal (fresco by Niccol`o dell’Abbate to
Francesco Primaticcio’s design)
59
Concert (fresco by Niccol`o dell’Abbate to
Francesco Primaticcio’s design)
59
Galerie d’Ulysse (Formerly)
Ulysses Meeting Hercules in Hades (fresco by
Francesco Primaticcio)
59
Mus´ee du Chˆateau
David and Goliath (double-sided painting by
Daniele da Volterra)
22, 25, 46
FRANCE
Private Collection
Verso: Copy After a Dionysiac Sarcophagus
(drawing by Battista Franco)
33
HAARLEM
Teyler Museum
A6/VT142: Portrait of Michelangelo (drawing
for the Assumption of the Virgin in the della
Rovere chapel of the Trinit`a dei Monti, by
Daniele da Volterra)
7, 107
A13 recto/VT 362: Four Studies of Hands
(drawing by Bartolommeo Passerotti)
114
HAMBURG
Thomas le Claire, 1990
Portrait Head of Michelangelo (drawing by
Bartolommeo Passerotti)
107
LILLE
Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts
Cabinet des Dessins
Brejon de Lavergn´ee, 4: Study for the
Cleansing of the Temple in the Montauto
Chapel of Santissima Annunziata, Florence
(drawing by Alessandro Allori)
25, 42, 101
Brejon de Lavergn´ee, 5: Study for the
Cleansing of the Temple in the Montauto
Chapel of Santissima Annunziata, Florence
(drawing by Alessandro Allori)
25, 42, 101
Brejon de Lavergn´ee, nos. 246–260: Drawings
by Antonio Maria Gabbiani
35
Brejon de Lavergn´ee 717–808: Sketchbook (By
Raffaello da Montelupo, formerly attributed
to Michelangelo)
66
LIVERPOOL
The Walker Art Gallery
2783: The Life of Saint John the Baptist
(painting from the circle of Francesco
Granacci)
45
LONDON
The British Museum
Department of Prints and Drawings
1854-6-28-1: Seated Nude Man (by Baccio
Bandinelli)
113
1860-6-16-93/Popham and Pouncey, 1950,
no. 237: Three Armed Horsemen (drawing by
Luca Signorelli)
36
1874-8-8-91/PG1962, no. 182: A Lunette in
the Golden House of Nero?
83
1885-5-9-35 recto: Standing Woman (by
Baccio Bandinelli)
107
1895-9-15-548: The Martyrdom of Saint
Lawrence (by Baccio Bandinelli)
8
1895-9-15-1025: Portrait Head of Michelangelo
(by Bartolommeo Passerotti)
107
1946-7-13-36: Figure Studies (related to
Cat. 76 recto, B); Architectural Elements
(related to Cat. 79) (by Raffaello da
Montelupo)
76, 79
1946-7-13-268 recto: Study of a Nude Man
(by Baccio Bandinelli)
11, 107
1946-7-13-374: Figure Studies (by Raffaello da
Montelupo?)
62
1946-7-13-495/GP 230 as Prospero Orsi:
Goliath (drawing after Daniele da Volterra) 46
1946-7-13-653/GP 95: Allegory (Dosio;
formerly attributed to Michelangelo)
34
1956-10-13-14/GP 90: David and Goliath
(drawing by Daniele da Volterra)
46
The National Gallery
Inv. 6337: The Virgin, Child, Saint Anne and
Saint John the Baptist (cartoon by Leonardo da
Vinci)
1
Inv. 1: The Raising of Lazarus (painting by
Sebastiano del Piombo)
11
The Victoria and Albert Museum
Department of Sculpture
Pope-Hennessy no. 461: A Right Hand
114
Department of Prints and Drawings
Dyce 159: Studies of a Hand (drawing by
Bartolommeo Passerotti)
114
Christie’s
1 July 1969, lot 119: Annunciatory Angel
(drawing after Leonardo by Baccio
Bandinelli)
8, 107
11 July 2002, lot 6: Studies of a Standing Figure
(Drawing by Bartolommeo Passerotti)
114
Crispian Riley-Smith, 1998
Recto: Copy After Fra Bartolommeo (drawing
by Baccio Bandinelli)
8
Verso: A Figure in a Martyrdom of St. Lawrence
(offset of a drawing by Baccio Bandinelli)
8, 107
Pouncey Collection (Formerly)
The Baptist Filling His Bowl (painting by
Giovanni Francesco Penni)
59
LYON
Mus´ee des Beaux-Arts
1971-115: Moses and the Brazen Serpent
(drawing attributed to Giulio Clovio)
34
MADRID
Accademia de Bellas Artes di San
Fernando
Inv. 163: Modello for a Double Tomb for Popes
Leo X and Clement VII (drawing by Baccio
Bandinell.)
8
Museo del Prado
The Ubeda Piet`a (painting by Sebastiano del
Piombo)
48, 49, 166
MELBOURNE
National Gallery of Victoria
351/4: Study for Saint John Baptising the
Multitude (by Andrea del Sarto)
42
MILAN
Biblioteca Ambrosiana
F265,INF. 67: Studies of a Hand (drawing by
Bartolommeo Passerotti)
114
MINNEAPOLIS
The Minneapolis Institute of Arts
Inv. 24.1: The Cleansing of the Temple
(painting by El Greco)
466
MODENA
Biblioteca Estense
YZ.22: Album of drawings, including record
copies after his earlier copies by Raffaello da
Montelupo (formerly attributed to Giovanni
Antonio Dosio but re-attributed to Raffaello
da Montelupo by Nesselrath, 1986)
34, 63
MUNICH
Bayerisches Nationalmuseum
Inv. 64/24: A Reclining Nude Woman (Dido)
(bronze statuette by Daniele da Volterra)
46
Alte Pinakothek
Inv. 38: John the Baptist in the Wilderness
(painting by or after Daniele da Volterra)
45
Graphische Sammlung
Inv. 2569: The Deposition (drawing by
Girolamo Muziano)
112
Inv. 13731: Studies of a Hand (drawing by
Bartolommeo Passerotti)
114
Art Market
Arnoldi-Livie, 2005
Proﬁle Portrait of Baccio Bandinelli (drawing by
Bartolommeo Passerotti)
107
NEW YORK
The Metropolitan Museum of Art
Department of Paintings
1970-134-1: The Birth of Saint John the Baptist
(painting by Francesco Granacci)
45

490
INDEX 2
1970-134-2: The Preaching of Saint John the
Baptist (painting by an associate of Francesco
Granacci)
45
OSLO
Nasionalgalleriet
Inv. B15252: Studies for a Fireplace (drawing by
Raffaello da Montelupo)
79
OTTAWA
National Gallery of Canada
41370 recto: A Reclining Male Nude (drawing
by Jacopo Pontormo)
6, 34
OXFORD
Ashmolean Museum
Department of Western Art
Prints and Drawings
P. II, 236: An Old Woman (drawing by Battista
Franco after Rosso’s drawing at Chatsworth,
Inv. 712)
62
P. II, 453: Studies of Hands (drawing by
Bartolommeo Passerotti)
16
P. II, 557: A Tempest (drawing by a member of
Raphael’s school probably after a lost
composition by Raphael)
33
P. II, 593: Head of a Young Man in Left Proﬁle
(drawing variously attributed)
58
P. II, no. 622: Copy of an Antique Torso
(drawing attributed to the School of
Raphael)
2
P. II, 625: Copies After the Antique (drawing by
Bartolommeo Passerotti)
99
P. II, 627: Copies After the Antique (drawing
by Bartolommeo Passerotti)
99
PARIS
Mus´ee Jacquemart-Andr´e
Inv. 1773: Spiritelli (bronze sculptures by
Donatello)
19
Mus´ee du Louvre
D´epartement des Peintures
Inv. 1939-28: The Massacres of the Triumvirate
(painting by Antoine Caron)
59
Inv. 874: Portrait of Michelangelo (painting by
Baccio Bandinelli)
107
RF 1225: Portrait of an Artist (painting from
the circle of G´ericault)
114
D´epartement des Arts Graphiques
Inv. 19: Head of a Woman, Related to
Michelangelo’s Dawn (drawing by Rosso
Fiorentino?)
60
Inv. 19 bis: Head of a Woman, Related to
Michelangelo’s Dawn (drawing by Rosso
Fiorentino?)
60
Inv. 81: Portrait of a Young Woman ( Jacopa
Doni?) (drawing by Baccio Bandinelli)
8
Inv. 717/J R2/Corpus 93: A Left Hand
(drawing by Bartolommeo Passerotti) 28, 114
Inv. 1512: David and Goliath (drawing by
Daniele da Volterra)
46
Inv. 1513: David and Goliath (drawing by
Daniele da Volterra)
46
Inv. 1525: An Unidentiﬁed King (drawing by
Daniele da Volterra)
22
Inv. 1704: An Ideal Head of a Woman (drawing
by Jacomo Ligozzi)
30
Inv. 2715/J R27: Portrait of Michelangelo
(drawing by Baccio Bandinelli)
107
Inv. 4973: A Child Strangling a Goose, After the
Antique (drawing by Battista Franco)
69
Inv. 5074: The Wedding at Cana (drawing by
Bartolommeo Passerotti)
107
Inv. 6093: Samson and Delilah (drawing by
Polidoro da Caravaggio)
35
Inv. 8472: Michelangelo’s Anatomy Lesson
(drawing by Bartolommeo Passerotti)
107
Inv. 8485: Portrait Head of Michelangelo
(drawing by Bartolommeo Passerotti)
107
Inv. 29.795.5: La natation (by an unidentiﬁed
draughtsman in the circle of Antoine
Caron)
26
RF 460: The Virgin, Child and St Anne
(drawing by Leonardo da Vinci)
1
RF 53029: Atlante (derivation from H on
Cat. 18 recto) (drawing by Francesco
Primaticcio)
26, 18
ROME
Churches
San Agostino
The Virgin, Child and Saint Anne (marble
sculpture by Andrea Sansovino)
1
Oratorio di San Giovanni Decollato
The Capture of the Baptist (fresco by Battista
Franco)
110
Palazzi
Palazzo Sacchetti
Galleria
Prophets and Sibyls and Old Testament subjects
(frescoes by Giacomo Rocca and assistants)
29, 22, 34
Salone
The Defeat of Saul (fresco by Francesco
Salviati)
29
Palazzo dei Conservatori
Corner Room
A Roman Triumph (fresco by Michele degli
Alberti and Giacomo Rocca)
29
The Farnesina
Loggia di Psiche
Jupiter and Cupid (fresco by Raphael and his
school)
109
Museums and Calleries
Istituto Nazionale per la Graﬁca
FC. 125514: The Martyrdom of Saint Catherine
(drawing by Alesandro Allori)
43
Museo Capitolino
Inv. 360: Saint John the Baptist in the Wilderness
(painting by or after Daniele da Volterra)
45
ROME, VATICAN CITY
Pinacoteca
The Transﬁguration (painting by
Raphael)
37, 187
Museo
The Torso Belvedere
2, 70
Bibliotheca
Inv. Vat. Lat. 13619, fol. 2: David and Goliath
(copy of a lost drawing by Daniele da
Volterra by an unidentiﬁed sixteenth-century
draughtsman)
46
Private Collections
Volpi Collection (Formerly)
A Standing Horse (wax model variously
attributed to Leonardo and Michelangelo)
4
ROTTERDAM
Boymans-Van Beuningen Museum
Inv. 1392: Portrait of Valerio Belli (drawing by
Parmigianino in a frame by Vasari)
2
STOCKHOLM
Nationalmuseum
Bjurstr¨om et al., 1110: Figure Studies
(attributed to a follower of Bandinelli)
43
Bjurstr¨om et al., 1201: Figure studies
(attributed to Domenico Beccafumi)
43
Private Collection (formerly)
Aeneas Commanded by Mercury to Relinquish
Dido (painting by or after Daniele da
Volterra)
30, 45
TURIN
Bibliotheca Reale
Inv. 15716/6 DC: The Head of a Woman,
Related to Michelangelo’s Dawn (drawing by
Rosso Fiorentino?)
60
UNITED KINGDOM
Private Collection
Mrs William Young Ottley (painting by Sir
Thomas Lawrence)
34
VENICE
Churches
San Rocco
Saint Sebastian (marble sculpture by
Bartolommeo Bergamasco)
24
Accademia
Inv. 214: Sketches for the Battle of Anghiari
(drawing by Leonardo da Vinci)
5
Inv. 230: The Virgin, Child, and Saint Anne
(drawing by Leonardo da Vinci)
1
VIENNA
Kunsthistorisches Museum
Inv. 1554: The Rape of Dinah (painting by
Giuliano Bugiardini)
30

INDEX 2
491
Graphische Sammlung Albertina
BK 125: A Standing Female Figure (after
Cat. 77 verso by Raffaello da Montelupo, by
Battista Franco)
77
BK2029: Studies of Hands (drawing by
Bartolommeo Passerotti)
114
WASHINGTON
National Gallery of Art
Inv. 1957.14.4 (1482): The Cleansing of the
Temple (painting by El Greco)
46
WINDSOR CASTLE
Royal Library
PW75: Figure Studies (drawing by Baccio
Bandinelli)
81
PW241: The Adoration of the Magi (drawing
by Giulio Clovio)
72
PW786 recto: Ideal Head of a
Woman (drawing by Raffaello da
Montelupo)
77
PW789: Leda and the Swan (after a lost
painting by Leonardo da Vinci by
Raphael)
32
8360: Copy After a Drawn Copy by Battista
Franco of a Dionysiac Sarcophagus (by an
unidentiﬁed draughtsman, perhaps Girolamo
da Carpi)
33
9567: Lunette 36 in the Golden House of Nero
(by an unidentiﬁed draughtsman)
83
12340: Cavalrymen in Action (drawing by
Leonardo da Vinci)
5
12377: A Cataclysm (drawing by Leonardo da
Vinci)
32
12378: A Cataclysm (drawing by Leonardo da
Vinci)
32
12379: A Cataclysm (drawing by Leonardo
da Vinci)
32
12380: A Cataclysm (drawing by Leonardo
da Vinci)
32
12381: A Cataclysm (drawing by Leonardo
da Vinci)
32
12382: A Cataclysm (drawing by Leonardo
da Vinci)
32
12383: A Cataclysm (drawing by Leonardo
da Vinci)
32
12384: A Cataclysm (drawing by Leonardo
da Vinci)
32
12495: Caesar and the Conspirators? (drawing
by Leonardo da Vinci)
32
12593: Study of a Male Nude (drawing by
Leonardo da Vinci)
1
12596: Study of a Male Nude (drawing by
Leonardo da Vinci)
1

