

Drawing for the Absolute Beginner


Willenbrink
absolute beginner
A Clear & Easy Guide to 
Successful Drawing
for
the
CINCINNATI, OHIO
www.artistsnetwork.com
for 
the
Mark and Mary
Willenbrink
absolute beginner
A Clear & Easy Guide to 
Successful Drawing

Drawing for the Absolute Beginner. Copyright © 2006 by Mark and Mary Wil-
lenbrink. Manufactured in China. All rights reserved. No part of this book may 
be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical means including 
information storage and retrieval systems without permission in 
writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote 
brief passages in a review. Published by North Light Books, an 
imprint of F+W Publications, Inc., 4700 East Galbraith Road, Cin-
cinnati, Ohio, 45236. (800) 289-0963. First Edition.
Other fi ne North Light Books are available from your local bookstore, art supply 
store or direct from the publisher.
10    09    08
         5    4
DISTRIBUTED IN CANADA BY FRASER DIRECT
100 Armstrong Avenue
Georgetown, ON, Canada  L7G 5S4
Tel:  (905) 877-4411
DISTRIBUTED IN THE U.K. AND EUROPE BY DAVID & CHARLES
Brunel House, Newton Abbot, Devon, TQ12 4PU, England
Tel: (+44) 1626 323200, Fax: (+44) 1626 323319
Email: postmaster@davidandcharles.co.uk
DISTRIBUTED IN AUSTRALIA BY CAPRICORN LINK
P.O. Box 704, S. Windsor NSW, 2756 Australia
Tel:  (02) 4577-3555
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Willenbrink, Mark and Mary
 
Drawing for the Absolute Beginner / Mark and Mary Willenbrink.— 1st ed.
 
 
p. cm
 
Includes index.
 
ISBN-13: 978-1-58180-789-9 (pb. : alk. paper)
ISBN-13: 978-1-60061-601-3 (EPUB)
 
ISBN-10: 1-58180-789-9 (pb. : alk. paper)
 
1. Drawing—Technique. I. Title.
ND2237 .B67 2001 
571.42’24328—dc21 
00-068694
Edited by Kelly Messerly
Designed by Guy Kelly
Production art by Lisa Holstein
Production coordinated by Matt Wagner
Metric Conversion Chart
To convert 
to 
multiply by
Inches 
Centimeters 
2.54
Centimeters 
Inches 
0.4
Feet 
Centimeters 
30.5
Centimeters 
Feet 
0.03
Yards 
Meters 
0.9
Meters 
Yards 
1.1
Sq. Inches 
Sq. Centimeters 
6.45
Sq. Centimeters 
Sq. Inches 
0.16
Sq. Feet 
Sq. Meters 
0.09
Sq. Meters 
Sq. Feet 
10.8
Sq. Yards 
Sq. Meters 
0.8
Sq. Meters 
Sq. Yards 
1.2
Pounds 
Kilograms 
0.45
Kilograms 
Pounds 
2.2
Ounces 
Grams 
28.3
Grams 
Ounces 
0.035
About the Authors
Mark Willenbrink is a freelance illustrator and fi ne artist whose work has been dis-
played in fi ne art shows, with several paintings receiving awards. Mark also teaches 
art classes and workshops using demonstration, simple instructions and professional 
tricks to help his students achieve beautiful artwork they can be proud to display.
Mary Willenbrink has her master’s degree. She is a Christian counselor and author, 
but feels her highest calling is to be home to raise her children.
As a husband and wife team, Mark and Mary have authored and illustrated Water-
color for the Absolute Beginner (North Light, 2003), and the book has been translated 
into several languages. Mark’s writings and illustrations have been featured in a num-
ber of other art instruction books. Mark is a contributing editor for Watercolor Magic 
Magazine. His regularly featured column, “Brush Basics” has been rated as a favorite 
among the magazine’s readers. 
Mark and Mary reside in Cincinnati, Ohio, with their three children.

Dedication
Laus Deo
Praise to God
We would like to dedicate this book to our fathers, Roy 
Willenbrink and Hugh (Bud) Patton, both of whom we love 
and miss greatly.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank those behind the scenes at F+W Pub-
lications who have made this all possible: acquisitions editor, 
Pam Wissman; contracts manager, Julia Groh; editorial director, 
Jamie Markle; designer, Guy Kelly and production coordinator, 
Matt Wagner. We would also like to give a special thanks to Pam 
Wissman for her encouragement to write this book.
To our cherished editor, Kelly Messerly, we would like to give 
our heartfelt thanks. Your time, patience, talent and encourage-
ment were wonderful! We could not have done this without you!
Thank you, Dorothy Frambes, Mike McGuire and Mary 
Helen Wallace for sharing your talents so they can be passed 
on to others.
We would like to thank our mothers, Clare Willenbrink and 
Grace Patton, who have been such an encouragement to us in 
our artistic pursuits. Also, thank you to our family and friends for 
your consistent support.
It is with great pride that we would like to acknowledge our 
three children for their patience and continuous support while 
we wrote this book. It is an honor to be your parents. Thank you, 
thank you, thank you!
It is our encouragement for each other and our unique insights 
that make this book special. It was fun to write together—which 
just proves that our marriage, like this book, is a work of art!
Lastly, we thank the Lord for His inspiration. We are all created 
in our Father’s image to be creative, and with our creativity we 
praise Him.

Contents
8 
Pencils
10 Paper and  Drawing Board
11 Erasers
12 Additional Drawing Tools
27 Using Basic Shapes
28 Gauging Proportions
30 Measuring Angles 
31 Working From Reference 
Materials 
32 Understanding Linear 
Perspective 
34 One-Point Perspective
36 Two-Point Perspective 
38 Three-Point Perspective 
39 Hidden Horizons and 
Vanishing Points 
40 Locating Vanishing Points, 
41 Atmospheric Perspective 
42 Ellipses 
44 Arches and Roofs
46 Refl ections 
55 Clouds and Grass 
56 Leafy Trees 
57 Evergreen Trees 
58 Brick, Stone and Wood
60 Rocks
62 Plane 
64 Train 
66 Automobile 
68 Boat 
70 Cat Face 
72 Side View of a Cat 
74 Dog 
76 Cow 
77 Swan 
78 Human Figures 
82 Faces 
15 Holding the Pencil 
16 Structural Sketches 
18 Value Sketches 
20 Black-and-White Sketches 
22 Contour Sketches 
24 Combining Approaches 
49 Contrast 
51 Creating Values 
52 Light Effects 
53 Plotting Shadows 
87 Arranging the Elements 
88 Number of Elements 
89 Cropping and Formatting 
90 Lines, Tangents and Shapes 
92 Still Life 
94 Textured Metal 
96 Scene in Perspective 
98 Natural Textures 
100 Using Contrast 
105 Expressive Portrait 
110 Telling a Story Through a 
Drawing 
116 Landscape 
120 Seascape Composition 
Chapter 1 
Sketching and Drawing
Chapter 2
Principles of Good Drawing
Chapter 3
Value
Chapter 4
Practice the Techniques
Chapter 5
Composition
Chapter 6
Let’s Draw
124 Glossary
126 Index

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Do you remember when you got out your crayons and drew 
pictures as a child? Now maybe you are proudly displaying your 
children’s artwork on the refrigerator door. You love their pictures 
because you can see their unique expression in the art, even if 
it looks more like a Picasso than a Rembrandt. You were just as 
proud of your own artwork at one time but somewhere along the 
road of life you began to doubt your artistic abilities. Our belief is 
that everyone is an artist, and that includes you!
The skills necessary for drawing are not limited just to pencil 
and paper but can be used in other art forms. When you draw, 
you are interpreting what you observe from your own perspec-
tive. With the principles in this book, you will develop your 
observational skills, learn the proper tools to use, apply different 
techniques to your drawing and make use of some of the tricks 
professionals use every day. 
You will learn more if you get out your drawing materials and 
become an active participant rather than if you just passively 
read through this book. The material is written to be used again 
and again. By doing the exercises more than once you will be 
able to witness the improvement of your artwork.
We hope you will regain that childlike passion for doing art 
and learning without critiquing yourself harshly. We won’t make 
you hang it on the fridge, but we do suggest you save your art-
work because it will show your progress and increase your confi -
dence as you go.
You Need Only a Few Materials to Draw
All you really need is a pencil and some paper, but 
a few other tools will make drawing easier where-
ever you go. See pages 8–13 for more explanation 
of drawing materials.
1 Pencils
2 Pencil extender
3 Erasers
4 Angle ruler
5 Pencil box
6 Small sketch pad
7 Large drawing pad
8 Drawing board
9 Pencil sharpener
Your Own Art Studio
With a few supplies, create your own drawing 
studio so you can work anywhere. Put your 
new studio in the park or in your living room. Sit 
down and rest the bottom edge of the drawing 
board on your knees. Use one hand to prop the 
drawing board and use the other hand to draw. 
Sit next to the subject, comparing your drawing 
to your subject as you work.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

8
Though one pencil may look just like any other, there are many 
different types of pencils to choose from. Each has different uses 
to achieve a wide range of results. One difference among pencils 
is the core, which may be made of graphite, carbon or charcoal. 
I especially like the graphite (commonly mislabeled lead) pencil 
because it can easily be erased, it comes in many degrees of 
fi rmness and it does not easily smear. Carbon and charcoal pen-
cils provide rich, dark colors but they don’t erase as well, smear 
easily and have a very soft feel. Black colored pencils don’t 
smear, but they don’t erase well and have a fi rm but waxy feel.
Pencil Hardness
Hardness is another important quality to consider when select-
ing pencils. Ratings, usually stamped on the pencils, range from 
H (hard) to B (soft), with F and HB in the middle. For the demos 
in this book, we will use 4H, HB and 4B graphite pencils. These 
will provide a range in hardness without requiring you to keep 
track of an overwhelming number of pencils. 8B pencils create 
nice darks, but they are so soft that they need to be continually 
sharpened.
Pencils
Runaway Pencils!
Use hex-shaped pencils instead of round 
pencils because round pencils roll and can get 
away from you.
Pencil Extender
To get more miles out of your pencils, use a 
pencil extender on the end of a pencil that has 
been shortened by use.
Pencils Come in a Variety of Hardnesses
HARDER
SOFTER
8H
7H
6H
5H
4H
3H
2H
H
F
HB
B
2B
3B
4B
5B
6B
7B
8B
Keep Your Pencil Choices Simple
4H, HB and 4B graphite pencils are used for the demonstra-
tions in this book, but you may choose to use a different com-
bination of pencil grades or a mechanical pencil for your own 
drawings apart from this book. If you are trying to duplicate the 
fi nished drawings in this book, make it easy on yourself and 
work with the same materials suggested, or you may end up 
frustrated, wondering why you achieved different results. 
8
Woodless Pencils
Woodless  pencils have only a thin 
coating over their thick cores. This is 
a novel idea, but woodless pencils are 
prone to breaking, especially when car-
ried in a pocket! Use pencils with wood 
surrounding the core instead.

9
If you want to draw a thin line, you will need a sharp point on 
the tip of your pencil. You can sharpen your pencils in two ways: 
with a pencil sharpener or by hand, using a craft knife and a 
sandpaper pad. 
A Craft Knife and Sandpaper Pad 
Reveal More of the Pencil’s Core
For a controlled point that exposes more of the 
core, sharpen your pencil with a craft knife and 
sandpaper pad.
Sharpened with a 
pencil sharpener
First Shape the Pencil With a Craft Knife
Grip the pencil in one hand, with the point away from you, and the craft 
knife in the other. Push the thumb holding the pencil against the thumb 
holding the knife to create leverage so the blade cuts into the pencil. 
Cut, then turn the pencil and repeat the process until you’ve worked 
the area into a point.
Then Sharpen the Core With a Sandpaper Pad
Sand the core back and forth on the sanding pad for a sharp point.
Identifying Your Pencils
To avoid having to search and squint to read the markings on 
the sides of your pencils, label the pencil ends with nail polish 
or colored tape. Place the nail polish or tape toward the top 
of the pencil, but avoid covering the rating stamp or placing it 
where the pencil extender would cover it.
Pencil Sharpeners Are the Simplest 
Way to Keep Pencils Sharp
A pencil sharpener is the quickest and easiest 
way to keep the tips of your pencils sharp.
Sharpened with a 
craft knife and sand-
paper pad
9

10
10
Paper and Drawing Board
Papers for sketching and drawing vary in size, weight, surface 
texture (usually referred to as tooth) and content. They may also 
be categorized as either sketch or drawing paper. When choos-
ing drawing paper, always choose an acid-free paper, or the 
paper may yellow over time. Sketch paper, as the name implies, 
is for sketching and usually has a paper weight of 50 to 70 lbs. 
(105gsm to 150gsm). Drawing paper, which is for more fi nished 
art, usually comes in 90-lb. (190gsm) weight. A small 6" × 4" 
(15cm × 10cm) pocket sketch pad is great for quick studies and 
ideas, while larger sketch pads are obviously needed for bigger 
sketches. Any drawing you begin may be completed as a keeper, 
so you may prefer to begin all your drawings using an 11" × 14" 
(28cm × 36cm) medium-tooth, acid-free, 90-lb. (190gsm) draw-
ing paper.
The lights and darks in a drawing are achieved by varying the 
amount of pressure applied to the pencil. Because of this, it is 
necessary to have a hard surface beneath the paper, ideally a 
drawing board. It offers a smooth, solid surface without surprise 
ruts or nicks, and it won’t bend or give with pressure the way the 
cardboard back of a drawing pad can. 
Sketching and Drawing Paper
Use both a small sketch pad and a larger drawing pad. Tear out the indi-
vidual drawing pad sheets and use them on a drawing board.
Drawing Boards Provide a Hard, Smooth Surface 
Drawing boards can be bought with a clip attached to one end and a rub-
ber band on the other to hold a sheet of paper in place.
Tracing Paper and 
Masking Tape
Use tracing paper to make a more 
refi ned sketch. Put the previous sketch 
under the top sheet of tracing paper. 
Use masking tape to secure the sheets 
of paper to each other, then carefully 
trace the desired elements of the image 
onto the tracing paper.

11
11
Avoid Using the Eraser at 
the End of Your Pencil
Never use the eraser at the end of a 
pencil. It may smear pencil lines and 
stain the paper.
Erasers
Erasers are the sort of thing to have with the idea that you will 
use them only sparingly. Each time you use an eraser, you risk 
smearing the drawing or damaging the paper.
Kneaded Eraser
The fi rst eraser you get should be a kneaded eraser. These soft, 
putty-like erasers are very gentle to the paper’s surface and leave 
few, if any, crumbs. To erase, fi rst try pressing the eraser to the 
paper’s surface; this is less damaging to the paper than rubbing 
the eraser back and forth.
White Vinyl Eraser
Use a white vinyl eraser to remove hard-to-erase pencil lines. 
White vinyl erasers are more abrasive than kneaded erasers but 
will not stain the paper, as some colored erasers often do. White 
vinyl erasers leave behind strings rather than crumbs, making 
cleanup easy.
Erasing Shield
Made of thin metal, an erasing shield masks the areas that are 
not to be erased. To use it, with one hand fi rmly hold the shield 
down over the area not to be disturbed and, with your other 
hand, carefully erase over top of the shield.
White vinyl eraser
Erasing shield
Kneaded eraser

12
12
Additional Drawing Tools
In addition to the basic supplies, there are other tools that will 
help make your drawing experience easier and more enjoyable.
Straightedge
Using a straightedge will give you sharp, accurate lines when 
your subject is technical and requires precision. The precision 
from a straightedge would look awkward in a sketchy drawing, 
though. If you want straightedge accuracy without the tightness, 
use the straightedge during the sketching stage with a light pen-
cil line, then draw over those lines more heavily freehand in the 
drawing stage.
Triangle
Because it is larger than a ruler and has more surface area to 
grip, a triangle can be easy to use for drawing straight lines.
T-Square 
Using a triangle with a T-square hooked to the side edge of your 
board or drawing pad will help you draw more precise vertical, 
horizontal and diagonal lines. This method is best used for draw-
ing technical subjects such as buildings in linear perspective (see 
pages 32–38).
Angle Ruler
An angle ruler works like a ruler, but it can pivot to measure 
angles and can fold small enough to fi t in a pencil box. See page 
30 for instructions on using this tool to draw angles.
Dividers
Dividers are used to observe and duplicate proportions from 
a photo or sketch. See page 29 for instructions on using 
standard dividers.
Angle ruler
• 4H, HB and 4B graphite pencils
• Pencil sharpener
• Sketch pad
• 11" × 14" (28cm × 26cm) medium-
tooth drawing paper
• Drawing board
• Kneaded eraser
• White vinyl eraser
Optional, But Not to Be Overlooked
• Straightedge, triangle or angle ruler
• Light box
• Dividers, proportional dividers or 
sewing gauge
• Small mirror
• Erasing shield
• Pencil extender
• Craft knife
• Sandpaper pad
• T-square
• Fixative
• Tracing paper
• Masking tape
Straightedge
Triangle
T-square
Must-Have Materials

13
13
Proportional Dividers
Proportional dividers are used to proportionally enlarge or reduce 
a image. (See page 29 for additional instruction.)
Sewing Gage
A sewing gauge is an inexpensive tool that can be used to 
measure the proportions of a still life, three-dimensional subject 
matter, or when working from fl at reference materials such as 
photographs. 
Light Box
A light box allows you to work from a structural drawing without 
having to sketch guidelines directly on your drawing paper. This 
process is explained in more detail on page 24.
Small Mirror
Use a small mirror for self-portraits and for observing facial fea-
tures. It is also handy for examining your artwork in reverse form. 
Looking at a drawing in reverse will allow you to see the compo-
sition through fresh eyes.
Fixative
Fixative is a spray applied to pencil drawings to prevent the 
artwork from smudging. It’s used mostly for carbon or charcoal 
drawings, which tend to be powdery. For the demos in this book, 
fi xative isn’t necessary because you’ll be drawing with graphite.
Graphite is not likely to smear if the drawings are stored loosely, 
one on top of the other. 
Sewing gauge
Proportional 
dividers
Light box
Dividers
Small mirror
Fixative

14
1
14
Sketching and drawing are two different things. A sketch is a work in prog-
ress. You may sketch to observe your subject matter or to resolve questions 
regarding a drawing you are working on. A sketch may help you understand 
the values of a subject, or gain more understanding of the subject’s structure, 
proportions and placement of its compositional elements. Sketches like these 
may progress toward a more fi nished drawing. On the other hand, (no pun 
intended!) drawing is an activity that is begun with the intention of producing a 
fi nished piece of art.
With these defi nitions in mind, recognize that there are times to begin a 
drawing with a sketch and there are times to begin a sketch without any inten-
tion of refi ning it into a fi nished drawing. As a beginner, if you are trying to do 
more drawings than sketches, then you may be putting too much pressure 
on yourself. Loosen up and enjoy learning four different 
approaches to sketching and drawing: structural line 
sketching, value sketching, black-and-white sketching 
and contour sketching.
Let the Lines Guide You
Line up your drawing board and paper with 
your subject and lightly sketch horizontal 
lines. These will guide you as you place 
your subject’s features. Grab a friend and 
try it yourself!
Sketching & 
Drawing
1

15
15
There are different ways to hold a pencil, depending on what 
type of strokes and lines you want to achieve. You may start out 
with loose, sketchy lines and progress to tighter, more controlled 
lines and shorter strokes. Here are some common hand grips 
Holding the Pencil
Create Thick, Tight Lines
Apply more pressure to the point of the pencil 
by moving your index fi nger closer to the tip. 
Your fi ngertips may rest on the paper, though it 
isn’t necessary that they do so for this stroke to 
be successful.
Create Thin, Controlled Lines
For lines like these, grip the pencil as in a 
handwriting position, with the pencil rest-
ing between your thumb, middle and index 
fi ngers. Your hand rests gently on the paper. 
For very thin lines, the pencil tip needs to 
come to a sharp point.
Cover the Drawing
Place a piece of scrap or copier paper over 
your drawing. Start the line strokes on the scrap 
paper and continue onto the drawing paper.
Lift the Frisket
Lift your frisket away. The pencil lines should 
look as if they start from one invisible line.
Create Long, Arcing Lines
This grip is similar to the handwriting position, 
except you hold the pencil out at length. Use 
this grip to achieve wide, straight and arced 
lines. Let your hand rest gently on the paper.
you can  try as you sketch and draw. You may fi nd something 
else that works better for you. You will fi nd that pressure and 
grip affects the line results of your drawings. Generally, the more 
pressure you apply, the darker your line will be.
Create Thick, Loose Lines
For thick, loose lines, avoid using the point of 
the pencil. Instead, grip the pencil with your 
thumb and fi ngertip so that the pencil lead lies 
fl at against the paper. Your fi ngertips should be 
either just above the paper surface or gently 
resting on it. This may smear your previous 
pencil lines, so be careful. You will use your 
entire arm to draw these wide lines.
Using a Frisket
A piece of paper can be used as a frisket 
to make an even edge for a set of pencil 
lines. This is also a great technique to use 
if you want to create a clean margin for 
your drawing. This method also works well 
for backgrounds.

16
A structual sketch is the basic linework in which values and 
details are built upon. They are a great way to observe your sub-
ject, and are often used as a basis for a more fi nished drawing. 
A structural sketch is also an excellent way to loosen up before 
doing another type of sketch or drawing. 
 
Structural Sketches
Focus on the Basic Structure
A structural sketch will help you observe and understand the underlying 
structure of the subject. Here you will focus on the placement and pro-
portions of the elements rather than on light or shadows (see page 18). 
16

1 
2 
3 
1
2
3
17
Must-Have Materials
4H graphite pencil 
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser 
Straightedge (optional for the fi rst 
step, absolutely prohibited for the 
rest of the steps)
A structural sketch helps you see how a subject is constructed. 
Look for basic shapes such as squares, rectangles and circles. 
Now ask yourself how they relate to one another. Before you pick 
up your pencil to sketch your coffee cup, take a minute to study 
your subject. 
Sketch the Basic Form and Structures
Use a 4H pencil to sketch the outer forms of the mug and 
the most relevant structural guidelines, such as those that 
will indicate the placement of the rim, the bottom of the cup and 
the handle. 
2 
Add More Structural Lines
Sketch the rim of the cup and the handle. Use the lines 
you drew in step one to help you add these additonal 
lines. Look for points where elements line up such as the rim of 
the cup and handle.
3 
Add Detail Lines to Finish
Add details such as the inner lines of the rim and handle. 
Erase any unnecessary guidelines with a kneaded eraser.
Structural guideline
1
2
3
17
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

18
Values are the degrees of lights and darks in a drawing or paint-
ing. A value sketch is used to observe a subject without much 
regard for structural or proportional accuracy. Here you focus on 
the lights and darks of your subject. One way to visually separate 
the structural lines from the values is to squint at your subject. 
Value Sketches
This blurs the structural lines and makes the lights and darks 
more noticeable. For a fi nished drawing that employs values, 
it’s a good idea to do a structural sketch fi rst to make sure the 
elements of your subject are in the right places. See page 24 for 
more explanation of combining drawing approaches. 
Use Layers of Shading for Value Sketches
Begin a value sketch by fi rst locating the areas of highlights, which will be left white. Then lightly 
shade the areas of overall values. The next step is to add more layers of shading for the middle 
values. Finally, add the darkest shading.
Using an Erasing Shield
If you want to erase in a specifi c area 
of your drawing, use an erasing shield. 
Place the erasing shield over the region 
that is not to be erased. Gently begin 
erasing with a kneaded eraser. Use a 
white vinyl eraser if the kneaded eraser 
doesn’t fully erase the fi rst time. 
18

2 
1 
3 
19
Must-Have Materials
4B graphite pencil
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
2 
Sketch the Middle Values
Continue adding layers for the middle values, gradually 
giving form to the sketch.
In this exercise you will be focusing on values instead of lines. 
The idea of a value sketch is to defi ne form through light and 
shadow instead of lines, so use shading to give your coffee cup 
form. Remember, this is not intended to be a fi nished drawing, so 
relax and enjoy the process. 
Value Sketch of a Coffee Cup
1 
Sketch the Lighter Values
Use a 4B pencil to sketch the lighter values, keeping the 
lightest ones the white of the paper. Use pencil strokes 
that feel comfortable for you. They may be vertical, horizontal or 
even scribbles.
3 
Sketch the Dark Values
Finish by adding more layers for the darkest values. 
Use a kneaded eraser to lighten some areas if you 
think they need it.
19
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

20
No Outlines or Middle Values Allowed
No matter what part of the subject you’re drawing, use only black and 
white forms to defi ne it for a Chiarosuro drawing. 
Black-and-white sketches are like value sketches, except that 
you focus on the contrasting blacks and whites and ignore the 
middle values. Your softest 4B pencil will work, but charcoal and 
carbon pencils work especially well for this because of their rich, 
Black-and-White Sketches
dark qualities. Also called chiaroscuro sketching, this type of 
sketch is a good exercise for understanding what makes images 
visually identifi able with the most basic of values, black and white.
ART 018-2 (1-5)
bw reﬂ ect
FPO
xxx%
Avoid Smudges
As you are drawing, your hand glides 
over the paper surface and can smear 
the pencil lines. One solution to this is to 
use a slip sheet, which is a sheet of paper 
placed between your hand and the draw-
ing surface. This way your hand does not 
rest directly on the drawing.
20

2 
1 
3 
21
Must-Have Materials
Anything from a 4B to 8B graphite, 
carbon or charcoal pencil
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
2 
Add More Darks
Continue adding darks, using them to defi ne the image. 
No, it’s not a fancy type of coffee, it’s a black-and-white sketch of 
a coffee cup! This is like taking a value sketch to the extreme; no 
outlines and no middle values will be used to interpret the sub-
ject. Use this method to examine a subject’s most basic lights 
and darks.
Remember, this is just a study. Like a sketch, this is not 
intended to look like a fi nished drawing. 
Start With the Most Obvious Darks
With a soft-lead pencil, sketch the most noticeable darks 
of the subject. In this case, the interior of the mug, along 
the rim, and down the right on the outside of the mug are the 
darkest areas. Keep your pencil strokes close together so areas 
will look black.
3 
Add a Background
Finish adding darks to complete the mug. Add a back-
ground and some shadows to further defi ne the image.
21
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

22
Continuous Line Sketch
Once you start moving your pencil, don’t lift it until the sketch is done.
Contour Sketches
Blind Contour Sketch
This sketch was done by observing the subject without looking at the 
drawing paper. Block your view of the sketch with a piece of cardboard 
until you’re fi nished. 
Blind Contour Sketches Help You Understand Your Subject
No one expects contour sketches to be identifi able. As Mary worked 
through this sketch, she gained a real understanding of the contours of 
her coffee cup.
This type of sketch is also called a continuous line sketch because 
you draw with one continuous line, drawing outlines and defi ning 
value areas. Don’t worry about accuracy. This is a fun exercise for 
loosening up before you draw, and it will sharpen your observation 
skills. Add more of a challenge by blocking your view of the sketch 
in progress, letting your hand guess at what the pencil line looks 
like on the paper. This is called blind contour sketching.
22

2 
1 
3 
23
Must-Have Materials
HB graphite pencil
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
2 
Continue the Pencil Movement
Keep moving the pencil so that the sketch is formed with 
a single line.
This sketch is done by placing the pencil onto the paper and not 
lifting it until the sketch is  fi nished. Look for lines and shapes. 
Follow the contours that defi ne the subject and the shadows 
around it. Doing a contour sketch is truly an exercise in putting 
observation into practice!
Start Moving the Pencil
Put an HB pencil to the paper and start moving it, 
following the contours of the subject without lifting the 
pencil from the paper.
3 
Finish Up
Keep moving the pencil until the sketch is complete.
23
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

24
We’ve explored four different approaches to sketching and draw-
ing. If you tried the value, black-and-white or contour sketch 
demos, you might be thinking your art didn’t turn out anything 
like you expected. Do not be discouraged and don’t give up! You 
are already growing in your observation skills. 
You can combine some of the different approaches to achieve 
a more fi nished drawing. For instance, start with a structural line 
sketch and then add values. During the structural sketch stage, 
you should look for the basic shapes (see page 27) and propor-
Combining Approaches
tions (see pages 28–29) so you can be confi dent of their place-
ment before you add the values. 
A light box is a device that allows you to see the structural 
lines for a drawing without having to draw them on the artwork 
itself. First, create a structural sketch of your subject. Place the 
structural sketch on the light box, then tape a piece of draw-
ing paper to the structural line sketch. The image will be visible 
through the drawing paper to provide a foundation for your value, 
black-and-white and contour drawings.
A Light Box Makes Combining Drawing 
Approaches Easy
Do a structural sketch of your subject, erase 
obsolete guide lines and add detail lines defi ning 
the form and shadows. Use this sketch as the 
basis for a value sketch, black-and-white sketch 
or contour sketch. Place the sketch on a light box 
and then place your drawing paper on top of the 
sketch. Turn on the light box so the image of the  
sketch will be visible through the drawing paper. 
This will provide a framework for your subject so 
you don’t have to sketch the structural guidelines 
onto the drawing paper.
Combine Approaches for a Finished Drawing
Work out proportions with a structural sketch and 
placement of the elements in your composition. Add 
value changes to defi ne form and shadow.
24

25
25
Structural Line Sketch
These lines indicate highlights and shadows as well as the structure of the 
subject. To use other drawing approaches, erase any obsolete markings. 
Value Drawing Using the 
Structural Line Sketch and Light Box
A light box was used to backlight the structural sketch as a guide for this 
value drawing.
Black-and-White Drawing (Chiaroscuro) 
Using the Structural Sketch and Light Box
A light box was used to backlight the structural sketch as a guide for this 
black-and-white drawing.
Contour Drawing Using the 
Structural Sketch and Light Box
A light box was used to backlight the structural sketch as a guide for this 
contour drawing.

2
26
Principles of 
Good Drawing
Good drawing does not come just from having a skilled or trained hand, but 
also from your ability to observe your subject matter. In fact, one of the things 
we love most about art is being able to see how each artist interprets a subject.
What is it that gives someone the ability to draw well? It is a matter of learning 
basic principles, applying them consistently and training the eye to observe 
the subject. Observing invovles noticing the basic shapes, proportions and val-
ues of objects rather than thinking of them as “buildings,” “trees” or “people.” 
Once you have an understanding of the principles and have trained yourself 
to observe, it is then only a matter of telling your hand to draw what your eye 
sees, not what your mind thinks the subject should look like.
2
26

2 
3 
4 
1 
27
Before you pick up a pencil to begin drawing, take time to 
observe your subject matter. Look for the basic shapes, then 
sketch them lightly on your drawing paper, working out the cor-
rect proportions of those shapes and determining where each 
should be in relation to one another. If you have questions about 
the composition, do a few quick thumbnail sketches at this point. 
Once you decide where to place the major elements of your 
composition, take your sketch to the next step, adding structural 
details. Finally, add the values. This method of drawing will help 
ensure that the results will be proportionally correct.
Using Basic Shapes
2 
Sketch the 
Basic Structure 
Start with the 
basic shapes and use 
them to work out pro-
portions (see page 28) 
and composition (see 
page 86).
3 
Add Details to the Structural Sketch
Add the details including the columns and trim to the 
building, defi ne the shape of the trees and add a row of 
shrubs in front of the building. 
4 
Add the Values
Add values over the lines to give the scene depth and 
defi nition, and to make it look more realistic. 
1 
Look for the 
Basic Shapes
Look for 
circles, squares, tri-
angles, ovals and rect-
angles in your subject 
before you sketch.
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N
Must-Have Materials
HB graphite pencil
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
27

28
Gauging proportions is as simple as making sure that the width 
and height of the objects in your drawing are proportionally simi-
lar to those in your reference. Believable art starts with correct 
proportions, so learning how to gauge proportions accurately will 
be invaluable. You don’t need to know the actual inches or cen-
Gauging Proportions
timeters; instead, measure the relative sizes of the elements to 
achieve an accurate representation of your subject. 
There are many tools available for gauging proportions, from 
a simple pencil to tools made specifi cally for measuring, such as 
sewing gauges or dividers. Dividers, both standard and 
Gauging Proportions With a Pencil
Gauging Proportions can be done by “mea-
suring” each part of the subject with a pen-
cil. Use the top of your thumb to make the 
distance from the end of the pencil. Now 
compare this measurement with those of 
other parts of the image. In this example, the 
teapot’s height is equal to its width. 
Lock in Accurate Proportions
To correctly gauge proportions in this manner, lock your arm straight in 
front of you, holding the pencil straight up. Look at the pencil and the 
subject you’re measuring through one eye. A bent arm may result in 
inaccurate measurements because you may bend your arm at different 
angles from one measurement to another.
28

29
Using Proportional Dividers
Proportional dividers are used not only to compare proportions but also 
to enlarge or reduce. Measure the subject in your reference with one end 
of the dividers, then use the other end to mark the measurement for your 
drawing. The notches in the center of the dividers let you determine just 
how much you want to enlarge or reduce the size of the image.
Using Standard Dividers
Measure the subject in your reference with the dividers and transfer the 
length to your surface. You can only measure a one-to-one ratio with 
standard dividers. If you wanted to enlarge this window to twice its size, 
you would have to double the divider’s measurement.
Get It Straight
Straight lines can be drawn using a 
straightedge or ruler. Another method 
is to place the side of the hand holding 
your pencil against the edge of your 
drawing surface, then glide your hand 
along the edge.
Using a Sewing Gauge
Align the edge of the object with the end of the 
sewing gauge, then move the slider up or down 
to mark the other edge. Transfer that measure-
ment to your drawing.
proportional, are used to gauge proportions of two-dimensional 
reference materials, such as photographs, rather than of three-
dimensional objects, such as those in a still-life setup. Propor-
tional dividers enable you to enlarge or reduce by measuring the 
reference with one end of the tool and then using the other end 
to determine the size of the image in your drawing.
Proportioning can be done loosely for a quick sketch or more 
precisely for a fi nished drawing. The subject also infl uences how 
accurate the drawing needs to be. You may be less concerned 
about the proportions of a tree than you are about the propor-
tions of an automobile.
29

30
Measuring angles sounds technical, but drawing angles mostly 
involves observation. If you want to take the guesswork out of 
drawing angles, use an angle ruler. Correct angles will make your 
drawings more successful. 
Measuring Angles
Duplicate the Angle
First, duplicate the angle of the subject by aligning a pencil with it.
Transfer the Angle to Your Drawing
Keeping the pencil at the same angle, hold it over the drawing and adjust 
the sketch as needed.
Using an Angle Ruler
An angle ruler (see page 12) also can be used for duplicating 
angles. Line up the angle ruler with the subject, then hold it over 
the drawing. Then transfer the angle to the drawing by placing the 
angle ruler on the relevant area of the drawing and marking along it.  
30

31
Images from books, magazines, greeting cards or the Internet 
that allow you to observe a particular subject are called reference 
materials. It is good to practice observing actual subjects such 
as the birds in your backyard. Firsthand observation will help you 
to capture the essence and nature of your subject. The problem 
with observing from life is that the subject, especially an animal, 
may not stay still for you. Moreover, the lighting and colors will 
constantly change. A still life, in which you set up your subject 
matter with a consistent light source, is another option. You 
can sit down and take your time observing your subject at your 
leisure—be sure to warn your family that the fruit bowl is being 
used for study, or your reference may be eaten by mistake!
Reference Materials
Observation of a subject can be enhanced with reference material. 
Start a reference fi le by categorizing photos and magazine pictures in 
an accordion folder.
Trace the Basic Shapes
Lay a piece of tracing paper over your reference and trace the 
basic shapes of the image.
Use Your Tracing as a Reference
Use the tracing as another reference to determine the placement 
of the shapes and their proportions as you begin the drawing.
How to Approach a Challenging Drawing
Some subjects may seem so daunting, you may not know 
where to begin. Even fi nding the basic shapes, which is the 
best place to begin, may be hard. The following method 
may help. 
Tracing 
paper
Basic-shapes 
reference
Initial source 
reference 
Reference material
31

32
32
Perspective is what gives the illusion of depth to a picture. It 
affects almost everything we see, if only in subtle ways, which is 
why it is important to have an understanding of how perspective 
works. Artists employ two types of perspective: linear and atmo-
spheric (also called aerial). Linear perspective involves the use of 
converging lines and the manipulation of the size and placement 
of elements within a composition to create the illusion of depth 
and distance. Atmospheric perspective, which will be explained 
in more detail on page 41, relies not on lines but on variations in 
value and detail to achieve similar effects.
Horizon Line
The fi rst step in using linear perspective is to establish a horizon 
line where the land or water meets the sky. The placement of 
the horizon infl uences the viewer’s perception of a scene and 
determines where its sight lines should converge. Even when the 
horizon line is not actually visible, its location must be clear or the 
perspective of the scene may not be correct (see page 39).
Understanding Linear Perspective
Vanishing Points
Vanishing points occur where parallel lines appear to converge, 
usually on the horizon. For example, when you look down a 
train track, the rails seem to converge in the distance. The place 
where the rails appear to meet is the vanishing point. A single 
drawing may contain several vanishing points—or none at all—
depending on the location of elements within a scene and the 
vantage point of the viewer. 
Vantage Point
The best way to describe the vantage point is to say that it is the 
point from which the viewer observes a scene. In a drawing, the 
relationship between the location of subject elements (such as 
trees and buildings) and the horizon line will determine the eye 
level of the vantage point. In addition, the vantage point can infl u-
ence the mood of a scene (see page 33). 
Vanishing point
Vanishing Points
A vanishing point occurs where parallel lines 
appear to meet in the distance. For instance, 
when you look down train tracks, the parallel 
lines of the rails seem to converge at a point 
on the horizon. 

33
33
High Horizon, High Vantage Point
A high horizon can give an unnatural feel to a subject that is normally 
viewed from eye level. Instead, bring the horizon line down to a more 
natural vantage point.
Overhead View
With the horizon placed well above the man 
and dog, the vantage point is also very high. 
This creates the feeling that the viewer is look-
ing down on both of them.
Man’s Eye Level
Placing the horizon at the same level as the 
eyes of the man in the scene puts the van-
tage point also at the man’s eye level. In this 
example, the horizon line runs through the 
man’s eyes.
Dog’s Eye Level
Placing the horizon low makes the vantage 
point seem low. In this example, the vantage 
point is at the dog’s eye level. Notice that the 
horizon line goes through the eye of the dog.
Low Horizon, Low Vantage Point
With the horizon placed low, the subject may look taller and more massive 
than normal.
Vantage Point Can Inﬂ uence Mood
The placement of the horizon can infl uence the mood of a scene by creating a variety 
of sensations in the viewer. Placing the horizon unnaturally low will make the viewer 
feel as if he were looking up at the subject from a very low vantage point. Placing the 
horizon unnaturally high will make the viewer feel as if he were looking down on the 
subject from a great height.

34
Horizon
Vanishing point
Draw these lines to the vanishing point, 
   even if it doesn’t feel right
Horizon
Vanishing point
These basic shapes 
could be the basis 
for a building or 
other structure
Parallel lines drawn 
so they meet at the 
vanishing point
One-point perspective is a simple form of linear perspective with 
only one vanishing point. Remember to always draw the horizon 
line fi rst, then determine the placement of the vanishing point 
on the horizon, which should not be far from the center of the 
scene. First draw the horizon line, then determine the placement 
of your two vanishing points on either side of the paper on the 
horizon line. As you work out the perspective of the elements in 
the scene, extend the parallel lines either up or down toward the 
vanishing point, depending on the vantange point you want to 
create for the viewer. 
One-Point Perspective
Let’s Get Technical
Use a T-square or triangle with your drawing board. These 
tools will make technical and perspective drawings easier 
to do and more accurate.
Dog’s Eye Level, One-Point Perspective
Here the horizon line and vanishing point are both at the dog’s eye level. 
Notice that all parallel lines below the dog’s eye level angle up toward the 
vanishing point and all lines above the dog’s eye level angle down. 
Man’s Eye Level, One-Point Perspective
Here the horizon line is at the man’s eye level, so this view shows a 
vantage point at the same height as his eye level. All parallel lines 
below the man’s eye level angle up toward the vanishing point and 
those above it angle down. 
34

35
Parallel lines are angled up 
towards the vanishing point
Horizon
Vanishing point
Principles of Perspective
There are three important principles to keep in mind when you 
render linear perspective: 
• Depth is expressed by size. Similar objects will appear 
bigger if they are positioned closer to the viewer than if 
they are placed farther away.
• Depth is expressed by obscurity. Objects closer to 
the viewer may hide from view, cover up or cancel out 
objects that are farther in the distance. 
• Depth is expressed by convergence. Elements that are 
parallel to each other will appear to converge in the 
distance. The point of convergence is called the vanish-
ing point. A scene with linear perspective may have an 
unlimited number of vanishing points, or none at all. 
Overhead View, One-Point Perspective
In this view, the horizon is above both the man and the dog. The vantage point is somewhere 
above the man and the dog creating the feeling that the viewer is looking down on the scene. 
All parallel lines angle up to converge at the vanishing point.
35

36
Extend the parallel lines toward the 
two vanishing points
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
Horizon
Man’s Eye Level, Two-Point Perspective
Here, the horizon line is at the man’s eye level; the vantage point is 
at the same level. All parallel lines above him angle down toward the 
vanishing points and all parallel lines below him angle up toward the 
vanishing points. 
Two-point perspective employs the same principles as one-point 
perspective but with an additional vanishing point. Two-point 
perspective can give a scene more depth than one-point per-
spective. The fi rst object you draw will help you determine the 
relative sizes of any other objects in the composition. 
Notice the man 
and the dog also 
have invisible parallel 
lines that need to be drawn 
through just like those of the boxes
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
Horizon
Extend the parallel lines toward 
the two vanishing points
Dog’s Eye Level, Two-Point Perspective
Here, the horizon line is at the dog’s eye level. The vantage point is also at the same level as the 
dog’s eye. Just as in one-point perspective, all lines above the dog’s eye level angle down toward 
the vanishing points and all lines below the dog’s eye level angle up toward the vanishing points. 
36

37
Parallel lines extend to converge 
at the two vanishing points
Horizon
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
Overhead View, Two-Point Perspective
Here, the horizon is above the man and his dog, 
creating the impression that the viewer is looking 
down on them. The vantage point is above the 
man and the dog. In this case all of the parallel 
lines are angled up toward the vanishing points.
Horizon
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
Two-Point Perspective, 
Two Vanishing Points
These books are neatly stacked and lined up, so 
they share the same two vanishing points.
Horizon
Vanishing points
Vanishing points
Two-Point Perspective, Many Vanishing Points 
A simple stack of books may have many vanishing points. 
Each of these books has its own set of two vanishing points. 
37

38
Linear perspective may include many vanishing points, as shown 
by the staggered books on page 37. When you add more vanish-
ing points to a scene, you also add drama and complexity to your 
composition. If you take a vanishing point and move it high above 
or far below the horizon, you will create three-point perspective.
Three-Point Perspective
Three-Point Perspective, 
Looking Down
This drawing of tall buildings employs three 
vanishing points and a high horizon. The 
resulting perspective is extremely dramatic. 
Three-Point Perspective, Looking Up
Reversing the placement of the vanishing 
points and horizon line gives the viewer the 
impression of looking up at the buildings. Once 
again, every line is directed to one of the three 
vanishing points.
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
38

39
39
Applying the principles of perspective to all objects in a scene 
is important, even though horizons and vanishing points aren’t 
always noticeable. They may be hidden behind other elements 
in the composition, but understanding where they are will help to 
Hidden Horizons and Vanishing Points
keep your perspective accurate. If necessary, sketch the horizon 
and vanishing points lightly with a pencil to make sure perspec-
tive is applied to eveything in your drawing. Once you’ve estab-
lished perspective, erase your guidelines and fi nish the drawing. 
Hide and Seek
Even when the horizon or vanishing points in a 
scene are hidden, they still affect your drawing. 
You can easily fi nd your horizon line and van-
ishing points. If you draw lines from all the par-
allel elements in this room, they will converge at 
the vanishing point. Now that you have discov-
ered the vanishing point, you know the horizon 
line goes through that point in the scene.
Horizon
Vanishing point
Beyond the Horizon
Though the subject is not bound to a horizon, 
this scene still uses the principles of linear 
perspective.
Vanishing point

40
Horizon
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
Horizon
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
The location of your vanishing points has an important effect 
on the vantage point of your drawing. The closer the vanishing 
points are to each other, the closer the object will appear to the 
viewer. The farther apart they are, the more distant the object will 
appear to the viewer. 
Distant Vanishing Points, Distant Vantage Point
With the vanishing points far apart, the box looks fl at, almost without 
perspective. This will give the viewer the impression that the box is in 
the distance.
Horizon
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
40
Farther Vanishing Points, Farther Vantage Point
The vanishing points are farther apart, making the angles less extreme.
Close Vanishing Points, Close Vantage Point
The vanishing points are close together, making the box appear close to the 
viewer. Notice how the sharp angles create a more exaggerated perspective.

41
Atmospheric perspective, also referred to as aerial perspective, 
uses defi nition and values to create the illusion of depth and dis-
tance. Atmospheric perspective relies on the idea that the closer 
something is to the viewer, the more it is defi ned and the more its 
values contrast. For instance, trees close to the viewer will show 
more detail and more color variation than trees farther away.
Atmospheric Perspective
Using Values to 
Create Depth
In this grouping of 
trees, the value of the 
closest trees con-
trasts more against 
the background than 
those farther away.
Linear Perspective Only
Depth in this scene relies on the size differences 
established by linear perspective. The larger wind-
mill seems closer to the viewer than the smaller 
ones. Atmospheric perspective is not used to 
show the distance between the windmills.
Atmospheric Perspective Only
All three windmills are the same size, so no lin-
ear perspective is used. The only difference is 
the intensity of their values, which makes them 
look like they are progressively more distant, 
going from left to right.
Combined Perspectives
By combining linear and atmospheric perspec-
tives, the depth of the scene is expressed 
through size and value contrast.
41

2 
1 
3 
42
Horizon line
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
A circle drawn in perspective becomes an ellipse because it 
follows the same principles as other shapes drawn in linear per-
spective. An ellipse can be made by fi rst sketching a square in 
perspective. The lines of the square will be used as the boundar-
ies for the ellipse, because both a circle and a square are equally 
as wide as they are tall.
Ellipses
2 
Connect the Opposite Corners
Sketch lines connecting the opposite ends of the square. 
Each line will defi ne the widest and narrowest parts of the 
ellipse. The intersection of these two lines is the center point of 
the ellipse.
Center point
Must-Have Materials
4H graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
White vinyl eraser
Horizon line
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
1 
Sketch a Square in Perspective
Sketch the horizon line, then place the vanishing points 
on the horizon. Now sketch a square in perspective by 
using those vanishing points.
3 
Sketch In the Ellipse
Sketch in the shape of the ellipse. Notice that the ellipse 
is longest in relation to the longest center line.
Ellipses Don’t Have Points
Ellipses do not have points on the 
end. Their ends are round, even if 
the ellipse is rather fl at.
Horizon line
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
42
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

43
Ellipses In Use
Ellipses can be drawn as vertical, horizontal and angled, but still 
use the same perspective principles. Remember the fi rst step in 
drawing an ellipse is to sketch a square in linear perspective.
Sketch Cylinders Using Ellipses
The ends of cylinders drawn in perspective are 
ellipses. First establish the horizon and vanish-
ing points, then sketch the boxes. The ends of 
the boxes will be the boundaries for the ellips-
es. Connect the ellipses to create the cylinders.
Ellipses Are All Around Us
Ellipses that stand vertically can be drawn in 
a similar manner. Notice how the center lines 
direct the shape of each ellipse.
43

1 
2 
3 
4 
44
Circles are not the only curved objects you must draw in per-
spective. Arches are also quite common and need to follow the 
rules of perspective to look accurate. The peak of an arch is cen-
tered over the space between its supporting walls. The same is 
true of most roofs. To draw a roof in proper perspective, you will 
need to know how to fi nd its the center point. Measuring with a 
ruler will not give you the correct center point as far as perspec-
tive is concerned, which is why knowing how to fi nd the center 
point is important. Try this little exercise to learn how to fi nd the 
center point for a roof. 
Arches and Roofs
1 
Sketch a Rectangle In Perspective
Establish the horizon line, then the vanishing points 
(which are far off to the left and right). Sketch a rectangle 
in perspective. This will become the walls that support the roof. 2 
Connect Opposite Corners of the Rectangle
Sketch lines connecting the opposite corners of the sides 
of the rectangle, making two Xs. The intersection of these 
lines are the center points for the sides.
3 
Add Vertical Lines
Sketch vertical lines up through the center of the Xs. 
These lines designate the center of the box’s side walls. 4 
Sketch the Top of the Roof
Sketch a line for the top of the roof. If completely drawn, 
this line would converge with the other lines on the right 
side of the box at the vanishing point far off to the right. 
Must-Have Materials
4H graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
White vinyl eraser
44
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

5 
45
5 
Connect the Points 
to Finish the Roof
Connect the lines from the top of 
the roof to the side points. These lines will 
make the roof ends.
Drawing Arches
Drawing the arch of a doorway or the bottom 
curve of a suspension bridge is similar to draw-
ing the roof of a building. For the doorway, fi nd 
the center point of the rectangle by connecting 
the opposite corners of the rectangle. Make a 
vertical line straight up to establish the peak 
of the arch. The curve of a suspension bridge 
can be thought of as an arch with the curve at 
the bottom instead of at the top, so apply the 
same principles.
Arch
Center point
Round out the top 
and sides to create 
an arch
Center point
45

46
Refl ections are an exciting element to draw because they double 
the beauty of a scene. The refl ection shares the very same hori-
zon and vanishing points as the images they are refl ecting.
Reﬂ ections Are Perpendicular to Their 
Reﬂ ecting Surface
Refl ected images are perpendicular to the 
refl ecting surface. The vertical lines show how 
both the trees and their refl ected images are 
perpendicular to the surface of the water. This 
is most noticeable when the refl ecting surface 
is smooth. 
Reﬂ ections Use the Same Perspective 
as the Objects They Reﬂ ect
In this pond scene, the same horizon and van-
ishing points are used for both the bridge and 
its refl ection. It is not a repeat or reverse of the 
bridge, but a continuation.
Reﬂ ecting surface
Horizon
Vanishing point
46

47
47
Distant Elements Can Be Reﬂ ected
The image refl ected doesn’t have to be near 
or directly over the refl ecting surface. The 
mountains are far away from the water, yet their 
image is still refl ected on its surface.
Reﬂ ections Can Be a 
Drawing’s Focus
In this example, the refl ection on a 
car’s wheel cover shows the sky, 
ground and trees. Even the person 
viewing it is visible in the center.
Reﬂ ection on a Rough Surface
When the refl ection surface is rough, such as when there are waves on 
the surface of the water, the refl ected image is broken up. This occurs 
because some of the waves are not perpendicular to the image, causing 
distortion to the image’s refl ection.

3
48
Values are the degrees of light and darkness in a drawing. They give additional 
form and depth to a basic structure. Observing the wide range of values that 
make up your subject will give you a better understanding of how light creates 
highlights and shadows on the form.
Values
3
Observing Values Exercise
Take white foam shapes from your local craft store, set them up with 
a good light source, then observe the characteristics of the shapes, 
the highlights and how the shadows fall. Notice the wide range of val-
ues. You may need to paint the foam white to get an opaque surface 
that refl ects light smoothly and accurately. Be sure to use latex paint, 
because spray enamel will melt Styrofoam.
48

49
Contrast
Differing values create contrasts that can affect the mood and 
composition of a drawing. The more extreme the difference 
between values, the greater the contrast. One way to achieve 
higher contrast in your drawing is to place your darks and lights 
side by side.  
It’s All Relative
Value contrasts are relative. They appear differently 
according to their environment. The small square 
on the far left may appear darker than the small 
square on the near left, but both are the same val-
ue. The square on the left appears darker because 
it is placed directly against the pure white of the 
paper, providing more contrast.
Value Contrast Creates Impact
A drawing done without much contrast will not have much impact and will look fl at and pale. The 
white smoke of the rocket on the right looks brighter against the dark background. The drawing on 
the right uses richer values, creating more contrast.
49

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1
2
3
5
50
4
Making a Value Scale
You can use a value scale to compare the values of a scene with 
that of a drawing. Hold the value scale up to the subject and look 
through the holes punched along the side. Where do the values 
in the subject fall on the value scale? As you begin to compose a 
drawing (see page 86), it is always best to establish the highlights 
and very light areas. Sketch those in, then look for where the oth-
er values are in the subject. To fi ll in the other values, one option 
is to go from the lightest shades of the drawing to the darkest. 
Another way to map out the values is to fi ll in some of the darkest 
areas around the lightest areas, then work with the midtones last. 
Try each of these methods to see which one works best for you.
1 
Draw a Rectangle
Draw a 2" × 6" (5cm × 15cm) rect-
angle on a 4" × 8" (10cm × 20cm) 
piece of drawing paper. Add a line down 
the middle right of the rectangle as a 
guideline for the holes you will punch out 
in the last step.
2 
Create the Lighter Values
Keeping the top white, use a 4H 
pencil to create the lighter values 
with back-and-forth strokes.
3 
Add the Middle Values
Add the middle values with an 
HB pencil.
4 
Add the Darkest Values
Use a 4B pencil for the dark-
est values. With scissors, 
trim around the rectangle pattern 
you drew, and punch seven holes 
along one side with a hole punch.
5 
Map Out the Value 
Variations in Your 
Reference Photos
Now you can hold your scale up to a 
picture or scene to judge the values 
as you work on your drawings.
Must-Have Materials
4H, HB, 4B graphite pencils
4" × 8" (10cm × 20cm) drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
Hole punch
Scissors
Ruler
1
2
3
5
50
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

51
Creating Values
4H
Individual lines
Individual lines, 
staggered
Back-and-forth lines
Back-and-forth lines, 
staggered
Crosshatching
Crosshatching, 
back-and-forth
4B 
Varied 
Pressure
HB
4B
When you draw, you use lines to suggest light and dark values. 
The grade of pencil, the sharpness of its point, the angle of the 
point on the paper, the amount of pressure applied to the pencil, 
and the surface of the paper all infl uence the values you create. 
Even the pencil strokes you use infl uence the values you create 
on the paper.
Often type of stroke and the direction of the lines is deter-
mined by the subject. When drawing wood, the pencil lines will 
follow the direction of the grain; when drawing a cat, the direction 
of the pencil lines will follow the contours of its body.
Making the Grade
Here are some basic lines strokes created with different pencil grades. 
Hard pencils are good for sharp, crisp line work, and they keep their 
points longer than soft pencils. Soft-grade pencils can make smooth, 
dark values. Consider duplicating these pencil strokes as an exercise, 
then get creative and invent other textures.
Different Folks Make 
Different Strokes
If you are right handed, it is natural for 
you to make lines moving from the 
upper right to the lower left. But lines 
may go any direction you like, depend-
ing on what is comfortable for you and 
the effect you want to achieve.
51

52
Values are used  to create the effects of light and shadow in a 
drawing. To make your drawings look realistic, you will need to 
replicate these different light effects.
• Light Source. Basically, the origin of the light. To determine 
the shading and shadows of a scene, it is important to deter-
mine the position of the light source so you know from which 
direction the light is coming. The light source is usually the 
sun or a lamp, so the light usually comes from the top. A light 
source positioned at the top left or right will give more depth 
than one located straight above your subject.
Using Light 
Accurately Adds 
Realism and Depth 
to Your Drawings
• Highlight. A highlight occurs where light refl ects off an object. 
In a drawing, this appears as a bright spot.
• Form Shadow. A shadow on an object that gives depth and 
dimension to its form.
• Cast Shadow. A shadow that is cast or thrown by one object 
onto another surface.
• Reﬂ ected Light. Light that bounces off a surface and adds 
light to a region of the object that would otherwise be darker.
Highlight
Form shadow
Cast shadow
Light source
Reﬂ ected light
A Natural Light Source
Moving the light source from below the 
subject to above gives the monster a less 
frightening appearance.
An Unnatural Light Source
It’s more than just a bad haircut that made 
Frankenstein’s monster look scary. Placing the 
light source below the subject contributes to 
his fi ghtening looks.
52

53
Plotting Shadows
Horizon
Light source
Direction of light
Perpendicular line to 
determine the shadow’s
vanishing point
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
Shadow’s vanishing point
While the concept of plotting shadows may seem daunting, a 
basic understanding of it will help you to draw realistically. There 
are two primary methods of plotting a shadow. One is for when 
the light source is in the background and can be shown on the 
drawing; the other is for when the light source is in the fore-
ground and cannot be seen directly. Both of these methods use 
the principles of linear perspective. You must also plot out the 
horizon line and vanishing points to be able to get the right per-
spective for the shape of the object’s shadow.
Light Source in the Background
In this example, the light source is in the 
background. Notice that there is a line coming 
straight down from the light source to the hori-
zon. That point on the horizon is the shadow’s 
vanishing point. From this vanishing point, draw 
lines passing through the bottom corners of 
the cube. Next, draw lines from the light source 
passing through the top corners of the cube. 
The intersections between the shadow’s van-
ishing point lines and the light source lines will 
make the shape of the shadow on the ground.
Vanishing point
Vanishing point
Horizon
Direction of light
Light’s vanishing point
Shadow’s vanishing point
Unseen Light Source in the Foreground
Though the general direction of the light is assumed, the light source is so far away that it cannot 
be indicated in the drawing. Because of this, the direction of the light and where those lines would 
converge on the horizon will be a vanishing point. Then draw lines from this vanishing point and 
pass them through the bottom corners of the cube. Next, plot the lines coming from the vanishing 
point of the angle of the light source. Place this vanishing point below and perpendicular to the 
other vanishing point. From this point, draw lines that pass through the top corners of the cube. 
The intersection of these lines will form the shape of the shadow of the cube.
53

54
4
54
You will fi nd certain subjects easier to draw than others. For instance, you may 
have a knack for drawing faces but feel you can’t draw a building in perspec-
tive to save your life. When you don’t feel comfortable with a certain subject, 
you will probably try to avoid it, but then you will not gain experience working 
with that subject. Challenge yourself—give some of the lessons you may deem 
more diffi cult a chance. You might even try some lessons more than once, then 
compare the results from your fi rst attempt with your last. I predict that you will 
be amazed at the improvement in your drawing skills. You can draw all of these 
examples with your 4H, HB and 4B pencils. Use the 4H and HB pencils for the 
light and medium values and the 4B pencil for the darkest values.
Practice the 
Techniques
4
Graphite on drawing paper
11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm)
Drawing Subjects Are Everywhere
Be on the lookout for drawing subjects such 
as these rocks. This drawing was done from 
a photograph taken by one of my students, 
Jackie Chunko.

55
55
Grass in Sunlight and Shadow
The background grass is shown as a dark silhouette, whereas the fore-
ground grass is suggested with light pencil strokes. Vary the direction 
and spacing of the lines to make the grass look more interesting.
Clouds in Sunlight
With the light source above, the tops of the clouds appear lighter, while 
the undersides appear darker and shadowed. One way to learn how to 
draw clouds in sunlight is to study the effects of light on something more 
solid, such as cotton balls. 
Clouds and Grass
The world around us offers an infi nite number of subjects to 
draw. Commonplace items such as clouds and grass can be 
interesting by themselves or as complements to other elements 
in a picture. 
When drawing clouds, start by sketching the outline, but 
use subtle value changes to show the shape and depth of their 
forms. You can achieve value changes by varying the type or 
pressure of your pencil strokes. Be particularly conscious of the 
location of your light source. Stormy days while the sun is still 
out are especially good for drawing clouds because there are so 
many sharp contrasts between the lights and darks of the sky. 
Grass in Sunlight
Line strokes can imply individual blades of grass. Use darker strokes to 
indicate shading and depth.
Clouds Blocking the Sunlight
Clouds can be both translucent and opaque. When the light source is 
behind the clouds, the cloud in front of the sun will appear bright white 
around the thin, translucent edges where the light shines through it. 
The thicker parts of the cloud will appear darker because they are more 
opaque, blocking more of the light. 

2 
3 
1 
56
Trees may be the center of interest in a scene or just a back-
ground element. Each tree has a character all its own.
2 
Sketch the Branches and Reﬁ ne 
the Shape
Sketch in some of the branches. 
Even if the branches are not visible in the 
fi nal drawing, sketching them will help 
you understand both the structure of the 
tree and the placement of the leaves. Add 
more defi nition to the outer form of the 
tree by outlining the edges of the leaves. 
3 
Add the Leaves and Shading
Erase any unnecessary lines. 
Use a variety of back-and-
forth lines to suggest the leaves. 
Make some lines darker than others 
to create shadows. Notice that the 
direction of the lines adds a sense of 
liveliness to an otherwise static sub-
ject. Remove your initial outline with 
an eraser. 
Branch Out
Exposed branches can add interest 
to an otherwise ordinary tree. First 
sketch the branches of the tree, then 
erase the lines that are going to be 
covered by the leaves. Finally, shade 
in the leaves. 
1 
Sketch the Basic Shape
Start with the basic overall shape 
of the tree. Place the trunk toward 
the bottom of the page.
Leafy Trees
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
Holding the Pencil (p. 15)
Using Basic Shapes (p. 27)
Creating Values (p. 51)
CHECK THIS OUT
56

1 
2 
3 
57
Evergreen Trees
Use the same basic steps to draw evergreens as you would use 
to draw leafy trees. When drawing a tree, examine the subject 
closely to capture its uniqueness.
1 
Sketch the Basic Shape
Start with the basic overall shape 
and trunk.
2 
Sketch the Branches
Sketch in the branches, noticing 
their direction. The branches angle 
downward the farther down you place 
them on the tree. Many trees are struc-
tured like this, not only evergreens.
3 
Add the Needles and Shading
Erase any unnecessary lines. Use 
a variety of staggered back-and-
forth lines to suggest the needles of the 
tree. Apply some lines more heavily than 
others to create shading and depth.
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N
Carry a Camera
Be on the lookout for interesting trees 
that you can photograph and use as 
references for future drawings.
Holding the Pencil (p. 15)
Using Basic Shapes (p. 27)
Creating Values (p. 51)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
57

58
Knowing how to draw different building materials such as brick, 
stone and wood comes in handy when you want to draw a 
house. These elements add a range of textures that make your 
drawing more interesting. Besides, they’re fun to draw.
Bricks Up Close
A subject viewed up close will display more 
texture than when viewed from a distance, so it 
should be drawn differently to show that detail. 
To emphasize their worn appearance, draw 
old bricks with multidirectional lines of varied 
degrees of thickness.
Bricks at a Distance
A distant view of bricks is drawn with minimal 
detail. Use back-and-forth line strokes to 
add values to the bricks. Add shadows under 
the individual bricks with heavy dark lines for 
a subtle sense of depth. Also create depth 
through the use of one-point perspective.
Brick, Stone and Wood
Draw Anywhere, Anytime
The really great thing about drawing is that once you have 
the necessary materials, you can draw anywhere, anytime. 
Draw while you’re waiting in line! Draw on the bus! Draw on 
your lunch break! 
58

59
59
Wood Beams
Draw wood grain using differing values and 
line strokes. Make the places where the wood 
was chipped out darker to suggest shadow 
and depth. Use semicircular lines to create the 
knots in the boards.
Rough Stones
Use irregular shapes and sizes, varied line strokes and shading to create 
a wall of rough stones. Add heavy, dark lines under the stones to imply 
shadow and depth. Notice the left end of the wall is set against a back-
ground made of dark vertical line strokes to suggest a corner.
Fitted Stones
Draw the massive fi tted stones of an ancient Roman building with shading 
lines going in different directions to show texture. Make the joints of the 
stones dark to imply shadow and depth.
Wood Boards
Draw weathered wood boards with coarse pen-
cil strokes fl owing in similar directions to show 
the grain. The spaces underneath and between 
the boards are dark to suggest depth.

1 
3 
2 
60
Apply the same drawing principles and techniques that are used 
when drawing complex subjects to relatively simple subjects 
such as rocks. You can make the drawing more interesting by 
varying the shapes and sizes of the rocks.
1 
Sketch the Basic Shapes
Sketch the outer shapes of the 
rocks, varying the sizes and 
shapes for interest.
Rocks
Holding the Pencil (p. 15)
Using Basic Shapes (p. 27)
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Creating Values (p. 51)
Light Effects (p. 52)
CHECK THIS OUT
3 
Add Shading and Shadows 
Use consistent up-and-down 
pencil strokes so that the surface 
of the rocks will look smooth. Make the 
pencil strokes darker on the left side of the 
rocks to create shading and depth.
2 
Map Out the Lights and Darks
Add lines to map out the lights and 
darks on the rocks. In this case, the 
light comes from the upper right, so draw 
lines on the upper right areas of the rocks 
for the highlights and on the lower left areas 
for the darkest portions of the rocks.
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
60
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

61
You may think that if you’ve seen one rock you’ve seen them 
all, but that just isn’t true. Rocks offer a variety of shapes, sizes 
and textures.
Coarse Rocks
The rough shaping of these rocks makes 
each one unique. This appears to be a simple 
drawing, but its subtle value changes make 
it challenging The outer shape of some of the 
background rocks is defi ned by the shading 
behind them. 
Projecting Rocks
These rocks jut upward, their top edges appearing light in value. 
Use back-and-forth lines to fi ll in the values, altering the pres-
sure of some of the strokes to add shading and depth.
61

1 
2 
4 
3 
62
Rudder
Fuselage
Plane
Holding the Pencil (p. 15)
Using a Frisket (p. 15)
Using an Erasing Shield (p. 18)
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Two-Point Perspective (p. 36)
Ellipses (p. 42)
Creating Values (p. 51)
Light Effects (p. 52)
CHECK THIS OUT
1 
Sketch the Wings
First sketch the wings as a long 
box, using two-point perspective 
as if looking down on the subject.
2 
Add Lines for the Body
Add lines for the basic structure of 
the fuselage and where the rudder 
and tail stop. These lines share the same 
perspective as the wings.
4 
Reﬁ ne and Add Details
Smooth out the lines of the wings 
and body and add details, includ-
ing the ellipses of the wheels, engine 
compartment and propeller.
3 
Add More Elements 
and Begin to Reﬁ ne the Shape
Add boxes to indicate the place-
ment of the wheels and engine area. Draw 
lines to better defi ne the shapes of the 
rudder. Chisel out the fuselage and short-
en the lower wing tips.
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
62
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

63
5 
63
5 
Add Shading
Erase any unnecessary lines, and 
shade in the overall form. Make 
sure the lines shading the wings follow the 
same direction as the wings’ perspective. 
Add the darkest areas last, such as the 
shadow under the wings.
Draw A High-Speed Jet
First draw the basic shapes in perspective to carve out the shape of the 
plane. Add highlights, shadows and details. 

4 
2 
3 
1 
64
4 
Add Details to the Train’s Structure
Add the tracks, wheels, engine light and smaller details 
such as the handrail and the steps. Also add trim to the 
tops of the cars.
2 
Indicate the Basic Shapes of the Front
Fill the previously drawn square with a circle. Add other 
lines to indicate the basic shaping of the front of the engine.
This type of steam engine is a Norfolk and Western 4-8-4. The 
structural elements of this scene are drawn using one-point per-
spective. Make use of the principles of atmospheric perspective 
as you apply the lights and darks. When you want to shade sub-
jects like these, friskets and erasing shields may be handy tools 
to use.
3 
Add More Structural Lines
Add the more obvious lines, including the vertical lines 
that defi ne the individual cars. Add a cross in the upper 
middle of the circle, to mark the placement of the engine lights.
1 
Sketch the Basic Shapes
Draw the horizon line, with the vanishing point on the left 
side. Start with the basic shape in one-point perspective. 
Notice that all the vertical lines are perpendicular to the horizon 
at this stage.
Train
Holding the Pencil (p. 15)
Using a Frisket (p. 15)
Using an Erasing Shield (p. 18)
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
One-Point Perspective (p. 34)
Atmospheric Perspective (p. 41)
Creating Values (p. 51)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
64
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

65
5 
65
Draw a 
Steam Engine
Sketch the basic 
shapes, chisel out 
the shape of the train, 
and add feature lines. 
Next add the shading, 
paying close atten-
tion to subtle value 
changes. 
5 
Add Shading
Erase any unnecessary lines, and 
fi nish with shading. Use uniform 
up-and-down pencil strokes to make a 
smooth appearance. Create atmospheric 
perspective by drawing the closer por-
tion of the train with more contrasts and 
details than the more distant portion.

4 
2 
3 
1 
66
4 
Add Details and Begin Shading
Add details such as the headlights, grill, windows and 
interior. Keep in mind that the cutouts for the wheel are 
shaped differently from the wheels themselves. Add some shad-
ing to the wheels and shadow under the car. 
2 
Add the Top and Squares for the Wheels
Add the top of the car to the basic shape. Draw squares 
in perspective to indicate the wheels’ placement. This 
will help you draw the ellipses for the tires accurately. Like all 
the elements, the squares share the same perspective as the 
basic box shape.
This is a Facel Vega, a French sports car built in the 1950s and 
1960s. This is a fun lesson to practice dissecting your subjects 
by fi rst looking for the basic shapes, remembering the rules 
of perspective. 
3 
Add and Reﬁ ne the Structural Lines
Chisel out the shape of the car, and sketch in ellipses for 
the wheels. Add lines to mark the placement of the front 
elements such as the grill and headlights.
1 
Sketch the Basic Shapes
Sketch a basic box shape in two-point perspective. Take 
the time to get this right so the rest of the drawing will 
work out accurately.
Automobile
Holding the Pencil (p. 15)
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Two-Point Perspective (p. 36)
Ellipses (p. 42)
Creating Values (p. 51)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
66
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

5 
67
Creating a Shiny, 
Metallic Surface
Rich darks and graduated values give 
this Jaguar a shiny metallic appearance. 
It is important to make uniform pencil 
lines to create the smooth, metallic look 
for the car’s surface.
5 
Add Details and Shade
Add more details to complete the 
car, such as wheel covers and 
chrome trim. Erase obsolete lines. Shade 
the form, using uniform line work to create 
a smooth appearance. Add another layer 
of darks to the wheels and shadows, giv-
ing them more contrast against the lighter 
values of the car.
67

3 
1 
2 
4 
68
3 
Add the Side of the Cabin and the Top of the Hull
Draw the side of the cabin and the curve of the top of the 
hull. The boat is viewed from the side and at a distance, 
making it look fl at. 
The graceful lines of boats and shimmering water refl ections 
inspire great compositions. For this demonstration, we’ll start 
with a simple side view.
1 
Sketch the the Lines of the Hull
Start with the lines of the hull, which tilt slightly upward on 
the left side. 
2 
Finish the Basic Shape of the Hull 
and Indicate the Cabin
Connect the ends to complete the basic shape of the hull. 
Add lines to indicate the placement of the cabin. 
4 
Add Details
Sketch in details, including windows, trim and the man.
Boat
Holding the Pencil (p. 15)
Using Basic Shapes (p. 27)
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Locating Vanishing Points (p. 40)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
68
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

5 
69
5 
Shade to Finish
Add values to the elements. Use 
long, straight pencil strokes on the 
hull. Make the inside of the cabin dark.
Sketch a Rowboat
Sketch the basic shapes in perspective, 
then add details and shading.
69

3 
1 
2 
70
For those of you who are cat lovers, this demo will be lots of fun. 
For those of you who prefer dogs (we know everyone falls under 
one of the two categories), go ahead and try this exercise, then 
give the fi nished art to one of your cat-loving friends. This demo 
offers a great way to develop your shading skills.
3 
Add the Ears and Neck
Add lines to indicate the ears and neck. 
Cat Face
Holding the Pencil (p. 15)
Using Basic Shapes (p. 27)
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Creating Values (p. 51)
CHECK THIS OUT
1 
Sketch the Basic Shapes
To draw the feline face, start with the basic outer oval, 
two lines for the top and bottom of the eyes, and an 
oval for the snout.
2 
Place the Facial Elements
Add more lines for the eyes, mouth and the top of the 
ears, as well as a triangle for the nose.
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
70
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

4 
5 
71
4 
Reﬁ ne the Lines and Add Details
Refi ne the structural lines, rounding 
and curving where necessary. Add 
details, including the pupils, nose and muzzle. 
5 
Add Shading
Erase any obsolete lines. Add 
shading with pencil strokes that 
follow the direction of the fur. Apply darker 
values for the stripes and shadows.
71

3 
2 
1 
72
3 
Add the Neck and Legs
Add lines for the neck that con-
nect the head to the body. Sketch 
angled lines for the legs. See page 30 for 
instructions on how to transfer angles.
Side View of a Cat
Cats are as varied as people, and it is fun to capture their unique 
qualities in your drawings. In addition to helping you create 
shape and texture, this demo will give you an opportunity to work 
on developing your proportioning skills. To sketch the legs and 
body in the correct proportions, fi rst sketch a baseline. A base-
line is used to establish the placement of your subject and to 
help work out proportions of a drawing.
Holding the Pencil (p. 15)
Using Basic Shapes (p. 27)
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Creating Values (p. 51)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
2 
Add the Head Shape
Sketch an oval for the head. Posi-
tion it so it just overlaps the top 
horizontal line. 
1 
Sketch the Basic Body Shape
Draw a rectangle to suggest the 
basic body structure. Take the ver-
tical lines all the way down to the baseline. 
72
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

4 
5 
73
4 
Complete the Body
Draw the outline of the tail, and 
complete the legs. Lightly indicate 
the legs on the other side of the cat’s 
body. Add the outline of the ears and 
position the eye and mouth. Erase any 
obsolete lines.
5 
Add the Shading and Details
Use back-and-forth strokes to suggest the cat’s 
fur, varying the lights and darks to imply form. 
Add details to the eye, mouth, nose, ear and paws. 
73

1 
2 
3 
4 
74
1 
Sketch the Basic Shapes
Sketch lines to form the basic body and head structure, 
including a baseline to establish where the feet will rest. 2 
Add Circles for the Head and Body
Add circles for the head, chest and rear. This will help you 
shape the dog’s overall form.
Use the steps you practiced on the cat’s body (see page 72) to 
draw a dachshund. Start with the basic overall structure and then 
add more features as your drawing progresses. While observ-
ing dachshunds for this drawing, I became aware of how short 
dachshunds really are!
3 
Add Lines for the Body, Neck and Legs
Connect the circles to form the shape of the body and 
neck. Sketch lines that will indicate the muzzle and the 
foreground legs.
4 
Reﬁ ne Lines and Add Structural Details
Refi ne the line work to further shape the dog’s body. Add 
the eye, tail, ears and legs. Place the background legs so 
they are staggered in comparison to the foreground legs.
Side View of a Dog
Holding the Pencil (p. 15)
Using Basic Shapes (p. 27)
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Creating Values (p. 51)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
74
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

5 
75
Drawing Long Fur
Use long pencil strokes that follow the 
direction of the fur to shade in the coat 
for a longhaired dog. Make these pencil 
strokes less uniform than those used 
for a shorthaired dog. This will make the 
long fur look more textured.
5 
Add Fur, 
Details and Shading
Erase any obsolete 
lines. Shade the dog’s glossy 
coat with short, uniform pencil 
strokes that follow the fur’s 
direction. Add details to the 
eye, nose, mouth and paws. 
75

4 
1 
2 
3 
76
4 
Add Shading and Finishing Details
Erase any extra lines. Add light shading to imply form, 
using darker shading in the more shadowed places. 
Make the coat’s dark patches with semi-uniform back-and-forth 
pencil strokes.
Cows are incredible creatures. Besides giving us milk, cheese 
and meat, cows do amazing tricks, but no one knows about it 
because they pull these stunts only when no one is looking. 
1 
Sketch the Basic Shapes
Sketch the basic shapes: a rectangle for the body and 
a triangle for the head. Add a baseline to establish the 
length of the legs.
2 
Indicate the Neck and Legs
Add lines for the neck and legs. Pay attention to the 
placement and angles of these lines. Use a small circle to 
indicate the joint of the front knee.
3 
Reﬁ ne the Lines
Refi ne the line work to further shape the cow’s body. Add 
the eye, ears, tail and udders.
Cow
Holding the Pencil (p. 15)
Using Basic Shapes (p. 27)
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Creating Values (p. 51)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
76
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

3 
4 
2 
1 
77
3 
Sketch in the Feathers
Indicate the feather placement on the swan’s back, and 
add the eye to the head.
4 
Add Final Details and Shading
Add the shading with short pencil strokes. Start with the 
lighter values, then add another layer of pencil strokes for 
the darker areas.
2 
Add the Neck and Beak
Add curved lines for the neck, then add the beak, paying 
attention to the distance between the neck lines.
The elegant lines of this swan makes it an interesting subject. 
Enjoy practicing your skills with this mini demo and then consider 
using your drawing as a greeting card.
1 
Sketch the Basic Shapes
Sketch the basic shapes of the head and body. Be con-
scious of their proportions and placement.
Swan
Holding the Pencil (p. 15)
Using Basic Shapes (p. 27)
Measuring Proportions (p. 28)
Creating Values (p. 51)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
77
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

78
Proportions for Adults
Though men are generally taller than women, they are shown as the 
same height here for comparison. For both sexes, almost half the height 
is made up of the legs, with the tips of the hands falling to the mid-thigh 
region. The waist is lower in men than in women. Another difference is 
that men are generally bulkier and wider than women.
People make fascinating subjects to draw. While at a mall, just 
look at all the different sizes, shapes and proportions of the 
people around you. Though you may observe that people come 
in many different “varieties,” there are basic principles that apply 
to all humans.
Middle line
Female waist
Male waist
78

79
Equal Height and Width
For most adults, their height is equal to the 
width of their outstretched arms.
Proportions for Children
Children are proportioned differently from adults, more noticeably in 
younger children. Their bodies are smaller in relation to their heads, and 
their legs are shorter, with the tops of their legs well below the middle line.
Middle
 line
Middle line
Figure Drawing
Once you become familiar with 
basic body structure and pro-
portions, you can draw more 
confi dently, using a minimum of 
structural guidelines.
Structural Sketch
This sketch has its structural 
elements blocked in.
79

80
1 
2 
80
As you draw the human fi gure, remember that almost half the 
height of the body is the legs. Establish the middle line fi rst, then 
mark the top of the inseam. Pay attention to the head size, which 
takes up a little more than one-eighth of the overall height. A 
common mistake in fi gure drawing is to make the head too large 
and the legs too short.
D E M O N S T R A T I O N
1 
Establish the General Proportions
Start with lines to indicate the placement and proportions. 
Because the weight of the body in this example rests over 
the man’s right leg, include a vertical line that goes from the head 
to the right foot.
Add top, bottom and middle horizontal lines. Then sketch 
a line halfway between the middle and top lines, then sketch 
another line between the last line drawn and the top line.
2 
Sketch the Head and Legs
Most adults are about 7½ heads high. The distance 
from the top line to the next lower line is one-eighth of 
the overall height. Make a line slightly lower and sketch an egg 
shape for the head, which should work out to about 7½ units of 
the overall height. You can use dividers if you want to check your 
proportions. Sketch in the legs, placing the top of the inseam just 
below the middle line.
Man Standing
Holding the Pencil (p. 15)
Using Basic Shapes (p. 27)
Gauging Poportions (p. 28)
Creating Values (p. 51)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser

81
3 
4 
5 
6 
81
3 
Add the Torso and Waist
Sketch the basic shape of the 
torso along with the waistline.
4 
Add the Arms, Hands and Feet
Add the arms, with the wrists falling 
at about the middle line and the fi n-
gertips reaching mid-thigh. Sketch a line for 
the placement of the eyes. Sketch in the feet 
along the baseline.
5 
Sketch in Details
Sketch in the details, including 
facial features and clothes.
6 
Shade the Drawing
Add shading and details.

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
1
2
3
4
5
6
82
To draw faces correctly, it’s important to understand their basic 
structures and proportions. One way to do this is to use the 
width of the eye as a unit of measurement. These examples 
show generic proportions of an adult male of European origin. 
The features of individuals vary according to age, gender and 
ethnicity, if only in subtle ways.
1 
Sketch the Basic Shape
Start with the basic shape egg-
shape of the head. It should be fi ve 
eye-widths wide by seven eye-widths high.
2 
Add the Eye Line
Sketch a horizontal line in the 
middle of the face to place the 
eyes. Sketch a vertical line to establish the 
center of the face.
3 
Add Eye Shapes and Nose and 
Mouth Lines 
Sketch the eyes, leaving one eye-
width between them. Add a line for the 
nose a little less than half the distance 
from the eyes to the chin. Sketch a line 
for the mouth a little less than halfway 
between the line for the nose and chin.
4 
Add Eyebrows and Lips
Add a horizontal line above the 
eyes for the eyebrows and sketch 
them in. Add the top and bottom lips.
5 
Add the Nose and Ears
Add the base of the nose. The 
width of the nose aligns with the 
inside corners of the eyes. Add the ears, 
with the tops of the ears aligned with the 
eyebrows and the bottoms aligned with 
the base of the nose.
6 
Add Details
Add details to the eyes and nose, 
along with the hair and neck.
Face: Front View
Width is about 
5 eye-widths
Height is 
about 7 
eye-widths
Eyes are 
halfway from 
crown to chin
General Face 
Proportions
1
2
3
4
5
6
82
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

4 
6 
5 
1 
2 
3 
83
4 
Add Eyebrows and Lips
Add a line to place the eyebrows, 
then sketch in the eyebrows. The 
curve of the brows should follow the curve 
of the eyes. Add the top and bottom lips.
6 
Add Details
Add details to the eyes and nose, 
along with the hair and neck. 
5 
Add the Nose and Ear
Add the nose. Working down, 
the nose bridge should angle in 
toward the center of the eyes and then 
angle out from the center to the base of 
the nose. Add the ear, with the top align-
ing with the eyebrows and the bottom 
aligning with the nose’s base.
1 
Sketch the Basic Shape
Sketch an egg-shape for the three-
quarters view with the chin slightly 
off-center toward the right. 
2 
Add the Eye Line
Add a slightly off-center horizontal 
line for the eyes. Sketch a vertical 
line through the middle of the eye line to 
establish the center of the face.
3 
Add Eye Shapes and Lines for 
the Nose and Mouth 
Sketch the shapes of the eyes 
with one eye-width between them. Add 
a line for the nose a little less than half 
the distance from the eyes to the chin. 
Sketch a line for the mouth a little less 
than half the distance between the line for 
the nose and the chin.
A three-quarters view of the face shows most of the face and 
part of the side of the head. Keep in mind that the proportions 
and the placement of the elements are similar to the front view.
Face: Three-Quarters View
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
83
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
84
Placing the elements for a side view of a face is similar to that for 
the front and three-quarters view. As with all drawings, look for 
proportions and places where the elements align. You may want 
to examine the proportions with a tool such as a pencil, dividers 
or a sewing gauge (see page 28).
1 
Sketch the Basic Shapes
Sketch a circle for the top and 
middle portion of the head. Sketch 
a vertical line down from the right side of 
the circle for the front of the face. Add a 
short horizontal line at the end of the verti-
cal line, slightly lower than the circle, as 
the base of the chin.
2 
Add Lines for the Eye, 
Nose and Ear
Sketch a horizontal line, halfway 
between the top of the chin, the circle and 
the base of the chin, for the placement of 
the eye. Sketch a vertical line to the right 
of the circle to help with the placement 
of the nose. Another vertical line, coming 
from the center of the circle, will help with 
the placement of the ear.
3 
Add the Eye Shape and Lines 
for the Nose and Mouth 
Sketch a triangle for the eye, plac-
ing it about a third of the distance from 
the right edge of the circle to the vertical 
line for the ear. Sketch a horizontal line a 
little less than half the distance from the 
eye line to the chin line for the base of the 
ear. Add a short horizontal line a little less 
than half the distance from the previously 
established nose line to the chin line to 
help place the mouth.
4 
Add Eyebrows and Lips
Add a horizontal line for the eye-
brow. Sketch the eyebrow, making 
it slightly curved. Add lines for the lips, 
connecting them to the vertical line in the 
front of the face.
5 
Add the Ear and 
Form the Proﬁ le
Sketch the ear shape, placing it 
slightly left of the central vertical line and 
from the brow line to the nose baseline. 
Form the profi le of the face and complete 
the jawline, which ends near the lower 
right part of the ear.
6 
Add Details
Add details to the eyes, ears and 
nose. Add the hair and neck.  
Face: Side View
Must-Have Materials
Graphite pencil
Drawing board
Drawing paper
Kneaded eraser
84
M I N I  D E M O N S T R A T I O N

85
Age Variations
For an elderly man or woman, draw the ears and nose larger, the chin 
longer and make noticeable wrinkles.
Most adult faces have similar overall proportions, with the differ-
ences being most noticeable in the features such as the eyes, 
nose, ears and lips. 
Women’s Features
When drawing a woman’s face, follow the same 
basic proportions and placement of features as 
used for the generic male. The ears, nose and 
jawline are usually smaller and more delicate, 
the lips larger and more noticeable. Details 
such as earrings, eyeliner and hairstyle can also 
express femininity.
Child’s Face
The proportions of a 
child’s face are different 
from those of an adult. 
While the eyes of an 
adult are placed at the 
middle, a child’s eyes are 
below the middle, creat-
ing a bigger forehead. 
The head itself is wide 
and the features small.
Drawing Individual Faces
Ethnic Variations
The ethnicity of a person can be developed by 
changing the features while using the same 
basic structure. 
85

5
86
Composition involves the arrangement of the elements in an artwork. Though 
composition is inherent to all art, good composition involves planning and fore-
thought. A strong composition entertains the viewer, while a weak composition 
may make the viewer feel indifferent toward the artwork. A good composition is 
cleverly planned to lead the viewer through the scene.
Aspects of composition include symmetry, the number and placement 
of elements within the scene, and how the scene is framed. As you plan your 
composition, you will also decide on a format, create a path for the viewer’s 
eye, and look for trouble spots. 
Composition
5
Graphite on drawing paper
11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm)
86

87
Using a Grid for Asymmetrical 
Composition
One method for achieving balance in an asym-
metrical composition is to divide the picture 
into nine equal rectangles. Use the intersec-
tions of these gridlines to locate major elements 
in the scene.
Asymmetrical Composition
Moving the tree off center makes the scene 
asymmetrical. The viewer should fi nd this more 
appealing and realistic.
Arranging the Elements
Symmetrical composition can be useful if you want to make your 
subject look orderly and structured, but it often comes across as 
bland. Asymmetrical composition is preferable because it makes  
the objects in your drawing seem more neutral.
Symmetrical Composition
Though this scene is evenly balanced, it has 
two strikes against it: the horizontal line splits 
the scene exactly in half, and because the tree 
is placed in the middle of the composition, the 
scene looks contrived.
Using Thumbnail Sketches
Thumbnail sketches allow you to plan 
what the fi nished drawing will look 
like. Examine the differing placement 
of lights and darks in these examples. 
Can you tell which thumbnail sketch 
was used as a guide for the Textured 
Metal demonstration (page 94)?
87

88
Even Number of Elements at the Edge
Evens and odds can also refer to the number of elements that reach the 
edge of the artwork. In this example, the buildings are touching the edge 
on the left and the right, making an even number.
Odd Number of Elements at the Edge
A simple change allows the buildings to touch the edge on the left, right 
and top, creating a more interesting composition.
The number and placement of elements can affect the balance 
of the composition and by leading the viewer through the scene. 
An odd number is usually more interesting than an even number. 
Evens and odds can also refer to the number of elements reach-
ing the edge of the artwork, which affects the way the viewer’s 
eye travels in and out of the composition. 
Number of Elements
Even Number of Elements
An even number of elements can seem uninteresting. The viewer’s eye 
has nowhere to go but from one fi sh to the other.
Odd Number of Elements
An odd number of elements is usually more interesting than an even 
number. This scene has an odd number of elements, with one dominant 
and two subordinate elements. The viewer is fi rst drawn to the big fi sh, 
then to the smaller fi sh, then back to the big fi sh.
88

89
Using Your Fingers
Forming a rectangle with your fi ngers is another way to crop a scene 
without using any special equipment.
Some scenes contain too much visual information to include in a 
composition, and it can be hard to determine where to begin and 
what to leave out. By looking through a viewﬁ nder, you can visu-
ally crop the composition before you pick up the pencil. Once 
you have determined the area you want to include, you will fi nd 
the drawing easier to manage. 
Cropping and Formatting
Using a Viewﬁ nder
One method for planning a composition is to crop the scene with a view-
fi nder, a piece of cardboard with a cutout like a window frame. This is 
especially helpful when working outdoors, when the subject may seem 
overwhelming and you don’t know where to focus your attention.
Format Affects a Composition’s Mood
The mood of a picture can be accentuated 
by its overall shape, or format. A horizontal 
format tends to give a stable, more serene feel, 
while a vertical format can feel more impressive 
or powerful.
Add Diagonals to Your Subject
Diagonal lines and angled elements create a 
sense of action in a drawing.
89

90
Remedying a Tangent
An easy remedy for this example is to move the tree slightly away from 
the corner of the house to avoid a tangent.
Good Use of 
Leading Lines
In this example we 
are led back to the 
distant mountains.
Leading lines guide the viewer through a composition. Lines can 
be indicated through a pattern of elements, such as stepping 
stones that lead the viewer to another place in the composition. 
Leading lines can also guide the viewer to a focal point, which is 
the center of interest in a composition. 
Bad Use of 
Leading Lines
Not all lines lead 
properly. They may 
lead the viewer right 
out of the scene.
Tangents Cause Confusion
Tangents can be confusing for a viewer. This sketch has a tangent 
where the tree aligns with the end of the house, making it look as if the 
tree were part of the house.
The Shape of Your Subject Is Important 
Make your drawing experience easier by looking for sub-
jects with an outer shape that is easy to identify. The form 
of a dog standing is more identifi able than the form of the 
same dog lying down. If you were to try to draw this dog 
lying down, the process of sketching and shading the dog’s 
shape could become a bit taxing.
With this shape, 
it’s clear this is a dog
In art, a tangent is the unfortunate meeting of two or more 
similar lines or elements. Artists usually avoid tangents because 
they can make a scene confusing.
This shape makes it less 
clear what the subject is
90

91
6
91
Be patient with yourself. Good drawing skills are developed through observa-
tion and practice. Try drawing the same demo more than once and compare 
your results. You will probably be surprised by the level of improvement you 
have made.
Each demo is done in two stages. In the fi rst stage, you’ll work through 
structural drawing. In the second stage you’ll apply values with pencil strokes. 
As you work through these demos, write the date in the corner of each draw-
ing and sign it. By doing this, you will be able to see the progression of 
your skills in your artwork. Save your artwork, even if you are tempted 
to throw it away or send it through a paper shredder. Sometimes 
the frustration of working on a diffi cult lesson overshadows 
the improvement that has taken place. By putting your 
artwork aside to view later, you allow yourself the 
opportunity to view it with a more objective eye, 
when you are more likely to appreciate the skills 
you have developed.
Let’s
Draw
6
Mountain Man
Graphite on drawing paper
14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm)

3 
4 
2 
1 
92
Still Life
A still life with fruit is always an interesting subject for interpreting 
forms through shading. This is a good demo for observing the 
play of light and shadow on common objects. 
3 
Deﬁ ne the Shapes of the Fruit
Add stems and sketch the shapes of the individual apples 
and bananas. You can use dividers or a gauge here to 
check your proportions. 
4 
Add Highlights and Shadow Lines
Before using your pencil, observe the highlights and 
shadows. With the 4H pencil, lightly sketch where the 
highlights will go so you will remember to leave them white. Then 
sketch in where the shadows fall. Keep in mind that the primary 
light source is at the upper left.
2 
Sketch the Apples
Use the 4H pencil to sketch circles for the apples. To 
determine the placement of the foreground circle, draw a 
line under the foreground banana. Line up the foreground apple 
with the foreground banana.
1 
Sketch the Bananas
Clip your paper to the drawing board. With a 4H pencil, 
sketch in the curved, oblong forms of the bananas. For 
accuracy, draw the full shape of the farthest banana, even though 
its image is partially blocked by the banana in the foreground. 
Using Basic Shapes (p. 27)
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Light Effects (p. 52)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
4H, HB, 4B graphite pencils • 11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm) medi-
um-tooth drawing paper • Drawing board • Kneaded eraser
Optional, But Not to Be Overlooked
Dividers, proportional dividers or sewing gauge • Erasing 
shield • Pencil sharpener • Value scale (see page 50) • White 
vinyl eraser
92
D E M O N S T R A T I O N

7 
5 
6 
93
7 
Add the Darker Values of 
the Bananas and Finish With 
Shadows and Background
With the HB pencil, shade the darker 
areas of the bananas. Use a 4B pencil 
to add shadows under the apples and 
bananas, with the darkest part closest to 
the fruit. Add the background value with 
a 4H pencil, using uniform pencil strokes. 
Make the apples slightly darker with a 4H 
pencil. Use the value scale to check your 
work and make any necessary adjust-
ments. Sign and date your drawing.
5 
Add Light Values to the Apples
With the 4H pencil, add value and form to the apples with 
light lines that follow their contours. Use uniform pencil 
strokes to make the surfaces look smooth.
6 
Add Darker Values to the Apples and Lighter 
Values to the Bananas
With the HB pencil, darken the shadow areas of the 
apples. With the 4H pencil, indicate the lighter values of the 
bananas. Check your work with the value scale.
Apples and Bananas
Graphite on drawing paper
11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm)
93

94
1 
3 
4 
2 
94
For this demonstration, you want a freehand look but may need 
the guidance of a straightedge for steps one, two and four. Make 
the lines you draw with a straightedge light so they won’t be so 
noticable with the sketchy lines used to portray a weathered 
watering can.
Textured Metal
1 
Draw the Cylinder of the 
Watering Can
With a 4H pencil, sketch a square, 
slightly tapered at the bottom. Draw a 
guideline above the square to help you 
place the top of the ellipse. Add height to 
the lines on the side, then sketch the top 
and bottom ellipses.
3 
Add Details to the Watering Can
Add an angled ellipse at the top, 
ellipses around the central section 
as ribs, lines to connect the handle, and a 
small cylinder for the end of the spout. 
4 
Add Details, Including the Leaves 
and Boards
Add details, including the wire handle 
at the top and lines where the spout attaches 
to the body. Create the dent by changing 
the shape of the lines that form the ribbing. 
Sketch the leaf shapes around the can and 
vertical lines for the boards in the back-
ground. Use a kneaded eraser to remove 
obsolete guidelines.
2 
Add the Spout and Handle
Use the 4H pencil to sketch the 
lines for the spout. Use one of your 
proportioning tools to compare the spout 
width to the width of the cylinder, using 
this drawing as a reference. Add lines for 
the handle and a curved line for the top.
Must-Have Materials
4H, HB, 4B graphite pencils • 11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm) medi-
um-tooth drawing paper • Dividers, proportional dividers or 
sewing gauge • Drawing board • Kneaded eraser
Optional, But Not to Be Overlooked
Erasing shield • Pencil sharpener • Value scale (see page 50) • 
White vinyl eraser
D E M O N S T R A T I O N
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Light Effects (p. 52)
Ellipses (p. 42)
Brick, Wood & Stone (p. 58)
CHECK THIS OUT

95
5 
6 
7 
95
5 
Add Values to the Watering Can
Add lines to indicate the structure of the leaves and 
boards. (See page 59 for tips on drawing wood.)
With the 4H pencil, add the shading on the watering can with 
thin strokes going in many directions to create a weathered tex-
ture. Because the light source is at the upper left, make the left 
side of the can lighter than the right side.
6 
Add Texture and Value to the Leaves and Boards
Shade the leaves, using an HB pencil for the soft line 
work and a 4H pencil for light, thin line work. With a 4H 
pencil, add the appearance of wood grain to the boards. 
7 
Add Darks and Details
Using 4H, HB and 4B pencils, add 
darks and details. Pinch the end 
of the kneaded eraser so it makes a point, 
and gently rub it on the paper to create 
lighter areas, such as the top of the ribs. 
Sign and date your artwork.
Watering Can
Graphite on drawing paper
11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm)
Give Your Line Work 
Character
Sketch over the lines you created with 
a straightedge to give them a more 
freehand look.

1 
2 
3 
4 
96
Scene in Perspective
Though it may not be obvious, this scene uses two-point per-
spective, so pay attention to the subtle angles of the wall and the 
gate. Proportion the gate correctly by using dividers, proportional 
dividers or a sewing gauge to compare the width of the gate’s 
opening to the opening’s height. 
1 
Sketch the Basic Lines of the Walk and Gate
Start by sketching the stone walk and the opening for the 
gate using a 4H pencil. Use your proportioning skills and 
tools to make sure the proportions are correct. 
2 
Add the Foliage
Lightly sketch the outer shapes of the foliage with a 
4H pencil.
3 
Add Structural Details
Sketch the details of the gate, foliage and stones. Erase 
any unnecessary guidelines with a kneaded eraser.
4 
Start Adding Values
With your value scale as a reference for the rest of this 
demo, use a 4H pencil to add values to the gate. Direct 
your pencil lines to follow the grain of the wood. Make the values 
of the shadowed side of the gate gradate from dark at the top to 
light toward the bottom.
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Two-Point Perspective (p. 36)
Rocks (p. 60)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
4H, HB, 4B graphite pencils • 11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm) 
medium-tooth drawing paper • Dividers, proportional dividers 
or sewing gauge • Drawing board • Kneaded eraser • Value 
scale (see page 50)
Optional, But Not to Be Overlooked
Erasing shield • Pencil sharpener • White vinyl eraser
96
D E M O N S T R A T I O N

7 
5 
6 
97
7 
Finish With Details and Darks
Add the fi nishing details and additional darks using 4H, HB 
and 4B pencils. Check the range of your values with your value 
scale and darken areas as needed. Sign and date your drawing.
5 
Add Values to the Foliage
With a 4H pencil, add values to the foliage. Draw the vari-
ous types of leaves differently from one another, using 
differing values and line strokes. Make the shadows behind the 
leaves darker than the leaves themselves.
6 
Add Values to the Ground and Stones
Add values to the stonework and to the ground around 
and between the stones with a 4H pencil. (See page 58 
for tips on creating the texture of stone.)
Garden Gate
Graphite on drawing paper
11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm)
97

1 
3 
4 
2 
98
Natural Textures
This fun drawing explores different textures, such as tree bark 
and fur. This is another drawing that could easily be made into a 
greeting card. It could also be framed and given to your favorite 
niece or nephew.
1 
Sketch the Faces
Observe the basic shapes that make up the raccoons’ 
faces before beginning. Using a 4H pencil, sketch ovals 
to represent the outlines of the raccoon’s faces. Sketch verti-
cal lines for the centers of their faces and horizontal lines for 
the placement of their eyes, which are below the middles of the 
ovals. Next, draw small ovals for the snouts.
3 
Erase Extra Lines
Erase guidelines with a kneaded or white vinyl eraser 
before continuing with your drawing.
4 
Add Details to the Raccoons
Add lines to indicate important details, including guide-
lines to indicate the markings on the raccoons’ faces, the 
the paw and the tree bark.
2 
Continue Reﬁ ning the Faces and Indicate the Tree
Add shapes representing the eyes, ears and noses. Draw 
the hole, trunk and small oval for the paw.
Using the Basic Shapes (p. 27)
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Creating Values (p. 51)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
4H, HB, 4B graphite pencils • 11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm) medi-
um-tooth drawing paper • Drawing board • Kneaded eraser
Optional, But Not to Be Overlooked
Dividers, proportional dividers or sewing gauge • Pencil 
sharpener • Value scale (see page 50) • White vinyl eraser
98
D E M O N S T R A T I O N

5 
6 
7 
99
5 
Begin Adding Values
Still using a 4H pencil, begin adding the lighter values to 
the raccoons and the tree.
6 
Add Dark Values
Now, using a 4B pencil, add the dark values. Keep small 
highlights in the eyes to suggest their glossiness.
7 
Add Middle Values and Finishing 
Details
Add fur and fi nishing details with 
an HB pencil, checking the range of your 
values with the value scale. Lighten or 
darken areas as needed. Sign and date 
your drawing.
Little Rascals
Graphite on drawing paper
11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm)
99

1 
2 
100
Using Contrast
This demo shows how to rely more on value contrasts than on 
pencil outlines to defi ne shapes. The light source in this scene is 
at the top right, but the snow also refl ects light, making the wolf’s 
outline light as well. This looks dramatic against the dark of the 
mountains. When collecting your supplies, include your value 
scale and proportioning devices so they will be handy when you 
need them.
1 
Draw the Basic Shapes 
Using a 4H pencil, sketch the basic shape of the body 
and the slope of the hillside. Add a circle for the basic 
shape of the head. While you may be tempted to rush on to the 
next step, this is the time to pay attention to proportions so the 
fi nished drawing will be accurate. Use a proportioning device to 
check your work, making adjustments as necessary.
2 
Sketch the Overall Shape of the Body
With the 4H pencil, sketch the shape of the body, includ-
ing the legs, neck, ear, mouth, lower jaw and tail. Pay 
close attention to the placement of the line for the belly because 
this will affect how tall the legs appear. Check your work with a 
proportioning device and make adjustments as needed.
Must-Have Materials
4H, HB, 4B graphite pencils • 14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm) 
medium-tooth drawing paper • Copier paper to be used as 
a friskett • Dividers, proportional dividers or sewing gauge • 
Drawing board • Kneaded eraser • Value scale (see page 50) • 
White vinyl eraser
Optional, But Not to Be Overlooked
Erasing shield • Pencil sharpener • Scissors • Straightedge, 
triangle or angle ruler
Using Basic Shapes (p. 27)
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Contrast (p. 49)
Creating Values (p. 51)
Lines, Tangents & Shapes (p. 90)
CHECK THIS OUT
100
D E M O N S T R A T I O N

3 
4 
101
3 
Add Detail Lines to the Wolf 
and Sketch the Mountains
Erase obsolete guidelines with your white vinyl eraser and 
add details to the face, including the eye and nose, with the 4H 
pencil. Suggest the texture of the coat with back-and-forth lines 
along the outline of the body and within the body itself. Sketch 
in the mountains. Pay attention to where the lines of the wolf 
meet the lines of the mountains, making sure you do not create 
unwanted tangents (see page 90).
4 
Start Adding Values
With a 4H pencil, add shading to the wolf, letting your 
pencil strokes follow the direction of the fur. With the 
exception of the head, keep the outer edges of the wolf light to 
suggest the light from the sky and the light refl ected off the snow. 
This is a good place to start referring to your value scale as you 
lay down lights and darks for the rest of this demo.
101

102
5 
6 
102
5 
Add Darks and Details to the Wolf
With the HB pencil, add the darker values to the coat and 
the shadow areas. Add facial details by darkening the 
eye, nose and mouth, leaving white spaces to indicate teeth. Add 
dots to the wolf’s muzzle to suggest whiskers.
6 
Add Lighter Values to the Distant Mountains
Using the 4H pencil, make back-and-forth strokes, fi lling 
in the mountains except for the area in direct sunlight.

103
7 
8 
103
7 
Add the Darks of the Trees
With the HB pencil, indicate the exposed rock of the 
mountains with short back-and-forth strokes.
8 
Add the Dark Background Trees
With a 4B pencil, use vertical pen-
cil strokes to add the dark areas 
of the background trees. To do this, cut a 
piece of copier paper in the same curve as 
the hillside. Use this as a frisket to create a 
clean edge, as discussed on page 15.

9 
104
Call of the Wild
Graphite on drawing paper
14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm)
9 
Add Finishing Touches
Now to step back from your drawing to observe the range of lights and darks in the 
sky. Before you attempt to add the sky, consider practicing this step on a piece of 
scrap paper. Using a 4H pencil, add light values to the sky with long, horizontal lines. Start 
with light pressure at the top and gradually decrease the pressure as you work down. If you 
get frustrated, leave the sky white; your drawing will still be dramatic. Be encouraged. You 
can come back and try this again at a later date for better results. Either way, sign and date 
your drawing.
104

1 
2 
105
Expressive Portrait
Good art begins with an interesting subject. Be on the lookout 
for inspiring subjects because your best art will no doubt come 
from this inspiration. For portraits, sketch the facial structure fi rst. 
Look into a mirror and use your own features as a guide. This 
will help you place elements such as the hat and beard with less 
guesswork. Apply line work in a rough and irregular manner to 
complement the rugged appearance of the subject.
1 
Sketch the Face
With a 4H pencil, sketch the overall shape of the head 
and lines for the eyes and center of the face. The head is 
viewed slightly from the side, making the center line of the face 
somewhat left of center. Sketch in lines for the mouth and nose. 
Add the eyes.
2 
Sketch Facial Features and the Top of the Hat
Sketch facial features, including the eyebrows, ears, 
nose, lips, pupils, irises and creases around the eyes, 
using the 4H pencil. Now is the time to adjust the facial features, 
if necessary. I decided to make the nose shorter from what I 
originally sketched. Add the top of the hat and band. Notice that 
much of its form follows the shape of the head. Add a curved line 
to indicate the major fold of the hat. 
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Human Figures (p. 78)
Face: Front View (p. 82)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
4H, HB, 4B graphite pencils • 14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm) medi-
um-tooth drawing paper • Drawing board • Kneaded eraser
Optional, But Not to Be Overlooked
Dividers, proportional dividers or sewing gauge • Pencil 
sharpener • Small mirror • Value scale (see page 50) • White 
vinyl eraser
105
D E M O N S T R A T I O N

106
3 
4 
106
Use a Small Mirror
Consider looking in a mirror through-
out this demo to observe your own 
features so you will better understand 
the structure and values of the face.
3 
Add the Brim, Shoulders and Arms
Using the 4H pencil, add the brim. Notice the sides are 
turned up. Add lines to indicate the arms and shoulders. 4 
Add the Hair, Beard and Details 
Sketch in the basic form of the hair, beard and mustache. 
Add details throughout the drawing, erasing the obsolete 
guidelines in the process with a kneaded eraser. Make minor 
adjustments to the hat, if necessary.

107
6 
5 
107
6 
Shade the Underside of the Hat
Now add values to the underside of the hat brim. Use 
back-and-forth strokes to indicate the shape of the hat’s 
underside. Use a 4H pencil for the light areas and an HB pencil 
for the dark, shadowy areas near the face.
5 
Add Values to the Face
With the 4H pencil, add values to the face. Pay particular 
attention to the eyes; they are the soul of a portrait. Con-
tinue adding values to the face using the HB pencil for the darker 
places such as the creases near the eyes, the eyebrows and the 
nostrils. Leave the lightest areas on the cheeks completely white 
as highlights. 

108
8 
7 
108
8 
Add Details to the Hair and Beard
With lots of squiggly lines, draw in the hair and beard 
using 4H and HB pencils. Notice that the lighter areas 
have fewer lines. 
7 
Add Details to the Top Portion of the Hat
Use a 4H pencil to add values to the top part of the hat. 
Add fewer lines for the lighter areas. Use the HB pencil 
for the darker shadow areas under the band and for the very 
top fold of the hat.

109
9 
109
Mountain Man
Graphite on drawing paper
14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm)
9 
Reﬁ ne the Shirt and Add Finishing Details
Add the shirt and suspenders with a 4H pencil for the lighter areas, an HB pencil for 
the darker areas. If you feel that you drew the shoulders too low, add more to them 
along the top. Add additional darks and details. Sign and date your drawing.

1 
2 
110
Telling a Story Through a Drawing
This is a great demo for learning more about how to draw people. 
Clothing and props can tell a story to add interest to a drawing.
1 
Draw the Basic Shapes of the Head, Neck 
and Shoulder
With a 4H pencil, sketch an egg-shape for the head, in 
three-quarters view. Sketch the neck and shoulders. Add a circle 
indicating the shoulder joint. Check your proportions with one of 
the proportioning tools. 
2 
Add the Arm and Hand
Add lines for the upper and lower forearm. For correct 
proportions, compare the length of the upper and lower 
arm to the height of the head, using one of the proportioning 
tools. Sketch lines for the hand and basket. Add lines that indi-
cate the ridges of the hand’s knuckles and thumb. At this stage, 
the hand should look like a mitten, since the individual fi ngers are 
not yet defi ned. Sketch lines to indicate the sides and bottom of 
the basket.
Using a Frisket (p. 15)
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Human Figures (p. 78)
Face: ¾ View (p. 83)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
4H, HB, 4B graphite pencils • 14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm) medi-
um-tooth drawing paper • Copier paper to be used as a frisket 
• Dividers, proportional dividers or sewing gauge • Drawing 
board • Kneaded eraser • Value scale (page 50)
Optional, But Not to be Overlooked
Pencil sharpener  • Scissors • White vinyl eraser
110
D E M O N S T R A T I O N

3 
4 
111
3 
Sketch the Features and Fingers
Sketch in placement lines for the eyes and nose, and 
add a line for the center of the face. Sketch ellipses for 
the basket. Then go back and refi ne the eyes, nose, mouth and 
eyebrows. Add the individual fi ngers on the hand. To see which 
fi ngers are longer and shorter, you may want to look at your own 
hand and draw accordingly.
4 
Continue Deﬁ ning the Face, Hand and Arm and 
Indicate the Clothing
Sketch the ear and add more defi nition to the facial fea-
tures, arm, hand and fi ngers. Erase any obsolete guidelines with 
a kneaded or white vinyl eraser. Add the basic form of the cloth-
ing and head scarf, noting where major folds occur. Also add 
short lines indicating the arm on the far side of the basket.
111

112
5 
6 
112
5 
Add Details and Begin Shading
Sketch in the vegetables, the weave of the basket and the 
jewelry. Add details to the clothing, basket and ear. Erase 
any obsolete guidelines with a kneaded or white vinyl eraser. 
Add very light lines to indicate value variations on the face, neck 
and arm. Use the value scale to check the appropriate value 
changes. Keep in mind that the light source is at the upper left, 
so shade accordingly. Lighten some of the pencil work on the 
forehead, cheek, nose and arm by gently pressing a kneaded 
eraser on these areas to lift some of the graphite.
6 
Add Darker Values to the Face, 
Neck, Arms and Hands
With an HB pencil, darken the neck, the far side of the 
face and under the nose and lips. Defi ne the eyes and ear, dark-
ening any area in shadow. Darken the arms and hand, making 
the farthest arm darker than the nearest arm. Use the value scale 
to check the values. Add a few details to the fi ngers, but keep the 
details to a minimum as the fi ngers are mostly in shadow. 

113
7 
8 
113
7 
Add the Background 
With the HB pencil, begin adding the darks of the back-
ground. Use the value scale to create the appropriate 
level of lights and darks. Confi ne your marks to the top and left 
sides of the background. To make a clean edge, use copier 
paper as a frisket and proceed with downward pencil strokes. 
After you’ve done some of the background with the frisket, 
remove it and continue putting in the background without the 
frisket, giving the border a rough, loose look.
8 
Darken the Background and Add Light Values 
to the Clothing
Use the HB pencil to make up-and-down strokes to fur-
ther darken the values of the background. With the 4H pencil, 
add the lighter values to the clothing. Add interest to the com-
position by continuing the clothing on the left beyond where the 
dark of the background ends. 

114
9 
10 
11 
114
9 
Add Darks to the Clothing
With an HB pencil, add the darks to the clothing. Use the 
value scale to help you add the appropriate values. The 
creases of the clothing will most likely be very dark. 
10 
Add Light Values to the Basket and Vegetables
With a 4H pencil, start adding values to the basket, 
keeping some areas light to show the weave. Use 
subtle value changes for the vegetables, with the lightest areas 
on the left. 
11 
Add Darks to the Basket and Vegetables and 
Add the Finishing Details
With the HB pencil, add darker values to the basket 
and vegetables. Use the value scale to see if you need to make 
any adjustments with the 4H and HB pencils. Make some areas, 
such as some of the clothing creases, even darker using a 4B 
pencil. Lighten any areas that are too dark by gently removing the 
graphite with the kneaded eraser. Sign and date your drawing. 

115
115
Market Woman
Graphite on drawing paper
14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm)

1 
2 
116
Landscape Composition
To a beginner, full compositions can seem overwhelming. Just 
remember, most elaborate drawings are just a grouping of small-
er drawings. This particular drawing is made up of three main 
subjects: the building, the tree left of the building and the sheep. 
Approach it with the idea that each is a separate drawing that 
contributes to the whole. Take your time, be patient with yourself 
and enjoy the process.
1 
Draw the Basic Shapes
With a 4H pencil, lightly sketch a rectangle for the basic 
shape of the springhouse, then add a line for the roof’s 
edge and another line for the front corner of the house. This may 
be a good time to get out your straightedge to help you draw 
accurate lines. Sketch the grass line, tree trunk, leaf canopy and 
ovals for the sheeps’ bodies.
2 
Add the Window, Door and Roof Lines
Using the 4H pencil and your straightedge, add the win-
dow and door to the springhouse along with angles to the 
roof. You may want to use an angle ruler to check your angles. 
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Measuring Angles (p. 30)
Two-Point Perspective (p. 36)
Arches & Roofs (p. 44)
Creating Values (p. 51)
Leafy Trees (p. 56)
Brick, Stone & Wood (p. 58)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
4H, HB, 4B graphite pencils • 14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm) medi-
um-tooth drawing paper • Drawing board • Kneaded eraser • 
Straightedge, triangle or angle ruler • Value scale (see page 50)
Optional, But Not to Be Overlooked
Dividers, proportional dividers or sewing gauge • 
Pencil sharpener • White vinyl eraser
116
D E M O N S T R A T I O N

4 
3 
117
4 
Add Deﬁ nition to the Trees, Foliage and Sheep
With a 4H pencil, add more branches. Sketch the basic 
shapes of the tree’s foliage and the bushes and shrubs 
along the house. Sketch the heads and legs of the sheep.
3 
Add Details to the Building and Tree
With the 4H pencil, add more lines to defi ne the spring-
house, including additional overhang to the right side. 
Erase any unnecessary guidelines with a kneaded eraser. Sketch 
in more of the tree’s structure, tapering the smaller branches that 
grow away from the trunk.
117

118
5 
6 
7 
118
Springhouse
Graphite on drawing paper
14" × 11" (36cm × 28cm)
5 
Reﬁ ne the Sheep and Trees
Use the 4H pencil to refi ne the sheep by adding ears and 
fi lling out the basic shapes of their legs. Begin shading 
the leaves of the tree with a 4H pencil. Create texture by applying 
scribbles with short, broad strokes with the pencil tip fl at against 
the paper, going back and forth. Use this same technique for 
the shrubbery. Check your values with the value scale and make 
adjustments as necessary.
6 
Add Shading and Grass
Add shading to the springhouse, sheep and foliage. Use 
the 4H pencil for the lighter shading and the HB pencil for 
the darker shading. Notice that the springhouse is darker on the 
left side because it is in shadow.
With 4H and HB pencils, add grass to the foreground and 
shade the sheep further. Make the body of the sheep on the far 
left dark and keep the grass around it light for contrast. The bod-
ies of the other two sheep are light, so make the grass around 
them darker with an HB pencil. By doing this, you won’t have to 
rely on outlines to defi ne the sheep; instead they are defi ned by 
contrast. Check your work with the value scale.
7 
Add the Darkest Darks and Finishing Details
Make any adjustments to the shading and details with 
the 4H and HB pencils. Use the 4B pencil for the darkest 
darks, such as the window and door openings and shadow areas 
of the tree. Check the range of your lights and darks with your 
value scale and make any necessary changes. Sign and date 
your drawing.

119
119

1 
2 
3 
4 
120
Seascape Composition
Approach this drawing by fi rst establishing the most diffi cult 
element to draw, the foreground boat, then work back in the 
distance. When shading in an area, let your line strokes follow 
the direction of the material you’re trying to create, such as the 
woodgrain of the boards.
1 
Sketch the Foreground Boat
With a 4H pencil, sketch the basic lines for the foreground 
boat. Add the curved lines of the hull and the lines of the 
back, or stern, of the boat. With a straightedge to guide you, 
sketch the side of the cabin, add the roof and the pole that sup-
ports the roof.
2 
Add Details to the Boat
Add the structural features of the boat. Erase obsolete 
guidelines with a kneaded or white vinyl eraser. Follow 
this procedure to add the refl ection of the boat.
3 
Add the Basic Structure of the Second Boat
Sketch the second boat with the 4H pencil. This boat is 
viewed straight on, so the use perspective is minimal. 4 
Add Details to the Second Boat
Sketch in the structure of the cabin. Add the refl ection of 
the boat, and erase obsolete guidelines.
Gauging Proportions (p. 28)
Measuring Angles (p. 30)
Two-Point Perspective (p. 36)
Arches & Roofs (p. 44)
Refl ections (p. 46)
Brick, Stone & Wood (p. 58)
Boat (p. 68)
CHECK THIS OUT
Must-Have Materials
4H, HB, 4B graphite pencils • 11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm) medi-
um-tooth drawing paper • Drawing board • Kneaded eraser • 
Straightedge, triangle or angle ruler
Optional, But Not to Be Overlooked
Dividers, proportional dividers or sewing gauge • Pencil sharp-
ener • Value scale (see page 50) • White vinyl eraser
120
D E M O N S T R A T I O N

5 
6 
7 
8 
121
5 
Sketch the Horizon and Begin the Building
You may want to use your straightedge for the following 
steps. Use the 4H pencil to add the horizon line, then add 
the horizontal lines of the building. Notice that they would con-
verge at a vanishing point far on the distant right. 
6 
Add the Vertical Lines of the Building
With the 4H pencil and a straightedge, sketch the verti-
cal lines of the building. Pay attention to their proportions 
and placement.
7 
Form the Roofs and Gables
Add the roofs and gables with the 4H pencil and a 
straightedge. Some of the lines, such as the one coming 
from the tallest roof peak, will go toward a vanishing point on 
the left side. 
8 
Add Details to the Building’s Structure
With the 4H pencil, add details to the building, includ-
ing windows, door and trim and the poles and stones to 
the pier. You may want to check your angles with an angle ruler. 
Erase any obsolete guidelines.
121

122
9 
10 
11 
12 
122
9 
Start Shading the Building and Stonework
Start shading the lighter side of the building and the 
stonework with a 4H pencil, remembering that the light 
source is at the upper right. Darken the stonework near the 
water line. Use the value scale to check your values as you work 
through the rest of these steps.
10 
Add the Darker Values 
to the Building and Stonework
Add the darker values to the roof, the chimney and 
the darker sides of the building with 4H and HB pencils. Use the 
HB pencil for the darker areas, such as adding shadows under 
the building.
11 
Continue Adding Darks 
to the Building and Stonework
Continue adding more darks and details to the 
building and stonework with 4H and HB pencils, as necessary. 
Apply the darkest darks with the 4B pencil.
12 
Start Adding Values to the Boats
Add the lighter values of the boats with a 4H pen-
cil. Make the foreground boat darker than the sec-
ond boat for contrast.

123
14 
13 
123
Rockport Harbor
Graphite on drawing paper
11" × 14" (28cm × 36cm)
14 
Add Reﬂ ections and Final Darks and Details
Add refl ections with back-and-forth horizontal 
strokes using a 4H pencil. Lightly indicate distant 
water and trees near the horizon. Add some darks to the boats 
with a 4B pencil and darken much of the foreground boat with 
the 4H pencil. Add some simple seagull shapes with a 4H pencil. 
Sign and date your artwork.
13 
Add Middle Values 
to the Boats
Add the middle values of 
the boats with the HB pencil. Clean up 
any smudges and erase any unnecessary 
lines with a kneaded eraser.

124
Acid-free paper. Paper that has not been 
processed with acid. Acid can cause 
paper to yellow over time.
Angle ruler. A small ruler that can fold in 
the middle to measure angles.
Asymmetrical. That which is not sym-
metrical. In reference to art, something 
may be balanced without being sym-
metrical.
Atmospheric perspective. The illusion 
of depth achieved through contrasts in 
value and defi nition.
Baseline. A line that establishes the 
placement of a subject and helps you 
work out the proportions of a drawing.
Blind contour sketch. A sketch or draw-
ing done with a single line without 
looking at the paper. 
Cast shadow. The shadow of an object 
that appears on a different surface or 
object.
Chiaroscuro. A sketch or drawing that 
defi nes the form of an object using 
only highly contrasting values, usually 
black and white, instead of with con-
tour lines or shading.
Composition. The arrangement of ele-
ments in an artwork.
Contour sketch (or Continuous line 
sketch). A sketch or drawing that is 
done with a single line.
Contrast. Differences between the values 
in a composition.
Craft knife. A small knife with a sharp, 
pointed, replaceable blade.
Crop. Determine the area of a scene to be 
included within an artwork.
Dividers. A handheld compasslike device 
for measuring and proportioning.
Drawing. A fi nished representation of a 
subject.
Drawing board. A smooth, sturdy board 
placed underneath the paper for 
sketching or drawing.
Drawing paper. Heavyweight paper, 
commonly 80 lb. to 90 lb. (170gsm to 
190gsm), used for drawing.
Ellipse. The shape a circle takes on when 
viewed at an angle. Used to show per-
spective.
Erasing shield. A thin metal shield used 
to mask areas that are not to be 
erased.
Eye level. See Vantage point.
Fixative. A spray applied to pencil draw-
ings to prevent the artwork from 
smudging.
Focal point. The area or part of a paint-
ing to which the composition leads the 
eye, also referred to as the center of 
interest.
Form shadow. A shadow on an object 
that gives the form more dimension.
Format. The overall shape of a composi-
tion.
Frisket. A sheet of paper used as a shield 
to create an even edge or a clean mar-
gin beside a set of pencil lines.
Gauge. To determine specifi c proportions 
of elements in a scene.
Graphite. A soft black substance used in 
the core of some pencils.
Highlight. An area of light on an object, 
usually placed in the direct path of the 
light.
Horizon line. The line where land or water 
meets the sky, in reference to linear 
perspective.
Kneaded eraser. A soft, pliable gray 
eraser.
Lead. The term mistakenly used for 
graphite in a pencil. Also the scale that 
rates the hardness or softness of the 
graphite.
Leading lines. A group of compositional 
elements used to form lines to direct 
the viewer’s eye to centers of interest.
Light box. A device that shines light 
evenly through a translucent surface. 
This allows the viewer to see slides, 
transparencies or drawings laid on its 
surface.
Light source. The origin of the light shin-
ing on elements in a composition.
Linear perspective. Depth implied 
through line and the relative size of ele-
ments in a composition.
Mechanical pencil. A pencil consisting 
of a thin stick of graphite encased by 
a holder similar to a pen. Mechanical 
pencils need no sharpening.
One-point perspective. A type of linear 
perspective with one vanishing point.
Pad. A stack of sheets of paper attached 
at one side with glue or wire.
Paper weight. The thickness of a sheet 
of paper; common weights for sketch 
paper are 50 lb. to 70 lb. (105gsm to 
150gsm). For drawing paper common 
weights are 80lb to 90lb (170gsm to 
190gsm).
Pencil extender. A device that attaches 
to the end of a pencil that has been 
shortened by use, used to extend the 
pencil’s life.
Pencil sharpener. A mechanical device 
used to sharpen the ends of pencils.
Perspective. A technique that gives the 
illusion of depth to a fl at picture.
Proportional dividers. Dividers that have 
points at both ends and are used for 
proportionally enlarging or reducing a 
hand-drawn image.
Reference materials. Pictures from 
various sources, used to examine a 
subject more closely, or from different 
angles, or under different conditions.
Reﬂ ected light. Light refl ected off one 
surface onto another.
Sandpaper pad. A very small pad of 
sandpaper sheets attached to a han-
dle; used for sharpening pencil tips.
Glossary
124

125
125
Sewing gauge. A hand-held device with 
a moveable marking guide that can be 
used for measuring proportions.
Sketch. A drawing in rough, unfi nished 
form.
Sketch paper. Lightweight paper, com-
monly 50 lb. to 70 lb. (105gsm to 
150gsm), used for sketching.
Slip sheet. A sheet of paper placed over 
an unfi nished drawing, under the draw-
ing hand, to prevent the hand from 
smearing the graphite as it moves 
across the paper.
Straightedge. A metal ruler or similar tool 
used for drawing straight lines.
Structural sketch. The primary line work 
that the values (lights and darks) and 
line work of a drawing are built upon.
Symmetrical. Balanced composition, 
with equal elements placed as if 
refl ected in a mirror.
Tangent. The unfortuante meeting of 
two similar compositional elements. 
Tangents usually detract from a com-
position because they can confuse the 
viewer.
Three-point perspective. A type of lin-
ear perspective with three vanishing 
points—two at the vantage point and 
one either above or below eye level.
Thumbnail sketch. A small, quick sketch.
Tooth. The roughness of a paper surface.
Tracing paper. Thin, translucent paper 
used in the process of drawing.
Triangle. A thin, transparent triangle 
formed out of plastic used for drawing 
lines.
T-square. A straightedge with a perpen-
dicular attachment that allows the tool 
to glide along the side edge of a draw-
ing board or paper pad.
Two-point perspective. A type of linear 
perspective with two vanishing points.
Values. Degrees of light and darkness in a 
sketch or drawing.
Value scale. A scale showing a range of 
values.
Value sketch. A thumbnail sketch used to 
plan the lights and darks of a drawing.
Vanishing point. A point usually on the 
horizon line, at which parallel lines 
seem to converge.
Vantage point. The point from which the 
viewer observes a scene.
Viewﬁ nder. A device used to crop a 
scene.
White vinyl eraser. A white, squarish 
eraser.

126
Index
Aerial perspective. See Atmospheric
 
perspective
Airplanes, 62–63
Angle ruler, 7, 12, 30
Angles, 89
 
gauging, 30
Arches, 44–45
Asymmetrical composition, 87
Atmospheric perspective, 41. 
 
See also Perspective
Automobiles, 66–67
Basic shapes, 24, 27
Black-and-white sketch, 14, 20–21, 
 
24–25
Boats, 68–69, 120–23
Branches, 56–57
Brick, 58–59
Camera, 57
Carbon pencils, 8, 13
Cast shadow, 52
Cat 
 
face, 70–71
 
side view, 72–73
Center point, 44–45
Charcoal pencils, 8, 13
Chiaroscuro, 20–21. See also 
 
Black-and-white sketch
Clouds, 55
Colored pencils, 8
Composition, 86–90
Continuous line sketch. 
 
See Contour sketch
Contour drawing, 25
Contour sketch,14, 22–23
Contrast, 49, 100–04
Cows, 76
Craft knife, 9, 12
Cropping, 89
Depth, 35, 41. See also Perspective
Dividers, 12–13, 28–29
Dog, side view, 74–75
Drawing, 14
Drawing board, 7, 10
Drawing pad, 7
Drawing paper, 10, 12
Drawing tools, 8–13
Elements
 
arranging, 87
 
number of, 88
Ellipses, 42–43
Enlarging, 13
Erasers, 7, 11–12
Erasing shield, 11–12, 18
Evergreen trees, 57
Faces, 82–85, 105–109
Figure drawing, 78–81, 110–15
Fixative, 13
Focal point, 90
Form shadow, 52
Formatting, 89
Friskets, 15
Fruit, 92–93
Fur, 75
Garden scene, 96–97
Graphite pencils, 8
Grass, 55
Grid, 87
Harbor scene, 120–123
Hardness, of pencils, 8
Highlight, 52
Horizon line, 32–38, 53
Kneaded eraser, 11–12
Landscape, 116–119
Leading lines, 90
Leaves, 56
Light box, 12–13, 24–25
Light source, 52–53, 55
Linear perspective, 12, 41–43. 
 
See also Perspective
Lines
 
horizontal, 14
 
straight, 29
 
types of, 15
Masking tape, 10
Materials, 7–13
Mechanical pencils, 8
Mirror, 12–13, 106
Mood, 33
Obscurity, and depth, 35
Paper, 10, 12
Parallel elements, 35
Pencil box, 7
Pencil extender, 7–8, 12
Pencil sharpener, 7, 9, 12
Pencils, 7–8, 12
 
as gauge, 28
 
holding, 15
 
sharpening, 9
Perspective, 32–33, 35, 46
 
atmospheric, 41
 
one-point, 34-35
 
two-point, 36-37
 
three-point, 38-39
Portraits. See Faces
Proportional dividers, 12–13, 28–29
Proportions, 13, 24, 27–28, 78–80
Raccoons, 98–99
Reducing, 13
Reference material, 31
Refl ected light, 52
Refl ections, 46–47
Rocks, 60-61
Ruler, 29
Sandpaper pad, 9, 12
Sewing gauge, 12–13, 29
Shadows, 48, 52–53, 55, 60
Shapes, 90
Size, relative, 35
Sketch pad, 7, 10, 12
Sketch paper, 10
Sketching, 14
Slip sheet, 20
Smudges, avoiding, 20
Spray fi xative, 13
Still lifes, 31, 92–93
Stone, 58–59
Straight edge, 12, 29
Structural line sketch, 13-14, 16–17, 
 
24–25, 27
Sunlight, 55
Swan, 77
Symmetrical composition, 87
126

127
Value drawing, 25
Value scale, 50
Value sketch, 14, 18–19, 24
Values, 27, 41, 48–53
Vanishing point, 32, 34–40, 53
Vantage point, 32–38
Viewfi nder, 89
White vinyl eraser, 11–12
Wolf, 100–04
Wood, 58–59
Woodless pencils, 8
Tangents, 90
Technical drawing, 34
Textures, 58–59, 94–95, 98–99
Thumbnail sketch, 87
Tooth, of paper, 10
Tracing paper, 10, 31
Trains, 64–65
Trees, 56–57
Triangle, 12, 34
T-square, 12, 34
127

128
The Drawing Bible
by Craig Nelson
ISBN-13: 978-1-58180-620-5
ISBN-10: 1-58180-620-5
Hardcover with concealed wire-o binding, 304 
pages, #33191
The Drawing Bible is the defi nitive drawing 
resource for all artists! Craig Nelson clearly 
explains basic drawing principles and shows 
you how to use a wide variety of drawing medi-
ums, both black-and-white and color. Demon-
strations and beautiful fi nished art throughout 
will instruct and inspire you, and the book’s 
chunky size and spiral binding make it conve-
nient to use and easy to carry anywhere.
The Pencil Box
From the editors of The Artist’s Magazine and 
North Light Books
ISBN-13: 978-1-58180-729-5
ISBN-10: 978-1-58180-729-5
Paperback, 128 pages, # 33403 
Tap the proven techniques and collective draw-
ing wisdom of over a dozen venerable Artist’s 
Magazine and North Light artists! The Pencil 
Box covers materials, tips for improvement 
and dozens of drawing techniques. Includes 
14 step-by-step demonstrations in a range of 
popular subjects, including landscapes, por-
traits, still lifes and seascapes.
Secrets to Drawing Realistic Faces
by Carrie Stuart Parks
ISBN-13: 978-1-58180-216-0
ISBN-10: 1-58180-216-1
Paperback, 144 pages, #31995
Learn how to master proportions, map facial 
features accurately, and study shapes within 
a composition to capture heightened realism 
and accuracy. Carrie uses clear step-by-step 
instructions, before-and-after examples from 
students, and proven drawing exercises used 
to train artists throughout the country.
Secrets to Realistic Drawing
by Carrie Stuart & Rick Parks
ISBN-13: 978-1-58180-649-6
ISBN-10: 1-58180-649-3
Paperback, 128 pages, #33238
If you’re an artist armed only with a pencil, this 
book is for you! Secrets to Realistic Drawing will 
have you creating lifelike drawings in no time by 
teaching you drawing principles in a clear and 
concise manner. The techniques, strategies 
and step-by-step demonstrations will help you 
quickly realize your artistic dreams.
These books and other fi ne North Light titles 
are available at your local fi ne art retailer or 
bookstores or from online suppliers.

“We hope you will regain that childlike passion for making 
art and learning without critiquing yourself harshly. We 
won’t make you hang it on the fridge, but we do suggest 
you save your artwork because it will show your progress 
and increase your conﬁ dence as you go.”
UPC
This inspiring book makes drawing in a realistic style easier 
than you may think and more fun than you ever imagined! 
Authors Mark and Mary Willenbrink (Watercolor for the Absolute 
Beginner) cover it all—from choosing materials and the correct 
way to hold your pencil, to expert advice on the tricky stuff, like 
getting proportions and perspective right, drawing refl ections, 
and designing strong compositions. 
 
At the heart of this book, a series of fun, hands-on exercises 
help you practice and perfect your strokes—24 mini-demos lead 
up to 9 full step-by-step demos. Each exercise builds on the 
previous one as you develop your skills, increase your confi -
dence, and enjoy yourself along the way. The lessons you learn 
by drawing simple subjects such as coffee mugs, clouds and 
trees will help you take on progressively more challenging matter 
like animals, still lifes, landscapes and portraits…the kinds of 
subjects and scenes you’ve always dreamt of drawing.
 
This book is just the ticket for budding artists of any age. It’s 
never too early or too late to discover the pure joy of drawing!
A Clear & Easy Guide to
Successful Drawing
ART 037-1B 
line art, print red
60%
DRAWING
—Mark and Mary Willenbrink
ISBN-13: 978-1-58180-789-9
ISBN-10: 1-58180-789-9
33465
US $19.99
EAN
9 781581 807899
9 0 0 0 0
(CAN $24.99)

