February 2018 · No 29 · Price £5.99
29
9 772059 287008
buyer’s guide • reviews • pro tips + more…
go MOJO
Hands-on with the Vortex 230
great shot!
The best aerial photos of 2017
OUR SURVEY SAYS…
Why aerial analysis can be
more complex than it looks
SAFETY FIRST
Essential advice for new drone
owners on flying within the law
MONEY TALKS
Planning your pricing
as a commercial pilot
£
2018 PREVIEW
The top technology and big issues for the year ahead
FPV FOR VICTORY
The top guns talk oF 
a season of success


Penvins Chapel 
Vannes, Brittany, France
“Penvins Chapel is one the highlights of the 
coastline in South Brittany; another being 
the Fortress of Château de Suscinio built in 
the nearby marshes.”
Photo by Cyrille Pillet 
Supplied by Dronestragram

4
DRONE MAGAZINE
contributors
Adam  
Juniper
Andrew spends his time 
monitoring the globe for drone 
news stories, testing to death the 
things people send him (mostly 
drones), and hoping his cats won’t 
moult all over his quadcopters. He's 
a graduate of the Freedonia Flying 
Academy and has never failed to 
walk away from a UAV landing. 
You can follow him on Twitter at  
@raggedydrones
Andrew 
Watton-Davies
Gemma 
Cox
Lee  
Schofield
Mark 
Baker
Dan 
francis
Rowan is cinematographer and 
drone fanatic with a passion for 
exploring new places and shooting 
them with his Xiro Xplorer. He’s 
always looking for new places to 
fly and new ways to push his work, 
and you’ll often find him along the 
Pembrokeshire coastline on most 
sunny/non-windy days! You can 
follow his most recent shots/trips 
on Instagram @RTBaileyMedia.
rowan 
bailey
Hooked from the moment he saw 
the AR.Drone at CES, Adam has 
spent the years since building, 
crashing, sinking, losing and 
occasionally flying drones. With 
a background in photography 
publishing and over a decade 
writing about video and still 
photography in his rear-view 
mirror, he was the only choice for 
Ilex’s recent book The Drone Pilot's 
Handbook (on sale now!).
Our launch editor for DRONE, 
Gemma has worked at the helm of 
NEO magazine for over ten years. 
Spending over a decade immersed 
in Asian pop culture, she recently 
branched out into the world of 
technology to take on UAVs. She’s 
most excited about the future of 
FPV racing and the prospect of 
drone deliveries! Can drone racing 
go prime time? She certainly hopes 
so! Follow NEO at @NEO_Magazine.
Mark is a commercial drone pilot 
based in the New Forest. In 2014, 
he founded Naughty Cat Media 
and specialises in providing low 
level aerial video and photography 
using drones. Most of his work  
is carried out with lightweight  
and affordable systems like the  
DJI Phantom series. Check out 
some of his shots and get in 
touch at his website, located at  
www.naughtycatmedia.co.uk.
Dan has been working within 
the protective case industry for 
the past three years, specialising 
in solutions for drone and 
photography equipment. He 
founded www.cases2go.co.uk 
and has spent the last few years 
sourcing and supplying cases for 
military, offshore oil, motorsport, 
A/V and film industries. If you 
want to keep your drone safe, 
Dan's got your back(pack)!
Known online as Painless360, 
Lee has a YouTube channel and 
business dedicated to making RC 
technology easier to use. An RC pilot 
for over eight years and with a 30-
year background in electronics he 
became hooked on quads when he 
was bought one in as a present. The 
rest, as they say, is history! By now 
he can probably strip a quadcopter 
and rebuild it blindfolded.
Michael gained his experience with 
drones through the US Army, flying 
the Shadow 200 system. After the 
Army he flew drones in Alaska before 
founding his own company, M2 
Flight Solutions. As well as working 
with emergency services, he was also 
the first person to fly an AV Puma 
system 300 miles from the true North 
Pole – the furthest a UAV system has 
flown from a coastguard ship.
MICHAEL  
COOK

Uncooked Media Ltd, PO Box 6337,
Bournemouth, BH1 9EH
Telephone: 01202 087627
www.uncookedmedia.com
Editor: Ian Collen
dronemaguk@gmail.com
Managing Editor: Gemma Cox
Design: Imran Kelly
Contributors: Rowan Bailey, Mark Baker,  
Michael Cook, Dronestagram, Dan Francis,  
Adam Juniper, Cyrille Pillet, Lee Schofield,  
Andrew Watton-Davies
Customer Services
01202 087627  
contact@selectps.com
Advertising & Marketing
Group Commercial Manager: Rob Cox
rob@uncookedmedia.com
Licensing
To discuss magazine licensing or content syndication 
please email: contact@selectps.com
 
Subscription Enquiries
01202 087627
chris@selectps.com
Distributed through the UK newstrade by 
Seymour Ltd, 0207 429 4000 
2 East Poultry Avenue, London EC1A 9PT
Distributed through the UK/US specialist trade by 
Diamond Comic Distributors, 020 8536 5730
Printed in the UK by MRC Print Ltd,  
Chelmsford, Essex
DRONE is published every four weeks by Uncooked 
Media Ltd. All text and layout remains the copyright 
of Uncooked Media Ltd. DRONE is a fully independent 
publication and its views are not those of any company 
mentioned herein. All characters and artwork shown 
in this magazine remain the © and trademark or their 
respective owners. 
No part of this magazine may be reproduced without 
the express written permission of the publisher. 
DRONE can accept no responsibility for inaccuracies 
or complaints arising from editorial or advertising 
within this magazine. All letters and emails received 
will be considered for publication, but we cannot 
provide personal replies. The publishers cannot be held 
responsible for unsolicited manuscripts, photographs, 
transparencies or artwork. Please do not call, email or 
write to enquire whether your unsolicited submission 
has been received, as our priority is the production of 
the magazine.
Another quality cold cut from
EST. 2003
DRONE © 2017 Uncooked Media Ltd
ISSN 2059-2876
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
5
WELCOME
To Issue 29 of Drone Magazine!
 W
ith 2017 now resigned to the history books, it’s always a good time to 
reflect on what’s happened and what we can look forward to in the months 
ahead – and that’s certainly true of the drone world. There hasn’t been 
much in the way of seismic changes or dazzling technological innovations that have 
revolutionised our lives; instead we’ve seen some steady, yet impressive, growth and 
development amidst signs that the drone industry is establishing a firm foundation 
from which to build on.
The impending regulations remains one hot topic. In many ways it was inevitable 
and, whether you agree with the likes of compulsory registration or not, it does help 
to give things an air of credibility, perhaps offering further reassurance to those 
rather less receptive to the technology that there are laws and safety protocols in 
place. The sooner they come into effect, the sooner we’ll all know where we stand.
I’d also point to areas such as FPV racing and UAVs in wider industry as other 
notable advancements in 2017, purely in terms of the number of people or companies 
getting involved. A year ago we were talking about drones in construction projects 
as being new and exciting; now they’re rapidly becoming just another piece of kit in 
every engineer’s toolbox – and this continued acceptance and widespread use of the 
technology can only help to increase awareness of the good that drones can do.
As for 2018, it’s a tough one to call. I think we’re going to see some big shifts in the 
commercial world, notably as increased automation – and subsequently demands 
for changes in the law to accommodate it – come into effect. Although, of course, I’d 
happily settle for the one thing that just about everyone wants: better batteries and 
longer flight times! Still, it promises to be a fun and exciting year for the entire drone 
community and I hope you stay with us for the ride…
Enjoy the issue – and have a great 2018!
Ian Collen, EDITOR
facebook.com/DRONEMagUK
twitter.com/DRONEMagUK
instagram.com/DRONEMagUK
February 2018  •  Issue 29
www.dronemagazine.uk

21
Drone registration back 
on for sub-250g owners 
in the USA
16
12
contents
6
DRONE MAGAZINE
12 // UK REGULATIONS
With further announcements on the Drone 
Bill, we’ve all the updates on the impending 
changes to the law.
14 // HIGH SOCIETY
As well as looking at legislation, the UK 
government has also been inviting cities to 
invest in urban drone innovations.
16 // CRASH TESTED
A fresh study into mid-air impacts between 
drones and manned aircraft draws a positive 
response from the industry.
22 // online SUPPORT
A retailer delivers some great advice for 
avoiding dodgy websites offering deals that are 
too good to be true.
24 // under investigation
New academic research looks into the use of 
UAVs to assist the police in finding murder 
victims buried in rural areas. 
28 // LUKE BANNISTER
An in-depth interview with arguably the best 
FPV racer around, as we track his career from 
the park to the podium.
18 // CHANNEL HOPPING MAD
A TV shopping show mistakenly claims a 
£50 online course would make you a CAA-
accredited pilot. Oops!
20 // TAKING THE LEAD
As BT takes broadband to the sky, we also 
report on the first UK police force to use the 
Emergency Service Exemption provision.
21 // AIR AMERICA
The FAA wins back the right to register to sub-
250g craft, while DJI gets accused of pilfering 
sensitive data to China.
22
28

SUBSCRIBE TODAY FOR ONLY £14.99! 
TURN TO PAGE 90
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
7
36 // THE RACING LINE
We get a full, and largely successful, end-of-
season report from the CEO of one of the top 
FPV teams around: NEXXBlades.
44 // 2018 PREVIEW: PT1
Our rough guide to the year ahead looks to the 
past to make some educated predictions for the 
top tech and advancements of the future.
50 // MONEY TALKS
If you’re setting up an aerial business, one of our 
experts shares his secrets for charging in a fair 
and profitable manner.
68 // FOLLOW the code
If you’re new to flying, the CAA has some 
important words for you! Plus some updates on 
those impending UK regulations.
74 // VIEW FROM ABOVE
An intriguing interview with an imaging expert 
on how there’s more to mapping and surveying 
than meets the eye.
80 // PICTURE PERFECT
A gallery of some of the best aerial photos of the 
year, as DJI’s SkyPixel community vies for the 
Grand Prize of 2017.
54 // 2018 PREVIEW: PT2
More pointers to the next 12 months, this time 
looking at the hot topics with FPV quads and the 
custom build sector.
62 // VORTEX 230 MOJO
Our reviews section gets off to a flying start, 
with this cool new racer and freestyle combo 
offering from ImmersionRC.
66 // TRNDLABS SPECTRE
We ain’t afraid of no ghost! Instead we had a lot 
of fun finding out how TRNDLabs continues to 
improve its range.
74
80
xx
62
36
44
What drone tech 
could be making the 
headlines in 2018?

8
DRONE MAGAZINE
Photo courtesy of NEXXBlades

36
we talk to the head 
of drone racing team 
nexxblades after a 
world-beating season 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
9

10
DRONE MAGAZINE
Photo by TRNDLabs

66
 a hands-on review 
with trndlabs’ latest 
offering, the spectre
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
11

12
DRONE MAGAZINE
The DRONE Bill
UK government reveals more on upcoming regulations
 F 
urther details on the UK government’s 
planned Drone Bill have been announced, 
with a formal update published by the 
Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for 
Transport, Baroness Sugg, on 27 November 
2017. The announcement set out further details 
on what the government is detailing as a means 
to ensure that the UK stays at the forefront of 
the drone market, both in terms of attracting 
more investment into the research and 
development of new technologies for the whole 
of the global market, and in seeing greater use 
of them in the UK itself. 
The update also identified safety as a key 
issue, stating that if the UK is “to realise the 
full potential of this new technology, we must 
also maintain our world class aviation safety 
record and address certain safety and privacy 
concerns.” It was also confirmed that a draft 
of the Drone Bill will be published in the 
spring of 2018.
Another intention of the bill is to mandate 
the use of “safety and airspace awareness apps” 
as well as building a framework to ensure that 
such apps meet the appropriate requirements, 
which will include giving users confirmation 
of a flight being safe and legal and making 
flights visible to other airspace users. They 
should also ensure that the privacy of “sensitive 
local sites, such as schools and residential 
areas,” and the security of “organisations or 
industries such as national infrastructure, 
government and military sites” are respected. 
Project Chatham, a “data project” looking 
into the establishment of geofencing through 
GPS, was also mentioned, with confirmation 
that a group made up of “departmental 
experts, the Civil Aviation Authority and 
NATS” are looking into issuing no-fly zone 
information into an easily usable format for 
manufacturers and developers.
With regards to the previously announced 
drone registration program, the Drone Bill is 
intended to create the legal powers, educational 
materials and technical systems needed for 
the testing and registration of leisure pilots 
through amendments to the Air Navigation 
Order (ANO). It was also stated that the 
government is reviewing potential measures, 
including an ANO amendment to ban all drone 
flights above 400 feet or near airports. With 
multiple new laws being proposed, the bill also 
plans to give the police the right to order drone 
operators to produce registration documents 
on request, to land their craft when necessary 
and to seize drones or their parts if officers 
have reasonable suspicion of the craft being 
involved in committing an offence.
 
Industry Reaction
Announcing the update, Baroness Sugg 
said: “Our approach will keep Britain at 
the forefront of the global market, whilst 
delivering a flexible framework for a safe, 
secure and successful drone industry.” She 
added that “these new laws strike a balance, 
to allow the vast majority of drone users to 
continue flying safely and responsibly, while 
also paving the way for drone technology to 
revolutionise businesses and public services.” 
Words by: Andrew Watton-Davies

Echoing the Baroness’ sentiments, National 
Police Chiefs’ Council Lead for Criminal 
Misuse of Drones, Assistant Chief Constable 
Serena Kennedy, said that the “police forces 
are aware of the ever-increasing use of drones 
by members of the public and we are working 
with all relevant partners to understand the 
threats that this new technology can pose when 
used irresponsibly or illegally. Do not take this 
lightly – if you use a drone to invade people’s 
privacy or engage in disruptive behaviour, you 
could face serious criminal charges.” 
Tim Johnson, Policy Director at the CAA, 
also released a statement saying that it 
“supports the safe development of drones in the 
UK. Drones can bring economic and workplace 
safety benefits but to achieve those we need 
everyone flying a drone now to do so safely. 
We welcome plans to increase drone operator 
training, safety awareness and the creation of 
no-fly zones.”
We also spoke with the Association of 
Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems UK 
(ARPAS) chairman, Perran Bonner, who told 
us: “ARPAS-UK is in general supportive of 
the proposals outlined by the Department 
for Transport (DfT) as we indicated in our 
response to the consultation. We note that the 
DfT intends to consult again before anything 
is formalised, at which time we would believe 
that issues of detail can be addressed.” 
With regards to the increased policing 
powers, Perran (a serving police officer 
himself) commented: “The most critical factor 
is for the police to have sufficient resources 
available to address issues of dangerous and 
irresponsible flying, and for awareness-
raising and training to be made available to 
relevant individuals. This will take time to 
be driven through, and we are aware already 
of some excellent work being undertaken by 
police forces. Increased police powers can 
only help, however, and will in itself help to 
raise awareness.”
Jody Easkiovitch, admin of the popular 
Drone Flyers UK Facebook group, did 
raise some pertinent questions after the 
announcement, including: “How much will 
this cost you (the drone operator)? Where do 
I need to go to take the tests? Is this going to 
follow the EASA structure of different classes 
for different environments?” 
He also commented that, whilst the 
consultation did indicate that high costs may 
have a negative impact on the scheme, “we will 
just have to wait and see. What’s not clear is 
how long this is valid for, which may prove to 
be an interesting sticking point if the rules and 
legislation change frequently.” 
Whilst he was not opposed to geofencing 
in principle, he added: “There needs to be a 
service level agreement or simple process to 
unlock these areas for legitimate legal use. 
There are plenty of people out there hacking 
the equipment to bypass the safety features of 
these drones, which needs to be addressed if 
this is going to be effective and successful.” 
Jody also raised concerns that with the 
requirements for the use of official apps, home-
built drones may be affected by the legislation. 
“It’s difficult to determine if this is actually the 
case. I sincerely hope not, though, as this is a 
route I took when I first got into drones.”
More information on the progression of the 
Drone Bill can be found at gov.uk/government/
organisations/department-for-transport.
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
13

 T
he Department for Transport has 
announced the launch of the Flying High 
Challenge, a collaborative engagement 
with up to five cities in the UK that is intended 
to “shape the future of drones and drone 
systems”. Run by Nesta, an innovation 
foundation more formally known as the 
National Endowment for Science, Technology 
and the Arts, in partnership with Innovate UK, 
the programme offers the chance for support 
in the research and development of pioneering 
drone projects within the winning locations.
The challenge will see city leaders, 
regulators, public services, businesses and 
industry leaders convene and collaborate to 
create strategies on how to integrate drones, 
and their various existing and potential 
uses, safely and sustainably into the local 
communities. After an initial six-month 
engagement phase with the selected groups, 
the programme will include the development 
of a series of technology challenges over the 
following 18-24 months, culminating in the 
demonstration of large-scale, real-world 
integrated drone systems.
At launch, the focus of the challenge is on 
the open call for applications from cities who 
would like to take part in the project and then 
a four-month strategic visioning exercise with 
the selected cities. The deadline to submit 
intentions has passed, with final applications 
closing on 19 January. Deran Thomas 
Garabedian, senior advisor at Nesta, informed 
us that, among other factors, the application 
process is seeking to discover the motivations 
of potential participants and what they hope to 
achieve during the engagement. 
Deran told us: “We are keen to understand 
what individuals or organisations the city 
envisions engaging during the Flying High 
Challenge programme; what these individuals 
and organisations bring to the process and how 
prospective Flying High cities plan to engage 
with their key constituents – the public – 
during the programme.
“Drone technology has developed fast. 
Companies and public services are already 
starting to use them more widely. Cities 
and people need to take strategic decisions 
now about how drone systems develop, in 
order to plan and ensure that the future of 
drones is one that solves social needs and has 
meaningful social and economic benefits. 
Cities and citizens need to take a view on how 
drones will operate.”
However, he did also point out that “there 
will be trade-offs; restricting them tightly to 
avoid risks or making calculations about what 
is acceptable and what is not. For instance, 
they could be completely prohibited above 
residential areas, but that would heavily restrict 
their use for deliveries.” 
As for specific technologies, Deran explained 
that “the Flying High Challenge will look 
at BVLOS, integration, infrastructure, 
deconfliction, airspace management and other 
components of the complex systems that will 
be required to operate safely and efficiently 
within urban and potentially hazardous and 
challenging environments.“
We spoke to Aviation Minister Baroness 
Sugg about the project, who told us: “Drones 
have great potential and we want to do 
everything possible to harness the benefits 
of this technology as it develops. This is why 
the government will be bringing forward 
new laws on drones to help users fly safely 
and responsibly and give police the power 
to tackle the dangerous use of drones. The 
Flying High Challenge will complement these 
measures by helping to shape how drones 
can operate safely in city environments and 
deliver benefits to communities.”
More information on the challenge, including 
how to subscribe for updates, can be found at 
flyinghigh.challenges.org.
City Slickers
DfT launches urban 
innovation programme
14
DRONE MAGAZINE
Words by: Andrew Watton-Davies
Baroness Sugg CBE 
Photo by David Parry

See WWW.LCEGROUP.CO.UK for 
accessories & more 
A small yet powerful drone with a range of 4.3 mi 
(7km), 5 vision sensors, a 4K camera supported by 
a 3-axis gimbal, is at your command with just a 
push of your thumb or a tap of your finger.
MAVIC
PRO &
PLATINUM
INSPIRE
2
Image quality, power and intelligence to meet 
the needs of professional filmmakers and 
enterprises around the globe. 
OSMO
includes spare battery
Motion without blur.
Action shots without shake.
OSMO MOBILE
It turns your smartphone into 
a smart motion camera.
OSMO +
3.5× optical and
2× digital lossless zoom.
OSMO PRO
4K video at 4096×2160/25fps.
Micro Four Thirds sensor.
OSMO RAW + FREE 512GB SSD!
Lossless 4K videos in
CinemaDNG RAW.
Micro Four Thirds sensor. 
£2999.00
£1899.00
£689.00
£219.00
£399.00
PHANTOM 3 STD        £449.00    
PHANTOM 4 PRO from £1379.00
INSPIRE 1 PRO          £2499.00    
YUNEEC TYPHOON H £739.00    
IN 
STOCK
IN 
STOCK
PHANTOM 3 PRO        £849.00
+ FREE SECOND BATTERY & HARD-
SHELL BACKPACK
SPARK &
SPARK COMBO
IN 
STOCK
£999.00
£3059.00
from
from
£449.00
from
Meet Spark, a mini drone that features all of 
DJI’s signature technologies. With intelligent 
flight control options, a mechanical gimbal, and 
a camera with incredible image quality.
Photography and videography platform packed 
with professional features and new safety and 
redundancy elements.
Take to the skies with the world’s first fully 
integrated aerial system equipped with 
the only M4/3 camera built exclusively for 
aerial imaging.
More intelligent, more powerful, and more 
accessible than ever before, the Phantom 3 
Professional offer an immersive, fun flying 
experience.
Safe, easy, and fun to fly, the Phantom 3 
Standard makes it possible for everyone to 
reach for the sky.
Equipped with a 1-inch sensor, the Phantom 4 
Pro camera shoots video at up to 4K 60fps and 
20 megapixel stills. It has 4 directions of obstacle 
avoidance and a 30-minute flight time.
VISIT YOUR LOCAL 
LCE FOR ALL 
OF OUR LATEST 
CAMERA OFFERS  
UK MAIL ORDER Next day delivery available from all LCE branches. Postage & Insurance £4.99 for most items. E. & O. E. 
Prices quoted include VAT @ 20%.  Prices subject to change. Goods subject to availability. 
BRANCHES NATIONWIDE
BATH
01225 462234
 
BRISTOL (BALDWIN ST)
0117 929 1935
 
BRISTOL (BROADMEAD) 
0117 927 6185
 
CHELTENHAM 
01242 519 851
 
CHICHESTER 
 
01243 531536
 
CHESTER  
01244 326531
 
COLCHESTER  
 
01206 573444
 
DERBY 
 
 
01332 348644
 
EXETER  
 
01392 279024
 
GLOUCESTER 
 
01452 304513
 
GUILDFORD 
 
01483 504040
 
HEREFORD  
 
01432 272655
 
LEAMINGTON 
 
01926 886166
 
LINCOLN (HIGH ST) 
01522 528577
 
LINCOLN (SILVER ST) 
01522 514131
 
LONDON (STRAND) 
 
0207 3790200
 
MANCHESTER  
 
0161 834 7500
 
NEWCASTLE 
 
0191 213 0060
 
NORWICH  
01603 612537
 
NOTTINGHAM 
 
0115 941 7486
 
PLYMOUTH 
 
01752 664894
 
PORTSMOUTH 
 
023 9283 9933
 
READING  
 
0118 9592149
 
SALISBURY 
 
01722 335436
 
SOUTHAMPTON (CIVIC CTR)  
023 8033 1720
 
SOUTHAMPTON (HIGH ST)
023 8022 1597
 
TAUNTON
01823 259955
 
WINCHESTER
01962 866203
 
WORCESTER 
01905 22314
 
OPENING TIMES:
Mon—Sat: 9am —5:30pm

16
DRONE MAGAZINE
Impact 
Assessment
FAA publishes new study  
into mid-air drone risks
 T 
he United States Federal Air Authority 
(FAA) has released the results of its 
“Airborne Collision Severity Evaluation 
Final Report” – a study into the dangers 
posed by drones impacting other aircraft. 
The research was conducted by the Alliance 
for System Safety of UAS through Research 
Excellence (ASSURE) and in its report, issued 
on 28 November 2017, it concluded that “drones 
that collide with large manned aircraft can 
cause more structural damage than birds of the 
same weight for a given impact speed.”
The differences in the potential damage 
is due to the hardened materials used in 
drones, such as plastics, batteries and metals, 
compared to the airborne wildlife. Researchers 
at Mississippi State University, Montana State 
University, Ohio State University and Wichita 
State University ran a series of computer 
simulations and physical verification tests, 
using drones weighing between 1.2kg and 
3.6kg to ‘fly’ into business jets and airliners.
The study demonstrated that, whilst in a 
number of scenarios drones caused no damage 
or posed no risk of failure to the other craft, 
it was possible that a collision could result in 
the plane’s exterior being pierced, the cockpit 
glass being broken or damage being caused 
to a plane’s engines. Full scale testing, such 
as impacting real drones with real aircraft 
in flight, was not used in the creation of the 
report, with ASSURE citing the cost and 
impracticality of such experiments.
Announcing the study, the FAA stated that 
it will “use the research results to help develop 
operational and collision risk mitigation 
requirements for drones.” It also said that the 
teams involved plan further research into the 
risks of engine ingestion of drones, working in 
collaboration with engine manufacturers, and 
will be producing additional studies into the 
potential dangers to helicopters and general 
aviation aircraft.
Ground Support
Responding to the report, Kara Calvert, 
executive director of the Drone Manufacturers 
Alliance, said the DMA “appreciates the work 
of ASSURE in conducting the UAS airborne 
collision severity research report.” She added 
that it “showed that the damage caused by 
a drone colliding with an airplane will vary 
widely, depending on the mass of the drone 
and the speed of the airplane,” whilst noting 
that aircraft at the altitudes most drones 
operate at would be flying at relatively slow 
speeds, so would also suffer less damage. 
She also confirmed that the “DMA’s members 
stand ready to assist ASSURE in its ongoing 
drone safety research”, and that it “looks forward 
to working with the FAA, ASSURE and manned 
aircraft manufacturers to continue developing 
new solutions to minimise risks to airplanes.”
We contacted the British Airline Pilots’ 
Association (BALPA) Flight Safety Specialist, 
Steve Landells, who told us: “We’re pleased to 
see more research has been carried out in this 
area, something we’ve been calling for since 
the release of our own collision testing report 
earlier this year. The results coming from the 
US echo our own in finding that drones pose 
a real threat to aircraft – and that current 
aircraft protection against bird strikes cannot 
be considered adequate against a drone.” 
Referring to the “Small Remotely Piloted 
Aircraft Systems (Drones): Mid-Air Collision 
Study” report, released in July 2017 and 
conducted in association with the Department 
Words by: Andrew Watton-Davies

for Transport and Military Aviation Authority 
(as reported on by us in Issue 24), Steve said 
that “the FAA study gives validation to our 
own UK study and we think this gives a strong 
indication of the potential threat. However, 
we would like to see live testing done against 
engine ingestion to further examine the risk to 
critical aircraft parts.” 
Steve also commented that “these results 
should now put an end to anyone in the drone 
community burying their head in the sand 
about the dangers. The proposed legislation 
from the government is sensible and there to 
encourage safety, not stop anyone’s fun. BALPA 
is not anti-drone but we must see drones 
integrated into the airspace safely.”
Commenting on the report, Ian Povey from 
Clear Vision Security who had previously 
made a number of popular blog posts 
discussing the UK study (reported further 
by us in Issue 25), told us: “It’s a positive 
step forward that this study uses university 
researchers rather than the BALPA/DfT study 
which used government contractors. 
“This helps to introduce a semblance of 
transparency and independence into the 
study which the UK one failed to do. It’s also 
encouraging that they’ve been explicit on 
the types of drones used in the study and the 
amount of information they’ve released about 
the rationale, methodology and findings. These 
are all positive steps forward in having an open 
and adult debate on the subject of manned and 
unmanned aircraft collisions.” 
In addition, Ian told us that the detailed 
information in the report raises questions 
about the security issues that BALPA and the 
DfT used for not disclosing the methodology 
in their own reports. He further asked: “If 
drones are such a danger to public safety that 
greater legislation and regulation is required 
to save lives, one has to ask the question why 
there isn’t money available to properly research 
impact studies?” The full FAA report can be 
found at assureuas.org.
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
17
“Drones that collide with large manned aircraft can cause more 
structural damage than birds of the same weight”

 T
he UK TV shopping channel Ideal World 
was forced into an awkward backtrack 
after advertising a low-cost drone 
course as having CAA approval. During its 
“Black Friday” show on the morning of 24 
November, bargain hunters were given an 
offer of £49.99 for a two-hour online “Drone 
School Competency Course” from Uplift Drone 
Training. It was described by one presenter as 
a “competency course for if you want to get 
really serious about drones” and that the course 
would give the purchaser an “official license” 
from the CAA, that would prove an operator 
“absolutely competent at flying a drone.” 
Unfortunately the CAA was quick to confirm 
that the product does not match any existing 
official certification. In addition, the course 
in question was only a fraction of the price 
and length of recognised commercial drone 
training courses (which can last for 2-3 days 
and cost well over £1,000). 
With videos of the offer circulating online, 
we contacted Uplift Drone Training where 
Director Matt Lee clarified that the team “regret 
and apologise for the error made at the weekend 
which resulted in describing the Competency 
Course as an ‘official licence’ accredited by the 
CAA. The course is neither and is a basic safety 
course. We are a CAA-approved NQE, providing 
NQE services to commercial drone operators 
and this is where we expect the confusion 
occurred with the presentation of the course.”
When asked how the company had 
responded to the incident, Matt confirmed 
that they had immediately contacted Ideal 
World to have the product removed from sale 
as soon as they became aware of the error. 
“All customers who purchased this course are 
being contacted to advise them of this error 
and are being offered a full refund. We remain 
committed to the idea of easily accessible drone 
safety education for all, with our goal to help 
reduce the drone incidents we regularly see in 
the press. We will be reviewing for relaunch 
sometime in 2018. If any of our customers do 
have any concerns please do contact us via 
email at info@upliftdronetraining.com.”
Ideal World was also contacted about the 
incident. Terry Birch, QA and Compliance 
Manager for the channel stated that the 
presenter who had made the claim of the course 
offering an “official license” was a guest on 
the show, who was told before the show not 
to reference that the course was endorsed or 
accredited by the CAA or the DfT. 
“As you will appreciate, the guest is not 
one of our regular presenters and he is not 
trained in live TV presentation,” he told us. “As 
such, occasionally errors can occur in a live 
environment. In this instance, the guest gave 
incorrect information, despite the pre-show 
briefing he had received. As a result of this 
incident we have reminded our producers to 
ensure that guest presenters give accurate and 
honest information about the products they 
are representing.” 
Terry also added:  “As a responsible retailer 
we ensure that in all our shows where we 
advertise drones, we reference the DroneCode. 
We actively encourage our viewers to follow 
the DroneCode and at Ideal World we also have 
specific video clips that are played during our 
drone shows to go into detail of the DroneCode.” 
The DroneCode and UK laws are also linked to, 
or directly quoted, on all drone-related pages on 
the channel’s website. 
Civil Unrest
Shopping show error over CAA accreditation
18
DRONE MAGAZINE
Words by: Andrew Watton-Davies


 E
ngineers from Openreach, a division of 
British Telecom, have successfully used 
a drone to help bring broadband to the 
village of Pontfadog in Wales. The DJI Mavic 
Pro was flown by the engineers in the Ceiriog 
Valley area to carry a length of strengthened 
fishing line over the tree canopy, before 
then pulling the internet cable across in an 
operation that took just over an hour.
Commenting on the use of the UAV, 
Openreach has said that the terrain in the area 
had meant that digging trenches, erecting 
roadside cabinets or even using satellite or 
radio connections were not a possibility. 
Chief Engineer Andy Whale added: “If we 
tried running the cable through the woods it 
was also very likely we’d get it caught up in 
branches and other natural obstructions, so 
we figured the best option was to fly it in over 
the top of the tree canopy and then lift it up to 
make sure it was clear of the tree line.”
Jonathan Carter from Openreach was able 
to confirm to us that the key modification 
to the craft was a custom 3D-printed release 
mechanism. He said that the Mavic was chosen 
for the task because it is “compact, agile and 
able to manoeuvre through tight spaces,” 
and that the company has since carried out 
a number of similar cable drops. Regarding 
the wider use of drones by the company, he 
stated: “If continuing trials prove successful, 
Openreach is looking at plans to equip and 
train selected engineers to pilot drones in 
engineering teams across the UK.”
Words by: Andrew Watton-Davies
 E
ssex Police has announced that it has 
become the first members of the UK 
emergency services to operationally 
deploy a UAV using the E4506 Emergency 
Services Exemption provision of the Air 
Navigation Order 2016.
The flight, carried out in October 2017, 
occurred following a road incident on the A12 
where a vehicle had travelled through a crash 
barrier at an interchange and was believed to 
be stranded inside an area of dense vegetation 
in the traffic island that made up part of the 
dual carriageway.
With such close proximity to a heavily used 
stretch of road and the heavy undergrowth 
in the search area, the attending officers 
assessed that it was not possible to perform a 
safe, accurate and timely visual assessment if 
passengers of the vehicle were in a potentially 
life-threatening position. The decision 
was made to deploy the drone team’s DJI 
Mavic Pro to investigate the area, using the 
E4506 provision to temporarily negate the 
requirement for operators to maintain a 
minimum distance from congested areas. 
This enabled the team to perform a search 
in minutes that would otherwise have 
taken hours. According to Perran Bonner, 
Assessment Manager for the drone team, 
that meant that “from a health and safety 
prospective, for the officers on the ground 
they weren’t tasked with going through nigh 
impregnable bush and from a life-saving 
prospective they were able to clear the area 
within minutes.” In this instance it ended up 
that life hadn’t been in danger, as the team 
discovered that the vehicle had carried on 
through the undergrowth and emerged back 
onto the road to continue its journey.
Essex Police claim UK first
Emergency Service
20
DRONE MAGAZINE
Web Support
BT using drones to connect communities

 T
he registration requirement for drones weighing over 250 grams 
has returned to the USA with the passing of the National Defense 
Authorization Act 2018. First launched way back in 2015, the bill 
was stopped in May last year when lawyer and drone user John Taylor 
successfully challenged the FAA’s authority to enforce the registration 
scheme. However, the new act which was passed in December includes 
a clause that says this ruling has now been restored.
The act largely deals with the budget of the US Department of Defense, 
but included a section entitled “Collaboration Between Federal Aviation 
Administration and Department of Defense on Unmanned Aircraft 
Systems”, with the sub-clause “Restoration of Rules for Registration and 
Marking of Unmanned Aircraft.” The clause reads: “The rules adopted by 
the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration in the matter 
of registration and marking requirements for small unmanned aircraft… 
shall be restored to effect on the date of enactment of this Act.” This 
supersedes section 336 of the FAA Modernisation and Reform Act of 2012, 
which had nullified the original ruling.
Talking to TechCrunch.com, an FAA spokesperson said that the 
organisation welcomes the reinstatement of these registration rules: 
“Ownership identification helps promote safe and responsible drone 
operation and is a key component to full integration.” The Small 
UAV Coalition also responded positively, describing the register as “a 
critical mechanism for safety and accountability… With registration 
reinstated, the Coalition looks forward to working with the FAA and 
Congress to implement remote identification and tracking standards 
that will be critical to ensuring safe integration and unleashing the 
potential for increased and expanded commercial UAS operations.”
Words by Andrew Watton-Davies
Sign US Up
American government restores 
FAA 250g registration powers
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
21
 A 
memo leaked from the US Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE) in November claims that DJI is using its 
drones to relay sensitive information back to government 
agencies in its home country of China. The claim is based on 
“information derived from open source reporting and a reliable 
source within the unmanaged aerial systems industry,” and that it 
“assesses with moderate confidence that Chinese-based company DJI 
Science and Technology is providing US critical infrastructure and law 
enforcement data to the Chinese government.” 
The memo also claimed “with high confidence” that DJI was 
“selectively targeting government and privately owned entities within 
these sectors to expand its ability to collect and exploit sensitive US 
data.” Unsurprisingly DJI has rejected the accusation, stating: “The 
bulletin is based on clearly false and misleading claims from an 
unidentified source… Several of the key claims made by this unnamed 
source show a fundamental lack of understanding of DJI, its technology 
and the drone market.” 
The company dismissed these other claims, such as that its products 
have the ability to recognise the face of a particular person, that it’s 
pricing strategy has caused Parrot and/or Yuneec to stop production, 
and that it sells its products at a loss cheaper in the US than in China. 
As to the foundation of the claims, Barbara Stelzner, Corporate 
Communication Director for DJI, told us: “Without knowing the source 
it’s hard to speculate on intent – which could include relying on a 
limited understanding of DJI, technology and the drone market, or 
misrepresenting DJI due to competitive or other improper motives.”
DJI-Spy
Drone giant accused  
of data exploitation

22
DRONE MAGAZINE
 A 
UK retailer has come up with a guide 
to warn would-be drone buyers against 
potentially dodgy websites that are 
offering great prices on top models, but with no 
intention of delivering the advertised product. 
Christian Smith from Leicester Drones took the 
move after being made aware of these “scam 
sites” early last year and recently posted an 
online conversation he had with such a site 
claiming to be for a retailer based in Leeds 
– despite having nothing else to suggest it 
actually had premises in the city.
“We all want the best deal when buying a 
drone and a quick search online will bring up 
all sorts of offers, with some of them seeming 
too good to be true,” Christian explained. 
Unfortunately that is often the case, as these 
websites will happily take your order for a 
popular model, but fail to deliver. “At worst you 
will lose all your money and even have your 
personal details passed on to other scam sites,” 
he warns. “The best outcome you can hope for 
is waiting two or three weeks for a drone that 
turns out to be a copy, a fake or a reconditioned 
product with 2-pin plugs, illegal remote control 
frequencies and no warranty.”
Christian told us that he was first made 
aware of the problem after some of his 
customers asked if his own company was able 
to match these unrealistically low prices. “It 
would be quite funny because they would then 
ask if the scam site was genuine and would they 
be okay to order from there? I lost a few sales to 
them but at the same time people would have 
a bad experience and eventually order a drone 
from me.”
Many of these scammers will be pretending 
to operate in the UK, but are in fact located 
overseas – with the same dangers presumably 
applying to people living in the US and other 
regions popular with drone owners, and also 
to many other related markets, with electrical 
items proving a popular theme. “I think these 
companies can get products cheaper outside of 
the UK because there is less tax to pay and they 
pretend to be in the UK to get people to order 
from them,” Chris told us. 
The problem is that when the knock-off 
product turns up, if at all, customers are left 
with the very difficult position of trying to track 
down the real location the product was sent 
from in order to get a refund or a replacement 
– with the scammers only too familiar with 
exploiting tricks and loopholes to get around 
the likes of PayPal, while arguing a potentially 
drawn out case that they did actually send you 
something if you bring up a credit card receipt.
Upon finding one such site offering discounts 
including a Mavic Pro for £200 under the going 
rate, Christian used its online chat system to 
grill them for information and the operator 
seemed to have an answer for every question 
– but ultimately failed to provide any evidence 
that their ‘offices’ actually existed in the UK or 
operated as advertised. Tell-tale signs included 
no photos of the outlet, no online reviews, 
no social media links and a fake company 
registration number (it turned out to belong to a 
used car retailer).
Words by: Ian collen
Don’t Get 
Scammed
when a deal is really a steal

“To be fair most people tell me they did 
eventually get their money back but there are 
some that lost everything. People love to say 
how they did manage to get their money back 
but the ones that lose everything don’t shout 
about it and are much less likely to tell people 
they have been a victim.” To help prevent others 
from making the same mistake, Christian came 
up with a nine-point checklist to help spot a 
fake site - as you can see below.
You can see his blog post on the matter and 
a full transcription of the online Q&A, on 
Christian’s own (and very legitimate) website 
www.leicesterdrones.com.
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
23
The Reality  
Checklist
• Are their prices just good or too good 
to be true? This is your first warning.  
Most drone manufacturers set the 
price that the drone should be sold for 
so if the price is some way below this 
they may not be a genuine retailer.
• Do they have a genuine UK address? 
This may be a shop or industrial unit 
but you should be able to check it out 
on Google Street View.
• Do they have a UK phone number? 
Beware of 0800 or 0845 numbers 
because these can easily be diverted 
out of the UK. If you get a recorded 
message hang up because the call 
could be premium rate.
• Does the company have a UK 
business registration number? You 
can check on gov.uk/get-information-
about-a-company. Alternatively they 
should have a VAT number which you 
can check with HMRC.
• Do they have any photos of their 
store on their website? If not why not?
• Is it possible to collect your order 
from them? Most genuine retailers 
offer a collection service.
• Do they have any online reviews? If 
not why not?
• Do they have active social media? 
Most companies use social media such 
as Facebook or Twitter to engage with 
their customers. If their website has 
no social media it should be a warning 
to you. Some of them have the social 
media icons on their site but they don’t 
link anywhere.
• Don’t fall for the online chat! Some of 
the sites have a chat box when you can 
get an instant answer to any questions. 
In truth you could be speaking to 
someone anywhere in the world. 

 A
lthough many of the ‘drones are good’ 
stories we run tend to focus on exciting 
technological advancements or colourful 
projects, there’s also a great deal of equally 
important uses for UAVs that might not make 
for quite such cheery celebration. One such 
potential field is in forensic investigations by the 
police, notably in missing person cases where 
they might be looking for someone presumed to 
be the victim of foul play.
Researchers Rykker Evers and Peter 
Masters from the Cranfield Forensic Institute 
at Cranfield University in Bedfordshire have 
undertaken a project to explore the potential 
for drone use to assist the police in searching 
for hidden burial sites. In a summary of 
their research Rykker explains: “Ongoing 
research suggests that drones can be beneficial 
in forensic archaeology, spanning wide 
landscapes in the search for clandestine burials 
occupied by victims of homicide.”
It’s maybe not a subject that we’d all happily 
chat about, but the fact is that murder cases can 
remain open for many years if the location of 
the body cannot be verified. Rykker points to 
the infamous Moors Murders as a high profile 
example where a missing body is still to be 
found. However, as the technology advances, 
so new ways are found to help the police with 
their investigations.
“By manipulating light from across the 
electromagnetic (EM) spectrum we are able to 
capture images that are invisible to the naked 
eye and this can be advantageous in identifying 
areas of disturbed soil and anomalous 
vegetation which commonly characterise 
clandestine graves,” Rykker explains. 
“Miniature drones are able to capture high 
altitude imagery from across the EM spectrum, 
allowing for non-intrusive techniques to be 
implemented by avoiding physical contact 
with the ground surface and subsequently 
preventing disturbance, and damage to possible 
evidence, unlike general foot searches.”
The research was conducted using a relatively 
low-cost package of a Phantom 2 with a GoPro 
Hero 3 fitted with a near NIR filter. According 
to Rykker: “The drone was flown over a 
natural burial ground which closely resembles 
characteristics to those of clandestine graves 
and photographs were taken in both the normal 
colour and NIR areas of the EM spectrum. After 
various simple image enhancement techniques 
of the aerial images, the results show that 
considerable and valuable differences can be 
seen between the two methods of photography 
in identifying clandestine graves and 
demonstrates the effectiveness and usefulness 
that drone photography can be in identifying 
anomalous areas of soil.”
We’ve looked at drones being used in more 
day-to-day operations of the police and other 
emergency services, but it’s interesting to see 
even more potential uses coming to light as 
the technology – and people’s awareness and 
appreciation of it – continues to improve. 
“This research has certainly highlighted 
further uses for drones in the forensic 
archaeology field in attempting to search for 
missing victims of homicide,” says Rykker, and 
we’re sure the officers otherwise tasked with 
scouring the ground on foot would have few 
complaints if some of the work was instead put 
into the hands of a drone pilot.
As far as the project goes, Rykker and Peter’s 
work is far from done. “Further research 
using a larger drone allowing for more costly 
and higher-quality modified cameras to be 
mounted has the possibility to considerably 
better distinguish grave areas from non-grave 
areas and prove its worth in this field,” says 
Rykker. And while we might not want to think 
too much about their findings, it could prove to 
be an invaluable resource for investigators in 
the years ahead. 
What Lies Beneath
A darker side of positive drone use
24
DRONE MAGAZINE
Words by: Ian Collen

T: 01225 722733  M: 07776 450293  E: info@phoenixuavcentre.co.uk  W: phoenixuavcentre.co.uk
Phoenix UAV Centre, Unit 3, Springleaze Park, Farleigh Road, Norton St Philip, Somerset BA2 7NG
 
FLIGHT SCHOOL
TAA CERTIFICATION
ALL IN ONE LOCATION
PACKAGE DEALS AVAILABLE
01225 722733
info@phoenixuavcentre.co.uk
www.phoenixuavcentre.co.uk
Phoenix UAV Centre, Springleaze Park, Farleigh Road, Norton St Philip, Bath, Somerset BA2 7NG
COURSE OPTIONS
• Ground School
• Flight Training 
• Flight Tests
• Operations Manual 
Consultancy
• Aircraft Servicing/
Maintenance/Repair
• DJI & Yuneec Dealer
The original and best Commercial Drone (UAV) training centre
Some flight training offered at reduced rates
Established 2010

Jubilee Pool, Penzance 
Photo by Dave Johnson
A Reader’s View

Proving once again that the overhead view offered by drones can 
provide shapes and colour contrasts you wouldn’t see from the 
ground, is this great photo from Dave Johnson taken with his Mavic 
Pro. As he explains: “I captured this shot at the end of October 
during a long weekend away. It was an extremely calm day and 
perfect for flying the Mavic out over the water without the fear of 
not getting back in against headwinds.”
Dave told us he was primarily shooting some 4K video while he 
was up in the air but wisely decided to take a few photos while he 
was above the pool. “I love the different colours and shades of blue 
against the jagged rocks.” He’s not the only one.
If you’d like to get one of your own photos into the magazine – and by 
submitting a shot for us to use, you are acknowledging that it is your own 
work and property – then email us at dronemaguk@gmail.com, along 
with the image (the highest resolution where possible) and ideally a few 
background details about what, why and how you got the shot. Maybe your 
favourite photo could make it into our next issue! 

28
DRONE MAGAZINE
DRONE PRO
Top Gun:
“I
’ve always been interested in flying. Back from when 
I can first remember I’ve wanted to be a full-scale 
pilot, so I started flying remote control planes ages ago. 
Then at my local club there was this new technology 
called FPV coming out so I got that for my birthday, put it on 
my planes and started flying those – and then I saw drones, so 
I moved into those about three years ago.” The rest, as they say 
is history.
Luke Bannister (or BanniUK, going by his racing handle) 
broke onto the world scene in March 2016 when, aged just 15, 
he took the top prize at the World Drone Prix in Dubai – along 
with a cheque for $250,000 for him and his team. Either side 
of that he’s established himself as one of the best FPV racers 
around, if not the best, taking titles on both the national 
and international stage. And all this while juggling school 
work, exams and the growing demands from a media keen to 
find out more about one of the biggest names in this rapidly 
expanding sport.
We spoke with him shortly after he’d won the vital final race 
at the Drone Champions League (DCL) in Berlin to earn his 
NEXXBlades team the overall victory as the 2017 season drew to 
a close. Not that his year ended there, as there was still time to 
head off to the States shortly afterwards to test his aerial skills 
in a different way, shooting video for promotional event at a 
snow resort. It’s the kind of lifestyle many youngsters can only 
dream of, but for Luke, now a veteran at the grand old age of 17, 
it’s still mostly about just having fun.
He’s arguably the number one FPV racer on 
the planet right now. Ian Collen caught up with 
Luke Bannister to share his story of success 
and find out what drives his need for speed…
Luke Bannister

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
29
DRONE PRO
All photos courtesy of NEXXBlades

30
DRONE MAGAZINE
The Start Line
Luke’s natural passion for flying made the transition to 
drones quite straightforward. “I remember when I was 
around eight years old getting a simulator joystick so I could 
play Flight Simulator X and things like that,” he tells us. “So 
when I got into drones I got used to it pretty quickly.” As 
many other pilots will know, the technology wasn’t great 
even just a few years ago and Luke admits that things were 
fairly simple to begin with. “The best you could see someone 
doing was a roll or a front flip, so I picked up the technology 
that was there pretty quickly.”
As the technology evolved, Luke was keen to learn and 
improve. “Back then I didn’t really realise I was that good. 
Obviously I really enjoyed what I was doing, but it was 
just a hobby for me. I was just messing around in a park, 
flying around some trees and enjoying it.” Without the 
clear benchmarks that new pilots may have to aspire to 
these days, it was more a case of just being better than the 
guy next to him. “You’d see someone doing a roll and you’d 
go off and do that yourself. As you see someone else doing 
something you’d want to do that yourself and so you’d push 
and push. As more and more people got into the hobby 
and the technology improved, everyone just got better and 
better exponentially.”
Although his own path to success was far from easy, Luke 
does point out how it’s only getting harder for new racers to 
make it to the top. “If you wanted to start doing high level 
racing now it would be much more of a grind because there 
are only so many people around who are of a good standard. 
The fact that I started so long ago, and was one of the only 
younger people doing it when I started, I managed to pick 
up sponsors from that and build up my YouTube to the point 
where I had my big breakthrough with XBlades in Dubai.”
Of course, his age did also work against him, because 
the older he got, so the more serious his schoolwork 
would become. “With school you’ve got preps, you’ve got 
homework, revision and so on – it’s like it’s never-ending. 
And for sure in the winter I don’t have much time to fly; I 
probably have half an hour or sometimes 45 minutes.” Not 
that his academic career makes him any less dedicated to 
being the best racer out there.
DRONE PRO

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
31
Becoming the Best
“The thing with practice is that there’s two ways you can go 
about it. You can just ‘go, go, go’ and do as much as you can 
– but you can’t do that much. You’ve got to make sure that 
the practice you do is useful. Also when you do lose a race, 
you need to analyse it and think ‘why did I mess up?’ If it’s a 
recurring thing why is this happening?” 
Luke points to a recent second place finish behind 
MinChan Kim at the International Drone Sports 
Competition (IDSC) in Korea. “I was watching all my 
footage back and it was like I was constantly micro-
correcting for the gates – and then I realised it was probably 
better for me to lower my rates to make it easier for me to fly 
under pressure. So I made some changes from there and it’s 
really helped my flying in terms of consistency.”
Likewise, as he grew into drone racing, so Luke 
developed a better understanding and appreciation for 
the technology. “I suppose in any sport, the better you get 
the more you notice these things. As I improved I’d start 
to notice ‘hang on, this is feeling weird, this is feeling 
different – what’s happening here?’ and you start to make 
conclusions based on what’s happening.” We raise the point 
of fine tuning right down to the aerodynamics but clearly 
that’s not an issue right now – “let’s face it, quads are just 
aerodynamics bricks that you force through the air!” – but 
tech such as the motors and propellers is always crucial. 
In terms of success, Luke says he first realised he could 
compete with the top pilots around at the inaugural UK 
Nationals back in 2015. “I got to the finals but crashed out, 
but I that was when I realised I had the pace.” And after 
winning in Dubai, he returned to win the UK Nationals in 
both 2016 and 2017 and a whole lot more besides.
DRONE PRO
Learn from the Champ
If you’re looking to get into FPV racing, be it for fun or with more serious 
ambitions, you can do a lot worse than take some sound advice from 
the world’s best. So here’s what Luke had to say when we asked him for 
some pointers beyond just ‘practice, practice, practice…’
“To start with, get yourself something small to learn the basics. So you 
learn how to hover, you learn line-of-sight, and then once you’ve done 
that it’s like ‘okay, I want to start flying the big quads now’. But don’t just 
go out and buy a big quad and think it’s going to be all fun and games. 
Buy a transmitter, buy a simulator and just put in 10 hours on that – then 
you can start looking at buying a bigger quad. 
“Also when you’re on the simulator, get out of auto as soon as you can 
because when you start flying Acro mode it’s the fastest way to race. 
But, for sure, perseverance is there and the simulator will get you quite a 
long way to being competitive but also you need to understand the tech 
and how to build and tune a little bit, because it will help your quad fly 
better, it makes it that little bit easier to fly.
“But when you’re actually racing you’ve got that ‘stick feel’. The feel of 
your quad is so, so key – and going on the simulators the physics is just 
slightly off, so you maybe have to turn slightly earlier or slightly later and 
that can mess with you. If I can’t fly for ages then I will just get on the 
sim, but if I’ve got a competition coming up I will not go on the simulator 
because it will just put me off flying my actual quad.”

We raised the point of his blossoming success bringing 
possible rivalries among his fellow racers but, having seen the 
fun and camaraderie of the pilots hanging out at race events, 
we had anticipated his response. “I see them as friends and we 
all unite over this common goal of flying drones. We all race 
really hard on the track, but once we get off the track we’re 
just best mates and we’ll help each other out. And that’s what I 
love about it; the community behind it.” 
There are countless examples but Luke reflected on the 
recent DCL event: “The teams were giving each other parts 
because we just want to have a fair race on the track. If a 
team doesn’t make it onto the track or has an issue because 
they don’t have the right parts then that sucks. It’s not a win 
if they have a technical issue. So we just want to help each 
other out so we can all put on a fair race and put on some 
good racing for the public.” On the other hand, though, 
being surrounded by the top talent on the FPV scene can 
also act as both a benchmark for where he needs to be and 
that little extra motivation to get there. 
Racing Ahead
As the sport has grown, so too has the prize money on offer. 
The World Drone Prix remains something of a one-off in 
terms of such a lofty reward, but Luke says he doesn’t really 
think about it. “I don’t do it for the money; I do it for the love 
of doing what I do,” he says, joking that he’s been at events 
and not even known if there was a prize for winning. “My 
focus is on being the best that I can be and to push myself. 
You’re racing everyone else but at the same time I’m mainly 
just racing myself.”
As a testament to that drive we can tell how a crash 
during the 1-v-1 heats of the DCL still bugs him: “I want to 
know why I crashed, as I was so consistent throughout the 
whole weekend and I just made that one tiny mistake that 
ended in a crash.” It’s this professional desire to be the best 
he can be that pushes Luke to the top of his game. “It’s all 
about analysing why you made mistakes, why you’re not 
improving or why someone beat you – and then working 
out how you can improve yourself.”
32
DRONE MAGAZINE
DRONE PRO
Fast Friends
Although Luke has enjoyed great success on the track, drone racing is still 
some way from being a self-financing sport and he’s lucky to have some 
great support, most notably from the NEXXBlades team. “The things they 
do for us in general are incredible,” he says. “For example, they’ve got 
people to build quads for me when I’ve been busy and help us to get to 
events so we don’t have to worry about organising travel or anything. It’s 
so awesome the support they give and the team spirit we have.”
He also has other commercial sponsors, with Mountain Dew highlighting 
how big brands are seeing the appeal of drone racing (and taking Luke to 
some great places for promotional events). He’s also teamed up with Air 
Hogs, manufacturer of drones geared towards newer pilots. “Air Hogs is 
awesome because it means I can help kids around the world get into this 
hobby through little Air Hog drones. Then I’ve got all my other sponsors 
for the hobby, it’s such a big list – Team BlackSheep, T-Motor, Hobbywing 
– just supplying me with the parts and stuff I need to do this; the list goes 
on and on so a big thanks to all of them for everything!”

It didn’t take Luke long to bounce back from that 
disappointment, winning the 4-v-4 ‘Big Heat’ showdown for 
his team. The team events certainly bring a fresh dynamic to 
FPV racing, along with a slightly different kind of pressure 
as it’s not just your pride on the line. “At the same time 
you’ve got to be a little bit smart with your racing,” Luke 
says, explaining how he deliberately sat back in one race 
while teammate Brett Collis battled a rival ahead. “If I tried 
to overtake both of them it could cause a mid-air, so by 
hanging back it means I can definitely get a second or a third, 
but then if they crash out I can maybe get a first or a second. 
In the 1-v-1s you just try to win them, but in the Big Heat 
you’ve got to be tactical and you’ve got to finish the race.”
It’s interesting talking tactics with Luke because it also 
underlines his confidence in his own abilities. “That’s taken 
me a while to develop; to be able to fly fast but to also be 
thinking and working out the best moves.” As an example 
he explains that in head-to-head races he’ll often let his 
opponent get away from the start line in the lead. “They 
know you’re behind them and that puts the pressure on 
them – and then you overtake them in a section and that 
puts more pressure on them and often causes a crash or puts 
them off. So it’s about flying smart and being able to read 
what the other person’s doing.
“I know what puts me off, and I know what puts other 
people off. Especially if you’re trying to win the race, 
it’s better to hang back and then you have control of the 
overtakes. If the person behind you isn’t thinking smart, 
they’ll overtake you in a bad section and hit you. So I like 
starting slightly behind so I can choose where to make the 
overtake and make a good tactical overtake.”
podium finish
Clearly these tactics have been working well over the past 
few years, with Luke unsurprisingly pointing to the UK 
National victories as a highlight along with the World Drone 
Prix title. “Dubai was the big thing, and I also think that 
because a younger person won it that also got a bit more 
news coverage so I feel like that was good for the sport in 
general. It helped to put drone racing on the map and made 
a career of it for me – and for other people as well, because 
people were then thinking ‘hang on, this is something 
worth investing in’.”
His success has brought more opportunities off the race 
track as well, with his piloting skills being put to good use 
for some memorable aerial cinematography (with some 
great shots of the 2017 Nine Royals alpine event as one 
example) and a host of other promotional events including 
helping to shoot an advert for the McLaren 720S. “That was 
awesome. Just meeting people, travelling – you don’t get to 
see a lot of the places but you get to meet a lot of people, you 
have new experiences and it’s good fun. It’s life experiences 
that I wouldn’t be getting if I wasn’t drone racing, especially 
being this young.”
For someone with the drone world at their feet, Luke 
remains impressively grounded in his approach and is 
happy to put the controller down to focus on his studies. 
“For sure it’s still a big part of my life, but it’s sort of going on 
the back-burner until June as it’s my final year and I’ve got 
my A-Levels coming up and it’s not worth risking it. It’s not 
my be all and end all because I’m not sure what’s going to 
DRONE PRO
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
33

happen with drone racing; it’s just something that’s popped 
into my life in these last few years.”
With one eye on the future, Luke is looking ahead to 
fulfilling his lifelong dream of flying full-size aircraft 
(“either airlines or the RAF”) but that doesn’t mean he’s 
ready to call time on his FPV career any time soon and is 
planning to commit to a full year on the professional scene 
once his studies are over. “Right now there’s a limited 
number of people who are actually making enough from 
drone racing to have it as a career. I think in the future there 
will be a lot more people, and hopefully by June time that 
will be a viable option.”
So does he think he’ll still be racing at the top level in 
maybe five or even ten years’ time? “For sure. I mean, I don’t 
know where it’s going to go as it’s hard to think that far into 
the future considering the sport’s only been around for a 
few years and it’s already exploded, but it will be interesting 
to see where it goes and I’ll take that year to evaluate what’s 
happening with the drone racing scene.”
With the competition hotting up all the time Luke 
certainly has to stay on his game to remain on the podium 
– and there’s no shortage of new, and young, blood coming 
through. “I love that there are so many younger people in 
this now,” he says. “You turn up at an event and there’s a 
good amount of us who are younger and that’s awesome, 
because it’s becoming more accessible in terms of prices, 
so it’s great to see so many younger people coming into it.” 
But does being the person all of these new pilots want to 
beat bring added pressure? “Not really. Obviously there’s 
pressure, but I don’t really care to be honest! I just get on 
with it and do my own thing.” Typically that involves 
winning, although Luke adds the final and perhaps most 
important factor: “And having fun!”
34
DRONE MAGAZINE
DRONE PRO
“I didn’t really realise I was that good. Obviously I really enjoyed what I was doing, 
but it was just a hobby for me”

Drone Safe Register (DSR) provides a national, 
searchable database containing the contact 
details and proﬁles of trained, qualiﬁed and 
insured drone pilots who are available for hire 
within the UK.
DSR has made the process of ﬁnding and hiring
a legal drone pilot quick and easy. 
Simply search using a postcode or area and 
choose from the list of approved drone operators 
available for hire in that region.
HIRE
Nationwide professionals for hire
NEW Aerial Footage Stock Website
dronesaferegister.org.uk
The UK’s
premium
aerial stock
website
www.coverdrone.com
@coverdrone       coverdrone
coverdrone@johnheath.com
Core Coverdrone features…
 
Loss or damage to the drones and associated equipment
 
Public/Products Liability insurance
 
In-house, fast claims service
 
Aviation Liability cover (hi-jacking, unlawful seizure of aircraft and other perils)
 
Professional Indemnity (inc. data protection and invasion of privacy)
 
Reinstatement of data
 
Increased costs of working (replacement drone hire)
 
Full reinstatement cover
 
Cover for operating at ‘high-risk’ premises, over water and indoors
 
Worldwide cover
 
‘In-training’ cover 
 
Compliant with EU Regulation (EC) No 785/2004
 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
“Fly safe. We've got you covered.”
BESPOKE INSURANCE
WE CAN COVER IT
We understand the risks involved, the mechanics and 
properties of Commercial Drone applications. Coverdrone 
is a bespoke insurance product for the aviation industry.
Whether your intended use is for Inspection, Surveillance, 
Photographic or other purposes we can help. If you’re not 
sure what cover you need just get in touch and we’ll be 
happy to advise you.
Coverdrone FlySafe
Coverdrone FlySafe is a companion application for all 
Coverdrone customers designed to help plan and 
conduct their drone ﬂights quicker and safer than 
ever before. Available on both iOS and Android.
www.coverdrone.com
@coverdrone       coverdrone
coverdrone@johnheath.com
Core Coverdrone features…
 
Loss or damage to the drones and associated equipment
 
Public/Products Liability insurance
 
In-house, fast claims service
 
Aviation Liability cover (hi-jacking, unlawful seizure of aircraft and other perils)
 
Professional Indemnity (inc. data protection and invasion of privacy)
 
Reinstatement of data
 
Increased costs of working (replacement drone hire)
 
Full reinstatement cover
 
Cover for operating at ‘high-risk’ premises, over water and indoors
 
Worldwide cover
 
‘In-training’ cover 
 
Compliant with EU Regulation (EC) No 785/2004
 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
“Fly safe. We've got you covered.”
BESPOKE INSURANCE
WE CAN COVER IT
We understand the risks involved, the mechanics and 
properties of Commercial Drone applications. Coverdrone 
is a bespoke insurance product for the aviation industry.
Whether your intended use is for Inspection, Surveillance, 
Photographic or other purposes we can help. If you’re not 
sure what cover you need just get in touch and we’ll be 
happy to advise you.
Coverdrone FlySafe
Coverdrone FlySafe is a companion application for all 
Coverdrone customers designed to help plan and 
conduct their drone ﬂights quicker and safer than 
ever before. Available on both iOS and Android.

interview
 Since we spoke to you towards the end of 
the 2016 season (as covered in Issue 14) one 
of the most notable changes is the new 
sponsor and revised team name – so has 
that been a big help in 2017?
As you know, we model ourselves on a well-tested wheel 
which is the motorsport and motorbike companies, where 
you have a title sponsor and they’re with you for a year. In 
our first year we had great backing from Tornado Energy 
and we then realised that facing the challenges, the budgets 
and the expansion of the sport it would be great to bring in 
a sponsor who’d be willing to go with us for two years – and 
NEX turned out to be that great sponsor. 
They’re a company that’s fascinated in technology, 
agility and speed, and so they saw a lot of synergies to what 
they do and so far they’ve been a great partner. They’ve 
provided us with great funding to be able to support our 
pilots. It’s facilitated us to go racing in multiple leagues and 
competitions across the world. We’ve been able to enter 
the Drone Champions League (DCL) with two teams; we’ve 
been able to enter the DR1 Champions Series, which is 
another great one, and race at many other events around 
the world, from the MultiGP Championship over in the US, 
to Korea, Shanghai, Manilla – we’ve raced all over the world 
this year with their support.
As well as more events, 2017 also took 
you to more global locations. Is there an 
extra pleasure in taking FPV racing to all 
corners of the world?
As you know we’re passionate about the sport and we’re 
really excited about the growth of the sport. It’s still a 
very young sport and anyone involved in it, you have to 
have a pioneering attitude. For my pilots, technicians and 
managers it’s been a very gruelling year – I can’t think 
of how many miles we’ve done. It’s been a lot of early 
mornings and long shifts but it’s super-exciting and we’re 
privileged to do it. 
As you may have seen, a lot of our pilots have put together 
the most stunning freestyle videos. They’ve been flying 
in these amazing locations and that’s been off the back of 
flying off to Korea, Shanghai, Iceland and other amazing 
locations in Europe, Asia and the US. It’s been an incredible 
life experience as well.
The NEXX Generation
36
DRONE MAGAZINE
Ian Collen gets an end of season report from Richard de Aragues, Team 
Principal and CEO of the world-beating FPV racing team NEXXBlades…
All photos courtesy of NEXXBlades

interview
The team has also been involved in various 
promotional and commercial ventures – so 
have you also seen in increase in demand in 
these areas?
Very much so. One of the most exciting projects we did 
was for a big company called Huawei. They’re the biggest 
mobile phone outlet in China and they came to us and said 
‘we’ve got this new phone we want to launch – how would 
you set up a race?’ So we had this really harsh, extreme 
location and the phone was used to go out on the recce, 
to photograph the natural gates and then we set up this 
fantastic race where we started on the glaciers and then 
dived down a huge waterfall. 
We then dived round the back of this waterfall down this 
amazing valley and out over the cliffs to the sea and sea 
stacks into some amazing caves. That was a great example of 
where you get a mobile phone company wanting to partner 
with drone racing because they see it as the zeitgeist; they 
see it as one of these amazing future sports that frees up the 
potential of the human being. 
What have been the standout events from 
the 2017 season?
The two championships that we’ve been competing in, 
the major televised ones, have been great. For the DR1 
Champions Series I think the locations were fantastic; 
being out in this amazing National Park in America which 
looked like something for pod racing in Star Wars and then 
suddenly having this race track that was the DHL Bonn 
(Post) Tower. I mean, we dived from this skyscraper then 
raced through gates in this park and back up. Normally, 
legally, you can’t do that, but we were given permission to 
make that the race track and it was extraordinary. 
They were very unusual locations from abandoned castles 
to the Mojave Desert. There was was a graveyard for planes 
that aren’t being used and we were literally flying through 
the insides of planes and through engine covers. The great 
thing we all know about drone racing is the wonderful 
ability to put a race track into any natural environment, any 
urban environment – your imagination is where the race 
track can be. 
So that was really exciting, and also the fact they 
smashed the ratings clean off the Richter scale. In their 
first viewing CBS – and this was one episode and one 
viewing – had 600,000 viewers. Now that’s more than 
great established sports like Premiership football. It was 
100,000 more than Formula E; it was a really amazing 
result to show that drone racing is beginning to catch a 
wider audience. 
DCL has been super-exciting for us, because the format 
is just a really great format to follow. The DCL involves 
teams of four and all eight pilots go up on the stage and you 
have this almost gladiatorial face-off between one pilot 
chosen from each team in round one, and then you have 
the full race between all the pilots and it’s proved a really, 
really exciting format. And we’ve also had some amazing 
spectator figures for that race. In Paris they closed down 
the Champs Elysees and the Arc de Triomphe and you had 
180,000 spectators at a drone race. I think these are great 
indicators of how the sport is growing.
The other great races we’ve been involved with… of course 
we went over to the MultiGP International. The competition 
is at such a high level and I was really proud of the boys 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
37

38
DRONE MAGAZINE
as they managed to win the team race there which was 
a really, really tough race to win. Of course the Koreans 
always put on amazing events so we were over at the IDSC 
(International Drone Sports Competition), which was an 
example of how Asia is really getting behind drone racing.
You’ve just come off the back of a great 
victory in the finals of the DCL out in 
Berlin, so that must rank up there with 
your best results?
Oh definitely. As you know with Luke, he’s an extraordinary 
pilot on another level. Him and Minchan Kim are up there 
and along with his other great teammates, Gary Kent, Mac 
Poschwald and Brett (Collis), they came to Berlin with the 
most incredibly professional attitude and under the pressure 
cooker of that final race got the points to the take the year’s 
Championship title. 
I’m really, really proud of the whole team and, of course, 
the amount of people working really hard behind the team 
is really important as well. The team manager, Victor Kirby, 
our top technician Florian Kamrath – there’s a lot of people 
working behind these guys, as there are in any sport. I think 
we’re all super-proud of that result as it was a wonderful 
way to end the season.
With such a great roster of pilots at your 
disposal does that mean you have some 
tough calls to make during the season 
about who makes the team and who gets to 
miss out?
Definitely. We have a very fair and equitable system within 
XBlades and all the pilots know about it. We have an 
internal ranking system, so each pilot knows when they 
go to each race that we’re looking at his lap times, we’re 
looking at his performance, we’re looking at the points he 
gets – and you can move up and down that ladder. 
So if you want to be continually selected for the A team, 
you’ve got to be in the top four. It takes a lot of dedication 
and some of the pilots who’ve started with us this year are 
great guys but their lives have gone in different directions, 
whether for business reasons or personal, and they’ve 
backed away from racing. 
We get a lot of applications from top pilots around the 
world looking to join the team and we have to very much 
balance that with the application and the raw talent 
we’re looking at – and of course we have to balance that 
with the careers of the pilots we’re already looking after 
as well. I think it’s like running any sporting team; it’s 
always a balance. 
“It’s been a very gruelling year – I can’t think of 
how many miles we’ve done but it’s super-exciting 
and we’re privileged to do it”
interview

How has the sport as a whole developed 
and improved over the past year?
 I think racing in all these different leagues, the 
organisation of them has got better although there’s always 
room for improvement. I think the biggest challenge for us, 
as a team, is that none of the organisations seem able to lock 
down their calendars and publish their dates in what would 
be a normal, and dare I say professional, manner.
A lot of our pilots are semi-professional. They’re trying to 
hold down jobs, they’re juggling holiday entitlements and, 
for us, one of our biggest budgets is logistics. If we have plenty 
of notice we can book flights and hotels and keep our costs 
down but often we get such short lead times. Even designing 
and building quads – if you’re building a prototype you’re 
normally given a year’s lead time or at least six months. 
Sometimes we’re having to react or build whole new quads 
with whole new specifications in like eight weeks.
So it’s still a very young sport on that front. Also there’s 
how you run an event smoothly and efficiently without too 
much downtime – especially if you’ve got a live audience 
as that really switches them off. You can’t have big lengthy 
gaps because there are technical problems. The biggest issue 
we all have in the sport is really high quality video with no 
video loss. 
I still think that’s one of the painful things that the sport 
still needs to shake off – and the frustration, of course, is 
that the solution to do it exists; there just isn’t the budget to 
employ them. You can employ the systems that are available 
in Formula 1, but it’s £40,000 per quad! And that would be 
very sad because the fact there are no barriers to entry and 
so many people can get into the sport is fantastic. So I’d like 
to see a lot more focus on the technology, investment in 
the technology and prioritising the fact that this is what’s 
needed to help the sport grow. 
The audience figures are up, so that does 
show some substantial growth…
That is the positive. I think everybody in that first year at the 
World Drone Prix, they kept thinking ‘oh yeah, this is going 
to be huge overnight’ but no one takes into account that 
a sport can take 10 to 15 years to grow properly and that’s 
traditionally how it’s been. Even eSports took 15 years.
Now I’m sure drone racing will be one of the fastest 
growing sports but I still think it’s got quite a few years 
to go. It’s going to take time to get wider audiences into it. 
It’s going to take time to put the right content, the right 
programme and the right format together, where we can 
engage audiences and they can follow it and enjoy it.
interview
“In Paris they closed down the Champs Elysees 
and the Arc de Triomphe and you had 180,000 
spectators at a drone race”
Would more standardisation or 
codification of the sport be beneficial, or 
is there merit in a variety of events?
I think the sport is still in pre-amalgamation, which means 
that there will be rival leagues all over the world. There 
isn’t one clear set of rules at the moment. There are various 
organisations claiming to be the world governing body and 
that hasn’t necessarily evolved into one clear picture as 
yet. We still get totally different rules depending on what 
leagues we’re racing in and you would have thought there’d 
be a standardised set of rules.
So I think there’s still a lot of evolution that can happen 
with the rules and how they are applied during a race. 
There are some simple, common sense rules that can still be 
applied. We work tirelessly with the other team managers 
and pilots to try and suggest ways that we can evolve the 
sport and evolve the rules.
With all of the big events taking place 
overseas is there more thaT can be done in 
the UK to improve the sport’s profile?
The UK is certainly not behind in great grassroots racing 
and it’s very well run by groups that you may well know. 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
39

40
DRONE MAGAZINE
What I’m disappointed in is that there isn’t more funding 
for these groups. There should be grants, the government 
should be jumping in, the various sporting bodies should be 
jumping in and, of course, big brands and sponsors should 
be jumping in because, just like in Formula 1, we’re the 
world leaders.
Some of the best talent in the world is home-bred. You 
look at the level of Luke Bannister, Gary Kent… I mean 
in 2017 Brett Collis was the pilot of the year in the Drone 
Champions League. The same for the wonderful up and 
coming talent like Adam FPV Kid and, of course, there are 
other great talents in other teams like Leo Whitfield. 
Believe me, I know. I’ve been banging on doors and doing 
all I can to drum up support, but unfortunately in the UK 
when it comes to tech sports we’re always very slow to 
move. And it’s crazy because we have this amazing heritage. 
Most of the Formula 1 cars in the world, even though they 
have a Mercedes badge on them or whatever, they’re built 
in the UK – so the possibility to grow the sport and grow the 
drone tech and applied sciences of drone tech, for me, seems 
like a real missed opportunity. Wake up business Britain, 
this is on your doorstep and you should be getting engaged 
with it!
It would be great to see some of the really 
big showcase races held here…
The only event we’ve had in the UK, and I have to say it 
was a great event and I attended it, was the DRL final at 
Alexandra Palace and I think all of the spectators who were 
there thoroughly enjoyed it. They put on a good show and 
we’ve got a few pilots going off to DRL this season. But sadly 
the race won’t be back in the UK this year. 
I think the 2018 season isn’t going to have a UK event, 
which I think is a real pity considering how strong Britain is 
on the international drone racing scene. We don’t have what 
I’d call our Wimbledon, we don’t have our Silverstone, we 
don’t have a big premier event where we can invite the rest 
of the world to race here. That just shows you what the lack 
of support is in the UK.
“We don’t have what I’d call our Wimbledon, we don’t have our Silverstone, we don’t 
have a big premier event where we can invite the rest of the world to race here”
interview

We talked about regulations in 2016, has 
the new government announcements made 
things any clearer about the impact that 
might have on the sport?
My opinion is that if you’re within a professional, controlled 
event and you’ve already liaised and coordinated with all 
of the relevant authorities, then you’re not going to have 
any problem. Obviously no one’s going to go illegal road 
racing but anyone can go to a circuit and race cars around a 
track because it’s a controlled environment with the right 
health and safety protocols in place – and it’s the same with 
drone racing. There’s no reason why drone racing shouldn’t 
continue to thrive. 
Where it’s going to become difficult, of course, is people 
going out and flying or training recreationally, whether 
those parks and spaces start to get closed down. That’s still 
very much under review. I think also we’ve got to be aware, 
and I think we’ve been quite lucky to date – everyone says 
‘oh there hasn’t been an incident’ but I don’t think it’s 
going to be long before there is an incident. And of course 
all of our pilots love going out, they love freestyling, they 
love finding abandoned places and you just have to be very 
responsible about who’s around, especially if you’re in these 
inner city areas.
So what are the big plans and goals for 
nexxblades in 2018?
We’re still trying to establish our calendar, of course, 
so that’s ongoing. We’ve got a couple of big series… I’m a 
little under the usual rubbish of NDAs (non-disclosure 
agreements) and that kind of stuff, but let’s just say that 
the Drone Champions League is going to be another 
championship that we’re probably going to be in and 
we’re going to be competing in many more locations, 
including potentially two new locations in Asia and China 
– so that’s expanding. 
interview
With Thanks To…
“The main thing I’d like to say is a massive thank you to all of my team, 
especially the pilots and the whole management team, in making 
what was another really, really successful and exciting year in drone 
racing. And also a big shout out to all of the wonderful people we’ve 
worked with, from the organisations to pilots to the supporters. We’ve 
got some wonderful support out there and it’s really appreciated. We 
hope that we can keep pushing this sport we love forwards and then 
everyone benefits from it!” Find out more at www.xbladesracing.com.
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
41
On top of that we’ve got an amazing championship tour 
with DR1 again, which is going to be a very exciting tour 
and that’s gone from strength to strength. On top of that… 
let’s just say there’s going to be some very intense big quad 
drag racing coming up, which is an interesting and exciting 
evolution into another potential area. So there should be 
some great stuff all round!


Ile Louët Island
Carantec, Brittany, France
“Once the lighthouse keeper’s house, the 
building is now available to rent in the 
summer time. The Château du Taureau (Bull’s 
Castle) is also visible in the background: a 
fort built in 1542 to protect the city against 
incursions of the British fleet.”
Photo by Cyrille Pillet
Supplied by Dronestagram

44
DRONE MAGAZINE

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
45
2018 
preview:
S
ince the big players in the drone world are always 
keeping their cards close to their chests and won’t 
reveal anything until it’s ready to launch, the 
best way to anticipate the future is to look back 
at how far things have come, and try to guess where the 
slingshot effect will take things. One thing is for sure; a lot 
has happened in a very short time. The drone timeline, as 
we know it, doesn’t really extend any further back than 
2010, just shy of eight years, when Parrott unleashed the 
AR.Drone on the unsuspecting Consumer Electronics Show.
The technology – and perhaps even more so the selling 
points – of that aircraft tell us a lot about what was ‘state 
of the art’ at the time. For one thing the App Store wasn’t 
even two years old at that point, so the creation of a drone 
that was flown via an iPhone app that created its own Wi-
Fi point was definitely a leap of faith on Parrot’s part. The 
motors were brushless, but still required gears. A linux-
based operating system was used to assist the pilot, and 
it had access to on-board sensors including a downward-
facing ultrasound. Cameras (yes, two) included a front 
facing one and another looking straight down.
Augmented Reality
In one respect the AR.Drone might even be considered 
ahead of what was to come after; the AR in the name 
stands for Augmented Reality, a technology which 
only now shows signs of going mainstream. Parrot’s 
interpretation gave you graphical ‘missiles’ to fire at 
a friend’s model so you could dogfight in the park – 
presuming you were able to do so within Wi-Fi range. 
As reported by this magazine back in Issue 21, a 
company called Edgybees has launched something not too 
dissimilar for DJI users using its API. DronePrix AR creates 
an imaginary race course in the air for you to follow, 
with rewards to bag and obstacles to avoid. Some noted 
As the technology advances, so will the fun and exciting 
opportunities to casual consumers and commercial 
drone users alike. Adam Juniper wonders if history can 
teach us a few things about what to expect in 2018…
Flying into the Future

The Slingshot Effect
2010
The AR.Drone 
was shown to the 
world months 
before the iPad 
was to become a 
familiar name.
2011
The CrazyFlie 
was a tiny 
nanocopter 
that proved 
the drone concept 
was capable of 
miniaturisation.
2012
As London 
prepared to host 
the Olympics, 
the AR.Drone 
2.0 introduced 
720p HD video.
46
DRONE MAGAZINE
latency issues and cynics pointed to the reckless nature of 
encouraging fast flying, but it’s certainly something that 
others will be looking to expand upon.
Augmented Reality has not been a big part of the drone 
world as yet, partly because DJI supplanted Parrot as the 
industry’s biggest player, but DronePrix AR arrived not 
long before Apple announced its ARKit APIs – a set of tools 
to make it easier for programmers to develop AR apps. And 
when Apple points the world in a direction, the world tends 
to follow. Current CEO Tim Cook has spoken of AR a great 
deal, too. Back in 2016 he said: “It will happen in a big way 
and we will wonder when it does how we ever lived without 
it. Like we wonder how we lived without our phone today.”
Vroom with a View
Our article on page 54 covers goggles in a bit more detail, 
but DJI’s entrance to the world of FPV goggles follows other 
consumer-friendly designs like those offered by Parrot 
with the Bebop 2. Although the quality of the DJI Goggles 
is certainly impressive there’s still some way to go. Parrot 
has also offered FPV for its popular Mambo, using its 
CockpitGlasses into which you can slide your phone (just 
like Samsung VR). You can take control of the compact 
Mambo with a joypad-like controller and the whole bundle 
is not far north of £100, which is a real sign of how costs can 
be kept under control with creative use of your phone as 
hub to a system.
Virtual Reality systems are not all based on the phone-in-
a-box principle; others for videogaming include their own 
motion sensors and display. 4K screens (2K used for each 
eye) exist, and it seems inevitable this kind of display will 
make their way into the drone world. The only downside 
right now is the quality of the existing live video signal 
provided by multicopters. 
There isn’t the bandwidth to stream 4K video from the 
camera as it’s shot, and the compression of a 4K signal – with 
its processing penalty and consequent latency – still makes 
flying difficult (and impossible for the high speeds FPV pilots 
live for). With processor power marching onward and 4K 
rapidly establishing itself as the standard in the home, it seems 
that this change is only a matter of time, and 4K signals for 
more sedate aircraft – such as those built with photography in 
mind – might be practical sooner rather than later. 
Something we might also hope for in terms of visuals 
is High Dynamic Range (HDR). Two standards have 
established themselves in the TV world, and in terms of 
flight, an HDR signal would make it easier to peer into the 
shadows while still seeing detail in the lighter areas. All 
this, of course, is dependent on one key element…
Can plotting a path through modern drone history help us predict where it will lead into 2018?
2013
DJI launched the first 
Phantom (maximum 
speed 10mph). At 
this point DJI still had 
a ‘bring your own’ 
policy when it came 
to cameras.

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
47
Cool Cameras
A great deal of work has gone into developing camera tech 
in recent years as the digital camera revolution seamlessly 
morphed into the smartphone revolution. With megapixel 
counts now comfortably capable of printing an A4 image 
without any pixelation showing, we should look to see more 
developments in terms of the ability to sense in low light, 
and overall dynamic range. To help with this big aircraft 
like the DJI Inspire and PowerVision PowerEye already 
allow lens swapping. That’s unlikely with drones half their 
weight, like the Phantom, but something that might be 
possible is switchable cameras. 
“The ability to perceive and respond autonomously 
to their environments will result in ever-better 
automatic camera modes”
If Apple can do it with the iPhone then why not a drone? 
For the uninitiated, this system has two zoom settings and 
these don’t involve the nigh-fraudulent “digital zoom” but 
are actually fixed lenses set at different focal lengths. In 
practical terms, the 12 megapixels at 1x (28mm effective 
focal length) would become 3 megapixels at 2x zoom, but 
with the tele-lens (56mm effective focal length) it’s just as 
detailed. Dual cameras of a different kind (one for each eye) 
would also be needed to deliver 3D.
Better by Design
Something that had never once been an issue for drone 
buyers before this summer was the decibel output. That’s 
not to say that we’ve not considered the somewhat irritating 
buzz of four or more propellers furiously whirring but until 
the Mavic Pro Platinum came along no one had done a great 
deal about it.
Half of the total 4dB reduction in output is achieved 
via re-modelled propellers, which are also available as an 
upgrade for the original. That means it seems possible that 
upgrades might soon be available for many of our favourite 
drones that slightly soften the noise – a potential boon for 
wedding and event photographers.
Relatively minor modifications in aerodynamics can have 
a massive effect; lifted wing tips reduce drag approximately 
6% to their range on commercial airliners (as well as 
looking cool). Similar winglets are seen on helicopter 
blades, aircraft propellers and even wind turbine blades, 
and the designs are improved with each new generation. 
Now multicopters have mastered the basics of flight and 
marketing teams have started to consider noise an issue, 
expect to see more research into aerodynamics – both for 
effect and for styling.
Aerodynamics is one way to further a drone’s endurance, 
but the most direct impact on the flight time comes from 
2014
The Phantom 
2 Vision+ 
(15mph) arrives, 
bringing with it 
3-axis gimbal 
stabilization and a 
built-in camera.
2015
The Inspire 1 brought 4K 
and Klingon styling to 
the drone world.
2016
The Phantom 
4 (20mph) 
introduced front-
facing obstacle 
avoidance as the 
UK braced itself 
for Brexit. 
2017
The DJI Spark 
brought gesture 
controls, colour 
choices and an 
accessible price 
point for mass 
market appeal.

the power-to-weight ratio. Graphene battery technology 
– that is batteries built from a nanomaterial just one atom 
thick – are expected to begin volume manufacturing in 
Spain during the year, and can store a hefty 1000Wh per Kg 
(considerably beating the existing LiPo’s 180Wh/kg). How 
soon this is implemented in the drone world isn’t yet clear, 
but one thing’s for sure – the impact on flight times will be 
significant. We’re not alone in looking toward to finding out.
Low Costs, High Standards
It’s no secret that the pound has taken a bit of a bashing 
of late, effectively increasing the price of most consumer 
electronics in the UK. On the positive side, drones are based 
on electronics and stuffed with computers, so Moore’s Law 
should be doing something to offer us more for less anyway, 
right? Well yes and no; the big brands are always likely to 
set a floor below which they don’t want to play, so if you’re 
looking to see Spark-style gesture control for under £50, 
you’ll need to wait a few years until one of the less brand-
conscious manufacturers is prepared to shift volume to 
more gift-based retailers.
Safety will remain a big issue for all, though. The drone 
industry lives in perpetual fear of the damage a rogue drone 
could do, either accidentally or wilfully. Stories about flying 
contraband seem to illicit intrigue rather than anger, but 
falling 2Kg weights might be another matter. Expect to 
see a gradual extension of safety features – less the Heath-
Robinson parachutes that have been discussed and more 
built-in redundancy of main components like computers, 
sensors and so on. Of course the ultimate redundancy 
would be a minimum of six rotors, but that has an impact 
on costs so expect the industry to adapt.
More complete obstacle avoidance systems, for those of 
us who don’t always fly forward, would seem inevitable 
as the computing power and sensors required continue 
to drop in price. The incentive to avoid collision is high for 
manufacturers, too. Not just in terms of a shared desire 
for aerial safety, but also because this built-in auto-pilot is 
going to help draw in more people not quite so confident 
with a flying machine at their fingertips. 
 
The Sky is not the Limit
The ‘state of the art’ barriers will be pushed further this 
year and beyond. Flight times have clearly not hit their 
practical limit and, with multi-core processing, the 
ability to perceive and respond autonomously to their 
environments will result in ever-better automatic camera 
modes. Gesture controls are certain to spread and while a 
controller might be optional on the Spark, it seems unlikely 
that the radio will go too far while digital technology 
remains laggy and imprecise. Could that change in 2018? 
And even if it does why would we ever lay down our 
joysticks anyway?
48
DRONE MAGAZINE
Too Soon?
Air Taxis
Back in September, Dubai-based 
Volocopter began unmanned testing 
of a two-seat autonomous multicopter 
taxi. It’s planned to have a service in 
operation for real customers to call via 
their smartphones in five years’ time, with 
competition from the likes of the Ehang 
184 AAV. City representatives see it as 
the eventual future of passenger travel – 
though there’s more than a few safety and 
legal hoops to fly through first.
Flying Chargers
Amazon has been granted a patent for a 
drone that can deliver a charge to Electric 
Vehicles (EVs) remotely. It seems rather 
dependent on the drone carrying a good 
amount of juice, but the idea is more of a 
backup to get a car to the next charging 
station than a replacement for physical 
cables and sockets.
Mobile Control
Back during the Occupy Wall Street 
protests Tim Pool modified an AR.Drone 
to feed live images of the protest to 
the globe. He planned to create a 3G 
system so that the drone could be piloted 
remotely. That kind of control seems 
feasible now given the range of newer 
aircraft, although the laws would need to 
keep up.

flYBY
  
With Flyby Technology’s unique training system, we will teach you to think like  
professional pilots and equip you with the confidence to excel in any situation.
All Flyby Technology instructors are ex-military pilots with extensive experience of 
 training today’s fighter and helicopter pilots.  We want to share that expertise  
with you to give you the professional and practical skills you need.
Whether you wish to be a professional pilot to land your dream job, are wishing to  
add to or start a business, or are  looking for the best training for you and your  
organisation, the team at Flyby Technology are here to make that happen.  
Visit the website and book on a course today!
Flyby Technology  Pilotwise International Ltd  |  Marlborough House  |  York Business Park  |  Nether Poppleton  |  York  |  YO26 6RW
FREEPHONE 08081 680626  |  admin@flyby.technology
www.flyby-technology.com
Your future as 
a drone pilot 
starts Here
neW! 
ONE-WEEK FAST 
TRACK COURSES 
AVAILABLE NOW
BooK online

50
DRONE MAGAZINE
 A
s a business owner, and especially in recent 
months, I’ve become used to having a lot of people 
ask: ‘How do you figure out what to charge for 
your aerial work?’ It might just be that they’ve 
got a client who wants to buy some video footage they shot 
as part of another service, but the bottom line is that many 
people don’t know what the going rate is for drone work. 
In my view this is a multi-tiered question with several 
answers, as well as a good and a bad side to the equation. 
In the first instance it all starts with you. How skilled are 
you? How well do you know the industry? And what are 
you worth? You see, a lot of the drone company owners that 
I talk to think that it’s like a standard business where you 
can just charge a heavy price because everyone wants your 
services. However, you’ll probably have to take a different 
approach as there are many different things drones can 
be used for – from core photography and videography to 
mapping, surveying, photogrammetry, real estate, farming, 
the emergency services and more.  
The point is that the prices can be very different for each 
area and for good reason, especially if additional skills or 
qualifications are involved. In this article, I’m going to lay 
out in relatively basic terms how I would typically work 
out a pricing framework for different clients. It’s a system I 
use to create a fair and profitable quote, and it’s helped me 
to win out almost every time when it comes to competing 
against other companies. 
For those who might think you just need to turn up and 
fly, in the drone business you can have a lot of overheads; 
Because You’re 
Worth It…
After our introduction to running 
a drone business last issue, Michael 
Cook raises the question of pricing 
and how to break down your work 
into a fair profit… 

maths simple, so these prices are not to be taken literally as 
a template for your own pricing!
First there is an hourly fee for the operator. You will have 
to pay taxes for them, so for the sake of this article we’ll say 
he gets £50 an hour and budget that perhaps 40% of that 
(£20) is going to be taxed. Obviously this rate varies based 
on your income and what country you’re working in. Then 
there could be the fee for your aircraft; let’s say that’s £10 
an hour. This fee helps to cover the insurance for the job as 
well as any maintenance costs – because even the best of us 
“It all starts with you. How skilled are you? 
How well do you know the industry? And what 
are you worth?”
there’s the cost of the aircraft, there’s the personnel 
(assuming you’re not a one-person crew), the processing 
and the production or presentation of the final product, 
as well as additional charges for storing what can be large 
amounts of data (with a monthly charge in place). So you 
have to take into account all of these elements, rather than 
just looking at one final price. 
There are also different costs involved for different 
types of jobs. As an example, if I did a drone job for the fire 
department, I would charge them less than my usual all-in 
rates because I believe it’s helping out my community when 
I can help fight fires or assist with the police. With these 
types of jobs, the emergency services haven’t hired you to 
make a profit themselves, so when it comes to working with 
police or fire departments I just charge for my time and the 
final product (if there is one); I don’t charge for the likes of 
processing or storage. 
This gives the fire and police the ability to use your 
services, and at the same time staying within their 
department budgets. If you are interested in working in 
such areas you will have to understand how their budgets 
and limitations work and be able to fit within it if you want 
to retain that repeat business moving forwards. This is 
just one example of where you might need to be flexible in 
your thinking, and obviously working with the emergency 
services can also bring in a different set of rules, but that’s a 
story for another time!
On the Charge
When it comes to working for a private company, again 
things can vary with it comes to figuring out what to 
charge. For example, a common enquiry might be for a 
company to call and say: “We’d like you to take pictures for 
our website”. This is a basic scenario for creating a quote 
and gives us an easy example to work with. Please note that 
we’ll be using generic figures here, mainly to help keep the 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
51

52
DRONE MAGAZINE
are going to break a few props and have a hard landing from 
time to time! 
Finally there is the cost to process the final product. 
This varies depending on the job and whether you have 
the set-up (and skills) to process it yourself or if you have a 
third party involved. Again, just for the sake of this article, 
we’ll say that you are going to process the photos and that 
there’s a charge of £100 for 10 pictures. So when you put all 
of that together you can come up with a fixed cost of £160 
for an hour’s work that generates 10 images for the client (in 
reality you may be charging more or less than this). 
Once you have these core numbers in place you can build 
from it. So if the client wants you to be on site for two hours 
and to include pictures and video, we know that it’s £60 an 
hour for the aircraft and operator (making £120), plus that 
same £100 for the pictures, along with an agreed rate for 
the finished film – based on how long it takes you to process 
and/or edit the video (unless the client chooses to handle 
this themselves, in which case you can work out a price for 
the raw footage). 
Once the work is done, it’s not unusual for a client to 
come back to you and say they want reprints or more 
pictures from that shoot. If so, it’s not unfair to go back to 
that hourly rate and say that 10 pictures at £160 works out 
to £16 per picture. It might not sound like a lot, especially 
after charging £100 for 10 photos previously, but there’s not 
always this fixed price for work – be it £200 to do a video 
shoot or £50 to take pictures of your home. 
At the end of the day it’s about your time. How long did 
you take to do the job? Companies can work with hourly 
rates. Plus it’s a good platform to work from when you are 
making an invoice, and there are a lot of apps out there that 
can help you keep track of your work hours. Companies can 
budget to have you working longer on a job when they are 
given an hourly rate with the final product included.
If that’s not enough, then it helps to see yourself as a sub-
contractor to your client (which is true). They are hiring 
you for a specific task which can usually be equated to a 
set amount of time and for the final end product (photos, 
video and so on) at the end of the job. Giving them an 
hourly fee for everything rolled up into one overall price 
can be appealingly simple to a company when it comes to 
competing with other drone businesses. 
There is the temptation, especially for new businesses, 
to attract new clients with low prices, but ultimately this 
can hurt the industry. Those clients will continue to expect 
those same cheap rates or may look elsewhere. Most of the 
companies I deal with are willing to pay a fair price for high 
quality work, rather than saving a few quid getting some 
quick pictures. So be sure to offer a pricing system that is 
both fair to you and to your client – and good luck on getting 
that next job!

Find a legal &
qualiﬁed pilot today at:
dronesaferegister.org.uk
CAA APPROVED
PILOTS FOR HIRE
NEW
UK AERIAL STOCK
FOOTAGE BY LOCATION

54
DRONE MAGAZINE
 2 
017 has been a great year for the drone and RC 
community. Lots of new pilots have joined the 
ranks, thanks largely to the explosion of interest in 
multirotors and the increasingly cheap availability 
of good products and quality parts, as well as the full kits 
and ready to fly models that are welcoming to newcomers.
Trying to predict what we could see in the coming year 
in such a fast moving area is always tricky. Radio control 
has experienced a boom of investment in the past couple of 
years and the pace of innovation has increased with it. The 
speed of cloning of this technology by China has forced the 
main manufacturers to develop strategies to combat the 
subsequent cheap knock-offs and, as a result, we’re seeing 
even faster updates for products – so what’s new today will 
be almost ancient in a matter of months.
In 2017 there were few really big revolutions in the hobby, 
but many areas of drone flying did see changes as we saw 
things getting more compact, more integrated and cheaper. 
One such example is the modern flight controller and as 
2018 gather pace controllers without an integrated OSD 
system will increasingly feel ‘old school’ and kitsch.
What we can do is look at the current direction of travel 
and make a few educated guesses on what we might expect 
this year. Companies like DJI will no doubt have lots of 
improvements and updates coming, too, and some of these 
will filter through to other related areas, but here we’ll be 
looking at the domain of the homebrew multirotor builder 
and FPV pilot who uses components to customise and fly 
their models.
The First-Person View
FPV flying is so common now that it’s hard to even 
remember a time where pilots flew using only line of sight. 
The market for goggles isn’t a huge one but it is increasing 
steadily every year. The challenge for vendors is that a good 
set of goggles can last a pilot many years, especially if they 
have some modular components that can be upgraded and 
changed to stay current. 
2018 preview:
With one eye on the FPV quadcopter scene, Lee 
Schofield weighs up some of the key advancements 
that could have custom builders reaching for the 
soldering iron in the year ahead…
Building for the Future

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
55
To this extent, competition is fierce when it comes to 
capturing the new pilots as they first enter into the hobby, 
with capable, inexpensive goggles for newcomers, while at 
the high end of the market there’s lots of choice for those 
looking to upgrade to something more expensive.
2017 saw the first sets of compact all-in-one Fat Shark 
and/or Boscam-style goggles from a number of new 
companies. The Aomway Commander V1 goggles were 
the best of the bunch that I tested in last year with many 
others falling far short of the bar despite asking similar 
price tags to the established top brands. In the race to make 
their products stand out we’ve seen some great features on 
these new goggles, even if they weren’t all implemented 
perfectly. Features like OSDs inside the goggles showing 
the battery status, signal strength, channel and band are 
becoming more common and are useful to monitor the FPV 
connection as you fly. 
Sadly, many sets released over the past 12 months have 
had serious flaws, which have highlighted how hard it is 
to make a set of compact all-in-one FPV goggles that work 
well for almost all pilots. Leading vendors like Fat Shark 
spend huge amounts of money on R&D and the creation of 
a new generation of goggles can take years – and even then 
the result is not as perfect as we’d like.
This trend for new vendors to try and enter all parts of 
the FPV goggle market is set to increase through 2018, as 
more and more attempt to bring out compact FPV goggles 
that provide either a cheap entry level model or a high-end 
version with all the bells and whistles. 
Many companies see that lower, entry level part of 
the market as being the most vital, as brand loyalty is 
established there – a pilot that has a good experience with 
one manufacturer when starting out cheaply will invest in a 
more expensive set of goggles from the same place the next 
time. I certainly did.
With the increased competition from newer, driven FPV 
vendors with lower overheads, I hope that 2018 will be the 
year that we see a new goggle platform from Fat Shark. 
The current generation of FPV goggles like the HD3 and 
Dominator V3 goggles are all based on a very mature shell 
and internal workings, with all of the improvements in 
recent years being small evolutions in the design and optics, 
so we’re probably due something completely new and 
exciting. Don’t get me wrong, I’m a huge Fat Shark fan and 
it would be great to see some of the big hitters pull ahead of 
the competition in 2018 and deliver some great innovation, 
to really set the bar higher and deliver all of those good ideas 
that we’ve seen in 2017 encompassed in a set of goggles that 
work flawlessly.

Advanced Controllers
2017 saw the end of support for F1-based flight controllers 
from Betaflight, Cleanflight and iNavflight. Models like the 
original Naze32 and CC3D were never designed with this 
size and complexity of flight firmware in mind. In the past 
few years developers have struggled to make the firmware 
fit into the smaller memory on these flight controllers and 
run with the limited CPU power. The good news is that 2018 
is the year of the F4 boards with F7-based processors and 
advanced flight controllers becoming more common now 
that Betaflight has added full support for them.
We should see lots of new flight controllers with 
integrated elements making building a model even easier 
than before. With F7-based flight controllers in place, faster 
processing and more memory should open up more room 
for development and new features. Hopefully we’ll also see 
more flight controllers developed for fixed wing models 
this year, as many of the new boards have only four outputs 
designed for the ESC connections in a multirotor. 
There had been a large number of pilots starting to use 
technology like iNav in their fixed wing craft and products 
56
DRONE MAGAZINE
Top Tech
One other technology to watch in 2018 will be 
something you may have heard of called FPVBlue. 
This system delivers 720p, low latency digital FPV 
that looks like it could well out-perform current 
systems from Connex. It’s not cheap and the 
receiver is a smartphone-sized gadget so it’s hardly 
a small addition. 
However, if it can deliver what it promises (and 
from the pilots I know who’ve tried the early kits, it 
does) then this could be a game changer, especially 
if the company can reduce the receiver size to an 
internal module. This is definitely one to watch in 
the year ahead – not to mention Connex responding 
with more advanced solutions of its own as digital 
continues to out-evolve analog solutions.
I’d also expect to see more of the ‘Smart 
VTX’ units on the market this year as the use of 
controlling the channel, band and power of the 
FPV signal via the integrated OSD is becoming 
more common. It will be interesting to see how 
ImmersionRC’s Touch and Race technology is 
adopted across the community as well.
One last thing I’d personally like to see is systems 
that allow you to record video on the model itself 
without the need for lots of extra pieces. On-board 
systems using SD cards and DVR are common in 
the ‘toy’ grade models but it would be great to have 
that ability on any model with a regular FPV video 
transmitter. Here’s hoping!
“We’re seeing even faster updates for 
products – so what’s new today will be almost 
ancient in a matter of months”

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
57
like the Omnibus F3 and F4 boards are the most commonly 
used. Is it time for a flight controller manufacturer to break 
the mould and design one that can to handle servos and 
fixed wing demands?
Let’s hope that working GPS support becomes a more 
standard feature on a wider set of firmware in the coming 
year, too. It supports those learning the hobby, helps 
prevent fly-always and could well be needed for compliance 
with any incoming legislation. After all, there are plenty of 
pilots who don’t spend a day’s flying simply racing around a 
field below an altitude of 10 metres.
Software like Betaflight, Cleanflight and iNavflight 
that run on these flight controllers will continue to evolve 
and fix problems caused by unforeseen builds and new 
standards this year. At this point all of the choices work 
very well out of the box, so needing to upgrade all of the 
time is no longer an absolute necessity. The wealth of new 
features and tweaks changed in every version can make 
it tricky to upgrade a model and keep all of your settings 
unless you’re very experienced. 
One thing I do hope happens this year is that the 
developers work on making the technology more accessible 
and easier to use and set up for newer pilots. Features 
like upgrade and setup wizards are not exciting and sexy 
to develop, but it would be a welcome step to see some 
time and effort being put in here rather than just adding 
more and more settings to tweak. Early software such as 
OpenPilot and Mission Planner both have setup wizards to 
help newcomers, so why not Betaflight and the rest? 
Sub-250g Models
Legislation that will force registration upon drone owners 
is on its way to the UK (more on page 12) and the ceiling 
for the smaller models that will avoid the vast majority 
of the new laws looks set to be at the 250 gram mark. The 
improvement in smaller flight controllers, frames, cameras, 
motors and VTX units means that a very capable multirotor 
can be built under that weight that works well for racing 
and freestyle flying.
The challenge on these mini models continues to be the 
flight times. The smaller LiPo batteries that power these 
craft and still keep them beneath that magic 250g limit will 
only provide a handful of minutes flight time – which is not 
enough if you want to do anything apart from a quick hoot 
around the local flying field. Here’s hoping that the work 
continues to develop these smaller models and the focus 
shifts to using larger props with slightly lower KV motors to 
give longer times in the air.

Another option for lightweight flying under the weight 
limit is FPV wings. I’ve tried lots out over the recent months 
and have to confess I’m hooked! The fact that a wing 
generates lift from the shape of the model is a big help, but 
just the thrust of the prop means that flight times are a 
lot longer with a LiPo of the same size. It seems like a no-
brainer that we’ll see more models in this weight class as we 
move through the year and pilots look for drones that are 
portable and avoid any legal limitations such as registration.
on the range
The past year has been great for the increase in powerful 
and inexpensive radio systems. New radios powered by 
OpenTX and Deviation mean that you no longer have to 
spend hundreds of pounds for a great radio. One further 
area that has become more active in the past few months is 
long range radio systems.
Pilots are now looking at these systems for a few reasons. 
Longer distances is the obvious reason, but even if you 
don’t need to fly tens of kilometres they are still very useful 
as they can provide improved connections when flying 
normally due to the lower frequencies they use. Some, 
such as the TBS Crossfire system we took a closer look at 
last issue, provide benefits in the areas of speed and robust 
telemetry support, for example.
New long range systems have been in development from a 
number of big players for most of 2017 and, while many will 
have been released by the time you read this, there’s bound 
to be even more to come. With this increased competition 
I’d expect that the TBS Crossfire system will continue to 
pick up the pace of development with more features and 
improvements from the Team BlackSheep crew. Other 
solutions like the M9 from FrSky and new systems from 
ImmersionRC will provide lots of choice for pilots looking 
to move away from the standard 2.4GHz to a more reliable 
signal in tricky areas.
High Hopes
It feels like the drone industry is really beginning to grow 
up. It happens with any high-tech sector, and we saw it in 
the IT industry back in the 1990s, with a huge amount of 
innovation and hundreds of new products from a variety of 
vendors and manufacturers being followed by consolidation 
and then standardisation.
The open source nature of the hobby will continue to drive 
innovation and this year will be no exception. I’m looking 
forward to seeing more powerful, easier to use technology 
in the coming months and having even more fun flying. 
One thing is for certain, we will have lots of new and hugely 
exciting technology to look forward to, and most likely the 
odd breakthrough that no-one could have predicted. So 
here’s to a great year’s flying – we can’t wait to get started!
58
DRONE MAGAZINE
“It would be great to see some of the big hitters pull ahead of the competition in 2018 
and deliver some great innovation”



Bois Teilleul Castle
Brittany, France
“This is a place I went to when I was 
a kid and I was recently given the 
opportunity to come back years later to 
take this unusual drone shot.”
Photo by Cyrille Pillet
Supplied by Dronestagram

 I
mmersionRC has as long a pedigree in FPV as any other 
manufacturer or retailer today. Last year this writer 
looked at its new Tramp HV video transmitter and 
RaceWand and was impressed, but ImmersionRC has 
also been producing FPV quadcopters for a while now, 
and the Vortex 230 Mojo is the latest in the very successful 
Vortex family. 
There is a huge choice for pilots looking for an FPV 
quadcopter and most companies use various qualities of 
off-the-shelf products. ImmersionRC has approached its 
own designs a little differently and used a few proprietary 
tweaks in this model to add extra functionality and 
differentiation over the other quads on the market. The 
result is a very well built and capable model – but it does 
come with a price tag just a little above the average. So, let’s 
spend a little time looking at what’s under the cover and 
where that ‘Mojo’ is coming from.
•	 Street Price: $379 (£284)
•	 Diagonal Size: 230mm
•	 Weight: 349g (without battery) 
•	 Battery Type: Not included
•	 Flight time: Variable (3-4 minutes typical)
•	 Controller: Not included (compatible with CPPM, 
S-Bus, Spektrum, XBus, SumD and SumH)
•	 Display device: Not included
•	 Website: www.immersionrc.com
62
DRONE MAGAZINE
REVIEW
ImmersionRC 
Vortex 230 Mojo
Reviewer: Lee Schofield
All photos by ImmersionRC, except where stated

Finding Our Mojo
The first job is to install the supplied stubby Spironet 
antenna onto the back of the model – powering up the 
craft without having it installed can damage the video 
transmitter, so it’s an important part of the process. Once 
you’ve got that done then it’s time to look over the rest of 
its design. The frame features a rugged camera mount, 
enclosed ESCs and main electronics, LEDs at the rear and a 
top battery mount. The whole thing feels very solid in your 
hands and oozes quality.
The hardest thing you’ll have to do with the model is 
install your radio receiver. You can buy BNF versions but in 
the box are a range of cables to use to connect your receiver 
of choice. I installed a trusty FrSky XSR onto our test unit. 
To install you remove the top deck of the model and there 
is a nice space at the rear of the internal components that 
should fit most of the mini receivers around. There are also 
a few options to route the antennae outside the main body, 
either through the LED covers or via small holes in front of 
the rear arms.
When you open the model to install the receiver you’ll 
notice that all of the electronics are installed on one main 
board that forms the bottom of the frame. The other thing 
you’ll notice is that not all of the pieces look like those off-
the-shelf components that almost every other racing and/or 
freestyle quadcopter manufacturer uses. 
On this main motherboard are the F3-based flight 
controller, an F3-powered custom on-screen display (more 
about this in a moment) and an integrated ImmersionRC 
Smart 40-channel video transmitter. Even the LEDs 
are soldered directly to this main board, so there are no 
connectors to come loose here.
The ESCs hidden away under the plastic protectors on the 
arms are a little special. They are full 32-bit ESCs running 
DShot 600 capable firmware and can support both 3S and 
4S batteries on the model. They feature an extra trick called 
RotorSense that allows you to change the direction of a motor 
simply by turning it by hand. No more messing about in 
BLHeli or soldering pads to configure everything. The model 
will come with this already set up so there’ll be no need to 
play with this feature – but it’s nice to know it’s there!
That Fusion F3 flight controller comes pre-installed with 
Betaflight as you’d expect. By default it’s set up well with 
8kHz loop times and custom tunes from professional pilots. 
Due to the custom nature of the electronics in this model 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
63
Photo by Lee Schofield
Photo by Lee Schofield
Further Specifications
•  frame: 2mm CF with aluminium standoffs
• Power Requirements: 3S-4S LiPo; 4S 1300mAh >45C recommended
•	 ESCs: Custom 32-bit, 30A ExESC Gen 4, DShot with RotorSense 
•	 motors: BrotherHobby R3 2206-2300kV
•	 props: HQ 5×4, 3×3 V1S Tri-Blades
•	 Flight Camera: Fat Shark CCD Gen3 600TVL (HS1177 sensor and chipset)
Photo by Lee Schofield

One of the really great features is the fact that the model 
has spent time in the hands of some of the world’s top pilots 
and their tunes and setups are available to use. The tunes on 
the model are very good and you can get the benefit of all 
that experience from day one. Some of the tunes may be too 
soft or aggressive depending on your flying experience and 
preferred style, but it is fun to explore them all and see the 
one you like the best. You can also tune it yourself of course!
Setting Up
Another big difference to a lot of other models is that the 
64
DRONE MAGAZINE
not everything is standard in the setup, though. LED control 
is not handled via Betaflight, neither is the OSD so when you 
come to set up and use the model it’s a little different from 
those models that are using off-the-shelf components. 
The OSD is very different from any other racing/freestyle 
quadcopter I’ve looked at. Holding the throttle control to the 
bottom left of the radio enters the OSD menu and here you 
can perform all of the things you can in a standard Betaflight 
OSD, but the vector-based graphics allow a lot more on top. 
You can configure the video transmitter, set up the camera, 
change the way the OSD looks, tweak the tuning and control 
the LEDs. The OSD also lets you run the transmitter setup 
wizard easily on first start-up.
Other great features include the addition of the Touch 
and Race technology from ImmersionRC which means the 
power, band and frequency of the video transmitter can be 
set by using the ‘Mini Wand’ – so this model will be able to 
fly at races and events that dictate the use of the system for 
VTX management. That in-built VTX even reduces the power 
output when disarmed so as not interfere with other pilots, 
which is a nice touch.
Another cool VTX setup trick is something called PitStick. 
When placed in this mode, the Vortex 230 Mojo will power 
up with the video transmitter disabled, and will only start 
transmitting when instructed to by the radio. The right stick 
is used to select channels 1 to 8 by using the extremes of stick 
movement. Up for CH1, up-right for CH2 and so on. The VTX 
can even be set up using DSMX on certain Spektrum radios.
ARF Measures
The Vortex 230 Mojo ships as an ‘ARF’ package, 
which for those new to flying translates to ‘almost 
ready to fly’. As with a BNF (bind and fly) model, 
this means it comes without a receiver, so you’ll 
need to provide your own controller – and in this 
instance your own choice of batteries, as well as 
the FPV goggles or a monitor to get your eyes on 
the feed from the camera. 
The key difference with an ARF model is that it 
may require more in terms of assembly, usually 
because the craft is open to varying combinations 
of components, making them popular with the 
custom crowd and DIY tinkerers. The good news 
here is that the Vortex 230 comes (almost) fully 
assembled and flight-tested – but if you’re not 
entirely comfortable in this area you should 
always check first, or you might want to look into 
your RTF (ready to fly) options which can be flown 
pretty much straight from the box.

first time you power on the system it will default to Fat 
Shark / IRC band Channel 1 and take you through a radio 
receiver setup wizard. It’s important to note that you will 
need to go through this before doing anything else, because 
if you don’t then any Betaflight settings won’t save to the 
model. So make sure the receiver is bound and your goggles 
are on and set to that channel when you power up the radio 
for that first time!
Once you’ve completed the setup then you can connect 
the model to Betaflight as normal but be aware that the 
LED and OSD controls are not managed in Betaflight, so 
you’ll need to control those from the OSD itself using the 
radio. By default the Airmode and arming are not selected 
on a switch. I’d recommend setting that up in the Betaflight 
modes tab before flying. 
Upgrades can be performed via the Vortex application 
available through the Google Chrome store so don’t update 
it using the standard Betaflight app. Plus, there are lots of 
‘extras’ that ImmersionRC has added to the standard build 
to support all of the extra good stuff inside.
In terms of getting the Vortex 230 Mojo up in the air, as 
you’d expect from a model by one of the leading names 
in the FPV business it flies extremely well – though to get 
the best from it I’d recommend a 4S 1300mAh pack (as 
ImmersionRC does). There is plenty of power and those pro-
tunes are wonderful, giving a very precise, locked in feel to 
the way the model flies. The OSD works great and the vector 
graphics are clear and easy to use. Few quads have made me 
grin this much on those first few flights. 
Designed to be fast and agile, making it equally at home 
whether you’re racing or freestyling, the Vortex 230 Mojo is 
a lovely model to fly, but then you could argue that it should 
be at this price. There are lots of spares available if you do 
happen to crash out and break anything, but the few ‘hard 
landings’ I’ve had have been shrugged off by this tough 
little model so it may be a while until you’ll need anything 
apart from some spare props. 
The OSD works well although the lack of a customisation 
option to change any of the three default layouts is a bit 
of a miss. The default screen setups go from feeling very 
cluttered to missing key data like battery voltage/mAh 
consumed or remaining. But if these are our biggest gripes 
then we’re really just nit-picking. 
Overall, if you’re a pilot who wants a well setup and 
impressively tuned model from a leading manufacturer 
with all of the support and backup that it provides then 
this model is well worth a look. It builds nicely upon the 
growing Vortex range and is another fast, nimble, robust 
and very well-made addition to the family.
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
65

 T
he TRNDLabs production line is showing no signs 
of slowing down, with the company’s latest offering 
staking a firm claim in the higher reaches of the 
mini-drone market with its heaviest craft so far: 
the Spectre. Aimed at offering an “unprecedented level of 
control and stability,” it certainly looks the part with its sleek 
black design. But all that is for nothing if it can’t deliver in 
the air – so we braved the cold winter to take it out for a spin.
The first thing to note is that getting it set up is mostly a 
doddle as almost everything is ready to go straight out of the 
box. The phone holder – a perennial trouble spot for mini-
drone controllers – was already attached and the blades 
and legs were all in place. The only set-up duties were to 
smoothly slide the battery cartridge out of its well-designed 
port for charging, unscrew and unclip the battery cover 
from the controller and effortlessly load up four AAs.
We did have a bit of a struggle with the blade guards that 
just didn’t want to go in and never seemed to sit in place 
correctly. This is only a minor design problem, as we did 
eventually get them in and they aren’t essential for operation, 
but it was just that little bit disappointing given how 
everything else fits together so well, and the push-and-shove 
may well cause people to give up and fly without them.
•	 Street Price: £112.48
•	 Dimensions: 320 x 320 x 70mm
•	 Weight: 125g
•	 Battery Type: 3.7v 500mAh LiPo
•	 Flight time: 6-7 minutes 
•	 Charge time: 45 minutes
•	 Frequency / Range: 2.4 GHz / 50m
•	 Website: www.trndlabs.com
66
DRONE MAGAZINE
REVIEW
TRNDLabs Spectre
Reviewer: Andrew Watton-Davies
All photos by TRNDLabs

Getting ready for launch we turned our attentions to the 
controller, and what a beauty it is. The main body is a hefty 
16 x 14cm and it looks like something you would get with a 
craft five times the price. It also feels really satisfying to the 
touch, with a smooth, yet grippy and tactile coating to it. 
And whilst the controller may be big, it’s still usable by small 
hands, as sticks are positioned well to the sides and the top 
buttons are right on the shoulders. 
To top that off is the aforementioned phone holder, which 
can be removed if you want but is balanced so nicely that 
you don’t have to. The holding mechanism is a large, spring-
assisted clip, which works far better than you’d think by 
looking at it. It’s capable of hosting phones up to 85mm wide 
and it did the job of keeping our smart device in place whilst 
not being a pain to load it in and out. The only downside with 
the controller was that smudges and dirt show up on it quite 
easily, but it’s so nice you won’t mind giving it a quick clean 
every now and then!
Spirit in the Sky
And so to the air, which is accomplished with a simple press 
of the launch button on the shoulder and sends the Spectre 
to a hover around a metre and a half up. Position hold on the 
days we tested it was reasonable, keeping it in about a three 
foot ‘box’, but it’s worth bearing in mind that the winter 
winds were up and the model only weighs 125g so a little 
extra movement was to be expected. 
Overall our flights were pretty good and it went where 
we wanted it to at a fairly nimble pace. It shouldn’t be 
approached as a racer or a stunt craft – beyond the built-in 
flips which look great but cause it to drop like stone and 
blur out any potential footage. It’s really in its element as a 
low-end camera platform, with a solid 50m range of control 
before any kind of problems set in and a consistent average 
of around six and a half minutes of flight time per charge.
How good the camera is becomes a matter of opinion. 
At 720p and 2MP it isn’t exactly in the HD bracket, despite 
the website claiming it’s something “the best smartphones 
would be envious of”. However, with a bit of practice and 
determination, it is sufficient to give viewable footage – 
allowing for decent light levels and some occasional screen 
tearing. The still images weren’t too bad either, although 
you would need pretty calm weather to take quality pictures 
with the craft. For the weight and price of the Spectre, the 
results are fine but just don’t go expecting a bargain HD flyer 
or you might wind up disappointed.
One thing that does need to be stated is that you will 
need to be sure to calibrate it on very flat ground, as not 
doing so can lead to flight problems and we had a couple 
of runaways during our first runs as a result. On the plus 
side we can report that the auto-land feature works quickly 
and prevented the craft from flying beyond the controller’s 
range, and that the craft can take a face-first landing with 
no harm done.
On the flip side we discovered that the largely all black 
design makes it much harder to find it in a field. It does have 
LEDs under each of the rotors, but they aren’t strong enough 
to be seen in the daylight, so more of the high contrast and 
aesthetically pleasing yellow as seen on the on/off button 
and camera shell would have been nice. 
The minimalistic approach of the colours on the Spectre 
also extends to its companion app, although in this case it’s 
a real positive. Stripped down to the basics of giving you the 
camera eye-view, options to take or review photos, and even 
fly in FPV split-screen, it does everything you need it to do in 
a straightforward manner.
Looking at the Spectre as a whole, it’s easy to point to the 
few flaws it has. But whilst they could be off-putting they’re 
hardly deal-breakers given the price point, they mostly 
stick out simply because of how impressively well the rest of 
the model works. 
The only possible stumbling block was the calibration 
issues we encountered, but experience and tinkering fixed 
that and it doesn’t take away from the fact that it feels like 
a far more expensive drone than it is. For someone making 
their first steps into the drone world and looking for 
something with a bit more style to it, the Spectre is certainly 
one to look at.
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
67
Package Content
Controller / USB charging cable / User guide / 
Replacement rotor blades / 2GB MicroSD card / 
USB MicroSD card reader / Screwdriver  
[Requires 4 x AA batteries]

68
DRONE MAGAZINE
 I
t was only a short while back for our previous issue that 
we joined up with the Civil Aviation Authority as part 
of its ongoing campaign to raise awareness of air safety 
among drone users (and would-be drone users), as we went 
along to its first ‘Share the Air’ event, bringing UAV and 
General Aviation pilots together. However, with the CAA 
predicting some 1.5 million new drones in UK airspace 
following the Christmas period, that work continues in 
earnest into 2018 and beyond.
It’s probably worth pointing out that no-one is 
predicting all of those craft will be swarming all over the 
skies as you read this – with many of them winding up in 
the hands of part-time enthusiasts flying the odd weekend, 
or a fun flyer that might take it out of the box for an hour 
or so before banishing it to a cupboard to gather dust. 
What is important, though, is that there is potentially a 
vast number of new pilots out there, maybe a few of them 
reading this, and so it’s crucial that the CAA is able to 
spread the good word of safe and legal drone flight.
It doesn’t need to be complex or time-consuming. 
As Jonathan Nicholson, assistant director of corporate 
communications for the CAA told us: “So much of what we 
try to cover with safety messages is almost like trying to 
legalise common sense. If people think something seems 
dubious as far as the location or what they’re trying to do 
with the drone, then it probably is a bit dubious.”
If you are new to flying, then all it takes is a quick trip 
to the CAA’s www.dronesafe.uk website to check out the 
DroneCode. “If people do nothing except look at the six 
images on the DroneCode then that should be enough to 
keep them safe and within the law – that’s literally all they 
have to do,” says Jonathan. “If you just say, ‘don’t fly above 
legal eagles:
With the Christmas rush behind us, the CAA remains 
as keen as ever to keep promoting responsible and 
lawful drone use, as Ian Collen explains…
know the law and stay safe in the air
All images courtesy of the Civil Aviation Authority

The Drone Code
In order to stay safe, the CAA advises all pilots to adhere to 
the following six very simple rules:
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
69
400ft, don’t fly near airports or airfields and don’t fly too 
close to people and property’ – if you do that then you’re 
going to stay safe and you’re going to stay within the law.”
Spreading the Message
One of the problems facing the CAA, and others invested 
in safe drone use, is in bridging a lack of awareness among 
those who aren’t already invested in the world of UAVs, 
such as those who found one under the Christmas tree. 
As Jonathan points, through no fault of their own, many 
of these people just won’t know what their legal or moral 
responsibilities are for flying. It doesn’t help that many of 
those cheaper models will be considered as ‘toys’ sold next 
to model cars or iPads and so there’s no immediate link to 
the wider world of aviation and airspace safety.
The CAA is doing all that it can to rectify this, though. 
Over Christmas the likes of Maplin, Carphone Warehouse 
and MenKind had all signed up to spread the message with 
over-the-counter advice and DroneCode leaflets upon 
purchase (Maplin even put the DroneCode on its receipts). 
DJI has been putting the DroneCode into every box shipped 
to the UK, so the message is getting out there – the problem 
remains that those looking to takes the hobby seriously will 
do their research first (and be more receptive to abiding 
by the rules), those picking one up as a gift or an impulse 
purchase will be far less likely to have read up on the 
regulations before ripping open the box.
Jonathan assures us that the work will continue well 
into 2018 and beyond, with educational projects, its Share 
the Air campaign and more – but it will take time. “It’s 
a long-term behavioural change campaign,” he says. “If 
you relate it to drink driving, smoking in restaurants… all 
of those things are not quick fixes; this is about getting to 
millions of people who aren’t proactive members of the 
aviation community that we can just send an email out to; 
it’s a lot more complicated than that and it’s going to take 
us a long time.”
Although education will always take priority as a 
preventative measure, the added emphasis on the police 
to enforce the drone law could add an extra deterrent – 
endangering an aircraft can lead to a prison sentence of up 
to five years. “Yes, there are some elements among drone 
users out there and maybe an element of enforcement will 
be required to convince them of the fact that this is serious,” 

Jonathan tells us, but he does add a warning: “We all want 
drones to be a success and if we get to the enforcement 
stage then potentially that will start to hinder that success, 
because that then becomes the story.”
Law and Order
Speaking of laws, with the new drone regulations due to 
hit during 2018, we took the opportunity to get the latest 
from Jonathan (pictured to the right) in terms of what to 
expect, and when. The European Aviation Safety Agency 
(EASA) is looking to implement its own regulations relating 
to potential registration, mandatory training, geofencing 
and other amendments. Jonathan says that these are likely 
to be finalised in 2018, but adds that “normally EASA gives 
two to three years before it becomes legally binding and 
applicable.” This is so that manufacturers and the like are 
able to adapt to any new specifications, manufacturing 
standards or legal requirements.
As reported on page 12, the UK is also planning very 
similar legislation, including compulsory registration and 
training, as well as making things like the 400ft rule a law 
(currently the law only applies to line of sight, which the 
CAA interprets as 400ft as a recommendation) as well as 
minimum distances from airports and airfields. Likewise 
these are due to be outlined early in 2018, but the timescale 
for actual implementation is yet to be established.
If you’re confused about which rules we’ll get to follow, 
EASA rulings apply to the EU and its affiliate states (which 
brings Brexit into the equation) and Jonathan explained how 
it generally takes the lead in terms of saying what needs to 
be done, but then it’s up to each country to work out how to 
implement the finer details (in our case, the UK’s own Drone 
Bill). “Potentially they should absolutely dovetail together” he 
says. “EASA will be the very top level; the government will be 
about the detail in this country.” We should know a lot more 
about what to expect in the next few months.
70
DRONE MAGAZINE

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
71
For now, the CAA is keen to focus on what it does have 
rather more direct control over – and that’s making all 
drone owners aware of their responsibilities and not 
looking to spoil anyone’s fun. “We’re not the anti-drone 
police,” Jonathan once again assures us. “A lot of us fly 
drones, we support drones and we think they have a 
fantastic future. But to get there we need people to fly safely 
now, because if they don’t that will have an adverse effect 
on what everybody can do with a drone in the future.”
Safety First
If you’re looking for more information on safe drone use, 
Jonathan advises anyone looking to buy to approach a 
reputable outlet that can offer good advice, both on what to 
buy and how to safely use it.
If you already own a drone he says you should head to 
www.dronesafe.uk and look up the DroneCode for a few 
more pointers than we’ve provided here. You can also go 
to the NATS portal at drones.nats.aero/home for lots more 
useful information (and the caa.co.uk site for that matter).
One final piece of advice from Jonathan is to get a 
companion app for flying – there are links to some of them 
on the above websites. “They will give you a really good idea 
about whether where you’re planning to fly is a sensible 
place to fly; they’ll show you the airspace and are really 
useful and a great confidence booster as well. We have lots 
of people who are new to drone flying that feel much more 
confident using the app, knowing that they’re going to be 
flying in a good place.”
NATS Life
One notable showcase of the impact caused by erroneous 
drone flight in 2017 was a video from NATS which displayed the 
knock-on effects of a UAV encroaching on Gatwick Airport, with 
numerous flights diverted and hundreds of passengers affected. 
Jonathan points to the financial impact: “For some of those 
diversions you’re talking about £20,000 an aircraft by the time 
you’ve taken into account the fuel, repositioning the aircraft, 
new crew, transiting all the passengers back to their original 
airport and so on.” In addition, the added burden and stress on 
the air traffic controllers brings further disruption and potential 
safety issues – and the video certainly helped to increase 
awareness of those knock-on effects of one single errant flight.


St Michel Chapel  
Monts D’Arrée, Brittany, France
“This chapel was built in 1677 on top of the Saint 
Michael Mountain which is 380m high. The 
weather is ever changing and you can’t plan for 
whether or not you’ll be able to fly and take a 
nice shot.”
Photo by Cyrille Pillet
Supplied by Dronestagram

interview
74
DRONE MAGAZINE
The Bigger Picture
Although many might be aware of the potential for drones in areas such as surveying 
and mapping, it takes a lot more than the right tech to do the job properly – as Andy 
Carman, managing director at ARC Aerial Imaging, explained to Ian Collen…
All photos by ARC Aerial Imaging

interview
 Can you give us some background into the 
origins of your company? 
Having had a busy and fulfilling 22-year career in the 
Royal Air Force I was approaching a significant crossroads 
in my service career – do I continue my service contract 
with the RAF (for a further eight years) or, having 
achieved so much professionally in two decades, do I 
take advantage to retire from the RAF and start a new 
challenge? I decided to do the latter.
It was late 2012 when I got to thinking if there was 
a potential demand and viable uses with drones and, 
more importantly, their various forms of aerial imaging 
outputs for commercial undertakings coupled with the 
technical imagery analysis skills that I possess. I decided 
that I could apply my knowledge and experience with 
imagery and spatial analysis having worked with many 
forms of aerial imaging data collected from various 
means of military platforms, including UAVs, during 
my RAF career. I attended business courses, wrote a 
constantly-evolving business plan, gained the necessary 
CAA accreditations and acquired the relevant COTS 
(commercial off the shelf) drone platforms and imagers in 
order to get started in this industry.
Since January 2015, ARC Aerial Imaging has been 
providing a proven, professional and flexible aerial 
imaging and spatial consulting service based in the north-
east of England, utilising a variety of sUAS platforms 
coupled with high resolution stills and UHD video 
sensors. Not only are we a source provider of baseline 
aerial imaging and processed datasets but, together with 
over two decades of relevant expertise, we are also able 
to provide a comprehensive aerial imaging and spatial 
consulting service.
How quickly did you see the benefits and 
potential for drones in your line of work?
Unlike many other professional commercial drone 
operators that I’ve met with, I had no previous RC flying or 
technical engineering experience with drones and much 
of my understanding and knowledge in these respects 
when I first started out was quite limited. However, with 
the experience and knowledge that I do have with aerial 
imaging and spatial data, it put me in a unique position 
amongst my contemporaries who weren’t so much in 
possession of such knowledge. This became quite apparent 
as I was beginning to be asked to provide advice and 
guidance by other operators that my knowledge with 
imaging would help them with.
What are the most common uses for 
drones in your line of work?
Aside from the more generic forms of aerial imaging 
that we undertake on behalf of several commercial 
photographers and filming production companies who are 
not certified to commercially operate drones, mapping and 
imaging for construction projects or stakeholder updates 
and inspection imaging are the most common forms of 
commissions that we undertake. The company also works 
in close partnership with those entities who are more 
suitably qualified in structural and industrial processing 
inspections, or land developers and surveyors, by 
providing this aerial imaging information and processed 
spatial data on their behalf. 
As platform and sensing technology evolves, becoming 
more bespoke for certain commercial applications – there is 
never one platform or imaging solution for every problem – 
ARC Aerial Imaging is still providing key essential elements 
of imaging information using what might be regarded 
by others as ‘old tech’. However, it’s about knowing how 
to continually push and apply your current platforms 
and imagers beyond their normal applications but with 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
75

76
DRONE MAGAZINE
operating safety always in mind. After all Napoleon 
Bonaparte did state: “It’s not the General with the best 
equipment that will prevail; it is the General that uses his 
equipment the best.”
You’ve suggested that there’s a lack of 
knowledge or understanding of these 
fields among some commercial users – can 
you explain this a bit more?
What is concerning is the lack of understanding of 
sensing and the technical imaging outputs that some new 
entrants in the industry have. In particular those who 
self-proclaim to be “the leading experts in...” but who 
are not in possession of the appropriate understanding of 
these fundamentals, lacking the experience or accredited 
qualifications and ascertaining their “expertise” by 
acquiring this knowledge via the plethora of online forums 
and advice groups.
If ARC was tasked to not only provide aerial imagery 
and certain processed datasets on the behalf of a client for 
a surveying commission but also provide GCP (Ground 
Control Point) data to provide onward orthorectified 
survey-grade imagery, it would appoint an appropriately 
trained and qualified entity to undertake this form of 
ground work on its behalf and, therefore, not expose itself 
to commercial risks or to any potential legal implications 
– a point that some commercial drone operators need to be 
made aware of.
The rush to acquire the latest and best platform 
equipment and sensing technologies is very tempting 
when starting out as a new commercial drone business. 
But without the core fundamental understanding on their 
applicable uses and, more importantly, knowing what the 
various collected data means, in terms of how it can provide 
specific solutions to a client’s problem sets, can potentially 
expose those who are unqualified despite what they claim 
to be. The clients we have supported over the past few years 
have remarked upon this through their own observations 
and having applied their due diligence practices, which is 
good to see now that the dust appears to be settling within 
the commercial drone industry.
What are the common mistakes made by 
those not properly trained in these fields?
The misunderstanding or misinterpretation of aerial 
imaging can be quite unforgiving and potentially costly to 
the lesser-informed and under-prepared drone operating 
business. With the advent of easy methods of automated 
data processing via the cloud-based portals that provide 
processed spatial products, collators and users of aerial 
imaging information need to fully understand what is 
being presented and how this relates to the client’s problem 
sets, instead of drawing upon automated conclusions solely 
based on what is being provided.
If we use the example of mapping arable landholdings 
for the precision agricultural industry, the ‘false analysis’ 
and misrepresentation of so-called NDVI imaging that 
has in fact been derived from RGB imagery alone is often 
promoted and used by some commercial operators as a 
“The experience and knowledge that I have with 
aerial imaging and spatial data put me in a unique 
position amongst my contemporaries”
interview

form of confirmative service. Yet true NDVI imaging can 
only be produced through the more expensive and capable 
multispectral sensors which can often be beyond the reach, 
in terms of costs and appropriate uses, of those who are 
often too quick to rush into the industry and declaring 
themselves as “operationally-ready” with such services.
Similarly this can be equated with those who use thermal 
infrared sensing and yet do not have a fundamental 
understanding of this sensing output. If you are going to 
provide thermal aerial imaging services for your clients, it 
is highly recommended to gain some form of fundamental 
learning and attend an accredited course in thermography. 
In this respect it can take many years to be an experienced 
imagery and spatial analyst.
As more automated systems come into play, 
how much of a help is that to the market?
Automated ways and means of collecting aerial imaging 
are great software tools and I often use them according to 
what they can do and for the acquisition of data, knowing 
that I’ve applied an appropriate collection plan according 
to the subject that’s required for mapping or surveying. 
When the drones are on task I’m often in awe of how they 
are operating autonomously via what is a straightforward 
planning process through various apps or mission planning 
software. The benefits of such automated systems are clearly 
apparent; it’s a precise and accurate way of collating this 
data and is often done in a very time-effective manner.
The same could also be stated with emerging machine 
learning and automated analysis tools with imaging, where 
certain commands, values or thresholds are in place to 
auto-detect and report on. One example for this would be 
for structural defect detection and analysis. In principle this 
would be a time-saving process but, in these early days of 
machine learning, it will still primarily be used as an aid for 
indicating possible issues rather than a tool of confirmation. 
The need for experienced and professional structural 
experts, or imagery analysts for that matter, will still be 
required for such undertakings. However, these automated 
analysis tools will no doubt be improved upon in time.
The use of automated mapping applications can also 
present its disadvantages if they are overused and over-
interview
In the Hangar
“I first started out with the Phantom2 with a GoPro Hero3 in order to 
get acquainted with the technology and get certified under the sub-7Kg 
sUAS PfCO (formally PfAW) qualification before I started commercially 
operating. As soon as it was released, when ARC Aerial Imaging was in 
its infancy, I bought the dual-operator Inspire 1 and X3 combo, which was 
later upgraded to the ‘Pro’ version when I subsequently acquired the X5 
camera. Due to the demand of good aerial imaging outputs required by 
clients, the Phantom 2 has hardly been used for commercial work, but I 
have kept it in the inventory ‘just in case’...
“I later introduced the Phantom 3 and Phantom 4 Pro drones to the 
hangar which permitted me to use these for the generic aerial imaging 
that we undertake and allowing for longer flights and collection times. 
The Inspire was also used for generic imaging and filming tasks but 
its flight duration of around nine minutes was limiting, especially for 
mapping. The Phantom 4 Pro now is more commonly applied for this as 
its individual flight endurance and imaging capability (20MP) is much 
better and it’s also a great mapping imaging tool.”
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
77
relied upon. As previously eluded to, an operator who 
doesn’t possess a firm understanding of the fundamentals 
of aerial imaging according to what they are aiming to 
achieve on behalf of their client’s specific requirements, 
could possibly be providing a less than satisfactory service.
To address this, ARC runs courses and 
workshops on the subject, so what are the 
key areas that make up your training?
As the only two-day sUAS mapping course of its kind 
currently running in the UK, and delivered by an instructor 
with an accredited background – that’s me! – it teaches 
current PfCO-holding attendees the important theory 
and fundamentals of aerial imaging to enhance their 
understanding and approaches towards mapping planning 
through various collection techniques for the creation of 
mapping and other technical spatial products.
Our aim is to help attendees to increase their commercial 
value by providing informed planning consultation to their 
clients on how best to collect optimal drone aerial imaging 
for their mapping and surveying projects. In addition this 
could reduce, even eliminate, unwanted processing errors 
with photogrammetry software so as to produce better 
geospatial products and measurable data for their client’s 

78
DRONE MAGAZINE
end requirements. This helps them to stay competitive and 
retain their valuable clients by knowing how to accurately 
collect drone aerial imaging for their mapping and 
surveying needs.
What are those elements of expertise that 
the untrained user might not be aware of?
During these mapping workshops, we cover essential 
fundamentals on how drone aerial imaging works. From 
the understanding of individual drone platforms – focusing 
more on the DJI drones due to their broad use, their 
flexibility of use and their cross-compatibility with various 
mapping apps – their individual cameras, sensors and 
lenses, and how they can be applied more effectively for 
mapping tasks. 
It’s having a firm understanding of these areas and 
how they relate to interpretable information according to 
the mapping undertaken and the client’s requirements 
that’s an important element to appreciate. The commercial 
drone mapping operator needs to achieve a more informed 
understanding of this, so they can be in a more informed 
position by providing essential imaging planning 
consultation to their clients in accordance to their specific 
imaging needs and output requirements. 
There’s no one-stop solution and each job 
is presumably unique, but do things change 
much from one environment to the next?
Indeed and that’s a key point that we address. There are 
certain ways and means of applying specific or individual 
mapping collection plans, according to not only the subject 
that’s being imaged or mapped and what imaging outputs 
and processed datasets will be produced, but also how the 
operating environment can often dictate and affect how 
to work the drone, camera and/or the sensor within the 
unique area of interest.
What are the pros and cons of using UAVs 
compared to more traditional methods? 
Does the technology still have some 
limitations to address?
The quality assurance of accurate geotagged aerial imaging 
and data is probably the most obvious disadvantage 
of COTS drone aerial imaging – in particular those 
platforms that are engaged for any ‘survey-grade’ forms 
of commercial undertakings. These really cannot be 
interview

solely relied upon or employed for accurate mensuration 
commercial work due to their known on-board geotagged 
inaccuracies (often +/- 5m in the lateral axis, +/-10m in 
the vertical axis). More traditional and proven means 
of positional data information collection via ground 
surveying equipment to record accurate GCP information 
will still be needed to accompany and improve the 
accuracies of this drone-derived aerial imaging.
The advancement of RTK and GNSS nodes and devices 
fitted onboard drones and their sensors to provide more 
accurate geotagged imaging are interesting developments 
and are being commercially used but, having liaised 
with several certified civil surveyors in regards to this 
advancement, many are yet to be convinced of their output 
geodetic accuracies and have indicated that they would still 
apply their more traditional methods of GCP information 
gathering via their proven deployed surveying systems.
Is there such a thing as too much data? Or 
is it a case of finding solutions to better 
collect, collate, analyse and manage all 
of this information?
I don’t think there’s such a thing as too much data - in 
fact, I strongly encourage those who attend the mapping 
workshops, and your readers, to always plan to collect more 
content than is actually required by the client. If time whilst 
on site is not a limiting operating condition, applying a 
second or third mapping plan, but at different orientations 
or operating heights so more spatial information of the 
subject is obtained, the better the processed results will 
be when this data is introduced into photogrammetry 
processing software. 
However, this will take longer and require more demand 
on your computer because of the additional imaging 
information that is being ingested and processed – as with 
everything, there’s always a balance! Not forgetting that the 
more forms of aerial imaging data that have been collected 
by the operator at the time, various types of processed 
products can be also produced which might be required by 
the client later on. It’s all about how to plan better and be 
in a good position with a client by going above and beyond 
what’s required.
interview
What do you think the future holds for a 
company such as yours?
ARC Aerial Imaging has validated and understands where 
it’s positioned within the commercial environment with 
COTS drones and has also augmented other commercial 
providers on their commissions by providing specialist 
imaging and spatial analysis knowledge. We saw a gap 
in the market by providing specific training in mapping 
with drones for the benefit of other commercial drone 
operators who have sought to improve their own services, 
helping them to become better collators and providers of 
aerial imaging and processed spatial data to their clients 
– and this will continue in 2018. Technology will no doubt 
advance and EVLOS and BVLOS (extended and beyond 
visual line of sight) will certainly benefit operations with 
mapping if, or when, we decide to cross this bridge. 
You can see more on the work and services of Andy and 
the team over at www.arcaerialimaging.com.
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
79

2017
80
DRONE MAGAZINE
A Year in 
Pictures
SkyPixel brought the curtain down on 2017 with a competition 
to showcase some of the best photos submitted to its aerial 
photography community, run in cooperation with DJI, from the 
past 12 months. Here are some of the leading contenders…
Drying Clothes in Autumn
Photo by 菜鸟视
All photos supplied by SkyPixel.com

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
81
Mother and Child
Photo by Yantastic
Geometry of Liquid Gold
Photo by Javier del Cerro
Salar de Uyuni
Photo by Alfredo Rebaza

82
DRONE MAGAZINE
Polar Bear Hunting
Photo by Florian Ledoux
Drying Nature
Photo by 在那片更高的天空
Lines
Photo by Javier del Cerro

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
83
The Rebirth
Photo by Andrea
Emerald Gem of Lake Baikal
Photo by 李珩
Line
Photo by 279061368
The final date for entries passed on 29 December, with the winners set to be announced on 31 January. $15,000 worth of prizes will be awarded to the Grand 
Prize recipient and further rewards worth up to $7,000 will be handed out to various group winners and the most popular entries. To follow the results or see 
the full gallery of photos, head over to www.skypixel.com/events/photocontest2017.

THE UK’s best magazine 
for Asian pop culture
Anime, manga, movies, games, music,  
cosplay and more!
Every four weeks
£4.75 at Tesco, Asda, WHSmiths and independent shops
	
facebook.com/neomagazineuk 	
www.selectmagazines.co.uk/product/neo	
twitter.com/neo_magazine

Try the FREE sample issue of FSM by searching your app store 
for Fighting Spirit Magazine. You can also read FSM on your PC or 
Mac by visiting www.tinyurl.com/PocketFSM
n Hi-res screen brings
out the best in FSM’s 
photographs
n Many hours of relevant
matches and interviews  
are included, exclusively  
to FSM’s digital format
n Reading on the go has
never been easier
n Immediate access to 
new and back issues
I know you’ve written  
about how much you  
love print, but downloading 
FSM every month is just  
so easy. I prefer doing it  
this way!   
– david ritchie, oak brook, Illinois
available to 
download
today
tap in to the best of FSM

Drone On
Get connected with DRONE Magazine
www.get-drone.today
Never miss an issue! Subscribe today from only £14.99.
facebook.com/DRONEMagUK
All the latest news, videos and industry announcements. Follow us to 
stay up-to-date and have your say on new developments.
instagram.com/DRONEMagUK
We’ll be sharing some of the best images from the magazine, and 
maybe a few shots of our fresh from the latest press event!
twitter.com/DRONEMagUK
Regular tweets about the magazine and updates from around the drone 
industry. 280 characters is more than enough!
www.dronemagazine.uk
Take a few clicks to catch up on any missing back issues or pick up a 
great subscription deal and get the mag delivered straight to your door.
86
DRONE MAGAZINE
www.dronestagr.am
Dronestagram 
www.dronestagr.am
This issue’s excellent showcase shots 
were taken by Drone Magazine reader and 
keen photographer Cyrille Pillet. You can 
enjoy more of his work with regular new 
shots on his Dronestagram profile page, 
www.dronestragr.am/author/arsovicy, as 
well as many more great photos and videos 
available to browse on the main website 
www.dronestagr.am.

Sitting amidst the central location of Christchurch Road, Bournemouth’s Vintage Emporium is a stylish treasure trove of curiosities. 
Hosting over 50 traders selling quality original antiques, vintage and unusual items you won’t find on the high street.
  With the addition of a vintage-styled barbers shop and quirky Victoriana tea rooms, you’ll be spoilt for choice at this unique shopping 
emporium. The emporium and tea rooms are guided by an etiquette to maintain a creative, inspirational and visual backdrop to your 
visit. Imagine, if you will, a vintage department store. Set in the heart of the Vintage Quarter of Bournemouth, just down the road from 
Pokesdown Rail Station, we look forward to welcoming you to help you find your must-have, one off piece.
1172-1180 Christchurch Road, Bournemouth, Dorset BH7 6DY
01202427797
www.bournemouthvintageemporium.com
B
Emporium
Bournemouths
VINTAGE

ON SALE thursday 1st february
88
DRONE MAGAZINE
Plus
The Best of CES  //  ehang 184 AAV  //  Zenmuse x7 
New Build Tips  //  UAVs in general aviation  //  And more!
LOOKING 
AHEAD
Eyes-on with the DJI 
Goggles: Racing Edition
Next Issue
Photo by DJI

drone 
magazine 
back issues 
are priced 
at £5.99 
+ £1 p&p
Issue 28
Issue 27
Issue 26
Issue 25
Issue 24
Issue 23
Issue 22
Issue 21
Issue 20
Issue 19
Issue 18
Issue 17
Issue 16
Issues 15
Issue 14
back issues
01202 087627
Please have all your details to hand
Complete the form (right) and send it to: Drone Magazine Back Issues, 
Select Publisher Services Ltd, PO Box 6337, Bournemouth BH1 9EH
www.get-drone.today
Go to the above URL and click on the back issues link for a full list
Please allow 14 days for delivery of your back issues.
Three easy ways to order:
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
89
Payment details
Issue numbers of Drone Magazine required 
.........................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Each back issue costs £5.99 + £1 for p&p (UK only)*
*For overseas rates please visit our website at www.get-drone.today, 
or call 01202 087627
Cheque
[  ] I enclose a cheque for ...............................................................................................................................
All cheques and postal orders must be made payable to “Uncooked Media Ltd”
Credit/debit card
[  ] Visa     [  ] MasterCard     [  ] Maestro     [  ] Switch
Card Number
Expiry date	
Valid from (if shown)
Issue number	
Security number
(if shown)	
(last 3 digits on the back of the card)
Signature ............................................................................................................................................................................   
Date
Return this form to: Drone Magazine Back Issues, Select 
Publisher Services Ltd, PO Box 6337, Bournemouth BH1 9EH
[   ] Please tick this box if you DO NOT want to receive any other 
information from Select Publisher Services.
[   ] Please tick this box if you DO NOT want to receive any other 
information from other companies.
Your details
Mr/Mrs/Miss/Ms (delete as applicable)
First name ..................................................................................................................................................................................
Surname ........................................................................................................................................................................................
Address ...........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Postcode ..............................................................  Country ....................................................................................
Email .....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Daytime phone .................................................................................................................................................................
Mobile .................................................................................................................................................................................................
back issues order form
D
M
Y
Y
D
M
Y
Y
DM#29
Missing an earlier issue? Order a copy and 
complete your collection today…

Photo by Parrot
Never miss an issuE OF 
DRONE MAGAZINE
Subscribe today from as little as £14.99*
90
DRONE MAGAZINE

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
91
Easy ways to subscribe
Call 01202 586 035 
and subscribe via debit or credit card
 
Online at www.get-drone.today
Pay by cheque or postal order, made payable 
to Uncooked Media Ltd
And send to:
DRONE Subs, Select Publisher Services,
PO Box 6337, Bournemouth BH1 9EH
Return this form to:
DRONE Subs, Select Publisher Services Ltd, PO Box 6337, Bournemouth BH1 9EH
        Please tick this box if you DO NOT want to receive any other information from Select Publisher Services Ltd 
and Uncooked Media Ltd.
        Please tick this box if you DO NOT want to receive any other information from other companies.
This subscription is:	   n For me      n A gift for someone*
Your details   Mr n  Mrs n  Miss n  Ms n
First name ................................................................ Surname .................................................................................
Address ............................................................................................................................................................................
Postcode .................................................................. Email .........................................................................................
Daytime phone ...................................................... Mobile ......................................................................................
*If giving DRONE MAGAZINE as a gift, please complete both the recipient’s and your own details (above).
gift recipIent’s details only     Mr n  Mrs n  Miss n  Ms n
First name ................................................................ Surname .................................................................................
Address ............................................................................................................................................................................
...................................................................................................................... Postcode ..................................................
SUBSCRIption form
YES! I’d like to subscribe to DRONE MAGAZINE and save money.
Payment options
Direct Debit payment  £14.99 every 3 issues (UK only)
Instruction to your bank or building society to pay by Direct Debit
Please fill in the form and send to: 
DRONE Subs, Select Publisher Services Ltd,  
PO Box 6337, Bournemouth BH1 9EH
Name and full postal address of your bank or building society:
To: The Manager        Bank/building society ......................................................................................................
Address ....................................................................................................................................................................................
............................................................................................................................. Postcode ...................................................
Name(s) of account holder(s) .....................................................................................................................................
Branch sort code n n n n n n    Account number n n n n n n n n
Reference n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n   (Official use only)
Instruction to your bank or building society
Please pay Select Publisher Services Ltd Direct Debits from the account detailed in this 
instruction subject to the safeguards assured by the Direct Debit Guarantee. I understand 
that this instruction may remain with Select Publisher Services Ltd and, if so, details will 
be passed electronically to my bank/building society.
Signature .................................................................................................   Date n n /n n/n n
Banks and building societies may not accept Direct Debit instructions for some types of account.
Subscription pricing when paying by cheque or credit/debit card
6 issues  UK £30  n     12 issues UK £55   n    6 issues  EUR £45  n     
12 issues EUR £80   n     6 issues  ROW £50  n     12 issues ROW £90  n   
Cheque 
I enclose a cheque for ............................................ (made payable to Uncooked Media Ltd)
Credit/debit card    n Visa  n MasterCard  n Maestro  n Switch
Card Number	 n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n
Expiry date	
n n  n n	
Valid from  n n  n n  (if shown)
Issue number	 n n (if shown)	
Security number n n n
	
	
(last 3 digits on the back of the card)
Signature .................................................................................................   Date n n /n n/n n
I would like my subscription to begin from issue .................................................................. (month + year)
Service user number n n n n n n
8
3
8
7
7
3
DM#29
Benefits
Get your copy before it hits the shops 
Save money
Never miss an issue
Posted direct to your door
Free delivery
 
prices
UK 12 issues £55
UK 6 issues £30 
Eur 12 issues £80
Eur 6 issues £45
ROW 12 issues £90
ROW 6 issues £50
Direct Debit = UK only, £14.99 every three issues
*with a UK Direct Debit

Skeye Hexa Drone
Category: Toy, Indoor, Compact
Street Price: £39.92
Camera: None
Weight: 30g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 130mm
Battery Type: LiPo
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 50m
Best Feature: Great for beginners
Parrot Mambo
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Fun
Street Price: £99
Camera: 3MP / 60fps
Weight: 63g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 180mm
Battery Type: 550mAh LiPo 
Control / Range: iOS or Android / 20m
Best Feature: Ideal for office hi-jinks!
Revell Control  
VR-Quadcopter
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Fun Flyer
Street Price: £99.00
Camera: 720p, 2MP
Weight: 100g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 280mm
Battery Type: 500mAh, 3.7v LiPo 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 50m
Best Feature: Good introduction to FPV flying
GestureBotics Aura
Category: Toy, Fun Flyer
Street Price: £99.99
Camera: None
Weight: 54g
Diagonal motor spacing: 85mm 
(without cage)
Battery type: 500mAh LiPo
Control / Range: Glove / 7 metres
Best feature: Fully gesture controlled
UDI U818A FPV
Category: Camera drone
Street price: £130
Size: 250mm
Weight: 140g
Best Feature: Live-view in App 
Revell Control GPS Pulse 
Quadcopter
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Fun Flyer
Street Price: £109.00
Camera: 720p, 2MP
Weight: 152g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 185mm
Battery Type: 610mAh, 7.4v LiPo  
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 50m
Best Feature: Great stability for its size
Revell Multicopter 
Hexatron
Category: Outdoor
Street Price: £100.00
Camera: Optional FPV version
Weight: 1200g
Diagonal motor spacing: 114mm
Battery type: LiPo
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 100m
Best feature: It’s just monstrously big
Bionic Bird
Category: Ornithopter
Street Price: €129 (£116)
Camera: None
Weight: 9.2g
Wingspan: 330mm
Battery Type: 55mAh LiPo 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 100m
Best Feature: Fly like a bird!
TrndLabs Fader
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Fun Flyer
Street Price: £99
Camera: 720p, 1MP
Weight: 55g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 175mm
Battery Type: 520mAh LiPo 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 50m
Best Feature: Good starter model 
BLADE INDUCTRIX 
FPV BNF
Category: Indoor, Racer, FPV
Street Price: £85.99 (£164 for the 
Ready-to-Fly version)
Camera: Integrated FPV
Weight: 24g
Diagonal motor spacing: 83mm
Battery type: 200mAh LiPo
Control / Range: 2.4GHz RF / 100m
Best feature: Perfect for rookie racers
Syma 4 Channel 2.4Ghz  
Quadcopter with Camera
Category: Indoor, Outdoor
Street Price: £45
Camera: Front-facing, 0.3MP
Weight: 590g
Diagonal motor spacing: 300mm
Battery type: LiPo
Control / Range: 2.4GHz RF / 500m
Best feature: Lightweight prop guards
Revell Control  
Mini Charger
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Fun Flyer
Street Price: £34.99
Camera: None
Weight: 15g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 95mm
Battery Type: 250mAh Li-Po 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 20m
Best Feature: Protective cage
92
DRONE MAGAZINE
Buyer’s guide
our comprehensive round-up of some of the 
top drones around. find the perfect model to 
suit all tastes and budgets!
under £150
Top 5
Budget Drones
1 Hubsan X4
2 Parrot Rolling Spider
3 Syma X5SC-1
4 UDI U818A FPV
5 Blade Glimpse FPV

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
93
£150-£600
Yuneec Breeze
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: £439
Camera: 4K / 13MP
Weight: 385g (inc. battery)
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 196mm
Battery Type: 1150mAh Li-Po 
Control / Range: 5GHz Wi-Fi / 100m
Best Feature: Great for aerial selfies 
DJI Spark
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: £519
Camera: 1080p, 12MP
Weight: 300g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 143mm
Battery Type: 1480mAh, 3S LiPo 
Control / Range: Wi-Fi / 100m 
Best Feature: Great tech in a small package 
Xiro Xplorer
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: From £315
Camera: 1080p, 30fps
Weight: 410g (inc. battery)
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 225mm
Battery Type: 3S Li-Po, 1300mAh 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 500m
Best Feature: Great price
The Beast 280 MK2  
Racing Drone
Category: Racer
Street Price: £350
Camera: Sony 700TVL
Weight: 30g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 280mm
Battery Type: Li-Po
Control / Range: Optional
Best Feature: Very, very fast
Propel Star Wars Collection
Category: Fun Flyer, Air Combat, Collectible
Street Price: £190
Camera: None
Weight: Varied
Diagonal Motor Spacing: Varied
Battery Type: 800mAh Li-Po 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 100m
Best Feature: Too cool to fly!
Top 5
Beginner Drones
1 DJI Phantom 4
2 Parrot Bebop 2
3 Hubsan X4
4 Blade Nano QX
5 Blade Glimpse FPV
Accessory:  B&W Type 1000 
DJI Spark case
Price: £40.91 
Dimensions: 270 x 215 x 105mm 
weight: 1.7lbs (1.9lbs with packaging) 
volume: 4.1 litres
Designed as an entry level case for the aspiring 
Spark pilot, this offering from B&W boasts all of 
the features that we have come to expect when 
looking for a rugged storage and transport 
solution for your quad. It makes for a solid, 
lightweight, durable travel system that feels 
like it could take a real beating and still protect 
the equipment inside.
Essential 
Accessories
The things that no drone owner 
should go without
A really good bag
From around £100
There’s a lot of fiddly electronics in the 
heart of your aircraft and, while they 
might look pretty strong, every last gram 
will be exorcised in the design process 
to lengthen flight times. Not only that, 
but if you’re after beautiful photographs, 
you’ll probably be travelling away from 
the beaten track, so look for comfort and 
convenience in a bag, too. Check out the 
likes of Lowepro, Manfrotto or specialist 
creations like the InsPak.
Portable Toolkit
From around £10
Keeping screws tight is a great way to 
make sure parts don’t fall off mid-air 
(which, incidentally, is very bad!). Make 
sure you’ve got a set of screwdrivers for 
hex, hex-socket and small Phillips sizes, 
as well as good-quality pliers. You’ll also 
find tweezers useful for when cables 
retreat inside plastic casing.
Anemometer
From around £15
If you’re flying regularly, a small 
investment in a wind-speed reader will 
help you make sure you don’t take off when 
the wind might carry your craft away.
ImmersionRC Vortex 285
Category: Racer
Street Price: £300
Camera: Fit your FPV camera of choice
Weight: 350g (no battery or camera)
Diagonal motor spacing: 285mm
Battery type: 3S/4S Li-Po
Control / Range: RF
Best feature: Foldable
Xiro Xplorer Mini
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: £429 / €499
Camera: 1080p, 13MP
Weight: 431g (inc. battery)
Diagonal motor spacing: 310mm
Battery type: 1650mAh, 3S Li-Po
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 100m
Best feature: Portable AND powerful
Ehang Ghostdrone 2.0 
Aerial
Category: Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: £540
Camera: 4K Sports Camera (GoPro 3, 3+ and 4 
compatible)
Weight: 1150g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 290mm
Battery Type: 4500mAh LiPo 
Control / Range: Smart device required / 500m
Best Feature: Fully controlled with 
your phone

94
DRONE MAGAZINE
£600+
DJI Phantom Range
Category: Outdoor/Flying Camera
Street Price: From £300 to £900
The Phantom 1 looks a lot like the latest 
model, but with no video streaming it’s 
for DIY hobbyists now. The Phantom 2 
came in a confusing variety of variants (a 
bad habit of DJI). The Vision and Vision+ 
added a built-in camera and gimbal, 
controlled by an app and phone clipped to 
the RC via Wi-Fi hotspot. The Phantom 3 
set new benchmarks for photo and video 
quality in a consumer-friendly design 
and is still popular today. And with the 
Phantom 4 range expanding, you can 
expect to find good deals on the original 
as its life-cycle draws to a close.
DJI Inspire
Category: Outdoor/Flying Camera
Street Price: Various
Leaving aside the changes in camera, the 
Inspire 1 airframe has been through a 
number of minor revisions in its lifetime, 
all while retaining the ‘1’ moniker. The 
screw-on propeller system at launch was 
quickly updated to a 1345S Quick Release 
model (about which there are some 
question marks). The V2 brought support 
for the new X5 cameras with a slight re-
modelling, a new form of quick release 
prop (1345T) and upgraded motors, from 
350kv to 420kv. If you plan to fit the 
professional X5 camera to an early Inspire 
1, it’ll need an upgrade pack that extends 
the landing legs and replaces the base-
plate to which the camera clips.
DJI Pre-owned
and End of Line
These days it pays to be savvy to 
older models you might see in 
stock clearances (or car boot 
sales) so you can bag a bargain 
rather than get fleeced.
DJI Phantom 4 Advanced
Category: Commercial, Flying Camera
Street Price: £1,469
Camera: 4K, 20MP
Weight: 1,368g
Diagonal motor spacing: 350mm
Battery type: 5870mAh, 4S LiPo 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 4.3 miles (7km)
Best feature: Excellent camera 
DJI Inspire 2
Category: Commercial, Professional, Flying Camera
Street Price: £3,059
Camera: None (X4S and X5S compatible)
Weight: 3,920g (with batteries, without camera/
gimbal)
Diagonal motor spacing: 605mm
Battery type: 4280mAh Li-Po (dual system)
Control / Range: 2.4/5.8GHz / 4.3 miles
Best feature: Top of the line technology
DJI Matrice 600
Category: Commercial, Professional Rig
Street Price: £3,999
Camera: Not included
Weight: 9.1kg
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 1668mm
Battery Type: 4500mAh Li-Po (5700mAh 
optional) 
Control / Range: 2.4/5.8GHz / 3.1 miles (5km)
Best Feature: Highly versatile
PowerVision PowerEye
Category: Commercial, Flying Camera
Street Price: £3,999
Camera: 4K, 16.1MP
Weight: 3.9Kg
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 315mm
Battery Type: Dual 9000mAh LiPo 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 3.1 miles (5km)
Best Feature: Intelligent design
DJI Mavic Pro
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: £1,089
Camera: 4K/1080p, 12.7MP
Weight: 743g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 198mm
Battery Type: 3830mAh, 3S Li- Po
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 4.3 miles (7km)
Best Feature: Great tech in a portable package
DJI Matrice 200
Category: Professional, Flying Rig
Street Price: From £5,899
Camera: None (X4S, X5S, Z30 and XT compatible)
Weight: 3.8kg
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 887mm
Battery type: 4280mAh Li-Po 
Control / Range: 2.4/5.8GHz / 4.3 miles (7km)
Best feature: Brilliant with the Z30 camera
Yuneec Tornado H920 Plus
Category: Professional, Flying Camera 
Street Price: £3,999
Camera: 4K, 16MP
Weight: 5kg
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 920mm
Battery Type: 4000mAh, 6S LiPo 
Control / Range: 2.4/5.8GHz / 1 mile (1.6km)
Best Feature: Pro air and ground solution
PowerVision PowerEgg
Category: Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: £1,399
Camera: 4K, 13.8MP
Weight: 2.1kg
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 476mm
Battery Type: 6400mAh Li-Po 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 3.1 miles (5km)
Best Feature: Unique stylish design
TBS Crossfire
street Price: $208.95 (£158.25)
dimensions: 150 x 80 x 20mm
weight: 340g
output power: 10-500mW 
Compatibility: Via PPM stream output 
and JR adapter
This RC link from Team BlackSheep 
uses a much lower frequency and some 
clever technology to preserve the signal 
quality and provide a better signal than 
traditional 2.4GHz radios. While the 
primary benefit is to be seen in a much 
greater range on offer, it also provides a 
more secure link for flying your drone 
in close proximity as well as a much 
faster low latency connection to the 
model you’re operating.
Top 5
All-Time Greats
1 DJI Phantom Series
2 Parrot AR.Drone
3 Hubsan X4
4 Fossils Stuff Gravity 250
5 Yuneec Typhoon H

ImmersionRC Vortex 250 Pro
Category: Ready-to-Fly FPV
Street Price: £400
Size (motor-to-motor): 250mm
Carbon Fibre: 4mm thick
Weight (before battery, camera): 415g
Best feature: The LEDs (in this RTF version)
ImpulseRC Alien 5”
Category: FPV Frame
Street price (frame only): £110
Size (motor-to-motor): 225mm
Weight (frame only): 135g
Best feature: Replaceable arms
FPV frames
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
95
RC Controller  
and Receiver
It should be obvious, but you’ll need 
something to control your craft and 
communicate via the transmitter (TX), 
and your craft will need the means to hear 
it (RX). The pair will need to work together 
(so use the same manufacturer). The big 
brands are Spektrum, Turnigy and FRSky, 
and more expensive models offer the 
ability to store settings for multiple craft 
and possibly even to display telemetry 
data like battery health (assuming the 
aircraft can transmit it).
Goggles (or monitor)  
and Camera
FPV is defined by the ability to see that 
‘first person’ view. The company Fat Shark 
is almost synonymous with these goggles, 
although alternatives can be found (some 
find the bigger Quanum screen-in-a-box 
more comfortable). Some feature built-in 
receivers and might be bundled with a 
camera and transmitter, too. FPV racers 
see a lot of static, so look out for a ‘non-
blue screen’ monitor which won’t revert 
to a blank ‘no signal’ screen in tough 
conditions.
Batteries  
and charger
If you’re not going down  
the DJI route (and few  
people would purely for  
FPV flying), then charging  
batteries, or Lithium-ion Polymer batteries 
(better known as Li-Po), while still not 
exactly art, are a little further from science 
than you might hope for. A good charger 
and a charging/discharging regimen is 
important; always make sure you look 
after your batteries!
Gear up for FPV
Even if you’re getting a pre-built 
racer, make sure you’ve got (or 
are getting) everything you need.
Top 5
Flying Cameras
1 DJI Inspire 2
2 DJI Phantom 4
3 Parrot Disco
4 Yuneec Typhoon H
5 3DR Solo
Accessory: FrSky Taranis Q X7S
Price: £164 
Channels: 16 (up to 32) 
lcd screen: 128 x 64 outdoor readable LCD 
model memories: 60 (extendable via 
MicroSD (TF) card) 
Compatibility: FrSky receivers in 
D16/LR12 mode
We could still happily recommend the original Q 
X7 as an entry-level radio but with upgraded M7 
gimbals, new switches and several added features 
(such as the wireless trainer function), the Q 
X7S just offers that little bit more – but at a cost. 
Although if you don’t need the upgrades or the 
extra expense, you should now be able to pick up 
the older model at a knock-down price!
Lowepro DroneGuard BP 400
street Price: £129
internal dimensions: 30 x 20 x 47cm
weight: 1.69kg
type: Clamshell Backpack
Compatibility: DJI Phantom Series
A good drone needs a good backpack: Step forth 
the DroneGuard BP 400 from Lowepro. This 
backpack features a padded ‘CradleFit’ pocket for 
a 15-inch laptop, and inside the main body are 
flexible dividers that enable you to comfortably 
fit a DJI Phantom (1 to 4 Advanced), the remote 
controller, an iPad or iPad mini, and up to – by our 
estimations – eight spare batteries. A lot of thought 
has obviously gone into protecting your gear while 
you bounce over the landscape.
Fossils stuff revo
Category: Bind-n-Fly FPV
Street price: $288 (£219)
Size (motor-to-motor): 180-240mm
Weight (frame only): 115g
Best feature: Super rigid design
Holybro Kopis 1
Category: Ready-to-Fly FPV
Street Price: £175
Size (motor-to-motor): 230mm
Weight (with battery!): 300g
Best feature: Beautiful carbon fibre finish 
Lumenier QAV-X CHARPU
Category: FPV frame
Street price (frame only): £90
Carbon Fibre: 4mm thick
Size (motor-to-motor): 214mm
Weight (frame & battery protector  
only): 93g
Best feature: Camera mount system
ViFly R130
Category: Bind and Fly FPV 
Street Price: $189 (£143)
Size (motor-to-motor): 130mm
Weight (frame only): 165g
Best feature: Good all-round FPV model

96
DRONE MAGAZINE
Commercial
The FAA currently authorizes the use of 
unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) for 
commercial or business purposes on a case-
by-case basis. You may not fly your UAS for 
commercial purpose without the express 
permission from the FAA. You should check 
with the FAA for further determination as to 
what constitutes a commercial or business use 
of small UAS.
What is a commercial use of UAS?
Any commercial use in connection with a 
business, including:
l	 Selling photos or videos taken from a UAS.
l	 Using UAS to provide contract services, 
such as industrial equipment or factory 
inspection.
l	 Using UAS to provide professional services, 
such as security or telecommunications.
What are some examples of commercial uses 
of UAS?
l	 Professional real estate or wedding 
photography.
l	 Professional cinema photography for a film 
or television production.
l	 Providing contract services for mapping or 
land surveys.
If you want to use UAS for a commercial 
purpose, you have a few options. You can apply 
for an exemption from the FAA to operate 
commercially. You can use UAS with an FAA 
airworthiness certificate and operate pursuant 
to FAA rules. In both cases you would also need 
an FAA Certificate of Authorization (COA). 
For more information about how to apply for 
an exemption, visit https://www.faa.gov/uas/
legislative_programs/section_333.
Recreational
Currently, small unmanned aircraft systems 
(sUAS) may be operated for hobby and 
recreational purposes under specific safety 
guidelines as established by Congress. Small 
UAS flown for recreational purposes are 
typically known as model aircraft.
Under the Special Rule for Model Aircraft, 
recreational UAS must be operated in 
accordance with several requirements, 
including a community-based set of safety 
guidelines and within the programming of a 
nationwide community-based organization 
such as the Academy of Model Aeronautics 
(AMA). Operators not operating within 
the safety program of a community-based 
organization should follow the FAA’s guidance 
at http://www.faa.gov/uas/publications/
model_aircraft_operators.
What is recreational use of a sUAS?
The recreational use of sUAS is the operation 
of an unmanned aircraft for personal interests 
and enjoyment. For example, using a sUAS 
to take photographs for your own personal 
use would be considered recreational; using 
the same device to take photographs or 
videos for compensation or sale to another 
individual would be considered a commercial 
operation. You should check with the FAA for 
further determination as to what constitutes 
commercial or other non-hobby, non-
recreational sUAS operations.
What are the safety guidelines for sUAS 
recreational users?
l	 Follow community-based safety guidelines, 
as developed by organizations such as the 
Academy of Model Aeronautics.
l	 Fly no higher than 400 feet and remain 
below any surrounding obstacles when 
possible.
l	 Keep your sUAS in eyesight at all times, and 
use an observer to assist if needed.
l	 Remain well clear of and do not interfere 
with manned aircraft operations, and 
REGULATIONS: USA
We’ve covered flying in the UK in some detail in recent issues but the rules do 
change from one country to another. So for our American-based readers or anyone 
planning a trip Stateside in 2018 here is all of the essential information you need to 
know for flying in the USA, recreated with permission from KnowBeforeYouFly.org.
Photo by DJI

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
97
you must see and avoid other aircraft and 
obstacles at all times.
l	 Do not intentionally fly over unprotected 
persons or moving vehicles, and remain 
at least 25 feet away from individuals and 
vulnerable property.
l	 Contact the airport or control tower before 
flying within five miles of an airport.
l	 Do not fly in adverse weather conditions 
such as in high winds or reduced visibility.
l	 Do not fly under the influence of alcohol or 
drugs.
l	 Ensure the operating environment is safe 
and that the operator is competent and 
proficient in the operation of the sUAS.
l	 Do not fly near or over sensitive 
infrastructure or property such as power 
stations, water treatment facilities, 
correctional facilities, heavily travelled 
roadways, government facilities, etc.
l	 Check and follow all local laws and 
ordinances before flying over private 
property.
l	 Do not conduct surveillance or 
photograph persons in areas where there 
is an expectation of privacy without the 
individual’s permission (see AMA’s privacy 
policy).
If you want to use a model aircraft for 
recreational purpose, we encourage you to 
read the AMA’s Model Aircraft Safety Code and 
Community-Based Guidelines.
Public Entities
Public entities, which include publically 
funded universities, law enforcement, fire 
departments and other government agencies, 
may currently apply for a COA from the FAA in 
order to use sUAS in public aircraft operations.
Who can obtain a COA to operate public 
aircraft?
l	 Only government entities – such as federal 
and state government agencies, law 
enforcement agencies and public colleges 
and universities – can receive a COA for 
public UAS aircraft operations.
l	 Public aircraft operations must be conducted 
for a governmental function.
l	 COAs are most commonly issued to public 
(government) entities, but are also required 
for civil (private) operations.
l	 The FAA thoroughly evaluates each COA 
application to determine the safety of the 
proposal.
l	 COAs are issued for a specific period of 
time, usually two years, and include special 
provisions unique to each proposal, such as 
a defined block of airspace and time of day 
sUAS can be used.
How can I apply for a COA?
l	 Visit the FAA website for information on how 
to apply for a COA online.
l	 Since 2009, the FAA has taken steps to 
streamline the application process by 
transitioning online.
l	 The average authorization period is less than 
60 days.
l	 Expedited authorization is available in 
emergency and life-threatening situations.
For more information about public aircraft 
operations refer to 49 U.S.C. §§ 40102(a)(41), 
40125, and FAA Advisory Circular 00-1.1A, 
Public Aircraft Operations (Feb. 12, 2014).
Know Before You Fly is an educational 
campaign that provides prospective 
unmanned aircraft users with the 
information and guidance they need to fly 
safely and responsibly. For more information 
go to www.knowbeforeyoufly.org.
“Do not intentionally 
fly over unprotected 
persons or moving 
vehicles, and remain 
at least 25 feet away 
from individuals 
and vulnerable 
property”
Photo by ImmersionRC

Tennis is a Dangerous Game, 
Fleet, Hampshire, UK
“A fun shot taken with my family. This was 
to illustrate that drones can be great fun to 
fly and there is no limit to creativity. It was 
also a good opportunity for my wife and kids 
to get involved!”
Photo by Cyrille Pillet 
Supplied by Dronestragram

flYBY
  
With Flyby Technology’s unique training system, we will teach you to think like  
professional pilots and equip you with the confidence to excel in any situation.
All Flyby Technology instructors are ex-military pilots with extensive experience of 
 training today’s fighter and helicopter pilots.  We want to share that expertise  
with you to give you the professional and practical skills you need.
Whether you wish to be a professional pilot to land your dream job, are wishing to  
add to or start a business, or are  looking for the best training for you and your  
organisation, the team at Flyby Technology are here to make that happen.  
Visit the website and book on a course today!
Flyby Technology  Pilotwise International Ltd  |  Marlborough House  |  York Business Park  |  Nether Poppleton  |  York  |  YO26 6RW
FREEPHONE 08081 680626  |  admin@flyby.technology
www.flyby-technology.com
Your future as 
a drone pilot 
starts Here
neW! 
ONE-WEEK FAST 
TRACK COURSES 
AVAILABLE NOW
BooK online


