January 2018 · No 28 · Price £5.99
Hottest News • reviews • pro tips + more…
28
9 772059 287008
FPV FTW!
Three Vortex 
racers to be won!
snow days
Keeping you and your 
drone safe this winter 
GOING PRO
How to turn a hobby 
into a successful career TOOL BOX
The best kit to keep 
your drone in the air
Expert advice for rookie pilots
looking to earn their wings
essential NEW 
FLYER’S GUIDE
sky news
 Meet the photojournalist
taking UAVs into war zones
shoot to thrill
The first steps to becoming
a great aerial photographer

Practical Flight Training
Ground School
Ops Manual
Theory Test
Flight Test
SRG1320
Everything You Need to Immediately Submit  
your Application to the CAA including:
As well as:
Real Life Case Studies
How much to charge
The Right Kit for the Job
The Right Apps to Help You
Night Ops Training (Extra £100 + VAT)
How to Plan and Risk Assess any Mission
Waterproof Matrice 200 means rain won’t stop play
Ongoing Support and Advice from our Drone Experts
PHANTOMFLIGHTSCHOOL
Get your PfCO with the UKs Longest Established and 
Most Popular Practical Drone Training Organisation
A Radically Better PfCO Course
4 day Course, every month in Chester and Maidstone
£1,250 + VAT
01244 893 872    www.phantomflightschool.co.uk
A Radically Better PfCO Course
A Radically Better PfCO Course
PfCO delivered in association with the NQE, 3iC

Haleakala Sunset
Maui, Hawaii
“The sun beginning to set behind the 
West Maui Mountains. Taken from the 
switchbacks leading up to the summit 
of the dormant Haleakala volcano.”
Photo by Dawn Jernaill 
Supplied by Dronestagram

4
DRONE MAGAZINE
contributors
Adam  
Juniper
Andrew spends his time 
monitoring the globe for drone 
news stories, testing to death the 
things people send him (mostly 
drones), and hoping his cats won’t 
moult all over his quadcopters. He's 
a graduate of the Freedonia Flying 
Academy and has never failed to 
walk away from a UAV landing. 
You can follow him on Twitter at  
@raggedydrones
Andrew 
Watton-Davies
Gemma 
Cox
Lee  
Schofield
Mark 
Baker
Dan 
francis
Rowan is cinematographer and 
drone fanatic with a passion for 
exploring new places and shooting 
them with his Xiro Xplorer. He’s 
always looking for new places to 
fly and new ways to push his work, 
and you’ll often find him along the 
Pembrokeshire coastline on most 
sunny/non-windy days! You can 
follow his most recent shots/trips 
on Instagram @RTBaileyMedia.
rowan 
bailey
Hooked from the moment he saw 
the AR.Drone at CES, Adam has 
spent the years since building, 
crashing, sinking, losing and 
occasionally flying drones. With 
a background in photography 
publishing and over a decade 
writing about video and still 
photography in his rear-view 
mirror, he was the only choice for 
Ilex’s recent book The Drone Pilot's 
Handbook (on sale now!).
Our launch editor for DRONE, 
Gemma has worked at the helm of 
NEO magazine for over ten years. 
Spending over a decade immersed 
in Asian pop culture, she recently 
branched out into the world of 
technology to take on UAVs. She’s 
most excited about the future of 
FPV racing and the prospect of 
drone deliveries! Can drone racing 
go prime time? She certainly hopes 
so! Follow NEO at @NEO_Magazine.
Mark is a commercial drone pilot 
based in the New Forest. In 2014, 
he founded Naughty Cat Media 
and specialises in providing low 
level aerial video and photography 
using drones. Most of his work  
is carried out with lightweight  
and affordable systems like the  
DJI Phantom series. Check out 
some of his shots and get in 
touch at his website, located at  
www.naughtycatmedia.co.uk.
Dan has been working within 
the protective case industry for 
the past three years, specialising 
in solutions for drone and 
photography equipment. He 
founded www.cases2go.co.uk 
and has spent the last few years 
sourcing and supplying cases for 
military, offshore oil, motorsport, 
A/V and film industries. If you 
want to keep your drone safe, 
Dan's got your back(pack)!
Known online as Painless360, 
Lee has a YouTube channel and 
business dedicated to making RC 
technology easier to use. An RC pilot 
for over eight years and with a 30-
year background in electronics he 
became hooked on quads when he 
was bought one in as a present. The 
rest, as they say, is history! By now 
he can probably strip a quadcopter 
and rebuild it blindfolded.
Michael gained his experience with 
drones through the US Army, flying 
the Shadow 200 system. After the 
Army he flew drones in Alaska before 
founding his own company, M2 
Flight Solutions. As well as working 
with emergency services, he was also 
the first person to fly an AV Puma 
system 300 miles from the true North 
Pole – the furthest a UAV system has 
flown from a coastguard ship.
MICHAEL  
COOK

Uncooked Media Ltd, PO Box 6337,
Bournemouth, BH1 9EH
Telephone: 01202 087627
www.uncookedmedia.com
Editor: Ian Collen
dronemaguk@gmail.com
Managing Editor: Gemma Cox
Design: Imran Kelly
Contributors: Rowan Bailey, Mark Baker,  
Michael Cook, Dronestagram, Dan Francis,  
Dawn Jernaill, Adam Juniper, Lee Schofield, 
Andrew Watton-Davies
Customer Services
01202 087627  
contact@selectps.com
Advertising & Marketing
Group Commercial Manager: Rob Cox
rob@uncookedmedia.com
Licensing
To discuss magazine licensing or content syndication 
please email: contact@selectps.com
 
Subscription Enquiries
01202 087627
chris@selectps.com
Distributed through the UK newstrade by 
Seymour Ltd, 0207 429 4000 
2 East Poultry Avenue, London EC1A 9PT
Distributed through the UK/US specialist trade by 
Diamond Comic Distributors, 020 8536 5730
Printed in the UK by Precision Colour Printing, Telford, 
Shropshire, UK
DRONE is published every four weeks by Uncooked 
Media Ltd. All text and layout remains the copyright 
of Uncooked Media Ltd. DRONE is a fully independent 
publication and its views are not those of any company 
mentioned herein. All characters and artwork shown 
in this magazine remain the © and trademark or their 
respective owners. 
No part of this magazine may be reproduced without 
the express written permission of the publisher. 
DRONE can accept no responsibility for inaccuracies 
or complaints arising from editorial or advertising 
within this magazine. All letters and emails received 
will be considered for publication, but we cannot 
provide personal replies. The publishers cannot be held 
responsible for unsolicited manuscripts, photographs, 
transparencies or artwork. Please do not call, email or 
write to enquire whether your unsolicited submission 
has been received, as our priority is the production of 
the magazine.
Another quality cold cut from
EST. 2003
DRONE © 2017 Uncooked Media Ltd
ISSN 2059-2876
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
5
WELCOME
To Issue 28 of Drone Magazine!
 I
t may have seemed like we jumped on Santa’s sleigh a little early last time around, 
but with this issue taking us into the New Year (when it feels really weird to be 
celebrating Christmas!) it gives us the opportunity to turn our attention to the 
many people who might have picked up a new model during the festive season – 
whether it’s as a gift from others or a bargain in the sales that just couldn’t be ignored.
Although we’re leaning towards welcoming new pilots into the fold, that doesn’t 
mean that existing drone owners can’t also benefit from a fresh look. Perhaps you’ve 
upgraded to a model with a camera that makes it worth looking into your photo and 
video options? Maybe you’ve got the kit you need, along with a New Year’s resolution, 
to finally kick-start those ambitions to turn your aerial skills into something more 
professional? Whatever your passion, there’s always scope to learn in this industry 
and hopefully we’ve got something that will benefit pilots of all abilities.
If you really are passionate about the future of drones, and in spreading the good 
word among the wider aviation community, how about getting involved with the 
CAA’s new ‘Share the Air’ initiative? You can find out more about it on page 18 and, 
having attended the first major event of its kind in the UK, I can safely say that 
there are a lot of people who are interested in finding out more – both drone owners 
and pilots from General Aviation curious to find out what all the fuss is about (and 
whether we’re really a threat to them, or an ally in the skies!).
Certainly there’s a great deal of work that can be done to help lessen the sense of ‘us 
and them’, and instead bring the whole aviation world together in unison to promote 
the safe, responsible and shared use of the airspace around us.
Enjoy the issue – and Happy New Year!
Ian Collen, EDITOR
facebook.com/DRONEMagUK
twitter.com/DRONEMagUK
instagram.com/DRONEMagUK
january 2018  •  Issue 28
www.dronemagazine.uk

18
10
contents
6
DRONE MAGAZINE
10 // BUSINESS CLASS
Parrot has launched two new craft geared 
towards the professional user – meet the Bebop-
Pro Thermal and the Bluegrass.
12 // TROUBLED WATERS
Rotor Riot causes a stir after a video of its latest 
FPV stunts around a bridge draws the ire of 
Canadian authorities.
14 // DOWN UNDER
Google has taken its prototype Project Wing 
system to Australia to further test deliveries of 
food and aid to rural areas.
22 // NEW FLYER’S GUIDE
If you’re new to drones and looking to make your 
first flights, we’ll help make you a master of the 
skies in no time!
28 // COMPETITION
We’ve not one, not two, but THREE ImmersionRC 
Vortex quadcopters to give away! That’s got to be 
worth a quick email…
30 // IN THE WARS
A fascinating insight into the work of Gail 
Orenstein, a photojournalist now using drones 
to report on areas of conflict and crisis.
15 // SIZE MATTERS
Another delivery solution, but this time 
featuring a collapsible frame that greatly 
reduces the drone’s non-flying size.
16 // SILVER SERVICE
Drones can not only mix a mean cocktail, they 
can also bring emergency network coverage to 
crisis areas.
18 // SHARE THE AIR
We report back from the CAA’s first self-hosted 
event to bring drone users and General Aviation 
pilots together.
22
28
30

SUBSCRIBE TODAY FOR ONLY £14.99! 
TURN TO PAGE 88
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
7
38 // YOU’RE HIRED!
Fancy turning your passion for drones into a 
business? We’ve some great expert advice to 
help get you started.
46 // INDUSTRY INSIGHT
We speak to the UK trade association ARPAS 
about the hot topics on its agenda and what to 
expect in 2018.
50 // TOOLED UP
Running repairs and replacing parts is a key 
part of a drone owner’s down-time. We round 
up the best kit for your toolbox.
70 // A NIP IN THE AIR
Don’t let the cold weather keep you grounded! 
Warm yourself up with some great tips for 
flying in a winter wonderland.
78 // IN THE FRAME
More excellent advice for newcomers, as our 
friendly neighbourhood professional guides you 
through your first aerial shots.
90 // BUYER’S GUIDE
Depending on when you read this, it’s either 
Christmas or the New Year sales – and both are 
a great excuse to upgrade your fleet!
58 // CROSS WORDS
We take a look at how the current version of 
Team BlackSheep’s Crossfire RC link is helping 
to boost both long and short-distance flights.
62 // CASE STUDY
A review of the DroneGuard BP 400 backpack 
from Lowepro – perfect for your Phantom and a 
whole lot more.
64 // PILOT LIGHT
A great interview with expert pilot and designer 
Zoe Stumbaugh as she reflects on the good and 
the bad of the drone industry.
62
70
64
38
50
78

8
DRONE MAGAZINE
Photo by Mark Baker / Naughty Cat Media

78
how to take your first 
shots on the way to 
becoming a master 
aerial photographer
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
9

 P 
arrot has confirmed the addition of two 
quadcopters to its ‘professional’ fleet of 
craft. It’s unveiled the purpose-designed 
Bluegrass offering a bespoke quadcopter for 
agriculture users, along with the Bebop-
Pro Thermal, an amended version of the 
Bebop 2 which is geared towards helping the 
construction industry and rescue services 
carry out thermal inspections in safety.
The Bebop-Pro Thermal was originally 
announced back in May (see Issue 22 for more) 
and is a modified version of the Bebop 2, with 
a rear mounting for the 36.5g, FLIR One Pro 
thermal camera, with a built in 1440 x 1080p 
RGB sensor and 160 x 120p thermal sensor. In 
addition to the drone and a decent bundle of 
the usual accessories – SkyController 2, three 
batteries, two chargers and a backpack – the 
system comes with access to the FreeFlight 
Thermal app, which enables the FLIR One Pro 
to be used with three imaging modes. 
‘Standard’ mode displays thermal 
images from red to blue, allowing for quick 
identification of hot and cold spots; ‘Dynamic’ 
offers a similar function but adapted to the 
ambient temperatures; and ‘Hotspot’ is 
designed for fire safety and emergency search 
and rescue specialists, highlighting only the 
highest temperatures combined with the 
RGB image. Estimated thermal temperature 
readings for an area can be gained by accessing 
the app on your smart device – which is a free 
Android download, but only compatible with 
the Bebop-Pro Thermal. 
Despite the additional weight of the FLIR 
camera and its housing, we’ve been assured 
by Vanessa Loury at Parrot that “there is 
only a minor impact on flight time” with the 
projected 25 minutes a little down on the 30 
minutes offered by the recent Bebop 2 Power. 
Vanessa also told us that Parrot has been 
collaborating with firefighters for several 
years, and that during the 2016 summer floods 
in Paris, the French manufacturer’s drones 
were used by firefighters to survey the severity 
of the flooding in real-time, thanks to the 
live streaming functionality available on the 
craft. The information gathered then allowed 
for the quick decision to evacuate some 4,000 
residents from the area. 
As well as being a useful and very portable 
tool for firefighters and other emergency 
services, the Bebop-Pro Thermal and its 
companion app also targets the work of 
architects, builders, real estate agencies and 
other professionals in related fields. Examples 
include roofers checking for thermal losses 
without putting themselves at risk, as well 
as accessing hard-to-reach places when 
inspecting buildings for a full thermal analysis.
10
DRONE MAGAZINE
Parrot Goes Pro
Two new models added to its Business Solution fleet
Words by Andrew Watton-Davies

Crop Circles
Launched at the same time was the Bluegrass, 
Parrot’s first quadcopter designed specifically 
for use in the agricultural industry (not 
counting the fixed wing Disco or eBee Ag 
models the company also owns). The craft 
comes equipped with two monitoring systems: 
a front facing Full HD video camera and a 
Parrot Sequoia multispectral sensor, which 
allows for the collection of images over four 
distinct spectral bands. 
This combination enables users to carry 
out low level and precise monitoring of farm 
land and infrastructure, as well as spotting 
potential problems with crop fields. With a 
25 minute flight time, it’s able to cover up to 
30 hectares of land at an altitude of 230 feet 
(70m). The system also comes equipped with 
the Pix4Dcapture flight planning app for ease 
of operation, as well as access to the AIRINOV 
FIRST+ mapping and analysis platform for 
processing the collected data.
We asked Vanessa about Parrot’s move into 
agricultural quadcopters and she explained: 
“We wanted to design a drone capable of 
transporting a payload (the Parrot Sequoia 
multispectral solution) while offering the right 
flight time to fly over a needed area. We also 
wanted Parrot Bluegrass to be a multi-purpose 
tool, so it has a front camera in addition to the 
multispectral sensor.” 
Vanessa added: “Parrot Bluegrass is a multi-
purpose quadcopter solution for smart farmers 
or small agriculture cooperatives that helps 
them to detect problem areas in all type of 
crops.” She also stated that the Bluegrass is able 
to fly at low altitude (and up to 2km or 1.2m), 
whereas its fixed-wing sibling, the Disco-Pro 
AG is able to cover larger areas whilst flying at 
higher altitudes. 
Although the Bluegrass appears to be a new 
design that is optimised for different tasks to 
the Disco, we’re told is does inherit a lot from 
Parrot’s fixed wing projects. Vanessa says 
the new model “is designed around Parrot 
C.H.U.C.K. (Control Hub & Universal Computer 
Kit), the advanced autopilot also included in 
our fixed wing drone Parrot Disco.” 
We were also told that Parrot’s experience 
with fixed wing systems, together with 
its ongoing interest in understanding how 
professionals work and the feedback they 
receive from them, has enabled it “to identify  
areas in professional activities where our 
drones – associated with a complete solution – 
would be able to save time, perform better and 
generate more business.”
The Thermal package is priced at $1,500 
(£1,226) with the Bluegrass at $5,000 (£3,755). 
Details on both can be found at Parrot.com. 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
11

12
DRONE MAGAZINE
 T
he FPV collective Rotor Riot has found 
itself under investigation by Transport 
Canada and the Delta Police Department 
after posting a video of a flight made near a 
bridge in British Columbia. The footage showed 
a drone being operated in the first-person view 
flying within metres of the structure while it 
was in use by local traffic, and includes several 
dives around the support pillars as well as 
alongside vehicles on the bridge.
Following the release of the video in late 
October, a number of Canadian news agencies 
became aware of the flights, with News 1130 
describing the incident as “a drone dangerously 
flying over one of the busiest bridges in Metro 
Vancouver”. The flight has been described 
by many commentators as being in direct 
violation of Canadian drone law, which 
prohibits flights outside of direct line of sight, 
more than 500 metres from the operator, or 
within 30 metres of vehicles or the public for 
drones weighing more than 250g. 
Whilst individuals can be fined up to $3000 
CAD per violation, a business can potentially 
be looking at $15,000 for each rule breached. At 
the time of the news reports Transport Canada 
stated that it was “aware of this event and 
reviewing the video footage.” 
It also pointed out that “there are specific 
rules and guidelines in place on how to fly a 
recreational drone – also called a model aircraft 
– safely and legally. Transport Canada will 
not hesitate to take immediate action should 
the people flying this drone be found to be in 
contravention with the regulations.”
Posting on the Rotor Riot Facebook group 
shortly afterwards, member Chad Kapper 
stated: “Some of you might be aware that Rotor 
Riot got some negative attention from the 
Canadian news. I contacted Transport Canada 
directly (instead of waiting for their call). I 
expressed my desire to learn what we can from 
all of this. I mentioned the idea of working 
with them to create some Mythbuster-style, 
educational episodes (closed course, permits, 
etc.)… Contrary to the accusations and fear-
based reactions, I want this hobby/sport to 
grow in a positive way. I’m willing to dedicate 
my efforts to making it happen.”
This was followed by another post to the 
group, with Chad offering a letter to assist 
Transport Canada with its investigation 
into any violation of the Canadian Aviation 
Regulation (CAR) 602.41 (“No person shall 
operate an unmanned air vehicle in flight 
except in accordance with a special flight 
operations certificate or an air operator 
certificate”) and that he had been advised by 
the Civil Aviation Enforcement investigator 
that the maximum fine could be as high as 
$25,000 CAD. 
Chad also said that: “I intend on being 
accountable to our actions and my number 
one priority is that our actions don’t negatively 
affect the hobbyists or drone operators in 
Canada.” He also commented to the group that 
“while neither side has closure yet, the call 
seemed to end on a very positive note. I’m not 
looking forward to a fine (which I’m hoping 
can be reduced), however I feel really good 
about being able to share this experience with 
all of you!”
We have been in contact with Chad about the 
incident, but he was unable to make further 
comment at the time of going to press.
Bridge Toll
Rotor Riot facing fine after FPV stuntS
Words by: Andrew Watton-Davies

See WWW.LCEGROUP.CO.UK for 
accessories & more 
A small yet powerful drone with a range of 4.3 mi 
(7km), 5 vision sensors, a 4K camera supported by 
a 3-axis gimbal, is at your command with just a 
push of your thumb or a tap of your finger.
MAVIC
PRO
INSPIRE
2
Image quality, power and intelligence to meet 
the needs of professional filmmakers and 
enterprises around the globe. 
OSMO
includes 2x spare batteries
Motion without blur.
Action shots without shake.
OSMO MOBILE
It turns your smartphone into 
a smart motion camera.
OSMO +
3.5× optical and
2× digital lossless zoom.
OSMO PRO
4K video at 4096×2160/25fps.
Micro Four Thirds sensor.
OSMO RAW + FREE 512GB SSD!
Lossless 4K videos in
CinemaDNG RAW.
Micro Four Thirds sensor. 
£2999.00
£1899.00
£689.00
£219.00
£489.00
PHANTOM 3 STD        £449.00    
PHANTOM 4 PRO from £1589.00
INSPIRE 1 PRO          £2999.00    
YUNEEC TYPHOON H £739.00    
IN 
STOCK
IN 
STOCK
PHANTOM 3 PRO        £849.00
+ FREE SECOND BATTERY & HARD-
SHELL BACKPACK
SPARK
COMBO
IN 
STOCK
£1099.00
£3059.00
from
only
£629.00
only
Meet Spark, a mini drone that features all of 
DJI’s signature technologies. With intelligent 
flight control options, a mechanical gimbal, and 
a camera with incredible image quality.
Photography and videography platform packed 
with professional features and new safety and 
redundancy elements.
Take to the skies with the world’s first fully 
integrated aerial system equipped with 
the only M4/3 camera built exclusively for 
aerial imaging.
More intelligent, more powerful, and more 
accessible than ever before, the Phantom 3 
Professional offer an immersive, fun flying 
experience.
Safe, easy, and fun to fly, the Phantom 3 
Standard makes it possible for everyone to 
reach for the sky.
Equipped with a 1-inch sensor, the Phantom 4 
Pro camera shoots video at up to 4K 60fps and 
20 megapixel stills. It has 4 directions of obstacle 
avoidance and a 30-minute flight time.
VISIT YOUR LOCAL 
LCE FOR ALL 
OF OUR LATEST 
CAMERA OFFERS  
UK MAIL ORDER Next day delivery available from all LCE branches. Postage & Insurance £4.99 for most items. E. & O. E. 
Prices quoted include VAT @ 20%.  Prices subject to change. Goods subject to availability. 
BRANCHES NATIONWIDE
BATH
01225 462234
 
BRISTOL (BALDWIN ST)
0117 929 1935
 
BRISTOL (BROADMEAD) 
0117 927 6185
 
CHELTENHAM 
01242 519 851
 
CHICHESTER 
 
01243 531536
 
CHESTER  
01244 326531
 
COLCHESTER  
 
01206 573444
 
DERBY 
 
 
01332 348644
 
EXETER  
 
01392 279024
 
GLOUCESTER 
 
01452 304513
 
GUILDFORD 
 
01483 504040
 
HEREFORD  
 
01432 272655
 
LEAMINGTON 
 
01926 886166
 
LINCOLN (HIGH ST) 
01522 528577
 
LINCOLN (SILVER ST) 
01522 514131
 
LONDON (STRAND) 
 
0207 3790200
 
MANCHESTER  
 
0161 834 7500
 
NEWCASTLE 
 
0191 213 0060
 
NORWICH  
01603 612537
 
NOTTINGHAM 
 
0115 941 7486
 
PLYMOUTH 
 
01752 664894
 
PORTSMOUTH 
 
023 9283 9933
 
READING  
 
0118 9592149
 
SALISBURY 
 
01722 335436
 
SOUTHAMPTON (CIVIC CTR)  
023 8033 1720
 
SOUTHAMPTON (HIGH ST)
023 8022 1597
 
TAUNTON
01823 259955
 
WINCHESTER
01962 866203
 
WORCESTER 
01905 22314
 
OPENING TIMES:
Mon—Sat: 9am —5:30pm

 P
roject Wing, the drone delivery project 
being run by Google’s ‘Moonshot 
Factory’ research and development 
division (also known as ‘X’), has announced 
that following the success of its 2016 testing 
at Virginia Tech University, it has now started 
testing its system in Australia. 
The new round of trials involves the delivery 
of products by the Guzman y Gomez Mexican 
food chain and the Chemist Warehouse chain 
of pharmacies, and will see customers in 
the Australian Capital Territory (ACT) and 
Queanbeyan regions of Australia being able to 
place orders for delivery via their smartphones.
The ACT area that has been selected for 
testing is described by the company as “rolling 
land spotted with gum trees and horses,” in 
which residents face a 40-minute round trip to 
reach shops to make food or medical purchases. 
As well as being the kind of location expected 
to most benefit from UAV delivery, the Project 
Wing team has noted that “with each delivery, 
we encounter a new yard space with its own 
layout of trees, sheds, fences and power lines. 
That means that in addition to learning what 
people want delivered, we also have to learn 
how to best deliver items to people.” 
The team has added that it will to train its 
system to “reliably identify safe and convenient 
delivery locations” through the use of sensors 
that are used to identify obstacles such as 
parked cars or outdoor furniture. It was also 
confirmed that this was not their first trip 
Down Under. “We’ve been testing in Australia 
since 2014, when we delivered radios, batteries, 
and bottled water to farmers in Queensland” a 
spokesperson told us. 
The choice of the location as a test centre 
was also helped by the fact that “Australia 
has always taken a progressive approach 
to drone use and has used this technology 
for many years in agriculture, industry and 
during emergency situations. This is reflected 
in Australia’s progressive regulatory system, 
which encourages the safe and controlled 
testing of drone technologies.”
Details on the craft being used in the trial 
are limited; however the images that have 
been released suggest that it is a hybrid craft 
with at least 14 propellers. The spokesperson 
confirmed: “Our current prototypes have 
fixed wings like a traditional airplane, with 
a wingspan of roughly one metre, as well as 
hover rotors like a quadcopter drone. This 
allows us to get the best of both worlds – rotors 
help us take-off and land with precision, 
and we can take advantage of the speed and 
efficiency gained by flying on the wing.”
The trials will also offer a chance to learn 
more about the companies providing the 
products for delivery. Guzman y Gomez will 
help the team identify the notice periods and 
lead times required for cooking, packing 
and loading the food, as “one well-timed 
workflow”. Meanwhile a variety of nearly 100 
products being offered by Chemist Warehouse, 
and in a wide range of shapes and sizes, will 
give details on how to optimise the use of the 
fixed-sized packaging. 
In addition, the team will also be working 
with ACT Rural Fire Services during the trials 
to help them assess “how drone delivery 
technology could be used in fire-fighting and 
other emergency services environments to 
help bring urgently needed supplies to the 
frontline.” More details on the project can be 
found at blog.x.company.
Wizards of Oz
Project Wing takes its prototype to Australia
14
DRONE MAGAZINE
Words by: Andrew Watton-Davies

 R
esearchers at the École Polytechnique 
Fédérale de Lausanne research institute 
and university in Switzerland have been 
demonstrating their ‘PackDrone’ design for a 
folding delivery UAV. What makes it unique 
is that, while it has many of the navigation 
and control features found in other delivery 
systems, both the package and the multirotor 
system are encapsulated in a protective shell 
that is wrapped around it when in flight, but 
folds away when not in use.
The design was developed by PhD student 
Przemyslaw Kornatowski with funding from 
NCCR Robotics. The carbon fibre tubes of the 
cage are connected with flexible 3D-printed 
joints, which protect the craft and its cargo 
from collision or fall damage, while also 
allowing for the delivery recipient to catch 
the system in their hands without danger of 
harming themselves or the vehicle.
The cage comes with an auto-cut off power 
system once it is opened, enabling what the 
team is describing as “last centimetre delivery”. 
As well as the improved safety, the design also 
makes it easier to store the delivery system, 
with frame collapsing down to 92% of its in-
flight volume – small enough for it to be easily 
transported when not in use. 
It can currently carry a 0.5kg package up to 
a distance of 2km. However, Professor Dario 
Floreano, who supervised the project, has 
told us that the system can be scaled up or 
down to accommodate different parcel sizes 
and operational requirements. “We have been 
developing foldable and collision-resilient 
drones for more than five years, but the 
project on folding drones for last-centimetre 
delivery started approximately three years 
ago and involved at least four engineers and 
more than ten undergraduates. We have 
also developed the autonomous navigation 
system and the ground logistics software, and 
experimented with different user interfaces 
and operation modalities.”
As for the PackDrone, Professor Floreano 
said that the inspiration behind this approach 
was to “think of the drone as a wrapping 
paper that you use to package”. He also 
added: “We arrived at this design by trying to 
address a fundamental issue with the laws of 
physics, which dictate that the lift generated 
by an aerial surface is proportional to the 
product of the aerial area and of the air speed 
over that surface. In the drone world, this 
means that larger payloads require larger 
wings or larger propellers. 
“Therefore, drones that transport parcels 
are relatively large and this generates two 
problems: The first problem is that one needs 
more storage space for the drones than for the 
parcels, which is impractical both for logistics 
centres and for postal officers carrying the 
drones in their scooters or cars. The second 
problem is that drones with large propellers 
can be dangerous for people, which is why 
today delivery drones are conceived to land or 
release parcels far from untrained persons.”
So far the craft has gone through more than 
150 test deliveries, with no incidents incurred 
and lots of information gathered on how people 
handle the drone. Exact details on the next 
step of the project have yet to be revealed, but 
the professor told us that “we received a lot 
of attention and interest from companies and 
we are currently working with some of them 
to deploy our solution for last-centimetre air 
delivery.” More details can be found at the 
website actu.epfl.ch.
In the Fold
Collapsible frame shrinks delivery options
Words by: Andrew Watton-Davies
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
15

16
DRONE MAGAZINE
 O
nedr.One, a New York-based provider of “high impact 
drone-based experiences,” has unveiled its latest experience: 
Cocktails with Drones. When installed at an event, guests 
are able to select any cocktail they wish and have it loaded into the 
custom-designed cradle mounted under the drone. Then, by either 
hitting the ‘shake’ or ‘stir’ button, they can have the craft mix their 
drink through a pre-set flight routine.
Michael Cirino, chef and artist of the team behind the creative, 
if largely impractical project, has confirmed that the process 
doesn’t change the taste of the drink, adding that: “It’s all about the 
experiences of asking a robot to make you a drink and watching it fly 
with ‘your’ drink. Creating an awesome moment, a truly special and 
personalised video, and then being able to marvel over that moment 
while you enjoy your beverage.”
As the system is intended for use near event attendees (and 
exposed blades and alcohol aren’t a wise combination!), Michael says 
safety had to be a priority in its creation. “The layout and execution of 
the event was actually designed with safety regulators, lawyers and 
insurance agents to make sure we were looking out for the guests, 
the client and our staff in as many different ways as possible.”
He also commented that “the project was designed to be 
whimsical, simple and unexpected, and it captures guest’s attention. 
The sound of the drone, the wind, the videos being displayed on-site 
and through their friend’s social media all get people excited about 
having their chance at getting a personalised video or cocktail.” If 
you need to see it to believe it, head over to onedr.one.
Get your cocktails on the fly
Words by Andrew Watton-Davies
 A
T&T, the world’s largest telecommunications company and 
second largest provider of mobile phone services in the USA, has 
deployed its Flying COW (Cell on Wings) drone system to the 
San Juan area of Puerto Rico to help with the relief efforts following 
Hurricane Maria. This is the first time that the system has been actively 
deployed outside of a testing environment, and saw the system provide 
mobile connectivity for customers in a 40-square mile area with a 
configuration that allows for use by over 4,000 people.
The system uses a Pulse Vapor 55 drone, which has a total propeller 
span of over 7.5ft and a launch weight of more than 55lbs. Flying 
between 200 and 400ft in a fixed location, the craft is tethered to a 
power generator, which allows for both the craft and its on-board 
communications equipment to provide voice and data services for “an 
extended period of time”. 
Project leader Art Pregler confirmed that whilst this was the first 
real-world outing for the system, there are still plans for it to be used in 
additional areas, including the military hospital at Manati Coliseum, to 
further assist with relief efforts. However, as the Flying COW exceeds 
the weight limit for operating under the FAA’s Part 107 rules, an 
Emergency Certificate of Authorisation had to be issued – although it 
was not confirmed whether or not this impeded on the system’s usual 
operations. More details on the Flying COW can be found at att.com.
Holy COW
UAV system provides mobile 
network relief
Mixing it Up

Lost your Mojo?
It’s right here,waiting!
ImmersionRC Limited proudly presents, in association with Brother Hobby Motors, a product put into motion by 
HQ Props, featuring RotorSense 32-bit 30A ESCs, running off of a selection of ST Microelectronics ARM processors, 
utilizing the latest Betaflight 3.2 Code. Constructed of 3K Carbon Fiber and HDPE plastic, supported by Titanium Screws and 
powered by twin F3 processors. Designed to be used by Experienced Pilots intent on creating yaw-dropping freestyle videos
Vortex 230 Mojo
Available 
now!
$379
€399
£379

 A 
fter the Civil Aviation Authority 
announced its new Share the Air 
initiative a couple of months ago (as 
reported back in Issue 26), it was quite handy 
when it confirmed its first ‘official’ event was 
to be held a relatively short hop from us at 
Compton Abbas Airfield in Wiltshire. The mid-
November weather was befitting of a British 
autumn, but that did nothing to dampen the 
enthusiasm of those attending, all keen to 
find out more about the growing popularity of 
drone technology.
What makes this initiative all the more 
interesting is that it aims to bring drone 
owners (and presumably people who are 
already sold on the idea of UAVs) together 
with pilots in the wider General Aviation (GA) 
community – people who might have rather 
more reservations about this new technology 
encroaching on ‘their’ airspace; uniting the 
two with a shared passion for flying that 
resonates throughout. 
It’s hoped that by bringing these groups 
together at local airfields across the UK, drone 
owners will gain a greater appreciation for 
the airspace around them and the importance 
of treating it, and other airspace users, with 
respect. Conversely it aims to help to spread 
the positive aspects of UAV use among the 
GA pilots, and show to the rest of the aviation 
community that we’re not all idiots looking to 
fly at 1000ft over airports.
Although the CAA was hosting this 
particular event, it’s hoped that airfields and 
flying clubs up and down the country will 
take it upon themselves to hold similar events 
– whether to large crowds or just a handful of 
curious locals. We referred to this as the first 
‘official’ event because a club-run event was 
held in Manchester a little earlier, and anyone 
reading this who fancies getting involved 
somehow is actively encouraged to check the 
DroneSafe website or contact the CAA for help.
The Compton Abbas event was a fairly 
professional affair, with the 130-strong crowd 
snapping up the free tickets within a few 
days of them being offered. Held in one of the 
airfield’s hangars, the gathering was supported 
by Yuneec UK, on hand to showcase to its new 
H520 model – and eventually putting on an 
impressive aerial display during a break in the 
inclement weather.
 NATS was also there to talk air traffic control 
and, most notably, its Drone Assist app, while 
the Phantom Flight School was offering plenty 
of great advice to new and seasoned pilots alike. 
Local distributor UAVision also had a stand, 
ready and willing to provide expert tech support 
(and make a few sales to boot!), while Rotor Rush 
was working alongside VR specialist V-Mach 
Media to showcase its new drone simulator 
– something which proved a big hit with the 
younger members of the audience while their 
parents talked about ESCs and flight times.
18
DRONE MAGAZINE
A United 
Front
Ian Collen reports back from 
the CAA’s first ‘Share the Air’ 
event, looking to bring drone 
owners and General Aviation 
pilot together…
Images courtesy of the Civil Aviation Authority

Air Support
At the start of proceedings a show of hands was 
asked to identify the drone owners from the 
GA pilots, with what seemed like a response of 
around 65% in the former, 25% from the latter, 
and the remaining 10% happy to plant a flag 
in both corners. It was widely to be expected, 
as the drone community still has a lot to learn 
about the industry as a whole and days like this 
are also a great chance to get an inside look at 
the world of General Aviation.
A Q&A at the end of the presentations 
and the general chat over coffee and cake 
afterwards gave an interesting insight 
into the various concerns of the attendees. 
Unsurprisingly a fair amount of the queries 
were targeted towards the CAA and the 
likes of drone regulations and 
commercial use – but there was 
a common appreciation that safety and the 
legal and moral responsibilities associated with 
flying was paramount; a theme which also 
helped to bring the GA pilots on board as it was 
clear that pretty much everyone at the event 
was of a similar mindset.
Speaking after the event, the CAA’s assistant 
director of corporate communications, 
Jonathan Nicholson (also the day’s host 
presenter and target of the bulk of the 
questions!), told us that despite some 
differences, the drone and GA communities 
do have a lot in common. “With a lot of private 
pilots the age profile is late to middle age and 
a lot of them got into aviation from building 
radio controlled aircraft – and I think today’s 
version of that is drones.
“Absolutely there is an initial wariness 
from GA pilots because they don’t 
have the knowledge of what drones can do 
and the kind of people that are involved. 
When you talk to them about the things that 
are the really big potential commercial uses 
for drones, and the potential for transferring 
that technology into GA aircraft – and where a 
really big commercial drone future could fund 
some of that – then the GA people become very 
engaged, and they’re big fans of drones by the 
time you get to that level of conversation.”
As for future events, that’s up to the drone and 
GA communities. The CAA is planning to host 
another day in the spring (though further north 
in the UK), but anyone interested in ‘sharing the 
air’ at their own local airfield or flying club is 
encouraged to access www.dronesafe.uk, where 
you can download presentations, promotional 
flyers and other support materials to help put on 
your own show! 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
19

Parys Mountain Copper Mine,  
Anglesey, Wales  
Photo by James Hare
A Reader’s View

Although at a quick glance this may look like the bottom of a child’s 
crayon box, this impressive array of colour is actually an overhead 
view of a copper mine on a Welsh mountain – a mine that dates back 
to the Bronze Age. 
The photo was taken by James Hare, who explained to us: “It 
was taken with my DJI Spark and is a series of nine images stitched 
together. The colours of the landscape at Parys Mountain are unreal 
and from a distance the photo looks like an abstract painting – it’s 
only on closer inspection that you really see what it is.” It certainly 
highlights the unique perspectives you can get from the air!
If you’d like to get one of your own photos into the magazine – and by 
submitting a shot for us to use, you are acknowledging that it is your own 
work and property – then email us at dronemaguk@gmail.com, along 
with the image (the highest resolution where possible) and ideally a few 
background details about what’s in it and why/how you got the shot. Maybe 
your favourite photo could make it into our next issue! 

Learning to Fly
Getting a new drone is one thing, but actually operating it 
safely and with confidence takes a little effort. Thankfully 
Adam Juniper is on hand to deliver your first flying lesson…
 I
f you’ve just taken possession of a drone, then 
you’ll no doubt be itching to get in the air. 
Actually getting it into the air isn’t really the 
hardest part; the point is that you can’t really 
consider yourself to have mastered the basics 
of piloting until you’re able to stay in the air for 
as long as you want, and then bring it down in 
a state that would make further flight feasible. 
Luckily all that is something we can cover in the 
time it takes to charge a battery!
A drone is a curious hybrid of controls; on one 
level you think of it as having a distinct front and, 
as such, be able to fly forward and backward, as 
well as climbing and descending. The aircraft can 
also rotate – whether it’s flying forward or not – 
and strafe left or right without rotation.
The idea of drones having a front, and so being 
able to go ‘forward,’ might seem a little strange 
if you’ve only given them a cursory glance. Most 
have a rotational symmetry that makes it difficult 
to identify the front from back, but in practice 
there usually is something to differentiate the 
nose from the tail. If there’s a camera, it’ll most 
likely point forwards (even it can also rotate). If 
there’s no camera you’ll probably just have to 
make do with the paint scheme or possibly some 
conveniently coloured LEDs to keep tabs on 
which way it’s facing! 
Take Control
The default control mode for your remote 
controller, whether it uses physical thumbsticks 
or virtual sticks on a phone/tablet screen, is called 
Mode 2. There are actually 4 modes: Mode 1 with 
the throttle on the right is relatively unusual in 
the drone world, although it was more common 
historically in the UK and Australian model plane 
communities; Mode 2 dominated in the USA and 
the Far East. 
Since ready-built aircraft tended to be shipped 
with the largest markets in mind first, Mode 2 has 
come to dominate multirotors. My advice would 
be to fall in line with it, but since many systems 
do allow you to choose in the settings, check that 
you’re in Mode 2. That will be the assumption in 
this article.
Basic Movements
A drone will use its on-board sensors to stay 
level, with you able to move it in either plane 
horizontally with the right stick – which includes 
your forward and backward movements. On the 
left hand stick you’ll have both the rotational 
control (turning left and right) and the throttle 
(ascending and descending). It can be confusing 
at first, because car owners will be used to the 
‘throttle’ controlling forward movement, but 
22
DRONE MAGAZINE

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
23
knowing how the throttle will behave is crucial, as there 
are two distinct behaviours. 
The most common among mainstream consumer drones 
is for an automated hover (or ‘altitude hold’), in which the 
left stick will be spring back to the centre when you let go of 
it and the drone will maintain its altitude using its built-in 
altitude sensors. Racing drones and smaller ‘toy’ models are 
more likely to have a manual throttle, in which you’ll need 
to constantly tweak the throttle control in order to keep the 
drone at the preferred height.
Headless Mode
There is an exception to Mode 2, called Headless Mode, 
which is offered by many drones as a useful option. This 
dispenses with the idea of the aircraft having a fixed 
heading, and instead moves in relation to your position (so 
you can ‘fly it as you see it’). The right stick moves the craft 
around you in one direction or another, while up and down 
bring the drone nearer or sends it further away.
The aircraft can still be rotated with the left stick’s 
horizontal motion, so you can re-direct the camera on your 
subject even if the camera only points forward, but whether 
Headless Mode is any easier to use is very debatable. What 
it definitely is not is a path toward flying drones in a FPV 
racing context, which, of course, is very much head-on and 
requires a lot more skill and control.
Pre-Flight Checks
Before anything – before heading outdoors, certainly – 
you need to make sure that all of your batteries are fully 
charged and that your software is up to date. You will find 
rechargeable batteries not only in your drone, but in many 
cases for your controller as well – and it’s easy to forget one 
when charging the other. If your controller requires you to 
use a phone, iPad or other accessory, don’t forget to charge 
that, too. If you need a memory card for the camera, check 
you’ve got one and that there’s plenty of room on it (ideally 
you’ll get into the routine of backing-up and formatting 
your card/s regularly).
As we’ve seen, there are some options for setting up your 
drone and it’s important that you know which ones you’ve 
selected before powering up, especially those that affect the 
flight characteristics. Make sure that you also know if and 
where your system displays battery information. Failing 
that, set some kind of countdown timer to warn you to land 
a minute or two before you expect your battery to expire.
It’s also worth making sure you pick a sensible take-off 
spot. From a practical perspective, a flat surface is good, 
keeping the drone’s sensors level and avoiding vegetation 
that might obstruct the props or gimbal. One option is to 
carry with you a fold-out landing mat, which will also 
reduce the risk of dust being thrown up on take-off. 
From a legal and common-sense perspective, you need 
to be 50m from people and buildings, 150m from crowds 
and built-up areas and rather more from airports. You 
can find more guidelines on the CAA’s ‘DroneCode’ at 
www.dronesafe.uk and a more detailed breakdown of UK 
regulations on page 94.
Taking Flight
Once you’re ready for take-off altitude is your friend. One 
of the most common mistakes first-time flyers make is 
attempting to hug the ground in case anything should go 
wrong. In practice, being near the ground gives you the 
shortest amount of time to correct most possible problems 
and the largest number of obstacles to overcome. There are 
limits, not least the 400ft (120m) the CAA advocates you stay 
below (largely as manned aircraft have a minimum distance 
of 500ft from ground objects). In general don’t be over-
cautious with your first climb – even 100ft is a long way up!
So, with your take-off position chosen, power up your 
controller and then your drone. At this point it’s always best 
to have control already available in case something goes 
wrong. When you’re ready, step back from your drone with 
the craft facing away from you. If the drone is facing toward 
you, many of the controls will be reversed, making it very 
unnatural – it’s definitely better to get the hang of things 
the right way round first.

Indoor drones with propeller guards allow a little more 
leeway, but if you’re taking off it’s a good idea to face the 
back of the drone from at least ten metres. Now it’s time 
to give your drone ‘the signal’ to arm it (usually a simple 
action via the controller) and get those propellers turning. 
Then just push the left stick upward to launch it into the air, 
without being afraid to take it a good distance into the sky, 
but still within clear sight. 
Be ready to keep your aircraft from drifting sideways 
with the right stick by countering any unplanned 
movements such as those caused by a strong breeze; if it 
moves a little to your left, push the right stick slightly to 
your right. This is how you compensate for the wind if you 
don’t have (or aren’t using) your system’s GPS – DJI drones 
call this ATTI Mode. Mostly, though, your first concern 
should be achieving a controlled take-off and then simply 
hovering using the left stick’s vertical motion (the throttle).
You’ll soon find that you’ve got the hang of this simple 
manoeuvre and are ready to progress. If you’re flying a 
drone with GPS and have only touched the throttle then 
ideally you’ll barely have drifted from the take-off point so 
you can try a first landing. To do this throttle down a little 
– to the point the aircraft is slowly descending – but do not 
push the stick to the floor as the drone will drop too rapidly 
and you risk slamming into the ground. 
Get Moving
After slowly bringing the drone back to earth, you can de-
arm the craft to test that you understand how that process 
works and then power it straight back up for another test 
flight. Take off again and resume your hover, but this time 
you can start working with the right stick. Assuming there 
are no obstacles, push it gently forward (pitch) so the drone 
moves away from you. Now try pushing it left a little the 
same way and watch the aircraft move. It should be easier to 
judge the distance travelled as you strafe (roll) left and right, 
24
DRONE MAGAZINE
24
DRONE MAGAZINE
“One of the most common mistakes first-time 
flyers make is attempting to hug the ground 
in case anything should go wrong”
so use this as an opportunity to get a feel for the drone’s 
travelling speed.
Use this process to move your drone in a square path and 
bring it back to hover close to its original take-off position 
(so forward, left, back, right). The front of the drone should 
still be pointing in the same direction (away from you). 
Once you’re confident with these movements it’s time to 
experiment with the drone’s rotational control on the left 
stick, also known as yaw. 
By rotating the drone on its axis, you change your 
perspective on all the controls you’ve just tried, so a first 
step would be to try turning the drone through 180-degrees 
– so if there is a camera on the front, it’s now facing you 
ready for your first drone selfie! Then carefully repeat the 

movements you made while getting the hang of the right 
stick; notice how moving the stick left now sends the drone 
right. You can repeat the same ‘square’ pattern as before 
with just the right stick, or you can try rotating the craft 
through 90-degrees so that the ‘front’ is facing the intended 
direction of travel. 
It’s always a good idea to round off each exercise with a 
manual landing, rather than relying on a Return to Home 
function, for example. It’s also good practice to rotate 
back to the original facing away take-off position before 
descending as it’s just easier to land if you don’t have to be 
mentally translating the roll and pitch controls. Before you 
power down, check the battery. 
Manoeuvres in the Park
Once you’re in the air and you’ve tried out the basic 
movements, the next step is to start putting them together 
into some basic manoeuvres. By combining yaw and roll 
to orbit, for example, you start to make the drone more 
useful and by practicing these moves you give yourself 
something useful and fun to help build up your confidence. 
There’s nothing really complicated here, and once you’re 
comfortable with them, you’ll be able to put them together 
however you choose – you’ll be a pilot!
Circle
The horizontal control on the left stick (in Mode 2) takes 
the place of the rudder on a traditional model plane, which 
turns the drone around its central axis. Combining this 
with pitching forward using the right stick and you’re flying 
in a manner much like a traditional model plane. If you can 
fly in an even circle, this is a good way of getting the knack 
of the controls – you’ll need to constantly balance the speed 
and yaw which can take some getting used to, but it’s great 
practice and helps train your mind to instinctively choose 
which control is best for correcting any drift.
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
25

Figure of Eight
Still keeping things broadly two-dimensional, try 
moving from the circle to a figure of eight. It’s a little more 
challenging as you’ll need to do more than just keep the 
sticks in roughly the same positions. This time you’ll need to 
actively move the left stick as you move into and out of the 
turns at either end to accommodate the change in direction.
Orbit
This is similar to the circle, but this time pick a central 
point or object (possibly yourself) and rotate around it, 
while keeping the front of the drone pointed at the object. 
If you’ve got a camera, this is another great time to perform 
a ‘dronie’ and test drive its video capabilities. Control-wise, 
combine the left stick’s horizontal moves (yaw/rudder) with 
the sideways movement of the right stick (roll) so that the 
speed you’re traveling with the craft is exactly countered by 
the speed you’re rotating. 
If you apply the rudder too hard you’ll spin in small 
circles and still drift off in the same direction, while if the 
directional roll control is too strong, the drone will arc 
away like a decaying orbit. Only the perfect balance will 
give you an orbital circle. If getting great video is your 
plan, this is definitely a move you’ll want to master. 
Admittedly, more and more drones will have such 
manoeuvres as one-touch automated features, but you 
should still learn to get used to flying them all yourself 
– you never know when you might lose GPS or have a 
software malfunction!
The illustrations used in this article were replicated 
with permission from The Drone Pilot’s Handbook, also 
written by Adam Juniper. The book is available now from 
Amazon and other good retailers priced at £9.99.
26
DRONE MAGAZINE
Fly, Fly Away!
This should be enough to get you comfortable 
with the basics of flying, until you decide it’s 
time to take an advanced class or perhaps start 
targeting specific uses (such as photography or 
FPV racing). However, by combining these turns 
and then gradually adding the third dimension with 
the throttle – such as an orbit that slowly rises up 
or descends like a helix – you’ll be able to quickly 
build up your skills and confidence. And with a 
little perseverance and a lot of practice, you’ll be a 
master pilot in no time!

MCMCOMICCON

terms and conditions
Competition is open to mainland Great Britain and Northern Ireland residents only. Prizes are subject to availability. No correspondence will be entered into. No employees of 
Uncooked Media or the companies providing the prizes may enter. No cash alternative is offered to these prizes. Entries are only valid if they reach us by the closure date. Multiple 
entries will be disregarded. The publisher’s decision is final. Good luck!
competition
Win!A Vortex 
Racing Quad
awesome FPV action for racers of all levels!
28
DRONE MAGAZINE
 I
mmersionRC has been at the forefront of FPV flying for many 
years, as regular readers will have seen in our interview 
with co-founder Sander Sassen in Issue 19. Back then the 
company was launching its small but speedy Vortex 150 racing 
quadcopter, with the larger Vortex 180 also on the way. Now the 
ImmersionRC team is ready to let fly with its newest model, the 
Vortex 230 Mojo – and the great news is that we’ve got one of each 
model to give away!
The three designs each excel in their own right, and with 
differnt pilots in mind. The Vortex 150 is perfect for newcomers or 
intermediate pilots looking to hone their skills. It combines speed 
with agility and its robust frame makes it a great choice for anyone 
looking to have fun without too much drama. The Vortex 180 is 
similar in design but the 4-inch props and custom XNova motors 
makes it an out-and-out racer at its very best. The all-new Vortex 
230 Mojo really combines the best of both worlds, maintaining 
the electric speed and precision of its predecessors but also adding 
improved agility to appeal more as a freestyle/racing crossover, 
with fast stops and super-smooth rolls and tricks.
All three craft pack the best in ImmersionRC tech, with the 
Synergy flight control system with twin F3 processors, Tramp HV 
video transmitter, Touch ‘N’ Race support and much more. You 
can tailor each quad with your own choice of battery set-up and 
you’ll also need to add your own receiver and display (typically 
your FPV goggles of choice), but whatever you use you can be sure 
you’re taking flight with one of the best racers around!
You can find out more about each model and the rest of the 
ImmersionRC range by heading to www.immersionrc.com – but 
to be in with a shout of winning one of these three great models 
all you have to do is email us with the correct answer to the 
following question:
We featured ImmersionRC’s excellent  
new video transmitter back in Issue 20. 
What is it called?
A) trump av
B) tramp hv
C) hobo hd
 
To enter simply send an email to dronemagcomp@gmail.com, 
with the correct answer in the subject header, along with your 
name, address and a contact phone number. 
Closing date: 04 January 2018. Good luck!

T: 01225 722733  M: 07776 450293  E: info@phoenixuavcentre.co.uk  W: phoenixuavcentre.co.uk
Phoenix UAV Centre, Unit 3, Springleaze Park, Farleigh Road, Norton St Philip, Somerset BA2 7NG
 
FLIGHT SCHOOL
TAA CERTIFICATION
ALL IN ONE LOCATION
PACKAGE DEALS AVAILABLE
01225 722733
info@phoenixuavcentre.co.uk
www.phoenixuavcentre.co.uk
Phoenix UAV Centre, Springleaze Park, Farleigh Road, Norton St Philip, Bath, Somerset BA2 7NG
COURSE OPTIONS
• Ground School
• Flight Training 
• Flight Tests
• Operations Manual 
Consultancy
• Aircraft Servicing/
Maintenance/Repair
• DJI & Yuneec Dealer
The original and best Commercial Drone (UAV) training centre
Some flight training offered at reduced rates
Established 2010

30
DRONE MAGAZINE
DRONE PRO
All photos by Gail Orenstein
Fight or Flight:
“W
hen I first saw a drone I just started thinking, 
not could I possibly, but I have to take these 
drones into war zones.” Having worked as 
a photojournalist since first documenting prisoners in 
Guatemala in 1982, subsequently covering conflict zones 
across 71 countries and seeing her work in a wealth of major 
media outlets (CBS, the BBC and TIME, to name just a few), 
drones are a relatively new technology in Gail’s toolkit, but 
they are changing how she can view the world around her 
– and therefore how all of us can see these events unfolding 
in the news.
“Immediately when I saw small UAVs I thought that 
this absolutely is an extension of my work, because where 
I work I have to be incredibly careful and there are places 
I want to go but of course I can’t.” It’s not just avoiding 
threats on the ground, such as IEDs and snipers, but also 
in reaching places that are difficult on foot. “I’d always 
been fiddling with monopods, extending them and trying 
all different ways of extending this DSLR camera,” Gail 
explains. “Even when I was doing film, it was ‘how can I 
push these boundaries more?’ And so drones were just like a 
happy marriage.”
A native of Mystic in Connecticut, USA, Gail has been 
living in London for 20 years, and she earned her flying 
wings with the Phoenix UAV Centre out in Somerset, 
before opting for a DJI Phantom 3 Pro and a Parrot Bebop 
2 to kick-start her fleet. “I was really ready to fly; I just 
wasn’t sure if I should bring these to Iraq and where I 
should start flying first with them. In the end I decided I 
was just going to go ahead and bring them.”
Her first trip with the drones took place in March 
2017 during the liberation of Mosul. “There were a few 
photographers, a few video journalists, but no way were 
A photojournalist with more than 25 years’ 
experience working within conflict and 
humanitarian crises, Gail Orenstein spoke 
with Ian Collen to explain how drones have 
given her work a fresh perspective…
Taking drones into war zones
Gail combines aerial work with her more traditional 
on-foot photography, so it’s not about changing 
her toolkit; it’s about expanding her options.

there any drone pilots there at that time when it was being 
liberated,” Gail says. “I think I saw one crew in Mosul but 
none at the refugee camps. That’s not to say they weren’t 
there, it’s just that during the few months I was there 
doing that work, I never saw anyone – so it lent itself a lot 
of opportunity.”
A Flexible Friend
Gail lived out in Iraq for a few months whilst working 
there, and quickly found that there was a lot more to her 
new equipment than just getting photos and aerial footage. 
“Every single day I had drone work. I think especially in 
conflict zones you’re really a useful tool when somebody 
hears that you’ve got the ability to do particular types of 
surveying. So I went from camp to camp, looking at what 
the NGOs (non-governmental organisations) needed to 
build in the camps, working with programme directors 
and things like that. We looked at a lot of the area and how 
far out they could build using the footage, and it was pretty 
amazing to be able to help in a different way.”
One such example was in a refugee camp in eastern 
Mosul which saw floods of people fleeing the city, leaving 
those in charge of the camp having to manage some 40,000 
new residents. “They always had to walk the premises to get 
a sense of surveying, so droning was just a natural thing I 
presented to them,” Gail told us. 
“We’d sit down, look through the footage, go over the 
aerial views of how large the camp was getting, where 
clusters of people were using the water on the ground, why 
they were using this area of water more than the others… 
You could look at the footage and really start to think about 
food and aid distribution – all kinds of ways without having 
to walk around the premises every single time.”
All of this was a far cry from the safety of the quaint 
British countryside where Gail had trained to fly with the 
Phoenix UAV team. “I learned how to drone in the most 
difficult circumstances at a very early point in my (aerial) 
career,” she says. “When I decided to take the drones to Iraq 
“I was putting in my batteries while riding in a little 
auto-rickshaw, as I knew I had about eight minutes 
until the monsoon hit”
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
31
DRONE PRO
The Phantom Menace
DJI has become the biggest name in the drone world, but that fame comes 
at a cost. Not only because negative media stories on UAVs will typically 
have a stock photo of one of its models alongside it, but also because 
customs officials and security forces also recognise them – as Gail has 
found out on her recent travels to Iraq. “Every time I bring the large DJI 
craft in, it’s impounded,” she says of her Phantom 3 Pro. “There hasn’t 
been a time when I’ve been through and it hasn’t been impounded.”
Part of the reason is that the Asayish, the Kurdish military security 
wing, use the Phantom 4 for things such as surveying, so there’s an 
awareness of the product range there. Also others have been looking 
to weaponise these craft. “Islamic State had used the Phantom in some 
pretty gruesome ways so until I had the proper paperwork, they wouldn’t 
release it,” Gail says. Curiously the likes of the Bebop 2 and Mavic Pro 
have remained largely untouched.
“A part of me is now 
thinking I don’t really 
need the hassle, so the 
next time I’m not bringing 
the Phantom. I’ll have my 
Mavic and my Bebop. So 
it might be something 
people want to think 
about; you have to make 
sure you have your 
paperwork in place before 
you start bringing larger 
models into these areas.”
Gail shows a young refugee how her small 
Bebop 2 operates. Many Iraqi refugees have had 
very negative experiences with UAVs, such as 
drone strikes or when IS used smaller craft as 
weapons against the civilian population.

32
DRONE MAGAZINE
I had to fly through really difficult situations,” pointing to 
the likes of power lines and telephone wires that had been 
downed amidst the surrounding rubble. 
One prime example was when she was asked by 
Assyrian Christians to film the nine churches in Nineveh 
Plains that had been destroyed by Islamic State. “They 
wanted to rebuild them and they said ‘can you drone 
inside the church and can you film as close as you can to 
these altars as we need to see where these major repairs 
are and we can’t get up there’. So I did the Church of 
Ascension, which is the biggest church there, and wow! 
I would say every three feet there were downed wires. 
And the church is pretty large, so it was really quite 
challenging but I was able to get close to the altar and get 
them the footage they wanted.”
In contrast, more recently Gail also had to contend with 
monsoon season on the border of Myanmar and Rakhine 
State in Bangladesh, where torrential rain could be only 
minutes away. “The times the monsoon hit you’ve got 
maybe 20 minutes of flying time and then it is going to 
be a downpour. So that’s the antithesis to Iraq where it 
was very dry, so you have to start thinking a lot about the 
weather conditions.”
With a lot more buildings downed during the conflict, 
Gail found herself flying inside more often, making the 
smaller and more nimble Bebop 2 the preferred drone 
DRONE PRO
Gail explained: “Many of the churches in Nineveh 
had been tripped-up (booby-trapped) by ISIL upon 
their defeat and the drone helped the community 
to evaluate the aerial footage first before 
approaching the hazardous situation.”
Part of a survey of Camp Chamkor in eastern Mosul. 
After scouting for a suitable flight path, Gail was 
able to get a good idea of the enormity of the camp.

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
33
of choice on many occasions. The fixed camera required 
more thought, “but it was so good through literally so 
many obstacles. I was talking to someone who does a lot of 
drone racing and I thought it was interesting as they were 
doing these straight lines and I was doing just the opposite, 
dodging and weaving, and you really learn to be quite agile 
when you’ve got such obstacles in front of you.”
In the Zone
Certainly flying in areas of conflict demands a somewhat 
different mentality to your working habits, making speed 
and mobility preferable over something that might be better 
but more cumbersome. “Drone journalism is a very niche 
kind of droning; it’s very different,” Gail told us. “I’m not a 
drone Instagram person. So if you’re looking for revved up, 
HDR footage, that’s very secondary to me. Good quality is 
a priority but I’m not looking for 20,000 hits for the most 
beautiful footage.
“I see these guys using their DSLRs on their drone but in 
the kind of environments that I’m in, I think that would be 
a hindrance because I don’t really have the time to change 
lenses. You can’t fuss about; you have to be safe and you 
have to be quick and really think on your feet. Most of the 
time I was putting in my batteries while riding in a little 
auto-rickshaw, as I knew I had about eight minutes until 
the monsoon hit – you really have to prepare for these 
situations in a very different way than just your normal pre-
flight preparations. 
“Going fairly hardcore with the flying like this has been 
very good for me. You have to be very fast and when you’re 
navigating you have to think very quickly. Until you do it, 
it’s very hard to describe because most people don’t pilot 
DRONE PRO
that way; it’s a very different way to pilot. You really have to 
be malleable if you’re going to make a conscious choice and 
say ‘I’m going to drone in a conflict zone’. I find it incredibly 
challenging and absolutely fascinating.”
What’s interesting with Gail’s work is that her experience 
in photojournalism tends to keep her a lot closer to the 
ground than many of the newer recruits to the profession. 
“There’s a big difference between the way we work, as they 
drone at a massive distance. Coming from my background  
A few days prior to this photo taken on foot with 
her DSLR, there had been fatalities following a 
stampede at another food distribution area. As 
tensions rose, Gail was able to use her drone to 
capture the rest of the story from a safer distance.
“That is a profound, life-changing 
experience when you start reviewing 
footage in post-production that you 
never imagined you could see”

as a photojournalist, I never shot with anything except a 
14mm fixed camera, so any time there was unrest, I was 
always in the unrest, shooting, getting the emotion of the 
crowd and everything like that. 
“When I started droning I just couldn’t fly at a distance. 
I could see more and I could see the environment but I felt 
very distant from the actual emotion of what was going 
on around me. When you’re piloting over it, it’s like I’m 
not feeling any emotion, I’m just droning – but I feel it in 
post-production when I look at the footage. Whereas as a 
photojournalist you’re very much in the moment with the 
emotion, so it’s very, very different.”
A Fresh Perspective
Using drones does give Gail more options in the field, both 
in terms of offering up the aerial view as well as reducing 
the risk of putting herself in harm’s way. She tells of a 
situation where thousands of hungry Rohingya people were 
struggling to reach a food distribution area and there was a 
risk of escalation. “A few days before there was a stampede 
where several people were killed in another feeding 
distribution field. So I said, ‘you know what? This is way 
too dangerous’ so I jumped off the truck and said ‘I’m just 
going to drone it’. It’s really fascinating to be able to have 
that choice.”
Another example saw her taking an auto-rickshaw past 
a new camp for days on end, before finally deciding to take 
a drone up for a better look. “I was absolutely gobsmacked 
at how large it was – it was enormous. I went back and forth 
every day to the same camp and it wasn’t until I droned it 
that I got a real sense of the enormous impact, not just upon 
the environment but the whole situation. That is a profound, 
life-changing experience when you start reviewing footage 
in post-production that you never imagined you could see, 
because you couldn’t get there.”
The nature of her work and the places she travels to 
also means Gail has on eye on the wider humanitarian 
potential for drones, pointing to UAVs dropping aid and 
relief bags into war zones. “Your mind starts to think 
about all kinds of things related to how you can help 
humanity using the technology. A camera is a great 
tool, but a camera is never going to have an extended 
arm that can feed people. Now that I have my drone and 
34
DRONE MAGAZINE
DRONE PRO
Not-so-Secret Agents
If you’re interested in following in Gail’s footsteps, her advice is to get 
yourself an agent. Gail herself is contracted to three agencies and you can 
find all of her drone footage on Getty Images. “I’m already established as a 
photojournalist, so my agents took the video as well,” she tells us. “It was 
like ‘okay, now she does video as well’, so I had a place to send the footage. 
“A lot of people who are starting out don’t have that, so they might go 
and drone for the love of droning, but you might not get published, or you 
might not get an assignment from an NGO. It’s very, very competitive, 
because you have people like me who are published already, who are in the 
field already and the next step is we’re using drones. If you’re looking to 
start this now, if you’re looking to monetise this, you should probably have 
an agent before you go, some place that can sell the aerial footage. I’m 
fortunate in that I’m already established.”
“When I started droning I just 
couldn’t fly at a distance… I felt very 
distant from the actual emotion of 
what was going on around me”

I’ve got the ability to do this, I’m thinking about bigger 
responsibilities towards these crises.”
High Hopes
Unsurprisingly Gail has an optimistic view of her future 
drone use, as far as seeing the potential for the technology, 
even if there is still a long way to go. Battery life is one such 
issue – not too dissimilar to Gail’s younger days dragging 
around up to 50 rolls of film in her bag, only now she’s 
packing a bumper seven batteries for each drone she takes 
into the field. It’s an expensive and heavy solution but 
there’s not always going to be a handy power supply in a 
conflict zone.
Having recently upgraded the Phantom 3 to a Mavic 
Pro Platinum to fly alongside her Bebop 2, Gail is getting a 
little more flight time, and she also appreciates the reduced 
noise and foldable frame that adds to the ever-important 
portability. Her only regret is that drones weren’t around 
on her previous visits to the likes of eastern Ukraine and 
Syria: “I can imagine how many less risks I could have put 
myself in if I’d had a drone when I was in these places, but 
the technology just wasn’t there.”
As the technology does advance, Gail is hopeful that more 
photojournalists, and more women, will follow her into the 
skies. “Women have really lost out on technology,” she says. 
“I’m not making any profound feminist statement here, I 
just know because I see it. It’s true that there are wonderful 
female photojournalists. Are they in the majority? Certainly 
not, but they’re there. I’m hoping we can get in early on 
drone journalism, or in any drone field whatever it is, but 
especially in my field because many of the victims are 
women and children.”
One area where Gail is interested in having a direct 
impact is with the very people she’s been documenting over 
the years. “It would be great if maybe locals could be trained 
to work in the refugee camps doing surveying because a lot 
of the time when you’re in a refugee camp for a long time, 
there’s such severe boredom. I would love to be part of some 
kind of training scheme that trains young females to start 
thinking about how this could fit into their future. I’d love 
to see a lot of young women get in on this technology early; 
that would be fabulous.”
As for her own path into the drone world, Gail seems to 
find it challenging and rewarding in equal measure. “So 
far I’ve been lucky. In this drone community I have felt 
incredibly welcome and everybody has been fascinated 
by what I’ve been doing. I feel very good about it; I feel 
wonderful about the way women are getting involved in the 
drone industry right now. It’s very exciting.”
To see more on Gail’s photojournalism career and her 
aerial work head to her website www.gailorenstein.com. 
You can also follow her on Twitter @DroneOrenstein.
DRONE PRO
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
35


Making Windrows 
Saskatchewan, Canada
“Swathers at work in a canola field.”
Photo by Dawn Jernaill 
Supplied by Dronestagram

Business 
School 
Whether you’re 
new to flying or 
a seasoned pilot 
looking to turn 
pro, there are 
many commercial 
opportunities out 
there. Rowan Bailey 
is on hand as your 
personal drone 
business advisor…
All photos by DJI 
38
DRONE MAGAZINE
Helping your aerial career take off!

 S
o you want to turn this hobby into a profitable 
income? It’s more easily said than done, so it’s 
important you appreciate the ins and outs of 
what it’s like to start an aerial business or how 
to supplement your current work in a safe and legal 
way. In this article we’re leaning more towards the likes 
of photography and video work as these are the most 
common areas, but the same philosophy can apply to other 
areas of drone use.
Before we get into it, there’s a lot of information here 
and a lot of do’s and don’ts. It may sound like we’re 
being negative about the amount of work involved or the 
restrictions in place but this is simply to highlight the 
challenges you’ll face. Working as a professional drone 
operator is an incredible job and very rewarding, but it’s 
crucial to ensure you’re operating legally and safely! 
To start with, it’s worth talking about the UAV 
industry and how it’s evolved over the past few years. 
Since drones as we now know them hit the market the 
industry has evolved at an incredible rate. In fact, the 
legalities surrounding safe operation had to catch up 
(and many would say they still need to) with the amount 
of people getting into it. Technology has made it so that 
almost anyone can be up and flying relatively easily so 
understandably when people hear you can make money 
from this fun hobby it’s no surprise that there’s a lot of 
them wanting a piece of this potentially lucrative pie.
The problem with anything like this is that the 
marketplace can become saturated very quickly, with 
competitors undercutting each other – and let’s not forget 
those people or companies that are operating illegally 
or unsafely and creating a negative stereotype for drone 
operators in general. This brings us to our first point… 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
39

How Much Can You Earn? 
You might hear about drone operators making £1,000+ day 
rates and think that you’ll be turning over six figures in no 
time, but unfortunately for most this simply isn’t going to 
happen. There are different ways to profit from this work and 
certainly some aspects can bring in rates such as this, but 
there are so many things you have to take into account. 
Depending where you’re based, there could already be 
dozens of companies competing for the same kind of work 
you want to get into, so make sure you do your market 
research. We’ve seen it many times where someone starting 
out will offer to do jobs for next to nothing just to get their 
foot in the door and expand their portfolio. This is absolutely 
fine but it does mean that your clients will come to expect 
similarly low rates in the future. 
I’ve also seen many people offering their services for 
free because they haven’t got their permissions from the 
CAA yet. This, again, is a big problem in many situations 
as they are breaching a lot of the restrictions. Even though 
they’re not charging for the work, it doesn’t mean the 
footage/photos aren’t being used for commercial use so 
they are still liable and should be operating with the correct 
qualifications and insurance. 
The majority of people working in the drone industry 
are working as cinematographers and/or photographers. 
There’s good money in commercial and large scale 
production work, but it’s also incredibly hard to get your 
foot in the door unless you already have the contacts or 
experience. Realistically most of the work out there will be 
events-based, real estate or tourism and travel work. 
You can earn some good money from this but if you’re 
already a photographer or videographer you’ll be aware 
of the kind of budgets your clients have – so don’t expect 
to charge a lot more for using a drone on top of your 
usual rates. You can top up your costs by including it, but 
remember that flying the drone is only a small percentage 
of what’s required time-wise when shooting professionally 
(more on this later) so you may end up with a lot more work 
for little return. 
If you want to get into a more niche area of the industry 
then it could be worth looking into the likes of 3D mapping 
and construction work. You will need to spend more time 
40
DRONE MAGAZINE
40
DRONE MAGAZINE
“There’s good money in commercial and large scale production work, but 
it’s also incredibly hard to get your foot in the door”

on courses, training and investing in the relevant software 
but if you market yourself properly the potential income is 
much greater. It’s a growing market, albeit not on the scale 
of standard photo/video work, so if you do your research 
and get your qualifications and permissions, you could soon 
be on your way to making a full-time income from survey 
and site inspections. 
Ground work
When you become a commercial drone operator you’ll 
quickly realise that the majority of your daily routine 
involves paperwork, research, requesting permissions and 
marketing; followed by marketing and then some more 
marketing. Flying drones is a lot of fun but for the most 
part if you’re shooting photo and/or video content you’ll 
typically be in the air for 10-30 minutes (assuming you’ve 
planned things correctly!). 
The paperwork and assessments that you need to operate 
legally can take a few hours to complete, if not more 
depending on the complexity of the shoot. There are things 
you can do to expedite these processes but these are not 
things you want to get wrong. It becomes easier when you 
get used to what you’re looking for and the various forms 
you have in place. 
The main point to make here is that I’ve heard many 
people moaning about this aspect of the job. What you 
have to remember is that if you’re running a business then 
all liability lands on your shoulders. You may have never 
crashed a drone or had any problems whatsoever, but if you 
aren’t aware that there’s going to be low flying military tests 
in the same area or high levels of interference from a nearby 
power grid, then it could result in a serious accident. You 
may be confident with your drone of choice but you never 
know if you’re going to have a motor failure or a fly away. 
If you’re flying at an event with a lot of people on the 
ground and your drone disconnects from the remote and 
it’s in ATTI mode, then you need to know exactly what 
procedures to follow. This involves running tests to try to 
reconnect and, if all else fails you need to be on the phone 
to the nearest airport and emergency services to inform 
them of a drone heading their way. You should have all this 
information at hand, as you don’t want to be wasting time 
Googling these numbers or rooting around for a manual. 
Getting Qualified
In order to operate professionally you need a few things in 
place, not least a Permission for Commercial Operations 
(PfCO) in the UK. The CAA determines that any flight which 
will result in payment or commercial gain would need 
to be done by a qualified pilot. As mentioned, it’s not just 
about whether you are earning money or not; it’s whether 
the content you’re creating is being used for commercial 
purposes and whether you’re operating within the 
restrictions imposed on aerial work. 
For example, if you’re into property management and 
take some great aerial shots of a house you’re selling, even 
though you’re not being paid directly, then there’s still a 
commercial gain to be made from those photos. Likewise, 
you can’t offer jobs for free to build up your portfolio prior 
to taking your training if you want to operate legally. 
Technically even YouTube videos with ads running can 
count as commercial use so bear this in mind and err on the 
side of caution if you’re not sure. 
The bottom line is you need permission from the CAA to 
operate commercially. Most people call this a license but it’s 
not quite how it works. You’re essentially given approval to 
operate within certain parameters, with the PfCO to show 
that you have a solid understanding of drone operation, 
airspace regulations and all of the necessary checks and 
research required for safe operation. 
This is typically done in a classroom environment where 
your studies lead to written exams (and the creation of an 
Operations Manual that outlines your personal commercial 
intentions and safety protocols), most likely followed by a 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
41

practical flight test where you showcase your abilities to 
follow procedure before and after flight, as well as operating 
in certain challenging situations. Think of it as a driving test 
for your drone. 
These courses can take anywhere between two and four 
days, so prepare for hotel and travel costs if the nearest 
training centre isn’t close by. Costs vary from course to 
course but generally speaking you can look at spending 
£1,000-£2,000 on a course and around £110 a year on your 
fees to the CAA. If you manage to pass both the written and 
practical stages then a request for your PfCO will be sent 
off to the CAA, which generally takes about 4-6 weeks to 
get approved. There are further additional qualifications or 
permissions for specific situations that you can do, either at 
the same time or at a later date, such as operating heavier 
platforms and flying at night. 
In addition to passing your tests you also need to prove 
to the CAA that you have the necessary insurance in place 
to cover your commercial work. Without this they will not 
give you permissions. Depending on what drone you’re 
using and the extent of the coverage you need, insurance 
policies can start from around £25 per month – although 
typically you’d be looking at £40-£50 a month. 
A Head for Business
One thing for certain is that you need a good business head 
on your shoulders. You don’t need to have a business degree 
or even have experience in management but becoming 
a professional drone operator isn’t just about flying and 
creating great content. As mentioned, there’s a lot of 
paperwork to complete for each and every job. On top of 
that you’ll need to strategise things like marketing, website 
development, a social media presence and networking in 
order to turn it into a profitable business. Even if you get all 
of this nailed there’s still no guarantee that you’ll make a 
healthy income just from flying. 
You should do your market research; find out what 
competing aerial companies are in your area and how much 
they charge. It may not be worth starting out on your own 
if the market is saturated and it may even benefit you to 
approach one of these businesses offering your services 
as a freelancer, or possibly change tact and look to offer 
something that they don’t. 
Teaming up with others is no bad thing, though. You 
may need to produce a show reel or shadow them on a 
few shoots, but if you can prove your worth then you can 
cover jobs where they’re double booked as a win-win for 
both parties. Working as a freelancer is a great way to earn 
money in this industry if you know what you’re doing and 
you’re naturally networking whilst you work, which can 
have some incredible returns. 
A lot of my work has come from freelancing and making 
connections in the industry – this, in turn, has led to 
42
DRONE MAGAZINE

Photo by Christian Miller / Parley for the Ocean 
international jobs as well as working for large organisations 
and getting sponsorships from drone companies. 
Gear Up!
If you’re thinking of turning your hobby into a profession 
then the chances are you already have a platform that you’d 
be operating with, or at least a good idea of what you want. 
Beyond your drone of choice, however, there are several 
other things that you’ll need in addition to make sure you’re 
operating safely and with backup. 
It’s a Health & Safety staple, but you’ll need to get a high 
visibility jacket to make it clear that you are the ‘Pilot 
in Command’ as well as relevant jackets for additional 
staff such as camera operators and spotters. Some form 
of signage to state that drone operation is taking place in 
a given area is a great way to inform anyone that may be 
passing not to enter the area or make them aware of the 
potential dangers.
You are required to be in control of those around you 
(such as making people in the area aware you are flying and 
adhering to the rules outlined on page 94) so you’ll need 
to consider anyone who might wander in unexpectedly. 
There could be public access just out of sight of your take-off 
area so sign posting these areas will highlight the dangers 
immediately. You can also cordon off the take-off/ landing 
area to establish a safe (and legal) perimeter. However, even 
with these signs in place it’s still recommended that you 
have an assistant with you to help keep the public and other 
dangers in check and away from you and your drone. 
Another key addition is an anemometer to measure wind 
speed at ground level. You’ll need this for your notes but also 
to ensure that the weather predictions are accurate when on 
location. Bear in mind that wind speed on the ground will 
differ from that at a higher altitude, but it will give you a 
rough idea of what you’re dealing with at lower levels. Make 
sure you test the wind speed over the span of 5-10 minutes 
so that any large variations of wind are measured. Anything 
less and you could miss a gust that increases the wind speed 
above what your platform can handle safely. 
A first aid kit should also be on your shopping list. 
Generally speaking the main issues you may have to 
contend with are cuts and abrasions caused by the props, 
but having a fully stocked kit for every shoot should keep 
you covered. On a more extreme level, you should also 
get a fire extinguisher! As many of you may know, drone 
batteries can be incredibly volatile. If punctured during 
a crash or exposed to water they can become explosive or 
start a fire, so have an extinguisher with you that’s suitable 
for an electrical or battery-based fire.
We’ve covered some of the other accessories in recent 
issues but, to quickly summarise, you should also stock up 
on spare batteries, SD cards and props. A power bank with 
USB output is also to be advised, as is checking your radio is 
fully-charged before each trip (consider buying a second as 
back-up). On one occasion, as I placed my transmitter into 
a Pelican case, the compression of the foam turned it on. By 
the time I was set up and ready to fly the battery was almost 
dead which meant I was grounded for the day!
Social Services
Once you’ve got yourself qualified and ready to make 
your first steps into the commercial world, there are some 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
43
“You don’t need to have a business degree but becoming a professional 
drone operator isn’t just about flying and creating great content”

other useful factors to consider. An obvious step is set up a 
website. It doesn’t have to be fancy, just something with a 
clean home page, a portfolio of your work (and services) and 
contact info for potential clients to get in touch. There are 
templates and plenty of support tools to help get you online.
Your website can then tie into social media. Your 
preferences might vary depending on your work, but 
Facebook and, for me, Instagram are a must. Facebook has 
one of the most powerful advertising tools that enables you 
to target very specific people for all of your ad campaigns. 
Instagram is a great place to share your aerial shots with a 
large user base of drone enthusiasts, with pages dedicated 
to sharing drone work from people around the world. Find 
out what hashtags work well on drone-related pages and 
use them on every post. 
It pays to target other drone operators and hobbyists 
at first, rather than just possible clients, as they are more 
likely to interact with your page. It’s easier to build up a 
large following and likes per post with people who are also 
into drones. Once you’ve built that up you will look more 
appealing to potential clients. If you’ve got 89 followers with 
5 likes per post and your competition has 10K followers 
and averages 1,000 likes, then you’re always likely to be the 
second choice. 
When it comes to building up your actual workload, if 
you’re looking for a foot in the door, get in touch with drone 
companies to establish new contacts and offer to freelance 
for them, if it’s just as a spotter. Even a 10 minute coffee with 
someone can open a few doors for future opportunities, so 
take your time to approach others. The worst they can do 
say is no. 
Also start looking for local businesses that could benefit 
from your aerial expertise. Whether it’s a hotel in the 
countryside, a sporting event coming up or just someone 
you know who is getting married. Explain who you are and 
what you can do and offer them a price that is competitive 
from others. Be honest with them about your experience 
level and offer to do the job for a set rate but they only have 
to pay if they’re happy with the results. Some people are 
still dubious about drones but more often than not when 
they see the resulting images they’re blown away. The worst 
case scenario is you shoot some content that they don’t want 
(or pay for) but you get more experience and another solid 
example to showcase to others.
All being well, it won’t take long to build up a decent 
portfolio and, in turn, your client base. However, you will 
always need to keep up your social media presence and 
add to your website on a regular basis. Even though the 
marketplace can become a bit saturated it’s still relatively 
easy to compete by having a solid SEO strategy in place for 
your local area to keep you on top. And if you need to Google 
‘SEO’, you’ll soon appreciate the irony.
As a final, and perhaps most important, word of warning: 
Never rush a job or take on a project if you’re not 100% sure 
about the safety and legality of it. For every single shoot 
ask yourself if you could confidently defend any potential 
accident in a courtroom. To this extent you should be sure 
that you can prove that you have taken every eventuality 
into account and prepared sufficiently for them. 
If you can’t, then you either need to abandon the shoot 
or take further precautions to ensure that everything is 
running safely. It might seem like a dour note to end on, but 
it’s worth echoing the point that you are liable for each and 
every flight you make, so it’s about protecting yourself as 
well as the safety of others! 
Rowan Bailey is a professional photographer and 
cinematographer. To see his own website, portfolio and 
aerial services head to www.rtbaileymedia.com.  
44
DRONE MAGAZINE


interview
 A
RPAS is the largest professional body and trade 
association for the RPAS industry in the UK. 
Founded in 2013, it now has over 500 individual 
and group members in its ranks. Since March 2017 
it has been chaired by Perran Bonner, who sat down to take 
us through how things have gone under his watch so far, 
and what can expect moving into 2018.
For those who might be new to the drone 
world, can you explain what ARPAS is and 
what does it does?
ARPAS UK is a not-for-profit professional body that 
represents our fast-evolving, remotely piloted aircraft 
industry. We work as a committee on behalf of our 
members to influence regulation and promote safe 
operational best practice. 
We have a chairman – currently myself – and eight 
active directors who perform a number of different roles, 
including standards, promotion of education, finance, 
business development and membership. Each of us are 
unpaid volunteers, putting in two, often more, days 
a month towards achieving objectives in the overall 
business plan. As well as that great core team, we have 
various working groups with a majority of those involved 
being our members.
What does your own position involve?
My role involves normal chairman duties, which really is 
helping to effectively manage the team as well as performing 
my business plan objectives. Because of my experience 
of working within the industry, I’ve also done a lot of the 
meetings with the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), and I also 
deal with the corporate negotiations and member benefits. 
Chairmen typically stand for a year; I took the post in 
March so at our AGM in March 2018 I’ll be handing on 
to another worthy candidate that will be elected by the 
 arpas:
The Voice of an Industry
46
DRONE MAGAZINE
Andrew Watton-Davies speaks with Perran Bonner, chairman of the 
Association of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems, to see what the 
future holds for drone owners…

interview
membership. The AGM is a day where we’ll present the 
team, present what we’ve been doing, look at what we’ve 
achieved – and sometimes didn’t achieve – against the 
business plan, and we’ll look at new candidates and vote in 
those that the membership believe will be most beneficial 
to the organisation. 
What made you join up with ARPAS?
As an individual, I originally joined because I wanted the 
ARPAS name and brand on my website and my literature. I 
wanted something that said I belong to a trade association 
that represents the industry that I work within. And then 
the more I learned about the association, the more I realised 
what it was doing and I personally felt that it was important 
that there was an association lobbying for the industry, that 
is well connected with the CAA, Department for Transport 
(DfT) and other official bodies, and indeed are our European 
counterparts, that best represents us. 
Also there was a closer networking opportunity; that 
quality of the people within the group. You get a more 
serious calibre of person joining; we have a website and 
a technical forum, so there are good communication 
channels with your fellow associates that you can share an 
awful lot of information with, both the good, the bad and 
the ugly.
Can you give use some examples of the kind 
of lobbying that ARPAS has been doing for 
the industry?
At the beginning of the year we replied to the Department 
for Transport consultation, with ARPAS getting directly 
mentioned in the final response, and we’ve been consulting 
on the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) proposals 
as well.
Did you contact them to get involved or did 
they seek ARPAS out?
Through various channels, we were encouraged to be 
one of the replying bodies, not least by the CAA. They 
encouraged the commercial users out there and us, being 
the association representing unmanned aviation, to 
respond. The CAA did their own response, we did our own 
response and various corporations and businesses did their 
own response. We also encouraged our own members to get 
stuck in and send responses; the members were probably 
sick of seeing the calls for a response by the end of it!
What are your thoughts on the current 
regulations being proposed?
I think we’ve got to look at it in two ways. There’s going to 
be the ‘With Europe’ EASA regulations and then there’s 
going to be the ‘Without Europe’ DfT option. None of us can 
say which it will be as it all boils down to if there is going 
to be a hard Brexit and we’re not going to get a clear idea on 
that for a while. 
Fundamentally, if you asked “what’s the impact of the 
upcoming regulations?” once things are nailed down and 
further details are clarified they should be able to accelerate 
routine operations, such as beyond-visual-line-of-sight 
(BVLOS), and there are number of organisations that 
are in need of that kind of operating permission. I know 
that within the police we are currently utilising BVLOS 
on a day-to-day basis, but commercial industry – and 
particularly those interested in parcel delivery – they see 
that as the next step. So once the decision behind ‘which 
direction are we going to go in?’ on terms of governance is 
decided, I see routine operation of BVLOS accelerating with 
more commercial use. 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
47
“I’m confident that when talking to senior 
members of the CAA they know and 
understand what ARPAS is doing and they 
value that”

interview
48
DRONE MAGAZINE
My concerns on the NPA (Notice of Proposed 
Amendment) that’s been proposed by Europe, is that there 
is a lack of differential between commercial and leisure 
users, and the potential for an influx of inexperienced 
operators. I’m also particularly worried about the 
potentially reduced levels of training and flight experience 
required to become a qualified flight operator under the 
European proposals. Those are the kinds of things that 
we’ve been lobbying Europe hard on.
Do you think these official bodies hear 
what you’re telling them?
I’m confident that these bodies are listening to us, as 
per the DfT final response. I’m also confident that when 
talking to senior members of the CAA they know and 
understand what ARPAS is doing and they value that, 
the same with other Government committees around 
unmanned aviation. So I’m happy with where we are in 
terms of positioning and recognition. 
How do you think things are shaping for 
the industry in 2018?
We’re seeing a significant change in the market; things are 
less focused on the individual now and it’s becoming more 
and more focused on the medium-to-large enterprises. 
You’ve got the big corporates that are getting involved and 
they are employing consultants to advise on setting up and 
creating unmanned operations within their businesses, 
and they are starting to spend money on fleets of drones to 
perform cost-saving, or life-saving, tasks. The key thing is 
that the industry is maturing.
Does this mean that solo operators risk 
becoming a dying breed?
No, I don’t think so and I wouldn’t want to even suggest 
that. A lot of our members are individual operators and I 
run a consultancy, so I would very much be in that same 
boat. What I think is happening is that they’re being sub-
contracted to larger operators to perform their tasks and 
obligations. It’s just maturing; we need more pilots as 
general industry is becoming more aware of the potential of 
unmanned vehicles. 
Those of us who were in the industry five years ago 
had lots of those frustrating meetings, presenting 
the capabilities and benefits of drone operations. But 
that’s not so difficult these days as companies are more 
understanding of the benefits and, rather than you having 
to approach them, they’re starting to approach you.
ARPAS quite often gets people asking for careers advice, 
so you’ve got two options where you go and get your 
training and then you set yourself up as a commercial 
operation or you apply to an organisation to become a drone 
“The weight of the industry is now so big that 
I don’t see it going backwards, but good news 
stories will help it go forwards”

pilot for them – and we’re seeing more and more adverts 
just looking for drone pilots. One option involves running 
your own company and the other involves being employed 
with someone else having that challenge.
Do you think an increase in the number of 
drones being operated will help with the 
public’s acceptance of them?
I think so. The industry as a whole has got an awareness 
problem. If you’ve got a police hat on then the public’s first 
thought is, ‘are you spying on me?’; if you’re a commercial 
operator and you’re working, you’ve got people going ‘I 
don’t want you working here!’; they’re not aware of the 
benefits of what you’re doing. I think that once the public 
starts seeing more of it, and starts to understand that it’s 
not a threat, starts seeing the cost saving, health and safety, 
or even life-saving advantages over things like manned 
aviation, then they’ll see the benefits of it.
It is not helped by our sensationalist media, which likes to 
report a drone strike or airprox on an approach to Heathrow 
that then turns out to be a black plastic bag. When they do 
that, the damage is done and the sensational story is out 
there, but what the media doesn’t do is follow up two weeks 
later when it’s been investigated and go ‘sorry everyone, we 
got it wrong’.
Is ARPAS involved in addressing these 
sensationalised stories?
Yeah, I’ve done various interviews. A number clearly 
weren’t sensational enough as they never got aired, so I’ll 
take that as a success. Also one of the requests we’ve had 
from a number of organisations, including the CAA and a 
number of major drone manufacturers, is for good news 
stories to get out to the public. That’s something that the 
general drone community can get involved in. I would 
absolutely encourage them to share positive drone stories on 
their own media channels and to send them in to the likes 
of ARPAS and the CAA. In my opinion, the weight of the 
industry is now so big that I don’t see it going backwards, 
but the good news stories will help it go forwards.
What do you see happening on the 
technical front in 2018?
If you reflect on the last 12 months, and the 12 months 
before that, the advancements are significant. For example, 
DJI came out with the Mavic, so for a thousand pounds 
you’ve got a HD camera, with sense-and-avoid and track-
and-follow technology that you can deploy out of a pocket 
and fly for 25 minutes. Three or four years ago it would be a 
lot of time rigging up a camera on a huge craft that could fly 
for 15 minutes. 
I think over the next 12 months, amongst other things, 
we’re going to see improved flight times and a lot more 
in the way of automated technology. You’ll start to see 
swarming technologies and managed flight technologies 
for BVLOS flying. Personally, I want to see improved 
weather durability; something that can fly in rain and 
higher windspeeds, as that’ll tick a lot of boxes for 
emergency services.
And for the industry as a whole?
I think it’s going to be a good year, I really do. We’re going 
to suffer from the odd media story, and it’s certainly going 
to be part of the role of ARPAS to deal with those challenges 
and publicise the good news stories, but I fundamentally 
believe that in the UK, and globally, drones are here to stay.
For more on ARPAS, as well as membership details, 
operators and additional industry information, head to 
the website www.arpas.uk.
interview
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
49

50
DRONE MAGAZINE
tools of the trade
If you want to make the most of your craft, it pays to have the 
right kit. Lee Schofield takes you through the essentials for 
basic maintenance and building…
 W
hen you start out in any hobby you’ll find 
that there are some specialised things that 
you need. It’s no different with drones, and 
whether you’re flying for fun or with more 
serious intentions, you’ll likely find you need a collection of 
tools to get things in order. 
Over these pages we’ll take you through some of the key 
additions to your aerial workshop, along with a few tips and 
tricks for items that can prove useful accessories to keep in 
that ‘spares’ bin. At the end, you’ll have a good selection of 
tool to keep your drones in airworthy condition.
A lot of the items here you may well own already if you 
have a reasonably well stocked toolbox. Others you’ll have 
if you’re into electronics or if you’ve used other electrically-
powered models, but together they form the basics for any 
hobbyist to build and maintain a model.
As you progress you’ll find you need tools with much 
more specific uses, but for now we’ll look at the basics that 
you’ll need. The majority of the photos in this article are 
taken from this writer’s own toolkit, which explains the 
wear on some of them! But remember: a good tool is an 
investment and will last for decades if looked after…

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
51
The Bare Necessities
Screwdrivers
Okay, this is probably an obvious starter but most of the 
screwdrivers in an average household are not designed for 
the miniature screws that we have to deal with in modern 
multirotor models. Phillips and Pozidriv screw heads are 
very common and a set of smaller screwdrivers designed for 
detail work (such as those used to repair spectacles) will be 
a great help.
In addition, the screws in smaller drones are often made 
from aluminium, not steel, as it’s lighter and cheaper for 
the manufacturer. The problem is that it’s a soft metal and it 
won’t take much for you to damage the head if you’re using 
the wrong sized bit. Invest in a set of precision screwdrivers 
or bits and save yourself a lot of trouble when taking things 
apart. It also helps if you can avoid overtightening things, 
as often these are screwed into a plastic part of the model 
which can be damaged.
Hex Drivers
Another very common type of fastener on a modern 
multirotor are the kinds with the hexagonal head, 
particularly for high stress areas like motor mounts and 
key bolts in the frames of many models. In the early days I 
used a set of ‘Allen keys’ from the local hardware store. They 
worked okay but were not very well-made so I did round out 
a few stubborn bolts with smaller hex heads. Luckily with a 
precision set of hex drivers even a damaged bolt can usually 
be removed. Just like the screwdrivers, cheaply made Allen 
keys are a recipe for trouble. 
Soldering Iron
This is one of those less common tools in the modern 
household but can be essential for maintenance on the 
modern drone once you get beyond the cheaper models and 
start looking at replacing or upgrading components. Very 
small indoor craft usually forgo bulky expensive connectors 
to keep prices low and reduce the weight. The downside is 
that the soldered connections used in their place may need 
to be unsoldered when replacing a part.
If you’re someone without a lot of soldering experience the 
temptation is to go for a cheap soldering iron and non-lead 
solder ‘just in case you need them’. In my experience this 
is a false economy. I’ve had the same Weller soldering iron 
station for almost 30 years and it’s still going strong. Irons 
with replacement tips are very handy as you can change the 
tip depending on the fineness of the work you’re doing and 
replace them as they wear out and oxidise. Soldering is like 
any other skill, it improves with practice. Trying to solder 
well with a poor quality soldering iron is tricky even for 
those of us who’ve been using them for decades.
“Invest in a set 
of precision 
screwdrivers 
or bits and 
save yourself 
a lot of trouble 
when taking 
things apart”

52
DRONE MAGAZINE
Wire Snips
Sharp, small wire snippers are handy. I’m sure many of you 
without this tool that maybe needed it would have done 
the same as I did in the early days – used the cutting jaws 
on the side of some big pliers. That’s tricky to do when the 
wire you’re trying to cut is in the middle of a small model 
alongside a dozen or so other vital connections. With a 
quality set of flush side cutters you can snip wires to length 
as well as trim tie wraps neatly. Once you’ve got a pair you’ll 
wonder how you managed without them!
Wire Strippers
Manual wire strippers are cheap and will save you a ton 
of trouble stripping wires. Automatic wire strippers 
are great if you have the space to wield them but often 
you’ll be working in tight spaces. Using a blade works 
but it can damage the connector as well as remove the 
insulation. Always err on the side of caution when stripping 
wires, so you make sure it’s only the insulation that the 
strippers catch, and test the setting on the strippers before 
committing to stripping the wire(s) you need.
Needle Nose Pliers
It might not be something you’ll see in many manuals, but 
you’ll use these a lot! There are hundreds of uses for a decent 
pair of needle nose pliers, from retrieving a washer that’s 
fallen inside the model’s body, to helping pull the servo 
cable through an opening in the body. I also have a set of 
tweezers with various tips and sizes for the finer jobs but 
a decent set of needle nose pliers will be able to do most of 
the work you’ll need. You’ll usually find that the smaller the 
tips, the better.
Multi-Meter
This is one of those things that is worth its weight in gold 
when you need it. A multi-meter is vital if you’re building 
your own models and also essential when troubleshooting 
a problem. I’ve had many chats with pilots who’ve had an 
issue with their drone and they couldn’t perform basic 
troubleshooting and check that the voltage is where it needs 
to be. 
Checking that everything is electrically sound is also 
vital when building to make sure that there are no short-
circuits between the power connections before plugging in 
the battery for the first time. I know a few people who’ve 
‘made do’ without one of these until the first time they 
plugged in a battery and saw ‘magic smoke’ escaping!

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
53
LiPo checker
When starting out it’s a simple task to keep track of the 
LiPo batteries and their charge status. You charge them and 
then fly, right? Once you start to get more into the hobby 
and invest in more batteries then you’ll find it harder to 
keep track. Most pilots have a system to make sure that the 
batteries they use are fully charged and the ‘empty’ packs 
are put in a safe place for charging later. 
Sometimes when you’re out in the field you can lose track 
of things or need to land due to an unforeseen issue which 
can confuse matters. Being able to check that the battery is 
as fully charged as you think it is before taking off is very 
useful. A friend of mine has lost three quadcopters by flying 
over water with a battery that wasn’t fully charged, so be 
warned, it does happen!
Computer
Most modern flight controllers have companion software 
that helps you set up the model to fly the way you want. 
Windows PCs seem to run all of the software at the moment 
but support for Macs is getting better. Android tablets are 
also useful but, for me, it’s better to use a Windows tablet or 
PC to run all of the applications like Betaflight, BLHeliSuite, 
Mission Planner and others. It can be handy to run a flying 
or FPV simulator on it as well, to keep those skills sharp in 
the winter months or when you’re not able to get out and fly 
in the real world.
Up to this point we’ve covered the key tools I find myself 
using almost every day in the hobby. To expand things a 
little more, we’ll also take a look at some of the others that I 
use less often but still come in very handy!
Gifts That Keep on Giving
To round off any good toolkit, here are two things that are my most 
common answers when the friends and family of a pilot pull me to one 
side and whisper: ‘What can I get them for a present? I’ve got no idea’...
Action Camera
Admittedly this is less of a tool and more of a fun addition, but a decent 
camera is still an essential addition in my book. Action cameras come in 
lots of shapes and sizes, with the likes of the compact Mobius or RunCam 
models that are very useful for a variety of drones and can be attached 
almost anywhere, while there are also the GoPro-type designs that might 
need a little more thought due to the size and weight. 
I’d always make sure that the camera you choose is well mounted on 
the model and nice and bright (RunCam cameras all tend to be orange 
now) as they do tend to be 
‘ejected’ from the model 
in the event of a crash so 
finding them in the grass 
can take a lot of time. Safe 
landing or not, watching the 
aerial footage back in HD 
afterwards is huge fun and 
can sometimes highlight 
parts of your flight you didn’t 
see when you were flying that 
you can learn from ready for 
the next time you head out. 
LiPo Battery Charger
Most drones come with a basic LiPo charger if the model is supplied with 
a battery. I had a whole tin full of these little mains-powered devices 
in the early days. However, these chargers are very slow and use low 
currents to charge the battery you’re using. Modern battery chargers are 
much smarter and can charge a LiPo in a fraction of the time, as well as 
monitoring the battery while they do so. Battery chargers able to charge 
more than one battery at a time are becoming a lot cheaper, too. 
With the huge range of battery sizes, capacities and voltages we use, 
being able to charge and balance them properly is vital. I have a couple of 
4-port chargers and they have reduced the time taken to charge all the 
LiPo packs before flying from the best part of a day to under two hours. A 
decent charger is an investment. As a point of caution, you should always 
use a LiPo safe bag when charging a battery and never leave a charging 
battery unattended.

54
DRONE MAGAZINE
useful additions
Servo Checker
This device allows you to check that a servo is moving and 
to connect the servo horn as close to 90 degrees as you 
can when building a model or replacing a broken servo. 
With the lack of quality assurance on cheap fixed wing 
models and servos on places like eBay, for example, it’s very 
possible to get a bag of 9g servos and find that one or two are 
dead. A servo checker is great for powering and checking 
everything is working before you install the controls into 
a model. It’s also very handy to check that the servo is still 
okay after a nasty crash.
5v Supply
Most electronics in the drone world run on 5 volts so being 
able to power them quickly and easily for testing and 
troubleshooting is great. Flight controllers get their power 
from the 5v supplied by the USB cable. You can modify a 
spare USB cable to provide the 5v needed to power receivers 
while you bind them. I also have a few 5v UBECs with 
battery connectors on the end for testing servos or when I 
need to power something that needs a lot of current.
Hot Glue Gun
Crashing is part of the hobby, so don’t feel too bad, as 
it happens to all of us – and you should find you learn 
something every time you do! A glue gun can help as it has 
a huge variety of potential applications, such as repairing 
damaged foam models, providing strain relief for cables, 
supporting and holding components in place and helping 
with rapid prototyping of parts and repairs. Hot glue is 
cheap, strong and easy to use, and can also be peeled off flat 
surfaces when you’ve had enough.
“A normal day with my flying 
buddies regularly involves the use of 
a couple of glue sticks for repairs to 
keep everything in the air”

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
55
If you don’t own a hot glue gun, then get one if you can. I 
have two of my own; one runs from the mains and the other 
runs off 12v via a battery connector so it can be used out in 
the field with a LiPo battery. A normal day with my flying 
buddies regularly involves the use of a couple of glue sticks 
for repairs to keep everything in the air.
Blade Balancer
In the early days of the drone technology as we now know it, 
we were building models using motors and props designed 
for fixed wing models. We’re lucky these days that there are 
hundreds of choices of motors, propellers and ESCs to help 
us power the drones we fly and build. Balancing the blades 
reduces vibration on the entire model, reduces the load and 
wear on the bearings in the motor, and also improves flight 
times and makes tuning a model easier as well. 
Many pilots don’t bother balancing their blades on their 
models but you only have to look at the efforts in software 
to create things like notch filters in Betaflight and anti-
vibration supports and designs for flight controllers to see 
what a huge problem this can be for a drone. Do yourself a 
favour and always balance your blades; it’s good practice 
and a good habit to get into.
Prop Spanner / Motor Wrench
The 2205 and 2206 motors common on the racing sized 
quadcopters are very powerful and efficient but many use 
locking nuts to hold the propeller on. Without the proper 
tools it can be tricky to get these on and off easily. Sure, you 
can use a standard socket to hold the nut but when it’s tight 
the motor can be tricky to get hold of while you crack the 
nut loose. 
These two items were the last ones I invested in on this 
list and I wish I’d have got myself a set years ago. They make 
the fitting and removal of props much easier and eliminate 
the risk to your hands when you’re trying to remove a 
broken prop with sharp edges – that can certainly do some 
damage if you slip. 
Summary
So, there you have it. As previously 
mentioned, many of the basic tools 
listed here you may well already have 
in a drawer in the kitchen or a toolkit 
in the shed, but it’s still wise to pick 
up the specialist tools for the job if 
you can. 
I’d also recommend investing in a 
‘drone’ toolbox to store all of these 
pieces in and also act as a safe place 
to keep all of your spare parts. 
Whether flying by yourself or with 
others, the lack of one or two of 
these items can make the building 
and repair of a model harder than 
it needs to be. Every minute spent 
struggling is a minute less you could 
be flying, and having the right tools 
can get you or a friend back in the 
air rather than having to call it a 
day – which is always going to make 
your investment in them seem all the 
more worthwhile! 


Prairie House
Saskatchewan, Canada
“An old farm house in the middle of a 
wheat field”
Photo by Dawn Jernaill 
Supplied by Dronestagram

58
DRONE MAGAZINE
Cross Examination
So why should you bother to consider using Crossfire? 
As mentioned earlier, the system uses a much lower 
frequency than the ‘standard’ 2.4GHz radios most of us 
use to fly. You can choose between 915MHz and 868MHz 
depending on where you live (as seen in the graphic below). 
This lower frequency has a much longer wavelength, 
and longer wavelengths propagate further on the same 
power. The bottom line is you can fly in your normal space 
with far more safety, or (if legal) fly miles and miles away 
and still retain a strong connection to the model. With 
the maximum power of two watts, using the larger TBS 
Crossfire module flights of tens of kilometres have been 
achieved easily.
But there are a few other tricks up its sleeve that make 
it worth considering if you’re not interested in long range 
 I
t seems hard to believe, but TBS Crossfire 
has been around for over two years now. 
More recently there have been a number of changes and 
developments in the product to keep it ahead of other 
vendors looking to enter this space. If you’ve heard of the 
Crossfire system or watched some online videos you’d be 
forgiven for thinking it’s all about super long flights that are 
many kilometres long, but that’s only part of the story.
In terms of its general appeal, by using a much lower 
frequency and some clever technology to preserve the signal 
quality, the Crossfire system is designed to provide a better 
signal than traditional 2.4GHz radios. While it’s true that this 
does result in much more range, it also provides a more secure 
link for flying in close proximity as well as providing a much 
faster low latency connection to the model you’re flying. 
That said, most pilots who are using the Crossfire 
are using it to push the flight distances, so if you’re not 
planning on flying for miles at a time should you just 
skip this article? We’d still advise you to read on, not least 
because the Crossfire system has developed into a very 
powerful and flexible connectivity system for our models 
and now provides some features that you’ll not find on any 
of the other long range systems that we’ll cover here.
On a personal note, I have learnt a lot about the system 
over the past two months and the developers at Team 
BlackSheep (TBS) have been generous with their time in 
helping me wade my way through the manual and pick 
up some tips and tricks along the way. With all of the 
recent changes some pilots are now not sure what the TBS 
Crossfire system can do, so let us look at some of the basics 
and check out the latest features of this system and pass 
these tips to you..
In the Crossfire
As Team BlackSheep’s Crossfire 
system continues to evolve, 
Lee Schofield takes a closer 
look at how this popular  
RC link is shaping up  
right now… 
All photos by Team BlackSheep

flights but are looking for the fastest connection to your 
model. TBS has developed a super-fast, resilient protocol 
called CRSF. This enables pilots to talk to the module in the 
radio ten times faster than PPM and then have the signals 
sent to the flight controller at the other end three times faster 
than S-Bus. The result is a super-fast, low latency connection 
to the model for those flying at speed or needing the finest 
control – something which is especially handy when racing.
The other benefit of the CRSF protocol is due to the fact 
that it’s a flexible and resilient two-way system. It allows 
for information to be sent to, and received from, the flight 
controller and systems on the model. If you’re using 
Betaflight 3.2 you can use the LUA scripts on the radio to 
configure all of the Betaflight settings over the link and 
there is further development to improve this in Betaflight 
3.3 due out early 2018. 
Not all radios and systems support CRSF right now. If 
you’re not using one of the OpenTX powered radios then 
you can connect the Crossfire module to the radio using the 
supplied trainer cables and use PPM as normal. At the other 
end you can configure the receiver to send PPM, PWM or 
S-Bus if you’re using a flight controller that isn’t ready for 
CRSF yet, so the system should be able to work with any 
model and system.
If you look on the TBS website (team-blacksheep.com) 
you’ll see that there are two versions of the Crossfire module 
available: The full-sized original ‘Crossfire TX’ and the 
newer, more compact, ‘Crossfire Micro TX’ Module. The 
smaller module doesn’t have the screen and can’t support 
transmission powers higher than 100mW but here in the EU 
we can’t run that much power anyway. Apart from that all 
of the features are shared between the two modules.
How it Works
Installing and setting up the system is straightforward. 
Before doing anything else I’d pop on the T-shaped antenna 
and update the Crossfire transmitter module to the latest 
firmware using the USB port on its side and the TBS Agent 
software you can download from the website.
You then install the module into the back of the radio 
(if it has a JR-style bay) or connect it to the trainer port on 
the radio using one of the supplied cables. The first time 
you power up the module, it will ask you to confirm your 
location and it will then use that detail to set the maximum 
power levels. If you’re using OpenTX 2.2 or later then copy 
the Crossfire LUA scripts to the SD card so you can configure 
the module from the controls on the radio.
Once you’ve done that you can pop the TBS Crossfire 
system into ‘Bind’ mode and power up the receiver. If it 
doesn’t connect automatically a quick push of the bind 
button on the receiver will start the process. You’ll notice 
that the firmware will be updated on the receiver during 
this step, too. Very clever.
Now you can configure how you want the TBS Crossfire 
receiver to operate and set the failsafe. The configuration 
of the receivers is very flexible. Using the screen on the 
Crossfire module or the LUA script on the radio, you can 
configure any output and input on any of the pins available 
on the receiver you have. Using this setup you can configure 
the receiver to output PPM, PWM or S-Bus for traditional 
systems or CRSF for things like Betaflight. You can also 
configure MAVLink telemetry to be sent and received on 
spare pins, too.
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
59
“The Crossfire system has developed into a very powerful and 
flexible connectivity system”

Then it’s just a case of setting up the model as normal, but 
now with the ability to use the CRSF protocol for very fast 
communication to the model. With software like Betaflight 
you’ll need to use a hardware UART for CRSF but other 
manufacturers are starting to work towards native support 
so it should get easier to use this newer protocol in future. So 
far it’s all pretty normal for any seasoned pilots out there, but 
let’s take a look at a few of the nice touches in the system.
The X Factor
As some of you may have already gathered, the TBS 
Crossfire works best with OpenTX. Without the screen and 
controls on the back, the smaller Crossfire Micro TX module 
will need a radio running OpenTX 2.2 and the LUA script to 
configure it. This integration with OpenTX provides some 
great features. Using the system you’ll be able to discover a 
whole set of Crossfire-specific sensors that can be used to 
warn you if the signal is dropping or if the mode changes 
while flying. The RQly sensor is the most useful at the 
moment and you’ll need to set up a warning at 70% and an 
alarm if it goes below 60%. 
The MAVLink support in Crossfire is very sophisticated. 
A lot of APM and PixHawk pilots used Crossfire in the 
early days due to this feature alone. Normally to use the 
MAVLink telemetry wirelessly with these flight controllers 
you need to install separate 3DR-style radios on the model 
but the Crossfire system can transmit and send the MAVLink 
data over its own link, removing the need for that extra 
complexity and setup. 
The icing on the cake is that the full-size Crossfire module 
can also send and receive the MAVLink signals using a 
built-in Bluetooth modem to a tablet or PC, so you can 
simply connect the device to it and get all of that MAVLink 
power wirelessly.
As the CRSF protocol specification is open, it appears that 
a number of other manufacturers like Spektrum and Futaba 
are also working on adding CRSF support to their radios. 
This is great and will help make the system even easier for 
those who don’t use FrSky radio systems and help make the 
CRSF protocol one of those we all know and use daily.
You do have some choice when it comes to the receivers. 
There are two currently available, a smaller one for 
multirotors (TBS Crossfire Micro Receiver V2) and a larger 
full-sized receiver (TBS Crossfire 8ch Diversity Rx) that 
includes a rechargeable battery inside. That’s very handy 
when using the ‘Model Finding’ mode on the transmitter. If 
the model crashes, even if the battery is ejected, the larger 
receiver will stay powered, enabling you to use the signal 
strength graph on the transmitter to find the strongest signal 
and direction to the model. Very cool. 
Crossed Wires
As with any system there are common ‘gotchas’ that new 
pilots make and, having spoken with TBS on the matter, 
here are a few of the most common:
The best tip is to update to the latest software on the TBS 
Crossfire module as soon as you get it. Install the latest Beta 
software. Normally I would always advise that you stay 
away from the Beta software unless you are a beta tester but 
the rapid changes to the code and pace of innovation at TBS 
at the moment is resulting in the code not staying still for 
long enough to become an official ‘gold’ release. The latest 
firmware will give you all the bells and whistles – so update!
As with any system, antenna alignment is key. The 
Crossfire system uses a ‘T’-shaped antenna and similar 
antennae on the receivers, too. When the antennae are 
aligned physically there is the strongest signal but as 
the model pitches and rolls the antennae will fall out of 
alignment and the signal drops. The advice is to mount the 
antennae vertically on the radio and in an ‘L’ or ‘V’ shape on 
the model; that way as the model moves one of the antennae 
should be in alignment and give great reception.
60
DRONE MAGAZINE
60
DRONE MAGAZINE
Key Features
n Longer range flights
n Uses much lower frequencies
n Two-way communication protocols
n Low latency, 150MHz updates
n Receivers can output PPM, PWM, S-Bus or CRSF
n Selectable RF power
n Dedicated Head Tracking (HT) port
n Wireless connection to app on phone/tablet
n Two receivers available: Full-size with built-
in battery, Micro-size for drones and flight 
controllers
n Configurable through LUA script on OpenTX 2.2
n OLED display on original version

If you want to use Crossfire on the FrSky Q X7 or X7S 
radios you will need OpenTX 2.2.1 or a hardware mod for it 
to work properly and not give telemetry errors constantly. 
The problem is down to a very slow signal inverter inside the 
radio that can’t run the CRSF protocol at full speed (we told 
you it was a lot faster than PPM). There are mods coming out 
for the radio to replace that slow inverter but until they are 
available we’re stuck waiting for OpenTX 2.2.1. It’s likely 
that when FrSky decided to replace the Texas Instruments 
inverter fitted to the very first batch of radios with another 
inferior version the company wasn’t thinking about high 
speed systems like Crossfire and CRSF…
While we’re on the subject of OpenTX, remember that 
you’ll need a radio with the Crossfire LUA script on it to 
configure the Crossfire Micro as it hasn’t got the OLED 
display and joystick on it to help with configuration. You 
can download it from the link on the TBS website.
My final tip is a very handy one if you need to change 
the location detail that you used the first time the Crossfire 
module powered up. Maybe you are in the EU but are now 
flying in the USA? At the moment TBS is trying to install 
the ‘Konami’ code (seasoned gamers will know what this 
is!) into all of its products to get you out of trouble. With the 
system powered and a receiver connected you can input this 
code into the full-sized Crossfire system using the joystick 
or simply press the button on the back of the Crossfire Micro 
TX module 10 times to ‘unlock’ it to allow you to change the 
settings – equally handy if you’ve made a mistake!
Summary
With the choice of UHF systems about it pays to do 
your research before investing. It appears that other 
manufacturers are jumping on the Crossfire bandwagon 
and creating their own, largely similar, systems – which 
also means that the TBS team will not be resting on their 
laurels. That’s good for us as more competition means more 
innovation and lower prices. 
The benefit of the Crossfire system is that it’s been around 
long enough to have almost all of the wrinkles ironed out 
and can provide a solid platform to build in new features 
for us owners. The bottom line is if you’re looking for safe 
ranged flying, to support a fast connection to your model or 
to fly a MAVLink-capable flight controller more safely and 
easier than before, then the TBS Crossfire system is well 
worth a look.
The TBS Crossfire is currently priced at $208.95 (£158.25) 
and is available at team-blacksheep.com.
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
61
Things to Watch
n Poor antenna position will affect range
n Select the region and correct frequency for 
where you’re flying
n You’ll need the Crossfire LUA if you use the 
module without the OLED screen
n Full bi-directional support for changing all of the 
settings will be available in Betaflight 3.3
n An update is needed for the Q X7 models (OpenTX 
2.2.1) to get it working on those radios perfectly

62
DRONE MAGAZINE
 A  
good drone needs a good backpack. They go together 
like school and a schoolbag, gym and a gym bag, or dog 
walks and a little plastic bag. We need them because 
only by slinging the bag over our shoulders and marching 
out into the great outdoors do we grant the drone access to 
all of the beautiful countryside that its high-spec camera 
deserves access to. Most of us know the rules about proximity 
to people and the urban environment, so getting away from 
them in maximum comfort is an issue for all pilots.
That distance exacerbates things, too; when you’re away 
from home you need to carry as many charged batteries 
and other accessories as you can. You might even find you 
want to bring a laptop with you to admire, edit or share your 
handiwork on location. At the same time you definitely don’t 
want to be adding strain to your poor back. You want a bag 
to be as light as reasonably possible while protecting your 
precious (or at least pricey) cargo.
Step forth the DroneGuard BP 400 from Lowepro. This 
backpack features a padded ‘CradleFit’ pocket for a 15-
inch laptop, and inside the main body are flexible dividers 
that enable you to comfortably fit a DJI Phantom (1 to 4 
Advanced), the remote controller, an iPad or iPad mini, and 
up to – by our estimations – eight spare batteries. Lowepro 
itself conservatively puts it at five “and some personal items”. 
Perhaps it’s a weight thing – in fairness I don’t have that 
many batteries for my Phantom so I wasn’t able to fully test 
the theory.
A lot of thought has obviously gone into protecting your 
gear while you bounce over the landscape. The elastic strap 
Lowepro DroneGuard BP 400
REVIEW
• Price: £129
• Internal Dimensions: 30 x 20 x 47cm
• Weight: 1.69kg
• Type: Clamshell backpack
• Compatibility: DJI Phantom series
• Website: www.lowepro.co.uk
All photos by Lowepro, except where stated

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
63
with Velcro is both quick and easy to pull around your 
Phantom, but keeps it in place firmly, even if you hold the 
bag open upside-down (don’t worry, I’ve tested this so 
you don’t have to). There is a similar, and equally effective, 
solution for the controller.
In terms of keeping the weight down while maintaining 
the bag’s semi-flexible, compression-moulded, FormShell 
shape, Lowepro opted not to fill the bag with protective 
(but restrictive) custom-moulded foam. Instead it’s placed a 
single pad on the lid of the case which can be positioned at 
any point along the centre, but the logical position is so that 
it makes contact with the centre of your Phantom when the 
bag is closed. The Phantom then effectively becomes part of 
a central pillar preventing the shell from collapsing in on 
itself. Don’t worry; it’s a much better idea than it sounds.
On the inside lid of the bag is a pocket for your propellers, 
though I found that it was tricky to use this and the DJI prop 
bag I already have. There are other smaller pockets which 
will serve as homes for spare memory cards and so on, so 
you can be very flexible with how you load things.
Incidentally, I did try using this bag with my Mavic Pro, 
but I was surprised to find that, rather than putting it in 
the main drone bay – even if I tweaked the positions of the 
pads – it actually made more sense to use the spaces either 
side of the Phantom for the Mavic and its rather less chunky 
controller. I’m not sure whether this would be a good idea 
on a long excursion – there would be rather less padding 
between the Phantom and the Mavic than you might hope 
for – but in fairness the bag DJI itself supplies with the 
Mavic Pro isn’t especially thickly padded and the drone and 
controller must knock around next to each other, so perhaps 
it’s not that much of an issue. 
Finally, perhaps the most important question is do these 
features add up to a comfortable bag? And I’ve got to say yes. 
I was happily able to walk several miles with drone, laptop 
and all the other accessories behind me without feeling 
remotely uncomfortable (or wanting for the chest strap that 
at first I’d been worried was missing). At roughly the price of 
a spare battery, I’d gladly recommend this as another way of 
extending the range of your drone – although, coincidentally 
it’s a case that may also make you want to splash out on 
another LiPo for your travels…
Rock the Cradle 
This 15-inch MacBook Pro, made slightly 
chunkier as it’s encased in a two-piece 
protective plastic shell, slides neatly into 
the CradleFit Pocket. Apparently it’s also 
possible to fit a further 10-inch tablet at 
the same time, with the pocket’s load 
supported above the bottom of the bag, 
like a cradle (hence the name). 
Choices, Choices
The design is very flexible. You could 
easily move a few battery bays to create 
room for your camera, for example. 
There’s room for a decent-sized 
mirrorless or a small SLR, but the hard 
shell’s width is definitely designed with 
the Phantom series in mind.
Photo by Adam Juniper
Photo by Adam Juniper

interview
 Z
oe Stumbaugh has been involved with drones since 
2014, both as a drone developer and as a highly-
skilled FPV pilot (she won the USA’s first fully-
sanctioned FPV race). As a freestylist with AirVūz, 
as well as being a technical collaborator with the likes of 
UniqueFPV, BeeRotor, GemFan, RunCam and Tattu, she has 
a very busy schedule. Fortunately, though, she was able to 
find a little spare time to talk to us about how she got into 
the hobby, what craft she has been tinkering with lately 
and some further thoughts on the world of FPV and getting 
more women involved in the sport… 
What was it that first got you interested in 
the world of drones?
I was a computer science major at Cabrillo College, as I’ve 
always had a passion for technology. Then unfortunately 
I was basically bed-bound from a bunch of medical 
complications. I couldn’t motorcycle, I couldn’t go to school. 
A friend told me to go and find a hobby because I needed 
something in my life. I went to a hobby store and I ended up 
finding a little Proto-X microdrone. 
I then flew the hell out of that, crashed it into the ceiling a 
good 20 times on the first day and kept flying it till I broke it. 
So then I went ‘okay, I need a new one’ and went back to the 
store. I got a Nano-QX and fell in love with flying that. I felt 
‘this is fun and this is a skill I can keep coming back to see 
continual improvement on’. 
When I found out the upgrade for it was $300 I decided 
‘screw that’ and went online and found out how to do it 
myself. That’s when I found people flying FPV and I was 
like ‘WOW! People flying with goggles; that’s amazing, 
I want to do that’. So I sold my original Oculus Rift 
Development Kit One to buy a pair of FPV goggles and that 
was my ticket back into the world around me – that gave 
me a spark in life again.
What was it that led you from here into 
developing your own custom parts for 
Unmanned aircraft?
Necessity! Quite literally nothing was good enough for me. I 
remember the 2015 drone nationals; I was getting into flying 
3D and at the time there was nothing that worked well with 
it. I knew what I wanted to do was possible but I didn’t have 
the hardware to do it. So I went on a long and tortuous track 
of going to different manufacturers, dealing with people 
working on designs and working on a theory to make sure 
that whatever I designed is going to be functional. And, lo 
and behold, the quest to build a quadcopter that flew the 
way I wanted it to got me into the realm of the back-end of 
drone design, development and production.
So you rang up the manufacturers and 
said “I like that part you have, but can you 
make it like this”?
Yes, that and providing the designs and specifications. 
That’s why I have so many partners on my website; I talk 
Zoe Stumbaugh:
Love at First Flight
64
DRONE MAGAZINE
An avid pilot, racer and designer, Zoe 
Stumbaugh has been at the forefront of the 
drone world for several years now. Andrew 
Watton-Davies finds out more about her passion 
for flying and the problems facing women in an 
increasingly male-dominated environment…

interview
to and deal with a lot of people in the industry. I love 
tinkering, so testing stuff and creating new products is, 
for me, more fun than racing the quads. It’s kind of like 
the Wild West: the access to the technology, to 3D printers, 
to carbon cutters, manufacturers, to the people making 
the parts and products. For someone like me that isn’t 
necessarily out there looking to make a big buck but loves 
innovating and creating something new, it’s amazing. 
There’s always something new to do, something new to try, 
always a new plateau to reach. That is why I love drones and 
why I love flying.
The first machine that I put out was the Excalibur, with a 
custom design, custom frame, custom motors and custom 
propellers. It’s not a rebrand; there are a lot of pilots that 
have rebranded products with their name on it and made it 
look really shiny but they have done nothing for the back-
end design and development of that motor. They’re like ‘oh, I 
like the way this motor feels so make me this motor but use 
my name’. I can honestly say, as far as I’m aware, that I’m 
the first pilot that came out with their own unique motor. 
The Drone Racing League (DRL) holds the world record for 
the fastest quadcopters using ESCs that I helped develop.
What are you working on at the moment?
It’s going to be a giant drone racing frame from Dysonian. 
The final improvements to it are being made and it’s taking 
a bit of a different approach than mini-quad frames. I’ve 
seen the expediential development of them over the last few 
years – boxy quads growing into aerodynamically shelled 
machines that I’m seeing breaking the speed records. 
So, we’re taking the best of that and incorporating it into 
a standard frame design and using that as the core for future 
designs going forward. I’m finding out what we can scale it 
up to, practically, and what doesn’t work at that size. And 
we’re getting there. They weigh about five to six pounds; 
the size of the frames varies but right now the sweet spot is 
about 800mm. 
The aerodynamics have a lot more impact than the 
weight, though, and there’s a lot happening to them with 
the physics that the mini-quads don’t have to deal with. In 
a straight line we can break 130mph, in turns we’re hitting 
consistently above 70mph, so it’s getting to that point. For 
perspective, some of these machines are now faster than 
the cars on the automotive race track we use. And once the 
industry starts seeing what we’ve been doing, we’ll see a 
very different landscape with racing going forward.
Do you think this could be the next ‘big’ 
thing on the racing scene?
(Groans) Oh, the puns! Well, let me put it this way: if you 
follow MultiGP News, they announced ‘big things are 
coming from drone racing’ and they’ve partnered up with 
MDX and I know they’re going to have a Titan Class. On top 
of that, I know that at least two or three giant drone racing 
organisations are working on the sport going forward with 
different leagues, and that there are sponsors out there that 
are saying ‘hey, you build them and we’ll come’.
They look like monsters compared to quad 
racers. What are they like to fly?
Re-introducing the danger certainly makes them a bit more 
fun, especially when you’re dealing with experimental 
machines. You are always going to be dealing with things 
that are on the edge of working. The one I’m talking about 
is 1000mm and has 15-inch propellers, and travels 130-
plus mph. Locally there is a group that started up called 
X-Class for anything larger than 800mm and smaller than 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
65

interview
66
DRONE MAGAZINE
1200mm, so substantial-sized machines. If you go to my 
team’s website you’ll see what we’ve been doing.
There was recently an outcry from the 
female pilots about the Drone Racing 
League’s decision to run events in Saudi 
Arabia. Can you talk us through your 
involvement in this?
Sally French originally posted a note to the Amelia 
Dronehart Facebook group about how she had contacted 
DRL about where they were hosting the races: a DRL 
spokesperson returned with a statement and Sally wanted 
to get other women’s ideas and thoughts on it for a post. 
I and several other women said that it would bar us from 
competing and that that’s not cool. So she ended up taking 
those quotes and the quotes from the DRL representative 
and posted it up at thedronegirl.com, which brought the 
issue to light, publicly. 
DRL didn’t really respond to my emails to them about 
the issue, and they didn’t get back to me after 24 hours 
and it was keeping me up at night as it affects me and 
other women going forward in the industry – it’s a big 
problem. I made up the image [of Jet from the DRL as a hair 
dye packaging parody] before I even made the post as it 
summed up my opinion that it’s a league ‘Just For Men’ and 
I could not have said it better any other way and that’s why 
that image exists.
I posted that image up on Sally’s Facebook page and it got 
a little bit of attention from women in the industry. I was a 
bit disappointed by the small response it got, though, as it’s 
a big issue and most of the men in the industry either don’t 
know about it or don’t care to do anything about it, so that’s 
when I decided that it was something I could do to help get 
the conversation going. 
So I ended up spending a day writing and trying to find 
the right words, and then slept on it… Once it was up, it was 
like a storm. Every few seconds there was another message. 
DRL got in touch and asked nicely that I ‘comply’ to take 
the image down, but in the same email that they politely 
threatened me to take down the image, they also asked me 
to come out to New York to meet them face to face.
What are your feelings towards the Drone 
Racing League at this time?
Honestly, at one point I thought it would be cool to be a pilot 
for DRL. But after all the stuff that I’ve seen, it’s not a league 
I want to support because of that culture – and that’s sad, 
because they have the most money and the most ability to 
make changes in this industry. 
The whole point of the post was that Jet is the face of DRL 
right now, along with all those other, exclusively male, 
pilots. If women see that, are they really going to think 
‘this is a sport for me’? If I saw that advertised to me when 
I was originally getting into it, I wouldn’t really feel all that 
interested in it. Instead, when I was getting into it in late 
The DRL Response
DRL’s full statement in response to its decision to hold an event in Saudi Arabia 
can be found on Sally French’s blog at thedronegirl.com. It reads in part: “As we 
expand, we do so with our values of inclusion and competition at the core, bringing 
the best pilots, staff and technology everywhere we go.” 
It adds that: “DRL’s decision to host the 2018 Allianz World Championship race in 
Saudi Arabia was driven not only by our desire to satisfy our growing fan base in 
the region, but also because the GSA is making a concerted effort to bring global 
sports to the kingdom, by their own description, “that will also lead to wider social 
and economic benefits for the country.” DRL is one of many sports organisations 
hosting events in Saudi Arabia in 2018, including La Liga football, the automotive 
Race of Champions (featuring drivers from Formula 1, NASCAR, Le Mans and 
IndyCar), the World Chess Championships and the World Boxing Super Series.”
The statement went on to say: “This venue announcement changes nothing 
about our league. As it has always been, DRL is an inclusive league. It is open to 
people of all genders, gender identities and nationalities. To date, we’ve had two 
seasons, and in that time we’ve had both men and women and citizens of eight 
countries compete in DRL. As we plan our 2018 Championship race we will work 
to ensure we are respectful of local cultures while ensuring our values remain 
uncompromised.”
“It went from being the tinkerers and innovators to, as a guy working in the 
industry put it to me, ‘Bro Culture’”

interview
2014, it was promoted as these quirky, different things for 
intellectuals that want to experience something different. 
This was just three years ago and the culture of this has 
changed rapidly. I mean it went from being the tinkerers 
and innovators to, as a guy that’s working in the industry 
put it to me, ‘Bro Culture’. This was someone who’s been 
into drones long enough for him to see it going from this 
weird eclectic thing in the Eighties that were mostly land-
based giant machines to the drone racing we have now, 
which is being largely promoted by the industry to young, 
male audiences.
Do you see this as a problem that’s been 
growing for some time?
I’ve had to keep my mouth shut on a lot of the transgressions 
I’ve personally seen in the industry because bringing them 
up might cause a fervour, and it doesn’t necessarily look 
good for the industry as a whole. I really want the industry 
as a whole to flourish, so for me to talk about this issue and 
bring it to light in the way I have was something I wrestled 
with for a few days. I was really trying to work out: how do 
we navigate this problem, because if we don’t start talking 
about how, I believe, some of these bigger leagues are 
keeping women out of them, and creating an environment 
where they’re really not welcomed, it creates the culture 
going forward.
When I got into this hobby – back before drone racing 
was even a thing, nothing was ever called drone racing, it 
was like wasn’t even a term! – it was just people with quads 
hanging out, flying and having fun. It was purely about the 
out-of-body experience that these machines could afford 
you and how freeing that was. It was a different culture 
then. There was also, I think, a higher ratio of women in it 
then than there is now.
Zoe celebrates with Angela Jacques, Charles Skip 
Walton and Austin Gossard after clinching first 
place at the IDRA Dover International Team Drone 
Race: “I am so proud of these misfits!”
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
67

interview
68
DRONE MAGAZINE
how much of a ‘scene’ is there for female 
pilots these days?
There are a very small number of female pilots out and 
about, racing and competing. That being said, I’m being 
followed every day by one or two more female pilots posting 
FPV posts and images. I know that these women are out 
there, I know they’re flying and I know that, over the last 
year especially, women have been getting into this hobby, 
industry and sport and have become really great pilots. 
They might not be as visible as some of the male pilots in 
the industry, but I know they’re out there as I’ve seen them 
with my own eyes. They’re getting into flying, but they’re 
not getting into ‘the community’, as ’the community’ right 
now is a bro-tastic culture of guys. A lot of women have a 
hard time integrating into the culture that currently exists. 
It becomes a self-fulfilling problem, because there are no 
women in the drone racing industry, so it’s harder to get 
women into the drone racing industry.
I know in my heart of hearts that when I’m out in the 
field or I’m going to an event, if other women know about it 
then a higher than average number of women turn out. If 
there are role models available, and shown, then things will 
change. Angela from FPV Racing Mexico hosts the Mexican 
drone nationals, the biggest event in the country. She’s an 
amazing pilot; we travelled around for four weeks last year 
going to different events. 
One of them in Oregon was a drone retreat for women. 
Each of the pilots that went to that event has gone on to fly 
better and to promote themselves. They really have that 
spark behind them that they can put out there with the 
guys, to really promote more women in the industry. And 
that spark… you can either stomp it out, or support it.
What do you think the community can do to 
address the problem?
Over the years I realised that women are just not included 
at the highest levels of drone racing. If you start involving 
women at the highest levels of these events you’re going to 
start seeing change. Right now, I think there are enough 
women pilots with the right skills that can compete at that 
top level; they just need more visibility. I know a lot of great 
pilots that compete regularly, that don’t post Instagram 
photos all the time, that aren’t posting on YouTube every 
week. If you’re not doing all of those things it doesn’t matter 
how good you are, because no one’s going to know or take 
you seriously.
A lot of the women that do [promote themselves] end up 
getting a lot of sexist comments, and once you start being 
public about it, because of the culture that exits, it ends up 
almost painting a target on your back and that makes it 
even harder for women to stand out. At the end of the day 
they just want to fly, they just want to be treated as equals 
and be included in the groups. 
At this time in the sport, it’s at risk of becoming like 
every other automotive sport where it’s really hard for 
women to compete. Drone racing has an opportunity 
to buck the trend, especially when this is one of the few 
sports where it really eliminates the physical nature of 
the sport; it’s muscle memory and the brain. That’s really 
why I want to see it flourish as a sport that includes, and is 
promoted to, everyone.
For more details on Zoe’s story and her various projects, 
go to Zoefpv.com. More on her giant drone racing team 
can be found at Dysonian.com. The Amelia Dronehart 
group can be found at Facebook.com/groups/
AmeliaDronehart.

From Drone Zero to Drone Hero
Expert                    
Pre-flight checks
Can I fly here?
Should I fly here?
Our unique 4:4:3 rules for safe flying
The fail-safes and how they can go wrong
The ten most common reasons for accidents  
and how to avoid them
Confident in all phases of flight
Intelligent Flight Mode
Flying effectively in ATTI mode
Operating in strong winds
Camera settings
Filters
Composition
Smooth operation
Cinematic effects
Subject matter
Photoshop
iMovie and Final Cut Pro
Flying indoors
Drone Deploy
Theory test
Flight test
Advanced
Intermediate
Beginner
Mark Thomas
James Patterson
Steve Samosa
Steve Ashman
Images are by Finalists in the 400ft Britain drone 
photography competition
All are PhantomFlightSchool clients
01244 893 872           www.phantomflightschool.co.uk          info@phantomflightschool.co.uk
Learn to Fly Like a Pro, 
Film Like a Pro 
What we can teach you:
With

Chilling Out
The winter weather doesn’t usually favour drone 
pilots, but Lee Schofield has some excellent advice to 
keep you and your craft safe and warm!
 T
he first time flying in the colder climes of winter 
can be an educational time for most new pilots. It 
doesn’t matter if you’re flying a small FPV quad, a 
fixed wing drone or a larger platform with high-end 
camera gear – the cold, damp and wintry conditions affect 
both you and the drone.
This may seem like such an obvious statement but the 
fact is that these differences can catch many pilots out, so 
over these pages I’ll cover some of the tips and tricks that 
I’ve learnt from flying in cold conditions. A few of these 
pointers come from the direct result of problems both I, 
and some of my flying buddies, have had over the years 
and I’ll share a few of the less embarrassing examples to 
illustrate why certain things need consideration when 
flying in the winter months. 
With all that said, for anyone who is entering into 
their first winter flying UAVs you can also find a magical 
new dimension to your flying when it’s above frost or 
even snow-covered landscapes. The photos, videos and 
experiences flying in these conditions can be amazing, so 
let’s get started with making sure that those aerial shots 
make it back home in one piece!
Warming Up
The most important part of your set-up that will need 
adapting for the colder weather is, of course, you! Standing 
still for long periods in a field and moving very little while 
flying will let the heat ebb away from your feet, hands, face 
and anywhere else that isn’t covered by lots of layers. The 
answer is to wrap up and make sure you have something 
70
DRONE MAGAZINE

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
71
warm with you. I tend to take a flask of something hot with 
me, as spending a few hours in a freezing field can become 
painful on the extremities and a hot drink can help warm 
you up and keep your fingers nimble. 
I’ve had problems in past seasons by not making sure that 
my hands went straight back into gloves between flights. 
Your fingers are your sole connection to the entire control 
system and when cold they will become stiff and slow down 
your reactions. A few of my flying friends keep a hand-
warmer or two in their jacket pockets and use them to keep 
the circulation going between flights, helping to keep that 
much-needed flexibility and feeling in their fingertips. 
You’ll probably have noticed that LiPo batteries will get 
warm when used and so these can also double up as useful 
hand-warmers after a flight. Many is the time I’ve been 
taking a break to watch a friend fly, while holding onto a 
couple of spent LiPo batteries to get the feeling back into 
my fingers. 
There are also large enclosures available for the radio and 
your hands, too. They appear like one huge glove that covers 
everything and have a clear panel on the top so you can see 
the screen of the radio. Those will help keep you and your 
kit warm while you fly but I find them cumbersome and 
prefer to fly with bare hands or thin fingerless gloves and 
warm my hands between flights. 
Batteries Don’t Like  
The Cold Either!
LiPo batteries convert stored chemical energy into electrical 
energy and how well that reaction works is related to the 
temperature: The colder the temperature, the slower the 
reaction. A battery that gives you ten minutes of flight time 
in the warm days of summer may only last eight minutes 
in very cold weather. To this extent, reduce the timers on 
the radio for your model/s by about 20% to avoid over-
discharging the packs. For the first few flights be prepared 
for the power to be a little less, too, until you get used to the 
feel of the craft in the colder air. 
My advice is to keep the batteries in a warm place and only 
bring them into the cold when you’re about to fly. I used to 
pop everything into the boot of my car on the way to the field 
where they would slowly chill, but now I keep the battery 
box up front with me where the heat is as I travel to the flying 
field and only take them out of the warm at the last minute.
The other consideration is for all of those batteries that 
you won’t use over the winter season. Don’t store LiPo 
batteries away fully charged as it will cause irreversible 
changes to the chemistry inside the battery and decrease its 
performance and lifespan. Use the ‘Storage Charge’ setting 
on your charger to get each of the cells in a battery to 3.8v. 
At that voltage the batteries will be happy to sit for 
months. Even with the low levels of self-discharge over 
the winter months, the batteries should still be in good 
shape when you get them out to charge again in spring. 
The ‘smart’ LiPo batteries using BattGo technology will 
auto-discharge to this 3.8v per cell level after a period 
automatically but its good practice to always store your 
packs at a storage charge any time of the year.
Clean and Dry
The big problem with the adverse weather is that the flying 
conditions will often be muddy and wet. Moisture can affect 
all of the electrical systems on a drone and cause failures 
and unexpected behaviour. Multirotors are especially 
vulnerable, as modern high performance frames and 
motors have lots of space for cooling and saving weight.
This means that landing on wet grass, dirt or snow can 
kick up a lot of water and mud into the sensitive parts of 
your model. To counter this, I use a piece of foam-board 
covered in tape to take-off and land on (although purpose-

built landing mats are available to buy), as well as keeping 
a towel handy to dry off a model after a flight and help keep 
everything else clean and damp-free. 
Fixed wing models tend to end up with long muddy 
streaks on the undercarriage and wingtips during landing. 
If it’s a foam model then you don’t need to worry too much 
about it out in the field while it’s wet. Instead you can let the 
model dry out at home and use a soft brush to remove the 
dried soil. It’s easier and works better.
It’s the multirotor drones that tend to have the worst 
problems with the soft ground in winter months. ‘Hard 
landings’ that would just result in maybe a bent prop in the 
summer can end up with you digging the model out of the 
ground in winter. I’ve had a few crashes where one arm of 
the model was stuck straight into the muddy soil. 
In the event of any imperfect landing, take care when 
recovering the model and try to remove as much of the 
muck as you can. Be careful not to push the soil and grit 
further into the motor or electronics and under any heat 
shrink. I tend to remove what I can in the field and then 
take it home to dry out and use a soft brush to clean up 
what’s left. 
If the bearings in the motor are not sealed then you may 
end up with grit in one of them. If so, don’t panic; you 
can flush them with bearing oil to dislodge any stubborn 
particles. Motor protectors on the ends of arms can save 
a lot of problems when flying in muddy places. Likewise, 
there are products you can use to spray exposed electrical 
components that provide a waterproof layer. If you are going 
to fly a lot in places where the model may end up a little wet 
these are well worth looking at.
Line of Sight
With the poorer light conditions, adding bright tape, and 
especially LEDs, to a model is a great idea to improve your 
eyes-on visibility. Orientation can be more challenging in 
the flatter, lower light so the LEDs will let you fly safely in 
dusk conditions allowing for a slightly longer flying day. 
72
DRONE MAGAZINE
72
DRONE MAGAZINE
“The photos, videos and experiences flying in these conditions can be 
amazing, so make sure that those shots back home in one piece!”

Watch for lower clouds and mist as you’re flying. The 
cloud base can be a lot lower in cold weather and the height 
of them can be deceptive, so stay on your toes and be 
prepared to reduce your altitude if you start to lose sight of 
your drone in the clouds.
An obvious piece of advice is to be prepared to land 
quickly if the weather changes. Rain, snow and lots of other 
winter delights can happen without a great deal of warning 
and making sure you’re always ready to land at a moment’s 
notice is good practice. I’ve had a few friends take off in 
lovely calm conditions and then be fighting gusts of wind 
trying to bring a model into land safely.
Remember that the denser, colder air will make the craft 
perform differently and with the changes in performance 
from the colder battery packs, the drone may not fly exactly 
how you’re used to. You’ll quickly get to grips with it but use 
the first few flights to get a feel for things and double-check 
the flight times you’ll get from the LiPo packs you’re using.
The First-Person View
Flying FPV is one of the most fun ways to take to the skies 
in the winter weather, as the sights are simply spectacular 
and you’ll see some wonderful views of your local winter 
landscape normally reserved for the birds and local light 
aircraft. Again, it’s wise to add LEDs to the model. If the FPV 
system has an issue you’ll need the help with orientation, 
especially if you don’t have an automatic ‘Return to Home’ 
GPS function. 
It also helps to ensure the model has a buzzer alert as a 
model can sink into snow and slush. The first time I tried 
to fly FPV in the cold weather I crashed. The lenses in my 
FPV goggles steamed up in a matter of seconds and left me 
unable to see what was going on. A short ditch-dive later I 
was digging the quadcopter out of the mud.
In light of this incident, you should also watch out for 
condensation on goggles and camera lenses and keep all 
of your FPV gear in the warm until you intend to fly. Don’t 
store the goggles in the boot of the car like I had that first 
time (much like the batteries); even with a demisting fan 
like those fitted to the Fat Shark Dominator 3 and HD3 
goggles you’ll struggle to keep the lenses clear.
Consider using a ground station instead of goggles in the 
cold weather. It’s not as immersive but in the lower light 
of a winter’s day the screen is a lot easier to see and there 
isn’t the problem of misting up to consider. If you have 
something like the Fat Shark transformers, the screen can 
be unclipped from the goggles and mounted on a tripod for 
just this type of flying. 
The last area to watch out for is the capabilities of the FPV 
camera you’re using. Watch out for poor light conditions 
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
73

and the likelihood of a low sun when you’re about to fly. 
Cameras without a wide dynamic range will struggle to 
expose the bright sun low in the sky and keep the detail in 
the ground. Most of the modern cameras from RunCam and 
Foxeer have very wide dynamic ranges and can handle this 
easily, but older, cheaper cameras and those on the smaller 
models can struggle and leave you looking at nothing useful 
to fly with.
that’s a wrap!
Just because the weather closes in and the temperatures 
drop, it doesn’t mean that you need to put your new hobby 
on hold. With a little care, flying in winter can be even 
more fun that flying in summer. Just watch those batteries, 
including those in the radio and action cameras you’re 
using, and don’t forget to wrap up warm yourself!
With the shorter days there are fewer opportunities to 
fly unless you have a model with all of the extra pieces and 
permissions for night flying. So my last piece of advice is 
to consider buying a flying or FPV simulator to use when 
conditions are against you in order to brush up on your 
skills and keep that muscle memory nice and sharp. That 
way, when you do have a beautiful calm and clear morning 
you’ll be ready for a fun day’s flying!
74
DRONE MAGAZINE
74
DRONE MAGAZINE
“The cloud base can be a lot lower in cold weather 
so be prepared to reduce your altitude if you start to 
lose sight of your drone”

Try the FREE sample issue of FSM by searching your app store 
for Fighting Spirit Magazine. You can also read FSM on your PC or 
Mac by visiting www.tinyurl.com/PocketFSM
n Hi-res screen brings
out the best in FSM’s 
photographs
n Many hours of relevant
matches and interviews  
are included, exclusively  
to FSM’s digital format
n Reading on the go has
never been easier
n Immediate access to 
new and back issues
I know you’ve written  
about how much you  
love print, but downloading 
FSM every month is just  
so easy. I prefer doing it  
this way!   
– david ritchie, oak brook, Illinois
available to 
download
today
tap in to the best of FSM


Three’s a Crowd
Maui, Hawaii
“A swimmer comes across two sea 
turtles near a reef.”
Photo by Dawn Jernaill 
Supplied by Dronestagram

78
DRONE MAGAZINE
All Photos by Naughty Cat Media
Photography on the Fly

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
79
One of the most popular 
and obvious uses for 
drones is for photography 
and filming. So, for anyone 
looking to take their first 
aerial views, Mark Baker 
is on hand to guide you 
through the basics…
P
erhaps you’ve just finished unwrapping your brand 
new drone, or maybe you’ve finally been tempted 
to pick one up in the New Year sales – and of course 
you want to get it in the air and show what you can 
do. You might fancy yourself as the next big thing in aerial 
photography, or maybe you’re planning some Hollywood-
quality video creations ready to dazzle your friends or 
YouTubers around the world.
The bad news is that you’ve never shot an image that wasn’t 
from your smartphone or an old digital camera. However, the 
good news is that we’re here to help with some basic tips and 
advice to give you the best possible results from your early 
flights. Creative photography is a long (and often frustrating) 
journey, so do yourself a favour and learn from the many 
mistakes of those who have gone before you!
Schoolboy Errors
There are plenty of ways to ruin an aerial photo or video shoot 
and, whether it’s your first flight or your thousandth, some of 
them are easier to prevent than others. The following ground 
rules might sound obvious, but trust us; pilots of all levels can 
(and have) come unstuck. Whether you create a meticulous 
mental checklist or some hastily scribbled notes, these basic 
rules should be front and centre whenever you fly.
1. Always Remove Your Lens Cover! 
Forgetting to do this on a traditional ground-based camera is a 
minor inconvenience and only slightly embarrassing. At 400ft 
and 500m away it can be soul-destroying. This is exacerbated 
if you are a new pilot and lose your bearings without a video 
feed, prompting an early function test of your drone’s ‘Return 
to Home’ option. 
If you can see the likes of grass, feet and ants on your screen 
before take-off then you’re probably good to go. If all you see 
is darkness do yourself a favour and check the lens cover is 
off. We have it on good authority that more than one new 
purchase has been returned to a dealer because “the camera 
isn’t working”… 
2. Check your Storage! 
In the ‘good old days’ aerial photography was literally a hit-
first 
shots
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
79
Photography on the Fly

80
DRONE MAGAZINE
Photography on the Fly
and-hope affair. You pressed the timelapse shutter on your 
GoPro and that was the last thing you could control until 
you landed. For this reason it was reassuring to know that 
you couldn’t possibly start capturing images without a 
MicroSD card inserted. 
However, many modern drones will not warn you 
that your card slot is empty until you try and take a shot. 
Arguably even worse, some apps will let you capture 
images directly to your phone or tablet, but only at low 
resolution. This writer once captured hundreds of shots of a 
once-in-a-lifetime meeting of three cruise ships (in perfect 
lighting conditions) and not realised until later that night 
that they were stored on an app in 720p – which is great for 
thumbnails but not so good for printing in poster size. 
Always check that you have a card, it has enough space 
on it, and you’ve inserted it before take-off. Keep a spare 
card in your wallet, your car, or anywhere else that will save 
you a humiliating journey home to get a new one. Get into 
the habit of transferring your shots to a hard drive or cloud 
storage, and then formatting your card before it goes back 
into your flight case.
3. Remove Your Gimbal Guard / Clip! 
These simple plastic attachments are fantastic for protecting 
your precious camera / gimbal combination in transit. 
Leaving them on while your drone is powering up is one 
of the fastest ways to burn out the motors of your gimbal, 
though. The crazy twitching that your camera unit does 
when initialising is an important part of its calibration and 
balancing routine. If you’re worried that you might forget, 
attach a luggage tag, cable tie or even a big lanyard that 
states “REMOVE ME!” to the retaining clip.
4. Keep it Clean!  
Your monitor screen might do a good job of telling you that 
you’ve left the lens cap on your camera. It’s not always great 
for helping you identify fingerprints, dust, grease and any 
other contaminants on the glass that could spoil your shoot. 
‘Spit and Polish’ is great for shining boots but not really cut 
out for delicate camera components. 
The first line of defence is to minimise handling the 
camera and keep the unit away from dust, sand and water. 
For the times when that fails, do yourself a favour and 
invest a few pounds in a lens-cleaning kit. It should have 
a blower and/or soft brush for removing dust, a gentle 
cleaning solution and a microfibre cloth.
Fully Automatic
Even relatively basic drone cameras can 
have a baffling array of features and 
settings for you to get lost in. In the longer 
term you will want to master every variable 
at your disposal to produce the perfect 
print (as we’ve covered in some of our 
earlier issues). In the early days it’s better 
to avoid the frustration of battling with 
fiddly menus, especially if you are new to 
photography in general. Let your camera 
do some of the work for you, and leave as 
many settings as possible at ‘Auto’.
Historically, auto settings would give 
you a ‘best of a bad bunch’ result. With 
recent drones this is not so true. Generally 
speaking, the auto mode will do a pretty 
decent job of covering up any mistakes you 
make, giving you a much better foundation 
to work from. Over time you will want to 
experiment and push the camera settings 
to achieve certain effects or counter 
problems you might face. 
If you are interested, it’s well worth 
taking a bit of time to read up on what each 
setting does to your final image. Change 
only one variable at a time and you will 
develop a much better understanding of 
what works in a specific situation. Just 
don’t kill your new-found enthusiasm for 
aerial photography by trying to do too 
much, too soon. If you’re happy with the 
results in full auto mode then you can save 
yourself a lot of aggravation – leaving you 
free to spend more time flying and less 
time fiddling with menus!

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
81
Photography on the Fly
Shoot to Thrill
Practicalities out of the way, you’re probably desperate to 
get snapping. While we can’t condense the whole spectrum 
of aerial photography into one issue, there are some useful 
tips we can offer to get you off the ground. Remember that 
all rules are made to be broken, so if you find a different 
technique that works for you then go for it!
Light and Shade
n The best lighting for shooting landscapes and those 
scenic vistas is generally with the sun behind the camera. 
If you think of the drone as your eyes it’s easier to imagine 
the optimum position for the sun as coming over your 
shoulders. This ensures that the scene is well lit without 
harsh shadows and highlights.
n Shooting directly into the sun can create issues for your 
camera. It can struggle to capture the darker parts of the 
image accurately, even on a fairly cloudy day. Unless you 
want to work with very high contrast shots or create strong 
silhouettes try to avoid being ‘blinded by the light’. 
This will likely be your introduction to HDR (High 
Dynamic Range) – the difference between the brightest 
and darkest parts of an image, and your camera’s ability 
to render them accurately in a single image. There are 
editing solutions that can recover shadows and highlights, 
but in general the easiest starting point to work from is an 
evenly-lit image.
n Time of day is also a factor to consider. The first hour or 
two after sunrise (and those before sunset) will often give 
the most pleasing results from an artistic point of view. This 
holds true for many types of photography, but especially 
when your tripod is at 400ft! 
Colours will usually appear softer, warmer and a little 
more natural-looking. The long shadows at these times of 
day can be problematic, but they can also be used creatively. 
Looking straight down from above when the sun is low in 
the sky can unlock a whole world of shapes, shadows and 
textures which aren’t apparent from the ground.
n Watch out for glare and strong reflections which might 
become a problem when you are higher up. Water (such as 
the sea and lakes) is the most common culprit but snow and 
ice, bare ground and reflective surfaces on buildings can all 
impact your image. These can be overcome to an extent by 
changing the pitch of your camera gimbal or flying to shoot 
from a slightly different angle. 
Our recommendation, though, is to invest in a Circular 
Polarizing filter (often called a CP or Polar) as your first 
drone accessory. You don’t need to spend more than £10-20 
to get hold of something which can make a massive impact 
on your photography, reducing glare, adding contrast and 
creating rich and interesting skies. 
Classical Composition
While photography is a subjective matter there are a few 
tips which can help to keep your shots interesting and add 
some professional polish. Feel free to experiment with the 
following and add your own twist to the classic techniques.
n Splitting your image into the ‘rule of thirds’ when you 
compose it is a simple yet effective way of leading the eye 
naturally through an image. The temptation when you first 
start drone photography is to fly as high as possible and 
keep the camera parallel to the ground. This usually results 
in a horizon which sits exactly halfway in the frame. Try to 
If you are struggling to visualise the thirds within an image try looking 
at the options within your camera app. Most will allow you to overlay a 
3x3 grid on your preview image for precisely this reason (as do the likes 
of Instagram). Alternatively you could crop your images later in editing 
software to follow the rule of thirds, but remember you will lose overall 
resolution – and possibly other points of interest – by doing so.
break away from this and change the angle of your gimbal 
so that you have a ratio of one third foreground to two 
thirds sky, or vice versa.
n Another common trap to fall into is framing your shot 
with the subject in the very centre. Try to reposition your 
camera so that points of interest sit on the line between 
vertical thirds of an image. For example, if you are shooting 
a building against a horizon, shift it to the left or right 
‘third’ line instead of having it dead-centre.
n Even more impactful is to place subjects at the 
intersections where vertical and horizontal third lines 
meet. This is a great way to naturally lead the viewer’s eye 
through an image. 

82
DRONE MAGAZINE
Photography on the Fly
General Advice
n Plan ahead. Drone batteries don’t last for very long, so you 
don’t want to waste precious air time by looking around for 
the perfect shot. If you can scout an area from the ground 
before take-off, or even use the likes of Google Earth to get 
an aerial view, then you can give yourself an idea of what 
you want to photograph or film in advance, enabling you to 
spend more time shooting and less time doing recon once 
you’re up in the air!
n It’s difficult to tell accurately from your camera exactly 
what you are capturing. Always shoot plenty of images, 
even when you have a clear idea of what you want to begin 
with. Change your angles, heights and distances to give 
yourself the most options to work with later, especially if 
you are shooting in unusual lighting or a location you can’t 
easily get back to. Take shots on the way to, and back from 
your subject. We’ve had plenty of occasions when these 
‘B-Roll’ captures have turned out to be the star of the show!
n Take a second or two to ease off your controls before you 
hit the shutter. Drone gimbals have come a long way in a 
short time and do a great job of stabilizing your camera, so 
give them the best possible chance to give you a sharp image 
by letting your aircraft settle into position before a capture. 
Shooting from a moving drone leaves the shot susceptible to 
blurring or having the props tilting into the frame.
n Get yourself familiar with some free editing apps. We 
tend to use Snapseed, but there are plenty of alternatives for 
iOS and Android platforms alike. They will introduce you to 
some of the fundamentals of image processing and creative 
editing, without you having to lose yourself for hours in 
manuals and tutorials.
n If you have a location nearby where you can fly safely, 
try shooting at different times of the day and in varying 
light conditions. This will really help to give you an 
understanding of the different styles of image and effects 
you can achieve, as well as identifying any strengths or 
weaknesses in your camera’s performance.
n Try to get involved with aerial photo sharing sites (like 
Dronestagram and Skypixel) or join some of the many 
Facebook groups dedicated to drone imagery. Don’t let the 
odd troll discourage you from sharing your own shots – you 
can get advice, inspiration and support that might get you 
through any spells when you don’t feel like you’re making 
progress. And above all, fly safe and have fun!
Mark Baker is a professional aerial photographer and 
cinematographer. You can see more of his work, and get 
in contact with him if you have any specific questions, via 
his website www.naughtycatmedia.co.uk.

THE UK’s best magazine 
for Asian pop culture
Anime, manga, movies, games, music,  
cosplay and more!
Every four weeks
£4.75 at Tesco, Asda, WHSmiths and independent shops
	
facebook.com/neomagazineuk 	
www.selectmagazines.co.uk/product/neo	
twitter.com/neo_magazine

Drone On
Get connected with DRONE Magazine
www.get-drone.today
Never miss an issue! Subscribe today from only £14.99.
facebook.com/DRONEMagUK
All the latest news, videos and industry announcements. Follow us to 
stay up-to-date and have your say on new developments.
instagram.com/DRONEMagUK
We’ll be sharing some of the best images from the magazine, and 
maybe a few photos fresh from the latest press event!
twitter.com/DRONEMagUK
Regular tweets about the magazine and updates from around the drone 
industry. 280 characters is more than enough!
www.dronemagazine.uk
Take a few clicks to catch up on any missing back issues or pick up a 
great subscription deal and get the mag delivered straight to your door.
84
DRONE MAGAZINE
www.dronestagr.am
Dronestagram 
www.dronestagr.am
The beautiful showcase shots in this 
issue were taken by Hawaiian native 
Dawn Jernaill. You can see more great 
shots of her homeland and other 
stunning locations on her Dronestagram 
profile page, www.dronestragr.am/
author/dawn-jernaill, as well as finding 
many more great photos and videos on 
the main website www.dronestagr.am.

Drone Safe Register (DSR) provides a national, 
searchable database containing the contact 
details and proﬁles of trained, qualiﬁed and 
insured drone pilots who are available for hire 
within the UK.
DSR has made the process of ﬁnding and hiring
a legal drone pilot quick and easy. 
Simply search using a postcode or area and 
choose from the list of approved drone operators 
available for hire in that region.
HIRE
Nationwide professionals for hire
NEW Aerial Footage Stock Website
dronesaferegister.org.uk
The UK’s
premium
aerial stock
website
www.coverdrone.com
@coverdrone       coverdrone
coverdrone@johnheath.com
Core Coverdrone features…
 
Loss or damage to the drones and associated equipment
 
Public/Products Liability insurance
 
In-house, fast claims service
 
Aviation Liability cover (hi-jacking, unlawful seizure of aircraft and other perils)
 
Professional Indemnity (inc. data protection and invasion of privacy)
 
Reinstatement of data
 
Increased costs of working (replacement drone hire)
 
Full reinstatement cover
 
Cover for operating at ‘high-risk’ premises, over water and indoors
 
Worldwide cover
 
‘In-training’ cover 
 
Compliant with EU Regulation (EC) No 785/2004
 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
“Fly safe. We've got you covered.”
BESPOKE INSURANCE
WE CAN COVER IT
We understand the risks involved, the mechanics and 
properties of Commercial Drone applications. Coverdrone 
is a bespoke insurance product for the aviation industry.
Whether your intended use is for Inspection, Surveillance, 
Photographic or other purposes we can help. If you’re not 
sure what cover you need just get in touch and we’ll be 
happy to advise you.
Coverdrone FlySafe
Coverdrone FlySafe is a companion application for all 
Coverdrone customers designed to help plan and 
conduct their drone ﬂights quicker and safer than 
ever before. Available on both iOS and Android.
www.coverdrone.com
@coverdrone       coverdrone
coverdrone@johnheath.com
Core Coverdrone features…
 
Loss or damage to the drones and associated equipment
 
Public/Products Liability insurance
 
In-house, fast claims service
 
Aviation Liability cover (hi-jacking, unlawful seizure of aircraft and other perils)
 
Professional Indemnity (inc. data protection and invasion of privacy)
 
Reinstatement of data
 
Increased costs of working (replacement drone hire)
 
Full reinstatement cover
 
Cover for operating at ‘high-risk’ premises, over water and indoors
 
Worldwide cover
 
‘In-training’ cover 
 
Compliant with EU Regulation (EC) No 785/2004
 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
“Fly safe. We've got you covered.”
BESPOKE INSURANCE
WE CAN COVER IT
We understand the risks involved, the mechanics and 
properties of Commercial Drone applications. Coverdrone 
is a bespoke insurance product for the aviation industry.
Whether your intended use is for Inspection, Surveillance, 
Photographic or other purposes we can help. If you’re not 
sure what cover you need just get in touch and we’ll be 
happy to advise you.
Coverdrone FlySafe
Coverdrone FlySafe is a companion application for all 
Coverdrone customers designed to help plan and 
conduct their drone ﬂights quicker and safer than 
ever before. Available on both iOS and Android.

ON SALE thursday 4th january
86
DRONE MAGAZINE
Plus
DJI Goggles Racing Edition  //  3D Mapping   
Zenmuse X7  //  Augmented Reality  //  And more!
GETTING OUR MOJO
Hands-on with ImmersionRC’s new Vortex 230 racer
Next Issue
Photo by ImmersionRC

drone 
magazine 
back issues 
are priced 
at £5.99 
+ £1 p&p
Issue 27
Issue 26
Issue 25
Issue 24
Issue 23
Issue 22
Issue 21
Issue 20
Issue 19
Issue 18
Issue 17
Issue 16
Issue 15
Issues 14
Issue 13
back issues
01202 087627
Please have all your details to hand
Complete the form (right) and send it to: Drone Magazine Back Issues, 
Select Publisher Services Ltd, PO Box 6337, Bournemouth BH1 9EH
www.get-drone.today
Go to the above URL and click on the back issues link for a full list
Please allow 14 days for delivery of your back issues.
Three easy ways to order:
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
87
Payment details
Issue numbers of Drone Magazine required 
.........................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Each back issue costs £5.99 + £1 for p&p (UK only)*
*For overseas rates please visit our website at www.get-drone.today, 
or call 01202 087627
Cheque
[  ] I enclose a cheque for ...............................................................................................................................
All cheques and postal orders must be made payable to “Uncooked Media Ltd”
Credit/debit card
[  ] Visa     [  ] MasterCard     [  ] Maestro     [  ] Switch
Card Number
Expiry date	
Valid from (if shown)
Issue number	
Security number
(if shown)	
(last 3 digits on the back of the card)
Signature ............................................................................................................................................................................   
Date
Return this form to: Drone Magazine Back Issues, Select 
Publisher Services Ltd, PO Box 6337, Bournemouth BH1 9EH
[   ] Please tick this box if you DO NOT want to receive any other 
information from Select Publisher Services.
[   ] Please tick this box if you DO NOT want to receive any other 
information from other companies.
Your details
Mr/Mrs/Miss/Ms (delete as applicable)
First name ..................................................................................................................................................................................
Surname ........................................................................................................................................................................................
Address ...........................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Postcode ..............................................................  Country ....................................................................................
Email .....................................................................................................................................................................................................
Daytime phone .................................................................................................................................................................
Mobile .................................................................................................................................................................................................
back issues order form
D
M
Y
Y
D
M
Y
Y
DM#28
Missing an earlier issue? Order a copy and 
complete your collection today…

Photo by DJI
Never miss an issuE OF 
DRONE MAGAZINE
Subscribe today from as little as £14.99*
88
DRONE MAGAZINE

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
89
Get 12 issues for £50!
Call 01202 087627 
and subscribe via debit or credit card
 
Online at www.get-drone.today
Pay by cheque or postal order, made payable 
to Uncooked Media Ltd
And send to:
DRONE Subs, Select Publisher Services,
PO Box 6337, Bournemouth BH1 9EH
Return this form to:
DRONE Subs, Select Publisher Services Ltd, PO Box 6337, Bournemouth BH1 9EH
        Please tick this box if you DO NOT want to receive any other information from Select Publisher Services Ltd 
and Uncooked Media Ltd.
        Please tick this box if you DO NOT want to receive any other information from other companies.
This subscription is:	   n For me      n A gift for someone*
Your details   Mr n  Mrs n  Miss n  Ms n
First name ................................................................ Surname .................................................................................
Address ............................................................................................................................................................................
Postcode .................................................................. Email .........................................................................................
Daytime phone ...................................................... Mobile ......................................................................................
*If giving DRONE MAGAZINE as a gift, please complete both the recipient’s and your own details (above).
gift recipIent’s details only     Mr n  Mrs n  Miss n  Ms n
First name ................................................................ Surname .................................................................................
Address ............................................................................................................................................................................
...................................................................................................................... Postcode ..................................................
SUBSCRIption form
YES! I’d like to subscribe to DRONE MAGAZINE and save money.
Payment options
Direct Debit payment  £14.99 every 3 issues (UK only)
Instruction to your bank or building society to pay by Direct Debit
Please fill in the form and send to: 
DRONE Subs, Select Publisher Services Ltd,  
PO Box 6337, Bournemouth BH1 9EH
Name and full postal address of your bank or building society:
To: The Manager        Bank/building society ......................................................................................................
Address ....................................................................................................................................................................................
............................................................................................................................. Postcode ...................................................
Name(s) of account holder(s) .....................................................................................................................................
Branch sort code n n n n n n    Account number n n n n n n n n
Reference n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n   (Official use only)
Instruction to your bank or building society
Please pay Select Publisher Services Ltd Direct Debits from the account detailed in this 
instruction subject to the safeguards assured by the Direct Debit Guarantee. I understand 
that this instruction may remain with Select Publisher Services Ltd and, if so, details will 
be passed electronically to my bank/building society.
Signature .................................................................................................   Date n n /n n/n n
Banks and building societies may not accept Direct Debit instructions for some types of account.
Subscription pricing when paying by cheque or credit/debit card
6 issues  UK £30  n     12 issues UK £50   n    6 issues  EUR £45  n     
12 issues EUR £80   n     6 issues  ROW £50  n     12 issues ROW £90  n   
Cheque 
I enclose a cheque for ............................................ (made payable to Uncooked Media Ltd)
Credit/debit card    n Visa  n MasterCard  n Maestro  n Switch
Card Number	 n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n
Expiry date	
n n  n n	
Valid from  n n  n n  (if shown)
Issue number	 n n (if shown)	
Security number n n n
	
	
(last 3 digits on the back of the card)
Signature .................................................................................................   Date n n /n n/n n
I would like my subscription to begin from issue .................................................................. (month + year)
Service user number n n n n n n
8
3
8
7
7
3
DM#28
Benefits
Get your copy before it hits the shops 
Save money
Never miss an issue
Posted direct to your door
Free delivery
 
prices
UK 12 issues £50
UK 6 issues £30 
Eur 12 issues £80
Eur 6 issues £45
ROW 12 issues £90
ROW 6 issues £50
Direct Debit = UK only, £14.99 every three issues
*with a UK Direct Debit
get 12 issues for £50! 
exclusive christmas offer

Skeye Hexa Drone
Category: Toy, Indoor, Compact
Street Price: £39.92
Camera: None
Weight: 30g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 130mm
Battery Type: LiPo
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 50m
Best Feature: Great for beginners
Parrot Mambo
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Fun
Street Price: £99
Camera: 3MP / 60fps
Weight: 63g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 180mm
Battery Type: 550mAh LiPo 
Control / Range: iOS or Android / 20m
Best Feature: Ideal for office hi-jinks!
Revell Control  
VR-Quadcopter
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Fun Flyer
Street Price: £99.00
Camera: 720p, 2MP
Weight: 100g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 280mm
Battery Type: 500mAh, 3.7v LiPo 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 50m
Best Feature: Good introduction to FPV flying
GestureBotics Aura
Category: Toy, Fun Flyer
Street Price: £99.99
Camera: None
Weight: 54g
Diagonal motor spacing: 85mm 
(without cage)
Battery type: 500mAh LiPo
Control / Range: Glove / 7 metres
Best feature: Fully gesture controlled
UDI U818A FPV
Category: Camera drone
Street price: £130
Size: 250mm
Weight: 140g
Best Feature: Live-view in App 
Revell Control GPS Pulse 
Quadcopter
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Fun Flyer
Street Price: £109.00
Camera: 720p, 2MP
Weight: 152g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 185mm
Battery Type: 610mAh, 7.4v LiPo  
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 50m
Best Feature: Great stability for its size
Revell Multicopter 
Hexatron
Category: Outdoor
Street Price: £100.00
Camera: Optional FPV version
Weight: 1200g
Diagonal motor spacing: 114mm
Battery type: LiPo
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 100m
Best feature: It’s just monstrously big
Bionic Bird
Category: Ornithopter
Street Price: €129 (£116)
Camera: None
Weight: 9.2g
Wingspan: 330mm
Battery Type: 55mAh LiPo 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 100m
Best Feature: Fly like a bird!
TrndLabs Fader
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Fun Flyer
Street Price: £99
Camera: 720p, 1MP
Weight: 55g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 175mm
Battery Type: 520mAh LiPo 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 50m
Best Feature: Good starter model 
BLADE INDUCTRIX 
FPV BNF
Category: Indoor, Racer, FPV
Street Price: £85.99 (£164 for the 
Ready-to-Fly version)
Camera: Integrated FPV
Weight: 24g
Diagonal motor spacing: 83mm
Battery type: 200mAh LiPo
Control / Range: 2.4GHz RF / 100m
Best feature: Perfect for rookie racers
Syma 4 Channel 2.4Ghz  
Quadcopter with Camera
Category: Indoor, Outdoor
Street Price: £45
Camera: Front-facing, 0.3MP
Weight: 590g
Diagonal motor spacing: 300mm
Battery type: LiPo
Control / Range: 2.4GHz RF / 500m
Best feature: Lightweight prop guards
Revell Control  
Mini Charger
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Fun Flyer
Street Price: £34.99
Camera: None
Weight: 15g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 95mm
Battery Type: 250mAh Li-Po 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 20m
Best Feature: Protective cage
90
DRONE MAGAZINE
Buyer’s guide
our comprehensive guide to some of the best 
drones on the market. check your budget, the 
key specs and see what’s right for you!
under £150
Top 5
Budget Drones
1 Hubsan X4
2 Parrot Rolling Spider
3 Syma X5SC-1
4 UDI U818A FPV
5 Blade Glimpse FPV

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
91
£150-£600
Yuneec Breeze
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: £439
Camera: 4K / 13MP
Weight: 385g (inc. battery)
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 196mm
Battery Type: 1150mAh Li-Po 
Control / Range: 5GHz Wi-Fi / 100m
Best Feature: Great for aerial selfies 
DJI Spark
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: £519
Camera: 1080p, 12MP
Weight: 300g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 143mm
Battery Type: 1480mAh, 3S LiPo 
Control / Range: Wi-Fi / 100m 
Best Feature: Great tech in a small package 
Xiro Xplorer
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: From £315
Camera: 1080p, 30fps
Weight: 410g (inc. battery)
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 225mm
Battery Type: 3S Li-Po, 1300mAh 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 500m
Best Feature: Great price
The Beast 280 MK2  
Racing Drone
Category: Racer
Street Price: £350
Camera: Sony 700TVL
Weight: 30g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 280mm
Battery Type: Li-Po
Control / Range: Optional
Best Feature: Very, very fast
Propel Star Wars Collection
Category: Fun Flyer, Air Combat, Collectible
Street Price: £190
Camera: None
Weight: Varied
Diagonal Motor Spacing: Varied
Battery Type: 800mAh Li-Po 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 100m
Best Feature: Too cool to fly!
Top 5
Beginner Drones
1 DJI Phantom 4
2 Parrot Bebop 2
3 Hubsan X4
4 Blade Nano QX
5 Blade Glimpse FPV
Cameras
Not every drone comes with its 
camera attached…
Mobius
Street Price: £60
A less financially-distressing action 
camera, the Full HD Mobius is also shaped 
differently, with the lens on the nose of a 
mini candy bar rather than the GoPro’s tiny 
traditional camera shape; many find this 
more practical to strap onto self-builds.
DJI Zenmuse cameras
Street Price: Z3 (Zoom) £800 / X5 
from £1,250
DJI’s Inspire 1 introduced a mount for a 
detachable camera and gimbal combination 
which has now made it into a number of 
DJI aircraft, as well as the handheld Osmo. 
The Z3 offers 3.5x optical zoom for £799, 
while the X5 features a detachable lens 
and, crucially, a much bigger image sensor 
– as each pixel can more accurately detect 
more subtle gradations in light and is less 
susceptible to noise.
GoPro
Street Price: Hero 4 £280 /  
Session £160
The grand-daddy of all action cameras, 
the GoPro Hero series is well loved by 
professional filmmakers the world over, 
and the top-end Black Edition can grab 
4K video at 30fps, but a faster frame rate is 
helpful for FPV, so users often switch down 
to ‘Full HD’ (1080p) at 60fps. The tiny cube-
like ‘Session’ model can also shoot video at 
this quality, though it can’t capture stills.
Accessory:  B&W Type 1000 
DJI Spark case
Price: £40.91 
Dimensions: 270 x 215 x 105mm 
weight: 1.7lbs (1.9lbs with packaging) 
volume: 4.1 litres
Designed as an entry level case for the aspiring 
Spark pilot, this offering from B&W boasts all of 
the features that we have come to expect when 
looking for a rugged storage and transport 
solution for your quad. It makes for a solid, 
lightweight, durable travel system that feels 
like it could take a real beating and still protect 
the equipment inside.
ImmersionRC Vortex 285
Category: Racer
Street Price: £300
Camera: Fit your FPV camera of choice
Weight: 350g (no battery or camera)
Diagonal motor spacing: 285mm
Battery type: 3S/4S Li-Po
Control / Range: RF
Best feature: Foldable
Xiro Xplorer Mini
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: £429 / €499
Camera: 1080p, 13MP
Weight: 431g (inc. battery)
Diagonal motor spacing: 310mm
Battery type: 1650mAh, 3S Li-Po
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 100m
Best feature: Portable AND powerful
Ehang Ghostdrone 2.0 
Aerial
Category: Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: £540
Camera: 4K Sports Camera (GoPro 3, 3+ and 4 
compatible)
Weight: 1150g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 290mm
Battery Type: 4500mAh LiPo 
Control / Range: Smart device required / 500m
Best Feature: Fully controlled with 
your phone

92
DRONE MAGAZINE
£600+
Top 5
All-Time Greats
1 DJI Phantom Series
2 Parrot AR.Drone
3 Hubsan X4
4 Fossils Stuff Gravity 250
5 Yuneec Typhoon H
DJI Phantom 4 Advanced
Category: Commercial, Flying Camera
Street Price: £1,469
Camera: 4K, 20MP
Weight: 1,368g
Diagonal motor spacing: 350mm
Battery type: 5870mAh, 4S LiPo 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 4.3 miles (7km)
Best feature: Excellent camera 
DJI Inspire 2
Category: Commercial, Professional, Flying Camera
Street Price: £3,059
Camera: None (X4S and X5S compatible)
Weight: 3,920g (with batteries, without camera/
gimbal)
Diagonal motor spacing: 605mm
Battery type: 4280mAh Li-Po (dual system)
Control / Range: 2.4/5.8GHz / 4.3 miles
Best feature: Top of the line technology
DJI Matrice 600
Category: Commercial, Professional Rig
Street Price: £3,999
Camera: Not included
Weight: 9.1kg
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 1668mm
Battery Type: 4500mAh Li-Po (5700mAh 
optional) 
Control / Range: 2.4/5.8GHz / 3.1 miles (5km)
Best Feature: Highly versatile
PowerVision PowerEye
Category: Commercial, Flying Camera
Street Price: £3,999
Camera: 4K, 16.1MP
Weight: 3.9Kg
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 315mm
Battery Type: Dual 9000mAh LiPo 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 3.1 miles (5km)
Best Feature: Intelligent design
DJI Mavic Pro
Category: Indoor, Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: £1,089
Camera: 4K/1080p, 12.7MP
Weight: 743g
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 198mm
Battery Type: 3830mAh, 3S Li- Po
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 4.3 miles (7km)
Best Feature: Great tech in a portable package
DJI Matrice 200
Category: Professional, Flying Rig
Street Price: From £5,899
Camera: None (X4S, X5S, Z30 and XT compatible)
Weight: 3.8kg
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 887mm
Battery type: 4280mAh Li-Po 
Control / Range: 2.4/5.8GHz / 4.3 miles (7km)
Best feature: Brilliant with the Z30 camera
Yuneec Tornado H920 Plus
Category: Professional, Flying Camera 
Street Price: £3,999
Camera: 4K, 16MP
Weight: 5kg
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 920mm
Battery Type: 4000mAh, 6S LiPo 
Control / Range: 2.4/5.8GHz / 1 mile (1.6km)
Best Feature: Pro air and ground solution
QuestUAV Q-100 Datahawk
Category: Pro-mapping, long-range survey
Street Price: £15,995
Camera: 20MP Sony QX1
Weight: 2kg
wingspan: 1160mm
Battery Type: Ah Li-Po
Range: 8,000m
Best Feature: Rugged, all-weather design
PowerVision PowerEgg
Category: Outdoor, Flying Camera
Street Price: £1,399
Camera: 4K, 13.8MP
Weight: 2.1kg
Diagonal Motor Spacing: 476mm
Battery Type: 6400mAh Li-Po 
Control / Range: 2.4GHz / 3.1 miles (5km)
Best Feature: Unique stylish design
Adobe Lightroom
£6.98 per month
Easily the most capable image cataloging 
and editing program to emerge in the 
era of ‘RAW’ image files. What makes 
RAW files such a leap forward is that they 
record as much of the dynamic range as 
the camera is capable of recording. This 
effectively means that even if something 
is way too dark or too light there is a 
decent chance of recovering it – and 
Lightroom is the place to do it.
Pix4Dmapper Mesh
£320 per year
If you’re interested in landing work with 
quantity surveyors, or perhaps have an 
architectural scheme to pitch, this will 
allow you to turn a grid of photos into a 
photorealistic 3D model. In turn you can 
also do great things from spectacular 
special effects to digital volumetrics.
Liftoff
£14.99 on Mac or PC
Liftoff isn’t the only FPV sim out there, but 
it’s the one the community seems to talk 
about the most. You can fly a virtual Vortex 
250 or 285 using a Spektrum or FRSky 
Taranis controller (or a PS4 pad). Pricier 
simulators like DroneSimPro or RealFlight 
might make more sense if you’re looking to 
master more than just FPV.
Software 
Accessories
If you’re going to take drones 
seriously, then expect software to 
become a big part of your life, too!

Fossils stuff revo
Category: Bind-n-Fly FPV
Street price: $288 (£219)
Size (motor-to-motor): 180-240mm
Weight (frame only): 115g
Best feature: Super rigid design
ImmersionRC Vortex 250 Pro
Category: Ready-to-Fly FPV
Street Price: £400
Size (motor-to-motor): 250mm
Carbon Fibre: 4mm thick
Weight (before battery, camera): 415g
Best feature: The LEDs (in this RTF version)
ImpulseRC Alien 5”
Category: FPV Frame
Street price (frame only): £110
Size (motor-to-motor): 225mm
Weight (frame only): 135g
Best feature: Replaceable arms
FPV frames
WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
93
RC Controller  
and Receiver
It should be obvious, but you’ll need 
something to control your craft and 
communicate via the transmitter (TX), 
and your craft will need the means to hear 
it (RX). The pair will need to work together 
(so use the same manufacturer). The big 
brands are Spektrum, Turnigy and FRSky, 
and more expensive models offer the 
ability to store settings for multiple craft 
and possibly even to display telemetry 
data like battery health (assuming the 
aircraft can transmit it).
Goggles (or monitor)  
and Camera
FPV is defined by the ability to see that 
‘first person’ view. The company Fat Shark 
is almost synonymous with these goggles, 
although alternatives can be found (some 
find the bigger Quanum screen-in-a-box 
more comfortable). Some feature built-in 
receivers and might be bundled with a 
camera and transmitter, too. FPV racers 
see a lot of static, so look out for a ‘non-
blue screen’ monitor which won’t revert 
to a blank ‘no signal’ screen in tough 
conditions.
Batteries  
and charger
If you’re not going down  
the DJI route (and few  
people would purely for  
FPV flying), then charging  
batteries, or Lithium-ion Polymer batteries 
(better known as Li-Po), while still not 
exactly art, are a little further from science 
than you might hope for. A good charger 
and a charging/discharging regimen is 
important; always make sure you look 
after your batteries!
Gear up for FPV
Even if you’re getting a pre-built 
racer, make sure you’ve got (or 
are getting) everything you need.
Top 5
Flying Cameras
1 DJI Inspire 2
2 DJI Phantom 4
3 Parrot Disco
4 Yuneec Typhoon H
5 3DR Solo
Accessory: FrSky Taranis Q X7S
Price: £164 
Channels: 16 (up to 32) 
lcd screen: 128 x 64 outdoor readable LCD 
model memories: 60 (extendable via 
MicroSD (TF) card) 
Compatibility: FrSky receivers in 
D16/LR12 mode
We could still happily recommend the original Q 
X7 as an entry-level radio but with upgraded M7 
gimbals, new switches and several added features 
(such as the wireless trainer function), the Q 
X7S just offers that little bit more – but at a cost. 
Although if you don’t fancy the extra expense, 
you should be able to pick up the older model at a 
knock-down price!
GPC Inspire 2 Backpack
Price: $299 (£228) 
dimensions: 610 x 520 x 254mm 
weight: 363g (544g shipping)
At $299 this isn’t cheap, but then quality cases aren’t and 
this definitely offers more than just another solid box to 
move your drone around in. If you’re prepared to ‘shell’ 
out even more to protect your Inspire 2, then you can add 
a hard case to store the backpack in for a further $295. 
Alternatively, GPC also offers a hard-shell Travel Mode Case 
for $469 and the top-end Landing Mode Case for $549. 
Holybro Kopis 1
Category: Ready-to-Fly FPV
Street Price: £175
Size (motor-to-motor): 230mm
Weight (with battery!): 300g
Best feature: Beautiful carbon fibre finish 
Lumenier QAV-X CHARPU
Category: FPV frame
Street price (frame only): £90
Carbon Fibre: 4mm thick
Size (motor-to-motor): 214mm
Weight (frame & battery protector  
only): 93g
Best feature: Camera mount system
ViFly R130
Category: Bind and Fly FPV 
Street Price: $189 (£143)
Size (motor-to-motor): 130mm
Weight (frame only): 165g
Best feature: Good all-round FPV model

94
DRONE MAGAZINE
THE LEGAL POSITION
The operation of multirotors for sport and 
recreational purposes is covered by the same 
legal considerations as other model aircraft; 
the law makes no specific distinction on types 
of aircraft other than weight limits.
The overriding consideration is compliance with 
the relevant articles of the Civil Aviation, Air 
Navigation Order; the primary “endangering” 
provisions are addressed by Articles 241 and 240 
which are reproduced here:
Article 241;
“A person must not recklessly or negligently 
cause or permit an aircraft to endanger any 
person or property.”
Article 240;
“A person must not recklessly or negligently act 
in a manner likely to endanger an aircraft, or 
any person in an aircraft.”
These apply to all model aircraft at all times, 
whatever their weight or size.
Article 94 (set out here) covers the general 
principles that again apply to all model aircraft. 
However, only the provisions that specifically 
apply to the activity we are discussing here are 
included. Aircraft weighing in excess of 7kg 
have other, additional legislation, but these are 
fairly specialized pieces of equipment more 
usually employed in commercial operations. 
Article 94; (Small Unmanned Aircraft)
2) The person in charge of a small unmanned 
aircraft may only fly the aircraft if reasonably 
satisfied that the flight can safely be made.
3) The person in charge of a small unmanned 
aircraft must maintain direct, unaided visual 
contact with the aircraft sufficient to monitor 
its flight path in relation to other aircraft, 
persons, vehicles, vessels and structures for the 
purpose of avoiding collisions.
5) The person in charge of a small unmanned 
aircraft must not fly the aircraft for the purposes 
of commercial operations except in accordance 
with a permission granted by the CAA. 
Perhaps the most relevant provisions in terms 
of photography / filming with model aircraft 
as a sport and recreational activity are covered 
within Article 95 below, which sets out the 
basic conditions of operation, as well as 
specifying exact distances.
Article 95; (Small unmanned surveillance 
aircraft)
1) The person in charge of a small unmanned 
surveillance aircraft must not fly the aircraft 
in any of the circumstances described in 
paragraph 2) except in accordance with a 
permission issued by the CAA.
2) The circumstances referred to in paragraph 
1) are:- 
(a) over or within 150 metres of any congested 
area;
(b) over or within 150 metres of an organised 
open-air assembly of more than 1,000 persons;
(c) within 50 metres of any vessel, vehicle or 
structure which is not under the control of the 
person in charge of the aircraft; or
(d) subject to paragraphs 3) and 4), within 50 
metres of any person.
3) Subject to paragraph 4), during take-off or  
landing, a small unmanned surveillance aircraft 
must not be flown within 30 metres of any 
person.
4) Paragraphs 2) d) and 3) do not apply to  
the person in charge of the small unmanned 
surveillance aircraft or a person under the 
control of the person in charge of the aircraft.
5) In this article ‘a small unmanned surveillance 
aircraft’ means a small unmanned aircraft 
which is equipped to undertake any form of 
surveillance or data acquisition.
These regulations are only concerned with 
models equipped with cameras, video 
equipment etc that have the potential to be 
used for surveillance purposes, either visual 
or electronic. It should also be noted that the 
above legislation (Articles 94 and 95) does NOT 
prohibit you from flying a camera or video 
equipped model for recreational purposes. 
The person in charge of the model must retain 
direct visual contact with the model (Article 
94) and there are some restrictions as to where 
you can fly (Article 95). Probably the most 
important of these restrictions are the limits of  
REGULATIONS: UK
If you’ve recently got your first drone it’s crucial that you understand and 
appreciate the rules and regulations for flying. Here’s a one-stop guide to the 
key information you’ll need to stay safe and legal in the United Kingdom!
All photos by LaTrax

WWW.DRONEMAGAZINE.UK
95
not flying within 50 metres of any person or  
30 metres from any person during take-off and 
landing, and these are exactly the same as for 
any model over 7 kg. 
THE PRACTICAL APPLICATION 
As ever, a little common sense goes a long way  
towards interpreting and complying with the  
relevant legal requirements. The primary aim  
of the various Air Navigation Order provisions 
is to prevent members of the public being 
endangered, and full size aviation being 
endangered. To a lesser degree, these provisions 
also help to limit the potential for causing 
nuisance and for invading privacy.
In terms of filming or image capturing, this  
limits how close we can get to people and 
structures that are nothing to do with us (i.e. 
not under the control of the pilot); however, 
the positive aspect is that the wording of 95(c) 
permits closer operations where it is with the 
consent and knowledge of all parties involved 
(notwithstanding the primary endangering 
considerations, of course).
commerical operations OR 
SPORT AND RECREATION?
Another primary consideration is the purpose 
of the flight. The flying of a model aircraft with 
a camera on board is recognised as a sport and 
recreational activity by the CAA, and therefore 
covered under the terms of the insurance 
provided as part of the BMFA membership 
package (provided that the activity is legal in 
respect of the Air Navigation Order).
However, where a flight is made for payment 
or the purpose is in any way commercial, i.e. 
not as a sport and recreational activity, then it 
becomes classed as ‘commercial operations’ by 
the CAA and requires an exemption to the Air 
Navigation Order to be issued in order to take 
place lawfully. Details of this and exemption 
application information can be obtained 
through the CAA website www.caa.co.uk.
It should be noted that “commercial operations” 
are an entirely separate activity to model flying 
and, as such, must be insured under the terms 
of an appropriate commercial policy.
The standard policy provided to BMFA members  
does not provide cover for aerial photography 
on a commercial basis. 
FLYING LOCATIONS
Whilst the overall considerations are the same  
as for any other model aircraft, there is no 
doubt that multirotors open up new areas for  
flying due to their ability to operate in relatively  
small spaces. This does however mean that 
careful consideration is required before flying 
in order to remain lawful.
If intending to fly on private land, then the 
permission of the landowner should be sought. 
If flying on public land such as a park or open 
access site, then you must ensure that there are 
no bylaws in place specifically prohibiting or 
restricting model flying.
The other main consideration is the overall 
suitability of the location for the activity, and 
that all flying can take place in compliance 
with the primary “endangering” provisions 
of the ANO (Articles 240 and 241) and also in 
accordance with the distances set out in Article  
95 above.
Text provided by www.bmfa.org. Visit the site 
for more information on all aspects of model 
flying, including membership and insurance.
SUMMARY
n Be familiar with the legal requirements relating to 
your chosen activity.
n Do not endanger person or property.
n Ensure that the proposed flying location is 
appropriate and safe.
n Maintain line of sight for the purposes of control at 
all times (see CAA Exemption for specific details of 
FPV flight permissions).
n Charging for flights renders it a commercial operation.
n Do not constitute a nuisance.
n Do not invade privacy.
n Ensure that appropriate liability insurance cover is 
in place to protect you in the event of an incident 
leading to a claim against you.
“The operation of multirotors for sport 
and recreational purposes is covered 
by the same legal considerations as 
other model aircraft”

DRONE GLOSSARY
96
DRONE MAGAZINE
Types of Drones
Drone: A popularised term for all 
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs)
Camera Drone: A drone 
(usually a quadcopter) with a 
camera attached
Radio Controlled / RC: 
Drones and model vehicles of all 
sorts that are controlled remotely
Multirotor: A drone with 
several motors, or props
Tricopter: A drone with three 
motors, or props
Quadcopter: A drone with 
four motors, or props
Hexacopter: A drone with six 
motors, or props
Octocopter: A drone with 
eight motors, or props
Nanocopter: An exceptionally 
small drone
Ready To Fly / RTF: A drone 
supplied with all parts, ready to go 
from the box
Bind ‘n’ Fly / BNF: Ready to be 
bound to a transmitter and flown
Almost Ready To Fly / ARF: 
A partially built drone
UAV: Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
Associations and 
Organisations
ARPAS UK: Association of 
Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
BFPVRA: National association for 
FPV racing in the UK
BMFA: British Model Flying 
Association
CAA: Civil Aviation Authority
DRONE SAFE REGISTER: UK 
database of trained pilots and 
commercial UAV services
FAA: Federal Aviation 
Administration
FPVUK: A non-profit organistion 
for FPV flying in the UK
IAA: Irish Aviation Authority
Jargon
Autonomous: A pre-
programmed flight mode for a 
drone with no live input from pilot
Altitude Hold: Maintaining 
height in flight mode
Bind: Connecting a controller to 
the drone so it can pick up signals
Build: A completed, usually DIY, 
drone built from parts or a kit
First person view / FPV: 
Viewing the drone’s flight via an 
on-baord camera typically via 
a pair of goggles or a monitor, 
usually for racing
Line of Sight / LOS: 
Maintaining visual contact with 
your drone at all times: a legal 
requirement
Payload: The amount a drone 
can lift, aside from its own weight 
and batteries
PfCO: Permission for Commercial 
Operations. The certification 
required to fly for work in UK.
Pitch: The front/back movement 
or tilt of the drone in the air
Return to home / RTH:  A 
failsafe GPS option that returns 
the craft to a pre-set point
Roll: Rotation left or right 
without other movement
Yaw: Rotation around a central 
point
Parts
Accelerometer / ACC: 
Component that measures the G 
force/acceleration 
Battery Eliminator Circuit 
/ BEC: Device to allow the battery 
to power multiple components
Electronic Speed 
Controller / ESC: Conveys 
signal from controller to motors
Flight Controller: Controls 
the movement of the drone
Gimbal: Mount that steadies the 
camera’s movement relative to the 
ground
Gyroscope: Device to allow the 
drone to maintain its level
Lithium Polymer / LiPo: 
Popular energy source for drone 
batteries
Props: Short for propeller, the 
rotating motor that the blades are 
fitted to
Power distribution board 
/ PDB: Divides electrical power to 
the circuits
Receiver: Device that receives 
signals from the transmitter and 
sends them to the flight controller
Transmitter: The control 
device that sends pilot commands 
to the drone’s receiver
 Useful links
www.arpas.uk
www.bfpvra.org 
www.bmfa.org
www.caa.co.uk
www.dronesaferegister.org.uk
www.faa.gov
www.fpvuk.org
www.iaa.ie
A Guide to the Tech Talk


Fallen
British Columbia, Canada
“A portrait of a massive fallen tree in its 
resting place on a river sandbar.”
Photo by Dawn Jernaill 
Supplied by Dronestagram

flYBY
  
With Flyby Technology’s unique training system, we will teach you to think like  
professional pilots and equip you with the confidence to excel in any situation.
All Flyby Technology instructors are ex-military pilots with extensive experience of 
 training today’s fighter and helicopter pilots.  We want to share that expertise  
with you to give you the professional and practical skills you need.
Whether you wish to be a professional pilot to land your dream job, are wishing to  
add to or start a business, or are  looking for the best training for you and your  
organisation, the team at Flyby Technology are here to make that happen.  
Visit the website and book on a course today!
Flyby Technology  Pilotwise International Ltd  |  Marlborough House  |  York Business Park  |  Nether Poppleton  |  York  |  YO26 6RW
FREEPHONE 08081 680626  |  admin@flyby.technology
www.flyby-technology.com
Your future as 
a drone pilot 
starts Here
neW! 
ONE-WEEK FAST 
TRACK COURSES 
AVAILABLE NOW
BooK online

Free flying lesson and drone set up when you buy your DJI drone from us
The UKs longest established and most 
popular drone flying school
Flying sites for lessons across the UK 
One Hour: £120, Two Hours: £200
One to one hands-on flying 
lessons for beginners to experts
3,000 hours of one-to-one flying lessons, workshops, and drone holiday flying completed
100% 5* reviews on website from happy flying lesson customers
01244 893 872  www.phantomflightschool.co.uk
Our Pilots
Alan Proto               Anto Baird               Anna Henly            Simon Smith          Newall Hunter         Tom Jacobs

