
DRUG USE
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Consumer Culture, Douglas J. Goodman and Mirelle Cohen
Courts and Trials, Christopher E. Smith
Dating and Sexuality in America, Jeffrey Scott Turner
Environmental Activism, Jacqueline Vaughn Switzer
Espionage, Glenn Hastedt
Gay and Lesbian Issues, Chuck Stewart
Media and Politics in America, Guido H. Stempel III
Racial and Ethnic Diversity in America, Adalberto Aguirre Jr.
Racial Justice in America, David B. Mustard
Reproductive Issues in America, Janna C. Merrick and Robert H.
Blank
U.S. Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Women and Equality in the Workplace, Janet Zollinger Giele and
Leslie F. Stebbins
Women in Prison, Cyndi Banks

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as terrorism, sexual harassment,
homelessness, AIDS, gambling, animal rights, and air pollution.
Written by professional writers, scholars, and nonacademic
experts, these books are authoritative, clearly written, up-to-
date, and objective. They provide a good starting point for
research by high school and college students, scholars, and
general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject; a detailed chronology; biographical
sketches; facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material; a directory of organizations and agencies;
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources; a glossary; and
an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to better understand the
social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing the
world today.


DRUG USE
A Reference Handbook
Richard Isralowitz
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California • Denver, Colorado • Oxford, England

Copyright © 2004 by Richard Isralowitz
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for
the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission in
writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Isralowitz, Richard.
Drug use : a reference handbook / Richard Isralowitz.
p. cm.—(ABC-CLIO's contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-57607-708-X (alk. paper)  ISBN  1-57607-709-8 (e-book)
1. Drug abuse—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Drug
abuse—Prevention—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Title. II. Series:
Contemporary world issues.
HV5801.I67 2004
362.29—dc22
2004003047
08 07 06 05 04 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. Visit abc-
clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper      .
Manufactured in the United States of America
∞

vii
Contents
Preface and Acknowledgments, xi
1
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem and
Those Factors Associated with Use?, 1
What Is a Drug? Its Use, Abuse, and Dependence, 1
Drugs, 1
Use, 2
Abuse, 2
Dependence, 3
What Are the Types of Drugs?, 3
Types of Drugs: A Review, 4
Alcohol, 4
Amphetamines, 4
Caffeine, 5
Cannabis (Marijuana and Hashish), 5
Cocaine, 6
Hallucinogens, 6
Inhalants, 7
Nicotine, 7
Opiates, 8
Phencyclidine, 8
Sedatives, Hypnotics, and Anxiolytics, 8
Who Uses Drugs? What Are the Risk Factors?, 9
Society and Social Order, 9
Social Forces: Physical Environment, Values, and
Morals, 9
Interpersonal Relations, 10
Labeling-Criminalization Process, 11
Biological and Psychological Characteristics, 11

Which Drugs Define the Problem?, 12
Brief History, 12
Tobacco (Nicotine), 12
Alcohol, 13
Cannabis (Marijuana and Hashish), 15
Heroin, 17
Cocaine, 18
Prevention and Treatment Factors, 20
Prevention, 20
Treatment, 26
References, 31
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions: U.S. Drug
Policy in Perspective, 33
Problems, 33
Numbers: What Do They Show?, 35
Money: What Does All This Cost?, 38
Effectiveness of Prevention and Treatment
Programs, 39
Current Policy in the United States: The President’s
National Drug Control Strategy, 44
Key Points of the National Drug Control Strategy, 44
Progress toward Two- and Five-Year Goals, 46
Legislating Reform: What Are the Perspectives?, 47
The Cannabis/Marijuana Controversy: What Are the
Perspectives?, 59
The War: The Debate Goes On, 74
Notes, 76
References, 77
3
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?, 79
International and U.S. Developments, 79
Production, Trafficking, and Consumption, 80
Cannabis (Marijuana and Hashish), 80
Opium and Heroin, 84
Cocaine, 92
Illicit-Drug Overviews, 96
Drug Use, Disease, and Ground-Level Zero for the
Problems—The Former Soviet Union, 96
Illicit Drugs and Terrorism: The Connection, Cost, and
Need for Change, 99
viii
Contents

Youths and Illicit-Drug Use in the United States:
Attitudes and Behavior, 100
References, 104
4
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and
Data?, 107
Tobacco, 107
Female Tobacco Use, 108
Adolescent Tobacco Use, 110
Advertising, 113
It’s about Money: Tax Revenues and Big Business, 118
Alcohol, 122
Female Alcohol Use, 125
Adolescent and Young-Adult Alcohol Use, 127
Infant Alcohol Syndrome, 137
Binge Drinking, 141
Licit-Drug Overviews, 146
Children of Alcoholics, 146
Impaired Driving, 148
Notes, 151
References, 151
5
Chronology, 155
References, 173
6
Biographical Sketches, 177
Harry J. Anslinger (1892–1975), 177
Len Bias (1963–1986), 178
Joseph Califano Jr. (1931– ), 179
Sigmund Freud (1856–1939), 180
Francis Harrison (1873–1957), 181
David Kessler (1951– ), 182
C. Everett Koop (1916– ), 182
Timothy Leary (1920–1996), 183
Alfred Lindesmith (1905–1991), 184
Richard M. Nixon (1913–1994), 186
Benjamin Rush (1745–1813), 188
George Soros (1930– ), 189
Luther Terry (1911–1985), 190
Andrew Volstead (1860–1947), 191
William “Bill” Wilson (1895–1971), 192
References, 193
Contents
ix

7
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and
Agencies, 195
Nongovernmental Organizations, 195
University-Based Drug Research and Policy Centers, 205
Governmental Organizations, 207
International Organizations, 212
8
Print and Nonprint Resources, 215
Books, 215
Journals and Newsletters, 219
Web Resources, 225
Information Sources and Databases, 225
National Statistics, 228
Other Web Sites, 228
Bibliography, 232
Books, 232
Journals, 233
Government Publications and Other Reports, 234
Glossary, 241
Appendix: Commonly Abused Drugs: Categories and Street
Terms, 251 
Index, 255
About the Author, 269
x
Contents

xi
Preface and
Acknowledgments
T
he use of tobacco, alcohol, marijuana, heroin, cocaine, and
other substances is a deeply imbedded characteristic of most
societies. It often shows itself in the form of illness, death,
crime and violence, police action and imprisonment, property
confiscation, massive allocations of governmental resources, as
well as many ways of human suffering. It tends to attract more
concern and attention than any other social issue throughout the
world.
In the United States, the scope and impact of drug use are
profound. It is estimated that 11 percent of the adult population
suffers from substance abuse or dependence during the course of
a year. Nearly 14 million adults each year abuse or are dependent
on alcohol, and about 5 million abuse or are dependent on illicit
drugs. On a yearly basis, the cost of substance abuse to the U.S.
economy has been estimated to be more than $414 billion; the il-
legal drug market is reported to be $150 billion and rising; the
federal antidrug budget for law enforcement exceeds $12 billion;
and more than $3 billion goes to conduct overseas drug wars,
with more than half of that amount going to Colombia to elimi-
nate opium and coca cultivation. The annual cost to the nation for
each addict is about $30,000. And it has been estimated that sub-
stance use and addiction add more than $40 billion annually to
the costs of elementary and secondary education due to class dis-
ruption and violence, special education and tutoring, teacher
turnover, truancy, children left behind, student assistance pro-
grams, property damage, injury, and counseling.
More than ever before, governmental and nongovernmental

policy and program decision makers, educators, service workers,
and ordinary people are aware of the damage caused by the use
of drugs. People are exposed to research, evaluation reports, pol-
icy proclamations and debates, as well as education. Many are
aware that drug problems involve intervention with interrelated
factors, including those of a health, judicial, educational, and wel-
fare nature, and understand that there is no short-term fix. And
although there are considerable investment of resources and ef-
forts to prevent and treat drug use, the drug problems show no
signs of abating. There are no simple solutions to this complex
issue.
This volume examines the drug-use problem from multiple
perspectives. It defines terminology; reviews history; examines
the scope of drug production, trafficking, and use in the United
States, Europe, and elsewhere; describes the main substances of
abuse; reviews the role of key people involved with shaping the
problem and how it has been and is being addressed; and pro-
vides information sources for further inquiry. It is intended to be
a starting point for study rather than a comprehensive theory, ex-
haustive history, or detailed policy analysis. I hope this book
helps readers to begin considering, discussing, and studying the
issue so that their input will contribute to informed and balanced
decision making, organization, coordination of common concerns
and effort, follow-up, and investment of prevention and treat-
ment intervention at local, state, and national levels.
Many people have supported me throughout the preparation
of this volume. Appreciation is expressed to the personnel of
ABC-CLIO, including Mildred “Mim” Vasan for her steadfast
support throughout the development phases of the book, Alicia
Merritt who was instrumental in promoting my relation to ABC-
CLIO, Vicki Speck for her cooperation and open-mindedness to
suggestions, Jessica Bothwell for her administrative support, and
Gina Zondorak who helped move this effort forward to publica-
tion. Gratitude is extended to Annette Wenda for her work as
copyeditor. Thanks to Sofia Borkin, M.D., for her cooperation
during the preparation of this effort.
xii
Preface and Acknowledgments

1 
What Is Needed to
Understand the Drug
Problem and Those Factors
Associated with Use?
H
armful drugs destroy lives and communities, undermine sus-
tainable human development, and generate crime. They affect
all sectors of society in all countries; in particular, drug abuse
affects the freedom and development of young people, the world’s
most valuable asset. Harmful drugs are a grave threat to the health
and well-being of all humanity, the independence of states, democ-
racy, the stability of nations, the structure of all societies, and the
dignity and hope of millions of people and their families (United
Nations 1998). They are a primary cause of illness, death, crime and
violence, police action and imprisonment, property confiscation,
and massive allocations of public resources. Harmful drug use is a
social issue that generates considerable public concern and attention.
What Is a Drug? Its Use, Abuse,
and Dependence
Drugs
A drug may be defined as any substance other than food that by
its chemical nature affects the structure and function of the living
1

organism. Its meaning, however, often varies with the context in
which it is used—from country to country and changing over
time in response to social and economic pressures. Psychoactive
substances like alcohol and tobacco were generally not regarded
as drugs forty years ago. Today, most experts in the drug field be-
lieve both substances are drugs. A drug may be legal or illegal,
harmful or helpful, such as those substances used in medical
therapy. In most countries, tobacco and alcohol are legal drugs.
Marijuana, amphetamines, barbiturates, heroin, and cocaine are
regarded as illegal drugs in the United States.
Use
Use refers to those individuals who have tried or continue to use
nicotine, alcohol, or illegal drugs but who are not dependent or
addicted to the substances. The use of a drug is driven by one of
two types of reasons. One group of people tends to use drugs just
to feel good. They are seeking a good time and use drugs because
their friends are doing it and they do not want to be left out. The
second reason includes people who are suffering and use drugs
to try to feel better or even normal. This group often includes
people who live with poverty and/or who have been abused. It
includes people with a variety of mental disorders like clinical de-
pression, manic-depressive illness, panic disorders, and schizo-
phrenia.
Many people use drugs to achieve a state of euphoria, pleas-
ure, or relaxation, and it may be argued that they do not abuse the
substances. They tend to fall into different subgroups: (1) those
who have tried a substance but have discontinued use, (2) those
who use infrequently and primarily in response to social circum-
stances, and (3) those who use periodically but infrequently
enough to avoid dependence or addictions (Leshner 2001).
Abuse
Medical and governmental authorities have defined abuse as the
nonmedical use of a substance. This includes the use of prescrip-
tion drugs in a manner inconsistent with accepted medical prac-
tices, the use of over-the-counter drugs contrary to labeling, or
the use of any substance (for example, marijuana, glue, and
heroin) for psychic effect, dependence, or suicide attempt. In the
2
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), abuse
is referred to as a maladaptive pattern of repeated use that brings
on significant adverse consequences, including the failure to ful-
fill obligations, repeated use in physically hazardous situations,
as well as recurrent social, interpersonal, and legal problems
(American Psychiatric Association 2000).
Dependence
Dependence involves compulsive use, usually accompanied by
craving, increased tolerance, a pattern of compulsive use, and
considerable impairment of health and social functioning. There
is a pattern of repeated self-administration that usually results in
tolerance, withdrawal, and compulsive drug-taking behavior.
These terms are defined as follows: (1) tolerance is the need for
greatly increased amounts of the substance to achieve intoxica-
tion (or the desired effect) or a markedly diminished effect with
continued use of the same amount of the substance; (2) withdrawal
is a maladaptive behavioral change, with physiological and cog-
nitive consequences; and (3) dependence or compulsive drug-
taking behavior is when an individual takes the substance in
larger amounts or over a longer period than was originally in-
tended (for example, continuing to drink until severely intoxi-
cated despite having set a limit of only one drink).
What Are the Types of Drugs?
The DSM of the American Psychiatric Association lists eleven
classes of pharmacological agents or drugs: alcohol, ampheta-
mines or similarly acting agents, caffeine, cannabis, cocaine, hal-
lucinogens, inhalants, nicotine, opiates, phencyclidine (PCP) or
similar agents, and sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics (that is,
drugs such as benzodiazepines that have an antianxiety effect
and are used widely to relieve emotional tension). There is a
twelfth residual category for everything else, including anabolic
steroids (substances like testosterone that increase muscle mass
and strength), nitrous oxide, and so on (Erowid’s Psychoactive
Vaults 2003; Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Adminis-
tration 2000; Falkowski 2000; Ray and Ksir 1990; World Health
Organization 1992).
What Are the Types of Drugs?
3

Types of Drugs: A Review
Alcohol
Beverage alcohol is a liquid obtained by fermenting or distilling
various fruits, vegetables, or grains. The major types of alcoholic
beverages are distilled spirits, beer, and wine. Like heroin, co-
caine, and d-lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), alcohol is a psy-
choactive substance. It is a central nervous system depressant that
lowers inhibitions, impairs judgment, and is addictive. Alcohol
affects the brain, coordination, judgment, reflexes, vision, and
memory. It may cause blackout. It can damage every organ in the
body, and it can increase the risk for a variety of life-threatening
diseases, including cancer. Drinking can lead to risky behaviors,
including unprotected sex that may expose a person to
HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases or cause un-
wanted pregnancy.
Amphetamines
Amphetamines are a group of drugs that stimulate the central
nervous system. The substances produce an increased state of
arousal accompanied by a sense of confidence and euphoria.
Users tend to appear in a state of hyperactivity, agitation, or ex-
haustion; when amphetamines are used over prolonged periods
of time, irrational and paranoid behavior may be evidenced.
Medically, these substances are used to treat depression, obesity,
attention disorders, narcolepsy, and other conditions. Most non-
medically prescribed amphetamines, however, are produced in
backyard laboratories and sold illegally. Presently, two substances
tend to define this category of substances: methamphetamine and
Ecstasy.
Methamphetamine
Methamphetamine (“meth”) is a relatively easily produced syn-
thetic stimulant that is known as meth, crank, crystal, crystal
meth, and speed. It is a powerfully addictive substance that af-
fects the brain and the rest of the central nervous system. Easily
made with relatively low-cost materials, meth is an odorless, bit-
ter-tasting white crystalline powder that dissolves in water or al-
cohol. The active ingredient is either ephedrine or pseu-
doephedrine—a common ingredient found in prescribed or
4
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

over-the-counter medicines. Methamphetamine in powder form
is smoked, snorted, or injected intravenously. Crystal meth, or
“ice,” is a concentrated form of methamphetamine that resembles
tiny chunks of translucent glass. As crack is to cocaine, ice is to
methamphetamine. The effects of methamphetamine last six to
eight hours, depending on the way it is used.
Ecstasy
Ecstasy is a synthetic psychoactive substance with stimulant and
mild hallucinogenic properties; it is often used in pill form. The
substance is structurally similar to methamphetamine and the
hallucinogen mescaline. The substance has been associated with
verbal memory impairments and poor memory performance, and
it may have an effect on the ability to reason verbally or sustain
attention. Ecstasy is used in social settings such as nightclubs and
dance clubs, private homes, college dormitories, and bars. Ec-
stasy combines two opposite effects: stimulation and relaxation.
The effects are similar, though more intense, to the popular anti-
depressant Prozac (fluoxetine). It is often used in combination
with other drugs—mostly alcohol, but also with other club drugs
like gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB), ketamine, marijuana,
methamphetamine, psilocybin mushrooms, and LSD.
Caffeine 
Caffeine, one of the oldest stimulants known, affects the central
nervous system. It is capable of reversing the effects of fatigue on
both mental and physical tasks. It is present in coffee, tea, soft
drinks, and over-the-counter drugs such as No-Doz, Anacin, and
Excedrine. The symptoms of caffeine overdose (caffeinism) will
vary according to individual differences and the amount con-
sumed. Excessive doses of caffeine from 250 to 750 milligrams (2
to 7 cups of coffee) or more can produce restlessness, dizziness,
nausea, headaches, tense muscles, sleep disturbances, irregular
heartbeats, anxiety attacks, drowsiness, ringing ears, diarrhea,
vomiting, light flashes, difficulty breathing, and convulsions.
Cannabis (Marijuana and Hashish) 
Marijuana refers to the leaves and flowering tops of the hemp
(cannabis) plant. It is also known as cannabis, pot, weed, and
ganja, among other names. Although sixty cannabinoids
Types of Drugs: A Review
5

(certain chemical compounds) are found in marijuana, the psy-
choactive one that most affects the brain is tetrahydrocannabi-
nol (THC). The THC level in marijuana has increased over the
past quarter century from less than 1 percent to as much as 17
percent. Hashish and hash oil also come from the cannabis
plant. Hashish is a resinous material that is extracted and
pressed into different shapes. Marijuana and hashish are
smoked and eaten. Marijuana is the most commonly used illegal
substance. Use of the substance is a criminal offense under U.S.
federal law. Local and state enforcement of marijuana violations
varies from location to location. From a medical perspective,
marijuana has been found to be beneficial in treating the symp-
toms of AIDS, cancer, multiple sclerosis, glaucoma, and other se-
rious conditions.
Cocaine
Cocaine is a naturally derived central nervous system stimulant
extracted and refined from the coca plant grown primarily in the
Andean region of South America. Cocaine, a white powder with
a bitter, numbing taste, is most often snorted. Converted to a liq-
uid form, it can be injected with a needle. Because of the high
temperatures present when smoking, powder cocaine tends to
burn rather than vaporize. For this reason, freebase cocaine, also
known as crack, is created from powder cocaine for smoking.
Crack vaporizes at smoking temperatures, providing more effect
with less substance; it provides a faster onset and a more intense
high than powder cocaine. People who use cocaine often do not
eat or sleep regularly. Among the symptoms experienced are in-
creased heart rate, muscle spasms, and convulsions.
Hallucinogens
Hallucinogenic drugs are substances that distort the perception of
objective reality. Under the influence of hallucinogens, the senses
of direction, distance, and time become distorted. These drugs
can produce unpredictable, erratic, and violent behavior in users
that sometimes leads to serious injuries and death. Among the
well-known hallucinogens is phencyclidine, otherwise known as
PCP, angel dust, or love boat. This substance is described as a sep-
arate category in DSM. LSD is a powerful synthesized psychoac-
6
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

tive substance. LSD use is unlikely to cause addiction in most
people, and there is no physical addiction or withdrawal; how-
ever, it can become psychologically habit forming. Other sub-
stances in this category are peyote, a small button-shaped cactus
that is dried and eaten; peyotillo; tsuwiri; sunami; donana;
dolichothele; and San Pedro, a cactus that has gained consider-
able attention for its hallucinogenic effects. The effects of these
plants come from their main active alkaloid, mescaline.
Inhalants
Inhalants are chemical products that are intentionally inhaled to
cause an immediate high. Because they affect the brain with much
greater speed and force than other substances, they can cause ir-
reversible physical and mental damage. Inhalants include sol-
vents (for example, gasoline, glues, nail-polish remover, lighter
fluid, paint thinners, dry-cleaning fluid, markers, and correction
fluid); gases and propellants used in butane lighters; and aerosols
such as spray paints, hair spray, fabric protectants, refrigerants,
and volatile nitrates found in room deodorizers. Chronic inhalant
users may exhibit signs such as anxiety, excitability, irritability, or
restlessness.
Nicotine
Nicotine is a naturally occurring liquid alkaloid that is colorless
and volatile. Nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction.
In the form of smoking, the substance is the most common cause
of lung cancer and preventable death in the United States. The
substance is found in cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, and smoke-
less tobacco products. The pharmacological and biological
processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those
that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine.
Among the risks associated with nicotine use, especially in the
form of smoking, are decreased senses of smell and taste, frequent
colds, bleeding gums and frequent mouth sores, wheezing,
coughing, bad breath, yellow stained teeth and fingers, gastric ul-
cers, chronic bronchitis, increase in heart rate and blood pressure,
emphysema, heart disease, stroke, and cancer of the mouth, lar-
ynx, pharynx, esophagus, lungs, pancreas, cervix, uterus, and
bladder.
Types of Drugs: A Review
7

Opiates
Substances derived from the opium poppy are opiates. The most
commonly abused illegal substance is heroin. Prescription drugs,
usually used for pain relief, include codeine, morphine, oxy-
codone (that is, OxyContin and Percocet), and others. Included in
this category may be synthetic substances such as methadone and
levo-alpha-acetylmethadol (LAAM), labeled “opioids,” with the
property to interact with opiate receptors in the brain. The sub-
stances may be eaten, but they are generally smoked, sniffed, or
injected, subcutaneously or intravenously. The subcutaneous in-
jection, referred to as “skin-popping,” produces a slower absorp-
tion with a lower degree of euphoria but longer-lasting effects, in-
cluding characteristic marks on the skin. People under the
influence of opiates appear calm, sometimes sleepy, and have a
tendency to take everything in stride. Pure opiates cause rela-
tively little body damage; however, substances sold on the streets
as “opiates” usually contain a large amount of contaminants, in-
cluding poison, that can produce serious damage or even death to
the user. Unlike stimulants, opiates do not produce a psychotic
state when used in their pure form and have the ability to reduce
or eliminate psychotic symptoms in mental patients.
Phencyclidine
PCP is a synthetic substance that was developed in the 1950s as
an intravenous anesthetic. The substance affects the user at dif-
ferent times as a stimulant, hallucinogen, analgesic, or sedative. It
can be snorted, smoked, or eaten. For smoking, PCP is often ap-
plied to a leafy material such as marijuana, cigar tobacco, mint,
parsley, or oregano. Among the names given for the substance are
“angel dust,” “wack,” and “rocket fuel.” PCP is addictive, leading
to psychological dependence, craving, and compulsive PCP-
seeking behavior. Numbness or rigidity of extremities, large
motor dysfunction, jerking eye movements, auditory hallucina-
tions, nausea, drooling, dizziness, and memory loss have been
reported as well.
Sedatives, Hypnotics, and Anxiolytics
This class of drugs when abused is commonly known as “down-
ers.” They include prescription drugs used to reduce anxiety or
8
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

facilitate sleep. The most commonly abused drugs in this class are
benzodiazepines (Valium, Xanax, Ativan, Halcion, and others)
and barbiturates (phenobarbital, Seconal, Nembutal, and Amy-
tal). Other substances in this category have been referred to as
“date-rape drugs.” They include two substances: GHB and fluni-
trazepam (Rohypnol). GHB is a central nervous system depres-
sant usually sold as an odorless, colorless liquid in springwater
bottles or as a powder and mixed with beverages. In addition to
being used in drug-assisted rapes, GHB is used as a muscle-
stimulating growth hormone, sleep aid, and aphrodisiac. Fluni-
trazepam, a benzodiazepine that is smuggled into the United
States primarily from Mexico because it is no longer sold in the
United States, is used mostly with beer as an “alcohol extender”
and disinhibitory agent. Also, it is used in drug-assisted rape.
Who Uses Drugs? What Are the
Risk Factors?
A host of often interrelated sociological, biomedical, and psycho-
logical factors underlies the problem of drug use and dependence.
The following review describes some of the major considerations.
Society and Social Order
People are often referred to as deviant when they do not share
the values or adhere to the social norms regarding conduct and
personal attributes prescribed by society. Although the process
of identifying deviance involves the use of normative definitions
that may vary over time, the essential nature of deviant behavior
associated with the use of drugs and problem behavior is that it
reflects a departure from the norms of a particular society
(Goode 1989).
Social Forces: Physical Environment, Values,
and Morals
The environment where a person lives can influence the use and
abuse of drugs. An environment that is deteriorating and
poverty-stricken serves as a breeding ground for such behavior.
Who Uses Drugs? What Are the Risk Factors?
9

Living in this type of setting are people usually beset with a huge
assortment of personal and family problems. Lower-class values
and morals and the disproportionate amount of crime and drug
problems found among poor people have been widely covered by
sociological research and literature. Such problem behavior, how-
ever, is also indigenous to the middle and upper classes. Facts
and statistics reveal that drug use and abuse are problems that
traverse all social classes.
Interpersonal Relations 
Family
The family has a major role in shaping the personality and be-
havior of children. Factors such as parental divorce, arrest, a
lack of closeness between parents and children, parent and sib-
ling drug use, family disorganization, mental illness, low edu-
cational aspirations for the children, lack of parental involve-
ment in the child’s activities, weak parental control and
discipline, death or absence of a parent, and emotional, physi-
cal, and/or sexual abuse are factors that have been found to be
linked to drug use.
Peers
Peer relations are often linked to drug use and dependence. Such
behavior may be learned through association and interaction
with others who are already involved with drugs. A person’s re-
lationship with peers may serve as a means of providing the in-
dividual with an escape from other undesirable dealings such as
family, school, or work. Interaction with peers may also be a
means by which a person can receive emotional gratification,
recognition, reinforcement, security, self-protection, and defense
for problem behavior. Association with substance-using peers
tends to be a very strong predictor of substance use.
Education
The school is a major agent of status definition in society and has
a significant role in the socialization process of people; conse-
quently, it tends to be an important factor associated with drug
use. The relationship between a negative school experience and
drug use is strong. For example, negative attitudes toward school,
low academic aspirations and educational achievement, and dis-
ciplinary problems often precede the onset of drug use and/or
10
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

dropping out of school. Furthermore, teenage pregnancies and
frequent school absenteeism are associated with increasing levels
of drug use.
Media
Since the 1920s when motion pictures became a major source of
mass entertainment, the effects of the media have been subject to
scientific inquiry and public concern. It has long been recognized
that movies, television, and popular “hard rock” music portray
an excessive amount of drug-use behavior. Research has found
that youths who spend more time watching television and listen-
ing to drug-related music are more likely to use drugs.
Labeling-Criminalization Process
The labeling process is a method that determines the fate of a per-
son. It often reinforces problem behavior rather than ameliorates
it. In terms of drug use, a consistent pattern of events tends to
take place, resulting in a feedback cycle involving more devia-
tions, more penalties, and still more deviations. Hostilities and re-
sentment are built up, culminating in official reactions that label
and stigmatize the addict. This situation is often used by author-
ities to justify even greater penalties that close offenders non-
criminal options and coerce them into a career of systematic norm
violations, including drug use.
Biological and Psychological Characteristics
Certain individuals are predisposed to drug and alcohol use be-
cause of their genetic makeup. Also, it appears that genetic load-
ing in combination with environmental and personality factors
can make for a significantly higher level of drug abuse or alco-
holism in certain individuals or groups of people. The National
Institute of Drug Abuse reports that genetic factors play a major
role in the progression from drug use to abuse and dependence.
From a psychological perspective, drug use and dependence
may be viewed in two ways: (1) drugs have addictive reinforce-
ment properties, independent of personality factors, and (2) per-
sonality pathology, defect, or inadequacy points to problems of
an emotional or psychic nature of certain individuals, leading
them to drug use. Drugs are used to escape from reality as a
means of avoiding life’s problems and retreating into a state of
Who Uses Drugs? What Are the Risk Factors?
11

indifference. It has been found that people who use drugs tend to
lack responsibility, independence, and the ability to defer grat-
ification in order to achieve long-range goals. They exhibit
difficulties controlling emotions such as rage, shame, jealousy,
and anxiety; have low self-esteem; and have feelings of peer re-
jection and parental neglect. It has been found that drug users are
less religious, less attached to parents and family, less achieve-
ment-oriented, less cautious, ambivalent to authority, compul-
sive, confused over sex roles, narcissistic, defiant, and resentful,
and they have unrealistic expectations for achievement (Lettieri,
Sayers, and Pearson 1980; Petraitis et al. 1998).
Which Drugs Define the Problem?
Brief History
The use of an addictive substance is a complex phenomenon that
includes the history of the drug, the social strata of society who
use it, the kinds of situations in which the substance is used, and
the publicity and public opinion associated with its use. Five legal
and illegal substances tend to define the drug problem over time:
tobacco (nicotine), alcohol, cannabis (marijuana and hashish),
heroin, and cocaine (Isralowitz 2002).
Tobacco (Nicotine)
Tobacco is a leafy plant, a stimulant, indigenous to North, Cen-
tral, and South America. Introduced to Columbus by natives of
the New World, the substance found its way to Europe, and its
importance was closely tied to economic interests. The Spanish,
for example, had a monopoly on tobacco sales for more than one
hundred years until the British colonies, notably Virginia, were
able to produce sufficient quantities from the seventeenth century
onward. Tobacco use has taken the form of cigarette, cigar, and
pipe smoking; snuff; and chewing.
Tobacco is a psychoactive drug, and its use is one of the
major causes of debility and premature death. Midway into the
nineteenth century and long before scientific evidence emerged
about the extent of the health risks they posed, cigarettes were la-
beled “coffin nails.” In 1963, cigarette use in the United States
reached an all-time high, precipitating the 1964 surgeon general’s
12
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

report that definitively linked cigarette smoking to health prob-
lems. In 1980, the surgeon general said that cigarette smoking is
the single most important preventable cause of death and disease.
Additional facts revealed that cigarettes and other forms of
tobacco are addictive, nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes
addiction, and pharmacological and behavioral processes that de-
termine addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to
drugs such as heroin and cocaine.
Tobacco production and sales have represented big business
for hundreds of years, not only for growers and manufacturers but
also for governments in the form of tax revenues. During the colo-
nial period of the seventeenth century, tobacco was an important
cash crop, and it was a federally taxed commodity that was used
to help finance the Civil War. More recently, it has been estimated
that the tobacco industry directly generates more than $40 billion
of the gross national product and provides employment for more
than 700,000 people. Additionally, reports show that $12 billion to
$35 billion is spent each year in the United States alone to treat
smoking-related diseases—a significant revenue source for health-
related services and industries. It has been estimated that the
tobacco industry and its suppliers generate about $10.6 billion in
federal taxes and $8.3 billion in state and local taxes each year. Fur-
thermore, when the trade deficit is of concern, the billions of dol-
lars’ worth of cigarettes exported by the United States is not an
insignificant factor. In 1998, after years of legal suits claiming vio-
lations of antitrust laws, consumer fraud, conspiracy to withhold
information about the harmful health effects of tobacco use, and
even manipulation of nicotine levels to keep people addicted to
smoking, historic settlements totaling $246 billion were reached
between state attorneys general and the tobacco industry. Only a
few years after this victory, it is clear that many states faced with
economic downturn and decreased revenues have been forced to
use settlement compensation to maintain commitments and prior-
ities other than those promised, such as drug-prevention and ed-
ucational services (ibid.).
Alcohol
Over time, alcohol is the most prominent drug used to experience
special physical sensations. After tobacco, alcohol abuse and de-
pendence are by far the most common form of drug addiction. Al-
though it is not known exactly when alcohol and its effects on
Which Drugs Define the Problem?
13

human behavior were discovered, some experts believe that hu-
mans have been drinking alcoholic beverages since 6400 B.C.
when beer and berry wine were discovered. Grape wines date
from 300 to 400 B.C. The drinking custom is probably even older
than that. Reference to alcoholism is in the Bible (1 Sam. 1). Lead-
ers throughout history have encouraged moderation.
Early use of alcohol seems to have been worldwide; for ex-
ample, the American Indians encountered by Columbus drank
beer. In the “new continent,” what American colonists considered
normal drinking would be defined as deviant and intemperate
from a contemporary viewpoint. In America, Benjamin Rush
(1745–1813), a physician and signer of the Declaration of Inde-
pendence, described in his work An Inquiry into the Effects of Ar-
dent Spirits upon the Human Body and Mind (1785) that drunken-
ness was a disease resembling certain hereditary, family, and
contagious diseases. In the United States in the nineteenth cen-
tury, a temperance movement that “demonized” alcohol became
an important social force and a rallying point for the expanding
middle class; thus, the liquor problem became a focus of attention
for a broader sector of U.S. society that would bring social, polit-
ical, and religious activism together, culminating in Prohibition.
In the United States, an amendment to the Constitution in
1919 made it illegal to manufacture or sell any alcoholic beverage.
This amendment remained in effect until 1933 and had a signifi-
cant impact on the nation’s social patterns, economy, and under-
ground life during those years and after. It has been suggested
that the end of Prohibition was the result of corporate interests
that saw the restoration of liquor taxes as a means of lowering
personal and business taxes. Once Prohibition was repealed, the
windfall from taxes on alcohol was used to fund depression-relief
projects. No record of alcohol sales was kept in the United States
from 1920 to 1933; nevertheless, there is a general perception that
alcohol consumption rose during this period and that Prohibition
was a failure. Contrary to this belief, death by cirrhosis of the
liver, which is very closely correlated with alcohol consumption,
decreased during Prohibition and increased once alcohol use was
legal again. The number of people arrested and jailed on charges
of public drunkenness and the number of automobile fatalities,
another factor strongly related to the consumption of alcohol, de-
clined as well. Exaggeration, myths, and the media probably ac-
count more for the misunderstanding of Prohibition’s effect on
people’s drinking behavior than any other factor. For the most
14
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

part, it has been noted that most Americans did not drink during
the Prohibition years, and those who did drank less and less often
than before or after the period.
Cannabis (Marijuana and Hashish)
Cannabis (marijuana and hashish) has generated much contro-
versy and investigation in terms of its impact on individual be-
havior and society. Cannabis may have been cultivated as long as
ten thousand years ago. It was grown in China by 4000 B.C. and in
Turkistan by 3000 B.C. It has long been used as a medicine in
India, China, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, South Africa, and
South America. By A.D. 1000, the social use of the plant spread to
the Muslim world and North Africa, and in the region of the Mid-
dle East its use was associated with a religious cult that commit-
ted murder for political reasons. The cult was called Hashishiyya,
from which the word assassin developed.
The chemical compounds responsible for the intoxicating
and medicinal effects of cannabis are found mainly in a sticky
golden resin taken from the female plants. The three varieties are
known as bhang, ganja, and charas. The least potent and cheap-
est preparation, bhang, is produced from the dried and crushed
leaves, seeds, and stems. Ganja, prepared from the flowering
tops, is two or three times as strong as bhang. Charas, also
known as hashish in the Middle East, is the pure resin. Any of
these preparations can be smoked, eaten, or mixed in drinks.
Cannabis has been used as an analgesic, a topical anesthetic for
the mouth and tongue, and for problems and discomfort related
to tetanus, neuralgia, dysmenorrhea (painful menstruation), con-
vulsions, childbirth pain, asthma, postpartum psychosis, gonor-
rhea, chronic bronchitis, preventing migraine attacks, certain
kinds of epilepsy, depression, asthma, rheumatism, gastric ulcer,
and drug addiction, particularly of morphine and other opiate
substances.
A considerable amount of medical attention was given to
cannabis from 1840 to 1900, recommending it for a variety of ill-
nesses and discomforts. By 1890, the medical use of cannabis was
on the decline. Among the reasons were that the potency of the
preparations was too variable, and the invention of the hypoder-
mic syringe in the 1850s made opiates more effective in pain relief
since hemp products are insoluble in water and cannot be easily
administered by injection. Also, synthetic drugs such as aspirin,
Which Drugs Define the Problem?
15

chloral hydrate, and barbiturates that are chemically more stable
became attractive for medicinal purposes in spite of their disad-
vantages.
In the 1930s, marijuana received much negative attention. It
was claimed that the substance would cause users to go crazy and
become violent, men would rape and kill under the influence,
and women would become promiscuous. Today, these supposed
effects receive no attention, even in the most vigorous antimari-
juana polemics. The illegal status of marijuana may be attributed
to four primary reasons: (1) certain special-interest organizations
and labor unions were against cheap migrant workers; therefore,
attributing the use of cannabis to immigrants was a productive
means of keeping them out of the United States; (2) pharmaceuti-
cal companies interested in the marketing of profitable medicines
may have seen the multipurpose benefits of cheap cannabis as a
threat to profitability; (3) the alcohol industry and government,
with big profits as well as local, state, and federal tax revenues at
stake, were not interested in having any competition from
cannabis; and (4) cannabis appears to have served as a powerful
theme for government officials and politicians to generate sup-
port for a variety of reasons, including election to public office
and the funding of governmental initiatives ranging from educa-
tion to law enforcement.
After years of debate and controversy, there is an abun-
dance of information regarding the characteristics of marijuana.
What is known about the substance tends to be presented in
ways that are contradictory, supporting the special interests of
those who advocate legal regulation of marijuana because of its
alleged harmful effects or who advocate legalization because of
its helpful and benign characteristics. In 2002, after a two-year
study, the Canadian Senate Special Committee on Illegal Drugs
reported that scientific evidence indicates that cannabis is sub-
stantially less harmful than alcohol and should be addressed as
a social and health issue. Essentially, the report called for the le-
galization, with controls, of cannabis use in Canada—a policy
supported by a growing number of nations throughout the
world who tend to say that the time has come to no longer have
the “made in America” problem be their problem. The response
from officials of the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA) and White House Office of National Drug Control Policy
(ONDCP) has been uniform, expressing disappointment and
disdain for any policy decision that is contrary to that expressed
16
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

by U.S. government officials who call for more research and in-
formation gathering on the potential harmful effects of the sub-
stance.
Heroin
If one substance were to be labeled the “king” of illegal drugs,
most people would say it is heroin. Since the turn of the century
when it was created, heroin has virtually defined the drug prob-
lem. Heroin addicts are the most stigmatized of all drug users. Its
association in the public mind with street crime, in spite of com-
petition from crack, is stronger than for any other drug. Heroin is
chemically derived from morphine, which in turn comes from the
opium poppy grown primarily in Afghanistan; the Golden Cres-
cent, which is between Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran; the
Golden Triangle, located in parts of Thailand, Laos, and Burma
(now Myanmar); the Middle East, most notably Lebanon; and
Latin American countries, including Colombia and Mexico.
In 1806, the primary active ingredient in opium was identi-
fied—an ingredient ten times more potent than opium itself. The
substance was named morphium, after Morpheus, the god of
dreams. In 1874, a chemical bonding process for morphine was
discovered that produced heroin—a substance about three times
as potent as morphine. Initially marketed by Bayer Laboratories of
Germany in 1898 as a nonaddictive substitute for codeine derived
from opium, it took nearly a decade of research before heroin was
found to be the most addictive of the opiates, able to affect brain
functioning faster than anything yet known. With a ban on non-
medical use of opiates caused by the Harrison Narcotics Act of
1914, addicts began seeking the substance by illegal means. This
provided an incentive for illegal organizations to enter the market
for making a quick profit. Until the mid-1960s, laboratory facilities
to transform morphine base into heroin were available only in Eu-
rope and the United States. This meant that most of the product
had to be transported to be refined, and the refining process put a
great deal of money into Western hands. In the mid-1960s, the sit-
uation changed, especially when Hong Kong–based drug entre-
preneurs succeeded in establishing a series of laboratories in fields
along the Mekong River. They started refining the product locally.
It is rumored that those organizations foresaw the massive U.S. in-
tervention in the Vietnam War and readied themselves to profit
from the American soldiers coming to the area. Others claim that
Which Drugs Define the Problem?
17

the Vietcong foresaw U.S. intervention and assisted the Chinese in
establishing the laboratories so that heroin could be easily avail-
able in order to support the war effort.
Since the end of the cold war between the United States and
the former Soviet Union, drugs have been financing some reli-
gious and ethnic conflicts. According to Interpol, the warlords
have become the drug lords. The opening of borders in the Euro-
pean Union afforded unprecedented access to a vast untapped
market. Aggressive criminal gangs in Africa and South America
have been quick to seize the initiative, too. Capitalizing on skills
in dealing marijuana or cocaine, they have expanded their prod-
uct lines to include heroin, with a significant amount coming
from South America. In 1994, it accounted for 32 percent of the
heroin seized in the United States; by 1995, it was up to a stag-
gering 62 percent.
Cocaine
Categorized as a stimulant, cocaine use dates back more than
2,000 years to the Andes Mountains in South America. The an-
cient Incan civilization worshiped cocaine. Despite efforts by
Spanish invaders in the sixteenth century to stamp out its use, the
coca leaf found its way to Europe, where scientists and physicians
studied its effects. The Indians from the region, now Colombia,
Peru, and Bolivia, still chew the leaves that contain about 1 per-
cent cocaine to ward off fatigue and hunger, enabling them to
work long hours without stopping.
Isolated from coca leaves in about 1860 (the exact date is un-
certain), cocaine became popular through a concoction consist-
ing of quality coca leaves steeped in good red wine, known as
“Mariani’s Coca Wine.” Also during that time, in 1885, the Parke-
Davis Pharmaceutical Company (now part of the Pfizer pharma-
ceutical conglomerate) started to market cocaine as a promising
tonic, noting that it was a wonder drug that could take the place
of food. There were many competitors to Mariani’s cocaine-laced
wine. None were more famous, however, than an Atlanta phar-
macist by the name of John Pemberton who developed the for-
mula for Coca-Cola. Pemberton sold only 160 gallons of the
syrup, and soon the drink was taken over by Asa Griggs Candler,
a pharmacist who made history with Coca-Cola.
18
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

Available in a large number of products for drinking, snort-
ing, or injection, cocaine became identified with despised or
poorly regarded groups—blacks, lower-class whites, and crimi-
nals—at the turn of the twentieth century. The regulatory actions
eventually taken by the United States against the manufacture,
sale, distribution, and use of cocaine were at variance with the
drug’s wide acceptability. When the Harrison Narcotics Act
(1914) was used as a means of controlling drug addiction, cocaine
became less available and more expensive. During this period,
musicians, songwriters, and singers soon accepted cocaine, and
the substance became indelibly connected in the public mind
with elements in every branch of show business, including the
brand-new radio scene.
The use of cocaine declined in the 1930s with the introduc-
tion of inexpensive and easily available amphetamine substances.
It did not increase again until the end of the 1960s when amphet-
amines became harder to obtain. Three factors have been pointed
to as contributing to an increase of demand: (1) there was a law-
enforcement initiative against American-made amphetamines,
which had an immediate effect on demand for the more natural
imported product—cocaine; (2) the jet aircraft revolutionized
travel and drug trafficking between the southern states in the
United States and the Caribbean and Latin America; and (3) there
was a strong revolt in the 1960s against any suggestion that gov-
ernment had the right to prescribe what people should or should
not consume. During the early 1980s, cocaine abuse in the United
States maintained epidemic status.
Until the late 1970s, the usual form of cocaine available on
the street was cocaine hydrochloride, a salt form of cocaine that is
usually sniffed (snorted) nasally or injected intravenously when
mixed with water. Since the hydrochloride salt is quickly de-
stroyed at high temperatures, it cannot be smoked unless it is in
a freebase alkaloid form. When cocaine hydrochloride and
sodium bicarbonate (baking soda) are mixed and then heated, the
solution becomes a solid. The resultant pieces of the solid, also
called “rock,” release vaporized cocaine when heated. Since 1990,
a lump, or rock, of crack costs about ten dollars, which makes it
available to the poor. Cocaine and crack have become synony-
mous with the so-called War on Drugs.
Which Drugs Define the Problem?
19

Prevention and Treatment Factors
Prevention
Although there is no single definition of prevention, it may be de-
fined as those efforts that keep alcohol, tobacco, and other drug
problems from occurring by reducing risk factors. Ensuring that
at-risk populations do not use these substances prevents some
problems. Also, when these substances are not used, other prob-
lems are prevented such as drinking and driving (Center for Sub-
stance Abuse Prevention 1993). The first line of defense is often
referred to as primary prevention, and the goal is to foster an en-
vironment in which: (1) alcohol use is acceptable only for those of
legal age and only when the risk of adverse consequences is min-
imal; (2) prescription and over-the-counter drugs are used only
for the purposes for which they were intended; (3) other abusable
substances such as inhalants, including gasoline and aerosols, are
used only for their intended purposes; and (4) illegal drugs and
tobacco are not used at all (Center for Substance Abuse Preven-
tion 1994).
When a person is in the early stages of problem behaviors as-
sociated with the use of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs (ATOD),
secondary prevention or early intervention efforts such as coun-
seling and treatment may be used to cease use of the harmful sub-
stances by the person. Tertiary prevention refers to efforts that try
to end compulsive use of ATOD and/or ameliorate their negative
effects through treatment and rehabilitation. This is most often re-
ferred to as treatment but includes elements of rehabilitation and
relapse prevention (Office of Substance Abuse Prevention 1991).
Numerous strategies are used to prevent drug use. Generally,
they are associated with information, education, alternative be-
haviors, and primary and early intervention activities. These in-
terventions focus on reducing risk factors and building protective
factors and may be directed at any segment of the population.
Several prevention activities or strategies may be used effectively
in combination. Substance abuse prevention strategies reported
by the White House Office of National Drug Control Policy in-
clude:
•
Alternatives—This approach calls for the participation
of target populations in constructive and healthy
activities such as drug-free dances, youth/adult-
20
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

leadership activities, community drop-in centers, and
community service activities that exclude drug use.
Constructive and healthy activities are designed to
offset the attraction to, or otherwise meet the needs
usually addressed by, alcohol and other drugs.
•
Community-Based Process—This strategy enhances the
ability of the community to more effectively provide
prevention and treatment services for alcohol, tobacco,
and drug-abuse disorders. Activities in this strategy
include organizing, planning, enhancing efficiency and
effectiveness of service implementation, interagency
collaboration, coalition building, and networking. Some
examples include community and volunteer training,
multiagency coordination and collaboration, accessing
programs and funding needed services, and
community team building.
•
Early Intervention—This approach uses activities that
are designed to modify the behavior of an early
substance abuser. It includes a wide spectrum of
activities ranging from user education to formal
intervention and referral to treatment provided by a
substance-abuse professional.
•
Education—This strategy builds critical life and social
skills through structured learning processes. Critical life
and social skills include decision making, peer
resistance, coping with stress, problem solving,
interpersonal communication, and systematic and
judgmental abilities. Examples of this strategy include
classroom and/or small group sessions, parenting and
family-management classes, peer-leader/helper
programs, educational programs for youth groups, and
groups for children of substance abusers.
•
Environmental—Programs of this nature challenge and
change community standards, codes, and attitudes that
tend to tolerate, accept, or support the use of drugs in
the general population. This strategy is divided into
two subcategories to permit distinction between
activities that center on legal and regulatory initiatives
and those that relate to the service and action-oriented
initiatives. Some examples include promoting the
review of drug-use policies in school; technical
assistance to communities to maximize local
Prevention and Treatment Factors
21

enforcement procedures governing availability and
distribution of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs;
modifying alcohol and tobacco advertising practices;
and product-pricing strategies.
•
Information—This approach provides knowledge and
increases awareness of the nature and extent of drug
use, abuse, and addiction, and their effects on
individuals, families, and communities. Knowledge
and awareness are promoted of available prevention
and treatment programs and services. Some examples
include clearinghouse/information resource centers,
resource directories, media campaigns, brochures,
radio/TV public-service announcements, speaking
engagements, health fairs/health promotion, and
telephone/computer information lines.
•
Problem Identification and Referral—This strategy
includes activities that identify those who have
engaged in illegal or age-inappropriate use of tobacco
or alcohol and persons who have begun to use illicit
drugs. Effort is generated to assess whether the early
alcohol and drug use of the individual can be reversed
through education. It does not include any activity
designed to determine if a person is in need of
treatment. Some examples include employee-assistance
programs, student-assistance programs, and
educational programs related to driving while under
the influence or driving while intoxicated. Increased
chances of substance use, stress, violence, trauma, and
posttraumatic stress are among the reasons people are
at greater risk of substance abuse, including relapse to
alcohol and drug abuse, addiction, and cigarette
smoking. Emotional strain caused by the September 11,
2001, terrorist attacks on the United States and threats
of bioterrorism have led large numbers of Americans to
seek treatment for substance-abuse problems. For
example, “one year after the Oklahoma City bombing
three times as many residents of that city reported
increased drinking compared with residents of
comparatively sized Indianapolis, Indiana.
Understandably, rescue workers in Oklahoma City also
experienced significant rates of substance abuse,
depression, and suicide months and years after the
22
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

bombing.” (Columbia University Center of Addiction
and Substance Abuse 2001)
According to the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention,
such events are important reasons for promoting effective pre-
vention efforts in every community. The Center for Substance
Abuse Prevention publication Science-Based Prevention Programs
and Principles: Effective Substance Abuse and Mental Health Programs
for Every Community (2002) summarizes more than two decades of
research on prevention programs. It delineates the broad range of
influences that can lead to substance abuse or other potentially
dangerous behaviors and presents practical community-based
ways to curb the risk factors for these behaviors. Effective inter-
ventions are identified at the individual, family, peer group,
school, community, and society level; a state-of-the-science re-
view of substance-abuse prevention theory and practice is pro-
vided; and a compendium is included of tested and effective
model substance abuse–prevention and mental health–promotion
programs. The following programs, selected for universal appeal,
are a few examples of “model” prevention initiatives.
Keep a Clear Mind (KACM) is a take-home drug-education
program for upper-elementary-school students (eight to twelve
years old) and their parents. The take-home material consists of
four weekly sets of activities to be completed by parents and their
children together. The program also uses parental newsletters
and incentives. KACM lessons are based on a social-skills train-
ing model designed to help children develop specific skills to re-
fuse and avoid the use of “gateway” drugs. This early interven-
tion program has been shown to positively influence known risk
factors for later substance use. Specifically, the program aims to
increase students’ ability to resist peer pressure to use tobacco, al-
cohol, and marijuana; increase student recognition of the harmful
effects of tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana; help students identify
and choose positive alternatives to substance use; decrease stu-
dents’ actual use of tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana; help parents
become effective drug educators; increase parent-child communi-
cation about substance use; and strengthen relationships with
adults and peers.
Evaluation of KACM activities compared parents who par-
ticipated in the program to those who were not involved. Results
of those involved with KACM show that 20 percent of parents in-
dicated that their children had an increased ability to resist peer
Prevention and Treatment Factors
23

pressure to use alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana; 29 percent indi-
cated a decreased expectation that their children would try sub-
stances; and 14 percent expressed a more realistic view of drug
use among young people and a greater realization of its effects.
Outcomes reported by children who participated show a 9 per-
cent decrease in the KACM students’ perceptions of extensive
substance use among peers compared to an 18 percent increase in
the control group’s perceptions; a 15 percent decrease in KACM
participants’ expectations that they would use tobacco, compared
to more than a 100 percent increase in the control group; and a 59
percent increase in the number of children who indicated that
their parents did not approve of the use of marijuana. Further in-
formation about the Keep a Clear Mind program may be obtained
by contacting Michael Young, Ph.D.; Health Education Projects
Office (HP 326A); University of Arkansas; Fayetteville, AR 72701
(e-mail: meyoung@comp.uark.edu; Web site: http://www.uark.
edu/depts/hepoinfo/clear.html).
Project ALERT is a drug-prevention curriculum for middle-
school students eleven to fourteen years old that reduces both the
onset of substance abuse and regular use. The two-year fourteen-
lesson program focuses on the substances that adolescents are
most likely to use: alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, and inhalants.
Project ALERT uses participatory activities and videos to help
motivate adolescents against drug use, teach adolescents the
skills and strategies needed to resist pro-drug pressures, and es-
tablish non–drug-using norms.
Guided classroom discussions and small group activities
stimulate peer interaction and challenge student beliefs and per-
ceptions, while intensive role-playing activities help students
learn and master resistance skills. Homework assignments that
also involve parents extend the learning process by facilitating
parent-child discussions of drugs and how to resist using drugs.
These lessons are reinforced through videos that model appropri-
ate behavior.
Evaluation of Project ALERT shows that it was effective in
schools with both large and small minority populations from a
variety of socioeconomic backgrounds, with youths experiment-
ing with drugs and at risk for becoming regular users, as well as
those who had not tried drugs before the program began. It sub-
stantially decreased pro-drug attitudes and beliefs, including in-
tentions to use drugs, beliefs that drug use is not harmful, and
perceptions that many peers use drugs. It also increased beliefs
24
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

that one can successfully resist both internal and external pres-
sures to use drugs. The program markedly reduced the use of
marijuana and cigarettes and the initiation of marijuana use. Fif-
teen months after the baseline information was collected, com-
pared to a control group of youths who did not receive Project
ALERT, results of the program’s effect show that marijuana initi-
ation rates were 30 percent lower for ALERT students, current
marijuana use was 60 percent lower in adult-led programs, cur-
rent and occasional cigarette use was 20 percent to 25 percent
lower, regular and heavy cigarette use was one-third to 55 percent
lower, and antidrug beliefs were significantly enhanced, with
many effects persisting into the tenth grade. Further information
about this prevention effort may be obtained by contacting Proj-
ect ALERT; 725 South Figueroa Street, Suite 970; Los Angeles, CA
90017-5416 (e-mail: info@projectalert.best.org; Web site: http://
www.projectalert.best.org).
Community Trials Intervention to Reduce High-Risk Drink-
ing (RHRD) is a multicomponent community-based program de-
veloped to alter alcohol-use patterns of people of all ages (for ex-
ample, drinking and driving, underage drinking, acute or binge
drinking, and related problems). The program uses a set of envi-
ronmental interventions including community awareness, re-
sponsible beverage service (RBS), preventing underage alcohol
access, enforcement, and community mobilization.
For RHRD to be successful, the implementing organization
must first determine which program components will best pro-
duce the desired results for its community. The RHRD program
uses five prevention components:
•
Alcohol Access—Assists communities in using zoning
and municipal regulations to restrict alcohol access
through alcohol outlets (bars, liquor stores, and so on),
density control, and RBS. Through training and testing,
RBS assists alcohol beverage servers and retailers in the
development of policies and procedures to reduce
intoxication and driving after drinking.
•
Responsible Beverage Service—Through training and
testing, RBS assists alcohol beverage servers and
retailers in the development of policies and procedures
to reduce intoxification and driving after drinking.
•
Risk of Driving and Drinking—Increases actual and
perceived risk of arrest for driving after drinking
Prevention and Treatment Factors
25

through increased law enforcement and sobriety
checkpoints.
•
Underage Alcohol Access—Reduces youth access to
alcohol by training alcohol retailers to avoid selling to
minors and those who provide alcohol to minors, and
through increased enforcement of underage alcohol-
sales laws.
•
Community Mobilization—Provides communities with
the tools to form the coalitions needed to implement
and support the interventions that will address the
previous four prevention components.
Outcome results show that the RHRD program generated a 51 per-
cent decline in self-reported driving when “over the legal limit” in
those communities that had the program compared to those who
did not participate, a 6 percent decline in self-reported amounts
consumed per drinking occasion, a 49 percent decline in self-
reported “having had too much to drink,” a 10 percent reduction in
nighttime injury crashes, a 6 percent reduction in crashes in which
the driver had been drinking, a 43 percent reduction in assault in-
juries observed in emergency rooms, and a 2 percent reduction in
hospitalized assault injuries. Further information about RHRD
may be obtained by contacting Andrew J. Treno, Ph.D.; Prevention
Research Center; 2150 Shattuck Avenue, Suite 900; Berkeley, CA
94704 (e-mail: andrew@prev.org; Web site: http://www.PREV.org).
Treatment
According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse (1999), there
are many addictive drugs, and treatments for specific drugs can
differ. Treatment also varies depending on the characteristics of
the patient. Problems associated with an individual’s drug addic-
tion can vary significantly. People who are addicted to drugs
come from all walks of life. Many suffer from mental health, oc-
cupational, health, or social problems that make their addictive
disorders much more difficult to treat. Even if there are few asso-
ciated problems, the severity of addiction itself ranges widely
among people. A variety of scientifically based approaches to
drug-addiction treatment exist. Drug-addiction treatment can in-
clude behavioral therapy (such as counseling, cognitive therapy,
or psychotherapy), medications, or their combination. Behavioral
therapies offer people strategies for coping with their drug crav-
26
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

ings, teach them ways to avoid drugs and prevent relapse, and
help them deal with relapse if it occurs. When a person’s drug-
related behavior places him or her at higher risk for AIDS or other
infectious diseases, behavioral therapies can help to reduce the
risk of disease transmission. Case management and referral to
other medical, psychological, and social services are crucial com-
ponents of treatment for many patients.
The best programs provide a combination of therapies and
other services to meet the needs of the individual patient, which
are shaped by such issues as age, race, culture, sexual orientation,
gender, pregnancy, parenting, housing, and employment, as well
as physical and sexual abuse.
Treatment medications, such as methadone, LAAM, and nal-
trexone, are available for individuals addicted to opiates. Nico-
tine preparations (patches, gum, and nasal spray) and bupropion
are available for individuals addicted to nicotine.
Medications, such as antidepressants, mood stabilizers, or
neuroleptics, may be critical for treatment success when patients
have co-occurring mental disorders, such as depression, anxiety
disorder, bipolar disorder, or psychosis. Treatment can occur in a
variety of settings, in many different forms, and for different
lengths of time. Because drug addiction is typically a chronic dis-
order characterized by occasional relapses, a short-term one-time
treatment often is not sufficient. For many, treatment is a long-
term process that involves multiple interventions and attempts at
abstinence.
The National Institute of Health’s MEDLINEplus Medical En-
cyclopedia (2003) offers this additional definition of drug-abuse
treatment: “Treatment for a person with drug abuse or depend-
ence begins with the recognition of the problem. Though previ-
ously ‘denial’ was considered a symptom of addiction, recent re-
search has shown that this symptom can be dramatically reduced
if addicts are treated with empathy and respect, rather than told
what to do or ‘confronted.’”
Treatment of drug dependency involves detoxification, sup-
port, and abstinence. Emergency treatment may be indicated for
acute intoxication or drug overdose. Often, support of the respi-
ratory system is needed as there may be a loss of consciousness.
This usually entails being on a mechanical respirator temporarily.
The specific treatment depends on the drug.
Detoxification is the gradual withdrawal of an abused sub-
stance in a controlled environment. Sometimes a drug with a
Prevention and Treatment Factors
27

similar action is substituted during the withdrawal process to re-
duce the unpleasant symptoms and risks associated with with-
drawal. The process can be managed either on an inpatient or on
an outpatient basis. Rehabilitation is the process that occurs after
detoxification and is often needed to prevent relapse. Individual,
group, or family therapy is usually part of this process, which
may continue for a month or longer. Information and support
may also be sought from local twelve-step groups such as Alco-
holics Anonymous (AA) and Narcotics Anonymous (NA), which
can be located through the phone directory or on-line. There are
also alternative programs for those who do not like or do not do
well in twelve-step programs. These include SMART Recovery,
Women for Sobriety, and LifeRing Recovery, which can also be
found on-line.
If a depression or other mood disorder exists, it should be
treated appropriately. In the past, addiction-treatment providers
discouraged use of antidepressant medications, which actually
made relapse to addiction more likely. Very often, drug abuse de-
velops from efforts to self-treat mental illness.
Aftercare often involves lifelong abstinence from drug abuse.
Self-help groups such as Narcotics Anonymous can offer support.
For heroin addicts, long-term methadone maintenance is the treat-
ment with the best track record of reducing relapse, improving
functioning, and restoring health (MEDLINEplus 2003). Nearly
three decades of scientific research have yielded thirteen funda-
mental principles that characterize effective drug-abuse treatment:
1. No single treatment is appropriate for all individuals.
Matching treatment settings, interventions, and services
to each individual’s particular problems and needs is
critical to his or her ultimate success in returning to
productive functioning in the family, workplace, and
society.
2. Treatment needs to be readily available. Because
individuals who are addicted to drugs may be
uncertain about entering treatment, taking advantage
of opportunities when they are ready for treatment is
crucial. Potential treatment applicants can be lost if
treatment is not immediately available or is not readily
accessible.
3. Effective treatment attends to multiple needs of the
individual, not just his or her drug use. To be effective,
28
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

treatment must address the individual’s drug use and
any associated medical, psychological, social,
vocational, and legal problems.
4. An individual’s treatment and service plan must be
assessed continually and modified as necessary to
ensure that the plan meets the person’s changing needs.
A patient may require varying combinations of services
and treatment components during the course of
treatment and recovery. In addition to counseling or
psychotherapy, a patient at times may require
medication, other medical services, family therapy,
parenting instruction, vocational rehabilitation, and
social and legal services. It is critical that the treatment
approach be appropriate to the individual’s age,
gender, ethnicity, and culture.
5. Remaining in treatment for an adequate period of time
is critical for treatment effectiveness. The appropriate
duration for an individual depends on his or her
problems and needs. Research indicates that for most
patients, the threshold of significant improvement is
reached at about three months in treatment. After this
threshold is reached, additional treatment can produce
further progress toward recovery. Because people often
leave treatment prematurely, programs should include
strategies to engage and keep patients in treatment.
6. Counseling (individual and/or group) and other
behavioral therapies are critical components of effective
treatment for addiction. In therapy, patients address
issues of motivation, build skills to resist drug use,
replace drug-using activities with constructive and
rewarding non–drug-using activities, and improve
problem-solving abilities. Behavioral therapy also
facilitates interpersonal relationships and the
individual’s ability to function in the family and
community.
7. Medications are an important element of treatment for
many patients, especially when combined with
counseling and other behavioral therapies. Methadone
and levo-alpha-acetylmethadol (LAAM) are very
effective in helping individuals addicted to heroin or
other opiates stabilize their lives and reduce their illicit-
drug use. Naltrexone is also an effective medication for
Prevention and Treatment Factors
29

some opiate addicts and some patients with co-
occurring alcohol dependence. For persons addicted to
nicotine, a nicotine replacement product (such as
patches or gum) or an oral medication (such as
bupropion) can be an effective component of treatment.
For patients with mental disorders, both behavioral
treatments and medications can be critically important.
8. Addicted or drug-abusing individuals with coexisting
mental disorders should have both disorders treated in
an integrated way. Because addictive disorders and
mental disorders often occur in the same individual,
patients presenting for either condition should be
assessed and treated for the co-occurrence of the other
type of disorder.
9. Medical detoxification is only the first stage of
addiction treatment and by itself does little to change
long-term drug use. Medical detoxification safely
manages the acute physical symptoms of withdrawal
associated with stopping drug use. While detoxification
alone is rarely sufficient to help addicts achieve long-
term abstinence, for some individuals it is a strongly
indicated precursor to effective drug-addiction
treatment (National Institute on Drug Abuse 1999).
10. Treatment does not need to be voluntary to be effective.
Strong motivation can facilitate the treatment process.
Sanctions or enticements in the family, employment
setting, or criminal justice system can increase
significantly both treatment entry and retention rates
and the success of drug-treatment interventions.
11.
Possible drug use during treatment must be monitored
continuously. Relapses to drug use can occur during
treatment. The objective monitoring of a patient’s drug
and alcohol use during treatment, such as through
urinalysis or other tests, can help the patient withstand
urges to use drugs. Such monitoring can also provide
early evidence of drug use so that the individual’s
treatment plan can be adjusted. Feedback to patients
who test positive for illicit-drug use is an important
element of monitoring.
12. Treatment programs should provide assessment for
HIV/AIDS, hepatitis B and C, tuberculosis (TB), and
other infectious diseases, and counseling to help
30
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

patients modify or change behaviors that place
themselves or others at risk of infection. Counseling
can help patients avoid high-risk behavior. Counseling
can also help people who are already infected manage
their illness.
13. Recovery from drug addiction can be a long-term
process and frequently requires multiple episodes of
treatment. As with other chronic illnesses, relapses to
drug use can occur during or after successful treatment
episodes. Addicted individuals may require prolonged
treatment and multiple episodes of treatment to achieve
long-term abstinence and fully restored functioning.
Participation in self-help support programs during and
following treatment is often helpful in maintaining
abstinence.
References
American Psychiatric Association. 2000. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders. 4th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation.
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP), Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration. 1993. A Discussion Paper on Pre-
venting Alcohol, Tobacco, and Other Drug Problems. Rockville, MD: United
States Department of Health and Human Services.
———. 1994. Prevention Primer: An Encyclopedia of Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Other Prevention Terms. Rockville, MD: United States Department of
Health and Human Services.
———. 2002. Science-Based Prevention Programs and Principles: Effective
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Programs for Every Community.
Rockville, MD: United States Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices.
Columbia University Center of Addiction and Substance Abuse. 2001.
Results of post-September 11 survey of substance use in the United
States. Available at http://www.casacolumbia.org/absolutenm/tem-
plates/PressReleases.asp?articleid=114&zoneid=48 (accessed January 9,
2004).
Erowid’s Psychoactive Vaults. 2003. Available at http://www.erowid.
org/psychoactives/psychoactives.shtml (accessed January 9, 2004).
Falkowski, C. 2000. Dangerous Drugs. Center City, MN: Hazelden.
References
31

Goode, E. 1989. Drugs in American Society. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Isralowitz, R. 2002. Drug Use, Policy and Management. Westport, CT:
Auburn House.
Leshner, A. 2001. “Why Do Sally and Johnny Use Drugs?” Available at
http://www.drugabuse.gov/Published_Articles/Sally.html (accessed
January 12, 2004).
Lettieri, D., M. Sayers, and H. Pearson, eds. 1980. Theories on Drug Abuse:
Selected Contemporary Perspectives. Rockville, MD: National Institute on
Drug Abuse.
MEDLINEplus. 2003. Medical Encyclopedia: Drug Abuse and Dependence.
Available at http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/
001522.htm (accessed February 1, 2003).
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). 1999. Principles of Drug Addic-
tion Treatment: A Research-Based Guide. Rockville, MD: National Institute
on Drug Abuse.
Office of Substance Abuse Prevention (OSAP), Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and
Mental Health Services Administration. 1991. Prevention Plus III: Assess-
ing Alcohol and Other Drug Prevention Programs at the School and Commu-
nity Level. Rockville, MD: United States Department of Health and
Human Services.
Petraitis, J., B. Flay, T. Miller, E. Torpy, and B. Greiner. 1998. “Illicit Sub-
stance Use among Adolescents: A Matrix of Prospective Predictors.” Sub-
stance Use and Misuse 33, no. 13: 2561–2604.
Ray, E., and C. Ksir. 1990. Drugs, Society and Human Behavior. St. Louis:
Times Mirror/Mosby.
Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
2000. Tips for Teens Series. Washington, DC: SAMHSA.
United Nations General Assembly Political Declaration. 1998. “Declara-
tion on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction.” June 8–10.
White House Office of National Drug Control Policy. Available at
http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/prevent/strategies.html (ac-
cessed February 1, 2003).
World Health Organization. 1992. The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and
Behavioural Disorders: Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines.
Geneva: World Health Organization.
32
What Is Needed to Understand the Drug Problem

2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions: U.S. Drug
Policy in Perspective
I
n this chapter, the drug problem is examined in terms of its
impact and cost to society and people. The effectiveness of pro-
grams and policies to address the problem are discussed as
well. The president’s National Drug Control Strategy (2003) is
presented, followed by a review of the pros and cons about leg-
islation and an examination of the marijuana controversy.
Thoughts are offered about the need for reform, including possi-
ble solutions.
Problems
U.S. society has a major drug problem on its hands; the condition
is undesirable and it appears that policies must be changed and
new programs instituted (Goode 1989). This statement was made
more than a decade ago and little has changed based on observa-
tions and reports regarding patterns of drug use and addicted be-
havior, criminal activity, emergency hospital visits, and violence.
The opinions expressed by antidrug leaders, a wide range of re-
spected judicial and government officials, social scientists, and
commentators on social order tend to agree that national drug
policy and the War on Drugs is a “dismal failure,” “monumental
error,” and “utter futility” (Russell 1992; Sweet 1996).
33

Opinions show:
•
More than 50 percent of those surveyed in a 1999
Gallup poll said that their concern about illicit-drug use
had grown in the past five years, and adolescent drug
use and crime are among the top concerns.
•
Most Americans view the nation’s drug war as a
failure. According to a 2001 survey by the Pew
Research Center, no less than 90 percent say drug abuse
is a serious problem in the nation, with a quarter
calling it a national crisis. Nearly three-quarters of
Americans say the drug war is being lost, and just as
many say that insatiable demand will perpetuate the
nation’s drug habit.
•
According to Drug Wars, a four-hour Frontline report
aired on television by the Public Broadcasting Service
(PBS) in 2000, little has been accomplished over the
past three decades to stem the use and availability of
illegal drugs.
•
Other reports and commentary show that the U.S.
antidrug campaign is waning. Americans are tired
of wasting billions of dollars on a drug war that is
not working, especially when clear, pragmatic
alternatives exist. Wealthy businessmen have joined
together to find ways of ending the drug war since
their belief is that the federal government has proved
incapable of reform, living in fear of the right-wing
moralists.
•
Editorials from leading newspapers such as the New
York Times, Washington Post, and International Herald
Tribune express criticism of drug policy, including the
fact that it appears to be a war on civil liberties in
which black men are being imprisoned for drug
offenses at thirteen times the rate of white men.
•
After five years as the U.S. “drug czar” Gen. Barry
McCaffrey refers to the drug problem as a “cancer,”
not a war, calling for new drug courts, methadone,
and access to insurance for drug abuse and mental
health, which he believes will lower the level of
spousal abuse and violence as well as save immense
resources. 
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Numbers: What Do They Show?
The most revealing evidence about the state of the U.S. drug pol-
icy lie among the numbers of people involved and affected. Facts
and numbers show:
•
The national rate for past-year dependence on or abuse
of alcohol or illicit drugs among persons aged twelve or
older tends to be about 6.3 percent, slightly higher than
the rate for just alcohol dependence or abuse (5.4
percent), which is three times larger than the rate for
illicit-drug dependence or abuse only (1.9 percent).
•
An estimated 14.5 million Americans aged twelve or
older have been classified with dependence or abuse of
either alcohol or illicit drugs. Most of these persons
(10.2 million) are dependent on or abuse alcohol only.
Another 1.9 million are dependent on or abuse both
alcohol and illicit drugs, while 2.4 million are
dependent on or abuse illicit drugs only.
•
Throughout the United States (in 2000), almost half of
the Americans aged twelve or older reported having a
drink in the past month (46.6 percent), and about one-
fifth (20.6 percent) of them participated in “binge”
drinking in the past thirty days. Moreover, among
youths, 16.4 percent reported using alcohol in the past
month, and 10.4 percent of them reported past-month
“binge” alcohol use.
•
In 1997, more than 2.5 million arrests were made for
alcohol offenses and more than 1.5 million for other
drug offenses.
•
About half of the state prison inmates and 40 percent of
the federal prisoners incarcerated for committing
violent crimes reported that they were under the
influence of alcohol and/or drugs at the time of their
offense. Alcohol is more likely to be involved in crimes
against people, including homicides, rapes, and sexual
assaults.
•
From 1985 to 1995, the proportion of drug offenders in
state prisons increased from 9 percent to 23 percent,
and the proportion of federal inmates sentenced for
drug offenses grew from 34 percent to 60 percent.
Problems
35

•
More than one in three women in state prisons was
serving a sentence for drug offenses in 1997, up from
one in eight in 1986. The increases in incarcerated drug
offenders are related, in part, to mandatory minimum-
sentencing laws for drug offenses and are often cited as
major reasons for prison overcrowding.
Additional information shows:
•
The number of hard-core users of cocaine remained
steady during the past decade, at around 3.5 million.
•
The number of hard-core heroin users rose from 600,000
in the early 1990s to 980,000 in 2001.
•
In 1960, the U.S. inmate population (counting those
locked up in long-term prisons but not counting illegal
immigrants and minors) stood at 333,000. During the
next two decades, it rose at a comparatively modest
pace, to 474,000. Then, from 1980 to 2000, the number
of incarcerated quadrupled to 2 million. Regarding
incarceration, 9.7 percent of black males in their
twenties are imprisoned, compared with 2.9 percent of
Hispanic men and 1.1 percent of white men in the same
age group.
•
According to the U.S. Department of Justice’s Bureau of
Statistics, 38,288 drug offenders were referred to federal
prosecutors in 1999, an increase from 11,854 in 1984.
Furthermore, 84 percent of the 38,288 suspects were
subsequently charged in a U.S. court, and 90 percent of
the drug offenders were convicted, the majority for
drug trafficking.
•
One-third of the federal drug offenders in 1999 had
never been previously arrested, and two out of three
had no prior felony convictions. Of that minority of
drug offenders with previous convictions, 32 percent
had only prior drug convictions. Fewer than 10 percent
of all drug offenders convicted in 1999 had previous
felony convictions.
•
About 90 percent of the people convicted on federal
drug charges in 1999 were nonviolent offenders, and
two-thirds of those convicted were first-time felony
offenders. Nine out of ten first-timers (92 percent) went
to prison anyway.
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

•
Almost 2 million Americans are either in prison (after
conviction) or jail (waiting for trial). Of every 100,000
Americans, 481 are in prison. By comparison, the
incarceration rate for Britain is 125 per 100,000, for
Canada 129, and for Japan 40. Only Russia, at 685, has a
higher rate of lockup.
•
In the United States, 1.5 million children have at least
one parent in prison. The 1999 figures mean that 500,000
more children have a parent in prison compared to
1991. There is a 98 percent increase over the past eight
years in the number of minors with a mother in prison.
•
Among the children with a parent in prison, 58 percent
were younger than ten, with the average age of eight.
Fathers are most likely to be the imprisoned parent—
representing 93 percent of all imprisoned parents—with
the children generally living with their mothers. In
addition, half of the parents in prison are African
American, one-quarter are white, and one-fifth are
Hispanic.
•
National estimates of the need for drug-abuse
treatment suggest that only two in five illicit-drug
abusers who need treatment for severe problems
actually receive care. In 1996, about 5.3 million people
with serious drug-abuse problems needed treatment,
while only about 2 million received it.
•
A fundamental building block for an antidrug strategy
is treatment, yet in the past decade funds for treating
drug addiction dropped from 25 percent of the federal
drug budget—well before the cocaine epidemic created
millions of new addicts—to only 14 percent. In the
same period, arrests for drug crimes doubled, while
violent crime jumped by more than one-third.
•
Most offenders arrested for homicide or aggravated
assaults were using cocaine or heroin, as were three-
quarters of those arrested for burglary or robbery.
•
More than three-quarters of all state prison inmates are
drug users—at least 500,000 offenders—but only 10 to
20 percent receive any help. Although addicts
maintained on methadone will give up heroin and
commit fewer crimes, such treatment is available to less
than 20 percent of the nation’s heroin addicts.
(Isralowitz 2002, 173–174)
Problems
37

Money: What Does All This Cost?
•
The economic cost of substance abuse to the U.S.
economy each year is staggering. In 2001, the White
House Office of National Drug Control Policy
estimated the annual economic impact of substance
abuse to be $373 billion. This figure includes the costs
of health care, social services, and criminal justice
systems, as well as losses due to crime, impact of
premature death and disability, and spending on
prevention, treatment, and law enforcement. In terms
of this amount, alcohol abuse is the most costly (44
percent), followed by smoking (37 percent) and illicit-
drug abuse (19 percent).
•
In 1992, the total cost to society for alcohol and illegal
drug use was $965 for every person in the United
States; the per-person cost for drug abuse alone was
$383 (Swan 1998).
•
The drug market in the United States was estimated to
be at $150 billion a year in 1996.
•
In 1996, the jails and prisons cost $20 billion a year; in
2001, the expense was in the area of $40 billion a year to
construct and operate federal, state, and local prisons.
The cost to taxpayers for the federal prison system
alone that cares for 150,000 prisoners was estimated to
be $4.66 billion in 2001. This means that the annual cost
per prisoner is $31,000. In 1986, when federal
mandatory minimum sentences were enacted, the
budget of the Bureau of Prisons was $0.7 billion,
according to the president of the Criminal Justice Policy
Foundation.
•
The annual federal antidrug budget grew from roughly
$53 million in 1970 to $10 billion in fiscal year 1997. In
2002, the budget was approximately $11.5 billion.
•
Since 1970, the United States has invested roughly $77
billion in domestic and foreign drug enforcement—$74
billion since 1981.
•
In 1996, it was reported that the United States spent
more than $3 billion a year on its overseas drug wars
alone; in 2001, nearly $1.3 billion went to Colombia.
•
Most of the federal government’s annual drug-fighting
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

budget is spent on interdiction and enforcement. The
national drug control spending budget for 2002 was in
excess of $18 billion. By function, approximate amounts
show $9.5 billion for domestic law enforcement, $3.8
billion for treatment (with research), $2.4 billion for
prevention (with research), $2.1 billion for interdiction,
and $1 billion for international activities. A California
study has shown that on average, every dollar invested
in treatment saves $7 in crime and health care costs.
•
In a Rand Corporation study of drug-treatment
spending by U.S. governmental agencies, a $1 billion
overstatement was found. Although the White House
Office of National Drug Control Policy estimated that
U.S. agencies spent $2.8 billion on drug treatment,
authors of the Rand study said in 2001 that the actual
amount was closer to $1.8 billion, or 36 percent less
than reported.
•
It has been reported that substance abuse and addiction
added at least $41 billion—10 percent—to the costs of
elementary and secondary education in 2001 due to
class disruption and violence, special education and
tutoring, teacher turnover, truancy, children left behind,
student-assistance programs, property damage, injury,
and counseling.
•
The National Association of State Alcohol and Drug
Abuse Directors estimates that the annual cost to
incarcerate a drug offender is up to $50,000 per inmate
compared to the annual cost of outpatient drug-free
treatment at $2,300, methadone maintenance at $3,000
per patient, and residential drug-free treatment at
$14,000. (ibid., 174–176)1
Effectiveness of Prevention and
Treatment Programs 
In the war against drugs, a major battlefront involves prevention
and treatment. At best, drug use–prevention and –treatment pro-
grams tend to reflect a mixed bag of results. It appears that a
number of intervention strategies have demonstrated the ability
to reduce or prevent drug use and drug-related crime. They
include school- and community-based education and prevention,
Problems
39

various methods of treatment, drug testing and employee-
assistance programs in the workplace, organized neighborhood
action to drive out dealers, media campaigns, parenting skills,
grassroots coalitions, and other efforts to change attitudes and
promote norms that rule out drug use.
For the most part, drug-prevention and -treatment efforts
have been fragmented, underfunded, less than comprehensive,
and poorly planned and integrated for a variety of historical, po-
litical, and economic reasons. In spite of this, it has been found
that better outcomes tend to exist when treatment is individual-
ized, promotes client motivation, and extends the amount of time
the client is involved in the program.
Drug addicts are not a homogeneous group, and, in theory,
the needs of each client should be matched, preferably to a service
system characterized by rational, flexible, responsive, well-
defined, and short- and long-term integrated service plans devel-
oped on dependable funding sources with ongoing monitoring
and evaluation. The fact remains, however, that such approaches
are, for the most part, absent in the United States. Additionally,
over the past three decades, commitment to drug-abuse treatment
has waxed and waned under different administrations with dif-
ferent funding priorities and in response to changing patterns of
drug use, drug availability, and perceived national threat. Despite
sporadic efforts by national commissions, policy advisory panels,
and federal agencies to develop policies and plans to improve
treatment—many of which have detailed the same or similar rec-
ommendations for what is needed—the development of drug
treatment has more often than not been reactive rather than
proactive, piecemeal rather than planned, and fragmented rather
than integrated. Current policy and practice tend to isolate the
drug abuser from mainstream health care. Also, legislation and
general policy, including funding priorities, have created often
insurmountable barriers to treatment for many people with drug
problems (ibid, 176–178).
Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE)
Drug-prevention efforts tend to reflect a muddled scene of policy
and practice. Specifically, the U.S. government invests annually
hundreds of millions of dollars in an antidrug program known as
Drug Abuse Resistance Education. In one evaluation of the pro-
gram, it was found that the level of drug use among kids who had
gone through DARE was virtually identical to the level among
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

kids who had not and that the program does not produce any
long-term prevention effects on adolescent drug-use rates. In
1994, a National Institute of Justice–sponsored study concluded
that while many teachers and participants loved the program, it
had no effect on drug use. In response to this finding, the Justice
Department refused to release the peer-reviewed study; however,
the American Journal of Public Health accepted it for publication. In
a 1996 study published in Preventive Medicine, it was found that
any results from DARE were extremely short-lived and that there
was no evidence that the prevention program reduces drug use.
More recently, elected officials throughout the country have
called DARE a fraud on the people of the United States that has
wasted opportunities to develop school programs that can work.
Also, a survey released by the National Center on Addiction and
Substance Abuse (CASA) in 2001 said that the popular DARE
program presented little evidence of any extended impact.
After years of debate and controversy about the DARE pro-
gram, the U.S. Government Accounting Office in January 2003 re-
ported that based on six long-term evaluations of the DARE ele-
mentary-school curriculum, no significant differences were found
in illicit-drug use between students who received DARE and stu-
dents who did not. All of the evaluations suggested that DARE
had no long-term effect on preventing youth illicit-drug use. The
report also noted that in spite of the evidence regarding DARE’s
failure, the program continues to operate in about 80 percent of
all school districts across the United States and in numerous for-
eign countries.
It has been noted that there is uncertainty about the real costs
of DARE because there is no centralized accounting of the funds,
expenditures, and resources used to support the program. Ac-
cording to the New York Times, in 2001 the Department of Justice
gave DARE about $41.7 million; police departments (taxpayers)
gave DARE approximately $215 million in indirect benefits in the
form of officer salaries for speaking appearances and other du-
ties, and DARE received around $15 million in private money. Of-
ficials in the U.S. Department of Education, who administer more
than $500 million of safe-schools federal grant money annually to
state education and governors’ offices, do not know and do not
keep records of how much goes to support the DARE program.
The Institute of Industrial Relations in 2001 reported the annual
costs for the program, including local expenses, may range as
much as $1 billion to $1.3 billion (Shepard 2001).
Problems
41

National Youth Anti-Drug Media Campaign
The National Youth Anti-Drug Media Campaign is a U.S. gov-
ernment–funded initiative to reduce and prevent drug use among
young people. Through the use of television, radio, and other ad-
vertising, complemented by public-relations efforts including
community outreach and institutional partnerships, the cam-
paign addresses youths directly and indirectly as well as encour-
ages their parents and other adults to take actions known to affect
drug use. The campaign was initiated under the Treasury-Postal
Appropriations Act of 1998 with Congress-approved funding
(P.L. 105-61). Annually, the campaign receives about $180 million
to deliver its messages. The Drug Reform Coordination Network
(http://www.drcnet.org) reported that this taxpayer-funded ad-
vertising campaign had cost $929 million by 2002 and included
more than 200 TV commercials using popular performers such as
the Dixie Chicks and Mary J. Blige in an effort to turn kids away
from drugs.
Under contract from the National Institute on Drug Abuse,
Westat (a private consulting group) in cooperation with the An-
nenberg School for Communication at the University of Pennsyl-
vania conducted an evaluation focused on evidence of the cam-
paign’s effects on youths and parents, including recall of
campaign messages, effects on parents, and effects on youths.
From the final evaluation, little evidence was found supporting a
favorable effect of the campaign on youths, either directly or
through their parents’ exposure to the campaign. In fact, there
was evidence consistent with an unfavorable direct effect of the
campaign on youths’ cognizance of marijuana.
National Research Council Report on Drug Enforcement Activities
In 1998, the White House Office of National Drug Control Policy
sponsored a study by the National Research Committee to review
the entire range of data and research that might contribute to in-
formed policy making about illegal drugs. The National Research
Council reported in 2001 that although the federal government
invests about $12 billion each year in drug-enforcement pro-
grams, little evidence exists to determine the programs’ effective-
ness. It was noted that the nation’s ability to evaluate whether its
drug policies work is no better now than it was twenty years ago,
and the assessment of drug-enforcement activities is severely
hampered by an absence of adequate, reliable data on both drug
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

consumption and the cost of illegal drugs. According to the chair-
man of the committee, “It is unconscionable for this country to
continue to carry out a public policy of this magnitude and cost
without any way of knowing whether, and to what extent, it is
having on the desired result” (The National Academies News
2001).
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
The Drug Enforcement Administration is responsible for enforc-
ing the controlled-substances laws and regulations of the United
States. The DEA is the lead agency responsible for the develop-
ment of overall federal drug-enforcement strategy, programs,
planning, and evaluation.
Does the DEA work? According to the White House Office of
Management and Budget (OMB), which released its evaluation of
the agency in early 2003, the answer is no. The report says that the
DEA spends $1.56 billion each year on drug law enforcement, but
it has no idea whether it has an effect on its mission. According to
the report, the DEA is unable to demonstrate progress in reducing
the availability of illegal drugs in the United States, it lacks clear
long-term strategies and goals, its managers are not held ac-
countable for problems, and its financial controls do not comply
with federal standards. In a New York Times article (February 5,
2003), it was noted that DEA critics say that drug purity has in-
creased and drugs are easier to buy than ever before. Addition-
ally, it was noted by President Bush in his report on drug strategy
for 2003 that use among young people was at “unacceptably high
levels” and that “in recent years we have lost ground in reducing
illegal use.”
Support for the DEA has more than doubled since 1995; now,
the agency’s financing is to remain virtually the same, while other
law enforcement agencies are receiving increases of 10 percent or
more. Furthermore, with the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) moving four hundred agents off drug cases to terrorism, the
DEA is being asked to pick up the slack. According to the presi-
dent of the Criminal Justice Policy Foundation, the DEA emperor
has no clothes and the White House report should really shake up
our national revelry with drug enforcement and generate a major
reevaluation of our antidrug efforts. Others say the OMB critique
was long overdue and could start a debate about how the War on
Drugs is working.
Problems
43

Current Policy in the United States: The
President’s National Drug Control
Strategy
In Febrary 2003 director of the White House Office of National
Drug Control Policy, John Walters, unveiled the president’s new
National Drug Control Strategy. The strategy reports progress to-
ward meeting the president’s goals of reducing drug use by 10
percent over two years, and 25 percent over five years, high-
lighted by reductions in drug use among young people for the
first time in nearly a decade. The strategy also highlights a new
treatment initiative funded with $600 million over three years to
help addicted Americans find needed treatment and support
services from the most effective programs, including faith-based
and community-based organizations.
Key Points of the National Drug Control
Strategy
The strategy proposes a fiscal year 2004 budget of $11.7 billion for
drug control serving three core priorities: (1) stopping drug use
before it starts, (2) healing America’s drug users, and (3) disrupt-
ing the market.
Stopping Drug Use before It Starts 
Continuing the initial reductions in drug use by young people
will require action by all Americans through education and com-
munity involvement. In homes, schools, places of worship, the
workplace, and civic and social organizations, Americans must
set standards that reaffirm the values of responsibility and good
citizenship while dismissing the image that drug use is consistent
with individual freedom. America’s children must learn from an
early age that avoiding drug use is an expectation and lifelong re-
sponsibility.
•
The strategy ties national leadership with community-
level action to help re-create the formula that has
helped the United States succeed against drugs in the
past. The president’s budget backs up this goal with a
$10 million increase in funding for the expanded Drug-
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Free Communities Support Program, along with
providing $5 million for a new Parents Drug Corps.
•
In fiscal year 2004, the strategy proposes that tools such
as student drug testing be available in communities
where parents and educators deem them appropriate,
and funds them with $8 million.
Healing America’s Drug Users
Despite substantial drug-prevention efforts, some 16 million
Americans still use drugs on a monthly basis, and roughly 6 mil-
lion meet the clinical criteria for needing drug treatment. Yet the
overwhelming majority of users in need of drug treatment fail to
recognize their need. The second core priority of the strategy em-
phasizes the crucial need for family, friends, and former addicts
to intercede with and support those fighting to overcome sub-
stance abuse. Drug users also need the support of institutions and
the people who run them—employers, law enforcement agencies,
faith-based and community-based organizations, and health care
providers, among others—to help them recognize their drug ad-
diction and to seek treatment.
•
Overall, for 2004, the administration proposes $3.6
billion for drug treatment, an increase of 8.2 percent
over 2003.
•
The 2004 request includes new funding of $200 million
($600 million over three years) for a new treatment
initiative to provide drug treatment to individuals
otherwise unable to obtain access to services. People in
need of treatment, no matter where they are—
emergency rooms, health clinics, the criminal justice
system, or schools—will receive an evidence-based
assessment of their treatment need and will be issued
vouchers to obtain help at effective treatment
organizations, including faith-based and community-
based organizations.
Disrupting the Market
Priority 3 of the strategy, disrupting the market, seeks to capital-
ize on the engagement of producer and transit countries like
Colombia and Mexico in order to address the drug trade as a
Current Policy in the United States
45

business—one that faces numerous and often overlooked obsta-
cles that may be used as pressure points. The drug trade is not an
unstoppable force of nature but rather a profit-making enterprise
where costs and rewards exist in an equilibrium that can be dis-
rupted. Every action that makes the drug trade more costly and
less profitable is a step toward “breaking” the market. As the
strategy explains, drug traffickers are in business to make money.
We intend to deny them that revenue.
•
To help secure U.S. borders, the president’s budget
includes $2.1 billion for drug interdiction, an increase of
7.3 percent from 2003. Internationally, the Bush
administration will continue to target the supply of
illegal drugs in the source countries.
•
The administration is requesting $731 million in
dedicated funds in 2004 for the Andean Counterdrug
Initiative to be applied in Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia,
Ecuador, Panama, Peru, and Venezuela.
•
To ensure unity of effort, the strategy advocates the use
of a single list identifying high-level targets (the
Consolidated Priority Organization Targeting list)
among the various agencies involved in domestic drug
law enforcement.
Progress toward Two- and Five-Year Goals
Only the first year of the two-year goal period has elapsed, yet al-
ready the goal of reducing current use by 10 percent among
eighth, tenth, and twelfth graders, as measured by the Monitor-
ing the Future survey, is well on the way to being met.2 Adjust-
ments to the measuring baseline for the goals have been
prompted by discontinuities in the National Household Survey
on Drug Abuse (NHSDA). As a result, the goal of reducing drug
use among adults will still be measured by the NHSDA, but the
baseline has been reset to the 2002 survey, which is not released
until midyear 2003.3 For detailed data tables related to the Na-
tional Drug Control Strategy, visit http://www.whitehousedrug-
policy.gov. Information about the Monitoring the Future report is
available at http://monitoringthefuture.org.
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Legislating Reform: What Are the
Perspectives?
Legislation is a route to drug-policy reform. Two perspectives are
presented. The first is from Asa Hutchinson, who served as Pres-
ident Bush’s director of the Drug Enforcement Administration
and resigned his position in March 2003. Mike Jay, a journalist
and author, presents another view of the issue.
”Drug Legalization Doesn’t Work,” by Asa Hutchinson
This column by Asa Hutchinson first appeared in the Washington
Post on October 9, 2002.
On a recent summer tour through south London, I saw
the future of drug legalization. A young couple in-
jected heroin inside the filthy ruins of an abandoned
building. In this working-class neighborhood, resi-
dents weave in and out of crowded sidewalks, trying
to avoid making eye contact with dealers who openly
push heroin, marijuana and crack.
Scotland Yard aggressively targets international
drug traffickers, and I applaud its strong overall an-
tidrug policy. But last year, a local police commander
initiated a pilot program in which people caught pos-
sessing marijuana are warned rather than arrested.
Often, they’re just ignored. In news reports and my in-
terviews, residents criticize the program for bringing
more drug dealers, more petty criminals and more
drug use.
The one-year Lambeth pilot ended Aug. 1, but
Britain has announced it will relax the country’s mari-
juana laws. That move has given fuel to those in the
United States who believe we should follow suit. Some
have called for the outright legalization of marijuana.
People could buy dope over the counter, as they do in
the red-light district of Amsterdam.
What these legalization advocates do not talk about
are the disturbing problems that people in Lambeth
lived with every day. They ignore the sad misery of
young people addicted to drugs. They ignore the seri-
Current Policy in the United States
47

ous problems that countries such as the Netherlands
are experiencing—problems that are leading them to
reconsider their own liberal drug laws.
The culture of drug use and acceptance in the
Netherlands has played a role in that country’s be-
coming the world’s top producer of Ecstasy. It’s inter-
esting that, in a 2001 study, the British Home Office
found that violent crime and property crime increased
in the late 1990s in every wealthy country except the
United States. No doubt effective drug enforcement
had a part in declining crime in the United States.
Maybe it’s time Europeans looked to America’s
drug policy as their model. Our approach—tough
drug laws coupled with effective education programs
and compassionate treatment—is having success. It’s a
great myth that there’s been no progress in our an-
tidrug effort. To the contrary, there’s been remarkable
success. Overall drug use in the United States is down
by more than one-third since the late 1970s. That’s 9.5
million fewer people using illegal drugs. We have re-
duced cocaine use by an astounding 70 percent in the
past 15 years.
This is not to say we have done enough. Drugs are
still readily available, and a new National Household
Survey on Drug Abuse shows that American kids are
increasingly using drugs such as Ecstasy. As long as
we have despair, poverty and frustration, as long as
we have teenage rebellion, we’re going to have prob-
lems with drugs. But we must keep in mind our suc-
cess and also keep some perspective about U.S. drug
use. Less than 5 percent of the population uses illegal
drugs. That’s 16 million regular users of all illegal
drugs, compared with 66 million tobacco users and
109 million alcohol users.
Emerging drug threats such as Ecstasy and metham-
phetamine are going to require even more resolve and
innovation. We need a renewed dedication by all
Americans to help our kids stay away from the misery
and addiction of drugs. In fighting drugs, we do have
new ideas: from drug courts to community coalitions;
from more investment in education to more effective
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

treatment; from drug testing in the workplace to drug
counselors in schools. These are ideas that work.
What doesn’t work is legalization. It’s a well-kept
secret that we have tried it before in this country. In
1975, Alaska’s Supreme Court held that under that
state’s constitution, an adult could possess marijuana
for personal consumption at home.
The court’s ruling became a green light for mari-
juana use. A 1988 University of Alaska survey showed
that the state’s teenagers used marijuana at a rate more
than twice the national average for their age group.
The report also showed a frequency of marijuana use
that suggested it wasn’t experimental but was a well-
incorporated practice for teens. Fed up with this dan-
gerous experiment, Alaska’s residents voted in 1990 to
recriminalize the possession of marijuana. But 15 years
of legalization left its mark—increased drug use by a
generation of our youth.
Legalizing drugs is simply a surrender. It’s giving
up on the hope of a drug-free future for our next gen-
eration. It’s writing off those still in the grip of addic-
tion and despair. Isn’t every life worth fighting for?
”Legalisation: The First Hundred Years: What Happened When Drugs
Were Legal and Why They Were Prohibited,” by Mike Jay
The following paper was presented at a conference in London on
July 17, 2002, organized by the Institute for Public Policy Research
(IPPR).4
Today, as the notion of legalising drugs is making its
way into the mainstream political agenda for the first
time in living memory, one of the most common objec-
tions to it is that it represents a high-risk experiment
whose outcome cannot be accurately modelled or pre-
dicted. Yet within the context of history, the opposite is
true: it is the prohibition of drugs that is the bold ex-
periment without precedent. A hundred years ago,
any of us could have walked into our high street
chemist and bought cannabis or cocaine, morphine or
heroin over the counter. At this point, mind-altering
drugs had been freely available throughout history
Current Policy in the United States
49

and across almost every culture, and their prohibition,
pressed forward largely by the goal of eliminating al-
cohol from modern societies, was a radical break with
the traditional wisdom of public policy.
Nor was it the case that the prohibition of drugs was
a response to their sudden emergence in Western soci-
eties. In 1800, virtually the only drugs familiar to the
West were alcohol and opium; but by 1900, the con-
stellation of substances that form the modern category
of illicit drugs—opiates, cannabis, cocaine, stimulants
and psychedelics—had all found their niches within a
consumer culture driven by scientific discovery and
the expansion of global trade. The nineteenth century,
typically regarded as an era of repression, moral pro-
bity and social control, could also be billed as “Drug
Legalisation—The First Hundred Years.”
There is much that today’s policy makers can learn
from this era. Not only were most of the policies now
being debated—statutory control and regulation, med-
ical supervision and legal exclusion—all pioneered
with varying degrees of success, but the legal avail-
ability of drugs offers a glimpse of how the general
public originally negotiated their benefits and dan-
gers, and how the various substances found their own
levels within the society at large. History, of course,
has its limits: it cannot tell us everything, and cannot
be expected to repeat itself exactly. Cannabis, for ex-
ample, was legal throughout the nineteenth century,
and its levels of use remained for various reasons quite
low: if it were legalised tomorrow, we would hardly
expect its prevalence to fall to nineteenth-century lev-
els. But history nevertheless illuminates many of the
underlying dynamics in the modern drug debate, not
least by offering the possibility of distinguishing be-
tween the consequences of drugs themselves and
those that only followed once their use had been pro-
hibited.
Perhaps the most significant difference was that
today’s prime distinction between “medicinal” and
“recreational” drugs was, in a society without illicit
drugs, at best embryonic. Opiate and cocaine prepara-
tions, like alcohol and tobacco, were both intoxicant
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

and medicine, and the distinction between “use” and
“abuse,” “feeling good” and “feeling better” was
vague and subject to medical and social fashion.
Today’s Class A substances were not typically under-
stood as drugs of “abuse” but as tonics, pick-me-ups
or mild sedatives, medicines “for the nerves” inhabit-
ing a middle ground perhaps similar to that occupied
today by health supplements, over-the-counter stimu-
lants or energy drinks. This was not because they were
only available in mild preparations like opium tinc-
tures and coca teas: even in the late nineteenth century,
when pure cocaine and injectable morphine were
readily available, the great majority of the public chose
to continue consuming these drugs in dilute and man-
ageable preparations.
Even in this era of mild plant and patent prepara-
tions, though, there was a clear need for some types of
statutory drug controls. Until the 1860s, the market
was unregulated: anyone could sell any substance to
anyone, and make whatever claims they wished for it.
Although most doctors were not overly preoccupied
with the dangers of opiate addiction—which was typ-
ically seen as a marginal side-effect of the most effec-
tive medicine in their pharmacopeia—accidental poi-
sonings and overdoses were a risk that was clearly
exacerbated by preparations that labelled their con-
tents inaccurately or not at all. The emergent phar-
macy profession began to lobby for control of the sale
of such substances, and in 1868 the Poisons and Phar-
macy Act was passed. This limited the sale of arsenic,
cyanide and opium, previously sold everywhere from
grocers’ to pubs, to registered pharmacists; the phar-
macists, in turn, were obliged to record details of their
sales (date, quantity and purchaser).
In retrospect, this initial level of statutory regulation
was perhaps the most effective public policy initiative
of the era. Public confidence in the drug business rose,
and misuse fell. Deaths by accidental overdose, sui-
cide or poisoning remained steady from the 1870s to
the 1900s at less than 200 a year in Britain—a figure
that today’s doctors would gladly trade for the thou-
sands associated with modern prescription drugs. The
Current Policy in the United States
51

combination of reliable health information and trace-
able sales provoked a modest public reaction against
opiate drugs, the first indication that a population pre-
sented with a credible assessment of the dangers of
drug use will to some extent regulate their use on their
own initiative.
But there were two initially unrelated dynamics in
nineteenth-century culture that would, by the end of
the century, have dovetailed to put the outright prohi-
bition of drugs on the political agenda. The first was a
growing set of racial anxieties at the prospect of a mul-
ticultural society; the second was the extension of
medical science into the notion that drug addiction,
and by extension all drug use, was a disease that
needed to be addressed under medical supervision.
It was the racial anxieties that bit first. In 1874, the
Opium Exclusion Act passed in San Francisco became
the first drug prohibition in the modern West; but this
was a prohibition to the Chinese population only. It
was represented as being for the immigrants’ own
good as well as for the protection of the whites who
might be contaminated by the foreign habit, but the
most obvious driving force was the fear of miscegena-
tion between Chinese and whites in the informal and
disinhibited surroundings of Chinatown opium dens.
Around the same time, the political mood in Britain
was turning against the imperial adventures of the
Opium Wars, and images of a China “enslaved” by
addiction to British opium became prevalent through
the reports of missionaries and campaigning journal-
ists. Although these images have subsequently been
shown to have been greatly exaggerated, they trans-
formed the perception of opium from indigenous
medicine to foreign poison, and anti-opium groups
(including Quakers and Temperance activists) promul-
gated the fear that the growing Chinatowns in Britain
might become breeding-grounds for the new
“plague.”
Metaphors of “plague” and “contagion” were, si-
multaneously, being given new and literal force by a
medical profession for whom the addictive qualities of
opium, morphine and cocaine were becoming more
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

significant. The development in the 1870s of the hypo-
dermic syringe, and consequent wider use of potent
alkaloidal extracts like morphine, fuelled medical con-
cerns about unprecedentedly powerful and dangerous
drugs being available to the general public. Opium
users like Thomas de Quincey had long since pointed
out that constant use of the drug led to serious physi-
cal cravings, tolerance of high doses and withdrawal
symptoms (in opposition to much of the medical opin-
ion of the 1820s, which saw these effects simply as
overindulgence or vice). But from the 1870s onwards
the modern notion of addiction came to take shape,
along with the still-familiar claim that this was a “dis-
ease” that required specialist treatment by profession-
als. This, particularly in the context of the contempo-
rary “degeneration theory” that proposed that
indulgence in drugs could pass on hereditary disor-
ders to the users’ offspring, gradually led to some doc-
tors calling for all opiates to be prohibited to the gen-
eral public without medical supervision.
There was an element of professional self-interest in
all this: opium was the most common and effective
remedy of its time, and the majority of the population
understandably preferred self-medication with cheap
patent pills and tinctures to paying doctors’ fees. But
there was also, in the new world of cocaine, morphine
and needles, a pressing need for new medical advice
and statutory controls: manufacturers’ guarantees of
strength and purity, professional guidance around the
potentially hazardous issues of injection and dosage,
and public information about the risks of addiction.
Yet many medical voices went further, arguing for an
outright ban with an urgency perhaps attributable to
the fact that the largest group in the emerging addict
population were medical professionals: from the 1870s
to the 1920s, the profession’s own surveys repeatedly
suggested that around half of all addicts were doctors
and their wives. As the medical profession grew in ex-
pertise and stature, calls for legal controls on opiates
and cocaine became more authoritative. For the med-
ical profession was not only becoming better organ-
ised to extend its remit into new arenas of public
Current Policy in the United States
53

health—it was developing its new views against the
background of a popular and influential Temperance
movement. 
Temperance had a diverse set of lobbying groups
behind it—the church, the Women’s Movement and,
particularly in America, the moral high ground of pol-
itics—but at its core was an aspirational middle-class
crusade to convert the alcohol-fuelled culture of the
working classes to civic responsibilities, Christian
virtues and “moral hygiene.” Most campaigners, doc-
tors and churchmen alike, were united in their belief
that alcohol was by far the most significant root of so-
cial evil, and the dangers of drugs like opium and co-
caine were only stressed in the particular contexts
where ethnic minorities lived cheek-by-jowl with the
white working classes. Nevertheless, the Temperance
movement had the side-effect of carrying the drug de-
bate in its wake. Medical diagnoses like “opium
inebrity” were coined, and the urge to indulge in any
form of intoxication was classified as “moral insanity,”
a condition whose ultimate recourse was confinement
in an asylum. The public voices prepared to defend the
traditional use of drugs were few, and the new medical
taxonomy of drug use as a disease, and by extension a
contagious “plague,” dovetailed with broader fears
about miscegenation and racial contamination to pro-
duce a climate where, led by the United States, the
League of Nations began around 1900 to agree on in-
ternational measures to prohibit the nonmedical use of
opiates and cocaine.
The basic template for today’s drug laws was ham-
mered out at summits like the Hague Conference of
1911, and mostly passed into national law in the form
of emergency wartime legislation like Britain’s 1915
Defence of the Realm Act, later codified in the Dan-
gerous Drugs Act of 1921. The initial effect most no-
ticeable to the general public was that the range of
preparations available over the chemist’s counter—
long-time staples like cannabis, opium or coca tinc-
tures, as well as recently-developed brand medicines
like Bayer Pharmaceuticals’ new cough treatment,
‘Heroin’—were replaced with synthetic alternatives
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

like codeine or ephedrine, alongside useful new pal-
liatives like aspirin. Despite their universal availabil-
ity, the problematic use of the newly illicit drugs was
little higher at this point than it had been a generation
before, and the prohibition initially led only to a lim-
ited and regional illegal traffic in pure and concen-
trated substances like morphine, cocaine and heroin.
The pressing drug issue of the day was the campaign
for alcohol prohibition in America, which built up an
irresistible head of steam until the 18th Amendment
brought it into law, via the Volstead Act, in 1919.
Historically, there are clear examples of prohibitions
that have worked. We only have to look around the
world today to see that drugs that are prevalent in
some countries have been prevented from gaining a
foothold in other similar ones by legal exclusion. But
the common denominator of successful prohibitions is
that they have nipped a drug habit in the bud, inter-
dicting supply before demand has been established.
Once demand is present, the financial arbitrage pre-
sented to suppliers will always be a more powerful
driver than government tools for interdiction and en-
forcement. Counterexamples are rare—the Japanese
success in curtailing amphetamine use in the 1950s is
perhaps the best—and American prohibition was not
among them. Alcohol use was too widely established
across the social spectrum to halt an illicit traffic that
began on the day the law was passed and which pro-
ceeded, through financial muscle and the corruption
of public officials, to develop a vast shadow economy,
which in its centres like Chicago came virtually to
amount to an alternative government.
The collapse of the American experiment with pro-
hibition in 1932 left America both internally ravaged
by organised crime and corruption and externally iso-
lated from the rest of the world, which had balked at
following its lead, and it was in this climate that much
of today’s drug legislation was assembled, driven
through League of Nations Conferences and Geneva
Conventions mostly by American initiatives. There
were many interest groups in America who had much
to gain by switching the focus from alcohol to drugs,
Current Policy in the United States
55

and from rebranding traditional medicines as “new
menaces.” The U.S. Narcotics Bureau needed to shake
off the stigma that attached to the Alcohol Bureau by
showing that their new quarry was a genuine enemy,
far more dangerous than alcohol, and that this time
their goal was one that every citizen should support
and respect. Medical opinion, too, was keen to back-
track from the less-than-credible excesses of their anti-
alcohol warnings and to reverse the nineteenth-
century consensus by insisting that substances such as
cannabis were, in fact, more dangerous than alcohol.
The press and other media, too, found their readers
and listeners eager to believe that drugs might be the
slippery slope to hell, which had been claimed of alco-
hol a generation before. Drugs were still prominently
linked with ethnic minorities, and new anxieties led to
the “anti-narcotic” laws being extended to control the
sale of new substances such as cannabis, associated
with the Mexican immigrant population, which had
previously been assessed (by a British Royal Commis-
sion among others) as a minor public health issue. The
new legislation left a picture almost unrecognisable
from the one that had existed before prohibition. The
thrust of the original drug prohibitions—to protect the
majority white population from the habits of ethnic
minorities—failed to stem demand as drugs flowed
through the emerging multicultural societies in much
the same way as other culturally specific tropes like
fashion, music or food. Medically, new and serious
problems emerged. The mild patent preparations,
which had proved the most popular forms of the now-
illicit drugs, had vanished: now opiates and cocaine
were provided by illicit traffickers only in their most
concentrated, lucrative and dangerous forms. The
health costs of drugs increased in other ways, as risky
procedures like injection moved away from the ambit
of doctors and chemists and into more dangerous and
unhygenic [sic] areas situated specifically beyond the
reach of the law. Criminal organisations, many with
their origins in alcohol prohibition, filled the vacuum
left by patent and pharmaceutical companies, enforc-
ing their illicit trade with violence. Drugs were not
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

without their problems before prohibition, but the ma-
jority of the problems associated with them today only
emerged fully under the legislation of the twentieth
century.
These problems may have been produced by prohi-
bition but, although many of them would not survive
long without it, they cannot all be expected to vanish
overnight with its repeal. The last century of public
policy has transformed our traditional relationship
with drugs into something new and uniquely prob-
lematic, for which history offers no tailor-made solu-
tion. It does, however, offer a reminder that the drug
that presents the most obvious public health problems
is alcohol, and that although alcohol policy remains
highly problematic it has broadly proved to be best
tackled not with prohibition but with socialisation
under an umbrella of statutory regulation and educa-
tion. History offers, too, an illustration of how a soci-
ety legally permeated by today’s illicit drugs used to
function, and shows that high levels of overall drug
prevalence can coexist with low levels of problematic
use. . . .
Harm Reduction: An Alternative Approach
The Drug Policy Alliance is a major advocacy organization fo-
cused on promoting drug policies based on common sense, sci-
ence, public health, and human rights. The Alliance and the Lin-
desmith Library (http://www.lindesmith.org) are supported by
George Soros, a wealthy reformer who maintains a fundamental
position about promoting human rights. Ethan Nadelmann, an
outspoken critic of U.S. government drug policy, is director of the
alliance. The following description about “harm reduction” is
drawn from the alliance’s Web site.
Harm reduction is a public health philosophy that
seeks to lessen the dangers that drug abuse and our
drug policies cause to society. A harm reduction strat-
egy is a comprehensive approach to drug abuse and
drug policy. Harm reduction’s complexity lends to its
misperception as a drug legalization tool.
•
Harm reduction rests on several basic
assumptions. A basic tenet of harm reduction is
Current Policy in the United States
57

that there has never been, is not now, and never
will be a drug-free society. A harm reduction
strategy seeks pragmatic solutions to the harms
that drugs and drug policies cause. It has been
said that harm reduction is not what’s nice, it’s
what works.
•
A harm reduction approach acknowledges that
there is no ultimate solution to the problem of
drugs in a free society, and that many different
interventions may work. Those interventions
should be based on science, public health,
common sense, and human rights.
•
A harm reduction strategy demands new
outcome measurements. Whereas the success of
current drug policies is primarily measured by
the change in use rates, the success of a harm
reduction strategy is measured by the change
in rates of death, disease, crime, and suffering.
•
Because incarceration does little to reduce the
harms that ever-present drugs cause to our
society, a harm reduction approach favors
treatment of drug addiction by health care
professionals over incarceration in the penal
system.
•
Because some drugs, such as marijuana, have
proven medicinal uses, a harm reduction
strategy not only seeks to reduce the harm that
drugs cause, but also to maximize their
potential benefits.
•
A harm reduction strategy recognizes that some
drugs, such as marijuana, are less harmful than
others, such as cocaine and alcohol. Harm
reduction mandates that the emphasis on
intervention should be based on the relative
harmfulness of the drug to society.
•
A harm reduction approach advocates
lessening the harms of drugs through
education, prevention, and treatment. Harm
reduction seeks to reduce the harms of drug
policies dependent on an overemphasis on
interdiction, such as arrest, incarceration,
establishment of a felony record, lack of
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

treatment, lack of adequate information about
drugs, the expansion of military source control
intervention efforts in other countries, and
intrusion on personal freedoms.
•
Harm reduction also seeks to reduce the harms
caused by an overemphasis on prohibition,
such as increased purity, black market
adulterants, black market sale to minors, and
black market crime.
•
A harm reduction strategy seeks to protect
youth from the dangers of drugs by offering
factual, science-based drug education and
eliminating youth’s black market exposure to
drugs.
•
Finally, harm reduction seeks to restore basic
human dignity to dealing with the disease of
addiction.
The Cannabis/Marijuana Controversy: What
Are the Perspectives?
Marijuana has generated more controversy and response to its
impact on individual behavior and society than any other illegal
substance in the United States. There is an abundance of infor-
mation about marijuana. What is known tends to be presented in
ways that are contradictory, supporting the special interests of
those who advocate legal regulation of the substance because of
its harmful effects or who advocate legalization because of its
helpful and benign characteristics. Details presented in this sec-
tion have been drawn from Washington, D.C.–based advocacy
groups for marijuana reform—the Marijuana Policy Project Foun-
dation (http://www.mpp.org) and Common Sense for Drug Pol-
icy (http://www.drugwarfacts.org). Also, information published
by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (http://www.
usdoj.gov/dea/ongoing/marijuana) has been used to provide a
comparison of what is communicated about marijuana. A brief re-
view of “Cannabis: Our Position for a Canadian Public Policy—
Report of the Senate Special Committee on Illegal Drugs” (Nolin
and Kenny 2002) is added to this perspective of the marijuana
controversy.
Current Policy in the United States
59

For Policy Change: What the Reformists Say
The Marijuana Policy Project Foundation states the following:
General
Very few Americans had ever heard about mari-
juana when it was first federally prohibited in 1937.
Today, nearly 70 million Americans admit to having
tried it. . . . According to government-funded re-
searchers, the perceived availability of marijuana
among high school seniors has remained high and
steady despite decades of a nationwide drug war. With
little variation, every year about 85 percent consider
marijuana “fairly easy” or “very easy” to obtain. . . .
Legal and Policy Perspectives
There have been more than 12 million marijuana ar-
rests in the United States since 1970, including a record
704,812 arrests in 1999. About 88 percent of all mari-
juana arrests are for possession—not manufacture or
distribution. . . . Cultivation of even one marijuana
plant is a federal felony. . . . Lengthy mandatory mini-
mum sentences apply to a myriad of offenses. For ex-
ample, a person must serve a five-year mandatory sen-
tence if federally convicted of cultivating one hundred
marijuana plants. This is longer than the average sen-
tences for auto theft and manslaughter. . . . Approxi-
mately 60,000 marijuana offenders are in prison or jail
(June 1999). . . . Civil forfeiture laws allow police to
seize the money and property of suspected marijuana
offenders—charges need not even be filed. The claim
is against property, not the defendant. The property
owner must then prove that the property is “inno-
cent”—and indigents have no right to appointed legal
counsel. Enforcement abuses stemming from forfei-
ture laws abound. . . . [It is] estimated that the war on
marijuana costs taxpayers more than $9 billion annu-
ally. . . . “Decriminalization” involves the removal of
criminal penalties for possession of marijuana for per-
sonal use. Small fines may be issued (similar to traffic
tickets) but there is no arrest, incarceration, or criminal
record.
Marijuana use is presently decriminalized in 10
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

states—California, Colorado, Maine, Minnesota, Mis-
sissippi, Nebraska, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
and Oregon. In these states, cultivation and distribu-
tion remain criminal offenses. . . . Decriminalization
saves a tremendous amount in enforcement costs. Cal-
ifornia saves $100 million per year. . . . 
Medical
Organizations that have endorsed medical access to
marijuana include the AIDS Action Council, American
Academy of Family Physicians, American Public
Health Association, California Medical Association,
California Society of Addiction Medicine, Lymphoma
Foundation of America, National Association of
People with AIDS, National Nurses Society on Addic-
tions, the New England Journal of Medicine and oth-
ers. . . . A few of the many editorial boards that have
endorsed medical access to marijuana include: Boston
Globe, Chicago Tribune, Miami Herald, New York Times,
USA Today. . . . 
Facts compiled by Douglas A. McVay (2002) for Common
Sense for Drug Policy are:
•
In 2000, the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports for the
United States show that 46.5 percent of the 1,579,566
total arrests for drug abuse violations were for
marijuana—a total of 734,497. Of those, 646,042
people were arrested for possession alone. This is an
increase over 1999, when a total of 704,812
Americans were arrested for marijuana offenses, of
which 620,541 were for possession alone.
•
According to the United Nation’s Office for Drug
Control and Crime Prevention estimate, 141 million
people around the world use marijuana. This
represents about 2.5 percent of the world
population.
•
A Johns Hopkins study published in the American
Journal of Epidemiology (May 1999) examined
marijuana’s effects on cognition on 1,318
participants over a 15-year period. Researchers
reported “no significant differences in cognitive
Current Policy in the United States
61

decline between heavy users, light users, and
nonusers of cannabis.” They also found “no  male-
female differences in cognitive decline in relation to
cannabis use . . . These results . . . seem to provide
strong evidence of the absence of a long-term
residual effect of cannabis use on cognition,” they
concluded. Current marijuana use has been found to
have a negative effect on global IQ score only in
subjects who smoked five or more joints per
week. A negative effect was not observed among
subjects who had previously been heavy users but
were no longer using the substance. Furthermore, it
has been concluded that marijuana does not have a
long-term negative impact on global intelligence.
Whether the absence of a residual marijuana
effect would also be evident in more specific
cognitive domains such as memory and attention
remains to be ascertained. These findings were
published in the Canadian Medical Association Journal
in April 2002.
•
In March 1999, the U.S. Institute of Medicine’s
(IOM) Division of Neuroscience and Behavioral
Research reported on various aspects of marijuana
including the so-called Gateway Theory (the theory
that using marijuana leads people to use harder
drugs like cocaine and heroin). The IOM stated that
there is no conclusive evidence that the drug effects
of marijuana are causally linked to the subsequent
abuse of other illicit drugs.
•
The Institute of Medicine also explained that
marijuana has been mistaken for a gateway drug in
the past because patterns in progression of drug use
from adolescence to adulthood are strikingly
regular. Because it is the most widely used illicit
drug, marijuana is predictably the first illicit drug
most people encounter. Most users of other illicit
drugs have used marijuana first. In fact, most drug
users begin with alcohol and nicotine before
marijuana—usually before they are of legal age.
•
The Institute of Medicine found that for most
people, the primary adverse effect of acute
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

marijuana use is diminished psychomotor
performance. It states that it is inadvisable to
operate any vehicle or potentially dangerous
equipment while under the influence of marijuana,
THC, or any cannabinoid drug with comparable
effects.
•
In 1988, the DEA’s administrative law judge, Francis
Young, concluded that in strict medical terms
marijuana is far safer than many foods we
commonly consume. For example, eating ten raw
potatoes can result in a toxic response. By
comparison, it is physically impossible to eat
enough marijuana to induce death. Marijuana in its
natural form is one of the safest therapeutically
active substances known to man. By any
measure of rational analysis marijuana can be
safely used within the supervised routine of
medical care.
•
Commissioned by President Nixon in 1972, the
National Commission on Marijuana and Drug
Abuse stated that “Marihuana’s relative potential
for harm to the vast majority of individual users
and its actual impact on society does not justify a
social policy designed to seek out and firmly punish
those who use it. This judgment is based on
prevalent use patterns, on behavior exhibited by the
vast majority of users and on our interpretations of
existing medical and scientific data. This position
also is consistent with the estimate by law
enforcement personnel that the elimination of use is
unattainable.” When examining the relationship
between marijuana use and violent crime, the 1972
National Commission on Marijuana and Drug
Abuse concluded, “Rather than inducing violent or
aggressive behavior through its purported effects of
lowering inhibitions, weakening impulse control
and heightening aggressive tendencies, marihuana
was usually found to inhibit the expression of
aggressive impulses by pacifying the user,
interfering with muscular coordination,
reducing psychomotor activities and generally
Current Policy in the United States
63

producing states of drowsiness, lethargy,
timidity and passivity.”
•
When examining the medical affects of
marijuana use, the National Commission on
Marijuana and Drug Abuse concluded, “A
careful search of the literature and testimony of the
nation’s health officials has not revealed a single
human fatality in the United States proven to
have resulted solely from ingestion of marihuana.
Experiments with the drug in monkeys
demonstrated that the dose required for overdose
death was enormous and for all practical purposes
unachievable by humans smoking marihuana. This
is in marked contrast to other substances in
common use, most notably alcohol and barbiturate
sleeping pills.” The WHO reached the same
conclusion in 1995.
•
The World Health Organization (WHO) released a
study in March 1998 that states: “there are good
reasons for saying that [the risks from cannabis]
would be unlikely to seriously [compare to] the
public health risks of alcohol and tobacco even if as
many people used cannabis as now drink alcohol or
smoke tobacco.” The authors of the 1998 WHO
report comparing marijuana, alcohol, nicotine and
opiates quote the U.S. Institute of Medicine’s 1982
report stating that there is no evidence that
smoking marijuana “exerts a permanently
deleterious effect on the normal cardiovascular
system.”
•
Some claim that cannabis use leads to “adult
amotivation.” The World Health Organization 1998
report addresses the issue and states, “it is
doubtful that cannabis use produces a well
defined amotivational syndrome.” The report also
notes that the value of studies that support the
“adult amotivation” theory are “limited by their
small sample sizes” and lack of representative
social/cultural groups.
•
Since 1969, government-appointed commissions
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

in the United States, Canada, England,
Australia, and the Netherlands concluded, after
reviewing the scientific evidence, that marijuana’s
dangers had previously been greatly exaggerated,
and urged lawmakers to drastically reduce
or eliminate penalties for marijuana
possession.
•
The Canadian Senate Special Committee on
Illegal Drugs recommended in its 2002 final report
on cannabis policy that “the Government of
Canada amend the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Act to create a criminal exemption
scheme. This legislation should stipulate the
conditions for obtaining licenses as well as for
producing and selling cannabis; criminal penalties
for illegal trafficking and export; and the
preservation of criminal penalties for all
activities falling outside the scope of the exception
scheme. 
•
UK Home Secretary David Blunkett announced in
July 2002, “We must concentrate our efforts on
the drugs that cause the most harm, while sending
a credible message to young people. I will
therefore ask Parliament to reclassify cannabis
from Class B to Class C. I have considered the
recommendations of the Home Affairs Committee,
and the advice given me by the ACMD medical
experts that the current classification of cannabis is
disproportionate in relation to the harm that
it causes.”
•
The Police Foundation of the United Kingdom
stated in April 2000:
Our conclusion is that the present law on
cannabis produces more harm than it prevents.
It is very expensive of the time and resources of
the criminal justice system and especially of the
police. It inevitably bears more heavily on
young people in the streets of inner cities, who
are also more likely to be from minority ethnic
Current Policy in the United States
65

communities, and as such is inimical to police-
community relations. It criminalizes large num-
bers of otherwise law-abiding, mainly young,
people to the detriment of their futures. It has
become a proxy for the control of public order;
and it inhibits accurate education about the rel-
ative risks of different drugs including the risks
of cannabis itself.
•
According to the federal Potency Monitoring Project
in 2002, supported by the U.S. National Institute on
Drug Administration (NIDA), the average potency
of marijuana has increased very little since the
1980s. The Project reports that in 1985, the average
THC content of commercial-grade marijuana was
2.84 percent, and the average for high-grade
sinsemilla in 1985 was 7.17 percent. In 1995, the
potency of commercial-grade marijuana
averaged 3.73 percent, while the potency of
sinsemilla in 1995 averaged 7.51 percent. In 2001,
commercial-grade marijuana averaged 4.72 percent
THC, and the potency of sinsemilla in 2001
averaged 9.03 percent.
Against Policy Change: What The U.S. Drug Enforcement
Administration Says
In “Exposing the Myth of Medical Marijuana: Marijuana the
Facts,” the DEA states the following:
Q: Does marijuana pose health risks to users?
•
Marijuana is an addictive drug with significant
health consequences to its users and others.
Many harmful short-term and long-term
problems have been documented with its use.
•
The short term effects of marijuana use include:
memory loss, distorted perception, trouble with
thinking and problem solving, loss of motor
skills, decrease in muscle strength, increased
heart rate, and anxiety.
•
In recent years there has been a dramatic
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

increase in the number of emergency room
mentions of marijuana use. From 1993 to 2000,
the number of emergency room marijuana
mentions more than tripled.
•
There are also many long-term health
consequences of marijuana use. According to
the National Institutes of Health, studies show
that someone who smokes five joints per week
may be taking in as many cancer-causing
chemicals as someone who smokes a full pack
of cigarettes every day. Marijuana contains
more than 400 chemicals, including most of the
harmful substances found in tobacco smoke.
Smoking one marijuana cigarette deposits
about four times more tar into the lungs than a
filtered tobacco cigarette.
•
Harvard University researchers report that the
risk of a heart attack is five times higher than
usual in the hour after smoking marijuana.
•
Smoking marijuana also weakens the immune
system and raises the risk of lung infections. A
Columbia University study found that a control
group smoking a single marijuana cigarette
every other day for a year had a white-blood-
cell count that was 39 percent lower than
normal, thus damaging the immune system
and making the user far more susceptible to
infection and sickness.
•
Users can become dependent on marijuana to
the point they must seek treatment to stop
abusing it. In 1999, more than 200,000
Americans entered substance abuse treatment
primarily for marijuana abuse and dependence.
•
More teens are in treatment for marijuana use
than for any other drug or for alcohol.
Adolescent admissions to substance abuse
facilities for marijuana grew from 43 percent of
all adolescent admissions in 1994 to 60 percent
in 1999. Marijuana is much stronger now than
it was decades ago. According to data from the
Potency Monitoring Project at the University of
Current Policy in the United States
67

Mississippi, the tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
content of commercial-grade marijuana rose
from an average of 3.71 percent in 1985 to an
average of 5.57 percent in 1998. The average
THC content of U.S. produced sinsemilla
increased from 3.2 percent in 1977 to 12.8
percent in 1997.
Q: Does marijuana have any medical value?
•
Any determination of a drug’s valid medical
use must be based on the best available science
undertaken by medical professionals. The
Institute of Medicine conducted a comprehensive
study in 1999 to assess the potential health
benefits of marijuana and its constituent
cannabinoids. The study concluded that smoking
marijuana is not recommended for the treatment
of any disease condition. In addition, there are
more effective medications currently available.
For those reasons, the Institute of Medicine
concluded that there is little future in smoked
marijuana as a medically approved medication.
•
Advocates have promoted the use of marijuana
to treat medical conditions such as glaucoma.
However, this is a good example of more
effective medicines already available.
According to the Institute of Medicine, there
are six classes of drugs and multiple surgical
techniques that are available to treat glaucoma
that effectively slow the progression of this
disease by reducing high intraocular pressure.
In other studies, smoked marijuana has been
shown to cause a variety of health problems,
including cancer, respiratory problems,
increased heart rate, loss of motor skills, and
increased heart rate. Furthermore, marijuana
can affect the immune system by impairing the
ability of T-cells to fight off infections,
demonstrating that marijuana can do more
harm than good in people with already
compromised immune systems.
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

•
In addition, in a study by the Mayo Clinic,
THC was shown to be less effective than
standard treatments in helping cancer patients
regain lost appetites.
•
The American Medical Association
recommends that marijuana remain a Schedule
I controlled substance.
•
A synthetic THC drug, Marinol, has been
available to the public since 1985. The Food
and Drug Administration has determined that
Marinol is safe, effective, and has therapeutic
benefits for use as a treatment for nausea and
vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy,
and as a treatment of weight loss in patients
with AIDS. However, it does not produce the
harmful health effects associated with smoking
marijuana.
•
It’s also important to realize that the campaign
to allow marijuana to be used as medicine is a
tactical maneuver in an overall strategy to
completely legalize all drugs. Pro-legalization
groups have transformed the debate from
decriminalizing drug use to one of compassion
and care for people with serious diseases. The
New York Times interviewed Ethan Nadelmann,
Director of the Lindesmith Center, in January
2000. Responding to criticism from former drug
czar Barry McCaffrey that the medical
marijuana issue is a stalking-horse for drug
legalization, Mr. Nadelmann did not contradict
General McCaffrey. “Will it help lead toward
marijuana legalization?” Mr. Nadelmann said:
“I hope so.”
Q: Does marijuana harm anyone besides the indi-
vidual who smokes it?
•
Consider the public safety of others when
confronted with intoxicated drug users.
•
Marijuana affects many skills required for safe
driving: alertness, the ability to concentrate,
coordination, and reaction time. These effects
Current Policy in the United States
69

can last up to twenty-four hours after smoking
marijuana. Marijuana use can make it difficult
to judge distances and react to signals and
signs on the road.
•
In a 1990 report, the National Transportation
Safety Board studied 182 fatal truck accidents.
It found that just as many of the accidents were
caused by drivers using marijuana as were
caused by alcohol—12.5 percent in each case.
•
Consider also that drug use, including
marijuana, contributes to crime. A large
percentage of those arrested for crimes test
positive for marijuana. Nationwide, 40 percent
of adult males tested positive for marijuana at
the time of their arrest.
Q: Is marijuana a gateway drug?
•
Yes. Among marijuana’s most harmful
consequences is its role in leading to the use of
other illegal drugs like heroin and cocaine.
Long-term studies of students who use drugs
show that very few young people use other
illegal drugs without first trying marijuana.
Although not all people who use marijuana go
on to use other drugs, using marijuana
sometimes lowers inhibitions about drug use
and exposes users to a culture that encourages
use of other drugs.
•
The risk of using cocaine has been estimated to
be more than 104 times greater for those who
have tried marijuana than for those who have
never tried it.
In Summary:
•
Marijuana is a dangerous, addictive drug that
poses significant health threats to users.
•
Marijuana has no medical value that can’t be
met more effectively by legal drugs.
•
Marijuana users are far more likely to use other
drugs like cocaine and heroin than
nonmarijuana users.
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

•
Drug legalizers use “medical marijuana” as a
red herring in an effort to advocate broader
legalization of drug use.
A Solution to the Marijuana Problem? What Canada Says
Following a two-year study of public policy related to
marijuana, the Canadian Senate Special Committee on
Illegal Drugs found that the drug should be legalized.
Released on September 4, 2002, the Senate report, enti-
tled, Cannabis: Our Position for a Public Policy, is a result
of research, analysis, and extensive public hearings in
Ottawa and communities throughout Canada with ex-
perts and citizens (Canadian Senate Special Commit-
tee on Illegal Drugs 2000).
Significant excerpts from the Commission report include:
•
Clearly, current approaches are ineffective and
inefficient. Ultimately, their effect amounts to
throwing taxpayers’ money down the drain in a
crusade that is not warranted by the danger posed by
the substance. It has been maintained that drugs,
including cannabis, are not dangerous because they
are illegal but rather are illegal because they are
dangerous. This is perhaps true of other types of
drugs, but not of cannabis. We should state this clearly
once and for all, for public good: it is time to stop this
crusade. (ibid., 34)
•
As far as cannabis is concerned, only behaviour causing
demonstrable harm to others should be prohibited:
illegal trafficking, selling to minors and impaired
driving. (ibid., 35)
•
We were told that drugs were made criminal because
they are dangerous. Analysis of debates in Parliament
and in media accounts clearly shows how far this is
from truth.
•
When cannabis was introduced in the legislation on
narcotics in 1923, there was no debate, no justification,
in fact many members did not even know what
cannabis was. (ibid., 21)
Current Policy in the United States
71

•
Early drug legislation was largely based on a moral
panic, racist sentiment and a notorious absence of
debate. (ibid., 22)
•
In our view, it is clear that if the aim of public policy is
to diminish consumption and supply of drugs,
specifically cannabis, all signs indicate complete failure.
(ibid., 31)
•
In effect, the main social costs of cannabis are a result of
public policy choices, primarily its continued
criminalization, while the consequences of its use
represent a small fraction of the social costs attributable
to the use of illegal drugs. (ibid., 27)
•
In fact, more than for any other illegal drug,
[marijuana’]s criminalization is the principal source of
social and economic costs. (ibid., 31)
•
Billions of dollars have been sunk into enforcement
without any greater effect. There are more consumers,
more regular users and more regular adolescent users.
Cannabis is more available than ever, it is cultivated on
a large scale, even exported, swelling coffers and
making organized crime more powerful. And there
have been tens of thousands of arrests and convictions
for the possession of cannabis and thousands of people
have been incarcerated. However, use trends remain
totally unaffected and the gap the Commission noted
between the law and public compliance continues to
widen. (ibid., 33)
•
It is time to recognize what is patently obvious: our
policies have been ineffective, because they are poor
policies. (ibid., 33)
•
Cannabis itself is not a cause of other drug use. In this
sense, we reject the gateway theory. . . . Cannabis itself
is not a cause of delinquency and crime; and Cannabis
is not a cause of violence. (ibid., 15)
•
Physical dependency on cannabis is virtually
nonexistent. Psychological dependency is moderate
and is certainly lower than for nicotine or alcohol.
(ibid., 26)
•
We have seen that approximately 50 percent of high
school students have used cannabis within the past
year. Nevertheless, a high percentage of them stop
using, and the vast majority of those who experiment
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

do not go on to become regular users. Even among
regular users, only a small proportion develop
problems related to excessive use, which may include
some level of psychological dependency. (ibid., 38)
•
There are clear, though nondefinitive indications of the
therapeutic benefits of marijuana in the following
conditions: analgesic for chronic pain, antispasm for
multiple sclerosis, anticonvulsive for epilepsy,
antiemetic for chemotherapy and appetite stimulant for
cachexia. . . . Measures should be taken to support and
encourage the development of alternative practices,
such as the establishment of compassion clubs [medical
marijuana buyers’ clubs]. . . . The practices of these
organizations are in line with the therapeutic
indications arising from clinical studies and meet the
strict rules on quality and safety (ibid., 18–19). . . . The
international drug control conventions are, at least with
respect to cannabis, an utterly irrational restraint that
has nothing to do with scientific or public health
considerations. (ibid., 29)
•
In our opinion, the data we have collected on cannabis
and its derivatives provide sufficient grounds for our
general conclusion that the regulation of the production,
distribution and consumption of cannabis, inasmuch as
it is part of an integrated and adaptable public policy, is
best able to respond to the principles of autonomy,
governance that fosters human responsibility and
limitation of penal law to situations where there is
demonstrable harm to others. A regulatory system for
cannabis should permit, specifically:
•
more effective targeting of illegal traffic and a
reduction in the role played by organized
crime;
•
prevention programs better adapted to the real
world and better able to prevent and detect at-
risk behaviour;
•
enhanced monitoring of products, quality and
properties;
•
better user information and education; and
•
respect for individual and collective freedoms,
and legislation more in tune with the behaviour
of Canadians. (ibid., 31–32)
Current Policy in the United States
73

The Canadian Senate Special Committee on Illegal Drugs report
consists of eleven recommendations. Among the three that ap-
pear to be most far reaching are:
Recommendation 5: The Committee recommends that the
Government of Canada adopt an integrated policy on the
risks and harmful effects of psychoactive substances
covering the whole range of substances (medication,
alcohol, tobacco and illegal drugs). With respect to cannabis,
this policy should focus on educating users, detecting and
preventing at-risk use and treating excessive use.
Recommendation 6: The Committee recommends that the
Government of Canada amend the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Act to create a criminal exemption scheme. This
legislation should stipulate the conditions for obtaining
licenses as well a for producing and selling cannabis;
criminal penalties for illegal trafficking and export; and the
preservation of criminal penalties for all activities falling
outside the scope of the exemption scheme.
Recommendation 7: The Committee recommends that the
Government of Canada declare an amnesty for any person
convicted of possession of cannabis under current or past
legislation.
The War: The Debate Goes On
The National Review has stated that the time had come to revise the
laws on drug trafficking. “[The National Review] deplores the [use
of drugs] and we urge the stiffest sentences against anyone con-
victed of selling a drug to a minor. But that said, it is our judgment
that the war on drugs has failed, that it is diverting intelligent en-
ergy away from how to deal with the problem of addiction, that it
is wasting our resources, and that it is encouraging civil, judicial,
and penal procedures associated with police states.” Based on a
symposium of national experts sponsored by the magazine, the
primary conclusions were: “(1) that the famous drug war is not
working, (2) that crime and suffering have greatly increased as a
result of prohibition, (3) that we have seen, and are countenancing,
a creeping attrition of authentic civil liberties, and (4) that the di-
rection in which to head is legalization” (Buckley 1996).
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Efforts to reverse drug prohibition face formidable obstacles
such as antidrug-warlords’ control over the attitudes and behav-
ior of those involved with all aspects of drug control, prevention,
and treatment through the distribution of funding resources and
the “bogeyman syndrome”—the need of people to use scapegoats
to “embody their fears and take blame for whatever ails them. . . .
Just as anti-Communist propagandists once feared Moscow far
beyond its actual influence and appeal, so today antidrug prose-
lytizers indict marijuana, cocaine, heroin and assorted hallucino-
gens far beyond their actual psychoactive effects and psychologi-
cal appeal. . . . The evidence of history and of science is drowned
out by today’s bogeymen. No rhetoric is too harsh, no penalty too
severe” (Nadelmann 1993).
In the United States, change is occurring, especially at the
state level as evidenced by initiatives to reduce penalties for mar-
ijuana use and legal challenges against the tobacco industry for
compensation of health costs and reform. A broad-based coalition
of respectable special-interest groups and grassroots organiza-
tions may prove to be the vanguard for moving drug policy and
practices to a more rational and pragmatic level for addressing
the problem. Certainly, if this expectation does not come to
fruition, there is always the issue of economic realities and con-
straints—Americans are not inclined to pay for the rising costs of
enforcing laws, especially when substantial tax revenues can be
generated through different methods of control and regulation
(ibid.). In an effort to address the state of New York’s $11.5 billion
deficit, for example, Governor George Pataki and the state legis-
lature have agreed that the Rockefeller-era drug laws are too
harsh, especially in terms of mandating sentences for some first-
time nonviolent drug offenses. Based on a study of the Legal Ac-
tion Center, it has been reported that
Three thousand eight hundred and eighty-four indi-
viduals incarcerated in 2001 would have been eligible
for judicial diversion under the [State] Assembly’s
drug reform law (A-7078). For each offender diverted
from prison to community-based treatment the state
would save approximately $50,000 in total net criminal
system–related spending and $10,000 in health care
and welfare costs, and crime and increased tax contri-
bution. Furthermore, New York State would save an
additional $24,384,000 under the Assembly bill by re-
ducing the sentences of individuals serving certain
Current Policy in the United States
75

drug offenses, potentially saving the state $164,244,000
a year. These calculations do not include savings that
would result from decreased burden on the foster care
system and increased local economic benefits resulting
in higher employment and increased wages. . . . [T]his
report shows that reforming New York’s Rockefeller-
era drug laws to make greater use of mandated com-
munity treatment would save taxpayers enormous
sums of money. (“New Report” 2003)
The door is open for change in terms of how the problem of
drug use is to be addressed; the only question is when and how
that change will occur. Getting there will not be easy, and the ef-
fort should be taken incrementally. Such gradualism, which
should begin with cannabis, would allow for a necessary shift in
values so that more socially and economically pragmatic policies
can be formulated and enacted. For some, such legislation may be
a leap in the dark. Indeed, there will be unpredictable conse-
quences as well as predictable ones. But that does not argue for
doing nothing or talking tougher with words that are empty in
terms of action and outcomes (Isralowitz 2002).
Notes
1. Cost figures vary according to sources of information.
2. In December 2003 the results of the Monitoring the Future survey
showed current use (past thirty days) declined 11 percent over the previ-
ous year, from 31.8 percent to 28.3 percent.
3. The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse has been renamed the
National Survey on Drug Use and Health [NSDUH]. The report was re-
leased in September 2003, and information from that report is used in
chapter 3.
4. Jay, M. 2002. “Legalisation: The First Hundred Years: What Happened
When Drugs Were Legal and Why They Were Prohibited.” Reprinted
with permission obtained from IPPR. Available at http://www.cedro-
uva.org/lib/jay.legalisation.html (accessed January 22, 2004).
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

References
Buckley, W. 1996. “400 Readers Give Their Views.” National Review 1
(July): 32.
Buckley, W., E. Nadelmann, K. Schmoke, J. McNamara, R. Sweet, T.
Szasz, and S. Duke. 1996. “The War on Drugs Is Lost.” National Review 12
(February): 35–48
Canadian Senate Special Committee on Illegal Drugs. 2000. “Cannabis—
Our Position for a Canadian Public Policy.” Available at http://
www.ukcia.org/research/CanadianPublicPolicy/default.html (accessed
January 27, 2004).
Goode, E. 1989. Drugs in American Society. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Horgan, C. 2001. Substance Abuse: The Nation’s Number One Health Prob-
lem. Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Hornik, R. 2002. Evaluation of the National Youth Anti-Drug Media Cam-
paign: Fifth Semi-Annual Report of Findings, Executive Summary. Rockville,
MD: Westat.
Isralowitz, R. 2002. Drug Use, Policy and Management. Westport, CT:
Auburn House.
McVay, D. 2002. “Updated Drug War Facts: Common Sense for Drug Pol-
icy.” Available at http://www.drugwarfacts.org (accessed March 1,
2003).
Nadelmann, E. 1993. “Should We Legalize Drugs? History Answers.”
American Heritage 44 (February–March): 41–56.
The National Academies News. 2001. “Data Sorely Lacking on Effective-
ness of Nation’s Drug Enforcement Programs.” Available at
http://www.4.nas.edu/news.nf (accessed March 29, 2003).
“New Report on Savings to New York State under Law Reform Bill.”
2003. Available at http://www.lindesmith.org (accessed March 20, 2003).
Nolin, P., and C. Kenny. 2002. “Cannabis: Our Position for a Canadian
Public Policy—Report of the Senate Special Committee on Illegal
Drugs.” Special Committee on Illegal Drugs, Senate of Canada. Available
at http://www.ukcia.org/research/CanadianPublicPolicy/default.html
(accessed March 1, 2003).
Russell, A. 1992. “Making America Drug Free: A New Vision of What
Works.” Carnegie Quarterly 37, no. 3 (summer).
Shepard, E. 2001. The Economic Costs of DARE. Syracuse, NY: Institute of
Industrial Relations.
References
77

Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Administration (SAMSHA).
2002. National Household Survey on Drug Abuse. Rockville, MD: United
States Department of Health and Human Services.
Swan, N. 1998. “Drug Abuse Cost to Society Set at $97.7 Billion, Contin-
uing Steady Increase Since 1975.” NIDA Notes, NIH Publication No. 98-
3478. Available at http://www.drugabuse.gov/NIDA_Notes/ NNVol
13N4/ Abusecosts.html (accessed January 27, 2004).
Sweet, R. 1996. “The War on Drugs is Lost.” National Review (February
12): 35–48.
U.S. General Accounting Office. 2003. “Youth Illicit Drug Use Preven-
tion.” Publication number Washington, DC-03-172R. Available at
http://www.drugpolicy.org.docUploads/DAREfinal.pdf. (accessed March
1, 2003).
U.S. Office of Applied Studies. 2002. “Summary of Findings from the
2000 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse.” DHHS Publication
no. SMA 01-3549. Rockville, MD: SAMSHA.
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s
Happening?
International and U.S. Developments
I
llicit-substance use and its consequences (for example, crime
and violence, military and police intervention, lost work, family
destruction, property confiscation, and massive allocations of
funding resources for treatment and health maintenance) consti-
tute a major public concern. This is true for well-established mod-
ern Western democracies as well as developing nations and
regions throughout the world.
From an international perspective, a limited history exists in
terms of addressing the production and use of illegal substances.
For example, the United Nations (UN) General Assembly has
held only one special session devoted to this issue since its be-
ginning in 1946. That special session was held in 1990 to address
the drug-control issue. Eight years later, its current secretary gen-
eral, Kofi Annan, said that the problem of illicit drugs remains
with us and the trends are not slowing. Drug trafficking is a
multibillion-dollar industry, a clandestine, criminal, cartel-driven
enterprise, leaving no country untouched. Addiction is indis-
criminate, crossing lines of class, gender, religion, and country.
At UN-sponsored meetings held during 1998 in Vienna and
New York, the representatives from 130 governments agreed to a
political declaration calling for a drastic reduction of both illicit
supply and demand for drugs by the year 2008. Additionally, the
79

main themes for the members’ discussion and consideration in-
cluded precursor chemicals used to manufacture illicit drugs; the
manufacture, trafficking, and abuse of amphetamine-type stimu-
lants that are the most abused synthetic drugs manufactured
clandestinely; judicial cooperation such as strengthening the legal
framework to improve application of drug-control laws regard-
ing extradition and illicit traffic by sea; the laundering of money
derived from illicit-drug trafficking and other serious crimes; the
elimination of illicit crops and the promotion of alternative crop
development; as well as other matters.
According to a report issued by the United Nations Office for
Drug Control and Crime Prevention (UNODCCP), the 1980s and
1990s were a period that exhibited a surge of illegal drug activi-
ties (Kazancigil and Milani 2002). Activities such as the process-
ing, export, production, and distribution of illicit drugs were
taken over by major criminal organizations. These organizations
are now present in all the major regions of the world. For the drug
trade today, nationalities and borders do not exist.
This chapter provides information about the nature and ex-
tent of the illicit-drug problem that varies by drug type and re-
gion. Specifically, the production, trafficking, and consumption of
cannabis, heroin, and cocaine are discussed in international and
U.S. contexts. It concludes with overviews of the relation of illicit
drugs to disease, with a focus on the former Soviet Union because
of the rapid spread of problems there, terrorism, and youth atti-
tudes and behavior in the United States.
Production, Trafficking, and Consumption
Cannabis (Marijuana and Hashish)
Cannabis is grown throughout the world; however, there is a lack
of usable information to make an assessment about the extent of
its cultivation at the global level, according to UNODCCP.
Cannabis ranks first among all substances in terms of the
amounts seized and number of seizure cases. In recent years, it
has been given a low-priority status among law enforcement au-
thorities in many countries, including the Netherlands, Great
Britain, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Portugal, and Canada. This
factor along with increased levels of seizures lead to the assump-
tion that there is an increased level of production and trafficking.
80
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

In terms of global seizures in metric tons of illicit substances, ap-
proximately 72 percent is cannabis and 17 percent cannabis resin
(hashish).
Worldwide, cannabis is the most extensively trafficked drug.
In 2000, more than half of the cannabis seized was in North Amer-
ica, mostly in Mexico. Nearly a quarter of the seizures were in
southern Africa, particularly South Africa. Regarding hashish
(that is, cannabis resin), there has been an increase of law en-
forcement efforts in Morocco, Near and Middle East countries,
and southern Africa. Western Europe accounts for almost two-
thirds of the global hashish seizures, of which nearly half comes
in Spain alone.
In the United States, trafficking patterns show that cannabis
is mainly imported from Mexico. Canadian-grown marijuana, in-
cluding the seedless and potent “BC bud,” is being reported in
numerous locations. Domestic cultivation, especially indoor hy-
droponics, including those in private homes, exists in many areas.
Other reports related to cultivation and trafficking in the United
States indicate that some Latin American marijuana still enters
Miami from Jamaica, the Bahamas, and other Caribbean trans-
shipment points; trafficking patterns in certain locations have
shifted from coastal marine and air smuggling to complex indoor
growing with hydroponics and domestic interstate shipments;
and Colombian marijuana-trafficking organizations are moving
back into the marijuana market (National Institute on Drug
Abuse 2001).
In Kentucky, it has been reported that the annual marijuana
crop grown there generates about $4 billion revenue generated
from markets of the Northeast willing to pay high street prices.
It’s kind of like the old moonshine days with neigh-
bors making a living at it. . . . Everybody seems to
know somebody who grows it, sells it, smokes. It’s the
dirty little secret of Kentucky. . . . More than 200,000
pot plants, each worth about $1,000 in retail produce,
are seized each year alone in the sprawling beauty of
the Daniel Boone National Forest. . . . The planters use
hydroponics, growing lamps and scientific pruning
techniques to produce a crop every 89 days in base-
ments, silos, closets, and even underground bunkers,
replete with booby traps and remote video monitor-
ing. (Clines 2001)
Production, Trafficking, and Consumption
81

In terms of consumption, cannabis is the most widely used
drug in the world. It is estimated that 147 million people, or 3.5
percent of the global population, fifteen years and older, used
cannabis from 1998 to 2000. The largest numbers of cannabis
users are found in Asia where the people there account for more
than 25 percent of the global consumption, followed by 25 per-
cent in Africa, 25 percent in the Americas, and about 20 percent in
Europe. The largest demand for the substance is in the United
Kingdom, Spain, the Netherlands, and Sweden. When compared
to opiates and cocaine, cannabis users are a lower proportion in
treatment. Nevertheless, treatment demand for cannabis is far
from negligible. On average, about 15 percent of all treatment de-
mand at the global level is related to cannabis use. This rate is ris-
ing in many countries as consumption levels and the THC levels
increase (United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime Pre-
vention 2002). In Europe, details about cannabis use include:
•
At least 45 million Europeans (18 percent of those aged
fifteen to sixty-four) have tried cannabis at least once.
Around 15 million (about 6 percent of those aged
fifteen to sixty-four) have used cannabis in the past
twelve months.
•
Use is higher among younger groups. About 25 percent
of those aged fifteen to sixteen and 40 percent of those
aged eighteen have tried cannabis. In some countries,
use has doubled since 1990; in others, the rise is less
marked; and in a few, it has stabilized.
•
Curiosity is a primary motive for trying cannabis, and
use is more experimental or intermittent than
persistent.
•
There is an increase in numbers, especially young
people, attending treatment centers for cannabis use.
Additional drugs are also involved.
•
Cannabis remains the primary drug in drug offenses,
mostly for possession rather than trafficking. (European
Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction 2000)
In the United States, patterns of marijuana use over the past
twenty years or so do not indicate that governmental efforts have
been very successful in reducing or controlling the use of the sub-
stance. Since 1992, teenage marijuana use has grown consider-
ably, and by one measure it has doubled. In 2002, it was used by
82
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

75 percent of the current population of 19.5 million illicit-drug
users. Approximately 55 percent of current illicit-drug users (10.7
million) used only marijuana, 20 percent used marijuana and an-
other illicit drug, and the remaining 25 percent used an illicit drug
but not marijuana in the past month. During the past year, 12.2
percent of marijuana users used the drug on 300 or more days.
This translates into 1.8 million persons using marijuana on a daily
or almost daily basis over a twelve-month period. Among past-
month users, about one-third (32.6 percent persons) used mari-
juana on twenty or more days. Of the 2.2 million current illicit-
drug users aged twelve to seventeen, about 71 percent used
marijuana—boys more than girls. The highest rate of illicit-drug
use is among those eighteen to twenty-five years—20.2 percent,
or 3.9 million users. About 86 percent of this age group use mari-
juana compared to 27 percent who use prescription-type drugs
nonmedically, which is the next most common substance used; 9
percent use cocaine; and 9 percent use hallucinogens. Among
adults aged twenty-six or older, 5.8 percent, or 1.1 million, re-
ported current illicit-drug use: 69 percent used marijuana and 34
percent used prescription-type drugs.
In 1965 and 1966, only 1.8 percent of youths had ever used
marijuana. Beginning in 1967, use increased until it reached the
level of 19.6 percent in 1979. A period of decline followed until
1991, when the rate was 11.5 percent, after which the trend re-
versed, reaching a peak at 21.9 percent in 2001. The percentage of
youths aged twelve to seventeen who had ever used marijuana
declined slightly from 2001 to 2002 (21.9 to 20.6 percent). Regard-
ing young adults aged eighteen to twenty-five who had ever used
marijuana, the percentage was 5.1 percent in 1965, but increased
steadily to 54.4 percent in 1982. Although the rate for young
adults declined somewhat from 1982 to 1993, it did not drop
below 43 percent and increased to 53 percent in 2001 and 53.8 per-
cent in 2002 (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Ad-
ministration 2003b).
From hospital emergency department (ED) information it
has been found that the use of cannabis among adolescents is
common, approaching that of cigarette use among young adults.
The eighteen-to-twenty-five age group accounts for the highest
rate of marijuana hospital ED mentions in most cities throughout
the United States. Youths are increasingly dominating the mari-
juana treatment demographics. In most areas, primary marijuana
users are generally younger than primary cocaine or heroin
Production, Trafficking, and Consumption
83

admissions. Males outnumber females nationally among mari-
juana ED mentions, accounting for 60 percent or more of the total.
Treatment admissions are also more likely to be male than female.
Racial/ethnic distributions of primary marijuana treatment ad-
missions vary across the country (Willard and Schoenborn 1995;
Schlosser 1997; NIDA 2001; NIDA 2002).
Marijuana users were asked in the National Survey on Drug
Use and Health how, from whom, and where they obtained the
marijuana they used most recently. In 2002, most users (56.7 per-
cent) got the drug for free or shared someone else’s marijuana. Al-
most 40 percent of marijuana users bought it. Most marijuana
users obtained the drug from a friend; 79 percent who bought
their marijuana and 81.8 percent who obtained the drug for free
had obtained it from a friend. More than half (55.9 percent) of
users who bought their marijuana purchased it inside a home,
apartment, or dorm. This also was the most common location for
obtaining marijuana for free (67.2 percent). The percentages of
youth users who obtained marijuana inside a home, apartment,
or dorm were 34.7 percent for buyers and 48 percent for those
who obtained it free. Almost 9 percent of youths who bought
their marijuana obtained it inside a school building, and 4.8 per-
cent bought it outside on school property (Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration 2003b).
Throughout the United States, the following routes of
cannabis use have been reported. “Blunts” or “Vega”—gutted ci-
gars refilled with marijuana—remain entrenched in the culture of
adolescents and young adults in many areas. Blunt smoking is fre-
quently accompanied by alcohol consumption. Marijuana tends to
be used in combination with other substances, particularly alcohol
and cocaine (usually crack) and sometimes PCP. The mari-
juana/PCP combination is called a “love boat,” “wets,” “lilies,”
“wacky sticks,” “donk,” or “dream team.” Marijuana–crack co-
caine combinations are referred to as “geek joints,” “oolies,” “dia-
blitos,” “primos,” “woolies,” and “turbo,” depending on the city.
Marijuana with PCP plus formaldehyde is called “fry,” “amp,” or
“water-water” (National Institute on Drug Abuse 2001; Isralowitz
2002b).
Opium and Heroin 
In the 1990s, Afghanistan became the world’s leading opium pro-
ducer, with about 80 percent (5,674 metric tons) of the substance
84
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

by 1999. Other major producers are Myanmar, Laos, Colombia,
Mexico, and Pakistan. Following the imposed ban by the Taliban
in July 2000, Afghanistan opium poppy cultivation was down by
91 percent, and opium production dropped by 94 percent in 2001
compared to the 2000 levels. In global terms, opium poppy culti-
vation dropped by 35 percent, and the potential production of
opium went down by 65 percent from 2000 to 2001. Such a large
supply decrease would normally reduce trafficking and con-
sumption unless large stocks were available. This was in fact the
case, as confirmed by seizures and prices in the source region and
further along the trafficking routes, according to UNODCCP.
With production curtailed in 2001, an opiate shortage was ex-
pected on the Western European market. Among the projected
consequences were price increases, including a rise in crime by
addicts to pay the higher prices; a reduction in purity of heroin
sold in the streets, with health implications; a shift to legal opiate
substitutes such as methadone or buprenorphine or to other ille-
gal substances available on the market such as cocaine and am-
phetamine-type stimulants; and an increase in the demand for
treatment. Many of these conditions could have happened if it
had not been for the events of September 11 and the subsequent
military campaign. Rather, consumer prices fell because of panic
sales of opiate stocks, revealing that there was an ample supply
for transport to Western Europe.
Afghanistan opium production is returning to the levels that
existed in the mid-1990s. If it were not able to, illicit-opiate
sources for Europe and western Asia would shift to other grow-
ing areas such as Myanmar, Laos, and Colombia to address con-
sumer need. This has been happening for years as a result of fac-
tors such as drought, war, and law enforcement.
The history of heroin trafficking in the United States during
the past twenty-five years is a prime example of how flexible
heroin sources from one region to another can address market de-
mand. UNODCCP reports that in 1972, the French connection that
had been supplying Turkish heroin to the U.S. market was dis-
banded and Turkey enforced a ban on opium production. In re-
sponse, Mexican heroin was brought in to fill the gap. The Mexican
government soon initiated a process of eradication that led to the
need for another source to be found—Southeast Asian heroin. With
a decline of Mexican and Southeast Asian heroin because of a
drought, combined with the development of the cocaine epidemic,
there was a decreased level of heroin abuse in the United States.
Production, Trafficking, and Consumption
85

For the next fifteen years, from 1979 to 1993, heroin-use lev-
els remained stable at a relatively low level. During that time,
heroin from Southeast Asia, Pakistan, and then more from
Afghanistan dominated the U.S. market. In the early 1990s,
opium poppy cultivation started to develop in Colombia. This,
along with a number of heroin trafficking problems in Southeast
Asia, provided the opportunity for Colombian heroin to make its
entry into the United States, fueling a revived heroin demand.
The UNODCCP reports that during the past thirty years, the U.S.
market has been supplied, in succession, by all the main opium-
producing areas (United Nations Office for Drug Control and
Crime Prevention 2002).
Afghanistan is a focal point for the production and distribu-
tion of opium and heroin. The following description of drug traf-
ficking in the Afghanistan region, including its border countries,
is based on a report prepared in 1999 by a senior military official
of the United Nations Anti-Drug Project “Osh Knot” in Osh, Kyr-
gyzstan (Isralowitz 2002a). More than four years later, violence
and instability in the country and region continue in spite of
large-scale intervention by the United States after September 11.
Over time, the flow of drugs has gone through Iran to
Turkey and then to Europe. In the mid-1980s, however,
Iran proclaimed a jihad, or holy war, against drugs.
The country’s drug legislation was tightened, Islamic
antidrug troops were formed, and a huge stone wall
was built along the state borders. This situation along
with the collapse of the Soviet Union, including a melt-
down of its economy, ethnic clashes, as well as politi-
cal and social upheaval, caused drug barons to move
their trafficking efforts to the central Asian region. This
region includes Tajikistan, which has a 1,200-kilometer
common border with Afghanistan, 800 kilometers of
which are in the Gorno-Badakhshan region. Here, a
major “narco-beachhead” was created in 1991–1993
where one kilo of raw opium could be easily ex-
changed for a pair of soldier’s boots, a pea jacket, or
big iron pot. . . .
Via the mountain road to Khorog (a small city center
of the Gorno-Badakhshan region of Tajikistan) to Osh
(a regional center in southern Kyrgyzstan), “made in
Afghanistan” drugs made their way to the Kyrgyz Re-
public, then to Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Russia, the
86
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

Baltic countries, and Europe. Drugs coming through
the “Osh corridor” could be found in Germany,
Greece, Poland, the Netherlands, and elsewhere
throughout Europe.
By 1995, Osh was a major drug-trading center. Ac-
cording to experts at that time, the estimated weekly
amount of raw opium being dealt with was up to 100
kilograms. One year later, trading had escalated to a
level such that 726 kilograms were seized via the
“overclouded route” of Osh-Khorog, meaning that
vast amounts were being traded and moving west-
ward. With the excess flow of drugs came an increase
of weapons, counterfeit dollars, and corruption in the
region. Although local government, armed forces, and
domestic law enforcement agencies tried to keep the
situation under control, they found themselves over-
whelmed. For this reason, international agencies such
as the UN were called on to help strengthen the an-
tidrug enforcement capacities of Uzbekistan, Kyrgyz-
stan, and Tajikistan.
In order to close the “overclouded trafficking route,”
police and customs operative units were joined with
governmental military troops, special task forces, and
border troops. The narco-dealers, however, were orga-
nizationally superior and much more flexible in terms
of responding to adverse conditions than those pursu-
ing them.
Numerous small side roads along the distance of the
Kyrgyz-Tajik border, more than 800 kilometers
guarded by no one, became the new gateways for
drugs. Heroin began to displace raw opium as the
smuggled substance of choice, and the efforts of
Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan in trying to guard hun-
dreds of kilometers of joint borders with Afghanistan
against the narco-smuggling were futile.
In 1997, opium production in Afghanistan was
nearly 3,000 tons, sufficient to produce almost 300 tons
of heroin. These figures have been reported by UN of-
ficials in a report issued by the International Narcotics
Control Board titled “Taliban. . . . ” Drugs were used to
pay for weapons and food. And according to opera-
tives in the region, heroin-producing laboratories were
Production, Trafficking, and Consumption
87

moved from Iran and Pakistan to borders areas with
Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan.
During the period of Taliban control of the region, its
emissaries fanned out to the small Afghan Pamirs—an
arduous mountain area inhabited by 3,000 ethnic Kyr-
gyz who have been wandering there with cattle for
generations. In order to survive and protect their live-
stock interests, the inhabitants of the region were
forced into the drug business—buying and selling
opium. Meanwhile, those engaged in Afghan narco-
traffic sought new directions for transporting drugs—
for example, through China. The situation around the
China-Afghanistan-Tajikistan borders has been re-
ported to be similar to the wild barter scene that existed
on the Tajik-Afghan border in Gorno-Badakhshan dur-
ing 1991–1993. Over time, Chinese frontier guards ar-
rested opium-smuggling citizens from Tajikistan and
Kyrgyzstan. This situation generated considerable con-
cern among Chinese authorities for two reasons. First,
drugs were spreading into China. Second, there was
the danger of Muslim radicals, “Mojaheddins,” sup-
plying weapons and instructors to people of the “ex-
plosive” Scin-Czyan-Uyghur region of China. Accord-
ing to specialists dealing with the drug problem, there
was concern that international narco-mafia interests
were moving in to gain control of the China Kara-
Korum [Pass] and its seaports on the Pacific Ocean in
order to transport drugs. This would have enabled
them to move cheap Afghan drugs more easily to
major markets in Japan, Europe, and the United States.
With a glut of readily available heroin on the mar-
ket, marijuana and hashish addicts in the region
switched to that substance as their drug of choice. The
problem of heroin drug abuse, common to big cities,
became a rural problem as well. Women became in-
volved as drug couriers, drug-related criminal cases
soared in Kyrgyzstan, and opium/heroin control in
Tajikistan became a source of power for armed groups.
In 1997 to 1998, a large-scale military operation car-
ried out by governmental forces uncovered a huge
amount of opium traffic in the area. Russian border
troops in Tajikistan intercepted 135 narco-smugglers,
88
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

resulting in forty armed clashes and the death of
thirty-five couriers. In retaliation, narco-barons tar-
geted commanders of Russian frontier outposts and
fortified zones for elimination. Because of the deterio-
rating situation, a decision was made to extend the UN
antidrug presence in the region and to allocate $8 mil-
lion for a special antidrug program establishing a se-
curity belt around Afghanistan.
Producing more than 3,000 metric tons of raw
opium annually, Afghanistan moved its drugs through
Uzbekistan via roads, rail, and waterways. Although
some organized and well-equipped narco-smugglers
were neutralized in Uzbekistan, Afghan heroin labora-
tories caused the greatest troubles for drug-control au-
thorities of that country. In 1995 to 1998, Uzbek cus-
toms-service personnel cut off attempts to smuggle 72
tons of opium. Nevertheless, the number of drug
abusers in the country increased rapidly, and like else-
where, the problem spread from population centers to
rural areas, affecting agricultural production.
Regardless of the extent of intervention, including
the removal of the Taliban and the presence of U.S. and
international forces, the region has remained a hotbed
of instability, opium and heroin production, smug-
gling, and huge profit making for a few people. The in-
ternal armed conflict in Afghanistan is lasting. And it
is wrong to believe that this conflict is “internal” only
to Afghanistan. In his January 1998 report to the UN
Security Council, the special UN resident-representa-
tive in Afghanistan at that time said that the presence
and the activity of international humanitarian aid
agencies could not be restored in the country in the
near future because of insufficient security. The mili-
tary presence of Pakistani armed groups in the coun-
try, international terrorists, as well as Osama bin Laden
also aggravate the situation. He expressed his disap-
pointment with results from the efforts of the “six +
two” group—countries neighboring Afghanistan plus
the United States and Russia.
Regarding consumption, opiates including heroin are the
main problem drugs in the world. Those who use and abuse opi-
ates make up about two-thirds to three-quarters of the people in
Production, Trafficking, and Consumption
89

need of treatment. In the United States, more people are admitted
for treatment of opiates than for cocaine abuse.
The estimate of opiate users worldwide is about 13 million
people—half of whom are in Asia, mainly in the areas of
Afghanistan and Myanmar. The total number of opiate users in
Europe is estimated to be about 4 million, accounting for 30 per-
cent of the global number. The bulk of opiate use in Eastern Eu-
rope is found in countries of the former Soviet Union. The esti-
mated rate of opiate use in Australia is comparable to that in
Europe—about 0.62 percent of the population age fifteen and
above.
In Europe, details about heroin use include:
•
Known users are a largely aging population with
serious health, social, and psychiatric problems.
•
Heroin experience overall remains low (1 to 2 percent
in young adults), and school surveys show pupils are
highly cautious about using the substance.
•
Some countries report anecdotal evidence of increased
heroin smoking among young people, and some school
surveys reveal greater experimentation.
•
Heroin use is reported among young heavy
“recreational” users of amphetamines, Ecstasy, and
other drugs. Other high-risk groups include
marginalized minorities, homeless young people,
institutionalized youth and young offenders, prisoners
(women in particular), and sex workers.
•
New clients entering treatment for heroin use are less
likely to inject and more likely to smoke the drug than
clients returning to treatment.
•
Numbers of heron seizures and the quantities involved
are stable across the European Union, although
variations exist among countries. (European
Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction 2000)
In the United States, since the mid-1990s, the prevalence of
lifetime heroin use increased for both youths and young adults.
From 1995 to 2002, the rate among youths aged twelve to seven-
teen increased from 0.1 to 0.4 percent; among young adults aged
eighteen to twenty-five, the rate rose from 0.8 to 1.6 percent. Dur-
ing the latter half of the 1990s, the annual number of heroin initi-
ates rose to a level not reached since the late 1970s. In 1974, there
90
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

were an estimated 246,000 heroin initiates. Between 1988 and
1994, the annual number of new users ranged from 28,000 to
80,000. Between 1995 and 2001, the number of new heroin users,
annually, was consistently greater than 100,000.
Results from the 2002 National Survey on Drug Use and
Health show that there are an estimated 166,000 current heroin
users (generally defined in terms of use during the past thirty
days) in the United States (0.1 percent of the population). This
number reflects an increase from the 123,000 reported in the 2001
National Household Survey and the 130,000 in 2000. Other details
about heroin use in the United States show that in 2000, about 2.4
million (1.1 percent) of the 218 million persons represented in the
National Household Survey on Drug Abuse reported heroin use
(that is, smoking, snorting or sniffing, or injecting) in their life-
time, and 308,000 persons (0.1 percent) used the substance in the
past year. In the total population, males more than females and
blacks more than whites and Hispanics were likely to report life-
time use of heroin. Lifetime use was higher among unemployed
persons than those employed. Those aged twelve to twenty-five
were more likely to report past-year heroin use than were those
twenty-six or older. Heroin/morphine was the top-ranking drug
among drug-related deaths reported to the Drug Abuse Warning
Network in twenty-one metropolitan areas in 2000. Heroin/mor-
phine was the third most commonly mentioned drug, constitut-
ing 16 percent of the hospital ED episodes.
Throughout the United States, the following routes of heroin
use have been reported. Injecting remains the most common
route of administration among heroin addicts in the majority of
cities; however, intranasal use is popular in many locations.
“Monkey water” and “shebanging” describe heroin nose drops.
The drug is dissolved in water and then either sprayed up the
nose using a squeeze bottle or squirted up the nose using a sy-
ringe. Due to high purity, snorting is the common starting route
of administration for new and younger users, but progressions to
injection are widely reported due to the increased effect from a
given amount of heroin. There are reports of younger adults
burning heroin in aluminum foil and inhaling the fumes—known
as “chasing the dragon”—or snorting the powder form. These al-
ternative methods of using heroin are seen in the sex-industry
business and topless bars. Smoking heroin remains relatively
rare, accounting for 1 to 3 percent of heroin hospital ED admis-
sions in most eastern and central parts of the country.
Production, Trafficking, and Consumption
91

Cocaine 
Primary cultivation and production locations for coca leaf, the
source for cocaine hydrochloride and crack, are Colombia, Peru,
and Bolivia. In terms of production, Colombia produces about 74
percent, Peru 18 percent, and Bolivia 8 percent of cocaine, which to-
tals 827 metric tons according to 2001 estimates. In these countries,
an estimated 1 million people, including farmers and laborers,
grow coca leaves and process and export cocaine products. At the
growing and harvesting stages, those involved are simple farmers
and rural laborers who are out to earn an income by growing a crop
long consumed without great danger. For the most part, poor
people involved with coca production know that they are breaking
the law, but that is unfortunately common in societies with large in-
formal sectors that have been forced by governmental rules to
work illegally. The income from the cocaine industry grew in the
late 1970s and early 1980s. Such a rise was associated with the deep
economic troubles of Bolivia and Peru in terms of governmental
deficits and rampant inflation. Avicious cycle was created for these
two countries when the price for coca leaf soared while the legal
economy was in a state of decline. In order to temporarily hide con-
ditions, the Bolivian and Peruvian governments created massive
overemployment in the government and in loss-making state-
owned enterprises. With the major population centers no longer
able to absorb migrants from the overcrowded and resource-poor
highlands, people from those areas had little choice but to move to
the coca-growing regions to grow coca (U.S. Department of State,
Office of International Information Agency 1992).
Cocaine trafficking is concentrated in the Americas and Eu-
rope. More than 90 percent of all the cocaine seized in the world
is in the Americas—about two-thirds of the seizures in that region
equally shared between the United States and Colombia. It is es-
timated that 38 percent of the global supply of cocaine was inter-
cepted in 2000. The need to bring cocaine (as well as other illicit
drugs) to its principal market, the United States, has generated a
considerable amount of ingenious illegal import activity. For ex-
ample, one courier had a half of pound of cocaine surgically im-
planted under the skin of each of his thighs. The cocaine was di-
vided into four one-square-inch packages of one-quarter pound
each. Cocaine has been carried across the border in Arizona on
the backs of mules or horses and on foot. Variable amounts of co-
caine have been containerized and shipped out of Ecuador with
92
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

such products as shrimp, cacao, and bananas. Tons of cocaine
have been shipped from Venezuela to Miami inside concrete fenc-
ing posts, in false-bottomed metal boxes labeled as toilet seats
and bathroom sinks, in counterfeit bottles of Pony Malta de
Bavaria (a nonalcoholic malt drink from Colombia), in 55-gallon
drums of guava pulp with the cocaine in plastic packets inside the
fruit, in cardboard boxes packed with canned fruit stuffed with
cocaine, in anchovy cans shipped from Argentina, and in stuffed
teddy bears, Peruvian handicrafts, and cans marked “asparagus.”
Panamanian cocaine smugglers have developed a technology
that combines cocaine with vinyl to produce a material that has
been used in making luggage and sneakers. The cocaine is sepa-
rated from the vinyl after reaching its destination. Cocaine has
been smuggled in suitcases hidden behind interior panels of air-
planes, hidden in a secret tank within the fuel tank of a cabin
cruiser, and packed in 1-kilogram lots and placed inside a plastic
pipe that was bolted to the bottom of a banana boat docked in the
harbor of Bridgeport, Connecticut. It has been sewn into the inte-
rior roof of a family station wagon and transported during a fam-
ily vacation, in a false compartment in the floor of a mobile home,
and in the gas tank of a car equipped with a baffle that made the
left side a separate compartment. With the disintegration of the
former Soviet Union in the late 1980s came opportunities to ex-
pand Russian-speaking drug operations throughout the world. In
one incidence, Colombia drug traffickers considered the purchase
of a Russian-made submarine to transport cocaine and other ille-
gal drugs (Isralowitz 2002b).
Worldwide, cocaine is the second most common problem
drug in terms of treatment demand. It is the most widespread
problem drug in the Americas, and the second or third most com-
mon problem in several countries throughout Europe. Approxi-
mately 13.4 million people, or 0.3 percent of the global popula-
tion, are affected by cocaine use. About 70 percent of all cocaine
used in the Americas and half of the total number of cocaine users
worldwide are in North America. Abuse levels in the United
States are three times higher than they are in Europe. Cocaine
abuse in Eastern Europe and in Asia is relatively low (National
Institute on Drug Abuse 2001).
In Europe, details about cocaine use include:
•
Although cocaine is less commonly used than
amphetamines or Ecstasy, its use is rising.
Production, Trafficking, and Consumption
93

•
Depending on the country, between 1 and 6 percent of
those aged sixteen to thirty-four and 1 to 2 percent of
schoolchildren have tried cocaine at least once,
although some surveys show levels of up to 4 percent
among fifteen to sixteen year olds.
•
Higher levels of use are found among socially outgoing
and employed young adults in urban centers.
•
Cocaine tends to be used experimentally or
intermittently and is usually sniffed in powder form.
•
Many clients treated for heroin use also use cocaine
either intravenously or smoked as “crack.”
•
Severe problems associated with smoking “crack” have
been identified, particularly among female sex workers.
•
The proportion of clients seeking treatment for cocaine
use is increasing in many countries. How much this is
linked to heroin use or has developed from heavy
recreational use of other drugs is unclear. (European
Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction 2000)
After marijuana, cocaine is the second most commonly used
illegal substance in the United States. In 2000, 25 million persons,
or about 10 percent of the country’s population over the age of 12
years, reported cocaine use sometime in their life; approximately
3.3 million reported use in the past year, and 1.2 million reported
current use (that is, within the past thirty days). About 2 percent
of the population, or 5.3 million persons, used crack cocaine in
their lifetime; 721,000 persons used it in the past year; and 265,000
used the substance in the past month. In 2002, an estimated 2 mil-
lion persons (0.9 percent) were current (within the past thirty
days) cocaine users, 567,000 of whom used crack during the same
time period (0.2 percent) (Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration 2001; Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration 2003b).
From 1965 to 1967, only 0.1 percent of youths had ever used
cocaine, but rates rose throughout the 1970s and 1980s, reaching
2.2 percent in 1987. A period of decline followed in the early 1990s,
after which the trend reversed, reaching a peak of 2.7 percent in
2002. Rates of cocaine use show substantial variation by age, with
the highest for the young-adult age group (18 to 25 years). The
percentage of youths aged 12 to 17 who had ever used cocaine in-
creased slightly from 2001 to 2002 (2.3 to 2.7 percent). The per-
centage of young adults aged 18 to 25 who had ever used cocaine
94
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

was less than 1 percent during the mid-1960s, but rose steadily
throughout the 1970s and early 1980s, reaching 17.9 percent in
1984. By 1996, the rate had dropped to 10.1 percent but increased
to 14.9 percent in 2001 and rose to 15.4 percent in 2002 (Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 2003b).
Incidence of cocaine use generally rose throughout the 1970s
to a peak in 1980 (1.7 million new users) and subsequently de-
clined until 1991 (0.7 million new users). Cocaine initiation
steadily increased during the 1990s, reaching 1.2 million in 2001.
Age-specific incidence rates have generally mirrored the overall
incidence trends, with greater initiation among adults than
among youths under 18. Approximately 70 percent of cocaine ini-
tiates in 2001 were age 18 or older. Since 1975, males have gener-
ally composed the majority of cocaine initiates. In 2001, there
were 0.7 million new male users and 0.5 million new female
users. The average age of cocaine initiates rose from 18.6 years in
1968 to 23.8 years in 1990 and subsequently declined to approxi-
mately 21 years from 1995 to 2001.
Lifetime, past-year, and past-month cocaine use is more com-
mon among males than females; when broken down by age, how-
ever, gender differences are not always found. Although female
cocaine users account for between 17 and 30 percent of the mor-
tality demographics in major cities, males account for the major-
ity of deaths, emergency department mentions, and cocaine treat-
ment admissions in all locations throughout the United States.
Overall, and for those aged 12 to 25 and 26 to 34, whites have a
higher lifetime use of cocaine than blacks and Hispanics. Also,
there appear to be no differences in race/ethnicity for past-year
use, but past-month use tends to be higher among blacks and
Hispanics than whites. In the total population, past-year and
past-month cocaine use tends to be more likely to occur among
those with less than a high school education than those who had
attended or graduated from college. Unemployed adults use co-
caine at higher rates than employed adults.
Based on hospital emergency department data, cocaine/
crack cocaine was reported in 29 percent of the drug episodes,
compared with 16 percent for heroin/morphine, 16 percent for
marijuana/hashish, and 2 percent for methamphetamine/speed.
By comparison, mentions of alcohol in combination with other
drugs occurred in 34 percent of the ED episodes in 2000. Other in-
formation about U.S. cocaine use shows that new youthful cocaine
users are not for the most part showing up in standard indicators.
Production, Trafficking, and Consumption
95

Mortality demographics continue to reflect an older cocaine-using
population. Likewise, data continue to suggest an aging cohort of
cocaine users with a few exceptions that bear watching.
Throughout the United States, the following routes of co-
caine and crack use have been reported. Smoking, typically crack,
is the dominant route of administration among primary cocaine
treatment admissions. Needle-exchange workers in major cities
on the East Coast see some injecting drug users (IDUs) dissolving
crack cocaine in vinegar or lemon juice to be used most often in
combination with heroin (known as “speedballing”). In Chicago,
imposed drug-paraphernalia laws to eliminate the sale of crack
pipes have caused crack (rock) users to improvise, using cans or
bottles to smoke the drug; smokers commonly use a car antenna
and a piece of scouring pad as a screen to smoke rock. The smok-
ing of crack with metal “straight shooters” that are usually car an-
tennas may cause problems with the lungs due to the metal alloys
from the antennas. Crack/marijuana combinations are reported
in some areas. For example, “bazooka” is crack and tobacco in a
joint. Some users dip crack in formaldehyde to produce a more
intense high (National Institute on Drug Abuse 1996; National In-
stitute on Drug Abuse 2001).
Illicit-Drug Overviews
Many aspects of the illicit-drug problem warrant attention. The
following overviews of disease, terrorism, and youth show the
connection between illicit drugs and other problems, including
health, crime, security, and social well-being.
Drug Use, Disease, and Ground-Level Zero
for the Problems—the Former Soviet Union
In 1984, research groups led by Robert Gallo of the U.S. National
Cancer Institute, Luc Montagnier at the Pasteur Institute in Paris,
and Jay Levy at the University of California at San Francisco all
identified a retrovirus as the cause of AIDS. Today, it is widely ac-
knowledged that the spread of HIV/AIDS as well as hepatitis C
and other blood-borne viruses is in part linked to drug use, in
particular injection drug use. A cure for these diseases remains
elusive; however, considerable efforts through prevention, educa-
tion, treatment, and rehabilitation are being made to try to curb
96
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

infection. For illicit-drug users, policies and programs tend to
focus on the need for demand-and-supply reduction of drugs, ed-
ucation, and measures that reduce or eliminate the need to share
nonsterile injecting equipment.
At the end of 2002, an estimated 42 million people were liv-
ing with HIV/AIDS. In that year alone, 5 million people became
infected with HIV, of which more than 95 percent lived in devel-
oping countries. The epidemic has claimed an estimated 3.1 mil-
lion lives, and 33 percent of the people living with HIV/AIDS are
between the ages of fifteen and twenty-four. Although sub-
Saharan Africa remains the most affected region, accounting for
about 70 percent of people living with HIV/AIDS, considerable
attention is being given to the former Soviet Union where the
spread of injection drug use is increasing and the fact that injec-
tion of a substance directly into the bloodstream is by far the most
efficient mode of HIV transmission, much more so than through
sexual intercourse. The chances of contracting HIV infection
through the injection route increase when injection drug users
(IDUs) share contaminated injecting equipment, solutions, pots,
or containers (UNAIDS/WHO 2002; UNAIDS 2000).
In the region of Eastern Europe and central Asia, about 1 per-
cent or more of all adults are injecting illicit drugs such as opiates
and amphetamines, and many of these people have become in-
fected with HIV. In 2002, there were an estimated 250,000 new in-
fections in that region, most of them IDUs (Dehne et al. 1999; UN-
AIDS/WHO 2002).
In the Russian Federation, where estimates of the number of
IDUs range between 1 million and 2.5 million, the HIV epidemic
emerged only in 1996. Approximately 90 percent of the new HIV
infections are IDUs, with more than 100,000 infections reported in
the course of 2001. Almost 60 percent of HIV infections in Ukraine
are related to injection drug use. Until recently, the prevalence of
HIV infection has been low in central Asia. Now the problem is ev-
ident and growing in Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kyrgyzs-
tan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan where there has been a considerable
increase of injection drug use with cheap opium heroin originating
from Afghanistan and its neighboring countries. For example, in
Uzbekistan, in the first six months of 2002, new HIV infections
nearly equaled the number that had been recorded in the whole of
the previous decade. Some recent city-based studies conducted in
the Eastern European and central Asian region report that many fe-
male IDUs are involved in commercial sex (UNAIDS/WHO 2002).
Illicit-Drug Overviews
97

Both hepatitis C virus (HCV) and hepatitis B virus (HBV) in-
fections are highly prevalent among IDUs. In Europe and the for-
mer Soviet Union, it has been reported that depending on location,
between 40 and 90 percent of the injecting subpopulations moni-
tored are infected with the virus (World Health Organization
2000a). Data on HBV among IDUs indicate prevalence varying be-
tween 20 and 60 percent (World Health Organization 2000b).
HIV and tuberculosis are closely linked. In a joint press re-
lease issued in 2001, the United Nations AIDS Program and World
Health Organization reported that about 13 million people world-
wide are infected with both HIV and TB. Also, up to 50 percent of
those people living with HIV can expect to develop TB, which is
the most common cause of death in persons with HIV. HIV se-
verely weakens the immune system and makes people highly
vulnerable to diseases such as TB (U.S. Information Service 2001).
Among infectious diseases, TB remains the second leading
killer in the world, with more than 2 million TB-related deaths
each year. Nearly one-third of the entire population of the world
is infected with this bacterium that is easily spread through the
respiratory route—that is, when it is present in a patient’s lungs,
it can be passed on to another person through coughing (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention 2002). TB is most prevalent in
crowded low-income areas with substandard health conditions,
and it is linked to drug users and alcoholics who have a history of
crime, imprisonment, and unemployment (Migliori and Am-
brosetti 1998). Drug users are two to six times more likely to con-
tract TB than nonusers, and compared to other people with TB,
IDUs are more likely to develop the disease in multiple organs
and body sites, rather than only in the lungs (National Institute
on Drug Abuse 2001).
A serious form of the disease is multidrug-resistant tubercu-
losis (MDR TB). The American Lung Association reports that “re-
sistance to one or several forms of treatment occurs when the bac-
teria develops the ability to withstand antibiotic attack and relay
that ability to their progeny” (2003). Since that entire strain of bac-
teria inherits this capacity to resist the effects of various treat-
ments, resistance can spread from one person to another. On an
individual basis, however, inadequate treatment or improper use
of the antituberculosis medications remains an important cause of
drug-resistant tuberculosis. The World Health Organization esti-
mates that up to 50 million persons worldwide may have been in-
fected with drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis in 2001.
98
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

In the former Soviet Union, deteriorating conditions, includ-
ing poverty, unemployment, inadequate hygiene and heath care,
and a lack of preventive health education, have provided fertile
ground for the rise of injection drug use and the spread of HIV
and tuberculosis (Malinowska-Sempruch 2002). Referred to as
“Ebola with wings,” tuberculosis has increased sharply in Russia
and central Asia during the past decade. The occurrence has more
than doubled—from 34 per 100,000 in 1992 to 90 per 100,000 in
2000. In contrast, the U.S. rate is 5.8 cases per 100,000. A reason tu-
berculosis is common among IDUs in the former Soviet Union is
that many of them have a history of incarceration in poorly ven-
tilated prisons where inmates fall ill with TB that tends to be re-
sistant to medications.
On April 4, 2003, the World Bank announced that it had ap-
proved a $150 million loan to the Russian Federation for its Tu-
berculosis and AIDS Control Project. According to the World
Bank director for Russia, “the rapidly growing number of people
infected with TB and HIV pose daunting challenges to the coun-
try’s social and economic development” (World Bank 2003).
Illicit Drugs and Terrorism: The Connection,
Cost, and Need for Change
The distribution of drugs goes hand in hand with terrorism. Ter-
rorism is financed, in large part, by the production and sale of il-
legal drugs such as opium, heroin, and cocaine. Terrorist organi-
zations need money to operate, and for the most part their
interests are fueled through illegal funding sources, particularly
those related to the production and trafficking of illicit drugs. As
noted earlier in this chapter, drugs are used as a monetary equiv-
alent to pay for weapons and support of terrorist activity—in
Afghanistan, the Bekaa Valley in Lebanon, as well as elsewhere
throughout the world where cultivators and tribal drug lords
working with militias have built up a thriving business generat-
ing billions of dollars each year in illegal revenues.
Despite a year-old ban by the Taliban on growing poppy,
which may have been a calculated ploy to control the world mar-
ket prices, September 11, large-scale bombing of the area, and
subsequent relief and construction efforts led by the United
States, Afghanistan and the region remain the number-one pro-
ducers of opium and heroin in the world. And the revenues from
this activity continue to support terrorist activity.
Illicit-Drug Overviews
99

A new national priority and resolve are sweeping through
the United States to address terrorism. It has been pointed out
that this mission will not be accomplished quickly—this is not
Desert Storm; it will take time, patience, and resources. Such re-
sources will be drawn, in part, by rechanneling governmental
support for human services and by staff reduction. New York
City alone is facing a potential deficit of $4 billion to $6 billion in
a $39 billion budget. As pointed out by Felix Rohatyn, chairman
of the New York–based Municipal Corporation from 1975 to 1993,
“Is it reasonable, under existing circumstances, to believe that the
city and the state can close budget gaps of possibly $6 billion in
one fiscal year and maintain the city as a viable economic and so-
cial entity? . . . It would be impossible to do so as a practical mat-
ter. . . . [L]ayoffs throughout the declining economy, both reduc-
ing revenues and increasing costs for state and local
governments, will undo many of the positive effects of any fed-
eral stimulus program proposed by President Bush” (2001).
Throughout the world, there is a need to address the problem
of terrorism, just as there is a need to address the problem of
drugs and disease—problems that are intertwined, requiring pol-
icy that supports rapid responses and effective results. Reform of
present governmental policy and action should not be viewed as
an admission of failure in the War on Drugs; rather, it should be
considered a much needed step toward responsible decision mak-
ing to move the United States and other nations forward at a very
challenging time. It is hoped that progressive and open-minded
leadership will have the courage and steadfastness to make
changes that are needed, those that respond to the needs of mil-
lions of people rather than the ideological, political, and eco-
nomic interests of a few (Isralowitz 2002a).
Youths and Illicit-Drug Use in the United
States: Attitudes and Behavior 
The following examination of illicit-drug use and youth in the
United States is drawn from the National Survey on Drug Use
and Health (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Ad-
ministration 2003b). It provides an examination of measures re-
lated to the prevention of illicit-substance use among youths aged
twelve to seventeen. These measures include perceptions of risk,
availability of substances (cigarettes, alcohol, and illicit drugs),
perceived parental disapproval of substance use, attitudes to-
100
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

ward school and religion, participation in youth activities, in-
volvement in delinquent behavior, and exposure to substance
abuse–prevention messages and programs.
Perceptions of Risk
Youths were asked how much they thought people risk harming
themselves physically and in other ways when they use various
substances. Response choices in the survey were “great risk,”
“moderate risk,” “slight risk,” or “no risk.” Only 32.4 percent of
youths indicated that smoking marijuana once a month was a
great risk. A higher percentage of youths perceived a great risk in
using cocaine once a month (50.5 percent). In contrast, smoking
one or more packs of cigarettes per day was cited as a great risk
by 63.1 percent of youths. About three-fifths of all youths (62.2
percent) thought that having four or five drinks of an alcoholic
beverage nearly every day was a great risk. Youths of different
ages reported different patterns of perceived risk from substance
use. The percentage of youths who perceived smoking marijuana
once a month as a great risk decreased with age. Specifically, 42
percent of youths aged twelve and thirteen and 24.1 percent of
youths aged sixteen and seventeen perceived smoking marijuana
once a month as a great risk. In contrast, the percentage of youths
who perceived using cocaine once a month as a great risk in-
creased with age. Specifically, 42.8 percent of youths aged twelve
and thirteen and 59.2 percent of those aged sixteen and seventeen
perceived a great risk of using cocaine once a month. Among
youths indicating that “smoking marijuana once a month” was a
“great risk,” only 1.9 percent indicated that they had used mari-
juana in the past month. However, among youths who indicated
“moderate, slight, or no risk,” the prevalence rate was 11.3 per-
cent—almost six times larger.
Availability
Approximately one in six youths (16.7 percent) reported that
someone selling drugs in the past month had approached them.
Those who had been approached reported a much higher rate of
past-month use of an illicit drug than those who had not been ap-
proached (36.2 and 6.7 percent, respectively). Slightly more than
half of youths aged twelve to seventeen indicated that it would be
fairly or very easy to obtain marijuana if they wanted some (55
percent). Yet the ease of obtaining marijuana varied greatly by
age. Only 26 percent of twelve and thirteen year olds indicated
Illicit-Drug Overviews
101

that it would be fairly or very easy to obtain marijuana; 79 percent
of those sixteen and seventeen years of age indicated that it
would be fairly or very easy to obtain this substance. The per-
centages of youths reporting that it was fairly or very easy to ob-
tain specific drugs were 25 percent for cocaine, 19.4 percent for
LSD, and 15.8 percent for heroin. The percentage of youths who
reported that it would be fairly or very easy to obtain marijuana
was similar for youths who lived in large metropolitan areas (55.2
percent), small metropolitan areas (55.5 percent), and nonmetro-
politan areas (53.6 percent). There were some statistically signifi-
cant differences across metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas
in the percentages of youths reporting that it would be easy to ob-
tain cocaine, heroin, and LSD; however, these differences were
typically quite small.
Parental Disapproval of Substance Use 
Youths who perceived that their parents would “strongly disap-
prove” of their use of illicit substances were much less likely to
use those substances than youths who perceived that their par-
ents would only “somewhat disapprove” or “neither approve nor
disapprove.” For example, among youths who perceived that
their parents would strongly disapprove of smoking one or more
packs of cigarettes a day (89.5 percent of youths), only 9.4 percent
had used cigarettes in the past month compared with 44 percent
of youths who perceived that their parents would not strongly
disapprove. Most youths (89.1 percent) reported that their par-
ents would strongly disapprove of their trying marijuana once or
twice. Among these youths, only 5.5 percent had used marijuana
in the past month. However, among youths who perceived that
their parents would only somewhat disapprove or neither ap-
prove nor disapprove of their trying marijuana, 30.2 percent re-
ported past-month use of marijuana.
Attitudes about School
Youths were asked whether they liked or kind of liked school,
whether assigned schoolwork was meaningful and important,
whether their courses at school during the past year were very or
somewhat interesting, whether the things learned in school dur-
ing the past year would be important later in life, and whether
teachers always or sometimes in the past year let them know that
they were doing a good job with schoolwork. Youths who had
these types of positive attitudes about their school were less likely
102
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

to use substances than other students. For example, 78.8 percent
of youths reported that they “liked or kind of liked going to
school.” Among those youths, 9.3 percent had used an illicit drug
in the past month; however, among youths who either “didn’t
like it very much” or “hated it,” 20.8 percent had used an illicit
drug in the past month.
Delinquent Behavior
Approximately one-fifth (20.6 percent) of youths aged twelve to
seventeen reported having gotten into a serious fight at school or
work one or more times during the past year. Taking part in a
group-against-group fight was reported by 15.9 percent of youths.
Other delinquent activities included carrying a handgun (3.3 per-
cent), selling illegal drugs (4.4 percent), stealing (or trying to steal)
something worth more than fifty dollars (4.9 percent), and attack-
ing others with the intent to seriously hurt them (7.8 percent).
Youths who self-reported delinquent behavior during the past
year were more likely to use illicit drugs in the past month than
other youths. Specifically, youths reported the following levels of
using an illicit drug in the past month depending on whether they
had engaged in the delinquent behavior: getting into a serious
fight at school or work (20.7 percent versus 9.3 percent); carrying
a handgun (34.6 versus 10.8 percent); selling illegal drugs (68.8
percent versus 9 percent); and stealing or trying to steal something
worth fifty dollars or more (43.8 versus 9.9 percent).
Participation in Religious and Other Activities
Among youths who attended religious services twenty-five times
or more in the past year (33 percent of youths), 7.1 percent had
used an illicit drug in the past month. Among youths attending
less often or not at all, 13.9 percent reported past-month use.
Among youths who agreed or strongly agreed that religious be-
liefs are a very important part of their life (78.2 percent of all
youths), 9.2 percent had used an illicit drug in the past month. In
contrast, among youths who “disagreed or strongly disagreed”
with the statement, 20.5 percent had used an illicit drug. Among
youths who participated in two or more youth activities, such as
band, sports, student government, or dance lessons (84.6 percent
of youths), only 10.7 percent had used an illicit drug in the past
month. On the other hand, among those youths indicating one or
no youth activities in the past year, 17.3 percent had used an illicit
drug in the past month.
Illicit-Drug Overviews
103

Exposure to Prevention Messages and Programs
In 2002, a majority (83.2 percent) of youths aged twelve to seven-
teen reported having seen or heard alcohol- or drug-prevention
messages outside of school in the past year. Youths who had seen
or heard these messages indicated a slightly lower past-month use
of an illicit drug (11.3 percent) than youths who had not seen or
heard these types of messages (13.2 percent). Among youths aged
twelve to seventeen who were enrolled in school during the past
twelve months, 78.8 percent reported having seen or heard drug-
or alcohol-prevention messages in school during that period. Of
those indicating they had seen or heard these messages, the rate of
past-month illicit-drug use was 10.9 percent compared with 14.6
percent for the remaining youths. More than half of all youths
aged twelve to seventeen (58.1 percent) indicated that they had
talked with at least one parent in the past year about the dangers
of tobacco, alcohol, or drug use. The prevalence rate for past-
month use of an illicit drug was 11.3 percent among this group and
12.1 percent among those who had not had this parental discus-
sion. Youths were asked if they had participated in various special
programs dealing with substance use and other related problems
in the past year. These programs and the percentage of youths par-
ticipating were problem-solving, communication-skills, or self-
esteem groups (23.5 percent); violence-prevention programs (17.1
percent); alcohol-, tobacco-, or drug-prevention programs outside
of school (12.7 percent); pregnancy- or sexually transmitted dis-
ease (STD)–prevention programs (13.9 percent); and programs for
dealing with alcohol or drug use (5.5 percent).
References
American Lung Association. 2003. “Multidrug-Resistant Tuberculosis
Fact Sheet.” Available at http://www.lungusa.org/diseases/mdrtbfac.
html (accessed April 1, 2003).
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2002. “World TB Day 2002.”
Available at http://www.cdc.gov/nchstp/tb (accessed March 24, 2003).
Clines, F. 2001. “Fighting Appalachia’s Top Cash Crop, Marijuana.” New
York Times, February 28.
Dehne, K., J. Grund, L. Kodakevich, and Y. Kobyshcha. 1999. “The
HIV/AIDS Epidemic among Drug Injectors in Eastern Europe: Patterns,
Trends and Determinants.” Journal of Drug Issues 29, no. 4: 393–402.
104
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction. 2000. An-
nual Report on the State of the Drug Problem in the European Union. Lisbon:
European Monitoring Centre.
Isralowitz, R. 2002a. “Drugs and Terrorism: The Need for Immediate Pol-
icy Change.” Journal of Social Work Practice in the Addictions 2, no. 2: 97–99.
———. 2002b. Drug Use, Policy and Management. Westport, CT: Auburn
House.
JTO—Join Together Online. 2001a. “CASA Releases New Study on Drugs
in Schools.” Boston University School of Public Health. Available at
http://www.jointogether.org/sa/news/alerts/reader/0,1854,545651,00.
html (accessed September 5, 2001).
———. 2001b. “U.S. Official Says to Expect Costly Columbian Drug
War.” Boston University School of Public Health. Available at http://
www.jointogether.org/sa/news/reader/0%2C1030%2C267034%2C00.ht
ml (accessed April 6, 2001).
Kazancigil, A., and C. Milani. 2002. Globalisation, Drugs and Criminalisa-
tion: Final Research Report on Brazil, China, India and Mexico. New York:
United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention.
Malinowska-Sempruch, K. 2002. “From Concern to Action: Harm Re-
duction as the Key to HIV Prevention and Treatment Efforts in Eastern
Europe and the Former Soviet Union.” Available at http://www.soros.
org/initiatives/ihrd/articles_publications/articles/unaids_20020709
(accessed January 21, 2004).
Migliori, G., and M. Ambrosetti. 1998. “Epidemiology of Tuberculosis in
Europe.” Mondali Archives of Chest Diseases 53, no. 6: 681–687.
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). 1996. Epidemiologic Trends in
Drug Abuse. Vol. 1: Highlights and Executive Summary. Rockville, MD: Na-
tional Institutes of Health.
———. 2000. Epidemiologic Trends in Drug Abuse. Vol. 1: Highlights and Ex-
ecutive Summary. Rockville, MD: National Institutes of Health.
———. 2001. Epidemiologic Trends in Drug Abuse. Vol. 1: Highlights and Ex-
ecutive Summary. Rockville, MD: National Institutes of Health.
———. 2002. Epidemiologic Trends in Drug Abuse. Vol. 1: Highlights and Ex-
ecutive Summery. Rockville, MD: National Institutes of Health.
Rohatyn, F. 2001. “Fiscal Disaster the City Can’t Face Alone.” New York
Times, October 9, A25.
Schlosser, E. 1997. “More Reefer Madness.” Atlantic Monthly (April) 4:
90–102.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA). 2001. Summary of Findings from the 2000 National Household
References
105

Survey on Drug Abuse. Rockville, MD: United States Department of
Health and Human Services.
———. 2003a. Emergency Department Trends From the Drug Abuse Warning
Network, Final Estimates 1995–2002. Rockville, MD: United States Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services.
———. 2003b. Results from the 2002 National Survey on Drug Use and
Health: National Findings. Rockville, MD: United States Department of
Health and Human Services.
U.S. Department of State, Office of International Information Agency.
1992. Consequences of Illegal Drug Trade: The Negative Economic, Political,
and Social Effects of Cocaine in Latin America. Washington, DC: U.S. De-
partment of State, Office of International Information Agency.
U.S. Information Service. 2001. “WHO and UNAIDS Emphasize Link be-
tween AIDS and TB: Health Agencies Warn of Potential for TB Cases to
Double.” Available at http://www.wwaegis.com/news/isis/2001/
US010406. htm (accessed April 24, 2001).
UNAIDS. 2000. Report on the Global HIV/AIDS Epidemic. Geneva: UN-
AIDS/WHO.
UNAIDS/WHO. 2002. AIDS Epidemic Update. Geneva: UNAIDS/WHO.
United Nations Economic and Social Council, Commission on Narcotic
Drugs. 2003. World Situation with Regard to Drug Abuse. Vienna: Commis-
sion on Narcotic Drugs.
United Nations General Assembly Political Declaration. 1998. “Declara-
tion on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction.” Available at
http://www.un.org/ga/20special/demand.htm (accessed January 13,
2004).
United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention (ODCCP).
2002. Global Illicit Drug Trends. New York: ODCCP Studies on Drugs and
Crime.
Willard, J., and C. Schoenborn. 1995. “Relationship between Cigarette
Smoking and Other Unhealthy Behaviors among Our Nation’s Youth:
United States, 1992.” In Advance Data no. 263. Washington, DC: National
Center for Health Statistics, April 24.
World Bank. 2003. “Tackling Tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS in Russia.”
April 7. Available at http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTER-
NAL/NEWS/0,contentMDK:20102994~menuPK:34457~pagePK:34370~
piPK:34424~theSitePK:4607,00.html (accessed January 13, 2004).
World Health Organization. 2000a. “Fact Sheet no. 164: Hepatitis C.” Rev.
October. Geneva: WHO.
———. 2000b. “Fact Sheet no. 204: Hepatitis B.” Rev. October. Geneva:
WHO.
106
Illicit-Drug Use: What’s Happening?

4
Tobacco and Alcohol: What
Are the Facts and Data? 
M
ore illness and death occur from the use and abuse of two
legal drugs, tobacco and alcohol, than all illegal substances
combined. In this chapter, facts, data, and discussion are
presented about these two drugs of mass destruction. Among the
issues examined are female and adolescent use of both sub-
stances, the role of advertising and big business with tobacco,
infant alcohol syndrome, binge drinking, and driving while
under the influence of alcohol.
Tobacco
Tobacco is a drug, and cigarettes as well as smokeless tobacco
products are delivery systems for nicotine, which is an addictive
substance. Nicotine, found in the smoke of cigarettes, cigars, and
pipes as well as in smokeless tobacco products, can, through re-
peated use, result in addiction. Cigarette smoking allows nicotine
to be inhaled through the lungs. For smokeless tobacco or envi-
ronmental tobacco exposure, the nicotine is absorbed through the
mucosal lining of the mouth or nose or through the skin. Cigar
and pipe smokers do not usually inhale the smoke, so the nicotine
is also absorbed through the mucosal membranes of the mouth.
After inhalation or absorption, nicotine passes rapidly into the ar-
terial bloodstream and then into the brain (Benowitz 1996).
Tobacco use is considered the most important preventable
cause of death and disease in the United States and the world.
107

Based on U.S. government and World Health Organization
(WHO) estimates, tobacco-related disease causes annually 450,000
deaths in the United States, 500,000 deaths in the European Union
countries, and about 2 million deaths in other countries through-
out the world with a high proportion coming from people living
in the poorest areas. The Switzerland Addiction Research Institute
(2003) claims that tobacco causes 4.9 million deaths annually. The
WHO believes that 10 million people are expected to die each year
from smoking-related illnesses by the year 2030, with 70 percent of
these deaths coming in developing countries.
The U.S. National Household Survey on Drug Abuse in 1999
shows that 67 million people aged twelve or older were current
tobacco users (that is, have used in the past month). This number
is about 30 percent of the civilian noninstitutionalized population
aged twelve or older. In 2002, an estimated 71.5 million Ameri-
cans (30.4 percent of the total population aged twelve or older) re-
ported current (past-month) use of tobacco products. About 61.1
million (26 percent) smoked cigarettes, 12.8 million (5.4 percent)
smoked cigars, 7.8 million (3.3 percent) used smokeless tobacco,
and 1.8 million (0.8 percent) smoked tobacco in pipes (Substance
Abuse Mental Health Services Administration 2003).
According to the WHO, there are now 1.1 billion smokers in
the world. This is one-third of the world’s adult population. In de-
veloped countries, 41 percent of men and 21 percent of women
regularly smoke. Each person, on average, consumes 2,400 ciga-
rettes a year. In developing countries, 50 percent of men and 8 per-
cent of women smoke an average of 1,400 cigarettes a year. The
counties with the highest rates of cigarette use are (listed in order):
Poland, Greece, Hungary, Japan, Korea, Switzerland, Iceland, the
Netherlands, Yugoslavia (now Serbia and Montenegro), Australia,
United States, Spain, Canada, New Zealand, Ireland, Germany,
Belgium, Israel, Cuba, Bulgaria, and the United Kingdom.
Female Tobacco Use
The U.S. surgeon general has reported that smoking-related dis-
ease among women is an epidemic and that the number of women
who die each year from smoking accounts for 39 percent of all
smoking-related deaths. For many years, smoking prevalence was
more prominent among men; it took nearly twenty-five years be-
fore the gap narrowed and smoking became commonplace among
women, said the surgeon general. Not only do women share the
108
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

same health risks as men, but they also face health consequences
that are unique to women, including pregnancy complications,
problems with menstrual function, and cervical cancer. According
to Women and Smoking: A Report of the Surgeon General (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention 2001b), there has been a 600 per-
cent increase in women’s death from lung cancer since 1950. At
least 90 percent of the lung cancer deaths in women are linked to
smoking. In the report, eight major findings were cited:
•
Despite strong evidence about the health risks
associated with smoking, 22 percent of women smoked
cigarettes in 1998.
•
In 2000, 29.7 percent of female high school seniors said
they had smoked within the past thirty days.
•
Since 1980, an estimated 3 million women in the United
States have died prematurely from smoking-related
diseases and burns caused by fires that were started by
cigarettes.
•
Lung cancer is now the leading cause of cancer death
among U.S. women, exceeding breast cancer.
•
Exposure to secondhand smoke is a cause of lung
cancer and coronary heart disease among women who
are lifetime nonsmokers.
•
Women who stop smoking greatly reduce their risk of
dying prematurely, and quitting smoking at any age is
beneficial.
•
Smoking during pregnancy remains a major public
health problem, despite increased evidence of the
adverse health effects.
•
Marketing by the tobacco industry is a factor in why
girls both in the United States and in other countries
start to smoke.
In 2002, 17.3 percent of pregnant women aged fifteen to forty-four
smoked cigarettes in the past month, compared with 31.1 percent
of nonpregnant women in the same age group.
The WHO recognizes the need to do more to reduce smok-
ing-related diseases in women. In Women and the Tobacco Epi-
demic—Challenges for the 21st Century (2001), it reports that
tobacco-related diseases are on the rise among women and points
to aggressive tobacco marketing and exposure to secondhand
smoke for the increase. The report said that only recently have
Tobacco
109

women in developing countries begun to smoke and that it may
be several decades before the full health impact is felt, but devas-
tating health consequences are inevitable unless action is taken
now. Also, the report notes that false images of good health, fit-
ness, stress relief, beauty, and being slim are used to appeal to
women and that tobacco products are promoted as a means of at-
taining maturity, gaining confidence, being attractive, and being
in control of one’s destiny—effectively exploiting the struggle of
women everywhere for equality.
Adolescent Tobacco Use
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) has reported that
every day in the United States more than 6,000 people under the
age of 18 try their first cigarette, and more than half of them will
become daily smokers. In 2002, an estimated 4.5 million adoles-
cents, or 33.3 percent of that age group, smoked in the United
States (University of Michigan News and Information Services
2002). The rate of lifetime daily cigarette use among youths aged
twelve to seventeen is 8.2 percent (Substance Abuse Mental
Health Services Administration 2003).
Young people grossly underestimate the addictiveness of
nicotine. Of daily smokers who think that they will not smoke in
five years, nearly 75 percent are still smoking five to six years
later. Data show the following:
•
Thirty-four point eight percent of high school students
are current (used in past thirty days) smokers.
•
Fourteen percent of high school males currently use
smokeless tobacco.
•
Fifteen point five million children are exposed to
secondhand smoke at home.
•
Youths consume about 900 million packs of cigarettes
each year, generating tobacco company revenues of $1.5
billion per year.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2001a) has
stated that among young people, the short-term health conse-
quences of smoking include damage to the respiratory system,
addiction to nicotine, and the associated risk of other drug use.
According to the 2003 American Legacy Foundation and the Na-
tional Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse, teenage tobacco
110
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

users are fourteen times more likely to use marijuana than their
nonsmoking peers. Long-term health consequences of youth
smoking are reinforced by the fact that most young people who
smoke regularly continue to smoke throughout adulthood.
Among the effects arethe following:
•
Smoking hurts young people’s physical fitness in terms
of both performance and endurance—even among
young people trained in competitive running.
•
Smoking among youths can hinder the rate of lung
growth and the level of maximum lung function.
•
The resting heart rates of young adult smokers are two
to three beats per minute faster than nonsmokers.
•
The younger people start smoking cigarettes, the more
likely they are to become strongly addicted to nicotine.
•
Smoking is associated with poor overall health and a
variety of short-term adverse health effects in young
people and may also be a marker for underlying
mental health problems such as depression among
adolescents.
Worldwide, 14 percent of the youths aged thirteen to fifteen
smoke, and one-quarter of all children who do smoke started by
age ten. In June 1995, a group of twenty-two international or-
ganizations and individuals met at the Rockefeller Foundation’s
Bellagio Study and Conference Center in Italy to examine the
implications of the current global trend in tobacco production
and consumption, especially in developing countries, for sus-
tainable development. Regarding children and youth, it was re-
ported that 300 million will eventually be killed by tobacco use
based on current smoking patterns. In a report issued by the
WHO focused on Europe, Hazardous Harmonization in Smoking
by European Youth (2002), it was reported that while there are de-
creasing rates by adults in some countries, no country has
shown a significant decrease in smoking by young people since
1997. Around 30 percent of fifteen to eighteen year olds in Eu-
rope are smokers. Since the mid-1990s, smoking among youths
in Eastern Europe has risen only slightly, while rates among
Western European teenagers have remained stable over the
same period. Furthermore, it was reported that there are no sig-
nificant differences in tobacco consumption among young
people between countries and subregions. The following charts,
Tobacco
111

drawn from the WHO report, provide comparisons of
youth/adult and regional differences in smoking rates in Eu-
rope.
112
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?
Table 4.1
Geographical Differences in Smoking Rates (% Smokers) among
Adults and Young People (Fifteen to Sixteen Year Olds)
Eastern
Western
Difference
Age Group
Countries
Countries
East/West
Young People
13
26
3
Adults
33.5
24
9.5
Source: WHO. 2002. Hazardous Harmonization in Smoking by European Youth. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office
for Europe, 15 February. Press backgrounder EURO/03/02. Available at http://www.who.dk/document/cma/
PB032002e.pdf (accessed February 27, 2004).
Table 4.2
Gender Differences in Smoking Rates (% Smokers) among Adults and
Young People (Fifteen to Sixteen Year Olds)
Difference
Age Group
Male
Female
Male/Female
Young People
29
25
4
Adults
34.5
22
12.5
Source: WHO. 2002. Hazardous Harmonization in Smoking by European Youth. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office
for Europe, 15 February. Press backgrounder EURO/03/02. Available at http://www.who.dk/document/cma/
PB032002e.pdf (accessed February 27, 2004).
Table 4.3
Age Group/Gender Differences in Smoking Rates (% Smokers)
among Adults and Young People (Fifteen to Sixteen Year Olds),
according to Comparable Data from Thirteen Countries
Young
Difference
Gender
People
Adults
Youth/Adult
Male
29.6
36
–6.5
Female
25.5
21.5
+4
Source: WHO. 2002. Hazardous Harmonization in Smoking by European Youth. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office
for Europe, 15 February. Press backgrounder EURO/03/02. Available at http://www.who.dk/document/cma/
PB032002e.pdf (accessed February 27, 2004).

Advertising
Tobacco has secured its position in many societies by controlling
the behavior of its consumers. This has been accomplished through
vigorous marketing methods (for example, the introduction of fil-
tered cigarettes in the 1950s, low-tar cigarettes in the 1960s, and
then smokeless and perfumed cigarettes) as well as by command-
ing a special position among governmental policy makers who for
years have protected the substance for reasons beyond the “best
Tobacco
113
Table 4.4
Smoking Prevalence (%) among Young People in Europe
Country
Boys
Girls
Total Youth
1993–1996 1997–2001 1993–1996 1997–2001 1993–1996 1997–2001
Austria†
29
30
31
36
30
33
Bulgaria*
35
38
36
Croatia*
27
31
18
25
23
28
Czech Republic*
30
39
20
34
26
36
Denmark*
22
31
24
32
23
32
Estonia*
36
38
17
18
25
27
Finland*
33
41
36
38
35
39
France‡
22
28
18
20
20
24
Hungary*
32
31
24
25
28
28
Iceland*
27
24
27
26
27
25
Ireland*
36
31
38
36
37
34
Israel†
9
24
9
13
9
19
Italy*
25
22
24
28
25
25
Latvia‡
33
38
14
23
23.5
30
Lithuania*
29
46
12
23
20
35
Malta*
20
20
18
21
19
20
Netherlands‡
27
26
27
Norway*
25
31
25
34
25
33
Poland‡
27
27
13
20
20
24
Portugal*
14
18
12
15
13
17
Russian Fed.*
46
38
42
Spain‡
25.2
35.8
23.5
Slovakia*
26
35
13
26
20
30
Slovenia*
16
25
17
26
16
26
Sweden*
28
26
28
25
28
25
Switzerland†
17
25
18
25
17.5
25
Ukraine*
41
39
18
18
29
29
United Kingdom*
25
24
30
28
27
26
Source: WHO. 2002. Hazardous Harmonization in Smoking by European Youth. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office
for Europe, 15 February. Press backgrounder EURO/03/02. Available at http://www.who.dk/document/cma/
PB032002e.pdf (accessed February 27, 2004).
*Data from European School Survey Project conducted in 1995 and 1999.
†Data from WHO Survey of Health Behaviour in School-Aged Children conducted in 1993–1994 and 1997–1998.
‡Data from national or other source.

interests” of the public. The following are among the statements
and slogans used by the tobacco industry since the glamour era of
cigarette advertising began, soon after World War I:
•
In the 1920s, Lucky Strike introduced the slogan “Reach
for a Lucky instead of a Sweet,” using celebrity
endorsers like George M. Cohan, Amelia Earhart, and
Helen Hayes to bring the message home.
•
Well into the 1950s, cigarette advertisers continued to
proclaim the health benefits of their product. “How are
your nerves?” an ad for one brand asked and proposed
a test. Any man who could not button a vest in twelve
seconds probably suffered from frayed nerves and
should begin smoking immediately.
•
Camels announced that its special Turkish tobacco
stimulated the flow of digestive fluids and raised the
level of alkalinity in the stomach.
•
Kool, in the brand’s early days, claimed to offer
protection against catching colds. And the tobacco
industry used doctors, athletes, movie stars, and
newsmakers to promote the use of cigarettes—for
example, “More doctors smoke Camels than any other
cigarette,” one ad proclaimed. In the 1950s, Ronald
Reagan, as an actor, lent his magic touch to
Chesterfields, a brand endorsed by Joe Lewis in 1947 as
“the champ” of cigarettes. (Grimes 1997) 
During the past few years, there has been a reversal of
tobacco industry fortunes, led by a vigorous campaign against
the substance by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the
United States and the medical community. Report after report re-
veal collusion and manipulation by tobacco companies to pro-
mote and preserve a market for their product—including special
populations such as children and youths, women, and minority
people. In a detailed account of the FDA’s battle with the tobacco
companies, David Kessler, the FDA’s former director, provides
much information about the issues of tobacco advertising and
marketing techniques:
After researching gender differences in the 1970s,
some industry researchers concluded that women
found it harder than men to quit smoking. [One in-
dustry official theorized that] “Women are more neu-
114
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

rotic than men and more likely to need to smoke in
stressful situations.” . . . The industry recognized the
implications of this “neurosis” for product develop-
ment [thinking that] women were . . . more likely to re-
spond to publicity about the health risks of smoking
by switching to “lighter” cigarettes [which have more
tar and nicotine than consumers think]. . . . [I]ndustry
executives cynically did what they could [through fe-
male-oriented cigarettes] to make it harder still to quit
smoking. (Kessler 2001, 274)
Although cigarette makers must adhere to advertising re-
strictions under the 1998 tobacco settlement in the United States,
they have still managed to increase their promotional spending
activity. According to the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC),
cigarette manufacturers increased promotional spending 22.3
percent in 1999. Advertising in magazines rose 25.5 percent to
$281.3 million, and direct-mail advertising increased by 63.8 per-
cent to $94.6 million. The FTC reported that the $8.24 billion spent
by the tobacco industry on advertising and promotions in 1999
was the most ever reported by the major cigarette manufacturers.
Because of the 1999 ban on billboard advertising, the tobacco
industry has shifted its advertising strategy to other areas, such as
convenience stores. Additionally, other ways to promote ciga-
rettes have appeared—for example, on clocks, shopping baskets,
or display shelving containing tobacco advertising. Philip Morris,
the tobacco giant, which according to a poll has one of the worst
reputations in U.S. business and recently changed its name to
“Altria,” which derives from Latin and means “high,” donates
$60 million a year to charity, and spends another $100 million in
advertising to inform the public about its good deeds. It has been
reported that each year, Philip Morris holds a desert adven-
ture–sports event in Utah aimed at attracting young smokers to
the Marlboro brand. The company sends its Marlboro Adventure
Team—a major overseas promotional tool for the brand—to Utah
with an entourage of foreign journalists. The journalists cover the
annual desert event and bring back footage that is broadcast in
Marlboro ad campaigns and as a promotion for future events.
Despite vigorous marketing attempts, cigarette smoking is
on the decline in the United States, Western Europe, and other
countries as a result of public opinion and politically responsive
government. Nevertheless, with people in Western countries al-
ready addicted, tobacco industries have focused their efforts on
Tobacco
115

other countries like those in Asia, Eastern Europe, nations of the
former Soviet Union, Latin America, and Africa for new profits.
Although many governments in Asia have launched antismoking
campaigns, their efforts have been overwhelmed by the “Madi-
son Avenue glitz” unleashed by the major cigarette companies.
Several Asian nations have banned cigarette advertising on tele-
vision and radio in recent years, but the tobacco companies often
find ways around the bans through indirect promotions that skirt
the law, including sports events, glossy advertisements for cloth-
ing brands, or travel agencies that bear the name and logo of a
cigarette brand.
Here are some additional facts and data about the cigarette-
advertising situation:
•
The World Health Organization’s Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control says that banning
tobacco advertising and sponsorship is one of the two
most effective ways of reducing tobacco use. The other
method is increasing prices for tobacco products. The
United States, Germany, and Japan strongly oppose an
outright ban on advertising. The United States has said
such a ban would be a violation of free speech under
the U.S. Constitution. Publishers of European
newspapers are very much opposed to a European
Union ban on tobacco advertising in newspapers and
magazines; on radio, the Internet, and television; and at
international sports events because it would cripple
media companies by reducing advertising revenues as
they face economic slowdown. The ban could also
cause many small local newspapers to close as a result
of lost income from tobacco ads.
•
The WHO has accused U.S.-based tobacco companies
of encouraging minors to smoke by offering free
cigarettes. Although distributing cigarettes to minors is
illegal in most countries, it is common to see young
girls giving out cigarettes in the streets in many
developing nations. Tobacco companies portray
cigarettes as a symbol of sophistication, independence,
and glamour to attract young smokers.
•
Although magazine and billboard advertising has
declined, it has been reported that there is an explosion
of marketing expenditures at the retail outlet.
116
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

According to the U.S. Federal Trade Commission,
tobacco companies have increased their in-store
promotions by paying retailers for prime shelf space
and offering giveaways to sell their products. The U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has found
that cigarette advertising displays in stores where
adolescents shop may encourage them to smoke.
Among the tobacco promotions were interior and
exterior signs placed low enough to be at eye level of
young children, self-service cigarette displays, and
discounts. Matthew Myers, president of the Campaign
for Tobacco-Free Kids, has said that seven out of ten
teenagers visit a convenience store at least once a week.
The retail outlet is the perfect place to get kids.
•
Cigarette advertising can impede parents’ efforts to
prevent children from smoking. Cigarette ads influence
teens to smoke even when parents are highly involved
in their lives.
•
After reviewing magazine advertisements, researchers
at the University of Chicago concluded that tobacco
companies continue to direct cigarette ads to school-age
children. According to the Massachusetts Tobacco
Control Program, the U.S. Smokeless Tobacco Company
spends millions of dollars on advertising in magazines
where at least 15 percent of the readership is young
people. Such a marketing strategy would be in
violation of the 1998 Master Settlement Agreement
between major U.S. tobacco companies and forty-six
states. The agreement specifically bans youth-targeted
advertising.
•
Women are more likely than men to smoke low-tar
cigarettes, a large percentage believing that the
products are less damaging than regular cigarettes. The
National Cancer Institute shows that “low tar” and
“light” cigarettes do not lower a smoker’s chance of
getting smoking-related diseases. Lawsuits against
tobacco companies like Philip Morris claim that that
there has been a conscious effort to market low-tar
cigarettes as less dangerous than regular cigarettes.
Under a European Union directive, a ban on terms such
as low tar went into effect in September 2003.
•
Tobacco advertising remains prominent in many
Tobacco
117

women’s magazines. Such magazines publish on
average 4.5 tobacco ads per issue. Cigarette advertising
in such magazines is designed to promote the link
between glamour and cigarettes. 
It’s about Money: Tax Revenues and Big
Business
The Master Settlement Agreement of 1998 required tobacco com-
panies to pay $246 billion to states and place limits on tobacco ad-
vertising. In spite of this agreement, tobacco companies continue
to turn a profit. Antismoking advocates thought a crackdown on
tobacco ads and an increase in cigarette prices would result in
fewer smokers. Tobacco companies, however, continue to recruit
new smokers, and according to industry figures it appears that
consumers have gotten used to paying more for their addiction
and consumption levels appear to be only marginally affected.
Additional data and facts confirm the connection between
money, tax revenues, big business, government, and tobacco:
•
The tobacco industry spent millions of dollars in direct
and soft-money contributions for political elections.
According to public records, Philip Morris contributed
$2.7 million to Republican causes in a recent election
cycle compared with a risk-hedging $538,000 to
Democrats. Since Bush was elected, the stock market
has pushed up tobacco stocks dramatically, meaning
that people think the administration will be doing their
bidding. The tobacco industry donated $120,000 in hard
and soft money to the Bush campaign for the
presidency. Philip Morris donated $100,000 for Bush’s
inauguration. Since 1989, the company has lavished no
less than $14.3 million on its Republican friends. When
questioned about its pattern of contributions, a Philip
Morris spokesman said that “it is very appropriate for
us to be contributing our policy positions and being
involved in the political process” (Lazarus 2002). The
annual tobacco industry contributions to federal
candidates and political parties are more than $5
million. The tobacco industry expenditures lobbying
118
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

Congress during 1998 were more than $65 million. The
annual tobacco industry advertising and promotion
expenditures nationwide are more than $6.8 billion.
With all this money spent, current prospects for the
tobacco industry have weakened. For example, the
tobacco giant R. J. Reynolds announced in September
2003 that it would cut its workforce by 40 percent,
eliminating 2,600 jobs as part of a plan to cut $1 billion
in costs by 2005. Nevertheless, the company still
expects to earn 60 to 90 cents per share on earnings of
$170 million to $220 million in 2003. Philip Morris,
“Altria,” announced in November 2002 that it would
spend $350 million on promoting its cigarette brands
worldwide, hoping to bolster its earnings and stock
market trading price.
•
A U.S. federal commission on smoking recommended
to the Bush administration that the federal tax on
cigarettes be increased from $.39 to $2.39 a pack
(February 2003). Health and Human Services Secretary
Tommy Thompson said in testimony to the U.S. House
of Representatives Budget Committee that “this
administration does not raise taxes.” Thompson has
also been quoted as saying that “the tax question is
problematic, politically.”
•
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
reports that increasing the price of cigarettes is an
effective way to reduce teen smoking.
•
The CDC has calculated the societal costs of smoking.
Each pack of cigarettes sold in the United States costs
the nation an estimated $7.18 in medical care and lost
productivity. That adds up to a total of $150 billion each
year, or about $3,391 per smoker per year.
•
The Master Settlement Agreement of 1998 contained no
requirement that states spend any specific percentage
of their settlement money. The economic downturn has
forced many states to spend a significant percentage of
their tobacco settlement funds for purposes like
highway repairs and tax relief rather than drug
prevention and education. Using the settlement funds
for such purposes has a negative result because credit-
rating agencies (such as Standard and Poor’s) are likely
to lower a state’s credit rating if the state fails to
Tobacco
119

convince them that it has a long-term solution for its
deficit. The use of tobacco revenue for deficit coverage
is a good indicator of the state being under stress. A
downgrading of its credit status means that the state
has to provide a higher rate of interest for the money it
borrows through public bond offerings.
•
States are collecting record amounts of revenues from
tobacco taxes and the tobacco settlement; however, they
are cutting spending on programs to keep children
from starting to smoke and help smokers quit. The
states in the 2002–2003 budget year collected a record
$20.3 billion in tobacco-generated revenues, an increase
of 9 percent from the year before. They cut spending for
tobacco prevention and cessation programs by $86.2
million, or 11 percent. (Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids
2003)
More cigarettes are traded than any other single product in
the world, with an annual value estimated to be $400 billion. Ac-
cording to the WHO, one-quarter of all cigarettes produced in the
world are smuggled, enabling multinational tobacco companies
to increase sales by evading local tariffs, maintaining a competi-
tive price with domestic producers, and promoting internation-
ally recognized brands such as Marlboro, Kool, Kent, and others.
Additionally, smuggling insulates the tobacco companies from
national controls to limit cigarette consumption that the WHO
warns will cause millions of deaths over the next thirty years.
The smuggling charge has brought tobacco companies to U.S.
courts, where they are being accused of violating the Racketeer In-
fluenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, of defrauding govern-
ments of hundreds of millions of dollars in tax revenues, and of
hiding and ultimately taking profits back to the United States,
which constitutes money laundering. After a six-month investiga-
tion by the Nation, the Center for Investigative Reporting, and the
PBS newsmagazine show NOW with Bill Moyers, the complex dis-
tribution system of a multibillion-dollar trade in smuggled ciga-
rettes was exposed. The WHO sees smuggling as a major public
health issue, asserting that it incapacitates one of the government’s
best weapons for lowering tobacco consumption—high taxes. The
WHO has a simple calculation to describe the challenge.
More smuggling equals cheaper cigarettes equals more
smokers, which means more smoking-related illnesses and
120
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

deaths. According to the World Bank, if the price of cigarettes
were to increase just 10 percent—which could be maintained
through taxation—an estimated 40 million people would quit
smoking worldwide (Schapiro 2002).
Finally, one of the most scathing charges against the U.S.
government’s relation to tobacco companies can be found in
Smoke & Mirrors: The Canadian Tobacco War:
The United States spends billions of dollars in its war
on illegal drugs. The American government portrays
drug-producing countries such as Colombia, Bolivia
and Afghanistan as the root or the problem and is
waging an international campaign to combat drug
production in the third world. At the same time, U.S.
multinationals are busy exporting tobacco addiction
all over the globe. They make the same obscene profits
as drug producers and traffickers. They all exploit,
poison and kill their victims except that tobacco
barons cause much more death and misery than for-
eign drug lords. With over [3] million tobacco deaths
in the world every year, the hypocrisy of the American
position is astounding.
The United States [attempted] to open up tobacco
markets in Taiwan, Thailand, South Korea, and Japan in
the 1980s. The tobacco industry was controlled by gov-
ernment monopolies in these countries and American
tobacco companies had no access. In 1985 the U.S. gov-
ernment warned that severe trade sanctions would be
imposed and waged an intense campaign to open up
these markets to American tobacco companies. In 1986
Taiwan and Japan succumbed to the threats and al-
lowed American tobacco products and South Korea fol-
lowed in 1988 [and Thailand too later complied]. Amer-
ican tobacco companies followed with huge advertising
and promotional campaigns to gain market share.
The forced opening of these markets to American
[tobacco companies] and subsequent massive cam-
paigns to [cause addiction to] these populations can
only be described as gross crimes against humanity.
The United States government and American tobacco
companies share complicity in this overt attempt to en-
tice foreign peoples into drug addiction for monetary
gain. The hypocrisy is that the American government
Tobacco
121

was waging tough antismoking campaigns at home
while vigorously promoting tobacco addiction abroad.
At the same time [the American government was]
waging a full-scale war against the international drug
trade [while] they were the biggest international drug
dealers in the world causing much more death and
misery abroad than illegal drugs ever did in the
United States. (Cunningham 1996, 217–220)
Alcohol
The magnitude of alcohol problems has been overshadowed in
recent years by the preoccupation with the widespread use of il-
licit drugs, including heroin, cocaine, crack, and Ecstasy, and the
threat of AIDS. According to the Switzerland Addiction Research
Institute, annually 1.8 million deaths worldwide are the result of
alcohol use while illegal drugs caused 223,000. The WHO claims
more than 55,000 people aged fifteen to twenty-nine across Eu-
rope die each year as a result of alcohol-related road accidents,
poisoning, suicide, and murders. The American Medical Associa-
tion believes that alcohol contributes to more than 100,000 deaths
annually in the United States from drunk driving, stroke, cancer,
cirrhosis of the liver, falls, and other adverse effects. These results
lead to the conclusion that if one adds together the deaths from
every abused illegal drug, it still does not equal the deaths or
costs caused by alcohol alone.
In 1995 in the United States, the cost of alcohol use and alco-
holism-related treatment services, medical consequences, lost
earnings due to illness, lost earnings due to crime and victimiza-
tion, crashes, fires, criminal justice, and so on was estimated to be
$167 billion. The comparable cost related to illegal drug use for
that same year was about $110 billion. The total cost to society of
alcohol is on order of thirty times what the United States spends
on its treatment—about $6 billion in 1997.
In 2002, alcohol use was targeted as the cause for 41 percent
of all driving fatalities (17,419 deaths) in the United States. It is
the major factor of adult drowning and has been seriously impli-
cated in millions of injuries and thousands of deaths resulting
from industrial accidents, a substantial proportion of general
(noncommercial) aviation crashes, and boating accidents. The
vast majority of fire fatalities and fire burns involve alcohol use at
122
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

the time of the accident—cigarette smoking is a major cause of
fires, and a direct association exists between drinking and smok-
ing in the general population. Alcohol has been found to be in-
volved in up to 70 percent of all deaths and 63 percent of all in-
juries from falls. Suicide is a major cause of death in the United
States, and about 30 percent of those who commit suicide are al-
coholics. Alcoholics are far more likely than nonalcoholics to at-
tempt and commit suicide while drinking, and alcohol’s mood-
changing properties have been seen as a possible link to suicidal
actions. Child abuse, neglect, molestation, and marital violence
are prevalent types of aggression in the family, and alcohol use is
a precipitating factor of these problems as well.
The U.S. Department of Justice estimates that nearly one-
third of the nation’s state prison inmates drank heavily before
committing rapes, burglaries, and assaults. As many as 45 percent
of the country’s homeless, estimated to be about 700,000 on any
given night, are alcoholics. The Bureau of Justice Statistics reports
that offenders in local jails throughout the country charged with
or convicted of driving while intoxicated were more than one in
every eleven inmates. Among convicted inmates, 86 percent of
those serving a sentence for driving while intoxicated (DWI) had
been sentenced in the past. Almost one-third of the DWI inmates
had served three or more previous sentences in jail or prison.
Those persons arrested for driving while impaired are more likely
to be serious offenders in terms of the nature of criminal activity.
In 1997, roughly 1.7 million drivers were arrested for driving
under the influence of alcohol or narcotics (Isralowitz 2002).
The use of alcohol in the United States has risen steadily since
the end of Prohibition to 1978. Since the early 1980s, however, there
has been a downward trend—a behavior pattern that appears in
consonance with the use of most psychoactive substances, includ-
ing cocaine (see table 4.5). The number of new regular users, de-
fined by the U.S. Public Health Service as people who drink alco-
hol once a month or more, peaked at 3.4 million in 1977, and since
the 1980s the number has remained at more than 2 million new reg-
ular drinkers each year. Other factors characterizing the downward
trend of alcohol use during the past decade include a decline in
sales, self-reported alcohol consumption for all ages, and fewer
young people ever drinking. Alcohol-related traffic fatalities
dropped from 25,165 in 1982 to 17,858 in 1992, 16,653 in 2001, and
17,970 in 2002. Another important indicator of the drop in excessive
alcohol use is cirrhosis (liver disease) deaths (Yoon et al. 2002).
Alcohol
123

Drinking patterns in the United States show the following
facts for lifetime, past-year, and past-month alcohol use:
•
Adult males drink more than females.
•
An estimated 120 million Americans aged twelve or
older (51 percent of the population in this age group)
report being current (within the past thirty days)
drinkers of alcohol.
•
More than one-fifth (22.9 percent, or 54 million) of the
persons aged twelve or older participated in binge
drinking (five or more drinks on the same occasion) at
least once in the past thirty days prior to the survey.
•
Those with a high school education or less and those
124
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?
Table 4.5
Per Capita Ethanol Consumption for the United States, 1850–19991
Year
Beer
Wine
Spirits
Total
1999 
1.25
0.32
0.64
2.21
1995
1.25
0.29
0.64
2.17
1990
1.34
0.33
0.78
2.45
1985
1.33
0.38
0.90
2.62
1980
1.26
0.34
1.04
2.76
1975
1.26
0.32
1.11
2.69
1970
1.14
0.27
1.11
2.52
1965
1.04
0.24
0.99
2.27
1960
0.99
0.22
0.86
2.07
1955
1.01
0.22
0.77
2.00
1950
1.04
0.23
0.77
2.04
1945
1.17
0.20
0.88
2.25
1940
0.73
0.16
0.67
1.56
1934
0.61
0.07
0.29
0.97
Prohibition
1919
1.08
0.12
0.76
1.96
1915
1.48
0.14
0.94
2.56
1910
1.47
0.17
0.96
2.60
1905
1.31
0.13
0.95
2.39
1900
1.19
0.10
0.77
2.06
1890
0.90
0.14
0.95
1.99
1880
0.56
0.14
1.02
1.72
1870
0.44
0.10
1.53
2.07
1860
0.27
0.10
2.16
2.53
1850
0.14
0.08
1.88
2.10
Source: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA). Available at http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/
databases/consum01.htm (accessed January 19, 2004).
1. Numbers may not sum to totals due to rounding. 

with some college were more likely than college
graduates to report heavy alcohol use.
•
White people tend to drink more than black and
Hispanic people.
•
Adults who graduate from college drink more than
those who do not graduate from college. Heavy alcohol
use, however, is more prevalent among those without
college education.
•
People who are employed drink more than those who
are unemployed. (Substance Abuse Mental Health
Services Administration 1999; Substance Abuse Mental
Health Services Administration 2003)
Female Alcohol Use
It is estimated that of the 15 million alcohol-abusing or alcohol-
dependent individuals in the United States, approximately 4.6
million, or nearly one-third, are women. According to the Na-
tional Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism in 1997, women
tend to drink less alcohol and have fewer alcohol-related prob-
lems and dependence symptoms than men. Among the heaviest
drinkers, however, women equal or surpass men in the number
of problems that result from their drinking. Drinking behavior
differs with age, role status, and marital status of women. In gen-
eral, a woman’s drinking resembles that of her husband, siblings,
or close friends. Younger women tend to have higher rates of
drinking-related problems than do older women; however, the in-
cidence of alcohol dependence is greater among middle-aged
women (aged thirty-five to forty-nine). Women who have never
been married or who have been divorced or separated are more
likely to drink heavily and experience alcohol-related problems
than women who are married or widowed. Unmarried women
living with a partner are at high risk to engage in heavy drinking
and to develop drinking problems.
Female alcoholics may encounter different incentives and ob-
stacles to seeking treatment than those encountered by men.
Women are more likely to seek treatment because of family prob-
lems, and they are often encouraged by parents or children to pur-
sue therapy. Men are usually encouraged to pursue therapy by
their wives. Fewer women than men reach treatment through the
criminal justice system or through employee-assistance programs.
Alcohol
125

Lack of child care is one of the most frequently reported barriers
to treatment for alcoholic women.
Additional facts about women and alcohol use include the
following:
•
Forty-five percent of females aged twelve or older
report current (past-month) alcohol use, 8 percent are
binge drinkers (defined as five or more drinks on the
same occasion at least once in the past month), and 2
percent drink heavily.
•
Current alcohol use is heaviest among women aged
twenty-six to thirty-four; binge and heavy drinking is
highest among eighteen to twenty-five year olds.
•
Women may be at higher risk for developing alcohol-
related problems at lower levels of consumption than
men.
•
Nearly 4 million American women aged eighteen and
older can be classified as alcoholic or problem
drinkers—this is one-third the number for men; of
these women, 58 percent are between the ages of
eighteen and twenty-nine.
•
Compared with men, women with drinking problems
are at increased risk for depression, low self-esteem,
alcohol-related physical problems, marital discord or
divorce, a history of sexual abuse, and drinking in
response to life crises.
•
Among the personal and environmental factors that
increase women’s risks for problem drinking are the
influence of a husband’s or partner’s drinking;
depression; sexual experience, including alcohol
expectancies and reported effects of drinking on sexual
behavior, sexual orientation, and sexual dysfunction;
and violent victimization, including physical and sexual
victimization in childhood as well as in adulthood.
•
Never-married, divorced, and separated women
generally have the highest rates of heavy drinking and
drinking-related problems, widowed women the lowest
rates, and married women intermediate rates.
•
Alcohol is present in more than one-half of all incidents
of domestic violence, with women most likely to be
battered when both partners have been drinking.
(Collins and Messerschmidt 1993, 96) 
126
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

Among pregnant women aged fifteen to forty-four, results from
the 2002 National Survey on Drug Use and Heath show that 9
percent used alcohol and 3 percent reported binge drinking in the
month prior to the survey. These rates were significantly lower
than the rates for nonpregnant women of that age (53.4 and 23.4
percent, respectively). Heavy alcohol use was relatively rare (0.7
percent) among pregnant women (Substance Abuse Mental
Health Services Administration 2003).
Adolescent and Young-Adult Alcohol Use
Despite the fact that it is illegal for virtually all high school stu-
dents as well as many college students and young adults, experi-
ence and active use with alcoholic beverages are widespread.
Based on national results of adolescent drug use in 2002
(ibid.), about 10.7 million persons aged twelve to twenty reported
drinking alcohol in the month prior to the survey. This is about 29
percent of the total age group.1 Of these youths, nearly 7.2 million
(19 percent of the total age group) were binge drinkers, and 2.3
million (6 percent) were heavy drinkers. More males than females
aged twelve to twenty reported binge drinking (22 percent versus
17 percent). Among persons in this age group who used alcohol
on a monthly basis, whites were far more likely to do so (33 per-
cent) than blacks (19 percent) and Asians (16 percent). Binge
drinking was reported by 23 percent of the underage whites, 23
percent of the underage American Indians or Alaska natives, 17
percent of underage Hispanics, 9 percent of underage Asians, and
10 percent of underage blacks. The prevalence of current alcohol
use increased with age: 2 percent—age twelve; 7 percent—age
thirteen; 13 percent—age fourteen; 20 percent—age fifteen; 29
percent—age sixteen; and 36 percent—age seventeen. Rates of
binge drinking were about 1 percent—age twelve; 3 percent—age
thirteen; 7 percent—age fourteen; 12 percent—age fifteen; 18 per-
cent—age sixteen; and 25 percent—age seventeen. The rate
peaked at age twenty-one (50 percent). The highest prevalence of
both binge drinking and heavy drinking in 2002 was for young
adults aged eighteen to twenty-five, with the peak rate of the
measures occurring at age twenty-one. Heavy alcohol use was re-
ported by 15 percent of persons aged eighteen to twenty-five and
by 20 percent of persons aged twenty-one. Binge and heavy alco-
hol-use rates decreased faster with increasing age than did rates
of past-month alcohol use. Overall, the rate of alcohol use is likely
Alcohol
127

to be higher among dropouts, and dropout rates differ among
racial and ethnic groups in the United States.
The high prevalence of use among youths aged twelve to sev-
enteen and young adults aged eighteen to twenty suggests that
laws prohibiting the purchase, possession, and use of alcohol by
young people in this age range may not be very effective. In terms
of youths and young adults, including women, the alcohol industry
and soft drink companies (for example, Coca-Cola and Pepsi) have
been very active promoting a market for new alcohol and alcohol-
related products. Like the cigarette industry, effort is being made to
address the psychology of these groups in terms of increasing their
use of alcohol. Alcoholic beverages mixed with juices and sweet liq-
uids, malt lemonades, and caffeine-loaded “energy” drinks (for in-
stance, Red Bull, KMX, and Adrenaline Rush) are examples of this
strategy to enlarge the drinking population and increase sales. Also,
it has been reported that binge drinking among college students ap-
pears to be the result of marketing and frequent price promotions.
On September 9, 2003, a long-awaited report titled Reducing
Underage Drinking: A Collective Responsibility was announced by
the National Academy of Sciences (NAS). The report called for co-
operation among the alcohol industry, health organizations, gov-
ernments, parents, and others to combat what the authors called
the nation’s biggest youth drug problem. The press releases is-
sued by the NAS, the Distilled Spirits Council (September 10),
and the Beer Institute (September 9) follow.
National Academy of Sciences
More young people drink alcohol than use other drugs
or smoke tobacco, and underage drinking costs the na-
tion an estimated $53 billion annually in losses stem-
ming from traffic fatalities, violent crime, and other be-
haviors that threaten the well-being of America’s
youth. Curbing underage drinking is an uphill battle
because alcohol is legal and readily available to adults.
To tackle the problem, a new report from the National
Research Council and Institute of Medicine of the Na-
tional Academies offers a comprehensive strategy that
requires a deep, shared commitment from many insti-
tutions and individuals, including alcohol manufac-
turers and retail businesses, the entertainment indus-
try, and parents and other adults in local communities.
Federal and state governments should help forge the
128
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

commitment to curtail alcohol consumption by minors,
the report adds. For example, the federal government
should do more to educate adults about existing laws
and the consequences of underage drinking. Federal
and state governments should also provide additional
financial assistance and other support to reinforce com-
munity-based initiatives, and to research the effective-
ness of the proposed strategy itself and related policies.
“All segments of U.S. society should address underage
drinking in a serious, coordinated, and sustained man-
ner,” said Richard J. Bonnie, John S. Battle Professor of
Law and director of the Institute of Law, Psychiatry, and
Public Policy at the University of Virginia at Char-
lottesville, and chair of the committee that wrote the re-
port. “We have to find effective ways to protect our
nation’s youth while we respect the interests of respon-
sible adult consumers of alcohol. The recommendations
in this report attempt to strike the right balance.” The
congressionally mandated study lays out a strategy that
includes heightened adult supervision of children’s be-
havior and calls upon the alcohol and entertainment in-
dustries to take stronger steps to shield young people
from unsuitable messages about alcohol consumption.
Taken as a whole, the plan would have a considerable
impact, the committee said, adding that the strategy
should be subject to ongoing refinement.
To fund the proposed activities and to help reduce
underage consumption, Congress and state legislatures
should raise excise tax rates on alcohol—particularly on
beer, which studies show is the alcoholic beverage that
most young people prefer. Alcohol is much cheaper
today, after adjusting for inflation, than it was thirty to
forty years ago. Higher tax rates should be tied to the
consumer price index to keep pace with inflation. In-
creasing the cost of alcohol has well-documented deter-
rent effects on underage drinkers, the report points out.
A National Wake-Up Call
Most adults express concern
about underage drinking and voice support for public
policies to curb it. Yet surveys show that youths often
obtain alcohol from adults. Studies also show that many
parents underestimate both the extent of the problem
and their own children’s alcohol-consumption habits.
Alcohol
129

States and localities should use a wide range of edu-
cational and enforcement measures to boost compliance
with laws that prohibit selling or providing alcohol to
children, adolescents, and young adults under the legal
drinking age of twenty-one. The aim is to deter adults
and youths alike, the report says. Among the recom-
mended steps are increasing the frequency of compli-
ance checks, in which authorities monitor whether busi-
nesses are obeying minimum-drinking-age laws and
levy fines when necessary, and requiring all sellers and
servers of alcohol to complete state-approved training
as a condition of employment. Likewise, the federal
government should require states to achieve specified
rates of retailer compliance with youth-access laws as a
condition of receiving federal funds. And states should
enhance efforts to prevent and detect the use of false
identification (ID) by minors who want to purchase al-
cohol—for example, by issuing driver’s licenses and
state ID cards that can be electronically scanned.
In addition, states that allow Internet sales and
home delivery of alcohol should adopt regulations
that require customers to sign statements verifying
their identity and age at the time of delivery. At the
local level, police, working with community leaders,
should create policies for detecting and shutting down
underage drinking parties, the report says.
State and local leaders should develop efforts to re-
duce underage drinking that are tailored to specific
circumstances of the problem in their communities, ac-
cording to the report. A broad range of public and pri-
vate organizations and institutions, including the fed-
eral government, should encourage and fund
community efforts that have a solid scientific base.
Likewise, the federal government should fund and
actively support the development of a national media
campaign to encourage parents and other adults to
take steps in their own households and neighborhoods
to discourage underage drinking. Officials should
carefully craft this activity to make sure that it would
reach a diverse audience, the report advises. All inter-
vention and education programs, the committee
stressed, should be rigorously evaluated.
130
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

Roles for Alcohol and Entertainment Industries
A substan-
tial portion of alcohol advertising reaches an underage
audience or is presented in a style that is attractive to
youth, the report states. For example, television ads for
alcohol often appear during programs when the per-
centage of underage viewers is greater than their per-
centage in the overall U.S. population.
The committee recommended that trade associations
in the alcohol industry and individual companies
strengthen their advertising codes to prohibit placement
of commercial messages in venues where a large portion
of the audience is underage. These groups should also
establish independent, external review boards to inves-
tigate complaints about ads and enforce codes. In 1999,
the Federal Trade Commission issued similar recom-
mendations urging the industry to toughen its advertis-
ing standards for alcoholic beverages. For years, those
standards have permitted ad placement in media where
adults constitute at least 50 percent of the audience. The
industry is expected to soon announce tougher stan-
dards that will restrict marketing to audiences with a
much larger proportion of adults.
In addition, alcohol companies, advertising firms,
and commercial media should refrain from marketing
practices—such as certain product designs or promo-
tion techniques—that may appeal to young people, the
report cautions.
The alcohol industry should also join with private and
public entities to create and fund an independent non-
profit foundation that is focused solely on preventing
and reducing underage drinking. The industry currently
invests in programs that were established with that
stated goal; however, the results of these programs typi-
cally are not assessed using rigorous scientific methods.
The entertainment media have key roles to play, too.
Officials in the music, television, and film industries
should use rating systems and codes to reduce the
likelihood that large numbers of young listeners and
viewers will be exposed to unsuitable messages about
alcohol consumption—even when adults are expected
to make up the majority of the audience. The Motion
Picture Association of America, for instance, should
Alcohol
131

consider content about alcohol use when rating films
and assign mature ratings for movies that portray
drinking in a favorable light.
The overall goal of the committee’s broad strategy is
to promote public awareness of the importance of re-
ducing underage drinking, as well as greater accounta-
bility in mass communication. To this end, Congress
should provide funding for the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS) to routinely track
youth exposure to alcohol ads by monitoring advertis-
ing practices. Likewise, HHS should regularly review
representative samples of movies, TV programs, music
recordings, and videos offered to audiences that are 15
percent or more underage. Findings from this work
should be reported to Congress and the public, the com-
mittee said. Moreover, HHS should issue a comprehen-
sive report to Congress each year on trends in underage
drinking and progress in reducing the problem.
Larger Governmental Investments Needed
The use of alco-
hol among adults is deeply rooted in U.S. culture, and
beliefs vary widely about alcohol consumption and ex-
pectations for young people. But underage drinking is
dangerous, the report emphasizes. It is a significant
factor in youth traffic fatalities, and associated with
suicide, other violence, and academic failure. When
people start drinking in childhood or adolescence,
they increase their risk of developing alcohol-related
problems as adults.
In the 2002 Monitoring the Future survey, a federally
sponsored study, about 72 percent of twelfth graders
and 39 percent of eighth graders reported that they
had consumed some alcohol in the past year. That
study also showed that more than one-quarter of high
school seniors had consumed five or more drinks in a
row in the previous two weeks.
Federal and state excise taxes are potentially impor-
tant tools for preventing and reducing underage
drinking and its harmful consequences, the committee
concludes. Extensive research indicates that even
small changes in these tax rates can decrease the
prevalence of drinking among youths, who tend to
have limited discretionary income. Current federal ex-
132
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

cise tax rates of $2.14 per 750-milliliter bottle of 80-
proof spirits, $.33 per six-pack of beer, and $.21 per
bottle of wine represent a long downward slide in the
value of these taxes. Further, the federal government
needs to enhance and better organize research in this
area. A federal interagency coordinating committee
should be formed, with the secretary of HHS serving
as chair, to provide national leadership on the topic.
HHS should create a national training and research
center on underage drinking and collect more detailed
data on the problem—gathering information on re-
gional trends and on brands of alcohol that are popu-
lar among young people, for instance. HHS should
also issue annual reports on progress in implementing
the proposed strategy.
State policy makers should designate an agency to
spearhead and coordinate their activities and programs
in this area, according to the report. Also, residential
colleges and universities, which face serious alcohol-re-
lated problems among students under twenty-one,
should develop, adopt, and evaluate comprehensive
prevention approaches in partnership with local com-
munities.
The report was sponsored by the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services. The National Research
Council and the Institute of Medicine are private non-
profit institutions that provide science and health pol-
icy advice under a congressional charter. The Research
Council is the principal operating arm of the National
Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of
Engineering. The Web site for the National Research
Council and Institute of Medicine Board on Children,
Youth, and Families is http://www.nap.edu.
The Distilled Spirits Council
The Distilled Spirits Council released its own report in September
2003, called “Parents and Adults Are the Key to Reducing Under-
age Drinking: Raising Taxes Is Not the Answer”:
The Distilled Spirits Council today said it was pleased
the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) underage
drinking study “recognized the critical role parents
Alcohol
133

and adults play in further reducing underage drink-
ing” but denounced the call for increased taxes on al-
cohol saying, “research shows raising taxes would do
little to reduce underage drinking and would severely
impact the hospitality industry and responsible adult
consumers.”
Peter H. Cressy, President of the Distilled Spirits
Council of the United States said, “We were pleased
the NAS report underscored that parents and adults
need to be the primary target of any campaign to re-
duce underage drinking. The distilled spirits industry
has long held this view and has been providing edu-
cational materials for parents, educators and role mod-
els for over a decade.” Cressy noted the industry has
been implementing and supporting many of the rec-
ommendations in the NAS report for decades. He cited
as examples the programs of The Century Council, the
distilled spirits industry’s not-for-profit organization
that has spent more than $130 million over the last 12
years on community programs to reduce illegal, un-
derage drinking. The Century Council’s award-
winning community programs are being used by po-
lice departments in more than 42 states, more than
1,200 colleges across the country and all branches of
the United States Armed Forces.
Cressy said the industry would not support some
recommendations including raising taxes as a means
to reduce underage drinking. Cressy pointed to the
fact that the NAS’ own report states that most youth
obtain alcohol from adults, a finding mirrored in yes-
terday’s FTC [Federal Trade Commission] report.
“As both the NAS and FTC reports point out, most
youth obtain alcohol from non-commercial outlets,”
said Peter Cressy. “Therefore it makes no sense to fur-
ther penalize responsible adult drinkers and the hos-
pitality industry by raising taxes on spirits when more
than half the purchase price already goes to taxes.”
The Beer Institute
The Beer Institute also released a statement, by its president, Jeff
Becker, titled “In Response to the National Academy of Sciences
(NAS) Report on Underage Drinking”:
134
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

The NAS Panel relied on a compilation of existing in-
formation, much of which contained erroneous con-
clusions, as the background for their report. Given
this, we are not surprised to see misguided recom-
mendations such as raising beer excise taxes. Experi-
ence has shown that the only clear results from in-
creasing beer excise taxes are higher unemployment
and higher prices for responsible adults—such meas-
ures do nothing to lower teen drinking.
In addition, at a time when both federal and state
governments are looking for ways to eliminate bu-
reaucracy and balance budgets, the report’s call for the
creation of a new federal interagency coordinating
committee, a national training and research center,
new federal annual reporting requirements, the estab-
lishment of a new external review panel, and addi-
tional Congressional funding, is woefully misguided.
Governments at all levels already spend billions of
dollars on programs designed to address illegal un-
derage drinking, alcohol and substance abuse. And the
fact of the matter is that underage drinking over the
last few years has decreased—not increased.
Further, we note that the NAS report stated that
youth usually “obtain alcohol—either directly or indi-
rectly—from adults.” If the report plainly states that
youth are not buying alcohol—how will higher prices
deter them? Even for those who do purchase alcohol,
research has shown that for youth—unlike adults—
higher prices do not impact underage drinking.
The fact of the matter is that what we know about
raising excise taxes is that it means jobs will be lost and
responsible adults who enjoy beer will pay higher
prices. Taxes borne by beer consumers are already far
higher than those of most other products in the U.S. In
fact, federal, state, and local taxes are the most expen-
sive ingredient in every beer purchased, making up ap-
proximately 44 percent of the cost of every beer. Hard-
working adult beer drinkers shouldn’t be forced to pay
more for beer in order to address an issue that is more
effectively addressed through voluntary measures.
At the same time, we are encouraged to see positive
attention paid to many of the effective, targeted and
Alcohol
135

sensible approaches—such as increasing parental in-
volvement, and consistent enforcement of existing un-
derage drinking laws—that the beer industry sup-
ports. These approaches have been the focus of the
extensive educational programs to prevent illegal un-
derage drinking the industry has implemented for
twenty years in communities nationwide.
Steady progress has been achieved over the past two
decades in reducing underage drinking, a fact borne out
in several government-funded studies and surveys. In
fact, one of the main indicators cited in the NAS report,
the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, reported
last week most teens—82 percent—do not drink.
Brewers have actively encouraged such approaches
for many years. Millions of copies of educational ma-
terials have been distributed free of charge to parents
and educators throughout the nation. Several other
programs supported by the industry or undertaken in
cooperation with state officials are addressed in the
NAS document.
The Beer Institute, established in 1986, is the national
trade association for the brewing industry, representing
both large and small brewers, as well as importers and
industry suppliers. The institute is committed to the
development of sound public policy and to the values
of civic duty and personal responsibility. Their Web site
address is http://www.beerinstitute.com.
Among Americans, it is commonly believed that youths and
young adults drink more frequently and experience more alco-
hol-related problems than their European counterparts. This per-
ception, in turn, is often used as an argument for change in U.S.
alcohol policies and prevention initiatives, including elimination
of minimum-drinking-age laws and development of programs
that teach responsible drinking to young people. Do European
young people drink less and have fewer problems than their
American counterparts? This question was addressed by a study
of the U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Juvenile Programs
(2001). Figures 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 compare youths aged fifteen to six-
teen in twenty-six European countries to similar-age youths (that
is, tenth graders) in the United States. The drinking patterns were
compared on prevalence of drinking in the past thirty days,
prevalence of drinking five or more drinks in a row, and the
136
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

prevalence of intoxication in the past thirty days. The findings
provide no evidence that youths from the United States drink
more than their European counterparts.
Infant Alcohol Syndrome
The U.S. National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
(NIAAA) reports that alcohol use during pregnancy is a public
Alcohol
137
24
50
46
41
38
23
29
14
34
37
40
38
31
47
36
23
33
51
31
39
61
38
27
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Croatia
Cyprus
Denmark
Czech Republic
Estonia
Faroe Islands
Finland
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Lithuania
Malta
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Sweden
Ukraine
UK
USA
Figure 4.2
Prevalence of Drinking Five or More Drinks in a Row:
United States and Europe
Figure 4.1
Prevalence of Drinking in Past Thirty Days: United States and Europe
39
74
55
55
46
53
49
54
43
66
59
66
69
56
48
74
58
45
51
81
67
68
39
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Croatia
Cyprus
Denmark
Czech Republic
Estonia
Faroe Islands
Finland
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Lithuania
Malta
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Sweden
Ukraine
UK
USA
Source: U.S. Department of Justice. 2001. Comparison of Drinking Rates and Problems: European Countries and the
United States. Calverton, MD: Pacific Institute of Research and Evaluation.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice. 2001. Comparison of Drinking Rates and Problems: European Countries and the
United States. Calverton, MD: Pacific Institute of Research and Evaluation.

health problem because it can cause a range of harmful conse-
quences to the developing fetus, resulting in serious birth defects.
The most serious condition caused by prenatal alcohol use is fetal
alcohol syndrome (FAS). This problem is characterized by de-
formed facial features, smaller heads, abnormal joints and limbs,
growth retardation, and developmental abnormalities in the cen-
tral nervous system that often include mental retardation as well
as poor coordination, learning problems, and short memories.
Other FAS characteristics that often exist are mental health prob-
lems, disrupted school experience, inappropriate sexual behavior,
trouble with the law, alcohol and drug problems, difficulty caring
for themselves and their children, and homelessness. In the
United States, estimates of FAS range from 0.5 to 2 cases per 1,000
live births. In high-risk populations, reported rates are 9.8 per
1,000 live births (Hankin 2002; Stratton, Howe, and Battaglia
1997; Streissguth and Kanter 1997). 
Another perspective of the Fetal Alcohol Syndrome problem
calls into question the seriousness of FAS and the fear it has gen-
erated. The following is an excerpt from the Internet site of Dr.
David Hanson, “Alcohol: Problems and Solutions—Fetal Alcohol
Syndrome.”
Should Pregnant Women Drink at All?
Is there a safe or acceptable level of alcohol con-
sumption for pregnant women?
•
The Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists recently conducted a large
138
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?
Figure 4.3
Prevalence of Intoxication in Past Thirty Days: United States and Europe
21
48
13
41
21
19
11
23
30
14
35
19
42
46
20
16
51
34
20
58
31
10
13
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Croatia
Cyprus
Denmark
Czech Republic
Estonia
Faroe Islands
Finland
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Lithuania
Malta
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Sweden
Ukraine
UK
USA
Source: U.S. Department of Justice. 2001. Comparison of Drinking Rates and Problems: European Countries and the
United States. Calverton, MD: Pacific Institute of Research and Evaluation.

study including 400,000 American women, all
of whom had consumed alcohol during
pregnancy. Not a single case of fetal alcohol
syndrome occurred and no adverse effects on
children were found when consumption was
under 8.5 drinks per week.
•
A recent review of research studies found that
fetal alcohol syndrome only occurs among
alcoholics. The evidence is clear that there is no
apparent risk to a child when the pregnant
woman consumes no more than one drink per
day.
•
A study of moderate drinking during pregnancy
found no negative effects. The researchers
suggested that one drink per day provides a
significant margin of safety, although they did
not encourage drinking during pregnancy. 
A study of pregnancies in eight European countries
found that consuming no more than one drink per day
did not appear to have any effect on fetal growth. A
follow-up of children at 18 months of age found that
those from women who drank during pregnancy, even
two drinks per day, scored higher in several areas of
development.
•
A recent analysis of seven major medical
research studies involving over 130,000
pregnancies suggests that consuming two to
fourteen drinks per week does not increase the
risk of giving birth to a child with either
malformations or fetal alcohol syndrome.
•
Negative effects appear to be related to
relatively higher levels of consumption per
occasion, and hence, to higher blood alcohol
content levels. Thus, it appears to be very
important never to consume more than one
drink in any one day while pregnant. 
The guidelines of the Royal College of Obstetricians
and Gynaecologists recommend “women should be
careful about alcohol consumption in pregnancy and
limit this to no more than one standard drink per day.”
These conclusions appear consistent with the research
Alcohol
139

findings of the Institute of Medicine of the National
Academy of Sciences, a major science body in the U.S.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gyne-
cologists concludes, “[T]here is no evidence that an oc-
casional drink is harmful. Women who drink heavily
throughout pregnancy may have smaller babies with
physical and mental handicaps, but women who drink
moderately may have babies with no more problems
than those women who drink rarely or not at all.”
This group of medical specialists points out that
“[i]t’s hard to determine the amount and timing of al-
cohol consumption that puts the fetus at risk. One
study shows that women who drank only occasionally
and moderately (described in this particular study as
between one and forty-five drinks spaced out over a
month) had babies with no more problems than those
women who drank rarely or not at all. There were no
differences either in size or number of babies’ handi-
caps between the women who drank moderately and
those who abstained or drank lightly.”
The Harvard Women’s Health Watch advises preg-
nant women “having more than one alcoholic drink
per day puts the fetus at risk for various defects and
disabilities.” Thus, it suggests that expectant women
should limit themselves to one drink per day. The
health publication emphasizes that one drink is twelve
ounces of beer, five ounces of wine, or 1.5 ounces of
spirits or liquor.
But, of course, alcohol consumption might have
very subtle or undetectable undesirable effects on chil-
dren. Therefore, until more is known for certain, preg-
nant women might well be advised to choose the
safest option, that of abstaining during pregnancy.2
What Is the Problem?
There is no scientific support for the type of wide-
spread hysteria that permeates public discussion on
fetal alcohol syndrome [FAS]. Many people falsely be-
lieve that even a single drink during pregnancy can
cause FAS. If this were true, the majority of the popu-
lations of dozens of countries around the world would
suffer the effects of FAS!
Some pregnant women have actually become fran-
140
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

tic upon realizing they had inadvertently eaten salad
that had wine vinegar dressing, fearing their children
would be born suffering from fetal alcohol syndrome.
Of course, wine vinegar, being vinegar, contains no
alcohol.
In reality, there is absolutely no evidence that light
drinking, even on a daily basis, leads to fetal alcohol
syndrome. Actually, most women who are light or mod-
erate drinkers choose not to drink during pregnancy.
The real problem is found among frequent heavy
drinkers, who most often are alcoholics consuming
heavily on a daily basis throughout their pregnancies.
Additionally, those who give birth to FAS children
characteristically smoke, use illegal drugs, are fre-
quently malnourished, and rarely receive adequate
medical care during pregnancy. And drinking during
pregnancy has not declined among such women over
time. Because of their addiction, these women are vir-
tually immune to our current educational approach.
This may also be because so many of these women are
poorly educated and often lead marginal lives.
This is the target group to which our efforts and re-
sources need to be directed in a massive drive to get
these women the necessary help and treatment. It will
not be cheap or easy, but it is essential if we seriously
want to reduce the incidence of fetal alcohol syndrome.
We need to abandon scare tactics for real solutions.
Binge Drinking
The consumption of five or more drinks in a row on at least one
occasion is defined as “binge drinking.” Based on the National In-
stitute on Drug Abuse “Monitoring the Future” report (Johnston,
O’Malley, and Backman 1999), 12 percent of eighth graders, 22
percent of tenth graders, 29 percent of twelfth graders, and 40
percent of college students reported five or more drinks in a row
at least once in the prior two-week period. It has been noted that
while there has been a significant decline in the use of other drugs
among high school seniors and college-age youths, very little has
changed in terms of the pattern of binge drinking over time,
according to four studies conducted by the Harvard School of
Public Health from 1993 to 2001.
Alcohol
141

Government publications note that a host of risk factors, in-
cluding sexual encounters with their inherent chance of pregnancy,
sexually transmitted diseases, and HIV exposure, as well as date
rape and other violence, can and do occur more frequently while
students are consuming large amounts of alcohol by binge drinking.
Binge drinking facts from public information newsletters
and Internet sources show the following:
•
College students engage in binge drinking more than
their noncollege peers.
•
Students who binge drink are more likely to damage
property, have trouble with authorities, miss classes,
have hangovers, and experience injuries than those
who do not.
•
Binge drinking in high school, especially among males,
is strongly predictive of binge drinking in college.
•
College presidents agree binge drinking is the most
serious problem on campus.
•
Students more likely to drink are white, age twenty-three
or younger, and are residents of a fraternity or sorority.
•
The percentage of students who are binge drinkers is
nearly uniform from freshman to senior year, even
though students under twenty-one are prohibited from
purchasing alcohol.
•
More than half of the binge drinkers, almost one in four
students, are frequent binge drinkers—they binge three
or more times in a two-week period, although one in
five students report abstaining from drinking alcohol.
(SAMHSA 1999; Alcohol Policies Project 2000; Harvard
School of Public Health 1993–2001)
As with fetal alcohol syndrome, a different interpretation of the
facts is presented. The following perception is that of Dr. David
Hanson.
What Is Binge Drinking?
To most people, binge drinking brings to mind a self-
destructive and unrestrained drinking bout lasting for
at least a couple of days during which time the heavily
intoxicated drinker “drops out” by not working, ignor-
ing responsibilities, squandering money, and engaging
in other harmful behaviors such as fighting or risky
sex. This view is consistent with that portrayed in dic-
142
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

tionary definitions, in literature, in art, and in plays or
films such as the classic “Come Back Little Sheeba” and
“Lost Weekend” or the recent “Leaving Las Vegas.”
It is also consistent with the usage of physicians and
other clinicians. As the editor of the Journal of Studies
on Alcohol emphasizes, binge describes an extended
period of time (typically at least two days) during
which time a person repeatedly becomes intoxicated
and gives up his or her usual activities and obligations
in order to become intoxicated. It is the combination of
prolonged use and the giving up of usual activities
that forms the core of the clinical definition of binge.
Other researchers have explained that it is counter-
productive to brand as pathological the consumption
of only five drinks over the course of an evening of eat-
ing and socializing. It is clearly inappropriate to
equate it with a binge.
Arecent Swedish study, for example, defines a binge as
the consumption of half a bottle of spirits or two bottles
of wine on the same occasion. Similarly, a study in Italy
found that consuming an average of eight drinks a day
was considered normal drinking—clearly not bingeing.
In the United Kingdom, bingeing is commonly defined
as consuming eleven or more drinks on an occasion. But
in the United States, some researchers have defined
bingeing as consuming five or more drinks on an occa-
sion (an “occasion” can refer to an entire day). And now
some have even expanded the definition to include con-
suming four or more drinks on an occasion by a woman.
Consider a woman who has two glasses of wine with
her leisurely dinner and then sips two more drinks over
the course of a four or five hour evening. In the view of
most people, such a woman would be acting responsi-
bly. Indeed, her blood alcohol content (BAC) would re-
main low. It’s difficult to imagine that she would even
be able to feel the effects of the alcohol. However, some
researchers would now define her as a binger!
How useful is such an unrealistic definition? It is
very useful if the intent is to inflate the extent of a so-
cial problem. And it would please members of the
Prohibition Party and the Women’s Christian Temper-
Alcohol
143

ance Union. But it is not very useful if the intent is to
accurately describe reality to the average person.
It is highly unrealistic and inappropriate to apply a
prohibitionist definition to describe drinking in the
United States today. Perhaps we should define binge
drinking as any intoxicated drinking that leads to cer-
tain harmful or destructive behaviors. Perhaps we
should at least require that a person have a certain
minimum level of alcohol in the bloodstream as a pre-
requisite to be considered a binger. Perhaps we could
even require that a person be intoxicated before being
labeled a “binger.” But one thing is certain: the unreal-
istic definitions being promoted by some researchers
are misleading and deceptive at best.
The conclusion is clear: Be very skeptical the next
time you hear or read a report about “binge” drinking.
Were the people in question really bingeing? By any
reasonable definition, most almost certainly were not.
What Is the Extent of “Binge” Drinking?
Although a continuing barrage of newspaper articles,
TV shows, and special interest–group reports claim
that binge drinking among young people is a growing
epidemic, the actual fact is quite to the contrary. Binge
drinking among young people is clearly declining and
it has been doing so for many years.
“Binge” drinking among high school seniors has
declined from 41.2 percent to 31.3 percent between
1980 and 1997. That’s a drop of almost one-fourth (24
percent).
Similarly, the proportion of U.S. military personnel
who “binge” has also declined significantly, according
to six worldwide surveys conducted for the military
over a recently ended fifteen-year period.
“Binge” drinking is also down among American col-
lege students, and it has clearly been declining for a
number of years. This is clear. For example, according
to a recent study of college drinking by Dr. Henry
Wechsler of Harvard University, “binge” drinking has
decreased significantly across the country over the
four years since his earlier study. His research also
found that the proportion of abstainers jumped nearly
22 percent in that short period of time.
144
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

These findings are consistent with data collected for
the National Institute on Drug Abuse by the Institute
for Social Research (ISR) at the University of Michigan.
The ISR research found that college “binge” drinking
in the United States recently reached the lowest level
of the entire seventeen-year period that its surveys
have been conducted. Similarly, it found that the pro-
portion of drinkers has reached an all-time low among
college students.
Research conducted at colleges across the United
States repeatedly since the early 1980s by Dr. David
Hanson (State University of New York) and Dr. Ruth
Engs (Indiana University) has found declines over that
time both in the proportion of collegians who drink at a
high level and in the proportion who drink any alcohol.
So the facts are clear. “Binge” drinking is down and
abstinence is up among American college students.
Yet, in spite of this and other overwhelming evidence,
the false impression persists that drinking is increasing
and that “bingeing continues unabated.”
So What’s the Harm?
This misperception is dangerous because when young
people go off to college falsely thinking that “every-
body” is drinking and bingeing, they are more likely
to drink and to “binge” in order to conform. Correct-
ing this misperception is important because it can
empower young people and break the vicious self-
fulfilling prophecy that helps perpetuate collegiate al-
cohol abuse.
Individual students almost always believe that most
others on campus drink more heavily than they do,
and the disparity between the perceived and the actual
behaviors tends to be quite large. By conducting sur-
veys of actual student behavior and publicizing the re-
sults, the extent of heavy drinking can be quickly and
significantly reduced. The most carefully assessed
such abuse prevention project on campus has demon-
strated a 35 percent reduction in heavy drinking, a 31
percent reduction in alcohol-related injuries to self,
and a 54 percent reduction in alcohol-related injuries
to others. And similar results have been demonstrated
Alcohol
145

at colleges across the country with this quick and in-
expensive approach.
Too many college students still abuse alcohol. But
people who exaggerate the problem and distort its
magnitude are actually making the problem worse. If
we are to further reduce alcohol abuse and the prob-
lems it causes, we have to publicize the actual facts
and correct damaging misperceptions. Doing so will
empower students to do what they as individuals gen-
erally want to do: drink less or not drink at all.
The challenge of correcting dangerous mispercep-
tions about college-student drinking is enormous.
Many researchers and others have a vested interest in
inflating the extent of “binge” drinking and stories of
drinking epidemics make dramatic headlines that sell
more publications. But scare tactics are actually coun-
terproductive and it turns out that the most effective
way to reduce alcohol abuse is simply to tell the truth
and make sure that young people understand the facts.3
Licit-Drug Overviews
Many aspects of tobacco and alcohol abuse warrant attention. The
following overviews focus on the alcohol issue in particular.
Children of alcoholics and impaired driving attract considerable
concern because of their impact on individuals, families, and so-
ciety—their well-being and safety.
Children of Alcoholics
It is estimated that about 7 million children under the age of
eighteen live in households in the United States with at least one
alcoholic parent. There is a genetic factor associated with vulner-
ability to alcohol dependence; however, there are other issues of
concern, including social and psychological dysfunction, that
may result from growing up in an alcoholic home. Among the
symptoms that may be exhibited as a result of living in such an
environment, as well as other types of dysfunctional families, are
depression and anxiety, including crying, bed-wetting, social iso-
lation, fear of school, or nightmares (Center for Substance Abuse
Prevention 1994).
146
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

The following “Facts for Families,” prepared by the Ameri-
can Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (1999), pro-
vides insight of the problem:
One in five adult Americans lived with an alcoholic
while growing up. Child and adolescent psychiatrists
know these children are at greater risk for having emo-
tional problems than children whose parents are not
alcoholics. Alcoholism runs in families, and children of
alcoholics are four times more likely than other chil-
dren to become alcoholics. Most children of alcoholics
have experienced some form of neglect or abuse.
A child in such a family may have a variety of problems:
Guilt—The child may see himself or herself as the main
cause of the mother’s or father’s drinking.
Anxiety—The child may worry constantly about the
situation at home. He or she may fear the alcoholic parent
will become sick or injured, and may also fear fights and
violence between the parents.
Embarrassment—Parents may give the child the message
that there is a terrible secret at home. The ashamed child
does not invite friends home and is afraid to ask anyone
for help.
Inability to have close relationships—Because the child has
been disappointed by the drinking parent many times, he
or she often does not trust others.
Confusion—The alcoholic parent will change suddenly
from being loving to angry, regardless of the child’s
behavior. A regular daily schedule, which is very
important for a child, does not exist because bedtimes and
mealtimes are constantly changing.
Anger—The child feels anger at the alcoholic parent for
drinking, and may be angry at the nonalcoholic parent for
lack of support and protection.
Depression—The child feels lonely and helpless to change
the situation.
Although the child tries to keep the alcoholism a secret, teachers,
Licit-Drug Overviews
147

relatives, other adults, or friends may sense that something is
wrong. Child and adolescent psychiatrists advise that the follow-
ing behaviors may signal a drinking or other problem at home:
•
Failure in school; truancy
•
Lack of friends; withdrawal from classmates
•
Delinquent behavior, such as stealing or violence
•
Frequent physical complaints, such as headaches or
stomachaches
•
Abuse of drugs or alcohol
•
Aggression toward other children
•
Risk-taking behaviors
•
Depression or suicidal thoughts or behavior 
Some children of alcoholics may act like responsible “parents”
within the family and among friends. They may cope with the al-
coholism by becoming controlled, successful “overachievers”
throughout school, and at the same time be emotionally isolated
from other children and teachers. Their emotional problems may
show only when they become adults.
Whether or not their parents are receiving treatment for al-
coholism, these children and adolescents can benefit from educa-
tional programs and mutual-help groups such as programs for
children of alcoholics, Al-Anon, and Alateen. Early professional
help is also important in preventing more serious problems for
the child, including alcoholism. Child and adolescent psychia-
trists help these children with the child’s own problems, and also
help the child to understand they are not responsible for the
drinking problems of their parents.
The treatment program may include group therapy with
other youngsters, which reduces the isolation of being a child of
an alcoholic. The child and adolescent psychiatrist will often
work with the entire family, particularly when the alcoholic par-
ent has stopped drinking, to help them develop healthier ways of
relating to one another.
Impaired Driving
A person who operates an automobile or motorcycle while under
the influence of alcohol (or other drug) is driving impaired. The
following information about impaired driving has been drawn
from multiple sources published on the Internet by Mothers
148
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

Against Drunk Driving (MADD) and the National Highway Traf-
fic Safety Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation
(2002). The facts presented below have been categorized in terms
of patterns of use and impaired driving; the consequences, often
injury and death; and costs.
Patterns of Use and Impaired Driving 
•
Impairment is not determined by the type of drink, but
rather by the amount of alcohol ingested over a specific
period of time.
•
The speed of alcohol absorption affects the rate at
which one becomes drunk. Unlike foods, alcohol does
not have to be slowly digested. As a person drinks
faster than the alcohol can be eliminated, the drug
accumulates in the body, resulting in higher and higher
levels of alcohol in the blood.
•
A standard drink is defined as 12 ounces of beer, 5
ounces of wine, or 1.5 ounces of 80-proof distilled
spirits, all of which contain the same amount of alcohol.
•
The average person metabolizes alcohol at the rate of
about one drink per hour. Only time will sober a
person up. Drinking strong coffee, exercising, or taking
a cold shower will not help. Beer is the drink most
commonly consumed by people stopped for alcohol-
impaired driving or involved in alcohol-related crashes.
Alcohol-related fatalities are caused primarily by the
consumption of beer (80 percent), followed by
liquor/wine at 20 percent.
•
There is evidence that heavier drinkers prefer to drink
at bars and other persons’ homes, and at multiple
locations requiring longer driving distances. Young
drivers have been found to prefer drinking at private
parties, while older, more educated drivers prefer bars
and taverns.
•
The rate of alcohol involvement in fatal crashes is more
than three times as high at night as during the day (63
percent versus 19 percent).
•
For fatal crashes occurring from midnight to 3:00 A.M.,
79 percent involved alcohol.
•
In 2002, 31 percent of all fatal crashes during the week
were alcohol-related, compared to 54 percent on
Licit-Drug Overviews
149

weekends. For all crashes, the alcohol involvement rate
was 4 percent during the week and 11 percent during
the weekend. 
The Consequences: Injury and Death
•
In 2000, the United States experienced the largest
percentage increase in alcohol-related traffic deaths on
record. Forty percent of all traffic fatalities were
deemed to be related to alcohol in 2000, versus 38.3
percent in 1999.
•
In 2002, an estimated 17,419 people died in alcohol-
related traffic crashes—an average of one every thirty
minutes. These deaths constitute 41 percent of the
42,815 total traffic fatalities.
•
In 2001, about 1,461 fatalities occurred in crashes
involving alcohol-impaired or intoxicated drivers who
had at least one previous DWI conviction—about 8.4
percent of all alcohol-related traffic fatalities.
•
The intoxication rate (those over 0.08 BAC) for male
drivers involved in fatal crashes was 25 percent,
compared with 12 percent for female drivers.
•
Those drivers twenty-one to twenty-four years old
were most likely to be intoxicated (BAC of 0.08 or
greater) in fatal crashes in 2002. Thirty-three percent of
drivers twenty-one to twenty-four years old involved
in fatal crashes were intoxicated, followed by ages
twenty-five to thirty-four (28 percent) and thirty-five to
forty-four (26 percent).
•
Incidence of intoxication for drivers in fatal crashes in
2001 was highest for motorcycle operators (31 percent)
and lowest for drivers of large trucks (2 percent).
•
About three in every ten Americans will be involved in
an alcohol-related crash at some time in their lives.
•
In 2001, more than half a million people were injured in
crashes where police reported that alcohol was
present—an average of one person injured
approximately every two minutes.
•
Drunk driving is the nation’s most frequently
committed violent crime.
•
In 2000, motor vehicle crashes were the leading cause
150
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

of death for people from one to thirty-four years old. 
Costs
•
Alcohol-related crashes in the United States cost the
public an estimated $114.3 billion in 2000, including $51.1
billion in monetary costs and an estimated $63.2 billion in
quality-of-life losses. People other than the drinking
driver paid $71.6 billion of the alcohol-related crash bill.
•
In 2000, alcohol-related crashes accounted for an
estimated 18 percent of the $103 billion in U.S. auto
insurance payments. Reducing alcohol-related crashes
by 10 percent would save $1.8 billion in claims
payments and loss-adjustment expenses.
•
In 2000, the average alcohol-related fatality in the
United States cost $3.5 million. The estimated cost per
injured survivor was $99,000.
•
In 2000, the societal costs of alcohol-related crashes in the
United States averaged $1.00 per drink consumed. People
other than the drinking driver paid $0.60 per drink.
Notes
1. Percentages are rounded to the nearest whole number.
2. David Hanson, professor emeritus of sociology, State University of
New York, Potsdam, NY. This excerpt was presented with permission.
Gratitude is expressed to Professor Hanson for the use of his informa-
tion, which is available at http://www2.Potsdam.edu/alcohol-info (ac-
cessed June 1, 2003). References used by Dr. Hanson for his presentations
of FAS and binge drinking may be found at his Web site.
3. Ibid. 
References
Alcohol and Drug Information Clearinghouse. 2003. “A Parenting Per-
spective: Children of Alcoholics.” Available at http://www.prevlink.
org/getthefacts/facts/coa.html (accessed June 1, 2003).
Alcohol Policies Project, Center for Science in the Public Interest. 2000.
References
151

“Fact Sheet: Binge Drinking on College Campuses.” Available at
http://www.cspinet.org/booze/collfact1.htm (accessed January 21,
2004).
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 1999. “Children
of Alcoholics.” AACAP Facts for Families series #17. Available at
http://www.aacap.org/publications/factsfam/alcoholic.htm (accessed
July 1, 2003).
American Legacy Foundation and the National Center on Addiction and
Substance Abuse. 2003. “Reducing Teen Smoking can Cut Marijuana Use
Significantly.” September 16. Available at http://www.teensarenota
disease.com/CASA_smoking_pot_link.htm (accessed March 9, 2004).
Benowitz, N. 1996. “Pharmacology of Nicotine: Addiction and Thera-
peutics.” Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology 36: 597–613.
Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. 2003. “Health Groups Say Tobacco Pre-
vention Programs Can Save States Money And Cuts Are ‘Penny-Wise,
Pound-Foolish.’” Press release, January 22. Available at http://
tobaccofreekids.org/Script/DisplayPressRelease.php3?Display=591 (ac-
cessed January 28, 2004).
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP). 1994. Prevention Primer:
An Encyclopedia of Alcohol, Tobacco, and other Prevention Terms. United
States Department of Health and Human Services. Rockville, MD:
SAMHSA.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2001a. CDC Fact Book
2000/2001. Washington, DC: U.S. Public Health Service, Office of the Sur-
geon General.
———. 2001b. Women and Smoking: A Report of the Surgeon General. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Public Health Service, Office of the Surgeon General.
Collins, J., and P. Messerschmidt. 1993. “Epidemiology of Alcohol-
Related Violence.” Alcohol Health and Research World 17, no. 2: 93–100
Cunningham, R. 1996. Smoke & Mirrors: The Canadian Tobacco War. Ot-
tawa: International Development Research Centre.
Distilled Spirits Council. 2003. “Parents and Adults Are the Key to Re-
ducing Underage Drinking: Raising Taxes Is Not the Answer.” Press re-
lease 
September 
10. 
Available 
at 
http://www.discus.org/
mediaroom/2003/release.asp?pressid=114 (accessed January 27, 2004).
Grimes, W. 1997. “The Next to Last Whiff of Smoke and Mirrors.” New
York Times, April 20, 2.
Hankin, J. 2002. “Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Prevention Research.” Na-
tional Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Available at
http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/arh26-1/58-65.htm (accessed
January 21, 2004).
152
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

Harvard School of Public Health, College of Alcohol Studies Surveys.
1993–2001. 
Available 
at 
http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/cas/
Documents/trends/ (accessed January 1, 2004).
Hibell, B., et al. 1997. The 1995 ESPAD Report: Alcohol and Other Drug Use
among Students in 26 European Countries. Stockholm: Swedish Council for
Information on Alcohol and Other Drugs.
Isralowitz, R. 2002. Drug Use, Policy and Management. Westport, CT:
Auburn House.
Johnston, L., P. O’Malley, and J. Backman. 1999. The Monitoring the Future
National Results on Adolescent Drug Use: Overview of Key Findings.
Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse. Available at
http://www.monitoringthefuture.org (accessed June 1, 2003).
Kessler, D. 1995. “Sounding Board: Nicotine Addiction in Young People.”
New England Journal of Medicine 333, no. 3 (July 20): 186–189.
———. 2001. A Question of Intent. New York: Public Affairs.
Lazarus, David. 2002. “U.S. Pushed by Philip Morris, Stalling Global Ban
on Tobacco Ads.” Join Togther On Line, September 22. Available at
http://www.jointogether.org/sa/news/features/reader/0,1854,555463,
00.html (accessed January 28, 2004).
Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD). “Did You Know. . . .” Avail-
able at http://www.madd.org/stats/0,1056,1789,00.html (accessed Jan-
uary 1, 2004).
National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence. 1998. “FYI:
Binge Drinking.” Available at http://www.ncadd.org/facts/fyibinge.
html (accessed January 1, 2004).
———. 1999. “Use of Alcohol and Other Drugs Among Women: Con-
sumption Rates, Pattrens and Trends.” August. Available at http://
www.ncadd.org/facts/women.html (accessed January 28, 2004).
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), U.S. Depart-
ment of Transportation. 2002. Traffic Safety Facts 2000: Alcohol. Washing-
ton, DC: NHTSA. Available at http://www.dol.gov/asp/programs/
drugs/party/fact.htm (accessed January 1, 2004).
———. 2003. “DOT Releases Preliminary Estimates of 2002 Highway Fa-
talities.” News Release April 23. Available at http://www.dot.gov/
affairs/nhtsa1303.htm (accessed January 13, 2004).
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 1990. “Alcohol and
Women.” 
Available 
at 
http://alcoholism.about.com/library/
blnaa10.htm (accessed January 21, 2004).
Schapiro, M. 2002. “Big Tobacco.” Nation (May 6). Available at
http://www.thenation.com/doc.mhtml?i=20020506&s=schapiro (ac-
cessed January 1, 2004).
References
153

Stratton, K., C. Howe, and F. Battaglia, eds. 1997. Fetal Alcohol Syndrome:
Diagnosis, Epidemiology, Prevention, and Treatment. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Academy Press.
Streissguth, A., and J. Kanter, eds. 1997. The Challenge of Fetal Alcohol Syn-
drome. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA). 1999. National Household Survey on Drug Abuse Main Find-
ings. Rockville, MD: United States Department of Health and Human
Services.
———. 2002. National Household Survey on Drug Abuse. Rockville, MD:
United States Department of Health and Human Services.
———. 2003. Emergency Department Trends from the Drug Abuse Warning
Network, Final Estimates 1995–2002. Rockville, MD: United States Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services.
Switzerland Addiction Research Institute. 2003. “Tobacco, Alcohol,
Drugs Killing 7 Million a Year.” Available at http://www.abc.net.au/
science/news/health/HealthRepublish_792982.htm (accessed January
10, 2004).
University of Michigan News and Information Services. 2002. Teen Smok-
ing Declines Sharply in 2002, More than Offsetting Large Increases in the Early
1990s. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan News and Information Ser-
vices. Available at http://www.monitoringthefuture.org (accessed Janu-
ary 1, 2004).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and SAMHSA’s Na-
tional Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information. “Prevention
Primer.” Available at http://store.health.org (accessed July 1, 2003).
U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Juvenile Programs. 2001. “Compar-
ison of Drinking Rates and Problems: European Countries and the
United States.” Available at http://www.ncjrs.org/html/ojjdp/com-
pendium/2001/9902NCPC_PIRE.pdf (accessed January 1, 2004).
World Health Organization. 2001. Women and the Tobacco Epidemic—Chal-
lenges for the 21st Century. Geneva: WHO.
———. 2002. Hazardous Harmonization in Smoking by European Youth.
Available at http://www.who.dk/document/cma/PB032002e.pdf (ac-
cessed January 1, 2004).
Yoon, Y., H. Yi, B. Grant, F. Stinson, and M. Dufor. 2002. Surveillance Re-
port #60: Liver Cirrhosis Mortality in the United States, 1970–99. Rockville,
MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Division of
Biometry and Epidemiology.
154
Tobacco and Alcohol: What Are the Facts and Data?

5
Chronology
T
his chapter lists significant events, legal decisions, and inter-
national agreements that have had an impact on the drug
problem in the United States and the policies that have been
adopted. Among the examples are those that relate to issues of
drug-supply reduction by limiting the cultivation, production,
trafficking, and distribution of drugs. Demand-reduction initia-
tives that seek to prevent the onset of drug use, help drug users
break the habit, and provide treatment through rehabilitation and
social reintegration are presented as well.
1875–
California passes the first antiopium law in the United
1890
States, declaring it a felony to use laudanum, an opium
preparation, or any other narcotic. This attempt fails to
control unlawful use of opium in the state.
In 1881, California passes a law making it a misde-
meanor to maintain a place where opium is sold,
given away, or smoked. The bill applies only to com-
mercial places, presumably the opium dens com-
monly frequented by Chinese immigrants. Smoking
opium alone, or with friends in a private residence, is
not covered by the legislation.
During the last quarter of the nineteenth century,
other western states such as Nevada and the Territory
of Oregon pass legislation restricting the sale and use
of opium and other substances. Doctors, however,
continue to prescribe opium derivatives for a variety
155

1875–1890 of ailments. Many over-the-counter preparations con-
(cont.)
taining quantities of morphine, heroin, and opium are
still available to anyone complaining of an illness
(Casey 1978).
1906
Congress passes the first Pure Food and Drug Act, de-
spite opposition from the patent-medicine interests.
The 1906 act requires that medicines containing opi-
ates and certain other drugs must say so on their la-
bels. Later amendments to the act also require that the
quantity of each drug be truly stated on the label, and
that the drugs meet official standards of identity and
purity (Brecher et al. 1972; Brecher 1972).
1909
First international meeting on drugs is held in Shang-
hai, China, to discuss opium. President Theodore Roo-
sevelt convenes the meeting in an effort to help China
deal with the problem of opium addiction among its
inhabitants. He hopes that in return China will reopen
its market to imported U.S. manufactured goods. This
market was closed in response to restraints placed on
Chinese immigration to the United States under the
Chinese Exclusion Act. The United States is in support
of a total ban on opium. Britain, fearing the loss of its
valuable trade, opposes the plan. Thirteen nations at-
tend, but no international treaty comes out of the con-
ference.
The U.S. Congress passes the Act to Prohibit the Im-
portation and Smoking of Opium and the Opium Ex-
clusion Act, making it criminal to buy and sell opium
for nonmedicinal purposes (Drug Policy Alliance
1998).
1912
The 1909 Shanghai conference did not produce an in-
ternational treaty; however, another international
drug conference is held in 1912. At the 1912 Interna-
tional Opuim Conference in the Hague, some forty-six
nations discuss morphine, cocaine, cannabis, heroin,
as well as opium. The outcome of the conference is the
Hague Convention for the Suppression of Opium and
156
Chronology

Other Drugs. It requires the production, sale, and use
of opium, heroin, morphine, and cocaine be limited to
medical and other legitimate purposes. Both the
United States and Italy want cannabis included in the
convention, but they are unsuccessful (Yao 1958).
1913
Congress passes the Harrison Act that is considered to
be a cornerstone of U.S. drug policy, including the
criminalization of drugs and the War on Drugs.
Prior to the act, narcotic use in the United States had
been declining; there was no black market in drugs,
no organized crime drug structure with its associated
violence and pervasive corruption of governmental
officials, and drug users were not stigmatized as
predatory criminals. After passage of the law, many
physicians were arrested, and some were convicted
and imprisoned for supplying narcotics to addicts
even on a physician’s prescription.
On May 15, 1915, just six weeks after the effective date
of the Harrison Act, an editorial in the New York Med-
ical Journal declared:
As was expected . . .the immediate effects
of the Harrison antinarcotic law were seen
in the flocking of drug habitues to hospitals
and sanatoriums. Sporadic crimes of vio-
lence were reported too, due usually to
desperate efforts by addicts to obtain
drugs, but occasionally to a delirious state
induced by sudden withdrawal. . . .The re-
ally serious results of this legislation, how-
ever, will only appear gradually and will
not always be recognized as such. These
will be the failures of promising careers,
the disrupting of happy families, the com-
mission of crimes that will never be traced
to their real cause, and the influx into hos-
pitals to the mentally disordered of many
who would otherwise live socially compe-
tent lives.
Chronology
157

1913
In 1918, after three years of the Harrison Act, the sec-
(cont.)
retary of the treasury appoints a committee to look
into the problem. The chairman of the committee is
Congressman Homer T. Rainey; members include a
professor of pharmacology from Harvard, a former
deputy commissioner of internal revenue responsible
for law enforcement, and Dr. A. G. Du Mez, secretary
of the United States Public Health Service. Among its
findings are the following:
•
Opium and other narcotic drugs (including
cocaine, which Congress had erroneously labeled
as a narcotic in 1914) are being used by about 1
million people. (This was almost certainly an
overestimate.)
•
The “underground” traffic in narcotic drugs is
about equal to the legitimate medical traffic.
•
The “dope peddlers” appear to have established a
national organization, smuggling the drugs in
through seaports or across the Canadian or
Mexican borders—especially the Canadian border.
•
The wrongful use of narcotic drugs has increased
since passage of the Harrison Act. Twenty cities,
including New York and San Francisco, report
such increases. 
To stem the rising tide of drug problems, the 1918
committee calls for sterner law enforcement. It recom-
mends more state laws patterned after the Harrison
Act.
Congress responds by tightening the Harrison Act.
In 1924, for example, a law is enacted prohibiting the
importation of heroin altogether, even for medicinal
use. This legislation grows out of the widespread
misapprehension that, because of the deteriorating
health, behavior, and status of addicts following pas-
sage of the Harrison Act and the subsequent conver-
sion of addicts from morphine to heroin, heroin must
be a much more damaging drug than opium or mor-
phine.
158
Chronology

In 1925, Dr. Lawrence Kolb reports that “If there is any
difference in the deteriorating effects of morphine and
heroin on addicts, it is too slight to be determined clin-
ically” (Kolb 1925). On the contrary, heroin ousts mor-
phine almost completely from the black market after
the law is passed.
An editorial in the Illinois Medical Journal for June
1926, after eleven years of federal law enforcement,
concludes: “The Harrison Narcotic law should never
have been placed upon the Statute books of the
United States. It is to be granted that the well-meaning
blunderers who put it there had in mind only the idea
of making it impossible for addicts to secure their sup-
ply of ‘dope’ and to prevent unprincipled people from
making fortunes, and fattening upon the infirmities of
their fellow men” (McNamara 2002; Brecher et al.
1972).
1916
United States v. Coca Cola Company of Atlanta is brought
before the Supreme Court, alleging that “Coca-Cola”
is adulterated and misbranded. The allegation of
adulteration is that the product contains an added
poisonous or added deleterious ingredient, caffeine,
which might render the product injurious to health. It
is alleged to be misbranded in that the name “Coca-
Cola” is a representation of the presence of the sub-
stances coca and cola; that the product contained no
coca and little if any cola and thus was an “imitation”
of these substances and was offered for sale under
their “distinctive name.” The Court rules in favor of
the company, declaring that “Coca-Cola” is the “dis-
tinctive name” of the product under which it has been
known and sold for more than twenty years as an ar-
ticle of food and not in violation of the Food and
Drugs Act provisions.
1919
The U.S. Supreme Court hears the Harrison Act in
United States v. Doremus and upholds the Harrison Act
as a valid exercise of the taxing power only by a 5–4
margin.
Chronology
159

1920
The Volstead Act (Prohibition) becomes the Eigh-
teenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution
(1920–1933). It legislates abstinence from alcohol. The
act prohibits the manufacture, sale, transport, import,
or export of alcoholic beverages. Upon ratification of
the amendment by the states, Congress votes its ap-
proval in October 1919, and enacts it into law as the
National Prohibition Act of 1920.
The law puts legal brewers out of business and opens
the nation’s door to unintended consequences: boot-
legging, gambling, prostitution, rackets, gangsters,
and organized crime (Minnesota Historical Society
2003).
1922
The Narcotics Drugs Import and Export Act (also
known as the Jones-Miller Act) is passed to eliminate
use of narcotics except for legitimate medicinal use.
Also, the legislation establishes the Federal Narcotics
Control Board (in the Treasury Department). Specifi-
cally, the act provides fines of up to $5,000 and prison
sentences of up to ten years for any individual found
guilty of being party to the unlawful importation of
narcotics. The legislation has little influence upon the
illicit-drug marketplace except to increase the price of
heroin and cocaine.
1925
In the landmark case Linder v. United States, the U.S.
Supreme Court rules unanimously, 9–0, that narcotic
agents have no legal right to interfere in the medical
prescription of narcotics—even if the prescription is
solely intended to maintain the narcotic addict on
their drug of choice. This is a major legal setback to
the supporters of the narcotic laws who want to stop
narcotic maintenance as a moral issue. In response,
the narcotic agents get around the ruling by indicting
15,000 people in the following years (by their own
records) but do not bring any of them to trial simply
because they know they would lose in court. The in-
dictments, however, are sufficient to instill enough
fear to permanently stop all medical attempts at nar-
160
Chronology

cotic maintenance in the United States (Schaffer Li-
brary of Drug Policy, Historical Research on Drug Pol-
icy; Linder v. United States).
1926
In United States v. Daugherty, the defendant is con-
victed of three separate offenses of sale of cocaine,
and receives three consecutive five-year sentences.
The court rules that it is legal to treat all three offenses
as separate offenses for sentencing but states: “We
deem it proper to add that the sentence of fifteen
years imposed upon respondent seems extremely
harsh.”
1929
Legislation (the Narcotics Control Act and the Nar-
cotics Farm–Porter Act) authorizes the construction of
two hospitals for drug addicts and the creation of the
Public Health Service (PHS) Narcotics Division. The
first of two facilities is built in Lexington, Kentucky, in
1935, and the second facility opens in Fort Worth,
Texas, in 1938. These facilities are in fact prisons mod-
ified to provide medical and psychiatric services.
1930
The Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN) is created in
the Treasury Department under a commissioner of
narcotics. The bureau is an enforcement structure
under the direction of Commissioner Harry Anslinger
who serves in the position as the bureau’s first com-
missioner for more than thirty-two years. The Federal
Bureau of Narcotics is one of the current Drug En-
forcement Agency’s predecessor agencies.
1932
Congress passes the Uniform State Narcotic Act to en-
courage state governments to control the rising use of
marijuana and to research the connection between
marijuana use and crime. Endorsed by the Federal Bu-
reau of Narcotics as an alternative to federal laws, by
1937 every state prohibits marijuana use.
1936
The government releases Reefer Madness, a docudrama
about the dangers of marijuana. The movie is still a
cult classic.
Chronology
161

1937
The Marijuana Tax Act imposes special taxes on per-
sons engaged in marijuana-related activities. Passage
of the act makes nonmedical use of marijuana illegal.
Only the birdseed industry, which argues that hemp
seeds give birds’ feathers a particularly shiny gloss, is
exempted from the act, and to this day birdseed pro-
ducers are allowed to use imported hemp seeds
treated so they do not sprout.
The Marijuana Tax Act effectively bans recreational
and medicinal use of cannabis in the United States.
The fines for violating the provisions of the act that
calls for the purchase of a Treasury Department tax
stamp are excessive—five years’ imprisonment, a
$2,000 fine, or both for noncompliance. Also, the act
authorizes the secretary of the treasury to grant the
commissioner (then Harry Anslinger) and agents of
the Treasury Department’s Bureau of Narcotics ab-
solute administrative regulatory and police powers
in the enforcement of the law (Bonnie and White-
bread 1970; Stack 2002; Musto 1972; Woodward
1937a; Solomon). In testimony to Congress,
Anslinger states, “Marihuana is an addictive drug
which produces in its users insanity, criminality, and
death.”
The American Medical Association goes on record
stating:
There is no evidence . . . that the medicinal
use of [cannabis and its preparations and
derivatives] has caused or is causing
cannabis addiction. As remedial agents,
they are used to an inconsiderable extent,
and the obvious purpose and effect of this
bill is to impose so many restrictions on
their use as to prevent such use altogether.
Since the medicinal use of cannabis has not
caused and is not causing addiction, the
prevention of the use of the drug for me-
dicinal purposes can accomplish no good
162
Chronology

end whatsoever. . . . The American Medical
Association has no objection to any reason-
able regulation of the medicinal use of
cannabis and its preparations and deriva-
tives. It does protest, however, against
being called upon to pay a special tax, to
use special order forms in order to procure
the drug, to keep special records concern-
ing its professional use and to make special
returns to the Treasury Department offi-
cials, as a condition precedent to the use of
cannabis in the practice of medicine.
(Woodward 1937b)
1942
The Opium Poppy Act passes, prohibiting the cultiva-
tion of the opium poppy except under license in the
United States.
1944
The New York Academy of Medicine publishes the La-
Guardia Report that examines the social, medicinal,
and legal aspects of marijuana. The report concludes,
among other things, that marijuana does not lead to
addiction.
1946
The Narcotics Act gives the Federal Bureau of Nar-
cotics authority over synthetic narcotics that could be
demonstrated as being addictive (U.S. Drug Enforce-
ment Agency).
1951
The Boggs Act is the first major drug legislation
passed since the 1937 Marijuana Tax Act. In response
to an apparent increase in illicit-drug use among mi-
nority populations in many northern cities, the act
calls for mandatory minimum federal sentences for
drug offenders, who face two to five years for a first
offense, five to ten for the second, and ten to twenty
for the third, with no possibility of parole or probation
after the first conviction (“On the Flip Side”).
Chronology
163

1956
The Narcotics Control Act is put into effect, imposing
harsher penalties than before. All drug violations are
now punishable by two to ten years for a first offense;
five to twenty years for a second offense; ten to forty
years for a third offense; a $20,000 fine; five to twenty-
five years on a first-time conviction for sales or smug-
gling, ten to forty years thereafter; ten to forty years for
sale by an eighteen year or older person to a minor; and
ten years to life imprisonment for heroin sale to a minor
with a possible death sentence. Other provisions of the
act rescind the ability to suspend a sentence or grant
probation except in cases of simple probation. Narcotics
agents are given permission to make arrests without
warrants, and drug users, drug addicts, and drug of-
fenders are made to register at the border when entering
or leaving the country (King 1974).
1960
The Manufacturing Act tightens controls and restrictions
over legally manufactured narcotic drugs. Asystem of li-
censing manufacturers and setting quotas for classes of
drugs, both natural and synthetic, is set in place.
The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs creates a
legal framework for combating trafficking in narcotic
drugs and drug abuse, including the early identifica-
tion, treatment, education, after-care, rehabilitation,
and social reintegration of the persons involved. The
convention does not specify what those measures
should be, leaving this to the individual signatories to
define. The convention proposes to outlaw cannabis
use and cannabis cultivation worldwide and eradicate
cannabis smoking within thirty years (by 1991). The
U.S. representative to the convention is Harry
Anslinger (European Legal Database on Drugs 2003).
President Kennedy appoints the “Prettyman Commis-
sion” (Advisory Commission on Narcotic and Drug
Abuse). Among its recommendations are to decrease
the use of minimum mandatory sentences, increase
appropriations for research, and transfer the Federal
Bureau of Narcotics to the Department of Health, Ed-
ucation, and Welfare.
164
Chronology

1961
Soon after his inauguration, President Kennedy initi-
ates action to have Harry Anslinger retire or removed
from his leadership role with the Federal Bureau of
Narcotics.
1962
California has a law against being an addict; Larry
Robinson is convicted based on the testimony of two
policemen who say that he had needle marks and ad-
mitted addiction. Robinson and his defense attorneys
say the conviction is unconstitutional. In Robinson v.
California, the state supreme court agrees, stating that
one’s “status” does not constitute a crime.
1963
The Community Mental Health Centers Act promotes
the establishment of community-based treatment cen-
ters. It is one of the first legislative acts to focus atten-
tion on drug treatment.
1965
The Drug Abuse Control Amendment puts control of
nonnarcotic drugs such as amphetamines, barbitu-
rates, and hallucinogenic substances under the
purview of the federal government.
1966
The Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act specifies nar-
cotic addiction as a “mental illness” and initiates a
federally sponsored national program for long-term
treatment and rehabilitation of narcotic addicts.
1968
The Alcoholic and Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation
Amendments authorize grants for the construction of
narcotic treatment facilities in the states, and for spe-
cialized training programs and materials for preven-
tion and treatment of narcotic addiction.
1969
Dr. Timothy Leary is charged with possession of mar-
ijuana. He argues that the Marijuana Tax Act is un-
constitutional on the grounds that it requires self-
incrimination in order to comply with the law. The
U.S. Supreme Court agrees with Dr. Leary, in Leary v.
United States, and overturns the Marijuana Tax Act on
constitutional grounds.
Chronology
165

1970
The Comprehensive Drug Abuse and Prevention and
Control Act expands the national drug-abuse program
by extending the services of federally funded commu-
nity treatment centers to nonnarcotic drug abusers as
well as addicts.
President Richard Nixon creates the National Com-
mission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse to review na-
tional drug policy.
Congress passes the Racketeer Influenced and Cor-
rupt Organizations law and the Continuing Criminal
Enterprise (CCE) statute. Both laws address the forfei-
ture of ill-gotten gain and the removal of the rights of
drug traffickers to any personal assets or property, in-
cluding real estate, cash, automobiles, and jewelry ob-
tained by or used in a criminal enterprise or under-
taking (Harrison, Backenheimer, and Inciardi 1995).
1972
The 1970 National Commission on Marijuana and
Drug Abuse report “Marijuana: A Signal of Misunder-
standing” is released. The report recommends the
elimination of criminal penalties for possession of
small amounts of marijuana. Noting that half the na-
tion’s young people admit using marijuana, the com-
mission argues that relying on the criminal justice sys-
tem to reduce drug use is neither practical nor
effective. Ten states adopt decriminalization laws, and
Alaska makes marijuana possession legal.
1974
The National Institute on Drug Abuse is established as
part of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health
Administration (ADAMHA). It serves as the lead fed-
eral agency for conducting basic, clinical, and epi-
demiological research to improve the understanding,
treatment, and prevention of drug abuse and addic-
tion and the health consequences of these behaviors.
NIDA is mandated to be responsible for the Drug
Abuse Warning Network and the National Household
Survey on Drug Abuse. The Addiction Research Cen-
ter in Lexington, Kentucky, becomes NIDA’s intramu-
ral research program.
166
Chronology

1978
Testifying before the Select Committee on Narcotics
Abuse and Control, two high-ranking Carter officials
state: (1) the federal government does not have a spe-
cific treatment program for marijuana, and in fact, the
administrator of the federal Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and
Mental Health Agency says, “There is no treatment re-
quired for the use of marijuana as such” (U.S. House
of Representatives 1978b, 9); (2) “[W]e have talked
about the propriety of decriminalizing the possession
of small amounts of marijuana for personal use, under
Federal statute only. This would, in effect, merely cod-
ify what is already occurring, since Federal law en-
forcement efforts should not be directed at people
who possess small amounts of any drug, particularly
marijuana” (U.S. House of Representatives 1978b, 8);
and (3) the federal position under the Carter adminis-
tration is that the move toward decriminalization is a
state-by-state choice and should not be mandated by
the federal establishment (ibid.; Harrison, Backen-
heimer, and Inciardi 1995).
1980
The National Organization for the Reform of Mari-
juana Laws (NORML) asks the Supreme Court to over-
turn the Controlled Substances Act prohibition on pri-
vate possession of marijuana. The Court declares in
NORML v. Bell that it is its responsibility “to construe
and enforce the Constitution and laws of the land as
they are and not to legislate social policy on the basis
of . . . personal inclinations or other nonlegal consider-
ations. . . . The legislative system may not always work
efficiently, or fairly, but we have staked our fortunes on
it, and our history would support the wisdom of our
forefathers’ judgment. . . . NORML’s efforts have
seared the conscience of many representatives. Eleven
states have decriminalized possession of marijuana
and efforts to decriminalize are continuing in many
others. The legislative branch, and not the judicial, is
the proper battleground for the fight to decriminalize
the possession of marijuana. The people, and not the
courts, must decide whether the battle will be won or
lost” (The National Organization for the Reform of Mari-
juana Laws (NORML) v. Griffin B. Bell 1980).
Chronology
167

1984
The Comprehensive Crime Control Act broadens
criminal and civil asset-forfeiture laws and increases
federal criminal sanctions for drug offenses.
1986
President Reagan signs the Anti–Drug Abuse Act that
mandates sentences for drug-related crimes. In con-
junction with the Comprehensive Crime Control Act
of 1984, the new law raises federal penalties for mari-
juana possession and dealing, basing the penalties on
the amount of the drug involved. Possession of 100
marijuana plants receives the same penalty as posses-
sion of 100 grams of heroin. The act establishes
mandatory six- and ten-year prison terms for drug
dealing, as well as the now-famous 100-to-1 crack-to-
cocaine ratio, in which possession of 5 grams of crack
cocaine triggers the same prison sentence as posses-
sion of 500 grams of powder cocaine. A life sentence
now requires the sale of just 3.3 pounds of crack. A
later amendment to this act establishes a “three strikes
and you’re out” policy, requiring life sentences for re-
peat drug offenders, and providing for the death
penalty for “drug kingpins” (PBS 1998).
1988
The Anti–Drug Abuse Amendment Act raises federal
penalties for marijuana possession, cultivation, and
trafficking. Sentences are to be determined by the
quantity of the drug involved; “conspiracies” and “at-
tempts” are to be punished as severely as completed
acts.
The UN International Conference on Drug Abuse and
Illicit Trafficking recognizes that drug abuse is a
global phenomenon affecting almost every country,
although its extent and characteristics differ from re-
gion to region. At the time of the convention, the most
widely consumed drug worldwide is cannabis. Three-
quarters of all countries report abuse of heroin, and
two-thirds report abuse of cocaine. Drug-related prob-
lems include increased rates of crime and violence,
susceptibility to HIV/AIDS and hepatitis, demand for
treatment and emergency room visits, and a break-
down in social behavior.
168
Chronology

At the 1988 UN General Assembly special session on
the world drug problem, member states recognize
that reducing the demand for drugs is an essential pil-
lar in the stepped-up global effort to fight drug abuse
and trafficking. They commit themselves to reduce
significantly both the supply of and the demand for
drugs by 2008.
1990
The Supreme Court rules on two workers who were
fired by a private drug-rehabilitation organization be-
cause they ingested peyote, a hallucinogenic drug, for
sacramental purposes at a ceremony of their Native
American church. Their applications for unemploy-
ment compensation are denied by the State of Oregon
under a state law disqualifying employees discharged
for work-related “misconduct.”
The Supreme Court, in Smith v. Oregon, upholds the
Oregon decision, stating that the First Amendment
protection of religious freedom applies only to laws
that specifically target religious behavior and that an
individual’s religious beliefs do not excuse one from
complying with statutes (that is, the use of banned
substances such as peyote) that indirectly infringe on
their religious rights.
1992
Drug Enforcement Agency administrator John Lawn
officially denies the petition of the National Organiza-
tion for Reform of Marijuana Laws to reschedule mar-
ijuana from Schedule I to Schedule II of the Controlled
Substances Act in 1989. On appeal, the decision is re-
viewed, and the judicial decision is made that mari-
juana has no currently accepted medical use.
The Drug Enforcement Agency initiates the “Kingpin
Strategy” to attack drug organizations at vulnerable
areas—the chemicals needed to process the drugs and
their finances, transportation, communications, and
leadership infrastructure in the United States. The
kingpin program essentially controls investigations
from DEA headquarters and selects a finite number of
targets for intensive investigative activity.
Chronology
169

1992
Manuel Noriega, the de facto leader of Panama and 
(cont.)
one-time operative for the Central Intelligence
Agency, is captured and brought to the United States
to stand trial. He is convicted on charges of racketeer-
ing, money laundering, and drug trafficking, and sen-
tenced to forty years in prison.
1996
Voters in California approve legislation, the Compas-
sionate Use Act, Proposition 215, allowing sick and
dying patients to use marijuana for medicinal pur-
poses.
1997
The Drug Free Communities Act becomes a catalyst
for increased citizen participation in efforts to reduce
substance abuse among youths and provide commu-
nity antidrug coalitions with funds to carry out their
missions. The act requires grants be made to coalitions
of representatives of youths; parents; businesses; the
media; schools; youth organizations; law enforce-
ment; religious or fraternal organizations; civic
groups; health care professionals; state, local, or tribal
governmental agencies; and other organizations. Also,
the act requires the Office of National Drug Control
Policy to provide technical assistance and training,
data collection, and dissemination of information on
practices determined to be effective in reducing sub-
stance abuse.
1998
The National Youth Anti-Drug Media Campaign is
created as a government-funded initiative to reduce
and prevent drug use among young people. Through
the use of television, radio, and other advertising,
complemented by public relations efforts including
community outreach and institutional partnerships,
the campaign addresses youths directly and indirectly
as well as encourages their parents and other adults to
take actions known to affect drug use.
The largest legal settlement in the United States is
reached between states and the tobacco industry.
Hundreds of billions of dollars (in total $246 billion)
are needed to resolve the settlement.
170
Chronology

1999
The Children’s Health Act authorizes expanded re-
search and services for a variety of childhood health
problems, reauthorizes programs of the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration,
and addresses the problem of youth substance abuse
and the violence associated with it among other pro-
visions.
In terms of reauthorizing the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration, the act in-
cludes critical provisions to curb drug and alcohol
use, especially among youth. The act authorizes grant
programs targeted at youth drug treatment and early
intervention. Other provisions include support for
law enforcement to combat dangerous drugs such as
methamphetamine and Ecstasy, investigative training
on clandestine methamphetamine laboratories, and
additional 
resources 
for 
high-intensity 
drug-
trafficking areas, and strengthens punishment for
meth lab operators and amphetamine and Ecstasy
traffickers. The legislation also creates the Metham-
phetamine and Amphetamine Treatment Initiative at
the Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, provides
for additional research to treat addiction to these dan-
gerous drugs, and establishes prevention grants to
teach children about the dangers of meth, Ecstasy, and
inhalants. This legislation expands the Clinton admin-
istration’s National Methamphetamine Strategy as
well as efforts to reduce drug abuse through the Youth
Anti-Drug Media Campaign.
2000
The U.S. Supreme Court rules in Food and Drug Ad-
ministration (FDA) et al. v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco
Corp. et al. by a vote of 5–4 that the FDA does not have
jurisdiction to regulate tobacco products or cigarette
company marketing practices under existing law. The
Supreme Court’s ruling renders invalid the FDA’s
1996 Regulations Restricting the Sale and Distribu-
tion of Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco to Protect
Children and Adolescents (the FDA’s 1996 Tobacco
Regulations). Those portions of the FDA’s 1996
Tobacco Regulations that had been in effect—the
Chronology
171

2000
provisions that set eighteen as the nationwide mini-
(cont.)
mum legal-sale age for tobacco and required that
retailers check photo identification before selling ciga-
rettes to persons who appear younger than twenty-
seven years of age—are declared no longer operative.
2001
President Bush signs legislation, the Drug Free Com-
munities Act, to reduce the demand for illegal drugs
through education, prevention, and treatment.
2002
Canada and England take legislative measures to
lower penalties for cannabis use. A Canadian govern-
ment Senate committee issues a white-paper report
recommending cannabis legislation.
2003
The U.S. Government Accounting Office and other in-
dependent evaluators declare major antidrug pro-
grams such as the Drug Abuse Resistance Program,
the National Youth Anti-Drug Media Campaign, and
the Drug Enforcement Agency are failing to achieve
measurable success objectives.
Representatives of 142 countries at the forty-sixth ses-
sion of the UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs in Vi-
enna say they will stick to the strict policies estab-
lished at a UN antidrug summit five years ago,
despite critics’ allegations the program is ineffective.
Participants in a UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs
meeting say in a statement they remain committed to
the campaign to curb cultivation, trafficking, and con-
sumption by 2008.
In his State of the Union address, President Bush an-
nounces a three-year $600 million plan to help addicts
receive treatment. The program will use vouchers that
give addicts a way to pay for treatment services, in-
cluding those provided by faith-based organizations.
Ed Rosenthal, a popular authority on marijuana, is ar-
rested in Oakland, California, by the DEA for distri-
bution of marijuana for medical purposes under state
172
Chronology

law. Rosenthal is found guilty; however, he is sen-
tenced to one day and released. This arrest sets the
stage for further judicial review regarding state and
federal marijuana laws, jurisdiction, and enforcement
(Harrison 2003).
The Illicit Drug Anti-Proliferation Act (formerly
known as the RAVE Act) becomes law. This legislation
makes it easier for prosecutors to charge, convict, and
imprison property owners, business owners, and
managers who fail to prevent drug-related offenses
committed by customers, employees, tenants, or other
persons on their property. Also, the law authorizes
funds to educate parents and children on the dangers
of Ecstasy and other “predatory” drugs, and it directs
the U.S. Sentencing Commission to consider increas-
ing sentencing penalties for offenses involving GHB, a
drug used in sexual assaults.
References
Bonnie, R., and C. Whitebread. 1970. “The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree
of Knowledge: An Inquiry into the Legal History of American Marijuana
Prohibition.” Virginia Law Review 56, no. 6 (October). Available at
http://www.drugtext.org/library/reports/vlr/vlr4.htm (accessed Janu-
ary 13, 2004).
Brecher, E. 1972. Licit and Illicit Drugs. Boston: Little, Brown.
Brecher, E., and the editors of Consumer Reports Magazine. 1972. The Con-
sumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs, Schaffer Library of Drug Pol-
icy.
Available 
at 
http://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/Library/
studies/cu/cu8.html (accessed January 13, 2004).
Casey, E. 1978. “History of Drug Use U.S.” Facts About Drugs Abuse Avail-
able at http://www.a1b2c3.com/drugs/gen003.htm (accessed, January
13, 2004).
Drug Policy Alliance. 1998. “Regulating Cannabis: Cannabis Land-
marks.” Available at http://www.drugpolicy.org/events/archive/
conferences/cannabis/landmarks (accessed January 13, 2004).
European Legal Database on Drugs. 2003. “Legal Status of Cannabis.”
Available at http://eldd.emcdda.org/trends/trends_cannabis.shtml (ac-
cessed January 13, 2004).
References
173

Harrison, A. 2003. “The Trial of Ed Rosenthal.” Available at http://
www.alternet.org/story.html?StoryID=14973 (accessed January 13,
2004).
Harrison, L., M. Backenheimer, and J. Inciardi. 1995. “Cannabis Use in
the United States: Implications for Policy.” In Cannabisbeleid in Duitsland,
Frankrijk En De Verenigde Staten, edited by Peter Cohen and Arjan Sas,
237–247. Amsterdam: Centrum voor Drugsonderzoek, Universiteit van
Amsterdam. Available at http://www.cedro-uva.org/lib/harrison.
cannabis.05.html (accessed January 13, 2004).
King, Rufus. 1972. “Narcotics Control Act of 1956.” In The Drug Hang-Up:
America’s Fifty Year Folly. Available at http://www.druglibrary.org/
special/king/dhu/dhu16.htm (accessed January 13, 2004).
———. 1974. “The American Legal System”: Legal Sanctions to Repress Drug
Use. In Drugs and the Criminal Justice System, edited by James A. Indardi
and Carl D. Chambers. Available at http://www.druglibrary.org/special/
king/king3.htm (accessed March 9, 2004).
Kolb, Lawrence. 1925. “Pleasure and Deterioraion from Narcotic Addic-
tion.” Mental Hygiene 9: 699–724.
McNamara, Joseph. 2002. “Testimony for the Little Hoover Commission,
Hoover Institution, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.” September 26.
Available at http://www.bsa.ca.gov/lhcdir/drug/McNamaraSep26.pdf
(accessed January 13, 2004).
Minnesota Historical Society. 2003. “Prohibition & the Volstead Act.”
Available 
at 
http://www.mnhs.org/library/tips/history_topics/
103prohibition.html (accessed January 13, 2004).
Musto, D. 1972. “The 1937 Marihuana Tax Act.” Archives of General Psy-
chiatry 26: 101–108.
The National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML) v.
Griffin B. Bell. Civ. A. No. 1897-73 (1980). Available at http://www.
druglibrary.org/schaffer/legal/l1980/bell.htm (accessed January 13,
2004).
“On the Flip Side.” Available at http://twist.lib.uiowa.edu/beat/
Beat-Drugs/SQUARE%7E1.HTM (accessed January 13, 2004).
PBS. 1998. Busted: America’s War on Marijuana. Available at http://www.
pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/dope/etc/cron.html (accessed
January 13, 2004).
Schaffer Library of Drug Policy. “Historical Research on Drug Policy.”
Available at http://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/history/1920.htm
(accessed January 13, 2004).
Solomon, D. “The Marihuana Tax Act of 1937.” Schaffer Library of Drug
Policy. Available at http://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/hemp/
taxact/mjtaxact.htm (accessed January 13, 2004).
174
Chronology

Stack, P. 2002. Medical Marijuana: A History. Vol. 16019. Available at
http://www.time.com/time/covers/1101021104/history.html (accessed
January 13, 2004).
U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency. “The Diversion of Drugs and Chemi-
cals.” 
Available 
at 
http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/pubs/
program/activities/background.htm (accessed January 13, 2004).
U.S. House of Representatives, Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and
Control, Drug Abuse. 1978a. “Demand Reduction in the United States
and Abroad.” SCNAC-95-2-1. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Print-
ing Office.
———. 1978b. “Drug Abuse Treatment: Part 1.” SCNAC-95-2-12. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Woodward, W. 1937a. “American Medical Association Opposes the Mar-
ijuana Tax Act of 1937.” Available at http://www.pdxnorml.org/
AMA_opposes_1937.html (accessed January 13, 2004).
———. 1937b. Legal Council, Bureau of Legal Medicine and Legislation,
American Medical Association submitted a letter on July 10 to the Hon.
Pat Harrison, chairman, Committee on Finance, United States Senate,
Washington, DC, regarding the position of the AMA to the Marijuana Tax
Act of 1937.
Yao, Y. 1958. “The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the Preven-
tion of Drug Addiction.” Available at http://www.undcp.org/
odccp/bulletin/bulletin_195801_1_page002.html (accessed January 13,
2004).
References
175


6
Biographical Sketches
M
any individuals have had a significant influence on drug
policy, research, and treatment in the United States during
the past hundred years or so. Some have been in the public
arena in positions as elected officials or appointed officials.
Others are best known for their legislative initiatives. A number
have gained public attention because of their organization, litiga-
tion, and advocacy efforts. Several in academia and research have
attracted media attention for their work or studies of importance.
Those presented in this chapter are but a few of the many who
have shaped the drug-use “state of affairs”—for better or worse.
Internet resources have been used for this chapter.
Harry J. Anslinger (1892–1975)
Known as the “Father of the Drug War,” Harry Anslinger was the
first U.S. commissioner of narcotics. He held the position for
thirty-two years and was U.S. representative on the UN Commis-
sion on Narcotics. According to biographer John McWilliams,
Anslinger was a cross between William Jennings Bryan and the
Reverend Jerry Falwell. He brought to the position a puritanical
conviction that Prohibition could succeed if there was enough
law enforcement. Anslinger has been likened to J. Edgar Hoover
in terms of having conservative, staunchly anticommunist law-
and-order values and idiosyncrasies that were strongly imposed
on their federal bureaucracies and personnel. And in his book
Outsiders, Howard S. Becker describes how the Federal Bureau of
Narcotics under Anslinger created the marijuana problem in the
1930s to cause the public to demand legislation.
177

Anslinger had a major role in deriding the LaGuardia Com-
mittee and its blue ribbon–panel report published by the presti-
gious New York Academy of Medicine. The committee found no
justification for Anslinger’s catastrophic claims of marijuana. It
found marijuana use did not lead to addiction in the medical
sense, nor was it a gateway to harder drugs; it was not wide-
spread in school yards or being used by children; and there was
no relationship between marijuana and juvenile delinquency.
What, then, was behind Anslinger’s propaganda that set in
motion decades of legislation, prosecution, and punishment
against the use of the substance? There seems to be no simple an-
swer; however, conspiracy theorists link Anslinger to William
Randolph Hearst, the DuPont Corporation, and Andrew Mellon.
First, Hearst—the media giant and industrialist—stood to forfeit
a fortune to hemp (that is, the cannabis plant). With the end of the
Civil War, the cheaper wood-pulp sulfide process displaced
labor-intensive hemp production. By the mid-1930s, however, a
new invention, the “Decorticator,” threatened to make hemp
paper actually cheaper than wood pulp. With his vast holdings in
timber, pulp, and paper mills, Hearst was poised to take a sub-
stantial financial loss. The Hearst media campaign against hemp
was a biased effort to sway public opinion and have the substance
banned. At the same time, DuPont (holders of the patent for a sul-
furic-acid wood-pulping process) had developed the synthetic
fibers rayon and nylon—direct competitors of natural hemp cloth
and rope. Finally, there was Andrew Mellon, chairman of the Mel-
lon Bank, which was a main source of finance for DuPont. Mellon
was the U.S. treasury secretary responsible for appointing
Anslinger as commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics.
Anslinger was married to Mellon’s niece (Hartsell 1994).
Another interesting note about Anslinger was reported in the
Atlantic Monthly in a 1997 article titled “More Reefer Madness.”
According to the author of the article, E. Schlosser, Anslinger in
his memoir, The Murderers (1961), confessed to having arranged a
regular supply of morphine for “one of the influential members
of Congress” who had become an addict. Anslinger’s biographer
believes that addict was Senator Joseph R. McCarthy.
Len Bias (1963–1986)
A gifted college basketball player, Len Bias died at the age of
twenty-two of what was believed to be the use of crack cocaine
178
Biographical Sketches

(according to autopsy reports, the cause was powder cocaine),
two days after being selected as the first-round draft pick of the
Boston Celtics. Shortly before his death, he had signed a million-
dollar endorsement contract with Reebok. The death of Bias rein-
forced the idea that the country was under assault by drugs. The
outrage was especially great in Boston, the home of congressional
House Speaker Tip O’Neill. A nonpartisan congressional coali-
tion, along with President Reagan and his wife, Nancy, moved
forward a crusade against drugs. Within the period of a few
months and without congressional hearings that are usually held
for significant legislative actions, the $1.7 billion Anti–Drug
Abuse Act was sent to the president for signature, funding drug-
treatment programs, interdiction efforts at the U.S. borders, and,
perhaps most important, mandatory minimum sentences for cer-
tain federal drug offenses. In essence, the message to the public
was that drugs, especially crack cocaine, are a menace to society,
and those involved with its sale and use need to be put in prison.
At the time the act was passed, NBC News labeled crack as
“America’s drug of choice,” and drug czar William Bennett pre-
dicted it would invade every home in the United States. Newsweek
compared crack to the bubonic plague and called it “the most ad-
dictive drug known to man.”
Prior to the law, federal judges had sentencing discretion. The
new statues now dictated mandatory minimum sentences with a
primary focus on crack cocaine—cocaine processed so that it can
be smoked. Possessing five grams of crack was made a felony with
an automatic five-year prison term, while five grams of the same
drug in powder form is a misdemeanor likely to carry no jail time.
Because a large proportion of crack users are black, the Anti–Drug
Abuse Act of 1986 has been considered a racially biased effort tar-
geted against them. According to a senior scientist at ABT Associ-
ates, a research think tank based outside of Boston, the problem of
disproportion of blacks being sent to prison would disappear if
the law treated the powder and crack forms of cocaine equally.
Joseph Califano Jr. (1931– )
Secretary of health, education, and welfare for two years
(1977–1979) under President Jimmy Carter, Joseph Califano Jr.
mounted major health-promotion and disease-prevention pro-
grams targeted against cigarette smoking and alcohol use. Since
1990, he has had a leadership role with the Center on Addiction
Biographical Sketches
179

and Substance Abuse at Columbia University, a think tank ad-
dressing substance abuse from a prohibition perspective. Cali-
fano has been critical of drug use, claiming it is the principal and
direct cause of crime, health problems, declining worker produc-
tivity, homelessness, and a range of other problems.
During the Carter administration, Califano became a vigor-
ous critic of smoking. Among other actions, he asked cigarette
companies to devote 10 percent of their advertising to a campaign
to discourage children and teenagers from smoking, an idea re-
jected by the companies on the grounds that “the mothers and fa-
thers of this nation, whether smokers or nonsmokers, should con-
tinue to have freedom of choice in the education and training of
their children.” In 1979, Califano was fired as secretary of health,
education, and welfare in part because his crusade against
tobacco was a considerable political liability to President Carter.
Before his dismissal, he pressed Carter to lend clout to the anti-
smoking crusade. Once converted to the cause, Carter planned if
reelected in 1980 to support a major increase in federal tobacco
taxes to two dollars per pack, believing the action would save
hundreds of thousands of lives while simultaneously raising bil-
lions for health care reform and deficit reduction. In 1997, prior to
the massive tobacco settlement with states, Califano expressed his
belief again to President Bill Clinton that a two-dollar per-pack
tax increase on cigarettes was needed to reduce teen smoking and
protect the public health
Sigmund Freud (1856–1939)
Born in what is now the Czech Republic, Sigmund Freud is best
known for his development of psychoanalysis for the treatment
of psychological and emotional disorders. In 1883, German physi-
cian Theodor Aschenbrandt administered cocaine to members of
the Bavarian army. It was found that the drug enhanced their en-
durance on maneuvers. Freud, who was at the time a young neu-
rologist, read the report and experimented with the substance. He
played a significant role in the development of the Western co-
caine industry, reporting, “I take very small doses of it regularly
and against depression and against indigestion, and with the
most brilliant success.”
Drug giants Merck and Parke Davis (now Pfizer) paid Freud
to endorse their rival brands. He wrote several enthusiastic pa-
180
Biographical Sketches

pers on cocaine, most notably Uber Coca (About Cocaine) in 1884,
reporting “exhilaration and lasting euphoria, which in no way
differs from the normal euphoria of the healthy person. . . . You
perceive an increase of self-control and possess more vitality and
capacity for work. . . . In other words, you are simply normal, and
it is soon hard to believe you are under the influence of any
drug. . . . Long intensive physical work is performed without any
fatigue. . . . This result is enjoyed without any of the unpleasant
after-effects that follow exhilaration brought about by alcohol. . . .
Absolutely no craving for the further use of cocaine appears after
the first, or even after repeated taking of the drug.” Freud con-
cluded the paper by recommending cocaine pharmacotherapy for
seven conditions: as a mental stimulant, possible treatment for di-
gestive disorders, appetite stimulant in case of diseases such as
cancer, treatment for morphine and alcohol addiction, treatment
for asthma, aphrodisiac, and local anesthetic. Cocaine was, at that
time, neither illegal nor prescribed.
Freud had envisioned taking cocaine in an oral solution that
was less likely to be addictive than when administered intra-
venously. Euphoric effects are delayed and less intense. In the
1880s, however, hypodermic needles started becoming more
widely available, and morphine addicts found that subcutaneous
injections of cocaine yielded a quick, potent, and addictive high.
Before long, many users became hooked on both substances. By
1887, Freud had changed his position about cocaine and reported
that it was more dangerous for public health than morphine
(Grinspoon and Bakalar).
Francis Harrison (1873–1957) 
In 1913, New York representative Francis Harrison introduced
two bills into Congress. One was to prohibit use and importation
of opium, and the other was to regulate the manufacturing of
smoking opium within the United States. Introduced as revenue
legislation, there was no real intention of producing revenue. A
few months after being introduced, President Wilson signed the
bills, which took effect on March 1, 1914. Eventually, the Harrison
Act caused more drug use than it prevented. A committee was
formed to investigate this problem, which found that illicit use of
narcotics had increased dramatically while the act had been in ef-
fect. Instead of improving the act, stiffer penalties were imposed.
Biographical Sketches
181

David Kessler (1951– )
Appointed by President Bush in 1990 as the commissioner for the
Food and Drug Administration, David Kessler took a number of
steps to make the FDA more consumer-oriented and continued
his work with that federal agency until 1997. During his seven
years, under two presidents, Kessler took on the tobacco industry
in order to tighten regulation.
Under his leadership, the FDA asked whether nicotine was a
drug, using the definition “an article other than food intended to
affect the structure or function of the body.” This set off a long in-
vestigation to prove the tobacco industry’s “intent.” Informants
provided internal documents showing that tobacco companies
understood the addictive nature of nicotine in the 1960s, and
sought to manipulate levels of nicotine in their cigarettes. Patents
indicated that the companies devised ways to add nicotine to fil-
ters and wrapping paper. Also, an informant provided informa-
tion about genetically engineered tobacco with high nicotine con-
tent that was being imported from Brazil.
The FDA, under Kessler, also discovered documents indicat-
ing that the industry had been actively marketing its cigarettes to
teenagers. That discovery, Kessler said, changed the dynamic of
ongoing court cases and of the industry’s fight against regulation.
“We were aiming at the heart of the industry,” he explained. Ju-
ries were much less inclined to accept grounds of choice and per-
sonal responsibility when they realized that children were being
targeted.
The Supreme Court subsequently ruled against FDA regula-
tion of tobacco, and Congress did not pass significant antitobacco
legislation. Nevertheless, Kessler (and C. Everett Koop) has been
in the vanguard advocating change of tobacco use in the United
States. Kessler’s book A Question of Intent, published in 2001 by
PublicAffairs Press, details his efforts and those of others targeted
against the tobacco industry. David Kessler is now dean of Yale
University Medical School (Brown University 2001).
C. Everett Koop (1916– )
After establishing a distinguished record as a pioneer in the field
of pediatric surgery, C. Everett Koop was appointed by President
Reagan in 1981 as deputy assistant secretary for health with the
182
Biographical Sketches

promise that he would be nominated as surgeon general. He was
officially sworn in as surgeon general on January 21, 1982.
Koop has been an outspoken advocate of public health is-
sues. The problem of tobacco was one he attacked, calling for “A
Smoke-Free Society by the Year 2000.” Although the Public
Health Service had been calling attention to the dangers of
tobacco use since the 1964 surgeon general’s report (see Luther
Terry) on smoking and health, its antitobacco campaign was rela-
tively low-key until Koop began speaking out on the problem. In
1982, he issued a report on the problems of secondhand smoke
that soon led to restrictions on smoking in public buildings and
facilities. In 1987, smoking was forbidden on domestic air trips,
and by 1990 the ban was made applicable to all flights. Koop was
the ideal exponent of the antismokers’ message. “A grandfatherly
figure with an ‘Old Testament’ presence, he exuded absolute in-
tegrity and a fearless devotion to health. He was the Platonic ver-
sion of the Surgeon General. Many still think he is the Surgeon
General” (Verkiul 1998). The 1986 surgeon general’s report on the
dangers of passive smoking was also an important milestone in
the fight against smoking.
In response to questions about his position to a major settle-
ment between state governments and the tobacco industry, Koop
said on the ABC television network show Nightline that he was
open to some sort of deal; however, he noted that many anti-
smoking activists “want to see the culprit, the tobacco industry,
flogged in public, and I understand how they feel. I feel that way
myself. They are very guilty. But flogging a company in public, if
it does not produce something for the health of the American
public, is a futile gesture.” When testifying before a Senate com-
mittee, he urged lawmakers to “face the scourge of tobacco for
what it is and legislate a tobacco policy that holds the industry ac-
countable” (ibid.).
Timothy Leary (1920–1996)
A psychologist, Timothy Leary was a leading advocate for the use
of LSD as well as other psychoactive drugs. Leary explored the
cultural and philosophical implications of psychedelic drugs. He
believed that the experience of using such drugs should be intro-
duced to the general public, particularly the young. His books
and papers as a psychologist helped launch the “humanistic
Biographical Sketches
183

psychology” movement with an emphasis on interpersonal rela-
tionships, multilevel personality assessments, group therapy,
body/mind interaction, and a libertarian redefinition of the doc-
tor-patient relationship.
Experimenting on himself and with friends, as well as on
volunteer graduate students, Leary studied the emotional, physi-
cal, and social effects of psychedelics at the Harvard University
Department of Psychology where he was employed. Before any
meaningful results were attained, LSD was labeled as a danger-
ous new drug and made illegal. Considered too controversial,
Leary’s experiments were shut down, and he was forced to pur-
sue his LSD research with private funding in Millbrook, New
York. Leary continued to publicly promote the benefits of LSD
use, and in the 1960s he was cast into the role of an “LSD guru”
by the media. As the drug gained popularity with the counter-
culture, he provided instruction manuals for safe usage. He en-
couraged respect for the drug and urged the practice of “set and
timing” as a safeguard against “bad trips.” During this time, he
coined the phrase “turn on, tune in, drop out,” and published
books with titles like The Psychedelic Experience (1964). Cultural
conservatives saw Leary as a corrosive influence on society—
President Nixon called him “the most dangerous man in Amer-
ica”—and many researchers felt Leary delegitimated the serious
study of psychedelic drugs.
After arrests in 1965 and 1968 for the possession of marijuana
and a prolonged legal battle, Leary was incarcerated in 1970 and
soon escaped. Living as a fugitive for more than two years until
being recaptured in Afghanistan, he was freed in 1976 and settled
in southern California where he died of natural causes (Erowid
2004).
Alfred Lindesmith (1905–1991)
Known for his confrontation with the drug-control establishment,
Alfred Lindesmith was a sociologist at the University of Indiana.
Lindesmith believed legal prohibition of addictive drugs was futile
and wrote on the threat to democracy inherent in such a policy. The
career of Lindesmith began during the 1930s and developed in re-
lation to the drug prohibition efforts in the early and mid-twentieth
century. Lindesmith was an advocate for rational and humane
drug laws that responded to the needs of an addict, including med-
184
Biographical Sketches

ical treatment. His views were diametrically opposed to those of
Harry Anslinger and the Federal Bureau of Narcotics.
The first attack on Lindesmith came in 1939 as a result of his
publications that presented his professional beliefs as a dissenter
to the prevailing policy of the Bureau of Narcotics—a.k.a. Harry
Anslinger. A bureau agent was sent to the University of Indiana
to meet with the Board of Trustees and president of that univer-
sity, informing them that Lindesmith was involved with a crimi-
nal organization. The organization was the World Narcotics Re-
search Foundation then being organized by Dr. E. H. Williams.
Williams was a nationally known writer on the narcotics problem
who operated a narcotics clinic at the behest of the Los Angeles
Medical Association and municipal health officials. Related to his
humanitarian efforts, he was sought out by federal drug agents
and convicted of a technical violation of the narcotic laws in a
much criticized trial.
The following year, Lindesmith published an article titled
“Dope Fiend Mythology.” The bureau responded with a twenty-
seven-page answer written by a San Francisco judge, Twain
Michelson, titled “Lindesmith’s Mythology.” Reproduced for
mass circulation by the Treasury Department, the government
document was disseminated for years in an effort to discredit Lin-
desmith and as an authoritative statement of bureau policy. In
1948, Lindesmith published an article in the journal Federal Proba-
tion describing a case in which the bureau allowed two affluent
addicts to receive opiates for more than twenty years, in contra-
vention of the bureau’s avowed organizational mandate. This out-
raged the bureau, which demanded a “correction” by that journal
and pursued ways of discrediting Lindesmith for decades.
Lindesmith did not have much support in the academic com-
munity for his approach to the federal government’s drug policy.
“For over two decades most prominent academicians either ig-
nored Lindesmith’s work or criticized it methodologically or sub-
stantively. . . . For his perspective on drugs, Lindesmith endured
three decades of harassment by Anslinger and the Federal Bureau
of Narcotics, while he was largely ignored in reputable academic
circles. By the 1960s, the academic community had finally caught
up with Lindesmith’s ideas. Unfortunately, by this time de-
draconian control policies had become institutionalized. Since the
1960s, few criminologists or criminal law professors have sup-
ported government drug policies” (Galliher, Keys, and Elsner
1998).
Biographical Sketches
185

Richard M. Nixon (1913–1994)
The thirty-seventh president of the United States, Richard M.
Nixon succeeded in ending U.S. fighting in Vietnam and improv-
ing relations with the former Soviet Union and China. The Wa-
tergate scandal, however, brought fresh divisions to the country,
leading to his resignation. During Richard Nixon’s presidency,
many drug-related challenges were addressed. A law-and-order
president, Nixon unveiled a drug program that addressed drug
abuse as a sickness, not a crime. For the first time in the history of
U.S. drug policy, treatment supplanted law enforcement in terms
of attention and allocation of funding. Nixon had started with a
strategy of trying to reduce demand rather than shut off supply
and punish consumers. As the 1972 election approached, the
White House moved away from a treatment-oriented strategy to
one of getting tough on drugs and anyone who uses them. In an
interview with Nixon’s domestic policy adviser, John Ehrlich-
man, it was acknowledged, “We knew we were lying about the
health effects of marijuana. We knew we were lying about the re-
lationship between heroin and crime. But this is what we were
doing to win the election. And it worked.” (Wink 1999).
The Nixon period appears to be marked with two significant
drug issues, marijuana and methadone. To control demand, the
Nixon administration proposed a dramatic centralization of all
federally sponsored efforts in drug treatment, rehabilitation, ed-
ucation, prevention, training, and research in a new White House
agency, the Special Action Office for Drug Abuse Prevention
(SAODAP). Also, the new organization was designed to counter
bureaucratic “foot-dragging” seen by the White House as cen-
tered in the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), which
normally would have funded and overseen the administration’s
effort to promote methadone maintenance programs. The White
House saw NIMH officials as being cautious of government
sanctioning one addiction (methadone) in order to reduce the
burden caused by another addiction (heroin). The administra-
tion’s effort to move methadone treatment forward was reflected
by the president’s designation of Dr. Jerome Jaffe—a prominent
supporter of methadone use in treatment—as his special con-
sultant for narcotics and dangerous drugs until SAODAP could
be legally constituted by Congress. When Jaffe assumed leader-
ship responsibilities in 1971, there were 135 federally funded
drug-treatment programs; eighteen months later, with an in-
186
Biographical Sketches

creased treatment budget, the number had tripled to 394. Treat-
ment for heroin addiction was prioritized, and the number of
methadone treatment programs increased considerably. With a
high rate of addiction among Vietnam soldiers and veterans, Dr.
Jaffe and his team established new programs to expand the Vet-
erans Administration capability to provide drug treatment. Ad-
ditionally, the Defense Department initiated a massive urinalysis
of all servicemen before they left Southeast Asia. Soldiers using
opium-based products including heroin were to be detained for
treatment and rehabilitation. President Nixon informed Con-
gress, “We will be requesting legislation to permit the military
services to retain for treatment any individual due for discharge
who is a narcotic addict. All of our servicemen must be accorded
the right of rehabilitation.” Shortly after Dr. Jaffe assumed re-
sponsibilities, the number of clients in funded treatment pro-
grams was estimated at just over 20,000 in October 1971. By De-
cember 1972, the figure was more than 60,000. As the methadone
problem became more pronounced in urban areas or at least re-
ceived unfavorable publicity, the White House began to distance
itself from the SAODAP. Dr. Jaffe, who has been promised direct
access to the president, was cut off from the White House staff.
Jaffe resigned in June 1973.
A second issue that Nixon had to face was marijuana. During
his presidency, the National Commission on Marijuana and Drug
Abuse, after conducting an exhaustive study of marijuana, con-
cluded in 1972 that it was virtually harmless and that people
should not go to jail for smoking it. Nixon disagreed with his
commission (Psychedelic Library 2004). Based on the Nixon tapes
from 1971 to 1972, it has been pointed out that the foundation of
the modern war on marijuana was the president’s prejudice as
well as a cultural war and misinformation. According to the pres-
ident of Common Sense for Drug Policy, Kevin Zeese, “At a criti-
cal juncture when the United States decided how it would handle
marijuana, President Nixon’s prejudices did more to dominate
policy than the thoughtful and extensive review of his own Blue
Ribbon Commission. . . . If we had followed the advice of the ex-
perts rather than Nixon’s prejudices we would have less mari-
juana use, be spending less money on marijuana enforcement and
many million less people would have been arrested.”
The following statements by President Nixon reflect his prej-
udices (Common Sense for Drug Policy 2002; Cockburn and St.
Clair 1998):
Biographical Sketches
187

•
Marijuana compared to alcohol: Marijuana consumers
smoke “to get high while a person drinks to have fun.”
Nixon also saw marijuana leading to a loss of
motivation and discipline but claimed: “At least with
liquor I don’t lose motivation.”
•
Marijuana and political dissent: “radical demonstrators
that were here . . . two weeks ago. . . . They’re all on
drugs, virtually all.”
•
Jews and marijuana: “I see another thing in the news
summary this morning about it. That’s a funny thing,
every one of the bastards that are out for legalizing
marijuana is Jewish. What the Christ is the matter with
the Jews, Bob, what is the matter with them? I suppose
it’s because most of them are psychiatrists.”
•
Marijuana and the cultural wars: “You see,
homosexuality, dope, immorality in general. These are
the enemies of strong societies. That’s why the
Communists and the left-wingers are pushing the stuff,
they’re trying to destroy us.”
•
Drug education: “Enforce the law, you’ve got to scare
them.”
•
Prior to launching the war on Drugs in 1969, H. R.
Halderman recorded in his diary a briefing by the
president: “[Nixon] emphasized that you have to face
the fact that the whole problem is really the blacks. The
key is to devise a system that recognizes this while not
appearing to.” 
After the departure of Jerome Jaffe, Robert DuPont was ap-
pointed by President Nixon to direct the White House Special Ac-
tion Office for Drug Abuse Prevention, a position he held until
the office terminated in 1975. DuPont, a critic of making drugs
more available, has expressed the belief that “[w]hen it comes to
getting well from addiction, the best, the most reliable and the
most effective path is through active participation in the 12 steps
programs, including Alcoholics Anonymous and Narcotics
Anonymous” (DuPont 1997).
Benjamin Rush (1745–1813)
A prominent physician and professor of chemistry, Benjamin
Rush served as surgeon general of the Continental army. He was
188
Biographical Sketches

one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence in 1776 and
an ardent abolitionist. Rush’s major contribution to medicine lay
with his work with the mentally ill. He believed that all mental
illness, including alcoholism, was due to physical causes. In his
famous Inquiry into the Effects of Ardent Spirits upon the Human
Body and Mind published in 1785, Rush enumerated the diseases
of the body and mind that plagued the drinker of distilled
liquors. He described drunkenness as a disease resembling cer-
tain hereditary, family, and contagious diseases. His theories on
the problem of alcoholism would eventually become the seeds of
alcohol-addiction treatment in the United States.
During the colonial period, most people were not con-
cerned with drunkenness; it was neither troublesome nor stig-
matized behavior. Although Rush had no concern with wine
and beer, he felt that the consumption of distilled liquor over
time could be lethal, and he was the first American to call
chronic drunkenness a distinct disease. Later generations of
temperance workers would come to refer to Benjamin Rush as
the “father of the temperance movement” (University of Water-
loo 2001).
George Soros (1930– )
Born in Budapest, George Soros survived Nazi occupation and
left Communist Hungry in 1947 for England, where he graduated
from the London School of Economics in 1952. In 1956, Soros
moved to the United States where he began to accumulate a large
fortune through an international investment fund he founded
and managed. Soros has been active as a philanthropist since
1979. He has provided support for the establishment of the Drug
Policy Alliance (previously the Lindesmith Center), a leading
drug-policy and research institute created in 1994 and directed by
Ethan Nadelmannn, who has been described by Rolling Stone
magazine as the point man for drug policy–reform efforts. Soros
has also helped finance marijuana referenda in California and
Arizona, among other related activities.
Soros became involved in the drug issue because of a com-
mitment to the concept of open society. The open society is based
on the recognition that “we act on the basis of imperfect under-
standing and our actions have unintended consequences. . . . An
open society that recognizes fallibility is a superior form of social
organization to a closed society that claims to have found all the
Biographical Sketches
189

answers.” In an article that he wrote for the Washington Post,
Soros (1997) stated:
I have devoted much of my energies and resources
over the past two decades to promoting the concept of
open society in formerly communist countries. I have
started to pay more attention to my adopted country,
the United States, because I feel that the relatively
open society we enjoy here is in danger. There is noth-
ing new about this peril; it is a characteristic of open
societies that they are always endangered.
Our drug policies offer a prime example of adverse,
unintended consequences. There is perhaps no other
field where our public policies have produced an out-
come so profoundly at odds with what was intended.
But those who are waging a ‘war on drugs’ refuse to
recognize this fact. They consider all criticism subver-
sive. To suggest the possibility that the war on drugs
may be self-defeating is tantamount to treason in their
eyes. This was confirmed by their reaction to the ap-
proval of the drug policy ballot initiatives in California
and Arizona.
Soros believes “a drug free America is a utopian dream.
Some form of drug addiction or substance abuse is endemic in
most societies. Insisting on total eradication of drug use can only
lead to failure and disappointment. The war on drugs cannot be
won; but, like the Vietnam War, it has polarized our society”
(ibid.).
Luther Terry (1911–1985)
A physician with preventive medicine and public health experi-
ence, Luther Terry came to public prominence when President
Kennedy selected him as surgeon general of the Public Health
Service in 1961.
In 1962, the Royal College of Physicians in Britain published
a report linking cigarette smoking to lung cancer, bronchitis, and
probably cardiovascular disease. Shortly, after the release of this
report, Terry established the Surgeon General’s Advisory Com-
mittee on Smoking and Health to produce a similar report for the
United States. “Smoking and Health: Report of the Advisory
190
Biographical Sketches

Committee to the Surgeon General of the United States” was re-
leased on January 11, 1964. The report concluded that cigarette
smoking causes lung cancer and chronic bronchitis. The report
also noted that there was suggestive evidence, if not definite
proof, that smoking was linked to emphysema, cardiovascular
disease, and various types of cancer. The committee concluded
that cigarette smoking was a health hazard of sufficient impor-
tance to warrant appropriate remedial action.
The landmark surgeon general’s report on smoking and health
stimulated a greatly increased concern about tobacco on the part of
the American public and government policy makers. Also, it led to
a broad-based antismoking campaign. At the time, 46 percent of all
Americans smoked; smoking was accepted in offices, airplanes,
and elevators, and TV programs were sponsored by cigarette
brands. Within three months of Terry’s report, cigarette consump-
tion had dropped 20 percent but was soon to climb back. The re-
port was also responsible for the passage of the Cigarette Labeling
and Advertising Act of 1965, which, among other things, mandated
the surgeon general’s health warnings on cigarette packages.
Andrew Volstead (1860–1947)
The son of Norwegian immigrants, Andrew Volstead was a mem-
ber of the Republican Party and elected to Congress in 1903 as a
representative from Minnesota. A strong supporter of the civil
rights movement and one of the few politicians in Congress will-
ing to argue for federal legislation against lynching, he was con-
cerned about the growing consumption of alcohol. In 1919, his
National Prohibition Act (also known as the Volstead Act) was
passed by Congress. The law prohibited the manufacture, trans-
portation, and sale of beverages containing more than 0.5 percent
alcohol. At the time of its passage, Senator Morris Sheppard from
Texas said, “There is as much chance of repealing the Eighteenth
Amendment [of the Constitution] as there is for a hummingbird
to fly to the planet Mars with the Washington Monument tied to
its tail.” The act was condemned by a large number of the Amer-
ican population who considered it a violation of their constitu-
tional rights. Volstead was defeated in the election of 1922 and re-
turned to Minnesota, where he worked as a lawyer. In 1933,
Prohibition was declared a failure and was repealed (“Volstead,
Andrew Joseph” 2001).
Biographical Sketches
191

William “Bill” Wilson (1895–1971)
Time magazine identified Wilson as one of the twenty people in
United States “who articulate the longings of the last 100 years,
exemplifying courage, selflessness, exuberance, superhuman
ability and amazing grace.” He overcame alcoholism and
founded the twelve-step program that has helped millions of oth-
ers do the same. In writing to Carl Jung in 1962, Wilson said, “In
the wake of my spiritual experience there came a vision of a soci-
ety of alcoholics.” The following details have been excerpted
from “Bill Wilson,” written by Susan Cheever for Time. Incarcer-
ated for the fourth time at Manhattan’s Towns Hospital in 1934,
Wilson had a spiritual awakening that led to the founding of Al-
coholics Anonymous and his revolutionary twelve-step program,
the successful remedy for alcoholism. The twelve steps have also
generated successful programs for eating disorders, gambling,
narcotics, debting, sex addiction, and people affected by others’
addictions. Aldous Huxley called him “the greatest social archi-
tect of our century.”
Convinced that by helping another alcoholic he could save
himself, Wilson found Dr. Robert Smith, a drunk whose family
persuaded him to give Wilson fifteen minutes. Their meeting
lasted for hours. A month later, Dr. Bob had his last drink, and
that date, June 10, 1935, is the official birth date of AA, which is
based on the idea that only an alcoholic can help another alco-
holic. “Because of our kinship in suffering,” Bill wrote, “our chan-
nels of contact have always been charged with the language of the
heart.”
After years of struggling to promote his mission of help to
other alcoholics, the Saturday Evening Post, in March 1941, pub-
lished an article on AA, and suddenly thousands of letters and re-
quests poured in. Attendance at meetings doubled and tripled.
Wilson had reached his audience. In “Twelve Traditions,” Wilson
set down the suggested bylaws of Alcoholics Anonymous. In
them, he created an enduring blueprint for an organization with
a maximum of individual freedom and no accumulation of power
or money. Public anonymity ensured humility. No contributions
were required; no member could contribute more than $1,000
(now the limit is $2,000).
Today more than 2 million AA members in 150 countries
hold meetings in church basements, hospital conference rooms,
and school gyms, following Wilson’s informal structure. Mem-
192
Biographical Sketches

bers identify themselves as alcoholics and share their stories;
there are no rules or entry requirements, and many members use
only first names.
Wilson believed the key to sobriety was a change of heart.
The suggested twelve steps include an admission of powerless-
ness, a moral inventory, restitution for harm done, a call to ser-
vice, and surrender to some personal God. Influenced by AA, the
American Medical Association has redefined alcoholism as a
chronic disease, not a failure of willpower (Cheever 2003).
References
Brown University. 2001. “Former DEA head David Kessler to Discuss
Confronting ‘Big Tobacco.’” Available at http://www.brown.edu/
Administration/News_Bureau/2000-01/00-098.html (accessed January
14, 2004).
Cheever, Susan. 1999. “Bill Wilson.” Time (June 14). Available at
http://www.time.com/time/time100/heroes/profile/wilson01.html
(accessed January 14, 2004).
Cockburn, A., and J. St. Clair. 1998. “Race and the Drug War.” Available
at http://www.counterpunch.org/drugwar.html (accessed January 14,
2004).
Common Sense for Drug Policy. 2002. “Nixon Tapes Reveal Twisted
Roots 
of 
Marijuana 
Prohibition.” Available 
at 
http://www.
csdp.org/news/news/nixon.htm (accessed January 14, 2004).
DuPont, R. 1997. “Violence and Drugs.” Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 29,
no. 4 (October–December): 303–305.
Erowid. 
2004. 
“Timothy 
Leary.” 
Available 
at 
http://www.
erowid.org/culture/characters/leary_timothy/leary_timothy.shtml (ac-
cessed January 14, 2004).
Galliher, John F., David P. Keys, and Michael Elsner. 1998. “Lindesmith v.
Anslinger: An Early Government Victory in the Failed War on Drugs.”
Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology 88, no. 2 (winter): 661–682.
Available 
at 
http://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/History/
anslingerlindesmith.htm (accessed January 15, 2004).
Grinspoon, L., and J. Bakalar. “Medical Uses of Illicit Drugs.” Schaffer Li-
brary of Drug Policy. Available at http://www.druglibrary.org/
schaffer/hemp/medical/meduse.htm (accessed January 14, 2004).
Hartsell, D. 1994. “Reefer Madness?” Available at http://www.
erowid.org/plants/cannabis/hemp/hemp_media6.shtml (accessed Jan-
uary 14, 2004).
References
193

Psychedelic Library Web site. 2004. Available at http://www.
psychedelic-library.org (accessed January 14, 2004).
Schlosser, E. 1997. “More Reefer Madness.” Atlantic Monthly 279, no. 4
(April): 90–120.
Soros, G. 1997. “The Drug War Debate; The Drug War ‘Cannot Be Won’;
It’s Time to Just Say No To Self-Destructive Prohibition.” Washington Post
(February 
2). 
Available 
at 
http://www.mega.nu:8080/ampp/
drugwar/j79.html (accessed January 15, 2004).
Verkiul, P. 1998. “A Leadership Case of Tobacco and Its Regulation.”
Available at http://www.upenn.edu/pnc/ptverkuil.html (accessed Jan-
uary 14, 2004).
“Volstead, Andrew Joseph.” 2001. The Columbia Encyclopedia. 6th ed.
Available at http://www.bartleby.com/65/vo/Volstead.html (accessed
January 19, 2004).
University of Waterloo. 2001. “Extracts from Benjamin Rush’s Inquiry
into the Effects of Ardent Spirits upon the Human Body and Mind.” Sea-
gram Museum Library Collections. Available at http://www.lib.
uwaterloo.ca/seagrams/temper/sea2.html (accessed January 14, 2004).
Wink, W. 1999. “The Fix We’re In.” Christian Century Foundation.
Available at http://www.religion-online.org/cgi-bin/relsearchd.dll/
showarticle?item_id=504 (accessed January 14, 2004).
194
Biographical Sketches

7
Directory of Organizations,
Associations, and Agencies
T
his chapter provides information about organizations, asso-
ciations, and agencies that address drug issues from supply-
and-demand control to legislation reform, prevention
education, treatment, and research. The chapter includes details
about significant nongovernmental organizations, university-
based research centers, and governmental organizations based
in the United States and elsewhere. Information for this chapter
has been taken from Internet sources accessed in June and July
2003.
Nongovernmental Organizations
Most of the organizations listed below are voluntary groups that
draw support and membership from the general public and pro-
fessionals. Some have a single national office, while others have
chapters in various cities. Most of these organizations provide ed-
ucational materials through their Web sites. Some raise and dis-
tribute funds for research; others conduct educational programs
for the public and encourage and develop local support groups.
A few maintain extensive library resources that may be accessed
on-line (for example, Drug Reform Coordination Network [DRC-
Net] maintains the Schaffer Library of Drug Policy at
http://www.druglibrary.org; the Drug Policy Alliance maintains
the Lindesmith Library database at http://library.soros.org; and
195

Common Sense for Drug Policy provides information through
Drug War Facts, http://www.drugwarfacts.org). The following
organizations are a few of the many that address drug issues.
Action on Smoking and Health (ASH)
John F. Banzhaf III, Executive Officer
2013 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20006
(202) 659-4310
Web site: http://www.ash.org
Action on Smoking and Health (ASH) is a nonprofit tax-exempt
legal-action antismoking organization based in the United States
that has been solely devoted to the problems of smoking for more
than thirty-five years. Its main activity is to serve as the legal-
action arm of the nonsmoking community, bringing or joining in
legal actions concerning smoking, and ensuring that the voice of
the nonsmoker is heard. It also serves as an advocate of the non-
smokers’ rights movement. ASH’s executive director, John F.
Banzhaf III, has been called the “Ralph Nader of the Tobacco In-
dustry,” “Mr. Anti-Smoking,” and the “Man behind the Ban on
Cigarette Commercials.”
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA)
Grand Central Station
P.O. Box 459
New York, NY 10163
(212) 870-3400
Web site: http://www.alcoholics-anonymous.org
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) is a voluntary worldwide organiza-
tion of men and women who meet together to attain and maintain
sobriety. The only requirement for membership is a desire to stop
drinking. There are no dues or fees for AA membership. It is esti-
mated that there are more than 100,000 groups and more than 2
million members in 150 countries. The AA fellowship is not affil-
iated with any other organization addressing alcoholism, has no
opinion on issues outside AA, and neither endorses nor opposes
any causes. Alcoholics Anonymous is self-supporting, accepts
contributions limited to $2,000 a year from its members, and does
not accept contributions from nonmembers. AA is a program of
total abstinence; sobriety is maintained through sharing experi-
ence and mutual support provided at group meetings.
196
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Anonymity is an essential characteristic of the organization, and
the identity of its members is not disclosed.
American Council for Drug Education (ACDE)
William F. Current, Executive Director
204 Monroe Street, Suite 110
Rockville, MD 20850
(800) 488-3784
E-mail: acde@phoenixhouse.org
Web site: http://www.drughelp.org
The American Council for Drug Education (ACDE) was created
in 1977 in response to the substance-abuse problem in the United
States. Its purpose is to provide the public with access to scientif-
ically based prevention programs and materials. Information on
illegal drugs and their effects is made available to people through
its publications, broadcast media, films, educational programs,
storybooks, and services. ACDE information and education pro-
grams are designed for teens, parents, employers, educators,
health care providers, policy makers, and others. In 1995, ACDE
became an affiliate of the Phoenix House Foundation, the largest
private nonprofit drug-abuse service agency in the country.
Association for Medical Education and Research in Substance
Abuse (AMERSA)
Isabel Vieira and Doreen MacLane-Baeder, Codirectors
125 Whipple Street, Third Floor
Providence, RI 02908
(401) 349-000 or (877) 418-8769
E-mail: isabel@amersa.org; doreen@amersa.org
Web site: http://www.amersa.org
The Association for Medical Education and Research in Substance
Abuse (AMERSA) was founded in 1976 as a multidisciplinary or-
ganization of health care professionals dedicated to improving
education in the care of individuals with substance-abuse prob-
lems. AMERSA provides leadership and training for all health
care professionals in the management of alcohol, tobacco, and
other drug problems; it disseminates scientific information about
substance-abuse education and research through its national con-
ference and journal, Substance Abuse; and it works toward pro-
moting a national network of substance-abuse experts who can
advise local, national, and international organizations on health
Nongovernmental Organizations
197

professional substance-abuse education through representation
at national forums, among other initiatives.
College on Problems of Drug Dependence (CPDD)
Martin W. Adler, Executive Officer
3420 North Broad Street
Philadelphia, PA 19140
(215) 707-3242
Fax: (215) 707-1904
E-mail: baldeagl@temple.edu
Web site: http://www.cpdd.vcu.edu
The College on Problems of Drug Dependence (CPDD), formerly
the Committee on Problems of Drug Dependence, has been in ex-
istence since 1929. It is the longest-standing organization in the
United States addressing problems of drug dependence and
abuse. CPDD functions as an independent body affiliated with
other scientific and professional societies representing various
disciplines concerned with problems of drug dependence and
abuse. It maintains cooperation with governmental, industrial,
and academic communities as well as educational, treatment, and
prevention facilities in the drug-abuse field, including the World
Health Organization.
Common Sense for Drug Policy
Melvin Allen, Director
3220 N Street NW, #141
Washington, DC 20007
(202) 299-9780
Fax: (202) 518-4028
E-mail: info@csdp.org
Web site: http://www.csdp.org
Common Sense for Drug Policy is a nonprofit organization with
offices in Washington, D.C.; Lancaster, Pa.; and Los Angeles that
addresses issues about drug policy, existing laws, and alterna-
tives to current policies. This organization provides advice and
technical assistance to individuals and organizations working to
reform current policies, promotes coalition building, dissemi-
nates research, hosts public forums, provides pro bono legal as-
sistance to those adversely affected by current drug policy, and
maintains an extensive and accessible information data bank—
Drug War Facts (http://www.drugwarfacts.org).
198
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Community Anti-Drug Coalitions of America (CADCA)
9001 North Pitt Street, Suite 300
Alexandria, VA 22314
(800) 54-CADCA
E-mail: webmaster@cadca.org or info@cadca.org
Web site: http://www.cadca.org
The Community Anti-Drug Coalitions of America (CADCA) pro-
motes development of drug-free communities throughout the
United States. This organization draws support and membership
for coalitions from multiple sectors of the community, including
businesses, parents, media, law enforcement, schools, faith or-
ganizations, health providers, social service agencies, and the
government. Through its coalition-building efforts, partners or-
ganize and develop plans and programs to coordinate their anti-
drug efforts.
Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE)
Glenn Levant, Executive Director
P.O. Box 512090
Los Angeles, CA 90051-0090
(919) 676-1031
(800) 223-DARE
Fax: (310) 215-0180
E-mail: anita.bryan@dare.com (DARE America educator)
Founded in 1983, Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE) is a
program that teaches children from kindergarten through twelfth
grade how to resist peer pressure and live in a drug-free environ-
ment. “Prior to entering the D.A.R.E. program, officers undergo
80 hours of special training in areas such as child development,
classroom management, teaching techniques, and communica-
tion skills. An additional 40 hours of training are provided to
D.A.R.E. instructors to prepare them to teach the high school cur-
riculum.” The DARE program is found throughout the United
States and other countries.
Drug Policy Alliance
Ethan Nadelmann, Executive Director
925 Fifteenth Street NW, Second Floor
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 216-0035
Fax: (202) 216-0803
Nongovernmental Organizations
199

E-mail: dc@drugpolicy.org
Web site: http://www.drugpolicy.org/contact/
The Drug Policy Alliance is a major organization addressing
drug-policy reform and promoting “alternatives to the war on
drugs based on science, compassion, public health and human
rights.” The alliance was established in 2000 with the objective of
building a national drug policy–reform movement. It has offices
in New York, San Francisco, and elsewhere throughout the
United States. It is the result of a merger of the Lindesmith Cen-
ter and the Drug Policy Foundation. The guiding principle of the
alliance is harm reduction, an alternative approach to drug policy
and treatment that focuses on minimizing the adverse effects of
both drug use and drug prohibition. The alliance and its affiliated
organizations promote education about alternatives to current
drug policies on issues ranging from marijuana and adolescent
drug use to illicit-drug addiction, the spread of infectious dis-
eases, policing drug markets, and alternatives to incarceration.
Drug Reform Coordination Network (DRCNet)
David Borden, Executive Director
1623 Connecticut Avenue NW, Third Floor
Washington, DC 20009
(202) 293-8340
Fax: (202) 293-8344
E-mail: drcnet@drcnet.org
Web site: http://www.drcnet.org/aboutdrc/
The Drug Reform Coordination Network (DRCNet) was founded
in 1993. This national organization promotes drug-policy reform
from a variety of perspectives, including harm reduction, reform
of sentencing and forfeiture laws, medical use of current Sched-
ule I drugs, and promotion of an open debate on drug prohibi-
tion. DRCNet has a well-developed information-gathering and
-distribution capability. It maintains the Schaffer Library of Drug
Policy at http://www.druglibrary.org, a major source of informa-
tion about the history of drug policy, and provides regular infor-
mation about drug-policy issues though an Internet newsletter.
Drug Strategies
Marie Dyak, Executive Director
1150 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 100
Washington, DC 20036
200
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

(202) 289-9070
E-mail: dspolicy@aol.com
Web site: http://www.drugstrategies.org
Drug Strategies promotes effective approaches to the nation’s
drug problems and supports private and public efforts to reduce
the demand for drugs through prevention, education, treatment,
law enforcement, and community initiatives. Among its efforts,
Drug Strategies conducts an annual review of federal drug-
control spending, and its “Keeping Score” initiative has become a
major resource for improving understanding of the impact of fed-
eral drug policy. Drug Strategies is developing a new interactive
Web site that helps teenagers connect to counseling and treatment
within their own communities.
Drug Watch International
Sandra S. Bennett, President
P.O. Box 45218
Omaha, NE 68145-0218
(402) 384-9212
Web site: http://www.drugwatch.org
Drug Watch International is a network of experts and community
volunteers from a wide range of professions whose mission is to
prevent drug use. This is accomplished by promoting sound drug
policies based on scientific research and opposing efforts to legal-
ize or decriminalize drugs. The purpose of Drug Watch Interna-
tional is to provide policy makers, the media, and the public with
current information, factual research, and expert resources, and to
counter drug-advocacy propaganda.
Hazelden Foundation
Ellen L. Breyer, President and CEO
P.O. Box 11-CO3
Center City, MN 55012-0011
(800) 257-7810
E-mail: info@hazelden.org
Web site: http://www.hazelden.org/visit_us.dbm
Founded in 1949, the Hazelden Foundation has been a pioneer in
the treatment of alcoholism and other drug dependency. It has
successfully helped thousands of men, women, and young
people with their substance-abuse problems. Hazelden Founda-
tion programs have served as models for many other successful
Nongovernmental Organizations
201

treatment centers all over the world. Its intensive program inte-
grates sound professional practices, which include individual-
ized planning by a multidisciplinary team, with the principles of
Alcoholics Anonymous.
Join Together
David Rosenbloom, Director
1 Appleton Street, Fourth Floor
Boston, MA 02116-5223
(617) 437-1500
Fax: (617) 437-9394
E-mail: info@jointogether.org
Web site: http://www.jointogether.org/
Join Together, founded in 1991, supports community-based efforts
to reduce, prevent, and treat substance abuse across the nation.
This organization is primarily supported by a grant from the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation at the Boston University School
of Public Health. Through its Web sites and services, its partner-
ships with twenty-nine cities, and its alliances with key cosponsors,
it helps communities develop and implement strategies designed
to improve drug-treatment services. Join Together maintains Join
Together Online (JTO), which publishes a daily newsletter on drug
and violence information, including current events, professional
publications, and government reports. JTO is a major information
source recommended for keeping informed of drug-related issues.
Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD)
Dean Wilkerson, National Executive Director
511 East John Carpenter Freeway, #700
Irving, TX 75062
(214) 744-6233, ext. 218
Fax: (972) 869-2206
E-mail: heard@madd.org
Web site: http://madd.org
Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) is a nonprofit grass-
roots organization with more than 600 chapters nationwide. It
was founded by a small group of California women in 1980 after
a hit-and-run driver killed a thirteen-year-old girl. The focus of
MADD is to look for effective solutions to drunk driving and un-
derage drinking problems, while supporting those who have al-
ready experienced the pain of these “senseless crimes.”
202
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

National Association for Children of Alcoholics (NACoA)
Sis Wenger, Executive Director
11426 Rockville Pike, Suite 100
Rockville, MD 20852
(888) 554-COAS
Fax: (301) 468-0985
E-mail: nacoa@nacoa.org
Web site: http://www.nacoa.org/aboutnacoa.htm
The National Association for Children of Alcoholics (NACoA),
founded in 1983, is the national nonprofit membership organiza-
tion working on behalf of children of alcohol- and drug-
dependent parents. The mission of NACoA is to advocate for
children and families affected by alcoholism and other drug de-
pendencies. This organization raises public awareness; provides
leadership in public policy at the national, state, and local levels;
advocates appropriate, effective, and accessible education and
prevention services; and promotes professional knowledge and
understanding.
National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence
(NCADD)
Stacia Murphy, Executive Director
20 Exchange Place, Suite 2902
New York, NY 10005
(212) 269-7797
Fax: (212) 269-7510
E-mail: national@ncadd.org
Web site: http://www.ncadd.org
Founded in 1944 by Marty Mann, the first woman to find long-
term sobriety in Alcoholics Anonymous, the National Council on
Alcoholism and Drug Dependence (NCADD) provides educa-
tion, information, help, and hope to the public. It advocates pre-
vention, intervention, and treatment through offices in New York
and Washington, D.C., and a nationwide network of affiliates.
National Organization of Reform for Marijuana Laws
(NORML)
R. Keith Stroup, Executive Director
1600 K Street NW, Suite 501
Washington, DC 20006-2832
(202) 483-5500
Nongovernmental Organizations
203

Fax: (202) 483-0057
E-mail: norml@norml.org
Web site: http://www.norml.org
The National Organization of Reform for Marijuana Laws
(NORML) was founded in 1970 as a nonprofit public-interest ad-
vocacy group representing the interests of Americans who smoke
marijuana responsibly. NORML leads the fight to reform state
and federal marijuana laws, whether by voter initiative or
through the elected legislatures. This organization serves as an in-
formational resource to the national media on marijuana-related
stories. It lobbies state and federal legislators in support of reform
legislation; publishes a regular newsletter; hosts, along with the
NORML Foundation, an informative Web site and an annual con-
ference; and serves as the umbrella group for a national network
of citizen-activists committed to ending marijuana prohibition
and legalizing marijuana.
Partnership for a Drug-Free America (PDFA)
405 Lexington Avenue, Suite 1601
New York, NY 10174
(212) 922-1560
Fax: (212) 922-1570
Web site: http://www.drugfreeamerica.org
The Partnership for a Drug-Free America (PDFA), established in
1986, is a nonprofit coalition of professionals from the communi-
cations industry. Through its national drug-education advertising
campaign and other forms of media communication, the partner-
ship helps kids and teens reject substance abuse. With roots in the
advertising industry, the partnership is composed of a small staff
and hundreds of volunteers who create and disseminate the part-
nership’s work. PDFA receives major funding from the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation and support from more than 200 cor-
porations and companies.
The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation—Substance Abuse
Policy Research Program
David Altman, National Program Director
Substance Abuse Policy Research Program
Center for Creative Leadership
One Leadership Place
P.O. Box 26300
204
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Greensboro, NC 27438-6300
(336) 286-4418
Fax: (336) 286-4434
Web site: http://www.phs.bgsm.edu/sshp/rwj 
The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation seeks to improve the
health and health care of all Americans. Among the goals of the
foundation is reducing the personal, social, and economic harm
caused by substance abuse—tobacco, alcohol, and illicit drugs. To
accomplish this objective, the foundation supports training, edu-
cation, research (excluding biomedical research), and projects that
demonstrate the effective delivery of health care services.
University-Based Drug Research and
Policy Centers
Monitoring the Future Study, University of Michigan (MFT)
Lloyd D. Johnston, Ph.D., Program Director
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
E-mail: MTFinfo@isr.umich.edu
Web site: http://monitoringthefuture.org/
The Monitoring the Future (MFT) project, begun in 1975, has
many purposes. Among them is to study changes in the beliefs,
attitudes, and behavior of young people in the United States. This
study focuses on youths from the eighth to the twelfth grades.
Approximately 50,000 students in about 420 public and private
secondary schools nationwide are surveyed annually.
National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at
Columbia University (CASA)
Joseph Califano Jr., President and Chairman
633 Third Avenue, Nineteenth Floor
New York, NY 10017-6706
(212) 841-5200
Web site: http://www.casacolumbia.org
The National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at Co-
lumbia University (CASA) is an organization that brings together
multiple professional disciplines to address drug-policy issues
through research, education, and related activities. CASA efforts
University-Based Drug Research and Policy Centers
205

address all substances—alcohol, tobacco, and illegal drugs.
Through its Web site, CASA provides useful information about
organizations that address drug problems.
Rutgers University, Center of Alcohol Studies (CAS)
Robert J. Pandina, Director
607 Allison Road
Piscataway, NJ 08854-8001
(732) 445-2190
Fax: (732) 445-3500
E-mail: rpandina@rci.rutgers.edu
Web site: http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/~cas2
The Center of Alcohol Studies (CAS) evolved in the late 1930s and
1940s at the Yale University Laboratory of Applied Physiology
and relocated in 1962 to Rutgers University. The center has re-
search programs and pre- and postdoctoral training in biochem-
istry, clinical and experimental psychology, neuropharmacology,
sociology, public health, education, and prevention.
University of California, Integrated Substance Abuse
Programs (ISAP)
Walter Ling, Director
11075 Santa Monica Boulevard, Suite 200
Los Angeles, CA 90025
(310) 312-0500, ext. 317
E-mail: darc@ucla.edu
Web site: http://www.uclaisap.org
The UCLA Integrated Substance Abuse Programs (ISAP) coordi-
nates substance-abuse research and treatment within the Depart-
ment of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences at the UCLA
School of Medicine. ISAP is one of the largest substance-abuse re-
search groups in the United States. It maintains an extensive pro-
gram of substance-abuse research, education, training, and infor-
mation transfer on national and international levels.
University of Kentucky, Center on Drug and Alcohol Research
(CDAR)
Carl Leukefeld, Director
643 Maxwelton Court
Lexington, KY 40506-0350
(859) 257-2355
206
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Fax: (859) 323-1193
E-mail: krieger@uky.edu
Web site: http://www.uky.edu/RGS/CDAR/index.html
The Center on Drug and Alcohol Research (CDAR) at the Uni-
versity of Kentucky, established in 1990, builds on addiction re-
search that began more than five decades ago in Lexington.
Presently, it conducts research, teaching, and service related to the
biological, psychological, sociocultural, and clinical aspects of
substance use, abuse, and dependency. The center brings together
faculty from various universities and colleges with interests in
drug and alcohol addiction.
University of Maryland, Center for Substance Abuse
Research (CESAR)
Eric Wish, Director
4321 Hartwick Road, Suite 501
College Park, MD 20740
(301) 403-8329
Fax: (301) 403-8342
E-mail: cesar@cesar.umd.edu
Web site: http://www.cesar.umd.edu
The Center for Substance Abuse Research (CESAR) at the Uni-
versity of Maryland was established in 1990. CESAR provides in-
formation to policy makers, practitioners, and the general public
about substance abuse—its nature and scope, its prevention and
treatment, and its relation to other problems. The center conducts
research and evaluation studies, disseminates information, and
provides training and technical assistance to agencies and organ-
izations working in substance abuse–related fields.
Governmental Organizations
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP)
Beverly Watts Davis, Director
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Rm 12-105 Parklawn Building
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857
(301) 443-8956
(800) WORKPLACE
Governmental Organizations
207

E-mail: info@samhsa.gov
Web site: http://prevention.samhsa.gov
The Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP) provides na-
tional leadership in the development of policies, programs, and
services to prevent the onset of illegal-drug use and underage al-
cohol and tobacco use, and to reduce the negative consequences
of using substances. CSAP promotes a comprehensive preven-
tion-system approach that includes community involvement and
partnership among all sectors of society.
Center for Substance Abuse Treatment (CSAT)
Westley Clark, Director
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Rm 12-105 Parklawn Building
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857
(301) 443-8956
(800) 662-HELP
E-mail: info@samhsa.gov
Web site: http://www.samhsa.gov
The Center for Substance Abuse Treatment (CSAT) is responsible
for expanding the availability of effective treatment and recovery
services for alcohol and drug problems. CSAT supports the na-
tion’s effort to provide multiple treatment modalities, evaluate
treatment effectiveness, and use evaluation results to enhance
treatment and recovery approaches.
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information
(NCADI)
John Noble, Director
P.O. Box 2345
Rockville, MD 20847-2345
(301) 729-6686
(800) 729-6686
Fax: (301) 468-6433
E-mail: webmaster@health.org
Web site: http://ncadi.samhsa.gov/
The National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information
(NCADI) is the information service of the Center for Substance
Abuse Prevention (CSAP). NCADI is the world’s largest resource
for current information and materials concerning substance
208
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

abuse. NCADI services include: (1) information available in Eng-
lish and Spanish and for the deaf; (2) the distribution of free or
low-cost ATOD materials, including fact sheets, brochures, pam-
phlets, monographs, posters, and videotapes; (3) culturally di-
verse prevention, intervention, and treatment resources tailored
for use by parents, teachers, youths, communities, and preven-
tion/treatment professionals; (4) customized searches in the
form of annotated bibliographies from alcohol and drug data-
bases; (5) access to the Prevention Materials Database, including
more than 8,000 prevention-related materials and the Treatment
Resources Database available to the public in electronic form;
and (6) rapid dissemination of federal grant announcements for
alcohol and drug prevention, treatment, and research funding
opportunities.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism (NIAAA)
Ting-kai Li, Director
Willco Building
6000 Executive Boulevard
Bethesda, MD 20892-7003
Web site: http://www.niaaa.nih.gov
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
(NIAAA) provides leadership in the national effort to reduce al-
cohol-related problems by (1) conducting and supporting re-
search in a wide range of scientific areas; (2) coordinating and col-
laborating with other research institutes and federal programs on
alcohol-related issues; (3) collaborating with international, na-
tional, state, and local institutions, organizations, agencies, and
programs engaged in alcohol-related work; and (4) translating
and disseminating research findings to health care providers, re-
searchers, policy makers, and the public.
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)
Nora Volkow, Director
National Institutes of Health
6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 5213
Bethesda, MD 20892-9561
(301) 443-1124
E-mail: information@lists.nida.nih.gov
Web site: http://www.drugabuse.gov/about/AboutNIDA.html
Governmental Organizations
209

The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), part of the Na-
tional Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices, focuses on key issues about drug abuse, ranging from the
molecule to managed care, and from DNAto community-outreach
research. NIDA supports more than 85 percent of the world’s re-
search on the health aspects of drug abuse and addiction.
National Youth Anti-Drug Campaign
(800) 788-2800
Web site: http://www.mediacampaign.org
The National Youth Anti-Drug Campaign is a program of the
White House Office of National Drug Control Policy. The media
campaign is designed to educate and empower youths to reject il-
licit drugs. The campaign uses a variety of media to reach parents
and youths, including TV ads, educational materials, Web sites,
and publications.
Regional Alcohol and Drug Awareness Resource (RADAR)
Network (NCADI/SAMHSA)
M. Cornelius Pierce
Manager RADAR Network Center Development
P.O. Box 2345
Rockville, Maryland 20847-2345
(800) 729-6686, Ext. 5111
Web site: http://ncadi.samsha.gov
The Regional Alcohol and Drug Awareness Resource (RADAR)
Network was formed in partnership with state governments and
national constituency groups to provide information to preven-
tion practitioners and other community members interested in
addressing alcohol, tobacco, and other drug problems. RADAR
Network centers are located in every state and U.S. territory. In
addition to state RADAR Network centers designated by state
governments, the network includes specialty RADAR Network
centers that operate at the national level, associate members that
work at the community level, and international organizations.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA)
Charles G. Curie, Administrator
210
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Parklawn Building, Room 12-105
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857
(301) 443-4795
Fax: (301) 443-0284
E-mail: info@samhsa.gov
Web site: http://www.samhsa.gov
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA) was established to provide prevention, diagnosis,
and treatment services for substance abuse and mental illnesses.
SAMHSA serves as the umbrella under which substance-abuse
and mental health–service centers are housed, including the Cen-
ter for Mental Health Services (CMHS), the Center for Substance
Abuse Prevention (CSAP), and the Center for Substance Abuse
Treatment (CSAT). SAMHSA also houses the Office of the Ad-
ministrator, the Office of Applied Studies, and the Office of Pro-
gram Services.
White House Office of National Drug Control Policy
(ONDCP)
John Walters, Director
Drug Policy Information Clearinghouse
P.O. Box 6000
Rockville, MD 20849-6000
1-800-666-3332 
Fax: 301-519-5212
E-mail: ondcp@ncjrs.org
Web site: http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov
The White House Office of National Drug Control Policy
(ONDCP), established in 1988, is a component of the executive of-
fice of the president. The principal purpose of ONDCP is to es-
tablish policies, priorities, and objectives for the nation’s drug-
control program related to the reduction of illicit-drug use,
manufacturing, and trafficking; drug-related crime and violence;
and drug-related health consequences. By law, the director of
ONDCP evaluates, coordinates, and oversees both the interna-
tional and domestic antidrug efforts of executive-branch agencies
and ensures that such efforts sustain and complement state and
local antidrug activities.
Governmental Organizations
211

International Organizations
Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse (CCSA)
Michel Perron, Chief Executive Officer
75 Albert Street, Suite 300
Ottawa, Ontario K1P 5E7
Canada
(613) 235-4048
Fax: (613) 235-8101
E-mail: info@ccsa.ca
Web site: http://www.ccsa.ca
The Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse (CCSA) is a national
agency established in 1988. The center promotes debate on sub-
stance-abuse issues; disseminates information on the nature, ex-
tent, and consequences of substance abuse; and supports and as-
sists organizations involved in substance-abuse treatment,
prevention, and educational programming.
Centre for Drug Research, University of Amsterdam, the
Netherlands (CEDRO)
Faculty of Social and Behavioural Sciences
SCO-Kohnstamm Instituut
Wibautstraat 4, 1091 GM
Amsterdam
The Netherlands
P.O. Box 94208, 1090 GE
Amsterdam
The Netherlands
31-20-525-4278
Fax: 31-20-525-4317
E-mail: info@cedro-uva.org
Web site: http://www.cedro-uva.org/about.html
The Centre for Drug Research (CEDRO) was established in 1996.
Its goal is to conduct social research in the fields of drug use, drug
policy, and drug distribution; disseminate information; and pro-
mote international communication about various aspects of the
drug problem from a social perspective.
212
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Drugtext and the Foundation on Drug Policy and
Human Rights
Mario Louis Sylvester Lap, Director
Koninginneweg 189
1075 CP Amsterdam
The Netherlands
31-20-664-4086
E-mail: mario@drugtext.org
Web site: http://www.drugtext.org
The purpose of both Drugtext and the Foundation on Drug Pol-
icy and Human Rights is to promote the development and dis-
semination of knowledge, research, education, scholarship, and
international jurisprudence in the area of drug policy and human
rights. Drugtext is a nonprofit foundation under Dutch law pro-
viding Internet services for the International Harm Reduction As-
sociation, the International Foundation on Drug Policy & Human
Rights, and the Foundation on Drug Policy and Human Rights.
European Working Group on Drugs Oriented Research
(EWODOR)
Rowdy Yates, Director
Department of Applied Social Science
Cottrell Building, Room 4B48
University of Stirling
Stirling, FK9 4LA
Scotland
44-(0)-1786-467695
Fax: 44-(0)-1786-466299
E-mail: p.r.yates@stir.ac.uk
Web site: http://www.stir.ac.uk/Departments/HumanSciences/
AppSocSci/DRUGS/ewodor.htm
The European Working Group on Drugs Oriented Research
(EWODOR) was founded in 1986 to provide a forum enabling re-
searchers in the field of drug/alcohol treatment, prevention, and
policy to share research experience and expertise; compare proce-
dures, methods, and results; and subject their work to peer ex-
amination. EWODOR provides (1) an annual symposium for the
presentation of current/recent research in the drug/alcohol field,
International Organizations
213

(2) an on-line discussion site for the exchange of information, and
(3) the archiving of research findings in the drug/alcohol field as
a means by which researchers can communicate.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director
Vienna International Centre
P.O. Box 500
A-1400 Vienna
Austria
43 1 26060 0
Fax: 43 1 26060 5866
E-mail: odccp@odccp.org
Web site: http://www.unodc.org/odccp.html
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) is a
global leader in the fight against illicit drugs and international
crime. Established in 1997, UNODC consists of the Drug Pro-
gramme and the Crime Programme. Its headquarters are in Vi-
enna with offices in New York and Brussels. UNODC publishes
reports about drug use on a region-by-region basis in English,
Spanish, French, Arabic, Russian, and Chinese.
World Health Organization (WHO)
Gro Harlem Brundtland, Director General
Avenue Appia 20
1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
41 22 791 21 11
Fax: 41-22-791-31-11
E-mail: info@who.int
Web site: http://www.who.int/about/contacthq/en/
The World Health Organization (WHO), the UN specialized
agency for health, was established on April 7, 1948. WHO con-
ducts and supports research, provides technical assistance, advo-
cates health care policy, and has an extensive library of informa-
tion resources on health-related issues, including tobacco,
alcohol, and illicit drugs, that may be accessed at: http://www.
who.int/library/reference/tutorials/wholis/index.en.shtml.
214
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

8
Print and Nonprint
Resources
L
iterally thousands of books, journals, articles, news stories, and
research studies have been written on the drug problem. Each
substance (that is, tobacco, alcohol, marijuana, heroin, and
cocaine), as well as each aspect of the problem, such as prevention
and treatment, generates vast amounts of information. The goal
of this chapter is to identify key resources that are accessible and
offer a variety of views of the drug problem. A few choice books
are included because of content. Key journal articles are not pro-
vided; however, the major outlets for scientific publications and
newsletters are listed with contact information. The chapter also
supplies addresses to nongovernmental and governmental Web
sites that provide access to keyword search information. The
resources in this chapter should equip the reader with an ade-
quate amount of contact information for reference and research
purposes. The final section of the chapter is a comprehensive list-
ing of the sources used to compile this reference handbook.
Books
Barr, Andrew. 1999. Drink: A Social History of America. New
York: Carroll & Graff.
In this cultural history of drink in the United States, the author
considers the significance of alcohol, historically and socially,
symbolic and real, in the evolution of a nation born of a rebel
215

spirit and intoxicated by liberty. Barr examines not only the social
influences that determine what, where, with whom, and why we
choose to drink but also the scapegoating of alcohol by moral
alarmists, the medical establishment, and platform politicians
who have more often produced dubious cures than they have ac-
complished social good.
Falkowski, Carol L. 2003. Dangerous Drugs: An Easy to Use Ref-
erence for Parents and Professionals. 2d ed. Center City, MN:
Hazelden.
This authoritative, up-to-date reference guide describes the latest
drugs to hit the community: what they look like, where they come
from, and why they are dangerous. Featuring a color photo section,
the second edition of Dangerous Drugs is an effective reference tool
for parents and professionals alike. Easy-to-understand profiles of
common legal and illegal drugs include information about how the
substance affects the mind, body, and behavior; its addictive and
overdose potential; and symptoms and signs of abuse.
Goode, Erich. 1998. Drugs in American Society. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
This well-respected text probes the drug phenomenon in all its
social, cultural, and legal complexity. It covers the full range of
psychoactive drug use—from legal medical and prescription use
to criminal and recreational use, from casual use to addiction. As
in previous editions, Goode remains unique in his emphasis on
the sociological perspective, explaining the drug phenomenon
using sociological concepts supported by recent data from a wide
range of sources. Drugs in American Society provides a balanced
and up-to-date investigation of drug use.
Gray, Mike. 2000. Drug Crazy: How We Got into This Mess and
How We Can Get Out. New York: Routledge.
Arguing that the federal government’s $300 billion campaign to
eradicate drug use over the past fifteen years has been a total fail-
ure, Gray calls for legalization of drugs and governmental regu-
lation of their sale, with doctors writing prescriptions to addicts.
Although there is a lack of specifics about how this would work
and the potential consequences, his argument for decriminaliza-
tion is strengthened by a revealing history of drug use in the
United States.
216
Print and Nonprint Resources

Isralowitz, R., M. Afifi, and R. Rawson, eds. 2002. Drug Problems:
Cross-Cultural Policy and Program Development. Westport, CT:
Auburn House.
This edited book is the first to be published on the drug problem
that exists among people in the Middle East, particularly Israelis
and Palestinians. Prepared with support provided by the U.S.
Agency for International Development, Regional Middle East Co-
operation Program, the book has been referred to as what could
be accomplished if “nations not lift up swords any more . . .and
beat them into plowshares.” This book offers chapters on drug
use among Palestinians as well as Israeli Arab and Jewish people,
bedouin Arabs, and Russian immigrants. The Israeli and Pales-
tinian authors are equally and well represented throughout this
book, joined by their colleagues from the World Health Organi-
zation and the United States.
Kessler, David A. 2001. A Question of Intent: A Great American
Battle with a Deadly Industry. New York: PublicAffairs.
This is the David-and-Goliath story of how an American bureau-
crat took on the tobacco industry and helped change its methods
of operation. This is a story of power politics and how David
Kessler, head of the Food and Drug Administration for seven
years under Presidents Bush and Clinton, and his team of
lawyers, scientists, advocates, and others were instrumental in
forcing tobacco companies to admit that nicotine is addictive and
cigarettes cause cancer, and in bringing about a sea change in the
industry’s legal and popular standing.
Marlatt, Alan G., David C. Lewis, and David B. Abrams, eds.
1998. Harm Reduction: Pragmatic Strategies for Managing High-
Risk Behaviors. New York: Guilford.
Harm-reduction principles and strategies are designed to mini-
mize the destructive consequences of illicit-drug use and other
behaviors that may pose serious health risks. Rather than insist-
ing on abstinence as a prerequisite to continued treatment, pro-
ponents of the harm-reduction approach aim to meet drug users
“where they’re at” with community-based services that empower
diverse clients to set and meet their own treatment goals. The first
major harm-reduction text, this provocative and timely volume
examines a wide range of current applications—from needle ex-
change and methadone maintenance programs to alternative
Books
217

alcohol interventions and AIDS-prevention campaigns. Insight is
also offered into the often contentious philosophical and policy-
related debates surrounding this growing movement.
Massing, Michael. 2000. The Fix. Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press.
Michael Massing exposes the political and ideological narrow-
mindedness that has made national drug policy a failure, and
demonstrates convincingly why we should reinstate the policy
that worked. Drawing on scores of interviews with federal offi-
cials charged with directing the drug war and on years of on-the-
street reporting, Massing offers a fresh new way of looking at the
drug problem. The heart of that problem lies not with recreational
users of marijuana, as many politicians and journalists maintain,
but with hard-core users of heroin, crack, and cocaine.
Ray, Oakley S., and Charles Ksir. 2004. Drugs, Society, and
Human Behavior. 10th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
The long-time market leader, this book examines drugs from all
perspectives, including behavioral, pharmacological, historical,
social, legal, and clinical. The book is well designed, providing
current facts and information. It is a primary resource for infor-
mation about the use and abuse drugs.
Schuckit, Mark. 1997. Drug and Alcohol Abuse: A Clinical Guide
to Diagnosis and Treatment. 4th ed. New York: Plenum.
This book provides an overview of drug mechanisms and drug
classification, and covers pharmacology and mental and physical
symptoms of depressants, alcohol, stimulants, opiates, cannabis,
hallucinogens, caffeine, and nicotine as well as over-the-counter
and prescription drugs. The book includes sections on emergency
conditions and rehabilitation as well information on comorbid, or
dual-diagnosis, issues and new pharmacological treatments.
Straussner, L., and S. Brown, eds. 2000. The Handbook of Addic-
tion Treatment for Women. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
This edited book addresses the special needs of women who are
addicted to drugs, alcohol, and other self-destructive behaviors.
Chapters consider the reasons underlying women’s additive be-
havior and addictive thinking, the history of women and addic-
218
Print and Nonprint Resources

tion, the challenges of the female addict, and issues of diagnosis
and treatment. Particular attention is given to differences of age,
ethnicity, and circumstance.
Journals and Newsletters
The following list includes journals and newsletters devoted to
substance-abuse topics. For most titles, the journal/newsletter’s
scope, author guidelines, contents, and subscription information
are presented at the URL listed. A few journals provide the full-
text articles on-line. These references have been drawn from in-
formation prepared by the Alcohol & Drug Abuse Institute Li-
brary (Nancy Sutherland), University of Washington for the
Substance Abuse Librarians and Information Specialists (SALIS):
An International Organization, http://salis.org/resources/
journals.htm, updated June 19, 2002.
ABMRF Journal. Abstracting and news journal of the Alcohol
Beverage Medical Research Foundation. http://www.abmrf.
org/journal.htm
Addiction. Contents, subscription information, and instructions
for contributors. http://www.addictionjournal.org
Addiction Abstracts. Contents and subscription information.
http://www.tandf.co.uk/addiction-abs
Addiction Biology. Contents, subscription information, and in-
structions for contributors. http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/
titles/13556215.html
Addiction Research and Theory. Aims and scope, instructions for
authors, and subscription information. http://www.tandf.
co.uk/journals/titles/16066359.html
Addiction Treatment Forum. Newsletter; full text. http://
www.atforum.com
Addictions Newsletter. From the American Psychological Associ-
ation. http://www.kumc.edu/addictions_newsletter
Journals and Newsletters
219

Addictive Behaviors. Contents, guide for authors, and order in-
formation. http://www.elsevier.nl/inca/publications/store/
4/7/1/
Adicciones. Published by Socidrogalcohol, a quarterly journal on
alcohol and other drug problems, widely distributed in Spanish-
speaking countries; on-line abstracts in Spanish and English.
http://www.adicciones.org
Alcohol. “An International Biomedical Journal,” published by El-
sevier. Contents, order information, and guide for authors.
http://www.elsevier.nl/locate/alcohol
Alcohol Alerts.
From NIAAA. Full text. http://www.
niaaa.nih.gov/publications/alalerts.htm
Alcohol and Alcoholism. Subscription information and instruc-
tions for authors. http://alcalc.oupjournals.org/
Alcohol Research & Health. NIAAA’s quarterly journal (with ab-
stracts); formerly Alcohol Health & Research World. http://www.
niaaa.nih.gov/publications/aharw.htm
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Other Drugs Section Newsletter. Newslet-
ter of American Public Health Association. ATOD section.
http://www.apha.org/sections/newsletterintro.htm
Alcoholis. On-line newsletter of the Medical Council on Alcohol-
ism (UK). http://www.medicouncilalcol.demon.co.uk/news.htm
Alcoholism Treatment Quarterly. Contents, subscription informa-
tion, and author instructions. http://www.haworthpressinc.com
Alcoholism: Clinical & Experimental Research. Official journal of
the Research Society on Alcoholism. Editorial scope, contents
with abstracts, author guide, and subscription information.
http://www.alcoholism-cer.com/
American Indian & Alaska Native Mental Health Research. Jour-
nal of the National Center for American Indian and Alaska Native
Mental Health Research, University of Colorado. http://www.
uchsc.edu/ai/ncaianmhr/journal/
220
Print and Nonprint Resources

American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse. Contents with ab-
stracts, author guidelines, editorial scope, and order information.
http://www.dekker.com/servlet/product/productid/ADA
American Journal on Addictions. American Psychiatric Associa-
tion. Contents, author instructions, and order information.
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/10550496.html
Drug and Alcohol Dependence. Official journal of the College on
Problems of Drug Dependence. Contents, abstracts, order infor-
mation, and author guidelines. http://www.elsevier.nl/inca/
publications/store/5/0/6/0/5/2/
Drug and Alcohol Review. Contents, subscription information,
and instructions for contributors. http://www.apsad.org.au
Drug Dependence, Alcohol Abuse, and Alcoholism: Exerpta Med-
ica Abstract Journal. Scope and order information. http://www.
elsevier.com/locate/drug
Drug Policy Analysis Bulletin. Newsletter of the American Fed-
eration of Scientists. http://www.fas.org
Drugs: Education, Prevention & Policy. Contents, subscription
information, and instructions for contributors. http://www.
tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/09687637.html
EGambling: Electronic Journal of Gambling Issues (Centre for
Addiction & Mental Health). Peer-reviewed; author guidelines.
http://www.camh.net/egambling
Employee Assistance Quarterly. Contents, subscription informa-
tion, and author instructions. http://www.haworthpressinc.
com/web/EAQ/
European Addiction Research. Contents, author instructions, and
subscription information. http://www.karger.com/ear
International Journal of Drug Policy. Official journal of the Inter-
national Harm Reduction Association. Contents, abstracts, order
information, and author guidelines. Full text of vols. 1–8 made
available by Drugtext. http://www.medwebplus. com/obj/25742
Journals and Newsletters
221

International Journal of Drug Testing. On-line journal, full text.
http://www.criminology.fsu.edu/journal
The Journal of Addiction and Mental Health. Centre for Addic-
tion and Mental Health. Full text; order information. Published
by the Addiction Research Foundation. http://www.camh.net
Journal of Addictions and Offender Counseling. Official journal
of the International Association of Addictions and Offender
Counselors. 
Author 
guidelines. 
http://www.counseling.
org/publications/journals.htm
Journal of Addictions Nursing. Official journal of the National
Nurses Society on Addictions. Selected contents, instructions to
authors, and subscription information. http://www. liebertpub.
com
Journal of Addictive Diseases. Official journal of the American
Society on Addiction Medicine (ASAM). Contents, abstracts, and
instructions for authors. http://www.asam.org/jol/journal.htm
Journal of Alcohol and Drug Education. Contents and author
guidelines. http://www.unomaha.edu/~healthed/JADE.html
Journal of Chemical Dependency Treatment. Official journal of
the National Association of Addiction Treatment Professionals.
Contents, subscription information, and author guidelines.
Search for title at publisher site: http://www.haworthpressinc.
com/web/JCDT/
Journal of Child & Adolescent Substance Abuse. Contents, sub-
scription information, and author guidelines. Search for title at
publisher site: http://www.haworthpressinc.com/web/JCASA/
Journal of Drug Education. Selected articles, author instructions,
and subscription information. Search for title at publisher site:
http://www.novapublishers.com/journal
Journal of Drug Issues. Contents, author instructions, and sub-
scription information. http://www2.criminology.fsu.edu/~jdi
222
Print and Nonprint Resources

Journal of Ethnicity in Substance Abuse. Formerly Drugs & Soci-
ety. Contents, subscription information, and author guidelines.
Search for title at publisher site: http://www.haworthpressinc.
com/web/JESA/
Journal of Maintenance in the Addictions: Innovations in Re-
search, Theory and Practice. Contents, subscription information,
and author guidelines. Search for title at publisher site:
http://www.haworthpressinc.com/web/JMA/
Journal of Ministry in Addiction and Recovery. Contents, sub-
scription information, and author guidelines. Search for title at
publisher site: http://www.haworthpressinc.com/web/JMAR/
Journal of Psychoactive Drugs. Subscription information.
http://www.hafci.org/journal
Journal of Social Work Practice in the Addictions. Contents, sub-
scription information, author guidelines. Search for title at pub-
lisher site: http://www.haworthpressinc.com/web/JSWPA/
Journal of Studies on Alcohol. Editorial and subscription infor-
mation. http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/~cas2/journal
Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment. Contents, author instruc-
tions, and order information. http://www.elsevier.com/locate
/jsat
Journal of Substance Use. Formerly Journal of Substance Misuse for
Nursing, Health and Social Care. Contents and scope. http://
www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/14659891.html
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR). Centers of
Disease Control. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr
NIAAA Surveillance Reports. From Alcohol Epidemiologic Data
System, on per capita alcohol consumption, liver cirrhosis mor-
tality, alcohol-related traffic crashes, and alcohol-related morbid-
ity based on hospital discharges. PDF format. http://
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
Journals and Newsletters
223

Nicotine & Tobacco Research. Journal of Society for Research on
Nicotine and Tobacco. Contents and author instructions.
http://www.tandf.co.uk
NIDA Notes. National Institute on Drug Abuse. Full text.
http://www.drugabuse.gov/NIDA_Notes/NNIndex.html
Prevention File: Alcohol, Tobacco, and Other Drugs. Subscription
information; 
some 
issues 
full 
text. 
http://www.adp.
cahwnet.gov/TA/TA_PF.shtml
Prevention Pipeline. Center for Substance Abuse Prevention
(CSAP). http://www.health.org/pubs/prevpipe
Prevention Researcher. Newsletter published by Integrated Re-
search Services. http://www.health.org/govpubs/MS510/Arti-
cles.htm
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors. Contents, abstracts, and au-
thor instructions. http://www.apa.org/journals/adb.html
Pulse Check. U.S. Office of National Drug Control Policy publica-
tion, index for this and other ONDCP publications. http://www.
whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/publications/drugfact/ pulsechk/f
RANES Report. Roizen’s Alcohol News & Editorial Service. Ron
Roizen, editor and publisher. http://www.roizen.com
Self-Help Magazine. Full text. http://www.shpm.com
Smoking and Tobacco Control Monograph Series. National Can-
cer Institute. Full text. http://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/tcrb/
monographs/
Social History of Alcohol Review. Scholarly magazine published
by Alcohol and History Temperance Group. http://www.
athg.org/
Substance Abuse. Official journal of AMERSA. Editorial scope
and subscription information. http://www.amersa.org/Am-
ersa/ameWeb.nsf/Pages/Substance+Abuse
224
Print and Nonprint Resources

Substance Misuse Bulletin. Centre for Addiction Studies, Lon-
don. http://www.sghms.ac.uk/depts/addictive-behaviour/ in-
fores/smb.htm
Substance Use & Misuse. Contents with abstracts, author guide-
lines, 
and 
order 
information. 
http://www.dekker.com
/servlet/product/productid/JA
Tobacco Control Update. On-line newsletter covering tobacco
control in Massachusetts. http://www.tobacco.neu.edu/tcu/
Tobacco Control. Full-text, searchable archive; free full text of ar-
ticles more than twelve months old. http://www.tobacco-
control.org/tcrc_Web_Site/Pages_tcrc/Links/International_
Links.htm
Web Resources
Information Sources and Databases
The following information has been drawn from governmental
publications and other resources in the public domain.
Center for Substance Abuse Treatment (CSAT) (Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, U.S. De-
partment of Health and Human Services). CSAT information in-
cludes information about treatment improvement protocols, tech-
nical assistance publications, and other CSAT publications.
Information may be accessed from the following Web site:
http://samsha.gov/csat/csat.htm
ERIC. The world’s largest source of education information, with
more than 1 million abstracts of documents and journal articles
on education research and practice. Coverage: 1966–present.
http://ericir.syr.edu/Eric
Information on Drugs and Alcohol (IDA). IDA contains scien-
tific literature relating to alcohol- and substance-abuse prevention
and sociological literature. Provides abstracts and bibliographic
records. http://idasearch.health.org/compass
Web Resources
225

MEDLINE. PubMed, a service of the National Library of Medi-
cine, provides access to more than 12 million MEDLINE citations
back to the mid-1960s and additional life-science journals.
PubMed includes links to many sites providing full-text articles
and other related resources. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
entrez/query.fcgi?db=PubMed
MEDLINEplus. MEDLINEplus, a gold mine of good health in-
formation from the world’s largest medical library, the National
Library of Medicine. http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information
(NCADI) Prevline. Prevline is the database portal to the re-
sources of the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug In-
formation. NCADI is the world’s largest resource for current in-
formation and materials concerning substance-abuse prevention.
http://www.health.org
National Criminal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS) Abstracts
Database. The NCJRS Abstracts Database contains summaries of
more than 170,000 criminal justice publications, including federal,
state, and local government reports, books, research reports, jour-
nal articles, and unpublished research. http://abstractsdb.
ncjrs.org/content/AbtractsD
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism—ETOH
database. This database contains more than 100,000 records on al-
cohol abuse and alcoholism. ETOH is updated monthly and con-
tains research findings from the late 1960s to the present, as well
as historical research literature. A thesaurus is available for
searching alcohol and other drug terms, including a subset index
of language used in the ETOH database. http://www.
niaaa.nih.gov/databases/databases.htm
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) Publications Cata-
log. This semiannually updated catalog provides a listing of re-
search monographs, clinical reports, surveys, brochures, preven-
tion packets, booklets, and posters. Videos are also available.
http://www.drugabuse.gov
226
Print and Nonprint Resources

National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws
(NORML). NORML provides information resources about the
right of adults to use marijuana responsibly, whether for medical
or personal purposes. http://www.norml.org
National Substance Abuse Web Index (NSAWI). This is a search
engine that indexes twenty-six authoritative, public interest, and
U.S. government sites on the Internet for locating reliable infor-
mation on prevention, treatment, alcohol, tobacco, and illicit
drugs. Use NSAWI to search through every document on promi-
nent sites in the prevention world. Sites are reindexed every two
weeks. http://nsawi.health.org
PsycINFO., Made up of more than 1 million searchable records,
PsycINFO is an abstract (not full text) database of psychological
literature from the 1800s to the present. http://www. apa.org/
psycinfo
Schaffer Library of Drug Policy. The Schaffer Library is the
largest Internet source addressing issues related to major studies
of drugs and drug policy, history of drugs and drug laws, med-
ical marijuana research, government publications on drugs and
drug policy, charts and graphs of drug-war statistics, and infor-
mation on specific drugs. http://www.druglibrary.org/
schaffer/index.htm
SMOKING. Items in this database focus on the scientific, med-
ical, technical, policy, behavioral, legal, and historical literature
related to smoking and tobacco use and its effect on health.
http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/search
Substance Abuse Information Database (SAID). This database
provides summaries and full text of materials relating to work-
place 
substance-abuse 
issues. 
http://www.dol.gov/asp/
programs/drugs/said.htm
Treatment Resource Database. The Treatment Resource Database
provides bibliographic citations to alcohol- and substance-abuse
treatment materials with a focus on intervention, recovery, treat-
ment, and relapse prevention. http://sadatabase.health.org/trd
Web Resources
227

National Statistics
Bureau of Justice Statistics: Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Sta-
tistics Online. Data from more than one hundred sources about
all aspects of criminal justice in the United States. http://www.
albany.edu/sourcebook
Federal Bureau of Investigation: Uniform Crime Reports
(UCR). Statistics for crime in the United States. http://
www.fbi.gov/ucr/ucr.htm
National Center for Health Statistics (FASTSTATS). National
health data and statistics. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/
default.htm
National Highway and Traffic Safety Administration—FARS:
Fatality Analysis Reporting System. FARS contains data on all
fatal traffic crashes within the fifty states, the District of Colum-
bia, and Puerto Rico. http://www-fars.nhtsa.dot.gov
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
(NIAAA)—Quick Facts. Provides tables presenting data on alco-
hol topics, including amounts and patterns of alcohol consump-
tion, alcohol dependence or abuse, consequences of alcohol con-
sumption, and other alcohol-related topics. http://www.
niaaa.nih.gov/databases/qf.htm
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA), Office of Applied Studies (OAS). The most recent na-
tional data on alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs from OAS surveys
are found here. http://www.drugabusestatistics. samhsa. gov
Other Web Sites
Web sites with useful links to other substance-abuse resources are
marked with an asterisk. The information presented is drawn
from material prepared by Substance Abuse Librarians and Infor-
mation Specialists (SALIS): An International Organization.
http://salis.org/resources
Alcohol Advisory Council of New Zealand, New Zealand.
http://www.alcohol.org.nz
228
Print and Nonprint Resources

Alcohol and Drug Abuse Institute Links, University of Wash-
ington. http://depts.washington.edu/adai/links/links.htm*
Alcohol Problems and Solutions. http://2.potsdam.edu/
alcohol-info*
Alcohol Research Group. http://www.arg.org
Alcoholics Anonymous. http://www.alcoholics-anonymous.
org
American Library Association (ALA). http://www.ala.org
Association for Medical Education and Research in Substance
Abuse (AMERSA). http://www.amersa.org
Association of Mental Health Librarians. http://www.
mhlib.org
Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids. http://tobaccofreekids.org*
Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse, Canada. http://
www.ccsa.ca*
Center for Alcohol and Addiction Studies, Brown University.
http://center.butler.brown.edu
Center for Disease Control Tobacco Page. http://www.
cdc.gov/tobacco
Center for Substance Abuse Research, University of Maryland.
http://www.cesar.umd.edu
Center of Alcohol Studies. http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/~cas2
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Canada. http://
www.camh.net
Centre for Drug Research, University of Amsterdam.
http://www.cedro-uva.org
Centre for Education and Information on Drugs and Alcohol,
Web Resources
229

Australia. http://www.ceida.net.au
Common Sense for Drug Policy. http://www.csdp.org.htm*
Daily Dose. http://www.dailydose.net/index.htm*
Drug Policy Alliance (formerly Lindesmith Center- Drug Policy
Foundation). http://www.drugpolicy.org*
European Association of Libraries and Information Services on
Alcohol and Other Drugs (ELISAD), European Union.
http://www.elisad.org
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction
(EMCDDA), European Union. http://www.emcdda.org
Google (Internet Search Engine). http://google.com*
Hazelden Foundation. http://www.hazelden.org*
Hazelden Foundation Resource Center. http://www.hazelden.
org/resource_center.DBM*
Health Web Substance Abuse, University of Minnesota
Biomedical 
Library. 
http://healthweb.org/browse.cfm?
subjectid=88*
Historical Resources on Alcohol Use in America, Rutgers Uni-
versity. http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/~cas2/histsites.htm
Indiana Prevention Resource Center. http://www.drugs.
indiana.edu*
Institute of Alcohol Studies, United Kingdom. http://
www.ias.org.uk*
International Council on Alcohol, Drugs, and Traffic Safety,
Australia. http://raru.adelaide.edu.au/icadts
Join Together Online. http://www.jointogether.org*
230
Print and Nonprint Resources

Marin Institute. http://www.marininstitute.org
Medical Library Association, Mental Health SIG. http://
www.miami.edu/mhsig
Medline. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db
=PubMed*
Minnesota Institute of Public Health Links.
http://
www.miph.org/links.html
National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse, Columbia
University. http://www.casacolumbia.org*
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information
(NCADI). http://www.health.gov (including Tips for Teens Se-
ries)*
National Clearinghouse on Tobacco and Health, Canada.
http://www.ncth.ca/NCTHweb.nsf*
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA).
http://www.niaaa.nih.gov*
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). http://www.
nida.nih.gov*
Office 
of 
National 
Drug 
Control 
Policy 
(ONDCP).
http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov*
Regional Alcohol and Drug Awareness Resource—RADAR
Network (SAMHSA). http:ncadi.samsha.gov*
Research Institute on Addictions, University at Buffalo.
http://www.ria.buffalo.edu
Schaffer Library of Drug Policy. http://www.druglibrary.
org/schaffer/index.htm*
Special Libraries Association (SLA). http://www.sla.org
Web Resources
231

Substance Abuse & Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA). http://www.samhsa.gov*
Substance Abuse Librarians and Information Specialists
(SALIS): An International Organization. http://salis.org/
resources*
UN International Drug Control Programme. http://www
undcp.org
U.S. Information Agency, Narcotics and Substance Abuse.
http://usinfo.state.gov/topical/global/drugs
U.S. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
http://www.niaaa.nih.gov*
University of California, Integrated Substance Abuse Programs
(ISAP). http://www.uclaisap.org*
Virtual Clearinghouse on Alcohol Tobacco and Other Drugs,
International
(in English, French, and Spanish). http://
www.atod.org*
Web of Addictions. http://www.well.com/user/woa*
Bibliography
Reference information including books, articles, government
publications, and other reports appear at the end of most chapters
in this book and are listed below.
Books
American Psychiatric Association. 2000. Diagnostic and Statisti-
cal Manual of Mental Disorders. 4th ed. Washington, DC: Amer-
ican Psychiatric Association.
Cunningham, R. 1996. Smoke & Mirrors: The Canadian Tobacco
War. Ottawa, Ontario: International Development Research Centre.
Falkowski, C. 2000. Dangerous Drugs. Center City, MN: Hazelden.
232
Print and Nonprint Resources

Goode, E. 1989. Drugs in American Society. New York: McGraw-
Hill.
Isralowitz, R. 2002. Drug Use, Policy and Management. Westport,
CT: Auburn House.
Ray, E., and Ksir, C. 1990. Drugs, Society and Human Behavior. St.
Louis: Times Mirror/Mosby.
Journals
Benowitz, N. 1996. “Pharmacology of Nicotine: Addiction and
Therapeutics.” Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology 36:
597–613.
Buckley, W. 1996. “400 Readers Give Their Views.” National Re-
view (July 1): 32.
Buckley, W., E. Nadelman, K. Schmoke, J. McNamara, R. Sweet, T.
Szasz, and S. Duke. 1996. “The War on Drugs is Lost.” National
Review 12 (February): 35–48.
Dehne, K., J. Grund, L. Kodakevich, and Y. Kobyshcha. 1999.
“The HIV/AIDS Epidemic among Drug Injectors in Eastern Eu-
rope: Patterns, Trends and Determinants.” Journal of Drug Issues
29, no. 4: 393–402.
Kessler, D. 1995. “Sounding Board: Nicotine Addiction in Young
People.” New England Journal of Medicine 333, no. 3: 186.
Migliori, G. and M. Ambrosetti. 1998. “Epidemiology of Tuber-
culosis in Europe.” Mondali Archives of Chest Diseases 53, no. 6:
681–687.
Nadelman, E. 1993. “Should We Legalize Drugs? History An-
swers.” American Heritage 44.
Nguyen, T. 2000. “The Social Context of HIV Risk Behaviour by
Drug Injectors in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.” AIDS Care 12,
no. 4: 483–495.
Bibliography
233

Petraitis, J., B. Flay, T. Miller, E. Torpy, and B. Greiner. 1998. “Il-
licit Substance Use Among Adolescents: A Matrix of Prospec-
tive Predictors.” Substance Use and Misuse 33, no. 13: 2561–2604.
Russell, A. 1992. “Making America Drug Free: A New Vision of
What Works.” Carnegie Quarterly 37, no. 3 (summer).
Schapiro, M. 2002. “Big Tobacco.” The Nation (May 6). Available
at http://www.thenation.com/doc.mhtml?i=20020506&s= schapiro
(accesed January 1, 2004).
Schlosser, E. 1997. “More Reefer Madness.” Atlantic Monthly 279,
no. 4 (April): 90–120.
Sweet, R. 1996. “The War on Drugs is Lost.” National Review (Feb-
ruary 12): 35–48.
Government Publications and Other Reports
Adelekan, M. 2001. “Injection Drug Use and Associated Health
Consequences in Lagos, Nigeria: Findings from WHO Phase II
Injection Drug Use Study.” In 2000 Global Research Network Meet-
ing on HIV Prevention in Drug-Using Populations, Third Annual
Meeting Report, July, 2000, Durban, South Africa. Washington, DC:
Department of Health and Human Services
Alcohol and Drug Information Clearinghouse. 2003. “A Parent-
ing Perspective: Children of Alcoholics.”
Available at
http://www.prevlink.org/getthefacts/facts/coa.html (accessed
January 21, 2004).
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 1999.
“Children of Alcoholics.” AACAP Facts for Families #17. Avail-
able at http://www.aacap.org/publications/factsfam/alcoholc.
htm (accessed January 15, 2004).
American Lung Association. “Multidrug-Resistant Tuberculosis
Fact Sheet.” Available at http://www.lungusa.org/diseases
/mdrtbfac.html (accessed January 21, 2004)
Ball, A. 2000. “Epidemiology and Prevention of HIV in Drug-
Using Population: Global Perspective.” In 1999 Global Research
234
Print and Nonprint Resources

Network Meeting on HIV Prevention in Drug-Using Populations, Sec-
ond Annual Meeting Report, August 26–28, 1999, Atlanta, Georgia.
Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP). 1993. A Discus-
sion Paper on Preventing Alcohol, Tobacco, and Other Drug
Problems. United States Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices. Rockville, MD: SAMHSA.
———. 1994. Prevention Primer: An Encyclopedia of Alcohol,
Tobacco, and other Prevention Terms. United States Department
of Health and Human Services. Rockville, MD: SAMHSA.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2001. CDC
Fact Book 2000/2001. Washington, DC: U.S. Public Health Ser-
vice, Office of the Surgeon General.
———. 2001. “Women and Smoking: A Report of the Surgeon
General.” Washington, DC: U.S. Public Health Service, Office of
the Surgeon General.
———. 2002. “Drug-Associated HIV Transmission in the
United States.” Available at http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pubs/
facts/idu.htm (accessed January 15, 2004).
———. 2002. “World TB Day 2002.” March 24. Available at
http://www.cdc.gov/nchstp/tb (accessed January 19, 2004).
Clines, F. 2001. “Fighting Appalachia’s Top Cash Crop, Mari-
juana.” New York Times, February 28, Sec. A, 10.
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction.
2000. Annual Report on the State of the Drug Problem in the Eu-
ropean Union. Lisbon, Portugal: European Monitoring Centre.
Hibell, B., B. Andersson, T. Bjarnason, A. Kokkevi, M. Morgan,
and A. Narusk. 1997. The 1995 Espad Report: Alcohol and Other
Drug Use Among Students in 26 European Countries. Stockholm:
Swedish Council for Information on Alcohol and Other Drugs.
Horgan, C. 2001. Substance Abuse: The Nation’s Number One
Health Problem. Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Bibliography
235

Hornik, R. 2002. Evaluation of the National Youth Anti-Drug
Media Campaign: Fifth Semi-Annual Report of Findings, Execu-
tive Summary. Rockville, MD: Westat.
Johnston, L., P. O’Malley, and J. Backman. 1999. “The Monitoring
the Future National Results on Adolescent Drug Use: Overview
of Key Findings.” Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug
Abuse.
Kazancigil, A., and C. Milani. 2002. Globalisation, Drugs and
Criminalisation: Final Research Report on Brazil, China, India
and Mexico. New York: United Nations Office for Drug Control
and Crime Prevention.
Lettieri, D., M. Sayers, H. Pearson, eds. 1980. Theories on Drug
Abuse: Selected Contemporary Perspectives. Rockville, MD: Na-
tional Institute on Drug Abuse.
MADD—Mothers Against Drunk Driving. “General Statistics.”
Available at http://madd.org/stats/0,1056,1789,00.html (ac-
cessed January 15, 2004).
Moulson, G. 2000. “U.N. Warns of AIDS Complacency, Says
Epidemic Explodes in Russia.” Associated Press, November 28.
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) U.S.
Department of Transportation. 2001. “Traffic Safety Facts 2000:
Alcohol.” Washington, DC: NHTSA. Available at http://www.
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/pdf/nrd-30/ncsa/tsf2000/2000alcfacts.pdf
(accessed May 1, 2002).
———. 2003. “DOT Releases Preliminary Estimates of 2002
Highway Fatalities.” News Release April 23, NHTSA 13-03.
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). 1996. Epidemiologic
Trends in Drug Abuse. Vol. 1: Highlights and Executive Summary.
Rockville, MD: National Institutes of Health.
———. 1999. NIDA Notes 14, no.2.
———. 1999. Principles of Drug Addiction Treatment: A Re-
search-Based Guide. Rockville, MD: National Institutes of Health.
236
Print and Nonprint Resources

———. 2000. Epidemiologic Trends in Drug Abuse, Vol. 1: High-
lights and Executive Summary. Rockville, MD: National Insti-
tutes of Health.
———. 2001. Epidemiologic Trends in Drug Abuse, Vol. 1: High-
lights and Executive Summary. Rockville, MD: National Insti-
tutes of Health.
Nolin, P., C. Kenny. 2002. “Cannabis: Our Position for a Cana-
dian Public Policy.” Special Committee on Illegal Drugs. Senate
of Canada. Available at http://www.ukcia.org/research/
CanadianPublicPolicy/default.html (accessed January 21, 2004).
Office of Substance Abuse Prevention (OSAP). 1991. Prevention
Plus III: Assessing Alcohol and Other Drug Prevention Programs
at the School and Community Level. Rockville, MD: ADAMHA.
Pan American Health Organization. 2001. HIV and AIDS in the
Americas: an Epidemic with Many Faces. Washington, DC: Pan
American Health Organization.
Reid, G., and G. Costigan. 2002. Revisiting “The Hidden Epi-
demic”: A Situation Assessment of Drug Use in Asia in the Con-
text of HIV/AIDS. Fairfield, Victoria, Australia: The Centre for
Harm Reduction/The Burnet Institute.
Sammud, M. 2002. “Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Report.” Presented
at the Twelfth Inter-Country Meeting of National AIDS Pro-
gramme Managers, Beirut, Lebanon, April 23–26.
Selwyn, P., and S. Batki. 1995. Treatment for HIV-Infected Alcohol
and Other Drug Abusers. Treatment Improvement Protocol (TIP)
Series. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Shepard, E. 2001. The Economic Costs of DARE. Syracuse, NY: In-
stitute of Industrial Relations.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA). 1999. National Household Survey on Drug Abuse
Main Findings. Rockville, MD: United States Department of
Health and Human Services.
Bibliography
237

———. 2001. Summary of Findings from the 2000 National
Household Survey on Drug Abuse. Rockville, MD: United States
Department of Health and Human Services.
———. 2002. National Household Survey on Drug Abuse.
Rockville, MD: United States Department of Health and Human
Services.
———. 2003. Results from the 2002 National Survey on Drug Use
and Health: National Finding, Rockville, MD: United States De-
partment of Health and Human Services.
Swan, N. 1998. “Drug Abuse Cost to Society Set at $97.7 Billion,
Continuing Steady Increase Since 1975.” NIDA Notes, NIH Pub-
lication No. 98-3478.
Switzerland Addiction Research Institute. 2003. “Tobacco, Alco-
hol, Drugs Killing 7 Million a Year.” Available at http://www.
abc.net.au/science/news/health/HealthRepublish_792982.htm
(accessed February 26, 2003).
Touze, G. 2001. “HIV Prevention in Drug-Using Populations in
Latin America.” In 2000 Global Research Network Meeting on HIV
Prevention in Drug-Using Populations, Third Annual Meeting Report,
July 2000, Durban, South Africa. Washington, DC: Department of
Health and Human Services.
UNAIDS. Report on the Global HIV/AIDS Epidemic. Geneva,
June 2000.
UNAIDS/WHO. AIDS Epidemic Update. Geneva, December
2002.
United Nations. 2001. Drug Abuse and HIV/AIDS: Lessons
Learned. Case Studies Booklet, Central and Eastern Europe and
the Central Asian States. Vienna: United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.
United Nations General Assembly Political Declaration. 1998.
“Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Re-
duction.” New York, June 8–10.
238
Print and Nonprint Resources

United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention
(ODCCP). 2002. Global Illicit Drug Trends. New York: ODCCP
Studies on Drugs and Crime.
United States Department of State, Office of International Infor-
mation Agency. 1992. Consequences of Illegal Drug Trade: The
Negative Economic, Political, and Social Effects of Cocaine in
Latin America. Washington, DC: United States Department of
State, Office of International Information Agency.
United States General Accounting Office. 2003. “Youth Illicit
Drug Use Prevention.” Washington, DC: USGAO. Available at
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d03172r.pdf (accessed January
19, 2004).
United States Office of Applied Studies. 2002. Summary of Find-
ings from the 2000 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse—
DHHS Publication No. SMA 01-3549. Available at http://
www.samhsa.gov/oas/NHSDA/2kNHSDA/2kNHSDA.htm
(accessed January 19, 2004).
Willard, J., and C. Schoenborn. 1995. “Relationship Between Cig-
arette Smoking and Other Unhealthy Behaviors Among Our
Nation’s Youth: United States, 1992.” In Advance Data no. 263.
Washington, DC: National Center for Health Statistics, April 24.
World Health Organization (WHO). 2000a. “Fact Sheet No. 164:
Hepatitis C.” Rev. October. Geneva: WHO.
———. 2000b. “Fact Sheet No. 204: Hepatitis B.” Rev. October.
Geneva: WHO.
———. 2001. “Women and the Tobacco Epidemic—Challenges
for the 21st Century.” Geneva: WHO.
———. 2002. “Hazardous Harmonization in Smoking by Euro-
pean Youth.” Available at http://www.who.dk/document
/cma/PB032002e.pdf (accessed January 19, 2004).
World Health Organization, Regional Office for the Eastern
Bibliography
239

Mediterranean. 2001. The Work of WHO in the Eastern Mediter-
ranean Region. Annual Report of the Regional Director (January
1–December 31, 2002), Regional Office for the Eastern Mediter-
ranean, Cairo, Egypt: WHO.
Yoon, Y., H. Yi, B. Grant, F. Stinson, and M. Dufor. 2002. “Surveil-
lance Report #60: Liver Cirrhosis Mortality in the United States,
1970–99.” Rockville, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, Division of Biometry and Epidemiology, December.
240
Print and Nonprint Resources

Glossary
Abstinence
The conscious choice not to use drugs. The term abstinence
usually refers to the decision to end the use of a drug as part of the
process of recovery from addiction.
Abuse
A term with a range of meanings. In international drug-control
conventions, abuse refers to any consumption of a controlled substance
no matter how infrequent (see also Drug abuse).
Adaptive behaviors
Useful behaviors we acquire as we respond to the
world around us. Adaptive behaviors help us get the things we want and
need for life.
Addiction
A brain disorder characterized by the loss of control of drug-
taking behavior, despite adverse health, social, or legal consequences to
continued drug use. Addiction tends to be chronic and to be character-
ized by relapses during recovery.
Addictive drugs
Drugs that change the brain, change behavior, and
lead to the loss of control of drug-taking behavior.
Alcohol
The world’s most popular drug, legally used in most coun-
tries. Alcohol is produced through the fermentation of fruits, vegetables,
and grains.
Alcoholics Anonymous
One of the earliest forms of addiction treat-
ment in the United States, AA developed the twelve-step approach to as-
sist recovery from alcohol addiction (alcoholism). Several other anony-
mous groups have adapted the twelve-step approach to help people
recover from addiction to other drugs (for example, Narcotics Anony-
mous, Cocaine Anonymous, Pot Smokers Anonymous).
Amotivational syndrome
A constellation of effects said to be associ-
ated with substance use (especially of cannabis), including apathy, loss of
effectiveness, diminished capacity to carry out complex or long-term
plans, low tolerance for frustration, impaired concentration, and diffi-
culty following routines.
241

Amphetamines
Stimulant drugs whose effects are very similar to co-
caine. Often called “speed,” this drug is a synthetically produced central
nervous system stimulant with cocainelike effects.
Analgesic
A substance that reduces pain and may or may not have
psychoactive properties.
Antagonist
A substance (such as Naloxone) that counteracts the effects
of another agent (such as an opiate drug).
Barbiturates
Depressant drugs that produce relaxation and sleep. Bar-
biturates include sleeping pills such as pentobarbital (Nembutal) and
secobarbital (Seconal).
Benzodiazepines
The so-called minor tranquilizers; depressants that
relieve anxiety and produce sleep. Benzodiazepines include tranquilizers
such as diazepam (Valium) and alprazolam (Xanax) and sleeping pills
such as flurazepam (Dalmane) and triazolam (Halcion).
Binge
Uninterrupted consumption of a drug for several hours or days.
Brief intervention
A treatment strategy in which structured therapy of
a limited number of sessions (usually one to four) of short duration (typ-
ically five to thirty minutes) is offered with the aim of assisting an indi-
vidual to cease or reduce the use of psychoactive substances or to deal
with other life issues.
Buprenorphine
A long-lasting opiate analgesic that has both opiate
agonist and antagonist properties. Buprenorphine shows promise for
treating heroin addiction.
Caffeine
A mild stimulant, the most widely used drug in the world.
Cannabinoid receptor
The receptor in the brain that recognizes THC,
the active ingredient in marijuana. Marijuana exerts its psychoactive ef-
fects via this receptor.
Cannabis
The botanical name for the plant from which marijuana
comes.
Cocaine
A bitter crystalline drug obtained from the dried leaves of the
coca shrub; it is a local anesthetic and a dangerous, illegal stimulant. It is
the primary psychoactive ingredient in the coca plant and a behavioral-
affecting drug.
Codeine
A natural opioid compound that is a relatively weak but still
effective opiate analgesic. It has also been used to treat other problems
(for instance, to relieve coughing).
Controlled substance
A term that refers to a psychoactive substance
and its precursors whose availability is forbidden under the interna-
tional drug-control treaties or limited to medical and pharmaceutical
channels.
242
Glossary

“Crack” cocaine
The chemical cocaine is found in the oil of the coca
plant leaf; when processed, cocaine is chemically turned into a water-
soluble powder form called cocaine hydrochloride; “crack” cocaine,
much like “freebasing” cocaine, is cocaine powder that has been turned
back into an oil form of smokable cocaine.
Craving
Hunger for drugs. It is caused by drug-induced changes that
occur in the brain with the development of addiction and arises from a
need of the brain to maintain a state of homeostasis that includes the
presence of the drug.
Cutting agents
These are various powders that are used to dilute co-
caine, heroin, and other drugs used in powder form. Lactose (milk sugar)
is an example; another is mannitol.
Demand reduction
This approach reflects the policy that reducing the
supply and availability of illicit drugs is an essential component of the
fight against drug abuse. Efforts to limit the cultivation, production, traf-
ficking, and distribution of drugs are strategies to implement this ap-
proach. Supply-reduction projects also seek to broaden regional cooper-
ation between governments in response to cross-border trafficking,
strengthen border controls by providing modern equipment, and de-
velop training in “best practice” law enforcement procedures.
Depressants
Drugs that relieve anxiety and produce sleep. Depres-
sants include barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and alcohol.
Designer drug
An illegally manufactured chemical whose molecular
structure is altered slightly from a parent compound to enhance specific
effects. Examples include DMT, DMA, DOM, MDA, and MDMA (Ec-
stasy).
Detoxification
The process of removing a drug from the body. This is
the initial period addicts must go through to become drug-free. With-
drawal symptoms appear early during this process. Depending on the
drug, detoxification lasts for a few days to a week or more.
Diversion
Taking legally prescribed medications (such as methadone
or tranquilizers) and selling them illegally. The term is also used to mean
the provision of an activity or activities that move a person away from
drug use.
Drug
A term of varied usage. In various UN conventions and in the
Declaration of Drug Demand Reduction, it refers to substances subject to
international control. In medicine, it refers to any substance with the po-
tential to prevent or cure disease or enhance physical or mental well-
being. In pharmacology, the term refers to any chemical agent that alters
the biochemical or psychological processes of tissues or organisms. In
common usage, the term often refers specifically to psychoactive drugs,
and often, even more specifically, to illicit drugs.
Glossary
243

Drug abuse
Using illegal drugs; using legal drugs inappropriately. The
repeated high-dose self-administration of drugs to produce pleasure, to
alleviate stress, or to alter or avoid reality (or all three).
Drug-free treatment
Approaches to helping addicts recover from ad-
diction without the use of medication.
Drug treatment
A combination of detoxification, psychosocial therapy,
and, if required, skill acquisition to help people recover from addiction.
Dual diagnosis (comorbidity)
A person diagnosed as having an alco-
hol- or drug-abuse problem in addition to some other diagnosis, usually
psychiatric (for example, mood disorder or schizophrenia).
Ecstasy (MDMA)
A chemically modified amphetamine that has hallu-
cinogenic as well as stimulant properties.
Ephedra
A plant genus comprising some forty distinct species that
grow wild in various regions of the world. Ephedra has a long history of
medical and ceremonial purposes. The herbs of various species have
been used in traditional medicines in China under the name of Ma
Huang and also in India to treat symptoms of asthma and respiratory in-
fections. Ephedra contains two principle alkaloids, ephedrine and pseu-
doephedrine. Both alkaloids are used in medicines worldwide. At the
end of 2000, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) advised con-
sumers to immediately stop using food supplements containing
ephedra. In order to protect consumers, the FDA initiated action to ban
the sale of dietary supplements containing ephedrine alkaloids.
Gateway theory
A model of the progression of drug use that has
grown out of research with adolescents that has identified a sequential
patterns of involvement in various legal and illegal drugs.
GHB
Gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB) was originally developed as an
anesthetic but was withdrawn due to unwanted side effects. At small
doses, GHB tends to reduce social inhibitions, similar in action to alco-
hol, and it is also reported to increase libido.
Hallucinogens
A diverse group of drugs that alter perceptions,
thoughts, and feelings. Hallucinogens do not produce hallucinations.
These drugs include LSD, mescaline, MDMA (Ecstasy), PCP, and psilo-
cybin (magic mushrooms).
Harm reduction
Harm reduction is a set of practical strategies that re-
duce negative consequences of drug use, incorporating a range of strate-
gies from safer use to managed use to abstinence. Because harm reduc-
tion demands that interventions and policies designed to serve drug
users reflect specific individual and community needs, there is no uni-
versal definition of or formula for implementing harm reduction.
Hashish
Cannabis preparation more potent than marijuana. It comes
from the resinous secretions of the marijuana plant’s flowering tops.
244
Glossary

Heroin
The potent, widely abused opiate that produces a profound ad-
diction. It consists of two morphine molecules linked together chemi-
cally.
Ice
A smokable form of methamphetamine. By smoking the drug, the
effect on the body occurs more quickly.
Inhalants
Any drug administered by breathing in its vapors. There are
a number of substances that produce strong intoxicating vapors such as
paint, paint thinner, modeling glue, gas liquid, correction fluid, markers,
and many others. These substances are very dangerous and are often
used by young people.
Intoxication
Being under the influence of, and responding to, the
acute effects of a psychoactive drug. Intoxication typically includes feel-
ings of pleasure, altered emotional responsiveness, altered perception,
and impaired judgment and performance.
Khat
The leaves and buds of an East African plant used to suppress ap-
petite and combat fatigue.
LAAM
A very long-lasting opiate agonist recently approved for the
treatment of opiate addiction.
Long-term effects
The effects seen when a drug is used repeatedly over
weeks, months, or years. These effects may outlast drug use.
LSD
These letters stand for d-lysergic acid diethylamide. This chemical
was synthesized from ergot in 1938 by Albert Hofmann of the Sandoz
Laboratories in Switzerland; a powerful hallucinogen whose effective
dose is 200 to 400 micrograms, a mere speck in size.
Marijuana
The Cannabis sativa plant that produces a mild euphoric ef-
fect. The active ingredient that produces the euphoric effect is delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol, or THC. Marijuana can be eaten or smoked in cig-
arette form or pipes. The oily resin of the marijuana plant can be
produced into hashish or hashish oil.
Marinol
The trade name of dronabinol, a synthetic version of THC
used as medicine.
MDA
One of several hallucinogenic “designer drugs” with psyche-
delic properties that are manufactured by basement chemists.
MDMA (Ecstasy)
A hallucinogenic “designer drug” with psychedelic
and stimulant properties.
Mescaline
A naturally occurring hallucinogenic drug that acts on the
serotonin receptor. This is the major hallucinogenic chemical found in the
peyote cactus. Mescaline is not found in the mescal cactus from which
tequila is acquired. To add to the potential confusion, there is another
hallucinogen found in the highly toxic “mescal bean” of the evergreen
shrub named Sophora secundiflora.
Glossary
245

Methadone
A long-lasting synthetic opiate used to treat cancer pain
and heroin addiction.
Methamphetamine
A commonly abused, potent stimulant drug that is
part of a larger family of amphetamines.
Morphine
A powerful narcotic that comes from the opium plant.
Heroin is derived from morphine. It is named after the Greek god Mor-
pheus, the god of dreams.
Motivational interviewing
A counseling and assessment technique
that essentially follows a nonconfrontational approach to questioning
people about difficult issues like alcohol and other drug use and assist-
ing them to make positive decisions to reduce or stop their drug use al-
together.
Naloxone
A short-acting opiate antagonist that binds to opiate recep-
tors and blocks them, preventing opiates from binding to these receptors.
Naloxone is used to treat opiate overdoses.
Narcotic drug
A chemical agent than can induce stupor, coma, or in-
sensibility to pain.
Nicotine
The drug in tobacco that is addictive. Nicotine also activates
a specific kind of acetylcholine receptor.
Nicotine gum, nicotine patch
Two methods of delivering small
amounts of nicotine into the bodies of people who are addicted to nico-
tine to help them quit smoking cigarettes by preventing nicotine with-
drawal.
Opiates
Any of the psychoactive drugs that originate from the opium
poppy or that have a chemical structure like the drugs derived from
opium. Such drugs include opium, codeine, and morphine (derived from
the plant), and hydromorphone (Dilaudid), methadone, and meperidine
(Demerol) that were first synthesized by chemists.
Opioids
Any chemical that has opiate-like effects; commonly used to
refer to endogenous neurochemicals that activate opiate receptors.
Outpatient treatment
Nonresidential treatment for drug addiction. Pa-
tients live at home, often work, and come to a clinic for treatment.
Overdose
The condition that results when too much of a drug is taken,
making a person sick or unconscious and sometimes resulting in death.
Oxycodone or OxyContin
An opiate painkiller, it is a semisynthetic
opioid derived from the opioid alkaloid thebaine that is similar to
codeine, methadone, and morphine in producing opiate-like effects.
Oxycodone is a Schedule II drug under the Controlled Substances Act
because of its high propensity to cause dependence and abuse.
246
Glossary

Paranoid schizophrenia
A severe form of mental illness typically char-
acterized by delusions of persecution and hallucinations. This condition
may be induced by binge use of stimulants.
PCP
The full name of this drug is phencyclidine. PCP has an array of
effects. Originally developed as an anesthetic, it may act as a hallucino-
gen, stimulant, or sedative.
Percocet
A narcotic analgesic, it is used to treat moderate to moderately
severe pain. It contains two drugs—acetaminophen and oxycodone.
Percodan This is a synthetically produced narcotic that acts like mor-
phine or heroin. It is the brand name of aspirin and oxycodone.
“Persian” heroin
This is heroin in a smokable form. Smoking heroin is
often called “chasing the dragon.”
Peyote
This is the name of the cacti that contain the hallucinogenic
chemical mescaline.
Prevention
Stopping drug use before it starts, intervening to halt the
progression of drug use once it has begun, and changing environmental
conditions that encourage addictive drug use.
Primary reinforcers
Stimuli, such as food and water, that produce re-
ward directly, with no learning about their significance or other inter-
vening steps required. Most drugs of abuse are primary reinforcers.
Psilocybe
Often referred to as “magic mushrooms,” this fungus con-
tains two hallucinogens named psilocybin and psilocin. There are a
number of other poisonous and hallucinogenic mushrooms.
Psilocybin
A natural hallucinogenic drug derived from a mushroom. It
acts on the serotonin receptor.
Psychedelic drug
Drugs that distort perception, thought, and feeling.
This term is typically used to refer to drugs with actions like those of
LSD.
Psychoactive drug
A drug that changes the way the brain works.
Psychological dependence
When drugs become so central to a user’s
life that the user believes he must use them.
Psychosis
Severe mental illnesses characterized by loss of contact with
reality. Schizophrenia and severe depression are psychoses.
Psychosocial therapy
Therapy designed to help addicts by using a
combination of individual psychotherapy and group (social) therapy ap-
proaches to rehabilitate or provide the interpersonal and intrapersonal
skills needed to live without drugs.
Glossary
247

Rapid assessment
A variety of methods for rapid or focused data col-
lection that since the 1980s have grown out of a sense of urgency for so-
cial science input in disease-control programs.
Rehabilitate
Helping a person recover from drug addiction. Rehabili-
tation teaches the addict new behaviors to live life without drugs.
Relapse
In general, to fall back to a former condition. With substance
abuse, it means resuming the use of a drug one has tried to stop using.
Relapse is a common occurrence in many chronic disorders that require
behavioral adjustments to treat effectively.
Residential treatment
Treatment programs that require participants to
live in a hostel, home, or hospital unit.
Reward
The process that reinforces behavior.
Risk reduction
Describes policies or programs that focus on reducing
the risk of harm from alcohol or other drug use.
Rock
A small amount of crack cocaine in a solid form; freebase cocaine
in solid form.
Route of administration
The way a drug is put into the body. Eating,
drinking, inhaling, injecting, snorting, smoking, and absorbing a drug
through mucous membranes all are routes of administration used to con-
sume drugs of abuse.
“Run”
A binge of (more or less) uninterrupted consumption of a drug
for several hours or days. This pattern of drug use is typically associated
with stimulants, but is seen with alcohol as well.
Rush
Intense feelings of euphoria a drug produces when it is first con-
sumed. Drug users who inject or smoke drugs describe their rush as
being sometimes as intense as, or even more intense than, sexual orgasm.
Seconal
A depressant drug of the barbiturate family that induces sleep.
Sedative/Hypnotic
Any of a group of central nervous system depres-
sants with the capacity of relieving anxiety and inducing calmness and
sleep.
Sinsemilla
There are male and female marijuana plants. The flowers of
the female marijuana contain the highest concentration of THC. Growers
have learned that if the female plants are not allowed to be pollinated,
the flowers cluster and excrete greater quantities of resin. Marijuana
grown like this is called sinsemilla, which simply means “no seeds.”
Skin-popping
Injecting a drug under the skin.
Snowballing
A method of recruitment of illicit-drug users either for re-
search purposes or for peer-based prevention purposes.
248
Glossary

Stimulants
A class of drugs that elevates mood, increases feelings of
well-being, and increases energy and alertness. These drugs also produce
euphoria and are powerfully rewarding. Stimulants include cocaine,
methamphetamine, and methylphenidate (Ritalin).
STP
This synthetically produced hallucinogen is a variation of mesca-
line and amphetamines. It is generally less potent than LSD, but it takes
longer to break down in the body and therefore lasts much longer, in
some instances twenty-four hours to several days.
Supply reduction
A broad term used for a range of activities designed
to stop the production, manufacture, and distribution of illegal drugs.
Production can be curtailed through crop eradication or through large
programs of alternative development.
Therapeutic communities
Communities that provide long-term resi-
dential treatment for drug addiction, offering detoxification, group ther-
apy, and skill acquisition.
Tolerance
A physiological change resulting from repeated drug use
that requires the user to consume increasing amounts of the drug to get
the same effect a smaller dose used to give.
Tranquilizers
Depressant drugs that relieve anxiety.
Transdermal absorption
Absorption through the skin.
Triggers
Formerly neutral stimuli that have attained the ability to elicit
drug craving following repeated pairing with drug use; also called cues.
Twelve-step group
A mutual-help group organized around the twelve-
step program of Alcoholics Anonymous or a close adaptation of that pro-
gram.
Valium
A depressant drug of the benzodiazepine family that relieves
anxiety.
Withdrawal
Physical symptoms in the body and brain that occur
after cessation of drug use in a person who is physically dependent on
that drug.
Xanax (aprazalom)
A depressant drug of the benzodiazepine family
that relieves anxiety.
Glossary
249


Appendix
Commonly Abused Drugs:
Categories and Street
Terms
The following list has been drawn from Commonly Abused Drugs,
National Institute on Drug Abuse (http://www. drugabuse.gov).
A detailed list called “Street Terms: Drugs and the Drug Trade”
may be found at the following Web site provided by the
White House Office of Drug Control Policy: http://www.
whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/streetterms/ByAlpha.asp.
Cannabinoids
Hashish
boom, chronic, gangster, hash, hash oil, hemp
Marijuana
blunt, dope, ganja, herb, joints, Mary Jane, pot, reefer, sin-
semilla, weed
Depressants
Barbiturates
Amytal, Nembutal, Seconal, Phenobarbital; barbs, reds, red
birds, phennies, tooies, yellows, yellow jackets
Benzodiazepines (other than flunitrazepam)
Ativan, Halcion, Librium,
Valium, Xanax; candy, downers, sleeping pills, tranks
251

Flunitrazepam
Rohypnol; forget-me-pill, Mexican Valium, R2, Roche,
roofies, roofinol, rope, rophies
GHB
gamma hydroxybutyrate; G, Georgia home boy, grievous bodily
harm, liquid ecstasy
Methaqualone
Quaalude, Sopor, Parest; ludes, mandrex, quad, quay
Dissociative Anesthetics
Ketamine
Ketalar SV; cat Valiums, K, Special K, vitamin K
PCP and analogs
phencyclidine; angel dust, boat, hog, love boat, peace
pill
Hallucinogens
LSD
d-lysergic acid diethylamide; acid, blotter, boomers, cubes, microdot,
yellow sunshines
Mescaline
buttons, cactus, mesc, peyote
Psilocybin
magic mushroom, purple passion
Opioids and Morphine Derivatives
Codeine
Empirin with Codeine, Fiorinal with Codeine, Robitussin A-C,
Tylenol with Codeine; Captain Cody, Cody, doors and fours, loads, pan-
cakes and syrup
Fentanyl
Actiq, Duragesic, Sublimaze; Apache, China girl, China white,
dance fever, friend, goodfella, jackpot, murder, 8, TNT, Tango and Cash
Heroin
diacetylmorphine; brown sugar, dope, H, horse, junk, skag,
skunk, smack, white horse
Morphine
Roxanol, Duramorph; M, Miss Emma, monkey, white stuff
Opium
laudanum, paregoric; big O, black stuff, block, gum, hop
Stimulants
Amphetamine
Biphetamine, Dexedrine; bennies, black beauties, crosses,
hearts, LA turnaround, speed, truck drivers, uppers
252
Appendix

Cocaine
Cocaine hydrochloride; blow, bump, C, candy, Charlie, coke,
crack, flake, rock, snow, toot
MDMA (methylenedioxymethamphetamine)
DOB, DOM, MDA;
Adam, clarity, Ecstasy, Eve, lover’s speed, peace, STP, X, XTC
Methamphetamine
Desoxyn; chalk, crank, crystal, fire, glass, go, fast,
ice, meth, speed
Methylphenidate
Ritalin; JIF, MPH, R-ball, Skippy, the smart drug, vi-
tamin R
Nicotine
bidis, chew, cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, snuff, spit
tobacco
Other Compounds
Anabolic steroids
Anadrol, Oxandrin, Durabolin, Depo-Testosterone,
Equipoise; roids, juice
Inhalants
Solvents (paint thinners, gasoline, glues), gases (butane, propane,
aerosol propellants, nitrous oxide), nitrites (isoamyl, isobutyl, cyclohexyl);
laughing gas, poppers, snappers, whippets
Resources
Friedman, D., and S. Rusche. 1999. False Messengers: How Addictive Drugs
Change the Brain. Amsterdam: Harwood Academic Publishers. Available
at http://www.addictionstudies.org/glossary.html (accessed January
15, 2004).
“Glossary of Drug and Alcohol Terms.” 2003. Available at http://www.
cocc.edu/lisal/health/drug_terms.htm (accessed January 15, 2004).
United Nations International Drug Control Programme. 2000. Demand
Reduction: A Glossary of Terms. Vienna, Austria: UNODC.
Commonly Abused Drugs: Categories and Street Terms
253


Abstinence, 241
Abuse, 241
Acid, 252. See also LSD
Action on Smoking and Health
(ASH), 196
Adam, 253
Adaptive behaviors, 241
Addiction
defined, 241
disease model, 54
journals and newsletters,
219–221
See also Dependence; Treatment
Adolescents. See Young people
and substance abuse
Adult amotivation, 64
Advertising
tobacco, 113–118
youth-targeted alcohol
marketing, 131–132
Afghanistan, 17, 84–89, 99
AIDS. See HIV/AIDS
Al-Anon, 148
Alaskan drug policy, 49
Alateen, 148
Alcohol, 4, 13–15, 122–151
associated arrests, 35
binge drinking, 141–146
children of alcoholics, 146–148
consumption patterns, 123–125
crime and, 123
definition, 241
dependence statistics, 35
economic impact, 38
female use, 125–127, 137–141
historical perspectives, 13–14
homelessness and, 123
impaired driving, 148–151
journals and newsletters,
220–221
“legal drug” status, 2
mortality estimates, 122–123
policy recommendations,
129–130
pregnancy and fetal alcohol
syndrome, 137–141
preventing high-risk drinking,
25–26
risky behaviors and, 4
social history, 215–216
societal costs, 122, 150–151
suicide and, 123
taxes, 132–136
temperance movement, 14, 54
U.S. Prohibition, 14–15, 55–56,
160, 191
young people and, 127–136
youth-targeted marketing,
131–132
Alcoholic and Narcotic Addict
Rehabilitation Amendments,
165
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), 28,
188, 192–193, 196–197, 241
American Council for Drug
Education (ACDE), 197
Amotivational syndrome, 64, 241
Amp, 84
Amphetamines, 4–5, 242
cocaine use and, 19
illegal status, 2
street names, 4, 252
Amytal, 251
Anabolic steroids, 3, 253
255
Index

Anadrol, 253
Analgesic, 242
Andean Counterdrug Initiative, 46
Angel dust, 6, 8, 252. See also PCP
Annan, Kofi, 79
Anslinger, Harry J., 161, 165,
177–178
Antagonist, 242
Anti-Drug Abuse Act, 168, 179
Anti-Semitism, 188
Anxiolytics, 8–9
Asia, cannabis consumption
trends, 82
Asian antismoking campaigns,
116
Asset forfeiture laws, 166, 168
Association for Medical Education
and Research in Substance
Abuse (AMERSA), 197–198
Ativan, 9, 251
Australia opiate consumption, 90
Azerbaijan, 97
Barbiturates, 2, 9, 242, 251
Barbs, 251
Bazooka, 96
Behavioral therapy, 26–27, 29
Bennies, 252
Benzodiazepines, 9, 242, 251
Bhang, 15
Bias, Len, 178–179
Big O, 252
Binge, defined, 242
Binge drinking, 141–146
Biphetamine, 252
Birdseed, 162
Black beauties, 252
Black stuff, 252
Block, 252
Blotter, 252
Blow, 253
Blunt, 84, 251
Boat, 252
Boggs Act, 163
Bolivia, 18, 92
Bonnie, Richard J., 129
Boomers, 252
Britain, cannabis demand in, 82
British drug policy, 47–48, 54,
65–66, 80, 172
Brown sugar, 252
Bump, 253
Buprenorphine, 242
Bupropion, 27
Buttons, 252
C, 253
Cactus, 7, 169, 247, 252
Caffeine, 5–6, 242
Califano, Joseph, Jr., 179–180
California drug policies, 155, 170
Canada, cannabis production, 81
Canadian Centre on Substance
Abuse (CCSA), 212
Canadian drug policy, 16, 65, 80,
172
Canadian Senate Special
Committee recommendations,
71–74
Candy, 251, 253
Cannabinoid receptor, 242
Cannabinoids, 5–6
Cannabis, 5–6, 15–17, 242
consumption trends, 82–84
illegal status, 50
production and trafficking,
80–81
street names, 5, 15, 251
treatment demand, 82
See also Hashish; Marijuana
Captain cody, 252
Cat Valium, 252
Center for Substance Abuse
Prevention (CSAP), 207–208
Center for Substance Abuse
Research (CESAR), 207
Center for Substance Abuse
Treatment (CSAT), 208
Center of Alcohol Studies (CAS),
206
Center on Addiction and
Substance Abuse, 179–180
256
Index

Centre for Drug Research
(CEDRO), 212
Chalk, 253
Charas, 15
Charlie, 253
Children’s Health Act, 171
Children
of alcoholics, 146–148
of incarcerated drug offenders,
37
See also Young people and
substance use
China, opium and, 52, 88, 156
China girl, 252
China white, 252
Chronic, 251
Cigarette smoking. See Tobacco
Civil forfeiture laws, 60
Clarity, 253
Club drugs. See Ecstasy; Gamma
hydroxybutyrate
Coca-Cola, 18, 159
Cocaine, 6, 18–19, 242
combinations with other drugs,
96
consumption trends, 19, 36,
93–96
consumption trends, youth,
101–102
Freud and, 180–181
history, 18–19
illegal status, 2
Len Bias’s death, 178–179
medical use, 181
production and trafficking,
92–93
routes of administration, 96
street terms, 253
War on Drugs, 19
See also Crack
Codeine, 8, 242, 252
Cody, 252
Coke, 253. See also Cocaine
College on Problems of Drug
Dependence (CPDD), 198
Colombia
cocaine production, 18, 92
marijuana production and
trafficking, 81
opiate production and
trafficking, 17, 85–86
Columbia University, National
Center on Addiction and
Substance Abuse (CASA),
205–206
Common Sense for Drug Policy,
59, 61, 187, 198
Community Anti-Drug Coalitions
of America (CADCA), 199
Community Mental Health
Centers Act, 165
Community Trials Intervention to
Reduce High-Risk Drinking
(RHRD), 25–26
Community-based process, 21
Compassionate Use Act, 170
Comprehensive Crime Control
Act, 168
Comprehensive Drug Abuse
Prevention and Control Act,
166
Controlled substance, defined, 242
Counseling, 29
Crack, 6, 19, 243, 248, 253
combinations with other drugs,
84, 96
consumption trends, 94–96
marijuana combinations, 84, 96
racially biased laws, 179
routes of administration, 96
sentencing policy, 168
War on Drugs, 19
See also Cocaine
Crank, 4, 253
Craving, 243
Cressy, Peter H., 134
Crime
alcohol use and, 123, 141
delinquent behavior, 103
substance use associations, 35,
37
See also Violent crime
Index
257

Criminal organizations, 18, 56, 79,
80
Crosses, 252
Crystal, 4, 253
Crystal meth, 4
Cubes, 252
Cutting agents, 243
Dalmane, 242
Dance fever, 252
Dangerous Drugs Act of 1921, 54
DARE. See Drug Abuse Resistance
Education
Date-rape drugs, 9
DEB, 253
Decriminalization, 60–61, 167
Degeneration theory, 53
Delinquent behavior, 103
Demand reduction, 243
Dependence
defined, 3
history of drug regulation, 52–53
national rate, 35
psychological, 247
See also Addiction
Depo-testosterone, 253
Depressants, 243
street terms, 251–252
See also specific drugs
Designer drug, 243
Detoxification, 27–28, 30, 243
Deviance, 9
Dexedrine, 252
Diablitos, 84
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM), 3
Disease model, 54
Dissociative anesthetics, 252
Diversion, 75, 243. See also
Methadone
Dolichothele, 7
DOM, 253
Domestic violence, alcohol and,
126
Donana, 7
Donk, 84
Doors and fours, 252
Dope, 251, 252
Downers, 251
Dream team, 84
Drinking and driving, 148–151
fatalities, 122
prevention initiatives, 25–26
Drug, defined, 1–2, 243
Drug abuse, 2
defined, 2–3, 244
economic cost, 38–39
problems, 33–34
social norms and, 9
statistics, 35–37
U.S. public opinion, 34
See also specific drugs
Drug Abuse Control Amendment,
165
Drug abuse prevention. See
Prevention
Drug Abuse Resistance Education
(DARE), 40–41, 172, 199
Drug abuse risk factors
biological and psychological
characteristics, 11–12
interpersonal relations, 10–11
labeling-criminalization process,
11
media and, 11
social and environmental
influences, 9–10
stress, 22
Drug abuse treatment. See
Treatment
Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA),
43, 161, 169, 172
Drug Free Communities Act, 170,
172
Drug Policy Alliance, 57, 189,
199–200
Drug Reform Coordination
Network (DRCNet), 200
Drug Strategies, 200–211
Drug trafficking, 79
National Drug Control Strategy,
45–46
258
Index

Noriega and, 170
terrorist connection, 99–100
Drug Watch International, 201
Drug-Free Communities Support
Program, 44–45
Drug-free treatment, 244
Drug-resistant tuberculosis, 98
Drugs, medicinal vs. recreational
status, 50–51
Drugs, types of, 3–9
Drugtext and the Foundation on
Drug Policy and Human
Rights, 213
Dual diagnosis (comorbidity), 244
DuPont, 178
DuPont, Robert, 188
Durabolin, 253
Early intervention, 21
Economic cost of substance abuse,
38–39
Ecstasy, 5, 244, 245
European production, 48
Illicit Drug Anti-Proliferation
Act, 173
prevention policy, 171
street terms, 253
Education
DARE, 40–41, 172, 199
drug abuse prevention
approaches, 21, 23–26
drug abuse risk factors, 10–11
harm reduction approach, 58–59
Emergency department
information, 83–84
Emergency treatment, 27
Employee-assistance programs, 22
Environmental approaches to
prevention, 21–22
Environmental influences, 9–10
Ephedra, 244
Ephedrine, 4
Equipoise, 253
Europe
cannabis consumption trends,
82
cocaine consumption, 93–94
opiate consumption, 90
smoking patterns, 111–113, 115
youth drinking patterns, 136
European Working Group on
Drugs Oriented Research
(EWODOR), 213–214
Eve, 253
Family, drug abuse risk factors, 10
Fast, 253
Federal antidrug budget, 38–39
Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), 43
Federal Bureau of Narcotics,
177–178, 185
Federal drug offenders, 36
Fentanyl, 252
Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS),
138–141
Fire, 253
Flake, 253
Flunitrazepam (Rohypnol), 9, 252
Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), 114, 171, 182
Forget-me pill, 252
Formaldehyde, 84, 96
Freud, Sigmund, 180–181
Friend, 252
Fry, 84
G, 252
Gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB),
5, 9, 173, 244, 252
Gangster, 251
Ganja, 5, 15, 251
Gateway theory, 62, 70, 72, 178,
244
Geek joints, 84
Genetic predisposing factors, 11
Georgia, 97
Georgia home boy, 252
Germany, 80
GHB (gamma hydroxybutyrate),
5, 9, 173, 244, 252
Glass, 253
Index
259

Glossary, 241–249
Go, 253
Golden Triangle, 17
Goodfella, 252
Government publications and
other reports, 234–240
Governmental organizations,
207–211
Great Britain, drug policy. See
British drug policy
Grievous bodily harm, 252
Gum, 252
H, 252
Halcion, 9, 242, 251
Hallucinogenic drugs, 6–7, 244.
See also specific drugs
Harm reduction approach, 57–59,
217–218, 244
Harrison, Francis, 181
Harrison Narcotics Act, 17, 19,
157–159, 181
Hash, 251
Hash oil, 6, 251
Hashish, 6, 244
street terms, 251
trafficking patterns, 81
Hashishiyya, 15
Hazelden Foundation, 201–202
Health effects
drinking and driving, 149–150
female tobacco users, 109–110
injection drug use and, 96–99
tobacco use, 12–13, 107–108, 183
tobacco use, female users,
109–110
tobacco use, young users, 111
Hearst, William Randolph, 178
Hearts, 252
Hemp, 251
Hepatitis B, 98
Hepatitis C, 96, 98
Herb, 251
Heroin, 8, 17–18, 244
combinations with other drugs,
96
consumption trends, 36, 90–91
Harrison Act and, 158–159
history, 17–18
illegal status, 2
methadone, 8, 27, 28, 37, 186,
187, 245
Persian, 247
production and trafficking,
85–89
routes of use, 91
street terms, 252
HIV/AIDS, 4, 96–99
Hog, 252
Homeless persons, alcoholism
and, 123
Hoover, J. Edgar, 177
Hop, 252
Horse, 252
Huffing. See Inhalants
Hutchinson, Asa, 47–49
Hydroponics, 81
Hypnotics, 8–9
Ice (smokable methamphetamine),
4, 245, 253
Incarcerated drug offenders,
35–38
harm reduction and, 58
Inhalants, 7, 245, 253
Injection drug use, infectious
diseases and, 96–99
International drug trafficking. See
Drug trafficking
International organizations,
212–214
Interpersonal relations, drug
abuse risk factors, 10–11
Intoxication, defined, 245
Iran, jihad against drugs, 86
Israel, 217
Italy, 80
Jackpot, 252
Jaffe, Jerome, 186–187
JIF, 253
Jihad against drugs, 86
260
Index

Join Together, 202
Joints, 251
Jones-Miller Act, 160
Journals, 219–225, 233–234
Juice, 253
Junk, 252
K, 252
Kazakhstan, 97
Keep a Clear Mind (KACM),
23–24
Kentucky, marijuana production,
81
Kessler, David, 114, 182, 217
Ketamine, 5, 252
Khat, 245
Kingpin Strategy, 169
Koop, C. Everett, 182–183
Kyrgyzstan, 86–88, 97
LA turnaround, 252
LAAM (levo-alpha-
acetylmethadone), 8, 27, 29,
245
Laos, 17, 85
Leary, Timothy, 165, 183–184
Leary v. United States, 165
Lebanon, 99
Legalization, 16, 216
Canadian recommendations,
71–74
critique of, 47–49
harm reduction approach, 57–59
Legislation. See Policy
Librium, 251
LifeRing Recovery, 28
Lilies, 84
Linder v. United States, 160–161
Lindesmith, Alfred, 184–185
Liquid ecstasy, 252
Loads, 252
Long-term effects, defined, 245
Love boat, 6, 84, 252
Lover’s speed, 253
Low-tar cigarettes, 117
LSD, 5, 6–7, 245, 252
Timothy Leary and, 183–184
youth consumption, 102
Ludes, 252
Lung cancer, 109
M, 252
Magic mushroom, 252. See also
Psilocybin
Mandatory minimum-sentencing
laws, 36, 60, 168
Mandrex, 252
Manufacturing Act, 164
Marijuana, 5–6, 15–17, 245
adverse effects, 62–64, 66–67,
69–70
arguments against legalization,
66–71
arguments for policy reform,
60–66
arrests, 60, 61
birdseed, 162
British policy, 65–66
Canadian policy, 65
Canadian Senate Special
Committee recommendations,
71–74
cognitive and health effects,
61–64
combinations with other drugs,
5, 84, 96
decriminalization, 60–61, 167
early legislation, 161–164
federal penalties, 168
gateway theory, 62, 70, 72, 178
history, 15–17
illegal status, 2, 16
legalization issues, 16, 47, 49,
60–71
medical use, 15, 58, 68–69, 73,
162–163, 169, 170, 172–173
National Commission on
Marijuana and Drug Abuse,
166, 187
National Organization for the
Reform of Marijuana Laws
(NORML), 167, 169, 203–204
Index
261

Nixon’s policy, 187–188
potency trends, 66, 67–68
prevalence, 61
production and trafficking,
80–81
propaganda campaign against,
177–178
sinsemilla, 248, 251
street names, 5, 15, 251
treatment, 67, 82, 167
violent crime and, 63
youth consumption trends,
101–102
See also Cannabis
Marijuana Policy Project
Foundation, 59, 60
Marijuana Tax Act, 162, 165
Marinol, 69, 245
Mary Jane, 251
Master Settlement Agreement,
118, 119
McCaffrey, Barry, 34
McCarthy, Joseph R., 178
McVay, Douglas A., 61
MDA, 245, 253
MDMA, 245, 253. See also Ecstasy
Media
anti-drug campaigns, 42, 170
criticism of drug policy, 34
drug abuse prevention
approaches, 22
drug abuse risk factors, 11
youth-targeted alcohol
marketing, 131–132
Medical or pharmaceutical
industry interests, 53–56
Medical use
cocaine, 181
harm reduction approach, 58
Linder v. United States, 160–161
marijuana, 15, 58, 68–69, 73,
162–163, 169, 170, 172–173
recreational use vs., 50–51
Medication-based treatment
approaches, 26–27, 29–30
Mellon, Andrew, 178
Mental disorders, 30
Mesc, 252
Mescaline, 245, 252
Meth, 4, 253
Methadone, 8, 27, 28, 37, 186, 187,
245
Methamphetamine, 4–5, 246
prevention policy, 171
smokable form (ice), 4, 245,
253
Methaqualone, 252
Methylphenidate, 253
Mexican Valium, 252
Mexico
cannabis industry, 81
heroin production and
trafficking, 85
opium production, 17
Microdot, 252
Middle East drug policy, 217
Miss Emma, 252
Monitoring the Future Study, 46,
205
Monkey, 252
Morphine, 8, 17, 246
alcohol use, 122–123
Harrison Act and, 158–159
street terms, 252
See also Heroin
Mothers Against Drunk Driving
(MADD), 148, 202
Motivational interviewing, 246
MPH, 253
Murder, 252
Mushrooms, 5, 247, 252
Myanmar, 17, 85
Nadelmann, Ethan, 57, 189
Naloxone, 246
Naltrexone, 27, 29
Narcotic drug, defined, 246
Narcotics Act of 1946, 163
Narcotics Anonymous (NA), 28,
188
Narcotics Control Act, 161
Narcotics Control Act of 1956, 164
262
Index

Narcotics Drugs Import and
Export Act, 160
Narcotics Farm-Porter Act, 161
National Association for Children
of Alcoholics (NACoA), 203
National Center on Addiction and
Substance Abuse (CASA),
205–206
National Clearinghouse for
Alcohol and Drug Information
(NCADI), 208–209
National Commission on
Marijuana and Drug Abuse,
166, 187
National Council on Alcoholism
and Drug Dependence
(NCADD), 203
National Drug Control Strategy,
44–46
National Household Survey on
Drug Abuse (NHSDA), 46
National Institute of Mental
Health (NIMH), 186
National Institute on Alcohol
Abuse and Alcoholism
(NIAAA), 209
National Institute on Drug Abuse
(NIDA), 166, 209–210
National Organization for the
Reform of Marijuana Laws
(NORML), 167, 169, 203–204
National Research Council Report
on Drug Enforcement
Activities, 42–43
National Survey on Drug Use and
Health, 84, 100
National Youth Anti-Drug Media
Campaign, 42, 170, 172, 210
Native American Church, 169
Nembutal, 251
Netherlands, 48, 80, 82
New York State drug policy, 75–76
Nicotine, 7, 107, 246
addiction treatment
medications, 27
FDA and, 182
street terms, 253
treatment approaches, 30
See also Tobacco
Nicotine gum, 246
Nicotine patch, 246
Nitrous oxide, 3
Nixon, Richard M., 186–188
Nongovernmental organizations,
195–205
Noriega, Manuel, 170
O’Neill, Tip, 179
Oolies, 84
Open society, 189–190
Opiates, 8
definition, 246
routes of administration, 8
street terms, 252
See also Opium; specific drugs
Opioids, 8, 246, 252
Opium, 17–18
consumption trends, 89–91
early legislation, 155–159,
181–182
history of regulation, 51–53
production and trafficking
patterns, 84–89
racial/ethnic associations, 52
street terms, 252
Opium Poppy Act, 163
Organizations, associations, and
agencies, 195
governmental organizations,
207–211
international organizations,
212–214
nongovernmental organizations,
195–205
university-based drug research
and policy centers, 205–207
Osh, Kyrgyzstan, 86–88
Outpatient treatment, 246
Overdose, defined, 246
Oxandrin, 253
Oxycodone, 8, 246
Oxycontin, 8, 246
Index
263

Palestinians, 217
Panama, 170
Pancakes and syrup, 252
Paranoid schizophrenia, 246
Parents Drug Corps, 45
Parest, 252
Partnership for a Drug-Free
America (PDFA), 204
PCP, 6, 8, 84, 247, 252
Peace, 253
Peace pill, 252
Peer relations, drug abuse risk
factors, 10
Percocet, 8, 247
Percodan, 247
Persian heroin, 247
Personality factors, 11–12
Peru, 18, 92
Peyote, 7, 169, 247, 252
Peyotillo, 7
Pharmacotherapy, 26–27, 29–30
Phencyclidine. See PCP
Phennies, 251
Phenobarbital, 251
Philip Morris, 115, 118
Policy issues
chronology, 155–173
decriminalization, 167
“Drug War” failures, 74
economic cost of substance
abuse, 38–39
harm reduction approach, 57–59
historical perspectives, 49–57
“Kingpin Strategy,” 169
legalization, 216
legislation, historical
perspectives, 49–57
marijuana legalization,
arguments against, 66–71
marijuana legalization,
arguments for, 60–66
media criticism, 34
medical/pharmaceutical
industry interests, 53–56
National Drug Control Strategy,
44–46
National Research Council
Report, 42–43
Nixon and, 186–188
program effectiveness, 39–43
racial/ethnic minorities and, 56
reform recommendations, 218
reform trend, 74–76
Soros’s “open society” concept,
189–190
treatment need vs. opportunity,
37
U.S. public opinion, 34
youth drinking and, 129–136
See also Prevention; Taxation;
War on Drugs
Portugal, 80
Posttraumatic stress, 22
Pot, 5, 251. See also Marijuana
Pregnancy
alcohol use and, 137–141
tobacco use and, 109
Prescription drugs, 8–9
Prettyman Commission, 164
Prevention, 20–26
“alternative activities”
approach, 20–21
community-based process, 21
definition, 247
Drug Abuse Resistance
Education, 40–41
early intervention, 21
educational approaches, 21,
23–26
effectiveness of programs,
39–43
environmental approaches,
21–22
harm reduction approach, 58
high-risk drinking, 25–26
information approach, 22
Keep a Clear Mind, 23–24
media campaigns, 22, 42, 170
National Drug Control Strategy,
44–45
National Youth Anti-Drug
Media Campaign, 42
264
Index

primary, secondary, and tertiary,
20
problem identification and
referral, 22–23
Project ALERT, 24–25
recent policies and initiatives,
170–173
youth exposure to messages
and programs, 104
Primary prevention, 20
Primary reinforcers, 247
Prims, 84
Problem identification and
referral, 22–23
Prohibition (alcohol), 14–15,
55–56, 160, 191
Project ALERT, 24–25
Prozac, 5
Pseudoephedrine, 4
Psilocybe, 247
Psilocybin, 5, 247, 252
Psychedelic drug, defined, 247.
See also Hallucinogenic drugs;
specific drugs
Psychoactive drug, defined, 247
Psychological dependence, 247
Psychosocial therapy, 247
Public Health Service (PHS)
Narcotics Division, 161
Pure Food and Drug Act, 156
Purple passion, 252
Quaalude, 252
Quad, 252
Quay, 252
R. J. Reynolds, 119
R2, 252
Race and ethnicity
drug legislation and, 52, 56, 179
incarceration rates and, 36
War on Drugs and, 188
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations (RICO) law, 166
Rapid assessment, 247
RAVE Act, 173
R-ball, 253
Red birds, 251
Reds, 251
Reefer, 251
Reefer Madness, 161
Regional Alcohol and Drug
Awareness Resource
(RADAR) Network
(NCADI/SAMHSA), 210
Rehabilitation, 28, 247
Relapse, 248
Religious freedom, 169
Residential treatment, 248
Reward, 248
Risk reduction, 248
Ritalin, 253
The Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation–Substance Abuse
Policy Research Program,
204–205
Robinson, Larry, 165
Robinson v. California, 165
Roche, 252
Rock, 248, 253. See also Crack
Rocket fuel, 8
Rohypnol, 9, 252
Roids, 253
Roofies, 252
Roofinol, 252
Rope, 252
Rophies, 252
Rosenthal, Ed, 172
Route of administration, 248
Run, defined, 248
Rush, Benjamin, 14, 188–189
Russian Federation
drug trafficking and, 88–89
health impacts of illicit drug
use, 97–99
Rutgers University, Center of
Alcohol Studies (CAS), 206
San Pedro, 7
Schlosser, E., 178
Seconal, 248, 251
Secondary prevention, 20
Index
265

Sedative/hypnotic, 248
Sedatives, 8–9
Self-help groups, 28
Sexual abuse, drug abuse risk
factors, 10
Single Convention on Narcotics
Drugs, 164
Sinsemilla, 248, 251
Skag, 252
Skin-popping, 8, 248
Skippy, 253
Skunk, 252
Sleeping pills, 251
Smack, 252
Smart drug, 253
SMART Recovery, 28
Smith, Robert, 192
Smith v. Oregon, 169
Smoking. See Tobacco
Snow, 253
Snowballing, 248
Social norms, 9
Soper, 252
Soros, George, 57, 189–190
Spain, 81, 82
Special K, 252
Speed, 4, 252, 253
Statistical databases, 227–228
Stimulants
defined, 248
street terms, 252–253
See also specific drugs
STP, 248, 253
Street terms for illicit drugs,
251–253
Stress, drug abuse risk factors, 22
Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA),
171, 210–211
Suicide, 123
Sunami, 7
Supply reduction, 249
Surgeon General, 182–183,
190–191
Sweden, 82
Switzerland, 80
Tajikstan, 86–88, 97
Taliban, 85, 87–88, 99
Tango and Cash, 252
Taxation
alcohol, 132–136
Marijuana Tax Act, 162
tobacco, 119–120
Television, drug abuse risk
factors, 11. See also Media
Temperance movement, 14, 54,
189
Terrorism, 99–100
Terry, Luther, 190–191
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), 6,
69
Thailand, 17
THC, 6, 69
Therapeutic communities, 249
TNT, 252
Tobacco, 7, 12–13, 107–122
adolescent use, 110–113
advertising, 113–118
Califano campaign against,
179–180
consumption patterns, 108
crack combination, 96
economic issues, 13, 38
FDA and, 114, 171, 182
female use, 108–110, 114–115
geographic patterns of
consumption, 111–116
health effects, 12–13, 107–110,
183
“legal drug” status, 2
litigation, 117, 120, 170, 217
low-tar cigarettes, 117
Master Settlement Agreement,
118, 119
mortality, 107–108
political and economic
influence, 118–122
secondhand smoke, 183
smoking during pregnancy, 109
smuggling, 120
266
Index

societal costs, 119
taxation, 119–120
U.S. Surgeon General and, 183,
190–191
See also Nicotine
Tolerance, 3, 249
Tooies, 251
Toot, 253
Tranks, 251
Tranquilizers, defined, 249
Transdermal absorption, 249
Treatment, 26–31
behavioral therapy, 26–27, 29
characteristics of effective
approaches, 28–31
children of alcoholics, 148
clinical guide, 218
Community Mental Health
Centers, 165
detoxification, 27–28, 30
drug-free, 244
early legislation, 161
effectiveness of programs,
39–43
government funding, 37, 39
harm reduction, 58, 217–218
journals and newsletters,
219–225
legislation, 166
marijuana, 67, 82, 167
medication approaches, 26–27,
29–30
National Drug Control Strategy,
44, 45
need vs. opportunity, 37
Nixon’s policy, 186–187
outpatient, 246
rehabilitation, 28
residential, 248
tertiary prevention, 20
twelve-step programs, 28, 188,
192–193, 249
women’s resource, 218–219
Triggers, 249
Truck drivers, 252
Tsuwiri, 7
Tuberculosis, 98–99
Turbo, 84
Twelve-step programs, 28, 188,
192–193, 249
Ukraine, 97
Uniform State Narcotic Act, 161
United Nations (UN), 79–80, 86
Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
172
International Conference on
Drug Abuse and Illicit
Trafficking, 168
Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), 214
United States v. Coca-Cola Company
of Atlanta, 159
United States v. Daugherty, 161
University of Calfornia,
Integrated Substance Abuse
Programs (ISAP), 206
University of Kentucky, Center on
Drug and Alcohol Research
(CDAR), 206–207
University of Michigan,
Monitoring the Future Study,
205
University-based drug research
and policy centers, 205–207
Uppers, 252
U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), 114,
171, 182
U.S. Surgeons General, 182–183,
190–191
Uzbekistan, 89, 97
Valium, 9, 242, 249, 251
Vega, 84
Violent crime, 35, 37
alcohol use and, 35, 141
marijuana use and, 63
Vitamin K, 252
Vitamin R, 253
Volstead, Andrew, 191
Volstead Act, 160, 191
Index
267

Wack, 8
Wacky sticks, 84
Walters, John, 44
War on Drugs, 33–34, 74
cocaine/crack preoccupation, 19
Harry Anslinger and, 177–178
program effectiveness, 39–43
racial/ethnic factors, 188
Soros and, 190
Water-water, 84
Weed, 5, 251. See also Marijuana
Wets, 84
White horse, 252
White House Office of National
Drug Control Policy
(ONDCP), 211
White stuff, 252
Wilson, William “Bill,” 192–193
Withdrawal, 3, 249
Women
alcohol consumption, 125–127,
137–141
incarcerated drug offenders, 36
tobacco use, 108–110, 114–115
treatment resource, 218–219
Women for Sobriety, 28
Woolies, 84
World Health Organization
(WHO), 214
World Narcotics Research
Foundation, 185
X, 253
Xanax, 9, 242, 249, 251
Yellow jackets, 251
Yellow sunshine, 252
Yellows, 251
Young, Francis, 63
Young people and substance use,
100–104
alcohol use, 127–137
attitudes about school and,
102–103
children of alcoholics, 146–148
delinquent behavior, 103
drug availability, 101–102
exposure to prevention
messages, 104
parent attitudes and, 102
participation in positive
behaviors, 103
risk perceptions, 101
tobacco use, 110–113
268
Index

About the Author
Richard Isralowitz is professor and director of the Regional Alco-
hol and Drug Abuse Resources (RADAR) Center, Department of
Social Work, Ben Gurion University in Israel. Professor Isralowitz
received his Ph.D. from the Heller School for Advanced Studies in
Social Policy and Management from Brandeis University. He has
served as director of social research at the Graduate School of Ap-
plied Social Sciences, Case Western Reserve University in Cleve-
land, Ohio, and director of the Hubert H. Humphrey Institute for
Social Research, Ben Gurion University.
Professor Isralowitz has received the Distinguished Interna-
tional Scientist Award from the U.S. National Institute on Drug
Abuse for his professional work. Also, he has received recogni-
tion for his work on the drug problem as a Fulbright Scholar at
the National University of Singapore; the Hallsworth Scholar for
Social Policy at the University of Manchester, England; and the
International Visiting Scholar at New York University. Among his
recent books are Drug Use, Policy and Management (2002), and
Drug Problems: Cross Cultural Policy and Program Development
(2002).
269

