
	




P. Candace Deans
University of Richmond, USA
 
  

	 	 	
 
	

	
 
  
  	
Hershey • London • Melbourne • Singapore

Acquisitions Editor:
Mehdi Khosrow-Pour
Senior Managing Editor:
Jan Travers
Managing Editor:
Amanda Appicello
Development Editor:
Michele Rossi
Copy Editor:
Ingrid Widitz
Typesetter:
Amanda Appicello
Cover Design:
Lisa Tosheff
Printed at:
Integrated Book Technology
Published in the United States of America by
IRM Press (an imprint of Idea Group Inc.)
701 E. Chocolate Avenue, Suite 200
Hershey PA 17033-1240
Tel: 717-533-8845
Fax:  717-533-8661
E-mail: cust@idea-group.com
Web site: http://www.irm-press.com
and in the United Kingdom by
IRM Press  (an imprint of Idea Group Inc.)
3 Henrietta Street
Covent Garden
London WC2E 8LU
Tel: 44 20 7240 0856
Fax:  44 20 7379 3313
Web site: http://www.eurospan.co.uk
Copyright © 2005 by IRM Press.  All rights reserved.  No part of this book may be reproduced in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, without written
permission from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
E-commerce and M-commerce technologies / P. Candace Deans, editor.
               p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-59140-239-5 (pbk.) -- ISBN 1-59140-566-1 (hardcover) -- ISBN 1-59140-240-9 (ebook)
  1.  Electronic commerce--Technological innovations. 2.  Mobile commerce--Technological
innovations.  I. Deans, P. Candace.
HF5548.32.E18298 2005
658.8'72--dc22
  2004003774
British Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library.
The views expressed in this book are those of the authors, but not necessarily of the publisher.

 	

 

	


Preface ....................................................................................................... vi
P. Candace Deans, University of Richmond, USA
Section I: Customer Relationship Management:
Internet and Wireless Channels
Chapter I
Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile
Channels: An Analytical Framework and Research Directions ....... 1
Susy S. Chan, DePaul University, USA
Jean Lam, IBM, USA
Section II: Wireless Technologies and Mobile Commerce
Chapter II
Presenting Large and Complex Information Sets on Mobile
Handhelds ................................................................................................. 32
B. Karstens, University of Rostock, Germany
R. Rosenbaum, University of Rostock, Germany
H. Schumann, University of Rostock, Germany
Chapter III
Mobile Payments (M-Payments) – An Exploratory Study of
Emerging Issues and Future Trends ................................................... 57
Melissa Soo Ding, Deakin University, Australia
Chandana R. Unnithan, Deakin University, Australia

Chapter IV
Motivations and Barriers to the Adoption of 3G Mobile
Multimedia Services: An End User Perspective in the
Italian Market .......................................................................................... 80
Margherita Pagani, I-Lab Centre for Research on the Digital
     Economy, Bocconi University, Italy
Danilo Schipani, Valdani Vicari & Associati, Italy
Chapter V
Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing
Countries .................................................................................................. 96
Ran Neuman, Philip Morris, USA
P. Candace Deans, University of Richmond, USA
Section III: Technologies and Applications for Digital Business
Chapter VI
An Introduction in Digital Watermarking: Applications,
Principles, and Problems ........................................................................ 127
Tino Jahnke, University of Cooperative Education
     Heidenheim, Germany
Juergen Seitz, University of Cooperative Education
     Heidenheim, Germany
Chapter VII
Integrated Domain Model for Digital Rights Management.............. 152
Eetu Luoma, University of Jyvaskyla, Finland
Pasi Tyrvainen, University of Jyvaskyla, Finland
Chapter VIII
Rates of Change in Ad hoc Networks .................................................. 176
Alex Yasinsac, Florida State University, USA

Section IV: Electronic Commerce Issues and Applications
Chapter IX
Loyalty Differences in the Effect of Negative Critical Incidents
and Quality Attributes Satisfaction: An Empirical Study of
Online Shopping....................................................................................... 195
Kwoting Fang, National Yunlin University of Science &
     Technology, Taiwan
Ya-Yueh Shih, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan and
     Ming Hsin University of Science & Technology, Taiwan
Duen-Ren Liu, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
Chapter X
Benefits and Difficulties of Internet Use in Hotels and Its Effects
According to the Facilities Rank, Property Size, Manager’s Age
and Experience ........................................................................................ 217
Luiz Augusto Machado Mendes-Filho, Faculdade Natalense
     para o Desenvolvimento do Rio Grande do Norte – FARN,
     Brazil
Anatália Saraiva Martins Ramos, Universidade Federal do
     Rio Grande do Norte – UFRN, Brazil
Chapter XI
A Reverse Auction Case Study: The Final Chapter .......................... 240
Andrew Stein, Victoria University, Australia
Paul Hawking, Victoria University, Australia
David C. Wyld, Southeastern Louisiana University, USA
About the Authors ................................................................................... 263
Index .......................................................................................................... 270

vi
	
Electronic and wireless technologies have changed the way we do business
forever. We have seen fast paced change in the last decade not only in infor-
mation technology advancement but also in business model design and strate-
gic direction.  Technology has become central to company operations as well
as strategy. Successful companies today recognize electronic technologies and
the Internet as mainstream to business success. Wireless technology is be-
coming increasingly important for companies seeking a means for cost cutting,
enhanced productivity and improved efficiency. The future for electronic and
wireless technology applications will continue to be promising to companies
seeking competitive advantage.
Keeping abreast of technological advancement has never been more difficult
or more important for companies as they compete in an increasingly global
economy.  Change comes from every direction and competitive forces surface
from nontraditional sources. The dot com era forced traditional companies to
think in new ways in order to remain competitive in a newly emerging market-
place. Today, business is electronic and e-business is business. Just as in the
PC revolution there is a point at which there is no turning back. Computers
today are a given necessity for doing business. The digital transformation has,
likewise, pushed companies to a new era of electronic business. That era is
being pushed a step further with the advent of wireless technologies and mo-
bile commerce initiatives. Tomorrow, business will be mobile. These transfor-
mations will not only impact the way business is transacted but it will impact
the very fabric of society.
Electronic and wireless technologies continue to evolve. Technological inno-
vation provides opportunities for new business applications and consumer
products.   Standards play a big role in the direction and eventual success of
new products and applications. Currently a lack of international standards has
made progress difficult as telecommunications companies move along differ-

vii
ent standards paths. Competing standards and technologies have emerged
that make decision making for companies more difficult as they plan for tech-
nology advancements. Europe and Asia (Japan) have advanced in wireless
technology faster than the US and other parts of the world.  Movement to-
ward third generation (3G) technologies has been slower than expected due
to the high cost of building out networks and the uncertainty in demand to
recoup the costs. In the US, for example, the trend to move toward 2.5G was
based on lower costs to implement than would be required for 3G. Japan and
Europe have moved more quickly down the 3G path but not without tremen-
dous cost in license agreements and network expense. Wi-Fi and the devel-
opment of hot spots around the US have progressed with some success. Cost
is a major consideration in these decisions but it is unclear how all these tech-
nologies will evolve in the future and which will eventually win out. Companies
are taking fewer risks and testing the waters more cautiously in the wireless
technology realm. Uncertain economic conditions have also contributed to the
confusion and proliferation of standards and technologies. The consumer per-
spective has not helped, as the demand for wireless technologies and devices
has not been as substantial as was expected. Worldwide trends and market
conditions will continue to evolve and play a significant role in the future di-
rection of electronic and wireless technology applications.
Currently, successful mobile commerce strategies have focused on applica-
tions and opportunities inside the organization. These applications have greater
potential for return on investment than those directed toward consumer com-
merce. It is not difficult for companies to make the business case for wireless
technology applications inside the company that meet objectives for cost sav-
ings, enhanced productivity, and increased efficiency. For example, sales force
automation and field force automation are key areas for companies to target
for return on investment. Wireless technology makes it possible for sales per-
sonnel to get critical information on clients and products while away from their
desks. This saves time, improves customer relationships, and increases rev-
enue and profitability. Field force personnel can get access to schedules, forms
that need to be completed on the job, and product information from their
handheld devices. This can cut labor costs and reduce the extra time and cost
of inputting data more than once. Data can be captured at the point of access,
which will also reduce error rates. Wireless technology is also being used in
the warehouse to keep inventory current and to improve accuracy. This trans-
lates into happier customers. Wireless LANs have also been implemented to
improve efficiency in the workplace. In addition, companies can now wirelessly
track their assets through Radio Frequency Identification (RDID) technology.

viii
This technology is expected to replace bar codes when the price point reaches
an affordable level. Product information can be stored on these tags that track
the product along the supply chain and keep track of important information
that was not before possible. Combined with location technology, company
assets can be located at any point in time. Telemetrics allows companies to
wirelessly access information and monitor status levels at all times. For ex-
ample, electricity meters can be read through wireless technology, eliminating
the need for a person to read each meter manually.  Layers of labor may be
eliminated with some applications providing additional cost savings. Machines
can be monitored at a distance and alerted when there are problems detected.
For example, the toner in a printer can be monitored and the company’s sup-
pliers notified to place an order without the intervention of a human. Wireless
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is still another avenue for com-
panies to exploit. Wireless technology provides another channel to interact
with the customer.  There are challenges from the marketing perspective but
the potential is real if implemented correctly.
From a consumer perspective, wireless technology has not taken off to the
degree expected, especially in the United States. In Europe, short message
system (SMS) was the driver for wireless devices. In Japan, entertainment,
ring tones, and wireless icons pushed mobile consumer commerce forward. In
the US market, consumers are still waiting for the killer application. The de-
mand for wireless has been slow to gain momentum because consumers do
not see a pressing need. Mobile payments are expected to be one means for
pushing mobile business forward. Currently, security is an issue for many ap-
plications and privacy issues play a role in acceptance of applications such as
location-based services. Consumers are skeptical about technologies that can
track their location at all times. Applications that provide for safety such as e-
911 and information availability that is timely such as local directions will be
most likely to succeed in the US consumer market. The consumer market has
experienced an increase in wireless access through laptops, personal digital
assistants (PDAs), and cell phones.  There has also been an increase in house-
holds that have wireless networks. As these trends continue, acceptance of
mobile commerce applications will increase as well.
Currently, worldwide trends indicate a period of transition from mainstream
electronic business to mainstream mobile business. It is unclear how long this
transition will take.  The eventual movement to 3G and 4G networks will
provide the infrastructure for companies to move forward with wireless tech-
nology applications. As will be discussed in the chapters that follow, many
issues remain to be addressed that have surfaced as a result of these techno-

ix
logical advancements. The enabling technologies will also undergo improve-
ments that will further enhance their usefulness. New technologies will con-
tinue to proliferate and further complicate the existing platforms and infra-
structure. Voice integration, for example, will emerge to play a role in future
mobile technology applications. Technology can be expected to continue to
change and evolve as well as play an increasingly significant role in the strate-
gic direction of companies.
Organization of the Book
The book is organized into four sections with 11 chapters. Section I addresses
the role of Customer Relationship Management (CRM) in the context of Internet
and mobile commerce channels. CRM has become increasingly important for
companies as electronic and wireless technologies have provided new oppor-
tunities to interact with customers. The evolution of CRM from traditional
systems to e-CRM to wireless CRM has provided companies with both new
challenges and new opportunities for developing innovative customer strate-
gies. Companies in the digital era have been forced to reinvent their compa-
nies from the customer perspective. Chapter 1 addresses a broad array of
issues related to evolving CRM systems and potential research directions.
Section II addresses specific issues related to wireless technologies and mo-
bile commerce. Specifically, Chapter 2 addresses the issues of information
presentation on handheld devices. This issue has been significant from the
consumer perspective.  Information must be packaged in ways that limit the
amount of information that must be read by the end user but at the same time
provide value in timely information. The authors address the issues of human
interface and interaction in this context. Chapter 3 addresses the critical issue
of making payments on mobile devices. Many believe solutions to mobile pay-
ments may be a driving force behind mobile commerce. In this chapter the
authors examine the various options for mobile payments and resulting chal-
lenges. Standards, security and consumer acceptance are discussed in this
context.  Chapter 4 examines the issues associated with 3G multimedia ser-
vices specifically from the perspective of the Italian market. Conclusions from
the study can be compared and applied to other markets. Lessons learned
may be relevant for other markets. Finally, Chapter 5 addresses a broad per-
spective on wireless technology and mobile commerce for developing coun-
tries. Developing countries have found it advantageous to leapfrog traditional

x
technologies through the use of wireless applications. The authors provide
specific examples of how these technologies are being implemented and the
development of new business opportunities afforded by these technological
advancements.
Section III takes a more focused look at specific technologies and issues
relevant to the digital age in general. Chapter 6 examines digital watermarking
technology in the context of specific applications and potential problems. The
authors explain the specifics of the technology and its potential benefits. Chap-
ter 7 addresses digital rights management and the issues related to the protec-
tion of intellectual property in digital format. The authors develop a domain
model to provide insights on issues and future trends. Chapter 8 looks at the
dynamic nature and role of ad hoc networks. Change rates are examined in
the context of these networks that form, change and dissolve in an ad hoc way
routinely. The authors examine the impact of these networks on network func-
tionality.
In Section IV, the focus shifts to specific issues relevant to electronic business.
In Chapter 9 the authors report results of an empirical study that measures the
loyalty of Internet shoppers to online companies. Based on the findings, the
authors provide recommendations for online companies. In Chapter 10, find-
ings of a study on managers’ perceptions of the benefits and difficulties of
Internet use in hotels is discussed. Finally, a case study is presented in Chap-
ter 11 that addresses the pros and cons and other issues relevant to reverse
auctions.
A strength of the book is its international flavor. Authors of the chapters are
from a variety of countries all over the world. This gives the reader perspec-
tives on the issues from different world viewpoints. Culture, the role of gov-
ernment, legal environments and other differences among countries may play
a key role in the direction countries take on various technologies and the sig-
nificance of security, privacy, ethics and other related issues. It has become
increasingly important to look at the direction of technological advancement,
trends, and specific applications from a global perspective.

xi

 

I would like to thank all the authors who made contributions to this book.
Without their dedication and interest the book would not have been possible.
I would also like to acknowledge all those involved in the review process.
Their constructive and comprehensive reviews were valuable to the overall
process and quality of the final product.
Special thanks go to the publishing team at Idea Group Inc. Mehdi Khosrow-
Pour and Jan Travers always provide encouragement and professional sup-
port. It has been a pleasure to work with the editorial team led by Jennifer
Wetzel. This project went smoothly because of the support and organization
from all those involved at Idea Group.
Candace Deans
January 2004

Section I
Customer
Relationship
Management:
Internet and
Wireless Channels

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   1
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter I
Customer Relationship
Management on
Internet and 
Mobile Channels:
An Analytical Framework
and Research Directions
Susy S. Chan, DePaul University, USA
Jean Lam, IBM, USA
Abstract
The Internet has served as an effective channel for companies to build and
manage relationships with customers. The mobile channel, emerging from
the convergence of wireless communications and the mobile Web, promises
to deliver additional support to meet consumer needs. This chapter
examines features of customer relationship management (CRM) as
implemented on the Internet (eCRM) and the mobile channel (mCRM)
from the customer’s perspective. It further explores how companies can

2   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
better coordinate their CRM strategies between these two channels to
support e-commerce customers. We propose an analytical framework to
examine the current eCRM and mCRM practice in terms of customer
loyalty, branding, customer satisfaction, customization, and trust. These
five factors affect customer acquisition, sales and services, and customer
retention. A checklist was developed to guide the evaluation of CRM
practice for e-commerce sites. Several examples and research directions
are discussed in the chapter.
Introduction
Customer relationship management (CRM) involves the deployment of strat-
egies, processes, and technologies to strengthen a firm’s relationship with
customers throughout their lifecycle – from marketing and sales, to post-sales
service. The motivation for CRM stems from companies’ desire to increase
their revenues and profitability through improved customer satisfaction and
retention (Reichheld, 1996; Reichheld & Sassar, 1990; Winer, 2001). Internet
technology has transformed CRM into electronic CRM (eCRM), because
companies can use Internet technologies to capture new customers, track their
preferences and online behaviors, and customize support and services. Fur-
thermore, the convergence of wireless communication and mobile Internet
provides companies with opportunities to interact with their customers through
a new mobile channel.
Despite the potential growth of mobile commerce for location-aware and
customer-aware services (Varshney, 2003), recent research points out that
most mobile sites were designed primarily for supporting existing e-commerce
customers (Chan et al., 2002). Customers who are already familiar with the
interface and services provided on a company’s Web site are likely to benefit
more from its mobile site. Therefore, out of a wide range of mobile services
(Varshney, 2003; Varshney & Vetter, 2001), it is logical to consider the mobile
channel as appropriate for building and retaining relationships with existing
customers. Because of current technology and usability barriers (Chan & Fang,
2003; Ernst & Young, 2001; Shim et al., 2002), businesses and consumers are
hesitant to adopt the mobile channel. Research is needed to examine how the
mobile channel can be effectively leveraged to attract and retain e-commerce
customers.

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   3
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The main purpose of this chapter is to provide an analytical framework for
examining how companies can build and manage relationships with their e-
commerce customers by leveraging the Internet and the mobile channels. We
take a customer’s perspective in examining the firm-customer interactions
through these two channels. The chapter focuses on the features of content and
services presented on companies’ Web and mobile sites. Our intent is to
identify (a) how CRM can be effectively coordinated between these two
channels, and (b) key research questions pertinent to the eCRM and mCRM
coordination. Our proposed framework examines CRM implementation across
three phases of an e-commerce site’s interactions with its customers –
acquisition, sales/service, and retention. Interactions in each phase are also
examined along five factors that are essential to Internet-based CRM solutions:
(1) customer loyalty, (2) branding, (3) customer satisfaction, (4) customization,
and (5) trust. We apply this framework to several e-commerce sites and their
corresponding mobile sites to explore how CRM features are currently
incorporated into these sites. A checklist, derived from the framework, was
used for the site analysis. From this exploratory work, we identify commonali-
ties between eCRM and mCRM, and the respective roles played by each
channel. Furthermore, we propose a set of research questions for future
investigation. This chapter contributes to a better understanding of mobile
commerce technology and strategies. In particular, it addresses how organiza-
tions can optimize CRM by leveraging the unique characteristics of Internet and
wireless technologies.
CRM and E-Commerce
CRM Research
CRM is a strategy for companies to build and manage long-term relationships
with their customers. Researchers have shown that CRM implementation can
provide better customer service, as well as improvement and management of
customer expectations and loyalty (Cho et al., 2001; Reichheld, 1996;
Reichheld & Sassar, 1990; Romano, 2001; Winer, 2001). CRM also comple-
ments a firm’s capability to present products, quality, and services to its
customers (Chen & Sukpani, 1998). By implementing CRM solutions, many

4   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
firms expect to improve profitability by gaining customer loyalty, customizing
offerings, and lowering costs.
The increasing pressure on profitability has motivated companies across
different industry sectors to invest in CRM solutions.  An Internet impact study
shows that CRM applications are the most widely adopted e-business solutions
(Varian et al., 2002). On the average, 71% of companies in this study have
adopted Internet-based solutions for customer service and support, 68%
adopted e-marketing for customer development, and 52% adopted e-com-
merce for sales and transactions. Generally, an investment in retaining repeat
customers contributes more to a company’s profitability than do marketing
expenditures for attracting new customers. Reichheld and Sassar (1990) have
demonstrated that the overall profit generated by existing customers over seven
years exceeded those generated by new customers. For e-commerce compa-
nies, the need to expand customer base and attract repeat customers may be
equally important for their sustainability. Forrester Research (2003) has
projected online retail sales to grow to $96 billion in 2003, a 26% increase from
2002. However, this growth only represents 4.5% of total retail sales in 2003.
E-commerce still has potential for further growth. Therefore, a dual emphasis
on customer acquisition and retention is important to achieve profitability for e-
commerce companies.
CRM approaches are built on the concept of relationship marketing, which
emphasizes building a long-term relationship with individual customers. In
contrast, traditional transaction marketing maintains a short-term focus on the
transaction of products. Relationship marketing embraces strategies of per-
sonal and ongoing exchanges with customers for brand management, feedback,
knowledge acquisition, and customer differentiation (Moon, 2002). Knowl-
edge acquisition enables companies to gather better information about their
customers through some type of self-disclosure. Customer differentiation
allows companies to offer services that match different customer needs and
customer values. Essential to relationship marketing is the strategy of custom-
izing the marketing mix – products, services, communications, channels, and
price.  Thus, “the relationship marketing process involves an iterative cycle of
knowledge acquisition, customer differentiation, and customization of the entire
marketing mix” (Moon, 2002).
Researchers and industry practice tend to adopt a suppliers’ (or firms’)
perspective of relationship marketing by emphasizing the goal of customer
retention and profitability (Hennig-Thurau & Hansen, 2000; Hennig-Thurau &
Klee, 1997). Most of the relationship and loyalty programs tend to focus on the

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   5
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
company’s drive for transforming relationships into profit (Winer, 2001). In
contrast, less attention has been devoted to understanding customers’ motives
and wishes regarding their relationships with the companies.
The IT approach to CRM stems from early research on customer resource life
cycle (CRLC).  Different life cycle modes have been used for analyzing how a
company can strengthen its relationship with customers through the application
of information technology (Burnstine, 1980; Ives, 1984). Ives (1984) expands
IBM’s four-stage model into 13 steps to: (1) establish customer requirements,
(2) specify requirements, (3) select sources, (4) order products or services, (5)
authorize and pay for product/services, (6) acquire products/services, (7) test
and accept products/services, (8) integrate products/services into existing
processes, (9) monitor product/service performance, (10) upgrade products/
services, (11) maintain the condition of products/services, (12) transfer or
dispose of products/services, and (13) account for the products/services. In
practice, this CRLC model may be simplified into three broad phases of
interactions between a firm and its customers – acquisition, sales/service, and
retention.
For e-commerce, the acquisition phase emphasizes marketing activities that are
based on personalization technology to facilitate the customer decision process
in the pre-sales phase.  During the sales phase, creating customized transac-
tions makes a customer’s shopping and purchasing experience more efficient
and satisfactory (Lee & Shu, 2001). An e-commerce site can enhance
customer retention by building customer trust and loyalty through a variety of
online features (Hoffman et al., 1999; Lee & Shu, 2001; Papadopoulou et al.,
2001). These features enable customers to check the status of transactions,
shipments and orders, and to work collaboratively with the sales force.
Incentives for repeat visits through push e-mails and other loyalty programs can
also enhance customer trust and loyalty.
Electronic CRM
Internet technology enables companies to capture new customers, track their
preferences and online behaviors, and customize communications, products,
services, and price. The mass customization concept, or the one-to-one
approach, promoted by writers such as Peppers and Rogers (1993), has
become the “mantra” of eCRM (Winer, 2001). A company’s e-commerce
Web site integrates marketing, sales/service, and post-sales support as a

6   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
seamless front-end to meet customer needs. Therefore, e-commerce Web sites
have become viable channels for customer acquisition, sales/service, and
retention.
The Internet plays an active role in customer acquisition via e-marketing, which
emphasizes proactive and interactive communications between companies and
their customers. Companies can provide information on products and services
on their Web sites for prospective customers. Advanced searching capability
and functions for product and service inquiry can attract new and repeat
customers to visit, compare products and prices, and reach decisions for
purchase. Companies also create online communities to facilitate social groups
among existing and prospective customers. Online product discussions and
reviews encourage customer-initiated communications between firms and
customers and among fellow customers (Strauss, 2000).  These online commu-
nities improve customer loyalty, branding, and trust, which can lead to
increased sales and improved customer relationships (Lee & Shu, 2001).
The Mobile Channel
The convergence of mobile Internet and wireless communication technology
has promised users “anytime anywhere” access to information for their work
and personal communication.  Mobile services support m-commerce transac-
tions and improved management of personal activities, mobile office, and
mobile operations (Alanen & Autio, 2003). Among many mobile applications
proposed by wireless researchers (e.g., Kannan et al., 2001; Mannecke &
Strader, 2001; Varshney & Vetter, 2002), mobile financial applications,
location-aware and context-aware advertising, and location-based services
seem to hold special promise (Varshney, 2003). These mobile services may
provide customized support for individual users.
Many researchers point to four reasons that the mobile channel could be used
to build relationships with customers. The mobile channel and wireless technol-
ogy enable companies to: (1) personalize content and services; (2) track
consumers or users across media and over time; (3) provide content and
service at the point of need; and (4) provide content with highly engaging
characteristics (Kannan et al., 2001). Anckar and D’Incau (2002) point out
that consumers are most interested in services with high mobile values that meet
spontaneous and time critical needs, such as checking stock quotes, driving
directions, and short messages.

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   7
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
A recent study indicates that, at present, most of the available mobile sites tend
to share similar interfaces with their corresponding Web sites and primarily
support existing customers (Chan et al., 2002). For example, Amazon only
offers the 1-click order option for purchasing from its wireless site. This feature
does not allow customers to review order details before submitting the order.
Once an order is submitted, it is difficult for customers to navigate to the right
screen on the handheld device to cancel the order. Therefore, only experienced
mobile customers who have already built trust in Amazon and the interface of
the 1-click order option would find it efficient to order products from the mobile
Amazon site. In comparison, new customers would be hesitant to use the
mobile channel. In the case of accessing eBay by a wireless PDA device, users
often encounter a large number of results from a product search. The high
volume of transferred data can result in connection errors and frustrate new
customers.  Only seasoned eBay customers are more likely to benefit from
using a handheld device to monitor a bid in progress.
These findings imply that current mobile sites have been designed primarily to
support existing e-commerce users. The inherent difficulties using the wireless
technology may discourage prospective customers from exploring a new
mobile site. These barriers include limited bandwidth and poor connectivity,
small screen display, and difficulty in input formats of wireless handheld devices
(Chan & Fang, 2003). The study by Anckar and D’Incaur (2002) indicates that
e-commerce users are more likely to adopt m-commerce services. Their
finding further confirms the proposition that the mobile channel is more relevant
to customer support and retention than acquisition.
An Analytical Framework
Based on the above review, we propose an analytical framework for examining
how e-commerce sites implement CRM strategies online and on the mobile
channel. This framework views eCRM and mCRM across three phases of
customer interactions with an e-commerce site — acquisition, sales/service,
and post-sales retention. In each phase, the framework also examines CRM
implementation according to five inter-related factors — customer loyalty,
branding, customer satisfaction, customization, and trust. These five factors
represent the salient characteristics of relationship marketing, as emphasized
by Winer’s (2001) customer relationship model, Lee and Shu’s (2001)

8   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
framework of American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI), and Andaleeb’s
(1992) research on trust in relationship marketing. Winer’s model (2001)
identifies customer satisfaction as the key to establishing customer relation-
ships. Customer loyalty, customization, community building, and unique ser-
vices with branding contribute to high customer satisfaction and retention.
Winer further emphasizes that delivering a high level of customer satisfaction
that exceeds customer expectation increases profitability – a key objective of
relationship management strategy. Lee and Shu’s (2001) ACSI framework
explains the importance of customization and brand building to raise customer
perception of quality and value of products and services. A higher level of
perceived quality and value of products and services contributes to customer
satisfaction and customer loyalty in a multi-layer fashion. Andaleeb and Anwar
(1996) point out that trust is one of the most widely confirmed factors in
Factors\ Phases 
Acquisition 
Sales & Service 
Retention 
Customer Loyalty 
Loyalty program details 
Loyalty program enrollment 
Loyalty program status display 
Loyalty program reward 
Custom status customer display 
Custom service for member 
and status customer 
Capability to redeem reward 
Membership convenience 
service 
Delivery options 
Order tracking 
Help desk service 
Product review and discussion 
group 
Customer feedback/survey 
Return policy 
Branding 
Large customer community 
Unique branding product/service 
Exclusive product 
Exclusive interface for 
transaction support 
Exclusive product 
Customer 
Satisfaction 
Information consistency 
Product variety  
Product and price comparison 
Attractive graphic interface 
Self-management capability 
Company details 
Efficient and accurate search 
engine 
Product review 
Easy to use transaction 
interface 
Alternate product and 
pricing recommendations 
Payment options 
Delivery options 
Order tracking 
Help desk service 
Product review and discussion 
group 
Customer feedback/survey 
Return policy 
 
Customization 
Profile and preference self-
manage capability 
Self-help, FAQ 
Personal custom display 
Preference product suggestion 
Question posting/ inquiry 
capability 
Use customer profile 
information to complete 
product transaction 
Fast check-out service 
Profile and preference self-
manage capability 
Self-help, FAQ 
Customer purchase history, 
detail billing, delivery history, 
and status 
Delivery tracking 
Custom incentive  
Custom services. E.g., 
personal reminder 
E-mail promotion notification 
Trust 
Information consistency 
Privacy statement for customer 
profile 
Authentication mechanism 
Authorization mechanism 
Third party signature  
 
Payment options 
Order confirmation 
Security measurements, 
digital certification, SSL 
transmission, encryption, 
non-repudiation  
Authentication mechanism 
E-mail order notification 
Help desk support 
 
Table 1. An analytical framework for CRM

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   9
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
relationship marketing. Table 1 provides an overview of the five CRM factors
and their roles in the three phases of firm-customer interactions. The ensuing
sections discuss the proposed framework in greater detail.
Customer Loyalty
Dick and Basu (1994) conceptualize customer loyalty as the strength of the
relationship between an individual’s relative attitude towards an entity (brand,
service, store, or vendor) and repeat patronage. The work of Lowenstein
(1997) further introduces the concept of commitment into the relational
paradigm through the identification of what he termed “commitment-based”
companies. These are firms that adopt a proactive approach to creating
customer value and loyalty management by constantly anticipating and re-
sponding to latent customer needs (Lowenstein, 1997). According to Aakar
(1991, 1996), customers who exhibit the highest level of commitment to a
brand will also demonstrate a high level of loyalty. Dekimpe et al. (1997)
emphasize that companies should treat their loyal customers as a competitive
asset. Indeed, customer loyalty represents a basis for charging price premiums
and a barrier to competitive entry (Aaker, 1996). Accordingly, companies can
provide unique customer benefits that are difficult for competitors to match in
order to achieve a higher level of customer loyalty (Evans & Laskin, 1994).
Relationship marketing strategy includes introducing customer loyalty pro-
grams, like frequent flyer and reward programs, membership, and online
community. For example, American Airlines offers the AAdvantage program
for its frequent travelers. This program encourages customers to accumulate
mileage from traveling with American Airlines to redeem free plane tickets for
future trips. Similarly, Starwood Hotel Group has implemented the Starwood
Preferred Guest program for repeat customers to accumulate hotel points with
Starwood-chain hotels and redeem these points for automatic upgrades and
free vacations.
E-commerce players can achieve customer loyalty by providing the following
CRM features:
•
Detailed information about the loyalty program;
•
Incentives for joining the loyalty program;
•
Instructions for creating a personal account;

10   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Detailed information about a personal account with purchase history and
loyalty status information;
•
Personalized services for repeat customers;
•
Frequent buyer incentives such as discounts or personal upgrade services;
•
A status page on customer loyalty status, upgrade options, redeem
procedures, and special discounts/promotions;
•
Special services for frequent buyers—no cost delivery, priority seating,
and/or 1-click checkout; and
•
Online mechanisms to actively collect feedback from frequent customers.
Companies have used loyalty programs for marketing and attracting new
customers. These programs are also important for repeat customers who value
the effectiveness and convenience for registered members to redeem rewards
and updates. An e-commerce site can also enhance customer loyalty through
retention efforts such as customer feedback, status information about loyalty
programs, and help desk services. Therefore, loyalty programs are important
for all three phases of firm-customer interactions.
Branding
The efficient use of branding can increase product differentiation (Aaker, 1991,
1996) and build customer relationships by influencing a customer’s attitude
towards the brand. A customer’s perception of the functional, experiential, and
symbolic aspects of the product can strengthen customer loyalty to the
company. Good branding tactics include selling exclusive products and ser-
vices and having a large e-community of customer participants.
In an e-commerce environment, branding involves a number of strategies:
•
Building a large customer community through online chat rooms, discus-
sion sessions, and product reviews (e.g., online chat rooms on MSN.com
and Amazon’s community of online reviewers) to accentuate the customer’s
experience with the brand;
•
Providing unique branding products or services (e.g., eBay’s auction
trading) to differentiate a site from its competitors;

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   11
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Providing exclusive brand name products, such as Gap.com and
JCrew.com;
•
Providing supplementary services to enhance the main business and raise
the barrier to entry, such as Citibank’s online personal banking services
through citi.com; and
•
Providing unique interfaces to support customer shopping experiences
(e.g., Amazon’s one-click ordering interface and Peapod’s grocery
shopping interface).
Large customer communities, unique branding of products and services, and
exclusive brands help to attract new customers. Exclusive products and
services help to build long-term customer loyalty and retention. Internet
technology has also enabled companies to create brand recognition through
their unique user interface design for transaction support.
Customer Satisfaction
Customer satisfaction is a major factor in retaining long-term customers and can
indirectly attract new customers through referral. Researchers have used the
confirmation/disconfirmation (C/D) paradigm to explain customer perception
of performance and quality (Anderson & Sullivan, 1993; Fournier & Mick,
1999). The C/D paradigm states that customer satisfaction stems from a
customer’s comparison of post-purchase and post-usage evaluation of a
product with the expectation prior to purchase (Achim et al., 2001). Oliver and
Swan (1989) suggest that customer satisfaction occurs when the purchasing
experience and after-sales service meet the customer’s expectation. Customer
satisfaction is often viewed as a cumulative experience, measured as the general
level of satisfaction based on the overall experience with the firm (e.g.,
Garbarino & Johnson, 1999). So CRM tactics, implemented across multiple
channels, can form a cumulative customer experience.
Silk and Kalwani (1982) suggest that fairness and ease in the ordering process
affect consumer satisfaction after purchase. If customers feel they are being
treated fairly and feel easy with the ordering process, they are more likely to be
satisfied with the products. Extending this finding to the e-commerce context,
one can suggest that user interface and usability are factors that contribute to
good customer satisfaction. There exists a high correlation between perceived

12   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
convenience and customer satisfaction with the products and services sold on
the Internet (Lee & Ahn, 1999). For e-commerce, low price, low asset
specificity, and clear description are important product and service character-
istics that attract online shoppers.
Therefore, an e-commerce site should incorporate the following features to
build customer satisfaction:
•
Wide variety and lower price products;
•
Useful descriptions and price comparison for products and services;
•
Self-service capability;
•
Self-help, FAQ, and help contact services;
•
Easy-to-use transaction interface;
•
Easy-to-understand text, images, and animation to communicate with the
customers;
•
Accurate information about products and services to support pre-pur-
chase services;
•
Company details;
•
Search engines for information searching;
•
Product reviews and discussion;
•
Different payment and delivery options;
•
Recommendations for alternate product and services;
•
Comparable products and services with lower prices;
•
Purchase and delivery confirmation;
•
Follow-up e-mail notification for product and service status;
•
An order tracking method;
•
Follow-up surveys for customer feedback; and
•
Easy options for product return.
The quality of information and interface design for information search on an e-
commerce site helps to draw new customers. For transaction and service
support, good interface design and usability of the shopping cart are critical to
a customer’s shopping or service experience.  Availability of timely post-sales

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   13
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
support, such as order tracking and response to customer inquiry, contributes
to customer satisfaction and retention.
Customization
Customization in CRM refers to the entire marketing mix – communications,
products, services, processes, prices, and channels. Lee and Shu (2001)
emphasize that the level of customization helps to shape customers’ perception
of quality in products and services. By tailoring products and services to meet
individual customers’ needs and preferences, a company can fulfill and exceed
customer expectations and increase their perception of product quality. By
using the ACSI model, Lee and Shu (2001) demonstrate how the perceived
quality and perceived value of a product contribute to customer satisfaction in
a multi-layer fashion.
Mass customization tactics, such as personalized direct e-mails and product
recommendations, are essential to eCRM. As acquiring information about
customers is essential to relationship marketing, the Internet technology has
made it easier for companies to collect data about customer profiles and online
activities. Winer (2001) emphasizes that building a customer database is the
first step towards an eCRM solution. His model involves the following steps:
(1) build a database of customer activities, (2) analyze customer activities, (3)
determine the target customers, (4) develop tool to target these customers, (5)
implement privacy issues, and (6) define metrics for measuring the success of
CRM program. After understanding the customer activities and selecting target
customers, the company can proceed to creating products and services.
Companies should characterize their customers as product makers rather than
product takers.
Personalization techniques can be used to customize online interactions with e-
commerce customers. Common techniques involve collaborative filtering, rule-
based, and intelligent agent-based methods. Amazon.com has applied these
techniques not only for pre-sales product recommendations, but also for one
of their loyalty programs in the form of Gold Box special promotions. A
registered customer has opportunities to receive discount promotions in a timed
presentation, but only once. The Gold Box service remembers what items have
already been shown to the same customer. Customers can also configure
products and services that they are interested in purchasing. For example,
Peapod.com allows customers to create personalized shopping lists, which, in

14   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
turn, enables customers to tailor their shopping experiences and product
choices. These forms of customization allow companies to capitalize on
customer-initiated communications and interactions. In the long run, both
firm-based and customer-initiated customization approaches can lead to
cumulative positive customer experience with the products, services, and the
Web site.
An e-commerce site can customize its content, products, and services by
providing the following features:
•
A personal page display, such as “my bookstore” and “my news box”;
•
Self profile and preference update with self-management capability;
•
Self-help, FAQ, and question posting capability;
•
Recommendations for products and services based on the customer’s
personal profile;
•
Customer purchase history, delivery history, and account status;
•
Incentives according to customer preference; and
•
Personal services – remembering the customer’s delivery address, per-
sonal reminders, previous search results, contact lists of friends and
families, and so forth.
Customization features can be implemented in all three phases of CRM. To
support pre-sales activities, customization can be applied by providing custom-
ers with product recommendations and the capabilities to create their own
profiles and preferences. Customized order transaction processes facilitate the
sales phase. Features that help to customize post-purchase support, such as e-
mail promotion notifications, delivery tracking, and self-management capability
for updating profiles and preferences are important for customer retention.
Trust
Trust is one of the most widely examined and confirmed constructs in relation-
ship marketing research. There is the notion that trust constitutes the belief,
attitude, or expectation of a party that the relationship partner’s behavior or its
outcomes will benefit the trusting party itself (Andaleeb & Anwar, 1996). Trust
is built on the level of risk, which can be determined by network infrastructure,

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   15
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Web and mobile applications, customer privacy issues, security of data
transfer, and system authentication (Lee & Ahn, 1999). On one hand, easy-to-
use system interfaces, consistent and complete information, reliable connectiv-
ity, and sufficient customer support ensure customer trust. On the other hand,
a high level of perceived risk associated with these system features may result
in customer hesitation for performing transactions via the mobile channel (Chan
& Fang, 2003).
Online trust is based on the user’s Internet experience. Reputation contributes
to “trust belief” and “trust intention”. Thus, third-party endorsement and icons
placed on e-commerce sites can affect consumer trust (McKnight, Choudhury
& Kacmar, 2000). Trust is “the willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the
actions of another party based on the expectations that the other will perform
a particular action important to the trustor, irrespective of the ability to monitor
or control the other party” (Mayer, Davis & Schooman, 1995, p. 712). This
definition accentuates vulnerability, which is not just risk-taking but the
willingness to take risks.  Ambrose and Johnson (1999) have applied this
definition to the online retailing environment. In this environment, the absence
of face-to-face interaction between the buyer and the seller increases the
buyer’s vulnerability. Customer perceptions of a site’s assurance of privacy
and security influence trust. Thus, a high level of perceived risk affects a
customer’s intention to carry out the transactions online.
Trust also affects customer satisfaction and customer loyalty, and it directly
influences the effectiveness of the eCRM strategy. Therefore, an e-commerce
site needs to build customer trust by incorporating the following features:
•
Consistent product and service information;
•
Product information that embodies brand equity, transience, quality,
variety, availability, as well as competitiveness and options for customization;
•
Price information and payment options;
•
A privacy statement to guarantee that customer information is kept
confidential;
•
Security measurement such as a digital certificate, public-key cryptogra-
phy, authenticity, integrity, confidentiality, non-repudiation, and third-
party verify signature, and SSL;
•
Proper authentication mechanism;

16   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Secure payment and transmission; and
•
Help desk support.
Trust features are important to all three phases of CRM. Privacy statements
should be thorough, and authentication mechanisms as well as third-party
signatures should be prominently demonstrated for new customers. Secure
transactions are essential for bringing back repeat customers.
Applying the Framework
To explore the applicability of the proposed framework, we conducted a
cognitive walkthrough of e-commerce sites and their corresponding mobile
sites for the Palm OS platform.  We also developed a checklist (in Appendix)
based on the framework to guide the cognitive walkthrough. The choice of Palm
Factors\ Phases 
Acquisition 
Sales/Service 
Retention 
Customer Loyalty 
(W) Online book 
community 
(C) Coupon available for 
redeem 
(W) Gold box 
(C) E-mail for purchase 
discount and promotional free 
shipping 
Branding 
(W) Online community for 
review and discussion 
(W) Purchase certificate 
(W) Used books and price 
info to facilitate other 
buying options 
(C) One-click order  
(M) Simple product browsing 
access anywhere anytime 
(W) Amazon credit card 
Customer Satisfaction 
(C) A Variety of products 
are available. 
(W) Promotion product - 
books, music, special deals, 
electronic, games 
(W) Price comparison 
(C) Book search 
(W) New hard copy, paper 
back and used books are 
available with price 
comparison. 
(C) Book review 
(C) Cross sales - customer 
also buy items) 
(C) E-mail confirmation 
(W) Purchase tracking  
(W) Full online support, FAQ 
and contact number 
(M)Simple FAQ 
Customization 
(W) News, preferences, and 
personal recommendation 
display on the first page 
(W) Personal wish list 
(W) Provide baby and 
wedding registry services 
(C) Require sign on for 
purchase 
(C) Access profile from the 
web 
(C) Able to modify delivery 
information 
(W) Provide friend and family 
occasion reminder 
(W) Personal order and 
personal recommendation 
available at sign in 
(M) Simple book purchase 
link on top of the first page 
Trust 
(C) Security guarantee on 
personal profile 
(C) Sign on required for 
purchase 
(C) Security indication 
(C) Profile is saved on the 
Web 
(C) Address and purchase 
information can be modified  
(W) Preference can only be 
modified on the Web 
(C) Common Feature
(W) Web Feature Only
(M) Mobile Feature Only
Table 2. Summary of eCRM and mCRM – Amazon.com (books)

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   17
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Factors\ Phases 
Acquisition 
Sales/Service 
Retention 
Customer Loyalty 
 
(C) Mileage plus program is 
associated with the customer 
purchase 
(W) Redeem award 
(C) Mileage Plus summary 
(C) Award availability 
(C) Upgrade status 
 
Branding 
(C) Flight schedule and 
arrival/departure detail  
(W) About United, united 
product and service, contact 
United 
 
(M) Upgrade, travel awards, 
and red carpet club are on 
the first page 
Customer 
Satisfaction 
(W) Promotion travel 
packages, special deals, and 
cruise  
(W) Price comparison  
(W) Spanish version 
support 
(W) Service information 
(W) Company details 
 
(C) Book/purchase a flight 
(C) Flight availability  
(W) Seat selection  
(W) Detailed price 
comparison 
(W) Electronic and non-
electronic tickets  
(M) Only electronic tickets 
(C) My itinerary  
(C) Flight status  
(C) Flight paging request 
registration  
 
Customization 
(W) After sign on, 
preference page display 
with personal preference of 
price alert 
(C) Sign on or fill in mileage 
plus member number is 
necessary for both platforms. 
(W) E-mail promotion 
registration and preference 
change 
(M)Book a flight, flight 
status, my itinerary, travel 
awards are on the first page 
Trust 
(W) Sign up can only 
perform on Web site 
(W) Customer address, 
profile and form of payment 
can only be changed on Web 
site 
(C) Both platforms indicate 
secure transaction 
 
(C) Profile is saved on the 
Web 
(M) Required to be mileage 
plus customer with current 
profile for access 
Table 3. Summary of eCRM and mCRM – United Airline (Flight)
(C) Common Feature
(W) Web Feature Only
(M) Mobile Feature Only
OS version of mobile sites allowed us to evaluate a wider range of CRM
features, because Palm handheld devices have relatively larger screens and
support more interface features than WAP phones do. On the Palm.Net site,
we downloaded the wireless applications for selected sites onto the Palm VII
device prior to the evaluation.
For illustration purpose, this chapter includes three examples — Amazon.com,
United Airlines (united.com), and USA Today (usatoday.com). These three
sites represent the retail, travel, and news portal industries. Tables 2, 3, and 4
summarize observations generated from the three cognitive walkthrough stud-
ies. Common features appearing on both the Web and the mobile channels are
noted as “C”. Features only available on the Web channel or the mobile channel
are noted as “W” or “M” respectively.
From these three examples, we observe that eCRM supports all three phases
of firm-customer interactions — acquisition of new customers, sales/services,

18   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
and retention of existing customers through cross-sell, sales promotion, and
loyalty programs. In contrast, mCRM focuses primarily on supporting and
retaining existing e-commerce customers; little attention is focused on acquisi-
tion of new customers.
Mobile sites require customers or subscribers to register online first, particu-
larly for sites involving transactions (Figure 1). It is not easy for new customers
to initiate relationships with a company on the mobile site. However, news sites,
Table 4. Summary of eCRM and mCRM – USA Today
(C) Common Feature
(W) Web Feature Only
(M) Mobile Feature Only
Factors\ Phases 
Acquisition 
Sales/Service 
Retention 
Customer Loyalty 
(W) Provide incentive for 
online subscriber 
(W) Online subscribe with 
American Express, earn 
member reward  
 
(W) With sign on id, the 
Web site recognizes 
subscriber 
 
 
Branding 
(C) Well known and 
reputation newspaper 
(W) Online archive search  
(W) Can online purchase 
full archive USAToday 
article or get free version 
of the brief highlight 
 
 
Customer Satisfaction 
(W) Attractive front screen 
design 
(C) One click to the latest 
news (highlights) 
(W) Search engine 
available 
(C) About USAToday 
(W) Provide quick tour and 
sample complete online 
paper for new customer 
 
(W) Search engine 
available 
(C) News display by 
category 
(W) Online stock quote 
inquiry 
(W) More real time news 
update  
(W) Provide online 
subscription process 
(W) FAQ and feedback are 
available 
(W) Provide electronic version 
of USAToday complete copy 
online (with subscription) 
(W) Online report with 
delivery problem 
(W) Confirmation to 
subscription 
Customization 
(W) Customize to favorite 
columnist 
(W) Customize local 
weather display 
(W) Can subscribe as a 
gift to someone else 
(W) Online profile and 
preference management 
(W) Online address and 
password maintenance 
(W) Current subscriber can 
retrieve past issues of paper 
online 
(W) Online and e-mail 
reminder for when 
subscription is up 
 
Trust 
(W) Provide quick tour and 
sample complete online 
paper for new customer 
(W) Subscriber is provided 
with decure login 
authentication 
(W) Partner with American 
Express 
 
(W) Provide multiple 
payment options 
(W) Online bill pay 
services 
(W) Confirmation to 
subscription 
(W) E-mail notification for 
subscription 

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   19
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
like USA Today, due to the time-sensitive nature of their services, seem better
positioned to attract new customers. For all three sites, the mobile channel
provides limited customer support. Other than limited product and service
information, customer self-help and self-configuration delivery are not avail-
able on the mobile site. Mobile customers need to refer problems or questions
back to the Web site.
In general, the mobile site emphasizes information delivery. Transaction and
registration functions are carried out on the Web sites. Among the three sites
illustrated in this chapter, the mobile site of USA Today, because of its focus
on content, offers the least amount of services for retention purpose. In
comparison, the mobile sites for Amazon and United Airlines include more
mobile services for sales transaction and post-sales support. United Airlines
provides a more complete range of mobile services to meet the needs of its
mobile customers.
Therefore, the mobile channel supplements, rather than substitutes, the Internet
channel for supporting and retaining existing e-commerce customers. mCRM
targets existing customers who are: (a) frequent users with a high purchase rate
Figure 1. Web customer registration interface and mobile logon
authentication for United.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Web Customer Registration Interface and Mobile Logon Authentication for United.com 
 
 
 

20   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
and strong brand loyalty, and (b) in need of “on the move” services and
spontaneous shopping. As illustrated in Figure 2, United Airlines’ mobile site
contains the essential information and features for a frequent traveler who is
already a registered Mileage Plus member. Figure 3 shows that customers who
chose to access Amazon’s mobile site must overcome many interface barriers
to access the mobile services.  These customers may already have a strong
commitment to the brand of Amazon.
Figure 2. Web and mobile front screen for United.com
Figure 3. Web and mobile book search and book matching display for
Amazon.com

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   21
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Research Directions
Drawing from the literature review and the analysis of eCRM and mCRM
presented in this chapter, we identify several implications and issues for future
research.
The Relationship between eCRM and mCRM
A company’s e-commerce Web site serves as the primary channel for building
and managing relationships with e-customers. The current state of wireless
communication technology limits the role of the mobile channel in supporting
customer needs. It seems more effective to use the mobile channel for retention
of a small number of frequent and loyal customers who have mobile needs. For
e-commerce sites that emphasize complex transactions and interactions, a
simpler version of these interactions and information delivery should be
provided for mobile users.  Companies should use the profile and preference
data from registered frequent users in designing appropriate mobile services.
Further research is needed to validate the relationship between eCRM and
mCRM in several areas:
•
How are eCRM and mCRM features implemented in other sectors of
online retailing, service, and content portals? How are these features
implemented across three CRM phases?
•
What services are provided on both channels? How consistently are these
services implemented on both channels?
•
What are characteristics of best practice for eCRM and mCRM?
•
Are mCRM features most often implemented for retention purpose?
•
How do companies map their mCRM to different wireless technology
platforms?
Coordination of CRM across Multiple Channels
Beyond the Internet and the mobile channels, companies should develop a
synergistic approach to coordinating CRM strategies across multiple channels
in order to optimize customer satisfaction. For example, a hotel could provide

22   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
a Web site for guests to conduct product and service search, compare prices
and services, and make reservations. Registered guests can use their mobile
devices to check and update reservations, and for advance room check-in
when they are on the road. The hotel could send e-mail alerts and location-
based information according to the guest’s profile and preference. These
interactions could be coordinated with the traditional in-hotel services to offer
the frequent guests an integrated experience. Further research should examine
multi-channel CRM in several areas:
•
How should the firm-customer interactions be mapped across the entire
process of customer life cycle to identify touch points for interactions?
•
What criteria should be considered to guide the process mapping and
requirement analysis?
•
How could the information gathered from different channels be integrated
to form a comprehensive customer profile?
The Tradeoff among CRM Factors
The five CRM factors emphasized in the proposed framework seem to play
different roles in eCRM and mCRM; each factor also affects the firm-customer
interactions differently. Our limited examples show that customer loyalty,
customer satisfaction, and customization factors are more prominently pre-
sented on transaction-based mobile sites than branding and trust factors. These
five CRM factors are inter-related. Future research should empirically examine
their individual and collective impact of these factors on eCRM and mCRM.
Researchers should construct and test the underlying model in the mobile
environment to examine which factors are most important to mobile customers.
Findings on specific mCRM features for transaction support and retention will
improve the understanding of specific CRM tactics.
•
How do the five CRM factors relate to one another in supporting customer
acquisition, shopping experience, and customer retention?
•
Which factors are most important for mCRM?
•
Which factors are most important for eCRM?

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   23
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Are loyalty, customization, and customer satisfaction factors more impor-
tant than trust and branding factors for mobile customers?
•
What kind of trade-offs among CRM factors should be considered to
strengthen long-term customer relationship?
mCRM and Customer Acquisition
Our analysis reveals that the mobile channel currently plays a limited role in
customer acquisition. Advantages of location- and context-based marketing
and mobile commerce remain conceptually sound but are not substantiated.
Location-aware advertising is primarily text based. However, the introduction
of third-generation mobile network and multimedia-enabled mobile devices
may change the mobile commerce environment. A recent study (Oh & Xu,
2003), an exploratory simulation, shows that multimedia location-aware ad-
vertising messages led to favorable attitudes and increased intention to reuse
the mobile advertising service. More creative mobile services for attracting new
customers will emerge. In the meantime, researchers will need to address:
•
How could location-aware and context-aware technology be effectively
used to attract new customers?
•
What are key concerns of new customers in selecting mobile commerce
sites?
•
How can multimedia technology and short text messages be best designed
to attract new mobile customers?
Usability and Personalization Issues for mCRM
As technology advances, a wider range of wireless applications may be
introduced. Future research on usability for wireless applications (Chan et al.,
2002; Chan & Fang, 2003) and personalized content adaptation (Zhang, 2003;
Zhou & Chan, 2003) may contribute to more effective use of the mobile Web
for relationship building with customers. Unique mobile features appear to be
implemented mostly by content adaptation so the mobile users can access
essential services and information more efficiently on their handheld devices.
Future research will need to address:

24   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
How could content and services be personalized for CRM on the mobile
platform? To what extent are current personalization techniques useful to
mCRM?
•
Would personalization be more important for mCRM in terms of informa-
tion content, transaction support, or services?
•
How does the flow of shopping experience using wireless devices differ
from the online experience? What are the implications of such differences
on interface design?
References
Aaker, D.A. (1991). Measuring brand equity across products and markets.
California Management Review, 38(3), 102-120.
Aaker, D. (1996). Managing brand equity: Capitalizing on the value of a
brand name. New York, NY: Free Press.
Achim, W., Thio, M., & Helfert, G. (2001). The impact of satisfaction, trust,
and relationship value on commitment: Theoretical considerations and
empirical results. In D. Ford, S. Leek, P. Naude, T. Ritter & R. Turnbull
(Eds.), IMP Conference, Vol. CD. Bath.
Alanen, J. & Aution, E. (2003). Mobile business services: A strategic perspec-
tive. In B. Mennecke and T. Strader (Eds.), Mobile commerce: Tech-
nology, theory, and applications (pp. 162-184).
Ambrose, P., & Johnson, G. (1999). A trust based model of buying behavior
in electronic retailing. Proceeding of 1998 Americas Conference.
Anckar, B., & D’Incau, D. (2002). Value creation in mobile commerce:
Findings from a consumer survey. Journal of Information Technology
Theory & Application, 4, 43-64.
Andaleeb, S. & Anwar, S. (1996). Factors influencing customer trust in
salespersons in a developing country. Journal of International Market-
ing, 4(4), 35-52.
Anderson, E. & Sullivan, N. (1993). The antecedents and consequences of
customer satisfaction for firms. Marketing Science, 12(2), 125-143.
Burnstine, D.C. (1980). BIAIT: An emerging management engineering
discipline. Working paper.

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   25
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chan, S., & Fang, X. (2003). Mobile commerce and usability. In K. Siau &
E. Lim (Eds.), Advances in mobile commerce technologies (pp. 235-
257). Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing.
Chan, S., Fang, X., Brzezinski, J., Zhou, Y., Xu, S., & Lam, J. (2002).
Usability for mobile commerce across multiple form factors. Journal of
Electronic Commerce Research, 3(2), 187-199.
Chen, L., & Sukpani, N. (1998). Assessing consumers’ involvement in Internet
purchasing. Proceedings of the Fourth Americas Conference on
Information Systems, 281-283.
Cho, Y., Im, Hiltz, R. & Fjermestad, J. (2001). Causes and outcomes of online
customer complaining behavior: Implications for customer relationship
management (CRM). Proceedings of the Seventh Americas Confer-
ence on Information Systems, 900-907.
Dekimpe, M.G., Steenkamp, J., Mellens, M., & Vanden. A. (1997). Decline
and variability in brand loyalty. International Journal of Research in
Marketing, 14(5), 405-420.
Dick, A., & Basu, K. (1994). Customer loyalty: Toward an integrated
conceptual framework. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
22(2), 99-113.
Ernst & Young. (2001). Global online retailing: An Ernst & Young special
report. Retrieved September 5, 2003, from http://www.ey.com/global/
Content.nsf/International/Industries_-_RCP_-_Global_Supply_Chain_
Survey .
Evans, J., & Laskin, R. (1994). The relationship marketing process: A
conceptualization and application. Industrial Marketing Management,
23(5), 439-452.
Forrester Research. (2003). The state of online retailing 6.0. Retrieved
September 5, 1993, from http://www.shop.org/press/03/051503.html.
Fournier, S., & Mick, D. (1999). Rediscovering satisfaction. Journal of
Marketing, 63(4), 5-28.
Garbarino, E., & Johnson, M.S. (1999). The different roles of satisfaction,
trust, and commitment in customer relationships. Journal of Marketing,
63(2), 70-87.
Hennig-Thurau, T., & Hansen, U. (2000). Relationship marketing – Some
reflections on the state of the art of the relational concept.  In T. Hennig-
Thurau & U. Hansen (Eds.), Relationship marketing: Gaining com-

26   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
petitive advantage through customer satisfaction and customer
retention (pp. 3-27). New York: Springer.
Hennig-Thurau, T., & Klee, A. (1997). The impact of customer satisfaction
and relationship quality on customer retention: A critical reassessment and
model development.  Psychology & Marketing, 14(8), 737-765.
Hoffman, D., Thomas, P., & Peralta, M. (1999). Building consumer trust
online. Communication of ACM, 41(3), 44-51.
Kannan, P., Chang, A., & Whinston, A. (2001). Wireless commerce: Market-
ing issues and possibilities. Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii Interna-
tional Conference on System Sciences.  Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Comp
Soc.
Lee, D., & Ahn, J. (1999). An exploratory study on the different factors in
customer satisfaction with e-commerce between in the United States and
in Korea. Proceedings of the Second International Conference on
Telecommunication and Electronic Commerce.
Lee, S., & Shu, W. (2001). An integrative and complementarity-based model
for the design and adoption of customer relationship management tech-
nologies. Proceedings of the Seventh American Conference on Infor-
mation Systems, 854-856.
Lowenstein, M. (1997). The customer loyalty pyramid. Westport, CT:
Quorum Books.
Mayer, R., Davis, J., & Schoorman, F. (1995). An integrative model of
organizational trust. Academy of Management Review, 20(3), 709-
734.
McKnight, D., Choudhury, V., & Kacmar, C. (2002). The impact of the initial
consumer trust on intention to transact with a Web site: A trust building
model. Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 11(3-4), 297-323.
Mennecke, B., & Strader, T. (2001). Where in the world on the Web does
location matter? A framework for location based services in m-com-
merce. Proceedings of the Seventh Americas Conference on Informa-
tion Systems, 450-455.
Moon, Y. (2002). Interactive technologies and relationship marketing strate-
gies. Marketing strategies business fundamental series. Boston: Harvard
Business School Publishing.
Oh, L., & Xu, H. (2003). Effects of multimedia on mobile consumer behavior:
An empirical study of location-aware advertising. Proceedings of Twenty-
fourth International Conference on Information Systems, 679-691.

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   27
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Oliver, R., & Swan, J. (1989). Equity and disconfirmation perceptions as
influences on merchant product satisfaction. Journal of Consumer
Research, 16, 372-383.
Papadopoulou, P., Andrew, A., Kanellis, P., & Martakos, D. (2001). Trust
and relationship building in electronic commerce. Internet Research:
Electronic Networking Applications and Policy, 11, 322-332.
Papers, D., & Rogers, M. (1993). The one to one future: Building relation-
ships one customer at a time. NY: Currency Doubleday.
Reichheld, F. (1996). The loyalty effect: The hidden force behind growth,
profits, and lasting value. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Reichheld, F., & Sasser, E., Jr. (1990). Zero defection: Quality comes to
services. Harvard Business Review, 68(5), 105-111.
Romano, N., Jr. (2001). An agenda for electronic commerce customer
relationship management research. Proceedings of the Seventh Ameri-
cas Conference in Information Systems, 831-833.
Shim, J.P., Bekkering, E., & Hall, L. (2002). Empirical findings on perceived
value of mobile commerce as a distributed channel. Proceedings of the
Eighth Americas Conference on Information Systems, 1835-1837.
Silk, A., & Kalwani, M. (1982). Measuring influence in organizational pur-
chase decisions.  Journal of Marketing Research, 43(2), 165-181.
Strauss, B. (2000). Using new media for customer interaction: A challenge for
relationship marketing. In T. Hennig-Thurau & U. Hansen (Eds.), Rela-
tionship marketing: Gaining competitive advantage through cus-
tomer satisfaction and customer retention (pp. 3-27). New York:
Springer.
Varian, H., Litan, R., Elder, A., & Shutter, J. (2002). The net impact study: The
projected economic benefits of the Internet in the United States, United
Kingdom, France and Germany. Retrieved August 25, 2003, from http:/
/www.netimpactstudy.com
Varshney, U. (2003). Mobile wireless information systems: Applications,
networks, and research problems. Communications of the Association
for Information Systems, 12(11), 155-166.
Varshney, U., & Vetter, R. (2001). A framework for the emerging mobile
commerce applications. Proceedings of the Thirty-fourth Hawaii In-
ternational Conference on System Sciences. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE
Comp Soc.

28   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Winer, R. (2001). A framework for customer relationship management.
California Management Review, 43(4), 89-105.
Zhang, D. (2003). Delivery of personalized and adaptive content to mobile
devices: A framework and enabling technology. Communications of the
Association for Information Systems, 12(13), 183-202.
Zhou, Y., & Chan, S. (2003). Adaptive content delivery over the mobile Web.
Proceedings of the Ninth Americas Conference in Information Sys-
tems, 2009-2019.

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   29
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Customer Loyalty 
 
L1 
Does the site provide enough information about the loyalty program? 
 
L2 
Does the site provide ways to join the loyalty program? 
 
L3 
Does the site provide a personal account?  
 
L4 
Does the site provide information about purchase history and shipping status? 
 
L5 
Does the site provide personalized services for repeat customers?  
 
L6 
Does the site provide frequent buyer incentives (discount or personal upgrade 
services)?  
 
L7 
Does the site provide a special page for status customers – Status page, upgrade 
options, redeem procedures, and special discount / promotion?  
 
L8 
Does the site provide special services for frequent buyers – no cost delivery, priority 
seating, or 2 clicks checkout?  
 
L9 
Does the site actively collect feedback from frequent customers?  
Branding 
 
B1 
Does the site have large customer community and provide chat room, discussion 
sessions, and product reviews? 
 
B2 
Does the site provide special service that differentiates it from other sites? 
 
B3 
Does the site provide exclusive brand name products?  
 
B4 
Does this site include exclusive interfaces to support order processing? 
 
B5 
Does the site provide supplementary services, which are associated with the 
traditional business services and high barrier of entry: Banking, Ameritrade, and 
American Express Credit Card? 
Customer Satisfaction: 
 
S1 
Does the site provide good variety and lower price products? 
 
S2 
Does the site provide good descriptions and price comparison for product and 
services (extensive feature description and product performance)? 
 
S3 
Does the site provide self-management capability? 
 
S4 
Is the transaction interface design easy to understand? 
 
S5 
Does the site provide good text, images, and animation to communicate with their 
customers? 
 
S6 
Does the site provide pre-sale services – accuracy product and services information? 
 
S7 
Does the site provide company detail? 
 
S8 
Does the site provide search engine for information searching? 
 
S9 
Does the site provide product review or discussion groups? 
 
S10 
Does the site provide different payment options? 
 
S11 
Does the site provide different delivery options? 
 
S12 
Does the site provide alternate product and services suggestions? 
 
S13 
Does the site provide comparable product and services with lower price? 
 
S14 
Does the site provide confirmation with purchase and delivery? 
 
S15 
Does the site provide self-help, FAQ, and help contact services? 
 
S16 
Does the site provide follow-up email notification for product and services status? 
 
S17 
Does the site provide order-tracking method? 
 
S18 
Does the site provide follow-up survey for customer feedback? 
 
S19 
Does the site provide easy way for product defective or unwanted return? 
Appendix
CRM Feature Checklist

30   Chan & Lam
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Customization 
 
C1 
Does the site provide personal page display? 
 
C2 
Does the site provide self-profile and preference update (self-management 
capability)? 
 
C3 
Does the site provide self-help, FAQ, and question posting capability? 
 
C4 
Does the site provide recommendations for product and services based on personal 
profile? 
 
C5 
Does the site provide customer purchase history, delivery history, and account 
status? 
 
C6 
Does the site provide incentives according to customer preference? 
 
C7 
Does the site provide personal services – remembering delivery address, personal 
remainder, previous search result, friends and family contact list, etc?  
Trust 
 
T1 
Does the site present consistent information? 
 
T2 
Does the site present product information with brand equity, transience, quality, 
variety, customization, competitiveness and availability? 
 
T3 
Are the price and payment options available? 
 
T4 
Does the site present a privacy statement to guarantee that customer information 
confidential? 
 
T5 
Does the site present security measurements such as: digital certificate, public-key 
cryptography, authenticity, integrity, confidentiality, non-repudiation, attributes of 
the system (benevolence, competency, predictability), third party verifies signature, 
and SSL? 
 
T6 
Does the site present the proper authentication mechanism? 
 
T7 
Is secure payment (payment gateway, firewalls and encryption) and transmission 
available? 
 
T8 
Does the site provide help desk support? 
 

Customer Relationship Management on Internet and Mobile Channels   31
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Section II
Wireless
Technologies
and
Mobile
Commerce

32   Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter II
Presenting Large and
Complex Information
Sets on
Mobile Handhelds
B. Karstens, University of Rostock, Germany
R. Rosenbaum, University of Rostock, Germany
H. Schumann, University of Rostock, Germany
Abstract
The opportunity to access information at any time and any place caused
a boom in the development of small mobile devices in recent years. Due
to their application, these handhelds become smaller and handier, which
leads to new challenges in human-computer interaction. Due to limited
resources of these devices new paradigms for information presentation
and interaction facilities are needed. We take this into account by
applying concepts for interaction and display of information from the
field of information visualization to mobile pocket-sized devices. We focus

Presenting Large and Complex Information Sets on Mobile Handhelds   33
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
on concrete problems caused by presenting huge images and large
hierarchies in such environments. Moreover, we introduce an effective
technique for browsing the World Wide Web via mobile handhelds. The
presented techniques offer an improved support in navigation, orientation
and interaction that enables the user to browse, interpret and handle
presented information much more easily.
Introduction
Small mobile devices have become more powerful and popular in recent years,
and are used in different application areas. Typical examples are personal
mobile navigation systems. However, in the future, the wireless and mobile
access of data and information via little handhelds will become as popular as
browsing the World Wide Web. Since mobile handhelds suffer from limited
resources, like screen space, interaction facilities and computational power,
new paradigms for presenting and exploring complex information on such
devices are needed.
On the other hand, in recent years the visualization of complex information
spaces has evolved to an important and innovative area in computer graphics.
A variety of novel visualization approaches and frameworks have been
developed and proposed. Nevertheless, these approaches were designed for
stationary devices, and using them for mobile handhelds leads to unsolved
problems.
This chapter focuses on the presentation of complex information on pocket-
sized devices. Information can be represented graphically or by abstract data
sets. Due to the reason that both types require different treatment for presen-
tation purposes, we want to discuss them separately.
Graphical information can be described in many ways, for example by text,
images, video, or combinations of them. To discuss typical problems, we limit
our considerations to one main and frequently used class: still images. Here, we
focus on raster graphics and show how special presentation techniques can be
used to solve the problem of exploring large images on small displays (third
section).
Non-graphical, for example, abstract information, can also be described by a
wide range of representations. However, the main challenge for representation
is to support the navigation and orientation in often complex information

34   Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
spaces. This can be done by presenting the basic structures of these information
spaces. We discuss this topic by two typical examples in the fourth section.
We bring these both basic approaches together by considering one typical,
well-known and widely used application: browsing the Web via mobile devices
(the fifth section). Future work and conclusions close our contribution in the last
section.
To give the interested reader an overview of existing and basal work in this area,
we briefly describe the basics in the following section.
Current Problems and State-of-the-Art
Although hardware of mobile devices is steadily improved, the main limitations
are still the same and can be stated as lack of
•
Screen size/resolution and
•
Processing power.
Moreover, due to the size of mobile devices, which might become even smaller
in the future, these two limitations seem unlikely to decrease during the next few
years. On the other hand, available information sets are increasing from day to
day. Therefore, new strategies for data access, presentation, and interaction
must be developed in order to present such complex information on mobile
handhelds.
One possible strategy is the use of advanced information visualization tech-
niques. Although the approaches in the field of information visualization have
mostly been designed for stationary devices, they focus on the same problem:
presentation of huge amounts of information on limited screen areas. Mainly
three concepts are applied to solve the problem:
•
Efficient use of screen space by special presentation techniques.
So-called FOCUS & CONTEXT-TECHNIQUES are a popular example of this
approach (see Keahey, 1998; Leung & Apperley, 1994). These tech-
niques combine a focus view, which shows a part of the layout at a high

Presenting Large and Complex Information Sets on Mobile Handhelds   35
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
degree of detail, and a context view, which presents the whole information
in lower detail to provide an overview. Depending on the distance from the
focus, the context is distorted in respect of space requirements. These
concepts can be used for information presentation on mobile handhelds as
well (Björk et al., 1999; Buyukokten et al., 2000; Fishers et al., 1997).
To avoid distortion, focus and context can be displayed in two different
images. This method is called OVERVIEW & DETAIL (Card et al., 1999). We
apply these principles in the third section.
•
Visualizing the structure of huge information sets to support navigation
and orientation.
The visualization of an underlying information structure is interesting,
especially for mobile environments. Since the screen space of mobile
handhelds is very limited, we can present relatively small parts of informa-
tion only. Thus, it is necessary to support the search for special information
to avoid extensive scrolling and panning. This can be done by showing the
relationships between information objects. A number of customized
methods to visualize the information structure have been developed. We
can distinguish between methods presenting hierarchical structures and
methods for more general classes of networks. Hierarchical methods are
well capable for mobile handhelds, since the number of presented nodes
(or information, generally spoken) can be controlled effectively (see the
fourth section).
•
Reducing the amount of presented information in an appropriate way
by using information hiding.
A basic approach of information hiding is the FILTER FISHEYE VIEW
(Furnas, 1981), where information is hidden based on the distance to a
point of interest. Another example is the interesting approach of Taivalsaari
(1999), which can be considered as an abstraction of a certain set of
information objects. Thus, the visibility of information is controlled by a
radial movement of the objects into or out of the EVENT HORIZON. Further
examples for information hiding are, for example, SECTION OUTLINING
based on text filtering and generation of abstracts (Brown & Weihl,
1996), or POWER BROWSER (Buyukokten et al., 2000) with image removal
or scaling. However, information hiding also requires suitable interaction
mechanisms to explore the hidden information. In the fifth section we
describe how these concepts can be used, extended, and combined with
interaction techniques to browse the World Wide Web.

36   Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
We use these concepts to display complex information on mobile handhelds as
follows:
•
For large images, we apply certain presentation techniques,
•
for abstract data, we apply methods from structure visualization, and
•
information hiding is used to enable an appropriate Web browsing.
The introduced techniques, now discussed in more detail, offer a powerful
approach for information presentation and can be used to display complex
information sets on mobile devices.
Presenting Graphical Information –
Displaying Large Images
In mobile environments, the size of large images often exceeds the display area
of the user’s output device. There are too many pixels that have to be displayed
eligibly. This problem is related to hitches in information visualization, where the
content of hundreds of thousands of different values has to be represented
suitably. In this section, we want to describe how certain presentation tech-
niques from information visualization can be used to display large images.
The basis of every presentation technique is the transformation of the image
from a logical to a display coordinate system. The transformation function
depends on the used presentation technique and the available display space.
The 2D-logical coordinate system contains the undistorted pixel representation
of the image to display. These image data are mapped into a 2D-display
coordinate system, which represents the available display area of the mobile
device.
Zoom & Pan
The way often used to overcome the limitation of a limited screen size is to pan
the undistorted image depending on the viewer’s current interests. This way of
view and interaction is done in every windows-like GUI, for example, the

Presenting Large and Complex Information Sets on Mobile Handhelds   37
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Windows operating system family, where the actual content is displayed on
the screen in separate windows. Due to the limited size of a single window, a
user has to choose an image area he or she wants to see by adjusting a vertical
and a horizontal slider, which indicate the relative position of the displayed area
to the whole image. By using sliders, the user selects an area in the logical
coordinate system, which has nearly the same size as the available display space
in the display coordinate system. Hence, the transformation function simply
consists in a pixel mapping from one area to another. If panning is used
exclusively, the user has no information about other areas of the image until he
or she pans to these specific regions. Furthermore, after the user leaves his or
her current view, all information about this position is discarded and will be no
longer displayed. So, if the user needs this information any longer, he or she has
to bear this in mind, maybe even together with the current position. This
demands a viewer’s complete attention and is rather complicated, especially on
mobile handhelds. Sometimes this technique is combined with zooming. By
doing so, the selected area in the logical coordinate system has another size than
the display area and the transformation function has to scale the image
information to the available display space. Its actual size depends on the zoom
factor. Zooming allows a hierarchical view of the image and gives the user a
better understanding of the whole image information. Like ordinary panning, it
is easy to implement, but needs more processing power since and additional
scaling must be executed. Furthermore, if the user wants to see an image detail
together with the context this technique cannot be applied.
The RECTANGULAR FISHEYE-VIEW
One of the techniques that can be used in mobile devices to combine the display
of image details with additional context information is the RECTANGULAR
FISHEYE-VIEW (Rauschenbach, 1999). This kind of view belongs to the class
of FOCUS & CONTEXT techniques, which embed the detailed information
directly into the context. To be able to display large parts of the image as
context information, they have to be distorted. FOCUS & CONTEXT techniques
are generally based on the reasonable assumption that the interest of the user
for a specific image region decreases with the distance from the detail. This is
used by the RECTANGLE FISHEYE-VIEW by applying different distortions to
different parts of the image, starting with less distortion near the focus to strong
distortion near the borders of the available display size (Figure 1a). Based on

38   Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Rauschenbach et al. 2001), we suggest three different implementations of the
transformation function with respect to the distortion of the context:
•
uniform context scaling: the complete image in the logical coordinate
system is divided into a focus and a surrounding context belt. To map the
context on the display coordinate system, the context belt is divided into
non-overlapping areas, each of them reaching from the focus to one of the
displays borders. To every context area a uniform scaling is applied,
depending on its size in the logical and display coordinate system. The
uniform scaling is a straightforward and, because of application of the
scaling to large areas, computationally inexpensive way of mapping the
context to the display area. A disadvantage of this method is aroused by
the scaling, which causes a visible discontinuity on the transitions between
focus and context.
•
belt-based context scaling: this more complex implementation of the
transformation function uses more than one context belt to allow a more
adapted scaling of the content. Every belt is created in the same way as
in uniform scaling, apart from the fact that belts near the focus are less
scaled than belts on the displays borders. The use of more than one belt
leads to decreased visual discontinuities, but they cannot be fully re-
moved. Furthermore, it needs more computational power than the uniform
scaling, which cannot be neglected for mobile devices.
•
non-uniform context scaling: With this method the requirement of a
smooth transition from the focus to the context can be achieved. The belt
layout is the same as in the uniform case – a single context belt is used.
Unlike the former case, the context scaling factor is continually decreasing
with increasing distance from the focus. Conceptually, this scaling mode
can be seen as composing the context of a very large number of narrow
context belts, which causes a considerable amount of computational
power and a slow screen refresh if the focus is moved during interaction.
This method leads to the best visual results, but can be inapplicable to
mobile devices with very limited processing power.
As in panning, the focus area is created by a simple pixel mapping, besides the
fact of a conspicuous smaller focus compared to the available display area. The
focus itself obtains its size and relative position in both coordinate systems,
which makes it rather easy to navigate within the image.

Presenting Large and Complex Information Sets on Mobile Handhelds   39
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The RECTANGULAR FISHEYE-VIEW uses most of the available space for the
context display, but in many applications the user is rather interested in a
specific detail than in the context. In such cases other solutions must be found.
The LARGE FOCUS-DISPLAY
Instead of embedding the focus in the context, DETAIL  & OVERVIEW –
techniques (Card et al., 1999) display them separately. We introduce this
concept to display large images and make use of more than one distinct region
to display focus and context. Figure 1b shows the LARGE FOCUS-DISPLAY
(Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann, 2003) as an example of such a technique.
Here, most of the space available at the screen area is used to view the detailed
region of current interest. Only a small part of the representation of the image
in the display coordinate system is used for a context overview. The overview
is a downscaled version of the image, where the currently displayed focus
region is highlighted. This allows a panning-like appearance in combination with
an additional view of the whole content and compensates most of the disadvan-
tages of ordinary panning. Nevertheless, the content region hides some of the
focus area, and this is one of the disadvantages of this method. To overcome
this, the placement of the overview can be chosen interactively, which allows
the complete exploration of the focus region. The transformation function is
quite similar to panning and zooming, which makes it rather fast during
Figure 1. Examples of image display on small devices (I)
1a) Rectangular FishEye-View
   1b) Large Focus-Display

40   Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
interaction. Therefore, it is useful especially for mobile palm-size devices. The
focus area is created as during panning, except the area that is occupied by the
content. This area contains a downscaled version of the whole image in the
logical coordinate system, which is mapped, as during zooming, to a smaller
area in the display coordinate system.
The PERSPECTIVE OVERVIEW-DISPLAY
The PERSPECTIVE OVERVIEW-DISPLAY is another example of a DETAIL  &
OVERVIEW – technique (Figure 2a). Here, two completely distinct areas are
used to display the overview (top) and detail (bottom) of an image. To save
valuable screen space while displaying the overview, the image has been
perspectively warped. The human recognition is quite familiar with the perspec-
tive distortion and can handle it very well, which was the reason for the choice
of such a distortion. Nevertheless, this makes it necessary to enhance the
transformation function to this mapping. The detail is displayed in its original
resolution using the described panning-transformation. This technique enables
the user to look at details of an image area and use the marked detail area on
the overview to navigate through the image. Despite these advantages, there are
two disadvantages: the increased processing effort to compute the perspec-
tively distorted overview, and the unused display space that appears by using
such a distortion.
2a) Perspective Overview-Display        2b) Transparent Focus-Display
Figure 2. Examples of image display on small devices (II)

Presenting Large and Complex Information Sets on Mobile Handhelds   41
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The TRANSPARENT FOCUS-DISPLAY
Lastly, we want to propose a technique that makes use of properties from
FOCUS & CONTEXT – as well as DETAIL  & OVERVIEW – techniques, the
TRANSPARENT-FOCUS-DISPLAY (Fig. 2b). To display the focus/detail and con-
text/overview two different images are used. These images are created by the
transformation function. To display the context, the whole image in the logical
coordinate system is scaled to the available display size. The focus is created
as during panning, but using an equal or smaller size than the available display
size. Afterwards the images are combined by the transformation function by
applying a fixed or time-variant α-blending. This blending can vary from the
solid display to the complete vanishing of the focus and can be adjusted by the
user or periodically by the system. This allows a simultaneous display of two
distinct images, each as large as the available display size. To change the focus
currently displayed, the user can move an area marked on the context view,
which allows an easy and fast interaction. The main disadvantage of this
technique is the increased processing power necessary to compute the α-
blending between the overlapping regions of focus and context. Nevertheless,
to create the initial images for the focus and context only a few transformation
steps are necessary.
Implementation Issues
All techniques described apply already known concepts of information visual-
ization to solve the problem of displaying large images on small screens. The
implementation of these techniques has shown that they also can be used in
mobile environments. However, since mobile handhelds are still limited in their
capabilities, like computing power or memory, a concrete implementation must
use the available resources appropriately. Due to the different ways to present
and to interact with image data on screen, every one of the introduced
techniques uses the resources differently. Especially in environments where
image handling exceeds the available capabilities of the device, this might cause
a long response time during interaction or other unpleasant effects, which
constrain the exploration of the image content. Thus, we want to give some
basic statements for the effective implementation and application of the
proposed display techniques, based on Rosenbaum and Tominski (2003).

42   Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
1.
Panning is faster than scaling:
This statement implies that display techniques that apply mostly panning
to display image areas of interest (e.g., the large focus-display) provide a
faster response time than techniques that scale the displayed image
content to a large extent (e.g., the rectangular fisheye-view).
2.
A simple scaling of raster data is fast but leads to low quality presentations:
There are a number of different methods to scale image content. Never-
theless, there is a correlation between the computation speed and the
quality of the scaled content. If more sophisticated scaling approaches,
like filtered scaling, are applied, the processing speed is in general slower
but leads to more appealing presentations. This conclusion might be used
to provide a fast scaling during interaction and a high quality scaling during
idle time.
3.
Additional manipulation of the image content needs additional time:
Besides scaling, some presentation techniques (e.g., the perspective
overview- or the transparent focus-display) call for additional manipula-
tion of the image content to be displayed. Depending on the kind of
manipulation (e.g., perspective distortion or blending), this also needs
additional processing power to produce the presentation. Such tech-
niques are not useful if mobile devices with very limited processing power,
for example Palm handhelds, are used.
4.
Handling of raster data is faster than of vector data:
We also compared the handling of raster data with vector data and found
that it is in most cases reasonable to work with raster data (Rosenbaum
& Tominski, 2003). This kind of data can be loaded, processed and
displayed very fast. Only if a high quality output is required or the number
of primitives used to describe the image content does not exceed a certain
number, using vector data is the better choice.
Based on these statements, a certain display technique might have an advantage
over others in specific environments and circumstances, and a developer must
carefully select the right approach. Nevertheless, besides the given technical
statements, there are a number of points, like user preferences or a concrete
application, that also influence the choice of an appropriate presentation
technique to display large graphical contents on small screens.

Presenting Large and Complex Information Sets on Mobile Handhelds   43
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Presenting Abstract Information –
Visualization of Hierarchies
Due to the limited screen space of mobile handhelds, we can only present small
parts of an abstract information set at once. Therefore, we need a special
treatment to connect different parts of the information set to support navigation
and orientation. One way in doing so is the visualization of relationships
between these different parts of the information content.
This structure can be expressed as a graph, where the nodes represent several
parts of the information, and the edges the relations between them. Several
graph drawing methods have been proposed in the past (Di Battista et
al., 1999). However, it can be difficult to keep the orientation if we cannot
assure that all nodes can be drawn. On the other hand, hierarchical structures
allow an efficient control of the number of nodes to be presented. Many
information structures are hierarchical, for example file systems. Moreover,
graphs can be decomposed into hierarchical structures (Abello & Korn, 2000).
Therefore, hierarchical methods can be applied to show information structures
on mobile handhelds. A number of customized methods for visualizing hierar-
chical structures have been developed (Keim et al., 2002). In the following, we
want to discuss two examples for visualizing structures on mobile hardware.
First, we adapt an effective approach for visualizing hierarchies, the MAGIC EYE
VIEW (Kreuseler et al., 2000), for our purposes. Secondly, we introduce the
RECTANGLE VIEW, a method that combines the visualization of a basic hierarchy
with the drawing of general graph structures.
MAGIC EYE VIEW
The original MAGIC EYE VIEW was designed for regular PCs or workstations.
The technique is based on a 2D hierarchy layout, which is mapped onto a
Figure 3. Projection rays before and after moving p0

44   Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
hemisphere such that each hierarchy node is located at the hemisphere’s
surface after the mapping. Furthermore, a projection is introduced in order to
achieve a FOCUS & CONTEXT display. Applying this projection allows smooth
transitions between focus area and context regions. For this projection, rays
are computed from the center of projection p0, which is initially located at the
hemisphere’s origin through each node on the hemisphere; that is, the directions
of the rays are determined by the nodes’ initial positions at the hemisphere. For
changing focus, the center of projection p0 can be moved arbitrarily, whereby
the directions of the rays are retained. New positions of the hierarchy nodes are
obtained by computing the new intersection points of the rays with the
hemisphere. Thus the distances between nodes are increased or decreased
depending on the position of p0. By increasing the distance between nodes we
obtain more space for showing details (focus) while maintaining context
information (see Figure 3).
Furthermore, coloured rings are introduced for minimizing the amount of
confusion that may be caused by applying the projection. Based on different
colours, hierarchy levels can be distinguished very easily (Figure 4).
Since real interactive 3D FOCUS & CONTEXT visualization exceeds the capabili-
ties of pocket-sized devices this technique must be customized in order to use
it on mobile handhelds. Thus, the following three adaptations have been applied
(Karstens, Kreuseler & Schumann, 2003):
Figure 4. An orthogonal view of the MAGIC EYE VIEW with about 1,000
nodes

Presenting Large and Complex Information Sets on Mobile Handhelds   45
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
1. Reducing the number of elements to be displayed
Due to the limited screen size, the number of represented elements must be
reduced. A simple but intuitive way is restricting the number of displayed
hierarchy levels. The EVENT HORIZON introduced by Taivalsaari (1999) is an
interesting technique to solve this problem. The key idea is the compression and
expansion of the graphical representation by a radial movement of objects,
which aligns every object with a certain distance to the so-called event horizon
in the middle of the screen. The event horizon can be considered as a virtual
container (sink) in which objects are stored and, thus, as a graphical abstraction
of a certain set of nodes according to the interaction of a user. If the set of nodes
in the event horizon is large, we can explore nodes on high levels of the
hierarchy, and if this set is relatively small we can consider nodes near the root
node.
We applied the concept of the EVENT HORIZON based on the following
considerations:
•
The user must specify the maximum number of levels that can be displayed
out of the event horizon. This is done due to the variety of mobile
handhelds, applications and requirements.
•
The amount of nodes inside an event horizon is given by three different
graphic styles:
•
Minigraph: The structure inside the event horizon is abstracted by an
iconographic view. Only little edges are used to create a minimized
representation of the level structure inside the sink.
•
Circlets (concentric circles): The sink is represented by small
concentric circles. Each circle represents one hierarchy level inside
the sink.
•
Symbol: One little colour-coded circle is drawn where the colour
reflects the number of nodes in the sink.
The three alternatives try to provide a tradeoff between minimum loss of
information (minigraph) and minimum space requirements in the display (sym-
bol). Figure 5 illustrates the drawing styles.
Furthermore, subtrees can be folded and unfolded to reduce the complexity of
the hierarchy. Arbitrary nodes of the structure can be selected and the entire

46   Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
subtrees below will be folded (hidden). Only the root node of a folded tree (i.e.,
the previously selected node) remains visible and is marked as folded. The
reverse operation is applied when selecting a folded node; that is, the entire
subtree below will be unfolded and displayed.
2. Reducing the complexity of the graphical output
Instead of 3D, a 2D representation of the Magic Eye View is used. This is done
by an orthogonal projection of the hierarchy onto a circular 2D display region.
Furthermore, simple graphical primitives such as circles, triangles and straight
lines are used instead of 3D primitives and curves. Replacing curves with
straight lines for edge drawing curves may cause overlapping problems.
Therefore, curve drawing is still offered as an option at the cost of slowing down
display performance.
Moreover, we are using a simplified FOCUS & CONTEXT-approach by moving
nodes in 2D either towards (moving into focus) or away (moving into context)
from the center of the circular display region, instead of using a center of
projection in 3D. Figure 6 gives an example for the MAGIC EYE VIEW on a
mobile handheld.
Figure 5. Different views of the event horizon: Minigraph with circlets
(left) and symbols (right)

Presenting Large and Complex Information Sets on Mobile Handhelds   47
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
3. Simplifying interaction functionality
The original MAGIC EYE VIEW provides rich interaction functionality such as 3D
transformations (zoom, rotation or translation), focusing areas, folding and
unfolding subtrees (Herman et al., 1998), changing parameter values, annota-
tions and so forth. While 3D functions are not needed for mobile handhelds the
remaining operations are implemented based on the available input mecha-
nisms. Nearly all interactions can be done via the input pen; in particular,
pointing with the pen (for annotation or folding) or moving the pen for focusing
should be mentioned.
Using theses adaptations, we can state that it is possible to use the MAGIC EYE
VIEW on mobile handhelds for up to 300 nodes in interactive time. Among other
things we have used the original Magic Eye View as a visual interface to
represent a huge ontology in the field of tourism industry. Now, we can provide
this functionality at mobile handhelds as well. For example, a mobile user can
click at a node on his or her handheld, representing relevant topics from tourism
industry, to be informed, for example, about hotels, restaurants or cultural
events in the user’s direct environment.
Figure 6. Visualization of hierarchical structures: The MAGIC EYE VIEW on
a mobile device

48   Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The RECTANGULAR VIEW for Mobile Handhelds
The RECTANGULAR VIEW was developed for displaying and interacting with
large networks on mobile handhelds (Karstens, Kreuseler & Schumann,
2003). The scenario to use these technique is: a user can browse on a network
of nodes and edges in a level of detail and select nodes that represent other
levels or pieces of information. New levels or underlying information can be
provided in conjunction with a server if necessary. First of all, one might ask -
what kind of graph is easy to compute and to display on a mobile handheld with
a small display area and a 33 MHz CPU? Hierarchical structures containing a
root node and nodes arranged in levels offer advantageous preconditions to
compute effective layouts for mobile handhelds, as we have shown for the
MAGIC EYE VIEW. This is not the case with more general networks. In our
example we want to display a large graph with 3,389 nodes and 7,311 edges.
Moreover, we restrict the considerations on a Palm environment. We have to
find appropriate layouts, which should be easy to compute and should not
produce edge crossings or unnecessary holes. Most layout algorithms for
networks are very expensive to compute, such as force directed methods,
which compute optimal layouts based on the physical analogy of spring forces.
Another common problem with existing graph layouts is undesired global layout
changes, when nodes or subgraphs are inserted or deleted from the graph. Thus
we use a hierarchical layer based algorithm for graph display on mobile
handhelds: the original method presented by Sugijama, Tawa and Toda (1981).
Improvements of the algorithm are introduced and published in Battista et al.
(1999). The algorithm contains three steps:
•
Layer Assignment:
The nodes of the graph are assigned to layers. Dummy nodes are inserted
if nodes are more than one layer apart.
•
Crossing reduction:
The nodes and subgraphs are permuted to minimize the number of edge
crossing.
•
Alignment:
The nodes in a layer are aligned horizontally.

Presenting Large and Complex Information Sets on Mobile Handhelds   49
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Classical horizontal layouts can only display about 100 nodes. In order to
extend the number of displayable nodes we apply a radial layout, but arrange
the levels as squares, and not as circles around the root in the center of the
screen. Thus, we exploit the rectangular screen space more efficiently. More-
over, this approach is very fast since node alignments require one incremental
integer addition per node only. However, a disadvantage of this method is the
necessary decision of at which side of the square a node must be placed. If one
node is mapped onto one side of the square, the subtree below must be placed
at the same side. Thus, arranging the children of the root along the four sides
of the square influences the appearance of the layout tremendously. This
arrangement is done by exploring the complexity of the substructures. How-
ever, placing a node and its entire subtree at the same side of a square (as it is
done by the layout algorithm) has another major advantage — user orientation
after folding subtrees is much better supported than in a circle based layout.
The introduced approach exceeds the computation power of a Palm-device.
Therefore we have to decide which parts of the algorithm have to be computed
on a PC and which on the mobile handheld. One suitable way is computing layer
assignment and crossing reduction on the PC, and transferring a hierarchical
graph to the mobile handheld. Each transferred node is associated with a level
of the hierarchy and a side of the square. The mobile handheld provides the
following functions: Specifying the number of levels to be displayed, computa-
tion of the exact position in the RECTANGLE VIEW, and interaction facilities with
the graph.
Figure 7. Visualization of a graph with the RECTANGULAR VIEW (Left: Full
hierarchy with 332 nodes. Right: Zoomed hierarchy with many folded
subgraphs - nodes with underlying graphs are black)

50   Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Since computing and drawing hierarchies of large graphs is time consuming and
complex, we restrict the dimension of the hierarchy to be computed. Our
solution uses the Coffmann-Graham-Layering to find layers with a minimum
width (number of nodes without dummy nodes per layer). Nodes that were not
assigned by this procedure are stored in separate substructures. In our example
the graph with 3,389 nodes was transformed into a hierarchy with 332 nodes
and several substructures. The hierarchy and the subgraphs are converted into
separate databases and transferred to the Palm. As by customizing the radial
MAGIC EYE VIEW to PDA environments, we applied different adaptations:
1.
Reducing the number of elements to be displayed:
Not all nodes of the original graph are inserted into the hierarchy. The
hierarchy is limited to 400 nodes. This is because we have found that it is
impossible to display more nodes at the same time on mobile handhelds.
The number of displayed layers can be adjusted by zooming. Moreover,
subgraphs can be folded in order to provide more space for the remaining
nodes.
2.
Reducing the complexity of graphical output:
The RECTANGULAR VIEW is a 2D-technique. Only simple primitives such
as lines and points are used. The calculations of node positions only
require incremental integer addition. Therefore, changes of the layout are
fast and easy to compute. Furthermore, colour-coding of nodes is
restricted to a very few colours. Leaf nodes are green, nodes with children
are red and folded nodes are brownish. Thus it is easy to distinguish “root
nodes” of folded subtrees from real leafs. An extra colour is used to mark
all nodes with underlying graphs (see Figure 7).
3.
Simplifying interaction functionality:
The presentation starts with the full hierarchy. The layout can be changed
by selecting nodes and folding its subgraphs. An alternative for changing
the presentation is using toolbar buttons. The buttons (at the left hand side)
can be used for zooming in and out, showing the mark of a node, drawing
the underlying graph or showing a history. Textual information can be
presented at the status bar at the bottom of the window.
Considering these adaptations, we can state that it is possible to work with the
RECTANGULAR VIEW in real time even if mobile hardware with little processing

Presenting Large and Complex Information Sets on Mobile Handhelds   51
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
power is used. We can handle structures around 3,400 nodes at once. We
found this is a good number to show relevant parts of complex information
spaces.
Presenting Compound Information –
Browsing the World Wide Web
In this section we consider a special application for the information presentation
on mobile handhelds, the browsing of Web contents. In particular, this covers
the adaptation of Web pages, which have not been sketched for such devices.
This requires a special treatment to ensure the information of the whole Web
can be used.
There are several approaches for the adaptation of Web pages:
•
Device based adaptation:
For different types of devices, special Web pages are available. Examples
are Web pages made with WML. The advantage of these techniques is the
optimal usage of device dependent properties. A drawback is the little
availability of such special pages.
•
Layout based adaptation:
Here, different layout classes are defined based on criteria like degree of
abstraction. These classes can be applied to Web pages. For example,
layouts can be specified for different output media by using cascading style
sheets (CSS). However, a problem is the need for a special preparation
of the Web pages.
•
Client based adaptation:
This approach uses the original information and changes the presentation
on the output device only. Appropriate adaptation can be done by
applying special algorithms or rules to a Web browser. Some examples
that use FOCUS & CONTEXT (FLIP ZOOMING: Björk et al., 1999; CZWeb:
Fishers et al., 1997) or OVERVIEW & DETAIL (Power Browser: Buyukokten
et al., 2000; WebThumb: Wobbrock et al., 2002) are well known. The
necessary information must be quickly generated from the original docu-
ment.

52   Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Document based adaptation:
Any Web page is transformed with their presentation on the display in
mind. It is possible to change the structure or content of elements of a Web
page. Examples are section outlining, the replacement from text parts by
hyperlinks (Zippers: Brown & Weihl, 1996), the removal or scaling of
pictures (Power Browser), or the text filtering and generation of a text
summary (West: Björk et al., 1999).
We have developed a client-based adaptation in connection with techniques
from the document based adaptation to present Web pages on mobile
handhelds. That means we avoid a document adaptation on the server. Our
design criteria have been as follows:
•
provide the same information,
•
allow the accessibility of all information, and
•
use the same presentation as on PC-oriented HTML sites as far as
possible.
Additionally, overview representations have to be presented. We restrict
ourselves on documents containing frames, tables and HTML elements,
especially used in scientific articles.
The base of the technology is a data structure called WEBGRAPH, which records
the layout of a Web page. The WEBGRAPH is a tree with nodes and edges. Leaf
nodes represent single Web elements like text, illustration, link, and heading.
Interior nodes contain at least one child node. These are frames, tables, table
contents and paragraphs. Furthermore, a set of possible edges must be defined
to specify the relationships between the nodes. An example is the edges of a
paragraph node. Children of a paragraph could be paragraph nodes, tables,
text, illustrations, links, and headings. That means the possible edges from a
paragraph are edges to one or more of those elements. For a clear specification
of the Web document some further definitions and rules must be made:
•
The root of the WEBGRAPH is a frame-node or paragraph-nodes repre-
senting the whole document.
•
Child nodes are aligned.

Presenting Large and Complex Information Sets on Mobile Handhelds   53
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Heading-nodes are assigned to position 0.
•
On table-nodes, the table-content-nodes are ordered regarding row and
column number and the table node is a single node in a paragraph node.
Based on the WEBGRAPH, three concepts (SECTION FOLDING, RELATIVE SIZE
and KEYWORD OVERVIEW) have been developed for the presentation of HTML
documents.
We introduced SECTION FOLDING as the concept of information hiding to reduce
the amount of information to be displayed. For this purpose, an enhancement
of section outlining (Brown & Weihl, 1996) that replaces textual parts of a
document by hyperlinks is used. Section folding operates on a WEBGRAPH, so
every node or subgraph can be replaced or hidden in the presentation. Because
there are several classes of nodes, it is possible to process them differently to
achieve an efficient treatment. For example, to generate the textual information
for hypertext, we can use the name of the table in a table node or the first
sentence in a text node. In order to use section folding optimally, an automatic
computation of the starting situation is necessary. Moreover, for information
filtering using a tree, the Filter-FishEye-View (Furnas, 1981) can be applied.
A degree of interest (DOI) is determined starting from the current point of
interest (POI) with a distance function and the certain level of detail (LOD).
Uninteresting information can be hidden by a threshold value.
With the concept RELATIVE SIZE, the extent of elements of a Web page is
adapted to the display of a mobile device, so it is possible to handle node types
like text, structural components and illustrations differently. Textual elements
can use fonts and font size of the handhelds. The size for structural components
can be processed by absolute size, by the relative size compared to parent- or
sister nodes or as a collection of child nodes. For structural elements like tables,
the optimal column width can be determined from the presentation window, so
it is possible to avoid horizontal scrollbars. On the handheld, images can be
displayed in its original size, scaled or also with an implementation of the
RECTANGULAR FISHEYE-VIEW to make use of its advantages described in the
third section.
The approach KEYWORD OVERVIEW uses techniques from text filtering for the
fast navigation on Web sites. Key-words are listed in an additional window, so
it is possible to jump to the appropriate regions of the presentation window. The
keywords are arranged either according to the object types or the position in

54   Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
the Web document. Thus, the keyword overview eases the orientation and
navigation, especially in unstructured sides.
Apart from the presented possibilities it is also possible to choose a full size
view with the assistance of scrollbars. In a section folding view a user can reach
all information of the original document by an info-bar as place holder. By
interaction in the section folding window or in the keyword overview, the
current point of interest can be changed. Subtrees can be folded and unfolded
manually, so beside automatic section folding an interactive section folding is
also possible.
All the presented techniques have been implemented and integrated into a Web
browser. Figure 8 shows an ordinary Web site, displayed using the Internet
explorer (left) and three different presentations of this site, using our proposed
concepts. In the second picture all information is folded and the picture is
scaled. The third picture shows an unfolded paragraph of interest and its local
environment, whereas the last picture shows a table with one unfolded table
row.
Conclusions
Information presentation on mobile handhelds requires a special treatment to
consider the limited resources of these devices like screen space, interaction
facilities and computational power. Nevertheless, basic techniques from the
field of information visualization can be adapted for these purposes.
Figure 8. Section folding on columns and table items

Presenting Large and Complex Information Sets on Mobile Handhelds   55
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
We have introduced methods for the display of graphical as well as abstract
information. For presenting large images on small screens, one existing tech-
nique has been adapted and three new presentation techniques have been
proposed. For presentation of abstract data, we introduced two techniques to
visualize hierarchical structures of large information spaces. Therefore, we
adapted the MAGIC EYE VIEW to mobile handhelds and developed the RECT-
ANGULAR VIEW for Palms. Lastly, we made use of these concepts and suggested
different approaches to browse the Web via mobile devices.
All these examples showed the feasibility of information presentation on
handhelds. Further work will concentrate on the combination of the proposed
approaches in a general framework and usability tests. This includes the
visualization of the Web graph described in the fourth section. Moreover, we
want to adapt and integrate more techniques like special graph drawing
algorithms, and evaluate our work by several application cases.
References
Abello J., & Korn, J. (2001). MGV: A system for visualizing massive multi-
digraphs. Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics.
Björk, S., Holmquist, L.E., Redström, J., Bretan, I., Danielson, R., Karlgren,
J., & Franzén, K. (1999). West: A Web browser for small terminals.
Proc. ACM Conference on User Interface Software and Technology
1999. ACM Press.
Brown, M.H., & Weihl, W.E. (1996). Zippers: A focus+context display of
Web pages. Technical Report SRC-140. Digital SRC Research Report.
Buyukokten, O., Molina, H.G., Paepcke, A., & Winograd, T. (2000). Power
browser: Efficient Web browsing for pdas. Technical report. Stanford
University.
Card, S.K., Mackinlay, J.D., & Shneiderman, B. (Eds.). (1999). Readings in
information visualization – Using vision to think. San Francisco:
Morgan Kaufman.
Di Battista, G., Eades, P., Tamissia, R., & Tollis, I.G. (1999). Graph drawing
algorithms for the visualization of graphs. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall.

56   Karstens, Rosenbaum & Schumann
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Fishers, B., Agedelidis, G., Dill, J., Tan, P., Collaud, G., & Jones, C. (1997).
Czweb: Fisheye views for visualizing the World-Wide Web.
Furnas, G.W. (1981). The fisheye view: A new look at structured files.
Technical report. Bell Laboratories.
Herman, I., Melançon, G., & Delest, M. (1998). Tree visualization and
navigation clues for information visualization. Computer Graphics Fo-
rum, 17, 153-165.
Karstens, B., Kreuseler, M., & Schumann, H. (2003). Visualization of
complex structures on mobile handhelds. Proceedings of IMC2003.
Rostock.
Karstens, B., Rosenbaum, R., & Schumann, H. (2003). Visual interfaces for
mobile handhelds. Proceedings of HCII2003, Crete.
Keahey, T.A. (1998). The generalized detail-in-context problem. Proc. Vis’98.
Research Triangle Park, NC: IEEE Visualization.
Keim, D., Müller, W., & Schumann, H. (2002). Information visualization
and visual data mining. State of the art report, Eurographics 2002,
Saarbrücken.
Kreuseler, M., Lopez, N., & Schumann, H. (2000). A scalable framework for
information visualization. INFOVIS’2000. Salt Lake City.
Leung, Y.K., & Apperley, M.D. (1994). A review and taxonomy of distortion
– Oriented presentation techniques. ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human-Interaction, 1 (2), 126-160.
Rauschenbach, U. (1999). The Rectangular FishEye View as an efficient
method for the transmission and display of large images. Proceedings
IEEE ICIP’99. Kobe.
Rauschenbach, U., Jeschke, S., & Schumann, H. (2001). General Rectangular
FishEye views for 2D graphics. Computers and Graphics, 25(4), 609-
617.
Rosenbaum, R., & Tominski, Ch. (2003). Pixels vs. vectors: Presentation of
large images on mobile devices. Proceedings of IMC2003. Rostock.
Taivalsaari, A. (1999). The event horizon interface model for small de-
vices. Technical Report TR-99-74. SUN Microsystem Laboratories.
Wobbrock, J.O., Forlizzi, J., Hudson, Scott, E., Myers, & Brad, A. (2002).
WebThumb: Interaction techniques for small-screen browsers. Proceed-
ings UIST 2002. Paris.

Mobile Payments   57
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter III
Mobile Payments
(M-Payments) –
An Exploratory Study
of Emerging Issues
and Future Trends
Melissa Soo Ding, Deakin University, Australia
Chandana R. Unnithan, Deakin University, Australia
Abstract
With the growing momentum of wireless revolution and m-commerce
explosion, it is evident that mobile devices are becoming a critical
component of the new digital economy. As mobile markets continue to
mature, being able to pay using the mobile handset may perhaps be the key
to the development of next generation services. The current market
penetration of mobile phones in conjunction with the optimism on the
growth of m-commerce offers high potential for m-payment surge over
the next few years. When mobile phones are equipped with a device to
protect personal information, the security level of an entire service,

58   Ding & Unnithan
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
including the network, improves considerably. However, the mobile
payments market today is typical of an emergent one, encumbered with an
abundance of approaches and concepts that may not interoperate. In this
chapter, we have explored the broad range of available m-payment
methods, emerging issues in standardization, security, and some proposed
and existing solutions.
Introduction
With the creation of the new freedom economy driven by deregulation, new
sources of global competition and ICT revolution (Keen & Mackintosh, 2001),
commercial transactions are rapidly transitioning from fixed locations, to
anytime, anywhere and anyone. New forms of mobile technologies are rapidly
transforming the marketplace. Optimists are of the opinion that the new world
economy will witness the transition of mobile devices from a simple communi-
cation device to a payments mechanism, because the sole ownership charac-
teristics of the mobile phone supports non-repudiation of transactions by
customers and enables secure certificates to be stored inside the device to
support security of mobile commerce (Ding & Unnithan, 2002). Mobile phones
have become devices for paying merchandise, receiving time sensitive informa-
tion such as stock quotes, or for dissemination of critical business processes in
the value chain (Paavalainen, 2001) in many countries. Mobile phones surpass
fixed lines in many economies, and in fact, some accession countries or
developing nations have made mobile network a choice over the fixed line
networks (Unnithan & Swatman, 2002). The number of mobile phone sub-
scribers worldwide was 946,297,000 (ITU, 2002) and is expected to reach 1
billion by 2002. With the rise in the number of Internet enabled mobile devices,
the number of subscriptions will rise and perhaps, the wireless Internet users
will outnumber the fixed line Internet users (Krueger, 2001). The market for m-
commerce in Europe alone is estimated to be worth Euro 3 billion by 2003
(KPMG, 2000; Muller-Veerse, 1999). Bucci (2001) highlighted that Italy – a
country with the highest mobile phone penetration rates (63.6 million for 57.5
million people), has more than half of the population participating in m-
commerce and 61% of the mobile phones are Internet enabled. Mobile
payments will gain significant foothold in coming years.

Mobile Payments   59
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Many authors (Keen & Mackintosh, 2001; Paavalainen, 2001) are of the view
that the growth potential of m-commerce is difficult to overestimate. Within the
next 3 years, millions of people will access the Net via their PDAs (Personal
Digital Assistants) – more than will do so via a PC (KPMG 2000). Wireless
World Forum (2002) highlighted that Japan, USA, Germany and UK will
represent four of the largest mobile payment markets in the world by 2006 and
forecasted that there will be more than 200 million regular mobile payment users
spending a total of 47.2 billion euros. The European Committee for Banking
Standards (ECBS) and the European Telecommunications Standards Institute
expects m-commerce to be one of the key drivers in developing the global
information society, with applications emerging in numerous areas including
banking, financial services, security services and shopping (m-Travel.com,
2002). As mobile markets continue to mature, being able to pay using the
mobile handset will be key to the development of next generation services
(Baschnonga, 2002). An important aspect in this sense is the expected
convergence between mobile phones and the Internet (Bucci, 2001).
However, a major inhibitor of m-commerce is the lack of a suitable payment
system (Heijden, 2002; Krueger, 2001; ZDNet, 2001;). If mass-market m-
commerce diffusion has to be achieved, a successful m-payment system needs
to be developed (Henkel & Zimmermann, 2001; KPMG, 2000; Krueger,
2001). Towergroup (2001) agrees that m-payments will begin to show
significant adoption globally as wireless industry hurdles are overcome and
consumer demand rises. According to their new research, by 2005 the number
of US based m-payment users are expected to become 3.5 million, making the
m-payment system a critical hub in the bank/consumer relationship (TowerGroup,
2001). Forrester Research claims that mobile payment market will be worth
$22 billion by 2005, making it the fastest growing part of global payments
scenario (Baschnonga, 2002). Compared to other payment systems, mobile
payments have the particular advantage that they can be used at the real point-
of-sale, as well as in e-commerce and in m-commerce (Dahlström, 2001;
Krueger, 2001b).
The spread of mobile phones also bodes well for the future of m-commerce.
Similar to e-purses, most mobile phones have an embedded chip that can be
used to store value or provide secure authorization and identification. In
addition, the fact that the mobile phone provides communication services
means that it does not have to rely on a card reader, PC and modem
combination or a POS terminal. Therefore, it is not surprising that some experts

60   Ding & Unnithan
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
believe that the mobile phone will replace even smart cards as a means of
payment (Bucci, 2001; Henkel & Zimmermann, 2001; Krueger, 2001b).
There has been great optimism as well as hype surrounding mobile payments
(m-payment) since 2000. Many market experts, vendors and mobile operators
had expected rapid, widespread adoption by consumers. Their optimism was
based on the increasing popularity of mobile phones and the positive attitude
consumers exhibited when using the devices. The vision of the handset as a
mobile transaction device is widely shared. According to Celent, a financial
services research and consulting firm, there will be 60 million mobile payment
users generating sales of $50 billion by 2004 (Mobile Payment Forum, 2002).
Towergroup (2002) further added that the number of consumers using mobile
devices to make payments would rise dramatically between 2002 and 2005.
Towergroup undertook a study that predicts that 118 million Western Europe-
ans and 145 million users in the Asia-Pacific region will purchase low-cost
mobile premium content by 2005. That far exceeds the reports’ estimate of 22
million such users in North America. M-payments are likely to become an
important segment of the retail payment market. Also, according to the report,
to a large extent the reason lies in immediate payment fulfillment and thus
reduced risk and transaction cost. The largest portion of those mobile payments
will be for content-related services that cost less than 10 • each. These are
called micropayments and include things such as ring-tones for phones or other
premium content. An approximate value of 10 • is seen as the dividing line
between micro- and macro-payments.
This chapter attempts to provide an insight into the progress of m-payments,
some current initiatives and emerging issues.
Defining Mobile Payments
Krueger (2001) defined m-payments as payments via the mobile phone.
Mobile payment is a point-of-sale (POS) payment made through a mobile
device, such as a cellular telephone, a smart phone, or a personal digital
assistant (PDA). Using the m-payment method, a person with a wireless device
could pay for items in a store or settle a restaurant bill without interacting with
any staff member. This ability makes it a potential e-commerce and m-
commerce application (Krueger, 2001).

Mobile Payments   61
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Heijden (2002) identified it as any conventional or new payment system that
enables financial transactions to be made securely from one organization or
individual over a mobile network.
Mobile payments are used to pay not only for merchandise purchased via
mobile channel but also for transactions in the physical world such as vending
machines, passport photo machines, car wash machines and so forth
(Paavalainen, 2001).
Some experts believe that the mobile phone will even replace smart cards as
a means of payment (Bucci, 2001; Henkel & Zimmermann, 2001; Krueger,
2001), as they have an embedded chip that may be used to store value or secure
authorization.
The m-payment vision is to transform the mobile phone into a personal mobile
wallet (m-wallet), holding credit cards, debit account information and mobile
“cash” for small transactions.
Mobile Payments – Current Scenario
M-payment is already in use in many parts of the world, including Europe and
Asia. There are several providers offering the m-payment systems services,
although the predominant players are Telcos and the financial institutions
(Bucci, 2001; KPMG, 2000; Krueger, 2001b; MeT, 2001; what-is.com).
Table 1 provides some examples of m-payment systems as of December 2001
(Krueger, 2001). The highlights are where mobile operators are participating
in the m-payment ventures.
In March 2002, Korea’s Seongnam City, south of Seoul, piloted a mobile
payment system, “Zoop,” which connects the city’s stores to a central payment
system via broadband links. The mobile payment system runs on infrared
technology and will be used for transit payments, for goods and services at retail
locations and in restaurants around the city. Because the credit card-equipped
phones interact with cash registers, and link to a central payment system, users
only have to enter a PIN on their phone handset to initiate a payment anywhere
in the city. The system, which applies infrared rays to link handsets with cash
registers, will come in handy for any kind of transaction (Korean Herald, 2002).
The Finnish carrier, Sonera, is running a mobile payment trial in Helsinki, with
Visa and Euro cards complementing its prepaid Shopper service, to which

62   Ding & Unnithan
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Table 1. M-payment ventures
S U P P L I E R  
T Y P E  O F  T R A N S A C T IO N  
B a n k o .m a x  ( A u str ia ) 
V irtu a l P O S  
B ib it (H o lla n d , in te rn a tio n a l) 
M -c o m m e rc e  (W A P -e n a b le d ) 
C e llo n e t (S w e d e n , N e th e rla n d s) 
P a rk in g  
C in g u la r  D ir e c tB ill (U S A ) 
V irtu a l P O S  
E M T  (E sto n ia ) 
P a rk in g  
G iS M o  (S w e d e n , U K , G e rm a n y ) 
V irtu a l P O S  
M e ta x  (D e n m a rk ) 
R e a l P O S  (fillin g  sta tio n s) 
M in t (S w e d e n ) 
R e a l P O S  
N T T  D o C o M o  (J a p a n ) 
M -c o m m e rc e  (su b sc rip tio n ) 
O m n it e l O n p h o n e  (Ita ly ) 
V irtu a l P O S  
O r a n g e  M o b ile  P a y m e n t (D e n m a rk ) 
P u rc h a se  o f m o b ile  a ir tim e  
O sk a r  (C z e c h  R e p u b lic ) 
P a y m e n t fo r p re p a id  a n d  in v o ic e  
P a ie m e n t C B  su r  m o b ile  (F ra n c e ) 
M a il o rd e r a n d  v irtu a l P O S  
P a y b o x  (G e r m a n y , in te rn a tio n a l) 
R e a l a n d  v irtu a l P O S  
P a y D ire c t (U S A ) 
V irtu a l P O S , P 2 P  
P a y itm o b ile  (G e rm a n y ) 
V irtu a l P O S  
P a y lin e  (F ra n c e ) 
V irtu a l P O S  
P a y P a l (U S A ) 
V irtu a l P O S , P 2 P  
P h o n e p a id  (U K ) 
V irtu a l P O S , P 2 P  
S o n e r a  M o b ile  P a y  (F in la n d , S w e d e n ) 
R e a l P O S  (in c lu d in g  v e n d in g  m a c h in e s) 
S tre e tC a s h  (G e rm a n y ) 
R e a l a n d  v irtu a l P O S  
T e le n o r  M o b il (N o rw a y ) 
T ic k e ts 
T e lia  P a y it (S w e d e n ) 
V irtu a l P O S  
V isa M ó v il (S p a in ) 
R e a l a n d  v irtu a l P O S  

Mobile Payments   63
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
funds are transferred from users’ bank accounts. Payments in the pilot are
added to the customer’s credit card invoice, or debited to a Shopper account
(Cnet, 2002).
In Australia, Telstra Mobile along with city councils of Bronte in Sydney and
CBD in Melbourne commenced a three-month m-commerce parking meter
trial in September 2002, where customers were able to pay for their parking
via their eligible mobile phone or using coin slot machines (Telstra, 2002). As
of December 2002, following the trials, motorists in Melbourne and Sydney are
able to pay for some parking spaces using their Telstra mobile phones (Cauchi,
2002). To pay by the mobile phone, drivers call a 1-900 number listed on the
meter. The transaction is confirmed by a voice message, and the meter displays
an expiry time and parking fee. Drivers cannot top up the meter by mobile and
must pay 55 cents to use the service. All charges appear on their next Telstra
phone bill. If a driver pays for more than 10 minutes, they get a free SMS
reminder of the expiry time (Cauchi, 2002). However, motorists are still
reluctant to use the phone payment system as it seems a lot easier to use coin
slots – as opposed to spending 55 cents extra, which equates 15 minutes of
parking time. Vodafone and Optus mobile phone subscribers are also unhappy
that they cannot use their mobile phones to pay for parking.
At the same time, Coca-Cola and Telstra have partnered to bring in the Dial-
a-Coke service. The mobile phone users in Australia can now use the phone to
buy a drink from specially marked Coca-Cola vending machines distributed
across Central Station, Sydney. The new Dial-a-Coke service allows consum-
ers to purchase a 600ml Buddy without the hassles of loose change. Customers
have to call the number displayed on the vending machine, make the selection
and the bottle will appear as if customers had used coins. The cost of the bottle
of soft drink will appear on the customer’s next mobile phone bill, and there is
no charge for the call. Dial-a-Coke is only available for Telstra post-paid GSM
customers (Telstra, 2002).
Bucci (2001) highlighted that the Italian banking institutions believe that
providing mobile payment services to their customers is their first priority and
are now starting to integrate e-banking services with the mobile services,
including mobile phone payments. However, the main m-payment initiatives are
currently coming from the telcos due to the technology push. An example of this
is TIM (Telecom Italia Mobile), who has jointly developed a system with
Oberthur Card Systems and Societa’ per i Servizi Bancari (SSB) that allows
the mobile phone user to carry out banking functions and m-payments.
Additionally, TIM and Banca Popolare di Milano (BPM) have jointly launched

64   Ding & Unnithan
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
We@TIM, a set of services for online trading, mobile banking and generalized
access to e-commerce. Others telcos that have provided similar mobile
payments initiatives include Omnitel, who has launched a trading service along
with Self Trade, a French broker on the Net. On “Omnitel 2000” to buy and
sell shares online, Blu and Nokia have signed a turnkey contract for the supply
and rollout of network solutions for their GSM network. Blu will probably
adopt the Nokia EMPS (Electronic Mobile Payment Services) technology.
The EMPS is a joint project between Nokia, MeritaNordbanken and Visa to
enable secure mobile payments using dual slot mobile phones with chip cards.
The first slot is for the SIM card that identifies the caller, and the second slot
is for a tiny credit card. Combined with BlueTooth, EMPS can be used to
facilitate a wide array of mobile transactions from vending machines to
supermarket purchases (Paavalainen, 2001).
Forrester Research reported in 2001 that mobile content payment for ring
tones and vending machines dominated the market with a total spending of •51
million. Forester Research also forecasted that low-value payments such as
those at vending machine payments would continue to increase by 2003,
although higher value payments such as supermarket payments will dominate by
2005 (Jüptner, 2001). Mobile users in Austria, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands,
Portugal, Switzerland, and the UK are more likely to spend an average of EUR
6.77 per mobile user per month in 2005, while Belgium, France, Greece,
Luxembourg, and Spain will only spend an average EUR 3.47 per mobile user
per month in 2005.
However, the promised technological outcomes did not live up to prevailing
expectation. Despite the high level of expectation that prevailed in 2000 and
2001, no m-payment platform has as yet gained significant market acceptance,
at least in Europe. Paybox (2003) announced in January 2003 that it was
withdrawing its mobile payment services from all countries except Austria,
where Mobilkom will take on its business. Also in July 2003 they informed all
their customers and merchants that moxmo.com will take over business and
services for Germany and will commence activities by September 1, 2003.
According to Jones (2003), Paybox was ahead of its time in its ability to offer
person-to-person and person-to-business payment services using mobile
phones. Although the Paybox system works well in a technical sense, consum-
ers and potential partners such as mobile operators and banks did not create
enough demand to make the payments processing business profitable. There
are other similar examples of past micro- payment ventures that have had
similar endings (e.g., Cybercash, Digicash, Flooz, Beenz.com, etc.) that had

Mobile Payments   65
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
been implemented for payments via the Internet as well as the evolution of m-
payment services (e.g., Paybox), but these are also gradually disappearing.
However, the areas in which mobile payments have proven to be successful are
niche applications such as parking or payments for specialized deliverables
such as games and ring tones, which do not need a general-purpose payment
system. Mobile payments as yet do not offer a sufficient advantage over
conventional systems such as credit cards to attract large numbers of consum-
ers or merchants. Despite the repeated stated willingness of customers to use
alternative payment solutions in the digital environment, only 1% of users
actually do so. In Germany, for example, alternative payment systems make up
only 3% of online transactions, while the remaining 97% are processed through
direct debit, invoicing and credit card payments (Cornelissen, 2003).
Mobile Payment Transaction
Environments
Consumers currently use mobile payments for transactions in three different
environments: remote, local and personal. Remote environments are typified by
services accessed over digital public mobile networks. Remote payments
generally use a browser-based transport infrastructure or an SMS/MMS-
based system. Although there are technical differences between IP and
messaging-based communications, payment protocols can operate similarly
across both. Local environment is characterized by services in the proximity
and involve the use of short range messaging protocols such as Bluetooth,
infrared, RFID and a contactless chip to pay for goods and services over short
distances (Met, 2003; Mobile Payment Forum, 2002; Visa, 2003). Personal
environment is the communication between multiple devices controlled by the
user such as mobile phone and PC or set-top box. In this chapter, we have
discussed remote and local payments.
A majority of mobile payment transactions today are in the area of remote
micro-payment and are usually handled via operator billing. Mobile remote
micro-payment started with the introduction of value-added SMS services
such as downloadable ringing tones. This market has grown to the size of over
1 Billion Euro for Europe alone and is still growing fast due to the introduction
of new personalization elements and digital content consumed in the mobile

66   Ding & Unnithan
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
phone. Some of the present digital content consumption also involves bigger
transactions, including subscriptions and service packages. Thus, there are
expectations for growth of remote macro-payments. This growth will be
substantially higher if topping prepaid accounts for mobile services predomi-
nantly occurs utilizing a mobile phone instead of scratch cards.
However, local mobile payment, also known as proximity payments and
contactless payment (terms used interchangeably throughout the document),
is in the phase of rapid development. Proximity payments are expected to be
particularly popular when time is short or when it may be physically difficult to
swipe a payment card in a payment terminal (Visa, 2003). In the United States,
most major cities are implementing or planning to implement contactless smart
card-based automatic fare collection (AFC) systems. In 2002, MasterCard,
VISA and JCB also announced the availability of contactless payment options
for traditional cash-only environments where speed is essential, in places such
as quick serve and casual restaurants, gas stations, convenience stores and
movie theaters. Proximity payment devices come in a variety of shapes and
sizes, ranging from traditional plastic cards to key fobs, watches and cellular
phones: for example, Smart Card Alliance (2003), Visa International (2003),
and Mastercard (2003). According to Smart Card Alliance (2003), there is an
increased interest shown by the financial, retail, and transportation industries
over this latest payment trend.
MET (2003) suggests that there is a large potential for growth in the emerging
local mobile payment environment, with continuing growth in remote micro-
payments and some potential for remote macro-payments. Other research
analysts in support of this stated that projected values of proximity micro-
payments are expected to grow from 423 million Euros in 2002 to 5005 million
Euros in 2005. Similar growth is projected for proximity macro-payments: 314
million Euros in 2002 to 12,674 million Euros in 2005 (Trintech, 2002).
However, whilst the forecast is for a major growth in proximity mobile
payments, others have suggested that it will take some time to build wide
acceptance for m-payments in general and results will not be seen until 2006
(Fife, 2002; Towergroup, 2002; Trintech, 2002). Clarke (2003) quoted
Tower Group Senior Analyst for Emerging Technologies, Edward Kountz, as
being positive about the success of radio-frequency (RF) technology for low-
value, non-remote, impulse-driven purchases. Kountz highlighted examples of
proximity payment solutions like Speedpass (US) and Korea (Octopus) and
further predicted that eventually RF payment devices would be included in
mobile phone covers and then phone chipsets. The ability of global card issuers

Mobile Payments   67
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
to leverage existing user habits with contactless convenience will drive the rise
of contactless retail and transit payment cards at a rapid growth rate between
2002 and 2007 (TowerGroup, 2003).
Some examples of current implementation of proximity cards, their technology
and device formats are summarized in Table 2 (SmartCard Alliance, 2003).
In September 2002, Visa International developed a new global payment
specification that removes the need to physically insert a smart card into a
reader. Based on an international standard, ISO 14443, the new specification
uses a chip embedded in a plastic card or an electronic device such as a mobile
phone. According to Visa International (2003), the device is held in front of a
terminal and a wireless interface transits the payment information, which
removes the need to insert or swipe a payment card, making it easier to pay in
places where speed and convenience are important. These technologies will
facilitate the move closer to the company’s goal of displacing cash. Visa
contactless payment was trialed in South Korea in conjunction with Harex
Technology and the mobile network providers in April 2002. It was commer-
cialized for the first time in the world as a wireless mobile proximity payment
service called ZOOP, using infrared communication. ZOOP is presently being
used in some 4,000 places including major department stores, coffee shops,
and restaurants in Seoul and Sungnam City (Mochizuki & Atsushi, 2003).
A pilot program was launched in April 2003 to test infrared credit card payment
service between Visa International, Nippon Shinpan, OMC Card, AEON
Credit and NTT DoCoMo Inc. The credit card data are downloaded and then
stored in the DoCoMo 504i and 504iS mobile phones, which are equipped with
Table 2. Featured applications and corresponding technology
Featured 
Application 
# of Cards 
Issued 
Technology 
Form Factor 
Hong Kong 
Octopus Card 
9+ million 
Non-standard 13.56 MHz 
(FeliCa) 
Plastic card 
ExxonMobil 
Speedpass 
6+ million 
Low-frequency RF (TI) 
Key fob, wrist watch, 
 window transponder 
Visa Contactless 
Payment 
7+ million 
ISO/IEC 14443 13.56 
MHz, Infrared 
Plastic card, mobile 
phone 
MasterCard 
PayPass 
Pilot phase 
ISO/IEC 14443 13.56 
MHz 
Plastic card 

68   Ding & Unnithan
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
infrared transmission (IrDA) ports. The pilot leverages a DoCoMo “i-±ppliTM”
application for payments based on the “Visa Proximity Payments Messaging
Specification”. Every DoCoMo 504i and 504iS phone is standard-equipped
with an IrDA port to exchange information with other IrDA-equipped devices
via an infrared signal (Visa International, 2003).
In May 2003, Nokia and MasterCard launched a similar trial for “contactless”
payment initiative using Nokia phones as credit cards. The Nokia phone
SmartCoverTM is embedded with a contactless chip and a radio frequency (RF)
circuit. The chip has been specially programmed with pre-registered MasterCard
payment account information and is compliant with the MasterCard PayPass
specification. When consumers tap or wave their Nokia phones on the specially
equipped PayPass readers at the point-of-sale, payment account information
is transmitted to the terminal. The transaction is then processed through
MasterCard’s highly trusted payment network in the normal way. A system
provided by JP Morgan Chase processes the payment account information.
Just a few seconds after consumers tap or wave their phone, payment
confirmation is received and the transaction is complete (Mastercard, 2003).
The key challenge in increasing the acceptability of mobile payments is to
replace cash payments with electronic cash, as the former still accounts globally
for about half of all transactions. Ajay et al. (2002) point out that payment
methods today are dominated by cards and cash simply because there is often
no better alternative despite their lack of security and lack of convenience.
Cash has an additional benefit of providing anonymity, which is not present in
any other forms of payment (Ajay et al., 2002).
Smart Card Alliance (2003) highlighted that contactless payment allows issuers
to penetrate the cash payment market, enjoy increased customer transaction
volume and improve customer retention and loyalty. At the same time,
consumers enjoy the convenience of hands-free payment, the ability to pay for
multiple services using one device and the security of not having to display a
card for payment (Smart Card Alliance, 2003).
Birch (2003) points out that the public wants a simple m-payment service
where they can point their phone at the payment register and the payment is
completed without the complexity of having to do all the things like registering
for the service, remembering credit card numbers and/or passwords or be with
a particular operator and so on.

Mobile Payments   69
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Many Dimensions of M-Payments
The many phases involved in an m-payment transaction, despite the environ-
ment, are illustrated in Figure 1 (Telecom Media Networks, 2002).
In the mobile environment, transaction dynamics are similar although the form
factor that contains the transaction credentials is different. In addition, in the
case of remote payments, the transport of payment details will involve a mobile
network operator and use either a browser-based protocol such as WAP or
HTML, or a messaging system, such as SMS or Unstructured Supplementary
Service Data (USSD). Alternatively, the transport of payment details could be
via Bluetooth, infrared, RFID or contactless chip in the case of proximity
payments.
To-date, m-payment transactions based on different strategies has been
implemented. They involve different combination of key players in the role of
Trusted Third Parties (TTP) and Payment Service Providers (PSP).
A trusted third party (TTP) is the company who performs the authentication and
the authorization of transaction parties and the settlement. It could be a telco,
bank, or credit card (pre-paid account, consumer bill, bank account, etc.). The
payment service provider (PSP) is the central entity responsible for the
payment process. It enables the payment message initiated from the mobile
device to be routed to and cleared by the TTP. This service generally includes
Figure 1. Phases in mobile payments transaction
Consumer
Content Provider(CP)
Trusted Third Party
eg telco, bank, credit 
card company , ISP
Payment Service 
Provider eg telco, 
bank, credit card
company, startup
1. Purchase indication
5. Delivery of content
7. Payment
6. Billing
0. Registration
2. Purchase 
Request
3. Authentication
/authorization
8. Revenue sharing
8. Revenue sharing
3. Purchase 
authorization
Consumer
Consumer
Content Provider(CP)
Content Provider(CP)
Trusted Third Party
eg telco, bank, credit 
card company , ISP
Payment Service 
Provider eg telco, 
bank, credit card
company, startup
1. Purchase indication
5. Delivery of content
7. Payment
6. Billing
0. Registration
2. Purchase 
Request
3. Authentication
/authorization
8. Revenue sharing
8. Revenue sharing
3. Purchase 
authorization

70   Ding & Unnithan
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
an “e-wallet” application that enables payers to store their payment details such
as credit card account numbers and shipping addresses on a provider’s secure
server so that they do not need to type in all the pertinent information required
for each sale on small and difficult-to-use mobile keypad devices. The PSP may
also act as a clearinghouse to share the revenues between all the partners
involved in the payment process. It could be a telco, a bank, a credit card
company, or a start-up.
Several models of collaboration as well as architecture have been implemented
to date in the m-payment transaction process: for example, a Full Payment
Service Provider, where the key player is acting both as the payment services
provider as well as the trusted third party between consumers and merchants.
Fees from these transactions together with basic hosting fees generate the
revenue for the full payment service provider. Some authors suggested that the
mobile network provider could fulfill this model if they have the technology to
handle the end-to-end.
Another model is the Mobile Wallet Provider, who offers mobile payment
processing without clearing. The provider stores and maintains consumer
account information and establishes secure communication with merchants for
user payment and order information. All communication between consumers
and merchants will be handled via the mobile wallet provider. The mobile wallet
provider provides customizable authentication methods that fulfill the consumer’s
needs for security. Transaction fees are the main source of revenue, which is
supplemented by hosting service fees. Other models include revenue sharing
models where separate key players undertake the roles of TTP and PSP
respectively.
In the above examples of m-payment models, the role of the customer and the
merchants remain consistent.
Many new initiatives that include various combinations of different types of
players already exist in the m-payment market. According to Northstream
(2002), the future m-payments market is one where players act together, each
taking a fair piece of the pie. New players will enter the market and will take
some of the profits that could otherwise remain with existing players; mobile
operators could possibly have a share of a market they have not been a part of
before; credit card companies could potentially have reduced profits due to the
entrance of mobile operators (Durlacher Research, 2001; Northstream, 2002).
A key advantage of the independent players is that they enable every mobile
user to use the service upon registration regardless of their mobile service
provider. For a specific merchant intending to use an m-payment solution,

Mobile Payments   71
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
teaming up with such a player is more efficient than teaming up with three or
more separate mobile operators.
On the other hand, an independent player will need to build a user base, usually
from scratch. A mobile operator or a bank will already have millions of
customers who are potential m-payment users (Northstream, 2002). The m-
payment value chain is complex and it will take some time before the different
roles are assigned to the best actors. It will, however, require expertise from
a variety of players in a carefully coordinated manner if mobile data services are
to be provided successfully (Fife, 2002). Cooperation between players is
desirable to achieve synergy, especially between banks and operators. Ac-
cording to Birch (2003), Paypal is an example that shows clearly how synergy
between a marketplace and an effective transaction system will by itself
generate and refine business models.
Emerging Issues in M-Payments
With some of the initiatives highlighted in the previous section, we found that
there are pertinent issues in the area that may be classified under two headings:
standardization and security. In the following sections, we have explored the
issues and current emerging solutions to these issues.
Standardization
MeT (2001) highlighted that the mobile commerce market today is typical of
an emergent one, encumbered with an abundance of approaches and concepts
that may not interoperate. Currently, there are several proprietary approaches
to formulating a functioning framework for mobile e-commerce and this lack of
a coherent roadmap for the future may lead to market fragmentation and delay
the growth phase. A standard interface is necessary because ease of use and
commonality of experience is key to driving adoption of new technology.
Having standards and a standards body will help jump-start the mobile
commerce market (Costello, 2002). Mobile commerce requires mobile pay-
ments. The payment, transactions and authorization component of mobile
commerce is currently being held back due to lack of standards and disparity
of systems that do not necessarily work together (Costello, 2002). The

72   Ding & Unnithan
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
adoption of m-payments, and the accompanying spread of m-commerce, may
be slowed down without standardization (Henkel & Zimmermann, 2001). A
host of different solutions have been proposed to enable mobile payments,
leading to a need for standardization, which may be reached by regulation,
voluntary agreements, or market forces (Henkel & Zimmermann, 2001;
Krueger, 2001b). Interoperability is central to the move towards next-
generation networks and the effective functioning of mobile payments will
require cooperation and interoperability (Krueger, 2001b; MeT, 2001). The
usefulness of payment systems increases with the number of users. As users
have a high preference for ubiquity, Krueger (2001) argues that the demand for
ubiquity will require interoperability and a certain amount of standardization.
Several initiatives are underway to provide ubiquity of services either by a
centralized solution or by cooperative solution. Early this year, two existing
bodies, the WAP Forum and the Open Mobile Architecture, have been
dissolved to form the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) as the first steps towards
wireless technology unification in its bid to devise the open, interoperable
standards industry needs to bridge the gaps among all the players (Open
Mobile Alliance, 2002). OMA aims to deliver responsive and high-quality
open standards and specifications for market and customer requirements, to
create a common architecture and to consolidate standards (Yahoo News,
2002). A consortium of companies called PayCircle, including Sun Microsystems
Inc., Hewlett-Packard Co., Oracle Corp., Lucent Technologies, Siemens AG
and several other smaller companies have teamed to create standards for the
way transactions originating on mobile devices are handled, a move that the
companies hope will remove some barriers to widespread mobile commerce
(Costello, 2002). PayCircle will attempt to correct non-standardization by
creating standard interfaces by which payment systems, wireless networks and
vendors will be able to communicate (Costello, 2002). In Europe, the Euro-
pean Committee for Banking Standards (ECBS) and the European Telecom-
munications Standards Institute (ETSI) have signed a co-operation agreement
to increase the effectiveness of their efforts towards the development of
standards for the security of telecommunications and m-commerce (m-
Travel.com, 2002).
RichSolutions is offering a mobile applications suite, RichPayments For Mobile
Devices, to render PDAs and mobile phones as mobile credit card terminals
that support signature capture and receipt retrieval. Card-present payments on
mass-market mobile devices such as Palm, Handspring, iPaq, Jornada, Sony,
and Kyocera smart phones, are possible given that the suite supports the Palm,

Mobile Payments   73
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Microsoft Windows CE and Symbian OS. The suite also works with industry
standard card readers, receipt printers and wireless carriers to give merchants
card-present services when used with card readers from Semtek or Verices.
The m-payment solution utilizes the connectivity options of mobile devices,
such as Palm.Net, CDPD, or 802.11b, to access the Internet for the processing
of SSL-secured payments (ePaynews.com, 2002). Nokia and Sony have
joined wireless carriers and manufacturers, such as AT&T, Cingular, NTT
DoCoMo, Vodafone, Samsung, Siemens and Ericsson, in an open initiative to
boost mobile Internet services. With the objective of establishing an “open
mobile architecture,” the venture aims to promote non-proprietary technology
to stimulate wireless innovation and competition (Total Telecom, 2001).
Security
The lack of security has been a major obstacle for the success of business-to-
consumer e-commerce in the fixed line Internet environment (Baschnonga,
2002; KPMG, 2000; MeT, 2001).  Baschnonga (2002) highlighted that the
evolution of payment services has been hampered by the absence of a
ubiquitous security standard. KPMG (2000) and MeT (2001) add that secure
payment standards are essential if m-commerce has to become a mass-market
pheonomenon. According to Kikuchi and Tanokura (2000), mobile commerce
began with the appearance of mobile phones equipped with smart cards,
because they offer security functions not available through other methods of e-
commerce. When mobile phones are equipped with a device to protect
personal information, the security level of an entire service, including the
network, improves considerably. Data on a smart card are said to be relatively
secure because it is difficult to extract encrypted data from the outside and
difficult to alter them. The mobile phone with its integrated SIM card is an ideal
bearer for the private key digital signature of a PKI system. Thus, the mobile
device can become a security tool, for example for secure payment in e-
commerce and m-commerce. The mobile phone will eventually become an
electronic wallet where payment will be made through electronic funds transfer
via the mobile phone network and the Internet or paid via the telephone bill
(Kikuchi & Tanokura, 2000).
Smart cards will be the preferred way of gaining access to a secure system. The
smart cards in third-generation (3G) mobile phones will include a processor for
encryption and other processing, an electrically-erasable programmable read-

74   Ding & Unnithan
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
only memory (EEPROM) to store user information, a program ROM, and
random access memory (RAM) work space. The EEPROM in the smart card
stores a variety of information that requires protection, including the terminal
information needed during communication, the electronic authentication certifi-
cate issued by the certifying authority to verify the identity of the user and the
encryption program itself. It can also store other confidential information such
as credit card numbers and personal identification details (Kikuchi & Tanokura,
2000).
Visa International announced a new global specification that ensures the
security of Internet payments made over mobile phones. The Mobile 3-D
Secure specification is based on existing payment technologies and extends
payment authentication initiatives into mobile commerce, enabling Visa card
issuers to validate the identity of their cardholders in real time. The Mobile 3-D
secure specification supports global interoperability, enabling consumers to
have a consistent and seamless experience regardless of the method or device
being used to access the Internet. It minimizes the impact on merchants and
requires no changes to backend payment systems. A number of Visa m-
commerce programs are currently underway worldwide to test the viability of
m-commerce payment solutions and raise consumer awareness. In Asia, Visa
has partnered with Hutchison Telecommunications and Dao Heng Bank to
develop a mobile payment service using Mobile 3-D Secure. In Europe, Visa
has signed a strategic alliance with Omnitel Vodafone, while in the US, Visa and
Sprint are working together to help facilitate secure mobile payments and
create opportunities to purchase goods and services over the Sprint PCS
nationwide wireless network (Visa, 2002).
Conclusions
It is evident that m-payment methods are here to stay, with m-commerce
gaining momentum. Lack of standards and security within devices as well as
networks may be pertinent issues for the future of m-payments. A range of
solutions involving financial institutions and mobile service providers seem to be
in progress, and perhaps is the key to addressing these issues. The lack of
standards across economies may be addressed through various consortiums,
involving many economic forums, mobile operators and also financial institu-
tions, if m-commerce has to be diffused into the mass market. The research

Mobile Payments   75
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
direction remains optimistic that m-payments will progress and become a
standard for future business.
Future Trends
As mobile commerce continues to evolve and new mobile devices emerge, m-
payment vendors will be compelled to evolve their solutions continually to keep
up with the changing technological and business landscapes. Eventually,
successful payment methods will be those that can allow increasingly sophis-
ticated client applications to be used on mobile handsets.
The need for secure, reliable payment methods to be made available to
consumers cannot be understated. Otherwise, consumers are potentially at the
risk of losing out in the long run. In this context, it is crucial to define standards
so as to guarantee real mobility, enabling seamless m-commerce and indepen-
dent from the current mobile infrastructure.
In addition, there are necessary amendments to be made in other areas such as
banking laws and retail traditions. Partnerships among mobile operators,
financial institutions and other businesses continue to emerge to provide
dynamic, secure mobile payment solutions. The development of this area would
be of interest to academics and industry consortiums involved in the dynamic
world of mobile business.
References
Ajay, C. et al. (2002). Mobile payment services [PDF]. Retrieved December
2, 2003, from http://islab.oregonstate.edu/koc/ece478/proj/2002RP/
GS.pdf
Baschnonga, A. (2002). Mobile payments [HTML]. Retrieved October 9,
2002, from http://www.pmn.co.uk/public/ce/features/pay01.html
Birch, D. (2003). Mobile payments are moving again [PDF]. Retrieved July 7,
2003, from http://www.hyperion.co.uk/PubWebFiles/Mobile
Payments.pdf

76   Ding & Unnithan
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Bucci, P. (2001). Mobile financial services and m-payments in Italy [HTML].
Retrieved October 8, 2002, from http://epso.jrc.es/newsletter/vol01/1-
4.html
Cavava R.Y., Delahaye, B.L., & Sekaran, U. (2001). Applied business
research. Australia: Wiley.
Clarke, M. (2003). M-payment technology will drive spending [PDF]. Re-
trieved February 7, 2003, from http://www.mobilepaymentforum.org/
pdfs/enn03-2003.pdf
Cnet. (2002). Sonera testing card-based mobile payment [HTML]. Retrieved
January 8, 2002, from URL:optional=&subject=&location=&ref=
keyword&f=view&id=1006947273621726189&block=
Cornelissen, J. (2003). Features - Mobile payments: Most solution providers
will go to the wall [HTML]. Retrieved May 19, 2003, from http://
www.kewney.com/articles/030223-payment.html
Dahlström, E. (2001). The common future of wallets and ATMs? Mobile
phones [HTML]. Retrieved October 8, 2002, from  http://epso.jrc.es/
newsletter/vol01/1-2.html
Ding, M., & Unnithan, C.R. (2002). mCommerce security – an appraisal of
current issues and trends. Proceedings of the Twelfth BIT Annual
Conference, Manchester, UK.
Durlacher Research. (2001). UMTS report: An investment perspective [PDF].
Retrieved January 27, 2003, from http://www.durlacher.com/down-
loads/umtsreport.pdf
ePaynews.com. (2002). RichSolutions offers mobile card payments [HTMl].
Retrieved December 9, 2002, from http://www.epaynews.com/
index.cgi?survey=&ref=browse&f=view&id=1031649974622215212
&block=http://www.epaynews.com/index.cgi?survey=&ref=
browse&f=view&id=1016111697621726189&block=
Heijden, H. vans der. (2002, June 17-19). Factors affecting the successful
introduction of mobile payments systems. Proceedings of the Fifteenth
International Bled Electronic Commerce Conference, Bled, Slovenia.
Henkel, J. & Zimmermann, F. (2001). The political dimension of payment
system innovations: The case of mobile payments [HTML]. Retrieved
January 8, 2002, from http://www.jrc.es/pages/iptsreport/vol63/english/
ICT2E636.html

Mobile Payments   77
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Jones, N. (2003). Paybox retrenches, but its technology remains attractive
[PDF]. Retrieved February 7, 2003, from http//gartner11.gartnerweb.com/
resources/112800/112827/112827.pdf
Jüptner, O. (2001). Europeans slow to adopt mobile [HTML]. Retrieved June
28, 2003, from http://www.e-gateway.net/infoarea/news/news.cfm?
nid=1600,
Kalakota, R., & Robinson, M. (2001). mBusiness- the race to mobility.
McGrawHill.
Kikuchi, T., & Tanokura, Y. (2000). Mobile phones provide secure eCommerce
[HTML]. Retrieved February 8, 2002, from http://www.nikkeibp.
asiabiztech.com/nea/200008/srep_108671.html
Korean Herald. (2002). Seongnam pushes to construct world’s first cash-free
city [HTML]. Retrieved January 8, 2002, from http://
www.koreaherald.co.kr/SITE/data/html_dir/2002/03/06/20020
3060026.asp
KPMG. (2000). Clash of the Titans – The future of m-financial services in
Europe [HTML]. Retrieved January 8, 2002, from  http://www.kpmg
consulting.co.uk/press/news/29nov00titan.html
Kreyer, N. et al. (2002). Standardized payment procedures as key enabling
factor for mobile commerce. EC-WEB 2002, Aix-en-Provence.
Krueger, M. (2001a). The future of m-payments –Business options and policy
issues [PDF]. Retrieved January 8, 2002, from ftp://ftp.jrc.es/pub/EURdoc/
eur19934en.pdf
Krueger, M. (2001b.) Mobile payments: A challenge for banks and regulators
[HTML]. Retrieved October 8, 2002, from http://www.jrc.es/pages/
iptsreport/vol63/english/ICT1E636.html
m-Travel.com. (2002). European groups to develop m-commerce standards
[HTML]. Retrieved November 9, 2002, from http://www.m-travel.com/
20222.shtml
Mastercard. (2003). MasterCard PayPass™continues to build momentum as
“The Simpler Way to Pay” [HTML]. Retrieved February 7, 2003, from
http://www.paypass.com/press/51303.html
MeT. (2001). MeT overview white paper (Version 2.0) – The Met Initiative
– Enabling mobile eCommerce [PDF]. Retrieved January 8, 2002, from
http://www.mobiletransaction.org/pdf/White%20Paper_2.0.pdf

78   Ding & Unnithan
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
MeT. (2003). MeT white paper on mobile transactions, [PDF]. Retrieved June
2, 2003, from http://www.mobiletransaction.org/pdf/R200/white_papers/
MeT_White_paper_on_mobile_transactions_v1.pdf
Mobile Payment Forum. (2002). Enabling secure, interoperable, and user-
friendly mobile payments [PDF]. Retrieved May 7, 2003, from http://
www.mobilepaymentforum.org/pdfs/mpf_whitepaper.pdf
Mochizuki & Atsushi. (2003). NTT data to tie up with Korean venture on
infrared mobile phone payment system [HTML]. Retrieved February 7,
2003, from http://www.mzoop.com/en/ad/news/adNewsReport.html?
cMode=view&nNum=20
Muller-Veerse, F. (1999) Mobile commerce report [PDF]. Retrieved Sep-
tember 5, 2001, from http://www.durlacher.com/research/res-reports.asp
Northstream. (2002). Mobile payments — Key aspects for launching success-
ful services. Retrieved January 14, 2003, from http://www.northstream.se/
download/mpayment.pdf
Open Mobile Alliance. (2002). New global organization, the Open Mobile
Alliance, formed to foster worldwide growth in the mobile services market
[HTML]. Retrieved October 8, 2002, from http://www.openmobile
alliance.org/pr2002-06-12.html
Paavalainen, J. (2001). Mobile business strategies. UK: Addison Wesley.
Paybox. (2003). The Paybox group restructures [Press release]. Retrieved
January 23, 2003, from http://www.paybox.co.uk/2555.html
Smart Card Alliance. (2003). Contactless payment and the retail point of sale:
Applications, technologies and transaction models [PDF]. Retrieved
February 7, 2003, from http://www.itsecurity.com/papers/sca1.htm#c
Telecom Media Networks. (2002a). Mobile payments in m-commerce [PDF].
Retrieved June 2, 2003, from http://www.cgey.com/tmn/pdf/Mobile
PaymentsinMCommrce.pdf
Telstra. (2002). M-commerce. The new way to pay – use your mobile phones
[HTML]. Retrieved September 19, 2002, from http://www.telstra.com.
au/mobilenet/cur_prom/m-commerce.htm
Ticehurst & Veal. (2001). Business research methods: A managerial
approach. Australia: Longman.
Towergroup. (2001). Research shows mobile payments will become critical
hub in bank/consumer relationship [HTML]. Retrieved November 9,

Mobile Payments   79
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
2002, from http://about.reuters.com/newsreleases/art_5-6-2001_id727.
asp#
TowerGroup. (2003). RF technologies and the rise of ISO 14443: The impact
on future proximity payments [HTML]. Retrieved July 7, 2003, from
http://www.mindbranch.com/page/catalog/product/2e6a73703f636f
64653d523330312d30333136.html
Trintech. (2002). Mobile payments: Preparing for the mCommerce revolution
[PDF]. Retrieved January 17, 2003, from http://www.marcusevans.com/
doc/Mobile_Payment_White_Paper.pdf
Unnithan, C.R., & Swatman, P.M.C. (2002, June). eBusiness and dot.com
driven transformation – A comparison of Australian and Indian experi-
ences in the telecom sector. Proceedings of the IFIP WG 8.4 Confer-
ence, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Visa. (2001). Visa announces new security standards for m-commerce pay-
ments [HTML]. Retrieved October 9, 2002, from http://corporate.visa.
com/mc/press/press29.html
Visa. (2003). Proximity payments [PDF]. Retrieved February 7, 2003, from
http://www.corporate.visa.com/mc/facts/ecommerce/pdfs/ecomm_
Proximity.pdf
Visa International. (2003). NTT DoCoMo, Visa International, Nippon Shinpan,
OMC Card and AEON Credit to test payments via mobile phone IrDA
ports [html]. Retrieved February 7, 2003, from http://www.corporate.
visa.com/mc/press/press143.html
Whatis.com. (2002). M-payment [HTML]. Retrieved January 8, 2002, from
http://searchebusiness.techtarget.com/sDefinition/0,,sid19_gci
772807,00.html
ZDNet. (2001). US mCommerce to top USD 10 Bn by 2005 [HTML].
Retrieved January 8, 2002, from  http://www.epaynews.com/index.cgi?
survey=&keywords=vending&

80   Pagani & Schipani
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter IV
Motivations and
Barriers to the
Adoption of 3G Mobile
Multimedia Services:
An End User Perspective in
the Italian Market
Margherita Pagani,
I-Lab Centre for Research on the Digital Economy,
Bocconi University, Italy
Danilo Schipani, Valdani Vicari & Associati, Italy
Abstract
This chapter provides an end-user perspective on mobile multimedia
services that are likely to emerge with the roll out of Third Generation
Mobile Services (3G). More specifically, the objectives of the study are:
•
to provide an insight into current behavior in terms of attitudes
towards, access and usage of multimedia mobile services by current
end users;

Motivations and Barriers to the Adoption of 3G Mobile Multimedia Services   81
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
to establish main clusters of mobile users;
•
to investigate the possible motivations and barriers of usage of new
mobile multimedia services as viewed by current users.
The remainder of this chapter is organized into the following four
sections. The first section provides a brief review of the literature on the
technology acceptance model. Next we present our research model based
on a qualitative exploratory survey conducted in six markets. Then we test
the proposed model on the Italian market and present the analysis and
results of our study. Finally we make conclusions by discussing the
implications of our study, followed by presenting future research
directions.
Introduction
As telecommunications move into an era where the distinction between voice,
video and data will be blurred, convergence of communications, information,
entertainment, commerce and computing will lay the foundation for the devel-
opment of an Information Society.
Over the last five years there have been a number of significant developments
in multimedia computing power, CD-ROM technology, digital television, the
Internet/Intranet, IP-based services, and terrestrial and satellite mobile com-
munications, which could have a profound impact on our society. These
technologies and systems may enable dramatic changes to take place in
working practices, entertainment, education and health care.
Many organizations within the computing, entertainment, and communications
industries are now looking to identify and capitalize on the promise of new
market opportunities in multimedia created by these developments.
However, demand for multimedia services, should they be successful, is
unlikely to be constrained to the fixed network. Greater pressure on time, and
the need for flexibility and responsiveness in business, will lead to a growing
demand for access to these services anytime, anywhere.
In order to meet the evolving needs of customers, and to capture the oppor-
tunity which this evolution represents, the mobile industry is looking to define

82   Pagani & Schipani
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
and develop a third generation of mobile technology that will take the personal
communications user into the Information Society by delivering voice, graphics,
video and other broadband information direct to the user, regardless of
location, network or terminal.
The purpose of the chapter is to provide an end-user perspective on mobile
multimedia services that are likely to emerge with the roll out of Third
Generation Mobile Services (3G).
The remainder of this chapter is organized into the following four sections. The
first section provides a brief review of the literature on the technology
acceptance model. Next we present our research model based on a qualitative
exploratory survey conducted in six markets. Then we test the proposed model
on the Italian market and present the analysis and results of our study. Finally
we make conclusions by discussing the implications of our study, followed by
presenting future research directions.
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM):
The Theoretical Background
Information Systems (IS) researchers have made significant efforts in building
theories to examine and predict the determinant factors of information technol-
ogy (IT) acceptance (Agarwal & Prasad, 1998, 1999). Existing models of IT
acceptance have their foundations from several diverse theories, most notice-
ably innovation diffusion theory, where individuals’ perceptions about using an
innovation are considered to affect their adoption behaviors (Agarwal &
Prasad, 1998; Moore & Benbasat, 1991; Rogers, 1995). Other important
theoretical models that attempt to explain the relationship between user beliefs,
attitudes, intentions, and actual system use include the theory of reasoned
action (TRA) (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980), the theory of planned behavior (TPB)
(Ajzen, 1991), and the technology acceptance model (TAM) (Davis, 1989;
Davis et al., 1989). Although there are numerous studies in the field of adoption
and diffusion of marketing-enabling technology (Daghfous, Petrof & Pons,
1999; Holak & Lehman, 1990; Labay & Kinnear, 1981; Plouffe, Vandenbosch
& Hulland, 2001; Rogers, 1995), previous work has mainly focused on the
adoption of products and technology (Au & Enderwick, 2000; Davis, 1989;
Eastlick & Lotz, 1999; Verhoef & Langerak, 2001). In contrast, the perspec-

Motivations and Barriers to the Adoption of 3G Mobile Multimedia Services   83
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
tive on services and service-enabling technologies is considerably less pro-
nounced. Despite the fact that several trend studies have been conducted
regarding the potential of wireless technology and 3G services (Durlacher,
2001; UMTS Forum, 2001), there exists a need for more substantive, theory-
based research, creating a more in-depth understanding of consumer behavior
with regard to m-commerce. In the information system literature on IT
adoption, researchers have conducted several studies to examine the relation-
ship between perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness, and the usage of
other information technologies (Adams et al., 1992; Chau, 1997; Davis, 1989;
Davis et al., 1989, Hendrickson & Collins, 1996; Mathieson, 1991; Szajna,
1996). Their researches have supported the Technology Acceptance Model
(TAM) proposed by Davis (1989), which posits that perceived ease of use and
perceived usefulness can predict the usage of technology.
TAM was derived from the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA). According to
Davis (1989), perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use are the two
determinants that influence people’s attitude toward IT usage intention and
actual IT usage. Perceived usefulness is defined as “the degree to which a
person believes that using a particular system would enhance his or her job
performance” and perceived ease of use is defined as “the degree to which a
person believes that using a particular system would be free of effort” (Davis,
1989, p. 320). Davis and his colleagues (Davis, 1989; Davis et al., 1989,
1992) demonstrated that perceived ease of use affected usage intention
indirectly via perceived usefulness.
In an extension to TAM, Davis and his colleagues examined the impact of
enjoyment on usage intention (Davis et al., 1992). They reported two studies
concerning the relative effects of usefulness and enjoyment on intention to use
and usage of computers. As expected, they found enjoyment had a significant
effect on intention. A positive interaction between usefulness and enjoyment
was also observed.
Several recent empirical studies have validated adoption theory in relation to
a wide range of products (Holak & Lehman, 1990; Labay & Kinnear, 1981;
Ostlund, 1973; Rogers, 1995) and technology (Beatty, Shim & Jones, 2001;
Plouffe et al., 2001). A large number of studies have investigated the use of
electronic commerce, but the field of mobile commerce has been left virtually
unexplored. In this research our goal is to extend the TAM model to study
motivations and barriers to the adoption of 3G mobile multimedia services. In
the following sections the research is divided into two stages: an exploratory
qualitative stage followed by a quantitative stage focused on the Italian market.

84   Pagani & Schipani
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Research Framework
Methodology
Many factors positively or negatively influence users’ adoption of multimedia
mobile services. In this section we identify several variables that influence
adoption of 3G mobile multimedia services. The variables are derived from two
preliminary pilot studies realized on a sample of young people in Italy and USA
followed by an exploratory qualitative study conducted by Nokia through 24
focus groups in six markets (Brazil, Germany, Italy, Singapore, UH, USA).
The second stage of the analysis concentrates specifically on a quantitative
marketing research. Data were gathered by means of a questionnaire. The
population consists of 1,000 Italian users of mobile services. It tries to describe
behaviors, roles and test variables influencing adoption of mobile computing.
We consider Italy because it is the European country with the higher penetration
of mobile phones and profitability, and it is also prone to market innovation.
The main goal of this research is to identify a hierarchy of importance
concerning the critical factors influencing the adoption of mobile services. To
realize this research objective, conjoint analysis was seen as the appropriate
statistical tool.
Conjoint Analysis
Conjoint analysis is a technique that allows a set of overall responses to
factorially designed stimuli to be decomposed so that the utility of each stimulus
attribute can be inferred from the respondent’s overall evaluations of the stimuli
(Green, Helsen & Shandler, 1988). A number of (hypothetical) combinations
of service elements can be formulated that will be presented to a sample of
customers. According to Lilien and Rangaswamy (1997), the analysis com-
prises three stages.
The first stage is concerned with the design of the study, where the attributes
and levels relevant to the product or service category will be selected. In the
second stage customers rate the attractiveness of a number of possible
combinations of customer service elements. Finally, in the third stage, ratings
are used to estimate part-worth utilities, that is, the utility that is attached to the

Motivations and Barriers to the Adoption of 3G Mobile Multimedia Services   85
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
individual levels of each service element included in the research design.
Consequently, an accurate estimate of customer trade-offs between services
elements can be obtained.
The dependent variable in our study was the intention to make use of mobile
services.
Exploratory Qualitative Stage
The fieldwork has been carried out face to face in the first and second quarters
of 2001 through 24 focus groups conducted by Nokia Networks in six markets
(Brazil, Germany, Italy, Singapore, UK, USA). The interviews focused in on
the core target for the 3G offering, namely, teenagers, young adults and family
adults, all currently using mobile phones for personal usage. The sample was
segmented by age, 16-19, 20-29 and 30-45, and by life stage.
The research looked primarily at the following mobile multimedia services:
photo messaging, mobile e-mail, video messaging and postcard messaging.
However, the research also briefly touched on rich text messaging, and on
video calling.
Of utmost importance in the study was to ensure that the respondents
concentrated on the messaging format, and did not allow previous misconcep-
tions about service or delivery of the service. They were therefore told to
Table 1. Fieldwork details
Country 
Sample 
Field times 
Brazil 
Nationally representative of adults 
aged 18-64 who are economically 
active 
6
th – 20
th March 2001 
Germany 
Nationally representative of adults 
aged 14+ 
23
rd March – 5
th April 2001 
Italy 
Nationally representative of adults 
aged 15+ 
23
rd March – 5
th April 2001 
Singapore 
Nationally representative of adults 
aged 15-64 
13
th – 26
th April 2001 
UK 
Nationally representative of adults 
aged 15+ 
23
rd March – 5
th April 2001 
USA 
Nationally representative of adults 
aged 18+ 
21
st – 30
th March 2001 
 

86   Pagani & Schipani
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Table 2. Motivation segmentation
1. 
Business 
- 
for business purposes 
2. 
Formality 
- 
When I want to send a formal message 
3. 
Urgency 
- 
When I need to know the message has arrived 
- 
When I want to send urgent communication 
- 
As a rapid way to stay in touch 
4. 
Function 
- 
To send a long piece of text 
- 
To send an attachment 
- 
When I don’t feel like talking 
- 
Practical reason (like to show something I want to buy) 
5. 
Price 
- 
When I want to communicate cheaply 
6. 
Discretion 
- 
Need to be discreet and quiet 
- 
When talking would disturb people around me 
- 
Might disturb the person I’m trying to contact 
7. 
Personal contact 
- 
To keep in touch with friends/family abroad 
- 
To send an intimate message 
- 
To contact people I don’t see very often 
- 
As a personalized way to send a message 
- 
To increase the feeling of contact 
- 
To share an experience 
- 
Nice for people to see me if they haven’t done so for a while 
- 
For longer greetings 
- 
When I don’t want to talk, but need to communicate 
8. 
Fun 
- 
Joke or chit-chat with friends 
- 
As a novel way to message 
- 
To share an experience 
- 
As it is just great fun 
- 
To send pictures from my holiday 
- 
To show something like a view 
- 
To express creativity 

Motivations and Barriers to the Adoption of 3G Mobile Multimedia Services   87
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
imagine that there would be no network problems, and not to concentrate on
pricing.
The prompted statements offered to the sample as motivations for usage of the
future multimedia mobile services can be classified to form eight broad
segments of usage (Table 2):
1.
Business
2.
Formality
3.
Urgency
4.
Function
5.
Price
6.
Discretion
7.
Personal Contact
8.
Fun
The research model to be empirically tested in the Italian market is illustrated
in Figure 1. The model is derived from the theories and hypothesis described
in the preceding section. The relationship constituting the model also has
support from prior theoretical and empirical work in the exploratory qualitative
stage.
Figure 1. Adapted TAM model on the adoption of multimedia mobile
services
 
PPeerrcceeiivveedd  eeaassee  
ooff  uussee  ((PPEEUU))  
PPeerrcceeiivveedd  
uusseeffuullnneessss  ((PPUU))  
AAttttiittuuddee  ttoow
waarrdd  
uussaaggee  ((AA))  
EEnnjjooyym
meenntt  
Urgency 
Personal Contact 
Formality 
Functions 
Business 
BBeehhaavviioorraall  
IInntteennttiioonn  ttoo  
UUssee  ((BB))  
Fun 
Hardware/Software 
functionalities 
Discretion 

88   Pagani & Schipani
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Exploratory Quantitative Stage
A following stage of analysis concentrates specifically on a quantitative
marketing research conducted in the second quarter of 2002 through question-
naires on a sample of 1,000 Italian users of mobile (sampled among over 18
Italians).
One thousand interviews provide a sampling error (at 50%) of  3.1% (with a
probability level of  95%).
The research, managed through telephone calls, tries to describe behaviors,
roles and variables influencing adoption of mobile computing.
The results of the quantitative marketing research are now summarized. This
research was structured in order to deepen the motivations and barriers
towards the innovative services delivered through 3G mobile services, the
eventual levels of demand and usage and the content types and formats that
consumers express opinion for.
Key items in the questionnaire used for analyzing the survey are as follows:
1.
Degree of service innovation perceived by consumers. Respondents
selected their answers from a list of innovative services categories;
2.
Interest for the services categories under scrutiny;
Figure 2.  Composition of the sample
!" 
# 
Women 
52.0% 
Men 
48.0% 
25-34 
years old 
19.7% 
18-24 years old 
11.6% 
35-44 years 
old 
17.3% 
55-64 years old 
14.5% 
beyond 65 
21.2% 
45-54 years old 
15.7% 

Motivations and Barriers to the Adoption of 3G Mobile Multimedia Services   89
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
3.
Preference for means/platforms through which selected services can be
accessed (portables, phone and/or TV);
4.
Analysis of key features of services (ease of use, speed, cost and
usefulness);
5.
Ranking of services features.
The services considered in the questionnaire are the following:
•
interactive and real-time entertainment;
•
data exchange among people and between people and various electronic
devices;
•
contextual and real-time shopping;
•
portfolio and personal funds management;
•
safety-related services;
•
location-based services.
All the services have been considered rather innovative (the average is 7.1 on
1 minimum -9 maximum scale).
In terms of the interest expressed towards these services, the sample distributes
are shown (see Figure 3).
Figure 3. Interest expressed towards multimedia mobile services
28.9% 
20.7% 
20.3% 
17.5% 
10.6% 
10.5% 
49.1% 
Portfolio and personal funds management 
Data exchange among people and  
between people and various electronic 
devices 
Remote control of place, objects and people 
Contextual and real-time shopping 
Play in real time 
Location based services (i.e., maps) 
Any service 

90   Pagani & Schipani
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Table 3 shows the main features preferred by the people to be attracted to use
these services.
“Usefulness” and ease of use are considered the most important variables in
order to access the segments of population and, as shown in Figures 4 and 5,
there are different meanings assigned to these words.
The final objective of the research was to identify the key descriptive elements
of homogeneous segments of the population. This is relevant in order to define
the right strategies to offer the new services in the proper and differentiated
way.
Table 3. Features preferred

 
$
 
%& 
31.3% 
	 
'& 
26.7% 
 
(& 
23.8% 
! 
)& 
18.2% 
	

Figure 4. Meaning of usefulness
Time savings  
23.9% 
Simple lifetime  
organisation  
 
35.2% 
Money savings 
22.5% 
Greater personal or 
family safety  
8.9% 
Enjoy 
9.5% 

Motivations and Barriers to the Adoption of 3G Mobile Multimedia Services   91
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The most statistically powerful variable in order to distinguish the behaviors of
people is the degree of interest towards the innovative services.
If we then clusterize the sample using this variable, and cross it with the socio-
demo data, it turns out that the kind of activities performed in life by the
consumers is the strong predictor of their future use of the new services.
In particular, it is possible to describe two different segments as indicated in the
following figure:
•
cluster 1 is composed of people who declared they are not interested in
the new services;
•
the remaining 51% can be divided in two groups that are different in terms
of the way firms should approach them to sell the new services.
The two segments are:
•
the “professionals,” that is, people who mainly are managers or entrepre-
neurs in life, who are 38% of the interviewed base;
•
the “students,” who account for the remaining 13%.
Figure 5. Meaning of ease of use
Few and simple steps  
29.3% 
Clear symbols  
and function keys 
36.5% 
Graphic display 
17.4% 
Help functions 
16.8% 

92   Pagani & Schipani
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The purpose is now to identify the variables network operators can use to
access the identified clusters. This is an essential piece of information for
crafting the right strategies in order to “catch” the segments.
The “professional” segment is made of people who look for usefulness as the
almost exclusive variable in order to access and pay for the service.
The “students” segment is made of people who look mainly for low-cost and
convenience.
For the entire interviewed base, an interesting relationship emerges: the degree
of interest is inversely related to the degree of knowledge of the service. In
particular it has been noticed that people who declare a low level of interest in
these services are those who actually know least the main features and potential
outcomes of these services, even though the interviewer deeply explained the
meaning of each service.
Conclusion
In this research, we attempt to identify valid factors that predict a user’s
adoption of 3G mobile multimedia services.
Figure 6. Main clusters of mobile users in the Italian market (base 1,000
Italian mobile users)
Cluster 3 
Professional
38%
Cluster  1 
Not interested 
in new  services
49%
Cluster 2 
Students
13%

Motivations and Barriers to the Adoption of 3G Mobile Multimedia Services   93
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The findings show key characteristics and factors playing decisive roles in the
development of strategies for the launch of multimedia mobile services.
The findings of this study have significant implications also in the perspective of
research on mobile consumer behavior. Our study provides further evidence on
the appropriateness of using the TAM model to measure the different dimen-
sions of actual multimedia mobile usage and it provides empirical evidence that
PEU (perceived ease of use) and PU (perceived usefulness) are important
factors that influence the user’s adoption of 3G multimedia mobile services.
The findings of the study suggest important practical implications for businesses
currently providing mobile multimedia services as well as those that are planning
to do so. It is evident from this study that in order to influence adoption of 3G
multimedia services, perceived ease of use (PEU) and perceived usefulness
(PU) must be enhanced.
Acknowledgment
The authors wish to acknowledge Massimo Farioli for his cooperation in the
data processing phase.
References
Adams, D.A., Nelson, R.R.,& Todd, P.A. (1992). Perceived usefulness, ease
of use, and usage of information technology: A replication. MIS Quar-
terly, 16(2), 227-250.
Agarwal, R., & Prasad, J. (1997). The role of innovation characteristics and
perceived voluntariness in the acceptance of information technologies.
Decision Sciences, 28(3), 557-581.
Agarwal, R., & Prasad, J. (1998). A conceptual and operational definition of
personal innovativeness in the domain of information technology. Infor-
mation Systems Research, 9(2), 204-215.
Agarwal, R., & Prasad, J. (1999). Are individual differences germane to the
acceptance of new information technologies? Decision Sciences, 30(2),
361-391.

94   Pagani & Schipani
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behaviour. Organizational Behaviour
and Human Decision Processes, 50(2), 179-211.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting
social behaviour. Eaglewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Allwood, C.M. (1998) Human-computer interaction-a psychological per-
spective. Lund, Sweden: Studentlitteratur.
Allwood, C.M., & Ljung, K. (1999). Computer consultants’ view of user
participation in the system development process. Computer in Human
Behavior, 15, 713-734.
Briggs, R.O., Adkins, M., Mittleman, D., Kruse, J., Miller, S., & Nunamaker,
J.F., Jr. (1998). A technology transition model derived from field inves-
tigation of GSS use aboard the U.S.S. CORONADO. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 15(3), 151-195.
Briggs, R.O., Vreede, G.J. de, & Nunamaker, J.F., Jr. (2003). Collaboration
engineering with ThinkLets to pursue sustained success with group
support systems. Journal of Management Information Systems, 19(4),
31-63.
Chau, P.Y.K. (1997). Re-examining a model for evaluating information center
success using a structural equation modelling approach. Decision Sci-
ences, 28(2), 309-334.
Chin, W.W., & Todd, P.A. (1995). On the use, usefulness, and ease of use of
structural equation modelling in MIS research: A note of caution. MIS
Quarterly, 19(2), 237-246.
Colby, C. (2002). Techno-ready marketing of e-services: Customer beliefs
about technology and the implications for marketing e-services. In T.R.
Rust & P.K. Kannan (Eds.), E-service: New directions in theory and
practice. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe Inc.
Davis, F.D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user
acceptance of information technology. MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 319-340.
Davis, F.D., Bagozzi, R.P., & Warshaw, P.R. (1989). User acceptance of
computer technology: A comparison of two theoretical models. Manage-
ment Science, 35(8), 982-1003.
Doll, W.J., & Torkzadeh, G. (1998, June). The measurement of end-user
computing satisfaction. MIS Quarterly, 12(2), 259-274.

Motivations and Barriers to the Adoption of 3G Mobile Multimedia Services   95
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Gefen, D., & Straub, D.W. (1997). Gender differences in the perception and
use of e-mail: An extension to the technology acceptance model. MIS
Quarterly, 21(4), 389-400.
Mathieson, K. (1991). Predicting user intensions: Comparing the technology
acceptance model with theory planned behaviour. Information Systems
Research, 2(3), 192-222.
Moore, G., & Benbasat, I. (1991). Development of an instrument to measure
the perceptions of adopting an information technology innovation. Infor-
mation Systems Research, 2(3), 192-222.
Nokia. (2002) 3G market research mobile messaging: An end user per-
spective. Nokia Report.
Parasuraman, A (2000). Technology readiness index: A multiple item scale to
measure readiness to embrace new technologies. Journal of Service
Research, 2(4), 307-320.
Rogers, E. (1995). Diffusion of innovations (4th ed.). New York: Free
Press.
Straub, D., Limayem, M.,& Karahanna-Evaristo, E. (1995). Measuring
system usage: Implications for IS theory testing. Management Science,
41(8), 1328-1342.
Szajna, B. (1994). Software evaluation and choice: Predictive validation of the
technology acceptance instrument. MIS Quarterly, 18(3), 319-324.
Szajna, B. (1996). Empirical evaluation of the revised technology acceptance
model. Management Science, 42(1), 85-92.
Taylor, S., & Todd, P.A. (1995). Understanding information technology
usage; A test of competing models. Information Systems Research, 6,
144-176.
VVA. (2002). Osservatorio marche: Le telecomunicazioni. VVA Report.
Zhu, W., & Nah, F.-H. (2002). Factors influencing adoption of mobile
computing. Issues and Trends of IT Management in Contemporary
Organizations – IRMA Conference Proceedings.

96   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter V
Impact of Mobile
and Wireless
Technologies on
Developing Countries
Ran Neuman,Philip Morris, USA
P. Candace Deans,University of Richmond, USA
Abstract
This chapter discusses the impact of mobile and wireless technologies on
developing countries.  The new technological advances and capabilities
allow developing countries the opportunity to “leapfrog” years of wired
technology and infrastructure development. Based on this study, it appears
that mobile and wireless technologies will not be enough to truly advance
developing countries.  In order to truly “leapfrog” and make up for years
of technological advancements, developing countries must consider dealing
with government corruption, violation of human rights and extremely low
literacy rates. These factors may derail the effort to “leapfrog” and gain
economic benefits from technological advancements.  The Village Cell

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   97
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Phone Program is presented as an example of how mobile technology can
be used to create a business opportunity along with changing the role of
women in society.  Any implementation of mobile and wireless technology
must be complimented with social and political reform in order to be
successful.
Introduction
Today there are more mobile phones than fixed-line telephone access through-
out the world, and the industry still shows a strong growth momentum. Wireless
subscription is expected to grow to 1.3 billion by 2004. The mobile technolo-
gies industry experiences rapid transformation with the evolution of new
standards and business strategies. In developing countries there is hope that the
digital divide, the gap in technology and infrastructure, will be history once
access to communication and the Internet is established and available to every
citizen. Current studies and literature on the advancement of digital technology
and its impact on developing countries allow us to witness just the beginning of
this digital revolution (Aronson). The impact this revolution is imposing on
developing countries is multidimensional:
•
Traditional businesses such as telecommunication carriers will have to
revise their business model and incorporate innovation as a core compe-
tency in order to succeed and survive this revolution.
•
Governments will need to adjust their approach for taxation and revenue
stream in order to compensate for the tidal wave of privatization and
dealing with the freedom and evolution of the Internet.
•
Dealing with illiteracy will become one of the main focuses, as it poses a
barrier for success of this revolution.
•
New laws and legal infrastructure will become a key necessity in order to
lead and manage rather than control and suppress the digital revolution.
•
Society will be transformed by changes in both social framework and
inherently changes in social structure, status and norms.
These are a few of the key elements surfacing in response to the digital
revolution and the fast paced evolution of mobile technologies. Many organi-

98   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
zations are set up to help developing countries narrow the digital divide and deal
with the changes detailed above.  There is visible evidence of successful
business models such as the “Village Cell Phone” programs. Developing
countries will continue to “leapfrog” years of wired technology and infrastruc-
ture, but they will not be able to “leapfrog” the social and political changes that
will result from this digital revolution and the adoption of innovative technolo-
gies and business models.
Mobile Technology Development
The concept of “leapfrog” refers to developing countries making a conscious
decision not to replicate the evolutionary cycle for infrastructure and business
models as based on developed countries. The concept refers to developing
countries bypassing years of historical development of wired infrastructure and
instead adopting newer standards, business models and change. According to
Gavin Jeffery of the Afghan Wireless Communications Company, “What we
will have is state of the art technology, straight from the beginning.” His quote
captured the essence of “leapfrog” during an interview with the BBC (BBC
News Online, 2002).
Technology Adoption Lifecycle
In his book “Crossing the Chasm,” Geoffrey Moore discusses the evolution of
technology and how we as a society adopt and mature along with the
technological advance. He introduces the “Technology Adoption Lifecycle” as
a representation of the population grouped by psychological profile and
demographics (Moore, 2002). The bell curve also signifies the lifecycle and the
point that each group is willing to accept the technology (see following page).
The groups are divided into Innovators, Early Adopters, Early Majority, Late
Majority, and Laggards. For many years, developing countries were classified
as either a Late Majority or Laggards from the perspective of technology
adoptions. There are many reasons why they were classified as such:
•
Education – Adopting new technology heavily depends on education,
skill, and the resources needed for support. In some countries up to 170

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   99
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
local languages are spoken, which presents a challenge when delivering
content. These developing countries are dealing with a high rate of
illiteracy as well as several failed attempts at standardizing the language.
Another language barrier is the use of non-Latin alphabets, which are
harder to adapt to computers and cell phones.
•
Cost – As wired infrastructure is maturing, the cost of implementation has
decreased, but is still relatively high. A study done by the Canadian
National Broadband Taskforce and InfoAmericas (see Appendix A)
organization reveals that it costs over 40,000 dollars to install one mile of
optical fiber, not including the cost of support infrastructure. This is a
tremendous undertaking for many of the underdeveloped countries, who
are still struggling to offer basic necessities for their citizens. Much of the
current infrastructure (electricity, running water) is not offered throughout
developing countries due to the challenges of funding, regulation, gover-
nance, and harsh topology such as mountains, wet and swampy ground,
and deserts.
•
Government – Local government still own and manage many of the
companies providing telecommunication services. Landlines are heavily
taxed and governments are reluctant to change the business model and
lose much of that revenue stream. Many developing countries are faced
Technology Adoption Lifecycle
innovators
early adopters
early majority
late majority
laggards

100   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
with political instability, bureaucracy, and corruption, which slow down
the adoption of change and the passing of reforms.
This list is not all-inclusive, but does illustrate why for many years developing
counties have been late to adopt technology and are classified as Late Majority
or Laggards (Moore, 2002).
As a witness to the changes brought on by the evolution of the Internet in the
late 1990s, developing countries have made a conscious decision to “leapfrog”
generations of technology and move to early stages of the technology adoption
lifecycle and become innovators and early adaptors of mobile technologies.
Convergence
Prior to further discussion about the industry trends and details about the
prevailing technologies, it is important to understand the nature of the demand
for mobile technologies. Many use the terms “wireless” and “mobile” inter-
changeably and to some extent that is correct; but as technology evolves the
Figure 1.
Source: DiamondCluster International

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   101
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
lines will become even blurrier. “Wireless” refers to transmitting and accessing
data through a device without being hooked to a fixed phone line or cable.
“Mobile” in the traditional sense refers to the ability to transmit voice over a
phone without being connected to a landline.  Figure 1 shows the relationship
between and the demand for voice and data to converge to one common
platform.
There is a tremendous growth and a push for the “surf-and-talk-a-lot” services.
In recent years, mobile manufacturers have responded by providing data
services through the use of a cell phone through services such as SMS (Short
Messaging Service) and Internet access though the use of portals (Nguyen,
2002). This trend will continue with the adoption of technologies such as Voice
Over Internet Protocol (VOIP) and the eventual adoption of 4G (Fourth
Generation) network standards (further details in the next section).
The Wireless Hype Cycle
In order to better illustrate the roadmap from past to present and future
perspective of mobile technologies, Gartner Group (a research organization)
presents another cycle to complement the technology adoption lifecycle. Much
of the technology evolution is dictated by the innovation and adoption of
standards throughout the industries. Each standard represents a way of
transmission, which can include data, voice or video. Standards are researched
and certified by standard bodies such as IEEE (Institute of Electrical and
Electronic Engineers). Once they are accepted, they are utilized throughout the
industry. Gartner Group presents the “Wireless Hype Cycle” (see Appendix
B), which illustrates the marketing hype or visibility of a technology versus its
maturity stage and the timeline for the technology to reach plateau of accep-
tance. The cycle goes through the following stages: Technology Trigger, Peak
of Inflated Expectations, Trough of Disillusionment, Slope of Enlightenment,
and Plateau of Productivity. Each technology is marked to indicate its position
and the time to plateau or adoption speed.
The United States is considered to be behind the rest of the developed world
in infrastructure and standards adoption. Asian and European countries have
made significant investment into 3G (third generation) networks (see Appendix
C). The heavy investment into 3G networks promised higher speed and larger
capacity for multimedia transmission. European countries sold licenses in the
sum of over 100 billion dollars, but most companies have found the technology

102   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
to be extremely difficult to implement and are rethinking their strategies.
Advances in technology since the standardization of 3G have also contributed
to companies refocusing their research and development. Wi-Fi – Hotspots are
currently at the height of the hype curve. Wi-Fi Hotspots provide high-speed
Internet access to equipped devices within approximately 50 meters of a small
base-station. This newer technology is much cheaper to implement and has
taken the industry in a new direction. The growing popularity of Wi-Fi Hotspots
has brought on new business models such as the Starbucks and T-Mobile.  The
hype and the successful business models forced companies to rethink their 3G
strategies and start looking toward the future for 4G (Fourth Generation)
(Gartner, 2003).
Europe and Asia are considered to be early adopters of technology, while
America is considered part of the early majority. Some might even classify the
United States as laggards based on the technology adoption lifecycle. Compa-
nies in America have not bought into the idea behind 3G, and therefore are still
supporting 2 and 2.5G. American companies have spent the last couple of years
maturing their infrastructure and providing incremental improvements.
In recent years, developing countries have been more influenced by Europe and
Asia and have started to invest directly in 3G networks, therefore bypassing
generations of infrastructure built up. European and Asian companies have
been willing to pay premium prices for 3G licenses and the right to sell wireless
services in those countries.  The governments of developing countries are still
holding on to the state-run telecommunication firms, focusing strictly on
traditional wired services such as fixed phone and low-speed Internet provider.
With the privatization of the wireless market and the large support of European
and Asian firms, new business models are forming within those countries based
on the newer technologies. The cost of implementing a wireless network could
be as much as 90% cheaper than the traditional implementation fixed and wired
access (see Appendix A). Local shop owners throughout rural areas in the
developing countries are setting up local area networks (LAN) and providing
complimentary services to those residing within a radius of a few miles of the
shops. In addition to Internet access, the shop owners can offer wireless
Internet access, wireless devices and mobile phones (Gartner, 2003).
Experts have predicted that 4G (Fourth Generation) networks will not be
actualized within the next five years, but in recent months the markets and
technology advances have accelerated the timeline. Gartner Group classifies
4G as a technology trigger in the Wireless Hype Cycle. Europe, Asia and
America are focusing on the development of 4G standards through research

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   103
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
and prototyping (Appendix D). The potential 4G standards bring promise to
developing countries in their attempt to narrow the digital divide. The newer
standard promises wider coverage area, supported by fewer base stations, and
will help developing countries provide services even in remote rural areas,
regardless of topology (Gartner, 2003).
Business Models for Mobile Technology
Mobile technologies are significantly changing current business models, even
with the fast pace evolution of e-commerce. The principles guiding the evolution
of m-commerce are anytime, anywhere, by/for anyone, with anything. Many in
the industry like to think of the m as representing: multilingual, multicultural,
multimodal, multidevice, and so forth. The telecommunication industry has
traditionally been about managing cost. Companies invest a tremendous
amount of resources in infrastructure and for the rest of the lifecycle, they focus
on driving down support and maintenance costs. One of the barriers for change
is the high investment or commitment in current infrastructure. Many companies
are forced to write off losses in order to refocus their resources on newer
standards. The new paradigm will force telecommunication companies to
change their business models and focus on innovation and value added
services.
Value Chain Analysis
Regina Wong, in her presentation to the GSM Congress Asia Pacific 2000 in
Singapore, presented a picture comparing the traditional versus the new mobile
technologies value chain (see Appendix E). In her view, mobile service
providers will simply replace the traditional services throughout the value chain.
In her model, application providers become the enablers while the mobile
service providers are responsible for aggregating content and providing func-
tionality. Regina Wong’s value chain representation is linear and does not take
into account the new value creation by way of new services or the need for
mobile service providers to provide content and transactional services. The
newer models promote collaboration and seamless integration as key services
as well as enhancement of the end-user experience (Wong, 2000). In August

104   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
of 2002, Bror Salmelin presented in a European Union forum about the
“Challenges and Opportunities in the E-economy - the Single European E-
Business Space”. In his presentation, he depicts a newer business model that
focuses on the empowerment, creativity and value creation based on
interoperability and open systems (see Appendix F). In the new m-commerce
business model only several of the key market players will provide vertical
integration, meaning they will have control throughout the value chain. Open
systems will provide for the involvement of many new players in the market;
some focusing on horizontal services, most focusing on niche markets. Tradi-
tional telecommunication companies once considered utilities will adopt new
business models and transform themselves to value add service providers
(Salmelin, 2002).
DiamondCluster International presented an illustration to better explain the new
value chain and the sources of revenue (see Figure 2). As countries adopt more
of the mobile technologies standards and go through deregulation and
privatization, more of these revenues will be realized. Developing countries
“leapfrog” many of the traditional business models we have created in the
developed countries and through small-scale developments they are transform-
ing their industries through the use of mobile technologies
In developing countries many of the governments still manage and control the
entire value chain. Keys to success include market reforms, deregulation and
Figure 2.
Source: DiamondCluster International
Access
Content
USER
REVENUES
BUSINESS
REVENUES
Network provision
Wireless service fee
similar to that charged for
voice (monthly access
fees, subscriber fees,
etc.)
Mobile ISP
Traffic charges
for data minutes
(based on
minutes until
GPRS, then
packet-based).
Mobile Portal
- Fees per use of
certain services
(info., reservations,
ticketing)
- Subscriber fees
- Fees per acess
Mobile Content
- Fees per use of
certain services
(info., reservations,
ticketing)
- Subscriber fees
- Fees per acess
Wholesale network
provision
Wireless service
Wireless mobile
ISP
Traffic charges
(based on
minutes until
GPRS, then
packet-based).
Portal Real
Estate
- Fees to be
listed
- Advertising (can
be location
based)
m-Commerce/
Transactions
- Referral fees
- Commissions
from affiliated
merchants
Illustrative
Sources of Revenue -- Pricing Models

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   105
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
privatization of many of the industries. This will allow outside and local firms to
compete and meet the future demand for m-commerce. The following section
provides an example of newly formed enterprises within developing countries
that utilize the lower cost and effectiveness of m-commerce (Nguyen, 2002).
The “Village Cell Phone” Program
The per capita income of a Bangladesh worker is one hundredth of that of a US
worker.  Meaning, you would need 100 Bangladeshis to provide the buying
power of one American. This statistic was on the mind of Dr. Iqbal Z. Quadir
when he was looking for investors for his idea of a mobile network in
Bangladesh. He is now the founder of Grameen Phone, which is built upon the
vision to transform poor countries by establishing a wireless network that will
be used for production rather then consumption.  Dr. Quadir’s company is the
sponsor of the “Village Cell Phone” program, which provides wireless and
banking services to over 50,000 Grameen Phone women (Grameen Phone,
2003).
In this program, women living in rural areas of developing countries that lack
developed infrastructure, such as fixed line telephones, are buying cell phones
financed by bank loans and are selling “talk time,” much like a pay phone. This
phenomenon is enabled by the development of mobile technology and entre-
preneurs who have a vision of transforming isolated and undeveloped areas into
emerging markets. Advances made in mobile technologies in the last few years
have made it possible for the realization and formation of business models
similar to the scenario of the “Village Cell Phone”.  Developing countries and
the service providers are claiming to “leapfrog” the rest of the developed world
by offering advanced mobile technologies. “Leapfrog” refers to the fact that the
developing countries are bypassing the wired generation and are directing their
attention and resources to wireless infrastructure and the newer advanced
technologies.  Mobile technologies have significantly changed the lives of those
living in the rural villages described in this article; but they also have other effects
on the social and economic development of those countries. The growth of the
“Village Cell Phone” program has transformed the role of women in their local
society as well as their economic status and their contribution to the welfare of
the village (BBC News Online, 2002).
Bangladesh has the lowest number of phones in South Asia, which is why the
“Village Cell Phone” program was a key in the transformation of the country.

106   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Grameen Bank, a subsidiary of Grameen Phone, provides a low cost bank loan
that is used to set up a mobile phone exchange. The bank only lends money to
women, which challenges the status quo of the culture. One of the conditions
of the loans requires the husband to transfer the deed of his property to his wife;
this is done to reduce the chances of abandonment. The bank sees women as
less of a credit risk and therefore targets them for their programs. Once the
mobile phone exchange is established, the women provide communication
services to their village, which in many cases has few to no telephone
connections (Grameen Phone, 2003).
This business strategy started out in the late nineties and has grown through the
years.  The Grameen Phone women have expended their enterprises and are
selling other services related to mobile technologies. The cost of the cell phone
has deceased significantly, becoming a viable replacement for landlines or pay
phones. Companies have created low cost or even disposable cell phones with
a prepaid function built into the system. The Grameen Phone women are able
to sell those newer phones without having to establish accounts or set up a
billing system. This allows the villagers to control their spending and provides
an alternative to either establishing a line of credit or meeting the requirements
of other mobile service providers. Many of the Grameen Phone women have
established their business inside a local coffee shop at the centers of their
villages. These relationships led to the creation of the “small-scale telecentres”
throughout the developing countries (CNN Specials, 2001).
Telecentres and Community Access
Starbucks wants their customers to access the Internet while sipping on their
premium coffee beverages. This is a new value added service that has rapidly
expended beyond the coffee shop. Wi-Fi is one of the key enabling technolo-
gies that allows mobile service provider to set up “hotspots” in highly dense
areas, therefore covering a greater customer base within a few mile radius. Even
Central Park within New York City now offers a free hotspot for the use of the
park’s visitors. While this has become a recent phenomenon in the United
States, this concept has been on the top agenda of many developing countries
as a way to link up rural areas and provide communication capability that is
otherwise not available.
Using a low cost tower, shop owners in many developing countries are setting
up local area networks (LAN) and are providing complimentary services within

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   107
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
their community. In the late nineties the focus was on communication between
the local villager and those village members who left for a job abroad. In the last
few years, those businesses have transformed themselves and are now provid-
ing newer service such as Internet access, billing service, and commerce. There
are several cited examples of farmers looking for a better location to sell their
products based on pricing information they receive through the Internet via PC
and cell phones. In the past they were forced to sell for rather cheap to the local
companies since they lacked the knowledge about the ongoing rate of their
crops. Many of the fishing villages utilize the Internet and mobile technology to
improve their fishing efficiency by accessing information about weather,
movement of fish, GPS based devices and overall security as they go out early
every morning (Cowhey, 2003).
Worker Migration
Many of the villages were losing their population due to lack of jobs and
opportunities.  This trend alarmed many of the village leaders and the govern-
ment of those developing countries. In order to provide opportunity and
maintain connectivity with rural areas, many of the villages have set up training
centers for the locals to learn more about the use of personal computer, mobile
devices and the application and services that they enable. This approach
creates a way for companies to offer more services to the villages and help the
villages maintain their infrastructure for developing new capabilities (Charny,
2003).
The above scenarios have gotten the most attention in recent years due to their
success.  Many organizations and developing countries that have adopted these
business models are utilizing the new mobile technologies to connect all rural
areas and provide new services where they were not previously available
before. The cost of implementing the infrastructure has declined, and many new
business models have formed, providing new value added services that were
previously not available for the majority of the population in the developing
countries. In order to be successful the local markets must go through further
reform and privatization of their businesses. The government should focus on
social, health and economic issues as they prepare their countries for the
changes the mobile industry will bring about.

108   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Social and Political Development due to
Introduction of New Technology
The evolution of the Grameen Phone women has not just created a change in
the business strategies, but also a social change. Many of the developing
countries are still years behind in social advances. They are faced not only with
poverty but also with illiteracy, health concerns, political instability and per-
sonal security. Mobile technology is not the panacea to solve all the issues
currently facing developing countries, but it does provide the means to
empower individuals and communities. Vanessa Gray and Michael Minges of
the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) discuss the other variables in
the effort to narrow the digital divide (see Appendix G). They focus on human
skills and the affordability of infrastructure as the other variables critical to the
success of any change in those countries. Human skills refer to literacy,
language, and learning as keys to the success of the mobile revolution.
Much of the success of the mobile phone is the fact that it serves a more basic
need of communication. Many of the breadwinners in these villages end up
going abroad to earn more money to support their families. The only mode of
communication is letters and packages, which are slow to arrive and are an
unprotected mode of transferring money to the families. Mobile phone satisfied
the need to connect with family members and maintain the close community ties
so ingrained in those cultures. Once mobile phone services were in place, it was
easy to build on the momentum and engage the population. Mobile phone
presents an easier learning curve than a personal computer. It is much easier to
learn the 10 key numbers versus learning how to use a keyboard regardless of
the language used, be it English or the commonly used local language. Many of
the newer devices are providing much-improved graphical interface with
multimedia capabilities; this allows many to avoid learning the use of the
traditional keyboard altogether (BBC News Online, 2002).
Education
Developing countries, with the help of world organizations, are setting up
training centers, many based on the Telecentres and Community Access
concepts. This provides a location for classes as well as a way to generate
revenue to further finance current and future expansion of the programs. This
helps elevate computer literacy within rural areas and furthers technology

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   109
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
awareness. In more urban areas, the government is relying on universities and
private companies to offer training and education opportunities to all citizens.
World organizations are monitoring the growth of class enrollment as a measure
of progress but there are still many obstacles to overcome (M-Business Daily,
2002).
Local Languages Going Digital
Many of the developing countries face the issues of localization and spoken
languages. According to studies by Ethnologue, many countries have over 100
local languages spoken; Malaysia and the Philippines both have 139 and 169
spoken languages respectively. This proves to be a challenge for providing
content since they cannot achieve economies of scale or apply same level of
resources for each language.
Representation of digital characters is one of the biggest challenges facing
content providers and application providers in localizing digital displays.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programs) cites examples describing the
difficulties in adjusting technology standards to serve developing countries. For
example, Thai language is not based on the Latin alphabet, has “some 44 Thai
consonants and around 30 vowels requiring almost 90 different letters on the
keyboard (compared to 66 for English)” according to UNDP (Gray, 2002).
Impact on Social Structure
Grameen Phone women are gaining status by owning businesses and are
becoming the breadwinners of their households; this trend is contrary to the
traditional cultural norms practiced in those countries. There are many ques-
tions and concerns about the role of women within the technology revolution.
Several organizations were established to address the many issues facing
women in the developing countries and the narrowing of the gender divide
(among many others):
•
Office of Women in Development Bureau for Global Programs, Field
Support and Research United States Agency for International Develop-
ment

110   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Women’s Learning Partnership (WLP)
•
Women in Global Science and Technology (WIGSAT)
Regardless of technology advancement these women are dealing with basic
human rights and equality. Many believe that thanks to programs such as the
“Village Cell Phone,” women will be empowered and be in a better position to
overcome cultural and political norms. In June 2001, Nancy Hafkin and Nancy
Taggart of the Academy for Educational Development (AED) released their
study on the topic of “Gender, Information Technology, and Developing
Countries: An Analytic Study”. The study deals with the role of women in
developing countries and the impact of new technology on their lives.  Cultural
and social progress starts with the freedom to make choices; this is not a reality
for many of the women in developing countries. Many women lack the basic
human rights such as walking in public venues, owning properties, having a job,
personal security from physical and mental abuses and many other rights
commonplace in the developed countries (Hafkin, 2001).
In order to address not only the digital divide, but also the gender divide,
organizations such as Grameen Phone are taking the counter-culture approach.
Grameen Phone made a conscious decision to make the “Village Cell Phone”
program available only to women. In order to ensure the education of women,
many institutions have started to hold “women-only days”. Many women
complained that they were feeling uncomfortable attending classes or cyber-
cafés frequented predominantly by men. This is attributed to the physical
presence and the public interaction with men, which is prohibited in many
countries. This would prove to be an issue when organizations were looking for
instructors and support personnel. Women were uncomfortable asking for help
or support from a man (Hafkin, 2001).
Changes in the Political Landscape
Developing countries have not done enough reform to open up their markets
and enable the growth of small business and the entry of outside firms into the
market. State-run companies, health care systems, and farms are slow to adapt
to the changes needed to benefit from the new advances in technology. This
stagnation is due to the potential loss of revenue from the traditional stream, for
example, phone line usage fees, taxes, tariffs, and lack of competition. Much
of that fear is unwarranted and is an inhibiting process.

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   111
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Governments of developing countries must reform in order to spur market
growth; not only to bridge the digital divide, but also to reduce the extremely
high levels of poverty and health concerns. The governments are not keeping
up with the change of technology and are late to adopt new governing
approaches. There is a missed opportunity to manage and generate growth
within the developing countries. In the late 1990s European governments
auctioned off licenses for 3G networks. The auction produced revenues
amounting to tens of billion of dollars. Developing countries have the opportu-
nity to invite outside investors and local companies to bid for licenses and
generate revenue. This is also an opportunity for the government to let someone
else manage the network and provide better quality of products and services
(Fink, 2002).
All over the world, there are new initiatives with the goal of redefining the way
people interact with the government through the e-government efforts. This is
done for the purpose of eliminating bottlenecks within the systems and making
the government more efficient. This is just one of the newer collaboration
business models that have evolved by the enablement of e-commerce. Mobile
technologies extend the business model toward other applications such as
billing for a variety of services from phone bills, movie tickets, grocery stores,
vending machines, and so forth. The mobile phone serves as a virtual purse and
based on a well-developed security model, a user can pay for any type of
service. The success of mobile technology is due to its shorter learning curve
versus learning to access the Internet via the traditional keyboard.
Mobile technology applications are already a reality, but in order for develop-
ing countries to partake there must be reform in the banking systems. Many of
the citizens in developing countries, especially in rural areas, do not hold a bank
account. This is a barrier for the growth of mobile services since they rely on
established accounts to solidify relationships with their customers. One of the
alternatives has been the growth of the prepaid calling plans; but those users do
not benefit from the same security and legal protection as those with an
established relationship with a bank and a service provider (Hermida, 2002).
Regulation
Companies entering into the developing countries’ markets lobby for the
formation of an independent regulatory body rather than government regula-
tion. Many of the countries have yet to relinquish control of the governing

112   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
bodies regulating the telecommunication industry. Without the knowledge of
how to regulate under the new standards any progress made economically
could be diminished. With government deregulation and the privatization of
industries, the legal systems must be updated to deal with anti-competitive
practices, copyright infringement regarding digital content, technology patents
and many other related laws. The development of a new legal system,
privatization and independent regulation would create a free market where
competition would lead to better pricing and quality mobile services for the
citizens (Hermida, 2002).
Implementing Change
Developing countries have bolstered their ability to “leapfrog” years of techno-
logical advances straight into the wireless age. Many have heavily depended on
outside firms and organizations for assistance in implementing and managing the
programs. In order to maintain the momentum, developing countries must
aspire to “leapfrog” years of social and political development. Implementing
mobile technology without the development of human capital and organizational
infrastructure would derail the effort of world organizations and private
companies entering the new markets. Without the readiness for new techno-
logical advances, only a few would benefit and the gap between developed and
developing countries would widen. The willingness to “leapfrog” years of
technological advances has many benefits as detailed so far, but there are also
risks such as implementing standards that have not fully matured and might fall
out of favor.  Developing countries adopting 3G networks are at risk of
investing large sums of resources while the rest of the world adopts more
promising 4G networks or Wi-Fi standards.
Investments in mobile and wireless technologies must be complemented with
investments in education and health. Issues such as illiteracy, lack of health care
services and other basic human services must be addressed in order to improve
the lives of those living in developing countries. Mobile and wireless technolo-
gies are not the panacea for all those issues, but rather the enablers for
developing countries to narrow the gap and improve the lives of their citizens.

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   113
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
References
Aronson, J. (2002, November 21). Mobile and wireless global trends and
strategies. USC GLOCOM Tokyo Forum on Socio-Economic Impacts
of Mobile/Wireless Technologies: Strategies and Policies.
Charny, B. (2003, April 2). Is Africa ready for 3G? CNET News.com. http:/
/news.com.com/2100-1037-995186.html
CNN Specials - Virtual Villages Bangladesh. (2001). CNN, http://
www.cnn.com/SPECIALS/2000/virtualvillages/story/bangladesh/>
Cowhey, P.F. (2003, January). The new networks and new economic
opportunities. Graduate School of International Relations and Pacific
Studies and California Institute for Telecom and Information Technology
University of California, San Diego.
Grameen Phone. http://www.grameenphone.com/
Gray, V., & Minges, M. (2001, June 21). It’s not just infrastructure: The 3
L’s & the Internet in South East Asia. International Telecommunication
Union (ITU), Geneva, Switzerland.
Hafkin, N., & Taggart, N. (2001, June). Gender, information technology,
and developing countries: An analytic study. Academy for Educational
Development (AED) for the Office of Women in Development Bureau for
Global Programs, Field Support and Research, United States Agency for
International Development.
Hermida, A. (2002, October). Wireless net strides Bangladesh. Online post-
ing. BBC News Online.
ITU: Mobile key to eliminating “Digital Divide”. (2002, March 27).  M-
BusinessDaily, http://www.mbusinessdaily.com/story/WORLDWATCH/
MBZ20020327S0001
 Mobiles find right price for farmers. (2002, October). Online posting. BBC
News.
Moore, G. (2002). Crossing the chasm. Harper Business.
Nguyen, L. Mobile Internet: Internet evolution or mobile revolution?
DiamondCluster International, www.diamondcluster.com
Online mobiles to leapfrog into the future. (2001, September). Online posting.
BBC News Online.

114   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Redman, P. (2003, March 23-27). Mobile technology and business sce-
nario. Gartner Group - U.S. Symposium/ITxpo, San Diego, California.
Redman, P., Dulaney, K., & Clark, W. (2003, May 30). Hype cycle for
mobile and wireless networking, 2003 - Strategic Analysis Report.
Gartner Group.
Salmelin, B. (2002, August). Challenges and opportunities in the e-economy
- the single European e-business space. DG Information Society.
Starbucks - Starbucks.com
Wong, R. (2000, September). Wireless Internet: Market trends and strategies.
ARC Group, GSM Congress Asia Pacific 2000, Singapore
Suggested Readings
Books
Keen, P. & Macintosh, R. (2001). The Freedom Economy, McGraw-Hill.
Moore, G. (2002). Crossing the Chasm, Harper Business.
Paavilainen, J. (2001). Mobile Business Strategies: Understanding the
Technologies and Opportunities, Addison Wesley.
Magazine and Online Articles
“4G - Beyond 2.5G and 3G Wireless Networks”, http://www.mobileinfo.com/
3G/4GVision&Technologies.htm
“Afghanistan joins mobile age”, Online posting, Feb. 2002, BBC News Online
“Asia: Profound developments this year in telecoms sector”, Dec. 18, 2002,
Business Asia, http://www.ebusinessforum.com/index.asp?layout=
rich_story&doc_id=6278
“CNN Specials – Virtual Villages Bangladesh”, 2001, CNN, http://
www.cnn.com/SPECIALS/2000/virtualvillages/story/bangladesh/>
“ITU: Mobile Key To Eliminating “Digital Divide”, March 27, 2002, M-
BusinessDaily, http://www.mbusinessdaily.com/story/WORLDWATCH/
MBZ20020327S0001

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   115
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
“Mobiles to leapfrog into the future”, Online posting, Sept. 2002, BBC News
Online
“Mobiles find right price for farmers”, Online posting, Oct. 2002, BBC News
Online
“The Economist: 3G mobile phone networks face new rival—4G”, May 29,
2003, ebusinessforum, http://www.ebusinessforum.com/index.asp?layout
=rich_story&doc_id=6509
“Wired up for wealth”, Online posting, July 2002, BBC News Online
Aronson, J. (2002). “Mobile and Wireless Global Trends and Strategies”,
Nov. 21, 2002, USC GLOCOM Tokyo Forum on “Socio-Economic
Impacts of Mobile/Wireless Technologies: Strategies and Policies”
Charny, B. (2003). “Is Africa ready for 3G?”, April 2, 2003, CNET News.com,
http://news.com.com/2100-1037-995186.html
Cowhey, P. F. (2003). “The New Networks and New Economic Opportuni-
ties”, Jan. 2003, Graduate School of International Relations and Pacific
Studies And California Institute for Telecom and Information Technology
University of California, San Diego
Dholakia, N. “Patterns, Opportunities, and Challenges in the Emerging Global
M-Commerce Landscape”, College of Business Administration, Univer-
sity of Rhode Island
Fink, C., Mattoo, A., & Rathindran, R. (2002). “An Assessment of Telecom-
munications Reform in Developing Countries”, Oct. 2002, World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper 2909
Fink, C. & Kenny, C. J. (2003). “W(h)ither the Digital Divide?”, Jan. 2003,
information and communication technologies (ICTs), http://www.itdg.org/
html/icts/icts.htm
Gauer, M. (2003). “M-Commerce Ready for prime time?”, April 2, 2003,
Mercer Management Consulting
Gray, V. & Minges, M. (2002). “It’s not just infrastructure: The 3 L’s & the
Internet in South East Asia”, June 21,2002, International Telecommuni-
cation Union (ITU), Geneva, Switzerland
Gray, V. (2003). “New challenges, new indicators: Measuring ICT knowl-
edge”, Jan. 15 – 17, 2003, International Telecommunication Union, 3rd
World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Meeting, Geneva
Hafkin, N. & Taggart, N. (2001). “Gender, Information Technology, and
Developing Countries: An Analytic Study” June 2001, Academy for

116   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Educational Development (AED) For the Office of Women in Develop-
ment Bureau for Global Programs, Field Support and Research, United
States Agency for International Development
Hermida, A. (2002). “Wireless net strides Bangladesh.” Online Posting. Oct.
2002. BBC News Online
Liddell, C. (2003). “Wi-Fi Delivers For Developing Countries”, May 1, 2003,
802.11 – Planet, www.80211-planet.com/columns/article.php/2199831
Liddell, C. (2003). “Wi-Fi Bridges Indonesia’s Digital Divide”, March17,
2003, 802.11 – Planet, www.80211-planet.com/columns/article.php/
2110671
Lui, J. (2003). “Coming: Wi-Fi roaming across Asia-Pac”, March 21, 2003,
CNETAsia, http://asia.cnet.com/newstech/communications/0,39001141,
39121582,00.htm
Lui, J. (2003). “Intel wants an unwired Asia”, March 12 , 2003, CNETAsia,
http://asia.cnet.com/newstech/systems/0,39001153,39119160,00.htm
McHugh, J. (2002). “Wireless Wonderboys: A High Wireless Act.” Red
herring Nov. 2002: 34-37.
Minges, M. “Mobile Internet for Developing Countries”, International Tele-
communication Union, Geneva, Switzerland
Mohr, W. “Mobile Communications Beyond 3G in the Global Context”,
Siemens Mobile, Munich, Germany
Nguyen, L. “Mobile Internet: Internet Evolution or Mobile Revolution?”,
DiamondCluster International, www.diamondcluster.com
Rothery, R. (2001). “Phone Loan: Wiring Bangladesh-Without Wires”, April-
June 2001, Volume 33, No. 2, Asian Development Bank, http://
www.adb.org/Documents/Periodicals/ADB_Review/2001/vol33_2/
wired.asp
Salmelin, B. (2002). “Challenges and opportunities in the e-economy - the
Single European E-Business Space”, Aug. 2002, DG Information Society
Tan, C. N. W., Dr. (2002). “From Internet Communication Tools to M-
Commerce”, mCommerce open day 2002, www.it.bond.edu.au/inft261/
Openday2002/ mcommerceopenday2002.ppt
Trujillo, M. F., PhD. (2003). “Does the Global Digital Divide Have Anything
To Do With Progress In Development”, April 11, 2003, http://
www.developmentgateway.org/topic/redir?item_id=307577&url=%
2fdownload%2f181539%2fTrujilloFinal%2epdf

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   117
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Ugwuegbu, N. (2002). “Owerri Digital Village: A grassroots approach to
empowering Nigerian youth and their communities” July 24, 2002, Youth
for Technology Foundation
Wong, R. (2000). “Wireless Internet: Market Trends and Strategies”, Sept.
2000, ARC Group, GSM Congress Asia Pacific 2000, Singapore
Company Information/Website
Starbucks - Starbucks.com
Grameen Telecom
Grameen Phone - http://www.grameenphone.com/
Grameen Technology Center - http://www.tech.gfusa.org/projects.shtml
Grameen bank - http://www.grameen-info.org/bank/GBGlance.html
A Grameen - Style Wireless Revolution for Uganda - http://www.gfusa.org
/newsletter/winter03/WirelessRevolution.shtml
Antenna Guy USA - http://www.jl-company.com/Antenna/VillageCellPhone.
html
Consulting Groups
Meta Group – leading provider of information technology research and
strategic consulting. - http://www.metagroup.com
Kozup, C. (2003). “The Real Impact of Wi-Fi .” Online posting. Jan. 27,
2003. Meta Group. http://www.metagroup.com.
Munch, B. (2003). “Asia Pacific Telecom Outlook for 2003: Keeping the
Pace!”, Jan. 17, 2003, Meta Group. http://www.metagroup.com.
Gartner Group – the best resource for current information regarding the impact
of information technology on business. - http://www.gartner.com/
Costello, R. (2002). “Technology Overview: Basic Concepts of Com-
munications: An Introduction”, Oct. 24, 2002, Gartner Group.
Redman, P., Dulaney, K., & Clark W. (2003). “Hype Cycle for Mobile
and Wireless Networking, 2003 - Strategic Analysis Report”, May
30, 2003, Gartner Group.

118   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Redman, P. (2003). “Mobile Technology and Business Scenario”, 23–
27 March 2003, Gartner Group - U.S. Symposium/ITxpo , San
Diego, California.
Websites Sources
International Telecommunication Union - http://www.itu.int/home/
http://www.medialabasia.org/
Business 2.0 - www.business2.com
Mobile Commerce - www.mbusinessdaily.com
Fierce Wireless -  www.fiercewireless.com - weekly mobile internet report
Wireless Week – www.wirelessweek.com - updates on wireless news
Mbusiness – www.mbizcentral.com - company news and industry trends
Mobile Commerce World – www.mobilecommerceworld.com - company
trends around the world
International Business Sources
Countrywatch - www.countrywatch.com
Country Research - www.ebusinessforum.com
Ethnologue.com - research of the world’s languages - http://www.
ethnologue.com

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   119
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Appendix A
“The New Networks and New Economic Opportunities” by Peter F.
Cowhey, January, 2003
	








	

		


	

	

	
	
	


 
! 
 
"
#$


!
!
%

& 


		


	

	

	
	
	


 
! 
 
"
#$


!
!
%

& 


120   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Appendix B
Mobile Technology and Business Scenario, Phil Redman, Gartner Group,
U.S. Symposium/ITxpo
Technology Trigger: A breakthrough, public demonstration, product launch or other event
generates significant press and industry interest.
Peak of Inflated Expectations: During this phase of over-enthusiasm and unrealistic projec-
tions, a flurry of well-publicized activity by technology leaders results in some successes,
but more failures, as the technology is pushed to its limits. The only enterprises making
money are conference organizers and magazine publishers.
Trough of Disillusionment: Because the technology does not live up to its over-inflated
expectations, it rapidly becomes unfashionable. Media interest wanes, except for a few
cautionary tales.
Slope of Enlightenment: Focused experimentation and solid hard work by an increasingly
diverse range of organizations leads to a true understanding of the technology’s applica-
bility, risks and benefits. Commercial, off-the-shelf methodologies and tools ease the
development process.
Plateau of Productivity: The real-world benefits of the technology are demonstrated and
accepted. Tools and methodologies are increasingly stable as they enter their second and
third generations. The final height of the plateau varies according to whether the technology
is broadly applicable or benefits only a niche market. Approximately 30% of the
technology’s target audience has or is adopting the technology as it enters the Plateau.
Time to Plateau/Adoption Speed: The time required for the technology to reach the plateau of
productivity.

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   121
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Appendix C
Mobile Communications Beyond 3G in the Global Context by Werner
Mohr of Siemens Mobile, Munich, Germany
1G
Analogue
2G
Digital (GSM, CDMA, PCS)
2.5G
GPRS
3G
Broadband
4G
Intelligent networks

122   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Appendix D
Comparing Key Parameters of 4G with 3G
    
3G (including 2.5G, 
sub3G) 
4G 
Major Requirement Driving 
Architecture  
Predominantly voice 
driven - data were always 
add on 
Converged data and voice over 
IP 
Network Architecture 
Wide area cell-based 
Hybrid - Integration of Wireless 
LAN (WiFi, Bluetooth) and 
wide area 
Speeds 
384 Kbps to 2 Mbps 
20 to 100 Mbps in mobile mode 
Frequency Band 
Dependent on country or 
continent (1800-2400 
MHz) 
Higher frequency bands (2-8 
GHz) 
Bandwidth 
5-20 MHz 
100 MHz (or more) 
Switching Design Basis 
Circuit and Packet 
All digital with packetized 
voice 
Access Technologies 
W-CDMA, 1xRTT, Edge OFDM and MC-CDMA (Multi 
Carrier CDMA) 
Forward Error Correction 
Convolutional rate 1/2, 
1/3 
Concatenated coding scheme 
Component Design 
Optimized antenna design, 
multi-band adapters  
Smarter antennas, software 
multiband and wideband radios 
IP  
A number of air link 
protocols, including IP 
5.0  
All IP (IP6.0) 
4G - Beyond 2.5G and 3G Wireless Networks

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   123
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
“Mobile and WirelessGlobal Trends and Strategies Strategies” by Jonathan
Aronson
USC GLOCOM, Tokyo Forum on “Socio-Economic Impacts of Mobile/
Wireless Technologies: Strategies and Policies” November 21, 2002
Appendix E
The traditional telecoms value chain
The current mobile technologies value chain
Traditional
Portals/
Aggregators
Operators
and 
ISPs
Vendors
End-users
Content 
Providers
Application 
Service 
Providers
Content
Providers 
Application
Service
Providers
Enabling 
Technologies
Mobile
Portals/
Aggregators
Enabling 
Technologies
Mobile
Service
Providers
Vendors
Market share
& Revenues
End-users

124   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Appendix F
Challenges and opportunities in the e-economy - the Single European E-
Business Space by Bror Salmelin, August 2002
Paradigms Change: New Business Models
Paradigms Change: New Business Models
Degree of innovation
Functional
integration
lower
higher
(3rd party) 
marketplace
value chain 
integrator
collaboration 
platform
virtual 
community
e-auction
e-
procurement
e-shop
trust 
services
Single
function
Multiple, 
integrated
functions 
value chain
service
provision
e-mall
information
services

Impact of Mobile and Wireless Technologies on Developing Countries   125
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Appendix G
3rd World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Meeting, Geneva, January
2003,
Vanessa Gray ITU (International Telecommunication Union)

126   Neuman & Deans
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Section III
Technologies and
Applications for
Digital Business

An Introduction in Digital Watermarking   127
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter VI
An Introduction in
Digital Watermarking:
Applications, Principles,
and Problems
Tino Jahnke,
University of Cooperative Education Heidenheim, Germany
Juergen Seitz,
University of Cooperative Education Heidenheim, Germany
Abstract
In order to solve intellectual property problems of the digital age, two
basic procedures are used: “Buy and drop,” linked to the destruction of
various peer-to-peer solutions and “subpoena and fear,” as the creation
of non-natural social fear by specific legislations. Although customers
around the world are willing to buy digital products over networks, the
industry is still using conventional procedures to push such a decisive
customer impulse back into existing and conventional markets. Digital
watermarking is described as a possibility to interface and close the gap
between copyright and digital distribution. It is based on steganographic
techniques and enables useful right protection mechanisms. Digital
watermarks are mostly inserted as a plain bit sample or a transformed

128   Jahnke & Seitz
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
digital signal into the source data using a key based embedding algorithm
and a pseudo-noise pattern. The embedded information is hidden in low-
value bits or least significant bits of picture pixels, frequency or other
value domains, and linked inseparably with the source of the data
structure. For the optimal application of watermarking technology a
trade-off has to be made between competing criteria like robustness, non-
perceptibility, non-delectability, and security. Most watermarking
algorithms are resistant against selected and application-specific attacks.
Therefore, even friendly attacks in the form of usual file and data
modifications can destroy easily the watermark or falsify it. This chapter
gives an overview in watermarking technologies, classification,
methodology, applications and problems.
Limitations, Threads, and Impacts on
the Digital Age
At this decade, the Internet and especially the World Wide Web, a global
working network with worldwide broadcasting potential, has been successfully
integrated into public and business domains. Recent surveys and public opinion
polls have accented the value of the Internet. Traditional television and the
Internet converge (Merz, 1999, p. 209). In addition, the growth and integration
of broadband access points, wireless and mobile technologies and the progress
towards one-in-a-box device proves the significance of developing a legitimate
marketplace for entertainment and business activities. Today, digital networks
and libraries, Internet services and the disposition of non-branded digital
products within a global accessible network support and lead to illegal copying,
modification and redistribution. Particularly, the music and entertainment
industry has struggled against the illegal distribution over peer-to-peer and
other networks for years. The Recording Industry Association (RIAA), the
leading music industry consortium, estimates the annual revenue for recorded
music in the USA to $14 billion and worldwide $38 billion and claims $5 billion
loss due to piracy in the year 2000 and millions $US to all forms of piracy per
day (Tadjer, 2000). Although the industry positively evaluates the Internet and
its distribution and economical quality, technologies, frameworks and support
were blocked for a long time. On the other hand, the most significant barrier for
online shopping – the trust of the customer – begins to fall. The increasing

An Introduction in Digital Watermarking   129
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
popularity of streaming media technologies and other types of distribution
methods of digital content will support and eventually boost the acceptance of
the Internet to become the most popular distribution channel in the future.
Decisive business activities, like Amazon.com, apple.com and yahoo.com,
who are selling entertainment products, like video and audio, clarify the
progress of these progressive distribution channels. But, as audio, video, and
any digital source can be straightforwardly copied and illegally distributed over
various channels, the capital loss prevents decisive business activities and
investments until a working juristic and technical protection mechanism would
be available. These concerns are supported by the facts that digital mass
recording devices for digital media have effectively entered the market (Hanjalic
et al., 2000). The importance and the supposed economical thread for
copyright holders are clarified by initiatives of the entertainment industry, like
VIVA and SDMI - Secure Digital Music Initiative. Although distributors and
artists have already recognized the advantages in making their material avail-
able online, they will not go further into the online business until their content can
be protected by technical and by wide law regulations. As new intellectual
property changes became new European law in 2003 and started to fit more
towards the proposals of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
political signals, that proves the importance was set. Therefore, the features of
the digital world lead to economical chances, but also to serious problems in
simplifying unauthorized copying and distribution. In order to solve these
problems, digital watermarking together with a working law framework can be
used and eventually close the gap between usability of goods and the security
level of protection.
Steganography, Data Hiding and
Historical Watermarking
The core principles of watermarking and data hiding can be traced back
approximately 4,000 years to Egypt and Greece. At this time, hidden packets
of information were transferred by special character adjustments or mutations
(Hanjalic et al., 2000). Herodotus, the great Greek storyteller, often refers to
the hidden information methodology transferred on wax-tablets or smuggling
secret messages tattooed on the skull of human messengers (Cox et al., 2002).

130   Jahnke & Seitz
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The most famous method is to mark the document with invisible secret ink, like
the juice of a lemon, and hide information. Another method is to mark selected
characters within a document by pinholes and to generate a pattern or signature
(Schneider, 1998). Such techniques are often referred to steganography.
Steganography is a sub-discipline of data hiding and a part of cryptology. While
the art of cryptography is about protecting the content of messages,
steganography is about covering their existence. Steganography means secret
writing and consists of the Greek words “steganos” and “graphia”. The main
security of a steganographic system is based on a simple procedure. Because
the steganographic message is integrated invisibly and covered inside other
harmless sources, it is very difficult to detect the message without knowing the
existence and the appropriate encoding scheme.
Plain watermarking instead is strongly related to the invention of papermaking
in China. It was intensively used in the eighteenth century in America and
Europe as a trademark and a method against counterfeiting books and money
(Cox et al., 2002; Schneier, 1998). Such watermarks are archived by the
“International Association of Paper Historians” electronically and clarify mainly
the historical meaning (Dittmann, 2000). Over recent years, simple, skillful and
aesthetic watermarks have been developed to prove authenticity, originality
and authorship, and to complicate the illegal redistribution process. The most
famous watermark can be detected holding a bank note against the light. Its
digital pendant, the “digital watermark,” considers the main principles and
practices of its steganographic approach.
Figure 1. Tattoo messages on Roman slaves (Bail)
“In Roman times a slave would have his head shaved, then tat-
tooed with an important message, and as the hair began growing, 
he made his way as instructed through enemy lines and indifferent 
countries, across water and inhospitable terrain, sleep and snow, 
mountain ranges, etc., finally reaching the reader who immedi-
ately had the head shaved, and eagerly scanned the message.” 

An Introduction in Digital Watermarking   131
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Digital Watermarking Methodology
Digital watermarking means embedding information into digital material in
such a way that it is imperceptible to a human observer, but easily to detect by
computer algorithms. A digital watermark is a transparent, invisible information
pattern that is inserted into a suitable component of the data source by using a
specific computer algorithm (Dittmann, 2000). Digital watermarks are signals
added to digital data (audio, video, or still images) that can be detected or
extracted later to make an assertion about the data.
The digital watermarking research field is well demarcated and the first
“noteworthy” publications can be tracked back to 1982. Since 1995 the
interest on digital watermarking has notably increased. This movement was
supported by the first SPIE “Information Hiding Workshop” in 1996 and
various upcoming conferences about digital watermarking and multimedia
security. At the same time, organisations like Copy Protection Technical
Working Group (CPTWG) and Secure Digital Music Initiative (SDMI)
were founded in order to industrialize, standardize, and evaluate the digital
watermarking field. Supported projects, like Visual Identity Verification
Auditor (VIVA) and The Tracing Authors Right Labelling Image Services
and Monitoring Access Network (TALISMAN), are examples for working
watermarking applications for monitoring broadcasting material. Since MPEG
is an accepted standard, the International Organisation of Standardization has
adopted digital watermarking in its specification draft. Such activities can be
measured as proof for its technical and industrial relevance.
Digital Watermarking Associations
In order to protect copyrighted material from illegal duplication, two typical
technologies have been developed. One approach uses key-based crypto-
graphic methods and procedures to control the process of copying, manipulat-
ing, and distributing media assets. Cryptography and encryption techniques
enable the appropriate security during the transmission process, but once the
encrypted data are decoded, the control of re-distribution and its spread falls.
To address the limitations of encryption the main idea is to label a digital material
with specific marks, which are called digital watermarks. Such technology can

132   Jahnke & Seitz
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
be used as ownership proof for distribution channel tracking and other
applications in business and public domains. Furthermore, watermarking
technology enables the owner to obtain the copyright status of certain docu-
ments, and distributors can be made accountable for the content. Additionally,
compatible media player technology, such as DivX and DVD players, can
detect distorted marks and refuse to play, display, or execute the media asset
files. The lack of such technologies has enforced the establishment of research
in information science disciplines and the foundation of different organisations.
Such initiatives especially focus on the development and progress of the
watermarking technology for applications. In the future, portable consumer
devices may be equipped with specific hardware detectors to protect business
models and the rights of the owners of media assets.
Digital Watermarking Initiatives,
Companies and Projects
In recent years, various activities in the digital watermarking field can be
detected. A powerful and significant non-profit organization, the SDMI-
Secure Music Initiative, was established in 1999 and consists of 161 compa-
nies in the music, entertainment and computer area. SDMI develops specifica-
tions that enable the protection of the playing, storing, and distributing of digital
music and points out that a new market for digital music may emerge that is led
by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The strategy of
SDMI is to mark music data in such way that the data are permanently attached
and recognized by all specified devices (Sherman). Actually they are reacting
to the popularity of MP3 and the introduction of portable consumer electronic
devices that play unprotected files. The SDMI consortium wanted to have
SDMI compliant devices available for Christmas 1999 (Lacy et al., 1997), but
its major plan was impaired by technological and political limitations.
CPTWG, the Copy Protection Technical Working Group, researches effective
protection mechanisms for DVD-Video. Additional state supported projects
have brought out industrialized results, for example, TALISMAN – The
Tracing Authors Right Labelling Image Services and Monitoring Access
Network, and VIVA, engaging the development of watermarking technology
for broadcasting monitoring. Additionally, commercial products, like MusiCode
for audio material, VEIL II and MediaTraxx for video, exist in the high-end

An Introduction in Digital Watermarking   133
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
consumer market. Digimarc, one of the first established watermarking compa-
nies, has successfully integrated its third party “plug-in” into Adobe’s Photoshop
Suite and other graphic software. Furthermore, a Mediasec cooperation has
developed a fragile watermarking framework used at major airplane industries
to prevent terrorists attacks and to enable an authenticity mechanism for
marked plane designs and technical instructions.
Other Activities
In June 1989, the music industry initiatives RIAA and IFIPA, and producers,
for example, Mitsubishi, Grundig, Phillips, and Sony, agreed on the integration
of a copy control mechanism for the digital audio tape named SCMS (Serial
Copy Management System). Since 1989, consumer DAT-devices have been
equipped with a copy mechanism that prohibits copying a copy. The DVD, the
standard storage medium for video, was kept back from the market because
of its copy control limitations. In all, approximately 10 safety techniques have
been integrated in DVD devices. The famous ones are CSS (Content Scramble
System), Macro vision, CGMS (Content Generation Management System),
Regional Code Playback Control, and digital watermarking. The Content
Scrambling System was integrated into DVD devices by patent activities
around 1996 and is based on an encryption and authenticity system. CSS video
streams are encrypted and can be decoded by a CSS-compliant MPEG-
decoder. In 1999, the CSS procedure was hacked and software tools
(DeCSS) were available for download in the Internet. The Copy Generation
Management System embeds information in the source document enabling a
mechanism to control if video stream can be copied or not. One of the most
effective copy control mechanisms is the regional code. It is integrated into the
DVD disk and DVD device. It disables the playback possibilities in specific
geographic regions (Bechtold, 2002).
Watermarking Applications
Digital watermarking is described as a viable method for the protection of
ownership rights of digital audio, image, video and other data types. It can be

134   Jahnke & Seitz
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
applied to different applications including digital signatures, fingerprinting,
broadcast and publication monitoring, authentication, copy control and secret
communication (Cox et al., 1997, 2000, 2002). As a signature, the watermark
identifies the owner of the content and can be used as a fingerprint to identify
content consumers. For example, a specific watermarking technique is planned
to be used to secure passports against counterfeiting in the United States.
Broadcast and publication monitoring describe the area of computer systems
that automatically monitor television and radio broadcast to track the appear-
ance of distributed material. Watermarking technology can also be used to
provide authenticity of several types of content. It is designed that any alteration
either destroys the watermark or creates a mismatch between content and
watermark that can easily be detected. Furthermore, watermarking enables
designing copy control applications within the embedded information and
contains rules of usage and copying. By integrating watermarking techniques in
copying devices by law or patent, the widespread occurrence of illegal copying
and distribution could be controlled. Digital watermarking can also be used to
transmit such secret information in images, audio streams, or any type of digital
data and it is reported that some communication activities of people or groups
linked to the 911 tragedy were based on such data hiding approaches.
Copyright Protection and Authentication
Digital watermarks are often used for copyright and intellectual property
protection (Cox et al., 2002; Friedrich, 1998). In this case, the author or
originator integrates a watermark containing his or her own intellectual property
signature into the original document and delivers it as usual. By doing this, he
or she can prove his or her intellectual creation later on, for instance in a legal
proceeding, and has the possibility to assert entitlement to the restricted use.
Figure 2. The “Lena-Image”

An Introduction in Digital Watermarking   135
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The “Lena-Image” in Figure 2 is one of the standard reference pictures used in
the scientific digital imaging area and was used in the first digital watermarking
publications without real permission of the owner (Cox et al., 2002).
Fingerprinting and Digital “Signatures”
In order to explain fingerprinting with digital watermarking, the pay-per-view
scenario in Friedrich (1998) is used. Customers are buying different media
types, like images, video and audio over the Internet. Within a real-time
watermarking framework, the digital goods are individually marked with the
fingerprint of the customer. This could be a generated OEM number or another
useful pattern. In this case, cryptographic methods could increase the data
security and can be combined with digital signatures. Although there seems to
be a conflict between digital signature and digital watermarking, because
watermarking differs from the idea of a public key encryption, it could be
interesting to combine both techniques. To identify those that make illegal
copies or re-distribute them, an automated agent scanning system can be used
to trace down the traitor. According to the popularity of DivX and screened
copies of brand new movies, “Screeners,” the cinema and film projectionist
could be traced, enabling such illegal action. Because of the analogues
techniques used in worldwide cinemas, the digital watermark has to survive the
change of the analogue to the digital domain. However, such watermarks could
be easily integrated with more security and reliability by using digital projectors
and digital devices.
Copy Protection and Device Control
Digital watermarks can be used to enable copy control devices. In this
combination, the recording device scans the digital data stream for an existing
watermark and enables or disables the recording action for a specific movie or
stream. Such technology could extend the pay-per-view concepts and close
the gap between the applied cryptographic approach and its usability. How-
ever, the implementation in consumer devices seems to be possible in using the
same procedures applied when inserting the “Macro Vision” and “CSS” DVD
copy mechanisms. By limiting the available DVDs to CSS compliant DVD-
player, manufacturers had to integrate new encoders that are secured by patent
law regulations in their devices to maintain the position in the market.

136   Jahnke & Seitz
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Broadcast Monitoring
The production cost of broadcasting material, like news, shows, and movies,
are enormous and can raise up to 100.000 US$ per hour and more. Therefore,
it is important for the productions companies, for example, Warner Bros.,
Miramax, and Universal Pictures, to secure their intellectual property and
permit illegal re-broadcasting activities. In this case, digital watermarking can
enable technical frameworks, like TALISMAN, which automatically monitor
broadcasting streams at satellite nodes all over the world and identify illegally
broadcasted material. Furthermore, TV stations can be monitored and the
unlawful use could be tracked and debited individually. In 1997, two Asian
broadcasting stations had been identified that intentionally overbooked their
advertising time and customers paid for un-played broadcasting time (Cox et
al., 2002). Such computer systems can be used for tracking and monitoring
advertisement activities on broadcasting channels and to examine advertise-
ment deals. Nielsen Media Research and Competitive Media Reporting are
offering such computer systems.
Data Authentication
Digital watermarking is often used to prove the authenticity of a specific digital
document. The digital watermark contains information that can be used to
prove that the content has not been changed before. Any operation on the file
destroys or changes the integrated watermark. If the watermark information
can be extracted without errors, the authenticity can be proven. In order to
design an effective watermarking algorithm the watermarking data or proce-
dure can be linked to the content of the digital document. Such watermarks are
called fragile watermarks or “vapormarks” (Cox et al., 1999).
Further Applications
Though the main application of digital watermarking is to secure the intellectual
property, it can also be used in the medical field. In using digital watermarks as
containers for information about patients and their diagnosis, medical images,
for example, X-ray or nuclear magnetic resonance tomography, could be
automatically associated to the patient (Peticolas et al., 1999). Furthermore,

An Introduction in Digital Watermarking   137
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
digital watermarking could be used to save context or meta-information in
source documents. In using special watermarking agents, generic search
machines are enabled to retrieve such information and can offer time-based
media documents as a result.
Classification and Requirements
Digital watermarks can be classified and measured on the basis of certain
characteristics and properties that depend on the type of application. These
characteristics and properties include the difficulties of notice, the surviving of
common distortions, and resistance of malicious attacks, the capacity of bit
information, the coexistence with other watermarks, and the complexity of the
watermarking method. In generally, they are described as fidelity, robustness,
fragility, tamper resistance, data payload, complexity and other restrictions.
Digital watermarks must fulfill the following often contradictory requirements
(Kutter & Hartung, 2000).
•
Robustness: It may not be possible without knowledge of the procedure
and the secret key to remove the watermark or to make it illegible.
Robustness also means the resistance ability of the watermark information
brought in a data material opposite changes and modifications of the
original file. Modifications will be particularly considered resizing, file
compression, rotation, and common operations. Especially commonly
used operations like lossy compression (JPEG, MPEG) should not
destroy the digital watermark (Hanjalic et al., 2000). Further examples
are linear and non-linear filters, lossy compression, contrast adjustment,
gamma correction, re-coloring, re-sampling, scaling, rotation, small non-
linear deformations, noise adding, pixel permutations, and so forth.
Robustness does not include attacks on the embedding scheme based on
the knowledge of the algorithm or on the availability of the detector
function. It means resistance to common operations applied in the imaging,
motion picture or audio field (Friedrich, 1998).
•
Non-perceptibility: It is important to recognize whether the brought bit
sample of the watermark produces perceptible changes acoustically or
optically. A perfect non-perceptible bit sample is present if it cannot be

138   Jahnke & Seitz
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
distinguished between data material marked with watermark and the
original. This classifier is based on the idea and properties of the human
visual system (HVS) and human audio system (HAS). The watermark is
non-perceptible or invisible if a normal human being is unable to distinguish
between original and carrier.
•
Non-detectable: The data material with the brought watermark informa-
tion are not detectable if they are consistent with the original data. In this
case, an embedding algorithm could use, for example, steganographically,
the noise components of the data source of a picture to hide the watermark
information. Non-detectability cannot be directly linked to non-percep-
tibility, which is based on the concepts of human perceptions. Non-
detectability is related to the data source and its components. It describes
the consistency with the original data (Friedrich, 1998).
•
Security: It is assumed that the attackers have full knowledge about the
applied watermark procedure; however, no secret key would be known.
Therefore, an attacker will try to manipulate the data material to destroy
the watermark, or again print and scan to win the original material without
a copyright-protection note. The complexity is also connected with the
security; that is, the algorithm for the bringing in and reading of watermark
information should work with enough long keys to discourage the search
for the appropriate secret key. However, for certain applications and
persons the watermark must be also detectable. The problem of secure
key exchange emerges.
•
Complexity: The complexity describes the expenditure to detect and
encode the watermark information. A measurement technique could be
the amount of time (Dittmann, 2000). It is recommended to design the
watermarking procedure and algorithm as complex so that different
watermarks can be integrated. By that, “trial and error” attacks can be
avoided (Voyatzis et al., 1998).
•
Capacity: Capacity is referred to amount of information that can be
stored in a data source. In using digital watermarking for simple copy
control applications, a capacity of one bit (one=allow/zero=deny) seems
to be sufficient. On the other hand, intellectual property applications
require about 60- to 70-bit information capacity to store data about
copyright, author, limitations, or ISBN, ISRC, or OEM numbers.
For the optimal watermarking application a trade-off has to be accepted
between the mentioned criteria. Robustness means, for example, that much

An Introduction in Digital Watermarking   139
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
information of a watermark must be embedded that is, however, then in case
of an attack better visibly or detectable. On the other hand, if a watermark
consists only of a minimal bit sample that covers only a small part of the picture,
such a watermark is quickly lost as a result of the modifications of the data
(Woda & Seitz, 2002). Finally the amount of watermarking information and the
robustness could have significant effects on the quality of the data source and
influences the requirements. Therefore, a decision has to be made for the right
application.
Digital Watermark Types
In the previous section we classified watermarks on the basis of their require-
ments. However, digital watermarks and their techniques can be subdivided
and segmented into various categories; for example, they can be classified
according to the application, source type (image watermarks, video water-
marks, audio watermarks, text watermarks), human perception and used
technique. As watermarks can be applied in the spatial or frequency domain,
different concepts, like discrete Fourier (DFT), discrete cosine (DCT) and
wavelet transformation, or additionally, manipulations in the color domain and
noise adding can be mentioned. Furthermore, digital watermarks can be
subdivided on the basis of human perception. Digital watermarks can be
invisible or visible. We see visible watermarks everyday watching television as
station logo. They can be robust against operations or even fragile for use in
copy control or authenticity applications. At least, digital watermarks can be
subdivided in blind and non-blind detection techniques, which are strongly
related to the decoding process.
Blind and Non-Blind Techniques
In order to detect the watermark information, blind and non-blind techniques
are used. If the detection of the digital watermark can be done without the
original data, such techniques are called blind. Here, the source document is
scanned and the watermark information is extracted. On the other hand, non-
blind techniques use the original source to extract the watermark by simple
comparison and correlation procedures. However, it turned out that blind
techniques are more insecure than non-blind methods.

140   Jahnke & Seitz
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
A General Watermarking Framework
In contrast to common techniques, including copyright information inside data
headers or visible areas, digital watermarks are weaved into the core structure
of the digital document in an invisible and unrecognizable way. The main goal
of the watermarking research is to develop digital watermarking methods that
survive all known format and common transformations, D/A and A/D conver-
sions, and any other kind of data operations used in image and audio
processing. The basic digital watermark method integrating information pack-
ages in digital data is based on steganographic methods. Figure 3 explains this
generic and its steganographically derived watermarking scheme. Digital
watermarks are inserted into pictures, video and audio files with different
embedding schemes, concepts and algorithms. Almost all watermarking pro-
cedures are based on the use of secret keys, which are applied in the integration
and detection process to extract the watermark information properly and
enable basic security (Kutter & Hartung, 2000). In general, any watermarking
scheme consists of the watermark, the encoder that inserts the information, and
the detector.
In contrast to traditional cryptographic methods, the watermark set does not
change the main functionality of the file. Therefore, the watermark must be
inserted into the data structure imperceptibly. Depending on the given data
type, it should neither be visible, audible, and so forth, nor detectable for
strangers or observers. Each watermark method consists of an embedding
algorithm and an extracting algorithm. The embedding, encoding algorithm
inserts the watermark information in the data and the extracting algorithm
Figure 3. Generic digital watermarking scheme (encoder) (Kutter &
Hartung, 2000)
Digital Watermark
Watermark W
Cover Data I
Secret/Public Key
Watermarked Data I
Digital Watermark
Watermark W
Cover Data I
Secret/Public Key
I‘
Digital Watermark
Watermark W
Cover Data I
Secret/Public Key
Watermarked Data I
Digital Watermark
Watermark W
Cover Data I
Secret/Public Key
I‘’

An Introduction in Digital Watermarking   141
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
decodes the watermark information. However, some methods extract the
whole watermark information and others only determine their existence. Such
methods can be either used as ownership proof or verification.
Watermark Encoding
In order to combine a watermark with a digital document, for example, images,
you need an image (I), a signature (S = s1, s2, sn ) that contains the watermarking
information and an encoding algorithm (E) to create a watermarked image (I’).
The encoder takes the signature and the cover document, and generates the
watermarked image, which is described as a function: E(I, S) = I’. In this case,
secret or public keys, and other parameters can be used to extend the
watermarking encoder.
Figure 4. Watermark encoding example
Figure 5. Watermark decoding example
Digital Watermark
Signature S 
Decoder D
Watermarked Image I(w)
Original Image I
non blind
Digital Watermark
Signature S 
Decoder D
Watermarked Image I(w)
Original Image I
non blind
Watermark Decoding
The watermark is extracted using a decoder function (see Figure 5). In this
case, the decoder D loads the watermarked, normal or corrupted image I(w)
and extracts the hidden signature S. Using non-blind watermarking techniques
Digital Watermark
Watermarked Image I‘ 
Encoder E
Original Image I
Signature S
Digital Watermark
Watermarked Image I‘ 
Encoder E
Original Image I
Signature S
’

142   Jahnke & Seitz
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
the decoder D loads an additional image I, which is often the original
image, to extract the watermarking information by correlation. Such
methods are more robust against counterfeit attacks. The process can be
described as: D(I, I (w)) = S.
Watermarking Techniques
“Why is it so difficult to find a needle in a haystack? Because of the size of the
needle relative to the size of the haystack. Also, because once the needle falls
out of your hand, it is not predictable where it will land in the haystack. Both
principles — inconspicuousness and randomness — help conceal information
in digital watermarks to protect intellectual property of multimedia docu-
ments.” (Zhao, 1997)
Zhao clarifies the main principles to hide information in digital documents. In
using randomness and inconspicuousness to hide information, a reliable secu-
rity level could be reached. Noise pattern, either Gaussian or normal distrib-
uted, are excellent carrier signals for information brackets. Noise patterns are
existent elements of life and often not predictable by human beings. Since
natural noise patterns are linked to source material, it is not recognized in the
most cases. Therefore, we have to pay attention to the source material when
designing the noise generator in order to integrate watermark information.
Further techniques consider the transformation of the image and its specific
domains. Most watermark techniques use the frequency or spatial domain in
order to integrate the watermark information (Dittmann, 2000). Such algo-
rithms are based on, for example, discrete Fourier, cosine, and wavelet
transformations, or fractal approaches for digital images. On the other hand,
time-variant materials, like audio files or video streams offer, sometimes in
combination with DCT and DFT, other technical possibilities, for example,
psychoacoustic transformations, phase modulations, echo-adding and spread
spectrum methods.
LSB Watermarking Technique
LSB watermarking describes a straightforward and basic way to integrate
watermark information in digital documents. Considering a basic greyscale

An Introduction in Digital Watermarking   143
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
image the pixel and its values can be sliced up into significant and irrelevant
levels. Because the significant levels merely represent a digital noise pattern, it
could be easily used for digital watermarking. In changing selected pixel values
of the noise pattern using a special or key-based algorithm, the watermarking
information can be easily integrated (Hanjalic et al., 2000). However, such a
technique is very insecure because the watermark could be easily destroyed.
On the other hand, such a technique could be useful in copy control and
authenticity applications.
Spatial Domain Watermarking
Digital watermarking techniques in the spatial domain use the values of the color
channels, luminance or brightness signals of a digital image (Dittmann, 2000).
One straightforward and rapid technique is based on the principle to generate
a pseudo-generated noise pattern and integrates it into specific chrominance or
luminance pixel values (Darmstaedter et al., 1998). Such pseudo-random noise
patterns consist of black (1), white (-1) and neutral values (0). The pseudo-
noise is generated with a “secret” key and algorithm. Additionally, the process
could be adjusted to the image components or feature vectors to achieve a
higher level of invisibility. In general, the watermark W(x, y) is integrated into
the image components I(x, y) by a factor that allows the amplification of the
watermarking values in order to obtain the best results.
IW(x, y) = I(x, y) + k * W(x, y)
The detection of the watermark is based on the principles of correlation. In this
case, a specific detector compares the watermarked image IW(x, y) with the
original image and automatically decides, based on a specific correlation level,
whether a watermark exists or not (Hanjalic et al., 2000). Such techniques
especially enable the integration of one-bit watermark information. In integrat-
ing more information, various techniques have been invented. Such methods
have the possibility to save up to 500 bits in one 512x512 image (Hanjalic et
al., 2000). In order to clarify this main procedure, the original image will be
subdivided into small blocks. Now, the selected blocks are watermarked or not
and produce a bit sequence in the detection process. In this case, the
watermarking detector scans the image and generates the bit sequence accord-

144   Jahnke & Seitz
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
ing to a specified correlation level. Using the CRC method could improve the
error-prone level.
Frequency Domain Watermarking
The basic principles adding or changing components of digital images and other
digital documents can be transferred to other value domains. In order to
integrate watermark information into frequency components, the document has
to be transformed into its frequency components using discrete cosine, discrete
Fourier, or Hadamard transformations (Dittmann, 2000; Hanjalic et al., 2000).
As such transformations are used in lossy compression techniques, for ex-
ample, MPEG and JPEG, the watermark appears to be very resistant against
usual attacks. Furthermore, in integrating watermarks in the most important
frequency components improve security and resistance, because every change
reduces the quality of the image significantly (Hanjalic et al., 2000). Therefore,
it is important to identify the coefficients of the transformation that are less
infected by the attack method. In most cases digital watermarks are integrated
into the mid-band frequencies. Research has determined a specific sensibility
of high-band frequencies against filter operations, lossy compression and noise
insertion, whereas manipulating low frequencies seems to produce visible
artifacts anytime (Hanjalic et al., 2000).
Spread Spectrum Watermarking
Spread spectrum techniques used in digital watermarking are borrowed from
the communication field. The basic idea of spread spectrum is to spread the
data across a large frequency band. In the case of audio, it is the entire audible
spectrum; in the case of images, it is the whole visible spectrum. Spread
spectrum is a military technology and designed to handle interferences and
disturbances. In most cases, signals that represent the information are modu-
lated at low intensity across the source bandwidth. Spread spectrum commu-
nication is used in radar, navigation and communication applications. The
information is weaved in the source material using a secret key or an embedding
procedure (Hanjalic et al., 2000).

An Introduction in Digital Watermarking   145
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Other Approaches
Further relevant watermarking methods for images use fractal transformation
to integrate bit information into the structure of the document (Jacquin, 1992).
Nevertheless, various procedures have been invented and used for diverse
watermarking applications in the image, audio, or video field. Especially,
watermarking for video data can profit by scientific findings of audio and image
watermarking. Audio watermarking in its place is based on psychoacoustic
theories, amplitude modification, dithering techniques, echo integration, phase
distortion and spread spectrum techniques (Bassia & Pitas, 1999; Bender et
al., 1996; Chen & Wornell, 1999; Cox et al., 1996; Gruhl et al., 1996 ). Such
techniques are usually based on the same concepts. In this case, watermarking
using amplitude modification means embedding a pseudo-noise pattern in the
least-significant bit audio data by replacing or modification (Bassia & Pitas,
1999). Other approaches, like using echo signals to save the bit information,
add a repeated adaptation of component with a small offset (delay time), initial
amplitude and decay rate to make it imperceptible (Chen & Wornell, 1999).
Other applications, like watermarking software code on the area of text
watermarking and watermarking of notes in music scores complete the digital
watermarking area.
Attacks on Digital Watermarks
The watermarking research area has produced a wide range of watermarking
techniques that can be subdivided into various methodical complexity levels.
Each of these methods tries to reduce vulnerability on various attack scenarios.
Attacks on digital watermarks can principally be classified into two main
groups: friendly and malicious attacks. Conventional image or data operations
applied in the normal use of computer technology can destroy the watermark
information. Different operation of the classical image processing field, like
scaling, colour and gamma corrections and so forth can be mentioned at this
point. Today, compression techniques can be also placed in the field of classical
operations, but often separated as a single element in the watermarking
research. Friendly attacks have two common features: They are generally
described as an unintentional event, and the user has no knowledge of the
watermark and its embedded procedure. The second type of attack, the

146   Jahnke & Seitz
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
malicious attack on watermarks, occurs with the intention to eliminate the
information. In order to test the robustness of watermarks some applications
have been developed. The powerful StirMark attack has been designed by a
research group at the University of Cambridge (Andersson, Petitcolas &
Kuhn). The attack simulates image distortions that commonly occur when a
picture is printed, photocopied, and re-scanned. The image is slightly stretched
and compressed by random amounts, and a small amount of noise is added
(Friedrich, 1998). Comparable applications are the mosaic and histogram
attacks. The mosaic attack assembles and reassembles the watermarked
image. The histogram attack describes an attack on simple watermark meth-
ods. Finally, it is important to consider that a partial knowledge of the
watermark or the process of watermarking enables pirates to remove the entire
watermark or to disturb it. A good model to classify such attacks is given by
Hartung et al. (1999).
Simple Attacks
Simple watermark attacks try to wipe out the watermark information in
manipulating the whole image and its components. The attack does not isolate
or identify the specific watermark information. The attack has been successful
when the watermarking information cannot be extracted or recognized any-
more and the usability has not been affected (Hanjalic et al., 2000). Examples
are common signal processing operations like linear filtering, such as high pass
or low pass filtering, non-linear filtering, such as media filtering, colour
reduction, D/A, A/D conversions, re-sampling, re-quantization, and dithering
distorting.
Detection Disabling Attacks
Detection disabling attacks directly destroy the watermarking information, for
example, in disturbing the correlation process. Such a watermark attack usually
bases on geometrical pixels or blocks shifting or direct modifications. Examples
are scaling, rotation, cropping and inserting. One of the most famous attacks is
based in the StirMark simulator, which destroys the watermark information in
using randomly selected spatial modifications or a combination of other attacks.

An Introduction in Digital Watermarking   147
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Ambiguity and Removal Attacks
Ambiguity attacks disable the watermark by inserting a new, overlapping
watermark in the source document. In inserting multiple watermarks, the use as
mechanism for intellectual property applications can be hindered. Let’s con-
sider a document marked which Bob’s and later on with Alice’s watermark
information. In this case, it is impossible to determine the originator of the
document. Such attacks are related to the use of intellectual property applica-
tion. Removal attacks analyze the watermark, estimate the technique or
watermark and try to extract the watermark in order to delete it. In this case,
statistical applications are used to analyze the source material.
Problems of Digital Watermarking
Digital watermarking techniques are already effectively used in associated copy
control applications and broadcast monitoring systems. In combination with
digital rights management frameworks they can solve the limitation of the
intellectual property dilemma in audio and image related business areas.
However, the main intellectual property problems cannot be solved by all
existing watermarking methods. Watermarking techniques behave differently
on attack operations or applications. Simple non-complex methods described
in Kutter et al. (1997) are not very resistant to JPEG and JPEG 2000
compression, but resist against normal image operations. Complex and difficult
watermarking techniques based on discrete, fast Fourier or wavelet transfor-
mations are in contrast very robust against compression techniques, but have
a lack of resistance in normal image operations. Today, most watermarking
methods cannot reach the main approach. It is still a wide and attractive field
for further research, in which innovative methods and techniques may be
established.
Conclusions
As a result, we summarize that the watermark technology is still at the beginning
of its development. Most watermark algorithms cannot tackle the attacks. Even

148   Jahnke & Seitz
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
the friendly attacks in the form of usual file modifications can easily destroy the
watermarks or falsify them. Therefore, a desirable watermarking algorithm
should not rely on a certain method, but it could insert watermarks repeatedly
in different ways (using least significant bits, frequencies or colour and contrast
relations), so that at least one of them survives an attack. After embedding in
an image has taken place, a watermark should be refreshed automatically. The
jurisdiction has to accept a digital watermark as permissible evidence for
copyright infringement. Besides, organizational frameworks are necessary to
be able to put through the author’s claim. Corresponding to the law and
authorization problems, infrastructures are also demanded for the key manage-
ment and time stamp services.
Meanwhile, several European projects work on copyright protection and its
realization in the digital world: CITED (Copyright in Transmitted Electronic
Documents), a part of the ESPRIT program, encloses access and user control
(CITED, 1993). The system is put on exceptional flexibility; it accepts all
widespread operating systems and can be applied for access over computer
networks. COPEARMS provides a uniform standard to guarantee the copy-
right of digital documents (COPEARMS, n.d.). COPEARMS cooperates
closely with another EU project, named IMPRIMATUR (IMPRIMATUR,
1999). The project takes care of the secure transmission and payment of
documents, including authentication. Especially this year a significant increase
of activities can be determined. Microsoft is planning to develop its Palladium
operation system, apple.com is successfully operating its music download
platform, yahoo.com is trying to complement the same area with audio and
video streams, and real.com and Microsoft (Windows Media Environment)
establish digital rights management extensions partly based on digital water-
mark technology in their products. Such activities clarify the importance of
digital watermarking, especially in combination with digital rights management,
and offer opportunities for further research activities. However, although the
main argument for digital watermarking is linked to enable and secure business
activities, like distribution of goods over networks, in the public and middle
class domain, it seems that digital watermarking is primarily supported by
mighty, international interest groups. Therefore, we suppose that digital
watermarking is dominated by such initiatives and running applications will be
supported by them, before the public domain can use the benefits of such
technology.

An Introduction in Digital Watermarking   149
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
References
Bail, M. (n.d.). The Europeans. Retrieved August 19, 2003, from http://
www.brickmag.com
Bassia, P., & Pitas, I. (1999). Robust audio watermarking in the time domain.
Proceedings of ICASSIP.
Bechtold, S. (2002). Vom Urheber- zum Informationsrecht – Implikationen
des Digital Rights Managements. München: Verlag C.H. Beck.
Bender, W. et al. (1996). Techniques for data hiding. IBM Systems Journal,
313–336.
Chen, B., & Wornell, G.W. (1999, January). Dither modulation: A new
approach to digital watermarking and information embedding. Proc. of
SPIE: Security and Watermarking of Multimedia Contents, 342–
353.
CITED (Copyright in Transmitted Electronic Documents). (1993, December).
Retrieved August 19, 2003, from http://www.newcastle.research.ec.org/
esp-syn/text/5469.html
COPEARMS. (n.d.). Retrieved August 19, 2003, from http://www.nlc-
bnc.ca/wapp/copearms/cop-surv.htm
Cox, I. J. et al. (1996). Secure spread spectrum watermarking for images,
audio and video. International Conference on Image Processing, 234–
246.
Cox, I.J, Kilian, J., Leighton, F.T., & Shamoon, T. (1997). Secure spread
spectrum watermarking for multimedia. IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing, 6(12), 1673-1678.
Cox, I.J, Miller, M.L., & Bloom, J.A. (2000, March 27-29). Watermarking
and their properties. Proceedings of the International Conference on
Information Technology: Coding and Computing, ITCC 2000, Las
Vegas, Nevada.
Cox, I.J, Miller, M.L., & Bloom, J.A. (2002). Digital watermarking. San
Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Cox, I.J., Miller, M.L., Linnartz, J.P.N.G., & Kalker, T. (1999). A review of
watermarking principles and practices. In K.K. Parhi & T. Nishitani
(Eds.), Digital signal processing in multimedia systems (pp. 461–
 485).

150   Jahnke & Seitz
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Darmstaedter, V., Delaigle, J.F., Quisquater, J.J., & Macq, B. (1998). Low
cost spatial watermarking. Computer & Graphics, 22(4), 417–424.
Dittmann, J. (2000). Digitale Wasserzeichen: Grundlagen, Verfahren,
Anwendungsgebiete. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Friedrich, J. (1998, November 4-6). Applications of data hiding in digital
images. Tutorial of the ISPACS ’98 Conference in Melbourne, Australia.
Gruhl, D., Lu, A., & Bender, W. (1996). Echo hiding. Information Hiding
First International Workshop Proceedings, 295-315.
Hanjalic, A., Langelaar, G.C., van Roosmalen, P.M.G., Biemond, J., &
Langendijk, R.L. (2000). Image and video databases: Restauration,
watermarking and retrieval. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Hartung, F., Su, J.K., & Girod, B. (1999, January). Spread spectrum
watermarking: Malicious attacks and counterattacks. Proceedings of
SPIE Electronic Imaging ’99, Security and Watermarking of Multi-
media Contents, San Jose, CA.
IMPRIMATUR. (1999, January 15). Retrieved August 19, 2003, from http:/
/www.imprimatur.net/about.htm
Jacquin, A.E. (1992, January). Image coding based on a fractal theory of
iterated contractive image transformations. IEEE Transactions on Im-
age Processing, 2(1), 18–30.
Kutter, M., & Hartung, F. (2000). Introduction to watermarking techniques.
In S. Katzenbeisser & F.A.P. Petitcolas (Eds.), Information hiding
techniques for steganography and digital watermarking. Boston:
Artech House Publishers.
Kutter, M., Jordan, F., & Bossen, F. (1997, February 13-14). Digital
signature of color images using amplituden modulation. Proceedings of
SPIE Storage and Retrieval for Image and Video Databases, San
Jose, CA, 518–526.
Lacy, J., Snyder, J., & Mahler, D. (1997, July). Music on the Internet and
intellectual property protection problem. Proceedings of ISIE.
Merz, M. (1999). Electronic Commerce. Marktmodelle, Anwendungen
und Technologien. Heidelberg: dpunkt.verlag.
Petitcolas, F.A.P., Anderson, R.J., & Kuhn, M.G. (1999). Information hiding
- A survey. Proceedings of the IEEE. Special Issue on Protection of
Multimedia Content, 87(7), 1062-1078.

An Introduction in Digital Watermarking   151
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Schneier, B. (1998). Angewandte Kryptographie. Protokolle, Algorithmen
und Sourcecode in C. Bonn. Addison-Wesley.
Sherman, C. (n.d.). Presentations to SDMI Organizing Plenary. Retrieved
from https://www.sdmi.org/dscgi/ds.py/GetRepr/File-38/html
Tadjer, R. (2000, May 29). Music establishment prevails – For now. Retrieved
August 19, 2003, from http://www.internetwk.com/transform/
transform052900_2.htm
Voyatzis, G., Nikolaides, N., & Pitas, I. (1998, September 8-11). Digital
watermarking – An overview. Proceedings of IX European Signal
Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), Island of Rhodos, Greece, 13–
16.
Woda, K., & Seitz, J. (2002, April 24-25). The role of digital watermarking
to the protection of rights for digital media assets. In W. Abramowicz
(Ed.), Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference Business
Information Systems BIS 2002, Poznan, Poland, 107-112.
Zhao, J. (1997, January). Digital watermarking is the best way to protect
intellectual property from illicit copying. Retrieved August 19, 2003,
from http://www.byte.com/art/9701/sec18/art1.htm

152   Luoma & Tyrvainen
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter VII
Integrated
Domain Model
for  Digital Rights
Management
Eetu Luoma, University of Jyvaskyla, Finland
Pasi Tyrvainen, University of Jyvaskyla, Finland
Abstract
Digital Rights Management (DRM) is an issue of controlling and managing
digital rights over intellectual property. It has recently broadened its
scope from being merely a content protection concern to description,
identification, trading, protection, monitoring and tracking of rights over
tangible or intangible assets. In our study we found out an essential
problem of the domain: lack of models on an appropriate level of
abstraction needed to support research and system development. Modelling,
identifying and describing the core entities enable the rights management
functionalities. This chapter contributes in recognizing the principal
entities and providing detailed description on current identification and

Integrated Domain Model for Digital Rights Management   153
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
description matters and solutions. Our analysis results in the remark of
distinguishing the evolution stages of digital content and separating the
different offers and agreements through which the rights are traded
between the value chain participants. Based on the depiction of the
domain model, this chapter additionally gives insight into the future
trends and issues on the DRM domain.
Introduction
Manual methods of managing intellectual property rights over organizations’
assets are well established, although somewhat inefficient. Digital environment
creates new challenges by disabling the inherent control over physical objects
that organizations had with legacy media and, thus, the conventional manage-
ment and securing of assets no longer applies. On the other hand, creation and
distribution of digital media – for example, documents, audio, video and
multimedia in digital format – offers opportunities for increased efficiency and
additional revenues in certain industries (National Research Council (U.S.),
2000; Rosenblatt, Trippe & Mooney, 2002). At this time, creation and
management of digital content itself has become uncomplicated. However,
efficient and effective management of intellectual property rights in a digital
environment is to date a complicated issue.
The worst scenario for those involved in digital content creation and commer-
cial utilization is that the copyrights and rights to those assets can be infringed
upon on a large scale. Misuses of digital products or confidential information
may occur:
•
as individual consumers are distributing content in peer-to-peer networks
or in a business-to-business environment, within client company and/or
between two companies;
•
within a company, where a department uses copyrighted content from
shared databases, being unaware of the restrictions of content usage;
•
on the creators’ side, for example, creator company operating in several
business networks utilizes the assets or knowledge created in one network
throughout other networks or similar exploitation in case of individual
creators.

154   Luoma & Tyrvainen
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Altogether, losing control over digital assets and their intellectual property
rights proposes an enormous risk. Besides the threats that the digital environ-
ment has brought about, also control may fail, as information management,
workflow and operations relating to management of intellectual property rights
in business and in technical environments are inadequately organized and
cumbersome. Taking the perspective of an individual (either on the creators’ or
consumers’ side or within the company), the easier it is to violate the honouring
of rights and the more valuable misused content is, the more typical are the
abuses of content.
Traditional management of intellectual property rights in a digital environment
is based on prohibiting access to the content in case a customer does not
comply with requirements, for example, payments or registration and logging
in. This is facilitated by various encryption and security methods (see e.g.,
Erickson, 2003; Molva, 1999; Trusted Computing Platform Alliance (TCPA)
specifications at http://www.trustedcomputing.org/ [July 2003]), which
force content providers and media distributors to select business models
according to the available technology (Rosenblatt et al., 2002). Since success
in electronic commerce seems to depend on the business model companies
select, a common conclusion is that the balance of technology and the way of
doing business should be the other way around. Additionally, current DRM
methods can considerably reduce customers’ ease of use; in other words the
usability of products, particularly in cases where cumbersome procedures to
obtain access to content are required or there are several incompatible
standards and software.
Given the opportunities, threats and disadvantages, the research domain,
currently associated under the term Digital Rights Management (DRM), has
developed from an immature consideration of digital products’ protection to
identification, description, trading, protection, monitoring and tracking of
digital rights over assorted assets, either tangible or intangible (Iannella, 2001).
Moreover, in addition to legal and technical issues, digital rights management
thus incorporates, for example, sociological, business and organizational
matters (Guth, 2002). Given the variety of different perspectives and novelty
of the domain, the research still is focused on specifying more complete
business requirements from which the technical requirements may be derived.
However, fulfilling such tasks with the intention of providing a comprehensive
solution sets high requirements to the development of an effective holistic DRM
system, which is to be integrated with current operational systems. Conceptu-

Integrated Domain Model for Digital Rights Management   155
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
alizing and formalizing the management in order to support organizational
change and information system development is needed. Moreover, the assign-
ment of the requirements to the system is challenging, as the domain lacks
sufficient overall picture with a desired level of abstraction applicable to various
situations and to describe the definitive characteristics of the domain elements.
We therefore provide a depiction of an integrated domain model in relation to
the current separate research and the standard development activities. Addi-
tionally, we make available a model for examining the digital rights management
domain in terms of information management. Our scope to the rights manage-
ment issues is on assets in electronic form, which is to say, on the content that
is easily created, managed and traded in the digital environment.
Traditionally, copyrights have protected organizational assets against those
parties out of the asset owners’ reach. However, in the digital world rights and
obligations related to asset usage can be negotiated and agreed upon in a
comparatively straightforward manner, even with an individual consumer. In
addition, the honouring of rights and obligations described in the agreements
may be monitored and enforced more effectively. Thus, the following presen-
tation should be read keeping in mind that in the digital environment the value
of agreements (or contracts) assigned between parties will be emphasized.
Consequently, below a particular importance is given to a novel way of
describing agreements, rights and obligations through digital rights expres-
sions (Rosenblatt, 2003). These expressions consist of information concerning
copyrights and usage rights, and parties involved in creation, trading, distrib-
uting and utilizing assets. The expressions define which, how, by whom, where
and when the assets may be utilized.
We start by defining the central information elements in digital rights manage-
ment. For this purpose, we make use of the depiction of a profound framework
to describe a domain from a commercial perspective and framework to define
different dimensions for assets. Then, the following sections introduce the
integrated domain model for digital rights management, and its essential entities
in detail with their relationships and attributes. Along with the illustration of the
model, various data schemes and standards are introduced, providing direc-
tions for those studying DRM. Finally, we conclude our discussion on the
implications of the domain model and on the future trends and issues for the
digital rights management domain.

156   Luoma & Tyrvainen
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Existing Frameworks for DRM
Renato Iannella has pioneered the DRM domain and proposed a functional
architecture for DRM that identifies three groups of digital rights management
activities (Iannella, 2001). In the first category, intellectual property asset
creation and capture, the underlying question is how to manage the creation of
content and rights so they can easily be traded. This category is further
segregated into tasks, which are applied to ascertain the confirmation of rights
to re-use the existing content, to assign rights to owner(s) and rights to new
content and which allow processing of content through workflow steps for
review and approval of rights. Basically, the latter implies rights expressions to
be stored and managed in a way that they may be efficiently used later.
Intellectual property asset management group includes repository and trading
functions. Repository functions are applied to authorize access and retrieval of
content and their relating metadata and rights descriptions in databases. In the
upstream processes, content is accepted from the creators and added into
content management system. On the other hand, trading functions enable the
assignment of licenses or selling outright by agreements for rights over content.
These functions moreover comprise management of payment data flows and,
if required, content may need to undergo specific fulfilment operations to satisfy
agreement provisions - for example, content is packaged and protected for
particular usage. The third activity group according to the Iannella’s functional
architecture is the intellectual asset usage. It consists of permission management
enabling the usage environment, for example, rendering applications, to enforce
and honour the rights for utilizing the content according to the provided rights
specifications and of tracking management responsible for monitoring the usage
of content in case tracking is required in license conditions. This task also
involves tracking and recording of trading transactions.
The introduced activities of the functional architecture may be reflected to the
digital media management value chain and divided among value chain partici-
pants. Such analysis concludes in separation of intermediaries’ roles and
establishment of three broad categories of processes concerning digital rights
management (Pagani, 2003):
•
Content processes that shall enable the creation, capture, formatting,
packaging, protection and storage of assets and that shall provide control
over when and how content is utilized.

Integrated Domain Model for Digital Rights Management   157
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Finance processes that shall enable players along the value chain to
receive return for their investments, for example, through a financial
clearinghouse.
•
Rights management processes that shall enable authorization of utilization
for distributors and customers, for example, through a content clearing-
house.
An existing work describing DRM entities and their relations is presented in the
framework of the <indecs> project (Rust & Bide, 2000). Their contribution is
based on the assumption that the complexity of intellectual property rights
information could be handled through generic models identifying fundamental
concepts with high-level attributes. The generic framework divides and iden-
tifies the principal entities, which include parties, rights and content. As these
entities are examined from a commercial point of view, their relationships are
described as follows: parties hold and trade rights over the content and
parties create and use content. The very same central entities for DRM may
also be found from existing agreement documents. Basically, an agreement
document consists of the subject of the contract that corresponds to the
content, of the parties entering the contract, of the agreement terms (i.e., rights
expressions) and of an indication of parties’ approval on the terms of the
contract.
This presentation, despite of its abstract nature, provides a basis for the
following discussion. With reference to Iannella’s DRM functionalities above,
definition of entities clarifies the needs of what is to be identified and described
(parties, rights and content itself), what is traded in the domain (content and
rights related to it), what we should protect (content and rights for infringe-
ments), and what is necessary for monitoring and tracking (usage of content and
honouring the rights). Rust and Bide stress the importance of identification
mechanisms and descriptive metadata and the reason for this is obvious.
Identifying and describing the entities with proper metadata enable DRM
functionalities.
The International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA) has made avail-
able a valuable framework to observe and model contents’ development
throughout its evolution stages from an abstraction to a realization (Plassard,
1998). The framework depicted in Figure 1 enables the properties of creation
to be identified through four stages of the lifecycle, beginning from the most
abstract: work, expression, manifestation, and item dimensions.

158   Luoma & Tyrvainen
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
These stages are situated on a scale “idea – experience”. The idea is the
intellectual, creative process and simultaneously the abstraction, which is the
foundation for all the creations. The other end of the axis, the experience,
represents the view of the customers over the creation. Work corresponds to
the most abstract level of a creation; thus, a work is not an identifiable entity and
it can be caught only throughout its expressions. An expression together with
a specific media and format embodies a manifestation of that particular
creation. An item is the entity, which finally ends up into the consumers’ hands.
Each of the items is individual even if they would exemplify the same manifes-
tation.
The notion of these different lifecycle stages offers some valuable viewpoints
for considerations in terms of content identification, description and trading.
Within its lifecycle, a creation serves several purposes, at first being a
realization of its creator’s intellectual effort, a content entity. Then the content
entity or several entities are transformed into a product available for exploita-
tion and use, and in the end, the copy of the product is offered to the customers
Figure 1. Four dimensions for the creations and their relationships
*
e.g., an idea of a story on authors mind
is realized through
+
e.g., a book or a performance
on the story
is embodied through
	
	
e.g., the book in CD-ROM
and PDF format
is exemplified through

e.g., the CD-ROM  that customer buys
is created by
is realized by
is produced by
is owned by
Person
Corporate body

Integrated Domain Model for Digital Rights Management   159
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
as something concrete and an experience worth paying for. Therefore, associ-
ated with the creation, we find a need for separate identification and description
schemes for different dimensions. Moreover, at different stages of evolution,
diverse rights holders can be distinguished.
The Integrated Domain Model for
Digital Rights Management
Despite the acknowledged contribution of <indecs> and IFLA’s frameworks,
they by definition cannot be used to capture and analyze the requirements of the
development of a DRM system. Data collection, processing and management
needs for DRM may be elaborated as the commercial view is considered with
the evolution aspect and the definitive characteristics of the domain’s entities.
To demonstrate our integrated domain model, we make use of the basic notions
in the object-oriented discipline. Constructing a domain model is one of the
fundamental tasks of object-oriented analysis methods. Moreover, we see
similarities in the basic principles of object-orientation and the needs for
identification and description of entities in DRM as discussed above. The
unified modeling language reference model (Jacobson, Booch & Rumbaugh,
1999) defines an object to be an entity with a well-defined identity assigned by
the system. This recognition mechanism enables an access to the properties. In
addition, the reference model suggests that an object’s structure is to be
described through its attributes. We do not suggest object-orientation to be the
most suitable for the implementation of DRM systems.  Rather, it provides a
valuable tool for illustrating and visualizing the substance of the domain. In the
domain model (see Figure 2), we use a notation of UML class diagram and
deploy introduced DRM frameworks in the context of a business model (a
basic value-chain).
Entities in the domain model represent the basic actors in the content produc-
tion value chain, different realizations of a creation through its lifecycle, and
rights descriptions evolving from offers to agreements describing permissions
and obligations of the content usage. In Figure 2, presenting the integrated
domain model, different categories are organized in a horizontal axis. The
leftmost column characterizes a category of essential offers and agreements for
digital rights management. Basically, these refer to documents that embody the

160   Luoma & Tyrvainen
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Figure 2. The integrated domain model for digital rights management

Integrated Domain Model for Digital Rights Management   161
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
negotiation and confirmation of the copyrights and usage rights transfer. The
model accordingly divides agreements into those assigning:
•
copyrights, for example, rights to make copies of the content, to modify
and aggregate several pieces of content, to perform required content
management functionalities, to distribute copies and sell them in order to
commercially exploit content;
•
usage rights, for example, rights to display the content on end-user device,
to render multimedia, to print a document, and rights to re-use the content
that is common in academic communities.
Entities in the rightmost column represent the evolution stages of digital content
processed and used by the value chain participant that are placed in the middle.
The evolution of content in a value chain leads us to the finding that different type
of descriptive data must be applied for each of the stages. Additionally, we
classify the subjects to different agreements reflecting the right level of
abstraction for the creations. As an example, the creation provider may
generate different products from one content entity according to the rights
acquired from the rights holder. Or, the content provider assembles content
entities into one product having multiple rights descriptions relating to it.
The entity characteristics are represented in the domain model as attributes
consisting of the metadata describing the content, the details and the roles of
organizations and individuals, as well as the details of offers and agreements
described in digital rights expression language. The different dimensions of the
creation are taken into account in the description of the material metadata.
Also, the identifiers are seen as attributes of the entity. When applying the
model, one should be keep in mind that identification schemes may vary
according to the nature of the entity. The complicated issue is not the selection
of metadata standard or scheme to apply. If anything, it is an issue on how the
scheme should by applied with different dimensions of the creation. On the
expression level the creation may have general metadata associated with it,
while the product manifestation will have more data attached to it – metadata
describing the media and format used – and on the product copy characteristics
of the single item shall be appended. Again, as the creation consists of several
individual parts, different metadata on expression and manifestation levels
exist.

162   Luoma & Tyrvainen
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Associations between entities follow the straightforward rules of the <indecs>
framework. Accordingly, there are always parties holding and trading rights
over content, which is created and used by the parties. However, the model
provides a more detailed view to the DRM domain as it considers the evolution
aspect of both content and agreements in context of the business model.
Further, associations point out the DRM processes performed to create the
introduced entities – negotiations and assignment of rights and obligations.
There are minimal associations between the parties, since the parties are
connected to each other by the means of offers and agreements. Further, this
implies that the content metadata have references to the rights descriptions and
vice versa.
A Detailed View to Identification and
Description Needs
Identification and Description of Content
Metadata, generally known as data about data (Gardner, 1998), are regarded
as a necessity in organizing, searching, retrieval, representation and utilization
of information as it has been prior to computerization (Gilliland-Swetland,
2000). Research issues on DRM have various linkages to the general field of
metadata research. This is due to the close relationship between content and
rights expressions, as presented in the framework of the <indecs> project.
Traditional research and practice on the identification and description as well
as the management of metadata have naturally concerned the actual content.
Thus, there are several established identifier and metadata standards for
particular purposes.
However, techniques used for identification in the traditional environments
cannot necessarily be transferred directly to the digital world. One downside
of traditional identifiers is that they consider creations at the manifestation level
– an identifier is assigned to content as it is transformed into products.
Nevertheless, in the digital environment we need to identify creations also both
at the expression level as well as at the item level, in order to enable monitoring
and tracking functionalities. Further, we need means for uniquely identifying
individual parts in complex composites consisting of several unique content

Integrated Domain Model for Digital Rights Management   163
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
entities, or even further, parts of content entities (see Erickson, 2001). Open
standards, including Uniform Resource Identifiers (Berners-Lee et al., 1998)
and Digital Object Identifiers (Paskin, 2001) aim at tackling some of these
issues. For our purposes, recognition of identifiers applicable to digital material
is a necessity for each dimension and for parts of composites.
In accordance to the development and applications of metadata, the objectives
and motivations differ greatly between different interest groups. Currently, for
several vertical industries, there exists an appropriate metadata scheme or
development activity. These may describe the same subject, for example,
educational material, with a different set of information. The following Table 1
introduces some widely used schemes and for referencing purposes.
Identification and Description of Parties
The users of a DRM system have to be identified and their roles recognized in
order to approve both the individuals and those representing the organizations
involved in the content provision and in order to perform their role specific
Table 1. Existing metadata standards and schemes
The Dublin Core scheme provides a metadata set that is intended to facilitate the discovery 
of digital documents and images and support interoperability amongst heterogeneous 
metadata systems. The Dublin Core standard includes 15 attributes, which are commonly 
agreed to be the most essential metadata standards. Moreover, the attributes have several 
qualifiers greatly extending the possibilities (Weibel, 1998). 
MARC standards make up the foundation of most library catalogues used today by providing 
the mechanism by which computers exchange, use and interpret bibliographic information 
and its data elements (Furrie, 2000). 
EDItEUR is developing ONIX Product Information Standard (2001) to homogenize the 
product information of books mainly for the needs of the publishing industry and e-
commerce. 
The Learning Object Metadata (LOM) standard is being developed by IEEE’s Leaning 
Technology Standards Committee (2001). The standard aims to define the minimal set of 
attributes needed to manage, locate and evaluate learning objects. 
National Information Standards Organization (NISO) and AIIM International are currently 
working on a data dictionary (NISO Z39.87-2002 AIIM 20-2002) that is to define a standard 
set of metadata elements for digital images (National Information Standards Organization, 
2002). The specification makes reference to TIFF/EP (ISO/DIS 12234-2), and the DIG35 
Working Group’s Metadata for Digital Images, which focuses on providing digital image 
metadata standard to support efficient management of individual images. Please refer to 
http://www.i3a.org/i_dig35.html 

164   Luoma & Tyrvainen
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
operations. At present, a few recognized standards for such purposes prevail
– for example, vCard, X.500, ONIX and MARC standards include proper
mechanisms (Dawson & Howes, 1998; ONIX Product Information Stan-
dards: Release 2.0, 2001; Weider, 1992).
In rights management, roles represent the basic activities in the trading of
intellectual property rights by initiating or facilitating the flow of rights, payments
or other information (IMPRIMATUR, 1999). To legitimate the individuals and
agents to perform their role- specific operations, actors of the system have to
be identified and their roles have to be recognized.
A creator wishes to circulate her creation and, as a result, assigns her rights to
exploit the creation to the creation provider with an agreement. Optionally, the
creator may have assigned her rights to some other legal entity; thus, the
agreement will be made between the third party rights holder and the content
provider. Although a creator is the initial intellectual property rights holder, here
the roles of the creator and the rights holder are differentiated, as their aims are
either to create or protect intellectual property. Rights holders’ main activity is
therefore to license the use of the creations as well as to grant permissions
related to the usage of the creations. IMPRIMATUR suggests that the defining
characteristic of the creation provider is responsible for making a creation
available for exploitation or use, in other words, making products. Additionally,
the creation provider operates in various functions concerning the control and
management of the creation, payments and intellectual property rights.
A media distributor’s task is to establish the trade of creations on behalf of the
creation providers in order to meet the needs of the customers. The media
distributor’s role may take responsibilities in packaging the product for
distribution and delivery, in facilitating and reporting on sales and payment
transactions and in providing marketing functions for the customers. However,
the basic responsibility of the media distributor is to deliver product copies to
the customer. Therefore, media distributors also enter into rights agreements,
which declare their rights and obligations concerning the distribution of content.
Finally, value to the chain is returned as customers acquire the product copies.
Considering description of parties, a brief analysis revealed that there are
numerous schemes in use and available in variety of frameworks. For that
reason, we recommend focusing on the issues of identification and authorization
of parties for DRM functions and selecting (or maintaining) the descriptive
scheme according to organization’s data gathering needs.

Integrated Domain Model for Digital Rights Management   165
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Identification and Description of Rights
Once the fundamental roles with their attributes relating to identification and
description are recognized and the type of digital content these roles produce
clarified, we may discuss their effect on rights expressions. Negotiation on the
terms of the trade will be carried out as parties choose to circulate and acquire
the content – offers between parties are created and possibly modified. Once
parties accept the terms of the offering, they enter an agreement specifying who
(party) acquires what (content) on which terms (rights expressions).
Agreement terms, rights and obligations concerning the content undergo a
certain lifecycle as they are distributed and handled through the value chain.
Basically, the current rights management processes involve predefined agree-
ment terms that are stated in the agreement template (Milosevic, 1995); thus,
Figure 3. Lifecycle of agreement terms as a state diagram

166   Luoma & Tyrvainen
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
the negotiations relating to assignment of creators’ copyrights are handled as
in Figure 3, employing agreement templates. An agreement template is consid-
ered as the initial content offer to the creator or other rights holders and the
rights agreement is usually formed with minor modifications and selection of
options given in template. In current DRM processes the idea of templates is
adopted into downstream trading of content and rights. Several product offers
with different rights expressions may be formed having a single piece of content
as the actual product. Corporate parties may consequently select a proper
business model – for example, subscription, paid downloads or usage metering
– for their digital products. However, proper mechanisms to adopt the common
real-world way of transferring rights are currently missing. Further, as corpo-
rate parties are only allowed to operate according to the rights they have
managed to acquire, it should be taken into account that rights and obligations
must be propagated from the rights agreement to products, possibly consisting
of several content entities.
Rights expressions, considered to describe the agreement terms, consist of
permissions, constraints and requirements of material utilization. Permissions
are connected to the usage of the material (e.g., permissions to display or print
the material), to downstream transfer of the material (e.g., permissions to sell
or give material forward), to content management (e.g., permissions to save a
copy or make a duplicate of the material), and to the reuse of the material (e.g.,
permissions to modify or aggregate the material). Permissions can have
constraints. The rights holder may wish to assign the material to a single group
of individuals, constrain the usage to some IP address space, constrain the
maximum period of time that the material will be accessible and so on.
Moreover, the rights holder may desire some consideration concerning the
utilization of her material; that is, the payments that may occur for example per-
use or before utilization of the material. Since corporate parties may only
operate according to the rights they have acquired, the agreement terms
product offer are propagated from rights agreement made earlier. As the digital
rights are transferred and traded between parties in a given business model, the
permissions tend to decrease, while the constraints and requirements tend to
increase.
Table 2’s terms reflect the possibilities of a currently evolving rights description
language, Open Digital Rights Language (Iannella, 2002). One similar devel-
opment activity is in progress: eXtensible Rights Markup Language
(ContentGuard, 2001). Like its competitor for the standard, XrML attempts
to provide “a general-purpose language in XML used to describe the rights and

Integrated Domain Model for Digital Rights Management   167
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
conditions for using digital resources”. Moreover, the semantics of the core
elements in these two are vastly similar. Digital rights data in the delivery channel
confine or enable, depending on the point of view, consumers to use the material
in the way defined in the rights descriptions. Such enforcement and possible
tracking of digital rights through special technologies strives to govern digital
rights data in a reasonable way.
Although the above depiction of the basic value chain suggests that the
customer will eventually pay for both the product and the value created in the
chain, also a notion of business-to-business trading of products and rights is
valuable, since the creation providers and media distributors both license and
sell rights to the content in order to provide them to the customers. These so-
called syndication processes involve providing an access to the content for
some authorized intermediaries. Here, rights descriptions provide intermediar-
Table 2. Structure and basic elements of rights expression language
(Iannella, 2002)
Rights and obligations are expressed as Agreements and Offers that further contain Permissions 
Permissions divide into four categories 
Usage Permissions 
Permissions to display, print, play, execute content 
Transfer Permissions 
Permissions to sell, lend, give, lease content 
Asset Mgmt. Permissions 
Permissions to move, duplicate, backup, save, content 
Reuse Permissions 
Permissions to modify, excerpt, aggregate, annotate 
content 
Permissions may have Constraints which divide into following categories 
User Constraints 
Constraints permission to specific individual or group 
Device Constraints 
Constraints permission to specific CPU, network, 
storage 
Bound Constraints 
Constraints permission to specific count, range 
Temporal Constraints 
Constraints permission to specific date & time, 
interval 
Aspect Constraints 
Constraints permission to specific format, unit, 
quality 
Target Constraints 
Constraints permission to specific purpose, industry 
Rights Constraints 
Constraints for the downstream transfer of content 
Permissions may have Requirements which include the following: 
Payment Requirements 
Requirements describing an amount of the payment, 
currency and if the amount is due prior to, after or for 
each the granting/use of the rights 
Interactions Requirements 
User is required to agree to textual information or 
must register their details with the party providing 
content 
Usage Requirements 
Includes requirements of attribution of content owners 
and whether a party will be tracked for the content 
usage 
Permissions may have Conditions that, if become true (or occur), revoke the Permissions 
Permissions 
Indicates the set of permissions that will trigger the 
revoking 
Constraint 
Indicates the set of constraints that will trigger the 
revoking 
 

168   Luoma & Tyrvainen
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
ies with directions from which content they may choose from and what the rights
are they have approved to redistribute. The Information and Content Exchange
(The Information and Content Exchange, 2002) is a known protocol sustaining
syndication relationships.
Although the description of rights relating to the content has become one of the
single most attractive research areas, the issue of identification should not be
neglected here. The unique identification of rights descriptions enables mecha-
nisms to build an association between the content, whether transformed into
products or product copies, and the rights regarding that particular content. An
inherent association between usage agreements and product copies should be
kept in mind here. Possibilities of such reference mechanisms include the
insertion of rights description into a package along with the actual content for
interpretation of rights in the terminal device, and the search for the rights
descriptions through content describing metadata with association to rights
descriptions, in addition to the administrate functions. In case product copies
are uniquely identified, the operations the customer performs to the content may
be monitored and tracked.
Conclusion and Future Issues for DRM
As elaborated in the introduction, creating and managing agreements in digital
format is vastly attractive in certain industries where digital agreement details
are to be distributed and handled between several organizations. In order to
serve the rights holders, publishers and distributors, the DRM system should
support and enhance processes generating and maintaining individual and
organizational data, metadata describing the content and digital rights expres-
sions, which stand for different offers and agreements between stakeholders.
The domain model constructed here presents data collection, processing and
management needs for digital rights management. It is therefore a valuable tool
in specifying requirements for a comprehensive management system and in
conceptualizing the domain for those influenced by the organization change that
managing of intellectual property rights in a digital environment requires.
Additionally, the model clarifies the need for a separate identification and
characteristics description of offers, agreements, value chain participants and
content through its lifecycle. Such data in digital form supported with suitable
processes will improve rights clearances and trading of rights over content as

Integrated Domain Model for Digital Rights Management   169
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
they occur in various different situations. Moreover, improvements may be
gained in the control of access and use of material, and in rights tracking and
monitoring.
The domain of digital rights management systems is in a phase where early
adopters of the technology have implemented information systems supporting
distribution of digital content over the Internet by using a variety of software
tools intended for protecting content from unauthorized use. Figure 4 presents
a typical DRM application workflow at delivery channel, where before
presenting the digital content, the customer is first required to have permission
to use the content. Then, rendering applications interpret the specified digital
agreement terms, for example, in licenses, indicating whether and how the user
of the application is allowed to access and utilize the content.
A large variety of software tool providers have offered systems focusing on
content packaging using encryption techniques with many of them withdrawing
from the business. So far the tool vendors have mostly been using in-house
schemes for identification of content units and description of rights associated
with the product package, but are paying increasing attention to standard-
ization. At this stage it is fully feasible to implement business models based on
digital distribution of content, but it requires careful matching of the business
requirements, the processes, roles of parties in the business chain, and the
Figure 4 . DRM application workflow

170   Luoma & Tyrvainen
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
technologies available. The domain model presented here provides a frame-
work for splitting up the field into roles of the parties, the processes to be
implemented, and for choosing the schemes used for each interface needed.
From the business perspective the contemporary research is emphasizing the
business models to be used and harmonization process of the constraints set by
national regulation and international treaties. Both legal and social factors need
to be considered in this research. Finding out the business models the
consumers are willing to adopt will have major impact on the technical side, on
the content protection means and on the core features of digital rights
description languages to be implemented uniformly in content packaging and
delivery systems. These vary from the physical form factor of the devices to be
used for consuming the content, varying from PDA, i-mode mobile handsets in
Japan, and other mobile devices to personal video devices (PVD) used with
digital TV equipment. Thus it seems likely that either one of the description
languages used for rights descriptions will gain a position of a de-facto standard
or a common subset of features used across a wide variety of platforms will
emerge.
The development of standard business models for e-commerce on digital
content will also be needed to find a standard set of role descriptions to be
used in technical implementations and system components of information
systems supporting content business models. Out of the variety of schemes for
role description elaborated in this chapter, none has so far gained wide
acceptance to the extent needed to establish itself as a mainstream de-facto
standard. Further research effort will be seen for example in the area of
defining standard business process descriptions for content trade in the form
of Business Process Specification Schemes (BPSS) of the ebXML language
(ebXML Core Components, 2001).
So far the commercial tools supporting use of DRM technologies has empha-
sized content packaging and protection while little tools are available for
trading content in between organizations and for acquiring rights descrip-
tions from the content producers. Trading content relates with the manage-
ment of large volumes of rights descriptions possessed by an organization with
the associated content and metadata. The content management systems
implemented so far do provide features on managing the content with metadata
and associated workflows, while they generally lack functionality needed for
exchanging offers and agreements with associated rights descriptions and
metadata in a standard format. This is much due to the lack of commonly
adopted standards for representing these. In the area of content identifiers the

Integrated Domain Model for Digital Rights Management   171
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
trend seems to be going from a vide variety of identity schemes towards use of
URI as the interchange format. Dublin Core is probably the most common
interchange format for metadata. However, in role descriptions and rights
descriptions the situation is still much more open.
Along with the standardization of schemes to be used in managing volumes
of data related to the content, more research and tools are needed for solving
transformations of content descriptions, right descriptions, and metadata
from one format to another. For example, the content described using metadata
in MARC format will contain elements not present as such in Dublin Core
metadata scheme. Or when an element with similar semantics exists, the
cardinality, domain or encoding of the value or values may be incompatible,
requiring use of mappings in between enumerated value domains or similar
approaches related to research on integration of federated databases and
enterprise application integration. In these cases also research and practical
techniques are needed for mapping identifier schemes, resolution of identifiers,
and certification of participants.
Assuming that an organization has the means to manage a uniform or a
heterogeneous database containing the data needed for rights management of
the content under possession of the organization, the next question is on
protocols for providing access to the data for external parties. This
includes concerns on business processes to be supported, technical aspects on
implementing the processes and on publishing the process to other parties, for
example in the form of ebXML BPSS business process descriptions published
in a registry or UDDI, technical concerns on processing queries on metadata
and right descriptions on the content another party desires to use, as well as
concerns on security. All these aspects need to be considered in each case by
each organization, while the standardization process is still under way. They
also provide fruitful starting points for further research.
In case agreement terms are to be distributed and handled digitally, it is useful
to capture them into digital expressions once they are assigned to corporate
parties. This will enable automation of rights transfer processes in the following
lifecycle phases as the terms of agreements can be retrieved, transferred, and
manipulated by computers instead of elaborate manual processes. Besides the
advantages gained through digitalization and automation of information man-
agement, digitalized agreement terms will be utilized with the content in digital
delivery channel.
Currently, there are simple approaches to produce digital expressions.
However, the current approaches reflect the way those languages express

172   Luoma & Tyrvainen
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
rights rather than actual agreement templates and agreement. Selection of terms
is carried out with selection elements having values directly from the expression
scheme. In contrast, creating agreement templates and agreements for the
exchange of assets requires both legal expertise and an understanding of
business models and agreement documents that must conform to the legal
foundations and reflect the corporation’s or organization’s way of operating.
Thus, a need to use formal natural language still exists. On the other hand, the
representatives of parties call for straightforward creation of agreements
through selecting from available, predefined agreement terms and through
minor modifications to the terms, if necessary. This applies for both the initial
assignment of creators’ rights to corporate parties and for the distribution of
rights to utilize the content between corporate parties and customers.
The problem domain of creating digital agreements can be elaborated
further. A need exists for providing a DRM applications and a method that
allows the creation of agreements in digital environment that conform to the
requirements set by legal and business matters of contracting. Further, a need
exists also for a solution that allows creation of digital agreement templates that
include possible agreement elements and parts, and from which the agreements
may be created in a straightforward manner through simple selections and
minor modifications. Additionally, we are required to capture the terms of
agreements to digital expressions in order to enable the digitalization and even
automation of distribution and handling of the agreement terms. Such capturing
must produce a set of digital rights expressions according to a standardized
schema, which may be interpreted by information processing systems and on
the digital delivery channel by rendering applications enforcing rights and
obligations. Moreover, a need exists for efficient means to distribute and handle
evolving agreement terms between numerous parties.
Altogether, the contemporary domain of DRM provides business opportunities
for early adopters as well as a multiplicity of interesting research questions. The
domain model presented in this chapter enables elaborating the areas to be
covered by projects implementing operational systems. It also draws attention
to specific research questions.

Integrated Domain Model for Digital Rights Management   173
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
References
Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., Irvine, U.C., & Masinter, L. (1998). Uniform
Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax. Network Working Group,
RFC: 2396. Retrieved July 18, 2002, from http://www.ietf.org/rfc/
rfc2396.txt
ContentGuard, I. (2001). eXtensible rights Markup Language (XrML) 2.0
Specification. Retrieved August 26, 2002, from http://www.xrml.com
Dawson, F., & Howes, T.E. (1998). vCard MIME Directory Profile. Network
Working Group, RFC: 2426. Retrieved September 9, 2002, from http:/
/www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2426.txt
ebXML Core Components. (2001). Core Component Overview version
1.05. Retrieved February 13, 2002, from http://www.ebxml.org/specs/
Erickson, J.S. (2001). Information objects and rights management. D-Lib
Magazine, 7(4).
Erickson, J.S. (2003). Fair use, DRM, and trusted computing. Communica-
tions of the ACM, 46(4), 34-39.
Furrie, B. (2000). Understanding MARC Bibliographic: Machine-readable
cataloging (5th ed.). Cataloging Distribution Service, Library of Con-
gress, in collaboration with The Follett Software Company. Retrieved
December 8, 2002, from http://lcweb.loc.gov/marc/umb/
Gardner, S. (1998). Building the data warehouse. Communications of the
ACM, 41(9), 52-60.
Gilliland-Swetland, A. (2000). Introduction to metadata pathways to digital
information: Setting the stage (2.0) [html-page]. Getty Research Institute.
Retrieved August 14, 2002, from http://www.getty.edu/research/insti-
tute/standards/intrometadata/
Guth, S. (2002). Perspectives of DRM.
Iannella, R. (2001). Digital rights management (DRM) architectures. D-Lib
Magazine, 7(6).
Iannella, R. (2002). Open Digital Rights Language (ODRL) Version 1.1. IPR
Systems Pty Ltd. Retrieved August 31, 2002, from http://www.odrl.net/
1.1/ODRL-11.pdf
ICE, The Information and Content Exchange. (2002). IDEAlliance. Retrieved
September 28, 2002, from http://www.icestandard.org/

174   Luoma & Tyrvainen
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
IEEE P1484.12 Learning Object Metadata Working Group Scope and
Purpose. (2001). IEEE Learning Technology Standards Committee
(LTSC). Retrieved July 23, 2002, from http://ltsc.ieee.org/wg12/s_p.html
IMPRIMATUR. (1999). Synthesis of the IMPRIMATUR Business Model.
The Information and Content Exchange. (2002). IDEAlliance. Retrieved
September 28, 2002, from http://www.icestandard.org
Jacobson, I., Booch, G., & Rumbaugh, J. (1999). The unified software
development process. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
MARC Code List: Relator Codes. (2002). Library of Congress: Network
Development and MARC standard office. Retrieved September 24,
2002, from http://lcweb.loc.gov/marc/relators/
Milosevic, Z., & Bond, A. (1995) Electronic commerce on the Internet: What
is still missing? Proceedings of the 5th Conference of the Internet
Society,  Honolulu, 245-254.
Molva, R. (1999). Internet security architecture. Computer Networks &
ISDN Systems Journal, 31(8), 787-804.
National Information Standards Organization, & International, A. (2002).
NISO Z39.87-2002 AIIM 20-2002 - Data Dictionary — Technical
Metadata for Digital Still Images. Retrieved September 15, 2002, from
http://www.niso.org/standards/resources/Z39_87_trial_use.pdf
National Research Council (U.S.), Committee on Intellectual Property Rights
and the Emerging Information Infrastructure, Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board, & Commission on Physical Sciences, M.,
and Applications. (2000). The digital dilemma: Intellectual property in the
information age. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
ONIX Product Information Standards: Release 2.0. (2001). EDItEUR. Re-
trieved August 26, 2002, from http://www.editeur.org/onix.html
Pagani, M. (2003). The critical role of digital rights management processes in
the context of the digital media management value chain. Paper presented
at the 14th IRMA International Conference.
Paskin, N. (2001). The DOI Handbook. International DOI Foundation.
Retrieved July 16, 2002, from http://dx.doi.org/10.1000/186
Plassard, M.-F. (1998). Functional requirements for bibliographic records.
Final Report, IFLA Study Group on the Functional Requirements for
Bibliographic Records. Retrieved June 8, 2002, from http://www.ifla.org/
VII/s13/frbr/frbr.pdf

Integrated Domain Model for Digital Rights Management   175
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Rosenblatt, B. (2003). Rights-expression language is key to interoperability.
The Seybold Report, 2.
Rosenblatt, B., Trippe, B., & Mooney, S. (2002). Digital rights manage-
ment: Business and technology. New York: M&T Books.
Rust, G., & Bide, R. (2000). <indecs> metadata framework: Principles, model
and dictionary, [pdf]. Indecs Framework Ltd,. Retrieved June 8, 2002,
from http://www.indecs.org/pdf/framework.pdf
Weibel, S., Kunze, J., Lagoze, C., & Wolf, M. (1998). Dublin Core metadata
for resource discovery. Network Working Group, RFC: 2413. Retrieved
December 9, 2002, from http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2413.txt
Weider, C., Reynolds, J., & Heker, S. (1992). Technical overview of directory
services using the X.500 Protocol [html]. Network Working Group,
RFC: 1309. Retrieved December 9, 2002, from http://www.ietf.org/rfc/
rfc1309.txt

176   Yasinsac
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter VIII
Rates of Change in
Ad hoc Networks
Alec Yasinsac, Florida State University, USA
Abstract
Ad hoc networks are inherently dynamic, with nodes entering, moving
around, and leaving the network, often for short duration membership.
This property of dynamic restructuring limits functionality and greatly
complicates security. Here, we establish a foundation for analyzing ad hoc
network functionality or security properties relative to their dynamic
nature. The essential structure in any network is the links between nodes.
Thus, our approach turns on measures of link availability to define
network properties that govern functionality. In this chapter, we
systematically address issues associated with changes that occur in ad hoc
networks. We consider the functionality impact of change and address
bounds on optimization that exist when change rates are high and provide
definitions that allow reasoning about limits on functionality resulting
from increasingly dynamic link activity.

Rates of Change in Ad hoc Networks   177
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Introduction: Dynamics of Ad hoc
Networks
Networks come in all shapes and sizes, with a wide variety of characteristics.
We are concerned with networks that have no permanent structure; essentially,
all nodes are not only mobile, but they characteristically regularly move about.
These networks are comprised of nodes with limited transmission ranges and
depend on other nodes to relay traffic in order to expand their broadcast
domain. We commonly term these ad hoc networks because networks form,
change, and dissolve in an ad hoc way, often and quickly, and as a matter of
routine. The networks that they form are often highly dynamic.
This chapter addresses questions about functional limitations that high and
fluctuating rates of change cause in ad hoc networks. Others have studied this
question empirically (Obraczka, Viswanath & Tsudik, 2001), but there is little
theoretical foundation for predicting or analyzing network functionality as a
factor of network rate of change. The focus of this chapter is to identify and
analyze the theoretical limitations on functionality in highly dynamic ad hoc
networks.
In the rest of this section, we systematically set up the discussion by defining key
terms and follow with an argument about the important metrics and the bounds
that apply given assumptions about these metrics.
Nodes, Links, Networks and Notation
Ad hoc networks are collections of nodes that intercommunicate by relaying
messages across peer-to-peer links. We label our nodes in capital letters, while
links are pairs using the lower case letters that correspond to the nodes that the
link connects. Thus, a link between nodes A and C is represented as (a, c), or
equivalently as (c, a) since, with no loss of generality, we assume all links are
bidirectional.
A network consists of a collection, or set, of interconnected nodes. We label
networks with upper case letters from the end of the alphabet, so we may say
that nodes A and B are elements of network X:
{A, B} ∈ X

178   Yasinsac
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
and that if bi-directional link (a, b) exists, it is also an element of X.
(a, b) ∈ X
We define a path as a set of interconnected links that connect two nodes. Paths
are represented as ordered tuples, with the number of entries dependent on the
number of links that must be crossed. Thus, a path from A to B that must go
through C and D (in that order) would be labeled (a, c, d, b), or equivalently
(b, d, c, a). These relationships are casually illustrated in Figure 1.
Network Structure Rate of Change
The ad hoc nature that is a primary characteristic of the networks we consider
results in dynamic networks. As the rate of change increases, the nature of these
networks becomes progressively more complex. For example, when a link
forms, it may join a node to a network, establish a cycle in an existing network,
or merge two networks. Conversely, dissolving a single link can have the
opposite effects.
We consider the specific types of network structure change in order to better
understand the nature of networks with high rates of change. We note that there
is presently no existing set of measures to reflect these notions.
Figure 1.
Network {A, B, C, D} 
Path (a,c,d,b) 
Network {A, C, D, E} 
Network {B,F} 
Link (a, b) 
Network {A,B} 
C 
D 
B 
A 
C 
D 
B 
A 
C 
D 
B 
A 
E 
F 
F 
E 
F 
E 

Rates of Change in Ad hoc Networks   179
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Discrete Structures in High Rate of Change Networks
One way to think about network changes is to consider the network structure
during static periods, as addressed in Obraczka, Viswanath and Tsudik
(2001). If we define change to occur instantaneously, then we can theoretically
identify the network structure at any instant and leverage the static interval
between changes. In such a network, answers to the following questions are
Boolean (though the answer may not be available):
•
Is node A connected to network X?
•
Does a link exist between nodes A and B?
•
Does a path exist between nodes A and D?
Practically, network structure change does not occur instantaneously, but
rather injects a “change interval” where the system neither has the previous
structure, nor the next structure.  These change intervals result in an additional,
fuzzy variable, and thus, an additional level of complexity into systematic
analysis of dynamic network functionality. In networks where the change
interval can be as long as link lifetimes, it may be impossible to reason about
functionality, at least in sparse networks.
Conversely, if the change interval is small, the impact on network functionality
is minimal. For simplicity, we consider networks with change intervals that are
small enough that we can consider them to be instantaneous, thus with little
impact on our results.
Most attempts to manage ad hoc networks are based on two assumptions
regarding the rate of change:
(1) The change interval is insignificant and
(2) There are long network structure static intervals that have a significant
interval between relevant changes in the network structure.
The impact of the former depends on the accuracy of the latter. Functions on
ad hoc networks assume that the network is static for relevant changes for a
period longer than is required to complete the function. For example, a node

180   Yasinsac
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
count function may not succeed if it cannot expect that the number of connected
nodes will not change between the time that the function begins and completes.
While it seems obvious that a network function cannot work if the links are not
alive long enough to do their part, classic networks were constructed under a
paradigm where long link lifetimes were the norm. In networks with low rates
of change and long static intervals, the change interval is less significant, since
network changes occur quickly in ad hoc networks. Adding or deleting a link
in a network routinely takes a few seconds at most. If the network structure is
routinely static for hours at a time, the few seconds it takes to make a structural
change is insignificant relative to the network structure static intervals. How-
ever, if the network structure intervals are short, the few seconds that it takes
to make changes have a larger impact.
Population Density in Ad hoc Networks
Considering the rate of change in network structure necessarily requires scope.
We now consider some subtleties of how changes affect sparse versus dense
networks. In general, large networks will have more changes than will smaller
networks. Thus, again generally speaking, larger networks require more
management effort because of the larger number of changes and the shorter
static intervals. On the other hand, each link in a smaller network tends to be
more important to the traffic in that network, so a larger percentage of changes
are significant relative to more network functions.
Some networks will have few nodes and few links. Others will have numerous
nodes, but are sparsely connected, while still others will have few nodes that
are highly connected. We posit that the rate at which changes take place has
different impacts in each situation. In a sparsely populated network, dissolution
of a node is more likely to split the network into two or more disconnected
networks than is loss of a single node in a densely populated network. Similarly,
loss of a single link is more likely to separate a node from the network if the
network is lightly connected (few links per node) than a more highly connected
network.
Conversely, in a densely populated network, rather than experiencing network
partitioning with loss of links, channels can quickly become saturated with
change information. Consider a network where there are 10% node changes
(add, loss, or move) every hour. In a sparse network of 10 nodes, there will be
only one change per hour. A denser network of 1,000 nodes will experience

Rates of Change in Ad hoc Networks   181
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
100 changes per hour. If the interval change is 10% per minute, low power,
bandwidth, and other such devices may not be able to keep up with the change
maintenance process in a dense network.
For the rest of this chapter, we employ the somewhat uncomfortable use of the
phrase “more dynamic” to address the network rate of change. We say that a
network that is more dynamic than another has a higher rate of network
structural change and shorter static intervals on average. We offer a series of
metrics that categorize the dynamic nature of ad hoc networks in the next
section.
Rate of Change Metrics
We now define measures of the dynamic nature of ad hoc networks. With little
background to build on in this area, our metrics are simple by design, leaving
rigorous definition and proof techniques to later work. Rather, we introduce
building blocks that we use to make intuitive arguments about bounds on
operational efficiency. We partition the metrics into the categories of architec-
tural and application oriented metrics.
Architectural Rate of Change Metrics
Link Lifetime
The first metric that we introduce is the network average link lifetime. Links in
ad hoc networks may be formed or dissolved for many reasons, but we limit the
scope of the problem by recognizing only four causes of link changes in an ad
hoc network.
•
A node enters the network
•
A node leaves the network
•
A node moves, allowing a new network link to form
•
A node moves, causing an existing network link to dissolve.

182   Yasinsac
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Changes may occur concurrently; for example, when a node moves, it may
cause one link to dissolve and another distinct link to form. However, if we
assume that changes are instantaneous, we can distinguish changes as one of the
four categories above.
Intuitively, a network with shorter average link lifetime is more dynamic than a
network with longer average link lifetime. This metric may be computed as the
sum of the duration of the existence of each link that has existed in the network,
divided by the number of links that have existed. We give the link lifetime
average for network X with n total links in Equation 1.
Avg_LLt(X) =  
n
LLi
n
i∑
=1
(1)
The link lifetime metric is not routinely considered when planning static
networks, since link lifetimes in that environment are sufficiently reliable in that
very long link lifetimes are the norm. In such an environment, the most
commonly used metric is the well understood mean time to failure (MTTF)
metric, where link loss is always considered as a type of failure of some piece(s)
of network equipment, and where the mechanical failure rates are empirically
established.
In highly dynamic ad hoc networks, link loss is a routine factor in the network
structure. Thus, rather than reason about the time between failures of essential
equipment, we reason about the duration that links can be expected to be
operationally available.
Practically, it is more difficult to compute the average link lifetime of an ad hoc
network than of static networks, since acquiring complete information is
unlikely. Rather than computing the average link lifetime of a network, we may
estimate or assume a value for this metric and reason about the resulting impact
on network functionality. It is straightforward to model link lifetime using
statistical methods. By fixing link lifetime and varying the distributions and
impacts of differing assumptions, we can observe the results as the link lifetime
increases and decreases, as most structure and functionality metrics have a
cause-effect relationship with average link lifetime. For example, link lifetime
will almost always be causally correlated with node lifetime, which we introduce
in the next section.

Rates of Change in Ad hoc Networks   183
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Node Lifetime
The second metric that we offer is node lifetime. Each time a node enters or
leaves the network, there is a connectivity impact that will likely be greater than
having a single link change. The computation for the average node lifetime is
similar to the average link lifetime, where m is the number of nodes that have
existed in X:
Avg_NLt(X) =  
m
NL
m
i
i
∑
=1
(2)
Number of Links per Node
We next introduce a metric that relates links and nodes: the average number of
links per node. This metric characterizes the redundancy and connectivity of the
target network. In a wireless network, it also characterizes the density of the
network, since in most wireless networks, links are a function of proximity and
broadcast range. Thus, when many nodes are within a close proximity and are
within broadcast range of one another, the number of links per node increases.
When considered as a factor of change, the number of links per node metric
also allows reasoning about how functionality changes as connectivity changes.
Simply stated, the number of links per node is represented as the number of
links (n) divided by the number of nodes (m) in the network.
LpN(X) = m
n
(3)
Network dynamic nature has a significantly different impact in sparse networks
than in dense networks. In sparse networks, the primary concern is maintaining
full connectivity in the face of link loss, since loss of a single link is more likely
to separate a single node from the network, or to separate two sections of the
network, than in dense networks. Mechanisms to address this factor focus on
recognizing the vulnerability and establishing mechanisms to overcome link
loss.

184   Yasinsac
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
In dense networks, network partitioning due to loss of a single link is unlikely.
Unfortunately, a different, but equally challenging problem exists in dense
networks: bandwidth saturation. Regardless of the signaling paradigm, ad hoc
wireless networks that are densely populated run the risk of saturation based
on factors such as bandwidth available, transmission volume per node, message
routing protocol employed, and the collision avoidance mechanism employed.
Percentage of Change per Unit Time
We now return to our earlier example of the total and percent of network
changes and use this metric as the springboard into talking about application
metrics. We define this metric as the number of changes divided by the desired
number of intervals of the selected time units. In very large (thousands of nodes)
or highly dynamic networks, change may be best measured in terms of minutes,
or even seconds. In smaller or more stable networks, hourly change rates may
apply.  Equation 4 is a mathematical representation of this metric.
Change(X) = 
time
n
m
∆
+
∆
(4)
Clearly, change (X) will be related to the link lifetime in a network. In fact, when
combined with the size of the network, link lifetime is telling regarding the
overall network change. This general metric gives some intuition about overall
functional opportunity in ad hoc networks.
Still, other properties such as network size and density play a part in function-
ality so we need to be able to represent their impact in order to accurately
analyze potential network functionality. For example, a network with 10
changes per minute is not relatively dynamic if there are 100,000 nodes and
500,000 links in the network. To give a better picture of this characteristic, we
generate an enhancement to this metric by including the total number of nodes
and links in the computation to produce the percent of change, given in Equation
5.

Rates of Change in Ad hoc Networks   185
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Percent_Change(X) = 
)
(
*
n
m
time
n
m
+
∆
+
∆
(5)
The metrics that we have defined so far are interrelated. For example, if the link
and node lifetimes for network X are longer than those for node Y, the percent
change of X will necessarily be larger than the percent change of Y. We can also
observe limits between these metrics. For example, the number of links can
change without the number of nodes changing, since a node may have several
links in the network, but since a node is only a member of the network if it has
a link in the network, if there are changes in the number of nodes, there must
also be changes in the links.
Application-Oriented Rate of Change Metrics
We now consider application-oriented metrics. These metrics reveal the
properties that allow us to recognize boundaries on ad hoc network function-
ality.
Path Length
Nodes in ad hoc networks communicate through a series of links that together
constitute a path. Consider an ad hoc network where we desire to identify a
path between nodes A and B. Notationally, a path is an ordered set of nodes
(represented in lower case) that begins at the source and terminates at the
destination. For example, if node C lies between A and B and if A can send
messages to B, but they must be relayed by C, we represent the path between
A and B as {a, c, b}, or equivalently {b, c, a}, and we say that C is an
intermediate node between A and B.
As with links, paths come and go in ad hoc networks. Because we assume
bidirectionality, there must be at least one path between any two nodes in a
network. However, as links dissolve, paths may also disappear. Since many
applications are focused on setting up paths or are dependent for their
functionality, we need to reason about the nature of paths in ad hoc networks.
We now consider the average path length within a network. For simplicity, we
assume that we can determine the shortest path (the path that traverses the

186   Yasinsac
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
fewest number of links) between any two nodes in a network and that if there
are two or more paths of this length, we select one as the primary path
(heretofore when we refer to “path” we are addressing the “primary path”).
Thus, we can enumerate the paths in a network. Under these assumptions, there
is only one path between any two nodes, so a network of m nodes has exactly
q = 
2
)1
(
2
−
m
 paths. We then define the average path length of the network as
the sum of the number of links in all paths divided by the sum of the number of
paths in the network as given in Equation 6.
Avg_PL(X) =  
q
m
m
i
i
∑
=1
|
|
(6)
Path Lifetime
Another network metric for functions that utilize paths is path lifetime. This
metric is important to all functions that operate between nodes, for example, by
forming a circuit or authenticated route. The path lifetime provides a guideline
on how much time the function can take and yet expect not to run out of time
before its purpose is met.
Our metric for average network path lifetime is similar to that for link lifetime.
It is based the proportionality of the network average path length and the
average link lifetime and is given in Equation 7.
Avg_PLt(X) = Avg_LLt(X) / Avg_PL(X)
(7)
Clearly, path lifetimes will be significantly shorter than link lifetimes in ad hoc
networks, since dissolution of any link also disables every path that traverses
that link. Similarly, and more importantly from a functional standpoint, longer
paths will necessarily have shorter expected lifetimes than shorter paths. This
means that network applications must be concerned about not only the average
path lifetime, but also the maximum path length, also called the network
diameter, which directly correlates to the minimum expected path lifetime that
the application may encounter in the network. As intuition may suggest,

Rates of Change in Ad hoc Networks   187
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
networks with longer paths will, in general, be less tolerant of protocols with
high overhead.
Notice that we cannot compute the network average path lifetime based on the
node lifetime. The difficulty here is that multiple paths may come and go without
any node changes whatsoever occurring within the network.
Metrics Summary
Table 1 is taxonomy of metrics for change rates in ad hoc networks. We do not
Table 1.
METRICS FOR RATE OF CHANGE IN AD HOC NETWORKS 
Category 
Type 
Sub-type 
Description 
Network 
Bandwidth 
Available 
Total capacity usually in bytes per 
second 
 
 
Utilization/consumption Expected bandwidth that is normally 
consumed at any given instant 
 
Size 
Total # nodes 
 
 
 
Total # links 
 
 
 
Network diameter 
Length of the longest path in the network 
 
Change rate 
Total changes per 
unit time 
Number of links and nodes that are added 
or lost over time 
Links 
Link 
lifetime 
 
Expected period a link remains active 
once it is established 
Nodes 
Node 
lifetime 
 
Expected period a node will be available 
once it is established 
 
Link add 
rate 
 
# of links that are added to a randomly 
selected node over time  
 
Link drop 
rate 
 
Expected # of links that are lost to a node 
over time  
Paths 
Path length 
 
The expected # of links in a randomly 
selected path 
 
Path 
redundancy  
 
The expected # of disjoint paths between 
two nodes 
 
Path 
lifetime 
 
Expected duration that paths will be 
available 
Density 
# links per 
node 
 
Expected number of links that any node 
will have 

188   Yasinsac
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
claim that the list is comprehensive, but believe it reveals usable metrics for
establishing functional limits.
Rate of Change Categories and
Illustrations
The underlying premise of this chapter is that before ad hoc networks can be
widely utilized, we must be able to reason about the impact of the rate of its
inherent change. In this section, we define four categories of change rates that
allow us to solve problems for classes of networks rather than for each specific
network. More importantly, it allows us to clearly state the assumptions about
ad hoc network functional characteristics.
We now give a few examples to illustrate the partitioning that we desire. These
examples also show that the metrics we give are practical. Below, we identify
four potential ad hoc network categories that correspond to different rates of
change.
1)
Low Rate of Change Ad hoc Network. The least dynamic (or the most
stable) category includes ad hoc networks where links exist on the
average some number of hours, up to several days. Changes at this rate
are relatively easy to handle and do not consume a significant percentage
of network resources. An example of such a network is an office
environment where employees carry their laptop computers, connected
by roaming wireless communications, home and work with them. While
the change rates may peak in the morning and again in the afternoon, the
average link lifetimes will likely be hours.
2)
Medium Rate of Change Ad hoc Network. We consider networks
with average link lifetime of 10 minutes to a few hours as a medium rate
of change network. The changes at these intervals do not consume even
a local majority of the network resources, but the resources consumed are
statistically significant. An example of such a network is a delivery service
network, where communication between carriers is via short wave radio.
Each vehicle may operate primarily within its own area with links to
adjoining areas that are interrupted intermittently.

Rates of Change in Ad hoc Networks   189
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
3)
High Rate of Change Ad hoc Network. High rate of change networks
are characterized by link lifetimes between a few seconds and a few
minutes. Managing change in these networks can take a majority of the
available resources. An example of such a network is a wireless network
between handheld devices in a crowd where individuals move about
independently and communicate via low-power, broadcast medium.
4)
Very High Rate of Change ad hoc Network. These networks are
characterized by average link lifetimes of just a few seconds. The primary
concern for any function on these networks is resource allocation, and
their utility is suspect with current technology. An example of such an ad
hoc network environment is that of jet aircraft in a combat or other high-
speed environment.
Impact of Rate Change
Thus far we have presented the foundation for reasoning about the nature of rate
of change limitations. We now address the impact that rate of change has on
applications.
There has been a significant amount of work done on ad hoc routing (Bose,
Morin, Stojmenovic & Urrutia, 2001; Carter & Yasinsac, 2002; Ko & Vaidya,
1998; Obraczka, Viswanath & Tsudik, 2001; Perkins & Royer, 1999), most
geared toward optimizing either the number of messages or time required to
acquire an effective route, where a route is available (we do not consider “wait
and see” routing protocols where route requests are held and re-forwarded
when new links appear). Flood routing provides a ceiling in both the amount of
overhead and message deliverability.
More formally, for any ad hoc network comprised of m nodes, the most
messages that are required to derive a route is 2m (each of m nodes floods two
messages). If we choose to optimize the number of messages in a new routing
protocol, any routing protocol that systematically produces a route with fewer
than 2m messages is superior to flooding. In a given environment, if there is no
protocol that can systematically produce an effective route with fewer than 2m
messages, then flooding is the optimal routing algorithm in that environment.
The metrics described above help us to reason about this problem. In this
section, we argue that optimization is not possible for some functions in highly

190   Yasinsac
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
dynamic networks and use of predetermined routes or circuits may not be
possible in networks that are highly dynamic.
Bounds on Routing Protocols in Ad hoc Networks
As we described earlier, applications that require circuits are particularly
vulnerable to the network dynamic nature. On demand routing protocols
generally produce such a circuit. We use the Secure Routing Protocol (SRP)
(Papadimitratos & Haas, 2002) to illustrate how rate of network change can
limit network functionality.
SRP is a leapfrog protocol that begins with a route request. Each node that
receives the route request appends its address and retransmits if the request is
new, and discards otherwise. The route request protocol continues until all
nodes in the network receive the route request. If the destination node receives
the route request, it prepares a route reply packet directed to the reverse path
of the first received route reply. When the originating node receives the route
reply, it utilizes the established circuit to communicate with the destination
node. Figure 2 illustrates the messages in SRP.
The goal of SRP is to establish a secure route (circuit) between two hosts on
an ad hoc network. SRP establishes a route with only n + l messages, where
n is the number of nodes in the network and l is the path length, a substantial
reduction in the number of messages over flooding.
The time required to complete SRP is twice the sum of the time required to
move between nodes on the resulting path. Our first observation regarding the
impact of the dynamic network nature is that SRP cannot be effective unless the
average path lifetime is at least twice as long as the average time required to
Figure 2.
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
abcde 
ae 
abcde 
abe 
abcde 
abce 
abcde 
abcde 

Rates of Change in Ad hoc Networks   191
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
complete SRP. Otherwise, we should expect that the path identified in SRP
would be invalid by the time the protocol completes.
While SRP offers an improvement in the number of messages over flooding, in
terms of time SRP is no better than flooding. Flooding can establish a circuit in
the time that it takes to traverse the path from the source to the destination and
back, the same amount of time as SRP.
This leads to our first rule regarding bounds on functionality of highly dynamic
ad hoc networks, where T(f) is the time required to complete function f that
must traverse its path twice.
Rule 1. For any function f that must access a circuit on network X cannot
expect to complete successfully unless:
T(f) < avg_PLt(X)
Consider some subtleties of this observation. First, we do not claim that
functions that violate this rule will never work. Certainly, for shorter circuits or
with low probability on longer circuits, functions that violate this rule may
occasionally work. However, we cannot expect the function to complete its
task if Rule 1 is not met. In fact, if T(f) is equal to the average path lifetime, the
function should expect to fail 50% of the time.
Secondly, the average link lifetime is a critical element of this computation. In
networks in category 4 (very high rate of change), where link lifetimes are only
a few seconds, it is likely impractical to expect to be able to utilize circuits at
all. Even category 3 networks may be constrained if reliability is essential or if
transmission times are long because of high traffic load or other reasons.
Intuition has sensed these observations in the past, but Rule 1 formulates a
mechanism to systematically reason about these limiting factors.
Tuning Factors for Effective Functions in Ad hoc
Networks
Another important question is: “Can we use Rule 1 to derive a rule that
guarantees that such a function will complete?” Since our approach is loosely
probabilistic, we prefer to deal with terms such as “likely” and “expected”

192   Yasinsac
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
rather than “guaranteed”. However, if we accept a slightly loosened form of
guarantee, “insignificant,” and set that threshold arbitrarily, we can derive some
helpful results.
Rule 2. Any function f that must access a circuit on network X will not be time
constrained if:
T(f) < minimum_PLt(X)
To make a strong assurance of success, T(f) should be (ideally substantially)
less than twice the minimum path lifetime of the network. While our discussion
has focused on the time necessary to traverse paths in the network, the
communication time is frequently a small percentage of the total function
completion time. Thus, functionality is determined by the demands of the clients
as well as the characteristics of the network. Functions that require longer time
to execute are less likely to be completed successfully than those with shorter
time demands.
Conclusion
All network functionality depends on the characteristics of its architecture. In
wired, or fixed structure networks, link lifetime, given in terms of hours, days,
or longer, dominates function time sufficiently that reliability is measured as the
mean time between failures. In highly dynamic networks, link loss cannot be
considered the exception that occurs only, or primarily, through failure. Rather,
link establishment and dissolution are not only normal, but also required for ad
hoc functionality.
We have shown how the varying rates of change in ad hoc networks affect their
functionality. We categorized these rates and established metrics to allow
systematic analysis of their impact. We went on to address specific functional
bounds that may occur for highly dynamic ad hoc networks, showing how one
secure routing algorithm cannot be effective in very highly dynamic networks.
We further show how to use our metrics to gauge functionality in any ad hoc
network.

Rates of Change in Ad hoc Networks   193
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Our work and examples focus on applications that employ circuits in ad hoc
networks. However, these metrics and techniques are applicable to a wide
variety of functions and environments and can be a productive mechanism for
designing and analyzing applications in ad hoc networks.
If ad hoc networks are to mature into a viable networking architecture, we must
establish a solid foundation for evaluating them in terms of the parameters that
dictate changes in their architecture. This work must be highly probabilistic,
founded in theory and proven in the laboratory.
References
Bose, P., Morin, P., Stojmenovic, I., & Urrutia, J. (2001). Routing with
guaranteed delivery in ad hoc wireless networks. Wireless Networks, 7,
609-16. Kluwer.
 Carter, S., & Yasinsac, A. (2002, November). Secure position aided ad hoc
routing. Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Com-
puter and Communication Networks, pp. 329-334. IEEE Computer
Society Press.
 Ko, Y., & Vaidya, N. (1998, October). Location aided routing in mobile ad
hoc networks. The Fourth Annual ACM/IEEE International Confer-
ence on Mobile Computing and Networking.
Obraczka, K., Viswanath, J., & Tsudik, G. (2001). Flooding for reliable
multicast in multi-hop ad hoc networks. Wireless Networks, 7, 627-34.
Papadimitratos & Haas, Z.J. (2002, January). Secure routing for mobile ad hoc
networks. SCS Communication Networks and Distributed Systems
Modeling and Simulation Conference.
Perkins, C., & Royer, E. (1999, February). Ad hoc on-demand distance
vector routing. Proceedings of the Second IEEE Workshop on Mobile
Computing Systems and Applications, pp. 90-100.
Yi, S., Naldurg, P., & Kravets, R. (2001, August). Security-aware ad-hoc
routing for wireless networks. Technical Report UIUCDCS-R-2001-
2241.

194   Yasinsac
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Section IV
Electronic
Commerce Issues
and Applications

An Empirical Study of Online Shopping   195
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter IX
Loyalty Differences in the
Effect of Negative Critical
Incidents and Quality
Attributes Satisfaction:
An Empirical Study of 
Online Shopping
Kwoting Fang,
National Yunlin University of Science & Technology, Taiwan
Ya-Yueh Shih, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan and
Ming Hsin University of Science & Technology, Taiwan
Duen-Ren Liu, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
Abstract
This chapter introduces the effect of negative critical incidents and
quality attributes satisfaction to heed the call for theoretically based
empirical work in terms of loyalty difference on Internet shopping. There
are some findings and recommendations. First, FNCIs would affect
overall satisfaction indirectly by QASAT. Second, either highly loyal
customers or less loyal customers, although the important order of

196   Fang, Shih & Liu
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
relationship between four latent factors of QASAT and FNCIs are not
equal, have causal relationships that were all significant. Third, the slow
response that affected overall satisfaction indirectly by QASAT seems to
be more important to customers who have less purchase frequency or
purchase amount than higher ones. Finally, online bookstores with
incomplete content that have untrustworthy transactions would affect
overall satisfaction indirectly to customers with high loyalty by QASAT;
this seems to be more important than it is to less loyal customers. It is
hoped that the results of this chapter could provide a valuable strategy for
marketers to rethink how they can find out and reduce the FNCIs that
customers may encounter.
Introduction
Strides in information technology and improvements in networking technology
have set the pace for rapid growth in new applications of electronic commerce
in a variety of settings. Business-to-business (B2B), business-to-customer
(B2C), customer-to-business (C2B), and customer-to-customer (C2C) have
become prevalent business channels and have reshaped the ways that business
transactions are conducted in the marketplace. According to Internet Data
Corporation (IDC), by the year 2005, there will be nearly one billion Internet
users, about 15% of the world’s population. IDC further predicts that those
users will promote more than $5 trillion of business in the Internet commerce
by 2005 (IDC, 2001). Given recent trends and forecasting, it is clear that no
business enterprise can afford to ignore the tremendous potential of these
emerging technologies in terms of the rate of creating, processing, and distrib-
uting the volume of business.
The proliferation of the Web potential for business, together with its profuse
customer information, have offered an alternative sales channel for a growing
number of firms and have prompted extensive research on the effect of negative
critical incidents on customer satisfaction with Internet shopping. The increase
in business-to-customer (B2C) channels has made several firms look for new
strategies to understand online shopping behavior in order to attract, retain and
satisfy customers’ needs (Ranganathan & Ganapathy, 2002). In fact, many
researchers have considered that customer satisfaction leading to higher levels

An Empirical Study of Online Shopping   197
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
of customer retention would depend on the success of critical factors, such as
quality design (Huizingh, 2000; Liu & Arnett, 2000), security concerns
(Bhimani, 1996; Denning, 1997), and other factors for electronic commerce.
However, Waterhouse and Morgan (1994) reported an interesting finding that
just one factor of dissatisfaction and defection would be enough to cause
customers to become disenchanted with Internet shopping. This finding is be
consistent with Friman et al. (2001), who found that negative critical incidents
(NCIs) play an important role for users’ cumulative satisfaction with public
transport services. A critical incident is an encounter that is particularly
satisfying or dissatisfying (Bitner et al., 1990). NCIs are customer encounters
that do not proceed normally but create friction, irritation, and dissatisfaction
(Edvardsson, 1992).
Occasionally, due to loss aversion (Kanheman & Tversky, 1979) or distinc-
tiveness in memory (Bower, 1981; Oliver, 1997), customers treated negative
critical incidents more silently and are unlikely to remember specific critical
incidents for a long time. However, they may accurately judge the frequency of
the critical incidents, in particular since such events stand out (Woodley & Ellis,
1989).
Additionally, Jones and Sasser (1995) have shown that the relationship
between satisfaction and loyalty is neither linear nor simple. High levels of
measured satisfaction sometimes go hand in hand with a continuous decline in
turnover (Heskett et al., 1994) or an increase in customer defection (Reichheld,
1996).
Given the literature review above, although many researchers have identified
critical incidents from different perspectives, little has been reported in the
literature with regard to the influence of negative critical incidents for Internet
shopping from the viewpoint of customer satisfaction. Therefore, this study
pursued better measures and models for use in predicting and explaining online
bookstores as an example of customer Internet shopping satisfaction. The
purpose of this study was twofold. First, it examined the frequency of NCIs in
combination with quality attributes satisfaction (QASAT), in an attempt to
understand their effects on the overall satisfaction of Internet shoppers.
Second, it heeded the call for theoretically based empirical work, in terms of
loyalty difference, on Internet shopping.
From the loyalty perspective, a number of studies (e.g., Goodman, 1992;
Hughes, 1994; Stone, 1995 ) have discussed the evaluation of customer
lifetime value in terms of RMF (recency, frequency and monetary). Recency is

198   Fang, Shih & Liu
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
time period since the last purchase; frequency is number of purchases made
within a certain time period and monetary is the amount of money spent during
a certain time period. Bult and Wansbeek (1995) and Liu and Shih (2002)
indicated that customers with less recency, and higher frequency and monetary
ratings represent who has high loyalty. However, since recency is hard to
determine in this study, a customer with high loyalty is defined as their purchase
frequency is more than three times a month and spends above 1,000 NT dollars
a month in online bookstores.
Proposed Model
With the boom in the online shopping, these proliferated Web sites have also
provided various online services. Understanding consumer behaviors relating
to online shopping is essential to effective Internet marketing. Recently,
numerous studies related to e-business have attempted to explore influences on
online shopping behavior (e.g., Bhatnagar et al., 2000; Koufaris et al., 2002;
Liao & Cheung, 2001). However, customer satisfaction with service quality of
course is essential to the success of any business system. Customer satisfaction
also has been linked to firm profitability and repurchase probability (for
example, Labarbera & Mazursky, 1983). It is imperative that satisfaction is
distinguished from cumulative satisfaction (Firman et al., 2001) and in both
cases satisfaction is either defined as an overall judgment of satisfaction or
quality attributes (Cronin & Taylor, 1992; Gotleib et al., 1994).
Research on Web quality attributes for measuring Internet shopping falls into
four broad categories: quality e-store, information content, security concerns
and consumers’ experience. These four categories were specified to construct
a set of critical incidents for encounter satisfaction. The four factors consisted
of 34 items from previous literature described as follows:
(1) Quality e-store (10 items): fast Web page download, store size, promo-
tions, ease of use and so on (Huizingh, 2000; Liu & Arnett, 2000).
(2) Information content (eight items): availability of information to compare
across alternatives, completeness of information provided about a firm,
product and service and so on (Huizingh, 2000; Ranganathan & Ganapathy,
2002).

An Empirical Study of Online Shopping   199
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
(3) Security concerns (five items): availability of secure modes for transmit-
ting information, provisions made for alternatives, overall concern about
security of transactions over the Internet, gathering of personal informa-
tion and so on (Mannix, 1999; Mardesich, 1999; Ranganathan &
Ganapathy, 2002).
(4) Consumer experience (11 items): increased customization, convenience
in purchasing, responsiveness in product delivery and so on (Elliot &
Fowell, 2000; Jarvenpaa & Todd, 1996).
These items were initially assessed using a Delphi method. Three e-commerce
scholars were asked to evaluate the items and make changes to eliminate
repetitive items. After two evaluation rounds, there remained 22 critical
incidents of Web quality attributes for further study.
Two questions were used to measure overall satisfaction. One is “What is the
degree of satisfaction for online bookstores?” The other question is “Will you
recommend using online bookstores to a friend?”
In order to compare the model difference and path coefficients between
customers with high loyalty and with less loyalty, a proposed model was shown
as Figure 1. A structural equation modeling (SEM) was used to evaluate the
group difference, where γ and β are path coefficients used in SEM. Herein,
group A is measured by frequency of purchasing; group B is measured by
amount of money spent.
Figure 1. Casual relationships among frequency of negative critical
incidents, quality attributes satisfaction and overall satisfaction
Frequency of
negative criteria
incidences
Quality attributes
satisfaction
Overall satisfaction
Frequency of
negative criteria
incidences
Quality attributes
satisfaction
Overall satisfaction
γ2
γ1
β1
β2

200   Fang, Shih & Liu
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
At first, the causal relationships among the frequency of NCIs, QASAT, and
overall satisfaction were shown as hypothesis H1.
H1: FNCIs affected overall satisfaction indirectly by QASAT.
According to Figure 1, the following hypotheses will be subject to test.
H2: FNCIs affected overall satisfaction indirectly by QASAT and determine
if there are differences by customer loyalty (less group/high group).
H2a: FNCIs affected overall satisfaction indirectly by QASAT and
determine if there are differences by frequency of purchasing (less/
high purchase frequency).
H21b: FNCIs affected overall satisfaction indirectly by QASAT and
determine if there are differences by amount of money spent (less/
high purchase amount).
Methodology
Measurement
A questionnaire was designed to measure satisfaction of service quality,
frequency of negative critical incidents, overall satisfaction, demographic
variables, and experience of online purchasing. The questionnaire was based
on the previous studies (Fang et al., 2003). A measurement of quality attributes
satisfaction and overall satisfaction, such as “What is the degree of satisfaction
for online bookstores?” included a five-point Likert scale from “strongly agree
(5)” to “strongly disagree (1).” A measurement of the second question of
overall satisfaction, “Will you recommend using online bookstores to a friend?”
included a five-point Likert scale from “strongly willing (5)” to “strongly
unwilling (1)”. A measurement of frequency of NCIs also included a five-point
Likert scale from “never experienced (5)” to “always experienced (1)”. In
addition, two demographic variables (gender and income) and three variables
with experience of online purchasing (number of online bookstore visits per
month, frequency of purchasing per month, average amount of money spent in

An Empirical Study of Online Shopping   201
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
online bookstores per month) are all measured by a nominal scale from
respondents to obtain more information for explaining the analytical results.
Data Collection
In this study, two pilot tests were conducted. For the purpose of content
validity, seven participants were asked to review the first draft of survey
instruments with 22 critical incidents of Web quality attributes for clarity,
content, and appropriateness of the questions. Modifications, served as the
second draft of the survey instrument, were made in accordance with their
suggestions. In order to remove the bias from inexperienced customers, 30
customers who have at least one online purchase were asked to respond to the
second draft of the instrument. Seven infrequently experienced negative
indices, including price, promotion activities, discounts, variety of payments,
personalized service, variety categories and search engine, were dropped.
There remained 15 critical incidents for further analysis. Once again, the
number of measuring variables, 15 critical incidents, was the same for measur-
ing the constructs of FNCIs and QASAT.
An online survey was performed for collecting the data. Participation in this
study was completely voluntary, but respondents of at least one online purchase
were considered qualified for analysis. In this online survey, our system would
check incomplete data and ask the respondents to fill out the questionnaire on
time.
This study used 210 respondents to examine the model differences among
loyalty. Table 1 presents the characteristics of respondents. The sample
included 88 (42%) males and 122 (58%) females, all of whom had made
purchases online, with 75% having had at least one or two experiences in online
book purchasing per month, spending varying amounts.
This study defined high loyalty as a person who purchases online books more
than three times a months and spends more than 1,000 NT dollars a month in
online bookstores. Therefore, for frequency of purchasing, there is a group with
less frequency of purchasing and a group with high frequency of purchasing of.
For amount of money spent, there is a group with less amount of money spent
and a group with high amount of money spent. Table 2 displays descriptive
statistics of the effective sample for each of the groups.

202   Fang, Shih & Liu
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Research Design
This study examined whether the FNCIs affected overall satisfaction indirectly
by QASAT for diverse customers; for example, whether high loyal customers
and less loyal customers are the same or not. Therefore, a proposed model was
used for each of the subgroups. At first, we would like to examine whether the
FNCIs affected overall satisfaction indirectly by QASAT, namely the inte-
grated model. For analysis purpose, this study might adopt a dummy variable
for loyalty (customer with high loyalty equals 1; customers with less loyalty
Table 1. Profile of respondents (N=210)
Table 2. Respondents’ information with different groups
 
Frequency of 
purchasing 
Amount of money 
spent 
 
Less 
High 
Less 
High 
Number of respondents 
158 
52 
88 
122 
Percentage of total 
respondents 
0.75 
0.25 
0.42 
0.58 
 
Frequency (%) 
Frequency 
(%) 
Gender 
 
 
No. of books purchased a month 
Male 
88 
42 
1-2 
158 
75.2 
Female 
122 
58 
3-4 
43 
20.5 
Income 
 
 
5-6 
6
2.9 
<=20000 
134 
61.9 
7-8 
2
1.0 
20001~40000 
45 
21.4 
>8 
1
0.4 
40001~60000 
27 
12.9 Average spending a month 
60001~80000 
4 
1.9 
<=500 
88 
41.9 
80001~100000 
4 
1.9 
501-1000 
85 
40.5 
No. of bookstores a month 
1001-1500 
16 
7.6 
1-2 
75 
35.7 
1501-2000 
13 
6.2 
3-4 
48 
22.9 
>2000 
8
3.8 
5-6 
31 
14.8 
7-8 
17 
8.1 
>8 
39 
18.6 
 

An Empirical Study of Online Shopping   203
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
equals 0). If a positive effect is significant, the latent variable is higher for
customers with high loyalty, and vice versa. Since the loyalty was measured by
frequency (frequency of purchasing) and monetary (amount of money spent),
customers with high purchasing frequency and amount of money spent equals
1; otherwise it equals 0. To examine the similarities or differences between
subgroups, structural equation modeling analysis was used in two stages. First,
a structural equation modeling (SEM) was used to compare the high loyal
customers to the less loyal customers in terms of frequency of purchasing and
amount of money spent, respectively, to determine if there were significant
differences. Then to verify this difference, a SEM was also run comparing the
high loyal customers to the less loyal customers.
The Lisrel 8.3 package (Joreskog & Sorbom, 1993) was selected for all model
fitting. A matrix of covariance between variables was input to Lisrel 8.3 using
the maximum likelihood estimated. There are five recommended fit indices that
were considered to determine if the proposed model fit the observed data.
These were described as follows: (1) normed Chi-square (Chi-square/df) (the
recommended level was between 1.0 and 2.0) was the most appropriate
parsimonious fit measure for the model fit (Hair et al., 1995). (2) Goodness-
of-fit index (GFI), which is an indicator of the relative amount of variances and
covariance jointly accounted by the mode. A marginal acceptance level is 0.9
(Hair et al., 1995). (3) Root-mean-square error of approximation (RMSEA,
Browne & Cudek, 1993), value below 0.05 indicates good fit. (4) Relative fit
index (RFI, Hair et al., 1995). (5) Comparative fit index (CFI & Bentler,
1990), which takes values between 0 and 1; the closer to unity, the better the
model fit.
For explanation, the total coefficient of determination (TCD) R2 for structural
equations was shown herein. Furthermore, t-statistics for examining the corre-
lation between the latent constructs and correlation among latent constructs
were used to test path links. T-statistics exceeded the critical value (1.96) for
the 0.05 significant levels and the 0.01 significance level as well (critical value
= 2.576) (Reisinger & Turner, 1999).

204   Fang, Shih & Liu
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Analysis Results
Quality Attributes Satisfaction (QASAT)
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a useful strategy for recovering an
underlying model that can then be evaluated with CFA (Gerbing & Hamilton,
1996). Therefore, this study used PCA to identify items belonging to the
different hypothesized latent variables first. Hair et al. (1995) suggested that
item loadings greater than 0.3 are considered significant, greater than 0.4 are
more important, and greater than 0.5 are considered very significant. Generally,
there are no accepted “absolute” standards for the cutoffs; the choice is based
on judgment, purpose of the study, and prior studies. Since our goal is to
examine a set of the most significant items evaluated in confirmatory factor
analysis (CFA), we decided to use a cutoff point of 0.7 for item loadings and
the factor analysis revealed four factors with an eigenvalue of greater than one
(as shown in Table 3).
Table 3. Principal component analysis with varimax rotation — Quality
attributes
Quality attributes 
Variable 
(Coded) 
Factor1 Factor2 Factor3 Factor4 
Acceptable service charge 
Sat4 
0.65 
0.16 
-0.08 
0.17 
Diversity shipping 
Sat5 
0.82 
0.14 
0.11 
-0.03 
Diversity ordering 
Sat6 
0.78 
0.10 
0.19 
0.10 
Diversity receiving 
Sat7 
0.81 
0.10 
0.05 
0.14 
Speedy product delivery 
Sat8 
0.24 
0.56 
0.35 
0.12 
Simple transaction process 
Sat9 
0.46 
0.42 
0.14 
0.28 
Variety of communication 
Sat10 
0.21 
0.70 
0.12 
0.20 
Quick response 
Sat11 
0.09 
0.83 
0.15 
0.14 
Convenience to exchange product 
Sat12 
0.10 
0.77 
0.11 
0.13 
Book preview service 
Sat13 
0.10 
0.41 
0.50 
-0.09 
Infrequent books 
Sat18 
0.05 
0.01 
0.82 
-0.01 
Complete introduction of books 
Sat19 
0.08 
0.23 
0.81 
0.21 
Accurate book reviews 
Sat20 
0.08 
0.24 
0.66 
0.32 
Security of transactions 
Sat21 
0.25 
0.17 
0.22 
0.81 
Privacy of personal details 
Sat22 
0.12 
0.23 
0.06 
0.85 
 

An Empirical Study of Online Shopping   205
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The following changes were made. Since three item scales (Sat8, Sat9 and
Sat13) did not load on any factors, they were removed. Sat4 and sat20 factor
loading less than 0.7 were removed. Finally, 10 measured variables onto the
four latent factors of positive emotions were constructed. Furthermore, quality
e-store, customer experience, and information content were renamed into
“ease of use, quick response, complete information, and trustworthy”.
It was found that ease of use consisted of three items and dealt with such
attributes as diversity shipping, diversity ordering, and diversity receiving.
“Quick response” reflects concerns related to finding specific details about
supporting multiple channels of communication with organizations and re-
sponse quickly.  “Complete information” consisted of two items: support of
infrequent books and complete introduction of books. “Trustworthy” contains
two items: security of transactions and privacy of personal details. The
standardized Cronbach’s alpha coefficients with 0.81, 0.79, 0.70, and 0.78 for
ease of use, quick response, complete information and trustworthy were all
exceeding the generally accepted guideline 0.7 and above (Hair et al., 1995).
In order to test that quality attributes satisfaction on Internet shopping is judged
with respect to ease of use, quick response, complete information, and
trustworthiness, maximum likelihood of confirmatory factor analysis (CFA)
was conducted. The following indices were shown: Norm Chi-square = 1.19,
RFI = 0.93, GFI = 0.99, AGFI = 0.94, RMSEA = 0.023. According to the
Table 4. The measurement model of the ratings of positive emotions
**: Level of significance = 0.01, *: = 0.05
Latent 
factor 
Variable 
(Coded) 
Quality attributes 
Standardized 
parameter 
estimates 
T-statistics 
Sat5 
Diversity shipping 
0.73 
11.16** 
Sat6 
Diversity ordering 
0.81 
12.46** 
Ease of use 
Sat7 
Diversity receiving 
0.76 
11.69** 
S10 
Diversity channel of communication 0.76 
11.60** 
Sat11 
Quick response 
0.86 
13.61** 
Quick 
response 
Sat12 
Convenience to exchange product 
0.64 
9.43** 
Sat18 
Infrequent books 
0.54 
8.50** 
Complete 
information Sat19 
Complete introduction of books 
1.00 
20.45** 
Sat21 
Security of transactions 
0.92 
12.10** 
Trustworthy 
Sat22 
Privacy of personal details 
0.70 
9.62** 
 

206   Fang, Shih & Liu
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
criteria enumerated above, we judge this to be an acceptable fit. The standard-
ized parameter estimates and t-statistics are shown in Table 4. According to the
analytical results, all of the t-statistics of critical incidents exceeded the 1.96
and 2.57 thresholds for both 0.05 and 0.01 levels of significance, respectively.
Frequency of Negative Critical Incidents (FNCIs)
As described above, FNCI measures were the same as the construct of quality
attributes satisfaction and thus FNCIs were mapped into four factors, useless,
careless, incomplete information, and untrustworthy, directly. In addition, the
results of a principal analysis extracting four factors suggested that six critical
incidents (Unsat1, Unsat5, Unsat7, Unsat9, Unsat10 and Unsat13) were
removed, since item loadings were less than 0.7 (as shown in Table 5).
Standardized Cronbach’s alpha coefficients for useless, careless, incomplete
information and untrustworthy were 0.85, 0.81, 0.68, and 0.85, respectively.
Same as QASAT constructs, the FNCIs on Internet shopping were judged
with respect to useless, slow response, incomplete information and
Table 5. Principal component analysis with varimax rotation — Critical
incidents
Variable 
Critical incidents 
(Coded) Factor1 Factor2 Factor3 Factor4 
Need more service charge  
Unsat1 0.55 
0.20 
-0.16 
0.40 
Less diversity shipping 
Unsat2 0.30  
0.79  
0.03  
0.24  
Less diversity ordering 
Unsat3 0.22  
0.87  
0.10  
0.18  
Less diversity receiving 
Unsat4 0.21  
0.77  
0.18  
0.12  
Slow product delivery 
Unsat5 0.66  
0.18  
0.41  
-0.02  
Complicated transaction process 
Unsat6 0.71  
0.17  
0.10  
0.27  
Lack of variety of communications 
Unsat7 0.61  
0.46  
0.26  
0.09  
Slow response 
Unsat8 0.73  
0.38  
0.18  
0.19  
Inconvenience to exchange product 
Unsat9 0.58  
0.20  
0.20  
0.41  
Don’t provide book preview service 
Unsat10 0.37  
0.18  
0.63  
-0.08  
Less variety of products 
Unsat11 -0.05  0.12  
0.80  
0.05  
Incomplete introduction 
Unsat12 0.11  
0.04  
0.85  
0.26  
Misleading book review 
Unsat13 0.32  
0.06  
0.60  
0.26  
Poor security of transactions 
Unsat14 0.20  
0.27  
0.13  
0.84  
Poor privacy of personal details 
Unsat15 0.23  
0.17  
0.23  
0.83  
 

An Empirical Study of Online Shopping   207
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
untrustworthiness, and maximum likelihood of confirmatory factor analysis was
also conducted. It was revealed that the fit indices (normed Chi-square = 1.70,
RFI = 0.93, GFI = 0.96, AGFI = 0.93, RMSEA = 0.053) were all greater than
the criteria with an acceptable fit. The standardized parameter estimates and t-
statistics are shown in Table 6. All of them are significant.
Integration of FNCIs and the QASAT Fit Model
The maximum likelihood estimated was also used to fit this model. Conver-
gence was achieved in 26 iterations, and no estimation problems were
encountered for the calibration sample of 210 respondents. A path analysis of
the integrated model shows acceptable fit to the data (norm Chi-square = 1.38,
RFI = 0.88, GFI = 0.90, AGFI = 0.87 and RMSEA = 0.039). The amount of
variance in the dependent variable, overall satisfaction, explained by this
integral model was 44%. There are eight paths (causal relationships) between
the FNCIs, QASAT constructs and overall satisfaction (Figure 2). Six of these
eight links, except the links between ease of use, trustworthiness, and cumula-
tive overall satisfaction, have path coefficients significant, in which all of the
remembered frequency of negative critical incidents are directly related to
quality attributes satisfaction. Accordingly, hypothesis H1 was support based
on the above findings.
Moreover, from the analytical reports of total effects in Table 7, indirect paths
between incomplete content, untrustworthiness and construct of overall satis-
faction mediated by QASAT were significant.
Table 6. The measurement model of the ratings of negative emotions
Latent factor Variable 
(code) 
Negative critical incidents 
Standardized 
parameter 
estimated 
t-value 
Unsat2 
Less diversity shipping 
0.83 
14.09** 
Unsat3 
Less diversity ordering 
0.90 
15.64** 
Useless 
Unsat4 
Less diversity receiving 
0.72 
11.48** 
Unsat6 
Complicated transaction process 0.66 
9.5** 
Slow response 
Unsat8 
Slowly response 
0.78 
12.20** 
Unsat11 
Less variety products 
0.59 
9.37** 
Incomplete 
information 
Unsat12 
Incompletely introduction 
1.00 
20.45** 
Unsat14 
Poor security of transactions 
0.88 
14.01** 
Untrustworthy 
Unsat15 
Poor privacy of personal details 0.84 
13.17** 
 

208   Fang, Shih & Liu
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Multiple Group Analysis
A structural equation modeling was used to change relationships between high
loyal customers and less loyal customers in terms of frequency of purchasing
and amount of money spent. Item means and standard deviations for each
group of loyalty are displayed in Table 8.
For frequency of purchasing and amount of money spent, three (RFI, GFI and
RMSEA) of five recommended indices to the overall goodness of fit of the
Figure 2. Integrated model with NCIs and QASAT path analysis
Untrustworthy
Slow
 response
Incomplete 
information
Useless
Trustworthy
Quick 
response
Complete 
information
Ease of use
Overall 
satisfaction
0.39**
0.63**
0.54**
0.46**
0.15
0.47**
0.24**
0.13
0.21
0.29
0.39
0.15
0.44
Table 7. Total effect, direct effect and indirect effect in the integrated
model fit
Latent (endogenous) 
Latent (exogenous) 
Indirect 
effect 
Direct 
effect 
T-value Total 
effect 
Ease of use 
Useless 
 
0.39** 6.22 
0.39 
Quick response 
Slow response 
 
0.63** 6.92 
0.63 
Complete information 
Incomplete content 
 
0.54** 6.87 
0.54 
Trustworthy 
Untrustworthy 
 
0.46** 6.48 
0.46 
Useless 
0.15 
 
0.62 
0.15 
Slow response 
0.47**  
3.61 
0.47 
Incomplete content 
0.24**  
2.07 
0.24 
Overall satisfaction 
Untrustworthy 
0.13 
 
0.88 
0.13 
 

An Empirical Study of Online Shopping   209
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
proposed model for the data collected from each of subgroups indicated that
the FNCIs that affected overall satisfaction indirectly by QASAT are different.
Although not all of the indices would indicate the differences existed absolutely,
we still retain this result. Then, hypothesis H2 (either H2a or H2b) was supported
by the data.
Therefore, we concluded that the FNCIs that affected overall satisfaction and
were indirectly mediated by QASAT of less loyalty and high loyalty are
different. Five recommended indices for each subgroup were summarized into
Table 9.
Table 8. Item means and standard deviations for QASAT and FNCIs
 
 
Frequency of purchasing 
Amount of money spent 
 
 
Less 
High 
Less 
High 
QASAT 
 
Mean (SD) Mean (SD) Mean (SD) Mean (SD) 
Sat5 
3.81 (0.96) 3.98 (1.08) 3.88 (0.91) 3.81 (1.05) 
Sat6 
3.85 (0.90) 3.85 (1.09) 3.89 (0.92) 3.85 (1.06) 
Ease of use 
Sat7 
4.10 (1.03) 4.17 (1.08) 
4.11 
(1.02) 4.19 (1.05) 
S10 
3.33 (0.97) 3.31 (1.15) 3.32 (0.97) 3.42 (1.05) 
Sat11 
3.40 (0.99) 3.35 (1.17) 3.41 (0.93) 3/42 (1.10) 
Quick 
response 
Sat12 
3.15 (0.98) 2.98 
(1.11) 
3.13 (0.96) 3.10 (1.04) 
Sat18 
3.51 (1.08) 3.40 (1.27) 3.42 (1.00) 3.50 (1.21) 
Complete 
information Sat19 
3.52 (1.01) 3.50 (1.26) 3.55 (0.87) 3.54 (1.20) 
Sat21 
3.55 (0.95) 3.44 (0.98) 3.58 (0.91) 3.50 (0.98) 
Trustworthy 
Sat22 
3.46 (0.93) 3.28 (0.88) 3.51 (0.88) 3.31 (0.93) 
FNICs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unsat2 
3.72 (1.06) 3.81 (1.16) 3.86 (0.10) 3.81 (1.14) 
Unsat3 
3.83 (1.01) 4.00 (0.93) 3.90 (0.92) 4.00 (1.03) 
Useless 
Unsat4 
3.84 (1.06) 3.89 (1.00) 3.81 (0.98) 3.87 (1.09) 
Unsat6 
3.67 (1.00) 3.62 (1.00) 3.71 (0.96) 3.67 (1.02) 
Slow 
response 
Unsat8 
3.57 (1.13) 3.42 (1.16) 3.72 
(1.11) 
3.54 (1.15) 
Unsat11 3.51 (1.13) 3.15 (1.26) 3.64 (1.09) 3.25 (1.23) 
Incomplete 
information Unsat12 3.19 (1.10) 3.17 (1.22) 3.14 (1.01) 3.27 (1.21) 
Unsat14 3.17 (1.10) 
3.1 
(1.10) 3.22 (0.99) 3.14 (1.14) 
Untrustwort
hy 
Unsat15 3.75 (0.96) 3.64 (0.95) 3.91 (0.89) 3.58 (1.07) 
 

210   Fang, Shih & Liu
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Group Difference
The results of the group comparison in purchase frequency and purchase
amount were shown in Figures 3 and 4. The overall satisfaction variance
explained in less loyalty (either customers with purchase frequency 0.55 or
purchase amount 0.87) was higher than in customers with high loyalty. These
coefficients depicting the relationship between FNCI and QASAT were all
significant in these two groups. However, the order of R2 was not similar. In
addition to this, slow response that affected overall satisfaction for a group of
less frequency of purchasing was stronger than when customers have high
frequency of purchasing. In either customers with high frequency of purchasing
or with high amount of money spent, incomplete content and untrustworthiness
Table 9. Model difference between less and highly loyal customers
 
Purchase 
frequency 
Purchase 
amount 
Chi-square 
421.37 
425.78 
Degree of freedom 
350 
354 
Norm Chi-square 
1.20 
1.20 
RFI (above 0.9 is good fit) 
0.88 
0.89 
GFI (above 0.9 is good fit) 
0.88 
0.82 
CFI (greater than 0.9) 
0.97 
0.98 
RMSEA (0.05 or less is better) 
0.059 
0.057 
Figure 3. Group difference in terms of frequency of purchasing
Untrustworthy
Slow
 response
Incomplete 
information
Useless
Trustworthy
Quick 
response
Complete 
information
Ease of use
Overall 
satisfaction
0.68**
0.80**
0.68**
0.50**
-0.14
-0.05
0.56**
0.24**
0.31
0.36
0.32
0.29
0.31
 
Untrustworthy
Slow
 response
Incomplete 
information
Useless
Trustworthy
Quick 
response
Complete 
information
Ease of use
Overall 
satisfaction
0.36**
0.57**
0.52**
0.50**
0.04
0.35**
0.30**
0.17
0.22
0.30
0.39
0.18
0.55
 
high loyal customers 
less loyal customers 
 

An Empirical Study of Online Shopping   211
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
that affected overall satisfaction mediated by QASAT were stronger than in
customers with less.
Discussion and Conclusions
This chapter used structural equation modeling to examine and verify whether
the difference loyalty would similar or difference in the FNCIs affected
QASAT. We summarized into the following findings and proposed some
recommendations for researchers and marketing practitioners in online book-
stores.
(1) FNCIs would affect overall satisfaction indirectly by QASAT. The
integrated model explains not only the variance in the dependent variable,
overall satisfaction being 44%, but also much more than variance ac-
counted for NCIs (23%) alone (Fang et al., 2003). In NCIs, only one
latent variable, slow response, affected overall satisfaction significantly. In
the integrated model, not only slow response but also incomplete content
showed an indirect effect of 0.47 and 0.24 mediated by quality attribute
satisfaction.
(2) In either high loyal customers or less loyal customers, although the
importance order of relationship between four latent factors of frequency
of negative critical incidents and quality attributes satisfaction are not
equal, causal relationships were all significant. To sum up, negative
Figure 4. Group difference in terms of amount of money spent
Untrustworthy
Slow
 response
Incomplete 
information
Useless
Trustworthy
Quick 
response
Complete 
information
Ease of use
Overall 
satisfaction
0.42**
0.61**
0.66**
0.68**
0.02
0.39*
0.43**
0.28**
0.50
0.45
0.47
0.18
0.51
 
Untrustworthy
Slow
 response
Incomplete 
information
Useless
Trustworthy
Quick 
response
Complete 
information
Ease of use
Overall 
satisfaction
0.55**
0.59**
0.40**
0.26**
0.07
0.91**
0.18
0.02
0.06
0.15
0.25
0.30
0.87
 
high loyal customers 
less loyal customers 

212   Fang, Shih & Liu
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
emotions have an effect on positive emotions and satisfaction in each
subgroup.
(3) The slow response that affected overall satisfaction indirectly by QASAT
seems to be more important to customers who have low purchase
frequency or purchase amount than high ones. It implies that customers
with low purchase frequency or purchase amount in online bookstores
have more expectations than higher ones. Once they have a feeling with
the slow response, slow product exchange or slow communication
channels, positive emotions will be influenced by these negative emotions,
and affect overall satisfaction indirectly, even affect re-purchase inten-
tions.
(4) Online bookstores with incomplete content and that have untrustworthy
transactions would affect overall satisfaction indirectly to customers with
high loyalty by QASA; this seems to be more important than to customers
with less loyalty.
According to above findings, there are some implications for researchers and
market practitioners. For researchers, Fang et al. (2003) have discussed that
cumulative overall and quality attributes satisfaction with online shopping
service are related to the remembered frequency of negative critical incidents.
Extending to their analytical results, this chapter also examined whether diverse
customers have different or similar effects. In conclusion, FNCIs that affected
overall satisfaction indirectly by QASAT was different by loyalty difference,
especially differences in slow response and incomplete content. Therefore,
managers in online bookstore would provide quick response for customers
with less loyalty, providing complete books’ content for customers with high
loyalty. In my opinion, few researchers focus on discussing this in previous
studies.
From the standpoint of business, market managers of online bookstores need
to be aware that cumulative overall satisfaction depends not only on positive
emotions, but also on negative emotions. This idea is similar to an example that
Babin et al. (1998) proposed – if a customer were to fill out a “satisfaction”
survey to indicate some satisfaction on the scale rating, the customer would
never return because of the high levels of negative emotion also experienced but
unassessed. From the commercial viewpoint, online shopping has become
more and more essential and is broadly well known. How to build, maintain,
and enhance customer relationships is an important issue in a fiercely competi-

An Empirical Study of Online Shopping   213
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
tive environment. Therefore, the results of this study indicate that it would be
a valuable strategy for marketers to rethink how they can find out and reduce
the frequency of NCIs that customers may encounter.
Several issues for future research need to be addressed. First, in this study, only
online bookstores were examined; other types of online shopping mall or
auction sites (for example, Acer mall, CoolBid.com) can be explained in future
studies. Finally, this study collected a set of quality attributes satisfaction and
asked customers to note the frequency of NCIs they encounter, regardless of
whether they repurchase or not. However, in fact, satisfaction also has been
linked to firm profitability and repurchase probability (e.g., Anderson &
Sullivan, 1993; Labarbera & Mazursky, 1983). Therefore, whether any
differences and similarities between customers with high loyalty and with less
loyalty in customer profitability or intention behavior are uncertain. These issues
are valuable and interesting for future studies.
References
Anderson, E.W., & Sullivan, M. (1993). The antecedents and consequences
of customer satisfaction for firms. Marketing Science, 12(2), 125-143.
Babin, B.J., Darder, W.R., & Babin, L.A. (1998). Negative emotions in
marketing research: Affect or artifact? Journal of Business Research,
42, 271-285.
Bentler, P.M. (1990). Comparative fit indexes in structural models. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 102(2), 238-246.
Bhatnagar, A., Misra, S., & Rao, H.R. (2000). On risk, convenience, and
Internet shopping behavior. Communications of the ACM, 43(11), 98-
105.
Bhimani, A. (1996). Securing the commercial Internet. Communications of
the ACM, 39(6), 29-35.
Bitner, M.J., Booms, B.H., & Tetreault, M.S. (1990). The service encounter:
Diagnosing favorable and unfavorable incidents. Journal of Marketing,
54, 71-84.
Bower, G.H. (1981). Mood and memory. American Psychologist, 36, 129-
148.

214   Fang, Shih & Liu
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Browne, M.W., & Cudeck, R. (1983). Alternative ways of assessing model fit.
In K.A. Bollen & J.S. Long (Eds.), Testing structural equation models
(pp. 136-162). Newbury Park: SAGE Publications.
Bult, J.R., & Wansbeek, T.J. (1995). Optimal selection for direct mail.
Marketing Science, 14(4), 378-394.
Cronin, J.J., & Taylow, S.A. (1992). Measuring service quality: A reexamina-
tion and extension. Journal of Marketing, 58, 53-66.
Denning, D.E. (1997). International encryption policy. In R. Kalakota &
A.B.Whinston (Eds.), Readings in electronic commerce (pp. 105-
118).  Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Edvardsson, B. (1992). Service breakdowns: A study of critical incidents in an
airline. International Journal of Service Industry Management, 3(4),
17-29.
Elliot, S., & Fowell, S. (2000). Expectations versus reality: A snapshot of
consumer experiences with Internet shopping. The International Jour-
nal of Information Management, 20, 323-336.
Fang, K.T., Shih, Y.Y., & Liu, D.R. (2003, May). The effect of negative
critical incidents and quality attributes satisfaction on Internet shopping:
An empirical study of online bookstores. 14th Information Resources
Management Association, Philadelphia, 133-136.
Fisk, A.D.,  & Schneider, W. (1984). Memory as a function of attention, level
of processing and automatization. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy, Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 181-197.
Friman, M., Edvardsson, B., & Garling, T. (2001). Frequency of negative
critical incidents and satisfaction with public transport services I. Journal
of Retailing and Consumer Services, 8, 93-104.
Goodman, J. (1992). Leveraging the customer database to your competitive
advantage. Direct Marketing, 55(8), 26-27.
Gotleib, J.B., Grewal, D., & Brown, S.W. (1994). Consumer satisfaction and
perceived quality: Complementary or divergent constructs? Journal of
Applied Psychology, 79, 875-885.
Hair, J.F., Anderson, R.E., Tatham, R.L, & Black, W.C. (1995). Multivari-
ate data analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Heskett, J.L., Jones, T., Loverner, W., Sasser, W.E., & Schlesinger, L.A.
(1994, March-April). Putting the service-profit chain to work. Harvard
Business Review, 164-171.

An Empirical Study of Online Shopping   215
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Hughes, A.M. (1994). Strategic database marketing. Chicago: Probus
Publishing.
Huizingh, E.K. (2000). The content and design of Web sites: An empirical
study. Information and Management, 37(3), 123-134.
IDC. (2001, June). www.idc.com.sg/Reports/internet_research.htm
Jarvenpaa, S.L., & Todd, P.A. (1996). Consumer reactions to electronic
shopping on the World Wide Web. International Journal of Electronic
Commerce, 1(2), 59-88.
Jones, T., & Sasser, W. (1995, November-December). Why satisfied cus-
tomers defect. Harvard Business Review,  88-99.
Joreskog, K.G., & Sorbom, D. (1993). LISREL 8: Structural equations
modeling with the SIMPLES command language. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Associates.
Kanheman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect: An analysis of decisions
under risk. Econometrica, 47, 313-327.
Koufaris, M., Kambil, A., & Labarbera, P.A. (2002). Consumer behavior in
Web-based commerce: An empirical study. International Journal of
Electronic Commerce, 6(2), 115-138.
Labarbera, P., & Mazursky, D. (1983). A longitudinal assessment of consumer
satisfaction/dissatisfaction: The dynamic aspect of cognitive process.
Journal of Marketing Research, 20, 394-404.
Liao, Z., & Cheung, M.T. (2001). Internet-based e-shopping and consumer
attitudes: An empirical study. Information and Management, 38, 299-
306.
Liu, C., & Arnett, K.P. (2000). Exploring the factors associated with Web
sites success in the context of electronic commerce. Information and
Management, 38(1), 23-33.
Liu, D.R., & Shih, Y.Y. (2004). Integrating AHP and data mining for product
recommendation based on customer lifetime value. Information &
Management (Accepted).
Mannix, M. (1999). Watch for Web hazards and you’ll shop hitch free. US
News and World Report, 13, 76.
Mardesich, J. (1999). The Web is no shopper’s paradise. Fortune, 140(9),
188-198.

216   Fang, Shih & Liu
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Oliver, R.L. (1997). Satisfaction, A behavioral perspective on the con-
sumer. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Ranganathan, C., & Ganapathy, S. (2002). Key dimensions of business-to-
consumer Web sites. Information and Management, 39, 457-465.
Reichheld, F. (1996). The loyalty effect. The hidden force behind growth.
Profits and lasting value. Bain Company, Inc. Boston: Harvard Busi-
ness School Press.
Reisinger, Y., & Turner, L. (1999). Structural equation modeling with Lisrel:
Application in tourism. Tourism Management, 20, 71-88.
Stone, B. (1995). Successful direct marketing methods. Lincolnwood, IL:
NTC Business Books.
Waterhouse, K., & Morgan, A. (1994). Using research to help keep good
customers. Marketing and Research Today, 22(3), 181-194.
Woodly, Z.P., & Ellis, N.R. (1989). Memory for frequency occurrence:
Intelligence levels and retrieval cues. Intelligence, 13, 53-61.

The Benefits and Difficulties of Internet Use in Hotels   217
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter X
Benefits and Difficulties
of Internet Use in Hotels
and Its Effects According
to the Facilities Rank,
Property Size, Manager’s
Age and Experience
Luiz Augusto Machado Mendes-Filho,
Faculdade Natalense para o Desenvolvimento do Rio Grande do Norte
– FARN, Brazil
Anatália Saraiva Martins Ramos,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte – UFRN, Brazil
Abstract
This study aims to analyze the perception of managers on the benefits and
difficulties of Internet use in hotels and its effects according to the
facilities rank and property size plus managers’ age and experience time.
It used a questionnaire to collect data from the managers of 35 hotels in
the city of Natal, RN, Brazil. By using analysis of variance (ANOVA) and
Tukey test, results showed that there is no significant difference in the

218   Mendes-Filho & Ramos
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
perception of managers on the impact of Internet use in hotels. Hence, the
managers of these hotels had similar opinions about the benefits and
difficulties of the Internet use in their hotels.
Introduction
Tourism is the most important industry in the world in terms of the numbers of
employees and its effect on the social and economical development of a region
or country (Holjevac, 2003). And Holjevac (2003) believes that by the year
2050, tourism will be by far the largest industry worldwide, with 2 billion
tourists and US $24 billion in domestic and international receipts. More-
over, the major tourist destinations will be India, China, Indonesia and
Brazil.
Tourism, along with the hotel industry, depends progressively on the resource
of new information technology to follow and update the tools that allow an
efficient development of activities in each section of the hotel, leading to better
results for its management (Matoso, 1996). To Phillips and Moutinho (1998),
IT is one of the critical factors of success in the hotel industry.
According to studies and data, the use of technological tools will allow a bigger
competitiveness for hotels. Technology will be the catalyst of change, a source
of growing connectivity and one of the most important factors in distinguishing
success among hotel companies. Few issues have greater importance to the
hospitality business than the technology decisions that will be made in the
coming years (Buhalis, 1998; Cline, 1999; Olsen & Connoly, 2000; Van Hoof
et al., 1995).
In tourism, the use of information technologies for basic functions is becoming
usual — conferences, business meetings in distant places, training, designed
routes and airlines, reservations and tickets purchased through computer
systems, tourist shops, and restaurants — all these services have led tourist
companies to adopt more updated methods in order to increase competition.
Consumers are already becoming familiar with new technologies and they
demand more flexible, interactive and specialized products and services, which
will bring new management techniques from the intelligent use of IT used to
accomplish tour companies’ business processes (Buhalis, 1998).

The Benefits and Difficulties of Internet Use in Hotels   219
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Note the importance of information technology and its significance for the
tourism industry as organizations use the WWW for interactivity and competi-
tiveness. The key factor for successful organizations is their willingness to do
business in this new way.
Though many experts and businesspeople agree that the Internet is probably
the most important technological tool, it is still relatively new and misused in the
hotel industry (Van Hoof & Verbeeten, 1997).
Viewing this scenario of Internet use in hotels, most precisely in the city of
Natal, estate of Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil, we had posed a research question
— which benefits and difficulties affect the perception of hotel managers
on the impacts of Internet in their facilities?
In order to answer that question, field research was carried out to identify the
benefits and difficulties that contribute to the perception of hotel managers
relating to Internet use in their hotels. The following specific aims were
defined:
1.
Describing the hotel and manager profiles and their organizational and
individual features of Internet use, respectively.
2.
Determining which aspects of Internet use are considered important to
hotel managers, identifying their individual perceptions in terms of benefits
and difficulties of Internet use in hotels.
3.
Identifying which benefits and difficulties contribute to the perception of
managers as to the use of Internet in hotels, particularly according to the
number of rooms, rate, manager age and their experience in the hotel
business.
This chapter is divided in five parts – the first one in the introduction itself. On
the second part we present basic concepts and a theoretical background. The
third part deals with methodological resources used on the research. In the
fourth part, results are presented and discussed through descriptive and
inferential analysis. In the end, a few statements are presented on the Internet’s
role in the hotel industry according to the results and main problems of the
research.

220   Mendes-Filho & Ramos
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Background
The hotel sector, which is part of the tourism and travel industry, includes
accommodation (hotels, motels, inns, hostelry, cottages, etc.) and food and
drink operations (Sheldon, 1997).
Decades ago, before the use of the computer in the accommodation sector,
those charged with making reservations performed their service checking
availability tables exposed on the wall or in large, updated, hand-written lists
(O’Connor, 1999).
The hotels received innumerous telephone calls, letters and telex from potential
clients, sometimes larger than that of the hotel’s reception, and worked to select
correspondence, type letters, send telegrams and deal with other demands. The
delays were frequent, the cost of correspondence writing went sky-high and
specialized typists were in demand (O’Connor, 1999).
A way found by the American hotel chains to streamline the reservation services
was to centralize this function in a main office serving the consumer better and
offering a valuable service to the hotels belonging to that chain.
O’Connor (1999) states that the reservation process in hotels in the USA was
made even easier with the introduction of free telephone services in the mid-
60s, which permitted potential clients to perform only one call to obtain
information or make reservations in any of the hotels in the world of that chain.
Although the reservation area became faster and more efficient, two large costs
remained, those of telecommunications (free telephone service payment) and
labor costs of the reservation agents necessary to answer the phones.
With the increase in trips during the 1960s, the airline companies developed the
Computer Reservation System (CRS), which pressured the hotel sector to
develop its own (O’Connor, 1999).
The main focus in hotel and restaurant management has always been the
maximization of consumer satisfaction and personalized attention. The use of IT
has, at times, seemed incompatible with this objective and the hotel sector has,
in a way, delayed the application of IT in its operations. The technology has
been viewed as a hindrance to personalized service because it creates an
impersonal, mechanical and cold environment with the clients.
However, this belief is being changed within the hotel sector. Nowadays,
according to Sheldon (1997), the establishments are noticing that IT can bring
efficiency to the hotel, besides reducing costs and being a great potential to
increase the levels of personalized service to the clients.

The Benefits and Difficulties of Internet Use in Hotels   221
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
In a survey performed by financial managers of American hotels, all stated that
IT increased the hotel’s productivity (David, Grabski & Kasavana, 1996). The
motives used to justify this statement were the following: the technology
reduces the administrative costs, decreases the amount of paperwork between
sectors, minimizes operational errors, increases the earnings/profits of the hotel
and makes the reservation management more efficient. This same survey
proved that IT is not only used to increase the hotel’s productivity but also to
improve the service as well as offer new services to the guests.
According to Namasivayam, Enz and Siguaw (2000), IT can also be used be
employed to reach business objectives. American and European hotel execu-
tives have performed planning to use the technology to reduce operational
costs, increase sales, improve the service to the client, increase the productivity
of employees and increase the earnings of the hotel.
In research performed by Van Hoof et al. (1995), 550 American hotel
managers answered about their perceptions of the use and implementation of
technology in their establishments. Those responding identified the front office
(reception and reservations) of the hotel as the sector that can benefit the most
from the use of the technology, followed by sales and marketing, accounting
and the food and drink sector.
According to Van Hoof et al. (1995), having a quality service is a challenge to
the hotel industry, which has high employee turnover indexes, employee salary
increase and low age of the most qualified people. Consequently, technology
applications have been developed in the hotels to increase this quality in the
services and improve the interaction of the hotel employees with the guests.
Impacts of the Internet in Hotel
Industry
During the 80s and 90s several authors from companies and universities had
already foreseen that as new technologies would increasingly be used, hotels
could benefit from that in a great range of situations, for example:  better
qualified services for customers, increased sales and profits, efficiency in
operation and integration of hotel sectors, quick communication and cost
reduction (Laudon & Laudon, 1999; Van Hoof et al., 1995).

222   Mendes-Filho & Ramos
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Technological applications enable information and knowledge to bring com-
petitive advantage to the future profile of the hotel. The “Age of Information”
idea is that the most modern companies will build their success upon the amount
of knowledge they have about their clients as well as give information on their
products and services and how they will get profit in this new environment
(Olsen & Connoly, 2000).
Internet being used as a means of communication gives several advantages or
benefits compared to other vehicles. According to Lage (2000), when it comes
to the tourist area, the main points are: the new relationship between consumers
and companies, marketing for actively participating consumers, the importance
of detailed information, self-service application, credibility and agility of
communication.
Tourism is among the largest online industries and is one of the most important
kinds of commerce through the Web. It corresponds to almost 40% of all global
electronic commerce transactions (Scottish Executive, 2000, Werthner &
Klein, 1999). So the data show that all major companies linked to the tourism
industry (hotels, agencies, air companies, rentals) do possess some kind of e-
commerce activity through the Web (O’Connor, 1999). Internet is probably
the newest star on communication and it is extremely valuable in the tourism
industry. The use of the Internet and the World Wide Web is spreading quickly
on most developments of consumers’ access area to travel databases. There
are hundreds of thousands of suppliers’ homepages, associations, e-news,
newsgroups and chats for the travel and tourism community. This bunch of
technologies provides many opportunities for the industry to interact with its
consumers and suppliers. It is also possible that, through information technol-
ogy, products and services may be personalized according to the tourist needs
and thus become a differential feature for those who adopt it (Buhalis, 1998;
Sheldon, 1997).
The purchase of products and services through the Internet is revolutionizing
the world of business and people’s lives as well. For some clients it is more
comfortable to book an air ticket through the company homepage rather than
going to the travel agency (Franco, Jr., 2001).
No technology had ever had such full acceptance to allow that to happen. As
the Internet began and grew, the use of such technologies at home or work and
also the new opportunities that arose from the lower costs in telecommunication
equipment made it possible for suppliers to distribute information to their clients
and process reservations directly with the clients (O’Connor, 2001). So it
became easy for IT to link clients to suppliers and thus, many new ways of doing

The Benefits and Difficulties of Internet Use in Hotels   223
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
business have been created and also reshaped the industry and created new
intermediates in the tourism industry.
According to Jeong and Lambert (2001), the Internet has already modified the
competitive strategy of some hotels. It is through the Internet that the client can
have a “self-understanding” in a service that is being offered to him or her in a
more efficient way. In hotels, check-in processes can already be totally
automatic, from the Internet booking until the moment the client takes his or her
keys in an automatic dispenser. The result is that clients can become more
informed and willing to have quick answers from the orders online.
On the other hand, several authors have identified impediments to the growth
of the Internet in the industry and hence, have reservations about the willingness
of hotel operators to adopt the Internet wholeheartedly (Wei et al., 2001).
These problems include user-friendliness, the quality and accuracy of informa-
tion obtained from the Web, and the issue of data security (Wei et al., 2001).
Here are other difficulties found by Lituchy and Rail (2000) in their research:
problems in updating new information in hotel Web pages, managers expressed
annoyance at inaccessible Webmasters, hard to find hotel Web sites, some
hotel employees do not know how to use the technology and impersonality of
the medium. That way, consumers have been slow to adopt the Internet as a
means to make hotel reservations; only 4% of reservations are made online
(Maselli, 2002).
Namasivayam, Enz and Siguaw (2000) summarize that almost 60% of the
hotels in their study had few technologies. To Van Hoof, Verbeeten and
Combrink (1996), a lack of proper training, high turnover rates and limited
financial resources were major barriers to the successful use and implementa-
tion of new technologies.
In addition to this, many hotels still believe that conventional means of
advertising, such as radio, television and printed material are the most effective
way of promoting their properties. The share of reservations received through
the Internet remains minute as compared to reservations received through
conventional means, such as phone, fax or mail (Van Hoof & Combrink, 1998).
However, these problems are diminishing with the growth of the number of
Internet users. And if customers become accustomed to browsing for rooms
and making reservations through the Internet, more and more properties will be
forced to get on the Internet as well (Mendes-Filho & Ramos, 2002).
In a specific way, the Internet provides an expansion on hotel services,
changing this industry and giving new opportunities to clients, thus being a new

224   Mendes-Filho & Ramos
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
channel to be developed. Besides online reservation services, the Internet
allows hotels to sell their services and charge them electronically and also to
offer new products through the World Wide Web (Blank, 2000; Laudon &
Laudon, 1999).
Through the Web, the customer can check hotel location, compare rates, see
pictures and watch videos, get tourist destination information about other
facilities, check room availability, book and confirm his or her booking for the
amount of time he or she wants to stay, among other services (Jeong &
Lambert, 2001). Hence, the interactivity of the Web provides an ideal medium
for distributing accommodation online, consolidating itself as a very adequate
platform for bringing information and services to the client in a very straightfor-
ward, efficient and quick way (Blank, 2000; Hotels, 2001).
Marriot, Hospitality Services of America and Hilton are a few of the hospitality
industry members that have successfully used marketing on the Internet to reach
new markets, track customers, take online reservations and offer information
about their products and services (Lituchy & Rail, 2000).
From the theoretical fundaments and similar studies briefly presented above, a
frame has been developed for the research, aiming at three targets to be
explored through the two dimensions of analysis that build the construct of “the
perception of the importance of Internet use”: benefits and difficulties.
On the other hand, to relate these dimensions of Internet use to conditioning
factors the model suggests a group of four variables: two on organizational level
(hotel rate and number of rooms) and two on an individual level (managers’ age
and hotel experience).
Research Methodology
The research was defined as descriptive, for it describes the features of a
certain population as well as establishes relationships between variables
through a standardized data collection technique. Its approach is quantitative,
since the research used quantification not only in the data collection process but
also in its treatment through statistical methods.
The data collecting tool was a questionnaire with closed questions, organized
in two parts: the first one had profile questions for manager/respondent, hotel
and Internet use; the second part had perception questions using a non-metric

The Benefits and Difficulties of Internet Use in Hotels   225
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
scale for measuring the importance from 1 to 5 (five-point Likert-type scale),
which tried to measure different levels of individual manager importance on the
following aspects of Internet use: benefits and difficulties, containing 16
perception evaluation items. This questionnaire was adapted from Van Hoof
and Combrink (1998) and validated for Brazilian reality, enabling confirmation
of the variables that belong to the questionnaire’s blocks.
The field research was developed in the city of Natal, capital of Rio Grande do
Norte state in Brazil. The organizational unity chosen was hotel enterprises with
more than 40 rooms (in the research area they are considered as medium to big-
sized) rated on the Guia Quatro Rodas Brazil (2003). The subjects of the
research were the managers who were more involved with Internet use in his
hotel.
The Guia Quatro Rodas Brazil was used as a reference for rating the
categorized researched hotels because this guide has been currently used by
tourists, tour agencies and tour operators for over 39 years in Brazil.
Small properties are out of the study, for this sort of facility has less awareness
on the importance of adopting technological solutions and also has less financial
conditions to invest in IT (Cooper et al., 1998). It is also believed that this could
interfere in the perception of managers on the impacts of the Internet.
Nine out of the 44 hotels selected were not given the questionnaire application,
as it is explained below: three of them had already taken the pre-test; four were
not rated in the Guia Quatro Rodas Brazil, one was not working, and another
one it was not possible to contact its manager to answer the questions, though
it was visited three times. So, 35 hotels were studied and the managers spent
25 minutes to answer the questionnaire.
This study is considered of the unique transversal type, for it extracted only one
sample from the interviewees of the target population and also the information
was collected only once. The first phase of collecting data refers to the pre-test
application period developed in the first week of August 2002, in three hotels.
After that phase, some due changes were made and the questionnaires were
then applied from August 14, 2002 to September 13, 2002.
With respect to statistical treatment of data, Microsoft’s STATISTICA
software for Windows was used to do the descriptive analysis of data, and for
inferential results, analysis of variance (ANOVA) and HSD Tukey test were
carried out.
In the descriptive analysis, software calculated the frequency table in each one
of the variables used in the study and distributed in five parts of the question-

226   Mendes-Filho & Ramos
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
naire. On the first and second parts (interview/hotel profile and Internet use) it
was calculated only the percentages of each one of the variables involved. On
the remaining parts (manager perceptions, benefits and difficulties), the vari-
ables’ percentages and averages were calculated.
The analysis of variance was used to check if there was any significant
difference on the opinions of hotel managers according to the hotel rate. The
ANOVA allows the researcher to compare averages of several different
samples (three or more) with data from the ordinal level to determine if
population averages from these samples have any significant differences
(Montgomery, 1996).
Tukey’s HSD test (“honestly significant difference”) was also used to locate
where significant differences were located between the averages. Tukey’s
HSD test that was used is specific for differently sized samples, which is the
case of this research. Tukey’s HSD test is one of the most useful tests for
multiple comparisons.
Results
The results of the research were divided in two parts: The first one consists on
a descriptive analysis where hotels and managers are profiled and also the
perception of managers of the use of the Internet in hotels; the second part
presents the analysis based on Tukey’s variance statistical tests.
Descriptive Results of the Research
Sampled Hotels’ and Managers’ Demographic Profiles
On Table 1 it is checked that most of the respondents were women (65.7%),
hotel reservation managers (60%), and relatively young, up to 35 years old
(68.6%).  In respect to their hotel experience, results were concentrated on six
to 15 years of experience (42.9%) but it is important to say that there is also
a considerable percentage of five years of experience (40 %).

The Benefits and Difficulties of Internet Use in Hotels   227
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Table 2 shows that the 35 researched hotels are rated as “simple” or “medium-
comfortable” (74.3%); a little more than a half of them have less than 100
rooms.
Table 1. Managers’ profile
Table 2. Hotels’ profile
Position 
N 
% 
General Manager 
3 
8.6 
Guest Manager 
2 
5.7 
Commercial Manager 
4 
11.4 
Administrative Manager 
2 
5.7 
Reception Manager 
3 
8.6 
Reservation Manager 
21 
60.0 
Total 
35 
100.0 
Age 
N 
% 
Less than 25 years old 
8 
22.9 
26 to 35 years old 
16 
45.7 
Over 36 years old 
11 
31.4 
Total 
35 
100.0 
Hotel Experience 
N 
% 
Less than 5 years 
14 
40.0 
6 to 15 years 
15 
42.9 
Over 16 years 
6 
17.1 
Total 
35 
100.0 
 Hotel Rate 
N 
% 
Simple 
14 
40.0 
Medium Comfort 
12 
34.3 
Comfortable/ Very Comfortable/ Luxury 
9 
25.7 
Total 
35 
100.0 
Number of hotel rooms 
N 
% 
Less than 50 rooms 
7 
20.0 
51 to 100 rooms 
11 
31.4 
101 to 150 rooms 
10 
28.6 
Over 151 rooms 
7 
20.0 
Total 
35 
100.0 

228   Mendes-Filho & Ramos
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Aspects of Internet Use in Hotels
When questioned about the use of the Internet in the hotels, most of the
managers answered that they did have Internet of some kind in their facilities
(97.1%). Other data show that 97.1% of the hotels have their own e-mail
address.
When it was asked if the hotel used the Internet to build up any kind of
relationship with its clients, 85.7% of managers answered “yes,” which seems
to demonstrate their interest in using the Web as an electronic marketing tool
aiming their customers’ faithfulness. Another relevant piece of information is
that only four (11.4%) out of the 35 managers said they had Intranet in their
work. This indicates that hotels do not seem to consider the importance of using
the Internet as a communication and cooperation tool for their employees. A
possible reason for these data is that some of these hotels do not use an Internet
platform as a way of corporate communication and cooperation.
Relating to hotel-supplier integration, only 20% of the hotels use Internet to
purchase from the supplier. Mendes-Filho and Ramos (2001) stated that
administration and food and beverage managers do research their product
prices but do not buy them through the Web; therefore the Web is used only
for price investigation.
A little more than 90% of hotels already have their homepages and 54.3%  of
such pages have existed for over two years, which resembles the research
carried out by Lituchy and Rail (2000) in the U.S. and Canada, where 89.2 %
of these facilities already have a Web site on the Internet and the vast majority
(55.9 %) have already been on the Web for over two years. Most of these
hotels are also using their homepages to offer Web room reservation services,
for 85% of them do have that service.
Wei et al. (2001) accomplished a research about homepage too, and they
concluded that of the hotels that had a Web page and also allowed their guests
to make reservations through the Internet, only a small proportion of their
reservations were received through the Web. In fact, less than 1% of the hotels
had received more than 20% of reservations through the Web. In the same
investigation, most respondents (73.6%) indicated that making reservations
through the Web was actually the same or worse compared to making
reservations by conventional means. Some common features were found on
these Web pages: photos of property features (78.2%), information on
reservations (67.3%), information on availability (22.4%), and virtual tours of
the property (21.2%).

The Benefits and Difficulties of Internet Use in Hotels   229
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Internet Benefits
The Internet enables the hospitality industry to control costs, improve employee
productivity and provide superior customer service (Cisco Systems, 2003). As
a result of this innovation, the hospitality industry has discovered that it is
possible to cut labor and overhead costs without sacrificing product quality or
customer service. It is relevant to hospitality-related businesses of every size,
from single-unit operations to multinational corporations (Cisco Systems,
2003).
On the managers’ opinion, the most expressive benefit reached was the
increase of hotel advertising and marketing in the local and worldwide media,
considered the most important by 85.7% of the interviewees (Table 3).
Another benefit that also had a great result was the increase of sales and
reservations through the Web: 80% of the managers said it is very important for
their facilities. The result is coherent to the Abreu and Costa study (2000), in
which it was demonstrated that the increase in the sales was the main aim
expected by hotels when using the Internet.
However, there were two benefits that were mentioned by 5.7% of the
managers as less important for their hotels: to facilitate the relationship with the
client through messages, forwarded messages and birthday cards and to allow
a greater knowledge on the client through homepage register forms.
Table 3. Biggest benefit that the Internet can bring to a hotel
Benefits 
Not 
important 
Little 
important 
Neutral 
Important 
Very 
Important 
Average 
Increasing hotel 
advertising and marketing 
2.9% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
11.4% 
85.7% 
4.8 
Increasing sales and 
reservations 
0.0% 
2.9% 
0.0% 
17.1% 
80.0% 
4.7 
Improving client service 
by providing hotel 
information 
0.0% 
0.0% 
0.0% 
37.1% 
62.9% 
4.6 
Reducing hotel costs 
0.0% 
0.0% 
5.7% 
31.4% 
62.9% 
4.6 
Improving hotel image  
0.0% 
2.9% 
5.7% 
45.7% 
45.7% 
4.3 
Facilitating the 
relationship with clients 
through messages and 
direct mail 
0.0% 
5.7% 
2.9% 
45.7% 
45.7% 
4.3 
Increasing competition  
(by competing with other 
hotels) 
0.0% 
2.9% 
2.9% 
51.4% 
42.9% 
4.3 
Allowing bigger 
knowledge on the client 
0.0% 
5.7% 
2.9% 
60.0% 
31.4% 
4.2 
 

230   Mendes-Filho & Ramos
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Internet Difficulties
The tourism industry’s advantage over most of the other sectors of electronic
commerce is that the consumer goes and collects the product at the point of
production. However, several issues have been identified as necessary steps
towards the full exploitation of tourism’s electronic commerce full potential
(Deimizi, 2003):
•
Increase security of transmissions;
•
Ensure credibility of information;
•
Secure intellectual property and copyright issues;
•
Enhance bandwidth and reduce speed limitations;
•
Reduce user confusion and dissatisfaction;
•
Provide adequately trained specialists;
•
Develop equal access for smaller and larger partners;
•
Establish pricing structures for distribution of information and reserva-
tions;
•
Enhance the standardization of information and reservation procedures.
Table 4. Biggest difficulty for the hotel to use the Internet
Difficulties 
Not 
difficult 
Little 
difficult 
Neutral 
Difficult 
Very 
difficult 
Average 
Cost and time involved on Internet 
installation process  
17.2% 
17.2% 
14.2% 
5.7% 
45.7% 
3.5 
Clients and employees are not used to 
using Internet 
14.3% 
14.3% 
5.7% 
34.3% 
31.4% 
3.5 
Developing training courses for 
employees who do not have any 
knowledge about Internet 
20.0% 
31.4% 
5.7% 
22.9% 
20.0% 
2.9 
Client becomes suspicious about 
using Internet 
28.5% 
25.7% 
14.3% 
22.9% 
8.6% 
2.6 
Safety and trust of hotel data to be 
exposed on the Web  
40.0% 
11.4% 
17.2% 
17.2% 
14.2% 
2.5 
Employees waste time by using 
Internet for personal purposes 
31.4% 
17.2% 
11.4% 
20.0% 
20.0% 
2.4 
Specialized labor cost for homepage 
maintenance and update 
20.0% 
51.4% 
5.7% 
14.3% 
8.6 
2.4 
Complex Internet management  
48.6% 
22.8% 
8.6% 
8.6% 
11.4% 
2.1 
 

The Benefits and Difficulties of Internet Use in Hotels   231
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
According to Table 4, for 45.7% of the managers interviewed, cost and time
involved in the setting of the Internet makes its use very difficult in a hotel. A
reason that may justify this statement is that most hotels are quite simple and
with less than 100 rooms, which may mean less financial power to invest time
and money for Internet access. The variable “clients and employees are not
used to using Internet and/or a computer” reached 31.4% of manager opinion
as an item that makes it difficult for their facilities to use the Internet.
According to managers’ opinions, the complexity of Internet management
(48.6%), and also the safety and trust of hotel data that can be exposed on the
Web (40%), do not seem to be difficult elements to be dealt with when it comes
to Internet presence in the hotel.
Inferential Results of Internet Use in Hotels
The one-way average comparison technique (ANOVA) was used with a 0.05
significance level to check if there were differences in the opinions of managers,
followed by a Tukey test to determine the bias of such differences.
Through the results of the research it is intended to identify which factors
contributed to the perception of managers relating to Internet use in hotels. The
analysis was developed for four variables: according to the number of rooms
and rate – both related to the organizational profile; age of managers and
experience time in hotel industry- both related to individual profile. Inside each
one of the profiles the perception on the importance of Internet use with the
benefits and difficulties of the Internet was analyzed.
Effect of Manager’s Age on Perception on the Use of the Internet
The analysis of variance (Table 5) has identified significance in two benefits
given by the use of the Internet in hotels: to allow a greater knowledge on the
client and to reduce the costs of the hotel.
In the area of difficulties related to the installation of the Internet, only one
variable had a significance level lower than 0.05: the development of training for
employees who do not know how to use the Internet.
Through the Tukey test it was possible to conclude that managers up to 25 years
old agreed that the Internet allows a greater knowledge of the client than the
older managers did.  Managers who were from 26 to 35 years old consider the

232   Mendes-Filho & Ramos
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Internet more important to reduce costs than the ones who are over 35 years
old.
By using the Tukey test the conclusion is that 26 to 35 year-old managers agree
that training for employees who do not have any knowledge on the Web makes
the use of IT more difficult than the ones who are over 35.
Effect of Manager’s Experience Time in Hotel Industry on the
Perception on the Use of the Internet
When it comes to the effect of managers’ experience in hotel industry in their
perceptions, there were no identified significant variables related to the
difficulties in Internet use.
From Table 6 it is observed that the ANOVA test found a variable with a
significance level below 0.05: Internet facilitates the relationship with the client
in terms of its benefits.
Table 5. Effect of managers’ age on the perception of the importance of
Internet use
*Variable with significance p<0.05
IMPORTANCE OF INTERNET USE 
 
Mean 
Less 
than 
25 
years 
old 
26 to 
35 
years 
old 
Over 
36 
years 
old 
F-
value 
P 
Benefits* 
 
 
 
 
 
Increasing hotel advertising and marketing on local and global media 
4.88 
4.63 
4.91 
0.582 
0.565 
Increasing hotel reservations and sales 
5.00 
4.75 
4.55 
1.308 
0.285 
Improving client service by providing hotel information 
4.88 
4.56 
4.55 
1.340 
0.276 
Reducing hotel costs 
4.63 
4.81 
4.18 
4.218 
0.024* 
Improving hotel image and facilitating the consolidation of its name/brand 
4.38 
4.25 
4.45 
0.258 
0.774 
Increase competition (Competition with hotels from other places) 
4.63 
4.25 
4.27 
0.881 
0.424 
Facilitating relationship with the client 
4.75 
4.06 
4.36 
2.158 
0.132 
Allowing greater knowledge on the client 
4.63 
4.31 
3.64 
5.904 
0.007* 
Difficulties* 
 
 
 
 
 
Cost and time required for installing Internet in the hotel  
3.88 
3.81 
2.64 
2.225 
0.125 
Clients and employees are not used to using IT  
3.25 
3.94 
3.18 
1.117 
0.340 
Need of training for employees who do not know the Web  
2.50 
3.75 
2.00 
6.564 
0.004* 
Client suspicious of using the Internet 
2.63 
2.38 
2.82 
0.342 
0.713 
Safety and trust of data in Internet ambient  
2.38 
2.50 
2.73 
0.129 
0.880 
Waste of time due to the use of Internet by employees for personal purposes 
2.75 
2.81 
2.82 
0.005 
0.995 
Specialized labor cost  
2.63 
2.38 
2.27 
0.191 
0.827 
Complex Internet management 
2.13 
2.31 
1.82 
0.387 
0.682 
 

The Benefits and Difficulties of Internet Use in Hotels   233
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Tukey test indicated that managers who have less than 5 five years of hotel
experience think that the use of the Internet facilitates the relationship with the
client far more than the more experienced managers.
Effect of Hotel Rate on the Perception of Internet Use
ANOVA test found no significant result relating to the effect of hotel rating on
the difficulties of Internet. However, as it is shown in Table 7, the ANOVA test
applied to the benefits of the Internet to the hotel has found a variable with a
significance level below 0.05: Internet use does improve the service to clients
by providing information of the hotel through its Web page and e-mail.
From the Tukey test, luxurious hotel managers consider it more important to use
the Internet to improve service to the client rather than simple hotel managers.
Table 6. Effect of manager’s experience time on their perception
*Variables with significance p<0.05
IMPORTANCE OF INTERNET USE 
 
Mean 
Less 
than 5 
years 
6 to 15 
years 
Over 
16 
years 
F-
value 
P 
Benefits* 
 
 
 
 
 
Increasing hotel advertising and marketing on local and global media 
4.64 
4.87 
4.83 
0.351 
0.706 
Increasing hotel reservations and sales 
4.64 
4.80 
4.83 
0.306 
0.738 
Improving client service by providing hotel information 
4.79 
4.40 
4.83 
3.254 
0.052 
Reducing hotel costs 
4.64 
4.60 
4.33 
0.558 
0.578 
Improving hotel image and facilitating the consolidation of its name/brand 
4.14 
4.47 
4.50 
0.886 
0.422 
Increase competition (Competition with hotels from other places) 
4.50 
4.27 
4.17 
0.649 
0.529 
Facilitating relationship with the client 
4.71 
4.20 
3.67 
4.776 
0.015* 
Allowing greater knowledge on the client 
4.43 
4.00 
4.00 
1.416 
0.257 
Difficulties 
 
 
 
 
 
Cost and time required for installing Internet in the hotel  
3.07 
3.73 
3.67 
0.656 
0.526 
Clients and employees are not used to using IT  
3.86 
3.33 
3.33 
0.539 
0.588 
Need of training for employees who do not know the Web  
2.93 
3.13 
2.33 
0.611 
0.549 
Client suspicious of using the Internet 
2.64 
2.67 
2.17 
0.310 
0.735 
Safety and trust of data in Internet ambient 
2.93 
2.13 
2.67 
1.014 
0.374 
Waste of time due to the use of Internet by employees for personal purposes 
3.00 
2.67 
2.67 
0.181 
0.836 
Specialized labor cost  
2.36 
2.67 
1.83 
1.019 
0.372 
Complex Internet management 
1.93 
2.13 
2.50 
0.334 
0.719 
 

234   Mendes-Filho & Ramos
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Table 7. Effect of hotel rate on the perception of managers
*Variables with significance p<0.05
IMPORTANCE OF INTERNET USE 
 
Mean 
Simple 
Medium 
comfort 
Luxury 
F-
value 
P 
Benefits* 
 
 
 
 
 
Increasing hotel advertising and marketing on local and 
global media 
4.86 
4.58 
4.89 
0.595 
0.558 
Increasing hotel reservations and sales 
4.71 
4.67 
4.89 
0.352 
0.706 
Improving client service by providing hotel information 
4.36 
4.67 
5.00 
6.232 
0.005* 
Reducing hotel costs 
4.64 
4.50 
4.56 
0.174 
0.841 
Improving hotel image and facilitating the consolidation of 
its name/brand 
4.36 
4.25 
4.44 
0.180 
0.836 
Increase competition (Competition with hotels from other 
places) 
4.14 
4.50 
4.44 
1.017 
0.373 
Facilitating relationship with the client 
4.29 
4.50 
4.11 
0.615 
0.547 
Allowing greater knowledge on the client 
4.00 
4.42 
4.11 
1.048 
0.362 
Difficulties 
 
 
 
 
 
Cost and time required for installing Internet in the hotel  
3.21 
3.33 
4.00 
0.689 
0.509 
Clients and employees are not used to using IT  
3.14 
3.50 
4.22 
1.597 
0.218 
Need of Training for employees who do not know the Web  
2.50 
2.67 
3.89 
2.966 
0.066 
Client suspicious of using the Internet 
2.71 
2.08 
3.00 
1.329 
0.279 
Safety and trust of data in Internet ambient 
2.36 
3.08 
2.11 
1.241 
0.302 
Waste of time due to the use of Internet by employees for 
personal purposes 
2.57 
2.92 
3.00 
0.244 
0.785 
Specialized labor cost 
2.00 
2.92 
2.33 
1.953 
0.158 
Complex Internet management 
1.86 
2.33 
2.22 
0.390 
0.680 
 
Table 8. Effect of the number of rooms in the perception of managers
*Variables with significance p<0.05
IMPORTANCE OF INTERNET USE 
 
Mean 
Less 
than 50 
rooms 
51 to 
100 
101 to 
150 
Over 151 
rooms 
F-value P 
Benefits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Increasing hotel advertising and marketing on local and global 
media 
4.86 
5.00 
4.50 
4.71 
0.853 
0.476 
Increasing hotel reservations and sales 
5.00 
4.45 
4.80 
4.86 
1.387 
0.265 
Improving client service by providing hotel information 
4.43 
4.64 
4.70 
4.71 
0.508 
0.679 
Reducing hotel costs 
4.57 
4.64 
4.40 
4.71 
0.413 
0.745 
Improving hotel image and facilitating the consolidation of its 
name/brand 
4.57 
4.27 
4.20 
4.43 
0.405 
0.750 
Increase competition (Competition with hotels from other 
places) 
3.86 
4.64 
4.30 
4.43 
2.087 
0.122 
Facilitating relationship with the client 
4.29 
4.64 
4.10 
4.14 
0.949 
0.429 
Allowing greater knowledge on the client 
4.29 
4.27 
4.00 
4.14 
0.282 
0.838 
Difficulties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cost and time required for installing Internet in the hotel  
3.57 
2.73 
3.60 
4.29 
1.457 
0.245 
Clients and employees are not used to using IT  
3.14 
3.27 
3.90 
3.86 
0.602 
0.619 
Need of training for employees who do not know the Web  
2.57 
2.82 
3.10 
3.14 
0.231 
0.874 
Client suspicious of using the Internet 
2.29 
2.55 
2.90 
2.43 
0.306 
0.821 
Safety and trust of data in Internet ambient 
2.57 
3.09 
2.40 
1.86 
0.978 
0.416 
Waste of time due to the use of Internet by employees for 
personal purposes  
3.14 
2.73 
2.30 
3.29 
0.662 
0.582 
Specialized labor cost  
2.71 
2.36 
2.10 
2.57 
0.385 
0.764 
Complex Internet management 
2.29 
1.45 
2.80 
2.00 
1.751 
0.177 
 

The Benefits and Difficulties of Internet Use in Hotels   235
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Effect of the Number of Rooms on the Perception of Internet Use
According to Table 8, the effect of the number of hotel rooms on the perception
of the managers showed no significant variable related to the benefits and
difficulties.
Future Trends
A hotel chain’s success has always depended on excellent services performed
by operation, marketing and human resources sectors. For Withiam (2000), in
the 21st century an essential factor will be technological support, making it
possible for computers to process information of reservation systems, affinity
programs and marketing data banks.
Improvements in the integration, centralized data banks and the use of Web
sites are some of the tendencies in the development of software for hotels
(Adams, 2001). Therefore, the connection of a hotel system to the Internet will
integrate information of the internal system with the Web site, and this will make
a lot of information available to managers. The new systems are being
developed with this integration with the Web site.
With the increasing demand of information in the tourist sector the importance
of IT use in this industry will only tend to increase in the future. Therefore, the
tourist businesses must understand, incorporate and use IT strategically to
serve the target markets, improve their efficiency, maximize profitability,
perfect services and maintain the profitability in the long term (Buhalis, 1998).
To Olsen and Connoly (2000), the volume of information about the guests
collected electronically is too large for the directors to be able to manage
without the help of technology. Data warehousing and data mining are tech-
nologies that are gaining popularity to analyze information about clients. These
technologies may be used to help hotel- keepers construct good relationships
with their guests, increasing their loyalty to them.
Using the Internet in the hotel industry has good prospects of growth, though
in many hotels the use of such technology is still moving slowly. It will be an
important and strategic issue for businesspeople to stimulate such Internet use
policies inside the tourist trade so that they become wired to this new reality and
can work on even terms with their competitors.

236   Mendes-Filho & Ramos
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Conclusion
Despite the fact that Internet use is very common, the proportion of reserva-
tions received from the Internet is small. The public could still be concerned
about issues of
security for financial transactions, or could not be satisfied with its inability to
synchronize inquiries. A low reservation rate from the Internet may also be
partly attributed to the lack of certain relevant information, such as room
availability, and virtual tours of the property not commonly included in the
homepage (Wei et al., 2001).
In general, the Internet does enable tourist companies to increase their
competitiveness. IT can improve the efficiency of suppliers and provide tools
for the development and delivery of different tourist products (Mendes-Filho
& Ramos, 2003). One of the benefits reached is the reduction of the depen-
dence on the middle-person in the distribution of tourist products. Hotel owners
should invest more money in technology besides concentrating more time and
attention to subjects in that area. IT affects all aspects of a hotel chain’s value,
going far beyond sectors and departments. As technology will be intrinsically
linked to hotel business, its executives will insert technology in all their strategic
decisions for the facility. That implies that all the employees (including managers
and directors) need to have enough knowledge to extract the potential the
technology provides.
Moreover, the Internet has decreased expenses and enabled small businesses
to conduct international business from home (Lituchy & Rail, 2000). Small inns
and bed & breakfasts are advertising on the Web and are therefore becoming
a presence in the global market. So, they face the likelihood of serving foreign
customers that may have different hospitality expectations.
In this research it was possible to portray the situation of mid- and large-sized
hotels in Natal, RN, Brazil, and also contribute by offering a panoramic view
on the use of Internet and some impacts perceived by managers in the hotel
industry. It has been demonstrated that there are not so many differences of
opinion as to the use of Internet in hotels. That leads to an important conclusion:
Nowadays the Internet has become a highly relevant instrument notwithstand-
ing any demographic variables that may occur (e.g., age, experience, size and
rate).
However, for its transversal and temporal character as well as its restraint to
Brazilian hotels with more than 40 rooms in a specific city, it is not possible to

The Benefits and Difficulties of Internet Use in Hotels   237
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
generalize all hotel universes. Hence, there is an expectancy that other research
on the academic level may complete and broaden this basis of knowledge on
the impacts of IT applications, remarkably the ones developed for the Web
platform, and therefore help the production sector to better understand them
and adopt them effectively in their businesses.
For that purpose to be fulfilled other research should be developed by
incorporating other variables, using other analysis techniques and observing
different cities, bigger hotel samples or even comparative studies with the
results obtained.
References
Adams, B. (2001). The PMS picture. Hotel and Motel Management, 216(2),
36-37.
Blank, D. (2000). Internet will shape revenue-management role. Hotel and
Motel Management, 215(11), 54-55.
Buhalis, D. (1998). Strategic use of information technologies in the tourism
industry. Tourism Management, 19(5), 409-421.
Cline, R. (1999). Hospitality 2000 - The technology. Lodging Hospitality,
55(7), 18-26.
Cooper, C. et al. (1998). Tourism - Principles and practice (2nd ed.).
Boston: Addison Wesley.
Cysco Systems. (2003). Industry overview: Hospitality. Retrieved August 22,
2003, from http://business.cisco.com/prod/tree.taf%3Fpublic_view=
true&kbns=1&asset_id=86667.html
David, J.S., Grabski, S., & Kasavana, M. (1996). The productivity paradox
of hotel-industry technology. Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Adminis-
tration Quarterly, 37(2), 64-70.
Deimizi, R. (2003). Information communication technologies and tourism
industry (part 2). Retrieved August 22, 2003, from http://
www.traveldailynews.com/makeof.asp?central_id=53&permanent_
id=12
Franco, C.F., Jr. (2001). E-business: Tecnologia de informação e negócios
na Internet. São Paulo: Atlas.

238   Mendes-Filho & Ramos
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Guia Quatro Rodas Brazil. (2003). São Paulo: Abril.
Holjevac, I.A. (2003). A vision of tourism and the hotel industry in the 21st
century. Hospitality Management, 22, 129-134.
Hotels. Hotels’2001 worldwide technology survey - part.1. (2001). Hotels,
35(2), 75-85.
Jeong, M., & Lambert, C. (2001). Adaptation of an information quality
framework to measure customers’ behavioral intentions to use lodging
Web sites. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 20(2),
129-146.
Lage, B.H. (2000). Comunicação de massa e turismo. In B.H. Lage & P.C.
Milone (Eds.),  Turismo: Teoria e prática. São Paulo: Atlas.
Laudon, K.C., & Laudon, J.P. (1999). Sistemas de informação com
Internet (4th ed.). Rio de Janeiro: LTC.
Licuchy, T.R., & Rail, A. (2000). Bed and breakfast, small inns, and the
Internet: The impact of technology on the globalization of small busi-
nesses. Journal of International Marketing, 8(2), 86-97.
Maselli, J. (2002, April 22). Hotels take to the Web to battle discounters.
InformationWeek.
Matoso, J.M.G. (1996). A informática na hotelaria e turismo (1st ed.).
Lisboa: Plátano Edições Técnicas.
Mendes-Filho, L.A.M., & Ramos, A.S.M. (2001). The impact of the Internet
adoption in the hotel industry: The opinion of hotel managers in Bangor,
Maine (USA). Proceedings of the Seventh International Congress on
Industrial Engineering and Operations Management, Salvador, Bra-
zil.
Mendes-Filho, L.A.M., & Ramos, A.S.M. (2002). The Internet adoption in
the hotel industry: A multiple cases study in Brazilian hotels. Proceedings
of the Thirteenth Information Resources Management Association
International Conference (IRMA 2002), Seattle, USA.
Mendes-Filho, L.A.M., & Ramos, A.S.M. (2003). The benefits and difficul-
ties of the Internet use in hotels: The effect of hotel rate on the managers’
perception. Proceedings of the 14th Information Resources Manage-
ment Association International Conference (IRMA 2003), Philadel-
phia, USA.
Montgomery, D. (1996). Design and analysis of experiments (4th ed.). New
York: John Wiley & Sons.

The Benefits and Difficulties of Internet Use in Hotels   239
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Namasivayam, K., Enz, C.A., & Siguaw, J.A. (2000). How wired are we? The
selection and use of new technology in U.S. hotels. Cornell Hotel and
Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 41(6), 40-48.
O’Connor, P. (2001). Distribuição da informação eletrônica em turismo
e hotelaria. Porto Alegre: Bookman.
Olsen, M.D., & Connoly, D.J. (2000). Experience-based travel. Cornell
Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 41(1), 30-40.
Phillips, P.A., & Moutinho, L. (1998). Strategic planning systems in hospi-
tality and tourism. CAB International, Wallingford, UK.
Scottish Executive. (2000). A new strategy for Scottish tourism. Edinburg.
Retrieved  July 21, 2002, from http://www.scotland.gov.uk/library2/
doc11/sfst.pdf
Sheldon, P. (1997). Tourism information technology. Wallingford, UK:
CAB International.
Van Hoof, H.B. et al. (1995). Technology needs and perceptions: An assess-
ment of the U.S. lodging industry. Cornell Hotel and Restaurant
Administration Quarterly, 36(5), 64-69.
Van Hoof, H.B., & Combrink, T.E. (1998). U.S. lodging managers and the
Internet: Perceptions from the industry. Cornell Hotel and Restaurant
Administration Quarterly, 39(2), 46-54.
Van Hoof, H.B., & Verbeeten, M.J. (1997). Vendors receive mixed reviews.
Hotel and Motel Management, 212(11), 42.
Van Hoof, H.B., Verbeeten, M.J., & Combrink, T.E. (1996). Information
technology revisited – international lodging-industry technology needs
and perceptions: A comparative study. Cornell Hotel and Restaurant
Administration Quarterly, 37(6), 86-91.
Wei, S., Ruys, H.F., Van Hoof, H.B., & Combrink, T.E. (2001). Uses of the
Internet in the global hotel industry. Journal of Business Research, 54,
235-241.
Werthner, H., & Klein, S. (1999). Information technology and tourism: A
challenging relationship (Springer Computer Science). New York:
Springer Verlag.
Withiam, G. (2000) Carlson’s “24K” consumer-centric computer. Cornell
Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 41(3), 13.

240   Stein, Hawking & Wyld
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Chapter XI
A Reverse Auction
Case Study:
The Final Chapter
Andrew Stein, Victoria University, Australia
Paul Hawking, Victoria University, Australia
David C. Wyld, Southeastern Louisiana University, USA
Abstract
The reverse auction tool has evolved to take advantage of Internet
technology and has been identified by many large organisations as a tool
to achieve substantial procurement savings. As companies adopt this
technology it is important for them to understand the implications of this
type of procurement. This chapter re-visits a reverse auction event and
discusses the impacts the reverse auction format had upon all participants
involved in the auction. In late 2001 a small Australian supplier of
transport and logistics services was asked to participate in a reverse
auction for services they had provided for five years to a multi-national
organisation. They were not successful in retaining their contract position

A Reverse Auction Case Study   241
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
and this chapter looks at the reverse auction and its business impacts two
years after the initial auction. The case study is viewed through the eyes
of the winning supplier, losing supplier, auction vendor, and buyer. The
main outcomes show that the reverse auction struggles to adapt to fluid
business conditions and is limited if it is used as only a price fixing
mechanism. It did not engender co-operative supply chains or win-win
situations between the auction players.
Introduction
Today, organisations spend over US$20 trillion globally on external goods and
services, and thus, the supply chain is now the focus in cost reduction and
efficiency increase (Minahan, 2001). As more and more innovative applica-
tions are developed, electronic commerce has increasingly adopted an ever-
widening definition. One recent application that has sought the “e” treatment is
procurement. Minahan (2001) defined e-procurement as:
“The process of utilising Web-based technologies to support the identifica-
tion, evaluation, negotiation, and configuration of optimal groupings of
trading partners into a supply chain network, which can then respond to
changing market demands with greater efficiency” (Minahan, 2001).
Activities that could be applied to the e-procurement process include:
•
Advertisement of tenders.
•
Electronic submission of tenders.
•
Electronic ordering.
•
Internet sourcing via third parties.
•
Electronic mail between buyers and sellers.
•
Electronic mail in contract management.
•
Research into supplier markets.
•
Integration of procurement within the financial and inventory systems.

242   Stein, Hawking & Wyld
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Accordingly, there are a plethora of tools that have been developed to support
these business activities. As organisations extend the reach of their information
systems into the supply chain, e-procurement has become a driving force for
achieving substantial cost savings. One mechanism that facilitates e-procure-
ment is the reverse online auction. Reverse online auctions are delivered by
intermediaries, many of whom promise to deliver savings of up to 20% for the
buying organisations. The rhetoric of B2B collaboration has “win-win” sce-
narios for all who participate in online auctions. But is this true? This chapter
will re-visit a case study of an Australian reverse online auction asking the basic
questions: what long-term impacts resulted from the original reverse auction?
It will analyse the online auction from all viewpoints, questioning the value
proposition of the reverse online auction as a tool in B2B e-commerce.
The Growth of E-Procurement
Many research organisations predict massive growth in the B2B market.
Bowles (2000) saw the global B2B market growing to US$968 million in 2002
and then US$1.551 billion in 2004. Yet, these figures pale into insignificance
when considering other market analysts, predictions:
•
Gartner: US$2.9 trillion by 2003.
•
AMR: US$5.7 trillion by 2004.
•
Forrester: US$7.29 trillion by 2004 (Diba, 2001; Hersch, 2000; Regan,
2001).
These predictions should be accepted with caution, however. In a recent article
in Management Research News, Wyld (2002) cautions that we are entering
the end of the “trough of disillusionment” phase of e-business, where exponen-
tial gains in efficiencies and cost reductions will be replaced with incremental
progress. Yet, there does seem to be a sea change in how procurement is
conducted in organisations. B2B has promised — and delivered in many
instances — to drive costs down and streamline procurement operations
(McGarvey, 2000). In fact, Metcalfe et al. (2001) predicted that European
companies could achieve a 50% gain in productivity through adopting Internet-
enabled B2B processes by 2010. Wyld (2000) developed an e-procurement

A Reverse Auction Case Study   243
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
model, presented in Figure 1, looking at the totality of the e-procurement
process, from drivers through impact to imperatives. The model demonstrates
some of the changes that are affecting the e-procurement value chain.
Organisations on the buying and selling side will need to address these
challenges to capture both the tactical cost control and the more strategic
market developments. One of the critical aspects will be decisions regarding
buyers’ employment of and sellers’ participation in online auctions.
The Auction Economy
Batsone (1999) asked the question whether in the future, what if the price of
everything would be negotiable? We have grown accustomed – both in the
Figure 1. The Wyld (2000) e-procurement model
Source: Wyld (2000, p. 4).
 
Drivers 
Impacts 
Imperatives 
Fast pace of tech 
innovation 
 
Internal linkage 
between supply 
chain & portal 
Economic 
Globalisation 
 
Shift of power from 
suppliers to buyers 
Develop online 
supplier 
qualification 
Rapid growth of 
e-business portal 
sector 
Leverage suppliers 
into e-portal 
marketplaces 
Large 
organisations 
become market 
makers 
Market makers 
increasing 
competition 
Develop vertical 
markets to force 
B2B and lower 
costs 
Vertical trading 
communities 
 
Demand for B2B 
solutions 
 
 
New product & 
services 
requirements 
 
Build strategic 
alliances between 
e-commerce 
players 

244   Stein, Hawking & Wyld
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
business and consumer marketplace – to the concept of market prices. Yet, at
the heart of the auction economy is the concept of pricing, and more impor-
tantly, dynamic pricing. Dynamic pricing simply means that a good or service
is priced according to what the market determines. The Web introduces the
element of real-time pricing and further elevates the importance of personal
price elasticities. Customers will determine the price, depending upon the price/
value trade-off. No longer is the supply/demand model determining price.
Rather, a more complicated, customer-centric price/value trade-off deter-
mines pricing (Batsone, 1999). Many service-based companies use this
principle when they have multiple – and sometimes hundreds – of price points
for the one product, most notably airlines and hotels.
O’Malley (1998) saw the Web being “a giant bidding war,” and Queree (2000)
commented that online auctions were fast becoming a mainstream business
model. The auction model has settled into the B2B marketplace and has been
developed for various e-government applications (NSW, 2001). Wyld (2000)
saw the auction model being adaptable for use in:
•
Procurement.
•
Disposition of used assets.
•
Internal corporate management.
There are several differing auction formats used in online auctions, including:
•
English.
•
Yankee.
•
Dutch.
•
Sealed bid.
•
Vickrey.
•
Forward and Reverse Auctions (Wyld, 2000).
Kafka et al. (2000) predicted that by 2004, US$ 746 billion of business will be
conducted through online auction models, based on dynamic pricing.

A Reverse Auction Case Study   245
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Reverse Auctions for E-Procurement
While many first think of eBay and forward auctions (where prices rise) when
the subject of online auctions is discussed, reverse auctions play an important
role in e-procurement strategies. In fact, growing numbers of firms worldwide,
led by the global Fortune 1000 companies, have successfully used online
auctions as a tool to reduce prices for goods and services (Emiliani, 2000). One
of the pioneers of online B2B auctions for e-procurement is Freemarkets,
which was established in 1995 and launched their online auction site in 1999.
To date, they have conducted auctions involving more than 19,000 suppliers
from more than 70 countries worth $US 30 billion (Freemarkets, 2002).
In the first quarter of 2000, they conducted auctions involving 47 Fortune 500
buyers and 4,000 suppliers (Freemarkets, 2002). Mayne Group, one of
Table 1. The reverse auction process
Source: Adapted from Buyers.gov, 2000.
Step 
Activities 
Make market (specifications) 
1) Market Made (Client focus) 
Identify Suppliers 
Pre-Award Review 
Contract/schedule, Specifications 
Ability to deliver, Quality 
assurance 
Past performance, Responsibilities 
Set-up technicals 
Approved suppliers listing 
Identify specific terms & conditions 
2) Pre-Qualification (Supplier Focus) 
Invite suppliers 
Set up Auction 
Create auction content, Set-up 
security 
Register bidders, Ensure readiness 
Contingency planning 
3) Pre Auction Planning (Client/Supplier) 
Supplier Auction Strategy 
4) Auction Activity (Supplier) 
Conduct Auction 
Suppliers bid real-time, Buyers 
monitors auction 
Winners selected, Contingencies 
ready 
5) Post Auction (Client) 
Contract write-up 

246   Stein, Hawking & Wyld
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Australia’s leading companies with major interests in health care and logistics,
signed a three-year deal in 2000 with Freemarkets to manage their procure-
ment and operate online auctions. Other major B2B auction facilitators include:
•
Ariba.
•
CommerceOne.
•
Andale.
•
Elcom.com.
•
Procuree.
•
Verticalnet.
The B2B auction facilitators usually work with buyers to select bidders to
participate in each auction, develop specifications in detail, and tailor the
bidding process to the situation. This service is billed to buyers accordingly.
There could be additional costs, based on a percentage of the anticipated
savings (Messmer, 2000). Freemarkets (2002) promotes the ability of their
auction format to decrease service prices by 16-18% and goods by 2-3%. The
reverse auction process involves intensive work on behalf of the buyer and
market maker to structure the bidding process and prepare suppliers for
qualification. This process is represented in Table 1.
Reverse Auctions: State of Play
A recent comprehensive report by the CAPS Research Group (Beall et al.,
2003) detailed the landscape for the operation and success for reverse
auctions. The report recognises that reverse auctions are controversial and are
implemented for many reasons:
•
Get buyers and sellers to interact in a real-time Internet enabled world.
•
Recognise that service quality and product quality are “givens”.
•
Massive cost savings are possible.
•
ROI is rapid with reverse auction tools.

A Reverse Auction Case Study   247
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Cycle-time savings in the procurement process are significant.
•
Buyers can reach more suppliers and thereby increase competitive
advantage.
While the literature shows rapid acceptance of the reverse auction format there
are several impediments to the successful operation of reverse auctions:
•
Unfamiliarity of the new procurement process and methodology.
•
False premise that price is the only determinant of the reverse auction.
•
Potential that the reverse auction will diminish buyer/supplier value trust
network.
Reverse auctions are still in their formative years. Organisations are only now
implementing their second and third iterations of reverse auctions. Issues to do
with ethical use of reverse auctions and business viability of the reverse auction
format are being developed. There is no doubt that the reverse auction tool is
becoming part of mainstream procurement operations as shown in Table 2
(ISM, 2002).
Beall (2003, p. 60) concludes by mentioning the acceptance and potential
impact that reverse auctions can have and makes the following points:
•
Definite acceptance for highly standardized products and services.
•
Reported payback after a few uses of reverse auctions.
•
Little evidence of reverse auctions harming buyer/supplier value trust
network.
•
Late adopters rushing to catch first adopters.
Table 2. Use of online reverse auctions for procurement
Source Data: ISM/Forrester. (2002). Reports on e-Business.
 
Q1-
2001 
Q2-
2001 
Q3-
2001 
Q4-
2001 
Q1-
2002 
Q2-
2002 
Q3-
2002 
Q4-
2002 
All Companies 
15.8% 
15.0% 
20.4% 
17.4% 
23.1% 
20.2% 
22.4% 
18.8% 

248   Stein, Hawking & Wyld
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
•
Ethical concerns are less than existing negotiations practices.
•
Predicted growth of reverse auctions into the future.
Reverse Auction Case Study
Methodology
The primary objective of this chapter was to return after two years to a study
of an Australian example (Stein et al., 2003) of reverse auction procurement
and analyse the auction process and outcomes. Whilst the growth of the reverse
auction has been marked in recent years few studies have looked at long-term
impacts of the process. The viewpoints of the winning and losing suppliers,
auction vendor and buyer will be presented, as there is a dearth of literature of
long-term case studies of participants in an online auction. This analysis will be
presented as a case study. More specifically, the research question to be
addressed in this study is: What are the long-term business impacts of the online
auction?
Case study research methodology was used in this research, as this project
represented an exploratory look at implications of reverse online auctions. Yin
(1994, p. 35) emphasises the importance of asking “what” when analysing
information systems. Yin goes further and emphasises the need to study
contemporary phenomena within real-life contexts. Walsham (2000, p. 204)
supports case study methodology and sees a need for a move away from
traditional information systems research methods, such as surveys, toward
more interpretative case studies, ethnographies and action research projects.
Several works (Benbasat et al., 1987; Chan & Roseman, 2001; Lee, 1989)
have used case studies in presenting information systems case-study research.
Cavaye (1996) used case study research to analyse inter-organisational
systems and the complexity of information systems. The data collection process
for the present research included:
•
Examination of existing documentation.
•
Content analysis of e-mail.
•
Interview of actors.
•
Direct observations.

A Reverse Auction Case Study   249
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The initial auction event was analysed (Stein et al., 2003) from the supplier
organisation’s viewpoint but this analysis will have emphasis on all participants
and outcomes of the event.
The Initial Reverse Auction
In April 2001, AusBuyer1 commissioned Auction.com to make a market for the
logistics component of their manufacturing activities. The market was broken
down into 19 channels, both state and nationally based. AusSupplier received
notification that a contract that it had partially carried out for five years was to
be auctioned on the Internet. AusSupplier started a six-month exploration into
online auctions and B2B procurement. Considerable time and financial re-
sources were expended to first learn about and then to participate in a reverse
online auction.
The Participants
AusSupplier is a micro-business, having two full-time and five part-time
consultants. It is an “infomediary,” or - in older parlance - a “middleman”.
AusSupplier turns over AUD$10 million and has a small client base. The role
of the “infomediary” is to win a contract for packing and exporting commodities
into the Asian marketplace. AusSupplier wins a contract from a large manufac-
turer (AusBuyer) and then negotiates transport and rates from shipping
organisations. The commodity that was to be auctioned was worth about
AUD$1.6 million per year. Currently, AusSupplier was responsible for about
20% of the contract, with a major transport company being responsible for the
other 80%.
Auction.Com is a multi-national, market leading e-commerce company,
specialising in e-procurement and auctions. It has about 1,000 employees
worldwide and operates for about 140 large multi-national clients. It has
conducted about US$ 21 billion in auctions, resulting in savings of about
US$ 6 billion. It is obvious when looking at Auction.Com and AusSupplier, the
difference in size, technology and more importantly, the chasm in understanding
e-business.
AusBuyer is an Australian manufacturer that is part of a global organization,
based in the United States. The global organisation was undergoing financial

250   Stein, Hawking & Wyld
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
strain, due to the poor commodities market worldwide. In order to reduce
costs AusBuyer turned to Auction.Com to conduct a number of auction events.
This case study outlines the first of over 300 auction events conducted over the
last two by Auction.com for Ausbuyer.
The Auction Process
The auction event was an Australia-wide procurement exercise, focusing on
logistics and transport services. The entire procurement operation of AusBuyer
was placed in 19 lots, with each lot undergoing a 1.5-hour auction. For
AusSupplier the auction event went through five stages:
1.
Market-made (client).
2.
Pre-qualification (supplier).
3.
Pre-auction planning & strategy (client/supplier).
4.
Conduct auction (supplier).
5.
Post-auction (client).
Stage 1
In stage 1 (Market-made), AusSupplier undertook research into the reverse
auction process, and then received a CD containing Web-based bidding
software and documentation from the manufacturer. This documentation
consisted of over 50 files: tender documents, quote spreadsheets, specifica-
tions and information sheets. It was updated four times before the final auction.
Initially, the deluge of information was overwhelming.
“I have spent hours retrieving, printing, reading and just trying to make sense
of the process.” Managing Director, AusSupplier, May 2001.
At this stage, considerable effort was expended to determine if AusSupplier
could participate in more than one channel (auction). It was felt that other
channels, including some interstate, could be bid for. However, a more
conservative approach was adopted, due to uncertainty about the online
auction process.

A Reverse Auction Case Study   251
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Stage 2
Stage 2, (pre-qualification), involves Auction.Com and AusBuyer weeding out
non-performing suppliers. Yet, at the same time, they are trying to ensure an
adequate number of bidders to be able to create the auction dynamic.
AusSupplier had no idea how many other companies had pre-qualified; it only
learned of the exact number at the auction event. Pre-qualification also
introduces some financial parameters for the event. Auction.Com set the
switching price at $AUD 1.3million; that is, the price when AusBuyer would
consider awarding the contract away from the existing supplier. Market
research by AusSupplier showed the existing contract was worth $AUD
1.6million. The difference between the price of switching to a new supplier and
the existing contract price was about 18%. This figure is similar to the figure
quoted in the advertising material by Auction.Com, which quotes savings of
18%.
AusSupplier again had expended considerable resources at this stage:
•
two site visits.
•
four sub-contractor meetings.
•
200 phone calls.
•
45 e-mails out.
•
15 e-mails in.
•
30 hours of managing director time.
•
20 hours of consultants’ time.
Thus, the bill for participating in the reverse auction was climbing. Summarising
the financial details thus far:
•
AusSuppliers market entry price
AUD$2 million
•
Existing contract price.
AUD$1.6 million
•
Reserve (switching) price.
AUD$1.3 million
The AusSupplier’s high market entry price ($AUD 2 million) was formulated
on the basis of entry into an unknown scenario. It was formulated on the rate

252   Stein, Hawking & Wyld
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
of moving the commodity by the tonnages quoted by AusBuyer, with a margin
built in. At this stage, it became apparent that the auction format was introducing
an element of incredulity to the quoting process.
“We are flying in the dark, some cowboy could underbid us and have no real
idea of what is involved in the job….” Managing Director, AusSupplier, June
2001.
AusSupplier had no idea of how many others bidders there were, no idea of
their market entry point and only one Auction.Com tutorial on a simulated
auction. Being pre-qualified and waiting for the auction became quite stressful
for the AusSupplier. Questions were raised in regards to:
•
What strategy should be adopted?
•
What would happen if the power failed, or if the ISP went down?
•
What would be the “bottom-line” position?
•
Would AusSupplier be swept up in the auction dynamic?
•
Who would press the buttons, and would they be able to keep their nerve?
Auction.Com conducted a training session from their Asian headquarters, and
AusSupplier personnel had soon mastered the auction interface.
Stage 3
In Stage 3, (Auction Strategy), AusSupplier developed three strategies for the
auction:
•
Entry strategy.
•
Middle strategy.
•
End strategy.
The entry strategy was to come in at the high pre-qualification bid after about
three minutes and then watch the market develop. The middle strategy was to
maintain control on the screen and drive the bids down in a controlled manner.

A Reverse Auction Case Study   253
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
During the auction event, AusSupplier would not know who were responsible
for the other bids. The only strategy for the end was to be in the “end game,”
and if they did not have the lowest bid, then, at least, they would be under the
switching cost at the end. It was believed that this would show AusBuyer that
AusSupplier was a serious bidder. It was stated that AusBuyer was not under
any obligation to accept the lowest bid. AusSupplier had seen sample auction
events, and they knew the “end game” was frantic.
Stage 4
Stage 4, (auction), was delayed a week with a late flurry of updates and
clarifications. Finally, the day of the auction arrived and at 10:33 a.m.
AusSupplier pressed the bid accept button to indicate they were part of the
event. Within five seconds, AusSupplier’s early and middle strategies were
destroyed. The screen showed there were three other bidders, with one bidder
right on the switching price (AUD$1.3 million). This was felt to be a ploy to
scare off other bidders and AusSupplier was confident that this was the existing
contractor, who had 80% of the existing contract. After about half an hour,
another bidder entered and soon started to drive the bidding price down
further. AusSupplier’s strategy was to drive down the bids to the reserve price.
As the scheduled auction time was nearing completion the bidding intensified
and AusSupplier’s phones were put on hold. A bid in the last minute extends
the auction minute-by-minute. There were three bidders left. There was tension
in AusSupplier personnel as the low price previously agreed upon was passed.
This resulted in the staff member in front of the computer handing over control
to the managing director.
The auction entered the phase that Auction.Com refers to as the “auction
dynamic,” the dynamic that drives the price down even further. In fact, the
reserve was driven down $90,000 in seven minutes. The number of bids in the
last seven minutes tripled all bids in the previous 1.5 hours. The managing
director became caught up in the auction dynamic, as he did not want to lose
to the other bidders. AusSupplier’s lowest bid was based on an agreed upon
margin of 12%, but this was reduced to 5% towards the end of the auction.
AusSupplier did not win the auction, but that did not mean that they had not won
the contract. They were in the game at the end, and they were determined to
drive the market down to inflict some pain on the other bidders.

254   Stein, Hawking & Wyld
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Stage 5
In Stage 5, (post-auction), AusSupplier was told that they would have to wait
five weeks for the result. However, the answer came much earlier. AusSupplier
was unsuccessful; they had lost the 20% of the contract that they had owned
previously. The managing director took about 2 weeks to get over losing to the
competition. There are several issues that need to be discussed concerning the
winners and losers of reverse auction e-procurement.
Discussion
What are the Long-Term Business Impacts of the Online
Auction?
A full case study analysis of the auction event is described in Stein et al. (2003).
The following analysis will focus on the long-term business impacts as experi-
enced by all participants of the initial auction.
The Auction Vendor – Auction.com
So, who benefited initially from the auction event and was this benefit main-
tained over the course of the contract? Auction.com was the big winner by
gaining their initial consulting fees for setting up the auction event and also a
percentage of the savings from AusBuyer. They also used this auction event to
demonstrate their auction technology to other large Australian companies.
They were very successful in demonstrating their ability to achieve savings and
this resulted in them conducting 300 reverse auctions for Ausbuyer in the
following year. Many organisations have moved to reduce the cost of the
reverse auction by moving from using auction vendors in an ASP format to
conducting their own auctions (Beall et al., 2003, p. 8) on site.
One year after the auction, Auction.com (Rawlings, 2002) commented on the
processes, transparency and fairness of reverse auctions. It is hard to argue
with the auction vendor, as the growth in reverse auction has been significant
(Beall et al., 2003:31). Auction.com did acknowledge the challenging nature of

A Reverse Auction Case Study   255
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
the reverse auction process but still felt that both suppliers and buyers were in
a win-win situation. Auction.com commented on the acceptance of the reverse
auction process by suppliers who appreciated the transparent nature of the
process and the widening of markets for suppliers. It is interesting to note the
impact of the reverse auction on middleman suppliers. In the case described
above (Stein et al., 2003), the auction vendor was able to prune 20% from the
contract price whilst charging something up to 20% for their fees. The sum
effect is a transfer of profit margin from the supplier to the auction vendor and
it is hard to imagine a more effective Internet enabled business strategy.
Beall et al. (2003, p. 11) point to the effect that changing external economic
conditions can have on the effectiveness of the reverse auction format. The
buyer is using the reverse auction tool to magnify their competitive advantage
over their suppliers. The more suppliers the better, but what happens if the
supply market tightens and suppliers have competitive advantage over buyers?
Beall suggests that suppliers might then conduct forward auctions to sell their
capacity to buyers. Again the auction vendor may be able to intercede and
transfer buyer margin into auction vendor fees.
The original auction event as described above specified a contract length of 2
years; would a reverse auction be sustainable a second or third time? Would
the auction vendor get a substantial fee for a claimed saving of another 20% on
repeated buys? As described below the contract in this case lasted only six
months before the commercial conditions were substantially changed. The
auction vendor was not penalised even though they play a major role in setting
the market in the first stage of the reverse auction process. Indeed the more
unsettled external market conditions render potential for auction.com to
conduct more auctions.
The Winning Supplier
The auction produced one clear-cut winner, or did it? The winning supplier,
prior to the auction, had 80% of the contract at a price of AUD$1.28 million.
They won the full contract at approximately the same price. Thus, they garnered
20% more work for a nominal extra margin. They did dispel the competing
supplier and became the preferred supplier. As the winning supplier was a large
national transport company and the losing supplier was an SME it is felt that the
winning supplier took a loss-leader position to win the contract.

256   Stein, Hawking & Wyld
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
In the initial contract the predicted product tonnage was specified. Six months
after the auction event additional logistics facilities became available to Ausbuyer,
and they began to move products without using the winning supplier. The initial
product specification in the RFQ was changed substantially. Would the winning
or losing supplier be able to have redress in terms of changing contracts?
Perhaps, but in the commercial environment where powerful multi-national
buyers are using smaller suppliers the buyer dictates changes in contract
conditions.
Two years after the initial auction, business circumstances have returned to
those existing before the auction. The winning supplier has about 90% of the
contract while the losing supplier has regained about 10%. Rates are as set in
the reverse auction and essentially this example of a reverse auction had only
two winners, Ausbuyer and Auction.com. Beall et al. (2003, p. 10) point to the
use of reverse auctions for indirect and direct procurement for commodity-like
products. Services or products that are irregular or subject to frequent change
do not lend themselves for reverse auction formats; these could include:
•
Design services.
•
Repair services.
•
Emergency deliveries.
•
Sudden surges in product demand.
The dramatic change in product tonnages and changed transport options meant
that the reverse auction was originally deciding a two-year contract when in
reality it was only a six-month contract period. So would it be viable to conduct
an auction every time the contract conditions changed markedly, or would
Ausbuyer go back to the original suppliers and negotiate new terms and
conditions? If negotiations are used, and Beall et al. (2003, p. 11) suggest they
are, then the reverse auction again reverts to a price fixing role with more
complex negotiations necessary to complete the contract. Does this then affect
the claim by Auction.com that the new reverse auction process is all-encom-
passing and transparent?

A Reverse Auction Case Study   257
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
The Losing Supplier
There were four losing bidders. AusSupplier had 20% of the contract prior to
the auction but lost all entitlements to the contract. This was devastating to
AusSupplier. At the time of the auction the AusSupplier management team
pondered whether there would be a price to pay when the contract lapses and
a premium paid to bring in another supplier to complete the contract. Indeed
this is precisely what happened 18 months into the contract. The winning
supplier could not service the contract with respect to margin and product
tonnages. Ausbuyer contacted AusSupplier and asked that they again fulfil the
role that they had prior to the reverse auction.
Another issue that AusSupplier had to contend with was the low availability of
new markets that Auction.com had said would eventuate for suppliers. In two
years only one potential new business opportunity was sourced for AusSupplier
through Auction.com. This opportunity was non-viable as it was in a product
area that AusSupplier had no expertise in. The greatest impact for AusSupplier
is in the area of supplier-buyer relations. Over a period of two years the trust
that had been developed over a period of 15 years had been eroded; all
together, the auction inspired a drop of 12% in margin. Was it worth the
potential savings? Beall (2003, p. 11) indicates many suppliers drop previously
“free” services because they are not value adding for them, or not affordable.
Goodwill and trust are negated in favour of the letter of the contract and the last
30-minute drop in price as observed in the reverse auction. The price focus of
the auction again seems to dominate accepted long-term business practices.
The Buyer
In the initial auction AusBuyer appeared to be the big winner, with a tangible
savings of a 20% reduction in the cost of the contract. There were minimal
switching costs, as they awarded the contract to the company who held the
majority (80%) of the contract previously. However, from this Auction.com’s
costs need to be subtracted. An intangible benefit was the pre-qualifying
process that identified future suitable suppliers. It appears the pre-qualifying
process was flawed in one of the other auction events conducted on the same
day when only one supplier was identified and this was the existing contractor.
The auction event still went ahead and resulted in a 5% increase in the contract
cost. In this case, the auction dynamic was missing, and therefore, no savings

258   Stein, Hawking & Wyld
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
were made. AusBuyer used the reverse auction process over 300 times in the
next year. There can be no doubt that reverse auctions can provide a value
adding business process in the procurement area. Beall (2003, p. 11) supports
this analysis when he comments on the benefit of reverse auctions to buyers:
“For a growing number of buying firms, e-Reverse auctions have found an
appropriate niche in their strategic sourcing toolkit, allowing them to
efficiently source goods and services that are highly standardized, have
sufficient spend volume, can be replicated by a reasonable number of qualified
competitors, and have insignificant switching costs.” (Beall et al., 2003, p. 13)
Conclusion
Many analysts (e.g., Deise et al., 2000; Wyld, 2000) believe that the use of the
Internet - as a medium for business - provides the opportunity for companies
to restructure their supply chains in collaboration with the other supply chain
partners. One of the imperatives in the e-procurement model proposed by
Wyld (2000) was to build strategic alliances between business partners. This
involves both buyers and vendors, working collaboratively to provide cost
efficiencies and add value to products and services. Many believe that this
strategic collaboration is essential to survive in the e-world. This is the premise
of the Value Trust Network (VTN). Raisch (2001) sees the supply chain being
enhanced by the established relationships between buyers and suppliers, not
just by the adoption of Internet technology. If reverse auction e-procurement
is to enhance enterprise competitiveness, then value must be delivered to ease
industry pain points, with trust being enhanced between suppliers and buyer
(Emiliani & Stec, 2002; Jap, 2000; Raisch, 2001).
The question that needs to be asked is to what extent does a reverse online
auction contribute to this value and trust? The whole issue of driving costs down
to the lowest possible level would seem to present a serious impediment to the
creation of any value or trust (Bartholomew, 2001). The attributes and skills
that buyers would like to foster in their suppliers are placed at a lower priority
to price. Mozer (2002) questions the elevation of cost savings over service
offerings, suggesting that buyers should be looking for the fairest price for the
supplier of choice, rather than the lowest offer. Do companies really want their
business to run on the lowest price?

A Reverse Auction Case Study   259
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Emiliani and Stec (2002) proposed several unresolved questions in their recent
study of reverse auctions:
•
Where do the cost savings come from?
•
Are reverse auctions one-time events?
•
Will online auction vendors replace the in-house buying function?
•
Is there a conflict between supply chain management and online auctions?
•
Do online auctions actually increase productivity?
The reverse auctioning method may indeed only be a short-term solution in a
business world that is increasingly based on long-term alliances and partner-
ships. Whilst Rapport (1998) believes that a reverse online auction is only a
“quick fix” to satisfy management objectives for increased shareholder value,
Beall (2003) points to the reverse auction being one tool applicable for specific
circumstances. Driving forces include the speedy ROI of reverse auction and
the overall shortening of the whole procurement cycle.
In the case study presented in this chapter, the reverse auction:
•
Did render massive cost savings.
•
Did replace existing in-house procurement.
•
Did increase supplier distrust.
•
Did have massive impacts on the suppliers, buyers and auction vendor.
•
Showed that price alone will not replace trust and negotiation in complex
business interactions.
Endnote
1
All company names are fictionalized.

260   Stein, Hawking & Wyld
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
References
Bartholomew, D. (2001, September). Co$t vs. quality. Industry Week, 34.
Batsone, D. (1999). Going once, going twice. Business 2, 4(5), 141.
Beall, S., Carter, C., Carter, P., Germer, T., Hendrick, T., Jap, S. et al.
(2003). The role of reverse auctions in strategic sourcing. CAPS
Focus Study, Institute of Supply Management and W.P. Carey School of
Business.
Benbasat, I., Goldstein, D., & Mead, M. (1987). The case research strategy
in studies of information systems. MIS Quarterly, 11(3), 215-218.
Bowles, J. (2000). eMarketplaces: How digital marketplaces are shaping the
future of B2B commerce. Forbes, 166(3), s20-s56.
Cavaye, A. (1996). Case study research: A multi-faceted approach for IS.
Information Systems Journal, 6(3), 227-242.
Chan, R., & Roseman, M. (2001). Integrating knowledge into process models
– A case study. Proceedings of the Twelfth Australasian Conference
on Information Systems, Southern Cross University, Australia.
Deise, M., Nowikow, C., King, P., & Wright, A. (2000). Executive’s guide
to e-business from tactics to strategy. New York:
PriceWaterhouseCoopers, John Wiley & Sons.
Diba, A. (2000). The B2B boom: What’s what. Fortune, 141(10), 142.
Emiliani, M. (2000). Business-to-business online auctions: Key issues for
purchasing process improvement. Supply Chain Management, 5(4),
176-186.
Emiliani, M., & Stec, D. (2001). Squaring online reverse auctions with the
CAUX round table: Principles for business. Supply Chain Management,
5(4), 32-34.
Emiliani, M., & Stec, D. (2002). Realising savings from online reverse auctions.
Supply Chain Management, 7(1), 12-23.
Freemarkets. (2002). Why Freemarkets? Retrieved February 20, 2002,
from http://www.freemarkets.com/benefits/default.asp
Hersch, W. (2000). Ebusiness: More friend than foe. Retrieved February
20, 2002, from http://www.cconvergence.com/article/TCM200007
28S0002

A Reverse Auction Case Study   261
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
ISM (Institute for Supply Management)/Forrester. (2002). Reports on e-
business. Retrieved November 20, 2002, from http://napm.org/isreport/
forrester
Jap, S. (2000, November-December). Going-going-gone. Harvard Business
Review, 30.
Kafka, S., Temkin, B., & Wegner, L. (2000). B2B auctions go beyond price.
Retrieved February 20, 2002, from http://www.Forrester.com
Lee, A. (1989). Case studies as natural experiments. Human Relations,
42(2), 117-137.
McGarvey, R. (2000). From business: To business. Entrepreneur, 28(6), 96-
100.
Messmer, E. (2000). Defense Dept.’s online auctions spark controversy.
Retrieved February 20, 2002, from http://www.mwfusion.com/news/
2000/0807reverse.html
Metcalf, D., Meringer, J., & Rehkopf, F. (2001). Achieving B2B productiv-
ity. Retrieved February 20, 2002, from www.Forrester.com
Minahan, T. (2001). Strategic e-Sourcing: A framework for negotiating
competitive advantage. Aberdeen Group, Retrieved December 20,
2001, from www.aberdeen.com/ab_company/hottopics/esourcing/
Mozer, E. (2002). E-procurement-Successfully using and managing reverse
auctions. Pharmaceutical Technology, Retrieved October 20, 2002,
from http://www.pharmtech.com
NSW. (2001). E-procurement framework. NSW Government, Retrieved
December 20, 2001, from http://www.cpsc.nsw.gov.au/e-procurement/
framework.htm
O’Malley, C. (1998, November). Internet: Do I hear a bid. Popular Science,
253, 52.
Queree, A. (2000, March 7). Rosky budness. Rolling Stone, 91-92.
Raisch, W. (2001). The eMarketplace: Strategies for success in B2B
eCommerce. McGraw Hill, New York.
Rapport, A. (1998). Creating shareholder value. New York: The Free
Press.
Rawlings, C. (2002, August 9). E-mail interview.
Regan, K. (2001). Is big talk a big pain for e-commerce. ecommercetimes,
Retrieved February 20, 2001, from http://www.ecommercetimes.com/
perl/story/?id=7160

262   Stein, Hawking & Wyld
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Stein, A., Hawking, P., & Wyld, D. (2003). The 20% solution: A case study
on the efficacy of reverse auctions. Management Research News, 26(5),
35-45.
Walsham, G. (2000). Globalisation and IT: Agenda for research. Organisational
and social perspectives on information technology (pp. 195-210).
Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wyld, D. (2000). The auction model. The PriceWaterhouseCoopers En-
dowment for the Business of Government. The Business of Govern-
ment, University of Southern Louisiana.
Wyld, D. (2002). The electric company: How the supply chain is being
reinvented through the rapid application of e-procurement processes in
the business-to-business arena. Management Research News, (in press).
Yin, R. (1994). Case study research, design and methods (2nd ed.).
Newbury Park: Sage Publications.

About the Authors   263
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
About the Authors
P. Candace Deans joined the faculty of the Robins School of Business at the
University of Richmond (USA) in 2002. She was previously on the faculty of
Thunderbird – The American Graduate School of International Management
(1993-2002) and Wake Forest University (1989-1993). She received her
PhD from the University of South Carolina in 1989. She holds other degrees
from the University of Arizona (MLS), East Carolina University (MBA), North
Carolina State University (MEd), and the University of North Carolina –
Chapel Hill (BS). Her research interests have focused on international issues of
information technology management and information strategy.
*     *     *     *     *
Susy S. Chan is an associate professor and directs the Center for E-
Commerce Research in the School of Computer Science, Telecommunications
and Information Systems at DePaul University (USA). She is the founding
director of DePaul University’s pioneering master’s and baccalaureate pro-
grams in e-commerce technology.  As a former CIO at DePaul, she developed
its six-campus IT infrastructure. Her research focuses on e-business strategies,
enterprise applications and transformation, e-commerce curriculum, and mo-
bile commerce. The Mobile Commerce Research Lab that she co-leads studies
usability and development issues concerning wireless applications. She re-
ceived a PhD in Instructional Technology from Syracuse University.

264   About the Authors
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Melissa Soo Ding is a part time lecturer and commercial researcher. She
holds a double major degree in IT and Accounting. Her diverse background
encompasses computer auditing, global systems, applications support, busi-
ness strategic planning and project management in the international banking
environment. She runs her own consultancy business offering e-commerce
business strategy and implementation services, in addition to being a commer-
cial researcher for a research consulting firm. Her current research focuses on
mobile commerce, specifically m-payments and security. During the year 2002,
she developed an enriching collaboration with Professor Felix Hampe, a
renowned name in the m-commerce area, to co-author, publish and jointly
develop/deliver lectures for mobile payments/security and data exchange via
mobile infrastructure within the mobile application systems unit – in the
University of Koblenz, Germany.
Kwoting Fang is currently professor and chairperson of Information Manage-
ment at the National Yunlin University of Science & Technology in Taiwan. He
has a BS in Industry Management from the National Cheng Kung University,
Taiwan, an MSBA in Business Information Systems and a PhD in Business
Technology from Mississippi State University. He has published extensively.
His publications have appeared in the Journal of Computer Information
Systems, Computer in Human Behavior, Journal of Information Manage-
ment, and the Journal of Management & Systems. His current research is in
structural knowledge, need assessment, and e-commerce. Dr. Fang is also the
editor of the Commerce & Management Quarterly.
Paul Hawking is senior lecturer in Information Systems at Victoria University,
Melbourne, Australia. He has contributed to the Journal of ERP Implemen-
tation and Management, Management Research News and contributed
many conference papers on IS theory and practice. He is responsible for
managing the university’s strategic alliance with SAP and is coordinator of the
university’s ERP Research Group. In 2002 and 2004 Paul was a committee
member of the SAP Australian User Group and in 2002 served as chairperson.
Tino Jahnke received his diploma in Business Administration and Information
Science from the University of Cooperative Heidenheim, Germany, and his
bachelor’s degree from Open University, London (2001). He is currently
finishing his master’s thesis in software technology at the University of Applied

About the Authors   265
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Science Lueneburg, Germany, and the University of Wolverhampton, UK.
Apart from his teaching experience in universities and companies, Jahnke has
been appointed to examine students in their diploma exams. Since 2001, he has
been researching digital watermarking technology, motion pictures and audio
signals. Furthermore, he has developed the knowledgebay e-learning frame-
work and manages his own software company.
B. Karstens graduated from the University of Rostock, Germany (1983,
master’s degree; 1987, PhD). Since 1983 he has been an assistant in the
Interactive Graphical System Research Group at the Department of Computer
Science in Rostock. His research profile covers human/computer interaction,
windows systems, handheld devices and user interface software.
Jean Lam is an information technology specialist at the IBM Corporation
(USA). She consults medium to large corporations regarding the design and
implementation of Web content management systems. She is a doctoral student
in the School of Computer Science, Telecommunications and Information
Systems at DePaul University. Her research interests include customer rela-
tionship management, Web and wireless usability studies, and electronic
commerce.
Duen-Ren Liu received his BS and MS degrees in Computer Science and
Information Engineering from the National Taiwan University (1985 and 1987,
respectively) and his PhD in Computer Science from the University of Minne-
sota (1995). He is currently an associate professor of the Institute of Informa-
tion Management, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan. His research
interests include databases, e-commerce, information security, workflow
systems, and Internet application. Dr. Liu is an associate member of the IEEE
and a member of the ACM.
Eetu Luoma takes studies information systems science and electronic com-
merce for his PhD at the Department of Computer Science and Information
Systems in the University of Jyväskylä. He lectures object-oriented systems
analysis and design, and operates as an academic and project manager in the
Dr.Elma (Digital Rights of Electronic Learning Materials) project. In brief,
Dr.Elma project focuses on management of digital rights information from the
perspective of learning material publishers and distributors.

266   About the Authors
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Luiz Augusto Machado Mendes-Filho holds an MSc in Production Engi-
neering (2002) and a BSc in Computer Science (1995) from the Federal
University of Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil. Currently, Mendes-Filho has been
teaching courses of information systems and business administration at FARN
(Faculdade Natalense para o Desenvolvimento do Rio Grande do Norte),
Brazil. He has already published 20 articles in national and international
congresses and is a member of the program committee of IRMA. His current
research interests include strategic use of information technology and impact of
Internet in organizations.
Ran Neuman is an IT architect for Philip Morris USA in Richmond, Virginia.
Ran completed his BA in International Business from James Madison Univer-
sity (1997), post-baccalaureate degree in Management of Information Sys-
tems from Virginia Commonwealth University (1999) and MBA from the
University of Richmond (2004).
Margherita Pagani is head researcher for New Media & TV-Lab inside I-
LAB Centre for Research on the Digital Economy of Bocconi University
(Milan), Italy. She is Adjunct Professor in Economy and Management in
Bocconi University (Milan - Italy). She has written two books on digital
interactive television and many publications about interactive television, digital
convergence, content management, and digital rights management discussed in
many academic conferences in Europe and USA. She has worked with RAI
Radiotelevisione Italiana and as Associated Member of the Permanent Forum
of Communications (work group “Digital Terrestrial”) for Ministry of Commu-
nications (Italy).
Anatália Saraiva Martins Ramos received her PhD in Production Engineer-
ing from Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. She is currently professor
at Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte and also a researcher at CNPq
(Brazilian National Science Foundation). Dr. Anatália Ramos has worked in
scientific work evaluation committees for congresses and journals and has
published over 30 articles in national and international congresses. She has
already been awarded with the Best Article award by the Information Systems
area, given by the National Association of Graduate in Business Administra-
tion. Her current research interests include strategic use of information technol-
ogy and impacts of Internet in organizations.

About the Authors   267
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
R. Rosenbaum is a research assistant currently employed at the Institute of
Computergraphics at University of Rostock, Germany. His personal research
interest covers the handling and processing of digital images. He is responsible
for different education and research programs, and has conducted and accom-
plished several projects in the visualization of large data sets considering
limitations of mobile environments. Beside this, he is working in image commu-
nication using JPEG2000, steganography, and watermarking.
Danilo Schipani is currently manager for VVA - Valdani Vicari & Associati
(Italy). In this role he has developed many consultant projects in the field of
Internet, assurance services, retail and information and communication tech-
nology for service and industrial companies in Italy and in Europe. He
developed capabilities in the areas of business models, customer relationship
management strategies, customer centered reengineering projects, marketing
and strategic planning, market analysis and process reengineering. He has a
degree in business administration and has attended international courses in
universities in the USA and Europe. His research interests include new
technologies management.
H. Schumann graduated from the University of Rostock, Germany (1977,
master’s degree; 1981, PhD; 1989, postdoctoral lecture qualification). Since
1992 she has been heading the Computer Graphics Research Group at the
Department of Computer Science in Rostock. Her research profile covers
information visualization and visual data mining, mobile interfaces, and render-
ing as well as image display. She was heading the cross-institutional research
group “MoVi,” Visualization of Multimedia Information on Mobile Computer
Systems, supported by the German Research Society - DFG.
Juergen Seitz received his diploma in Business Administration and Informa-
tion Science from the University of Cooperative Education Stuttgart, Germany,
and in Economics from the University of Stuttgart-Hohenheim. He received his
PhD from Viadrina European University, Frankfurt (Oder), Germany. He is
professor for information science and finance, and chair of information science,
especially e-commerce/e-business and m-business/telematics, at the Univer-
sity of Cooperative Education Heidenheim, Germany.

268   About the Authors
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Ya-Yueh Shih is a PhD candidate at the Institute of Information Management
at the National Chiao Tung University (Taiwan). She received her BS and MS
degrees from the Dept. of Information Management at the National Yunlin
University Science of Technology, Taiwan (1996 and 1998). Her current
research interests include data mining, consumer behavior, and e-commerce.
Her research has appeared in the Journal of Technology Management and
national and international conference proceedings including IRMA, DSI, ICEIS,
and ICEB.
Andrew Stein is a lecturer in the School of Information Systems in the Faculty
of Business and Law at Victoria University, Melbourne, Australia. He has
contributed to the International Journal of Management, Journal of Infor-
mation Management, Journal of ERP Implementation and Management,
Management Research News and contributed many conference papers on IS
practice through case studies. His research interests include enterprise systems
(SAP), e-procurement applications, e-marketplace business models and re-
verse auction systems. He is a member of the university’s ERP Research
Group.
Pasi Tyrväinen is a professor of Digital Media in the Department of Computer
Science and Information Systems at the University of Jyväskylä. He received
his MSc and doctoral degrees at the Helsinki University of Technology (1988,
1994). His prior positions include six years at Honeywell Industrial Control as
R&D manager and seven years research assignments at Nokia Research
Center. His research interests include enterprise content management (digital
rights management, genres of organizational communication, and document
management) and software economics (measuring return on ICT investment,
software business, development processes, and ICT management).
Chandana R. Unnithan is a lecturer in Business Information Systems and IT
Project Management. She has a master’s degree by research in Business
Computing and an MBA. She has spent 14 years in the information communi-
cations technology sector, highlights being with IBM GSA and TATAs of India.
She is actively consulting and focusing on research relating to mobile applica-
tions in project management, and implications of mobile technology for global
IT/IS projects in project driven organisations. She has a special interest in
comparative studies relating to mobile communications diffusion and growth of
mobile technologies using 3G.

About the Authors   269
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
David C. Wyld currently serves as professor of Management at Southeastern
Louisiana University (USA), where he teaches business strategy and heads the
College of Business & Technology’s Strategic e-Commerce Initiative. He has
been widely published in leading journals in business and management, and
recently, he was named editor of the Journal of the Academy of Strategic e-
Commerce. He has been awarded with the Distinguished Researcher Award
for Southeastern Louisiana University and has won several best paper awards
at leading academic conferences. He has conducted graduate executive
education courses and consulted with a wide variety of industrial and public
sector clients.
Alec Yasinsac is an assistant professor of Computer Science and co-founder
of the Security and Assurance in Information Technology at Florida State
University (USA). He is a retired Marine who has worked in computing and
networking for nearly 25 years. His research interests focus on network and
computer security, including formal analysis of security protocols, with a
particular interest in complex wireless and modern Internet protocols.

270   Index
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
Symbols
4G (Fourth Generation) network stan-
dards  101
A
ACSI framework  8
ad hoc networks  176
adoption speed  120
“Age of Information”  222
ambiguity and removal attacks  147
American Customer Satisfaction Index
(ACSI)  8
application-oriented metrics  185
application-oriented rate of change  185
auction economy  243
auction vendor  254
authentication  134
automatic fare collection (AFC)  66
B
belt-based context scaling  38
branding  2,  10
broadcast monitoring  136
business-to-business (B2B)  196
business-to-customer (B2C)  196
C
cascading style sheets (CSS)  51
CD-ROM technology  81
change metrics  181
child nodes  52
client based adaptation  51
Coca-Cola  63
computer reservation system (CRS)
220
confirmation/disconfirmation (C/D)
paradigm  11
confirmatory factor analysis (CFA)  204
conjoint analysis  84
consumer experience  199
contactless payment  66
convergence  100
copyright protection  134
copyrights  161
CRM implementation  3
CRM research  3
customer acquisition  23
customer loyalty  2,  9
customer relationship management
(CRM)  1,  2
customer resource life cycle (CRLC)  5
customer satisfaction  2,  11,  198
Index

Index   271
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
customer-initiated communications
6, 14
customer-to-business (C2B)  196
customer-to-customer (C2C)  196
customization  2,  13
D
data authentication  136
data hiding  129
Delphi method  199
detection disabling attacks  146
device based adaptation  51
device control  135
Dial-a-Coke service  63
digital age  128
digital characters  109
digital divide  110
digital environment  153
digital rights expressions  155
digital rights management (DRM)
152, 154
digital rights management systems  169
digital “signatures”  135
digital television  81
digital watermark types  139
digital watermarking  127, 131,  147
digital watermarking initiatives  132
digital watermarking methodology  131
digital watermarks  134,  145
discrete structures in high rate of
change  179
disillusionment  120
document based adaptation  52
E
e-commerce  3
e-commerce customers  2
e-procurement  242
ease of use  90
electronic CRM  5
electronic mail  241
electronic ordering  241
enlightenment  120
F
fingerprinting  135
FishEye-View  37
fixed-line telephone  97
forward auctions  245
frame-node  52
frequency domain watermarking  144
frequency of negative critical incidents
(FNCIs)  206
H
heading-nodes  53
historical watermarking  129
hotel industry  218
HSD test  226
human audio system (HAS)  138
human visual system (HVS)  138
I
inflated expectations  120
information content  198
information society  81
information systems (IS)  82
information technology (IT)  82
initial reverse auction  249
integrated domain model  152, 159
intellectual property asset management
group  156
intellectual property problems  127
intellectual property rights  153
International Federation of Library
Associations (IFLA)  157
Internet  6, 219
Internet (eCRM)  1
Internet Data Corporation (IDC)  196
Internet shopping  195, 198
Internet sourcing  241
Internet technology  240
Internet use in hotels  217
IP-based services  81
L
large focus-display  39
layout based adaptation  51

272   Index
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
“leapfrog”  105
“leapfrog” years  96
link lifetime metric  182
local area networks (LAN)  102, 106
losing supplier  257
loyalty difference  195
LSB watermarking technique  142
M
m-commerce  57
Magic Eye View  43
mean time to failure (MTTF) metric  182
metadata  162
mobile channel  1,  6
mobile channel (mCRM)  1
mobile commerce  2
mobile devices  58
mobile handhelds  32
mobile payment  57,  60
mobile payment transaction  65
mobile phone  61,  97
mobile technology  58,  103
multimedia computing power  81
N
negative critical incidents (NCIs)  195,
197
network dynamic nature  183
network structure rate of change  178
node lifetime  183
non-uniform context scaling  38
O
online auction  244
online shopping  195,  198
Open Mobile Alliance (OMA)  72
P
paragraph-nodes  52
path length  185
path lifetime  186
payment service providers (PSP)  69
perceived ease of use (PEU)  93
perceived usefulness (PU)  93
personal digital assistant (PDA)  60
personal mobile wallet (m-wallet)  61
personal video devices (PVD)  170
personalization techniques  13
perspective overview-display  40
plain watermarking  130
point-of-sale (POS) payment  60
principal component analysis (PCA)
204
processing power  34
productivity  120
proximity payment devices  66
proximity payments  66
Q
quality attributes satisfaction (QASAT)
195,  197,  204
quality e-store  198
R
radio frequency (RF) circuit  68
radio-frequency (RF) technology  66
rate of change metrics  181
rectangle view for mobile handhelds  48
resolution  34
reverse auction case study  240
reverse auction format  240
reverse auction tool  240
reverse auctions  245
rights expressions  166
routing protocols  190
S
screen size  34
secure digital music initiative (SDMI)
129
security concerns  199
simple watermark attacks  146
smart cards  73
spatial domain watermarking  143
spread spectrum watermarking  144
steganography  129,  130
structural equation modeling (SEM)
199

Index   273
Copyright © 2004, Idea Group Inc. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written
permission of Idea Group Inc. is prohibited.
T
table-content-nodes  53
table-nodes  53
“talk time”  105
technology acceptance model (TAM)
82
technology adoption lifecycle  98
technology trigger  120
telecentres  106
Telstra  63
theory of planned behavior (TPB)  82
theory of reasoned action (TRA)  82
third generation mobile services (3G)
80, 82
tourism  218
transparent focus-display  41
trust  2,  14
“trust belief”  15
“trust intention”  15
trusted computing platform alliance
(TCPA)  154
trusted third parties (TTP)  69
U
uniform context scaling  38
United Nations Development Programs
(UNDP)  109
unit time  184
unstructured supplementary service
data (USSD)  69
usage rights  161
V
value chain  103
value chain analysis  103
value trust network (VTN)  258
“Village Cell Phone” programs  97,  98,
105
Visa International  67
voice over Internet protocol (VOIP)  101
W
watermark decoding  141
watermark encoding  141
watermarking  129
watermarking applications  133
winning supplier  255
wireless hype cycle  101
wireless revolution  57
wireless technologies  96
worker migration  107
World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO)  129
Z
zoom & pan  36

