www.ebook3000.com

i
IGIP
E-Government Research: 
Policy and Management 
Donald Norris
University of Maryland, Baltimore County, USA
Hershey • New York
IGI Publishing

ii
Acquisition Editor:	
	
Kristin Klinger
Senior Managing Editor: 	
Jennifer Neidig
Managing Editor:	
	
Sara Reed
Development Editor:	 	
Kristin Roth
Copy Editor:	
	
Ashlee Kunkel
Typesetter: 	
	
Lindsay Bergman
Cover Design:	
	
Lisa Tosheff
Printed at:		
	
Yurchak Printing Inc.
Published in the United States of America by 
IGI Publishing (an imprint of IGI Global)
701 E. Chocolate Avenue
Hershey PA 17033
Tel: 717-533-8845
Fax:  717-533-8661
E-mail: cust@igi-global.com
Web site: http://www.igi-global.com
and in the United Kingdom by
IGI Publishing (an imprint of IGI Global)
3 Henrietta Street
Covent Garden
London WC2E 8LU
Tel: 44 20 7240 0856
Fax:  44 20 7379 0609
Web site: http://www.eurospanonline.com
Copyright © 2008 by IGI Global. All rights reserved.  No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or 
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, without written permission from the publisher.
Product or company names used in this book are for identification purposes only. Inclusion of the names of 
the products or companies does not indicate a claim of ownership by IGI Global of the trademark or registered 
trademark.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
E-government research : policy and management / Donald Norris, editor.
       p. cm.
  Summary: "This book provides scholars and practitioners with a critical mass of research on the integration, 
management, implications, and application of e-government. Covering such issues as e-government adoption 
and diffusion; social and performance issues of e-government; and information security, privacy, and policy, this 
book is an essential resource to any library collection"--Provided by publisher.
  ISBN-13: 978-1-59904-913-7 (hardcover)
  ISBN-13: 978-1-59904-957-1 (e-book)
 1.  Internet in public administration. 2.  Electronic government information. 3.  Public administration--Data 
processing--Management. 4.  Government information--Management.  I. Norris, Donald F. 
  JF1525.A8E237 2008
  352.3'802854678--dc22
                                                            2007041953
British Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library.
E-Government Research: Policy and Management is part of the IGI Global series named Advances in Electronic 
Government Series (AEGR) (ISSN: 1935-3073).
All work contributed to this book is original material. The views expressed in this book are those of the authors, 
but not necessarily of the publisher. 
www.ebook3000.com

Advances in Electronic Government Research Series (AEGR)
ISBN: 1935-3073
Editor-in-Chief: Mehdi Khosrow-Pour, D.B.A.
E-Government Research: Policy and Management 
Donald Norris; University of Maryland Baltimore County, USA 
IGI Publishing • copyright 2007 • 300+ pp • H/C (ISBN: 978-1-59904-913-7) • US $99.95 (our price)
Virtual technology is increasingly prevalent in all spheres of daily life, including infil-
tration into governmental policies, processes, infrastructures, and frameworks. E-Gov-
ernment Research: Policy and Management provides scholars and practitioners with a 
critical mass of research on the integration, management, implications, and application 
of e-government. Covering such issues as e-government adoption and diffusion; social 
and performance issues of e-government; and information security, privacy, and policy, 
this book is an essential resource to any library collection. 
Current Issues and Trends in E-Government Research 
Donald Norris; University of Maryland Baltimore County 
CyberTech Publishing • copyright 2007 • 319 pp • E-Book (ISBN: 1-59904-285-1) • US $63.96 
(our price) • H/C (ISBN: 1-59904-283-5) • US $85.46 (our price) 
As emerging trends and research threads surface in the area of e-government, academi-
cians, practitioners, and students face the challenge of keeping up-to-date with new and 
innovative practices. Current Issues and Trends in E-Government Research provides a 
complete synopsis of the latest technologies in information policy, security, privacy, 
and access, as well as the best practices in e-government applications and measurement. 
Current Issues and Trends in E-Government Research presents the most current issues 
in e-government hardware and software technology, adoption and diffusion, planning 
and management, and philosophy.
Order online at www.igi-global.com or call 717-533-8845 x10 – 
Mon-Fri 8:30 am - 5:00 pm (est) or fax 24 hours a day 717-533-8661
Hershey  •  New York

iv
E-Government Research: 
Policy and Management 
Table of Contents
Preface............................................................................................................................... vii
Chapter I
Information Technology and Administrative Reform: .
Will E-Government be Different?.....................................................................................1
 
Kenneth Kraemer, University of California, USA
 
John Leslie King, University of Michigan, USA
.
Chapter II
The Scholarly Literature on E-Government: Characterizing a Nascent Field...........21
 
Donald Norris, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, USA
 
Benjamin A. Lloyd, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, USA
.
Chapter III
E-Government Adoption and Acceptance: A Literature Review .
and Research Framework................................................................................................42
 
Ryad Titah, HEC Montréal, Canada
 
Henri Barki, HEC Montréal, Canada
.
Chapter IV
Worldwide E-Governance: A Longitudinal Assessment of Municipal .
Web Sites and the Digital Divide.....................................................................................98
 
Tony Carrizales, Marist College, USA
 
Marc Holzer, Rutgers University – Newark, USA
 
Aroon Manoharan, Rutgers University – Newark, USA
.
www.ebook3000.com

v
Chapter.V
Local.Democracy.Online:.An.Analysis.of.Local.Government..
Web.Sites.in.England.and.Wales...................................................................................120
 
Lawrence Pratchett, De Montfort University, UK
 
Melvin Wingfield, De Montfort University, UK
 
Rabia Karakaya Polat, Isik University, Istanbul
Chapter.VI
User.Help.and.Service.Navigation.Features.in.Government.Web.Sites....................140
 
Genie N. L. Stowers, San Francisco State University, USA
Chapter.VII
Repeated.Use.of.E-Gov.Web.Sites:.A.Satisfaction.and..
Confidentiality Perspective............................................................................................158
 
Sangmi Chai, State University of New York at Buffalo, USA
 
T. C. Herath, State University of New York at Buffalo, USA
 
I. Park, State University of New York at Buffalo, USA
 
H. R. Rao, State University of New York at Buffalo, USA
.
Chapter.VIII
If.You.Build.a.Political.Web.Site,.Will.They.Come?.The.Internet.
and.Political.Activism.in.Britain....................................................................................183
 
Pippa Norris, Harvard University, USA
 
John Curtice, Strathclyde University, UK
Chapter.IX
Civic.Engagement.via.E-Government.Portals:.Information,.
Transactions,.and.Policy.Making..................................................................................205
 
Yu-Che Chen, Northern Illinois University, USA
 
Daniela V. Dimitrova, Iowa State University, USA
Chapter.X
Citizen’s.Deliberation.on.the.Internet:.A.French.Case................................................230
 
Laurence Monnoyer-Smith, University of Technology of Compiègne, France
.
Chapter.XI
E-Government.for.an.Inclusive.Society:.How.Different.Citizen..
Groups.Use.E-Government.Services.in.Europe...........................................................254
 
Jeremy Millard, Danish Technological Institute, Denmark
.
Chapter.XII
The.Utilization.of.Online.Policy.Forums.on.Government.Web.Sites.
and.the.Practice.of.Digital.Democracy..........................................................................268
 
Chan-Gon Kim, Rutgers University – Newark, USA
 
Marc Holzer, Rutgers University – Newark, USA
.

Chapter.XIII
The.Evolution.of.Web.Governance.in.the.Federal.Government................................299
 
Julianne Mahler, George Mason University, USA
 
Priscilla M. Regan, George Mason University, USA
.
Chapter.XIV
Service,.Security,.Transparency,.and.Trust:.Government.Online.
or.Governance.Renewal.in.Canada?.............................................................................314 
 
Jeffrey Roy, University of Ottawa, Canada
.
Chapter.XV
Generational.Differences.in.IT.Use.and.Political.Involvement:.
New.Directions................................................................................................................336
 
Mack C. Shelley, II, Iowa State University, USA
 
Lisa E. Thrane, Wichita State University, USA
 
Stuart W. Shulman, University of Pittsburgh, USA
About.the.Contributors..................................................................................................357
Index.................................................................................................................................361
www.ebook3000.com

vii
Preface
Considerable hype surrounds e-government and e-government research. Much of the hype 
is promulgated by e-government advocates and by scholars and researchers, who should 
have known better, but who appear to have gotten caught up in the advocacy around e-gov-
ernment. The first chapter in this book should go a long way toward dispelling the notion 
that e-government is somehow special or has special properties to advance a governmental 
reform agenda or to produce unquestionably positive outcomes.  
The first and, to my mind, most important chapter in this book, was authored by Ken Kraemer 
and John King, two of the most prominent names in the study of information technology (IT) 
and government. Through an extensive review of literature on IT and government, Kraemer 
and King examine whether IT has been an instrument of administrative reform in the U.S. 
They conclude that this has not been the case in the history of IT and government in the 
U.S. Indeed, instead of being an instrument of reform, IT has served the interests of those in 
power and has supported existing administrative and political structures and arrangements. 
Kraemer and King conclude by questioning whether this finding from the history of IT and 
government might not have application to e-government, notwithstanding claims to the 
contrary. As a result, they are properly skeptical that e-government adoption will produce 
governmental reform any more than IT adoption did previously.
In the second chapter, my colleague Ben Lloyd and I examine the empirical research on 
e-government published in refereed journals through the end of 2004. We cast a very wide 
net, using several search engines and databases to find articles in refereed journals which 
employed some form of empirical methodology or which examined empirical data. 
We examined these articles using several criteria and concluded that, for the most part, the 
published research on e-government is neither particularly vast nor very good. Most articles 
were published in less than stellar journals, used less than rigorous methodologies, addressed 
or tried to advance theory, developed or formally tested hypotheses, included acceptable 
literature reviews, or stayed with their data when drawing conclusions. We concluded by 
expressing our hope that e-government research in the near future would improve in quality 
and sophistication.
Chapter III presents another paper based on a literature review, but its purpose is different 
from the review conducted by Kraemer and King. Ryad Titah and Henri Barki reviewed 
75 articles related to e-government adoption and acceptance published between 1990 and 

viii
2007 in leading academic journals and conference proceedings. Contrary to earlier studies, 
they found work that demonstrated a wider array of research methods, conceptual perspec-
tives, and findings, all pointing to “fairly considerable diversity in the topics, constructs and 
interrelationships considered by different studies.” Based on their review, they proposed 
a research framework for the complex interdependencies and interactions between orga-
nizational, managerial, technical, political, and individual factors that were found by past 
research to influence e-government adoption and acceptance. 
Chapter IV shifts focus to Web surveys. Here, Tony Carrizales, Marc Holzer, and Aroon 
Manoharan present findings from a 2005 survey of the Web sites of large municipalities 
worldwide. In particular, they examined the following features of these Web sites: security, 
usability, content, online services, and citizen participation. The top performing cities, based 
on this analysis, were Soeul, New York, Shanghai, Hong Kong, and Sydney. The authors 
found very few differences between the 2005 and 2003 surveys, but did find—not surpris-
ingly—that the digital divide between developed and lesser developed nations continues.
In Chapter V, Lawrence Pratchett, Melvin Wingfield, and Rabia Karakaya Polat present 
findings from their study of local government Web sites in England and Wales with par-
ticular attention to the potential of these sites to deliver e-democracy.  They found that local 
governments are providing many features on their Web sites that can facilitate e-democracy. 
However, for the most part, local governments in England and Wales have not tapped the 
full potential of the Internet to deliver e-democracy and that there is considerable variation 
among local governments in their delivery of e-democracy.
Genie N. L. Stowers’ examination of user help and navigation features on Web sites is Chapter 
VI. Stowers’ sample included a large number of federal government sites, all 50 states, and 
cities over 100,000. She found patterns across governments of help and navigation features, 
leading her to conclude that these features had diffused rather well within the public sector. 
However, she concluded that all was not well in Web land and that Web developers should 
work to install features on Web sites to assist users in finding information more easily.
In Chapter VII, Sangmi Chai, T. C. Herath, I. Park, and H. R. Rao examine data from a 
survey of adult Americans conducted by the PEW Research Center. They were interested 
in learning what motivated users of governmental Web sites to make return visits to those 
sites. They hypothesized that several factors including the users’ satisfaction, perceived 
performance of the site, and whether sites ask users for confidential information would affect 
the intention to return. They also hypothesized that gender and race will play moderating 
roles on continuation intentions. They found that, indeed, a user’s intention to return was 
affected by the user’s satisfaction with the Web site, perceived performance of the site, the 
requirement for confidential information, and that both gender and race had moderating 
effects on intentions of repeated use.
Our focus now shifts away from Web site analysis to three chapters that look at the use of 
the Internet for political activism, citizen engagement, and civic deliberation. Chapter VIII 
features an analysis of political activism in Britain by Pippa Norris and John Curtice. Their 
chapter is also noteworthy because it nicely summarizes the current debate about the po-
tential of the Internet for strengthening political activism. Drawing on data from the British 
Social Attitudes Survey from 2003, Norris and Curtice find, first, that political activism via 
the Internet is not as simple as it sounds. Different types of political activism are associated 
with different segments of the population, for example. Moreover, they found that the online 
population is likely to engage in forms of political activism (e.g., more cause oriented) that 
are quite different from more traditional forms (e.g., campaign activities).
www.ebook3000.com

ix
In Chapter IX, Yu-Che Chen and Daniela V. Dimitrova provide an exploratory study of 
civic engagement via governmental Web sites. They used a sample of Internet users to ex-
amine both the demand and supply sides (availability of governmental Web sites) of civic 
engagement. Their findings highlight the importance of the supply side for promoting civic 
engagement. Additionally, Chen and Dimitrova found several factors  associated with online 
civic engagement, particularly including perceived benefits and off-line political activism.
Laurence Monnoyer-Smith provides Chapter VIII. Her exploratory study examines the on-
line participation of French citizens in a public debate in 2001 held by the French National 
Public Debate Commission over the issue of the location of a third international Parisian 
airport. Although online participation was limited, Monnoyer-Smith believes that this ex-
ample shows the added value that Internet participation can provide. Here, she argues, it 
widened the profile of participation and expanded the nature of participants’ arguments and 
their means of expression. 
In Chapter XI, Jeremy Millard examines the attitudes and behavior of European users to e-
government citizen services. The study comes from the 2005 eUSER project that surveyed 
10,000 households in 10 European Union member states. Although there were variations in 
the findings based on nation of residence, Millard found that face-to-face contact remains 
the predominant mode of interacting with government in most countries. In the UK, tele-
phone and mail have surpassed face-to-face contact. However, the evidence is also strong 
that e-government users also continue to make high use of all other channels. They are 
“flexi-channellers.” Also, over 40% of e-government users act as social intermediaries using 
online services on behalf of an average of 2.4 members of their family or friends, and even 
higher numbers in the new member states of the EU where infrastructures and e-services 
are not so well rolled-out, so the impact of e-government is wider than first appearances. 
Millard’s study also identified a number of reported barriers to citizen use of e-government. 
But, those barriers diminish somewhat after users begin accessing governmental information 
and services online. 
Chapter XII moves from citizen use of the Internet to use by public officials. Here, Chan-
Go Kim and Marc Holzer examine data from a survey of 895 public officials in Korea 
about their intentions to use online policy forums to inform their decision making. They 
examined individual and organizational factors and system characteristics. Their analysis 
indicates that three variables were related to public officials’ intentions to use online forums. 
These were perceived usefulness, the officials’ attitudes toward citizen participation, and 
information quality.
Chapter XIII constitutes another shift in focus for this volume. In this chapter, Julianne 
Mahler and Priscilla Regan examine what has become known as Web governance, which 
they argue is “concerned with the control and content for agency Web sites.” In this study, 
they trace the history of efforts by Congress and OMB to specify Web site content rules, 
track the evolution of interagency groups that developed the rules, and examine agency 
activities to create Web governance procedures.
They found that the process of developing Web governance was decentralized and collab-
orative. Although there were guidelines, they were hardly demanding about either format 
or content. Moreover, within agencies studies, the process reflected “business as usual.” 
However, this situation was different in interagency settings where there was more network-
ing and collaboration. Perhaps one important reason for these findings is that OMB did not 
impose its will on federal agencies. This allowed agency practitioners in both organized 
forums and in informal interactions to develop the guidelines for Web governance. According 

x
to Mahler and Regan, this represents a paradigm shift in the way that the federal government 
goes about developing such guidelines.
In Chapter XIV, Mila Gasco and Jeffrey Roy compare e-government in Catalonia, Spain 
and Ontario, Canada. In particular, they examine the impacts of e-government both on 
administration and democracy in complex multilevel governmental environments.  Both 
Cataloina and Ontario were known as having invested aggressively in e-government and in 
both jurisdictions and that e-government was consciously used as an agent of governmental 
reform. After reviewing the evolution of e-government in both subnational jurisdictions, 
they conclude that the evidence “tempers the view that e-government will immediately and 
radically transform the public sector.”  In both Ontario and Catalonia, e-services predomi-
nated over e-democracy.
Mack C. Shelley, Lisa E. Thrane, and Stuart W. Shulman study generational differences in 
IT use and political involvement in our final chapter, Chapter XV. Here they examine data 
from a 2003 survey of adults in three American states. They found profound generational 
differences with respect to IT and to use of IT in political activities. For example, younger 
respondents were more favorably inclined toward IT and more likely to desire public IT and 
e-participation. They conclude by noting that “e-citizenry will compound existing societal 
divisions” in which those favorably disposed to IT will be advantaged and those not favor-
ably disposed will be disadvantaged.
As is clear from these chapters, e-government is still in its formative years. Its evolution 
is far from complete. As a result, researchers should continue to examine e-government 
from a variety of perspectives, using a variety of research methodologies. They should also 
engage in comparative analysis in order to understand what is occurring with respect to 
e-government around the globe.
www.ebook3000.com

Information Technology and Administrative Reform   1
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.I
Information.Technology
and.Administrative.Reform:
Will.E-Government.be.Different?
Kenneth Kraemer, University of California, USA
John Leslie King, University of Michigan, USA
Abstract
This article examines the theoretical ideal of information technology as an instru-
ment of administrative reform and examines the extent to which that ideal has been 
achieved in the United States. It takes a look at the findings from research about the 
use and impacts of information technology from the time of the mainframe computer 
through the PC revolution to the current era of the Internet and e-government. It 
then concludes that information technology has never been an instrument of admin-
istrative reform; rather, it has been used to reinforce existing administrative and 
political arrangements. It assesses why this is the case and draws conclusions about 
what should be expected with future applications of information technologies—in 
the time after e-government. It concludes with a discussion of the early evidence 
about newer applications for automated service delivery, 24/7 e-government, and 
e-democracy.

2   Kraemer & King
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Introduction
The past several decades have seen many studies of the impacts of information tech-
nology (IT) in business organizations and comparatively fewer studies in government 
organizations. The concerns of researchers have been largely the same across both 
sectors—effects on efficiency and effectiveness, changes to organizational structure, 
and impacts on work. Studies in government, however, have been unique in their 
concern with whether IT is a catalyst or instrument of administrative reform.
We define administrative reform as efforts to bring about dramatic change or trans-
formation in government, such as a more responsive administrative structure, greater 
rationality and efficiency, or better service delivery to citizens. Toward these ends, 
governments historically have undertaken structural reforms, such as city-manager 
government; budget reforms, such as the executive; performance and program 
budgets; financial reforms, such as unified accounting; personnel reforms, such as 
merit-based employment and pay; and many others. Computing has been viewed as 
an instrument of such reforms and also as a reform instrument, per se. Such instru-
ments are illustrated by urban information systems, integrated municipal informa-
tion systems, computer-based models for policymaking, geographic information 
systems, and, most recently, e-government. The rhetoric of these computing-based 
reform efforts has been that computing is a catalyst that can and should be used to 
bring about dramatic change and transformation in government (Fountain, 2002; 
Garson, 2004; Gasco, 2003; Reinermann, 1988; Weiner, 1969).
The question of whether computers will bring significant organizational change 
is nearly half a century old. In a classic 1958 Harvard Business Review article, 
“Management in the 1980s”, Leavitt and Whisler forecast that IT would replace the 
traditional pyramidal hierarchy in organizations with a lean structure resembling 
an hourglass, and productivity would soar through the elimination of most middle 
managers. Laudon’s (1974) path-breaking Computers and Bureaucratic Reform raised 
the question of administrative reform specifically with respect to local government. 
IT generally is considered to have the potential to bring about administrative reform. 
For example, Fountain (2002) says, “Technology is a catalyst for social, economic 
and political change at the levels of the individual, group, organization and institu-
tion” (p. 45). Yet others have argued that information technology does not tend to 
produce such reform and that it is implausible that IT could cause such changes in 
the first place (King & Kraemer, 1985; Kraemer & King, 1986; Laudon, 1974).
The era of e-government, which can be defined as the use of IT within government 
to achieve more efficient operations, better quality of service, and easy public access 
to government information and services is now underway. The IT world that sur-
rounds public administration in the United States has changed markedly. Technology 
diffusion within the society has been pervasive, with personal computers and the 
Internet extending to the majority of American households. Internet-based e-busi-
www.ebook3000.com

Information Technology and Administrative Reform   3
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
ness and e-government services rapidly are connecting businesses, households, and 
governments, thereby creating a much richer and more subtle IT environment. By 
2002, 67% of adults using the Internet had visited a government Web site (57% a 
federal site; 54% a state site; and 42% a local site) (Dean, 2002). Nearly all federal 
agencies and most state governments provide some information or services on the 
Web (Fountain, 2001). The vast majority of city and county governments (95%) 
had Web sites in 2004 (Norris, 2006), many offering non-financial services (e.g., 
requests for services, government records, maps) and less than 10% offering finan-
cial services (e.g., paying taxes, utility bills, parking tickets, and licenses/permits) 
(Norris, 2006; Norris & Moon, 2005). Thus, most of these services involve one-
way, easy-to-implement information services; very few permit citizens to complete 
transactions with government. Forrester Research (2000) estimated that by 2006, 
governments would receive 15% of their total financial collections over the Web.
Indeed, investment in information technology at all government levels has increased, 
new capabilities are more diffused throughout government agencies, technical 
expertise is stronger and more widely spread, and governments successfully have 
institutionalized modern principles for management of IT. If anything, there should 
be greater readiness for administrative reform from IT than ever before.
It seems likely that these changes would be sufficient in order to trigger the long 
expected administrative reforms, but Machiavelli’s admonition about the perils of 
dramatic change is as relevant in the 20th century as it was in the 15th century.1 
This article argues that IT remains a useful instrument of incremental administrative 
change, but it is no more likely to bring about administrative reform today than it 
was two decades ago. This article recapitulates four key propositions of the reform 
hypothesis, discusses empirical evidence related to each, assesses the reform hy-
pothesis in light of research results, raises relevant caveats, and concludes with a 
summary of the likely future relationship between IT and administrative reform.
Reform.Through.Information.Technology
The main problem with the claim that information technology is an instrument 
of administrative reform is the lack of evidence to back it up.2 Faced with this, 
proponents respond that the potential of IT to produce reform is thwarted because 
of top management’s failures to distribute the technology efficiently, to empower 
lower-level staff, to re-engineer the organization along with computerization efforts, 
and to become hands-on knowledge executives themselves. Much of the benefit 
that IT could bring to organizations is lost due to poor management, but this does 
not explain the failure of the reform hypothesis. It merely shifts the argument onto 
different grounds.

4   Kraemer & King
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
The reform hypothesis is misguided fundamentally, because it assumes that orga-
nizational elites want their organizations to change and that they are willing to use 
IT to accomplish such change. The empirical evidence suggests that IT has been 
used most often to reinforce existing organizational arrangements and to power 
distributions rather than to change them (Attawell & Rule, 1984; Danziger et al., 
1982; Dutton & Kraemer, 1985; Dutton et al., 1987; Holden, 2003; King & Kraemer, 
1986; Kling, 1974, 1980; Kraemer & King, 1979, 1987; Kraemer & Perry, 1979; 
Laudon, 1974; Perry & Kraemer, 1979). 
Based on a review of the research on e-government (Fountain, 2001, 2002; Holden, 
2003; Holden et al., 2003; Kaylor et al., 2001; Layne & Lee, 2001; Moon, 2002; 
Norris & Moon, 2005; Norris, 2005, 2006), we believe that this fundamental trend 
will continue into the foreseeable future. For example, Fountain (2001) initially 
assumed that the Internet “would overwhelm organizational forms and individual 
resistance and … would lead to rapid organizational change” (pp. x-xi). However, 
after researching the use of the Internet in U.S. federal agencies, Fountain (2002) 
concluded that “even the most innovative uses of IT typically work at the surface of 
operations and boundary-spanning processes and are accepted because they leave 
the deep structure of political relationships intact” (p. 45). Similarly, West (2004) 
concludes that “the e-government revolution has fallen short of its potential to 
transform service delivery and public trust in government” (p. 15). Norris’ (2006) 
review of multiple e-government studies finds that “[l]ocal e-government … remains 
mainly informational. … nowhere is it achieving the potential positive impacts 
claimed by its most ardent advocates. … e-government is not transformational, at 
least yet. … e-government, like IT and government before it, is incremental. … the 
trajectory of local e-government that has been observed to date will likely continue 
into the foreseeable future.”
Decisions about IT use are made by top managers and their direct subordinates. They 
use IT in the broad interests of the organization, but those broad interests usually 
intersect with their own interests. They use IT to enhance the information available 
to them; to increase their control over resources; to rationalize decisions to supe-
riors, subordinates, and clients; to provide visible deliverables with the aid of the 
technology; and to symbolize professionalism and rationality in their management 
practices. These aims do not necessarily work against the welfare of the organiza-
tion, simply because they work for the welfare of managers. Yet, such aims usually 
are not associated with and are frequently antithetical to administrative reform.
The following sections examine four key components of the reform hypothesis and 
provide the contrasting results of research that call those components into question. 
These empirical results are drawn primarily from experiences in the United States, 
and it is possible that the experiences in other countries have been quite different. 
Nevertheless, given the traditions of administrative reform in the U.S. and given the 
fact that the U.S. arguably leads the world in the levels of governmental and private 
www.ebook3000.com

Information Technology and Administrative Reform   5
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
investment in IT, one would expect the reform hypothesis to be strongly corroborated 
in the U.S. context. The fact that it is not corroborated bears consideration. 
IT.and.Administrative.Reform:.The.U.S..Experience.
U.S. public organizations have been applying IT unabated since digital computers 
were first introduced in the early 1950s. Picking only one era for closer examina-
tion—the mid to late 1980s—it is possible to see the magnitude of U.S. investment 
in the technology. Federal agencies had more than 20,000 mainframes and minicom-
puters and, even in those early days of the microcomputer, had more than 200,000 
installed. Federal agencies alone employed more than 100,000 IT specialists and 
spent more than $15 billion annually on computerization (GSA, 1986; OTA, 1985). 
State and local governments had well over 3,000 mainframes and minicomputers 
and more than 40,000 microcomputers, employed 35,000 IT specialists, and spent 
more than $8 billion annually on IT (Caudle & Marchand, 1989; Kraemer et al., 
1986; NASIS, 1989). That level of investment has grown substantially in the years 
since.3 In short, U.S. public administration has been an enthusiastic user of IT.
U.S. public administration also has been a fertile ground for research into the extent 
and effects of IT use (Bretchsneider, 1990; Caudle, 1990; Caudle & Marchand, 1989; 
Danziger & Kraemer, 1986; Danziger et al., 1982; Dutton & Kraemer, 1978; Dut-
ton & Guthrie, 1991; Fountain, 2002; George & King, 1991; Holden, 2003; Kling, 
1980; Kraemer & King, 1986). The empirical findings are somewhat fragmented 
and sometimes contradictory, but nevertheless, they can be brought together for 
how they bear on the following four reform propositions:
• 
Computers have the potential to reform public administrations and their rela-
tions with their environments.
• 
Information technology can change organizational structures and, thus, is a 
powerful tool for reform. 
• 
Properly used, information technology will be beneficial for administrators, 
staff, citizens, and public administration as a whole. 
• 
The potential benefits from information technology are under-realized due 
to a lack of managerial understanding of what the technology can do and an 
unwillingness of managers to pursue the potential of the technology when they 
do understand it.
The following four sections examine each proposition in turn.

6   Kraemer & King
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Reform Proposition 1. Computers have the potential to reform public  
administrations and their relations with their environments.
A good example of this was Gibson and Hammer’s (1985) claim that today’s ap-
plications of information technology can dramatically change the way individuals, 
functional units, and whole organizations carry out their tasks..As a case in point, 
computer technology was seen as an instrument of administrative reform at the 
federal level in projects of the U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare 
and in many state and local governments, as well, in the mid- and late 1970s (Kling, 
1980). These were efforts to create Information and Referral (I&R) systems in order 
to consolidate the many public and private local agencies that served large urban 
areas. I&R systems were believed to help by sharing information about clients, 
needs, resources, and performance among all participating agencies, improving both 
service delivery to clients and the allocation of social service resources. Addition-
ally, such systems might facilitate administrative consolidation, central budgeting, 
and performance monitoring in ways that administrative reforms had failed to ac-
complish. Despite huge investments, however, this strategy for services integration 
failed, because the local social service agencies failed to see the benefits to them 
from the reforms. The I&R systems had no power to bring about services integration 
indirectly, and they expired along with the whole reform effort.
IT can help effect some reforms, such as centralization of budgeting and account-
ing systems that allow greater citizen and elected official control over government 
resources (Kraemer et al., 1981). Computerization often required recalcitrant finance 
directors and department heads to reveal long-established practices that did not meet 
the expectations of professional financial controls. Also, second-generation financial 
automation brought sophisticated capabilities for cost accounting and billing on a 
fee-for-service basis, which helped government managers to enact new means of 
enhancing revenues in the face of fiscal limitations set by citizen referenda. Ad-
ministrative practices, such as centralized accounting and budgeting and services 
integration, might have failed in the face of organizational growth and decentraliza-
tion if not for application of IT, but IT was not the cause of such reforms. They were 
grounded in the early 20th-century efforts to increase professionalism in government 
management, and, at best, IT was an enabler of these reforms.
Finding.on.Reform.Proposition.1: Experience with information technology and 
administrative reform has shown the technology to be useful in some cases of ad-
ministrative reform but only in cases where expectations for reform are already well 
established. IT application does not cause reform and cannot encourage it where 
the political will to pursue the reform does not exist.
www.ebook3000.com

Information Technology and Administrative Reform   7
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Reform Proposition 2. Information technology can change organizational 
structures and, thus, is a powerful tool for reform.
This proposition is grounded in the belief that information technology can impact 
directly the data structures of public administration, enforcing or relaxing traditional 
hierarchical forms. Mainframe-based computerization was seen as reinforcing 
hierarchical organizational structures by consolidating data and expertise, while 
microcomputers were seen as facilitating organizational decentralization through 
distribution of data and expertise throughout government.
The empirical evidence suggests that the main impact of IT application has been to 
reinforce existing structures of communication, authority, and power in organiza-
tions, whether centralized or decentralized (Attewell & Rule, 1984; Danziger et al., 
1982; Dutton & Kraemer, 1977, 1978; George & King, 1991; King, 1983; Kraemer, 
1980; Laudon, 1974; Pinsonneault, 1990; Pinsonneault & Kraemer, 1997, 2002; 
Robey, 1981). This finding is consistent in research on computerization in both city 
and federal agencies. In the case of local governments, it is true regardless of the 
form of government. Computerization in city manager governments reinforces the 
power and control of the professional manager; in strong mayor governments, it 
reinforces the elected mayor; in commission governments, it reinforces the power 
of individual commissioners.
The reform proponents argue that these findings are based mainly on the era of 
centralized mainframe computing. Yet, the research shows that even in the main-
frame era, decentralized government organizations had decentralized mainframe 
computing arrangements (King, 1983). Moreover, even when focused on micro-
computers, the data do not support the proposition (Kraemer et al., 1986; Kraemer 
et al., 1992). Microcomputers have been used extensively for local text processing 
and other functions that do not support core government functions. To the extent 
that microcomputers do relate to core functions, it is through their use as intelligent 
terminals providing user access to centralized servers that support the large-scale 
processing tasks central to the government’s operations.
Even if IT itself is indifferent to power distribution, senior organizational leaders 
are not. Recent research suggests that use of IT is correlated with both increases and 
decreases in the number of middle managers in organizations, but the changes are 
contingent on particular organizational conditions that influence the views of senior 
leadership (Klatsky, 1970; Pinsonneault, 1990; Pinsonneault & Kraemer, 1997). For 
example, when middle managers in government organizations control IT deployment 
decisions, they tend to use the technology to increase their numbers. In contrast, 
when top managers are in control, they tend to use the technology to reduce the 
number of middle managers, especially when environmental triggers such as fiscal 
stress stimulate the need for change (Pinsonneault & Kraemer, 2002).

8   Kraemer & King
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
IT has had little discernible effect on organization structure and seems to yield 
somewhat greater centralization in already centralized organizations in support of 
existing organizational arrangements. Other organizational structures also appear 
to be compatible with IT application, including matrix organizations involving dual 
authority arrangements. There is no good evidence to support or refute this idea in 
government organizations, but one would assume that IT application in the context 
of these newer organizational forms also would be used to reinforce those structures; 
it would not change them (Vitalari, 1988).
Finding.on.Reform.Proposition.2: IT application has brought relatively little 
change to organization structures and seems to reinforce existing structures.
Reform Proposition 3. Properly used, information technology will be  
beneficial for administrators, staff, citizens, and public administration  
as a whole. 
Proponents of this proposition argue that information technology has the potential 
to decentralize administration, reintegrate and enhance work life, open access to 
data within the government and with citizens outside, and rationalize decision 
making on complex problems through computerized modeling. Such changes, it is 
hoped, will further democratize government by bringing citizens more fully into 
planning and administration activities of the government itself, especially in areas 
of citizen concern.
There is little dispute that IT is beneficial to the organizations that use it, especially 
in the area of productivity (Jorgensen et al., 2003; Lee & Perry, 1998; Lehr & 
Lichtenberg, 1998). In the case of government, such benefits come mainly from 
long-standing applications to structured and repetitive tasks at the core of govern-
ment operations: the day-to-day, transaction-oriented information processing of 
administrative agencies concerned with producing bills, recording payments, paying 
vendors and employees, recording public documents, answering citizen inquiries, 
and so forth (Danziger & Kraemer, 1986). These applications meet real needs of 
public agencies and represent substantial investments. They are not bold, innovative 
moves to reform public agencies; they simply are useful adaptations of the technol-
ogy in order to improve administrative performance. They reinforce the conservative 
values of governmental efficiency and social control inherent in U.S. governments 
for decades. However, they do not serve the needs of special citizen groups, such 
as the poor, the homeless, the aged, or the handicapped (Kraemer & Kling, 1985). 
There have been relatively few examples of IT applications aimed at broader, more 
liberal citizen service provision. An interesting example is Santa Monica, California’s 
www.ebook3000.com

Information Technology and Administrative Reform   9
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
PEN system, a public information utility designed to provide information, electronic 
mail, and conferencing among citizens and the city government through networked 
microcomputers located in public places and via remote links from people in their 
workplaces and homes. In many ways, the PEN system did achieve its goals, but it 
did so in the context of a city with legendary biases of political liberalism. In their 
case study of the PEN system, Dutton and Guthrie (1991) describe it as “reinforc-
ing the values and interests of a liberal democratic community supportive of citizen 
participation” (p. 295). The technology was used to reinforce community values (in 
this case, liberal democratic values), not to reform them.4 Once again, the empirical 
evidence suggests that those who control IT deployment and application determine 
whose interests are served by the technology.
Finding.on.Reform.Proposition.3: The benefits of information technology have not 
been distributed evenly within government organizational functions; the primary 
beneficiaries have been functions favored by the dominant political-administrative 
coalitions in public administrations and not those of technical elites, middle man-
agers, clerical staff, or ordinary citizens.5
Reform Proposition 4. The potential benefits from information technology 
are underrealized due to a lack of managerial understanding of what the 
technology can do and an unwillingness of managers to pursue the  
potential of the technology when they do understand it.
There is no question that some managers are more effective than others at applying 
IT successfully, but this has little to do with the reform hypothesis. The proposition 
states that managers lack the understanding necessary to motivate application of 
IT. In fact, IT is being applied widely in government with the full approval of all 
levels of the managerial hierarchy. Moreover, governments with professionalized 
administrations actually are more likely to adopt and apply IT (Danziger et al., 1982; 
Dutton & Kraemer, 1977). The issue is not that managers fail to understand the 
potential of IT; they understand that potential perfectly well when it comes to their 
own interests, and they exploit it aggressively in the pursuit of those interests. Those 
interests are in line with more traditional and conservative values of government 
in the U.S., as noted previously. In the occasional instances in which a government 
organization pursues a different political agenda, such as in Santa Monica, IT is 
applied toward those ends.

10   Kraemer & King
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Findings.on.Reform.Proposition.4: Government managers have a good sense 
of the potential uses of IT in their own interests, and in cases where their interests 
coincide with government interests, they push IT application aggressively.
Problem.with.the.Reform.Hypothesis
The U.S. experience with IT in government fails to support the reform hypothesis. 
The benefits of IT use are focused largely on administrative efficiency and not on 
reform of administrative organization, practices, or behavior. Two underlying as-
sumptions govern the reform hypothesis, as it has been articulated, that reform is 
required in government and that IT can be used to carry out such reforms. Both of 
these assumptions are questionable.
The reform hypothesis suggests that reform is necessary without specifying why. 
Government organizations may be flawed and subject to improvement, but that 
does not mean that they are doing a poor job at their objectives. Most government 
organizations are bureaucracies with hierarchically organized distributions of author-
ity, resources, and responsibility flowing downward to work units and information 
about organizational performance flowing back upward as a means of control. Most 
government managers want to keep organizations that way for good reasons. The 
bureaucratic form is highly refined from many decades of continuous study and 
improvement. It has evolved into a comprehensive set of conventions that work 
quite well at doing complicated tasks with reasonable performance on a sustained 
basis over many years. Government managers understand this form of organization, 
which makes them experts at using it to accomplish governmental objectives. None 
of this suggests that managers are averse to performance improvements; indeed, the 
U.S. research clearly shows senior government managers are strongly supportive of 
efforts to improve efficiency, productivity, and organizational control. What about 
the current system is broken? The reform hypothesis does not say.
IT application in the U.S. actually fits the agenda of improved government within 
the established bureaucratic model. For example, computerization in financial sys-
tems provides new information and control mechanisms simultaneously to senior 
executives, central financial managers, and department heads. Subordinates using 
such systems might find themselves under greater financial surveillance from their 
supervisors, but they also gain greater control over the details of their budgets, 
especially with respect to patterns of spending through real time, and accurate 
information about current balances. These systems allow managers at any level to 
enact immediate and across-the-board changes affecting subordinates, such as the 
elimination of funds for all open positions, enactment of budget cuts, assignment 
www.ebook3000.com

Information Technology and Administrative Reform   11
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
of overhead expenses, and so forth (Kraemer et al., 1981). This effect of IT use is 
not power-neutral; it reinforces the general hierarchical structure of bureaucratic 
organization even while giving managers at each level greater leverage over the 
operations below.
Even in cases where there are good reasons to reform government, the application of 
IT has a poor record as a lever for change. The short-run impacts of IT use have been 
far less pervasive and dramatic than forecast. Orientations, tasks, and interactions 
among managers and workers might change, but the changes in standard operating 
procedures tend to be modest. It is more common that IT is made to conform to 
existing behavior and practice than to change such a practice. Case studies covering 
30 years of computing in cities (Kraemer et al., 1986) and federal agencies (Westin 
& Laudon, 1986) indicate that reform has been limited mainly to the information 
processing function within organizations and not to the broader aspects of organiza-
tions. The indirect influence of information technology to achieve genuine reform 
within the political administrative system is far less powerful than the direct inter-
vention of executive, legislative, or judicial change. In theory, IT might lead to new 
administrative structures; in practice, it does not, and it probably should not. 
Implications.and.Conclusion
Proponents of the reform hypothesis might respond to the foregoing analysis with 
the objection that much of the evidence presented in the analysis is from studies of 
government IT application prior to the 1990s, when the Internet became a major 
force. The potential of the Internet to alter the prospects of e-government dramati-
cally can be inferred from the transformation of business organizations using IT and 
especially the Internet during and after the dot.com boom. This is a fair observation 
and deserves careful response.
It is true that much of the research cited in the previous arguments was done in 
the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, and that important changes in technology occurred 
between the 1990s and the present. Nevertheless, the studies cited were careful to 
account for the actual changes that might be associated with the application of IT 
to specific tasks in government organizations and not to changes that were specific 
to particular technologies. The reform hypothesis was an explicit focus of much of 
this research, and every effort was made to find evidence for the hypothesis. The 
most systematic of these studies refuted the hypothesis in fundamental ways that 
are relevant not only for the 30-year period of the studies but more generally into 
the 1990s and today. More important, studies done since the 1990s (Fountain, 2001, 
2002; Holden, 2003; Holden et al., 2003; Kaylor et al., 2001; Moon, 2002; Norris, 

12   Kraemer & King
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
2005, 2006) corroborate the basic findings of the earlier work—IT has not reformed 
or transformed government administration. The facts of today do not necessarily 
dictate the reality of tomorrow, but in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it 
is safe to assume that IT use will not result in the reforms that proponents of the 
reform hypothesis claim.
The role of the Internet bears attention, because the Internet (by which we broadly 
refer to computer networking) is a fundamental enabling component of e-government. 
Indeed, one might argue that the experience of the pre-Internet period is irrelevant 
to e-government, because without the Internet there would be no e-government. 
Again, the focus of this article is not on the broad question of whether IT affects 
government organizations; it is on the narrower question of whether IT use is likely 
to result in government reform. The Internet permits computers to communicate 
with each other and humans to communicate with computers and with each other 
via computers. It affects how tasks can be done and how work can be organized, but 
that does not mean that those tasks or the nature of the work itself will be altered 
in fundamental ways.
Use of IT has dramatically affected many business organizations and sectors in the 
past decade. Some business organizations and even whole sectors of business have 
undergone radical change since the Internet arrived. IT has brought major produc-
tivity gains to business organizations (Jorgensen et al., 2003), and, in most cases, 
those gains are specifically tied to changes in the ways organizations do business 
(Brynjolfsson & Hitt, 2003). A good example is seen in the personal computer 
industry (Dedrick & Kraemer, 2005). Competitive market forces required firms 
to change the organization of their activities from vertical, supply-driven models 
to virtual, demand-driven models In order to better match supply and demand and 
to avoid the cycles of excess inventory and product shortages that had plagued 
PC companies. Dell Computer pioneered this change, which happened to fit well 
with the capabilities of the Internet, and soon was copied as it took market share 
from the other vendors. PC makers reorganized their activities around information 
processes—order management, planning and coordination, and customer relation-
ship management. This allowed them to substitute information for inventory and 
to respond to market signals more quickly and more effectively. IT did not directly 
create new value in the PC industry; it allowed information processes to be redefined 
in ways that improved efficiency and added value to the customer. 
While this dramatic example is compelling, it is important to note that the catalyst 
of industry change was a company—Dell Computer—that was a relative newcomer 
to an industry that already had been destabilized by eroding profitability and intense 
competition. Dell did not so much reform the PC industry as create an entirely new 
and superior model for the industry. Despite considerable effort and investment, 
no other personal computer company yet has been able to match Dell’s efficiency 
(Dedrick & Kraemer, 2005). Other dramatic examples of business change associated 
www.ebook3000.com

Information Technology and Administrative Reform   13
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
with IT use, such as Wal-Mart, Amazon.com, eBay, and Google, show a similar 
pattern of forcing dramatic rethinking of the whole business enterprise.
One must be careful in drawing conclusions from such studies and applying them 
to government. The overall effects of IT on business are more complicated than 
they might first appear. While Amazon.com, eBay, and Google are stunning ex-
amples of the dot.com era, many companies that tried to change their industries or 
to create new industries failed completely and disappeared when the dot.com boom 
went bust. In addition, business and government organizations exhibit fundamental 
differences that influence the outcomes of IT use. Few business organizations have 
their tasks and work specified under statute or executive order; businesses, unlike 
governments, are free to decide what things to do and how to do them. Business 
organizations are driven mainly by market forces, which encourage radical innovation 
and can be characterized by Schumpeter’s gales of creative destruction. Govern-
ment organizations, in contrast, are driven by political/institutional forces that are 
not and cannot be subjected to destructive changes without severe consequences 
for their constituents. 
This does not mean that governments have little to learn from the changes seen in 
the business world. Examples from business prove that even well-established pro-
duction systems can be changed dramatically to produce results that are of benefit 
to consumers. At minimum, these examples provide hope that government services 
can be improved in ways that bring benefits to citizens through careful application 
of IT. In order for that to happen, however, the leadership of government organiza-
tions must establish the broader goals of the reform efforts, develop new models of 
electronic governance and electronic service delivery, and then bring IT carefully 
into consideration. Today’s e-government initiatives are part of a broader govern-
ment reform agenda that emphasizes customer service and greater responsiveness 
to citizens (Executive Office of the President, 2003; National Performance Review, 
1993). If this, indeed, is the will of the existing governmental power structure, IT 
might play a role in the reform. But that is not a foregone conclusion, and what 
actually happens remains to be seen.
A more difficult challenge arising from the arguments in this article is the question 
of what practitioners, researchers, and others who are interested in e-government 
should do in response to this assessment. One might conclude that e-government 
is a mere passing fad that will flare and then fade, as many other management fads 
have in the past (e.g., management by objectives or zero-base budgeting). This would 
be overreaching. The argument here is a cautionary note about e-government and 
significant government reform. It is not a criticism of e-government, per se, nor is 
it a claim that e-government will fail to produce significant long-term changes in 
the nature and conduct of government. Returning to business organizations, there 
is considerable evidence to suggest that profound transformations in whole sectors 
have occurred over time through the use of IT. Yates’ (2005) studies of IT in the rise 

14   Kraemer & King
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
of system approaches in American management between 1860 and 1920 and of the 
remaking of the U.S. insurance industry in the early 20th century provide elegant 
proof of the transforming power of IT enablement. King and Lyytinen’s (2005) 
study of transformation in the automobile industry in the 20th century provides 
insights about the role of IT in reshaping industrial ecologies. There is good reason 
to believe that e-government initiatives might affect government dramatically over 
the coming decades.
The question of whether expectations for e-government are realized or dashed depends 
on what those expectations are. This article suggests that claims that e-government 
will fundamentally alter governmental structure, performance, citizen engagement, 
and so on (Executive Office of the President, 2003; National Performance Review, 
1993) are likely to be dashed, given that IT in and of itself consistently has proven 
to have little bearing on those kinds of government reforms. IT is a general-purpose 
engine that can enable reform efforts, but unless the other factors required for reform 
are in place, the role of IT is immaterial. IT also has been used to thwart reform 
efforts, a fact that many who support the reform hypothesis overlook. True reform 
begins and ends with political will, and along the way, IT can play myriad roles.
Perhaps most important for e-government practice and research, nothing in this 
argument refutes the hope that IT will improve government operations and enable 
new government services. E-government, at least in principle, offers a great deal 
to government organizations facing increasing demands, shrinking resources, and, 
in many cases, more fractionated political climates. IT can be used to make impor-
tant marginal improvements in efficiency and effectiveness and, in some cases, to 
create truly innovative government responses to challenges. IT has brought such 
benefits to many organizations and many sectors, and there is nothing to preclude 
government organizations from enjoying such payoffs from thoughtful IT invest-
ment. A challenging agenda for e-government practice and research remains, even 
if government reform is removed from the agenda.
Another point that is seldom mentioned in the reform discussion might be added to 
the agenda: the implications of e-government in changing the political dynamics 
whereby government leaders are elected and appointed. As was pointed out in a 
1987 study of the use of computer models in the federal government, IT had failed 
conspicuously to alter fundamental dimensions of the federated governmental appa-
ratus of the United States, but the same could not be said for the processes of politi-
cal mobilization (Kraemer et al., 1987). The most recent U.S. presidential election 
was replete with examples of the ways in which IT can alter political balances and 
fortunes, including the Internet-based fundraising drives that allowed Democratic 
campaign financing to keep up with Republican financing and the effects of Weblogs 
and Internet-based news sites covering the campaign on the mobilization of public 
opinion, to the controversies regarding electronic voting (Nardi et al., 2004a, 2004b). 
It is in some ways fitting that the most significant impacts of IT on government thus 
www.ebook3000.com

Information Technology and Administrative Reform   15
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
far have been in the most political dimensions of government—the determination 
of who governs. This condition is likely to persist and is highly relevant to both 
practice and research in the realm of e-government.
References
Attewell, P., & Rule, J. (1984). Computing in organizations: What we know and what we 
don’t know. Communications of the ACM, 27(12), 1184-1192.
Bretschneider, S. (1990). Management information systems in public and private organiza-
tions: An empirical test. Public Administration Review, 50(5), 536-545.
Brynjolfsson, E., & Hitt, L. M. (2003, January 27). The catalytic computer: Information 
technology, enterprise transformation, and business performance. Unpublished 
manuscript.
Caudle, S. L. (1990). Managing information resources in state government. Public Admin-
istration Review, 50(5), 515-524.
Caudle, S. L., & Marchand, D. A. (1989). Managing information resources: New directions 
in state government. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University.
Danziger, J. N., Dutton, W. H., Kling, R., & Kraemer, K. L. (1982). Computers and politics. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Danziger, J. N., &. Kraemer, K. L. (1986). People and computers. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Dean, J. (2002). E-government hits the mainstream survey says. GovExec.com. Retrieved 
February 26, 2002, from http://govexec.com/dailyfed/0202/022602j1.htm
Dedrick, J., & Kraemer, K. L. (2005). The impacts of IT on firm and industry structure: The 
personal computer industry. California Management Review, 47(3), 122-142.
Dutton, W. H., Blumler, J. G., & Kraemer, K. L. (1987). Wired cities: Shaping the future of 
communications. Boston: G.K. Hall.
Dutton, W. H., & Guthrie, K. (1991). An ecology of games: The political construction of 
Santa Monica’s public electronic network. Informatization in the Public Sector, 1(4), 
279-301.
Dutton, W. H., & Kraemer, K. L. (1977). Technology and urban management: The power 
payoffs of computing. Administration and Society, 9(3), 304-340.
Dutton, W. H., & Kraemer, K. L. (1978). Management utilization of computers in American 
local governments. Communications of the ACM, 21(3), 206-218.
Dutton, W. H., & Kraemer, K. L. (1985). Modeling as negotiating: The political dynamics 
of computer models in the policy process. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Executive Office of the President. (2003, April). E-government strategy: Implementing the 
president’s management agenda for e-government. Washington, DC: EOP.

16   Kraemer & King
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Forman, M. (2003, May 12). Memorandum for the chief information officers Re: proce-
dures for requesting funds from the e-government fund. Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB). 
Forrester Research. (2000, August 30). Sizing U.S. e-government. Cambridge, MA: For-
rester.
Fountain, J. E. (2001). Building the virtual state: Information technology and institutional 
change. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Fountain, J. E. (2002). Information, institutions and governance. Cambridge: Harvard 
University.
Garson, G. D. (2004). The promise of digital government. In A. Pavlichev, & G. D. Garson 
(Eds.), Digital government principles and best practices (pp. 2-15). Hershey, PA: 
Idea Group Publishing.
Gasco, M. (2003). New technologies and institutional change in public administration. 
Social Science Computer Review, 21(1), 6-14.
General Services Administration (GSA). (1986). Automatic data processing inventory. 
Washington, DC: General Services Administration. 
George, J. F., & King, J. L. (1991). Examining the computing and centralization debate. 
Communications of the ACM, 34(7), 63-72.
Gibson, C. F., & Hammer, M. (1985). Now that the dust has settled: A clear view of the 
terrain. Indications, 2(5), 5-12.
Gronlund, A. (2003). Emerging electronic infrastructures: Exploring democratic components. 
Social Science Computer Review, 21(1), 55-72.
Holden, S. H. (2003). The evolution of information technology management at the federal 
level: Implications for public administration. In G. D. Garson (Ed.), Public informa-
tion technology: Policy and management issues (pp. 53-73). Hershey, PA: Idea Group 
Publishing.
Holden, S. H., Norris, D. F., & Fletcher, P. D. (2003). Electronic government at the local 
level: Progress to date and future issues. Public Productivity and Management Review, 
26(3), 1-20.
Jorgensen, D. W., Ho, M. S., & Stiroh, K. J. (2003, January 27). Lessons from the US growth 
resurgence. In Proceedings of the First International Conference on the Economic and 
Social Implications of Information Technology (pp. 453-470), Washington, DC. 
Kaylor, C. H., Deshazo, R., & Van Eck, D. (2001). Gauging e-government: A report on 
implementing services among American cities. Government Information Quarterly, 
18(4), 293-307.
King, J. L. (1983). Centralized vs. decentralized computing: Organizational considerations 
and management options. ACM Computing Surveys, 15(4), 319-345.
King, J. L., & Kraemer, K. L. (1985). The dynamics of computing. New York: Columbia 
University Press. 
King, J. L., & Kraemer, K. L. (1986). The dynamics of change in computing use: A theoreti-
cal framework. Computers Environment and Urban Systems, 11(1/2), 5-25.
www.ebook3000.com

Information Technology and Administrative Reform   17
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
King, J. L., & Lyytinen, K. (2005). Automotive informatics: Information technology and 
enterprise transformation in the automobile industry. In W. H. Dutton, B. Kahin, 
R. O’Callaghan, & A. W. Wychoff (Eds.), Transforming enterprise (pp. 283-312). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Klatzky, S. R. (1970). Automation, size and the locus of decision making: The cascade ef-
fect. Journal of Business, 43(2), 141-151.
Kling, R. (1974). Automated welfare client tracking and service integration. Communica-
tions of the ACM, 21(6), 484-493.
Kling, R. (1980). Social analyses of computing: Theoretical perspectives in recent empirical 
research. Computing Surveys, 12(1), 61-110.
Kraemer, K. L. (1980). Computers, information and power in local governments. In A. 
Mowshowitz (Ed.), Human choice and computers, 2 (pp. 213-235). New York: North-
Holland Publishing.
Kraemer, K. L., Dickhoven, S., Tierney, S. F., & King, J. L. (1987). Datawars: The politics 
of modeling in federal policymaking. New York: Columbia University Press.
Kraemer, K. L., Dutton, W. H., & Northrop, A. (1981). The management of information 
systems. New York: Columbia University Press.
Kraemer, K. L., & King, J. L. (1979). A requiem for USAC. Policy Analysis, 5(3), 313-
349.
Kraemer, K. L., & King, J. L. (1986). Computing and public organizations. Public Admin-
istration Review, 46(6), 488-496.
Kraemer, K. L., & King, J. L. (1987). Computers and the Constitution: A helpful, harmful, 
or harmless relationship? Public Administration Review, 47(1), 93-105.
Kraemer, K. L., King, J. L., Dunkle, D., Lane, J. P., & George, J. F. (1986). The future 
of information systems in local governments. Irvine, CA: University of California, 
Irvine.
Kraemer, K. L., King, J. L., Dunkle, D., & Perry, J. L. (1992). Distributable computing and 
organizational democratization: A test of conventional wisdom. Irvine, CA: University 
of California, Irvine.
Kraemer, K. L., & Kling, R. (1985). The political character of computerization in service 
organizations: Citizen interests or bureaucratic control. Computers and the Social 
Sciences, 1(2), 77-89.
Kraemer, K. L., & Perry, J. L. (1979). The federal push to bring computer applications to 
local governments. Public Administration Review, 39(3), 260-270.
Laudon, K. (1974). Computers and bureaucratic reform. New York: John Wiley and 
Sons.
Layne, K., & Lee, J. (2001). Developing fully functional e-government: A four stage model. 
Government Information Quarterly, 18(2), 122-136.
Leavitt, H. J., & Whisler, T. L. (1958). Management in the 1980s. Harvard Business Review, 
36(6), 41-48.

18   Kraemer & King
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Lee, G., & Perry, J. L. (1998). Are computers boosting productivity? A test of the paradox 
in state governments (Working Paper). Irvine, CA: University of California, Irvine.
Lehr, W., & Lichtenberg, F. R. (1998). Computer use and productivity growth in US fed-
eral government agencies, 1987-1992. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 46(2), 
257-279.
Moon, M. J. (2002). The evolution of e-government among municipalities: Rhetoric or 
reality. Public Administration Review, 62(4), 424-433.
Nardi, B., Schiano, D., & Gumbrecht, M. (2004a). Blogging as social activity, or, would 
you let 900 million people read your diary? In Proceedings of the Conference on 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (pp. 222-228). New York: ACM Press.
Nardi, B., Schiano, D., Gumbrecht, M., & Swartz, L. (2004b). Why we blog. Communica-
tions of the American Association for Computing Machinery, 47(12), 41.
National Association for State Information Systems (NASIS). (1989). Information systems 
technology in state government. Lexington, KY: Council of State Governments.
National Performance Review. (1993). From red tape to results: Creating a government that 
works better and costs less, and reengineering through information technology (accom-
panying report of the NPR). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Norris, D. F. (2005). Electronic democracy at the American grassroots. International Journal 
of Electronic Government Research, 1(3), 1-14.
Norris, D. F. (forthcoming). Electronic government at the American grassroots: The state of 
the practice. In A. V. Anttiroiko, & M. Malkia (Eds.), Encyclopedia of digital govern-
ment. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Reference.
Norris, D. F., & Moon, M. J. (2005). Advancing e-government at the grass roots: Tortoise 
or hare? Public Administration Review, 65(1), 64-75.
Office of Technology Assessment (OTA). (1985). Automation of America’s offices. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Congress.
Perry, J. L., & Kraemer, K. L. (1979). Technological innovation in American local govern-
ments. New York: Pergamon.
Pinsonneault, A. (1990). The impact of information technology on the middle management 
workforce: An empirical investigation. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University 
of California Irvine, Irvine, CA.
Pinsonneault, A., & Kraemer, K. L. (1997). Middle management downsizing: An empirical 
investigation of the impact of information technology. Management Science, 43(5), 
659-679.
Pinsonneault, A., & Kraemer, K. L. (2002). Information technology and middle management 
downsizing: A tale of two cities. Organization Science, 13(2), 191-208.
Reinermann, H. (1988). Vor einer “verwaltungsreform?” Informationstechnisch motivieerte 
ziele und “systemkonzepte” der verwaltungspolitik. In H. Reinermann, H. Fiedler, K. 
Grimmer, K. Lenk, & R. Traunmuller (Eds.), Neue informationstechniken neue verwal-
tungsstruckturen? (pp. 38-50). Heidelberg, Germany: R.V. Decker & C.F. Muller.
www.ebook3000.com

Information Technology and Administrative Reform   19
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Robey, D. (1981). Computers, information systems and organizational structure. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 24(10), 679-687.
Vitalari, N. (1988). The impact of information technology on organizational design and 
the emergence of the distributed organization. Irvine, CA: University of California 
Irvine.
Weiner, M. E. (1969). Service: The objective of municipal information systems. Storrs, CT: 
University of Connecticut.
West, D. M. (2004). E-government and the transformation of service delivery and citizen 
attitudes. Public Administration Review, 64(1), 15-27.
Westin, A., & Laudon, K. (1986). Information technology and the Social Security Adminis-
tration: 1935-1990 (Research Monograph). Washington, DC: Office of Technology 
Assessment.
Yates, J. (2005). Structuring the information age: Life insurance and information technology 
in the 20th century. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Endnotes
1 
The exact quote from Niccolo Machiavelli’s The Prince, which you can find at http://
www.brainyquote.com/quotes/authors/n/niccolo_machiavelli. html, is as follows: 
“There is nothing more difficult to take in hand, more perilous to conduct, or more 
uncertain in its success, than to take the lead in the introduction of a new order of 
things”. 
2 
This literature spans more than 30 years and is illustrated by the National Performance 
Review of 1993. From Red Tape to Results: Creating a Government that works Better 
and Costs Less, and Reengineering through Information Technology (accompanying 
report of the NPR). Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.
3 
By 2002, federal government spending for IT was $45 billion annually, with $45 mil-
lion set aside for e-government projects, increasing to $150 million by 2006 (Forman, 
2003).
4 
In a recent analysis of e-democracy in four municipalities in Sweden, Gronlund (2003) 
concluded that the various e-democracy initiatives reinforced the current procedures 
of formal politics by complementing them with increased direct communication with 
citizens rather than citizen participation and influence. Moreover, he concluded that 
this should be seen as a measure designed to reinforce the politicians’ position rather 
than the citizens’, as the agenda was set by the politicians. 
5 
In every government, there is a coalition of political and administrative leaders who 
have broad power and control over the organization. In simplest terms, this might 

20   Kraemer & King
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
be the city manager and city council in a council-manager form of government, the 
commissioners and CAO in the commission form of government, and the mayor and 
other top elected officials in the strong mayor form of government. These coalitions 
sometimes are referred to as the organization’s power structure and might well include 
others lower down in the hierarchy. This explanation is similar to Laudon (1974) and 
Danziger et al. (1982).
This work was previously published in International Journal of Electronic Government Research, Vol. 
2, Issue 1, edited by D. F. Norris & P. Fletcher, pp. 1-20, copyright 2006 by IGI Publishing, formerly 
known as Idea Group Publishing (an imprint of IGI Global).
www.ebook3000.com

The Scholarly Literature on E-Government   21
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.II
The.Scholarly.Literature..
on.E-Government:
Characterizing.a.Nascent.Field
Donald Norris, University of Maryland, Baltimore County,  USA
Benjamin A. Lloyd, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, USA
Abstract
The authors conducted a comprehensive review of articles on the subject of e-
government that were published in refereed scholarly journals through the end of 
2004 to serve as a baseline for future analysis of this emerging field. They found 
over 100 e-government articles, but only 57 with empirical content. The authors 
then examined the articles using 12 analytical categories. They conclude that the 
scholarship about e-government comes primarily from the United States, and from 
authors trained in the social sciences. Few e-government articles adequately used 
the literatures that were available (e.g., IT and government, e-government, or any 
specialized literatures), and few created or tested theory or hypotheses.  Articles 
employed both qualitative and quantitative methodologies, but many contained 
conclusions that were not supported by their data or analyses. The authors conclude 
that e-government research is a young and growing field that has yet to achieve 
adequate scholarly rigor.

22   Norris & Lloyd
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Introduction
Within the past dozen or so years, governments across the globe and at all levels 
have adopted electronic government (a.k.a., e-government) as a means of delivering 
of governmental information and services 24 hours per day, seven days per week. 
Nearly all national governments, most sub-national or state governments, and large 
numbers of local governments have established Web sites through which they provide 
e-government. In the U.S., the federal government has a strong e-government pres-
ence through its portal FirstGov.gov, and all federal departments and agencies have 
Web sites. All 50 states have Web sites as do most state agencies and departments. 
Finally, more than 95% of U.S. local governments with populations of 10,000 and 
larger have Web sites.   
Although governments have adopted e-government rapidly, e-government remains 
a relatively new phenomenon. For example, about two-thirds of local government 
Web sites in the U.S. are 10 years old or less (Holden, Norris, & Fletcher, 2003; 
Norris & Moon, 2005). This means that research into e-government is even younger 
because research typically lags behind practice by a few years.  
Nevertheless, over the past few years, a small but growing body of scholarly litera-
ture about e-government has begun to emerge. Most of this scholarship has been 
published in traditional journals in a few key fields, including the social sciences, 
information systems, computer science, and business administration.  
Although research in the field of e-government is still in its early days, now would 
be an appropriate time to pause and take stock of the field via an examination of the 
scholarly literature that has been published in it to date. In this article, we examine 
articles about e-government that have been published in refereed scholarly journals. 
We chose to focus only on articles in refereed journals because, in academic circles, 
these are the “gold standard” that defines the scholarship in a field.1
Method
As active researchers in the field, we endeavor to keep in touch with the scholarship 
and believe that we know the published works reasonably well. Thus, we began 
our search for articles about e-government by developing a list of works known 
to us. To ensure that we did not miss any relevant articles, we next searched the 
bibliographies of those initially identified works to find published articles of which 
we were unaware.
To expand the search further, we used 13 online article databases at the UMBC 
library (Academic Search Premier, Business Source Premier, CAIO, EconLit, Em-
www.ebook3000.com

The Scholarly Literature on E-Government   23
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
erald Library, ERIC, Infotrieve, JSTOR, LLBA, PAIS, PsycInfo, Social Sciences 
Abstracts, and Sociology Abstracts) to find yet additional articles about e-government. 
In these databases, we used “e-government,” “electronic government,” and “digital 
government” as our search terms. Depending on the design and capabilities of each 
database, we looked for articles that had at least one of these terms in either the title 
or abstract, or had one of the terms assigned to it as a subject term or keyword. We 
then examined the bibliographies of all of these articles to identify works that we 
had not otherwise found. Through these methods, we identified over 100 articles 
about e-government published in refereed journals.2  
Next, we read the articles to determine if they involved analysis of empirical data, 
or merely represented authors’ ruminations and speculations (no matter how well 
considered) about e-government. Our interest is with the empirical scholarship in the 
field, that is, works that undertake some form of quantitative or qualitative analysis 
of the empirical data or evidence about e-government. Thus, we eliminated articles 
that were essentially speculative in nature, and selected for further consideration 
only those articles that contained and analyzed empirical data. (By empirical data, 
we mean data derived from any research method involving “observation”, whether 
qualitative or quantitative.3) This left us with 57 empirical articles published in 
refereed journals through the end of 2004.
We chose to limit our review to the period from the appearance of the first empirical 
article about e-government to the close of 2004 because by the beginning of 2005 
four new refereed journals devoted to e-government had begun publication.4 We 
therefore examined only articles that appeared prior to the establishment of those 
journals. As such, this review should provide a good overview of the type and quality 
of published empirical works from the earliest days of e-government research.
In order to understand these works and their contributions to the nascent field of 
e-government research, we established 12 categories for examining them. These 
categories are:
• 
Year.published: Publication dates indicate both when e-government research 
began to appear and whether the number of works published about e-govern-
ment annually has grown over time.
• 
Type.of.journal: Here we were interested in knowing the disciplines in which 
articles about e-government have appeared and whether articles have appeared 
in journals of a certain discipline more often than in another. We categorized the 
journals as being either in the social sciences or in information technology (or 
IT, which also includes both computer science and information systems).4
• 
Type.of.issue: Did the article appear in a general issue of the journal or in a 
special issue devoted to e-government? This may indicate whether e-govern-

24   Norris & Lloyd
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
ment research is being mainstreamed or whether a few journals have “jump 
started” e-government research with focused issues on the subject.
• 
Type.of.article: What was the overall nature of the article? Did it involve data 
set analysis (e.g., from a survey or other data set), case study or studies, and 
Web site analyses?
• 
Type.of.data: What sort of data or evidence did the authors use in their analysis? 
Our categories were survey data, Web site content analysis, and “case data,” 
which we defined as being narrative descriptions of e-government programs 
or projects;  We considered combining these two categories (type of article 
and type of data) because they are similar.  At the same time, however, each 
has distinct value.  For example, some of the case study articles used survey 
data, while others used simple case stories.
• 
Discipline.of.lead.author:.This category allowed us to learn the disciplines 
from which authorship emanated. Our categories were: social sciences, IT (in-
cluding computer science and information systems), business and management, 
and communications. In cases when an author was located in the information 
systems department of a business school, we considered that author’s disci-
pline to be IT. We also included a category for practitioners of e-government 
programs who are outside of academia. In cases of multiple authorship (of 
which there were 34 articles), we used the discipline of the lead author only.
• 
Authors’.location(s).of.origin: Here, we determined whether the author(s) 
were based at a university or other location in the United States, or at a loca-
tion outside of the U.S., or, if there were multiple authors, were they located 
both inside and outside of the U.S.? This allowed us to determine whether 
the scholarship on e-government is dominated by authors based in the United 
States, or if it is truly an international field.
• 
Formulate.theory: Next we wanted to learn if an article involved the devel-
opment of original theory or the application of existing theory?  
• 
Test.of.theory:. Likewise, we wanted to know if an article engaged in the 
formal testing of original or existing theory. Arguably, articles that develop 
or test theory can be viewed as being more rigorous than those that do not. 
Those that do may also be more closely linked to prior scholarship in related 
fields than those that do not.
• 
Formulate.hypotheses.or.research.questions: This category enabled us to 
ascertain if an article developed formal hypotheses or research questions that 
then helped to drive or guide the research.
• 
Test.of.hypotheses.or.research.questions: Likewise, did the article involve 
the testing of hypotheses or research questions? Here again, articles that for-
mulate and test hypotheses or research questions arguably can be considered 
more rigorous than those that do not.
www.ebook3000.com

The Scholarly Literature on E-Government   25
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
• 
Type.of.analysis: Here we asked if the authors engaged in qualitative or 
quantitative data analysis or some combination thereof. If quantitative, what 
sort of analysis (e.g., descriptive statistics, correlation analysis, regression 
analysis)? Readers should note, however, that we agree with Yin (2004) and 
do not assert a hierarchy of research or analytical methods. That is, we do not 
argue that some methods of analysis (i.e., quantitative) are better than others 
(i.e., qualitative).  
Thus far, our categories have been descriptive and reasonably objective. This infor-
mation allows us to tell a basic story about the types of works about e-government 
that have been published in scholarly journals. However, an analysis of the scholarly 
literature about e-government would not be very satisfying or useful if it did not go 
beyond describing such things as types of journals, types of articles, types of data, 
and the like. Hence, we developed more qualitative (and frankly more subjective) 
categories for examining these works. We discuss these below.
•  
Adequacy.of.literature.review: Sir Isaac Newton was reported to have said 
that he had been able to achieve great scientific breakthroughs in part because 
he “stood on the shoulders of giants.” By this he meant that he read everything 
that came before him that was relevant to his work. This remains excellent 
advice for scholars today.  Hence, we were interested in learning if the articles 
we reviewed had stood on the shoulders of giants. To do so, we examined their 
literature reviews. In particular, we looked for reviews of literature from the 
nascent field of e-government as well as the well-developed field of IT and 
government. Did the authors cite appropriate works from those literatures? 
Several of the articles also involved issues beyond e-government alone (e.g., 
bureaucracy, participation, etc.). Thus, where relevant, we examined whether 
the authors cited and used appropriate works from those literatures as well. 
Regarding e-government literature reviews, our characterization became in-
creasingly strict over time.  We did not expect much of articles published in 
1999 and 2000, because there was not much e-government literature to cite 
(including literature published in other than peer-reviewed journals). However, 
we expected far more of articles published in 2003 and 2004 in terms of their 
e-government literature reviews simply because of the greater volume of ma-
terial available to inform scholarship. We characterized the literature reviews 
as weak, moderate, or strong based on the strength of the literature reviews in 
the bodies of the articles and the numbers of citations in the bibliographies.
•  
Support.for.conclusions:.We read each article with a view toward understanding 
the extent to which the authors’ conclusions were supported by the evidence and 
analysis presented in the work. We also examined the articles for whether their 
methodologies produced data that could reasonably be employed to produce or 

26   Norris & Lloyd
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
support the conclusions drawn. In other words, were the data “good” and did 
the authors stick to the data when drawing conclusions, or did they “go a bridge 
too far”?  An example of an article where the conclusions strayed too far from 
its data is one that examined the contents of governmental Web sites and drew 
its conclusions about governmental openness and responsiveness based solely 
on Web site contents. Another example would be an article that used data from 
a survey which had a very low response rate, and whose respondents were not 
representative of the population being described. We ranked articles as having 
weak, moderate, or strong evidentiary support for their conclusions.
Clearly, these subjective categories leave some room for disagreement. However, 
we believe that they represent at least a beginning point for developing a better 
understanding of the scholarship in this emerging field. Moreover, the two authors 
each read all of the articles independently and coded them separately. Inter-coder 
reliability was greater than 95%.
Findings
We discuss our findings in the following paragraphs. We then summarize the findings 
and draw conclusions about the nascent field of e-government research.
Year.Published
There was a slight but steady increase in the number of empirical articles about e-
government published each year between when the first empirical article appeared 
and the end of 2004. The first two articles appeared in 1999, about four to five years 
after the governments began adopting e-government in earnest. This number increased 
to three in 2000, six in 2001, and 13 in 2002. Then, in 2003, 16 articles appeared, 
followed by 17 in 2004 (Table 1).
Type.of.Journal
There was a nearly equal distribution of articles by discipline of the journals in 
which the articles appeared. A slight majority (30, or 53%) were found in journals 
of the social sciences, while the remaining 27 (47%) were from journals in the in-
formation systems, information technology, or related fields. Of the 27 articles in 
IT journals, 14 were found in Government Information Quarterly (GIQ)..The social 
www.ebook3000.com

The Scholarly Literature on E-Government   27
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
1999
2
2000
3
2001
6
2002
13
2003
16
2004
17
Table 1. Number of articles published by year
Social.Science.Journals
30
Social Science Computer Review
7
Public Administration Review
3
Public Performance & Management Review
3
Administration & Society
2
Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory
2
Administration
1
The American Review of Public Administration
1
Governance: An International Journal of Policy, Administration, and Institutions
1
International Journal of Public Administration
2
International Journal of Public Sector Management
2
New Media & Society
1
Political Communication
1
Public Administration
1
Public Administration and Development
1
Social Science Quarterly
1
State and Local Government Review
1
Information.Systems,.Information.Technology.and.related.Journals
27
Government Information Quarterly
14
Journal of Electronic Commerce in Organizations
5
Bulletin of Science, Technology and Society
1
Information & Management
1
Information and Communications Technology Law
1
International Journal of Electronic Business
1
Journal of Computer Information Systems
1
Journal of Computer Mediated Communication
1
Journal of Government Information
1
Technological Forecasting and Social Change
1
Table 2. Number of articles published by journal

28   Norris & Lloyd
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
science journal with the most empirical e-government articles was Social Science 
Computer Review (SSCR), which had seven. The remaining articles were dispersed 
among 24 different journals (Table 2).
In addition to identifying the types of journals in which articles were published, 
examination of the table also reveals something about the relative prestige of the 
journals publishing e-government works. Arguably, only three top-ranked journals 
appear here: Public Administration Review, Journal of Public Administration Re-
search and Theory, and Administration and Society. This suggests that e-government 
research is not yet seen as mainstream work in the top journals in either the social 
sciences or information sciences.
Type.of.Issue
Of the 57 articles, 40 (70%) were published in general issues of journals, while 17 
(30%) came from one of eight special e-government issues (Table 3). Four of the 
eight special issues were in GIQ (issues 18:2, 18:4, 19:4, and 20:4), and two were 
in Social Science Computer Review (21:1 and 22:1). The others were in Public 
Performance and Management Review (26:4) and the Journal of Electronic Com-
merce in Organizations (1:4). Clearly, the publication of e-government research has 
Table 3. Number of articles by type of issue
General Issue
40
Special Issue (about e-government)
17
Note: One article appeared in a journal special issue 
devoted to public information systems management 
(not e-government). Therefore we did not include it 
among the special issues devoted to e-government.  
Case Study
21
Data Set Analysis
19
Web Site Analysis
16
Theoretical
2
Table 4. Number of articles by type*
*Adds to 58 because one article was both a data set 
analysis and a Web site analysis
www.ebook3000.com

The Scholarly Literature on E-Government   29
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
been jump-started by these special or focused issues about e-government. Without 
them, the number of articles published about e-government would likely have been 
considerably smaller. Nevertheless, the great majority of articles appeared in regular 
issues of these journals.
Type.of.Article
Our survey yielded some variety in terms of article type. Case studies (21, or 37%) 
were the most common, followed closely by analyses of large data sets (19, or 33%), 
and Web site analyses (16, or 28%). Only two articles were primarily theoretical in 
nature (2, or 4%). As we noted earlier, we eliminated theoretical articles that had 
no empirical content from consideration here. The two theoretical articles that we 
included in the survey, while mainly theoretical, contained empirical content with 
which to test or justify the theory. One article was designed as both a data set analysis 
and a Web site analysis, so the percentages here add to more than 100 (Table 4).
For the most part, the case study articles were not produced from well-designed case 
studies in the sense that Yin (2004) means, that is, methodologically-rigorous cases 
that will produce highly reliable results and can be replicated. These articles, instead, 
were based on what Grönlund (2004) calls “case stories”. Therefore, our use of the 
term “case study” should be considered rather generous as applied herein.
Type.of.Data
Survey data (24 articles, or 42%) and data obtained by content analyses of Web 
sites (22 articles, or 39%) were the most common types of data found in the articles.  
Fourteen articles (25%) used only case data. One article, which we labeled as “other,” 
Survey Data
24
Web Site Content
22
Case Data
14
Other
1
Table 5. Number of articles by type of data*
*Adds to 61 because four articles used both 
survey data and Web content data

30   Norris & Lloyd
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
analyzed state laws mandating Web posting of government documents. Again, the 
percentages add to more than 100 because four articles used both survey and Web 
site analysis data (Table 5). As we noted above, the case data were developed largely 
from case stories, not rigorously designed case studies.
Discipline.of.Lead.Author
The majority of lead authors of the articles came from the social sciences (29, or 
51%). The second-most common discipline for authorship was IT (17, or 30%), 
followed by communications (4, or 7%), and business (5, or 9%). E-government 
practitioners within the U.S. federal government wrote the two remaining articles 
(Table 6).
It is somewhat surprising that more than one and one-half as many articles were 
written by social scientists as by information and computer scientists. It is surpris-
ing because funding for e-government research is not as readily available to social 
scientists as to information and computer scientists. Nevertheless, it was social 
scientists who published most of the empirical research in the field during this 
period. Information and computer scientists produced less than one-third of the 
articles about e-government.
Authors’.Location.of.Origin
The author(s) of 33 of the articles (58%) were based in locations in the U.S., while 
the author(s) of 19 of the articles (33%) were based outside of the U.S. Five addi-
tional articles (9%) were written by multiple authors originating from both inside 
and outside the U.S. (Table 7).
Social Sciences
29
Information Technology
17
Communications
4
Business
5
Practitioner
2
Table 6. Number of articles by discipline of lead author
www.ebook3000.com

The Scholarly Literature on E-Government   31
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Formulate.Theory
The overwhelming majority of articles (43, or 75%) did not formulate new theory 
nor extend existing theory; only 14 (25%) did so (Table 8).  
Test.of.Theory
Only 14 (25%) of the articles engaged in the testing of theory, while 43 (75%) did not 
(Table 9). It is important to note that of the 14 articles that formulated or extended 
theory, 12 tested the theory using empirical evidence. Two articles that formulated 
theory did not test it. Conversely, of the 14 articles that tested theory, two involved 
the testing of theory that was neither new nor extended from its original form. 
The absence of theory development and testing may suggest works that are less 
sophisticated or rigorous or that are less well connected to prior relevant scholar-
ship that should inform this new field. This may also be indicative of the newness 
of the field itself.
Formulate.Hypotheses.or.Research.Questions
In many academic disciplines, the formulation of hypotheses and research questions 
in a research article is a sign of research sophistication and methodological rigor. 
Of the 57 articles which we examined in this survey, only 19 (33%) formulated 
hypotheses or research questions; 38 (67%) did not (Table 10).
Table 8. Did the author(s) formulate origi-
nal theory or expand existing theory?
Yes
14
No
43
Table 9. Did the author(s) engage in the 
testing of original or existing theory?
Yes
14
No
43
United States
33
Outside of the U.S.
19
Both
5
Table 7. Number of articles by author(s) location of origin

32   Norris & Lloyd
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Test.of.Hypotheses.or.Research.Questions
Another test of research rigor and sophistication is whether hypotheses and research 
questions are formally tested in analyses.  Of the articles that formulated research 
questions or hypotheses, all 19 tested them (Table 11).
The absence of formulating and testing hypotheses and research questions may 
suggest certain weaknesses in the field of e-government research as well as its 
recent origin.
Type.of.Analysis
Slightly more than three-quarters of the articles (44, or 77%) employed some form 
of quantitative analysis, while 33 (58%) employed qualitative analysis. Totals here 
are greater than 100 percent because 20 (35%) of the articles used both quantitative 
and qualitative methods. Of the 44 articles with quantitative analyses, 41 (93%) used 
descriptive statistics, 13 (30%) used correlation analysis, 13 (30%) used regression 
analysis, and one article employed factor analysis. Less than half of the quantitative 
articles (18, or 41% of the 44) employed more than one quantitative method (e.g., a 
combination of descriptive statistics and either correlation or regression analysis). 
Qualitative
33
Quantitative
44
     Descriptive Statistics
41
     Correlation Statistics
13
     Regression Analyses
13
     Factor Analysis
1
Table 12. Types of analyses used
Table 10. Did the author(s) formulate 
hypotheses or research questions?
Yes
19
No
38
Table 11. Did the author(s) test hypotheses 
or research questions?
Yes
19
No
38
www.ebook3000.com

The Scholarly Literature on E-Government   33
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Nearly half (21, or 47%) of the articles that used quantitative methods presented 
only simple descriptive statistics (Table 12).
Adequacy.of.Literature.Reviews
Here we examined the articles’ literature reviews in three areas: e-government, IT 
and government, and any special topic (e.g., bureaucracy, participation, etc.) that 
the author(s) addressed in the article. For the most part, the literature reviews were 
unimpressive. Relatively few of the authors of these works “stood on the shoulders of 
giants”. We rated only seven (12%) of the e-government literature reviews as strong, 
compared with six (11%) that were moderate, and 44 (77%) that were weak. The 
bibliographies of the latter typically contained few, if any, citations from the available 
e-government literature (either articles, books, book chapters, monographs, or Web 
postings). The weakness of the e-government literature reviews was not a function 
of the lack of literature in the field. It was a function of the authors’ failure to cite 
relevant literature that was available at the time that the article was written.  
For the IT and government literature, a literature that e-government scholars should 
examine because it provides considerable theoretical underpinning for e-government 
research and also provides direction for e-government research in terms of empiri-
cal findings, again the articles failed to impress. We rated only five articles (9%) 
as strong in terms of their reviews of the IT and government literature. We rated 
eight (14%) as moderate, and 44 (77%) as weak.  Here again, weak bibliographies 
typically contained few, if any, citations from the IT and government literature, a 
literature which, as of this writing, is at least three decades old.
The specialized literatures fared somewhat better. Nine articles did not address is-
sues beyond e-government that would have required such literature reviews. Of the 
48 that had specialized literatures, we rated 16 (33%) as strong in their reviews of 
specialized literature, 12 (25%) as moderate, and 20 (42%) as weak (Table 13).
Type.of.
Literature
Strong
Moderate
Weak
E-Government
7
6
44
IT and 
Government
5
8
44
Specialized*
16
12
20
Table 13. Articles by adequacy of literature reviews
* Nine articles did not require specialized literatures; therefore there are 48 articles considered in 
this category.

34   Norris & Lloyd
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Support.for.Conclusions
Finally we examined these articles to ascertain if their conclusions were supported 
by their data or analyses. We were conservative in our determinations about whether 
an article’s conclusion was supported. For us to give an article a “strong” support 
rating, its conclusions must have clearly and reasonably followed from its evidence 
or analysis. In other words, the author or authors “stuck to their data.” Articles that 
received “moderate” or “weak” ratings went “a bridge too far” with their conclusions. 
That is, their authors exceeded reasonable inferences that could have been drawn 
from their data.  Additionally, we gave “weak” ratings for support for conclusions 
to articles that suffered from serious methodological flaws that would have rendered 
their data questionable. One of the articles contained no explicit conclusions so the 
number in the table totals 56.  
Of these 56 articles, the data strongly supported the conclusions in only one-third 
of them (18, or 32%). We found the conclusions in another 15 (27%) of them to 
have been supported moderately. The remaining 23 (41%) contained conclusions in 
which either: a) the authors went beyond their data in drawing conclusions, and/or 
b) the authors’ methodologies and data were seriously “challenged” (Table 14). 
Examples of articles whose conclusions were not supported well or at all by their 
data or analyses or whose methodologies were challenged included those in which 
conclusions were based on surveys with exceptionally small sample sizes or response 
rates or which used data from non-representative samples of respondents and articles 
which employed correlation and/or regression analyses of variables from data sets 
that did not make good bedfellows.5  
Conclusion
What can be said from this examination of the published scholarship in the nascent 
field of e-government research? Since we do not want to be criticized for “going a 
bridge too far”, that is, for going beyond what the data from the articles permit us 
to say, we will be cautious in drawing conclusions.  
Perhaps the first conclusion is that, through the end of 2004 (that is, during argu-
ably the first 12 years or so of e-government, and arguably eight years of published 
e-government research), relatively few (only 57) empirical articles about e-govern-
ment have been published in peer-reviewed academic journals. What is more, only 
seven (13%) of those articles appeared in what are generally considered the lead-
ing journals (e.g., Public Administration Review, Journal of Public Administration 
Research and Theory, and Administration and Society). All of the other articles 
appeared in lesser-ranked journals. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Scholarly Literature on E-Government   35
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Second, the empirical literature on e-government in this period was distributed al-
most equally between journals in the social sciences and journals in the information 
sciences. Within the subset of articles appearing in IT journals, however, more than 
half (14 out of 27) were published in a single journal, GIQ, which led in this category 
because of the number of special issues on e-government that it had published.  
Third, most of the authors (as determined by lead author’s discipline) of these articles 
were from the social sciences (51%). This is at least somewhat surprising because 
funding for e-government research is more available to computer and information 
scientists than to social scientists.  
Fourth, the most common types of empirical data found in the articles were survey 
data (42%) and Web site content analysis data (39%), each of which were used in 
40% of the articles. Case study data (which were mostly from “case stories” and 
not rigorously-developed case studies) was used less often, appearing in 25% of the 
articles, while one article used a content analysis of state legislation. Four articles 
used a combination of survey and Web site analysis.  
Fifth, 77% of the articles used some form of quantitative analysis, most frequently 
descriptive statistics, and often in conjunction with some form of correlation or 
regression analysis. A majority (57%) employed some form of qualitative analysis. 
Twenty articles employed both qualitative and quantitative analyses.
Sixth, only about one-quarter of the articles (25%) formulated new theory, or ex-
tended existing theory in a new way, or engaged in explicit testing of theory. Only 
slightly more (33%) formulated explicit hypotheses or research questions and tested 
them.
Seventh, of the authors who formulated or extended theory, nearly all (12 of 14, 
or 86%) formally tested the theory, while all who formed hypotheses or research 
questions engaged in formal testing. The scant number of articles that formulated 
theory, hypotheses, and research questions and that tested theory, hypotheses, and 
research questions suggests a lack of rigor in the published works in the emerging 
field of e-government research and also the relatively recent origin of the field.
Eighth, for the most part the authors of these articles did not heed Sir Isaac Newton’s 
advice to “stand on the shoulders of giants”. With exceptions as noted, the reviews 
of the e-government and the IT and government literatures were unimpressive. Here, 
we considered only 13 literature reviews in each category (23%) to be adequate 
(rated as either strong or moderate). The remaining articles (44, or 77%) received 
“weak” ratings. The articles were somewhat better when it came to reviewing 
specialized literatures (e.g., bureaucracy or participation) that were also topics of 
the articles. Here, 28 (58%) were rated as adequate, while 42% received “weak” 
ratings. (Because of their topics, nine articles did not need or contain reviews of 
specialized literatures.)
Finally, a number of the articles (23, or 41%) went a “bridge too far” and presented 
conclusions that were not supported by their data or analyses or whose data suf-

36   Norris & Lloyd
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
fered from methodological deficiencies. In only about one-third (18 or 32%) of the 
articles were conclusions strongly supported by the data or evidence presented, and 
in a quarter (27%) of them, conclusions were moderately supported.
Our review of the small but growing body of literature in the field of e-government, 
from its beginning through the end of 2004, strongly suggests that this is, indeed, a 
new field of scholarship that it is just “getting its legs.” Relatively few articles on 
e-government had been published in peer-reviewed articles in this period, fewer 
still were empirical in nature, and yet fewer appeared in leading scholarly journals. 
Indeed, the latter finding may help to explain the number of relatively weak articles 
that were published; they appeared in lesser-ranked journals. 
Although the published empirical articles demonstrated a range of (mainly quan-
titative) methodologies, few contained strong or even adequate links to previous 
scholarship in either the e-government or IT and government fields. Additionally, 
a surprising number of the articles drew conclusions that went beyond what their 
data or analyses would support.
As e-government itself continues to grow and evolve, what might we expect of 
the field of e-government research? We would both hope to see more and stronger 
(that is, more rigorous) articles, articles representing research from a wider range 
of disciplines, articles that employ a wider variety of research methodologies, and 
more articles that develop and test theory, hypotheses, and research questions. We 
would also hope that future articles would be linked more strongly to prior research 
(a.k.a., the relevant literatures), and that their conclusions would be more strongly 
supported by their data and analyses.
With the publication of four new journals devoted to e-government research begin-
ning in 2004 and 2005, at the very least, the quantity of articles about e-government 
can be expected to increase. Beyond the issue of quantity, however, and, given the 
findings of this research, we can only wonder whether the field can sustain four 
journals or whether their existence will result in the continuing publication of re-
search into e-government that lacks rigor and sophistication and is not adequately 
connected to prior relevant scholarship.
Whether our hopes and expectations for e-government research are fulfilled will 
require continuing examination of articles published in peer-reviewed journals—the 
gold standard of research in virtually any field.
References
Anderson, K. V., & Henriksen, H. Z. (2005). The first leg of e-government research: Domains 
and application areas, 1998-2003. International Journal of Electronic Government 
Research, 1(4).
www.ebook3000.com

The Scholarly Literature on E-Government   37
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Grönlund, Å. (2004). State of the art in e-gov research—A survey. In R. Traunmuller, (Ed.), 
EGOV 2004, LNCS 3183 (pp. 178-185). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Holden, S., Norris, D. F., & Fletcher, P. D. (2003). Electronic government at the local level. 
Public Performance & Management Review, 26(4), 325-344.
Korosec, R. L., & Norris, D. F. (in press). E-government among Florida municipalities: A 
comparison to national data and trends.  Baltimore: Maryland Institute for Policy 
Analysis and Research, University of Maryland, Baltimore County.
Norris, D. F., & Moon, M. J. (2005). Advancing e-government at the grassroots: Tortoise 
or hare? Public Administration Review, 65(1), 64-73.
Titah, R., & Barki, H. (2006). E-government adoption and acceptance: A literature review. 
International Journal of Electronic Government Research, 2(3), 23-57.
Yin, R. K. (2004). Case study research design and method. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications.
The.57.Empirical.E-Government.Articles
Barnes, S., & Vidgen, R. (2004). Interactive e-government: Evaluating the Web site of the 
UK inland revenue. Journal of Electronic Commerce in Organizations, 2(1), 42-63.
Becker, S. (2004). E-government visual accessibility for older adult users. Social Science 
Computer Review, 22, 11-23.
Beynon-Davies, P., Williams, M. D., Owens, I., & Hill, R. (2004). The electronic procure-
ment of ideas. International Journal of Electronic Business, 2(1), 3-19.
Cairns, G., Wright, G., Bardfield, R., van der Heijden, K., & Burt, G. (2002). Exploring 
e-government futures through the application of scenario planning. Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, 71, 217-238.
Cho, Y. H., & Choi, B. (2004). E-government to combat corruption: The case of Seoul met-
ropolitan government. International Journal of Public Administration, 27, 719-735.
Cooper, C. (2002). E-mail in the state legislature: Evidence from three states. State and 
Local Government Review, 34(2), 127-132.
Cresswell, A., & Pardo, T. (2001). Implications of legal and organizational issues for urban 
digital government development. Government Information Quarterly, 18, 269-278.
Cullen, R., & Houghton, C. (2000). Democracy online: An assessment of New Zealand 
government Web sites. Government Information Quarterly, 17, 243-267.
Dawes, S., Pardo, T., & Cresswell, A. (2004). Designing electronic government information 
access programs: A holistic approach. Government Information Quarterly, 21, 3-23.
Deakins, E., & Dillon, S. M. (2002). E-government in New Zealand: The local authority per-
spective. The International Journal of Public Sector Management, 15(5), 375-398.
Doty, P., & Erdelez, S. (2002). Information micro-practices in Texas rural courts: Methods 
and issues for e-government. Government Information Quarterly, 19, 369-387.
Fagan, J. C., & Fagan, B. (2001). Citizens’ access to on-line state legislative documents. 
Government Information Quarterly, 18, 105-121.

38   Norris & Lloyd
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Fagan, J. C., & Fagan, B. (2004). An accessibility study of state legislative Web sites. Gov-
ernment Information Quarterly, 21, 65-85.
Ferber, P., Foltz, F., & Pugliese, R. (2003). The politics of state legislature Web sites: Mak-
ing e-government more participatory. Bulletin of Science, Technology, and Society, 
23(3), 157-167.
Gilbert, D., Balestrini, P., & Littleboy, D. (2004). Barriers and benefits in the adoption of 
e-government. The International Journal of Public Sector Management, 17(4), 286-
301.
Golden, W., Hughes, M., & Scott, M. (2003). Implementing e-government in Ireland: A road-
map for success. Journal of Electronic Commerce in Organizations, 1(4), 17-33.
Grönlund, Å. (2003). Emerging electronic infrastructures: Exploring democratic components. 
Social Science Computer Review, 21, 55-72.
Ho, A. T. (2002). Reinventing local governments and the e-government initiative. Public 
Administration Review, 62, 434-444.
Ho, A. T., & Ni, A. Y. (2004). Explaining the adoption of e-government features: A case 
study of Iowa County treasurers’ offices. The American Review of Public Administra-
tion, 34(2), 164-180.
Holden, S., Norris, D., & Fletcher, P. (2003). Electronic government at the local level. Public 
Performance & Management Review, 26(4), 325-344.
Holliday, I. (2002). Building e-government in East and Southeast Asia: Regional rhetoric 
and national (in)action. Public Administration and Development, 22, 323-335.
Joia, L. A. (2003). A heuristic model to implement government-to-government projects. 
Journal of Electronic Commerce in Organizations, 1(4), 49-67.
Kaylor, C., Deshazo, R., & Van Eck, D. (2001). Gauging e-government: A report on imple-
menting services among American cities. Government Information Quarterly, 18, 
293-307.
Kim, S., & Kim, D. (2003). South Korean public officials’ perceptions of values, failure, 
and consequences of failure in e-government leadership. Public Performance & 
Management Review, 26, 360-375.
Kinder, T. (2002). Vote early, vote often? Tele-democracy in European cities. Public Ad-
ministration, 80(3), 557-582.
Koh, C., & Prybutok, V. (2003). The three ring model and development of an instrument for 
measuring dimensions of e-government functions. Journal of Computer Information 
Systems, 43(3), 34-39.
Kuk, G. (2003). The digital divide and the quality of electronic government service delivery 
in local government in the United Kingdom. Government Information Quarterly, 20, 
353-363.
LaPorte, T., Demchak, C., & de Jong, M. (2002). Democracy and bureaucracy in the age of 
the Web: Empirical findings and theoretical speculations. Administration & Society, 
34, 411-446.
Lee-Kelley, L., & James, T. (2003). E-goverment and social exclusion: An empirical study. 
Journal of Electronic Commerce in Organizations, 1(4), 1-16.
www.ebook3000.com

The Scholarly Literature on E-Government   39
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Li, F. (2003). Implementing e-government strategy in Scotland: Current situation and emerg-
ing issues. Journal of Electronic Commerce in Organizations, 1(2), 44-65.
Macintosh, A., Robson, E., Smith, E., & Whyte, A. (2003). Electronic democracy and young 
people. Social Science Computer Review, 21, 43-54.
Martin, S., Chamberlin, B., & Dmitrieva, I. (2001). State laws requiring World Wide Web 
dissemination of information: A review of state government mandates for documents 
online. Information and Communications Technology Law, 10(2), 167-179.
McGregor, M., & Holman, J. (2004). Communication technology at the Federal Communi-
cations Commission: E-government in the public interest? Government Information 
Quarterly, 21, 268-283.
McNeal, R., Tolbert, C., & Mossberger, K. (2003). Innovating in digital government in the 
American states. Social Science Quarterly, 84(1), 52-70.
Melitski, J. (2003). Capacity and e-government performance: An analysis based on early 
adopters of Internet technologies in New Jersey. Public Performance and Manage-
ment Review, 26, 376-390.
Moon, M. J. (2002). The evolution of e-government among municipalities: Rhetoric or 
reality?. Public Administration Review, 62, 424-433.
Musso, J., Weare, C., & Hale, M. (2000). Designing Web technologies for local governance re-
form: Good management of good democracy? Political Communication, 17, 1-19.
Potter, A. (2002). Accessibility of Alabama government Web sites. Journal of Government 
Information,  29, 303-317.
Reddick, C. (2004a). Public sector e-commerce and state financial management: Capacity 
versus wealth. Social Science Computer Review, 22, 293-306.
Reddick, C. (2004b). A two-stage model of e-government growth: Theories and empirical 
evidence for U.S. cities. Government Information Quarterly, 21, 51-64.
Shelley, M., Thrane, L., Shulman, S., Lang, E., Beisser, S., Larson, T., & Mutiti, J. (2004). 
Digital citizenship: Parameters of the digital divide. Social Science Computer Review, 
22, 256-269.
Shi, W. (2002). The contribution of organizational factors in the success of electronic govern-
ment commerce. International Journal of Public Administration, 25(5), 629-657.
Steyaert, J. (2000). Local governments online and the role of the resident: Government shop 
versus electronic community. Social Science Computer Review, 18, 3-16.
Steyaert, J. C. (2004). Measuring the performance of electronic government services. In-
formation & Management, 41, 369-375.
Stowers, G. (1999). Becoming cyberactive: State and local governments on the World Wide 
Web. Government Information Quarterly, 16, 111-127.
Thomas, J. C., & Streib, G. (2003). The new face of government: Citizen-initiated contacts 
in the era of e-government. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 
13(1), 83-102.
Thompson, C. (2002). Enlisting online residents: Expanding the boundaries of e-government 
in a Japanese rural township. Government Information Quarterly, 19, 173-187.

40   Norris & Lloyd
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Timonen, V., & O’Donnell, O. (2003). Development of e-government in Ireland: Remaining 
issues and challenges. Administration, 51(3), 3-20.
Waddell, P., & Borning, A. (2004). A case study in digital government: Developing and 
applying urbansim, a system for simulating urban land use, transportation, & envi-
ronmental impacts. Social Science Computer Review, 22, 37-51.
Wang, Y. (2003). The adoption of electronic tax filing systems: An empirical study. Govern-
ment Information Quarterly, 20, 333-352.
Weare, C., Musso, J., & Hale, M. (1999). Electronic democracy and the diffusion of municipal 
Web pages in California. Administration and Society, 31(1), 3-27.
Welch, E., & Wong, W. (2001). Global information technology pressure and governmental 
accountability: The mediating effect of domestic context on Web site operations. 
Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 11, 509-538.
West, D. (2004). E-government and the transformation of service delivery and citizen at-
titudes. Public Administration Review, 64(1), 15-27.
Whitson, T., & Davis, L. (2001). Best practices in electronic government: Comprehensive 
electronic information dissemination for science and technology. Government Infor-
mation Quarterly, 18, 79-91.
Wong, W., & Welch, E. (2004). Does e-government promote accountability? A compara-
tive analysis of Web site openness and government accountability. Governance: An 
International Journal of Policy, Administration, and Institutions, 17, 275-297.
Zhang, J. (2002). Will the government ‘serve the people’? The development of Chinese 
e-government. New Media & Society, 4(2), 163-184.
Zhou, X. (2004). E-government in China: A content analysis of national and provincial Web 
sites. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 9(4).
Endnotes
1 
See also Grönlund (2004), Andersen and Heinriksen (2005), and Titah and Barki 
(2006).
2 
We would also like to thank Prof. Ronnie L. Korosec, University of Central Florida, 
who as part of an e-government  research project on which she is working with Prof. 
Norris, identified four empirical articles that our search missed.  
3 
For a definition of empirical, see Merriam-Webster Online at http://www.m-w.com/
cgi-bin/dictionary?book=Dictionary&va=empirical&x=17&y=15 retrieved April 26, 
2005.
4 
We categorized these journals as either from the social sciences or information sys-
tems and technology based on their titles and typical contents. Other scholars might 
categorize them somewhat differently.
www.ebook3000.com

The Scholarly Literature on E-Government   41
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
5 
There is a story (no doubt, apocryphal) about an introductory statistics course in 
which the instructor assigned students the task of correlating the incidence of traffic 
accidents with the occurrence of high tide. The students found that there was a high 
correlation; when high tide occurred, more traffic accidents occurred. The instructor’s 
point was twofold: 1) Correlation does not equal causation (high tide occurred during 
rush hour!); and 2) some variables ought not to be correlated at all (it makes no sense 
to do so).
This work was previously published in International Journal of Electronic Government Research, 
Vol. 2, Issue 4, edited by D. F. Norris, pp. 40-56, copyright 2006 by IGI Publishing, formerly known 
as Idea Group Publishing (an imprint of IGI Global).

42   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.III
E-Government.Adoption.
and.Acceptance:
A.Literature.Review.
and.Research.Framework
Ryad Titah, HEC Montréal, Canada
Henri Barki, HEC Montréal, Canada
Abstract
Despite increased research interest on e-government, existing research has not 
adequately addressed two key issues concerning the implementation and integra-
tion of e-government systems: a better understanding of the factors influencing 
the adoption and acceptance of e-government systems, and a better understanding 
of the factors that influence the effective usage of these systems. The objective of 
the present chapter is to lay the groundwork for the development of a theoretical 
framework of e-government systems implementation. Based on an extensive review 
of the literature the chapter provides a synthesis of existing empirical findings and 
theoretical perspectives related to e-government adoption and presents the premises 
of a conceptual model that reflects the multidimensional nature of the acceptance 
and use of e-government systems. 
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   43
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Introduction
Electronic government refers to the use of information technologies (IT) to improve 
the efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and responsibility of public governments 
(Kraemer & King, 2003; World Bank, 2007). Viewed as radical, yet unavoidable 
transformation projects (Jaeger, 2003), the implementation of e-government systems 
has been attracting increased research interest, and is believed to constitute one of 
the most important IT implementation and organizational change challenges of 
the future (Marche & McNiven, 2003; Warkentin, Gefen, Pavlou, & Rose, 2002). 
According to some estimates, e-government systems are already helping save 2% 
of the annual U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) (UNDP, 2001). However, the 
realized savings are still far less than what is potentially possible. For example, 
World Bank (2007) figures indicate that even the countries that are most advanced 
in the implementation of e-government systems are able to capture only 20% of 
their real savings potential. Moreover, implementation failures of e-government 
systems are also common and often lead to adverse financial consequences (e.g., 
the Gires project in Québec or the Canadian Firearms Registry which cost $400M 
and $1 billion, respectively) (Radio Canada, 2003). 
Despite the potentially significant impacts of e-government systems on public 
administrations, organizations, individuals, and society, there is presently a dearth 
of systematic and thorough studies on the subject (Jaeger, 2003; Kraemer & King, 
2003, p.12). In addition, the research themes, as well as the research approaches and 
perspectives employed in the study of e-government implementations also exhibit 
significant diversity, making it difficult to reach conceptual clarity on the subject 
(Grönlund, 2005a). Finally, several authors remain skeptical (Kallinikos, 2003, 
2004; Kraemer & King, 2003) regarding the relevance of a radical transformation 
of the public bureaucratic model, with others seriously questioning the viability of 
the outcomes that result from IT-led transformations of institutionalized govern-
mental processes (Ciborra, 2005; Du Gay, 2003, 2004; Kallinikos, 2004; Stokes & 
Clegg, 2002).
Given the importance and complexity of the topic, and the lack of published 
comprehensive literature reviews of e-government adoption and acceptance, the 
present chapter provides a synthesis of existing empirical findings and theoretical 
perspectives on this subject, and presents the theoretical premises of a conceptual 
framework that reflects the multilevel and multidimensional nature of the adoption 
and acceptance of e-government systems. 
The chapter is organized as follows: the first section presents an analytical framework 
for conducting the literature review; the second section describes the main findings 
from this review; and the third section provides a discussion of the findings and the 
conclusions of the study.

44   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Past.Research.on.E-Government..
Adoption.and.Acceptance
Three data sources provided the input for our literature review of e-government 
adoption and acceptance: 1) ABI/INFORM and the ACM digital library; 2) Govern-
ment Information Quarterly, Information Systems Research, International Journal 
of Electronic Government Research, Journal of MIS, MIS Quarterly, Organization 
Studies, Organization Science, Public Administration Review, and Social Science 
Computer Review; and 3) Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS), 
International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS), and Hawaii International 
Conference on System Science (HICSS) conference proceedings. Our search targeted 
the identification of articles published since 1990 that presented either 1) reviews 
and studies of e-government adoption or acceptance in the IS domain, 2) reviews 
and studies of e-government adoption or acceptance in the public administration 
field, or 3) reviews and studies related to IT enabled organizational change in the 
public sector. 
It should be noted that electronic government is a multifaceted concept that can 
involve four types of stakeholders (government, citizens, businesses, and employ-
ees) in five used contexts: government-to-citizen (G2C), government-to-business 
(G2B), government-to-employee (G2E), government-to-government (G2G), and 
internal efficiency and effectiveness of e-government systems (IEE). While past 
e-government implementation efforts have focused mainly on internal efficiency 
and effectiveness (IEE) (Kraemer & King, 2006), current e-government initiatives 
are more centered on networked electronic provision of services to the four types 
of stakeholders identified above. The present review includes all studies related 
to e-government adoption and acceptance in the five different used contexts listed 
above. 
As the present review is specifically focused on e-Government adoption and accep-
tance, it represents a more focused and fine-grained complement to recent reviews 
of the more general e-government literature (e.g., Andersen & Henriksen, 2005; 
Grönlund, 2005b; Norris & Lloyd, 2006). In fact, the adoption and acceptance 
studies targeted by the present search correspond to two of the four e-government 
contextual research domains identified by Andersen and Henriksen (2005) of (1) 
diffusion management and (2) administrative e-services1. Further, our search specifi-
cally selected articles published in top IS, public administration and organization 
studies journals, as well as in top IS academic conference proceedings. Although 
European, Asian, or other specific regional IS conferences were not included in the 
search, the contributions of international research on e-government adoption were 
well represented in the surveyed peer-reviewed publications (see Tables 1 through 
5). Note also that the present search did not take into account research published in 
monographs or in other specialized e-government journals (e.g., Electronic Journal of 
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   45
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
e-Government, Journal of e-Government) or conferences (e.g., DEXA/EGOV; d.go). 
While acknowledging these limitations, the variety and quality of the publications 
included in the present search is thought to provide an adequate and reliable sample 
of existing research on e-government adoption and acceptance. It is interesting to 
note that 52% of the papers identified in Andersen and Henriksen’s (2005) review 
were in the two categories mentioned above, corresponding approximately to 86 
out of the 167 papers they found. Our literature search identified 99 articles related 
to e-government adoption and acceptance that conceptually map onto Andersen and 
Henriksen’s (2005) two categories. This suggests that the present review appears to 
have adequately captured past research on e-government adoption and acceptance. 
However, it should be acknowledged that, while our review is aimed at synthesizing 
a significant portion of e-government adoption and acceptance research, it inevita-
bly left out some segments. For instance, work on e-government cultural barriers 
(Margetts & Dunleavy, 2002) or on complex e-government change processes and 
mechanisms (Dunleavy & Margetts, 2000) were not included in the present review 
because of their specialized publication outlet. A few other specialized journals, 
monographs, and conferences were also excluded.
The 99 papers were content analyzed following a three step procedure. First, based 
on an emergent coding method (Allard-Poesi, 2003), preliminary analysis of the 
articles’ abstracts was conducted and led to the inference of the five main research 
themes. Second, the selected articles were carefully read and analyzed by the first 
author. Third, the face validity of the chapter classification categories and theme infer-
ences was separately assessed by both authors. Note that while both authors agreed 
on the classification of the articles, an interrater reliability score was not calculated. 
While the absence of a formal interrater score represents a limitation to the infer-
ences drawn, the detailed description of each article’s content enables a relatively 
straightforward assessment of the face validity of the proposed framework. 
Five topic categories were identified to broadly represent the subject matter investi-
gated by the 99 articles: (1) the influence of managerial practices on e-government 
adoption and acceptance; (2) the influence of organizational and individual charac-
teristics on e-government adoption and acceptance; (3) the influence of governmental 
subcultures on e-government adoption and use; (4) the influence of IT characteristics 
on e-government adoption and acceptance; and (5) the assessment of e-government 
impacts. The articles of each category are listed in Tables 1 to 5 with the content of 
each article presented based on the concept-centric approach suggested by Webster 
and Watson (2002), using the following elements: (1) theoretical framework, (2) 
methodology, (3) level of analysis, (4) technology, (5) variables or key concepts, 
and (6) main results or arguments.

46   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Topic 1. The Influence of Managerial Practices
Research related to the influence of managerial practices on e-government adoption 
and acceptance aims at the identification and/or measurement of specific management 
strategies and behaviors that are thought to significantly affect e-government adop-
tion and acceptance either by governmental agencies or by citizens and businesses. 
For example, a practice that has received significant research attention and that is 
posited as having an important effect on governmental agencies’ adoption is process 
reengineering. Several authors (e.g., Cahill, 2006; Golden, Hughes, & Scott, 2003; 
Kawalek & Wastall, 2005; Scholl 2003, 2005; Thong, Yap, & Seah, 2000) have em-
pirically shown that the absence of a clear and well executed process reengineering 
strategy significantly hinders e-government adoption and success. Related to this 
factor, there is also the influence of management support and leadership (Chan & 
Pan, 2006; Homburg & Beckers, 2002; Ke & Wei, 2004; Pardo & Scholl, 2002). 
For example, Thong et al. (2000) found that management support was a significant 
factor that influenced e-government acceptance. Chan and Pan (2006) also found 
that leadership was a key resource in e-government acceptance. In the same vein, 
Gauld (2007) identifies14 ill-managed elements that explained the implementation 
failure of an e-government system. Similarly, the establishment and exercise of a 
formal governance structure, as well as the perception of neutrality vis-à-vis this 
structure (Thong et al., 2000) were also found to be major enabling factors of e-
government adoption and usage. Moreover, several authors (e.g., Davison et al., 
2005; Esteves & Joseph, 2006; Layne & Lee, 2001; Tan, Pan, & Lim, 2005) have 
proposed e-government development stage models, and suggested the presence of 
different adoption enabling factors, adoption inhibiting barriers, implementation 
challenges, and intervention strategies for different maturity stages. Finally, some 
authors have also argued that e-government acceptance was significantly enhanced 
when all stakeholders were involved in the process (Chan & Pan, 2003; Esteves 
& Joseph, 2006; Jain & Patnayakuni, 2003). For example, Jain and Patnayakuni 
(2003) posit that the most legitimate e-government stakeholder, that is, the public, 
was left out of the critical conceptualization, development, and implementation 
phases of e-government.
In sum, managerial action appears to play a key role in facilitating the critical aspects 
of process reeingineering and integration, and in developing the main governmen-
tal capacities for adaptation and innovativeness. Little is known however about 
the specific actions managers need to undertake in order to foster organizational 
innovativeness via new knowledge acquisition, assimilation, transformation, and 
exploitation (Boynton, Zmud, & Jacobs, 1994; Zahra & George, 2002), or about 
the practices they need to undertake in order to positively influence and sustain e-
government adoption and acceptance. 
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   47
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Topic 2. The Influence of Organizational .
and.Individual.Characteristics
Research related to the influence of organizational or individual characteristics 
attempts to identify the attributes that explain how or why dissimilarities among 
individuals or governmental agencies influence their adoption and acceptance of e-
government systems. For example, one organizational characteristic that is thought 
to significantly influence the adoption of e-government is red tape (excessive bu-
reaucratic regulation). While some authors have found red tape to be negatively 
related to organizational adoption (e.g., Bretschneider & Wittmer, 1993; Moon & 
Bretschneider, 2002), others observed no significant relationship between red tape 
and e-government adoption (e.g., Welch & Pandey, 2005), although red tape was 
found to be significantly and negatively associated with information quality. Size is 
another organizational factor that has been shown to affect e-government adoption. 
For example, Norris and Moon (2005) found that adoption of Web sites was strongly 
related to local government size. Similarly, Caudle et al. (1991) found that small 
government agencies were more interested in technology transfer than large agen-
cies. Further, Ho (2002) argues that extended adoption and usage of e-government 
systems was hindered because of the e-government “paradigm,” which emphasizes 
coordinated network building and one stop customer service, thus contradicting the 
bureaucratic paradigm, which emphasizes standardization and division of labor.  
A significant research stream within this topic group has investigated the influence 
of individual characteristics on e-government adoption by following the tradition 
of the theory of reasoned action (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975) and the technology ac-
ceptance model (TAM) (Davis, 1989). Accordingly, the influence of individual 
characteristics on individuals’ intentions and behaviors are thought to be mediated by 
their beliefs and attitudes. For example, Phang, Sutanto, Li, and Kankanhalli (2005) 
found that perceived usefulness of Web sites was the most significant predictor of 
senior citizens’ intention to adopt them. Contrary to Doellman, Allen, and Powell 
(2006), Phang et al. (2005) and Gilbert, Balestrini, and Littleboy (2004) who did not 
find support for the influence of citizen’s perceived ease of use on adoption, Carter 
and Bélanger (2005) found that perceived ease of use had a significant effect on 
citizens’ intention to use. They also found a significant relationship between com-
patibility and intention to use, and between perceived trustworthiness and intention 
to use. Similar to Carter and Bélanger (2005), Hung, Chang, and Yu (2006) found 
that perceived ease of use had a significant influence on tax payers’ attitude towards 
usage. Furthermore, several researchers have studied the construct of trust as an 
antecedent of e-government adoption by individuals. For example, Bélanger and 
Carter’s (2005) field survey finds that “institution-based trust” and “characteristic-
based trust” had a significant influence on citizens’ intention to use “government 
online.” Similarly, Lee, Braynov, and Rao (1993) found that “trusting beliefs in 
e-government” had a significant effect on citizens’ “intention to use,” “intention to 

48   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
provide personal information,” as well as on “intention to depend on information” 
provided by e-government services. Moreover, Lee, Kim, and Rao (2005) also found 
that “Internet competence belief” had a significant indirect effect on intention to 
use, and that “trust in government” had a significant influence on “e-government 
authority goodwill.” Gefen, Pavlou, Warkentin, and Gregory (2002) conceptualize 
trust’s influence on intention to use by citizens to be mediated by perceived useful-
ness and perceived ease of use, and found that trust had a significant effect on both 
perceived usefulness and ease of use.
Moreover, studying e-government adoption at a national level, Srivastava and Teo 
(2006a, 2006b) found that ICT infrastructure, technology development, and the qual-
ity of human capital had a significant effect on e-government development. Finally, 
some studies adopted an interpretive approach to tackle the complex phenomena 
underlying e-government adoption. For example, Sorrentino (2005) argues that by 
taking into account overlooked factors such as “the degree of autonomy/heteronomy 
of actors, their levels of discretionary power and the coordination arrangements among 
them” (p. 2), a process-oriented perspective provides a richer understanding of e-
government implementation and adoption. In the same vein, Scatolini and Cordella 
(2005) found, through an action research study, that the “defense of political bonds” 
was the most salient resistance factor to IT adoption in a government setting. They 
also found that “organizational climate” and “decision making and responsibility 
assumption” were strong determinants of organizational innovation. 
In sum, the importance of organizational and individual characteristics on e-govern-
ment adoption appears to have been clearly established. However, future research 
related to the influence of these factors would probably gain much explanatory power 
if more longitudinal studies were conducted and if institutional factors (Gasco, 2003) 
were simultaneously considered as possible salient influences affecting organizational 
or individual intention to adopt e-government systems.
Topic 3. The Influence of Subcultures
Studies related to the cultural characteristics of public administration (e.g., Drake, 
Stecklem, & Koch, 2004; Schedler & Scharf, 2000) focus on explaining how the 
artifacts, values, symbols, and basic beliefs in the public sector influence the nature 
and the consequences of e-government adoption and acceptance. For example, Drake 
et al. (2004) shows the coexistence and coevolution of three principal subcultures 
in public administration: (1) a scientific culture, (2) a political culture, and (3) a 
bureaucratic culture. According to Drake et al. (2004), the differences between these 
three governmental subcultures can help explain the different design and information 
sharing modes that are found in governmental administrations. Whereas the mem-
bers of a scientific culture tend to see information as a means of connectivity that 
binds them to bodies of knowledge or communities of practice aiming at resolving 
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   49
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
problems, members of a political culture are essentially interested in knowing how 
information could help them influence political and legislative processes. On the other 
hand, members of a bureaucratic culture tend to see information as a convenience 
that constitutes the foundation of effectively managing public administration.
As such, the existence of cultural differences regarding the adoption and use of 
information and data within public administration points to two important consid-
erations. First, it suggests that it is important to take into account task-technology 
fit (Goodhue, 1995), that is, the fit between the various tasks of the different subcul-
tures and the IT being implemented. Second, it shows the importance of carefully 
assessing the interrelationships between cultural variables and other salient factors 
influencing e-government adoption and use.
Topic 4. The Influence of IT Characteristics
Studies grouped within this stream of research investigated the influence of IT de-
sign features on individuals’ acceptance and use of e-government applications. For 
example, several authors have shown that data security, accessibility, and perceived 
confidentiality significantly influenced individuals’ adoption of e-government services 
(Jaeger, 2003, 2006; Lee & Rao 2003; Warkentin et al., 2002) and that government 
Web sites generally neglected Web site accessibility for citizens with cognitive 
imparement and learning disabilities (Jaeger, 2006).
Other researcher within this stream includes studies of the influence of specific 
application models and algorithms on public managers’ and politicians’ decision-
making process (Henderson & Schilling, 1985; Lakshmi, Holstein, & Adams, 1990), 
and research that investigates the relationship between IT characteristics and IT 
diffusion in the public sector. For example, Northrop (2003) found that very few 
applications had interactive or transactional characteristics, thus hindering extensive 
participation of the citizens to the political life. 
Topic.5..Assessing.the.Impacts.of.E-Government
Studies related to this stream focus on assessing the consequences of e-govern-
ment adoption and use. While there is agreement among researchers regarding 
the importance of measuring e-government impacts systematically, some discord 
remains about which methods to employ and which metrics to use (Chircu & Lee, 
2003; Gupta & Jana, 2003; Lee, 2005). Several researchers argue that the relation-
ship between the adoption of e-government systems and their consequences is very 
complex and should be understood as emergent and context-dependent (Robey & 
Holmström, 2001; Robey & Sahay, 1996; Waddell & Borning, 2004). For example, 
several studies of the implementation of specific IT in the public sector (e.g., OLAP 

50   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
in 2001, GIS in 1996, and UrbanSim in 2004) found that the anticipated results of 
adoption did not materialize. Similarly, a survey of municipalities found that the 
cost reduction and downsizing benefits expected from e-government adoption did 
not materialize due to structural, legal, human, and organizational barriers (Moon, 
2002). Along the same vein, other researchers found that IT enabled municipality 
downsizing only when the technology was aligned with implementation strategy, and 
was well integrated with organizational processes (Pinsonneault & Kraemer, 2002). 
Likewise, Tolbert and Mossberger (2006) found that perceived government trans-
parency, accessibility, and responsiveness were significantly influenced by citizens’ 
use of e-government systems. Furthermore, other researchers have suggested that 
the assessment of e-government impacts should take into account both tangible and 
intangible benefits, thereby combining both “hard and soft” performance measures 
(Gupta & Jana, 2003). Consistent with this line of thinking, Saxton, Naumer, and 
Fisher (2007) propose a logic model for identifying e-government benefits at the 
individual, organizational, and societal levels. Finally, some researchers have argued 
that e-government benefits can only be captured when linkages are made between 
the benefits of e-government systems and the stage of evolution of e-government 
(Gupta & Jana, 2003; Layne & Lee, 2001; Moon, 2002).
A.Research.Framework.of..
E-Government.Adoption.and.Acceptance
Our literature search identified 99 articles published between January 1990 and 
February 2007 on e-government adoption and acceptance. Compared to previ-
ous literature reviews on e-government (Andersen & Henriksen, 2005; Grönlund, 
2005b; Norris & Lloyd, 2006), the present search adopted a drill down approach 
by specifically focusing on findings related to e-government adoption within two 
contextual e-government research domains identified by Andersen and Henriksen 
(2005): (1) diffusion management; and (2) administrative e-services. Contrary to 
Grönlund (2005b), but consistent with Andersen and Henriksen (2005) and Norris 
and Lloyd (2006), we found that theory testing papers represented a large portion 
of e-government adoption research (59% of the 99 papers) with 31% having con-
ducted field surveys and 28% case studies. Conceptual papers were also significant 
in that they represented 22% of the 99 papers. As our sampling frame, time period 
and focus differ from the literature reviews mentioned above, the present review 
complements and extends these earlier studies by providing a synthesis of the fac-
tors that enable or inhibit e-government adoption and acceptance. 
More specifically, the present chapter identifies four main categories of factors that 
influence e-government adoption and acceptance, and one category of factors related 
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   51
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
to the consequences of e-government adoption. The studies of the first category 
(Table 1) aim at identifying and measuring specific management strategies and ac-
tions that can influence e-government adoption and acceptance. The most significant 
factors identified within this category include top management/political support and 
the use of a clear and well-executed process reengineering strategy. The second 
category (Table 2) includes research aimed at identifying specific organizational or 
individual characteristics affecting e-government adoption and acceptance. Within 
this research stream, process integration, political issues, financial resources, size, 
perceived usefulness, and trust were found to be the most significant antecedents. The 
studies in the third category (Table 3) focus on examining how cultural differences 
affected e-government acceptance (and finding that the existence of governmental 
subcultures resulted in different motivations and patterns of adoption). The fourth 
category of research (Table 4) investigate the influence of IT design characteristics 
on e-government adoption and acceptance, identifying perceived security, privacy, 
accessibility, usability, and confidentiality as the most significant antecedents. Finally, 
the fifth category of studies (Table 5) focus on the assessment of the consequences 
of e-government adoption and acceptance, generally finding that the measurement 
of adoption outcomes was tightly linked with the extent of process reengineering 
induced by e-government implementation, as well as with the type of measures 
used to assess the benefits of e-government adoption (i.e., hard vs. soft measures, 
outcome-based, service specific, and agency specific measures). 
Several researchers have pointed out that the complex interdependencies and in-
teractions that exist between organizational, managerial, technical, political, and 
individual factors are key to understanding e-government adoption and acceptance 
(Andersen & Henriksen, 2005; Dawes et al. 2003; Gasco, 2003; Grönlund, 2005a; 
Kraemer & King, 2003; Pardo et al. 2004; Roy, 2005; Scholl, 2005). However, in 
the 99 articles that were identified, none were found to conceptualize the multidi-
mensional and multilevel nature of e-government adoption and acceptance or to 
systematically theorize and measure these interactions and complex relationships. 
As many empirical studies have been based on strict replications of established 
frameworks related to the IS literature (eg. TAM, or unified theory of acceptance 
and use of technology [UTAUT] models with extensions such as trust or self-efficay, 
etc.), or to the change management literature (eg. business process reengineering 
(BPR) models and maturity stage models), their explanatory power remains limited. 
In particular, past e-government adoption and acceptance research has not been able 
to explain the significant discrepancies in the levels of adoption and effective us-
age that have been observed among public agencies (Andersen & Henriksen, 2006; 
Grönlund, 2005a; Norris, 2005). 
In order to overcome the limitations of past approaches, we recommend that an 
e-government adoption and acceptance model not only identify the factors that 
influence the net-enablement of public administrations, but conceptualize the inter-
dependencies and nonlinear relationships that exist between these factors as well. 

52   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
We also believe that a framework that combines dynamic capability theory (DCT) 
(Eisenhardt & Martin, 2000; Pentland & Rueter, 1994; Teece, Pisano, & Shuen, 1997) 
and the theory of complementarities (TC) (Barua, Lee, & Whinston, 1996; Levina 
& Ross, 2003; Milgrom & Roberts, 1995a, 1995b; Samuelson, 1974, Whittington 
& Pettigrew, 2003) can provide a useful starting point for that purpose. First, DCT 
may help fully conceptualize and take into account the overlooked implications of 
the net-enabled customer focus of actual e-government initiatives (Ho, 2002). Net-
enablement refers to an organization’s ability to electronically “execute transactions, 
rapidly exchange information, and innovate at an unprecedented pace” by means of 
digital networks (Wheeler, 2002, p. 125). For governments, net-enablement entails 
significant changes to their structure and processes, as it calls them to “ask a new 
set of questions, to draw on new technical and commercial skills, and to employ 
new problem solving approaches” (Henderson & Clark, 1990, p. 9), also requiring 
them to execute “timely and ongoing reconfiguration of firm resources” (Wheeler, 
2002) and capabilities. Capability2 reconfiguration is particularly relevant in this 
context since bureaucratic routines and processes have been documented to be the 
main source of structural inertia within public administrations (Hannan & Freeman, 
1984; Perrow, 1986). However, while routines may indeed represent an important 
source of organizational rigidity (Leonard-Barton, 1992), they have also been 
shown to be a major source of “flexibility and change” (Feldman & Pentland, 2003). 
Organizational routines have in effect been shown to be both a key determinant of 
organizational behavior (Becker, Knudsen, & March, 2006), and a “major source of 
the reliability and speed of organizational performance” (Cohen & Bacdayan, 1994, 
p. 554). Therefore, understanding the mechanisms by which actual bureaucratic 
routines and capabilities are modified and reconfigured to produce new net-enabled 
delivery service competencies could provide key insights regarding the process of 
e-government acceptance, effective usage, and performance.
Second, because organizational capabilities are likely to be formed by comple-
mentary factors (Tranfield, Duberley, Smith, Musson, & Stokes, 2000, p. 253), the 
theory of complementarities can also provide a useful approach for conceptualizing 
and measuring their complex relationships (Barua et al., 1996). In the context of e-
government adoption and acceptance, a research model that is based on the concept 
of complementarities could be useful for three reasons: (1) It is likely to provide 
a means to capture the continuous and contextual character of e-government ac-
ceptance and the need for its apprehension as a process (Categories 1 and 5); (2) It 
can help highlight the role of managers and strategic leadership in e-government 
adoption (Categories 1 and 2); and (3) It can allow the capturing of the “interaction 
effects” that are likely to exist between various complementary (or substitutive) 
factors that influence e-government adoption and acceptance (Categories 1, 2, 3, 
and 4). The concept of complementarities can also allow researchers to take into 
account the complexity of integrating business processes in the public sector by 
more specifically identifying key integration enabling or inhibiting factors and their 
relationships (Barki & Pinsonneault, 2005). 
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   53
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Conclusion
In summary, our review of prior research related to e-government adoption and 
acceptance points to considerable diversity in the topics, constructs, and relation-
ships considered by different studies. While the present chapter has identified 
and categorized the key antecedents of e-government adoption and acceptance 
investigated in past research, much work remains to be done. In particular, given 
the multilevel nature and scope of e-government adoption and acceptance, future 
research is needed to investigate the influence of different stakeholders (internal and 
external constituencies) (Grönlund, 2005a) on e-government design, adoption, and 
acceptance, the mechanisms that enable integrations of a complex nature (Barki & 
Pinsonneault, 2005), and the interaction effects that exist between different ante-
cedents of e-government adoption and acceptance.

54   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Andersen and 
Henriksen 
(2006)
 E-government 
maturity mod-
els literature.
 Secondary 
data analy-
sis
 N= 110
 Conceptual
 Organizational 
 N/A
 Public sector process re-
building maturity model
 Proposes a public sector process rebuilding (PPR) 
maturity model as an extension to the Layne and 
Lee (2001) model.  
 Argues that the PPR model allows the capture of 
the strategic use of e-government systems by taking 
account all external users when performing the core 
activities of government.
Bygstad, Lanes-
tedt, and Chou-
drie (2007)
 Broadband dif-
fusion literature
 IS project 
management 
literature
 Field 
survey
 N= 130
 Organizational 
 N/A
 Service innovation
 Project management
 Broadband diffusion
 Argues that broadband service innovation in the 
public sector should focus more on the organiza-
tional rather than on the technical aspects of imple-
mentation.
 Posits that project management techniques are not 
suited to understand and manage service innovation.
Cahill (2006)
 BPR literature
 Action 
research
 N= 1
 Organizational
 N/A
 BPR
 Orgnanizational change
 Argues that the success of BPR activities is signifi-
cantly enhanced when the potential of organiza-
tional actors is fully utilized, and when change is 
delivered through people instead of method.
Caudle, Gorr, 
and Newcomer 
(1991)
 N/A
 Field 
survey
 N= 353
 Individual
 N/A
 Middle managers
 Red tape
 Local government
 “Linking the IS budgeting process and long-range 
IS planning is unique to the public sector, as is the 
technology transfer issue.”
 Top level public managers “are less inclined to 
implement new IT than middle-level public manag-
ers.”
 The “more red tape, the more flexible the IT em-
ployed.”
 Small government agencies “are more interested in 
technology transfer than large ones.”
 Local government IS issues “are driven by transac-
tion processing while state and federal government 
IS are more suitable for their oversight mission.”
Table 1. E-government “managerial practices” research
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   55
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Chan and Pan 
(2006)
 Resource based 
view
 Enactment 
concept
 Case study
 N= 1
 Organizational
 E-File sys-
tem
 Resource enactment
 Knowledge resource
 Leadership resource
 Social resource 
 Proposes a process model of resource enactment 
during three phases of e-government system imple-
mentation (planning, developing, and operating).
 Argues that the three key complementary resources 
in e-government implementation are the leadership, 
knowledge, and social resources.
 Posits that the capability to be innovative, the 
capability to be adaptive, and the capability to be 
responsive represent the focal capabilities during 
the planning, developing, and operating phases of 
implementation respectively.
Chan et al. 
(2003)
 Stakeholder 
theory
 Action 
research
 N= 1
 Organizational
 N/A
 Project management
 Relationship management
 Proposes a typology of relationships between stake-
holders and e-government projects.
Chircu and 
Hae-Dong Lee 
(2003)
 IT investments 
literature
 Case study
 N= 3
 Organizational
 e-grants ap-
plication and 
processing 
system
 IT value
 IT risk
 IT investment decision
 Political mission
 Power-shifting
 Proposes a value-oriented framework for IT invest-
ment decisions.
Cohen and Ei-
micke (2003)
 N/A
 Conceptual
 Organizational
 N/A
 Digital divide
 Procurement and information 
policies and processes
 Politics of information
 Professional skills
 Information overload
 Proposes guidelines to overcome five obstacles 
related to e-government adoption (see preceding 
column).
Davison, Wa-
gner, and Ma 
(2005)
 Transition stage 
models litera-
ture
 Conceptual 
 Organizational 
 N/A
 Transition paths
 Strategic alignment
 Proposes a five stage transition model for e-govern-
ment.
Ebrahim, Irani, 
and Al Shawi 
(2004)
 Adoption 
literature
 Stage develop-
ment models 
literature
 Conceptual
 Organizational
 N/A
 Stages of growth model
 Technological, organization-
al, and environmental factors
 Benefits and barriers
 Proposes a strategic framework for e-government 
adoption. 
Table 1. continued

56   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Esteves and 
Joseph (2006)
 N/A
 Conceptual
 Organizational
 N/A
 Maturity stages
 e-government assessment
 Stakeholders
 Proposes a framework for assessing e-government 
inititatives by taking into account the influence of 
the stakeholders and the maturity stages of e-gover-
nement deployment.
Gauld (2007)
 N/A
 Case study
 N= 1
 Organizational
 Shared medi-
cal system 
(SMS)
 IS implementation failure
 Argues that the SMS implementation failure in a 
large public Hospital was due to 14 ill managed 
elements:
“Large and multifaceted project; IS needs not de-
fined; IS project objectives not defined; No certainty 
that SMS product appropriate; Discontinuity of key 
management staff; No CIO through entire project; 
Ad-hoc reliance on external consultants for advice; 
Board views differ from management and front-line 
staff; Expectation of organizational reengineering; 
Lack of front-line staff involvement in decision-
making; Ill-constructed purchase contract; Front-
line staff resistance; Political interference in deci-
sion-making; High-level of politicization: external 
reviews, media, and political attention” (p.108).
Golden et al. 
(2003)
 BPR literature
 Case study
 N= 3 
 Organizational
 PSB (public 
service 
broker)
 BPR
 Evolutionary change
 Revolutionary change
 E-government adoption was found to be enhanced 
by top level management support and the creation of 
a central specific entity to supervise the implemen-
tation process.
Homburg and 
Beckers (2002)
 Resource 
dependency 
theory
 Property rights 
theory
 Case study
 N=2
 Organizational
 GBA (Dutch 
Municipal 
Register of 
Citizens’ 
Residential 
Data)
 NKR (Dutch 
Vehicle 
Registration)
 Back-office IS
 Political economies
 Integration
 Information exchange
 Contrasts project management and process manage-
ment characteristics, and argues that intraorganiza-
tional e-government acceptance may be enhanced 
by process management methods (rather than proj-
ect management methods) which emphasize con-
sensus building, goal seeking, identifying win-win 
situations, creating shared meanings, and coupling 
issues in various arenas (eg., system design, data 
ownership, and legislation).  
Table 1. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   57
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Jain and Patnay-
akuni (2003)
 N/A
 Conceptual
 Organizational
 N/A
 Public expectations
 Public scrutiny
 Call for research into “public expectations” and 
“public scrutiny” in the context of e-government.
 E-government initiatives are not adequately ad-
dressing “public expectations.”
 Proposes an adaptation of the Servqual approach to 
measure public expectations.
 Proposes a framework to measure public scrutiny.
Janssen and Joha 
(2006)
 Resource-based 
view
 Dynamic capa-
bility view
 Case study
 N= 2
 Organizational
 N/A
 Decision making structures
 Alignment processes
 Formal communications
 Organizational and manage-
rial processes
 Asset position
 Path dependency
 Value
 Rareness
 Nonsubstitutability
 Imperfectly imitable
 Governance mechanisms (decision-making struc-
ture, alignement processes, and formal communica-
tion) were found to significantly influence the abil-
ity to share services, and attain objectives among 
centralized and decentralized organizations.
Kawalek and 
Wastall (2005)
 BPR literature
 Case study
 N= 3
 Project
 Case 1: 
CIR (com-
prehensive 
information 
repository)
 Case 2: 
E-mail + call 
center sup-
port
 Case 3: Inter-
net sourcing 
and mainte-
nance
 Radical change
 Change methodology
 Strategic alignment
 Description and application of the Salford Pro-
cess Reeingineering Involving New Technology 
(SPRINT) methodology for process reengineering.
 E-government impacts are positive but limited in 
scope. 
 Call for discontinued strategies of change. 
 Participation may be a barrier to the success of the 
bureaucratic model.
Ke and Wei 
(2004)
 CSF and stage 
models devel-
opment litera-
ture
 Case study
 N= 1
 Organizational
 Portal
 Change Process
 Critical success factors
 Top management support was found to be a major 
enabling factor of e-government adoption at the 
infusion stage.
 Presence of a champion, change management, 
resources, mindset changes, bridging digital divide, 
usability, and strong leadership were found to be 
critical success factors of portal acceptance.
Table 1. continued

58   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Layne and Lee 
(2001)
 N/A
 Conceptual
 Organizational
 N/A
 Cataloguing
 Transaction
 Vertical integration
 Horizontal integration
 Proposes a four stage developmental model of 
e-government implementation and their associated 
technological and organizational challenges.
 “Universal access,” “privacy and confidentiality,” 
and “citizen focus in government management” are 
posited to be key factors for “efficient and effective” 
e-government.
Lee and Kim 
(2007)
 Grounded 
theory
 Field 
interviews
 N= 26
 Organizational
 N/A
 Growing systems
 Vertical integration
 Horizontal integration
 Management of emerging 
specialists
 Reward of risk takers
 Differentiated training pro-
grams
 Flexible budgetary cycle
 Accommodation of various 
viewpoints
 Fast technological develop-
ment
 E-government initiatives were found to be hindered 
by five main categories of factors: 1) financial (re-
source limitation, funding, and change of technolo-
gy); 2) organizational (smokestack phenomenon and 
scattered efforts); 3) technical (synchronization); 
4) human resources (retention); and 5) expectation 
(escalating commitment, project delay).
Melitski, Holzer, 
Kim, Kim, and 
Rho (2005)
 Stage models 
development 
literature
 Content 
analysis
 N=84 mu-
nicipality 
Web sites
 Web site
 Web site
 Security/privacy
 Usability
 Content
 Service
 Partcipation
 Develops an instrument to measure e-government 
practices in municipalities worldwide. 
 Results suggest that security and privacy issues 
should be taken into account more to enhance citi-
zens’ acceptance.
Ni and Bretsch-
neider (2005)
 Principal agent 
theory
 Secondary 
data
 N= 644 
observa-
tions
 Governmental 
services
 Multiple
 E-government services
 Contracting-out
 Contrary to what occurs at the local level, outsourc-
ing decisions at the national level are politically 
oriented.
Table 1. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   59
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Pardo and Scholl 
(2002)
 Infromation 
system devel-
opment litera-
ture
 Action 
research
 N=1
 Project 
 Central 
account-
ing system 
(CAS)
 Large-scale projects
 Risk
 Failure 
 Proposes a system development and maintenance 
framework comprising 13 cyclical activities that are 
posited to help avoid 7 identified shortcuts to fail-
ure.
 Stakeholder involvement and prototyping are pos-
ited to be critical success factors. 
Pardo et al. 
(2004)
 Organizational 
integration 
literature
 Conceptual
 Organizational
 N/A
 Interorganizational informa-
tion integration
 Social processes
 Resources 
 Organizational artifacts
 Technology artifacts
 Proposes a process model of interorganizational 
information integration. Posits that effective inter-
pretation and use of integrated information requires 
“the development and use of IT artifacts, which 
are embedded in a social process. The artifacts are 
developed jointly, through emerging social and tech-
nical processes…[These] processes are embedded 
in four different but related contexts: technology, 
business process, interorganizational, and political” 
(p. 4).
Park (2005)
 Cost-benefit 
analysis litera-
ture
 Case study
 N= 1
 Project
 Seoul Open 
System
 Efficiency
 Public goods
 Corruption
 Privacy and security
 System characteristics
 Maintenance
 Distributional and equity 
issues
 Cost-benefit analyses of government spenders were 
found to inflate the benefits of the project, while 
downplaying (or ignoring) major intangible costs.
 Maintenance and upgrading costs, as well as oppor-
tunity costs of government held assets were found 
to be the most underestimated costs of the project.
 Power issues should be taken into account in future 
research.
Roy (2005)
 Public adminis-
tration literature
 Trust literature
 Conceptual
 Illustration
 Organizational
 N/A
 Trust
 Transparency
 Security
 Service
 Governance
 Argues that public confidence and public trust are 
key determinants of e-government and e-gover-
nance reforms (p. 50)
 Posits that successful e-government and e-gover-
nance requires more integration between the techni-
cal design work of technology deployment and the 
broader governance design/redesign work oversee-
ing it (p. 52)
Table 1. continued

60   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Schildt, Beau-
master, and 
Edwards (2005)
 Strategic man-
agement model
 Case study
 N= 1
 Organizational
 MOPUS 
(municipally 
operated 
public utility 
systems)
 Change management
 Proposes a strategic management model of change 
for IT implementation.
 The complex nature of IT “poses political risks for 
the organization attempting to manage the IT infra-
structure” (p. 1).
 Successful strategies for managing IT “must take 
into account the differing value sets among [the] 
organizational and political members” (p. 1)
Schildt and 
Beaumaster 
(2004)
 Strategic plan-
ning literature
 Case study
 N= 1 
municipal 
public util-
ity depart-
ment
 Organizational 
 Various (e.g., 
SCADA, 
[System con-
trol and data 
acquisition], 
inventory bar 
code system, 
wireless 
meter read-
ing, 800 
MHz radios, 
blackberries, 
kiosks) 
 Change management
 IT Strategic planning
 Proposes a strategic information technology man-
agement framework highlighting the interactions 
between organizational, technological and political 
factors.
 Argues that internal and external driving forces for 
IT-led organizational transformation enhance the 
complexity of IT planning and management pro-
cesses.
 
Scholl (2003)
 BPR literature
 Conceptual
 Oganizational
 N/A
 Business process change
 Argues that e-government should be viewed as a 
special case of IT-enabled business process change, 
and draws 18 propositions to reflect the multidimen-
sional nature of e-government.
Scholl (2005)
 BPR literature
 Case 
study?
 N=2
 Project
 N/A
 Stakehoder involvement
 Culture/change readiness
 Process and resource inven-
tory
 Workflow analysis
 Internal competency and 
learning
 Consensus among officials 
and citizens
 Senior leadership support
 Challenges in record keeping
 Stakeholder involvement and senior executive com-
mitment were found to be the most significant issues 
affecting e-government change processes.
 Challenges in record keeping, workflow analysis 
and culture/change readiness assessment were 
found to be important issues affecting e-government 
change processes.
 Process and resource inventorying, as well as in-
ternal competency and learning were found to have 
little influence on e-government change processes.
 Consensus between officials and citizens was found 
to have no effect on e-government change process-
es.
Table 1. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   61
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Shackelton, 
Fisher, and 
Dawson (2004)
 Maturity mod-
els literature 
 Content 
analysis
 N= 20 Web 
sites
 Case study
 N=1
 Web site
 Web site 
 Local government
 E-management
 E-service
 E-commerce
 E-decion making/ e-democ-
racy
 Suggests that e-government linear maturity models 
may not fit the local government context since it 
was found that most municipalities had relatively 
immature Web sites while at the same time offering 
electronic participatory functions that were more 
advanced than higher government levels.
Tan et al. (2005)
 Organizational 
change litera-
ture
 Conceptual
 Case study  
N= 1
 Organizational
 CORENET
 Barriers to adoption
 Change intervention
 Proposes a three stage framework linking change 
interventions (commanding, engineering, teaching, 
and socializing) to adoption barriers.
Thong et al. 
(2000)
 BPR literature
 Case study 
 N= 1
 Project
 N/A
 Radical change
 Change methodology
 Differences between public 
and private sector
 Public organizations are “highly resistant to change” 
(p. 265). 
 Mass-media communication plays an important role 
in informing public managers about the necessity of 
change as well as its challenges.
 A neutral reengineering team facilitates the change 
process.
 Management support facilitates the implementation 
process 
 The use of pilot sites is an important success factor 
for e-government adoption.
Williams and 
Beynon-Davies 
(2004)
 Value chain 
literature
 Text analy-
sis
 N= 22 
 Organizational
 N/A
 Implementation enablers
 Proposes a value chain model positing that supply 
chain (e.g., extranets and tele-working), internal 
value chain (e.g., integration), customer chain (e.g., 
customer relationship management or CRM), infor-
matics planning, informatics management, informat-
ics development, and e-community represent key 
enabling factors of implementation success.
Table 1. continued

62   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Bélanger and 
Carter (2005)
 TAM
 Trust literature
 Field survey
 N= 214
 Individual
 Government 
online (not 
specified)
 Disposition to trust
 Institution-based trust
 Characteristic-based 
trust
 Perceived risk
 Intention to use
 Institution-based trust and characteristic-based trust 
were found to have a significant influence on inten-
tion to use.
 Disposition to trust had a significant influence on 
Institution-based and characteristic-based trust.
 Perceived risk had a significant influence on inten-
tion to use but not in the hypothesized direction.
 Institution-based trust had no impact on perceived 
risk.
 Characteristic-based trust had a significant and nega-
tive impact on perceived risk.
Bretschneider 
and Wittmer 
(1993)
 Innovation dif-
fusion theory
 Field survey
 N= 1005
 Organizational
 Microcom-
puters 
 Adoption
 Diffusion
 Environmental factors
 Facilitating and inhib-
iting adoption factors
 Prior experience
 Slack resources
 Red tape and bureau-
cracy
 After controlling for “organizational size, experi-
ence with computer technology, current investment 
in computer technology, procurement practices, and 
the task environment, the sector an organization 
operates in has a major influence on the adoption of 
microcomputer technology” (p. 88).
 Public organizations have more computers per em-
ployee, which can be due to their information intensive 
environment, as well as the use of IT as a side payment 
in lieu of salary, compared to private organizations.
Carter and Bé-
langer (2004)
 TAM
 Innovation dif-
fusion theory
 Trust literature
 Field survey
 N= 136 stu-
dents
 Individual 
 State e-
government 
sercives (not 
specified)
 Perceived usefulness
 Compatibility
 Relative advantage
 Image 
 Complexity
 Perceived ease of use 
(PEOU)
 Intention to use
 Perceived usefulness, relative advantage, and 
compatibility were found to significantly influence 
intention to use.
 No support was found for the link between PEOU, 
image, and complexity on intention to use.
Table 2. E-government “organizational and individual characteristics” research
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   63
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Carter and Bé-
langer (2005)
 Technology ac-
ceptance model
 Innovation dif-
fusion theory
 Trust literature
 Field survey
 N= 105
 Individual
 Department 
of Motor 
Vehicle 
(DMV) on-
line system
 Department 
of Taxation 
(TAX) on-
line system
 Compatibility
 Relative advantage
 Image
 Complexity
 PEOU
 Perceived Usefullness 
(PU)
 Trust of Internet
 Trust of Government
 Intention to use
 Compatibility, PEOU, and perceived trustworthiness 
were found to significantly influence citizens’ inten-
tion to use.
 Image and relative advantage did not have a signifi-
cant influence on intention to use.
Chen, Fan, and 
Farn (2007)
 Transaction 
cost theory
 Field survey
 N=255
 Individual
 Electronic 
Toll Collec-
tion System 
(ETC)
 Uncertainty 
 Asset specificity
 Perceived risk
 Transaction frequency
 Intention to adopt
 Uncertainty and asset specificity were found to have 
a significant effect on perceived risk.
 Perceived risk was found to have a significant and 
negative effect on intention to adopt and so forth.
 Transaction frequency was found to have a signifi-
cant effect on intention to adopt and so forth.
Conklin (2007)
 TAM
 Theory of 
reasoned action 
(TRA)
 Change 
management 
literature
 Innovation 
diffusion 
literature
 Conceptual
 Individual
 N/A
 Attitude
 Subjective norm
 Behavioral intention
 Senior leadership
 Constituent desires
 Bureaucratic rules
 Usage behavior
 PEOU
 PU
 Intention to use
 Proposes an extension to TRA and TAM models in 
the context of e-government adoption.
 Proposes the following moderating effects. For 
TRA: 1) leadership moderates the relationship 
between attitude and intention; 2) constituent desires 
moderate the relationship between subjective norm 
and intention; and 3) bureaucratic rules moderates 
the relationship between intention and use. For 
TAM: 1) leadership and constituent desires moderate 
the relationship between PU and intention; and 2) 
bureaucratic rules moderate the relationship between 
PEOU and intention, and between intention and use.
Table 2. continued

64   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Dawes et al. 
(2003)
 Public ad-
ministration 
literature
 IS use lit-
erature (not 
specified)
 Field inter-
views
 N= 22 admin-
istrators od 
data reposito-
ries
 Prototype 
evaluation
 N= 3 proto-
types
 Application
 NYS-GIS 
(New 
York State 
Geographic 
Information 
System)
 HIMS 
(Homeless 
Information 
Manage-
ment Sys-
tem)
 KWIC 
(Kids’ 
Well-being 
indicator 
Clearing-
house)
 Characteristics of 
users
 Predictability of uses
 Sensitivity of content
 Frame of reference 
 Status of meta data
 Uniformity of infor-
mation sources
 Degree of integration 
among information 
sources
 Usefulness of content 
over time
 Structure of relation-
ships with information 
suppliers and users
 Involvement of access 
provider
 Extent of data analysis 
conducted by access 
provider
 Nature of data flows
 Suitability of existing 
IT
 Relationship of the 
access program to 
overall organizational 
mission
 Design, implementation and operation of govern-
ment access systems were found to be influenced by 
15 dimensions related to information users, sup-
pliers, content, or use, and to aspects of the access 
program and its organizational context (see preced-
ing column).
 Interactions among the dimensions are positied to be 
crucial implementation factors. Three specific inter-
action groups were identified: a) interaction between 
nature of users and uses and nature of available data 
and metadata; b) interaction between size and nature 
of data repository and relationships among players, 
organizational structures, and business processes; 
and c) interactions between IT investments and the 
place of the investment in the mission of the pro-
vider organization (p.7). 
Doellman et al. 
(2006)
 Unified theory 
of acceptance 
and use of 
technology 
(UTAUT)
 Field survey
 N= 76 students
 Individual
 Online vot-
ing
 Performance expec-
tancy
 Effort expectancy
 Social influence
 Computer anxiety
 Trust
 Performance expectancy, social influence, and trust 
in the Internet were found to have a significant influ-
ence on intention to use online voting.
 Experience was found to moderate the relationship 
between performance expectancy and intention to 
use.
Fulla and Welch 
(2002)
 Interactivty 
literature 
 Case study 
 N= 1
 Relationship 
 ICAM 
 Communicative 
interaction model
 Relationships 
 Proposes a four stage model of interactive com-
munication between citizens and governments that 
develops upon virtual feedback. 
Table 2. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   65
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Gallat, Culnan, 
and McLoughlin 
(2007)
 Adoption 
literature
 Field survey
 N= 953
 Individual
 Electronic 
Tax Filing 
system 
 E-Filing
 Convenience
 Expensive
 Ease of use
 Risk 
 People who e-filed were found to perceive e-filing 
as less useful (measured as convenience) and less 
expensive than non e-filers.
Gefen et al. 
(2002)
 TAM
 Trust literature
 Field survey
 N= 243 MBA 
students
 Individual
 Online tax 
service
 PU
 PEOU
 Social influence
 Perceived risk
 Belief in Humanity
 Disposition to trust
 Predictability 
 Integrity
 Benevolence
 Ability 
 Intention to use
 Perceived social 
characteristics
 Institutional guaran-
tees
 Process-mode trust
 Nature of expected 
interaction 
 PU and social influence had a significant impact on 
intention to use and explained 33% of its variance.
 PEOU had a significant impact on PU.
 Social influence and trust were found to have a 
significant impact on PU.
 Perceived risk had a significant and negative impact 
on PU.
 Trust had a significant and negative impact on Risk.
 Trust had a significant influence on PEOU.
 Trust was found to be significantly influenced by 
belief in humanity, the nature of expected interac-
tion, the perceived social characteristics, and by the 
Institutional guarantees.
 Disposition to trust had no influence on trust.
Gilbert et al. 
(2004)
 Innovation dif-
fusion theory
 TAM
 Service quality 
literature
 Field survey
 N= 111
 Individual 
 Online pub-
lic service 
delivery
 Perceived relative 
benefits
 Avoid personal inter-
action
 Cost
 Time
 Perceived barriers
 Visual appeal
 Experience
 Financial security
 Information quality
 Low stress
 Trust 
 Willingness to use
 Time, cost, financial security, trust, and information 
quality were found to significantly influence willing-
ness to use.
 Ease of use was not found to be a significant deter-
minant of willingness to use.
 Older respondents (55+) were found to be less will-
ing to use online public services than younger ones.
Table 2. continued

66   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Grönlund 
(2003)
 Actor network 
theory
 Case study 
 N= 4
 Organizational 
 E-mail
 Discussion 
forums
 Web site
 Electronic 
search tools
 E-voting
 Translation
 Inscription
 Negotiation 
 Emerging electronic 
infrastructures
 E-democracy
 Politics “as design” (top-down strategy) and politics 
“as evolution” (bottom-up strategy) constitute two 
conflicting perspectives in the development of e-
democracy.
 The “increasing use of IT in administrative pro-
cesses, […] restricts the action space of the politi-
cal sphere, as this infrastructure becomes hard to 
change” (p. 69).
 The “civil society cultures, […] contain strong so-
cial elements but less of the characteristics of formal 
politics” (p. 69).
 The “official e-democracy initiatives, […] generally 
endorse information rather than participation”  (p. 
69).
Henriksen et al. 
(2004)
 N/A
 Conceptual
 Organizational
 PePP (Pub-
lic eProcur-
ment Portal)
 Public procurement 
adoption
 Economic rationality
 Political rationality
 Argues that economic rationalities are a necessary 
but insufficient condition for adopting public pro-
curement systems.
 Pricinpal barriers to adoption are posited to stem 
from structural-political issues related to widespread 
decentralization among government levels in Den-
mark.
 Suggests that a split between task and responsibility 
may decrease adoption barriers. 
Hinnant and 
Welch (2002)
 Adoption 
literature
 Field survey
 N= 856 pro-
gram manag-
ers
 Individual 
 N/A
 Self-efficacy
 Use 
 Training
 Education level
 Work experience
 IT strategy
 IT activities
 IT quality
 Computer self-efficay was found to be significantly 
influenced by the level of IT training and the extent 
of IS usage.
 Computer self-efficay was found to significantly in-
fluence managers’ perceptions regarding the effects 
of IT usage.
Table 2. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   67
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Ho (2002)
 N/A
 Content analy-
sis
 N= 46 cities
 Organizational
 WWW
 Local government 
reinvention
 The e-government paradigm, which emphasizes 
coordinated network building, external collabora-
tion, and one-stop customer services, contradicts the 
traditional bureaucratic paradigm, which emphasizes 
standardization, departmentalization, and division of 
labor.
 “Insufficient staff, lack of funding and the problem of 
digital divide among racial groups are major hindering 
factors” (p. 440) to the paradigm shift.
Holden, Norris, 
and Fletcher 
(2003)
 Adoption 
literature
 Field survey
 N= 1881 
(municipalities 
and counties)
 Organizational
 Web sites
 Local government 
adoption
 E-government barriers
 Web site adoption was found to be related to size of 
government, level and form of government, region 
and metro status (p. 4).
 Lack of technology/Web staff, financial resources, 
technology/Web expertise, information about e-
government applications, as well as security and 
privacy issues, the need to upgrade technologies, 
convenience fees for online transactions issues, and 
lack of support from elected officials were found to 
be the major barriers to e-government adoption at 
the local level.
Hung et al. 
(2006)
 Theory of 
Planned Be-
havior (TPB)
 Field study
 N= 1099
 Individual
 Online tax 
filing and 
payment 
system
 PEOU
 PU
 Perceived risk
 Trust
 Personal innovative-
ness
 Compatibility
 Attitude
 Exetrnal influence
 Interpersonal influ-
ence
 Subjective norms
 Self-efficay
 Facilitating conditions
 Perceived behavioral 
control
 Behavioral intention
 PEOU, PU, perceived risk, trust and compatibility 
were found to have a significant influence on atti-
tude.
 External and interpersonal influence were found to 
have a significant influence on subjective norms.
 Self-efficay and facilitating conditions were found 
to have a significant effect on Perceived behavioral 
control.
 Attitude, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral 
control were found to have a significant influence 
on behavioral intention and explained 72% of its 
variance.
 Sub-group comparisons between adopters (N=1008) 
and nonadopters (N=91) are also provided.
Table 2. continued

68   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Kim and 
Bretschneider 
(2004)
 Innovation and 
IT innovation 
literature
 Case study
 N= 7 munici-
palities
 Organizational
 Multiple 
(e.g., PCs, 
office ap-
plications, 
wireless 
devices, 
payroll 
systems, HR 
systems, 
etc.)
 IT capacity
 Managerial capability 
of IT manager
 Administrative au-
thorities support
 Financial support
 IT capacity (defined as the ability of the local gov-
ernment to effectively apply IT to achieve desired 
ends) was found to be influnced by the managerial 
capability of IT manager through interactions with 
administrative support and financial support. 
Lee and Rao 
(2007)
 Social ex-
change theory
 Transaction 
cost theory
 IT acceptance 
literature.
 Conceptual
 Field survey 
(pilot)
 N= 25
 Organizational
 Interagency 
anti/counter 
terrorism 
informa-
tion sharing 
systems.
 Information sensitivity
 Perceived mutual 
benefit
 Other’s info assurance
 Subjective organiza-
tional norm
 Ease of systems 
integration
 Internal systems 
utilization
 Institutional pressure
 Info sharing standards
 Info sharing systems 
acceptance.
 Perceived information assurance of others, and 
information sensitivity were found to have a posi-
tive corrrelation with information sharing systems 
acceptance.
 Subjective organizational norm and institutional 
pressure were found to have a positive correlation 
with information sharing systems acceptance and 
with interorganizational  information sharing.
 Subjective organizational norm was found to have a 
positive correlation with Information sensitivity and 
perceived mutual benefits from information sharing.
Table 2. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   69
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Lee, Braynov 
and Rao (2005)
 TAM 
 Trust literature
 Field survey
 N= 158
 Individual
 NS
 Trust in the Govern-
ment
 Perceived public 
emergency
 Trusting beliefs in 
e-Government
 Perceived riskiness
 PU
 Intention to depend on 
information
 Intention to provide 
personal information
 Intention to use 
 Citizens’ trust in the government and perceived 
public scrutiny were found to have marginal ef-
fects on individual trusting beliefs in e-government, 
perceived riskiness of the Internet, and perceived 
usefulness of e-government services.
 Trusting beliefs in e-government and PU had a 
significant effect on intention to use, on intention to 
provide personal information, and on intention to 
depend on information.
 Perceived riskiness had a significant and negative 
effect on intention to use, and on intention to provide 
personal information.
Lee and Rao 
(2003)
 Trust literature 
 Conceptual + 
pilot experi-
ment (N= 48 
students)
 Individual
 Department 
of Natural 
Resources 
Web sites
 Web site attributes
 Domain of authority
 Authority
 Structural assurance 
belief
 Competence belief
 Benevolence belief
 Integrity belief
 Trusting intention
 Proposes a conceptual model predicting intention to 
transact with online government services.
 The preliminary experiment found that “not all 
government sites command the same level of trust 
and that they cannot sorely rely on their authorities 
expecting successful online services” (p. 825).
Lee et al. (2005)
 IT acceptance 
literature
 Trust literature
 Field survey
 N= 84
 Individual
 IRS e-file 
service
 E-file experience
 Perceived potential 
benefit
 Trust in e-government 
 Belief in goodwill
 Domain competence
 Internet competence
 Trust in government 
and businesses
 Disposition to trust
 Internet risk
 Internet self-efficacy
 Intention to use
 Belief in IRS goodwill did not have a significant 
direct or indirect effect on intention to use.
 Internet competence belief was found to have a 
significant indirect effect, through potential benefit, 
on intention to use.
 The interaction of relational risk and goodwill of 
third party was found to be a “possible determinant” 
of intention to use.
 Trust in government was found to influence the 
belief in the goodwill of e-government authority.
 Direct positive experience was found to have a signifi-
cant effect on trusting beliefs.
Table 2. continued

70   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Luna-Reyes, Gil-
Garcia, and Cruz 
(2006)
 N/A
 Semistructured 
interviews (N= 
18)
 Documenta-
tion analysis
 Organizational
 N/A
 Collaboration
 Trust
 Benefits
 Risk
 Institutional arrange-
ments
 Organizational struc-
tures
 integration
 Proposes a framework explaining how institutions 
affect cross-organizational collaboration and interor-
ganizational information integration.
 The framework proposes that cross-organizational 
collaboration is the result of initial trust, which in 
turn is the result of perceived risk and perceived 
benefits of the project.
Moon (2002)
 E-government 
developmental 
stages litera-
ture.
 Survey
 N= 1471
 Organizational
 Web site, In-
tranet
 E-government adop-
tion
 E-government evolu-
tion
 Information stage
 Two-way communica-
tion stage
 Service and financial 
transaction
 Vertical and horizontal 
integration
 Political participation
 85.3% of the responding municipal governments had 
a Web site, and 57.4% of them had an Intranet.
 8.2% of the responding municipal governments were 
found to have a “comprehensive strategy or master 
plan to guide their future e-government initiatives.”
 Adoption and longevity of municipal government Web 
sites were found to be positively associated with their 
size.
 Lack of financial resources, lack of technology staff 
and expertise, technological upgrades, security, and 
privacy issues were found to hinder e-government 
adoption and evolution.
Norris and 
Moon (2005)
 IT adoption 
literature
 Field survey
 N= 1881 local 
governments 
in 2000, and 
N= 4125 local 
governments 
in 2002.
 Organizational 
 Web sites
 Adoption
 Organizational charac-
teristics
 Organizational output 
and outcomes 
 Local governments in the US “continue to make 
incremental progress in adopting and deploying 
e-government systems” (p. 72).
 Adoption of Web sites by public administrations “is 
strongly related to local government size (measured 
in terms of population)” (p. 72).
 “Not all reported impacts of e-government are posi-
tive” (p. 72).
 The most significant barriers to e-government 
adoption include lack of technology, Web staff, and 
financial resources, as well as privacy and security 
issues.
Table 2. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   71
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Norris (2005)
 N/A
 Field survey 
(2)
 N= 1881 local 
governments 
in 2000, and 
N= 4125 local 
governments 
in 2002.Focus 
group
 N= 37
 Organizational
 Web sites 
 Local government 
adoption
 Nonfinancial transac-
tions
 Financial transactions 
 Argues that while local governments were found to 
plan enhancements to their e-government service 
offerings, the pace of adoption would be slow.
 Shows that future e-government adoption at the 
local level involves more difficult implementation 
issues such as “integration with back office systems, 
integrating Web applications horizontally across the 
“silos” within governments, and integrating verti-
cally among levels of government…”(p.4).
Phang et al. 
(2005)
 TAM
 Field survey
 N= 99
 Individual
 Central 
provident 
fund (CPF) 
e-With-
drawal
 Compatibility
 Image
 Internet safety percep-
tions
 PEOU
 PU
 Intention to Use
 Contrary to Morris and Venkatesh (2000), perceived 
usefulness was found to be the most significant 
predictor of use intention in the context of senior 
citizens’ adoption intention in non-working work-
place settings. 
 Compatibility and image had no significant effect on 
perceived usefulness. 
Internet safety perceptions and perceived ease of use 
had a significant effect on perceived usefulness.
Phang and 
Kankanhalli 
(2005)
 Participation 
theories
 Conceptual
 Individual
 N/A
 Incentives-related 
factors
 Resource-related fac-
tors
 Political institution 
factors
 Social capital factors
 Personal belief factors
 IT factors 
 Participation
 Proposes a research framework for citizen participa-
tion via e-consultation.
Pieterson, 
Ebbers, and van 
Dijk (2007)
 Implementa-
tion literature
 TAM
 Conceptual
 Organizational
 Individual
 N/A
 Personalization of 
electronic services
 Organizational ob-
stacles
 User obstacles
 Proposes that implementation and use of personal-
ized electronic services are hindered by five orga-
nizational obstacles (i.e., process-based, financial, 
governance based, legal, and technical) and five user 
obstacles (i.e., access, trust, privacy, control, and 
acceptance).
Table 2. continued

72   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Scatolini and 
Cordella (2005)
 Interpretive 
perspective
 Action re-
search
 N= 1 project
 Organizational
 “onlining 
project”: 
various 
hardware 
and soft-
ware.
 IT adoption
 IT sensemaking
 IT as a social object
 “Management capacity of the direction,” “Personal 
and professional training” and “sharing responsibil-
ity for change” were found to be the most significant 
issues affecting IT implementation and adoption.
 The “defence of political bonds” was found to be the 
most salient resistance factor to IT adoption.
 “Human resource management,” “Organizational 
climate” and “decision making and responsibility 
assumption” were found to be strong determinants 
of organizational innovation.
S o r r e n t i n o 
(2005)
 Organizational 
change litera-
ture
 Case study
 N= 1 
 Organizational 
process
 Automatic 
filing system
 Resistance
 Process analysis
 Proposes a process-oriented perspective for under-
standing resistance to change and IT adoption.
Srivastava and 
Teo (2006a)
 Technology-
organization-
environment 
framework 
(Tornatzky and 
Fleisher)
 Secondary 
data analysis
 N= 115
 National
 N/A
 ICT infrastructure
 Technology develop-
ment
 Human capital
 Public institutions
 Macro-economy
 E-government devel-
opment
 ICT infrastructure, technology development, and 
human capital were found to have a significant 
relationship on e-government development.
 In post-hoc analysis, public institutions were found 
to be significantly, but negatively, related to e-gov-
ernment development.
Table 2. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   73
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Srivastava and 
Teo (2006b)
 Technology-
organization-
environment 
framework 
(Tornatzky and 
Fleisher)
 IT impact 
literature
 Secondary 
data analysis
 N= 113
 National
 N/A
 ICT infrastructure
 Human capital
 Public institutions
 Macro-economy
 E-government devel-
opment
 E-business develop-
ment
 Business competitive-
ness 
 ICT infrastructure was found to have a significant 
influence on e-government development.
 Quality of human capital was found to have a 
significant effect on e-government development.
 No support was found regarding the effect of public 
institutions and the macr-economy on e-government 
development.
Tan et al. (2005)
 Trust literature
 Case study
 N= 1
 Individual
 E-filing 
system
 Process-based trust
 Characteristic-based 
trust
 Institution-based trust
 Each trust mode can only be restored through a blend 
of sociopolitical strategies and IT
Treiblmaier, Pin-
terits, and Floh 
(2004)
 Theory of 
planned behav-
ior
 Field survey
 N= 631
 Individual
 Electronic 
payment 
systems
 Frictionless use
 Trust in e-payment 
security
 Experience
 Attitude toward e-pay-
ment
 Intention to use e-pay-
ment
 Experience with online payment was found to signifi-
cantly influence frictionless use and trust in e-payment 
security.
 Attitude toward e-payment was found to be significantly 
influenced by frictionless use and trust in e-payment 
security.
 Attitude had a significant impact on intention to use 
e-payment. 
Ventura (1995)
 Innovation dif-
fusion theory
 Case study 
 N= 1
 “Participant 
observation” 
(multiple 
agencies, num-
ber not speci-
fied)
 Organizational
 GIS
 Adoption
 Use 
 Technical factors
 Organizational factors
 Institutional factors
 Barriers to adoption include technical, organizational 
and institutional factors.
 Technical factors affecting adoption include system 
components, system design and technical expertise 
(p. 461).
 Organizational factors affecting adoption include 
“how well the staff of the organization understands 
the technology and its role, and how the organization 
adapts to new sources and types of information” (p. 
461).
 Institutional factors affecting adoption include “in-
tergovernmental relations, the economic and legal 
environment… the mandates and budgets under which 
(the agency) operates, and the perceptions of other 
organizations and the public” (p. 465).
Table 2. continued

74   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Warkentin et al. 
(2002)
 Technology ac-
ceptance model
 Theory of 
planned behav-
ior
 Trust literature
 Conceptual
 Individual
 N/A
 Institutional structures
 Disposition to trust
 Characteristics-based 
trust
 Experience
 PEOU
 PU
 Perceived behavioral 
control
 Perceived risk
 Degree of intrusive-
ness
 Culture (uncertainty 
avoidance)
 Culture (power dis-
tance acceptance)
 Intention to engage in 
e-government
 Proposes a conceptual model of key factors affecting 
individual e-government adoption.
We e r a k k o d , 
Choudrie, and 
Currie (2004)
 Stage develop-
ment models 
literature
 Case study
 N= 1
 Multiple
 Web site 
 Adoption barriers
 Accessibility of Web sites, paradigm shift, financial 
constraints, political constraints, technological con-
straints, data protection and security constraints, trust, 
awareness, usability, computer knowledge, and langage 
were found to be key barriers to adoption.
Table 2. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   75
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analy-
sis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments.
Coursey, Welch, 
and Pandey 
(2005)
 Web site ef-
fectiveness
 Filed survey
 N= 274 
 Individual
 Web sites
 Web help
 Centralization
 Records 
 Goal ambiguity
 Internal communica-
tion
 Bureaucratic culture
 Innovation culture
 Red tape
 External communica-
tion
 Political influence
 Customer orientation
 Budget
 Program
 Client groups pressure
 State pressure
 National political influ-
ence
 Regulatory pressure
 Web site effectiveness was positively related 
to external political and business pressures, 
internal communication characteristics, inno-
vative organizational culture, and size.
 External pressures positively affected Web site 
adoption by legitimating internal managerial 
actions.
 Web site adoption is effective when organiza-
tions are entrepreneurial, innovative, and open 
to external influence.
Drake et al. 
(2004)
 Archival 
documents 
analysis
 Critical 
incident inter-
views
 Conceptual
 Case study
 N= 2
 Organiza-
tional
 N/A
 Information sharing
 Public management 
context
 Political context
 Science context
 Bureaucrat subculture
 Political subculture
 Scientist subculture
 Choices “about data and data systems are 
predicated on a political stance and create 
political consequences” (p. 78).
 Information sharing systems “need to account 
for the downstream implications of choices 
people make, upstream requirements for in-
formation people need to make these choices, 
and tributary contributions and expectations 
regarding information from outside constitu-
encies” (p. 79).
 The three subcultures “have different pres-
sures, mandates, and goals for their work and, 
as a result, have developed differences in their 
bodies of knowledge and practices” (p. 80).
Table 3. E-government “subculture” research

76   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analy-
sis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments.
Dubauskas 
(2005)
 Privacy 
protection
 Literature 
review
 Web site 
evaluation 
(replication)
 Application
 Web sites
 Self-regulation
 Legislation
 Citizens’ expectations are not taken into 
consideration during the elaboration of confi-
dentiality policies.
 Public agencies do not consider consumer privacy 
concerns 
Siau and Long 
(2004)
 Growth 
theory
 Human 
capital theory
 Secondary 
data analysis
 E-govern-
ment Reports 
(2003)
 Human 
development 
report (2003)
 Project
 Web sites
 Information and com-
puter technology
 Human development 
indicator (HDI)
 E-government develop-
ment
 Technological and social factors affect the 
adoption of e-government by public adminis-
trations 
 E-government development for countries with 
high HDI is significantly different from coun-
tries with medium or low HDI.
Table 3. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   77
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.
analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Barnes and 
Vigden (2003)
 N/A
 Field survey
 N= 65 (T1) 
and 59 (T2)
 Web site
 FSMKE 
(Strategic 
Management 
Knowledge 
Exchange) 
Web site
 Usability
 Infromation quality
 Service interaction
 Ease of use was found to be a major factor of 
Web site usability. 
 Argues that evaluation and use of transna-
tional e-government Web sites varies across 
cultures.
Fedorowicz, 
Gogan, Gelinas, 
and Williams 
(2004)
 Adoption 
literature
 Case study
 N= 1
 Organiza-
tional
 IPP (Internet 
payment 
platform)
 Data technical issues
 Data utility issues
 Data security issues
 The appreciating database (i.e., a database 
where data is retained and available for inquiry 
at any time) was found to be a key enabling 
factor of IPP adoption. Data technical issues 
(e.g., handling of orders), utility issues (e.g., 
error reduction), and security issues (e.g., 
access control) were found to influence IPP 
adoption.
Gant and Gant 
(2001)
 N/A
 Content analy-
sis
 N= 50 State 
Web sites
 Web site
 Web sites
 Openness
 Customization
 Usability
 Transparency
 Accesibility
 Scroll down menu for information access is 
posited to facilitate Web site use as well as 
Web site maintenance and upgrade.
 Only three states were found to provide 
customization features for their Web sites.
 Intuitive menu system, site map, new informa-
tion indicators, search tools, common state 
logo, uniform masterhead, and dynamically 
generated list boxes were found to be key 
features of Web site usability.
 User help, online training, and assistance 
focused on new users were found to enhance 
usability.
 User ability to generate transactional receipts, 
absence of advertising, and security and 
privacy features were found to enhance Web 
site transparency
Table 4. E-government “IT characteristics” research

78   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.
analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Huang (2003)
 W3C Web 
content acces-
sibility guide-
lines
 Content analy-
sis
 N=35 Web 
sites
 Web site 
 Web sites 
 Accessibility indica-
tors
 Posits that Web site accessibility is enhanced 
when a strategic planning team is formed to 
apply the W3C guidelines. 
 Use of “alt” attributes, simplicity and clar-
ity of the interface, incorporation of new 
technologies (e.g., flash), and the existence 
of formal accessibility rules and regulations 
were found to enhance usability for citizens 
with disabilities.
Jaeger (2006)
 Section 508 
Rehabilitation 
Act compli-
ance. 
 Policy analy-
sis
 User testing 
(N=10)
 Expert testing
 Field survey 
(N=4)
 Web site
 Web sites
 Accessibility indica-
tors
 Compliance with section 508 was found to 
significantly vary between Web sites, thus 
hindering use of e-government sites by people 
with disabilities.
 Failure of text or buttons on sites to enlarge, 
the lack of sufficient space between lines of 
text, and the use of colors that were hard to 
distinguish were found to inhibit Web sites 
use (p. 184).
 Web site design for users with cognitive 
impairement, and users with learning dis-
abilities were found to be neglected among 
government Web sites.
Table 4. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   79
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.
analysis
Technology
Variables.or.key.con-
cepts.
Main.results.or.arguments
Northrop (2003)
 N/A
 Secondary 
data analysis
 N= 42 cities
 Organiza-
tional
 WWW
 Diffusion
 Many city Web sites are not frequently 
updated: 1/3 of the Urbis cities waited more 
than a month before any changes were made. 
1/8 updated weekly and 50% updated daily.
 There were “no absolutely common features 
on city web pages” (p. 12).
 Online transaction features “are still very rare 
across the board except in the cutting edge 
Best of Web cities” (p. 12).
 “Budget and privacy constraints are critical to 
how fast cities can move” to the transactional 
phase
Waddell and 
Broning (2004)
 N/A
 Case study 
 N= 1
 Project
 UrbanSim
 Project management
 Agile software devel-
opment
 Proposes an approach to identify real, 
unmet needs of local and regional govern-
ments
 Proposes a model specification process for 
developing e-government systems.
Wang, Bretsch-
neider, and Gant 
(2005)
 Web site 
evaluation 
standards
 Case study N= 
1
 Lab experi-
ment N= 1
 Individual
 Web sites
 Task characteristics
 Process outcome
 Site characteristics
 Individual characteris-
tics
 Develops a client centric Web design meth-
odology.
Table 4. continued

80   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analy-
sis
Technology
Variables.or.
key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments.
Abhichan-
dani and Horan 
(2006)
 User satisfac-
tion literature
 Field survey
 N1= 155 
 N2= 246
 individual
 Online 
advanced 
transporta-
tion in-
formation 
services
 Utility
 Reliability
 Efficiency
 Customiza-
tion
 Flexibility
 E-gov satis-
faction
 Proposes and tests a scale of 15 items for the measure-
ment of e-government satisfaction.
Danziger 
(2004)
 Innovation 
theory
 Critical book 
review
 Multiple
 Internet
 Technology 
enactment
 IT allows for “levels of integration and cooperation that 
far exceed those possible with earlier modes of main-
frame and desktop computing. The potential for such 
deeper structural changes raises the stakes for bureau-
cratic actors” (p. 108).
 Both the “bureaucratic structure and the behavior of 
key actors will determine the nature of IT use and its 
impacts” (p. 109).
 The manner in which “IT will be enacted is dependent 
on the interplay of bureaucracy, networks, and institu-
tional arrangements” (p. 109).
 Bureaucratic actors in the public sector are “driven by 
certain embedded imperatives and calculations that are 
possibly at risk or even incompatible with the likely ef-
fects of Web-based systems on behavior, incentives and 
information flows.”
Table 5. E-government “impact measurement” research
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   81
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analy-
sis
Technology
Variables.or.
key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments.
Gasco (2003)
 New institu-
tionalism
 Conceptual 
 Organiza-
tional
 N/A
 Institutional 
change
 E-government projects “are being implemented consid-
ering the type of institution they are inserted into” (p. 
13).
 E-government projects “will cause institutional change 
when they give rise to the adjustments of the whole set 
of technological, managerial, and political variables 
affected by ICT implementations” (p. 13).
 E-government projects “do not determine whether 
institutional change, when it occurs, takes a positive or 
a negative direction” (p. 13).
 E-government projects “do not necessarily alter that 
type of institution for greater efficiency and transpar-
ency or lead to culture and actors’ mental models trans-
formations” (p. 13).
 There is a need for further research regarding the ‘spe-
cific institutional constraints government agencies have 
to face when implementing e-government systems, [as 
well as] the strategies needed to facilitate a positive 
institutional change leading to a sustainable, successful 
e-government project implementation” (p. 13).
Gupta and Jana 
(2003)
 Performance 
measurement 
literature
 Case study
 N= 1
 Project
 NDMC E-
government 
infrastruc-
ture
 Cost benefit 
analysis
 Benchmark-
ing 
 Scoring 
method 
 Stages of e-
government
 Sociological 
angle
 Hierarchy of 
performance 
measures
 Proposes a framework to measure e-government tan-
gible and intangible benefits by combining hard and soft 
performance measures.
Table 5. continued

82   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analy-
sis
Technology
Variables.or.
key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments.
Grönlund 
(2005a)
 Actor net-
work theory
 Structuration 
theory
 Institutional 
theory
 Conceptual
 Organiza-
tional
 NA
 Political 
sphere
 Administra-
tive sphere
 Civil society
 Motivation
 Interest
 Mode of 
operation
 E-government systems “will only achieve long-term 
success when they sufficiently well implement interests 
and modes of operation of all three spheres of a gover-
nance system: formal politics, administration, and civil 
society” (p. 7).
Hae-Dong Lee 
(2005)
 IT business 
value
 Literature 
review
 Meta-analy-
sis
 N= 39 ar-
ticles
 Project
 NA
 IT value
 Public vs. 
private 
sector differ-
ences
 The public sector is inclined to use “soft” metrics to 
measure IT business value.
 E-government initiatives have a distinct set of business 
value sources different from those of e-business proj-
ects.
Table 5. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   83
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analy-
sis
Technology
Variables.or.
key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments.
Kraemer and 
King (2003)
 N/A
 Conceptual
 Organiza-
tional
 N/A
 Integration 
 Radical 
change
 IT impact
 IT use
 Administrative reform “involves the making of dramat-
ic, fundamental or radical change in form, and not just 
a change in degree as implied by the phrase ‘continuous 
improvement.’ Reform can be fast and disruptive or 
slow and incremental” (p. 4).
 There is “greater ‘readiness’ for administrative reform 
and for approaches such as reengineering than ever 
before” (p. 5).
 “Experience with IT and administrative reform has 
shown technology to be useful in some cases of admin-
istrative reform, but only when reform expectations are 
already well established. IT applications do not cause 
reform” (p. 8).
 “IT applications have brought relatively little change to 
organizational structures, and seem to reinforce existing 
structures” (p. 9).
 “The benefits of IT have not been evenly distributed 
within government organizational functions: the pri-
mary beneficiaries have been functions favored by the 
dominant political-administrative coalitions in public 
administrations, and not those of technical elites, middle 
managers, clerical staff, or ordinary citizens” (p. 10).
 Government organizations “are driven by political/in-
stitutional forces that are not and cannot be subjected 
to destructive change without severe consequences for 
their constituents” (p.13).
Table 5. continued

84   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analy-
sis
Technology
Variables.or.
key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments.
Moon et al. 
(2005)
 N/A
 Conceptual
 National
 Not speci-
fied
 Web pres-
ence index
 E-govern-
ment index
 Openness, 
transparency 
and interac-
tivity index
 E-govern-
ment score
 Macroeco-
nomic stabil-
ity
 HDI
 Internet 
penetration
 Democratic 
government
 Government 
expenditures
 Public insti-
tutions
 Argues that although there have been multiple attempts 
to develop global e-government measures, there is still 
a lack of rigourous measures to comparatively assess 
e-government performance among nations.
 Suggests that future research should focus on develop-
ing more intermediate, ultimate outcome-based, agency-
specific, and service-specific measures to capture e-gov-
ernment impact. 
Reddick (2006)
 Information 
resource 
management 
literature
 E-govern-
ment litera-
ture
 Feld survey
 N= 75
 Individual
 N/A
 Reinventing 
government
 External 
environment
 Resource 
capacity
 Demograph-
ic factors
 Information resource managers’ (IRM) e-government 
effectiveness was found to be significantly influenced 
by four categories of variables: 1) Reinventing gov-
ernment variables (employee’s empowerement and 
teamwork increase); 2) External environment variables 
(business and citizen interaction increase, effectiveness 
in dealing with customers, and greater need for e-gov-
ernment); 3) Resource capacity variables (job easiness, 
elimination of manual processes); and 4) Demographic 
variables (gender).  
Table 5. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   85
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analy-
sis
Technology
Variables.or.
key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments.
Robey and 
Holmström 
(2001)
 Institutional 
theory
 Organiza-
tional politics
 Case study
 N= 1
 Multilevel
 Powerplay 
(OLAP tool)
 Organiza-
tional trans-
formation
 IT imple-
mentation 
social conse-
quences
 Globaliza-
tion 
 A “logic of opposition” involving forces promoting both 
change and persistence was found to help “problematize 
the transformational agenda” of public agencies.
 IT may “enhance public participation in the democratic 
process” depending on the organizational and institu-
tional processes in place.
Robey and 
Sahay (1996)
 Social in-
terpretation 
perspective
 Case study
 N= 2
 Organiza-
tional
 GIS
 Social con-
sequences of 
IT
 Organiza-
tional trans-
formation
 Organiza-
tional learn-
ing
 The same IT was found to be experienced differently in 
two similar settings (counties).
 IT consequences are “socially constructed” and “depend 
upon its social meanings more than its material proper-
ties” (p. 106).
 The differences in consequences were found to be 
related to the differences in the implementation.
Saxton et al. 
(2007)
 2-1-1 In-
formation 
and referral 
services 
literature.
 Case study
 N= 1
 Individual
 Organiza-
tional
 Societal
 2-1-1 in-
fromation 
and referral 
(I&R) ser-
vices system
 information 
and referral 
services
 Benefits
 Costs 
 Proposes a logic model identifying the benefits and 
costs of the 2-1-1 information and referral services sys-
tem at the individual, organizational, and societal levels.
 At the individual level, 2-1-1 system was found to pro-
vide value in terms of immediate answers, saved time, 
correct information, comprehensive solving problems, 
more time to focus on deeper issues, and fewer people 
in need of resources.
 At the organizational level, 2-1-1 was found to induce 
outcomes such as saved resources, knowledgeable 
clients, less time wasted, and stronger and more focused 
organizations.
 At the societal level, 2-1-1 was found to induce out-
comes such as better informed users of services, know-
lageable public, increased social capital, better services, 
and a better disaster infrastructure.
Table 5. continued

86   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Authors
Theoretical.
framework
Methodology
Level.of.analy-
sis
Technology
Variables.or.
key.concepts.
Main.results.or.arguments.
Srivastava and 
Teo (2006b)
 Technology-
organization-
environment 
framework 
(Tornatzky 
and Fleisher)
 IT impact 
literature
 Secondary 
data analysis
 N= 113
 N/A
 ICT infra-
structure
 Human 
capital
 Public insti-
tutions
 Macroecono-
my
 E-govern-
ment devel-
opment
 E-business 
development
 Business 
competitive-
ness 
 E-government development was found to have a signifi-
cant influence on e-business development.
 No support was found regarding the relationship be-
tween e-government development and national business 
competitiveness.
 Posits that the impact of e-government development on 
national business competitiveness is mediated through 
e-business development.
Tolbert and 
Mossberger 
(2006)
 Trust litera-
ture
 Field survey
 N= 815
 Web sites
 Transapa-
rency and 
effectiveness 
of govern-
ment
 Accessibility 
of govern-
ment
 Respon-
siveness of 
government
 Trust in 
government
 After controlling for demographic, economic, and 
attitudinal factors, use of federal government Web sites 
was found to significantly influence user’s perceptions 
of government transparency. 
 After controlling for demographic, economic, and 
attitudinal factors, use of federal government Web sites 
was found to significantly influence user’s perceptions 
of government accessibility (measured by the ease of 
finding information). 
 After controlling for demographic, economic, and 
attitudinal factors, perceptions of local government 
responsiveness (through use of local government Web 
sites) were found to significantly influence user’s trust 
in government.
Table 5. continued
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   87
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Acknowledgment
The authors wish to thank the participants at the International Conference on eGovern-
ment (ICEG) 2005 mini-track on e-government adoption for their useful comments 
on earlier versions of this chapter. They also wish to thank the Editor-In-Chief, the 
Guest Editor and the three anonymous reviewers of the International Journal of 
Electronic Government Research (IJEGR, 2006, Vol. 2, Issue 3) for their insightful 
comments and suggestions. They finally wish to thank Professors Suzanne Rivard 
and Alain Pinsonneault for their valuable input and recommendations.
References
Abhichandani, T., & Horan, T.A. (2006). Toward a new evaluation model of e-government  
satisfaction: Results of structural equation modeling. In Proceedings of the Twelfth 
Americas Conference on Information Systems (pp. 249-257).
Allard-Poesi, F. (2003). Coder les données in Conduire un projet de recherche, Une perspec-
tive qualitative, Coordonné par Y. Giordano, Éditions EMS.
Andersen, K.V., & Henriksen, H.Z. (2005). The first leg of e-government research: Domains 
and applications areas 1998-2003. International Journal of Electronic Government 
Research, 1(4), 26-44.
Andersen, K.V., & Henriksen, H.Z. (2006). E-government maturity models: Extension of 
the Layne and Lee model. Government Information Quarterly, 23, 236-248.
Barki, H., & Pinsonneault, A. (2005). A model of organizational integration, implementation 
effort, and performance. Organization Science, 16(2), 165-179.
Barnes, S.J., & Vigden, R.T. (2003). Assessing the quality of a cross-national e-government 
Web site: A case study of the forum on strategic management knowledge exchange. 
In Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 
1-10). 
Barua, A., Lee, C.H.S., & Whinston, A.B. (1996). The calculus of reengineering. Informa-
tion System Research, 7(4) 409-428.
Becker, M.C., Knudsen, T., & March, J.G. (2006). Schumpeter, winter, and the sources of 
novelty. Industrial and Corporate Change, 15(2), 353-371.
Bélanger, F., & Carter, L. (2005). Trust and risk in e-government adoption. In Proceedings 
of the Eleventh Americas Conference on Information Systems, Omaha, Nebraska, 
(pp. 1955-1964).
Boynton, A.C., Zmud, R.W., & Jacobs, G.C. (1994). The influence of IT management practice 
on IT use in large organizationa. MIS Quarterly, 18(3), 299-318.
Bretschneider, S., & Wittmer, D. (1993). Organizational adoption of microcomputer technol-
ogy: The role of sector. Information Systems Research, 4(1), 88-108.

88   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Bygstad, B., Lanestedt, G., & Choudrie, J. (2007). Successful broadband projects in the 
public sector: A service innovation perspective. In Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 103b-109).
Cahill, M. (2006). Establishing a new vision for BPR in a large, complex, public sector 
organisation. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Americas Conference on Information 
Systems (pp. 2371-2374).
Carter, L., & Bélanger, F. (2004). Citizen adoption of electronic government initiatives. 
In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (p. 
50119c-501129). 
Carter, L., & Bélanger, F. (2005). The utilization of e-government services: Citizen trust, 
innovation and acceptance. Information Systems Journal, 15(1), 5-25.
Caudle, S.L., Gorr, W.L., & Newcomer, K.E. (1991). Key information systems management 
issues for the public sector. MIS Quarterly, 15(2), 171-188.
Chan, C. M. L. & Pan, S.-L. (2006). Resource enactment in the e-government systems imple-
mentation: A case study on the e-file system. In Proceedings of the 27th International 
Conference on Information Systems (pp. 483-498).
Chan, C. M. L., Pan, S.-L., & Tan, C. (2003). Managing stakeholder relationships in an 
e-government project. In Proceedings of the 9th Americas Conference on Information 
Systems (pp. 783-791).
Chan, C.M.L., & Pan, S.L. (2003). Managing stakeholder relationships in an e-government 
project. Paper presented at the Ninth Americas Conference on Information Systems 
(pp. 783-791).
Chen, C.D., Fan, Y.W., & Farn, C.K. (2007). Investigating factors affecting the adoption of 
electronic toll collection: A transaction cost economics perspective. In Proceedings of 
the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 107a-116).
Chircu, A.M., & Hae-Dong Lee, D. (2003). Understanding IT investments in the public sec-
tor: The case of e-government. Paper presented at the Ninth Americas Conference on 
Information Systems (pp. 792-800).
Ciborra, C. (2005). Interpreting e-government and development. Efficiency, transparency or 
governance at a distance? Information Technology and People, 18(3), 260-279.
Cohen, M.D., & Bacdayan, P. (1994). Organizational routines are stored as procedural 
memory: Evidence from a laboratory study. Organization Science, 5(4), 554-568.
Cohen, S., & Eimicke, W. (2003). The future of e-government: A project of potential trends 
and issues. In Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sci-
ences (pp. 146-156). 
Conklin, W.A. (2007). Barriers to adoption of e-government. In Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 98-105).
Coursey, D.H., Welch, E.W., & Pandey, S.K. (2005). Organizational determinants of inter-
nally perceived Website effectiveness in state health and human service agencies. In 
Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 
135-145).
Danziger, J.M. (2004). Innovation in innovation? The technology enactment framework. 
Social Science Computer Review, 22(1), 100-110.
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   89
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Davis, F.D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of 
information technology. MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 319-340.
Davison, R.M., Wagner, C., & Ma, L.C.K. (2005). From government to e-government: A 
transition model. Information Technology & People, 18(3), 280-299.
Dawes, S. S., Pardo, T. A., & Creswell, A. M. (2003). Designing government information 
access programs: A holistic approach. In Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (pp. 146-154).
Dawes, S.S., Pardo, T.A., & Creswell, A. M. (2003). Designing government information 
access programs: A holistic approach. In Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (pp. 146-154). 
Doellman, T., Allen. J., & Powell, A. (2006). Perceptions of online voting: New voters and 
senior citizens. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Americas Conference on Information 
Systems (pp. 2352-2356).
Drake, D.B., Stecklem, N.A., & Koch, M.J. (2004). Information sharing in and across 
government agencies. The role and influence of scientist, politician and bureaucratic 
subcultures. Social Science Computer Review, 22(1), 67-84.
Du Gay, P. (2003). The tyranny of the epochal: Change, epochalism and organizational 
reform. Organization, 10(4), 663-684.
Du Gay, P. (2004). Against ‘enterprise’ (but not against ‘enterprise,’ for that would make 
no sense). Organization, 11(1), 37-57.
Dubauskas, N. (2005). Business compliance to changing privacy protections. In Proceedings 
of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 134-143).
Dunleavy, P., & Margets, H. (2000). The advent of digital government: Public bureaucracy 
and the state in the Internet age. Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the 
American Political Science Association, Washington.
Ebrahim, Z., Irani, Z., & Al Shawi, S. (2004). A strategic framework for e-government adop-
tion in public sector organisations. In Proceedings of the Tenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems (pp. 1116-1125).
Eisenhardt, K.M., & Martin, J.A. (2000). Dynamic capabilities: What are they? Strategic 
Management Journal, 21, 1105-1121.
Esteves, J., & Joseph, R. (2006). Developing a framework for the assessment of egovern-
ment initiatives. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Americas Conference on Information 
Systems, (pp. 2325-2332).
Fedorowicz, J., Gogan, J. L., Gelinas, U.J., Jr., & Williams, C. (2004). E-government, e-
procurement, and e-payments: Data sharing issues associated with an appreciating 
database. In Proceedings of the Tenth Americas Conference on Information Systems 
(pp. 995-1002).
Feldman, M.S., & Pentland, B.T. (2003). Reconceptualizing organizational routines as a 
source of flexibility and change. Administrative Science Quarterly, 48(1), 94-118.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intentions and behavior: An introduction 
to theory and research. Boston: Addison-Wesley.

90   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Fulla, S., & Welch, E. (2002). Framing virtual interactivity between government and citizens: 
A study of feedback systems in the Chicago police department. In Proceedings of the 
35th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 125-135). 
Gallant, L.M., Culnan, M.J., & McLoughlin, P. (2007). Why people e-file (or don’t e-file) 
their income taxes. In Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (pp. 107b-112). 
Gant, J.P., & Burley Gant, D. (2001). Web portals and their role in e-government. In Proceed-
ings of the Seventh Americas Conference on Information Systems (pp. 1617-1623).
Gasco, M. (2003). New technologies and institutional change in public administration. 
Social Science Computer Review, 21(1), 6-14.
Gauld, R. (2007). Public sector information system project failures: Lessons from a New 
Zealand hospital organization. Government Information Quarterly, 24, 102-114.
Gefen, D., Pavlou P.A., Warkentin, M., & Gregory, M.R. (2002). Egovernment adoption. 
In Proceedings of the Eighth Americas Conference on Information Systems (pp. 569-
576).
Gilbert, D., Balestrini, P., & Littleboy, D. (2004). Barriers and benefits in the adoption of 
e-government. The International Journal of Public Sector Management, 14(4), 286-
301.
Golden, W., Hughes, M., & Scott, M. (2003). The role of process evolution in achieving 
citizen centered e-government. In Proceedings of the Ninth Americas Conference on 
Information Systems (pp. 801-810).
Goodhue, D.L. (1995). Understanding user evaluations of information systems. Manage-
ment Science, 41(12), 1827-1844.
Grönlund, A. (2003). Emerging electronic infrastructures. Social Science Computer Review, 
21(1), 55-72.
Grönlund, A. (2005a). What’s in a field: Exploring the egovernment domain. In Proceedings 
of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 125-132).
Grönlund, A. (2005b). State of the art in e-gov research: Surveying conference publications. 
International Journal of Electronic Government Research, 1(4), 1-25.
Gupta, M.P., & Jana, D. (2003). E-government evaluation: A framework and case study. 
Government Information Quarterly, 20, 365-387.
Hannan, M.T., & Freeman, J. (1984). Structural inertia and organizational change. American 
Sociological Review, 49, 149-164.
Henderson, J.C., & Schilling, D.A. (1985). Design and implementation of decision support 
systems in the public sector. MIS Quarterly, 9(2), 157-169. 
Henderson, R.M., & Clark, K.B. (1990). Architectural innovation: The reconfiguration of ex-
isting product technologies and the failure of established firms. Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 35, 9-30.
Henriksen, H. Z., Mahnke, V., & Meiland, J. H. (2004). Public e-procurement: Economic 
and political rationality. In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences (pp. 50124-50132).
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   91
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Hinnant, C. C. & Welch, E. W. (2003). Managerial capacity and digital government in the 
States: Examining the link between self-efficacy and perceived impacts of IT in public 
organizations. In Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences (pp. 1-9).
Hinnant, C.C., & Welch, E.W. (2003). Managerial capacity and digital government in the 
states: Examining the link between self-efficacy and perceived impacts of IT in public 
organizations. In Proceedings of the 35th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences (pp. 1-9). 
Ho, A.T.K. (2002). Reinventing local governments and the e-government initiative. Public 
Administration Review, 62(4), 434-444.
Holden, S.H., Norris, D.F., & Fletcher, P.D. (2003). Electronic government at the grass roots: 
Contemporary evidence and future trends. In Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (pp. 134-140). 
Homburg, V., & Bekkers, V. (2002). The back-office of e-government (managing informa-
tion domains as political economies). In Proceedings of the 35th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. 
Huang, J.C. (2003). Usability of e-government Web-sites for people with disabilities. In Pro-
ceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 
Hung, S.Y., Chang, C.M., & Yu, T.Y. (2006). Determinants of user acceptance of the e-govern-
ment services: The case of online tax filing and payment system. Government Information 
Quarterly, 23, 97–122.
Jaeger, P.T. (2003). The endless wire: E-government as global phenomenon. Government 
Information Quarterly, 20, 323-331.
Jaeger, P.T. (2006). Assessing section 508 compliance on federal e-government Web sites: 
A multi-method, user-centered evaluation of accessibility for persons with disabilities. 
Government Information Quarterly, 23, 169-190.
Jain, A., & Patnayakuni, R. (2003). Public expectations and public dcrutiny: An sgenda for 
tesearch in the context of e-government. Paper presented at the Ninth Americas Confer-
ence on Information Systems (pp. 811-820).
Jansse, M., & Joha, A. (2006). Governance of shared services in public administration. In 
Proceedings of the Twelfth Americas Conference on Information Systems (pp. 2306-
2314).
Kallinikos, J. (2003). Work, human agency and organizational forms: An anatomy of fragmen-
tation. Organization Studies, 24(4), 595-618.
Kallinikos, J. (2004). The social foundations of the bureaucratic order. Organization, 11(1), 
13-36.
Kawalek, P., & Wastall, D. (2005). Pursuing radical transformation in information age gov-
ernment: case studies using the sprint methodology. Journal of Global Information 
Management, 13(1), 79-101.
Ke, W., & Wei, K.K. (2004). Understanding of e-government development: A case study of 
Singapore e-government. In Proceedings of the Tenth Americas Conference on Infor-
mation Systems (pp. 617-625).

92   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Kim, H. J. & Bretschneider, S. (2004). Local government information technology capacity: 
An exploratory theory. In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference 
on System Science (pp. 1-10).
Kraemer, K.L., & Leslie King, J. (2003). Information technology and administrative reform: 
Will the time after e-government be different? CRITO, Center for research on informa-
tion technology and organizations. Retrieved August 27, 2007, from http://www.crito.
uci.edu.
Lakshmi, M., Holstein, W.K., & Adams, R.B. (1990). EIS: It can work in the public sector. 
MIS Quarterly, 14(4), 435.
Layne, K., & Lee, J. (2001). Developing fully functional e-government: A four stage model. 
Government Information Quarterly, 18, 122-136.
Lee, D.H.-D. (2005). Contextual IT business value and barriers: An e-government and e-
business perspective. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (pp. 221-234).
Lee, J., & Kim, J. (2007). Grounded theory analysis of e-government initiatives: Explor-
ing perceptions of government authorities. Government Information Quarterly, 24, 
135-147
Lee, J.K., & Rao, H.R. (2003). A study of customer’s trusting beliefs in government-to-
customer online services. Paper presented at the Ninth Americas Conference on 
Information Systems (pp. 821-826).
Lee, J.K., & Rao, H.R. (2007). Understanding socio-technical environments for acceptance 
of inter-agency anti/counter-terrorism information sharing systems. In Proceedings of 
the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 98-106).
Lee, J.K., Braynov, S., & Rao, H.R. (1993). Effects of a public emergency on citizens’ usage 
intention toward e-government: A study in the context of war in Iraq. In Proceedings of 
the Twenty Fourth Internationl Conference on Information Systems (pp. 896-902).
Lee, J.K., Kim, D.J., & Rao, H.R. (2005). An examination of trust effects and pre-existing 
relational risks in e-government services. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Americas 
Conference on Information Systems, Omaha, Nebraska, (pp. 1949-1954).
Leonard-Barton, D. (1992). Core capabilities and core rigidities: A paradox in managing 
new product development. Strategic Management Journal, 13, 111-125.
Levina, N., & Ross, J.W. (2003). From the vendor’s perspective: Exploring the value propo-
sition in information technology outsourcing. MIS Quarterly, 27(3), 331-364.
Luna-Reyes, L.F., Gil-Garcia. J.R., & Cruz, C.B. (2006). Collaborative digital government 
in Mexico: Some lessons from federal Web-based inter-organizational information 
integration initiatives. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Americas Conference on Infor-
mation Systems (pp. 2375-2384).
Marche, S., & McNiven, J.D. (2003). E-government and e-governance: The future isn’t what 
it used to be. Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences, 20(1), 74-86.
Margetts, H., & Dunleavy, P. (2002). Cultural barriers to e-government. National Audit 
Office (HC 704-III) in conjunction with the Value for Money report “Better Services 
Through E-Government” (HC 704).
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   93
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Melitski, J., Holzer, M., Kim, S.-T., Kim, C.-G., & Rho, S.-Y. (2005). Digital government 
worldwide: An e-government assessment of municipal Web sites. International Journal 
of Electronic Government Research, 1(1), 1-19.
Milgrom, P., & Roberts, J. (1995a). Complementarities and fit: Strategy, structure, and 
organizational change in manufacturing. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 19, 
179-208.
Milgrom, P., & Roberts, J. (1995b). The economics of modern manufacturing: Reply. The 
American Economic Review, 85(4), 997-999.
Moon, M. J., Welch, E. W., & Wong, W. (2005). Wha drives global e-governance? An 
exploratory study at a macro level. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (pp. 131-139).
Moon, M.J. (2002). The evolution of e-government among municipalities: Rhetoric or reality. 
Public Administration Review, 62(4), 424-433.
Moon, M.J., & Bretschneider, S. (2002). Does the perception of red tape constrain IT in-
novation in organizations? Unexpected results from simultaneous equation model 
and implications. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 12(2), 
273-291.
Ni, A.Y., & Bretschneider, S. (2005). Why does state government contract out their e-govern-
ment services? In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences (pp. 130c-140).
Norris, D. F. (2005). E-government at the American grassroots: Future trajectory. In Proceed-
ings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 125b-129). 
Norris, D.F., & Lloyd, D.A. (2006). The scholarly literature on e-government: Characterizing 
a nascent field. International Journal of Electronic Government Research, 2(4), 40-56.
Norris, D.F., & Moon, M.J. (2005). Advancing e-government at the grassroots: Tortoise or 
hare? Public Administration Review, 65(1), 64-75.
Northrop, A. (2003). E-government: The URBIS cities revisited? CRITO, Center for Research 
on Information Technology and Organizations. Retrieved August 27, 2007, from http://
www.crito.uci.edu
Pardo, T. A., Cresswell, A. M., Dawes, S. S., & Burke, G. B. (2004). Modeling the social 
and technical processes of interorganizational information integration. In Proceedings 
of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 50120-10127).
Pardo, T., & Scholl, H.J. (2002). Walking atop the cliffs: Avoiding failure and reducing risk 
in large scale e-government projects. In Proceedings of the 35th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (pp. 1656-1665). 
Park, H.M. (2005). A cost-benefit analysis of the Seoul OPEN system: Policy lessons for elec-
tronic government projects. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences (pp. 126b-135).
Pentland, B.T., & Rueter, H.H. (1994). Organizational routines as grammars of action. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 39(3), 484-510.

94   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Perrow, C. (1986). Complex organizations: A critical essay (3rd ed.). McGraw-Hill Publish-
ing Company.
Phang, C.W., & Kankanhalli, A. (2005). A research framework for citizen participation via 
e-consultation. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Americas Conference on Information 
Systems, Omaha, Nebraska, (pp.  2003-2010).
Phang, C.W., Sutanto J., Li, Y., & Kankanhalli, A. (2005). Senior citizens’ adoption of e-gov-
ernment: In quest of the antecedents of perceived usefulness. In Proceedings of the 38th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (p. 130a).
Pieterson, W., Ebbers, W., & van Dijk, J. (2007). Personalization in the public sector an 
inventory of organizational and user obstacles towards personalization of electronic 
services in the public sector. Government Information Quarterly, 24, 148–164.
Pinsonneault, A., & Kraemer, K.L. (2002). Exploring the role of information technology 
in organizational downsizing: A tale of two American cities. Organization Science, 
13(2), 191-208.
Radio Canada. (2003). Québec met fin au projet Gires. Retrieved August 27, 2007, from http://
radio-canada.ca/nouvelles/Index/nouvelles/200309/30/012-gires-abandon-rb.shtml.
Reddick, C.G. (2006). Information resource managers and E-government effectiveness: A 
survey of Texas state agencies. Government Information Quarterly, 23, 249–266.
Robey, D., & Holmström, J. (2001). Transforming municipal governance in global context: 
A case study of the dialectics of social change. Journal of Global Information Tech-
nology Management, 4(4), 19-31.
Robey, D., & Sahay, S. (1996). Transforming work through information technology: A 
comparative case study of geographic information systems in county government. 
Information Systems Research, 7(1), 93-110.
Roy, J. (2005). Service, security, transparency & trust: Government online or governance 
renewal in Canada? International Journal of Electronic Government Research, 1(1), 
40-58.
Samuelson, P.A. (1974). Complementarity: An essay on the 40th anniversary of the Hicks-Allen 
revolution in demand theory. Journal of Economic Literature, 12(4), 1255-1289. 
Saxton, M.L., Naumer, C.M., & Fisher, K.E. (2007). 2-1-1 information services: Outcomes 
assessment, benefit-cost analysis, and policy issues. Government Information Quar-
terly, 24, 186-215.
Scatolini, E., & Cordella, A. (2005). Technological artifacts and sense making in an Italian 
public administration. Paper presented at the 21st European Group for Organisational 
Studies (EGOS) Colloquium, Berlin.
Schedler, K., & Scharf, M.C. (2000). Exploring the interrelations between electronic gov-
ernment and the new public management. A managerial framework for electronic 
government. Switzerland: Institute for Public Services and Tourism at the University 
of St. Gallen. 
Schildt, K. & Beaumaster, S. (2004) Strategic information technology management: The city 
of Anaheim technological initiatives. In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Science (pp. 50121a-50130a).
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   95
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Schildt, K., Beaumaster, S., & Edwards, M. (2005). Strategic information technology man-
agement: Managing organizational, political, and technological forces. In Proceedings 
of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 126-135).
Scholl, H.J. (2003). E-government: A special case of ICT-enabled business process change. 
In Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 
136-147). 
Scholl, H.J. (2005). E-government-induced business process change (BPC): An empirical 
study of current practices. International Journal of Electronic Government Research, 
1(2), 27-49.
Shackleton, P., Fisher, J., & Dawson, L. (2004). Evolution of local government e-services: 
The applicability of e-business maturity models. In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 50120-50128). 
Siau, K., & Long, Y. (2004). Factors impacting e-government development. Paper presented at 
the Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Information Systems (pp. 221-234).
Sorrentino, M. (2005). Reconceptualizing resistance to change: A case of IT implementation 
in a local authority. Paper presented at the 21st European Group for Organisational 
Studies (EGOS) Colloquium, Berlin.
Srivastava, S.C., & Teo, T.S.H. (2006a). Facilitators for e-government development: An 
application of the technology-organization-environment framework. In Proceedings 
of the Twelfth Americas Conference on Information Systems (pp. 2315-2324).
Srivastava, S.C., & Teo, T.S.H. (2006b). Determinants and impact of e-government and 
e-business devlopment: A glabal perspective. Paper presented at the Twenty-Seventh 
International Conference on Information Systems (pp. 1-18).
Stokes, J., & Clegg, S. (2003). Once upon a time in the bureaucracy: Power and public 
sector management. Organization, 9(2), 225-247.
Tan, C.W., Pan, S.L, & Lim, E.T.K. (2005). Towards the restoration of public trust in elec-
tronic governments: A case study of the e-filing system in Singapore. In Proceedings 
of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 126-135).
Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic manage-
ment. Strategic Management Journal, 18(7), 509-533.
Thong, J.Y.L., Yap, C.S., & Seah, K.L. (2000). Business process reeingineering in the public 
sector: The case of the housing development board in Singapore. Journal of Manage-
ment Information Systems, 17(1), 245-270.
Tolbert, C.J., & Mossberger, K. (2006). The effects of e-government on trust and confidence 
in government. Public Administration Review, 3, 354-369.
Tranfield, D., Duberley, J., Smith, S., Musson, G., & Stokes, P. (2000). Organizational 
learning:  It’s just routine. Management Decision, 38(4), 253-260.
Treiblmaier, H., Pinterits, A., & Floh, A. (2004). Antecedents of the adoption of e-payment 
services in the publicsSector. Paper presented at the Twenty-Fifth International Con-
ference on Information Systems (pp. 65-76).
UNDP (2001). Human development report 2001: Making new technologies work for 
human development. Retrieved October 5, 2007, from http://hdr.undp.org/reports/
global/2001/en

96   Titah & Barki
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Ventura, S.J. (1995). The use of geographic information systems in local government. Public 
Administration Review, 55(5), 461-467.
Waddel, P., & Borning, A. (2004). A case study in digital government: Developing and 
applying UrbanSim, a system for simulating urban land use, transportation, and en-
vironmental impacts. Social Science Computer Review, 22(1), 37-51.
Wang, L., Bretschneider, S., & Gant, J. (2005). Evaluating Web-based e-government ser-
vices with a citizen-centric approach. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (pp. 129-137).
Warkentin, M, Gefen, D., Pavlou, P.A., & Rose, G.M. (2002). Encouraging citizen adoption 
of e-governement by building trust. Electronic Markets, 12(3), 157-162.
Webster, J., & Watson, R.T. (2002). Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: Writing a 
literature review. MIS Quarterly, 26(2), 13-23.
Weerakkody, V., Choudrie, J., & Currie, W. (2004). Realising e-government in the UK: 
Local and national challenges. In Proceedings of the Tenth Americas Conference on 
Information Systems (pp. 972-980).
Welch, E. W. & Pandey, S. (2005). E-Government and network technologies: Does bureau-
cratic red tape inhibit, promote or fall victim to intranet technology implementation? 
In Proceedigns of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 
1-10).
Wheeler, B.C. (2002). NEBIC: A dynamic capabilities theory for assessing net-enablement. 
Information Systems Research, 13(2), 125-146.
Whittington, R., & Pettigrew, A.M. (2003). Complementarities thinking. In A.M. Pettigrew, 
R. Whittington, L. Melin, C. Sanchez-Runde, F. Van den Bosch, W. Ruigrock, et al. 
(Eds.), Innovative forms of organizing: International perspectives (pp. 125-132). 
London: Sage Publications. 
Williams, M. D., & Beynon-Davies, P. (2004). Implementing e-government in the UK: An 
analysis of local-level strategies. In Proceedings of the Tenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems (pp. 1008-1015).
World Bank (2007). World Bank. Retrieved October 5, 2007, from http://web.worldbank.
org
Zahra, S.A., & George G. (2002). Absorptive capacity: A review, reconceptualization, and 
extention. Academy of Management Review, 27(2), 185-203.
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government Adoption and Acceptance   97
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Endnotes
1 
The other two contextual research domains identified by Andersen and Henriksen 
(2005) are: a) conceptualization of e-government, which refers to broad and conceptual 
aspects on, or related to, e-government; and b) e-democracy.
2 
An organizational capability refers to “a high level routine (or collection of routines)” 
(Winter, 2002, p. 3).

98   Carrizales, Holzer, & Manoharan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.IV
Worldwide.E-Governance:.
A.Longitudinal.Assessment.of..
Municipal.Web.Sites..
and.the.Digital.Divide
Tony Carrizales, Marist College, USA
Marc Holzer, Rutgers University – Newark, USA
Aroon Manoharan, Rutgers University – Newark, USA
Abstract
This following chapter highlights the research findings of a digital governance 
survey conducted in the fall of 2005. The study replicates a 2003 survey of large 
municipalities worldwide. This longitudinal assessment, based on the Rutgers-SKKU 
E-Governance Performance Index, focused on the evaluation of current practices 
in government, with emphasis on the evaluation of each Web site in terms of digital 
governance. Specifically, we analyzed security, usability, content of Web sites, the 
type of online services currently being offered, and citizen response and participation 
through Web sites established by city governments. Based on the 2005 evaluation of 
81 cities, Seoul, New York, Shanghai, Hong Kong, and Sydney represent the high-
est performing cities in digital governance. There were only slight changes in the 
top five cities when compared to the 2003 study. Moreover, there continues to be a 
divide in terms of digital governance throughout the world among the 30 developed 
nations belonging to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) and non-OECD member nations. This divide is highlighted by the change 
www.ebook3000.com

Worldwide E-Governance   99
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
in average scores among the municipalities when comparing municipalities from 
OECD and non-OECD member nations.
Introduction
The following research highlights the results of an international survey conducted in 
the fall of 2005 evaluating the practice of digital governance in large municipalities. 
A similar study was conducted in 2003 (Holzer & Kim 2004; Melitski, Holzer, Kim, 
Kim, & Rho, 2005) which provided one of the most exhaustive studies of municipal 
e-governance ever conducted. The research was replicated two years later through a 
collaboration between the E-Governance Institute at Rutgers-Newark and the Global 
e-Policy e-Government Institute at Sungkyunkwan University in Seoul. The joint 
study again produced a wealth of information that contributes to the growing field 
of digital government. In particular, we focus on the changes over two years in this 
longitudinal assessment of municipal Web sites. 
Literature.Review
A review of digital governance literature includes numerous areas of research, all 
highlighting the potential of technology under terms such as e-government, e-de-
mocracy, e-participation, and digital democracy. In particular, the literature below 
indicates potential for improved government services and online democratic prac-
tices. Our survey research evaluates municipal Web sites in these areas and the data 
presented reflect the current practice of e-governance throughout the world.
Numerous researchers have highlighted the potential for e-governance. In order for 
good governance to be achieved, Cloete (2003) argues for an acceptance of techno-
logical innovations, suggesting that Internet-based services and other technological 
service delivery applications will be the only way governments can meet their own 
service delivery goals. A 2003 survey by the Pew Internet & American Life Project 
attempted to determine how Americans contact government. Their study found that 
e-government is an increasingly popular tool for Internet users, with a primary purpose 
of getting information and sending messages to the government (Horrigan, 2004). 
West (2004) highlights a study of chief information officers, where the respondents 
felt positive about the capacity for the Internet to transform government, however, 
argues that e-government “has fallen short of its potential to transform government” 
in the areas of service delivery and trust in government (p. 16).

100   Carrizales, Holzer, & Manoharan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
E-government initiatives, specifically the Internet, must go beyond the static listing 
of information to more “intentions-based” design so that citizens can more effec-
tively utilize Web portals (Howard, 2001). Recent advances in e-services include the 
personalization of government Web pages. Virginia’s “MyGov” allows an individual 
to format Web pages around their interests from options such as public meeting an-
nouncements, interactive government services, legislative sites, local government, 
local media, public schools, lottery numbers, press releases, state government, and 
traffic information (Eggers, 2005). These developments in e-services are well inten-
tioned, but misdirected suggests Eggers (2005), because they are underutilized and 
rarely involve transactions, adding little to no value for individuals and businesses. 
Individuals still do not visit government Web sites enough to make services such 
as personalized Web pages a common locus for e-government initiatives.
Moreover, a relatively new aspect of digital governance, e-democracy, is in reality 
a concept with a history dating to the 1960s in which scholars, activists, and politi-
cians were forecasting technological utopias (Bryan, Tsagarousianou, & Tambini, 
1998). The current interest in e-democracy can in part be attributed to the lack of 
performance in old technologies used for democracy (Shane, 2002). Early discussions 
of the technology-democracy relationship highlighted the potential of telecommu-
nications, with emphasis on cable television and telephone conferencing (Arterton, 
1987, 1988; Becker, 1993; Christopher, 1987, McLean, 1989). However, the focus 
has now significantly shifted to the Internet (Bellamy & Taylor, 1998; Browning, 
2002; Gattiker, 2001; Kamarck & Nye, 1999, 2003; Loader, 1997; Westen, 1998, 
2000; Wilhelm, 1998; Witschge, 2002).
Unlike other mediums, citizens are now able to demand and obtain content when 
going online (Browning, 2002). Korac-Kakabadse and Korac-Kakabadse (1999) 
point out that ICTs provide the possibility for direct-democracy on a larger scale. 
They define e-democracy as the capacity for ICTs to enhance the degree and quality 
of public participation in government. Proponents argue that e-democracy will allow 
for greater government transparency and openness, which leads to a better-informed 
citizenry. The openness of government can lead to increased accountability and 
reduced government corruption. The case of Seoul’s Online Procedures Enhance-
ment for Civil Application (OPEN) system has demonstrated a successful practice 
of transparency and decreased corruption in government via the use of the Internet 
(Holzer & Kim, 2004). 
Online discussion boards are another example of an opportunistic use of technology 
for developing e-democracy. Online discussion boards allow for political discus-
sions without requiring participants to share space and time, leading to increased 
access to political debate (Malina, 1999). The potential for citizen participation in 
decision and policy-making is growing, albeit slowly, through initiatives such as 
regulations.gov (Skrzycki, 2003a, 2003b). Some municipalities have already begun 
to practice aspects of e-democracy, which include information disclosure pertinent 
to government decision making as well as mediums for two-way communication. 
www.ebook3000.com

Worldwide E-Governance   101
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
The following data will also reflect the changes in online citizen participation among 
municipalities worldwide. 
Scholars have outlined the potential of digital governance, but little can be said about 
the state of current e-government’s practices in municipalities worldwide. Interna-
tional studies, as this research is, are critical contributions to the overall literature 
of digital governance. To better understand how various regions of the world differ 
in the area of e-governance, comprehensive studies of regions throughout the world 
are necessary for a basis of comparison. More importantly, regional studies provide 
regional benchmarks and best practices that allow for increased performance in digital 
governance overtime for those municipalities still in the earliest developments. 
A review of the literature also suggests that our survey instrument is one of the most 
thorough in practice for e-governance research today. With 98 measures and five 
distinct categorical areas of e-governance research, the survey instrument is unlike 
any other. In studies of e-governance practices worldwide, our Performance Index 
differs quite significantly from other survey instruments. The following section 
reviews four of the most prominent and encompassing longitudinal worldwide e-
governance surveys. The critiques of the Annual Global Survey at Brown University’s 
Taubman Center for Public Policy (West 2001-2005), the United Nations Global 
E-government Report (UNPAN 2003, 2004, 2005), the Accenture E-government 
Leadership Survey (Accenture, 2002, 2004) and Capgemini’s European Commission 
Report (Capgemini, 2005) are intended to highlight the distinct differences between 
the survey instruments and results. The findings and rankings of e-governance 
worldwide can best be understood by highlighting the distinct differences among 
the survey instruments. 
The Taubman Center’s Global E-government Survey is one of the only international 
e-government studies that have been conducted on an annual basis for the past five 
years (e.g., West 2001, 2004, 2005). Since 2001, the researchers at the Taubman 
Center have utilized an index instrument that measures the presence of Web site 
features. That instrument is geared toward specific Web functions, with limited at-
tention to addressing privacy/security or usability. The e-governance area of citizen 
participation is only measured by one item. Moreover, their survey instrument has 
changed substantially from year to year. One of the problems with a rapidly evolv-
ing instrument is in the applicability of comparisons over the years. Our survey 
instrument has also changed with the inclusion of new questions, specifically in the 
citizen participation section. However, the Taubman Center’s survey instrument has 
decreased its measurement criteria over the years. In 2001 and 2002, the number 
of measures were 24 and 25, respectively. In 2003, 2004, and 2005 the number 
of measures decreased to 20, 19, and 19, respectively. For 2005, its measures are 
broken down into two groups, with 18 primary measures and one bonus measure 
encompassing 28 possible points. The final overall scores are converted for a pos-
sible total score of 100. We also use a final possible score of 100, with each of our 
five categories allowing for a possible score of 20.

102   Carrizales, Holzer, & Manoharan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
In all, the number of measures in the Taubman survey is limited, with only 19 
metrics. A final score of e-governance performance is reflective of the specific ques-
tions focused on Web features that are captured by those 19 measures. One of the 
consequences of this methodology is the limited differentiation in performance of 
e-governance among countries. As a result, many of the countries received the same 
scores. In addition, there is an inconsistency in the annual rankings, specifically in 
the non-English Web sites. For example, the Republic of Korea has fluctuated in 
rankings as follows: 45th in 2001, 2nd in 2002, 87th in 2003, 32nd in 2004, and 86th in 
2005. In other international findings, however, such as the United Nations Global 
E-government Survey, the Republic of Korea has consistently been recognized 
as one of the best in e-governance performance (4th in 2004 and 2005). One other 
example is Bolivia, which has also significantly fluctuated over the years in rank-
ings. Bolivia was ranked 18th in 2001, 164th in 2002, 119th in 2003, 20th in 2004, and 
225th in 2005. These significant variations in rankings can, in part, be attributed to 
the limited number of measures, allowing for shifting variations in overall scores. 
However, this can also be attributed to the method of not using native speakers when 
evaluating all the Web sites. In some cases, researchers at the Taubman Center have 
utilized language translation software available online, such as http://babelfish.
altavista.com. Online translation software, however, can misinterpret specific lan-
guages and phrases.
The United Nations Global E-government Report is also one of the few longitu-
dinal studies of Web presence throughout the world (e.g., UNPAN, 2004, 2005). 
The UN has two specific studies that it produces: an e-government readiness index 
and an e-participation index. The e-government readiness index incorporates Web 
measures, telecommunication infrastructure, and human capital. Their Web measure 
index is a quantitative measure, evaluating national Web sites. Their evaluation is 
based on binary values (presence/absence of a service). Their e-participation index 
is a qualitative study, with 21 measures used to assess the quality, relevance, use-
fulness, and willingness of government Web sites in providing online information 
and service/participation tools for citizens. The UN Global E-government Report 
takes methodological precautions to ensure accuracy and fairness. The surveying 
of Web sites is done within a 60-day “window” and Web sites are reevaluated by 
senior researchers for purposes of consistency. In addition, the survey incorporates 
native language speakers when necessary in an effort to review every Web site in 
the official language. However, this survey does differ from our research in that the 
UN studies central government Web sites, while we focus on large municipal Web 
sites throughout the world.
Accenture conducts a third global e-government study. Accenture’s annual E-gov-
ernment Leadership report highlights the performance of 22 selected countries (e.g., 
Accenture 2002, 2004). The most recent report (2004) measured 206 services when 
assessing national government Web sites. The 206 national government services 
were divided between 12 service sectors: eDemocracy, education, human services, 
www.ebook3000.com

Worldwide E-Governance   103
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
immigration, justice and security, postal, procurement, regulation, participation, 
revenue and customs, and transport. As an effort toward reliability, the research was 
conducted in a two-week period. The Accenture report, however, only focuses on 
22 countries. The Accenture study omits numerous countries throughout the world, 
as well as many of the top performing governments in e-governance. Similarly, a 
study conducted by Capgemini, on behalf of the European Commission, is limited in 
international focus (Capgemini, 2005). This study is limited to nations in the European 
Union and only utilizes 20 basic public services as measures in the research study. 
The methodology is split between studying services to citizens (12) and services to 
businesses (8). An additional worldwide e-government survey is conducted by the 
Waseda University Institute of E-Government in Japan. There methodology includes 
26 indicators as well as a component for surveying the Chief Information Officer of 
each country (World E-Gov Forum, 2007). Similar to the UN and Taubman Center 
studies, the Accenture, Capgemini, and Waseda University studies focus on national 
government Web sites, a distinguishing aspect from our research.
Design.and.Methodology
As stated above, previous e-governance research varies in the use of scales to evalu-
ate government Web sites. For example, one researcher uses an index consisting 
of 25 dichotomous (yes or no) measures (West, 2001); other assessments use a 
more sophisticated four-point scale (Kaylor, 2001) for assessing each measure. We 
have developed the Rutgers-SKKU E-Governance Performance Index for evaluat-
ing city and municipal Web sites, consisting of five components: 1.) Security and 
Privacy; 2.) Usability; 3.) Content; 4.) Services; and 5. Citizen Participation. Our 
2005 survey instrument utilizes 98 measures, of which 43 are dichotomous. For 
each of the five e-governance components, our research applies 18 to 20 measures, 
and for questions which were not dichotomous, each measure was coded on a four-
point scale (0, 1, 2, 3; see Table 1). Furthermore, in developing an overall score for 
Scale
Description
0
Information about a given topic does not exist on the Web site
1
Information about a given topic exists on the Web site (including links to other information and 
e-mail addresses)
2
Downloadable items are available on the Web site (forms, audio, video, and other one-way transac-
tions, popup boxes)
3
Services, transactions, or interactions can take place completely online (credit card transactions, 
applications for permits, searchable databases, use of cookies, digital signatures, restricted access)
Table 1. E-governance scale

104   Carrizales, Holzer, & Manoharan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
each municipality, we have equally weighted each of the five categories so as not 
to skew the research in favor of a particular category (regardless of the number of 
questions in each category). The dichotomous measures in the “service” and “citi-
zen participation” categories correspond with values on our four point scale of “0” 
or “3”; dichotomous measures in “security/ privacy” or “usability” correspond to 
ratings of “0” or “1” on the scale. 
In this research, the main city homepage is defined as the official Web site where 
information about city administration and online services are provided by the city. 
The city Web site includes Web sites about the city council, mayor, and executive 
branch of the city. Based on the concept above, this research evaluated the official 
Web sites of each city selected. Nineteen of 100 cities, however, do not have official 
city Web sites or were not accessible during the survey period: ten in Africa (71%), 
seven in Asia (22%), and two in North America (20%). As a result, this research 
evaluated only 81 cities of the 100 cities initially selected. Our research examined 
local government services using an e-governance model of increasingly sophisti-
cated e-government services. Moon (2002) developed a framework for categorizing 
e-government models based on the following components: information dissemina-
tion, two-way communication, services, integration, and political participation. 
Our methodology for evaluating e-government services includes such components; 
however, we have added an additional factor of security.
That additional e-governance factor was grounded in recent calls for increased 
security, particularly of our public information infrastructure. Concern over the 
security of the information systems underlying government applications has led 
some researchers to the conclusion that e-governance must be built on a secure 
infrastructure that respects the privacy of its users (Kaylor, 2001). 
The 2005 E-Governance Performance Index differs slightly from the one used in 
2003. The most significant change was in the citizen participation component, where 
six new research questions were added. These new questions are, in part, recognition 
of the growing literature focusing on the various methods for more digitally-based 
democracy. These new questions survey the presence and functions of municipal 
forums, online decision making (e.g., e-petitions and e-referenda), and online sur-
veys and polls. The new questions for the citizen participation component bring the 
total number of questions to 20, with a total possible raw score of 55. In addition, 
one question was removed from the security and privacy component. That question 
focused on the scanning of viruses during downloadable files from the municipal 
Web site. This aspect was found to be more dependent on personal computers than 
as a function of a municipal Web site. The removal of the question for the security 
and privacy component brings the total number of questions to 18, with a total pos-
sible raw score of 25. The final change to the E-Governance Performance Index 
was a question added to the content component. The additional question focuses on 
the number of possible downloadable documents from a municipal Web site. The 
www.ebook3000.com

Worldwide E-Governance   105
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
new question for content brings the total number of questions to 20, with a total 
possible raw score of 48. 
The changes to the E-Governance Performance Index have helped make this ongoing 
survey of municipal Web sites one of the most thorough in the field of e-governance 
research. The Index now has a total of 98 questions, with a total possible raw score 
of 219. Given the changes to the survey instrument between 2003 and 2005, the 
method of weighting each component for a possible score of 20 and a total score 
of 100 allows for a consistency in comparisons over time. Table 2, which features 
e-governance performance measures, summarizes the 2005 survey instrument, and 
in Appendix A we present an overview of the criteria used during the evaluation.
Similar to our 2003 study, to ensure reliability each municipal Web site was as-
sessed in the official language by two evaluators. Many of our evaluators were either 
doctoral students or researchers in the area of digital governance. In addition, all 
of the evaluators were provided comprehensive written instructions for assessing 
Web sites. The instructions and survey instrument itself included detailed examples 
for associated scores for each question. The two adjusted scores for each Web site 
were then compared and evaluated for consistency in evaluation. The evaluations 
were done via a preset spreadsheet instrument that alerted researchers when errors 
were made. Also, the instrument allowed for specific comments associated with 
each question, so that researchers can review in cases of evaluator discrepancy. 
Each Web site evaluation was done independent of one another and in cases where 
significant variation (+ or – 10%) existed on the weighted score between evaluators, 
E-governance.
Category
Key..
Concepts
Raw.
Score
Weighted.
Score
.
Keywords
Security/.Privacy
18
25
20
Privacy policies, authentication, encryption, 
data management, and use of cookies
Usability
20
32
20
User-friendly design, branding, length of 
homepage, targeted audience links or chan-
nels, and site search capabilities
Content
20
48
20
Access to current accurate information, public 
documents, reports, publications, and multi-
media materials
Service
20
59
20
Transactional services involving purchase or 
register, interaction between citizens, busi-
nesses, and government
Citizen..
Participation
20
55
20
Online civic engagement, internet based 
policy deliberation, and citizen based perfor-
mance measurement
Total
98
219
100
 
Table 2. E-governance performance measures

106   Carrizales, Holzer, & Manoharan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Web sites were analyzed a third time. The only Web site requiring a third evaluator 
for the 2005 survey was Brussels, Belgium. The three evaluations for Brussels were 
then reviewed and scores averaged to represent a municipal score. A framework of 
the survey instrument utilized is included in Appendix A.
International.Municipalities
Both the 2003 and 2005 studies focused on the evaluation of current practices in 
government, and the emphasis in the research was on the evaluation of each Web 
site in terms of digital governance. Simply stated, digital governance includes both 
digital government (delivery of public service) and digital democracy (citizen par-
ticipation in governance). Specifically, we analyzed security, usability, content of 
Web sites, the type of online services offered, and citizen response and participation 
through Web sites established by city governments.
This research examines cities throughout the world based on their population size, 
and the total number of individuals using the Internet. In the 2003 survey, data from 
the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), an organization affiliated with 
the United Nations (UN), were used to determine the 100 municipalities studied. 
Of 196 countries for which telecommunications data were reported, those with a 
total online population over 100,000 were identified. As a result, the most populated 
cities in 98 countries were selected to be surveyed (along with Hong Kong and Ma-
cao). For the 2005 worldwide survey, the most recent available ITU-UN data were 
used. These updated figures produced slightly different results from the previous 
survey in 2003. Countries with an online population over 100,000 increased to 119. 
Therefore, we set a new cut-off mark at countries with an online population over 
160,000. This resulted in 98 countries which met the new mark. With the inclusion 
of Hong Kong and Macao, as in 2003, a total of 100 cities were identified for the 
2005 survey. Hong Kong and Macao were added to the 98 cities selected, since 
they have been considered as independent countries for many years and have high 
percentages of Internet users.
The rationale for selecting the largest municipalities stems from the e-governance 
literature, which continues to suggest a positive relationship between population 
and e-governance capacity at the local level (Moon, 2002; Moon & deLeon, 2001; 
Musso, Weare, & Hale, 2000; Weare, Musso, & Hale 1999). In 2003, the most 
populated city in each country was identified using various data sources. In cases 
where the city population data that were obtained utilized a source dated before 2000, 
a new search was done for the most recent population figures. All city population 
data were updated to reference 2000-2005 figures.
Six countries that were identified in 2003 do not have online populations of over 
160,000. These countries and their most populated cities are: Manama, Bahrain; 
Port Louis, Mauritius; Port-of-Spain, Trinidad & Tobago; Asuncion, Paraguay; 
www.ebook3000.com

Worldwide E-Governance   107
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Sarajevo, Bosnia; and Havana, Cuba. Of these six cities, only five were surveyed, 
with Havana having an unidentified official government Web site. As none of the 
five surveyed cities listed above was ranked in the top 25th percentile of rankings, 
their exclusion from the 2005 worldwide survey was not found to be significant 
enough to retain. The six new cities are: Abidjan, Cote d’Ivoire; Accra, Ghana; 
Chisinau, Moldova; Omdurman, Sudan; Halab, Syria; and Libya, Tripoli. In 2003, 
80 of the 100 cities identified were surveyed (by two surveyors) and were included 
in the overall rankings. For the 2005 data, 81 of the 100 cities were included in the 
overall rankings, excluding municipalities where no official Web site was obtain-
able. Table 3 is a list of the 100 cities selected.
Africa.(14)
Abidjan (Cote d’Ivoire)*
Accra (Ghana)*
Algiers (Algeria)*
Cairo (Egypt)
Cape Town (South Africa)
Casablanca (Morocco)*
Dakar (Senegal)*
Dar-es-Salaam (Tanzania)*
Harare (Zimbabwe)*
Lagos (Nigeria)
Lome (Togo)*
Nairobi (Kenya)
Omdurman (Sudan)*
Tunis (Tunisia)*
Asia.(31)
Almaty (Kazakhstan)*
Amman (Jordan)
Baku (Azerbaijan)*
Bangkok (Thailand)
Beirut (Lebanon)
Bishkek (Kyrgyzstan)*
Colombo (Sri Lanka)
Dhaka (Bangladesh)
Dubai (United Arab Emirates)
Halab (Syria)*
Ho Chi Minh (Vietnam)
Hong Kong SAR (Hong Kong)
Istanbul (Turkey)
Jakarta (Indonesia)
Jerusalem (Israel)
Karachi (Pakistan)
Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia)
Kuwait City (Kuwait)*
Macao SAR (Macao)
Mumbai (India)
Muscat (Oman)*
Nicosia (Cyprus)
Quezon City (Philippines)
Riyadh (Saudi Arabia)
Seoul (Republic of Korea)
Shanghai (China)
Singapore (Singapore)
Tashkent (Uzbekistan)
Tehran (Iran)
Tripoli (Libya)*
Tokyo (Japan)
Europe.(34)
Amsterdam (Netherlands)
Athens (Greece)
Belgrade (Serbia and Montenegro)
Berlin (Germany)
Bratislava (Slovak Republic)
Brussels (Belgium)
Bucharest (Romania)
Budapest (Hungary)
Chisinau (Moldova)
Copenhagen (Denmark)
Dublin (Ireland)
Helsinki (Finland)
Kiev (Ukraine)
Lisbon (Portugal)
Ljubljana (Slovenia)
London (United Kingdom)
Luxembourg City (Luxembourg)
Madrid (Spain)
Minsk (Belarus)
Moscow (Russian Federation)
Oslo (Norway)
Paris (France)
Prague (Czech Republic)
Reykjavik (Iceland)
Riga (Latvia)
Rome (Italy)
Sofia (Bulgaria)
Stockholm (Sweden)
Tallinn (Estonia)
Vienna (Austria)
Vilnius (Lithuania)
Warsaw (Poland)
Zagreb (Croatia)
Zurich (Switzerland)
Table 3. One-hundred cities selected by continent (2005)
continued on following page

108   Carrizales, Holzer, & Manoharan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Findings.and.Longitudinal.Assessment
The rankings in Table 4 reflect the top twenty municipalities in overall score based 
on the five e-governance component categories. The highest possible score for any 
one city Web site is 100. Seoul received a score of 81.70, the highest ranked city 
Web site for 2005. Seoul’s Web site was also the highest ranked in 2003, with a 
score of 73.48. New York City had the second highest ranked municipal Web site, 
with a score of 72.71. New York City moved up two places from its fourth place 
ranking in 2003. Similarly, Shanghai, China moved up two places in ranking since 
2003, with the third ranked score of 63.93 in 2005. Hong Kong and Sydney, Aus-
tralia complete the top five ranked municipal Web sites with scores of 61.51 and 
60.82, respectively. Hong Kong was also ranked in the top five in 2003; however, 
Sydney significantly increased its score and ranking from 2003 (ranked 19th with 
a score of 37.41). 
Privacy and security results indicate that Seoul, Sydney, Zurich, New York, and Hong 
Kong are top ranked cities in the category of privacy and security. New to the top 
five are Sydney and Zurich. Sydney was ranked 11th in 2003 with a score of 6.79, 
but has improved to 2nd overall with a score of 16.80 in 2005. Zurich was ranked 20th 
in 2003 with a score of 3.57, but has improved to 3rd overall with a score of 16.40 
in 2005. The average score in this category is 4.17, an increase from a score of 2.53 
in 2003. Thirty-one cities evaluated earned 0 points in this category, a decrease in 
the total number of municipalities that earned 0 points in 2003 (36). Many cities 
still have not properly understood the importance of a privacy and security policy, 
a very important deficiency in the development of digital governance. 
North.America.(10)
Mexico City (Mexico)
Guatemala City (Guatemala)
Kingston (Jamaica)*
New York (United States)
Panama City (Panama)
San Jose (Costa Rica)
San Salvador (El Salvador)
Santo Domingo (Dominican 
Republic)*
Tegucigalpa (Honduras)
Toronto (Canada)
South.America.(9)
Buenos Aires (Argentina)
Caracas (Venezuela)
Guayaquil (Ecuador)
La Paz (Bolivia)
Lima (Peru)
Montevideo (Uruguay)
Santa Fe De Bogota (Colom-
bia)
Santiago (Chile)
Sao Paulo (Brazil)
Oceania.(2)
Auckland (New Zealand)
Sydney (Australia)
* Official city Web sites unavailable
Table 3. continued
www.ebook3000.com

Worldwide E-Governance   109
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Usability results indicate that New York, Shanghai, Seoul, Sydney and Riga are 
top ranked cities in the category of usability. New to the top five are New York, 
Sydney and Riga. New York was ranked 11th in 2003 with a score of 15.63, but has 
improved to 1st overall with a score of 19.06 in 2005. Sydney was ranked 34th in 
2003 with a score of 12.19, but has improved to 4th overall with a score of 17.81 in 
2005. Riga was ranked 51st in 2003 with a score of 10.00, but has improved to 5th 
overall with a score of 17.50 in 2005. The average score in this category is 12.42, 
an increase from a score of 11.45 in 2003. One of the best practices in the category 
of usability is New York, scoring 19.06. The Web sites for New York are very “user-
friendly.” For example, all pages use consistent color, formatting, “default colors,” 
and underlined text to indicate links. There are consistent uses of navigation bars 
and links to the homepage on every page. The Web sites contain very advanced 
forms, allowing citizens to submit pertinent information.
Results for content indicate that Seoul, New York, Tallinn, Zurich, Hong Kong, 
and Riga are top ranked cities in the category of content. New to the top five are 
Tallinn, Zurich, and Riga. Tallinn was ranked 6th in 2003 with a score of 12.55, but 
has improved to 3rd overall with a score of 14.79 in 2005. Zurich was ranked 28th 
in 2003 with a score of 7.66, but has improved to 4th overall with a score of 13.96 
in 2005. Riga was ranked 51st in 2003 with a score of 4.26, but has improved to 5th 
overall with a score of 13.75 in 2005. The average score for the top five cities has 
only slightly increased from 2003. The average score for the top five ranked cities 
in 2005 is 14.66, while the average score for the top five ranked cities in 2003 was 
14.08. However the overall average increase for this category is second largest of 
the five categories. The average score in this category is 7.63, an increase from a 
score of 6.43 in 2003.
The results for online services indicate that Seoul, New York, Singapore, Hong Kong, 
and Warsaw are the top ranked cities in the category of online services. New to the 
top five are New York and Warsaw. New York was ranked 6th in 2003 with a score 
of 12.28, but has improved to 2nd overall with a score of 15.76 in 2005. Warsaw 
was ranked 62nd in 2003 with a score of 1.93, but has improved to 5th overall with a 
score of 11.86 in 2005. The average score in this category is 5.32, an increase from 
a score of 4.82 in 2003. Only two cities evaluated earned 0 points in this category, 
a decrease from the three municipalities that earned 0 points in 2003. The average 
score for the top five ranked cities in 2005 is 14.51, while the average score for the 
top five ranked cities in 2003 was 13.69.
The results for citizen participation indicate that Seoul, Warsaw, Bratislava, London, 
and Prague are the top ranked cities in the category of privacy and security. New 
to the top five are all of those cities except Seoul, which repeats as the top ranked 
city in the category. Warsaw was ranked 74th in 2003 with a score of 0.00, but has 
improved to 2nd overall with a score of 12.55 in 2005. Bratislava was not ranked in 
2003, but has received a 3rd overall ranking with a score of 10.91 in 2005. London 
was ranked 51st in 2003 with a score of 1.54, but has improved to 4th overall with 

110   Carrizales, Holzer, & Manoharan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
a score of 10.55 in 2005. Prague was not ranked in 2003 but has received a 5th 
overall ranking with a score of 10.18 in 2005. The average score in this category 
is 3.57, an increase from a score of 3.26 in 2003. The category of citizen participa-
tion resulted in the smallest overall increase in performance. This can be attributed 
in part to the additional questions added to the survey instrument to better survey 
citizen participation online. However, the results can also be attributed, in part, to 
the lack of support for such online practices.
Ranking
City
Score
Privacy
Usability
Content
Service
Participation
1
Seoul
81.70
17.60
17.81
16.04
16.61
13.64
2
New York
72.71
16.00
19.06
14.79
15.76
7.09
3
Shanghai
63.93
12.00
18.75
13.13
11.69
8.36
4
Hong Kong 
61.51
15.60
16.25
13.75
13.73
2.18
5
Sydney
60.82
16.80
17.81
12.50
8.98
4.73
6
Singapore
60.22
10.40
15.94
11.67
14.58
7.64
7
Tokyo
59.24
12.00
16.25
12.29
10.34
8.36
8
Zurich
55.99
16.40
14.69
13.96
9.49
1.45
9
Toronto
55.10
11.20
14.06
11.46
9.83
8.55
10
Riga
53.95
6.80
17.50
13.75
6.44
9.45
11
Warsaw
53.26
0.00
15.31
13.54
11.86
12.55
12
Reykjavik
52.24
11.60
13.13
13.54
10.34
3.64
13
Sofia
49.11
8.00
13.44
11.67
7.46
8.55
14
Prague
47.27
0.00
16.88
10.21
10.00
10.18
15
Luxembourg 
46.58
7.20
15.31
11.88
7.29
4.91
16
Amsterdam
46.44
10.40
12.50
9.79
5.93
7.82
17
Paris
45.49
8.80
15.94
11.46
4.75
4.55
18
Macao 
45.48
10.40
13.44
13.13
5.42
3.09
19
Dublin
44.10
8.00
16.88
11.04
4.92
3.27
20
Bratislava
43.65
0.00
15.94
11.04
5.76
10.91
Table 4. Top 20 cities in digital governance (2005)
www.ebook3000.com

Worldwide E-Governance   111
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Rank
City
Country
Score
1
Seoul
Republic of Korea
17.60
1
Sydney
Australia
16.80
3
Zurich
Switzerland
16.40
4
New York
United States
16.00
5
Hong Kong 
Hong Kong
15.60
6
Rome
Italy
13.20
7
Berlin
Germany
12.80
8
Shanghai
China
12.00
8
Tokyo
Japan
12.00
10
Reykjavik
Iceland
11.60
Table 5. Top 10 cities in privacy and security (2005)
Rank
City
Country
Score
1
New York
United States
19.06
2
Shanghai
China
18.75
3
Seoul
Republic of Korea
17.81
3
Sydney
Australia
17.81
5
Riga
Latvia
17.50
6
Oslo
Norway
17.19
7
Dublin
Ireland
16.88
7
Prague
Czech Rep.
16.88
7
Jerusalem
Israel
16.88
10
Hong Kong 
Hong Kong
16.25
Table 6. Top 10 cities in usability (2005)
Rank
City
Country
Score
1
Seoul
Republic of Korea
16.04
2
New York
United States
14.79
2
Tallinn
Estonia
14.79
4
Zurich
Switzerland
13.96
5
Riga
Latvia
13.75
5
Hong Kong 
Hong Kong
13.75
7
Warsaw
Poland
13.54
7
Reykjavik
Iceland
13.54
9
Shanghai
China
13.13
9
Macao 
Macao
13.13
Table 7. Top 10 cities in content (2005)

112   Carrizales, Holzer, & Manoharan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
The comparisons between the findings from the 2003 evaluation and the findings 
of the 2005 evaluation indicate an overall average score increase from 28.49 in 
2003 to 33.11 in 2005. This would be the expectation for municipalities increas-
ingly seeking ways to utilize technology to increase effectiveness and efficiency. 
The Internet is an ideal medium for meeting such goals. Table 10 highlights these 
increases by continent. All six identified regions have collectively improved in their 
e-governance performance. 
The results, when analyzed by Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment (OECD) and non-OECD member countries, highlight a growing gap between 
the two groups. In all, 30 countries represent OECD member countries, and the 
Rank
City
Country
Score
1
Seoul
Republic of Korea
13.64
2
Warsaw
Poland
12.55
3
Bratislava
Slovak Republic
10.91
4
London
United Kingdom
10.55
5
Prague
Czech Rep.
10.18
6
Riga
Latvia
9.45
7
Toronto
Canada
8.55
7
Sofia
Bulgaria
8.55
9
Shanghai
China
8.36
9
Tokyo
Japan
8.36
Table 9. Top 10 cities in citizen participation (2005)
Table 8. Top 10 cities in service delivery (2005)
Rank
City
Country
Score
1
Seoul
Republic of Korea
16.61
2
New York
United States
15.76
3
Singapore
Singapore
14.58
4
Hong Kong 
Hong Kong
13.73
5
Warsaw
Poland
11.86
6
Shanghai
China
11.69
7
Tokyo
Japan
10.34
7
Reykjavik
Iceland
10.34
9
Prague
Czech Rep.
10.00
10
Toronto
Canada
9.83
www.ebook3000.com

Worldwide E-Governance   113
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
largest municipality for each of these countries was evaluated and included in the 
results. Fifty-one non-OECD member countries are also included in the evaluations. 
Seoul, Korea was the highest ranked municipality for OECD member countries 
and Shanghai, China was the highest ranked municipality for non-OECD member 
countries. OECD member countries have a combined average of 44.35, well above 
the overall average for all municipalities, 33.11. Non-OECD member countries have 
an overall average of 26.50. The increase for OECD member countries from 2003 
was 8.01 points, and for non-OECD member countries there was an increase of only 
2.24 from 2003. More importantly, the gap between OECD and non-OECD member 
countries increased since the 2003 evaluation. The difference in 2003 between the 
average scores of OECD and non-OECD member countries was 12.08. Based on the 
2005 evaluations, the gap has increased to 17.85. The increase in the overall average 
of scores has been predominately a result of OECD member countries improving 
overall municipal Web site performance. The following Figure 1 reflects the average 
scores of OECD member and nonmember countries, as well as the average score 
Oceania
Europe
Average
Asia
North.
America.
Africa
South.
America
2005.Overall.
Averages
49.94
37.17
33.11
33.05
30.21
24.87
20.45
2003.Overall
Averages
46.01
30.23
28.49
30.38
27.42
17.66
20.05
Table 10. Average score by continent for 2005 and 2003
Figure 1. Average score by e-governance categories in OECD member and non-
member countries (2005)
0.00
4.00
8.00
12.00
16.00
20.00
Usability C
ontent S
ervice  
Privacy  &
Security
Citizen
Participation 
OECD Member
Countries
Overall Average
Scores
Non-OECD
Member
Countries
C
S

114   Carrizales, Holzer, & Manoharan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
for each of the five e-governance categories. The figure highlights the gap between 
OECD member and nonmember countries across all categories. 
On further research, it has been found that the digital divide between the OCED and 
non-OCED member countries varies across the five established criteria as shown in 
Table 11. The most significant gap has been recorded in the areas of service, privacy, 
and citizen participation. Overall, OCED member countries have shown a higher 
percentage of increase in all areas except usability. In the area of usability, non-
OCED member countries increased 10.1% in average score, while OCED member 
countries had a minimal increase of 5%. However, the OCED member countries 
showed significant increase in scores in the areas of privacy and service with 82% 
and 26% change, respectively. The percent change for non-OECD member countries 
in the same e-government categories were only 36.4% and -4.5 %. This comparison 
sheds light on the significance of investment in e-government infrastructure involving 
privacy and security to sustain the e-government mechanisms in OCED countries, 
while the need for increased investment in non-OECD member countries. Moreover 
the negative average score changes for citizen participation (-2.95%) and services 
(-4.5 %) among non-OCED member countries signify that Web  presence alone will 
not indicate an increase in performance, but rather non-OCED member countries 
may need to develop a comprehensive policy that addresses the unique e-government 
requirements of individual countries and help in bridging the digital divide.
Specific increases in the five e-governance categories have been discussed above, but 
it is important to note that the most significant improvement in average score is in the 
area of privacy and security. Municipalities have recognized Web site security and 
Usability.
Content.
Service.
Privacy.&.
Security
Citizen..
Participation.
Year
OCED.Member.
Countries.
14.30
10.21
7.50
7.17
5.18
2005
OCED.Member.
Countries
13.62
8.55
5.95
3.94
4.29
2003
%.Increase.in.
Score.(OECD)
5 %
19.4 %
26.0 % 
82 %
20.7 %
Non-OCED.
Member.Coun-
tries
11.32
6.12
4.03
2.41
2.63
2005
Non-OCED.
Member.Coun-
tries
10.28
5.29
4.22
1.77
2.71
2003
%.Increase.in.
Score.(Non-
OECD)
10.1 %
15.6 %
- 4.5 %
36.4 %
- 2.95 %
Table 11. Variations in OCED and non-OCED member countries
www.ebook3000.com

Worldwide E-Governance   115
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
citizen privacy as key components to effective and efficient Web sites. The category 
with the smallest increase in average score is citizen participation. Municipalities 
still have not found that citizen participation in government is a critical component 
for online functions. Table 12 highlights these findings.
In addition, some of the changes in the individual municipal rankings from 2003 
to 2005 are of note. Table 13 shows the rankings of the top 10 municipalities based 
on the 2005 evaluations, as well as their change in ranking position. In general, 
Web sites would not be expected to decrease in score or ranking significantly, as 
a reduction or elimination in Web site services and functions is not common prac-
tice. For the most part, ranking changes were three places or less; however, there 
are significant changes in a few Web sites that have improved over the two years 
between evaluations. Those Web sites that have improved their Web sites signifi-
cantly, as is apparent by their increase in overall ranking, are Sydney, Zurich, and 
Table 13. Change in rank between 2003 and 2005 evaluations
Ranking
City
Country
2003
2005
Rank
(2003)
Rank
2005
Change.in.
Rank
1
Seoul
Korea
73.48
81.70
1
1
0
2
New York
United States
61.35
72.71
4
2
+2
3
Shanghai
China
58.00
63.93
5
3
+2
4
Hong Kong 
Hong Kong
66.57
61.51
2
4
-2
5
Sydney
Australia
37.41
60.82
19
5
+14
6
Singapore
Singapore
62.97
60.22
3
6
-3
7
Tokyo
Japan
46.52
59.24
9
7
+2
8
Zurich
Switzerland
28.59
55.99
35
8
+27
9
Toronto
Canada
46.35
55.10
10
9
+1
10
Riga
Latvia
17.12
53.95
62
10
+52
Table 12. Average score by e-governance categories in 2005 and 2003
Usability.
Content.
Service.
Privacy.&.
Security
Citizen.Partici-
pation.
2005
Average.Scores.
12.42
7.63
5.32
4.17
3.57
2003
Average.Scores
11.45
6.43
4.82
2.53
3.26

116   Carrizales, Holzer, & Manoharan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Riga. Sydney moved up 14 places in ranking to a 5th place ranking in 2005. Zurich 
moved up 27 places to 8th overall. Riga represented the most significant increase 
in rankings from those municipal Web sites evaluated in 2003. Riga moved up 52 
places to 10th overall in the 2005 evaluation.
Conclusion.
The study of municipal e-governance practices throughout the world is an area that 
clearly requires ongoing research. Our studies in 2003 and 2005 have produced find-
ings that contribute to the e-governance literature, in particular in the areas of Web 
site privacy/security, usability, content, services, and citizen participation. The 2005 
study highlights the increased attention spent on privacy and security and the need 
for further attention in the area of citizen participation via municipal Web sites. 
In addition, the gap between OECD and non-OECD member countries in average 
scores has increased since 2003. Although overall average scores have improved for 
non-OECD member countries, they have not done so at the rate of OECD member 
countries. As we concluded in 2003, since there is a gap between developed and 
less-developed countries, it is very important for international organizations such 
as the UN and cities in advanced countries to attempt to bridge the digital divide. 
We recommend developing a comprehensive policy for bridging that divide. That 
comprehensive policy should include capacity building for municipalities, including 
information infrastructure, content, and applications and access for individuals. 
With the growing research and development of e-governance emerging throughout 
the world, as well as the importance of information and communication technolo-
gies, we expect that the gap discussed above will be begin to close. The continued 
study of municipalities worldwide, with a third evaluation planned in 2007, will 
further provide insight into the direction of e-governance and the performance of 
e-governance throughout regions of the world. This second study of worldwide digi-
tal governance has allowed for initial assessments in the direction of e-governance 
performance via a two-year comparison. With forthcoming studies, already in the 
planning, the data will become critical in evaluating whether the gaps highlighted 
hear continue to increase. Moreover, every region has examples of best practices for 
overall performance and in each specific e-governance category. As municipalities 
seek to increase their municipal Web site performance, searching within their region 
offers opportunities to identify e-governance benchmarks. Those municipalities that 
serve as top performers in their respective regions can then look at the top-ranked 
cities in municipalities throughout the world. Although the 2005 study highlights 
increases in e-governance performance throughout the world, continuous improve-
ment should be the norm for every municipality. 
www.ebook3000.com

Worldwide E-Governance   117
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Acknowledgment
We are grateful for the work and assistance of research staffs in the E-Governance 
Institute/ National Center for Public Productivity at Rutgers, the State University of 
New Jersey, Campus at Newark, and the Global e-Policy e-Government Institute at 
Sungkyunkwan University. We would also like to express our deepest thanks for their 
contributions to the evaluators who participated in this project. A complete listing 
of names can be found at http://www.andromeda.rutgers.edu/~egovinst/Website/
References
Accenture. (2002). eGovernment leadership: Realizing the vision. The Government Executive 
Series. Retrieved September 9, 2006, from http://www.accenture.com/Global/Ser-
vices/By_Industry/Government/R_and_I/EGovVision.htm
Accenture (2004). eGovernment leadership: High performance, maximum value. The Gov-
ernment Executive Series. Retrieved September 9, 2006, from http://www.accenture.
com/Global/Services/By_Industry/Government/R_and_I/
Arterton, F. C. (1987). Can technology protect democracy? Newbury Park: SAGE Publica-
tions.
Arterton, F. C. (1988). Political participation and teledemocracy. PS: Political Science and 
Politics, 21(3), 620-626.
Becker, T. (1993). Teledemocracy: Gathering momentum in state and local governance. 
Spectrum: The Journal of State and Government, 66(2), 14-19.
Bellamy, C., & Taylor, J. A. (1998). Governing in the information age. Buckingham: Open 
University Press.
Browning, G. (2002). Electronic democracy: Using the internet to transform American 
politics. Medford: CyberAge Books.
Bryan, C., Tsagarousianou, R., & Tambini, D. (1998). Electronic democracy and the civic 
networking movement in context. In R. Tsagarousianou, D. Tambini, & C. Bryan, 
Cyber democracy: Technology, cities, and civic networks (pp. 1-17). New York: 
Routledge.
Capgemini. (2005) Online availability of public services: How is Europe progressing? Euro-
pean Commission Report. Retrieved September 7, 2006, from http://www.capgemini.
com/news/2005/Online_availibility_of_public_services_5th_measurement.pdf
Christopher, A. F. (1987). Teledemocracy: Can technology protect democracy? Newbury 
Park: SAGE Publications.
Cloete, F. (2003). Assessing governance with electronic policy management tools. Public 
Performance & Management Review, 26(3), 276-290.

118   Carrizales, Holzer, & Manoharan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Eggers, W. D. (2005). Government 2.0: Using technology to improve education, cut red 
tape, reduce gridlock, and enhance democracy. New York: Rowan & Littlefield 
Publishers, Inc.
Gattiker, U. E. (2001). The Internet as a diverse community: Cultural, organizational, and 
political issues. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Giga Consulting. (2000). Scorecard analysis of the New Jersey department of treasury. 
Unpublished report to the NJ Department of Treasury.
Holzer, M., & Kim, S.-T. (2004). Digital governance in municipalities worldwide. Newark, 
NJ: National Center for Public Productivity. Retrieved July 5, 2006, from http://www.
andromeda.rutgers.edu/~egovinst/Website/Report%20-%20Egov.pdf
Horrigan, J. B. (2004). How Americans get in touch with government: Internet users benefit 
from the efficiency of e-government, but multiple channels are still needed for citizens 
to reach agencies and solve problems. Washington, DC: Pew Internet & American 
Life Project. 
Howard, M. (2001, August). e-Government across the globe: How will “e” change Govern-
ment? Government Finance Review, 6-9.
Kamarck, E. C., & Nye, J. S., Jr. (Eds.). (1999). Democracy.com? Governance in a networked 
world. Hollis: Hollis Publishing.
Kamarck, E. C., & Nye, J. S., Jr. (Eds.), (2003). Governance.com: Democracy in the infor-
mation age. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Kaylor, C., Deshazo, R., & Van Eck, D. (2001). Gauging e-government: A report on imple-
menting services among American cities. Government Information Quarterly, 18, 
293-307.
Korac-Kakabadse, A., & Korac-Kakabadse, N. (1999). Information technology’s impact 
on the quality of democracy: Reinventing the ‘democratic vessel.’ In R. Heeks (Ed.), 
Reinventing government in the information age: International practice in IT-enabled 
public sector reform. London: Routledge.
Loader, B. D. (Ed.). (1997). The governance of cyberspace: Politics, technology and global 
restructuring. London: Routledge.
Malina, A. (1999). Perspectives on citizen democratisatin and alienation in the virtual public 
sphere. In B. N. Hague & B. D. Loader (Eds.), Digital democracy: Discourse and 
decision making in the information age. London: Routledge.
McLean, I. (1989). Democracy and the new technology. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Melitski, J., Holzer, M., Kim, S.-T., Kim, C.-G.., & Rho, S. Y. (2005). Digital government 
worldwide: An e-government assessment of municipal Web-sites. International Journal 
of E-Government Research, 1(1), 1-19. 
Moon, M. J. (2002). The evolution of e-government among municipalities: Rhetoric or 
reality? Public Administration Review, 62(4), 424-433.
Moon, M. J., & deLeon, P. (2001). Municipal reinvention: Municipal values and diffusion 
among municipalities. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 11(3), 
327-352.
www.ebook3000.com

Worldwide E-Governance   119
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Musso, J., Weare, C., & Hale, M. (2000). Designing Web technologies for local governance 
reform: Good management or good democracy. Political Communication, 17(l), 1-
19.
Skrzycki, C. (2003a, January 23). U.S. opens online portal to rulemaking; Web site invites 
wider participation in the regulatory process. The Washington Post, p. E01.
Skrzycki, C. (2003b, October 28). Idea of electronic rulemaking boots up slowly. The 
Washington Post, p. E01.
Shane, P. M. (2002, September 20-22). The electronic federalist: The internet and the 
eclectic institutionalization of democratic legitimacy. Paper Presented at the Pros-
pects for Electronic Democracy Conference, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania.
United Nations Online Network in Public Administration (UNPAN). (2003). United Nations 
global e-government survey. Retrieved September 7, 2006, from http://www.unpan.
org/egovernment3.asp
United Nations Online Network in Public Administration (UNPAN). (2004). United Nations 
global e-government readiness report. Retrieved September 7, 2006, from http://www.
unpan.org/egovernment4.asp
United Nations Online Network in Public Administration (UNPAN). (2005). United Nations 
global e-government readiness report. Retrieved September 7, 2006, from http://www.
unpan.org/dpepa-egovernment%20readiness%20report.asp
Weare, C. J., Musso, & Hale, M. (1999). Electronic democracy and the diffusion of municipal 
Web pages in California. Administration and Society, 31(1), 3-27.
West, D.M. (2001). WMRC e-government survey. Retrieved March 16, 2006, from http://
www.insidepolitics.org/egovt01int.html
West, D. M. (2004). Global e-government survey. Retrieved March 16, 2006, from http://
www.insidepolitics.org/egovt04int.html
West, D. M. (2005). Global e-government survey. Retrieved March 16, 2006, from http://
www.insidepolitics.org/egovt05int.pdf
Westen, T. (1998). Can technology save democracy? National Civic Review, 87(1), 47-56.
Westen, T. (2000). E-democracy: Ready or not, here it comes. National Civic Review, 89(3), 
217-227.
Wilhelm, A. G. (1998). Virtual sounding boards: How deliberative is on-line political dis-
cussion. Information, Communication & Society, 1(3), 313-338.
Witschge, T. (2002, September 22-22). Online deliberation: Possibilities of the internet for 
deliberation. Paper Presented at the Prospects for Electronic Democracy Conference, 
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
World E-Gov Forum. (2007) Top ten e-government countries 2007. Retrieved February 28, 
2007, from http://www.worldegovforum.com/article.php3?id_article=1367

120   Pratchett, Wingfield, & Polat
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.V
Local.Democracy.Online:
An.Analysis.of.Local.Government.
Web.Sites.in.England.and.Wales*
Lawrence Pratchett, De Montfort University, UK
Melvin Wingfield, De Montfort University, UK
Rabia Karakaya Polat, Isik University, Istanbul
Abstract
This report from the field analyzes the extent to which local authorities in England and 
Wales have responded to the e-democracy agenda by examining their Web sites and 
assessing their potential to deliver democracy. The analysis of Web sites provides a 
powerful insight into how local government is using the Internet to promote democracy. 
Two aspects of Web site use are particularly significant. First, the analysis reveals 
the overall commitment to e-democracy in local government, as it is a measure of 
actual behavior rather than simply an attitudinal survey. Second, it highlights the 
types of democratic structure being supported and the values being emphasized in 
the implementation of e-democracy. The research demonstrated that the potential 
of the Internet for enhancing democracy is not fully exploited by local authorities 
and there remain considerable variations between different authorities. 
www.ebook3000.com

Local Democracy Online   121
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Introduction
The idea that information and communication technologies (ICTs) have the capacity 
to greatly enhance democracy is hardly new. As long ago as 1970, researchers were 
examining the possibilities and problems of technology-mediated democracy and 
arguing that democratic engagement could be enhanced through ICTs (Martin & 
Norman, 1970). It was only in the 1990s, however, with the commercial develop-
ment of the Internet and its associated technologies, that the possibilities started to 
translate into reality. Initiatives from as far afield as Canada (Lyon, 1993) and the 
Netherlands (Schalken & Tops, 1995) experimented with different forms of citizen 
engagement in local government based primarily on the innovative application of 
new technologies. For the first time, new technologies were being taken seriously as 
a potential solution for some of democracy’s contemporary problems (cf. Arterton, 
1987; Abrahamson, Arterton, & Orren, 1988).1
Despite the existence of a range of e-democracy tools and some significant experi-
ence of using them in different contexts, the penetration and take-up of e-democracy 
in England and Wales, as elsewhere, remain limited. It is this gap between the ex-
istence of a variety of tools and their take-up that is the main focus of the research 
reported here. This paper reports on the results of a survey of local government Web 
sites in England and Wales. The results of a second phase of the project—in-depth 
interviews with a range of people who have responsibility for or an impact on local 
government’s approach to e-democracy—is described in more detail elsewhere (see 
Pratchett, Wingfield, & Karakaya-Polat, 2005).
Local government in the United Kingdom has made a significant investment in e-
government over the last few years. Supported by the Office of the Deputy Prime 
Minister through a range of ‘national projects’ and other devices, e-enabled local 
government is now considered to be a reality across all local authorities in England 
and Wales. Among these national projects has been a £4.5 million, 2-year local e-
democracy program aimed at “harnessing the power of new technology to encour-
age citizen participation in local decision-making between election times” (cited 
in MORI, 2005, p. 9). This research analyzes the extent to which local authorities 
have responded to the e-democracy agenda by examining their Web sites and as-
sessing their potential to deliver democracy. Consequently, it provides an analysis 
of e-democracy practice in England and Wales.
E-Democracy.Online:.A.Framework.for.Analysis
The Web site is a core strategic tool for local authorities. It is a unique medium for 
communicating information and providing services. In the context of e-democracy, 

122   Pratchett, Wingfield, & Polat
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
it is also a medium that can be used for encouraging political participation and 
democratic engagement. The Web site, hence, has a key role in providing channels 
for political participation and bringing life to the rhetoric of democratic renewal. 
In this research, the Web site analysis aimed to produce an e-democracy baseline 
and a first indication of the gap between rhetoric and reality in the e-democracy 
practices of local government.
Although the analysis of media sources and political documents has a long tradition 
(Berelson, 1952; Holsti, 1969), analysis of Web sites is a recent area of study within 
various disciplines. The research interests and specific research questions have dif-
fered across disciplines and depending on the purposes of the study. However, many 
of them start from the properties of the Internet and ask whether or not the examined 
Web sites exploit these properties. For example, Gibson and Ward (2000), in their 
analysis of political party Web sites, first identify the properties of the Internet and 
then ask, “given these distinctive properties, what are the particular ways in which 
we would expect parties to be using the WWW (emphasis added, p. 304)?” This 
leads to a technology-led evaluation of Web sites. We think that taking the proper-
ties of the Internet as “given” is a form of technological determinism. Instead, in 
this research we asked the following: “Given the importance of participation and 
democracy in the current political climate and the role of elected local government 
to engender participation and democracy, how do local authorities use the Internet 
for democratic purposes?” 
Accordingly, the main interest has been to evaluate the capacity of the Web sites 
to provide opportunities for citizen participation and the extent to which the Web 
sites provide information about the working of the local democratic system, such 
as information on elections, elected members, political management and so on. The 
framework also evaluated their ease of use by looking at features such as search 
facility or site map. 
The Web site analysis is based on a quantitative approach. Although initial Web 
site analyses were descriptive and anecdotal, more recent studies have taken a more 
systematic approach. This requires identification of indicators to measure various 
aspects of Web sites, such as ease of use, information content and interactivity 
(Gibson & Ward, 2000; Musso et al., 2000). Quantitative studies allow for system-
atic analyses of political sites. They also enable the researcher to identify trends 
across time and different cases. The Society of Information Technology Managers 
(SOCITM), for example, has been conducting a Web survey of all local authorities 
in the UK since 2000 using more or less similar tools. In this research, we aimed 
to develop a framework that would enable us to conduct a systematic analysis of 
local authority Web sites that can be used in the future for the same purpose. What 
distinguishes this framework from that developed and deployed by SOCITM is its 
specific emphasis on the democratic devices available (or not) in these Web sites. 
Therefore, we have not been interested in the capacity of these Web sites in provid-
ing services electronically. 
www.ebook3000.com

Local Democracy Online   123
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Research into local authority Web sites was undertaken using a data collection tool 
designed to test various elements of what facilitated democratic engagement. The 
data collection tool consisted of 141 factors which, taken together, represented 
aspects of democratic practice. The aim of the research was to replicate the experi-
ence from the perspective of the average user. Consequently, a research assistant 
with only a general knowledge of local government was employed to analyze all 
local authority (i.e., council) Web sites in England and Wales. Using a fast Internet 
connection within the University, the researcher was asked to spend no longer than 
1 minute attempting to find the answer to each question. Our assumption here was 
that a member of the public, probably using a slower connection than that available 
within a university, should not be expected to spend longer than 1 minute searching 
a local government Web site for information that supports the democratic process. 
The reliability of the research tool was validated by cross-sampling with two other 
researchers on 10% of the Web sites analyzed. The research was conducted from 
November to December 2004. All local authorities in England and Wales were 
included in the sample; therefore, the sample and population was equal (N = 408). 
There were no questions of an ethical nature to consider given the public access 
of Web sites. 
The research tool was divided into a number of sections, each of which investigates 
a different component of democracy as it might be offered through a Web site:
• 
Maintenance and navigability is concerned with the general look and feel of 
the Web site and its accessibility. Questions such as how easily the Web site 
can be found from a “Google” search and when it was last updated are all 
standard points of Web site investigation that clarify the value of the Web site 
to users. From a democratic point of view, citizens should expect a Web site to 
be easily found and navigated, and for the information on it to be up to date.
• 
Information is a key role of any Web site. From an e-democracy perspective, 
however, we can expect a good local government Web site to provide basic 
information on what the council’s roles and responsibilities are and how they 
are organized. Beyond this obvious information, there are also some core docu-
ments that might be expected to be available, such as the Council’s constitution 
and so on. These questions test for a selection of core documents rather than 
for comprehensiveness. 
• 
Elected members are clearly central to the way democracy works in local 
government, so it seems reasonable to expect Web sites to provide extensive 
information about them. As democracy is an inherently political process, it 
seems reasonable for the council’s Web site to state clearly the political al-
legiance of council members and the overall political balance of the council: 
Otherwise, the mechanism of political accountability is severely limited in the 
online world.

124   Pratchett, Wingfield, & Polat
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
• 
Information about elections is also an important component of the democratic 
process, so the Web site survey tests for how much information is available 
on this topic.
• 
Political management processes are clearly central to the day-to-day opera-
tion of local democracy. The survey tool asks a number of questions about the 
way in which political management processes are communicated through the 
Web site. The rationale behind these questions is to test the transparency of 
the new political management systems (introduced by the Local Government 
Act 2000) and the extent to which Web sites are being used to enhance the 
accountability of these new policy and decision-making structures.
• 
Links to other bodies are important insofar as local democracy is no longer just 
about elected local government but also about much wider patterns of local 
governance (cf. Sullivan & Skelcher, 2002; Stoker, 2004). It seems plausible 
to argue, therefore, that if local authorities are to fulfil their community lead-
ership role and lead on democratizing governance structures, then their Web 
sites should provide at least some links to key partner organizations.
• 
Consultations are a significant means of ensuring responsiveness to the public. 
The survey tests the Web sites, therefore, for the range and accessibility of 
both online and off-line consultation activities that local authorities might be 
engaged in. While these consultations are not necessarily about democracy, 
they are, nevertheless, a good proxy for the openness of the council towards 
public engagement.
• 
Online discussion forums are a widely recognized form of providing a greater 
voice for the public. While opinion is divided on their value to the democratic 
process (see, e.g., Wilhelm, 2000), again, they provide a good measure of 
councils’ willingness to engage with the public.
Chart 1. Maintenance and navigability
21%
94%
61%
38%
49%
34%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Percent of Web sites with function
Does the site indicate when
it was last updated?
Is there a general search
facility?
Is there a site map?
Are there any contact
details for the webmaster?
Is there a ‘what's new’
section?
Is there a FAQ section?
www.ebook3000.com

Local Democracy Online   125
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
The analysis of Web sites provides a powerful insight into how local government is 
using the Internet to promote democracy. Two aspects of Web site use are particularly 
significant. First, the analysis can reveal the overall commitment to e-democracy 
in local government, as it is a measure of actual behavior rather than simply an at-
titudinal survey. Second, it can highlight the types of democratic structures being 
supported and the values being emphasized in the implementation of e-democracy. 
Although some of the questions offered in this framework are specific to UK local 
government, the overarching framework is of more generic value to the analysis of 
e-democracy in any local government context.
Findings.From.the.Analysis
The analysis of Web sites reveals a sophisticated picture of how e-democracy is de-
veloping among local authorities in England and Wales. This main section reports the 
findings from the analysis, organized around the key features of the framework.
Maintenance and Navigability
Maintenance and navigability are important from a democratic perspective because 
they indicate how much emphasis is put on accessibility to the Web site across the 
community. Thus, the existence of a site map, an indication of when the site was 
last updated and so on (all of which are “good practice” on Web design) all provide 
some idea of how serious the local authority is about using the Web site as a tool 
for community engagement. 
Even at the most basic level, many local government Web sites failed to meet these 
expectations. As Chart 1 shows, only 21% of Web sites indicated when the site 
had last been updated. This indicator might not be directly related to democratic 
practice, but it is related to ease of use of sites which, in turn, it could be argued, is 
necessary for democratic engagement. Only 38% provided contact details for the 
Webmaster, while less than half offered a “what’s new” section as part of the Web 
site. In terms of maintenance, therefore, many local government Web sites remain 
poor. However, on a more positive note, a significant majority of Web sites provided 
good navigability. More than 60% offered a site map, while 94% of Web sites had 
a general search facility allowing users to search for their area of interest. 
In many respects, these findings match earlier analyses of local government Web 
sites (see e.g., SOCITM, 2004), which show that the degree of “professionalization” 
and quality of Web sites vary considerably. This finding is not only true of local 
government Web sites in the UK, but is also repeated in relation to local government 
Web sites in other European countries and, indeed, even in relation to some national 

126   Pratchett, Wingfield, & Polat
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
parliamentary Web sites within the European Union (Trechsel, Kies, Mendez, & 
Schmitter, 2002).
Basic Information
Maintenance and navigability, of course, provide only partial insight into how 
councils are attempting to communicate with the public. The basic information 
the Web site makes available is another and, arguably more significant, means of 
assessing the democratic intentions of the Council. The questions in this section 
were designed particularly to take account of the way in which local authorities 
would try to inform citizens of the basic roles and responsibilities they perform and 
the fundamentals of the political decision-making structures that exist. This type 
of information is important because, as the British Social Attitudes (BSA) Survey 
found, knowledge of local government is, at best, partial among large sections of 
the community. Nearly half of respondents to the BSA’s 1998 survey (admittedly 
before most local authorities had a Web presence) agreed that the council did not 
keep them well informed about the services it provides (DETR, 1999). This finding 
is backed up by research for the Scottish Executive in 1999, which found that citi-
zens in Scotland do not feel well informed about local services or local government 
more generally (Scottish Executive, 1999). Furthermore, the BSA survey found 
worryingly low levels of knowledge about local politics among citizens: Only 14% 
of respondents claimed to know the name of the leader of their local council and 
only one-third of these respondents were actually able to name that leader correctly 
(DETR, 1998). This knowledge gap translates into wider political inefficacy at the 
local level (Rao & Young, 1999). 
Chart 2. Basic information
56%
60%
41%
48%
80%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Percent of Web sites with information
Is there an introduction to
the Council?
Is there a guide to how
decisions are taken within
the Council?
Is the organisational
structure of the Council
clear?
Copy of community plan
Copy of the Council’s
Constitution
www.ebook3000.com

Local Democracy Online   127
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
The potential for local government Web sites to narrow this information gap and, 
thereby, enhance potential engagement in politics is obvious. For them to achieve 
this goal, however, there is some fundamental information that might be expected 
to have emerged on local government Web sites as they have been developed over 
the last few years. As Chart 2 shows, however, much of this information is surpris-
ingly absent from local government Web sites. Only 56% of local authority Web 
sites included a general introduction to the council. Some 59% of Web sites failed 
to clearly outline the structure of the council, while 40% failed to include a guide on 
how decisions were made within the authority. Even the most basic information that 
might be expected is missing (or is hard to find) in a significant number of cases.
Of more concern, however, was the finding that 57% of authorities failed to show 
basic information on the political control and balance of the council: that is, which 
party had control and how many seats each party had. This information seems to 
be a fundamental component of any democratic institution. Party politics in local 
government has become a major feature of local democracy, with more local au-
thorities being formally controlled by political parties than ever before (Rallings & 
Thrasher, 2003). It seems counter intuitive, therefore, that councils should not want 
to highlight the political features of council members and afford them some promi-
nence on their Web sites—especially in a climate of declining political engagement 
and concomitant attempts to reinvigorate local politics. As Chart 3 shows, however, 
there is an absence of clear information on political control and allegiance on many 
Web sites. The implications of this gap for effective e-democracy are significant. If 
even the most basic political information is excluded from local government Web 
sites, or buried to the extent that it is difficult to find for average citizens, then it 
seems that Web sites not only are failing to rise to the e-democracy challenge but 
that they may also, in some instances, be militating against effective democratic 
Chart 3. Political balance
43%
57%
42%
24%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Percent of Web sites showing information
Is the political balance of
the council clear?  
Can you identify who the
Leader of the council is?
Can you identify which
political party the leader
represents?
Can you identify who the
Chief Executive is?

128   Pratchett, Wingfield, & Polat
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
engagement. Failure to provide this basic information on a Web site may not only 
reflect an information gap but may actively discourage interested citizens from 
becoming more engaged when they discover that they cannot find the information 
they feel they need on the Web site.
It should be noted that in some instances the information on political balance 
could be obtained by looking at a list of council members and then counting the 
number of seats each party held. From our perspective, however, we discounted 
this information from the analysis because it does not specifically indicate political 
balance and its implications. For example, in hung councils it is not always clear 
what the coalition is (if it exists at all) simply by counting seats. Furthermore, it 
should not be assumed that all citizens will know that the majority of seats equates 
with political control.
Elected Members
The issue of information on elected members follows from the previous point about 
keeping citizens informed about the political processes of the council. Citizens not 
only need to know the political balance and leadership of the council but also who 
their council member is, their political allegiance and political activities on the council. 
Indeed, the ability to examine and monitor the political behavior of elected members 
is one of the big advantages predicted by many in relation to the development of 
e-democracy (Trechsel et al., 2002). It is somewhat disappointing, therefore, that 
in many cases identifying elected members was as far as councils appeared willing 
to go. As Chart 4 shows, on most Web sites there was a list of councillors by name 
(89%) or by ward (83%). However, on only 45% of Web sites were councillors 
Chart 4. Information on elected members
89%
83%
45%
61%
27%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Percent of Web sites showing information
Is there a list of councillors
in alphabetical order?
Is there a list of councillors
ordered by ward?
Is there a list of councillors
ordered by political party?
Responsibilities within the
council
External activities
(membership of other
bodies etc)
www.ebook3000.com

Local Democracy Online   129
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
ordered by political party. Of course, this finding is not surprising, given the evi-
dence from Chart 3. However, it does pose some challenging questions about how 
local authorities are seeking to develop e-democracy if, at the same time, many of 
them are ignoring or, at best, downplaying the political aspects of the council. What 
distinguishes local government from other elements of the governance structure is 
its elected nature based on party politics. Hence, it is difficult to understand why 
party identities are so weakly represented in local government Web sites.
One of the ways in which the Internet could be used to enhance local democracy is by 
supporting the relationship between elected members and citizens. This relationship 
could be enhanced through frequent use of e-mail, online surgeries, councillor Web 
sites and so on. Chart 5 analyzes the extent to which local authorities are exploiting 
these features. Two surprising features of the chart are worth emphasizing. First, an 
encouragingly high number of Web sites offer links to councillor e-mail addresses 
and councillor Web sites. Some 63% link to councillors’ e-mail addresses and 65% 
to their Web sites. However, it should be noted that a significant proportion of these 
are personal Web accounts rather than those provided by the council. This difference 
is significant, because it means that councillor Web sites and e-mail addresses lack 
both the legitimacy and clarity of council-owned addresses (i.e., with domain names 
that end with councilname.gov.uk). Members of the public cannot easily predict 
the name of a councillor’s e-mail address or Web site that is not in the council’s 
domain and cannot be certain that their e-mails will be directed exclusively to their 
councillor when e-mailing a non-council-owned address. Second, very few local 
government Web sites take the opportunity to provide information on councillor 
surgeries. Only 27% show surgery locations and even less (23%) provide surgery 
hours. This finding needs to be matched against the Office of the Deputy Prime 
Minister (ODPM)’s priority outcomes for local e-government (ODPM, 2004), 
Chart 5. Councillors online
23%
27%
63%
65%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
Percent of Web sites showing information
Surgery hours
Address of Surgery
Can you access councillor
e-mail addresses?
Can you access councillor
web pages

130   Pratchett, Wingfield, & Polat
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
which encourage online surgeries to be developed. Of course, the lack of interest 
in either of these forms of communication with citizens reflects the fact that many 
councillors do not hold surgeries, preferring other means of keeping in contact with 
their ward constituents (cf. Copus, 2004; Rao, 2000).
Elections
If information on party politics and councillors is limited, what about information on 
formal political processes? As Chart 6 shows, councils make extensive use of their 
Web sites in transmitting the results from previous elections (79%) and discussing 
elections in general terms (85%). Less use is made, however, of the facility Web 
sites offer in informing users of the forthcoming election cycle (24%). The research 
was conducted outside any election period; therefore, there was no imperative on 
local authorities to discuss the electoral process. An important element of the dis-
cussions on e-democracy focuses on the provision of alternative ways of voting, 
including e-voting. Some 64% of Web sites provided information about alternative 
ways of voting. The Web sites were also commonly used for electoral registration 
purposes (78%).
Overall, therefore, we conclude that local authorities are generally good at using 
their Web sites to provide election information.
Chart 6. Election information
85%
79%
24%
64%
78%
67%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Percent of Web sites showing information
Information about the
elections in general
Results of the last elections
Election timetable
Information on alternative
ways of voting?
Can you apply to join the
electoral register?
Can you download an
application form for
electoral register to post?
www.ebook3000.com

Local Democracy Online   131
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Political Management
The other aspect of local democracy is the extent to which the formal decision-
making processes of the council are made more transparent through the Web site. 
One of the main reasons for reforming the political management processes of lo-
cal government into a clearer separation of executive and assembly functions was 
to enhance such transparency (Armstrong, 1999). In exploiting Web sites, it can 
be expected that good councils will provide detailed information on cabinet and 
scrutiny functions.2
There was evidence of what could be considered good practice in informing Web 
users of both the time and access to cabinet and scrutiny meetings in many authori-
ties. There was some variability, however, between cabinet and scrutiny. While it was 
possible to identify cabinet members in 72% of authorities, the corresponding figure 
for members of scrutiny panels dropped to 64%. Authorities were generally more 
reticent to use their Web site to inform users of the possibility of attending either 
cabinet or scrutiny meetings. In both cases, only 42% of authorities used the medium 
offered by the Web site to inform Web users whether access was possible. 
There is obviously scope for authorities to increase the channels of communication by 
adding e-mail links to members of cabinet/scrutiny, thereby improving communica-
tion. Currently, 78% of authorities fail to provide a service whereby cabinet/scrutiny 
members can be contacted to discuss issues relating to their position. 
Chart 7. Cabinet and scrutiny
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Percent
Identify members?
Info on public attendance?
Date of next meeting
Agenda
Background documents and reports
Minutes from previous meetings
Can you email committees with any issues?
Are meetings Webcast?
Scrutiny
Cabinet

132   Pratchett, Wingfield, & Polat
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Links to Other Bodies
So far, the analysis has concentrated on the internal features of representative de-
mocracy in local government. However, as most councillors and officers recognize, 
local policy-making and decisions are increasingly a feature of a wider process of 
local governance in which a broad range of partners are necessary to effect changes 
in the locality. One of the main features of the Internet is its potential for Web sites 
to help “join up” disparate aspects of local governance (Perri 6, Leat, Seltzer, & 
Stoker, 2002). However, the reality of this joining up is much more limited. Almost 
three-quarters of authorities fail to link to either the local Police Authority or the 
local Health/Primary Care Trust (PCT), even though these bodies are key partners 
in most local strategic partnerships. Web sites are much more likely to have links 
to other elected local authorities (especially neighboring) and central government 
departments than they are to other service providers in the locality.
Consultation
Public engagement through consultation has become a significant part of local 
government over the last decade and continues to grow in significance, encour-
aged by best-value performance reviews and the responsiveness components of 
the Comprehensive Performance Assessment (Lowndes & Wilson, 2001). It seems 
logical, therefore, that councils should make use of e-democracy tools to support 
consultation, not least because by 2001, some 52% of local authorities claimed to 
use an interactive aspect of their Web site to support consultation (Birch, 2002). 
Our Web site analysis, therefore, applies hard measures to this claim.
27%
27%
19%
61%
66%
55%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
Percent of Web sites with links
Local Police
Local Health Trust/PCT
Learning and Skills Council
Community organisations
Central government
departments
Other local authorities
Chart 8. External links
www.ebook3000.com

Local Democracy Online   133
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chart 9 reveals some significant insights into the way local authorities are actually 
using online consultation, especially when compared with claims they have made to 
surveys. While 54% of local authorities provide an online list of “live” consultations, 
online questionnaires were used by just more than one-third of authorities (37%). 
It must be recognized that authorities may well have used this tool in the past, but 
during the period of our research none were in use. Consequently, this evidence does 
not necessarily contradict the Bristol/MORI survey of local authority ‘consultation 
leads’ (MORI, 2005), which found that online surveys were conducted by 47% of 
their respondents, but it does suggest the need to reflect on the limited number of 
authorities using such tools.
The other interesting feature of Chart 9 is that 15% of Web sites have links to con-
sultations outside of the council. These links include consultations undertaken by 
other agencies in the area (police, health trusts, learning and skills councils, other 
local authorities and so on) or in collaboration with them. However, it is difficult to 
know how to interpret this figure. On the one hand, 15% seems a surprisingly low 
level of linkage, given that consultation is a key feature of most local agencies’ daily 
life and that almost all local authorities “claim to be working in collaboration with 
other organizations on schemes to enhance public participation” (Birch, 2002). On the 
other hand, the fact that some local authorities are making such links is encouraging, 
suggesting that there is significant scope for local government to act as community 
leaders in citizen engagement through the effective use of Web sites.
Finally, only a small number of local authorities are actively using new technolo-
gies to provoke or promote participation. Only 7% of Web sites offered an option 
for individuals to be notified of future consultation exercises by e-mail and only 
2% offered a similar system by SMS text message. Even among those offering 
such facilities, the level of innovation was limited: Only half of those offering alert 
Chart 9. Consultation
2%
7%
15%
37%
54%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Percent of Web sites with facility
SMS notification facility
E-mail notification facility
Links to consultations outside of
the Council
Online questionnaires available
List of current consultations
available

134   Pratchett, Wingfield, & Polat
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
systems allowed citizens to customize the consultation alert according to whether 
it had significance for their postcode or was in a policy area in which they had a 
specific interest. Given that such facilities are specified as one of the “good” prior-
ity outcomes by the ODPM and are products that the Local e-Democracy National 
Project are now supporting, it can be expected that this type of facility will expand 
quickly in local government.
Online Discussion
The final area of interest from the Web survey is the development of discussion 
forums as a means of providing citizens with an equal opportunity for “voice.” For 
many, the development of various forms of discussion forums is the most promising 
feature of e-democracy insofar as they provide the opportunity for citizens to engage 
on their own terms. However, there is also critical literature on such forums, which 
demonstrates that, in many instances, they do not lead to any form of deliberative 
engagement but merely provide another opportunity for those with strong views to 
“talk past each other” (cf. Wilhelm, 2000; Wright, 2004). 
Despite the apparent limitations of various discussion forums, Chart 10 shows that 
a significant number of local authorities do provide such facilities. In 32% of Web 
sites, there were online discussion forums, some of which provided the opportunity 
for people to suggest new topics for discussion (20%). The existence of public bul-
letin boards in 16% of Web sites also supported this trend. However, what is not 
clear from this analysis is the extent to which these various forums are being used, 
the degree of moderation involved (if any) and the range of issues being discussed. 
79%
32%
20%
17%
16%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Percent of Web sites with facility
Is there an opportunity to submit
general opinions to the Council?
Are there any online forums?
Can citizens suggest a new
topic for discussion?
Are there links to other
discussion groups?
Is there a public bulletin board?
Chart 10. Online discussion
www.ebook3000.com

Local Democracy Online   135
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Of possibly even greater significance is the extent to which they are being listened 
to by councillors or officers.
Conclusion
This analysis shows that local government Web sites are already providing many 
functions that can be deemed a feature of e-democracy. However, there remains 
much more that they could do. The potential of the Internet for enhancing democracy 
is not fully exploited by local authorities and there remain considerable variations 
between different authorities. This conclusion does not necessarily mean that lo-
cal authorities are not aware of the ways they can use the Internet for democratic 
purposes. They may be encountering many barriers, such as lack of resources both 
in terms of human resources and finances. 
It is important to recognize the limitations of data collected in this way. The Web site 
analysis by itself does not tell the full story about the attitudes of local authorities 
towards using the Internet for democratic purposes. Limited use of the Internet could 
be related to certain normative arguments against the use of the Internet. Previous 
research shows that concerns about social exclusion and overrepresentation of certain 
groups, worries about losing the personal and face-to-face relation with citizens and 
a perceived lack of demand from citizens for e-democracy are important barriers to 
implementing e-democracy in local authorities (Karakaya, 2005). 
Likewise, the Web site analysis by itself cannot reveal whether the available in-
formation is made use of by citizens or whether the participation opportunities are 
used by them. In other words, the research did not examine the extent to which 
citizens had been using the council Web sites. Local authorities may be abstaining 
from using their Web sites for democratic purposes if they believe citizens would 
not be interested anyway. 
Despite these limitations, this research provides important insights into the scale 
and depth of e-democracy in local government. By investigating practice rather 
than attitudes, the Web site analysis provides a first benchmark of how seriously 
local authorities in England and Wales are taking e-democracy and where their main 
strengths and weaknesses lie. The absence of political information on local author-
ity Web sites is particularly instructive and raises significant questions over how 
serious local governments are about supporting existing institutions of democracy: 
Much of the e-democracy emphasis appears to seek alternative and individualistic 
forms of engagement. Of course, this position may change over time as e-democ-
racy matures.

136   Pratchett, Wingfield, & Polat
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
References
Abrahamson, J., Arterton, F.C., & Orren, G.R. (1988). The electronic commonwealth: The 
impact of new media technologies on democratic politics. New York: Basic Books.
Armstrong, H. (2000). The key themes of democratic renewal. In L. Pratchett (Ed.), Re-
newing local democracy? The modernisation agenda in British local government. 
London: Frank Cass.
Arterton, F.C. (1987). Teledemocracy: Can technology protect democracy? New York: 
Sage.
Barber, B. (1984). Strong democracy: Participatory politics for a new age. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press.
Beetham, D. (1996). Theorising democracy and local government. In D. King, & G. Stoker 
(Eds.), Rethinking local democracy. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Birch, D. (2002). Public participation in local government: A survey of local authorities. 
London: ODPM.
Blair, T. (1998). Leading the way: A new vision for local government. London: Institute of 
Public Policy Research.
Blears, H. (2003). Communities in control: Public services and local socialism. London: 
Fabian Society. 
Cochrane, A. (1996). From theories to practice: Looking for local democracy in Britain. In 
D. King, & G. Stoker (Eds.), Rethinking local democracy. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Coleman, S. (2002). Hearing voices: The experience of online public consultations and 
discussions in UK governance. London: Hansard Society.
Copus, C. (2004). Party politics and local government. Manchester: Manchester University 
Press.
Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions. (1998). Modern local govern-
ment: In touch with the people. London: DETR.
Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions. (1999). 1998 British social 
attitudes survey: Secondary data analysis of the local government module. Retrieved 
from http://www.local.dtlr.gov.uk/research/surv1998/04.htm#0301 
Department for Transport, Local Government and the Regions. (2001). Strong local leader-
ship: Quality public services. London: The Stationery Office.
Hacker K.L., & Dijk, J. (Eds.). (2000). Digital democracy: Issues of theory and practice. 
London: Sage.
Hague, B., & Loader, B. (1999). Digital democracy: Discourse and decision making in the 
information age. London: Routledge.
Held, D. (1996). Models of democracy: Second edition. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Horrocks, I., & Pratchett, L. (1995). Electronic democracy: Central themes and issues. In 
J. Lovenduski, & J. Stanyer (Eds.), Contemporary political studies 1995. Newcastle: 
Political Studies Association.
www.ebook3000.com

Local Democracy Online   137
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Horrocks, I., & Webb, J. (1994). Electronic democracy: A policy issue for UK local govern-
ment? Local Government Policy Making, 21(3). 
Karakaya, R. (2005). The Internet and democratic local governance: The context of Britain. 
International Information and Library Review, 37(2), 87-97.
Laudon, K. (1977). Communication technology and democratic participation. London: 
Praeger.
Leach, S., & Pratchett, L. (2005). Local government: A new vision, rhetoric or reality? 
Parliamentary Affairs, 58(2), 318-334.
Leigh, I. (2000). Law, politics and local democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lowndes, V., Pratchett, L., & Stoker, G. (2001). Trends in public participation: Part 1—Local 
government perspectives. Public Administration, 79(1), 205-222.
Lowndes, V., & Wilson, D. (2001). Social capital and local governance: Exploring the 
institutional design variable. Political Studies, 49, 629-647.
Maloney, W., Smith, G., & Stoker, G. (2000). Social capital and urban governance: Adding 
a more contextualised “top-down” perspective. Political Studies, 48, 802-820.
Lyon, D. (1993). The electronic eye: The rise of the surveillance society. Cambridge: Pol-
ity Press.
Martin, J., & Norman, R.D. (1970). The computerised society. London: Prentice Hall.
MORI. (2005). ‘What works’: Key lessons from recent e-democracy literature. Retrieved 
from http://www.e-Democracy.gov.uk 
ODPM. (2004). Defining e-government outcomes for 2005 to support the delivery of priority 
services & national strategy transformation agenda for local authorities in England. 
Retrieved from http://www.odpm.gov.uk/pns/pnattach/20040112/1.doc 
Pattie, C., Seyd, P., & Whiteley, P. (2004). Citizenship in Britain: Values, participation and 
democracy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Perri 6, Leat, D., Seltzer, K., & Stoker, G. (2002). Towards holistic governance. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Pratchett, L. (Ed). (2000). Renewing local democracy? The modernisation agenda in British 
local government. London: Frank Cass.
Pratchett, L., & Leach, S. (2003). Local government: Selectivity and diversity. Parliamentary 
Affairs, 56(2), 255-269.
Pratchett, L., & Lowndes, V. (2004). Developing democracy in Europe: An analytical sum-
mary of the Council of Europe’s Acquis. Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing.
Pratchett, L., & Wingfield, M. (1996). Petty bureaucracy and woolly-minded liberalism? 
The changing ethos of local government officers. Public Administration, 74(4), 639-
656.
Pratchett, L., Wingfield, M., & Karakaya-Polat, R. (2005). Barriers to e-democracy: Local 
government experiences and responses. Retrieved from http://www.dmu.ac.uk/facul-
ties/business_and_law/business/lgru/lgru_research_edemocracy.jsp
Rao, N. (2000). Reviving local democracy? Bristol: Policy Press.

138   Pratchett, Wingfield, & Polat
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Rao, N., & Young, K. (1999). Revitalising local democracy. In R. Jowell, J. Curtice, A. 
Park, & K. Thomson (Eds.), British social attitudes: The 16th report—Who shares 
new labour’s values? Aldershot: Ashgate.
Rallings, C., & Thrasher, M. (2003, September 5). I don’t even get out of bed for that. Local 
Government Chronicle.
Saward, M. (2003). Enacting democracy. Political Studies, 51(1), 161-179.
Scottish Executive. (1999). Perceptions of local government: A report of focus group research. 
Edinburgh: Scottish Executive Central Research Unit. Retrieved from http://www.
scotland.gov.uk/cru/kd01/local-gov-01.htm 
Schalken, K., & Tops, P. (1995). Democracy and virtual communities: An empirical ex-
ploration of the Amsterdam digital city. In W.B.H.J. van de Donk, I. Snellen, & P. 
Tops (Eds.), Orwell in Athens: A perspective on informatization and democracy. 
Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Sullivan, H., & Skelcher, C. (2002). Working across boundaries. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Stanyer, J. (1976). Understanding local government. London: Fontana.
Stoker, G. (2004). Transforming local governance. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Stoker, G., & Wilson, D. (2004). British local government into the 21st century. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Toffler, A. (1980). Future shock. New York: Bantam.
Trechsel, A.H., Kies, R., Mendez, F., & Schmitter, P.C. (2002). Evaluation of the use of tech-
nologies in order to facilitate democracy in Europe: E-democratising the parliaments 
and parties of Europe. Retrieved from http://www.cies.iscte.pt/destaques/pdf/1.pdf
van de Donk, W.B.H.J., & Tops, P. (1995). Orwell or Athens? In W. B.H.J. van de Donk, 
I. Snellen, & P. Tops (Eds.), Orwell in Athens: A perspective on informatization and 
democracy. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Wilhelm, A. (2000). Democracy in the digital age. London: Routledge.
Wilson, D., & Game, C. (2002). Local government in the United Kingdom. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Wright, S. (2004). Unpublished thesis, University of East Anglia.
Endnotes
* 
This research was sponsored by the UK Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (ODPM) 
through its Local e-Democracy National Project. We are grateful for permission to 
use the findings of the research here. We are also grateful to James Waterton for his 
efforts on Web analysis and to Anne V. Roland for editing the original document.
www.ebook3000.com

Local Democracy Online   139
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
1 
For detailed reviews of the early literature on e-democracy (sometimes referred to 
as digital or tele-democracy) see van de Donk and Tops (1995), Horrocks and Web 
(1994), Horrocks and Pratchett (1995) inter alia. For a summary of some of the recent 
literature, see MORI (2005).
2 
The research recognized that there are some exceptions to the cabinet and scrutiny 
systems.
This work was previously published in International Journal of Electronic Government Research, 
Vol. 2, Issue 3, edited by D. F. Norris, pp. 75-92, copyright 2006 by IGI Publishing, formerly known 
as Idea Group Publishing (an imprint of IGI Global).

140   Stowers
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.VI
User.Help.and.Service..
Navigation.Features.in.
Government.Web.Sites
Genie N.L. Stowers, San Francisco State University, USA
Abstract
This chapter examines user help and service navigation features in government 
Web sites and compares them across levels of government.  These features are 
critical to ensuring that users unfamiliar with government are able to successfully 
and easily access e-government services and information. The research finds clear 
patterns in the use of similar help and navigation features across governments, 
leading to a conclusion that these features are diffusing in the public sector Web 
development field. The chapter concludes by stating that Web developers should 
work to overcome a second digital divide, one with a lack of knowledge of Web site 
organization and government structure. Users need to be actively assisted to find 
information by Web developers. 
www.ebook3000.com

User Help and Service Navigation Features in Government Web Sites   141
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Introduction
This chapter reports on efforts to make American state, local, and federal e-gov-
ernment portals more user-friendly by providing user help, service navigation, and 
organizational structures to assist potentially novice users in finding e-government 
information and services.  
Once users have access to the Internet and learn how to use computers, they still 
have to understand how to navigate Web sites and find the information or services 
they need. Then, they have to understand how to interact with the Web site so that 
they can access those services.  Governments need to provide more proactive user 
help features, service navigation features, and organizational structures to actively 
assist users in finding information and services they desire; otherwise, they create 
a second digital divide, one between those who understand Web site structure and 
organization structure and those, who do not. As Hargittai (2003, p. 3) puts it:
many a Web developer wrongly assumes that gaining access to the Internet obliter-
ates any potential inequality that may result from lack of access to the new medium. 
There are factors beyond mere connectivity that need to be considered when discuss-
ing the potential implications of the Internet for inequality. In addition to relying 
on basic measures of access to a medium, one needs to consider more nuanced 
measures of use such as user ‘skill.’ ‘Skill’ is defined as the ability to locate content 
online effectively and efficiently.  
Usability.in.Public.Sector.Web.Sites
Today, West (2005) suggests that there is a great degree of variation among the 
organization and structure of current public sector Web sites and that not all sites 
are organized in a user-friendly fashion.  Indeed, there is little formal focus on these 
elements and their importance sometimes goes unheeded. Many government portals 
and Web sites are designed with government workers in mind, not the ordinary users 
without experience in government or with the use of Internet services.  
Bridging the “digital divide” does not mean just making computers themselves 
accessible but also involves making the Web sites themselves more user-friendly 
and easy to use by removing barriers due to lack of experience with the Internet 
(Nielsen, 2000; Rosenfeld & Morville, 1998). Designers and developers of public 
sector Web sites must assume that those using their sites have limited training and 
experience and will need sites that are easy to use and designed with usability and 
effective information architecture in mind. They must also consider that the design 

142   Stowers
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
lessons developed for private sector e-commerce sites might not necessarily work 
for public sector sites.  
User help, service navigation, and organizational structure are critical features of 
any public sector main portal that is dedicated to having users find its services and 
information. The presence or absence of these features on public sector sites can 
greatly affect the ability of a user to find information and services that might be 
available on the site and to effectively use those services. 
The usability of the e-government portal interface is an important feature of human-
computer interaction. To many users, the interface of the main portal is in fact the 
only important part (Singh & Kotze, 2002). Usability is typically defined as:
The measure of the quality of a user’s experience when interacting with a product 
or system—whether a Web site, a software application, mobile technology, or any 
user-operated device.  Usability is a combination of factors that affects the user’s 
experience with the product or system, including: ease of learning, efficiency of 
use, memorability, error frequency and severity, and subjective satisfaction. (U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, 2005)
Other factors that can be incorporated into usability include effectiveness, a match 
between the system and the real world, user control, safety, utility, flexibility, ro-
bustness, and consistency and usefulness of navigation (Nielsen, 2000; Singh & 
Kotze, 2002).  We also argue that usability includes adequate help features (includ-
ing embedded help, interactive help, or manuals) and an information architecture 
that is descriptive, broad, and shallow enough for users to “click through” rather 
than relying upon a deep structure (Kitajima, Blackmon, & Polson, 2005, 2000; 
Nielsen, 2000).  
Since the beginning of the World Wide Web, empirical studies have reported varia-
tions in usability for government Web sites (Harrison & Petrie, 2007), including 
low rates of successful information and retrieval (Nielsen, 2000) and wide variation 
in the lengths of time taken for success (Hargittai, 2003).  When Hargittai (2003) 
tested user ability to find the IRS 1040 tax form (given an unlimited amount of 
time), 93% could find the form but the time required varied from 30 seconds to 
almost nine minutes.  Of those participating, 60% used a search engine and 40% 
tried a specific URL. Among the problems encountered, particularly by those who 
were significantly older and by more recent users, were confusion about URLs and 
about page design layout. 
Jenkins, Corritore, and Wiedenbeck (2003) identify four groups of users who utilized 
different search strategies based upon their level of expertise in subject matter and 
with the World Wide Web. Those who were domain, or content, and Web novices 
searched broadly first but did little evaluations of their findings. Domain experts 
www.ebook3000.com

User Help and Service Navigation Features in Government Web Sites   143
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
who were Web novices searched broadly first but were able to evaluate their results 
more thoroughly for accuracy. Domain and Web experts first looked deeply, utilizing 
their expertise, and were able to follow those deep trails and evaluate their findings. 
Those who were experts on both domain and the Web were able to quickly find and 
identify the information needed. 
As Kitajima, Blackmon and Polson (2000) describe it, if a user has a 90% chance 
of finding and selecting the correct link at each level and there are five levels to go 
before they can access their desired services or content, the chance of successfully 
finding that information falls to .53 (.9 6) or 53%, rather than the 81% chance of 
success if there are only two levels to move through. 
Users typically seek to improve these odds by being goal driven and focused upon 
descriptions of content and links that match with their understanding of reality, rather 
than necessarily utilizing search facilities or navigation aids (Kitajima, Blackmon, 
& Polson, 2005, 2000). They seek out “information scent,” defined as “the imper-
fect, subjective, perception of the value, cost or access path of information sources 
obtained from proximal cues, such as Web links, or icons representing the content 
sources” (Chi, Pirolli, & Pitkow, 2000, p. 2).
Typically, users perform this through a two stage process. The first is an “attention” 
process where the user seeks to separate a Web page into sections based on labels, 
layout, and information on the page. To be effective in laying out information scent 
to guide user behavior, the layout and labels have to be able to direct the user to the 
appropriate section with labels that make sense for them.  The second step is the 
“action selection” stage where the user decides upon which link to choose. Clearly, 
here the appropriate labels are crucial to user success. Successful navigation thus 
requires gaining the user’s attention and leading them to the correct selection of 
the appropriate link at each hierarchical level of the Web site (Blackmon, Kitajima, 
& Polson, 2005).
For many users seeking online government information, conducting a successful 
search for information means solving an unfamiliar problem (Blackmon, Kitajima, 
& Polson, 2005). In essence, they know too little about government and how it 
is structured to be able to successfully navigate and make link choices on many 
government Web sites.  
There are numerous difficulties with the Web search task, some of them based upon 
the knowledge of and familiarity with Web site labels themselves.  Takeuchi and 
Kitajima (2002) effectively illustrate that, at the very least, there are gender differ-
ences in the understanding of many technical words. These differences are further 
accentuated when viewed across cultural divisions. Given that there are many other 
differences in levels of understanding of information and a wide variety of quality 
in labeling and the laying of information scents, it is clear that government Web 
designers have a daunting task.

144   Stowers
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
To overcome these many differences in abilities and understanding of how to use 
the technology and content, Web developers must develop effective site structures 
that reflect the users’ views of the content at that site, not just the organization’s own 
view of itself (such as one based upon the Web designers’ own organizational chart) 
(Nielsen, 2000).  In addition, many gaps in user knowledge can also be filled with 
effective help systems like live chat, online learning and tutorials, online manuals, 
and well-structured designs which seek to define choices in terms that inexperienced 
users might know (Shneiderman & Hochheiser, 2001).
Usability features include those which assist the user in finding information, finding 
services, and in finding their way around the Web site.  They include:
• 
Navigation (features that assist the user in moving around the site).
• 
Labeling (how the content is labeled, again so that the user knows how to find 
information).
• 
Searching systems (the usefulness of the search features) (Rosenfeld & Mor-
ville, 1998).
• 
Visible help features, including a help page, frequently asked questions (FAQs) 
about the site, site maps (pages that literally provide a map of the entire site), 
and tutorials on using the site.
This previous research is important in understanding the project reported on here 
but is still not sufficient to allow us to generate meaningful hypotheses of the more 
specific topic explored here, user help features.  Therefore, the research reported 
here will be structured around research questions. 
Structuring.Research.Questions.about.User.Help.Features.
Before we can identify research questions about user help features, we must identify 
these features. Initially, standard content analysis techniques were used to identify 
existing user help, navigation, and information architecture features on the Web 
portals.  Agency and government portals were visited, features were identified and 
categorized, and a comprehensive list was developed.  Once the list was developed, 
each portal in the study was coded as to the presence or absence of each feature.  
Table 1 presents the types of user help features identified on government portal sites 
as well as a brief explanation of each. These include information about the site, an 
explicit Help section, FAQs, information in other languages, and sitemaps. These 
features are organized into two sections according to whether or not they would be 
relatively easy to implement or require few resources. Thus, simple e-mail linkages 
for contacting the agency, an additional help feature, a feature with more informa-
www.ebook3000.com

User Help and Service Navigation Features in Government Web Sites   145
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Feature
Explanation
Easiest and Requires Fewest Resources To Implement
About the Site
Link to information about the site
Contact Us
Information and links to allow the user to contact the agency for more 
information or for help with the site
FAQs
Includes answers to Frequently Asked Questions 
Feedback
Invites users to give them feedback about the site 
Help
Explicit agency- provided help with the site
Index
An index of information, data, and agencies available 
Search
Search engine to allow users to search the site
Sitemap
Visual representation of the entire Web site
User Tips
Helpful hints on how users can use the site
More Technically Difficult or Resource-Heavy To Implement
Live Help
Links to live chat with agency representative to provide assistance
Other Languages
Site provides information in other languages 
Text Version
An alternate site is provided in text
Table 1. User help features
tion about the site, user tips, and an e-mail or comment section to provide feedback 
about the site would be easy to implement. Indices, sitemaps, FAQs, and search 
engines also would require minimally more work but little technical expertise to 
implement.
The most reasonable explanation for widespread user help features is that the features 
which are easiest and cheapest to produce will be utilized most frequently. There 
is no reason to believe that this pattern would differ across levels of government.  
Therefore, the first research question is:
R1:  User help features requiring the least technical abilities and fewest resources 
to implement will be found more frequently across all levels of government. The 
features requiring the most technical abilities and greatest levels of resources to 
implement will be found least often.
Table 2 provides a listing of the various portal features used to provide users as-
sistance in finding agency online services. These features are not as common as 
the user help features listed above. They include agency or government calendars 
leading to information as well as various ways to link to services (e.g., Answers 
A to Z, Do You Know?, Facilities Locators, Frequently Requested Site, Featured 
Links, Quick Links, and What’s New). 

146   Stowers
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
We already know that well-planned formatting leads to success in finding sought-
after information or services (Blackmon, Kitajima, & Polson, 2005) since users seek 
“information scent,” or clues to the information they want (Chi, Pirolli, & Pitkow, 
2000). Further, Web site developers can structure a site’s portal entryway to sepa-
rate users into knowledgeable consumers or users who might not know much about 
government. Thus, they are able to take advantage of the fact that users with experi-
ence and expertise typically utilize different strategies to find information (Jenkins, 
Corritore, & Wiedenbeck, 2003). Different agencies have used these principles to 
structure entry into their Web sites in different ways. This information can be used 
to structure service navigation schemes or the overall information organization of 
the entire Web portal.
This research is clearly exploratory and there are few theoretical or practical reasons 
to distinguish one type of service navigation scheme from another. In fact, there is 
no clear difference in the amount of level of technical expertise or resources needed 
to develop each scheme; they are just different ways of conceptualizing services 
and setting up the information scent discussed above. However, the simplest service 
navigation schemes are the ones which provide only basic description and require 
Feature
Explanation
Agency information
Listings of all agencies in directory form
Answers A to Z
Alphabetized listings of answers to questions
Calendars
Calendars of government activities and events 
Contact Information
Linkages to direct contact information for agencies
Do You Know How I Do ___ …?
List of questions organized according to major service areas 
from the citizen’s point of view, stating “how do I do x or y?”
E-Government Services
Direct link from home page to all e-government services
Events
Link to information on major events
Facilities Locator
Direct linkage to way to locate government offices
Featured Link/Spotlight
Many sites have featured programs or linkages
Hot Topics
Link to information on what are considered currently important 
issues
Most Visited/Frequently 
Requested Site
Links to or listings of the most frequently visited sites, 
indicating the importance of that information
Popular Services/Major Programs
Highlighting of popular services or major programs
Quick Links
Listing of the commonly asked questions in prominent format
Special Initiatives
Current, new, or special initiatives from the agency
What’s new
Listing of new items posted on the site
Table 2. Service navigation aid features
www.ebook3000.com

User Help and Service Navigation Features in Government Web Sites   147
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
no reconceptualization (e.g., E-Government Services linkages and Links to Agen-
cies); therefore, we would suggest that these would be most popular. There would 
be no expectation that the usage of these labeling systems would differ from one 
level to another level of government.
R2:  The E-Government Services/Links to Agencies service navigation labeling 
systems would be found most commonly among government agency Web portals, 
no matter the level of government. 
Table 3 identifies the information architecture, or structure, of systems of various 
Web site portals; in other words, how access to the information is organized. The 
various possible ways in which the Web portal can be organized include an audi-
ence/market orientation (the now familiar citizen/visitor/business/government) 
according to the types of services or tasks available, the kinds of topics or issues, 
or a hybrid of several types. 
The audience/market orientation is one in which the Web portal’s navigation 
scheme is segmented into a separate set of linkages for each potential audience. 
For example, the audience-oriented FirstGov.gov site has four tabs leading to four 
different sets of site features: For Citizens, For Businesses and Non-Profits, For 
Federal Employees, and Government-to-Government. States with audience/market 
orientations will often have their sites segmented according to the purpose of a 
visitor (Access Washington’s Living in Washington, Working/Employment, Doing 
Business, Education/Learning, and Visiting/Recreation).  
A portal guiding its visitors according to the types of services or tasks available 
will have navigation features listing the types of services provided by the agency 
and providing links to information or services on those areas. Portals guiding users 
according to topics or issues sets up navigation according to subject matter dealt 
with within the agency or government.  
Table 3. Types of information and service organization on government Web portals 
Type.of.Information.
Architecture
Description...Site.is.Organized.Around:
Audience/Market
The needs of particular audiences or markets. For example, 
Firstgov.gov has information organized around Online Services 
for Citizens, for Businesses, and for Governments. 
E-Government Services/
Links to Agencies
The services, tasks, or functions offered by the agency
Topics/Issues
Various topics, often just miscellaneous listings of topics
Hybrid site
Combinations of all of the above

148   Stowers
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
One of the few theoretical suggestions as to how these features would be clustered 
is by Ho (2002), who suggests that the system of information architecture used 
is a function of whether an agency is traditionally organized with a bureaucratic 
paradigm (in which case the information architecture would be structured according 
to a traditional listing of agencies) or whether it has moved to the more efficient e-
government paradigm emphasizing a customer service orientation (with a structure 
according to the Web site audience or market).  
However, Ho’s (2002) hypothesis also suggests that there is necessarily a direct 
and strong linkage between design ideas within an agency’s technology branch and 
the organizational sophistication of the overall agency, which is unlikely. Indeed, 
staff from these two areas are unlikely to communicate often (this is, in fact, one of 
the most commonly cited breakdowns of technological systems, the lack of com-
munication between technology developers and end users). Therefore, no research 
question is posited for these site features.
As discussed in the research methodology section, the components of these features 
on each government’s main Web portal were identified for this project, their presence 
or absence on the portal was coded, and basic analysis was conducted.  
Project.Methodology
The research project discussed here utilized a cross-sectional comparison that focused 
upon a review of federal, state, and local e-government portals and comparisons 
between them. All federal agency portals from executive agencies, cabinet agencies 
(including subagencies with their own domain name), and independent agencies 
were included in the study.  Federal boards and commissions were not included.  All 
50 states plus Washington, D.C. were included in the analysis along with all cities 
over 100,000 in population. This resulted in 43 federal sites, 51 state sites, and 47 
urban sites. The data were collected during the summer of 2005.  
The first stage of this analysis was to identify the user help features, service naviga-
tion features, and types of information architecture, or organization and presentation 
of information, that are currently being used on public sector Web sites all the while 
focusing upon the home portal of each portal.  (While accessibility is also a crucial 
aspect of usability, it was not part of this overall project and is not reported here.)  
Portals were the initial points of entry for users, as they define the usability and 
information architecture features for the entire site. Therefore, they are the most 
crucial part of an agency or government’s entire Web site. The identification of 
help or navigation features was accomplished by content analysis of federal, state, 
and local home pages and the construction of coding sheets including the identified 
features.  The presence of various features was determined through the examina-
www.ebook3000.com

User Help and Service Navigation Features in Government Web Sites   149
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
tion of the site’s portal, as this is the main entryway and where users would need 
these features.  
All coding was conducted by one individual, the author, which is a shortcoming 
of this research. To attempt to overcome this issue, the author double-checked the 
results and of course a simple yes or no check-off for each feature is a much less 
complex coding task than having to code an arbitrary scale of the effectiveness of 
a feature.  All features were working at the time of the coding. Sixty-four variables 
were coded, along with three additive indices.  
The author recognizes that a simple count does not address the issue of whether 
or not a feature is well-designed or not; however, this research is the first step in 
investigating this phenomena and the first step should be whether a feature exists 
or not.  Later, additional research should be conducted on the effectiveness of these 
features across jurisdictions.
Usability.and.Help.Features
The research reported here explores the simple research questions discussed above 
and is descriptive and exploratory in nature.
Descriptive.Results.
Table 4 presents basic descriptive data on user help features.  As can be seen, most 
governments utilize more than one help feature up to a maximum of six different 
features on the same portal, with state governments utilizing the most user help 
features. One federal and one local agency utilized none.  
Table 5 reports descriptive data on service navigation features.  An average of 5.1 
features per government Web portal were used, with federal agencies utilizing an 
average of 4.3 and state agencies utilizing the highest average number with 5.6 service 
navigation features per site. The minimum number on a site was one for federal and 
local and two for state. The maximum number utilized was quite high with seven 
features for federal agencies, eleven for state, and ten for local agencies.
Exploration.of.Research.Questions
The next part of the analysis is the exploration of the research questions and then 
more exploratory analysis. Clearly, the first research question can be supported, as 
the easiest and least resource-intensive types of user help features were found much 
more frequently (Table 6). Among all levels of government, the most commonly seen 

150   Stowers
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
help feature was a search engine (found in 97.9% of all sites investigated, with no 
significant differences among levels of government). This was followed by invitations 
to Contact Us, found in 70.2% of sites, also with no significant differences across 
types of government. Sitemaps and Help areas were also found very commonly but 
exhibited different patterns across governments. Sitemaps were used most frequently 
by federal agencies and only by less than one-quarter of local agencies. Help areas 
were created most frequently by state agencies (58.8%), followed by one-quarter 
of federal agencies, and only 12.8% of local agencies. User tips were very seldom 
utilized as user help features by any level of government. 
Also as suggested in Research Question 1, those user help features that would re-
quire more resources or more technical sophistication were found less frequently 
on government Web portals. However, two of them—the site presented in Other 
Languages and an alternate Text Version, both very resource intensive features—were 
available in 25.5% and 18.4% of all sites, respectively, and there were significant 
differences across types of governments. Federal agencies were much more likely 
to have sites available in other languages and text versions were more frequently 
found at state sites. 
Table 7 presents the distribution of service navigation features by level of govern-
ment.  As suggested, the very basic E-Government Services was present in 60.3% 
of all government sites, but more surprisingly, was seldom found on federal sites 
Table 4.  Distribution of user help features across level of government 
Total
Federal
State
Local
N
141
43
51
47
Mean.Number.of.Features
3.7 features
3.7 features
4.3 features
3.1 features
Standard.Deviation
1.36
1.35
1.30
1.17
Minimum.Number.of.Features
0
0
2
0
Maximum.Number.of.Features
6
6
6
6
Total
Federal
State
Local
N
141
43
51
47
Mean.Number.of.Features
5.1 features
4.3 features
5.6 features
5.3 features
Standard.Deviation
1.78
1.59
1.62
1.85
Minimum.Number.of.Features
1
1
2
1
Maximum.Number.of.Features
11
7
11
10
Table 5.  Distribution of service navigation features across level of government 
www.ebook3000.com

User Help and Service Navigation Features in Government Web Sites   151
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Table 6.  Distribution of help features by level of government (ranked by most fre-
quently used by all jurisdictions)
User.Help.Feature
Total
Federal.(%.
Sites.With.
Feature)
State
(%.Sites.
with.
Feature)
Local.
(%.Sites.
with.
Feature)
Chi-
Square
Probability
Easiest and Requires 
Fewest Resources To Implement
Search
97.9%
97.7%
100%
95.7%
2.139
0.343
Contact Us
70.2
65.1
72.5
72.3
0.769
0.681
Sitemap
48.2
69.8
52.9
23.4
20.043 
***
0.000
Help
33.3
25.6
58.8
12.8
25.021 
***
0.000
FAQs
19.9
27.9
21.6
10.6
4.355
0.113
About the Site
18.4
11.6
31.4
10.6
8.901 **
0.012
Feedback on Site
15.6
4.7
21.6
19.1
5.744
0.057
Index
12.8
20.9
5.9
12.8
4.744
0.093
User Tips
 2.8
2.3
2
4.3
0.526
0.769
More Technically Difficult or
Resource-Heavy To Implement
Other Languages
25.5%
41.9
11.8
25.5
11.11 **
0.004
Text Version
18.4%
4.7
31.4
17
11.17 **
0.004
Live Help
9.2%
0
19.6
6.4
11.39 **
0.003
Help features which are present at significantly different levels across government levels are bolded.
*  
Statistically different and significant at the .05 level
**  
Statistically different and significant at the .01 level
***  
Statistically different and significant at the .000 level
(16.3% only).  It was very common on state and local sites (72.5% and 87.2%); 
however and the differences between all three levels of government was statisti-
cally significant.
Featured Links, Links to Agencies, and Popular Services were the next most com-
monly found across all levels of government but again there were significant dif-
ferences across those levels in where it was used.  Featured Links were found on 
two-thirds of state and local sites, and Agency Links were found in three-quarters 
of local sites, approximately one-half of the state sites, but on only one third of the 
federal sites.  

152   Stowers
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Features like Calendars and Events were most commonly found on state and local 
sites while Facilities Locators, not surprisingly, were most often found on federal 
sites but very seldom on state or local sites (governments evidently presume that 
their residents know where these government facilities are located).
Finally, Table 8 presents the distribution of information organization types across 
levels of government. The most commonly utilized organizational scheme is the 
audience/market scheme, but that is because it is used by practically one-half of all 
states and 40% of all large cities in their Web portals. Federal agencies utilize this 
type only 14% of the time. A structure breaking down information by the types of 
services or processes offered is utilized far more often by federal agencies (44.2%) 
Service
Navigation
Feature
Total
Federal.(%.
Sites.With.
Feature)
State
(%.Sites.
with.
Feature)
Local.
(%.Sites.
with.
Feature)
Chi-Square.
Statistic
Probability.
Level
E-Government 
Services
60.3%
16.3%
72.5%
87.2%
52.2 ***
0.000
Featured Links
60.3
44.2
66.7
68.1
6.7 *
0.035
Link to Agencies
51.8
25.6
52.9
74.5
21.5 ***
0.000
Popular Services
35.5
32.6
54.9
17.0
15.6 ***
0.000
Do You Know/= 
How I Do ___?
31.9
18.6
37.3
38.3
5.1
0.080
Calendars
27.0
7
33.3
38.3
12.8 **
0.002
Link to Contacts
27.0
20.9
27.5
31.9
1.4
0.500
Events
23.4
18.6
15.7
36.2
6.5 *
0.038
What’s New
22.7
27.9
17.6
23.4
1.4
0.492
Quick Links
19.1
16.3
27.5
12.8
3.7
0.154
Special 
Initiatives
14.9
16.3
15.7
12.8
0.3
0.879
Most Visited
12.8
2.3
15.7
19.1
6.3 *
0.042
Facilities 
Locator
10.6
30.2
3.9
0.0
25.4 ***
0.000
Hot Topics
9.2
4.7
11.8
10.6
1.6
0.454
Answers A to Z
3.5
4.7
3.9
2.1
0.5 
0.798
Service navigation features which are present at significantly different levels across government levels are bolded.
*  
Statistically different and significant at the .05 level
**  
Statistically different and significant at the .01 level
***  
Statistically different and significant at the .000 level
Table 7.  Distribution of service navigation features by level of government (ranked 
by most frequently used by all jurisdictions)
www.ebook3000.com

User Help and Service Navigation Features in Government Web Sites   153
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
and by most of the rest of the states not using the audience scheme (43.1%). Only 
17% of the large cities used this type. Cities most frequently used a hybrid type of 
portal (in 40.4% of the cases) while states and federal agencies seldom used this. 
Finally, another third (34.9%) of federal agencies organized their information around 
topics or issues, a scheme avoided by states and local governments.  
Clearly, the differences here are statistically and substantively significant. The types 
of information organization schemes utilized are a function of the types of services 
provided and the site managers’ perceptions of their audiences.  Federal agencies 
seem to focus on what they can offer users rather than be organized according to any 
anecdotal perception of their audience’s identity (FirstGov.gov is a significant excep-
tion).  State agencies focus on the services they offer or provide a user perspective. 
Cities, on the other hand, have fewer resources with which to work, which might 
explain the high number of hybrid sites, which are of course less well-organized. 
Still, 40% of local portals have taken the audience approach.   
These initial results focus upon identifying user help, service navigation, and in-
formation architecture features used by the public sector. This is the first step in 
identifying which of these features ultimately are effective and really are helpful in 
assisting the general public in understanding these public sector portals and their 
services, and how to navigate and use them.  
Conclusion
From the results, it appears that similar patterns do exist across levels of government 
in the types of user help and information organizational structure utilized. More 
technically difficult features appear to be utilized by larger levels of government so 
Table 8.  Distribution of information or service organization available by level of 
government (ranked by most frequently used by all jurisdictions)
Type of Organization 
Available
Total
Federal.(%.
Sites.With.
Feature)
State
(%.Sites.with.
Feature)
Local.
(%.Sites.with.
Feature)
Chi-
Square.
Statistic
Probability.
Level
Audience
35.5
14.0
49.0
40.4
Services, Processes
34.8
44.2
43.1
17.0
Hybrid
17.7
7.0
5.9
40.4
Topics or Issues
11.3
34.9
2.0
2.1
67.7
.0000

154   Stowers
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
financial and staff resources are clearly determining patterns. However, there are 
many user help features that require little technical expertise so it is hard to explain 
their usage by the simple existence of resources in larger governments or agencies.  
In addition, it appears that states are leading the way in offering multiple types of 
features (see Tables 4 and 5) and in offering the arguably more user-friendly audi-
ence-based type of information and service organizational structure. 
Given the patterns found for some features, it appears that diffusion of these innova-
tions and features is occurring across jurisdictions and within level of government. 
Local government IT professionals meet and know one another through confer-
ences, professional associations, and other informal networks, as do those at the 
federal and state levels. Certain features are discussed and popularized among IT 
professionals as important and useful for assisting users. Then, other governments 
in a network follow up and develop that feature for their own Web site. Or, Web 
managers visit the Web portals of their sister governments, see a feature they like 
that works well for their own level of government, and move to adopt it. However, 
there is no sense, from these results, that there is any systematic usability testing 
being utilized in the Web development process. 
The development of user help and service navigation features—as well as systematic 
usability testing on Web portals—is crucial if governments really intend to effectively 
utilize e-government and provide electronic services. Deservedly, much focus is 
put upon the differences still existing between classes of users due to their access 
to computers and the Internet. Obviously, the inability of some groups of users to 
access e-government services reduces the equity of these services. 
However, it should be recognized that another digital divide exists. Even if users have 
access to computers and the Internet, in order to fully utilize e-government services, 
they need government agency Web sites that can be understood and navigated suc-
cessfully by everyone, not just by those who have knowledge and understanding 
about how government agencies and services work and are organized. 
Effective user help and service navigation features can remove this second divide 
by allowing novice users or users unused to contacting government to understand 
and fully utilize e-government services and information. We should not create the 
“other digital divide.” We should work to ensure that all can access government 
services in an online context.
 
References
Blackmon, M. H., Kitajima, M., & Polson, P. G. (2005.)  Tool for accurately predicting 
Website navigation problems, non-problems, problem severity and effectiveness of 
repairs.  In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
www.ebook3000.com

User Help and Service Navigation Features in Government Web Sites   155
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
(pp. 31-40). Retrieved July 29, 2005, from http://staff.aist.go.jp/kitajima.muneo/Eng-
lish/PAPERS(E)/CHI2005.pdf 
Blackmon, M. H., Polson, P. G., Kitajima, M., & Lewis, C. (2002). Cognitive walkthrough 
for the Web.  Retrieved July 29, 2005, from http://staff.aist.go.jp/kitajima.muneo/Eng-
lish/PAPERS(E)/CHI2002.pdf 
Chi, E. H., Pirolli, P., & Pitkow, J. (2000). The scent of a site: A system for analyzing and 
predicting information scent, usage, and usability of a Web site. In Proceedings of 
CHI 2000. ACM Press. Retrieved July 29, 2005, from http://www-users.cs.umn.
edu/~echi/papers/chi2000/scent.pdf
Cohen, S. A., & Eimecke, W.B. (2001). The use of the Internet in government service delivery. 
PricewaterhouseCoopers foundation for the business of government. Retrieved August 
22, 2002, from  http://endowment.pwcglobal.com/pdfs/CohenReport.pdf  
Daabaj, Y. (2002). An evaluation of the usability of human-computer interaction methods in 
support of the development of interactive systems. In Proceedings of the 35th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences. 
Daily Internet Activities. (2002).   Retrieved August 30, 2005, from http://www.pewinternet.
org/reports/chart.asp?img=Daily_Internet_Activities.jpg 
Dillon, A. (2001).  Beyond usability: Process, outcome and affect in human computer inter-
actions.  Canadian Journal of Information and Library Science, 26(4), 57-69.
Falling Through the Net: Toward Digital Inclusion. (2000). Retrieved February 21, 2001, 
from http://www.esa.doc.gov/fttn00.pdf 
Hargittai, E. (2003, Winter). Serving citizens’ needs: Minimizing online hurdles to accessing 
government information. IT and Society, 1(3), 27-41. Retrieved July 29, 2005, from 
http://www.ITandSociety.org 
Harrison, C., & Petrie, H. (2007). Severity of usability and accessibility problems in ecom-
merce and egovernment Websites. People and Computers, (EDIT20), 255-262.
Ho, A. T.-K. (2002). Reinventing local governments and the e-government initiative. Public 
Administration Review, 62(4), 434-444.
Huang, C. J. (2003). Usability of e-government Web-sites for people with disabilities. In 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.  
Internet Activities. (2002).   Retrieved August 30, 2005, from http://www.pewinternet.
org/reports/chart.asp?img=Internet_Activities.jpg
Jansen, B. J., & Pooch, U. (2000). Web user studies: A review and framework for future 
work. Journal of the American Society of Information Science and Technology, 52(3), 
235-246.  Retrieved August 1, 2005, from http://jimjansen.tripod.com/academic/pubs/
wus.pdf   
Jenkins, C., Corritore, C. L., & Wiedenbeck, S. (2003, Winter). Patterns of information seek-
ing on the Web: A qualitative study of domain expertise and Web expertise.  IT and 
Society, 1(3),  64-89. Retrieved July 29, 2005, from http://www.ITandSociety.org 
Jones, C. P. (2003). Usability and information design. In Proceedings of the Annual Confer-
ence for the Society for Technical Community (Vol. 50, pp. 333-338).

156   Stowers
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Kitajima, M., Blackmon, M. H., & Polson, P. G. (2000). A comprehension-based model 
of Web navigation and its application to Web usability analysis. In S. McDonald, Y. 
Waern, & G. Cockton (Eds.), People and computers XIV: Usability or else! (Proceed-
ings of HCI 2000) (pp. 357-373). Springer. Retrieved July 29, 2005, from http://staff.
aist.go.jp/kitajima.muneo/English/PAPERS(E)/HCI2000.pdf 
Kitajima, M., Blackmon, M. H., & Polson, P. G. (2005). Cognitive architecture for Website 
design and usability evaluation: Comprehension and information scent in perform-
ing by exploration. Paper presented at the HCI International 2005. Retrieved July 30, 
2005, from http://staff.aist.go.jp/kitajima.muneo/English/PAPERS(E)/HCII2005-
CoLiDeS.html on 
Lazar, J., Bessiere, K., Ceaparu, I., Robinson, J., & Shneiderman, B. (2003, Winter). Help! 
I’m lost: User frustration in Web navigation. IT & Society, 1(3), 18-26.  Retrieved 
July 29, 2005, from http://www.ITandSociety.org 
Nielsen, J. (2000). Designing Web usability: The practice of simplicity. Indianapolis: New 
Riders Publishing. 
Norris, P. (2001).  Digital divide: Civic engagement, information poverty, and the Internet 
worldwide.  New York: Cambridge Press. 
Paciello, M. G. (2000a). Web accessibility for people with disabilities. Lawrence, KA: 
CMP Books.
Pearrow, M. (2000b). Web site usability handbook. Rockland, MA: Charles River Media, 
Inc. 
Pew Research Center. (2002). Getting serious online. Pew Internet and American life project. 
Retrieved August 30, 2005, from http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/pdfs/PIP_Get-
ting_Serious_Online3ng.pdf  
Reiss, E. L. (2000). Practical information architecture.  New York: Addison Wesley.
Rosenfeld, L. (2000).  Special report: Design usability--seven pitfalls to avoid in information 
architecture.  Internet World Magazine. Retrieved July 29, 2005, from http://www.
internetworld.com/magazine.php?inc=121500/12.15.00feature3long.html 
Rosenfeld, L., & Morville, P. (1998).  Information architecture for the World Wide Web. 
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly and Associates. 
Shneiderman, B., & Hochheiser, H. (2001). Universal usability as a stimulus to advanced 
interface design.  Human-computer interaction lab, University of Maryland. Retrieved 
from August 1, 2005http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/pubs/tech-reports.shtml 
Singh, S., & Kotze, P. (2002). Towards a framework for e-commerce usability. In Proceedings 
of the 2002 Annual Research Conference of the South African Institute of Computer 
Scientists and Information Technologist on Enablement Through Technology.  Retrieved 
July 29, 2005, from http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=581508&CFID=51211042
&CFTOKEN=76008125 
State and Federal E-Government. (2005). Retrieved October 15, 2005, from http://www.
insidepolitics.org/egovt05us.pdf 
Takeuchi, H., & Kitajima, M. (2002). Web contents evaluation based on human knowledge 
of words. Paper presented at the International Conference on Soft Computing and 
www.ebook3000.com

User Help and Service Navigation Features in Government Web Sites   157
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Intelligent Systems. Retrieved July 29, 2005, from http://staff.aist.go.jp/kitajima.
muneo/English/PAPERS(E)/SCIS2002Takeuchi.pdf 
U.S. Department of Commerce. (2002).  A nation online: How Americans are expanding 
their use of the Internet.  Retrieved February 15, 2002, from http://www.ntia.doc.
gov/ntiahome/dn/index.html 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.  (2005). Usability basics at usability.gov. 
Retrieved August 4, 2005, from http://www.usability.gov/basics/index.html 
U.S. Office of Management and Budget E-Government Task Force. (2002). E-Government 
strategy: Simplified delivery of service to citizens.  Retrieved September 1, 2007, from 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/egovstrategy.pdf  
West, D. M. (2005).  Global e-government. Retrieved October 28, 2005, from http://www.
insidepolitics.org/egovt05int.pdf

158   Chai, Herath, Park, & Rao
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.VII
Repeated.Use.of.E-Gov.
Web.Sites:
A.Satisfaction.and..
Confidentiality Perspective
Sangmi Chai, State University of New York at Buffalo, USA*
T. C. Herath, State University of New York at Buffalo, USA
I. Park, State University of New York at Buffalo, USA
H. R. Rao, State University of New York at Buffalo, USA
Abstract
The potential success of e-government depends on its citizens adopting online services 
and the security of those services. However, despite the development and diffusion 
of a variety of government services on the Internet, little research has been carried 
out regarding: (1) the impact of perceived confidentiality of a user’s information on 
his or her intention to use the service; (2) the relationship between intention towards 
repeated use and satisfaction derived from service performance of government; and 
*Author names are listed alphabetically.
www.ebook3000.com

Repeated Use of E-Gov Web Sites   159
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
(3) the moderating effect of demographic characteristics (gender and race differ-
ence) on the relationship between a user’s satisfaction, confidentiality and repeated 
use intention. This paper develops an integrated framework of intentions towards 
repeated use with a level of confidential information shared by a user as one factor 
and e-government satisfaction derived from service performance as another factor. 
The results suggest that a user’s intention to continue using government Web sites 
is related to the user’s satisfaction, perceived performance of the Web site and the 
requirement for confidential information. This research also confirms that gender 
difference does moderate the relationship between users’ satisfaction levels and 
repeated use intention. Race difference has an effect on the strength of the relationship 
between the user’s perceived confidentiality and repeated use intention.
Introduction
In recent years, we have seen tremendous growth in the use of the Internet. As the 
use of the Web by the private sector has grown, the public sector has followed closely 
behind. According to United Nations (UN) estimates, more than 173 countries have 
developed government Web sites. More than 17 nations are now well beyond Web 
publishing and have begun to implement interactive transaction capabilities. The 
development and increasing use of information technology (IT) in the government 
(e-government) can result in more efficient processes by improving the quality and 
speed of government services toward citizens.
Many citizens who previously would visit or call government offices, often only 
to wait in line or on hold, increasingly choose to contact the government online to 
request information, register complaints or communicate their opinions on current 
issues. A July 2003 survey by the Pew Internet & American Life Project mentions 
that nearly 97 million adult Americans, or 77% of Internet users, took advantage of 
online government services in 2003, which included going to government. Users 
can seek information using Web sites and can contact government officials through 
e-mail. Internet facilities can be very cost effective for providers of high-volume, 
standardized services, and may also improve service and convenience levels to 
their users. 
E-government can be defined broadly as the use of information and communication 
technologies (ICT) to improve the activities of government organizations. Accord-
ing to Prattipati (2003), there are three main domains of e-government: Improv-
ing government processes (e-administration), connecting citizens (e-citizens and 
e-services), and building external interactions (e-society). According to the World 
Bank definition, e-government refers to the use of ICT to improve the efficiency, 
effectiveness, transparency, and accountability of government by providing better 

160   Chai, Herath, Park, & Rao
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
service delivery to citizens, providing better services to businesses, and empowering 
through information and efficient government purchasing (2005). E-government can 
leverage the capabilities and power of IT to deliver services provided by govern-
ments at local, municipal, state, and national levels. But implementing e-government 
can be a major effort (Grant & Chau, 2005) making it necessary to understand the 
factors that influence the use of e-government. 
Government cannot realize the potential benefits of e-government unless people use 
them. Despite the development and diffusion of a variety of government services 
on the Internet, little research has been carried out focusing on factors affecting 
repeated use. We contribute to current research by attempting to fill this gap.
Since the emergence of the Internet, a great deal of research has been conducted 
in the areas of marketing and information systems (electronic commerce), among 
others, that study the success factors that lead to the continued adoption of com-
mercial Web sites by customers. Theories and lessons learned from these studies 
can effectively be adopted in e-government to see what factors may lead citizens 
to use government services through the Web. This paper focuses on citizen-centric 
applications and investigates whether the perceived performance of the government 
Web site and satisfaction of the user influences the intention of repeated use of the 
government Web sites. We also identify perceived confidentiality as one of the fac-
tors influencing users’ intention to use government Web sites repeatedly. 
This paper is organized as follows: First, we provide a brief background explain-
ing the theories and constructs considered in this study. We consider not only the 
SERVPERF theory, explaining the constructs “satisfaction” and “performance,” 
but also “confidentiality,” which is a crucial element of information security. Next, 
we discuss the methodology used to empirically test the research model. Finally, 
we discuss the results of the empirical analysis and conclude with a discussion of 
theoretical and managerial implications. 
Theoretical.Background
Service.Performance.and.Satisfaction.
One of the strongest driving factors to construct e-government is customer-friendly 
government. According to Timonen, O’Donnell, and Humphreys (2003), the main 
motivation to develop e-government in Ireland is not a cost savings, but a desire to 
make efficient, citizen-oriented, and customer-friendly government. More importantly, 
based on survey results of 250 state-level government departments in Australia, 
Canada, and the United States, Breen (2000) found that governments think about 
their interaction with their citizens as they begin to realize that an enterprise approach 
www.ebook3000.com

Repeated Use of E-Gov Web Sites   161
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
to customer service yields the best results in starting e-government service. From 
these research findings, we strongly imply that success of e-government depends 
on how governments provide high-quality and customer-centric e-government 
services to the citizen.  
One of the critical factors in the success of e-government is government Web 
sites.
To attract more citizens to government Web sites, government should provide high-
quality Web sites. 
Bruno et al. (1997) and Agarwal, Ghosh, Banerjee, and Kishore (2000) present 
major components of quality Web sites. These include well-structured databases; 
well-presented multimedia, such as streaming video; audio; and quick and error-free 
navigation. To make users stay on the Web site, a server has to have short response 
time and be reliable in allowing many users on the Web site simultaneously. 
The relationship between the quality of a Web site and the success of a Web site has 
been discussed in some papers. According to Palmer (2002), Web site-quality indica-
tors leading to Web site success can be measured by connection speed, navigability, 
interactivity, responsiveness, and quality content. A study by Bateson (1984) found 
that efficiency and speed are the attributes highly important to a user. Web site qual-
ity has also been found to have a positive effect on developing customers’ trusting 
intentions toward an e-commerce Web site (McKnight, Choudhury, & Kacmar, 
2000). Thus, Web site service quality can be assumed as one of the strong predictors 
of e-government success and a user’s intention to repeatedly use an e-government 
Web sites. To study the relationship between Web site service quality and a user’s 
intention to use e-government Web site, we introduce the SERVPERF model. A 
performance-based service quality measurement scale, SERVPERF, developed by 
Cronin and Taylor (1992), measures the quality of a service perceived by a consumer 
based on his or her perception of the performance of a service provider. They find 
that consumers’ satisfaction with the service is positively related to their perception 
of the performance. Similarly, Alford (1996), Chenet, Tynan, and Money (1999), 
and Ennew (1999) also find a focal relationship between the perceived performance 
of a service and satisfaction based on the SERVPERF scale. 
Consumers are thought to have a positive perception of technology-based service 
attributes since they believe technology will deliver faster and more efficient ser-
vices than that of an employee (Weatherall, Ledingham, &Worell, 1984; Angur et 
al., 1999). Furthermore, performance of the Web site has a direct impact on online 
consumers’ satisfaction ( Kohli, Devaraj, & Mahmood, 2004). From prior research 
findings, we can expect that users, who think e-government Web sites perform well, 
will have a tendency to have a higher level of satisfaction with a Web site. Thus, a 
user’s perception of performance of an e-government Web site may increase the user’s 
level of satisfaction with the Web site. We therefore hypothesize the following: 

162   Chai, Herath, Park, & Rao
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Hypothesis.1:.Perceived performance of an e-gov Web site will positively affect a 
user’s level of satisfaction.
Cronin (1992) points out that increased satisfaction with service enhances custom-
ers’ repurchasing intentions towards that product or service. Similarly, Anderson, 
and Sullivan (1993) found that a customer’s repurchase intention was increased 
when they are more satisfied with products. In an online context, a study by Kim, 
Ferrin, and Rao (2003) supports this relationship, where they find that satisfaction 
is a strong predictor of the consumer’s repurchase intention. Bearden and Jessie 
(1983) and Churchill and Carol (1982) also confirm that the customer’s satisfaction 
leads to a repurchase intention on e-commerce Web sites. In the Web site context, 
Loiacono, Chen, and Goodhue (2002) found that Web site quality, such as usefulness, 
entertainment and response time, is a major factor that aids in predicting a Web 
consumer’s intention to reuse a Web site. This means that a user’s satisfaction about 
e-commerce Web site quality is one of the factors that influences increase in users’ 
continuous use of a Web site. 
Based on previous research, we expect a positive relationship between a user’s 
satisfaction and a user’s intention to continue to use an e-gov Web site. If users are 
satisfied, they will have more of an inclination to use the e-gov Web site repeatedly 
when they need to contact or get a service. Therefore: 
Hypothesis.2:.The user’s level of satisfaction with an e-gov Web site will positively 
affect a user’s intention to continue to use the e-gov Web site.
Previous research indicates that a user’s perceived performance toward products 
or a Web site can be another strong factor that indicates a user’s intention of re-
peated purchase, along with customer’s satisfactions of products (Cronin et al., 
2000). Brady, Cronin, and Brand (2002) analyzed this relationship and found that 
both perceived performance and service quality positively influence consumers’ 
repurchase intentions. From these research findings, we can hypothesize that users 
who have a high level of perceived performance of an e-government Web site will 
have more inclination towards usage of an e-government Web site. If users think 
that the e-government Web sites perform well, they will be more satisfied, which 
will result in an increased intention to repeatedly and continually use the Web site. 
In this study, we assume that there is a positive relationship between the user’s 
perceived performance of an e-gov Web site and the user’s intention to continue to 
use the Web site. Therefore:
Hypothesis.3: The user’s perceived performance of an e-gov Web site will positively 
affect a user’s intention to continue to use an e-gov Web site.
www.ebook3000.com

Repeated Use of E-Gov Web Sites   163
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Moderating.Effects.of.Gender.and.Race
Gender differences in technology adoption, usage behavior and perception has 
been extensively studied in various literatures. Several studies suggest that gender 
difference is a strong predicator of a user’s usage behavior and perception of 
technology. Gefen and Straub (1997) found that women and men show difference 
in perceptions and usage of e-mail. Their study confirms that women and men 
differ in their perception of the social presence of e-mail. Women also perceive 
a higher value of usefulness than men do. Their research supports the notion that 
men feel more at ease with computers than women do. Other studies point out that 
that gender differences play a significant role in a user’s online purchase intention 
(Kim & Kim, 2004; Larsen & Oystein, 2005; Slyke, Comunale, & Belanger, 2002). 
Male employees have a tendency to use the internet more frequently then female 
workers in an organization (Larsen & Oystein, 2005). In contrast to gender differ-
ences on technology adoption research, studies researching racial differences with 
the intention of using technology or usage behavior are few. However, Kolodinsky, 
Hogarth, and Hilgert (2004) found that there is no significant difference between 
various races while considering the utilization of e-banking.  
Based on these previous research findings, we propose the next two hypotheses. 
Hypothesis.4:.Gender difference will have a moderating effect on the relationship 
between the user’s level of satisfaction with an e-gov Web site and the user’s inten-
tion to continue to use the e-gov Web site.
Hypothesis.5: Race difference will have a moderating effect on the relationship 
between the user’s level of satisfaction with the e-gov Web site and the user’s inten-
tion to continue to use the e-Gov Web site.
Perceived Confidentiality 
Since the last decade, information privacy has been widely acknowledged as a major 
concern that has a profound effect on users’ adoption of the Internet. In recent years, 
sharing or loss of personal and sometimes confidential information among different 
agencies, organizations and even businesses has caused quite a concern.
The advances in IT that continue to increase capabilities and decrease cost allow us 
to capture and use information with ease. Ironically, the same practice that provides 
value to organizations and their customers also raises privacy concerns (Culnan et 
al., 1999). Technology advances have been accompanied by growing concerns over 
ethical and legal issues as related to the loss of private confidential information (Al-

164   Chai, Herath, Park, & Rao
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Fedaghi, 2005; Stalder, 2002). Currently, one of the major concerns is information 
security. This is primarily due to the fact that a user’s private information obtained 
by an unauthorized individual, whether internal or external to an organization, can 
be harmful ( Hexmoor, Bhattaram, & Wilson, 2004). 
Government agencies have taken steps toward implementing policies that regulate 
and direct the sharing of information to protect the privacy and security of personal 
data. The federal government plays an important role in many existing regulation 
efforts. Among the federal government regulations, The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
(GLBA), also known as the Financial Service Modernization Act, is supported and 
enforced by numerous national agencies, such as the Federal Trade Commission 
(FTC), Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), Federal Reserve (FED), 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and Office of Thrift Supervision 
(OTS). Another important federal regulation enacted by the FTC, “Fair Information 
Practices” in the area of electronic markets encourages Web sites to notify online 
customers about privacy policies in practice, provide customers with access to 
their personal information collected by the electronic banks, and secure customer 
information from leaks. In the health sector, implementation of the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), which was designed to stream-
line the health industry’s inefficiencies, had the primary objective of guaranteeing 
security and privacy of health information. 
Besides government attention to this issue, many researchers have studied the impact 
of privacy concerns on businesses in privacy, trust, confidentiality-related studies in 
information systems, electronic commerce, or marketing research. Researchers have 
found that a substantial percentage of the population is, to some degree, concerned 
about threats to privacy. Such threats to privacy may stem from new digital technolo-
gies, free markets and the virtually unlimited exchange of electronic information 
(Lester, 2001). Risk can be defined as “a consumer’s perceptions of the uncertainty 
and adverse consequences of engaging in an activity” (Dowling & Staelin, 1994, p. 
119). Hoffman, Novak, and Peralta (1999) reported that consumers fear to provide 
credit card information to commercial Web vendors, simply because they lack enough 
trust to engage in business relationships involving financial transactions. 
A study carried out by Ribbink, Riel, Liljander, and Streukens (2004) shows that 
e-trust has a significant positive effect on loyalty. Furthermore, assurance is shown 
to affect continued use positively both via customer satisfaction and e-trust. Without 
trust, the relationship between online buyers and sellers on the Internet will neither 
take place nor continue (Ambrose, 1998). Users are unlikely to trust a Web site if they 
perceive their online experience as not sufficiently secure (Vatanasombut, Stylianou, 
& Igbaria, 2004). Results of a survey study conducted by Brown and Muchira (2004) 
indicated that both errors in handling personal information and invasion of privacy 
have a significant inverse relationship with online purchase behavior. That is, the 
way in which personal data is handled appears to be critical. This may be partly 
due to the risk perceived by the consumer. The direct influence of perceived risk 
www.ebook3000.com

Repeated Use of E-Gov Web Sites   165
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
on intention is related to the notion of perceived behavioral control in the theory of 
planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991, 1985). Individuals are likely to hold beliefs of high 
personal control when they feel assured of the privacy of their personal information. 
Although many of these studies focus on the commercial Web sites and customer 
relations, the theories and lessons can be similarly applied to e-government. 
Privacy is defined in several ways in different contexts. Privacy is the ability of an 
individual to control the terms under which personal information is acquired and 
used (Culnan et al., 1999). It can be the expectation of anonymity, the expectation of 
fairness and control over personal information, or the expectation of confidentiality 
(Berman & Mulligan, 1999). Compared to the concept of privacy, confidentiality 
refers to the ways in which the information is handled and used (Commission, 2001), 
a tool for protecting privacy (NILAC, 1995). In general, confidential information 
refers to any information kept in confidence such that its revelation requires the 
consent of its owner (Al-Fedaghi, 2005). For this reason, the notion of confidentiality 
is usually applied to private information, government secrets and trade secrets 
(Coleman, 1993). 
Thus, confidentiality can be perceived in terms of the user’s perception regarding 
how their personal information will be handled by the government and to what 
level it will be protected. In the absence of direct knowledge of the process of how 
their personal information is handled, confidentiality may be perceived by a user 
in terms of how much personal information a particular service needs. Therefore, 
if users use a government Web site for purposes of searching for information such 
as tax, election date, and so forth, they may perceive the risk to be low, since they 
do not provide the government Web site any private information for such a simple 
search. However, if they use the Web site for paying taxes, updating licenses or 
getting permits, where they have to provide personal information on the Web site, 
they may perceive the risk to be high and, hence, the perceived confidentiality to 
be low. For this rationale, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis.6:.The need for confidential information for a particular task by an e-
gov Web site will negatively affect the user’s intention to continue to use the e-gov 
Web site. 
Customer satisfaction has been studied in the context of physical environments and 
human interactions. A SERVQUAL dimension used in an online context includes 
reliable/prompt responses, access, ease of use, attentiveness, security and credibility. 
Balasubramanian, Konana, and Meon (2003) suggested that dimensions such as 
tangibles, empathy and responsiveness—which are important in a traditional envi-
ronment—are less applicable in an online environment. However, they found that 
in an online investment market where potential transactions may contain sensitive 

166   Chai, Herath, Park, & Rao
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
information, perceived security has considerable effect on consumer satisfaction 
mediated through trustworthiness. Based on this, we propose:
Hypothesis.7: The need for confidential information for a particular task by an e-gov 
Web site will negatively effect the user’s satisfaction towards the e-gov Web site.
Moderating.Effects.of.Gender.and.Race
Many studies have discussed trust and perception of risk in great detail. A general 
norm seems to be that disposition to trust may affect the perception of risk in ad-
dition to various environmental factors, such as the nature of the situation or task. 
Prior literature suggests that the presence of privacy concerns leads to suspicion, 
which subsequently leads to active behavior. People who are concerned with privacy 
and take action to protect it are also less likely to continue online behavior, such as 
subscribing and purchasing (Dommeyer & Gross, 2003). On the opposite spectrum, 
Salisbury, Pearson, Pearson, and Miller (2001) found that perceived Web security 
enhances intent to purchase online in that customers who feel secure enough to give 
sensitive information such as a credit card number will engage in online activity, 
such as purchases. 
Although the results of the studies considering the relationship between demographic 
variables (such as gender) and privacy have been mixed, available literature discusses 
many demographic factors that may impact trust or disposition to trust, including 
gender, race, age, education, income and prior experience. To date, existing literature 
has considered e-mail usage pattern, communication as well as networking differences 
between men and women. Researchers have investigated whether gender affects 
privacy concerns, but several of these investigations have not revealed any gender 
effects. Phelps et al. (2000) examined a number of demographic variables—sex, 
income, marital status, education and employment status—and found only education 
to have a statistically significant relationship with privacy concern. Nonetheless, 
women have been found to process information in more detail and, thus, are more 
aware of and sensitive to changes in their environments (Meyers-Levy & Mahesh-
waram, 1991). Several surveys conducted in the 1990s as well as a 2002 survey by 
Harrison Interactive confirms that women conveyed more concerns about the potential 
misuse of their personal information. Flynn et al. (1994) suggested an explanation in 
the role of gender or race in perceived risk in terms of sociopolitical factors. Based 
on prior literature and results of their own study, Finucane et al. (2000) found that 
risks tend to be judged lower by men than by women and by white people than by 
people of color. This leads us to hypothesize:
www.ebook3000.com

Repeated Use of E-Gov Web Sites   167
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Hypothesis.8:.Gender will moderate the relationship between the need for confi-
dential information and the user’s intention to continue to use the e-gov Web site; 
and females will show higher negative impact than males. 
In a health information-related study, Brodie, Flournoy, Altman, and Blendon 
(2000) found that blacks are more likely than whites to have concerns about Internet 
privacy. Most claimed that they were “very worried” about the probability of an 
unauthorized person gaining access to their personal data. In their study, Finucane 
et al. (2000) found that white people tend to judge the risks as lower than people of 
color. Based on this, we hypothesize: 
Hypothesis.9:.Race will moderate the relationship between the need for confiden-
tial information and the user’s intention to continue to use the e-gov Web site; and 
whites will show reduced negative impact of the relationship than their non-white 
counterparts.
Method
Sample.
This study analyzes the “E-Government Survey 2003” data collected by Pew 
Research Center. A random digit-dial telephone survey was administered to adult 
(18 years or older) Americans by Princeton Survey Research Association between 
June 25 and August 3, 2003. The main aim of surveys carried out by Pew Internet 
is to explore the impact of the Internet on families, communities and life in general. 
This survey was specific to e-government, and questioned Internet users about their 
experiences with regard to government. 
The dataset available on the Pew Internet Web site contained 4,933 responses. No 
information could be obtained regarding how many people were initially contacted in 
order to understand the response rate. Among the 4,933 respondents, approximately 
23.4% (1,154) had access to the Internet and had used e-government services, and 
were considered as a sample for further analysis. Fifty percent of the remaining 
1,154 users of e-government were males. The average age for the Internet user 
sample was 41.16 years.

168   Chai, Herath, Park, & Rao
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Measurement
The analysis uses a subset of the original questionnaire items to test our hypoth-
eses.
Intention.towards.repeat.use (E-Gov Continuance Intention): the dependent vari-
able measured on a dichotomous scale, refers to the respondents’ intent to continue 
to use the Internet for contacting government. 
Performance: This independent variable was measured by the combination of two 
factors that compose the government’s performance: outcome perceived by the user 
and performance related to expected time. Perceived outcome was captured by a 
four-point scale question—“The outcome of your last contact with the government?” 
that attempts to find the outcome in terms of success in accomplishing the task. 
Performance related to expected time was measured with another four-point scale 
question—“Did your last contact with the government take about the amount of 
time you expected, more time than you expected, or less time than you expected?” 
The responses for these two questions were added to get the overall measure for 
performance. 
Satisfaction: A four-point interval scale question—“How satisfied were you with 
your LAST experience contacting the government?”—was used as a measure of 
this second independent variable. Although satisfaction is a single-item scale, previ-
ous research has shown considerable precedence for using single-item measures in 
the context of large-scale satisfaction studies (e.g., LaBarbera & Mazursky, 1983; 
Performance 
Satisfaction 
E-Gov 
Continuance  
Intention 
(+) 
Level of  
Confidential 
Information 
Race 
Gender 
(+) 
(+) 
(-) 
(-) 
Figure 1. Research model
www.ebook3000.com

Repeated Use of E-Gov Web Sites   169
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Kekre, Krishnan, & Srinivasan, 1995). For example, Yi’s research (1990) compared 
reliabilities between several multi- and single-item scales and showed that the reli-
ability of single-item scales is acceptable. 
Confidentiality: The level of confidential information was measured based on 
the amount of personal information shared by the user; a low level of personal or 
confidential information shared and a high level of personal information shared. 
This was measured by proxy based on responses to the question—“When you made 
contact with the government last time, what was the purpose of that contact?”—on 
a dichotomous scale. Categories such as getting information and expressing opinion 
were considered “low level of confidential information shared,” since they require 
a small amount of personal information to be given out during a transaction. On the 
other hand, responses to actions such as filing taxes or registering a car were used 
to measure “high level of confidential information shared,” since these transactions 
needed a higher level of personal information to be filled out. 
Demographics: We used gender and race as moderators of the relationship between 
independent and dependent variables. It is important that gender has a critical role 
when considering e-gov usage in both the organization and household contexts, 
because they may have different styles for using the Internet and Web sites. Race 
was also included as a moderator for similar reasons. Race was divided into “white” 
and “non-white.”
Analysis.and.Results.
SPSS 11.5 was used for testing relationships of satisfaction, performance and per-
ceived confidentiality on intention to continue to use e-gov. Since the dependent 
variable “intention to use” is dichotomous, this study was based on logistic regres-
sion analysis. For testing moderating effect of demographic variables “gender” and 
“race,” we followed Jaccard’s method on interaction effect in logistic regression 
(Jaccard, 2001). This method has been frequently cited as robust way in social science 
fields for testing the interaction effect. In the model, we also have a second-order 
dependent variable, “satisfaction,” for hypothesis.
In addition, we conducted linear regression for testing the effect of performance of an 
e-gov Web site where satisfaction is the continuous variable as described earlier.
 

170   Chai, Herath, Park, & Rao
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
The.Effect.of.Independent.Variables..
on.Intention.to.Repeat.Use.
To test the effect of independent variables on Intention to repeat use, we conducted 
logistic regression analysis. This model was found to be significant (χ2= 27.216, 
P<0 .000) and is reported in Table 1. Table 1 also summarizes the results that show a 
significant effect of satisfaction, performance, and level of confidential information 
on intention towards repeated use. The results indicate that intention to continue to 
use e-government increases as a user’s satisfaction increases. For every unit increase 
in satisfaction, the intention to continue to use increases by 1.2 times. 
As previous research in various fields, including information systems, marketing 
and organization, have argued (Anderson & Sullivan, 1993; Gupta, Guimaraes, & 
Raghunathan, 1992; Bhattacherjee, 2001), the significant results imply that the posi-
tive relationship that exists between satisfaction and intention to use is robust.
Performance (0.491, P<0.001) and level of confidential information (-0.549, P<0.01) 
were also found to affect the continuance intention significantly. The result shows 
that a unit increase in performance increases the likelihood of continuous use by 
1.634 times. Users who need to share higher levels of personal information use 
government Web sites less than users who need to share lower levels of personal 
information. These results are consistent with the study carried out by Ribbink, Riel, 
Liljander, and Streukens (2004) where assurance was shown to affect loyalty.  
An interesting find in this analysis is that satisfaction is a weaker predictor of per-
sistent intention than confidentiality. In other words, confidentiality was found to be 
a more important factor for e-government users to use the service repeatedly. These 
findings show that users who use government Web sites are more concerned about 
the security of their personal information than satisfaction or perceived performance 
of the e-government site. 
Effect of Satisfaction, Performance and Level of Confidential Information on Intention 
Towards.Repeat.Use
Variable 
B
S.E.
Wald
df
Sig.
Exp(B)
Satisfaction
Performance
Level of Confidential 
Information Shared
0.183*
0.491**
-0.549**
6.064
19.248
9.391
1
1
1
0.014
0.000
0.002
1.201
1.634
0.577
Chi-square= 27.216, df=3, P<0 .000; Accuracy=65%, sample size=1,474
Table 1. Logistic regression results
www.ebook3000.com

Repeated Use of E-Gov Web Sites   171
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
The.Effect.of.Exogenous.Variables.on..
E-Government.Satisfaction
This analysis was conducted by linear regression. Due to different dependent variables 
from the first part of the analysis, the sample size was changed. Table 2 tabulates the 
results of the effect of confidentiality and performance on satisfaction using linear 
regression. Unlike confirmation-expectation theory (Oliver, 1980), where satisfaction 
is determined by disconfirmation between expectation and perceived performance, 
we apply perceived performance of service quality as an antecedent of satisfaction 
according to SERVPERF (Cronin & Taylor, 1994, 1992). That is, satisfaction is 
determined by “performance-only measures,” which means that the user’s percep-
tions of the performance of e-government services, as opposed to the difference 
between the consumers’ perceptions about the performance and their performance 
expectations. We follow this method since it provides a useful tool for measuring 
overall service quality attitudes in a simple way (Cronin & Taylor, 1994). 
For the baseline model, R2 =0.297 and F2, 549=26.477 shows a decent fit. Our results 
indicate that performance of e-government’s services as perceived by users is an 
antecedent of satisfaction, even in the e-government context (b=.297, P< 0.01) and 
shows significant effect on satisfaction. However, the level of confidential informa-
tion shared by the user does not act as an antecedent for satisfaction but directly 
affects the continuance intention (b=-0.001, P>0.1). 
The.Moderating.Effect.of.Demographics..
on.Intention.to.Re-Use
One of the important issues is the moderating effect of demographics on the inten-
tion to repeatedly use e-gov Web sites. According to Baron and Kenny (1986), a 
moderator is defined as a qualitative (e.g., sex, race, class) or quantitative (e.g., level 
Effect of Performance and Level of Confidential Information on Satisfaction
Variable
Std.
Coefficient
Std. Error
T
p-value
Model
Intercept
Level of Confidential 
Information Shared 
1.95
-.001
-.001
.297
10.987
-.016
.000
.987
R2 = .297
F2,549 = 
26.477***
Performance
.297
.058
7.263
.000
Dependent Variable: Satisfaction
Table 2. Linear regression results

172   Chai, Herath, Park, & Rao
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
of reward) variable that affects the direction and/or strength of the relation between 
an independent or predictor variable and a dependent or criterion variable. 
In our research, we propose that gender and ethnicity affects strength of relationship 
between satisfaction and intention to re-use. For testing this effect, we considered 
gender and race regarding the moderating role of demographics. Results are reported 
in Table 3. The result on satisfaction was statistically significant, which indicates that 
gender has considerable effect on the relationship between satisfaction and intention 
to re-use. Effect of satisfaction was significant after considering the gender effect 
(b=0.408, p<0.001). Regarding Hypotheses 4 and 5, Table 3 showed that gender 
interacts in the relationship between satisfaction and intention (b= -0.352, p<0.01). 
Race, however, did not have any impact on intention; neither did it have an effect 
on moderating the relationship between satisfaction and intention to re-use.
Specific interaction effect of gender has been shown in Figure 2, with predicted 
log odd values of intention, which are the predicted values of logistic regression 
Testing Steps in Mediation 
Model
B
S.E.
Wald
df
Sig.
Exp(B)
Satisfaction
Gender (1)*
Race (1)
Satisfaction × Gender (1)
Satisfaction × Race (1)
Constant 
.408
1.626
-.352
-.455
-.098
-.728
.113
.519
.652
.159
.208
.369
12.999
9.798
.292
8.208
.224
3.897
1
1
1
1
1
1
.000
.002
.589
.004
.636
.048
1.504
5.082
.703
.635
.906
.483
Model Chi-square= 30.237, df =5, P<0 .001; accuracy=65%, sample size=708
*Reference: : male=1, female=0; white=0, non-white=1
Table 3. Testing moderating effects of gender using logistic regression
 
-0.5
-0.3
-0.1
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
s1
s2
s3
s4
Satisfaction
Male
Female
Intention
log odds
Figure 2. Interaction effect of gender
www.ebook3000.com

Repeated Use of E-Gov Web Sites   173
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
represented in Table 3 (Jaccard, 2001). Figure 2 indicates that for males, the inten-
tion to re-use slightly decreased as satisfaction increased. Other incentives may be 
required to make males’ intentions to re-use higher. On the other hand, females had a 
steeper slope than males, indicating that intention to re-use increased as satisfaction 
increased. This trend indicates that females focus more on satisfaction than males 
do for the decision to use e-gov sites repeatedly.
For Hypothesis 9, Table 4 shows the moderating effect of race. When the interaction 
effect term is included in the model, results show that the impacts of each level of 
confidential information shared, race and gender on Intention were significant (b= 
-.576, -1.465, and .563). Furthermore, significant interaction exists between level 
of confidential information shared and race on Intention to re-use e-gov (b= 1.371, 
p<0.01). However, the interaction effect of gender was not statistically significant 
(.b=-.377, p>0.1).
Figure 3 indicates that whites have higher probability of intention to re-use even 
in the case where a higher amount of confidential information is required (prob.= 
70.3%) than tasks that require very little to no personal information (prob.= 57.1%). 
For non-whites, the results show that higher possibility of intention to re-use in lower 
levels of personal information requirements (prob. = 54.78%). This result shows that 
different races may have different points of view with regard to confidentiality. That 
is, whites may consider using government Web sites to perform tasks that require 
higher levels of personal information. This is consistent with our hypothesis. This 
may be due to the ease that online services provide. On the other hand, it is shown 
that non-whites usually think of requirement of confidential information as a barrier 
to using e-gov Web sites. For this reason, they have low intention to re-use when 
the amount of personal information required is high. 
Testing Steps in Mediation 
Model
B
S.E.
Wald
df
Sig.
Exp(B)
Level of Confidential 
Information Shared
Race 
Gender
Level of CI × Race
Level of CI × Gender
Constant 
-.576
-1.465
.563
1.371
-.377
.861
.264
.395
.285
.506
.375
.200
4.752
13.731
3.899
7.338
1.011
18.572
1
1
1
1
1
1
.029
.000
.048
.007
.315
.000
.562
.231
1.756
3.940
.686
2.364
Model Chi-square= 27.876, df =5, P<0 .000; accuracy=65.9%, sample size=346
Table 4. Testing moderating effects of race using logistic regression

174   Chai, Herath, Park, & Rao
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Figure 4 shows the results of our conceptual model for all hypotheses. According to 
the test results, Hypotheses 1 2, 3, 4, 6 and 9 are supported by this data. However, the 
data did not support Hypothesis 7, which examines the effect of level of confidential 
information shared on satisfaction. Moderating effect of race on the relationship 
between satisfaction and intention, as well as moderating effect of gender on the 
relationship between confidentiality and intention, were also not supported. 
 
0.861
-0.604
0.285
0.191
-0.7
-0.5
-0.3
-0.1
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.1
Low
High
Level of Confidential Information Shared
White
Non-white
Intention 
log odds
Figure 3. Interaction effect of race
Performance
Level of 
Confidential 
Information
Satisfaction
E-Gov
Continuance 
Intention
H2: 0.491**
H3: 0.420**
H7: -0.001
H6: -0.549**
*: 0.05 level
**: 0.01 level
Race
Gender
H4: -0.352 **
H1: 0.183*
H9: 1.371 **
H8: ns
H5: ns
Performance
Level of 
Confidential 
Information
Satisfaction
E-Gov
Continuance 
Intention
H2: 0.491**
H3: 0.420**
H7: -0.001
H6: -0.549**
*: 0.05 level
**: 0.01 level
Race
Gender
H4: -0.352 **
H1: 0.183*
H9: 1.371 **
H8: ns
H5: ns
Figure 4. Direct and moderating effects on e-gov continuance intention
www.ebook3000.com

Repeated Use of E-Gov Web Sites   175
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Discussion
This study attempts to examine the role of three factors—namely, e-government’s 
service performance, satisfaction resulting from the performance and the level of 
confidential information shared—on users’ intention to repeatedly use e-gov services, 
using the survey data from Princeton Survey Research center. More specifically, we 
argue that the amount of personal information shared is a deterministic factor for 
users to use a government Web site repeatedly. Service performance and satisfac-
tion also play a role as an antecedent of repeated use intention. In addition, we have 
tried to determine whether e-government satisfaction is affected by performance 
and confidentiality. The empirical results of this study reveal that, as demonstrated 
by previous studies, performance is a predictor of satisfaction. However, perceived 
confidentiality does not directly effect a user’s satisfaction towards the service. This 
indicates that the level of confidential information plays a role, not as an antecedent 
of satisfaction but as the same level of satisfaction. Our findings are consistent with 
previous research, thus revealing the effect of satisfaction and confidentiality on 
intention to use. Confidentiality was considered more by users for using e-govern-
ment than satisfaction.
Our results of the effect of satisfaction and performance on intention towards re-
peated usage suggest that satisfaction and performance play a role as an antecedent 
of the intention to repeated usage as revealed by previous research. We found that 
performance has a more direct effect on repeated usage than satisfaction, which 
results from performance. In addition, the relationship between the amount of 
confidential information needed for a task and the intention of repeated use of the 
service indicates that users are critically concerned about exposing or sharing their 
personal information through the government Web site. They regard it as a determin-
ing factor in repeating use of the site more than other factors, such as satisfaction 
or performance. 
Finally, this study showed that users’ demographics, gender and race act as a 
moderator on the relationship between reuse intention and satisfaction (confiden-
tiality) by providing the interaction effect. Specifically, gender (race) played as a 
moderator on the relationship between intention to reuse and satisfaction (level of 
confidential information). Interestingly, in the relationship between intention to 
reuse and satisfaction, male users tended to slightly decrease their intention to reuse 
as satisfaction increased, whereas female users’ intentions drastically increased. 
According to marketing literature, satisfaction is a major antecedent of repurchase 
intention or retention (Bearden & Teel, 1983; Hellier, Geursen, Carr, & Rickard, 
2003; Oliver, 1980, 1981), which implies that a high satisfaction level leads to high 
intention of reuse. However, when compared to previous studies on satisfaction, our 
study showed different results on government Web sites for male users, although 
the impact on the relationship between intention and satisfaction was insignificant. 

176   Chai, Herath, Park, & Rao
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
This result indicates that users’ attitudes might be different depending on the con-
texts they face. In a recent study, Jolley, Mizerski, and Olaru (2006) showed that 
satisfaction does not play a primary role for enhancing retention in online gambling 
contexts; rather, users’ habits play a major role for the retention. In a similar vein, 
the results from this study provide a question for further research on e-government 
in the online Web site context with regard to the moderating effect of gender on the 
relationship between reuse intention and satisfaction. 
This study offers important practical and academic contributions. First, we provide 
empirical evidence that users are still reserved in participating in online activities 
that need personal information. Their participation can be encouraged by increas-
ing trust. Salam, Rao, and Pegels (2003) found that consumer-perceived risk is 
reduced with the increase in institutional trust. Although it can be assumed that 
users may have a high level of trust in the government as an institution, the trust 
also has to be developed in terms of technology and process. Therefore, to ensure 
the perception of security, users must be convinced that the Web is a secure place 
to engage in the exchange, and it must be proven to them that interacting with the 
site is safe and secure. The former can be done by implementing and informing 
users about security features available on the Web; for example, digital certificates, 
secure servers or third-party trusting agencies. Government must communicate that 
they have implemented technologies and procedures that prevent computer crimes; 
they always adhere to privacy principles; and their system is reliable because they 
always allocate sufficient resources to effectively correct any occurrence of errors. 
Thus, assurance is a service quality dimension that can be controlled by the service 
provider, which may aid in increasing citizen trust.
Second, this study showed important cues about how reuse intentions regarding 
e-gov Web sites could be affected by different factors from commercial Web sites. 
Researchers have devoted little attention to assessing intention to use e-government 
Web sites. By revealing factors that influence reuse intention of e-gov Web sites, 
this study has extended research in e-government. For example, the likelihood to 
reuse e-gov Web sites decreased despite increase of satisfaction with Web sites, 
and satisfaction has less effect than confidentiality. This is consistent with another 
recent study that shows that satisfaction was not a critical factor for reusing online 
gambling Web sites and online shopping (Jiang, 2005; Jolley et al., 2006). 
Avenues.for.Future.Research.
In this study, we used a secondary data set. Secondary data analysis can allow for 
the validation of prevalent theories. The main advantages of secondary data in-
clude: the availability of data without gathering it, which overcomes the obstacles 
of gathering data, such as peoples’ and organizations’ willingness to participate 
and cost to conduct the study. However, since the data is not collected though the 
www.ebook3000.com

Repeated Use of E-Gov Web Sites   177
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
protocols of scientific research with a specific study in mind, it can have drawbacks. 
The survey was designed to measure public opinion. The original research was not 
driven by a theoretical model. This may impact the validity and reliability of the 
measures. Individual questionnaire items may be unbiased but may not necessarily 
pass psychometric properties, such as the need to use multiple items. In this study, 
most of the variables were represented by one question each (except perceived 
performance, which was measured with two questions); hence, validity was based 
on expert opinion. 
The data has to be available for all the concepts that must be considered, which may 
not always be possible. Several other quality indicators mentioned earlier in the study 
can also be considered to consider satisfaction. But lack of items capturing such 
indicators posed limitations in considering any additional variables. We had to use 
different methods (logistic and linear regression) for analysis due to differing scales 
of the variables (i.e., dichotomous scale for dependent variable and all independent 
variables being continuous). For this reason, we could not test the causal relation-
ship among those constructs statistically, but test only the effects (relationship) of 
each variable on endogenous variables. 
In the light of these limitations, a more detailed analysis of each construct using a 
proper design methodology is recommended. Despite some limitations, this study 
is among the first studies measuring the impact of perceived confidentiality on the 
intention of repeated usage of a government’s site. More importantly, the strength 
of the research is that the data represents a national random sample of the US adult 
population rather than a convenience sample, and that the results are consistent 
with theory. We believe the findings from our research could shed meaningful light 
regarding e-government. 
Acknowledgment
We appreciate the comments made by anonymous reviewers and attendees at the 
ICEG 2005 conference, which have enhanced this paper. The research of the fourth 
author is funded by NSF under grant #0420448. The usual disclaimer applies. 
References
Agarwal, R., Ghosh, B., Banerjee, S., & Kishore, P. (2000). Ensuring Web site quality: A 
case study. In Proceedings of Management of Innovation and Technology, ICMIT 
2000 (pp. 664-670).

178   Chai, Herath, Park, & Rao
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Ajzen, I. (1985). From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior. In J. Kuhl, & 
J. Beckman (Eds.), Action control: From cognition to behavior. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag.
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, 50, 179-211.
Al-Fedaghi, S.S. (2005). Privacy as a base for confidentiality. In Proceedings of WEIS05, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
Alford, B.L., & Sherrell, D.L. (1996). The role of affect in consumer satisfaction judgments 
of credence-based services. Journal of Business Research, 37, 71-84.
Ambrose, P.J., & Johnson, G.J. (1998). A trust-based model of buying behavior in electronic 
retailing. In Proceedings of the 4th Americas Conference on Information Systems, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
Anderson, E.W., & Sullivan, M.W. (1993). The antecedents and consequences of customer 
satisfaction for firms. Marketing Science (1986-1998), 12, 125-143.
Angur, M.G., Natarajan, R., & Jahera, J.S., Jr. (1999). Service quality in the banking in-
dustry: An assessment in a developing economy. The International Journal of Bank 
Marketing, 17(3), 116-123.
Anol, B. (2001). Understanding information systems continuance: An expectation-confirma-
tion model. MIS Quarterly, 25, 351-370.
Balasubramanian, S., Konana, P., & Meon, N. (2003). Customer satisfaction in virtual en-
vironments: A study of online investing. Management Science, 49(7), 871-889.
Baron, R.M., & Kenny, D.A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social 
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.
Bateson, J.E. (1984). Perceived control and service encounter.
Bearden, W.O., & Teel, J.E. (1983). Selected determinants of consumer satisfaction and 
complaint reports. Journal of Marketing Research, 20, 21-28.
Berman, J., & Mulligan, D. (1999). Privacy in the digital age: Work in progress. Nova Law 
Review, 23(2), 551-582.
Bhattacherjee, A. (2001). Understanding information systems continuance: An expectation-
confirmation model. MIS Quarterly, 25(3), 351-370.
Brady, M.K., Cronin, J.J., & Brand, R.R. (2002). Performance-only measurement of service 
quality: A replication and extension. Journal of Business Research, 55, 17-31.
Breen, J. (2000). At the dawn of e-government: The citizen as customer. Government Fi-
nance Review,16(5), 15-20.
Brodie, M., Flournoy, R.E., Altman, D.E., & Blendon, R.J. (2000). Health information, the 
Internet, and the digital divide. Health Affair, 19(6), 255-265.
Brown, M., & Muchira, R. (2004). Investigating the relationship between Internet privacy 
concerns and online purchase behavior. Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 
5, 62-70.
www.ebook3000.com

Repeated Use of E-Gov Web Sites   179
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Bruno, G., & Agarwal, R. (1997). Modeling the engineering environment. IEEE Transac-
tions on Engineering Management, 44(1), 20-30.
Chenet, P., Tynan, C., & Money, A. (1999). Service performance gap: Re-evaluation and 
redevelopment. Journal of Business Research, 46, 133-147.
Churchill, G.A., Jr., & Surpernant, C. (1982). An investigation into the determinants of 
customer satisfaction. Journal of Marketing Research, 19, 491-504.
Coleman, A. (1993). Protecting confidential information. In C. Reed (Ed.), Computer law 
(2nd ed.). London: Blackstone Press.
Cronin, J.J., Brady, M.K., & Hult, G.T.M. (2000). Assessing the effects of quality, value, 
and consumer satisfaction on consumer behavioral intentions in service environments. 
Journal of Retailing, 76(2), 193-218.
Cronin, J.J., Jr., & Taylor, S.A. (1992). Measuring service quality: A reexamination and 
extension. Journal of Marketing, 56, 55-68.
Cronin, J.J., & Taylor, S.A. (1994). SERVPERF versus SERVQUAL; Reconciling perfor-
mance-based and perceptions-minus-expectations measurement of quality. Journal 
of Marketing, 58, 125-131.
Culnan, M.J., & Armstrong, P.K. (1999). Information privacy concerns, procedural fair-
ness, and impersonal trust: An empirical investigation.  Organization Science, 10(1), 
104-115.
Dommeyer, C.J., & Gross, B.L. (2003). What consumers know and what they do: An inves-
tigation of consumer knowledge, awareness, and use of privacy protection strategies. 
Journal of Interactive Marketing, 17(2), 34-51.
Dowling, G.R., & Staelin, R. (1994). A model of perceived risk and intended risk-handling 
activity. Journal of Consumer Research, 21, 119-134.
Ennew, C.T., & Binks, M.R. (1999). Impact of participate service relationships on quality, 
satisfaction and retention: An exploratory study. Journal of Business Research, 46, 
121-132.
Finucane, M.L., Slovic, P., Mertz, C.K., Flynn, J., & Satterfield, T.A. (2000). Gender, race, 
and perceived risk: The ‘white male’ effect. Health, Risk & Society, 2(2), 159-172.
Flynn, J., Slovic, P., & Mertz, C.K. (1994). Gender, race, and perception of environmental 
health risks. Risk Analysis, 14(6), 1101-1108.
Gefen, D., & Straub, D.W. (1997). Gender differences in the perception and use of e-mail: 
An extension to the technology acceptance model. MIS Quarterly, 21, 389-400.
Gupta, Y.P., Guimaraes, T., & Raghunathan, T.S. (1992). Attitudes and intentions of infor-
mation center personnel. Information & Management, 22, 151-160.
Harris Interactive. (2002, February 7). Privacy on and off the Internet: What consumers 
want. Retrieved January 11, 2006, from http://www.aicpa.org/download/webtrust/
priv_rpt_21mar02.pdf
Hellier, P.K., Geursen, G.M., Carr, R.A., & Rickard, J.A. (2003). Customer repurchase 
intention: A general structural equation model. European Journal of Marketing, 37, 
1762.

180   Chai, Herath, Park, & Rao
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Hexmoor, H., Bhattaram, S., & Wilson, S.L. (2004). Trust-based security policies. In Proceed-
ings of the Secure Knowledge Management Workshops, Buffalo, New York, USA.
Holmes, M.C. (1998). Comparison of gender differences among information systems 
professionals: A cultural perspective. The Journal of Computer Information Systems, 
38(4), 78-87.
Huberman, B.A., Adar, E., & Fine, L.R. (2005). Valuating privacy. In Proceedings of WEIS05, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
Jaccard, J. (2001). Interaction effects in logistic regression. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publica-
tions.
Jiang, P., & Rosenbloom, B. (2005) Customer intention to return online: Price perception, 
attribute-level performance, and satisfaction unfolding over time. European Journal 
of Marketing 39(1/2), 150.
Jolley, B., Mizerski, R., & Olaru, D. (2006). How habit and satisfaction affects player reten-
tion for online gambling, Journal of Business Research, 59, 770.
Jyoti, C., & Heejin, L. (2004). Broadband development in South Korea: Institutional and 
cultural factors. European Journal of Information Systems, 13(2), 103-114.
Jyoti, C., & Yogesh, K.D. (2005). The demographics of broadband residential consumers in 
a British local community: The London Borough of Hillingdon. Journal of Computer 
Information Systems, 45(4), 93-102.
Kekre, S., Krishnan, M.S., & Srinivasan, K. (1995). Drivers of customer satisfaction for 
software products: Implications for design and service support. Management Science, 
41(9), 1456-1470.
Kim, D.J., Ferrin, D.L., & Rao, H.R. (2003). A study of the effect of consumer trust on con-
sumer expectations and satisfaction: The Korean experience. In Proceedings of the 5th 
International Conference on Electronic Commerce, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
Kim, E.Y., & Kim, Y.-K. (2004). Predicting online purchase intentions for clothing products. 
European Journal of Marketing, 38, 883-897.
Kohli, R., Devaraj, S., & Mahmood, M.A. (2004). Understanding determinants of online 
consumer satisfaction: A decision process perspective. Journal of Management In-
formation Systems, 21, 115-136.
Kolodinsky, J.M, Hogarth, J.M., & Hilgert, M.A. (2004). The adoption of electronic bank-
ing technologies by US consumers. International Journal of Bank Marketing, 22(4), 
238-259. 
Labarbera, P.A., & Mazursky, D. (1983). A longitudinal assessment of consumer satisfac-
tion/dissatisfaction: The dynamic aspect of the cognitive process. Journal of Marketing 
Research, 20, 393-404.
Larsen, T.J., & Sorebo, O. (2005). Impact of personal innovativeness on the use of the 
Internet among employees at work. Journal of Organizational and End User Com-
puting, 17, 43-63.
Lester, T. (2001). The reinvention of privacy. The Atlantic Monthly, 27-39.
www.ebook3000.com

Repeated Use of E-Gov Web Sites   181
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Loiacono, ET, Chen, D.O., & Goodhue, D. (2002). WEBQUAL revised: Predicting the intent 
to reuse a Web site. In Proceedings of the 8th Americas Conference on Information 
Systems, Barcelona, Spain.
Longstaff, T.A., Ellis, J.T., Herman, S.V., Lipson, H.F., McMillan, R.D., Pesante, L.H., et 
al. (1997). Security of the Internet. Pittsburgh: Carnegie Mellon University, Software 
Engineering Institute.
McKnight, D.H., Choudhury, V., & Kacmar, C. (2000). Trust in e-commerce vendors: A 
two-stage model. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Information 
Systems, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. 
Meyers-Levy, J., & Maheshwaram, D. (1991). Exploring differences in males and females 
processing strategies. Journal of Consumer Research, 18, 63-70.
National Bioethics Advisory Commission. (2001). Ethical and policy issues in research 
involving human participants: Report and recommendations of the National Bioethics 
Advisory Commission. Retrieved from http://www.georgetown.edu/research/nrcbl/
nbac/pubs.html
NIIAC. (1995). Common ground: Fundamental principles for the national information 
infrastructure. The National Information Infrastructure Advisory Council (NIIAC).
Oliver, R.L. (1980). A cognitive model of the antecedents and consequences of satisfaction 
decisions. Journal of Marketing Research, 17, 460-469.
Oliver, R.L. (1981). Measurement and evaluation of satisfaction processes in retail settings. 
Journal of Retailing, 57, 25.
Palmer, J.W. (2002). Web site usability, design, and performance metrics. Information 
Systems Research, 13(2), 151-167.
Phelps, J., Nowak, G., & Ferrell, E. (2000). Privacy concerns and consumer willingness to 
provide personal information. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 19(11), 27-41.
Pratippati, S.N. (2003). Adoption of e-governance: Differences between countries in the use of 
online government service. Journal of American Academy of Business, 3, 386-391.
Ribbink, D., van Riel, A.C.R., Liljander, V., & Streukens, S. (2004). Comfort your online 
customer: Quality, trust and loyalty on the Internet. Managing Service Quality, 14, 
446-456.
Salam, A., Rao, H., & Pegels, C. (2003). Consumer-perceived risk in e-commerce transac-
tions. Communications of ACM, 46, 325-331.
Salisbury, W.D., Pearson, R.A., Pearson, A.W., & Miller, D.W. (2001). Perceived security 
and World Wide Web purchase intention. Industrial Management + Data Systems, 
101(3/4), 165-176.
Slyke, C.V., Comunale, C.L., & Belanger, F. (2002). Gender differences in perceptions of 
Web-based shopping. Communications of the ACM, 45, 82-86.
Stalder, F. (2002). The voiding of privacy. Sociological Research Online, 7.
Timonen, V., O’Donnell, O., & Humphreys, P. (2003). E-government and the decentraliza-
tion of service delivery, to achieve seamless client-centred service (CPMR Discussion 
Paper, 25). Dublin: IPA.

182   Chai, Herath, Park, & Rao
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Vatanasombut, B., Stylianou, A.C., & Igbaria, M. (2004). How to retain online customers. 
Communications of ACM, 47, 65-69.
Weatherall, D.J., Ledingham, J.G.G., & Worell, D.A. (1984). Oxford textbook of medicine. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Yi, Y. (1990). A critical review of consumer satisfaction. In V. Zeithaml (Ed.), Review of 
marketing. American Marketing Association.
This work was previously published in International Journal of Electronic Government Research, Vol. 
2, Issue 3, edited by D. F. Norris, pp. 1-22, copyright 2006 by IGI Publishing, formerly known as Idea 
Group Publishing (an imprint of IGI Global).
www.ebook3000.com

If You Build a Political Web Site, Will They Come?   183
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.VIII
If.You.Build.a.Political..
Web.Site,.Will.They.Come?
The.Internet.and..
Political.Activism.in.Britain
Pippa Norris, Harvard University, USA
John Curtice, Strathclyde University, UK
Abstract
This study focuses on the capacity of the Internet for strengthening political activ-
ism. The first part summarizes debates about these issues in the previous literature. 
This study starts from the premise that political activism is a multidimensional phe-
nomenon and that we need to understand how different channels of participation 
relate to the social and political characteristics of the online population. We predict 
that certain dimensions of activism will probably be strengthened by the rise of the 
knowledge society, particularly cause-oriented forms of political participation, 
reflecting the prior social and political characteristics of the online population. By 
contrast, we expect the Internet to have far less impact upon conventional channels 
of political participation, exemplified by election campaigns. The second part sum-
marizes the sources of data and the key measures of political activism used in this 
study, drawing upon the British Social Attitudes Survey from 2003. The third part 

184   Norris & Curtice
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
examines the evidence for the relationship between use of the Internet and patterns 
of civic engagement in the British context. The conclusion summarizes the results 
and considers their broader implications.
Introduction
The rise of knowledge societies represents one of the most profound transforma-
tions that have occurred in recent decades. This phenomenon, characterized by the 
widespread diffusion of information and communication technologies (ICTs) across 
society, promises to have major consequences by expanding access to education 
and training, broadening channels of expression and social networks, as well as 
revolutionizing the nature of work and the economy. The primary impact of this 
development has been evident in affluent nations such as the United States, Sweden, 
and Britain, but the Internet has also been widely regarded as an important instru-
ment for social change in poorer countries with relatively high levels of ICTs, such 
as Malaysia and Brazil (U.N., 2002; Franda, 2002). The core issue for this study 
concerns the social and political consequences of the rise of knowledge societies, 
in particular the capacity of the Internet for strengthening civic engagement. 
To consider these issues, the first part summarizes debates about the impact of the 
Internet on civic engagement. This study assumes that political activism is a multidi-
mensional phenomenon. The impact of the Internet on each of these dimensions, in 
turn, is assumed to be heavily dependent upon the social and political characteristics 
of Internet users. Given this framework, the study predicts that the primary impact 
of using the Internet will be upon facilitating cause-oriented forms of political activ-
ism, thereby strengthening social movements, voluntary associations, and interest 
groups, more than upon conventional channels of political participation, exemplified 
by election campaigns. To test these propositions in the British context, the second 
part summarizes the sources of data and the key measures of political activism 
used in this study, drawing upon the British Social Attitudes Survey of 2003. The 
third part examines the evidence for the relationship between use of the Internet 
and indicators of civic engagement. The conclusion in the final part summarizes 
the empirical results and considers their broader implications.
www.ebook3000.com

If You Build a Political Web Site, Will They Come?   185
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Theories.of.the.Impact.of..
Knowledge.Societies.on.Democracy
Multiple theories exist about how the growth of knowledge societies could potentially 
influence political participation and civic engagement in contemporary democracies. 
Three main perspectives can be identified in the previous literature. 
The.Internet.as.a.Virtual.Agora.
The most positive view is held by cyber-optimists, who emphasize the Panglossian 
possibilities of the Internet for the involvement of ordinary citizens in direct, delib-
erative, or “strong” democracy. Digital technologies are thought to hold promise as 
a mechanism facilitating alternative channels of civic engagement, exemplified by 
political chat-rooms, remote electronic voting in elections, referenda, and plebiscites, 
and the mobilization of virtual communities, thereby revitalizing levels of mass 
participation in public affairs (Barber, 1998; Budge, 1996, Rash, 1997; Rheingold, 
1993; Schwartz, 1996). This view was popular as the Internet initially rapidly ex-
panded in the United States during the mid-1990s, and this perspective continues to 
be expressed by enthusiasts today (Gilder, 2000). For example, Hauben and Hauben 
(1997) argue that by bringing people together, the Internet can help rebuild a sense 
of community and trust (see also Wellman & Guilia, 1999). Empirical backing for 
this view has come from analysis of the Pew Internet and American Life Project, 
which suggests that Internet users have wider social networks than non-users (Ran-
ney, 2000; Robinson et al., 2000; Pew 2001; Uslaner, 2004), a result replicated in 
Britain (Gardner & Oswald, 2001). 
The.Knowledge.Elite.and.Social.Inequalities
Yet these claims remain highly controversial. Cyber-pessimists regard the knowl-
edge society as a Pandora’s box reinforcing existing inequalities of power and 
wealth, generating deeper divisions between the information rich and poor. In this 
perspective, the global and social divides in Internet access mean that, far from 
encouraging mass participation, the growth of ICTs will disproportionately benefit 
the most affluent sectors in the developed world (Golding, 1996; Hayward, 1995; 
Murdock & Golding, 1989; Weber, Loumakis, & Bergman, 2003). Observers 
suggests that traditional interest groups, major parties, and governments have the 
capacity to reassert their control in the virtual political sphere, just as traditional 
multinational corporations have the ability to reestablish their predominance in the 
world of e-commerce (Hill & Hughes, 1998; McChesney, 1999; Selnow, 1998; 

186   Norris & Curtice
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Toulouse & Luke, 1998). If political resources on the Internet reflect the voice and 
influence of the more affluent sectors and dominant groups, this could reinforce 
existing political disparities and class biases commonly found in political activism 
within democratic societies.
Politics.as.Usual
An alternative skeptical perspective suggests that so far the potential of the knowledge 
society has failed to have a dramatic impact on the practical reality of “politics as 
usual,” for good or ill, even in countries such as the United States at the forefront 
of digital technologies (Margolis & Resnick, 2000). This view stresses the embed-
ded status quo and the difficulties of achieving radical change to political systems 
through technological mechanisms. During the 2000 American election campaign, 
for example, commentators suggest that George W. Bush and Al Gore used their Web 
pages essentially as glossy shop-windows, as fundraising tools, and as campaign 
ads, rather than as interactive “bottom up” formats facilitating public comment 
and discussion (Foot & Schneider, 2002; Media Metrix, 2000). Elsewhere, content 
analysis of political party Web sites in countries as diverse as the UK, France, 
Mexico, and the Republic of Korea have found that their primary purpose has been 
the provision of standard information about party organizations and policies that 
was also widely available off-line, providing more of the same rather than anything 
new, still less interactive facilities: 
Party presence on the Internet seems to represent largely an additional element 
to a party’s repertoire of action along with more traditional communication forms 
rather than a transformation of the fundamental relationship between political par-
ties and the public, as some earlier advocates of cyber democracy hoped. (Gibson, 
Nixon, & Ward, 2003)
Studies of the contents of government department Web sites have also found that 
these are often primarily used for the dissemination of information and the provision 
of routine administrative services. The Internet thereby serves as an aid to good 
governance and transparency, but it does not necessarily function so effectively as a 
medium expanding opportunities for citizen consultation, policy discussion, or other 
public inputs into the policymaking process (Allen, Juillet, Paquet, & Roy, 2001; 
Chadwick & May, 2003; Fountain, 2001; Haque, 2002; Stowers, 1999; Thomas & 
Streib, 2003). 
www.ebook3000.com

If You Build a Political Web Site, Will They Come?   187
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
The.Multidimensional.Nature.of.Political.Activism
In contrast to these perspectives, this study follows the convention established by 
Verba and his colleagues (Verba, Nie, & Kim, 1978; Verba, Schlozman, & Brady 
1995) in assuming that political activism is multidimensional with many distinct 
forms of involvement, each associated with differing costs and benefits. The impact 
of the Internet can be expected to differ in each of these, mainly due to the prior 
social and political characteristics of the online population. Four main categories can 
be distinguished, each with different costs and benefits: voting, campaign-oriented 
activism, cause-oriented activism, and civic-oriented activism.
Voting in regular elections is one of the most ubiquitous forms of citizen-oriented 
participation, requiring some initiative and awareness for an informed choice but 
making fairly minimal demands of time, knowledge, and effort. Through the ballot 
box, voting exerts diffuse pressure over parties and elected officials, and the outcomes 
of elections affect all citizens. Participating at the ballot box is central to citizenship 
in representative democracy but due to its relatively low costs the act is atypical 
of other, more demanding forms of participation. The Internet can be expected to 
encourage voting participation mainly by lowering some of the information hurdles 
to making an informed choice, although the provision of remote electronic voting 
through a variety of new technologies can be expected to have a more radical impact 
upon turnout (Tolbert & McNeal, 2003; Norris, 2004).
Campaign-oriented forms of participation concern acts focused primarily upon 
how people can influence parliament and government in representative democracy, 
primarily through political parties in British politics. Verba, Nie, and Kim focus 
on this aspect when they defined political participation as “those legal activities by 
private citizens that are more or less directly aimed at influencing the selection of 
governmental personnel and/or the actions they take” (Verba et al., 1978, p. 46). Work 
for parties or candidates, including party membership and volunteer work, election 
leafleting, financial donations to parties or candidates, attending local party meetings, 
and get-out-the-vote drives, all typify this category. Parties serve multiple functions 
in representative democracies: notably simplifying and structuring electoral choices; 
organizing and mobilizing campaigns; aggregating disparate interests; channeling 
political debate; selecting candidates; structuring parliamentary divisions; acting as 
policy think tanks; and organizing government. Not only are parties one of the main 
conduits of political participation, they also serve to boost and strengthen electoral 
turnout. If mass party membership is under threat, as many indicators suggest, this 
could have serious implications for representative democracy (Mair & van Biezen 
2001; Scarrow, 2001). Campaigning and party work typically generates collective 
rather than individual benefits but requires greater initiative, time, and effort (and 
sometimes expenditure) than merely casting a ballot. The Internet can be expected 
to provide new opportunities for activism in parties and election campaigns, for 
example, through downloading information, joining parties or donating funds, or 

188   Norris & Curtice
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
participating in discussion groups hosted on party or candidate Web sites (Gibson, 
Nixon, & Ward, 2003; Hague & Loader, 1999; Norris, 2001). At the same time, the 
online population is usually younger than average, while party members and activ-
ists are typically drawn from middle-aged and older sectors of society. The social 
characteristics of online users mean that they are unlikely to be drawn toward party 
Web sites and thus traditional forms of campaign activism.
Cause-oriented activities are focused primarily upon influencing specific issues and 
policies. These acts are exemplified by whether respondents have actual experience 
in taking part in demonstrations and protests, signing a petition, or raising an issue 
in the news media. The distinction is not water-tight; for example, political parties 
can organize mass demonstrations, and social movements often adopt mixed action 
strategies that combine traditional repertoires, such as lobbying representatives, 
with a variety of alternative modes such as online networking, street protests, and 
consumer boycotts. Nevertheless, compared with campaign-oriented actions, the 
distinctive aspect of cause-oriented repertoires is that these are most commonly used 
to pursue specific issues and policy concerns among diverse targets, both within 
and also well beyond the electoral arena. These acts seek to influence representative 
democracies within the nation-state through the conventional channels of contacting 
elected officials, ministers, civil servants, and government departments, but their 
target is often broader and more diffuse, possibly in the non-profit or private sectors, 
whether directed at shaping public opinion and “life-styles,” publicizing certain is-
sues through the news media, mobilizing a networked coalition with other groups 
or non-profit agencies, influencing the practices of international bodies such as the 
World Trade Organization or the United Nations, or impacting public policy in other 
countries. The proliferation of cause-oriented Web sites, combined with the typical 
age and educational profile of the online population, makes this a particularly rich 
area of activism that can be expected to be reinforced through the Internet.
Lastly.civic-oriented.activities, by contrast, involve membership and working to-
gether in voluntary associations, as well as collaborating with community groups to 
solve a local problem. The core claim of “Toquevillian” theories of social capital is 
that typical face-to-face deliberative activities and horizontal collaboration within 
voluntary organizations far removed from the political sphere—exemplified by trade 
unions, social clubs, and philanthropic groups—promote interpersonal trust, social 
tolerance and cooperative behavior. In turn, these norms are regarded as cementing 
the bonds of social life, creating the foundation for building local communities, civil 
society, and democratic governance. In a “win-win” situation, participation in asso-
ciational life is thought to generate individual rewards, such as career opportunities 
and personal support networks, as well as facilitating community goods, by fostering 
the capacity of people to work together on local problems. Civic organizations such 
as unions, churches, and community groups, Putnam suggests, play a vital role in 
the production of social capital where they succeed in bridging divisive social cleav-
ages, integrating people from diverse backgrounds and values, promoting “habits 
www.ebook3000.com

If You Build a Political Web Site, Will They Come?   189
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
of the heart” such as tolerance, cooperation, and reciprocity, thereby contributing 
toward a dense, rich, and vibrant social infrastructure (Putnam, 1993, 1996, 2000, 
2002; Pharr & Putnam, 2000). This dimension involves direct action within local 
communities, such as raising funds for a local hospital or school, where the precise 
dividing line between the “social” and “political” breaks down. Trade unions and 
churches, in particular, have long been regarded as central pillars of civic society, 
which have traditionally served the function of drawing European citizens into 
public life. For a variety of reasons, including the way that voluntary associations 
can strengthen social networks, foster leadership skills, heighten political awareness, 
create party linkages, and facilitate campaign work, people affiliated with church-
based or union organizations can be expected to participate more fully in public 
life. (Cassel, 1999; Radcliff & Davis, 2000) Access to the knowledge society can 
be expected to expand social networks and information, facilitating membership 
in civic associations and social groups, although the evidence whether the Internet 
strengthens or weakens social capital remains under debate (Bimber, 1998; Hor-
rigan, Rainie, & Fox 2001). 
Therefore the argument developed in this study rejects the view that everything will 
change as the Internet facilitates radical forms of direct democracy that come to 
replace the traditional channels of representative governance (as optimists originally 
hoped). Nor do we accept that the digital divide will inevitably reinforce existing 
socio-economic and demographic disparities in political activism (as pessimists 
predicted). The alternative view that nothing will change as the digital world merely 
replicates “politics as usual” (as the skeptics suggest) also seems implausible. Instead 
the argument developed here suggests that we need to understand the multidimen-
sional nature of political activism and how this interacts with the characteristics 
of Internet users. We predict that certain dimensions of activism will probably be 
strengthened by the rise of the knowledge society, particularly cause-oriented forms 
of political participation, reflecting the prior social and political characteristics of 
the online population.
Conceptual.Framework,.Evidence,.and.Survey.Data
Interpretations of the results of the existing empirical studies about the role of ICTs 
on civic engagement remain divided in part because the outcome may be conditional 
upon the characteristics of early Internet adopters, the location of individuals within 
society, and the particular types of society under comparison. It remains unclear 
how far the patterns uncovered in much of the existing U.S. research on these issues 
are conditioned by the particular characteristics of American politics and society, or 
how far the findings hold more generally elsewhere. One way to explore this issue 
is to consider the evidence for the uses and functions of the Internet in Britain. Both 

190   Norris & Curtice
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Britain and America are affluent post-industrial service economies, sharing strong 
cultural links. Yet significant contrasts are also evident, including in general levels 
of electoral turnout, party activism, and associational membership (Norris 2003).
To explore the impact of Internet use upon political activism in the British context, 
this paper draws upon the results of a multi-wave research project based on a special 
battery of items, contained in the British Social Attitudes (BSA) 2003. The BSA 
is a representative national survey that has been conducted every year since 1983. 
Each survey is conducted using more than 3,000 interviews with a representative 
random sample of people in Britain. The 2003 survey monitored use of the Inter-
net, social capital, and civic engagement. The core items are being repeated in two 
subsequent waves of the BSA surveys, allowing the evolution of the Internet to be 
monitored over time.
The 2003 survey gauged contemporary Internet access at home and at work, as 
well as measuring a variety of ways of using new communication and information 
technologies. To illustrate the baseline population, Figure 1 shows how far people 
use the Internet in the British sample. Overall, almost half (47%) of respondents 
never used the Internet, so that 53% went online in Britain, either at home, at work, 
or somewhere else. This proportion is about 8-10% less than the comparable fig-
ure in America during the equivalent period, as monitored by the Pew Internet & 
American Life Project1. Among the online population in Britain, just over one quarter 
(28%) had access only at home, while about one quarter had access both at home 
and at work, and a few (4%) only accessed the Internet at work. These estimates 
confirm, as expected, that Internet access currently remains lower in Britain than in 
the United States. Nevertheless the Pew surveys suggest that for the last few years 
4
22
28
47
0
10
20
30
40
50
Work Only
Personal and Work
Personal Only
Neither
Figure 1. Access to the Internet in Britain, 2003
www.ebook3000.com

If You Build a Political Web Site, Will They Come?   191
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
American Internet access appears to have stabilized at around two-thirds of the U.S. 
population, while by contrast Figure 2 indicates that in Britain personal use of the 
Internet has not yet hit a ceiling and indeed continues to expand slightly in recent 
years, albeit at a slower rate than earlier. The 2005 BSA suggests that use has now 
spread slightly further, to 56% of respondents.
As Internet use has diffused more widely in Britain, the social composition of the 
online population has become less distinctive in its higher educational background 
and its younger age profile, although analysis of the social characteristics of the 
online population by Bromley (2004) confirms that important digital divides in 
Internet access remain in Britain, as commonly found elsewhere (Norris, 2001; 
Wilhelm, 1999). This means that any multivariate analysis of the impact of Internet 
use needs to control for the prior social and demographic characteristics of users, 
including their age, sex, race, education, and social class. 
Nevertheless, with only cross-sectional survey data it remains difficult to isolate and 
disentangle the impact of access to the Internet from the social background of users. 
The BSA-2003 does provide a proxy indicator, however, by monitoring when people 
reported that they first went online. This makes it possible to compare the groups who 
are and are not online, as well as to compare the group who only recently started to 
use the Internet against the early adopters, who commenced using the Internet five 
or more years ago (i.e., prior to 1998). Any effect from the cumulative experience of 
using the Internet should be apparent if we find some significantly different political 
attitudes and behavior among these groups, for example, if more experienced users 
acquire civic skills and social networks online that encourage them to become more 
22
31
44
46
51
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
% at home
% personal use
Figure 2. Growing home use of the Internet in Britain, 1999-2003

192   Norris & Curtice
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
active in community affairs. Figure 3 illustrates some of these common contrasts, 
for example, how the most experienced users were significantly more likely to use 
the Internet for email, banking, and news. At the same time caution is needed when 
drawing inferences based on length of Internet experience, because over time the 
online population has gradually “normalized” in its characteristics, becoming more 
representative of the general public. As a result, it remains unclear whether any 
contrasts between the more and less experienced user groups can be attributed to 
Internet exposure per se, or to the “normalization” of the online population. 
If we establish that levels of civic engagement are significantly associated with 
use of the Internet, we still need to establish a suitable benchmark to evaluate the 
strength of this relationship. This study therefore compares Internet use with the 
role of regular newspaper readership. Studies have commonly found that those who 
habitually use and pay attention to newspapers are significantly more knowledgeable 
than the average citizen about party policies, civics, and candidates, as well as being 
more interested in public affairs and more likely to turnout to vote (Miller, 1991; 
Newton, 1997; Norris et al., 1999, p. 113). Similar patterns are commonly found 
elsewhere, with regular newspaper readers more informed and engaged than average 
(Norris 2000). The models in this study therefore compare the relationship between 
Internet use and civic engagement with that between regular newspaper readership 
and civic engagement. Controlling for newspaper readership also provides a way 
to monitor prior political predispositions.
5 years+
3-5 years
1 to 3 years
Under a year
Length of experience of using the Internet
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
% Online who use the Internet for...
Email
News and 
information
General information
Banking
News and 
information
Figure 3. Uses of the Internet by length of experience
www.ebook3000.com

If You Build a Political Web Site, Will They Come?   193
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
The design of the items measuring civic engagement are based upon the assumption 
that involvement is multidimensional, with many distinct forms, each associated 
with differing costs and benefits (Verba et al., 1978, 1995). This study compares 
the impact of Internet use and newspaper readership on the four main dimensions 
of activism already discussed, namely: voting, campaign-oriented, cause-oriented, 
and civic-oriented. These are summarized into a Political Activism Index combin-
ing all dimensions2. The basic items used to develop the measures are listed in 
Appendix A.
Voting participation is measured in the BSA 2003 by whether respondents reported 
that they recalled voting in the 2001 British general election.
Experience of campaign-oriented activism is gauged in this study by a three-item 
scale including whether people are members of a party3, whether they express a 
“fairly” or “very” strong party identification, and whether they have ever contacted 
their MP or MSP. Admittedly, these measures are far from ideal. Party identification 
is a psychological attitude, rather than form of behavior. Many people contact their 
MP for reasons that have nothing to do with campaigning per se. Better measures of 
campaign activism would also gauge typical activities, such as canvassing, donating 
funds to parties, or attending party meetings. These will be monitored in subsequent 
BSA surveys, but the measures used here can be regarded as at least general, if far 
from perfect, proxies for campaign activism that are available in the 2003 survey.
Cause-oriented activism is measured in this study by a seven-battery item including 
whether, in response to an unjust or harmful government action, people have signed a 
petition, spoken to an influential person, contacted a government department, raised 
the issue in an organization, formed a group of like-minded people, contacted radio, 
TV, or a newspaper about the issue, or gone on a protest or demonstration. 
Lastly, experience of civic activism is gauged here by a 14-point scale summarizing 
membership in a series of different types of voluntary organization and associations, 
focusing mainly upon traditional sectors such as parent-teacher associations, chari-
table organizations, church groups, and social clubs (excluding party membership), 
although also including some “new” social movements, exemplified by groups 
concerned about the environment and about international issues.
The summary Political Activism Index, providing an overview, is constructed simply 
by adding together experience of each of these different types of acts (each coded 
0/1). The study has therefore formed additive indices of each item within each of 
the four groups and also created an additive index across all four groups. It should 
be noted that the resulting summary index is currently heavily dominated by the 
civic-oriented scale, as this has the most items. It should also be noted that in this 
conceptual framework, with the important exception of partisan identification, this 
study focuses upon political activity; we are concerned with doing politics rather 
than being attentive to public affairs or having psychological attitudes thought 
conducive to civic engagement, such as trust in parliament or a sense of political 

194   Norris & Curtice
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
efficacy, explored elsewhere (Curtice & Norris, 2004). The study therefore does not 
regard exposure or attention to mass communications, exemplified by following 
political events in newspapers, as indicators of political activism per se. These factors 
may indeed plausibly contribute toward participation, and thereby help explain this 
phenomenon, as prior pre-conditions, but they are not, in themselves, channels that 
citizens can use for expressing political concerns or mobilizing group interests.
Analysis.of.the.Results
We can start by examining the simple bivariate relationships between Internet use 
and these multidimensional indicators of political activism, with the important 
proviso that the background of online users in Britain continues to be skewed to-
Uses.Internet
Political.
activism.
scale
Voted
Campaign-
oriented.
activism
Cause-
oriented.
activism
Civic-
oriented.
activism
Non-users
2.15
.69
.48
.43
.55
All Internet users
2.65
.65
.51
.65
.83
Difference 
+0.50
-.04
+.03
+.22
+.28
Sig.
.000
.004
.149
.000
.000
Eta
.117
.044
.022
.129
.129
SD Non-users
1.83
.46
.48
.74
.55
SD all Internet users
2.36
.48
.51
1.01
1.21
Used the Internet...
Under a year
2.79
.66
.49
.75
.93
1-3 years
2.94
.67
.56
.74
.98
3-5 years
3.39
.63
.66
.92
1.14
5 years+
3.74
.65
.65
1.07
1.39
Difference
+0.95
-0.01
+0.16
+0.32
0.46
Sig.
.000
.486
.009
.000
.000
Eta
.147
.039
.084
.126
.133
Total sample
2.38
.67
.50
.53
.68
Notes: The significance of the mean difference between Internet users and non-users is measured by ANOVA.  See the text for 
details of the construction of the scales.
Source:.The British Social Attitudes survey, 2003
Table 1. Mean scores on the indicator of political activism scales by experience of 
Internet use, without any controls
www.ebook3000.com

If You Build a Political Web Site, Will They Come?   195
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
ward the well-educated and more affluent social sectors, which are both resources 
closely associated with political activism, so that multivariate analysis is required 
controlling for these factors. 
Table 1 presents the mean score on these indicators for the group of all Internet us-
ers compared with all non-users, the standard deviation, and the significance of the 
difference (estimated by ANOVA). In line with our initial expectations, the results 
confirm that Internet users in Britain proved significantly more politically engaged 
than non-users across the indicators of cause-oriented and civic-oriented participa-
tion, as well as in the total activism scale. This pattern suggests that the forms of 
political involvement that are most likely to benefit through the development of the 
Internet are through single-issue politics, voluntary associations, and community 
groups, as expected given the prior characteristics of the online population. By 
contrast, if we compare more traditional forms of engagement, Internet users were 
slightly less likely to vote than non-users, and there were no significant differences 
between users and non-users in their levels of campaign activism. 
The comparison of activism by length of Internet use displays a slightly different 
pattern, illustrated in Figure 4, where early adopters with the longest experience of 
going online proved significantly more politically active across all dimensions except 
voting turnout (where there was no difference) when compared against those who 
 
Never
Last 6 
months
6 months to 
1 year
1 to 3 years 3 to 5 years
5 years+
When R started using the Internet?  Q301
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
Mean
Campaign-oriented 
activism
Civic-oriented 
activism
Cause-oriented 
activism
Voted
Campaign
Voted
Civic
Cause
Figure 4. Civic engagement by length of experience of using the Internet

196   Norris & Curtice
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
had first ventured online more recently. Yet without any controls it is not possible 
to determine whether this pattern is due to the effects of length of exposure to the 
Internet per se or whether this reflected the gradual changes in the social composi-
tion and political attitudes of the Internet population.
The multivariate regression analysis presented in Table 2 displays the results of 
the full model predicting overall levels of political activism, including the range of 
social and demographic controls as well as the impact of regular newspaper reading 
.
Unstandardized.
Coefficients
Standardized.
Coefficients
Sig.
 
B
Std. Error
Beta
 P.
(Constant)
-.580
.137
 
.000
DEMOGRAPHIC
Age (in years) 
.032
.002
.271
.000
Sex (Male=1/Female=0)                  
-.008
.062
-.002
.902
Ethnic minority (1)
.000
.116
.000
.998
SOCIO-ECONOMIC
Education (Highest 
qualification on 7-point scale)
.242
.019
.251
.000
Managerial
.433
.088
.097
.000
Lower white collar
-.007
.052
-.002
.895
Petit bourgeoisie
.037
.041
.014
.360
Foremen and technicians
.032
.025
.020
.199
MEDIA.USE
Regular.newspaper.reader.
(Normally reads paper at 
least 3 times a week)
.273
.061
.065
.000
Uses.Internet (Yes=1/No=0)
.323
.074
.076
.000
Adjusted.R2
.135
Notes: The model presents the results of OLS regression analysis where the dependent variable is the overall Political Activism 
scale. Class is categorized by the respondent’s occupation where the ‘working class’ functions as the contrast category in the 
model.  The significant variables are highlighted in bold.
Source:.The British Social Attitudes survey, 2003
Table 2: The impact of Internet use on the overall Political Activism scale, with 
controls (full model)
www.ebook3000.com

If You Build a Political Web Site, Will They Come?   197
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
and use of the Internet. The results show that, as expected, age had a significant 
and strong effect upon political participation, with people becoming more active 
as they enter middle age, with a slight fall in a curvilinear pattern in the over-70s. 
Interestingly, gender and race appear to be insignificant predictors of activism in 
this model, although women and men in Britain have been found to have different 
patterns of participation in other studies (Norris, Lovenduski, & Campbell 2004). 
As numerous studies have reported, by providing civic skills and boosting a sense of 
internal efficacy, education is one of the strongest influences upon activism (Verba 
et al., 1978, 1995). Graduates and those with higher educational qualifications are 
consistently the most politically engaged. Social class also plays a significant role 
in participation, with managers and professionals the most engaged, in part because 
occupational status is so closely related to educational qualifications. Even with 
this battery of controls, both regular newspaper readership and Internet use remain 
significant predictors of political activism. This relationship may obviously be re-
ciprocal, with knowledge and engagement encouraging media habits, as well as vice 
versa (Norris, 2000). The way in which the Internet serves as a source of general 
information about news, current affairs, and political events may help provide the 
knowledge and confidence that are strongly associated with active engagement in 
public affairs. And patterns of activism that develop may well encourage greater 
use of the Internet as a way to find out about current affairs, government services, 
or events in the news. In this regard, the Internet may appear to function in a similar 
Table 3: Summary models of the impact of media use on the activism indicators, 
with demographic and social controls (not presented)
Voted
Campaign-
oriented.activism
Cause-oriented.
activism
Civic-oriented.
activism
B
se
sig
B
se
sig
B
se
sig
B
se
sig
Regular.newspaper.
reader.(Normally 
reads paper at least 3 
times a week)
.280
.020
.000
.117
.020
.000
.036
.027
.172
.067
.032
.036
Uses.Internet (Yes=1/
No=0)
.216
.086
.012
.043
.024
.071
.073
.033
.026
.158
.039
.000
Notes: The table presents the results of regression analysis models, including the unstandardized betas (B), the standard error 
(s.e.), and their significance, where the dependent variables are the indicators of the four main dimensions of political activism. 
The full model presented in Table 2 is used, controlling for the respondent’s age, sex, race, education, and occupational class, 
although these coefficients are not reported here. A binary logistic model is used for voting participation and OLS linear models 
for the other scales. The significant variables are highlighted in bold.
Source: The British Social Attitudes survey, 2003

198   Norris & Curtice
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
way to newspapers, while also providing social networks and reinforcing contacts 
that can help mobilize citizens in the public sphere. 
Similar models were run with the battery of controls for all the four separate indica-
tors of political activism. The results in Table 3 confirm that Internet users remain 
more active than non-users in cause-oriented and civic-oriented forms of participa-
tion, suggesting that this is not simply a product of their distinctive social profile in 
terms of their age, gender, race, education, and class. The difference among users 
and non-users remains insignificant in the more traditional campaign-oriented forms 
of activism. And contrary to expectations, after applying these controls, Internet 
users became significantly more likely to vote, not less. It may be that the ubiquity 
and particular characteristics of this activity, with the lowest demands of time and 
energy, mean that voting participation is associated with both media. When the 
effects of Internet use are compared with those associated with regular newspaper 
readership, the patterns show the strongest contrast between traditional forms of 
campaign activism (which are significantly related to regular newspaper reader-
ship) and cause-oriented activism (which are significantly related to Internet use). 
The implications of these patterns for the political participation in democracy are 
considered next.
Conclusion.and.Discussion
The rise of the Internet has generated considerable interest and concern about its 
possible consequences for government and democracy. The bursting of the Internet 
economic bubble dampened the more utopian political hopes as well, and the con-
ventional wisdom shifted in a more skeptical direction. Yet in reality both the many 
hopes and fears may well prove to have been exaggerated, although this does not 
mean that there are no significant political consequences flowing from the develop-
ment of new communication and information technologies.
The conclusion from this study is that any analysis of the impact of using the Internet 
needs to take into account the distinct dimensions by which people channel their 
activism into public affairs. We need to understand how the types of Internet activ-
ism interact with the social profile of the online population. This account suggests 
that the most popular forms of online activism are likely to reflect the preponder-
ance of younger and well-educated populations using the Internet, in Britain and 
elsewhere, until such a time as the online population eventually “normalizes” to 
reflect a cross-section of the general electorate.
The conclusion from the British survey evidence is that the potential impact of the 
Internet on democratic participation depends heavily upon the type of activism under 
comparison. The online population is most predisposed to engage in cause-oriented 
www.ebook3000.com

If You Build a Political Web Site, Will They Come?   199
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
forms of activism, characteristic of petitioning, demonstrating, and contacting the 
media over single-issue politics and civic-oriented activities, such as belonging 
to voluntary associations and community organizations. By contrast, traditional 
campaign-oriented forms of political activism are associated more strongly with 
newspaper readership. The patterns by voting participation suggest that without 
any controls, Internet users are less likely to turnout than non-users, although this 
pattern is reversed once controls are introduced for the age, education, gender, and 
class of the online population. Subsequent surveys will monitor how far this pattern 
persists or evolves with newer developments in the Internet. The implications of 
these findings are not simply about whether use of the Internet will mobilize citi-
zens at individual level but also for the type of political practices that the rise of the 
Internet might encourage in the political system. What seems apparent is that use 
of the Internet by political parties seems unlikely to stem any erosion in traditional 
campaign-oriented activities. At the same time, the new technologies will probably 
prove to be of greatest benefit to engaging supporters in social movements, trans-
national policy networks, and single-issue causes, encouraging their expansion in 
many democracies. 
Acknowledgment
The special battery of items on Internet use was part of the E-society research pro-
gram funded by the Economic and Social Research Council of the UK. The authors 
are most grateful to the ESRC for supporting this project and to all the staff of The 
National Centre for Social Research (NatCen) for administering and conducting the 
BSA 2003 survey. For more details, see http://www.natcen.ac.uk.
References
Allen, B. A., Juillet, L., Paquet, G., & Roy, J. (2001). E-governance & government on-line 
in Canada: Partnerships, people & prospects. Government Information Quarterly, 
18(2), 93-104. 
Barber, B. R. (1998). Three scenarios for the future of technology and strong democracy. 
Political Science Quarterly, 113(4), 573-589. 
Bimber, B. (1998). The Internet and political transformation: populism, community and 
accelerated pluralism. Polity, XXXI(1), 133-160. 
Bimber, B. (2000). The study of information technology and civic engagement. Political 
Communication, 17(4), 329-333. 

200   Norris & Curtice
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Bimber, B. (2001). Information and political engagement in America: The search for ef-
fects of information technology at the individual level. Political Research Quarterly, 
54(1), 53-67.
Boas, T. C. (2000). The dictator’s dilemma? The Internet and U.S. policy toward Cuba. The 
Washington Quarterly, 23(3), 57-67. 
Bonfadelli, H. (2002). The Internet and knowledge gaps: a theoretical and empirical inves-
tigation. European Journal of Communication, 17(1), 65-84.
Bromley, C. (2004). Can Britain close the digital divide? In A. Park (Ed.), British social 
attitudes, 21st report. London: Sage.
Budge, I. (1996). The new challenge of direct democracy. Oxford: Polity Press.
Carpini, M. X. D. (2000). Gen.com: Youth, civic engagement, and the new information 
environment. Political Communication, 17(4), 341-349. 
Cassel, C. A. (1999). Voluntary associations, churches, and social participation theories of 
turnout. Social Science Quarterly, 80(3), 504-517. 
Chadwick, A., & May, C. (2003). Interactions between states and citizens in the age of 
the Internet: ‘E-government’ in the United States, Britain and the European Union. 
Governance, 16(2), 271-300. 
David, R. (1999). The web of politics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davis, R., & Owen, D. (1998). New media and American politics. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Drake, W. J., Kalathil, S., & Boas, T. C. (2000). Dictatorships in the digital age: Some con-
siderations on the Internet in China and Cuba. iMP: The Magazine on Information 
Impacts. Retrieved October from www.cisp.org/imp
Foot, K. A., & Schneider, S. M. (2002). Online action in campaign 2000: An exploratory 
analysis of the US political web sphere. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
46(2), 222-244.
Fountain, J. E. (2001). Building the virtual state: Information technology and institutional 
change. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Franda, M. (2002). Launching into cyberspace: Internet development and politics in five 
world regions. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Gibson, R., Nixon, P., & Ward, S. (Eds.). (2003). Political parties and the Internet: Net 
gain? London: Routledge. 
Gilder, G. (2000). Telecosm: How infinite bandwidth will revolutionize our world. New 
York: Free Press. 
Golding, P. (1996). World wide wedge: division and contradiction in the global information 
infrastructure. Monthly Review, 48(3), 70-85. 
Hague, B. N., & Loader, B. D. (Eds.). (1999). Digital democracy: Discourse and decision 
making in the information age. New York: Routledge. 
Haque, M. S. (2002). E-governance in India: Its impacts on relations among citizens, poli-
ticians and public servants. International Review of Administrative Sciences, 68(2), 
231-250. 
www.ebook3000.com

If You Build a Political Web Site, Will They Come?   201
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Hayward, T. (1995). Info-rich, info-poor: Access and exchange in the global information 
society. K.G. Saur. 
Hill, K. A., & Hughes, J. E. (1998). Cyberpolitics: Citizen activism in the age of the Internet. 
Lanham, MD: Rowan & Littlefield. 
Horrigan, J., Rainie, L., & Fox, S. (2001). Online communities: Networks that nurture long-
distance relationships and local ties. Pew Internet & American Life Project. Retrieved 
from http://www.pewinternet.org
Jennings, M. K., & Zeitner, V. (2003). Internet use and civic engagement—A longitudinal 
analysis. Public Opinion Quarterly, 67(3), 311-334. 
Johnson, T. J., & Kaye, B. K. (2003). Around the World Wide Web in 80 ways—How mo-
tives for going online are linked to Internet activities among politically interested 
Internet users. Social Science Computer Review, 21(3), 304-325. 
Kalathil, S., & Boas, T. C. (2003). Open networks closed regimes: The impact of the Inter-
net on authoritarian rule. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace. 
Kamarck, E. C., & Nye, J. S., Jr. (1999). Democracy.com? Governance in a networked 
world. Hollis, NH: Hollis Publishing.
Keck, M. E., & Sikkink, K. (1998). Activists beyond borders—Advocacy networks in inter-
national politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Kent Jennings, M., & Zeitner, V. (2003). Internet use and civic engagement—A longitudinal 
analysis. Public Opinion Quarterly, 67(3), 311-334.
Mair, P., & van Biezen, I. (2001). Party membership in twenty European democracies 1980-
2000. Party Politics, 7(1), 7-22. 
Margolis, M., & Resnick, D. (2000). Politics as usual: The cyberspace ‘revolution’. Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage.
McChesney, R. W. (1999). Rich media, poor democracy. Champaign, IL: University of 
Illinois Press. 
Media Metrix. (October 2000). Campaign 2000: Party politics on the World Wide Web. 
Retrieved from http://www.mediametrix.com
Murdock, G., & Golding, P. (1989). Information poverty and political inequality: Citizenship 
in the age of privatised communications. Journal of Communication, 39, 180-195. 
Norris, P. (2000). A virtuous circle. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Norris, P. (2001). Digital divide. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Norris, P. (2002). Democratic phoenix: Reinventing political activism. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Norris, P. (2003). The bridging and bonding role of online communities. In P. N. Howard, & 
S. Jones (Eds.), Society online: The Internet in context. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Norris, P. (2004). Will new technology boost turnout? In N. Kersting, & H. Baldersheim 
(Eds.), Electronic voting and democracy: A comparative analysis (pp. 193-225), 
London: Palgrave. 

202   Norris & Curtice
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Norris, P. (2005). The impact of the Internet on political activism: Evidence from Europe. 
International Journal of Electronic Governance, 1(1), 20-39.
Norris, P., Lovenduski, J., & Campbell, R. (2004). Gender and political participation (Report 
for the UK Electoral Commission).
Norris, P., & Sanders, D. (2003). Medium or message? Political Communications. 
Pharr, S., & Putnam, R. (Eds.). (2000). Disaffected democracies: What’s troubling the tri-
lateral countries? Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Putnam, R. D. (1993). Making democracy work: Civic traditions in modern Italy. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Putnam, R. D. (1996). The strange disappearance of civic America. The American Prospect, 
24. 
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American community. 
New York: Simon and Schuster. 
Putnam, R. D. (Ed.). (2002). Democracies in flux. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Radcliff, B., & Davis, P. (2000). Labor organization and electoral participation in industrial 
democracies. American Journal of Political Science, 44(1), 132-141. 
Rash, W., Jr. (1997). Politics on the net: Wiring the political process. New York: W.H. 
Freeman. 
Rheingold, H. (1993). The virtual community: Homesteading on the electronic frontier. 
Reading, MA: Addison Wesley.
Scammell, M. (2000). The Internet and civic engagement: The age of the citizen-consumer. 
Political Communication, 17(4), 351-355.
Scarrow, S. (2001). Parties without members? In R. Dalton, & M. Wattenberg (Eds.), Parties 
without partisans. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Schwartz, E. (1996). Netactivism: How citizens use the Internet. Sebastapol, CA: Songline 
Studios. 
Selnow, G. W. (1998). Electronic whistle-stops: The impact of the Internet on American 
politics. Westport, CT: Praeger. 
Shah, D. V., Kwak, N., & Holbert, R. L. (2001). “Connecting” and “disconnecting” with 
civic life: Patterns of Internet use and the production of social capital. Political Com-
munication, 18(2), 141-162. 
Shah, D. V., McLeod, J. M., & Yoon, S. H. (2001). Communication, context, and com-
munity: An exploration of print, broadcast, and Internet influences. Communication 
Research, 28(4), 464-506. 
Stowers, G. N. L. (1999). Becoming cyberactive: State and local governments on the World 
Wide Web. Government Information Quarterly, 16(2), 111-127. 
Thomas, J. C., & Streib, G. (2003). The new face of government: Citizen-initiated contacts 
in the era of e-government. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 
13(1), 83-101. 
Tolbert, C. J., & McNeal, R. S. (2003). Unraveling the effects of the Internet on political 
participation? Political Research Quarterly, 56(2), 175-185.
www.ebook3000.com

If You Build a Political Web Site, Will They Come?   203
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Toulouse, C., & Luke, T. W. (Eds.). (1998). The politics of cyberspace. London: Rout-
ledge.
United Nations/ American Society for Public Administration. (2002). Benchmarking e-gov-
ernment: A global perspective. New York: United Nations/DPEPA.
Uslaner, E. M. (2004). Trust, civic engagement, and the Internet. Political Communication, 
21(2), 223-242. 
Verba, S., Nie, N., & Kim, J. (1978). Participation and political equality: A seven-nation 
comparison. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Verba, S., Schlozman, K., & Brady, H. E. (1995). Voice and equality: Civic voluntarism in 
American politics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Weber, L. M., Loumakis, A., & Bergman, J. (2003). Who participates and why? An analy-
sis of citizens on the Internet and the mass public. Social Science Computer Review, 
21(1), 26-42.
Wilhelm, A. (2000). Democracy in the digital age: Challenges to political life in cyberspace. 
New York: Routledge. 
Endnotes
1 
See www.pewinternet.org
2 
Since the dimensions are theoretically defined and constructed, based on understand-
ing the role of different forms of participation in representative democracy, the study 
did not use factor analysis to generate the classification or measurement.
3 
It should be noted that the BSA survey monitored “party and trade union” membership, 
but the latter was also measured separately, so in the recoded measure, the residual 
group remains only the party members.
This work was previously published in International Journal of Electronic Government Research, Vol. 
2, Issue 2, edited by D. F. Norris, pp. 1-21, copyright 2006 by IGI Publishing, formerly known as Idea 
Group Publishing (an imprint of IGI Global).

204   Norris & Curtice
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Appendix.A
Scales
Question wording
Voted
May I just check, thinking back to the last general election - that is 
the one in 2001 - do you remember which party you voted for then, or 
perhaps you didn’t vote in that election? Yes/No
Campaign-
oriented
activism
And have you ever done any of the things on this card about a 
government action which you thought was unjust and harmful?...
• Contact my MP or MSP
Are you currently a member of, or do you regularly join in the 
activities of, any of the organisations on this card? 
• Political parties or trade unions (inc student unions)
Do you think of yourself as a little closer to one political party than to 
the others?
(IF ‘yes’),.Would you call yourself very strong (party), fairly strong, 
or not very strong? (‘very’+’fairly’).
Cause-oriented 
activism
And have you ever done any of the things on this card about a 
government action which you thought was unjust and harmful?
• Contact a government department
• Contact radio, TV or a newspaper
• Sign a petition
• Raise the issue in an organization I already belong to
• Go on a protest or demonstration 
 
• Form a group of like-minded people
Civic-oriented 
activism
Are you currently a member of, or do you regularly join in the 
activities of, any of the organisations on this card? 
• An environmental or conservation group
• A pressure group or campaigning organisation
• Parent-teachers’ / school parents association / Board of Governors 
etc
• Youth groups (e.g. scouts, guides, youth clubs etc)
• Education, arts, drama, reading or music group / evening class
• Religious group or church organisation
• A sports or recreation club
• Tenants’ / Residents’ group / Neighbourhood watch
• Social club / working men’s club
• Women’s group / Women’s Institute
• Group for older people (e.g. lunch clubs)
• Local groups which raise money for charity (e.g. The Rotary Club)
• Other local community or voluntary group 
• Other national or international group
www.ebook3000.com

Civic Engagement via E-Government Portals   205
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.IX
Civic.Engagement.via..
E-Government.Portals:
Information,.Transactions,..
and.Policy.Making*
Yu-Che Chen, Northern Illinois University, USA
Daniela V. Dimitrova, Iowa State University, USA
Abstract
This exploratory study examines civic engagement with e-government via Web sites. 
It provides an analytical framework that integrates both the supply and demand sides 
of citizen interaction with e-government. In modeling three dimensions of online 
civic engagement (government information access, service transactions, and con-
tributing to government policy-making processes), the study framework incorporates 
a number of variables, including political activism, civic involvement, perceived 
benefits and difficulties, information channels, and demographic characteristics. 
Based on a national sample of Internet users, the study highlights the importance 
of the supply side (availability of e-government) for promoting civic engagement. 
Furthermore, political activism is found to be positively related to accessing gov-
*This study was funded by an internal grant from the Institute of Science and Society (ISS) at Iowa State Univer-
sity. An earlier version of this manuscript was published in the International Journal of Electronic Government 
Research. 

206   Chen & Dimitrova
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
ernment policy information and contributing to policy-making processes. The study 
results also confirm the significant impact of perceived benefits in fostering online 
civic engagement. Future research can benefit from this study by utilizing a more 
comprehensive model, treating various dimensions of online engagement separately, 
and conducting an in-depth analysis of the elements of perceived benefits. 
Introduction
Electronic government services have gradually evolved from simply providing 
information on Web portals to offering citizens opportunities to communicate and 
conduct online transactions. Engaging citizens online to improve governance and 
facilitate e-democracy remains one of the key challenges of the next generation 
of electronic government (Pratchett & Krimmer, 2005). Norris and Moon (2005) 
report, however, that there is little progress made at the local level in adopting 
interactive services (Norris & Moon, 2005). A study of local government officials 
also suggests that e-democracy is not high on their agenda for future deployment of 
electronic government (Norris, 2005). Surveys of government Web sites indicate that 
even, when available, interactive features to engage citizens in formulating public 
policy are rarely used (West, 2004). Although with the introduction of Internet  
technologies, governments are shifting away from the traditional bureaucratic 
paradigm, providing customer services rather than enhancing citizen participation 
in policy making remains the primary focus (Ho, 2002). This seems to be a missed 
opportunity when recent evidence has shown a positive link between visiting local 
government Web sites and trust in government (Tolbert & Mossberger, 2006). 
Learning from experience and building on the information and communication 
infrastructure, government can introduce meaningful ways to engage citizens in the 
policy making process. One of the main criticisms of current e-government concerns 
the top-down bias impacting decisions on what type and nature of information and 
services are to be provided (McNeal, Tolbert, Mossberger, & Dotterweich, 2003). 
Thus, e-government tends to either ignore the citizen’s perspective or misunderstand 
it. Moreover, existing scholarly literature on e-government seems to pay limited 
attention to the citizen’s perspective. Studies of transparency (Pandey & Bretsch-
neider, 1997), information and service delivery (Holden et al, 2003), online public 
involvement (Scott, 2006), and reforms (Ho, 2002) are mostly based on surveys of 
either government Web sites and/or government officials. Although some popular 
studies take a more citizen-centric approach in trying to understand the demand side 
(e.g., Graafland-Essers & Ettedgui, 2003; Horrigan, 2004), such studies have limited 
analytical methodologies for understanding the impact of individual factors. One 
exception is the investigation of the factors leading to e-government adoption by 
Carter and Belanger (2004), who tested the impact of several variables on intent to 
www.ebook3000.com

Civic Engagement via E-Government Portals   207
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
adopt e-government services. However, using college students as the sample limits 
the generalizability of their findings. Finally, current e-government studies tend to 
ignore opportunities for integrating insights from relevant bodies of literature. For 
example, public administration and political science researchers often overlook lit-
erature on information management systems, and rarely integrate social and network 
dimensions into the study of e-government (Norris & Lloyd, 2004).
To fill these gaps in existing research, this book chapter proposes a framework 
that takes into account both the supply and demand sides of civic involvement 
in e-government. This study sheds light on how making online services available 
impacts the willingness of citizens to use e-government and their actual utilization 
of e-government information and services. Moreover, the study integrates insights 
from allied fields of research, examining the social aspects of civic engagement 
and analyzing the importance of information channels and perceived benefits of 
e-government services. Lastly, this study employs regression analysis to ascertain 
both the direction and significance of various factors impacting online civic engage-
ment, thus moving beyond mere descriptive studies. 
We begin by introducing the proposed analytical framework and formulating hypoth-
eses based on relevant theoretical insights. Next, we discuss the models and measures 
used and explain the data collection and data analysis process. The discussion of the 
results includes theoretical and policy implications of the key findings. Finally, we 
conclude with a summary of the findings and suggestions for future research.
Analytical.Framework
The proposed conceptual framework aims for comprehensiveness by addressing 
both the supply and demand sides of e-government as they impact the level of 
civic engagement. Supply side refers to the availability of e-government services. 
Demand side refers to citizen willingness to interact with government online. This 
supply-demand approach is analogous to Pippa Norris’s (2005b) political market 
model. Graafland-Essers and Ettedgui (2003) also provide some important insights 
into the dynamics of supply and demand. Supply and demand are seen as jointly 
determining the levels of engagement and satisfaction. The framework is illustrated 
in Figure 1.
The other main goal of the framework is to make a clear distinction between will-
ingness to adopt and actual utilization of electronic government information and 
services. Willingness to adopt does not necessarily translate into actual adoption. It is 
particularly the case when the interactive features citizens may demand are not made 
available to them. As a result, the percentage of citizens using transactional services 

208   Chen & Dimitrova
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
is relatively low. For example, online renewal of driver licenses and recreational 
licenses are at 12% and 4%, respectively (Larsen & Rainie, 2002, p. 3).
Several theoretical models are relevant for understanding how citizens behave 
when they interact with government online. The technology acceptance model 
(TAM) developed and modified by Davis (1986, 1989) and Venkatesh and Davis 
(2000) shows the importance of the perception of benefits and the perception of 
task complexity in determining the actual use of information technology. Roger’s 
(2003) diffusion of innovations approach puts emphasis on how social systems im-
pact diffusion and adoption decisions. These models are relevant because engaging 
government online can be conceptualized either as acceptance of new technology 
(i.e., Web-based technologies) or innovation adoption (using online functions as 
adopting innovation).
In a 2005 white paper, Titah and Barki offer a comprehensive review of literature 
on e-government adoption. They categorize all published articles on this topic into 
the following broad categories: (1) e-government “managerial practices” research; 
(2) e-government “organizational and individual characteristics” research; and (3) 
e-government “subculture” research. Our research fits well under the individual 
characteristics of e-government users category. Common theoretical approaches 
within this category of research are the TAM model and diffusion theory insights 
from which are used in our proposed model. 
Literature on social capital also provides certain insights (Lin, 2001). Social capital 
is conducive to traditional civic engagement (Skocpol & Fiorina, 1999, p. 13) and it 
impacts cyber engagement as well (Brainard, 2003)..Literature from mass commu-
Demographic 
characteristics 
Civic engagement 
on government 
Web sites 
Social and political 
engagement 
Exposure to 
information channels 
Perceived benefits and 
difficulties 
Citizen willingness 
to engage with 
government online 
Availability and 
competition effect 
of multiple means 
of information and 
service delivery 
Figure 1. A conceptual framework for online civic engagement
www.ebook3000.com

Civic Engagement via E-Government Portals   209
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
nication also proves relevant, reinforcing the notion that initial exposure to multiple 
information and communication channels creates awareness and may lead to shifting 
opinions about an issue (Andreasen, 1995; Rice & Atkin, 2001). Individuals who 
are exposed to multiple information and communication channels are more likely 
to learn about innovations such as new e-government functions (Rogers, 2003; 
Whitehead, 2000). Reviewing e-government research, we can identify factors af-
fecting the use of government Web sites, particularly demographic characteristics 
emphasized in studies on the “digital divide” (Mossberger, Tolbert, & Stansbury, 
2003; Norris, 2005b). These studies also provide some potential classifications of 
dimensions of citizen online engagement (Ho, 2002; West, 2004). 
Below, we incorporate these theoretical insights into the key components of the 
framework, while hypothesizing the relationships among the components. We shall 
begin by defining online civic engagement as the main dependent variable in the 
conceptual framework. 
Defining Online Civic Engagement with Government
In a broad sense, civic engagement refers to “the participation of individual citizens 
in the association of civil and political society” (Brint & Levy, 1999, p. 164). The 
present study focuses on government Web sites as the vehicle for civic engagement. 
This approach complements, without duplicating, the efforts of political scientists 
to understand political mobilization via the Internet in elections.1 This study aims to 
analyze the factors affecting the willingness and actual utilization of e-government 
services that help engage citizens in public governance. Thus, in this study, “civic 
engagement” is limited to interactions with government online via Web portals. 
Further, this study draws from Ho’s (2002) scheme classifying various activities in 
online civic engagement. Ho (2002) argues that there is a hierarchy of activities. 
At the most basic level, citizens conduct passive search for government informa-
tion, such as information on council meetings, community calendars, and schedules 
for rule making. This basic level of engagement is important because citizens can 
use the information as resources. Above this level of interaction, citizens conduct 
relevant transactions with the government by downloading forms, paying taxes, 
and so forth. At yet another higher level, citizens participate in government policy 
making by providing online comments and using other types of input mechanisms. 
At the highest level, according to Ho (2002), citizens participate in government in 
real-time.
The present study views such online activities as interlocked dimensions, not as a 
hierarchy of levels. Online transactions such as paying taxes and processing permits 
are rather different from getting public policy information and providing input. There 
is probably no hierarchical progression in such participation.

210   Chen & Dimitrova
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Nevertheless, we must make an important distinction, differentiating between the 
mere willingness to interact and the actual level of interaction with government 
online. This distinction may prove particularly critical when what government offers 
through their Web portals lags behind citizen demands and expectations.
Demographic.Characteristics
Citizens who tend to interact with government online share several common demo-
graphic characteristics. First, users of government Web sites tend to be middle age 
(GAO, 2001; Horrigan, 2004; Thomas & Streib, 2003). Second, these users tend to 
be affluent, as evident in Internet voting patterns (Gibson, 2002), and as suggested by 
patterns in searches for government information and getting services online (GAO, 
2001; Hart-Teeter, 2003; Horrigan, 2004; Mossberger et al., 2003). Third, education 
is positively correlated to sending comments to government (Larsen & Rainie, 2002, 
p. 16) and holding a positive view of engaging government via the Internet (Shelley, 
Trane, Shulman, Lang, Beiser, Larson, et al., 2004). A fourth factor involves race. 
Minorities are under-represented in Internet voting (Gibson, 2002) and they conduct 
less online searches for government information (Mossberger et al., 2003).
The relationships suggested by these studies are based on analyses of both Inter-
net and non-Internet users. Following the insights of these studies, we formulate 
Hypothesis 1:
Hypothesis.1:
 
H1a:.A high level of education and income is positively related to engagement 
with government online.
 
H1b:.Middle-age and nonminority citizens are more likely to exhibit willing-
ness to interact with government online.
It should be noted that the present study is focused on a broad set of factors de-
termining online engagement with government and the inclusion of demographic 
characteristics is mostly for control. There is already extensive literature focusing 
on these variables. We will instead concentrate on less-researched, nondemographic 
factors.
Social.and.Political.Involvement
All else being equal, one might expect politically active citizens to be more likely 
to engage government online. Indeed, there is positive correlation between Internet 
www.ebook3000.com

Civic Engagement via E-Government Portals   211
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
use and political participation (Weber, Loumakis, & Bergman, 2003). Such politi-
cal participation would include attending public meetings, writing letters to elected 
officials, and participating in political rallies and speeches (Weber et al., 2003, p. 
32). Internet use includes surfing the Internet for recreation and accessing digital 
libraries, newspapers, and magazines, for example. Moreover, based on European 
Social Survey data, Pippa Norris (2005b) shows the importance of prior political 
orientation in shaping the demand for electronic information on government and 
politics. Dimitrova and Chen (2006) also found that prior interest in government is 
a significant predictor of e-government adoption. Thus, we can expect that a citizen 
who is more active in politics is more likely to engage government online. 
Hypothesis.2:.A higher level of political activism is positively related to engage-
ment with government online.
In addition to political activism, community involvement is also likely to be 
positively associated with engaging government online. Community involvement 
refers the level of citizen participation in community groups such as church or 
school organizations. A relationship between community involvement and online 
engagement with government probably stems from two complementary factors: 
the positive role of social influence in shaping innovation adoption decisions (Lin, 
2003; Lynch, Kent, & Srinivasan, 2001; Rogers, 2003), and the need for involved 
citizens to engage government to foster communities. In terms of the first factor, 
when citizens are active in a community, they are more likely to be exposed to in-
novative ideas, or are more likely to be innovators themselves. As a result, these 
community activists are more likely to utilize online information and services that 
help further build a sense of community. For instance, the electronic village at 
Blacksburg, Virginia, has seen church groups and clubs actively utilize the online 
community network to facilitate communication and collaboration with their exist-
ing and potential members (Carrroll & Rosson, 1996). 
In terms of the second factor, engaging government to foster community may 
include, for example, applying for a community development grant to construct a 
community center, or participating in public meetings. Online networks can further 
facilitate citizens’ involvement in discussing about and mobilizing around community 
issues (Rogers, Collins-Jarvis, & Schmitz, 1994). The use of the Public Electronic 
Network (PEN), an interactive communication system, in Santa Monica facilitates 
the involvement of disadvantaged segments of population (i.e., the homeless) in 
deliberation of public policy. The experience of PEN demonstrates the association 
between community involvement and the use of online government services. As 
government puts more and more information and services online, the citizens with 
high community involvement will be more likely to access these services. Hence, 
we arrive at Hypothesis 3. 

212   Chen & Dimitrova
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Hypothesis.3:.A higher level of community involvement is positively related to 
engagement with government online.
Information.Channels
One basic theme of electronic government is the utilization of information and 
communication channels. As posited by the literature on innovation diffusion, early 
adopters of innovations tend to utilize more information channels than nonadopters 
(Rogers, 2003). Mass media channels are particularly important in creating aware-
ness of new services such as e-government transactions (Andreasen, 1995; Rice & 
Atkin, 2001). These channels include newspapers, TV, radios, billboards, printed 
materials such as government newsletters, electronic mails, and Web sites. An in-
dividual who utilizes many channels of communication is probably more likely to 
use government Web portals. Mass media information channels are effective not 
only in creating awareness, but also in changing the attitudes of potential adopters 
(ITPC, 2002; Whitehead, 2000). 
Existing e-government research neglects to assess the relationship between the use of 
multiple information and communication channels and the propensity for engaging 
government online. Diffusion literature shows that individuals with a high level of 
utilization are more likely to receive information about e-government information 
and service offerings (Andreasen, 1995; Rogers, 2003). As a result, we expect that 
those who are exposed to multiple information and communication channels would 
be more likely to show a willingness to engage government online.
Hypothesis.4:.High level utilization of information channels is positively related 
to engagement with government online.
Perceived.Usefulness.and.Complexity
Perceived usefulness is important for the adoption of new technologies. Based on 
the technology acceptance model (TAM) (Davis, 1986, 1989; Venkatesh & Davis, 
2000), perceived usefulness is empirically asserted to be an important determinant 
of adoption. Perceived usefulness refers to “the extent to which a person believes 
that using the system will enhance his or her job performance” (Venkatesh & Davis, 
2000, p. 187). 
Perceived usefulness is a concept broad enough that it can be applied to citizen in-
teraction with government. Nedovic-Budic and Godschalk (1996), utilizing TAM, 
studied the willingness to adopt geographic information systems at government 
agencies. For individuals, perceived usefulness in comparison with the old system 
www.ebook3000.com

Civic Engagement via E-Government Portals   213
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
is an important factor in their willingness to use that system. Perceived benefits 
could include improvement in job performance and convenience. Extending the 
argument to the context of online civic engagement, perceived usefulness refers to 
the belief that interacting with government online benefits participating citizens. 
These benefits may include the convenience of no waiting in line, avoidance of mail 
delay, and the convenience of accessing information and services 24/7. If citizens 
believe they could benefit significantly from obtaining online information or from 
conducting online transactions on government Web sites, they would more likely 
to use them. Therefore, we expect that perceived usefulness is positively associated 
with willingness to interact with government online. 
Hypothesis.5:.Perceived usefulness is positively related to engagement with gov-
ernment online.
On the other hand, perceived problems are likely to reduce the willingness of citizens 
to interact with government online. Individuals may lack the needed comfort level 
to conduct online transactions. This may stem from personal attitudes or beliefs 
(Lin, 2003; Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980). For example, citizens may not wish to conduct 
transactions with government because of a lack of trust due to perceived security 
problems or privacy concerns. Moreover, it may stem from the lack of technological 
expertise, or perceptions of low self-efficacy (Bandura, 1997).
Technical expertise of individuals shapes their perception of the severity of the prob-
lems and difficulties associated with adopting a new piece of technology. Northrop, 
Dunkle, Kraemer, and King (1994) show that people’s computer background affects 
their use of a computer. If software is easy-to-use, users are more likely to adopt 
the application. Previous computer experience and exposure to technology are also 
favorable conditions for individual adoption of geographic information systems in 
a local government (Nedovic-Budick & Godshalk, 1996). 
In terms of engaging government online, there are several sources of potential 
problems, such as, the quality and accessibility of information (Horrigan, 2004), 
and privacy and security (West, 2004). Usability issues such as navigation and 
help functions are also critical for the use of e-government services, particularly 
online transactions (Barnes & Vigden, 2007). These can be seen as barriers to using 
e-government information and services. In sum, citizens would be less willing to 
engage government online if they perceive problems. 
Hypothesis.6:.Perceptions of problems with e-government information and services 
are negatively associated with engaging government online.

214   Chen & Dimitrova
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Availability.and.Competition.Effects
Availability of government information and services is likely to shape the extent 
to which citizens engage government online. At the local level, e-government Web 
sites are still mostly focused on information (Norris & Moon, 2005). Online trans-
actions are rather rare. There are limited interactive services on government Web 
sites (Hart-Teeter, 2003; Thomas & Streib, 2003). Even the creators of government 
Web portals do not perceive the portals as a vehicle for interaction and transactions 
with government but simply as a channel for information delivery (Norris, 2005a). 
As for specific interactive features, about 15% of Web sites offer areas for posting 
comments or complaints (West, 2004). About 7% of Web sites offer broadcasting 
of government events, and about 1% of Web sites offer personalized information 
gathering targeted directly to the attention of the citizen (West, 2004). Thus, it is 
important to qualify the limited use of interactive functions according to actual 
availability. 
Availability is the first barrier to actual utilization of government information and 
interactive services. However, availability is also a matter of awareness. If the user 
is not aware of the services, the user cannot utilize them. Some government officials 
have admitted that making the public aware of available services is sometimes a 
challenging task. We can expect that perceived availability is positively associated 
with the actual online engagement with governments. 
Hypothesis.7:.Awareness of information and service availability is positively related 
to engagement with government online.
Engaging government online should be put in its proper context. Online engagement 
is only one of several ways for citizens to interact with government. Citizens can 
visit government offices in person. They also have the option of writing letters or 
making phone calls. A 2003 national survey has shown that citizens still interact with 
government via traditional channels (Horrigan, 2004). When survey respondents 
were asked to rank methods of interaction, communication by telephone ranked the 
highest (42%) among other options such as Web site visit, in-person visit, e-mail 
correspondence, and letter writing. The use of government Web sites ranked second 
(29%). Nevertheless, in-person visits and e-mail correspondence remained viable 
options (20% and 18%, respectively). We will use willingness to engage govern-
ment via traditional channels as a control.
www.ebook3000.com

Civic Engagement via E-Government Portals   215
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Methods.and.Data
Models.and.Measures
This study analyzes three dimensions of citizen engagement with government online: 
accessing information, conducting transactions, or providing public policy input. 
Each of the hypotheses proposed in the conceptual framework will be tested against 
these three dimensions. Further, each dimension will then be tested in two models, 
using willingness and actual utilization to differentiate between intentions and use 
of e-government information and services. As a result, we have six models: the first 
three models capture willingness to engage with e-government and the next three 
models capture actual engagement with government online (See Table 1). 
Willingness is measured by a scale-based query. Respondents are asked to rate the 
extent to which they agree with a statement, using a scale of “strongly disagree” 
(value=1) to “strongly agree” (value=5).2 For the context of accessing information, 
the survey statement reads, “I would like to search for information on government 
Web site.” For the context of conducting transactions and providing public policy 
input, the survey statement will begin similarly with the phrase of “I would like to,” 
but each statement uses a different inserted phrase, such as “conduct transactions 
with government agencies online,” or “participate in government policy making by 
providing my opinions and comments online.” 
Dimensions of 
Online Engagement
Matched.Survey.Items
Getting government 
information online
A summation of scores for the following five survey items on the question “how 
often you look for the following information on government web sites” (Scale of 1-5; 
1=never, 5=very often): (a) Look up contact information (e-mail, phone number) for 
government offices or officials; (b) Seek information about public policies or issues 
(environment, safety, etc.); (c) Get information about elections or voting; (d)
Get information about public hearings or other policy forums; and (e) Get 
information about the impact of government decisions on your community.
Conducting 
transactions with 
government online
A summation of scores for the following three survey items on the question “how 
often you conduct the following activities on government web sites” (Scale of 1-5; 
1=never, 5=very often): (a) File taxes (state or federal income taxes); (b) Purchase or 
renew licenses (driver’s, business, hunting, fishing, and other licenses); and (c) Pay 
bills or tickets (i.e., utility bills, parking tickets).
Providing public 
policy input to 
government online
A summation of scores for the following four survey items on the question “how 
often you conduct the following activities on government web sites” (Scale of 1-5; 
1=never, 5=very often): (a) Give comments to government officials; (b) Express a 
position on a government policy or initiative online; (c) Submit information to assist 
in ensuring public safety, protecting the environment, and so forth; and (d) File 
complaints.
Table 1. Operationalization of citizen online engagement with government

216   Chen & Dimitrova
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
The degree of engagement is measured by a score which evaluates both the number 
of activities and their intensity. For example, for the public policy input variable, this 
question is posed, “How often do you conduct the following activities on government 
Web sites: (a) give comments to government officials, (b) express a position on a 
government policy or initiative online, (c) submit information to assist in ensuring 
public safety, protecting the environment, and so forth, and (d) file complaints.” 
Each activity is measured on a scale of 1-5 (1=never, 5=very often), and the total 
sum is the measurement of degree of engagement. Table 1 provides more details 
about the other two dependent variables. 
The key independent variables identified in the conceptual framework and their 
measures are presented in Table 2. The measure of “political involvement” focuses 
on both willingness and actual action. “Community involvement” is a measure of 
the extent to which a citizen is involved in the community, including number of 
memberships in various organizations such as fraternities, labor unions, and youth 
groups. The questions are modeled after the U.S. General Social Survey to ensure 
comprehensiveness in naming community groups and to take into account intensity 
of involvement. The “utilization of information channels” construct is specific to 
learning about information and services accessible on government Web sites. This 
degree of specificity will let us pinpoint the government Web site activities as the 
foci of the framework. 
The “perceived difficulties” construct measures the degree of perceived obstruction 
preventing online interaction with the government, as identified by the respondents. 
Similarly, the “perceived benefits” construct is specific to each dimension of civic 
engagement. This level of specificity matches the three dimensions of civic engage-
ment. Likewise, the “availability” construct is specific to each dimension of civic 
engagement and each is measured according to the rating of availability of specific 
online activities on a scale of 1-5. The “competition” construct captures the com-
petition effect of alternative channels of communication (such as personal visits 
to government offices or writing letters). This is a composite index, which takes 
into account use and level of satisfaction; both are critical factors in choosing one 
channel of communication over another. Standard demographic variables are used 
for control. Operationalization of each variable is in Table 2.
Research.Design.and.Data.Collection
The target population of this study was Internet users in the United States. The unit of 
analysis was the individual Internet user. We designed and implemented a two-stage 
data collection to achieve a sample of these Internet users and to collect relevant 
data on the conceptual constructs operationalized in Tables 1 and 2. Since our target 
population was Internet users, we felt that it is reasonable to reach respondents via 
the Internet. Moreover, despite their shortcomings, Internet surveys have become 
www.ebook3000.com

Civic Engagement via E-Government Portals   217
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Conceptual.
Constructs
Survey.Items.and.Operationalization
Political Involvement
A summation of scores for the following two survey items on the question “how 
much you agree or disagree with the statement” (Scale of 1-5, 1 “strongly disagree” 
and 5 is “strongly agree”): (a) I am interested in politics and (b) I am active in 
lobbying, elections, and other political activities.
Community 
Involvement
The product of the total number of membership in the community and the level of 
activity. Total number of membership include those in the following 15 types of 
organizations: fraternal group, service group, veterans group, political club, labor 
union, sports club, youth group, school organization (PTA), hobby club, school 
fraternity/sorority, nationality group, farm organization, literary or arts group, 
professional society, and church organization. The level of activities is measured at 
the scale of 1-5 where 5 means “Very active” and 1 means “Very inactive.”
Utilization of 
Information Channels
A count of the number of information channels being utilized to learn about the 
information and services provided on government Web sites. The list of channels 
include: newspaper advertisement, TV advertisement, radio advertisement, 
billboard, printed materials from government (newsletter, payment notice, postcard, 
etc.), e-mail, ad on a search engine (e.g., Google or Yahoo), online advertisement 
on a general Web site, online advertisement on a government Web site, and mobile 
advertisement (e.g., putting the government URL on a license plate). 
Perceived Benefits
This is a rating of the following statements (scale of 1-5, 5 means “strongly agree” 
and 1 means “strongly disagree”). For information related models (Models 1 and 
4), the rating for Question (a) is used. For online transaction models (Model 2 and 
5), the rating for Question (b) is used. For public policy input, Question (c) is used. 
Question (a): I could benefit significantly from obtaining online information from 
government Web sites. Question (b): I could benefit significantly from conducting 
online transactions with government Web sites. Question (c): I could benefit 
significantly from submitting my opinions or comments on public policy issues 
online at government Web sites. 
Perceived difficulties
A count of the number of the following barriers identified by the respondent: quality 
of information, accessibility of information, privacy, security (e.g., identity theft), 
too hard to obtain information, no person-to-person contact, and difficult to follow 
online instructions.
Availability and 
Competition
Availability
This is a rating of the availability of the information and services relevant to 
a particular dimension of online engagement (scale of 0-4, 4 means “always 
available” and 0 means “not available”). For information related models (Models 
1 and 4), the score is the rating of availability of public information such as 
recreation, businesses, health, and business opportunities. For online transaction 
models (Models 2 and 5), the score is the rating of availability of transactions with 
government agencies, such as paying taxes, getting driver or professional licenses, 
and getting permits. For public policy input models (Models 3 and 6), the score 
is the rating of the availability of online features to voice your opinion on public 
policy.
Table 2. Conceptual constructs of determinants for engaging government online 
and their measures
continued on following page

218   Chen & Dimitrova
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
an established data collection method and are considered a viable alternative to 
traditional survey methods (Dillman, 2000; Schonlau, Fricker, & Elliott, 2001). 
 We took several precautions in order to avoid the common pitfalls of Internet surveys, 
such as lack of control over the number of times an individual can take the survey, 
whether the survey respondent is a legitimate individual, and the overall quality of 
responses. First, we worked with a professional survey company, Survey Sampling 
International (SSI), Inc., to generate a panel of legitimate U.S. Internet users for the 
survey. Each person in the panel had to be registered with the survey company. We 
further employed commercial online survey software called Opinio to restrict the 
same individual from taking the survey twice based on their IP address. Further, 
the quality of responses was carefully assessed based on the time used to fill out 
the survey, the required fields, and demographic data from the survey company to 
validate with the same information collection through our online survey. Despite 
these efforts, it is important to recognize that online surveys, similarly to traditional 
surveys, are subject to nonresponse error (i.e., potential bias in the data if the non-
respondents are significantly different from those who completed the survey). 
A total of 5,000 survey invitations were sent out via e-mail by SSI on July 11, 2004, 
and the first stage of data collection ended within 10 days. This yielded 447 valid 
responses leading to a response rate of 9%, which is comparable with similar Web 
surveys (e.g., Comley, 1996; Smith, 1997). We achieved two objectives at the first 
stage. First, we collected additional demographic information such as race, age, 
income, and education to include in the data analysis. Second, we were able to 
identify those individuals who had previous experience with using online govern-
ment information and services. At the second stage, we contacted those individuals 
Competition Ranking
This is the ranking of various channels that citizens can use to interact with 
government. These channels include: (a) in person, (b) letter, (c) telephone, (d) e-
mail, and (e) government Web site. The ranking is based on a composite index of 
frequency of use and satisfaction. A ranking score of 5 means the best option and a 
score of 1 means the least preferred option. 
Demographics
Income Level
This is done through ranking. 1. Below $20,000; 2. $20,000 - $29,999; 3. $30,000 
- $39,999; 4. $40,000 - $49,999; 5. $50,000 - $59,999; 6. $60,000 - $74,999; 7. 
$75,000 - $99,999; 8. $100,000 -  $149,999; and 9. over $150,000
Race
1= Caucasian and 0= other
Gender
1= male and 0= female
Age
Actual age at the time of the survey
Level of Education
This is done through ranking. 1. Completed some high school; 2. High school 
graduate; 3. Completed some college; 4. College degree; 5. Completed some 
postgraduate; 6. Master’s degree; and 7. Doctorate, law or professional degree
Table 2. continued
www.ebook3000.com

Civic Engagement via E-Government Portals   219
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
to ask more detailed questions about their online civic engagement. The survey 
invitations were sent out on February 1, 2005. Two e-mail reminders were sent out 
on February 7 and 10, 2005. A total of 143 valid responses were generated at this 
stage, which translates into a response rate of approximately 3%. These responses 
form the basis of our analysis. 
Data.Analysis
The first analysis we conducted was to assess the extent to which the resulting 
sample after the two-stage of data collection is representative of the U.S. Internet 
user population. We benchmarked our sample against a national random sample of 
U.S. population obtained via the Pew Internet and American Life Project (2004), 
which included 2,925 Americans age 18 and over. For the comparison of demographic 
characteristics between our sample and the Pew sample, we included only those 
Pew respondents who had access to the Internet. This yielded a sample of Internet 
users (n=1,899). Given the random sampling used, the Internet user sample from 
the Pew study should be representative of the national Internet user population and 
can serve as a benchmark.
As Table 3 shows, we achieved representative sample of Internet user population 
by matching our sample to that of the Pew study. In particular, we match gender 
and age breakdowns of the Pew sample. Table 3 includes the percent distribution 
of the sample respondents that belong to various combinations of gender and age 
groups before and after weighting. For example, 9% of the sample respondents 
 
Sample Distribution
Pew 
Data
 
Sample Distribution
Pew 
Data
Female
Before 
Weighting
After 
Weighting
 
Male 
Before 
Weighting
After 
Weighting
18-24
3%
6%
6%
18-24
1%
8%
8%
25-34
17%
10%
10%
25-34
2%
10%
10%
35-44
9%
13%
13%
35-44
7%
11%
11%
45-54
20%
11%
11%
45-54
9%
10%
10%
55-64
10%
7%
7%
55-64
15%
7%
7%
65+
3%
3%
3%
65+
6%
4%
4%
 
 
50%
50%
 
 
50%
50%
Table 3. Age group breakdown by gender for creating a weighted sample to match 
pew data on Internet users

220   Chen & Dimitrova
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Model #
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Model 5
Model 6
Dependent.Variable
Willingness
Actual Utilization
Public Info. 
Search
Online 
transactions
Public 
Policy 
Input
Public Info. 
Search
Online 
Transactions
Public 
Policy 
Input
Independent.
Variables
Constant
1.717
(.427)
0.205
(.457)
0.578
(.427)
4.321*
(1.944)
1.882
(1.607)
0.521
(1.496)
Political Involvement
0.080**
(.032)
0.043
(.038)
0.131*
(.038)
0.612***
(.147)
-0.173
(.133)
0.247
(.135)
Community 
Involvement
-0.015
(.010)
-0.019
(.011)
-0.015
(.011)
-0.037
(.044)
0.030
(.039)
0.099*
(.039)
Utilization of 
Information Channels
0.007
(.039)
0.047
(.044)
0.009
(.044)
0.536**
(.178)
0.127
(.156)
0.177
(.155)
Perceived Benefits
0.574***
(.082)
0.762***
(.075)
0.518***
(.080)
0.805*
(.371)
1.242***
(.264)
0.568*
(.279)
Perceived Difficulties
-0.029
(.041)
-0.034
(.044)
0.157***
(.045)
0.004
(.185)
-0.154
(.156)
0.049 
(.157)
Availability and 
Competition
Availability
-0.053
(.084)
-0.039
(.071)
0.156*
(.079)
0.372
(.385)
1.120***
(.250)
0.559*
(.276)
Competition
0.059***
(.016)
0.024
(.018)
0.027
(.017)
0.273***
(.074)
0.116
(.063)
0.154*
(.061)
Demographics
Income level
-0.016
(.029)
0.081*
(.033)
0.045
(.032)
0.040
(.133)
0.130
(.115)
0.116
(.112)
Race (White vs. non-
white)
0.372
(.223)
0.333
(.252)
-0.107
(.248)
0.136
(1.014)
-0.023
(.888)
-1.387
(.870)
Gender
0.288*
(.141)
0.102
(.156)
-0.002
(.161)
-0.586
(.641)
1.057
(.549)
0.632
(.563)
Age
-0.013**
(.005)
-0.003
(.005)
0.002
(.005)
-0.048*
(.022)
-0.025
(.019)
0.032
(.019)
Education Level
-0.059
(.049)
0.006
(.056)
-0.099
(.054)
-0.089
(.222)
-0.447*
(.196)
-0.288
(.191)
Model.Fit
R-Square
0.587
0.585
0.591
0.470
0.423
0.437
Adjusted.R-Square
0.549
0.547
0.553
0.421
0.370
0.385
*, ** and *** denotes a coefficient significant at the .05, .01, and .001 level, respectively. 
Table 4. Models of various dimensions of engaging citizens online with  
government
www.ebook3000.com

Civic Engagement via E-Government Portals   221
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
belong to the female, 35-44 age group before weighting, as opposed to 13% after 
weighting. After weighting (see “after weighting” and “Pew” columns), the sample 
distribution becomes representative of Pew data on Internet users for each gender 
and age combination. 
Nonetheless, we recognize that our small sample size as well as sampling process 
may introduce some biases. Even after weighting according to age groups and gender, 
the sample data may not be able to achieve full representation on all demographic 
characteristics. As a result, this study should be viewed as exploratory in nature and 
generalization of the findings to all Internet users should be treated with caution. 
We then employed OLS regression analysis to test the hypotheses generated in 
the analytical framework for three dimensions of online civic engagement both in 
terms of willingness and actual utilization. To address potential multicollinearity 
problems, we have run collinearity diagnosis for all models. Since all tolerance 
collinearity statistics are above 0.5, we concluded that multicollinearity is not an 
issue.3 Multivariable regression analysis allows us to assess the significance as well 
as the direction of each hypothesized relationship. Thus, we are able to identify the 
independent effect of factors such as political involvement while controlling for 
age, education, and other demographics. 
Results.and.Discussions
The study results are summarized in six regression models presented in Table 4. The 
first three focus on willingness and the remaining three capture actual engagement 
with e-government. Model 1 examines the influence of political involvement, com-
munity involvement, information channels, perceived benefits, perceived difficulties, 
and demographic characteristics on the willingness to conduct information searches 
on government Web portals (See Table 4). Models 2 and 3 measure the influence of 
the same variables on willingness to conduct online transactions and willingness to 
provide public policy input, respectively. 
Model 4 measures the effects of political involvement, community involvement, 
information channels, perceived benefits, perceived difficulties, demographic 
characteristics, availability, and competition from off-line government services on 
actual utilization of government Web portals for information searches. Models 5 
and 6 measure the effects of the same set of variables on actual utilization of online 
transactions and providing public policy input, respectively. The adjusted R-squares 
show substantial explanatory power for each of the six models. The following dis-
cussions present the general patterns observed in all six models and their theoretical 
and policy implications.   

222   Chen & Dimitrova
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Engaging.Government.Online.is.a..
Multi-faceted.Phenomenon
The first important finding suggests that engaging citizens with government online 
is a multifaceted phenomenon. Each dimension of engagement has its own dynam-
ics. In particular, engaging citizens in online transactions with government (such 
as paying taxes) differs from citizens accessing online information and providing 
input on public policy. Political involvement as measured by interest and level of 
activities in politics is not significantly associated with transactions (see Models 2 
and 5). On the other hand, political involvement is strongly associated with both the 
willingness and actual online engagement with government to access public policy 
information and provide input (see Models 1, 3, and 4). 
This finding has both theoretical and policy implications. First, it seems important 
to differentiate between these two activities. Public administrators should examine 
how political involvement may create two different kinds of groups who interact 
with government online. Different strategies may need to be employed for promot-
ing engagement when the target groups of online transactions and participatory 
governance differ.
Availability.is.Critical.in.Determining.Utilization
The results also confirm the importance of availability, particularly for online trans-
actions and interactive public policy input. For online transactions (see Model 5), 
perceived availability is significantly and positively associated with actual trans-
actions (e.g., e-filing, purchasing or renewing licenses, paying bills or penalties, 
etc.). Similarly, perceived availability is significantly and positively associated with 
providing public policy input to government online in terms of both willingness 
and actual utilization (e.g., expressing a position on a government policy or initia-
tive, submitting information to assist in ensuring public safety and protection of the 
environment, etc.) (see Models 4 and 6). 
The significance of availability as an independent determining factor is particu-
larly notable when all other factors are taken into account. Perceived availability, 
although positively related to accessing government information online, is not 
significant. Perhaps, governments are already doing a fair job in providing some 
important information online. Thus, in this specific case, availability seems to no 
longer be an issue.
The question of availability is critical in understanding both the supply and demand 
for e-government Web sites. Future researchers should consider treating supply 
and demand simultaneously rather than looking at supply or demand individually. 
www.ebook3000.com

Civic Engagement via E-Government Portals   223
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
If public administrators want to improve their e-government efforts, perhaps they 
may need to better communicate the availability of such services. 
Availability is an important prerequisite for citizens to utilize e-government ser-
vices. Another key consideration is perception. Governments are sometimes being 
criticized for not being particularly effective in marketing their services. At times, 
transactions and options are available online but citizens are not aware of them. 
Governments need to consider using information channels more effectively to ad-
dress the gap between the perception and reality of availability.
Perceived Benefits Are Conducive to Online Engagement
Perceived benefits are a critical factor in determining the willingness and utilization 
of e-government. This is the only factor that shows consistent significance in all six 
models. In almost all models, this factor has the highest level of significance com-
pared to other variables. The results show that the more benefits citizens perceive, 
the more likely they will interact with government online. 
The importance of perceived benefits lends support to the technology acceptance 
model (TAM). This seems to be a major factor in the adoption of new e-government 
information access and services. When the transaction involves obtaining permits 
or filing taxes, the perceived benefits may be convenience or a monetary advantage. 
For engaging citizens in public policy discussions, government must show how such 
discussions have a bearing on the content and direction of final policy decisions. 
Otherwise, citizens will not see any benefit in providing policy input and they would 
simply stop participating. 
Political.Activism.Drives.Online.Public-Policy.Engagement
Political activism emerges as a significant predictor for seeking policy information 
and engaging in public governance online (Models 1, 3, and 4). The relationship is 
positive. In contrast, for conducting online business transactions, political activism 
has no significant bearing (Models 2 and 5). An interpretation of these findings may 
be offered: political activism gives citizens the basic motivation for seeking public 
policy information and engaging government in public policy issues. Government 
Web sites provide new ways for doing so. In comparison, community involvement 
does not establish itself as a significant motivation for engaging government online. 
Having more and active membership in community organizations such as PTAs, 
hobby clubs, service groups, and so forth, does not show any significant relation-
ship with engaging government online, with the only exception of utilizing online 
mechanisms to give comments to government. This suggests that membership in 

224   Chen & Dimitrova
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
community groups, while controlling for other factors, only plays a role in giving 
government comments online. 
The finding puts political activism at center stage, suggesting that interest in politics 
as well as actual participation in election and lobbying activities play a much more 
important role than general community involvement. Social capital as defined by 
community involvement in general does not translate directly into online civic en-
gagement. Government Web sites seem to serve more as extensions of traditional 
methods of political participation rather than extensions of community building. If 
government aims to foster online public policy discussions, one important way is 
to augment political activities with electronic options. 
Demographic.Characteristics.of..
Internet.Users.Have.Limited.Relevance
Our findings show that demographic characteristics play a limited role in deter-
mining willingness or actual utilization of online civic engagement options. When 
other factors are taken into account, income level does not impact searching for 
online government information or providing online input into policy. Age plays 
a role only in information searches but not in transactions or public policy input. 
Level of education plays a role only in conducting online transactions, but not in 
any other online activities. These findings suggest that, for our sample of Internet 
users, demographic characteristics have rather limited influence on user willingness 
and actual engagement with e-government. 
Treating age, gender, race, and income level as controls, the findings demonstrated 
that those citizens who are politically involved off-line and perceive e-government as 
personally beneficial are more likely to use online government. This finding should 
be interpreted with caution, however, since it cannot be generalized to the general 
population. Our sample was limited to computer users who have access to the In-
ternet already; in other words, higher income people who are not representative of 
the population at large. One possible explanation is that once a citizen has become 
part of the online community, factors such as perceived benefits and political activ-
ism seem to play important roles. At the same time, demographic characteristics 
become less significant. 
Conclusion
Titah and Barki (2005) contend that despite the large amount of research on e-gov-
ernment, the field lacks a unified theoretical framework. One of the contributions of 
www.ebook3000.com

Civic Engagement via E-Government Portals   225
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
our study is the identification of specific variables that may facilitate or impede the 
adoption of e-government information and services. Our findings also provide an 
important step in understanding the supply and demand sides of online civic engage-
ment. The proposed framework incorporates both the availability and competition 
effects of various communication channels, aiming to provide a more comprehensive 
view of online civic engagement. The framework combines several dimensions of 
online engagement, such as, e-government information searches, online business 
transactions, and contributing public policy input. The study is limited by the small 
sample size and its focus only on Internet users. 
This study nevertheless highlights the importance of several key factors in explain-
ing both the willingness and actual utilization of various online civic engagement 
options. Perceived benefits seem to be a key factor in explaining the intensity of 
online civic engagement. This validates the relevance of the technology acceptance 
model. In terms of policy recommendations, public managers need to have a better 
understanding of the specific kinds of benefits that citizens want. 
Political involvement off-line emerged as a critical factor in explaining why citizens 
seek public policy information and provide public policy input online. In compari-
son, general community involvement does not play as significant a role as originally 
expected. E-government efforts need to take this into consideration to effectively 
engage citizens online.
Finally, perceived availability of e-government services seems to encourage citizens 
to interact with government online. Government can bridge the availability gap 
by providing more online business transactions and more opportunities for online 
public policy input. In addition, it is important to note that availability becomes 
less of a factor for engagement when sufficient amounts of information and types 
of services are made available. 
Future research can build on the conceptual framework proposed in this study, which 
integrates insights from various fields. One fruitful area of research will be to explore 
the various elements that constitute perceived benefits. When governments learn 
from citizens, realizing that the connection between policy input and final policy 
decision is the most important element, governments will need to make that link 
a priority and communicate this to its citizens. Another avenue for future research 
is to differentiate between the three levels of government and test the models with 
longitudinal data to see how perceived availability shapes actual utilization over 
time. This approach will provide insights into the evolution and dynamics of supply 
and demand as they impact online civic engagement. 

226   Chen & Dimitrova
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
References
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Andreasen, A. R. (1995). Marketing social change. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: W. H. Freeman. 
Barnes, S., & Vigden, R. (2007). Interactive e-government: Evaluating the web site of the 
UK Inland Revenue. International Journal of Electronic Government Research, 3(1), 
19-37.
Brainard, L. (2003). Citizen organizing in cyberspace: Illustrations from health care and 
implications for public administration. American Review of Public Administration, 
33(4), 384-406.
Carroll, J. M., & Rosson, M. B. (1996). Developing the Blacksburg electronic village. Com-
munication of the ACM, 39(12), 69-74.
Comley, P. (1996). The use of internet as a data collection method. Paper presented at ESO-
MAR, Edinburg, UK. Retrieved August 20, 2004, from http://www.virtualsurveys.
com/news/papers/paper_9.asp
Davis, F. D. (1986). A technology acceptance model for empirically testing new end-user 
information systems: Theory and results. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Sloan 
School of Management, MIT, Cambridge, MA. 
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of 
information technology. MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 319-339.
Dillman, D. (2000). Mail and Internet surveys (2nd ed). New York: John Wiley and Son.
Dimitrova, D.V., & Chen, Y.C. (2006). Profiling the adopters of e-government information 
and services: The influence of psychological characteristics, civic mindedness, and 
information channels. Social Science Computer Review, 24(2), 172-188.
General Accounting Office (GAO) of the United States. (2001). Characteristics and choices 
of Internet users. Retrieved September 24, 2005, from http://www.gao.gov/new.
items/d01345.pdf
Gibson, R. (2002). Elections online: Assessing internet voting in light of the Arizona 
democratic primary. Political Science Quarterly, 116(4), 561-583.
Graafland-Essers, I., & Ettedgui, E. (2003). Benchmarking e-government in Europe and 
the US (Statistical Indicators Benchmarking the Information Society [SIBIS]). Santa 
Monica: RAND.
Hart-Teeter. (2003). The new e-government equation: Ease, engagement, privacy and 
protection. Retrieved August 15, 2004, from http://www.cio.gov/documents/egov-
poll2003.pdf 
Ho, A. T. (2002). Reinventing local governments and the e-government initiative. Public 
Administration Review, 62(4), 434-444. 
www.ebook3000.com

Civic Engagement via E-Government Portals   227
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Horrigan, J. (2004). How Americans get in touch with government: Internet users benefits 
from the efficiency of e-government, but multiple channels are still needed for citizens 
to reach agencies and solve problems. Pew Internet & American Life Project.
Indiana Tobacco Prevention and Cessation (ITPC) Board. (2002). Seeing is believing: How 
exposure to ITPC’s media campaign affects tobacco knowledge, attitude, and beliefs 
among Hoosier adults. Retrieved February 25, 2004, from http://www.in.gov/itpc/
files/research_80.pdf 
Larsen, E., & Rainie, L. (2002). The rise of the e-citizen: How people use government 
agencies’ Web site. Washington, D.C.: Pew Charitable Trust. Retrieved September 2, 
2007, from http://www.pweinternet.org
Lin, N. (2001). Social capital: A theory of social structure and action. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.
Lin, C. A. (2003). An interactive communication technology adoption model. Communica-
tion Theory, 13(4), 345-365. 
Lynch, P. D., Kent, R. J., & Srinivasan, S. S. (2001). The global internet shopper: Evidence 
from shopping tasks in twelve countries. Journal of Advertising Research, 41, 15-
23.
McNeal, R. S., Tolbert, C. J., Mossberger, K., & Dotterweich, L. J. (2003). Innovating in 
digital government in the American states. Social Science Quarterly, 84(1), 54-70.
Menard, S. (1995). Applied logistic regression analysis. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Moon, M. J. (2002). The evolution of e-government among municipalities: Rhetoric or 
reality. Public Administration Review, 62(4), 424-433.
Mossberger, K., Tolbert, C., & Stansbury, M. (2003). Virtual inequality: Beyond the digital 
divide. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Nedovic-Budic, Z., & Godschalk, D. R. (1996). Human factors in adoption of geographic 
information systems: A local government case study. Public Administration Review, 
56(6), 554-567.
Norris, P. (2001). Digital divide: Civic engagement, information poverty, and the Internet 
worldwide. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Norris, D. F. (2005a). Electronic democracy at the American grassroots. International Journal 
of Electronic Government Research, 1(3), 1-14. 
Norris, P. (2005b). The impact of the Internet on political activism: Evidence from Europe. 
International Journal of Electronic Government Research, 1(1), 20-39.
Norris, D. F., & Lloyd, B. (2004, December 12). The scholarly literature on e-government: 
Characterizing a nascent field. Paper presented at the Special Interest Group, E-Gov, 
Pre-ICIS (International Conference on Information) Systems Workshop.
Norris, D. & Moon, J. (2005). Advancing e-government at the grassroots: Tortoise or hare? 
Public Administration Review, 65(1), 64-74.
Northrop, A., Dunkle, D., Kraemer, K., & King, J. (1994). Computer, police and the fight 
against crime: An ecology of technology, training, and use. Information and the Public 
Sector, 3(1), 21-45.

228   Chen & Dimitrova
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Pandey, S., & Bretschneider, S. (1997). The impact of red tape’s administrative delay on 
public organizations’ interest in new information technologies. Journal of Public 
Administration Research and Theory, 7(1), 113-30.
Pew Internet & American Life Project. (2004, May 24). How Americans get in touch with 
government. Retrieved July 22, 2004, from http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_E-
Gov_Report_0504.pdf
Pratchett, L., & Krimmer, R. (2005). The coming of e-democracy. International Journal of 
Electronic Government Research, 1(3), i-iii.
Rice, R. E., & Atkin, C. K. (Eds.). (2001). Public communication campaigns (3rd ed.). 
London: Sage.
Rogers, E. (2003). Diffusion of innovations (5th ed.). New York: Free Press.
Rogers, E., Collins-Jarvis, L., & Schmitz, J. (1994). The PEN project in Santa Monica: 
Interactive communication, equality, and political action. Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science, 45(6), 401-410.
Schonlau, M., Fricker, R. D., & Elliott, M. N. (2001). Conducting research surveys via 
e-mail and the Web. Rand. Retrieved August 18, 2004, from http://www.rand.org/
publications/MR/MR1480/
Scott, J. (2006). “E” the people: Do U.S. municipal government Web sites support public 
involvement? Public Administration Review, 66(3), 341-353.
Shelley, M., Trane, L., Shulman, S., Lang, E., Beiser, S., Larson, T., et al. (2004). Digital 
citizenship. Social Science Computer Review, 22(2), 256-269.
Skocpol, T., & Fiorina, M. (1999). Civic engagement in American democracy. Washington, 
D.C./ New York: Brookings Institution Press & Russell Sage Foundation.
Smith, C. B. (1997). Casting the net: Surveying an internet population. Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, 3(1). Retrieved August 20, 2004, from http://www.ascusc.
org/jcmc/vol3/issue1/smith.html
Thomas, J. C., & Streib, G. (2003). The new face of government: Citizen-initiated contacts 
in the era of e-government. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 
13(1), 83-102. 
Titah, R., & Barki, H. (2005). e-Government adoption and acceptance: A literature review. 
White paper. Retrieved February 25, 2007, from http://whitepapers.techrepublic.com.
com/whitepaper.aspx?&docid=162384&promo=100511
Tolbert, C., & Mossberger, K. (2006). The effects of e-Government on trust and confidence 
in government. Public Administration Review, 66(3), 354-369. 
Venkatesh, V., & Davis, F. D. (2000). A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance 
model: Four longitudinal field studies. Management Science, 46(2), 186-204. 
Weber, L., Loumakis, A., & Bergman, J. (2003). Who participate and why? An analysis of 
citizens on the Internet and the mass public. Social Science Computer Review, 21(1), 
26-42.
West, D. (2004). E-Government and transformation of service delivery and citizen attitudes. 
Public Administration Review, 64(1), 15-27.
www.ebook3000.com

Civic Engagement via E-Government Portals   229
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Whitehead, D. (2000). Using mass media within health-promoting practice: A nursing 
perspective. Journal of Advanced Nursing,.32(4), 807-816.
Witte, J., Amoroso, L., & Howard, P. (2000). Method and representation in Internet-based 
survey tools: Mobility, community, and cultural identity in Survey2000. Social Science 
Computer Review, 18(2), 179-195.
Endnotes
1 
For an illustrative example, see Brainard et al., 2003.
2 
The online survey did not differentiate between the three levels of government.
3 
The tolerance statistics are in the range of .5 and 1.0. They are well above .2, a number 
below which would indicate a potential problem (Menard, 1995). 

230   Monnoyer-Smith
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.X
Citizen’s.Deliberation..
on.the.Internet:
A.French.Case
1
Laurence Monnoyer-Smith, University of Technology of Compiègne, France
Abstract
Within the frame of the deliberative democratic theory, development of information 
and communication technologies (ICT) has been proposed as a solution to enhance 
discussion in large groups and foster political participation among citizens. Crit-
ics have however underlined the limits of such technological innovations which do 
not generate the expected diversity of viewpoints. This chapter highlights the limits 
of a Habermassian conception of deliberation which restrains it to a specific type 
of rational discourse and harnesses citizen’s expression within strict procedural 
constraints. Our case study, the DUCSAI debate, that is, the French public debate 
about the location of the 3rd international Parisian airport, shows that the added 
value of Internet-based deliberation rests in that it offers, under specific conditions, 
another arena of public debate. The chapter shows that hybrid forms of debate can 
widen a participant’s profile, the nature of the participant’s argumentation, and the 
participant’s means of expression if it provides the opportunity to voice concerns 
the way the participant chooses to do so. 
www.ebook3000.com

Citizen’s Deliberation on the Internet   231
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Introduction
In recent years, the theory of deliberative democracy has become the main, if not 
the dominant, approach in democratic theory. As John Dryzek (2000) puts it, “the 
final decade of the second millennium saw the theory of democracy take a strong 
deliberative turn” (p.1). Contrary to a century-long tradition of suspicion towards 
the ability of citizens to exercise wise scrutiny of government’s activity and its will 
to dedicate the necessary time to complex political matters (Lippmann 1922), many 
theorists, inspired by John Dewey’s work (1927), called in the early 1980s for a 
new approach to democracy (Barber, 1984; Cohen, 1986; Macpherson, 1977). The 
traditional “liberal rationalist” model has been challenged by a communitarian call 
for a grass-roots participation to politics as a pedagogic tool as well as a way to 
enrich the democratic debate in modern societies (Pateman, 1970). More recently, 
the work of U. Beck and A. Giddens has elucidated a new aspect of deliberation 
and participation in democracies as a consequence of reflexive modernization in 
risk societies (Beck, 1992; Beck & al., 1994; Giddens, 1990, 1991). Citizens are 
more eager to be involved in the decision-making process because they are directly 
concerned by potentially dramatic consequences of public policies (such as tech-
nological infrastructures, ethical-linked scientific programs, and so on). Therefore, 
with the growth of technological risk, technology assessment procedures limited 
to experts and scientists have been slowly replaced by public debates including lay 
people. Genetically modified organisms (GMOs), nuclear wastes, nanotechnology, 
embryonic manipulation, and so forth have formed the core themes of the first 
public debates. 
The on-going crisis of representation which affects modern democracies since the 
mid-80s has also been interpreted as a symptom of a contested gap between elected 
officials and citizens (Norris, 1999). Therefore calls for a new type of communi-
cation and relationship between the public and its representatives have emerged, 
insisting on the normative value of public discussion (Guttman & Thomson, 1996; 
Habermas, 1984; Cohen, 1997a, 1997b). 
The deliberative turn acknowledges an important switch in the conception of legiti-
macy: the legitimacy of a political decision emerges out of its deliberative process 
and not out of the institution which produces it (Manin, 1985, 1994). Therefore, an 
important feature of this theory rests in its procedural dimension: the legitimacy of a 
decision can only be recognized if a real deliberation occurs, that is, if conditions of 
“equal, reciprocal, reasonable and open-minded participation” (Mendelberg, 2002, 
p. 153) are fulfilled. Even if different perspectives persists among political theorists 
about the main features of an ideal deliberative democracy, they all agree on the 
fact that deliberation can be distinguished from other types of communication in 
that it supposes “an unconstrained exchange of arguments that involves practical 
reasoning and always potentially leads to a transformation of preferences” (Cooke, 

232   Monnoyer-Smith
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
2000, p. 948). Myriads of propositions have been made in order to actively engage 
citizens in political participation (from consensus conferences to deliberative pools); 
nevertheless, the core idea remains largely communitarian in spirit: “It is thought to 
promote tolerance and trust, lead to a heightened sense of one’s role within a political 
community and stimulate further civic engagement” (Price, in press, p. 4). 
The discursive dimension of deliberative democracy appears central in the academic 
literature as it focuses on the idea that political decisions should be the result of a 
rational process where only the “forceless force of the better argument” (Habermas, 
1975) prevails over manipulation, aggregation of viewpoints, or force (Bohman 
& Regh, 1997; Cohen, 1989; Dryzek, 2000; Elster, 1998). A fundamental facet of 
deliberation then rests on the heavy constraints it imposes to participants, that is, 
in order to preserve the fairness of the debate, arguments have to be exchanged in 
the most civilized, detached, and articulated way. 
The deliberative procedures then reach their own limits when it comes to putting 
them into  practice; as many scholars have pointed out, public debates usually favor 
certain types of citizens, such as those who are outspoken and well educated men, 
and who feel comfortable within the procedure’s format (Loader, 1998; Sanders, 
1997; Wilhelm, 2000b; Young, 1996, 2000 ). As R. Blaug (1996) puts it, “the de-
gree of abstraction required to posit a universal norm of communicative fairness 
moves his [Habermas] theory so far from the contexts in which specific discourses 
occur that he tends to gloss over the importance of rhetoric, persuasion and other 
aesthetic components of collective judgement” (p. 52). This leads to questioning of 
the heuristic value of discursive deliberation theory which can only be envisioned 
as a normative goal, yet not applicable in real life. Moreover, it might prevent one 
from recognizing, out of empirical experiments, attempts to deliberately use other 
forms of communication than discursive arguments and yet leading to normative 
agreements.
In this context, the Internet has been envisioned as an innovative tool to promote 
large discussion and deliberation among citizens and it revitalized an apathetic po-
litical involvement on the citizen’s part. It “makes manageable large-scale, many 
to many discussion and deliberation” (Coleman & Gøtze, 2001, p. 17) and offers 
easy solutions to four traditional problems which have prevented people from fully 
participating in public debates because of the constraints they impose. Those prob-
lems are time, size, knowledge, and access (Street, 1997). Nevertheless, the extent 
to which the use of Internet has really enhanced the public sphere and introduced 
new actors in the democratic process through discussion and deliberation remains 
somewhat uncertain. 
Many scholars acknowledge the inclusive potential of the new medium and dem-
onstrate that online discussions reduce the potential influence of social status and 
diminish symbolic pressure on participants (Coleman, 2004; Klein, 1999; Pruijt, 
www.ebook3000.com

Citizen’s Deliberation on the Internet   233
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
2002). Group experiments suggest that, compared with face-to-face discussions, 
online deliberation tends to generate more open and direct exchange of ideas. Physi-
cal absence and the reduced visibility of social cues are generally interpreted as a 
positive factor on participants’ interactions (Rains, 2005; Stromer-Galley, 2002). 
On the other hand, critics have expressed three main reservations about the ability 
of the Internet to overcome the traditional flaws of face-to-face discussion, and 
posited that it might not be a suitable medium for deliberation. First, one of the main 
concerns is the question of access Even if Internet usage is now widespread in the 
population, a significant portion either has no material access or no competence to 
interact via a computer (Hill & Hugues, 1998; Luke, 1998). Price (in press) recently 
recognized in a summary of two large experiments that “people who showed up for 
the electronic discussions were, again in both projects, significantly less likely to be 
non-white than those who did not (about 3-4 percent difference), significantly older 
(by about 3 years in average) and better educated” (p. 12). Second, studies have 
shown controversial results of online discussion experiments, showing that they could 
encourage the fragmentation of the public sphere which leads to a “balkanisation 
of politics” (Bellamy & Raab, 1999). In this perspective, making available online 
a more heterogeneous scope of viewpoints could polarize the attention of people 
on Web sites they feel in harmony with (Dalhberg, 2001; Manin, 2005; Sustein, 
2001). Third, effects on political behavior and participation are contested by authors 
like Putnam (2000) who emphasize that social capital cannot be reinforced through 
computer mediated communication. Political engagement necessitates physical and 
emotional contacts which are not provided by online discussion. Still, the academic 
debate remains quite open as these statements have been contradicted by recent 
experiments and observations (Coleman, 2004; Monnoyer-Smith, 2006a; Price, in 
press; Price & Capella, 2002; Stromer-Galley, 2003). 
This chapter, based on a French case study of a public debate organized in 2001 
by the National Commission of Public Debate (Commission Nationale du Débat 
Public, CNDP), aims to show how the online features of the debate Web site and 
its appropriation by citizens have overcome the constraints of its off-line version. 
I stress in this chapter that normative standards of deliberation, as they have been 
described by J. Habermas and J. Cohen, do not fully appreciate the inherent limita-
tion of the deliberative process that any type of procedure implies by imposing a 
format of participation which might prevent some citizens from giving an opinion. 
Therefore, instead of evaluating online procedures under the normative banner of the 
ideal speech situation, one should analyze how complementary online and off-line 
procedures are, what type of participation they can enhance, and which citizen they 
could mobilize. In this perspective, the recent evolution of CNDP suggests that if 
multichannel contribution has developed a participative culture among civil associa-
tions, it has reached its limits for lay citizens whose writing aptitudes are limited. 

234   Monnoyer-Smith
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Online participative systems still have to overcome a literacy gap which could be 
reduced by recognizing the argumentative potential of multimedia productions. 
I suggest that a key dimension of a deliberative discussion rests on its ability to 
provide citizens with different types of procedural constraints. Hybrid systems offer 
them a wider scope of expression (from storytelling to photos or short videos for 
example) and welcome in the debate a larger portion of the population. 
I will first present the French debate that our case study is based on and the method-
ology used by our multidisciplinary team. I will then show how actors’ involvement 
is linked with the procedure and the Web site design. An analysis of the online ar-
gumentation will link technical aspects of the Web site with participants’ argumen-
tative strategies. I stress the fact that a real argumentation took place online which 
differs from the off-line one in some aspects. I will conclude that hybrid deliberative 
processes highlight the determinant role played by diverse arrangement structures. 
Therefore, the theory of deliberation has to reconsider its discursive anchorage if 
one is to open public debates to a large number of citizens. 
The.CNDP,.an.Original.French.Agency
The National Commission of Public Debate was created by a 1995 law as a conces-
sion from the government to civil associations following decades of conflicts and 
lack of citizen’s consultation around important infrastructure projects (e.g., Medi-
terranean speed-train line, French-Spanish tunnel, high voltage power lines, etc.). 
Two years were necessary to set the Commission up and appoint its 21 members; 
a delicate balance between elected representatives, judges from various national 
courts, and user associations’ representatives had to be found. Between 1997 and 
2002, its scope of action was limited to finalized projects on public infrastructure 
about which the Commission had to organize public debates evaluating both their 
opportunity and characteristics. With the 2002 Act on Local Democracy, the Com-
mission became an independent agency and could also decide to organize public 
debates on wider topics in order to help the government to shape a future policy. 
So far, only two debates of this kind have been planned: the first one on nuclear 
wastes (October- January 2006) and the second one on the public transport policy 
in the Rhone Valley (April-July 2006). Since its creation, the CNDP has directly 
organized 28 debates (mainly concerning new railways and motorways, and more 
recently nuclear infrastructures and wastes) and has assigned 19 to project manag-
ers (for less important infrastructures, under the Commission scrutiny). Its activity 
has increased significantly since the enlargement of its intervention perimeter in 
2002, from 4 debates in the first period (1997-2002) to 24 up until today. Project 
www.ebook3000.com

Citizen’s Deliberation on the Internet   235
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
managers have now included in their calendar the four necessary months of public 
consultation and discussion before finalizing any infrastructure project. Statistics 
show an important growth of information consultation on the CNDP’s Web site. 
Pages viewed per day has increased from 297 in 2003 to over 3,300 in 2006; single 
visits per day has also boomed up from 56 in 2003 to nearly 900 in 2006.2
Our case study, the Ducsai Debate, was held between April and October 2001 and 
can be considered as a milestone for the CNDP. Specifically, appointed aside from 
its traditional boundaries, it was to test the future Commission’s mission, enacted 
some months later by the 2002 Act on Local Democracy. For the first time, the 
Commission experimented new procedures by introducing an online version of the 
debate including a discussion forum.
“Ducsai” stands for “Débat d’Utilité Concertée pour un Site Aéroportuaire Inter-
national” which literally means concerted usefulness debate about the location of 
an international airport, which, even in French, has never been heard of. This is 
the result of an awkward arbitrage by the Prime Minister between the Minister of 
Transport (Communist Party) and the Minister of Environment (Green Party), both 
members of the left wing coalition. The debate was supposed to involve all stake-
holders in a public debate focused on the geographic location of the airport but not 
on the legitimacy of its existence. 
The organization was improvised by the National Commission President who con-
sidered it to be an extraordinary democratic progress; for the first time in French 
administration history, citizens would be able to fully participate in a procedure 
which would have a direct impact on a highly strategic and political decision, before 
it was actually taken. Pierre Zemor selected 22 people (health specialists, sociolo-
gists, transport specialists, etc.) to form a board (called the Ducsai Mission) to help 
him animate, coordinate, and enlighten the debate. He also created a dedicated Web 
site on which information could be shared and arguments exchanged in order to 
“improve traditional public debates.” Thirty-three public meetings were organized, 
first in Paris, then in potential location sites, and their transcription on the Internet 
fed the public forum, which was open to comments and questions for 6 months (in-
cluding the summer months of July and August). Public meetings held in Paris were 
not as popular as those organized on potential sites; citizens were not yet informed 
and therefore not really involved. During the first phase (April through June) the 
public was mostly made up of experts from government agencies, national associa-
tion members, and elected officials. Things changed during the summer as citizens 
mobilized themselves both through their networks and online. Between September 
and October, public meetings attracted a huge and very concerned crowd in small 
northern towns where the airport might have been potentially built. Citizens and 
associations formed the main public, elected officials and government agencies were 
outnumbered. One can estimate at around 1,500 as the number of people who had 
at least come to one public meeting. 

236   Monnoyer-Smith
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
The Web site was both dedicated to the debate and very informative. It included 
downloadable documents (aside from the extensive transcriptions) including maps 
and charts for an easier apprehension of the challenges at stakes, a simplistic discus-
sion forum with no internal organization, and a very limited a priori moderation, but 
no search engine. Three hundred thirty-four messages were posted over a 6 month 
period by approximately 156 participants (some may have changed their names 
without us noticing). They sent from 1 to 11 messages, and 13 participants can be 
considered as “active” with 6 messages or more sent. Any actors in the debate could 
feed the Web site with documents, analysis, and comments, all of which has been 
widely used. The amount of information available online grew significantly once 
citizens got involved and ad hoc associations created a network of associations, 
during June 2001.
Of course, 156 (participants) might appear a narrow figure for a national debate 
which has involved more than 1,500 participants in public meetings. One has to 
recall that in 2001, only 5 million French households were connected to the Internet 
(95% without broadband). Today, these figures have increased to10 million with 
90% with broadband. The fact that the Ducsai debate mobilized only 156 people 
in 2001 has then to be put in perspective with the average Internet equipment and 
use at that time. As the Ducsai was the first of its kind in France, it had to deal with 
the novelty factor and poor equipment; nowadays National Commissions debates 
generate an average of 20,000 single visits and a few hundred questions through 
their discussion forums. In comparison,  another 2001 debate, (EPA in the U.S.) 
counted over 300 participants for over 1,200 posts. Considering that the U.S. is 30 
times bigger than France, it suggests that that our 156 participants was not such an 
insignificant figure at the time. The point here is that we witnessed with the Ducsai 
the beginning of a new participative trend which is considered by the National 
Commission as an essential asset to public meetings. I therefore do not pretend 
here that those 156 citizens are a representative sample of the population, but that 
we can learn from this emergent use, even with a limited sample.
During the debate, eight potential sites were considered according to various geo-
graphical, sociological, and economical characteristics and each of them has been 
extensively discussed in public. But more importantly the core idea of the neces-
sity of a new airport has been the subject of passionate discussions both online and 
offline, even though it was not supposed to be a topic of the debate, and limited to 
the location of the airport.
By October, the CNDP gave its conclusion to the government with a list of criteria 
according to which the final decision should be taken (e.g., concerned population and 
protection against noise, distance to Paris, air traffic saturation) without expressing 
a preference for any of the eight locations selected. In November, after the debate’s 
closure, while the government was analyzing the results and taking its decision on 
the debate, both ad hoc associations and more perennial ones mobilized their mem-
www.ebook3000.com

Citizen’s Deliberation on the Internet   237
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
bers through the Internet and by demonstrating in the concerned villages and towns. 
They were stressing that the Ducsai debate had shown no need for a new airport, 
their argument being recently reinforced with the 9/11 tragedy. By mid-November, 
the final governmental decision fell: a little village named Chaulnes, in the Somme 
Valley, had been chosen. Quite unfortunately, in the selected area were buried hun-
dreds of Second World War British and New Zealand soldiers. Outraged citizens 
and associations expressed their emotions and discontent with such a decision and 
started lobbying in order to slightly move the location and leave the cemeteries in 
their original position.
As the 2002 presidential campaigns started, these new networks created by the 
debate activated a strong lobbying strategy on candidates who publish online their 
comments about the actual left wing government decision. Jacques Chirac won 
the May 2002 presidential elections and his party (UMP) won a very large major-
ity in Parliament. One of the first decisions taken by the new Transport Minister, 
also Mayor of Amiens, a northern city quite involved in the Ducsai debate, was to 
cancel the former decision. The parliamentary commission mandated to assess the 
necessity of the airport a few months later, expressed no emergency in building 
such an infrastructure. Five years later, with increased concern for climate change 
and sustainable development central in the 2007 presidential campaign, the idea of 
a new airport seems to have been abandoned.
Research.Questions
The purpose of this research was to evaluate the deliberative dimension of the Ducsai 
debate and to compare its online and off-line versions. The specific features of this 
arrangement allowed us to question the impact of technical constraints on citizen’s 
discussions. Academic literature on ICT-enabled debates and online forums has 
come to an ambiguous conclusion: there seems to be as many negative effects on 
deliberation as positive experiments of online discussions. On one side, the Internet 
has been offered as a solution to modern democracies’ crisis of representation as 
it reaches apathetic citizens and gives them the opportunity to discuss, avoiding 
traditional time, space, and symbolic constraints of public expression (Blumler 
& Coleman, 2001; Coleman & Gøtz, 2001; Klein, 1999; Pruijt 2002; Rheingold, 
1994). Empirical studies have shown that dissenters feel more liberated to express 
their views online than off-line as they do not have to cope with discontentment 
and manifestations of disapproval (Davies, 1999; Wallace, 1999). Jennifer Stromer-
Galley (2002) considers for example that online conversations free people from the 
psychological barriers that otherwise would prevent them from getting involved in 

238   Monnoyer-Smith
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
a deliberative process. Coleman (2004), evaluating the deliberative dimension of 
two parliamentary UK consultations, also clearly notes an inclusive phenomenon. 
He states that:
Most participants in both of the consultations were not the ‘usual suspects’: party 
members, lobbyist or people who lived in or around the Westminster village. The 
voices heard in these consultation forums would probably not otherwise be heard 
by parlementarians. (p. 16)
 It seems though that this could be explained by the intense advertising and recruiting 
effort deployed by organizers to assure an heterogeneity of population participating 
in the consultation.
On the other hand, this heterogeneity has been questioned. If the Internet provides 
a space for different and alternative views, people also tend to participate and visit 
discussion forums and Web sites they share common values with and do not really 
look for controversies (Davies, 1999; Sustein, 2001; Wilhelm, 2000a, 2000b). The 
heterogeneity of people deliberating online is also narrowed by the social capital 
factor. Vincent Price and Joseph N. Capella (2002) state that their “examination of 
who participated to the Electronic Dialogue Events strongly supports the theoreti-
cal connections of social capital—voluntary associations, interpersonal trust and 
shared norms of civic values—to political engagement” (p. 322). A crucial element 
of deliberation, that is, its openness, the equality of parole, and its access, therefore 
seems to be jeopardized in the light of empirical data. 
Behind these contradictory results, one can stress that less attention has been given 
to the technical frame of the deliberative artefacts used. Qualified as “mundane” 
aspects of the debate which should be taken care of (Ranerup, 2000), these techni-
cal and physical constraints play a great role in the participant’s involvement. The 
software and the type of interaction it allows, the nature of the moderation, the ap-
propriation of the interface by users, and their ability to manipulate it, all intervene 
in the success or failure of a deliberative experiment. Scott Wright (2006) notes 
that “the way in which the debates are framed may, through the design of the in-
terface, generate the polarization discovered by Wilhelm and Davies.” The impact 
of moderation on the deliberation is supported by his empirical analysis of BBC 
and government-run forums (Wright, 2005). Morison and Newman (2001) observe 
that “it seems that the interface affects the way people write and deliberate online, 
from the immediacy of chat systems to the stilted but carefully considered essays 
submitted to structured website bulletin boards” (p. 185). 
www.ebook3000.com

Citizen’s Deliberation on the Internet   239
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
With its hybrid format for public debates, the CNDP offers researchers interesting 
objects for observation and comparison between two types of deliberation, both 
dependant on technical and material constraints which affect citizen’s mode of 
expression and involvement. Our research program has compared the impact of 
both online and off-line structures of the debate on its argumentative content. This 
has led to more theoretical considerations about the discursive anchorage of the 
deliberation theory. 
Methodology
Case studies have a few shortcomings. One of them has been well summarized 
by Anthony Wilhelm (2000a): it is “the propensity of researchers, the media, and 
policy makers to want to generalize to all cyber democracy projects based on the 
findings from a single-shot study” (p. 25). He therefore takes the exemplary case of 
the Santa Monica Public Electronic Network (PEN) which with positive evaluation 
has been interpreted by many authors as a scientific element of proof that computer 
mediated communication discussion leads to an effective improvement of the local 
democratic process, dismissing that contextual elements were limiting the scope of 
the case study’s conclusion. Then Wilhem (2000) pursues “we must be careful that 
we do not generalize beyond what the data tell us about various aspects of online 
public life within the community of study” (p. 25-26). 
This drawback can be partially contained if the case study is completed with an 
important ethnographic research. Enlightening the context, the history of the debate 
and the evolution of its actors allow us to follow the case to witness its consequences 
in the concerned community and provide us with elements to better appreciate the 
qualities of discussion during the debate. As Stephen Coleman (2004) points out in 
his own case study on two online UK parliamentary consultations, 
The environment and the structure of communication has a significant effect upon 
its content; synchronous chat rooms and peer-generated Usenet groups are no more 
indicative of the scope for online public deliberation than loud, prejudiced and 
banal political arguments in crowded pubs are indicative of the breadth of off-line 
political discussion. (p. 6)
On this basis, we have combined different approaches to our case study. The first 
one is both historical and, to a certain extent, ethnographical. We have conducted 
exploratory interviews with 25 actors (2 to 4 hours each) who have been involved in 
the Ducsai debate and also, for some of them, in long term discussions and negotia-

240   Monnoyer-Smith
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
tions with both Parisian airports (Orly and Roissy-Charles-de-Gaulle) about air traffic 
noise and pollution, in which the Ducsai debate takes place. These interviews gave 
us the opportunity to draw a broad picture of relations established between local 
associations, Aéroport de Paris (ADP, a private company managing both Parisian 
airports, Orly and Charles de Gaulle), and the government from 1974 (opening of 
Roissy) until December 2003(the date of our last interview, 2 years after the end 
of the Ducsai debate). Our objective was to relate the trajectory followed by the 
actors, their strategies, their birth, alliances, and disappearance from the “airport 
discussion” scene. Like Hiram Sachs (1995a,1995b) in his work on the nonprofit 
computer network Peace Net, I think that studying how public opinion has been 
formed is often overlooked, although it is of utmost importance to understand this 
single moment we were analysing in this long history. A content analysis of this 
material with Nudist© software allowed us to highlight the evolution of the debate’s 
themes, even well after its end.
Another salient element of our methodology is its strong linguistic dimension; the 
discourse analysis conducted by our team had several levels. I will only describe in 
this chapter two of them. The first one is a comparison of arguments used by Internet 
participants on the forum and ordinary citizens during public debates. The purpose 
of this analysis was to focus first on the link between technical constraints and the 
nature of arguments and second on the variety and quality of them. Two “tree-type” 
maps of the argumentative structure (one for each modality of the debate) have 
been produced and the results are discussed below. The second discourse analysis 
has focused on the “quoted discourse” on the forum, that is, citations of others in 
someone’s mail. The way participants have quoted each other has been compared 
with the characteristics of other online forums, and has been interpreted here to 
define the type of interaction developed between respondents on the forum. We 
acknowledge here that our two samples are of different sizes, therefore our conclu-
sions constitute only trends of emergent uses qualitatively analysed which should 
be further explored in the future, in a more quantitative fashion.
Discussion
Two.Arenas,.Multiple.Actors
 I use the concept of arena (Dobry, 1992; Dodier, 1999; Renn, 1992) to describe the 
characteristics of these two spaces of discussion. It derives from an analysis of modern 
society as segmented in various spaces in which communication codes, legitimacy 
processes, regulation rules, and conflict nodes diverge. Therefore, the concept of 
www.ebook3000.com

Citizen’s Deliberation on the Internet   241
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
arena is a heuristic tool to understand how different symbolic spaces manage their 
own discussion and how they can influence the political decision process.
An arena has two major characteristics (Joly & Assouline, 2001), and I would like 
to add a third one out of our observation of public debates: 
• 
Specific access rules, the use of specific types of arguments, and resources 
they can mobilize in their interactions (power, money, fame, etc.). Some ac-
tors can belong to multiple arenas and develop different identities in each of 
them (e.g., company director in the economic arena, elected representative in 
the political arena, etc.) 
• 
Each arena produces its own symbolic references which determine its relation-
ship with the public, the nature of its internal conflicts, and their resolution 
patterns.
• 
Every arena is technically and materially configured. This encourages or pre-
vents certain types of behavior from its participants and contributes structuring 
of its symbolic dimension.
The arena concept is of utmost pertinence here to describe how both the Web site 
and public meetings actually function as segmented symbolic spaces. Each of them 
has developed specific types of arguments, rituals, ways to envision a specific sub-
ject, tones used by participants to express themselves, access codes, and types of 
beliefs they can mobilize.
Therefore, the presence of different actors in different arenas is not surprising per 
se, it is not easy to master and be legitimate according to different arenas codes.
In our case study, despite our limited online sample, we can witness that the two 
arenas are quite distinct and overlap very little. Participants in public meetings rarely 
go online to pursue the debate, even if they keep an eye on the forum and publish site 
their official position paper on the Web. They are mainly official representatives of 
well-known associations when local militants or basic citizens constitute a majority 
of online participants (even if they did come to some local meetings). This confirms 
the flexible nature of the Internet which widens the variety of actors involved (Bei-
erle, 2002; Coleman, 2001, 2004). Even if the use of nicknames sometimes makes 
it difficult to identify certain online participants, contents of mail suggests a limited 
involvement in the other arena. Only two individuals were identified as contributors 
on both sides. This characteristic explains the variety of arguments expressed online 
and the tone used by Internet users. Not only does one not write on a forum the 
same way as one speaks in public, but also, one does not have to follow the same 
speech ritual as that imposed on every public debate participant.

242   Monnoyer-Smith
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
More importantly, due to the openness of the debate, its length, and its online archives, 
many actors have identified themselves as being concerned by the debate instead 
of being identified by the legitimate authority (Coleman & Gøtze, 2001). Here, the 
use of Internet as an archive keeper for deliberative processes has played a great 
role in public ability for future mobilization. Several months after the beginning of 
the procedure, two independent associations unaware of its existence were able to 
retrieve every element of the debate and then accurately make their contribution. 
The medium has therefore played an important role for those actors with no specific 
network contacts through which they could have access to precise data (such as up 
to date air traffic information, or landing trajectories of an Airbus 340). 
The Internet has also created the conditions which have allowed people to prepare 
quickly and contribute serious input to the discussions. Contacts were made via 
e-mail between remote local associations and active individuals who then went off-
line to meet. With information and the discussion forum being available online, the 
whole process of identifying the various actors’ viewpoints and their weaknesses, 
making contact with alike-minded people, and getting organized as a powerful 
association has been extremely fast. Actors then organized themselves in associa-
tions, even federations, to improve the defence of their position and gain collective 
expertise in a very limited time (3 months). Once informed, they have participated 
actively and brought considerable expertise to the debate. All people interviewed 
mentioned that this first national debate experiment had set a precedent for future 
debates organized by the National Commission and therefore could be seen as a 
positive experience for them and their organization. 
Another effect of multiple arenas is the enormous amount of knowledge gained by 
all actors. People have invested a great deal of time and passion in the debate. Start-
ing from scratch, some of them have sought information from the administration 
and the Internet, asking questions in order to be able to discuss with the adminis-
tration’s experts. The former minister for the environment (Corinne Lepage) who, 
as a lawyer, was involved in trials over aircraft noise levels, the former minister of 
transport (J.-C. Gayssot who was in charge of this case ), and several members of 
the National Commission expressed their amazement about how quickly ordinary 
people where able to find their way around complex administrative and technical 
dossiers concerning aircraft traffic, airport building constraint, and so forth. Some 
of them emphasized the role played by early retired and well educated people be-
longing to associations and their new attitude towards authority. The public aptitude 
for self-learning and rational discussion on complex matters clearly contradicts an 
important political science tradition of disregard (and even distrust) towards the 
average citizen (Almond, 1960; Converse, 1964; Lippman, 1922). We here follow 
Page and Shapiro’s (1992) analysis that an informed and educated citizen properly 
involved in an appropriate deliberative process is perfectly able to give an articulate 
and stable opinion on any complex topic.
www.ebook3000.com

Citizen’s Deliberation on the Internet   243
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Actors have adapted to the procedure and chosen their arena of expression in such 
a way that it had led to a common building of new expectations and values that 
will determine future decisions about the airport (e.g., its location, its local imple-
mentation, and the respect of the environment). This constitutes a new analytical 
framework in which the concerned stakeholders already position themselves. The 
“urgency” argument used by the pro-airport group, stating that a decision to build 
the airport must be taken urgently because of the increased air traffic in the five past 
years that will soon bring Roissy to its limits, diminished during the debate under 
the pressure of the in-depth prospective analysis of air traffic evolution in a post 
9/11 world presented by opponents to the project. 
The Ducsai debate has paved the way for the evolution of the Commission as an 
independent agency, after 2002. Their Web site has been formally redesigned in order 
to keep all debate archives and to offer an open area of expression to lay citizens and 
institutions willing to do so in a more or less official fashion. Every debate has its own 
Web site according to a predesign model with six sections within which the content 
varies (i.e., the debate organization, information, participation, news, press section, 
and links to related Web sites). If the information section has significantly grown in 
pages as multimedia documents are progressively integrated, the participation one 
has is reduced, in most debates, to a one-way communication. Stake holders and 
citizens can either ask questions or post comments and position papers; horizontal 
exchanges and discussion have been suppressed in most cases. In a recent interview, 
the Commission Vice-President justifies this by the nonappropriation of forums by 
Internet users; in two recent debates, only 15 persons went online for discussion. 
Two hypotheses, to be tested, can explain this disaffection for forums. The first is 
technical: the forums were so segmented in multiple themes and under-themes that 
a post had a limited chance to be seen by anyone, especially as the forum has been 
largely polluted by spam messages. This did not favor interaction between people. 
The second one seems to be a side-effect of a voluntary communication choice 
made by the Commission. All questions and comments written by mail (25%), 
during public meetings (50%), or online (25% in 2006) are now available online, 
with their answers from the appropriate authority and, most important, showing no 
traces of their media origins. In doing so, the perimeter for an online discussion 
has been jeopardized as there is no way to know who is online and who is not. The 
system seems to have reached its limits. If a new public is attracted to the debate 
via the Internet, it does not interact directly, as it used to do in the Ducsai case, even 
if questions sometimes refer to one another.

244   Monnoyer-Smith
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Deliberation.on.the.Forum:..
Argumentation,.Appropriation,.and.Design
I have concluded from the Ducsai case that it has been easier for 156 people online 
to discuss the legitimacy of the creation of a new airport than it has been for the 
other 1,500 participating in public reunions. First, because the design of procedure is 
more open to participants online than off-line, and second because the interactivity 
of the Internet allows users to manipulate this design to their own benefit. One has 
to notice that new Web site conceptions do not favor online deliberation as creativ-
ity is restrained by a controlled design and rational argumentation shows its limits 
for a larger inclusion of population. 
Online.Argumentation:.ICT.as.a.Source.of.Creativity
Despite the many claims that there was no real debate, a close analysis of the Ducsai 
online argumentation shows that participants have used various strategies to pass 
on their messages by avoiding thematic and technical limits installed by the Web 
site designer. Here I refer to the sociology of uses to interpret those strategies. I 
do not mean here that technical constraints were intentional, but rather they were 
more or less a result of a cumbersome public debate organization, by ill-experienced 
organizers, and lots of “bricolage,” to quote Michel de Certeau. One has to notice 
that online debates are more easily appropriated by citizens than an off-line public 
debate which is shorter, often ritualized, and organized in such a way that inter-
ruptions and demonstrations cannot find a way to express themselves. Therefore, 
deliberation on the Internet offers new ways of expressing citizen’s feelings and 
arguments because ICT can be adopted in a nonanticipated fashion. Here, creativity 
can become a fruitful resource for the deliberative process. Two examples illustrate 
this learning process. 
The Ducsai debate was originally organized by the head of the National Commission 
who decided which would be the main issues discussed both on the Web site and 
during public meetings. As such, the Web site questions which are pertinent in the 
debate are formulated on the first page (e.g., the nature of the new airport and what 
type of traffic [it could have been passengers or freight or both]). The question of 
the airport’s existence was not supposed to be part of the debate. But in fact, most 
interventions were focused on the “existence issue” and the Commission had to deal 
with that. It then included it in public meetings. Online, however, this issue was 
not mentioned as one that should be discussed, but in fact it was one of the hottest 
topics and nobody could prevent it (in public meetings people were sometimes 
reprimanded for going over old ground!). Users of the Internet here have played a 
great role in redefining the “legitimate” issue, sometimes with anger. Most of them 
www.ebook3000.com

Citizen’s Deliberation on the Internet   245
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
have then argued against a specific location by showing how the idea of building 
a new airport was illegitimate. The thematic frame proposed on the Web site has 
been overcome by an argumentation strategy which cannot be easily stopped as in 
public meetings where the chairman interrupts for being off the subject. Online, the 
forum’s moderator has never really interfered into discussions. He recalls having 
asked civil servants to answer some of the questions asked by citizens on the forum, 
but this is how far his intervention has really gone.
This absence of real moderation on the forum, partly due to an overload of work 
for a small team, and partly corresponding to a policy of free expression online, has 
emphasized the difference between the online and off-line debate. I here agree with 
J. Street and S. Wright (in press) on their analysis of the role played by moderation 
in an online deliberation: “The choice of moderation style can be significant (and 
positive) in shaping the quality and usefulness of the debates, particularly for gov-
ernment-run discussions.” Nevertheless, because online debates are not subject to 
specific schedules, and because the “moderator” does not play the same role than 
the chairman—who is often showing authority towards participants in a public 
meeting—it has been easier for Internet users to extend the scope of the debate to 
nonexpected topics. 
A second example reveals how smart Internet users can be. When they logged onto 
the Web site forum page, participants were invited to “ask a question,” which is quite 
different to, for example, to “send your message,” which is a common phrase used 
in public debate. It suggests that the participant is not in a position to exchange ideas 
with experts and the administration but instead that participant needs to be informed 
in order to appreciate the quality of the proposed program. This tiny detail reflects 
the difficulty the administration and public debate organizers have to conceive a 
real and balanced exchange of opinions, despite their claims. Internet users have 
overcome this strong suggestion by using the question mark to deliver their opinion. 
They used the “object” line on e-mails to sum up their positions (“useful debate?” 
“For Vatry,” and so on) and very often their nickname has also been an indicator of 
their position (e.g., “no to the airport,” “Juvincourt yes,” “a countrywomen,” etc.). 
Thanks to this little trick, a wide variety of opinions have been expressed and few 
discussions between users have occurred, although one has to notice the absence 
of civil engineers on the net. Most discussion and exchange with them happened 
off-line, during public meetings, or aside, thanks to personal contacts.
Lessons have been learned from the Ducsai case. The Commission for instance keeps 
open every topic on a debate on his Web site as a counterpart of public meetings 
which are all focused on a specific topic except introductory ones. Participants are 
not compelled to “ask questions” and can now give their opinion in various forms 
(e.g., simple online statement, formal letter available in pdf format, or elaborated 
position paper), all of which are archived. Nevertheless, the formalization of each 
debate Web site does not leave much space for any local specificity or new form of 
creativity; online participation seems to have reached a new level. The domination 

246   Monnoyer-Smith
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
of writing and rational argumentation still values a traditional way of expression 
which limits the inclusive potential of an interactive media to state or local institu-
tions and an educated portion of the population. According to the Commission’s 
Vice President, their main concern remains as: How do we include more people 
into the debate and how can we adapt our deliberation process to their mode of 
communication?
A.Real.Argumentation.on.the.Forum
The comparison between online and off-line argumentation and their structure has 
shown that the extension of an actor’s ways of participating to the debate is not 
detrimental to the debate’s quality. 
Three rhetorical questions have been covered on the Ducsai forum: For or against a 
new airport?; Its location?; and, Is the public debate a real and fruitful one? Almost all 
arguments expressed online have their counterparts off-line: the environmental one 
(noise pollution, worse quality of air…), the economical one (it is a very expensive 
public infrastructure, but, on another hand, it could enhance local economy), and 
the “alternative” one (there are other solutions to explore). 
Nevertheless they slightly differ from each other. Public meetings have seen more 
elaborate and technical arguments developed. This has lead to an important analysis 
on the air traffic evolution in the last decade and in the near future. One can notice 
that each arena brings to the debate its own point of view on a specific topic; “private” 
and “public” interests have been defined and legitimized differently in each arena. 
Online, “private” concerns rightfully expressed themselves as enlightening some 
local consequences (Doury, 2005a), whereas off-line, the same set of arguments is 
inaudible; national authorities “represents” the national public interest and will not 
let it be challenged by local actors. 
The reengineering of the Commission’s Web sites has blurred frontiers between 
online contributions and traditional writing ones. With both of them indistinct from 
the user’s point of view, it tends to legitimate a rational and extended argumentation. 
The proliferation of position papers and written contributions and the absence of 
forums have eliminated on-the-spot comments and quick exchanges we had seen 
in the Ducsai debate. Therefore, more research is now needed in order to evaluate 
the argumentative structure and content of online contributions. 
www.ebook3000.com

Citizen’s Deliberation on the Internet   247
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Conclusion—Hybrid.Debates:..
A.New.Form.of.Deliberative.Space?
Since the Ducsai, the National Commission has developed its Web site and given voice 
to hundreds of people not able to attend public meetings and has spread information 
to associations and citizens. The Internet is now widely used and quite intertwined 
with off-line debates; questions, contribution, and their answers constitute the center 
of the participative process. Between February and May 2006, in a similar generic 
debate about the extension of the Parisian tramway, the CNDP counted more than 
1,500 participants to meetings asking 300 questions, and 25,000 single visitors on 
the Web site asking more than 400 questions. It appears that since the Ducsai, hy-
brid procedures have become a common way of participating to public decisions, 
even if it is not yet widely recognized and accepted by all political elites. We have 
here an unidentified deliberative object which presents certain characteristics of 
traditional deliberation (online and off-line meetings with arguments exchanged, 
a transparency of the procedure, and opened to all stakeholders), but which does 
not correspond to the canon of deliberation (Cohen, 1994; Habermas, 1997). It is 
a moving space, with actors entering and exiting, a wide use of rhetoric, emotions, 
and personal relationships. 
This has brought us to question the heuristic value of a concept of deliberation 
which rests on a rather normative and discursive ground. Instead of incriminating 
the procedure for not being deliberative enough (not inclusive enough, transparent 
enough, sincere enough, and so on), one should reconsider what deliberation really 
is. If the concept of deliberation does not allow us to comprehend the existing situa-
tion, should we not reconsider it or rephrase it? This could be the theme of another 
chapter for instance, but I would like to stress here two dimensions of deliberation 
which have not been deeply considered by the theory.
First, material and technical factors shape deliberation and therefore contribute to 
excluding potential participants from debates. In our case study, the evolution from 
the first Ducsai debate to more recent ones suggests that the inclusive potential of 
the Internet has now reached its own limits. Based on writing skills, contributions 
are as selective as oral ones which necessitate mastering emotions and commend-
ing symbolic authority. If Internet favors alternative ways of expressing arguments 
which enhance the heterogeneity of the public as it has been shown in the Ducsai 
debate, it has not yet been configured to open itself to other forms of expression, 
such as images, mini-films, and other forms of multimedia productions. 
By limiting debate to “public reason,” one, by definition, limits the variety/plurality 
of people participating and tends to restrain it to articulated forms of oral/written 
argumentation. These criticisms have been formulated by Marion Young (1996) 
towards the habermassian conception of deliberation:

248   Monnoyer-Smith
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Restricting practices of democratic discussion to moves in a contest where some 
win and others lose, privileges those who like contest and know the rules of the 
game. Speech is assertive and confrontational is here more valued than speech that 
is tentative, exploratory or conciliatory. (p. 123) 
Therefore, a procedural and discursive approach to deliberation not only excludes 
many potential participants from the debate, but also structures all discussion by 
imposing a unique type of constraint that might not fit with the creative potential of 
many citizens. We advocate here that production of norms rests within the creative 
capacity of every member of the deliberative process to express his or herself with 
one’s own perspective as long as everybody listens to each other in the format one 
chooses to do so. In this perspective, new Web services and technology offer interac-
tive and multimedia solutions which could help citizens to voice their concerns in 
an alternative fashion to writing. The wide use of cell-phone filming devices could 
be envisioned as a way of participating in online blogs, for instance. 
Second, we have concluded from our case study that the use of ICT as another arena 
of expression has helped citizens to overcome traditional and symbolic face-to-face 
constraints (Davies, 1999; Stromey-Galley, 2002), such as its rituals, its forms of 
power, and its argumentative frame, by giving them a chance to build another delib-
erative space. It has become a somewhat creative space for individuals uncomfortable 
with the public meetings scheme. Nevertheless, actual Web site design and control 
by the National Commission has jeopardized citizen’s appropriation of this delib-
erative space as there is less room for improvisation and creativity. Formatting and 
modelling discussion spaces within the debate tends to prevent us from welcoming 
other types of population in the discussion, especially those who have not framed 
their communication skills within those restricted boundaries. Therefore, the Internet 
should be considered as an alternative space for deliberation but not the “ultimate” 
one, as participants shape their expression according to the medium they use, which 
depends on various socioeconomic factors (Young, 1999).
I have tried in this chapter to show that there could not be such a thing as an “ideal 
procedure” as a true deliberative process should be as inclusive as possible and there-
fore could not be reduced to only one format. The potential of these new online and 
hybrid debates rests in their ability to mobilize citizen’s creativity and use it within 
a larger deliberative frame than a traditional exchange of rational argument. 
A next step in the theory of deliberation is now needed. It should rephrase the pro-
duction of normative structures out of its discursive anchorage in order to show how 
argumentation can take various semiotic forms. I have tried elsewhere to start such 
a research program using Hans Joas’ theory of creative action (Monnoyer-Smith, 
2006b). In this perspective, hybrid deliberative processes are not measured out of 
a normative concept of deliberation but can be analyzed in their aptitude to include 
as many forms of expression as the local context justifies it. This could certainly 
lead to interesting field experiments and research analysis. 
www.ebook3000.com

Citizen’s Deliberation on the Internet   249
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
References
Almond, G. A. (1960). The American people and foreign policy. New York: Praeger.
Barber, B. (1984). Strong democracy. Participatory politics for a new age. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press.
Beck, U. (1992). Risk society: Toward a new modernity. London: Sage.
Beck, U., Giddens, A., & Lash, S. (1999). Reflexive modernization. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Beierle, T. B. (2002). Democracy on line. An evaluation of the national dialogue on public 
involvement in EPA decisions (RFF Report). Washington, D.C. Retrieved March 24, 
2006, from http://www.rff.org/rff/Documents/RFF-RPT-demonline.pdf
Bellamy, C., & Raab, C. D. (1999). Wiring up the deck-chairs? In S. Coleman, J. Taylor, & 
W. Van de Donk (Eds.), Parliaments in the age of the Internet (pp. 156-172). Oxford 
University Press.
Bohman, J., & Rehg, W. (Eds.). (1997). Deliberative democracy. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cohen, J. (1989). Deliberation and democratic legitimacy. In A. Hamlin & P. Pettit (Eds.), 
The good polity (pp. 17-34). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Cohen, J. (1994). Critical viewing and participatory democracy. Journal of Communication, 
44(4), 98-113.
Cohen, J. (1997a). Deliberation and democratic legitimacy. In J. Bohman & W. Rehg (Eds.), 
Deliberative democracy (pp. 67-92). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Cohen, J. (1997b). Procedure and substance in deliberative democracy. In J. Bohman & W. 
Rehg (Eds.), Deliberative democracy (pp. 407-437). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cohen, J. R. (1989). Deliberation and democratic legitimacy. In A. Hamlin & P. Pettit (Dir.), 
The good polity (pp. 17-34). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Coleman, S. (2001). The transformation of citizenship? In B. Axford & R. Huggins (Eds.), 
New media and politics. London: Sage, 109-126.
Coleman, S. (2004). Connecting Parliament to the public via the Internet: Two case studies 
of online consultations. Information, Communication & Society, 7(1), 3-22.
Coleman, S., & Gøtze, J. (2001). Bowling together: Online public engagement in policy 
deliberation. London: Hansard Society Publishing.
Coleman, S., Hall, N., & Howell, M. (2002). Hearing voices. The experience of online public 
consultations and discussions in the UK. London: Hansard Society Publishing.
Converse, P. E. (1964). The nature of belief systems in mass publics. In D. E. Apter (Ed.), 
Ideology and discontent (pp. 206-261). New York: Free Press.
Cooke, M. (2000). Five arguments for deliberative democracy. Political Studies, 48(5), 
947-969.
Dahlberg, L. (2001). Computer-mediated communication and the public sphere: A critical 
analysis. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 7(1), 1-28.

250   Monnoyer-Smith
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Davies, R. (1999). The web of politics: The Internet’s impact on the American political 
system. Oxford University Press.
Dewey, J. (1927). The public and its problems. London: Allen & Unwin.
Dobry, M. (1992). Sociologie des crises politiques. Paris: Presses de la FNSP.
Dodier, N. (1999). L’espace public de la recherche médicale. Autour de l’affaire des ciclo-
sporines. Réseaux, 95, 109-154.
Doury, M. (2005a, May 26-29). Thesis and ethos: How to defend private interests without 
ruining one’s image. Paper presented at the IADA Congress, Bucharest, Romania.
Dryzek, J. S. (2000). Deliberative democracy and beyond. Liberals, critics, contestations. 
Oxford University Press.
Elster, J. (1998). Deliberative democracy. Cambridge University Press.
Giddens, A. (1990). The consequence of modernity. Cambridge: Polity. 
Giddens, A. (1991). The modernityand self-identity. Cambridge: Polity. 
Guttmann, A., & Thompson, D. (1996). Democracy and disagreement. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Habermas, J. (1975). Legitimation crisis. Boston: Beacon Press.
Habermas, J. (1984). The theory of communicative action. Boston: Beacon Press. 
Habermas, J. (1997). Droit et démocratie. Entre faits et normes. Paris: Gallimard.
Hill, K., & Hugues, J. (1998). Cyberpolitics: Citizen activism in the age of the Internet. 
Oxford: Rowman and Littlefield.
Joly, P.-B. & Assouline, G. (2001). Assessing debate and participative technology assessment 
in Europe, Final report. Grenoble: INRA Economie et Sociologie rurales, Teys: QAP 
Decision. Retrieved from http://www.inra.fr/internet/Directions/SED/sciencegouvern-
ance/pub/ADAPTA/index.html
Klein, H. (1999). Tocqueville in cyberspace: Using the Internet for citizen associations. The 
Information Society, 15, 213-220.
Lippmann, W. (1922). Public opinion. New York: Mac Millan.
Loader, B.D. (Ed.). (1998). Cyberspace divide: Equality, agency and policy in the informa-
tion society. London: Sage.
Luke, T. (1998). The politics of digital inequality: Access, capability and distribution in 
cyberspace. In C. Toulouse & T. W. Luke (Eds.), The politics of cyberspace. London: 
Routledge. 
Macpherson, C. B. (1977). The life and times of liberal democracy. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Manin, B. (1985). Volonté Générale ou Délibération ? Esquisse d’une Théorie de la Délibéra-
tion Politique. Le débat, 33, 72-93.
Manin, B. (1994). On legitimacy and political deliberation. Political Theory, 15(3), 338-
368.
Manin, B. (2005). Délibération et Discussion. Swiss Political Science Review, 10(4), 34-
46.
www.ebook3000.com

Citizen’s Deliberation on the Internet   251
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Mendelberg, T. (2002). The deliberative citizen: Theory and evidence. Research in Micro-
politics, 6,151-193.
Monnoyer-Smith, L. (2006a). Citizen deliberation on the Internet: An exploratory study. 
International Journal of E-government Research, 2(3), 58-74.
Monnoyer-Smith, L. (2006b). La délibération comme invention du politique. Sciences de 
la Société, 69, 51-70.
Morison, J., & Newman, D. (2001). Online citizenship: Consultation and participation in 
lew labour’s Britain and beyond. International Review of Law, Computers and Tech-
nology, 15(2), 171-194.
Norris, P. (1999). Critical citizens: Global support for democratic goernment. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Page, B., & Shapiro, R. (1992). The rational public: Fifty years of trends in American policy 
preferences. Chicago University Press.
Pateman, C. (1970). Participation and democratic theory. Cambridge University Press.
Price, V. (in press). Citizens deliberating online: Theory and some evidence. In T. Davies 
& B. S. Noveck (Eds.), Online deliberation: Design, research and practice. CSLI 
Publications/University of Chicago Press. Retrieved September 3, 2007, from http://
www.ksg.harvard.edu/netgov/files/talks/docs/11_13_06_seminar_Price_citizens-
delib_online.pdf
Price, V., & Cappella, J. N. (2002). Online deliberation and its influence: The electronic 
dialogue project in campaign 2000. IT and Society, 1, 303-328.
Pruijt, H. (2002). Social capital and the equalising potential of the Internet. Social Science 
Computer Review, 20(2), 109-115.
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American community. 
New York: Simon and Schuster.
Rains, S. A. (2005). Leveling the organizational playing field-virtually. Communication 
Research, 32(2), 193-234.
Ranerup, A. (2000). Online forums as arena for political discussions. In T. Ishida & K. 
Ibister (Eds.), Digital cities: Technologies, experiences and future perspectives (pp. 
209-223). Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Renn, O. (1992). The social arena concept of risk debates. In G. S. Krimski & D. Westport 
(Eds.), Social theories of risk (pp.179-196). Westport, CT: Praeger.
Rheingold, H. (1994). The virtual community: Homesteading on the electronic frontier. 
New York: Harper Perennial.
Sachs, H. (1995a). An ethnographic study about the computer networks. Media, Culture 
and Society, 17(1), 81-99.
Sachs, H. (1995b). Computer networks and the formation of public opinion: An ethnographic 
study. Media, Culture & Society, 17(1), 81-99.
Sanders, L. (1997). Against deliberation. Political Theory, 25, 347-375.
Street, J. (1997). Remote control? Politics, technology and ‘electronic democracy.’ Journal 
of Communication, 12(1), 27-42.

252   Monnoyer-Smith
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Stromer-Galley, J. (2002). New voices in the political sphere: A comparative analysis of 
interpersonal and online political talk. Javnost/The Public, 9(2), 23-42.
Sustein, C. (2001). Republic.com. Princetown University Press.
Wallace, P. (1999). The psychology of the Internet. Cambridge University Press.
Wilhelm, A. G. (2000a). Democracy in the digital age: Challenges to political life in cy-
berspace. London: Routledge.
Wilhelm, A. G. (2000b). Virtual sounding boards: How deliberative is online political discus-
sion? In B.N. Hague & B. Loader (Eds.), Digital democracy: Discourse and decision 
making in the information age (pp. 154-178). London: Routledge.
Wright, S. (2005). Design matters: The political efficacy of government-run discussion 
forums. In R. Gibson, S. Oates, & D. Owen (Eds.), Civil society, democracy and the 
Internet: A comparative perspective (pp. 80-99). London: Routledge
Wright, S. (2006). Government-run online discussion fora: Moderation, censorship, and 
the shadow of control. The British Journal of Politics and International Relations, 
8(4), 550-569.
Wright, S., & Street, J. (in press). Democracy, deliberation and design: The case of online 
discussion forum. New Media and Society.
Young, I. M. (1990). Justice and the politics of difference. Princeton University Press.
Young, I. M. (1996). Communication and the other: Beyond deliberative democracy. In S. 
Benhabib (Ed.), Democracy and difference: Contesting the boundaries of the political. 
Princeton University Press.
Young, I. M. (1999). Difference as a resource for democratic communication. In J. Bohman 
& William Rehg (Eds.), Deliberative democracy (pp. 387-398). Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Young, I. M. (2002). Inclusion and democracy. Oxford University Press.
www.ebook3000.com

Citizen’s Deliberation on the Internet   253
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Endnotes
1 
This paper is an updated version of an article published in the International Journal 
of E-government research, 2(3), pp. 58-74.
2 
These figures are available in the Commission’s 2007 annual report.

254   Millard
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.XI
E-Government.for.an..
Inclusive.Society:
How.Different.Citizen.Groups.Use.
E-Government.Services.in.Europe
Jeremy Millard, Danish Technological Institute, Denmark
Abstract
This chapter examines the role of e-government in supporting an inclusive society 
by focusing on how government and e-government services are used, and who uses 
them. In this context, the socioeconomic and other characteristics of users and 
nonusers of e-government services are examined, as is the importance of the differ-
ent user access channels, including the digital channel, and the consequences this 
has. The focus is also on user experiences of e-government and the role of human 
intermediaries in delivering services. In each case, the benefits and challenges of 
e-government for an inclusive society are documented and analyzed. Finally, con-
clusions are drawn concerning appropriate inclusion policy. 
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government for an Inclusive Society   255
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Introduction
There has been a relative dearth of studies and data on the user demand and usage 
side of e-government services compared with the supply side. This is both because 
it is much easier to collect supply side data from mainly public organizations than 
it is to collect usage data from citizens, and because chronologically roll-out takes 
place before take-up and use. This chapter presents new data and analysis (Millard, 
2006) which, to some extent, redress this imbalance.1 These findings are related 
to other sources and specifically to the issue of an inclusive society by examining 
the consequences of e-government for inclusion and how the benefits could be 
optimized.
The overall focus of the chapter is thus on the role e-government plays in an inclu-
sive society by examining who the users of government and e-government are, the 
channels they use, and the role of social intermediaries in delivering e-government 
services.
Who.Uses.Government.and.E-Government.Services
According to the eUSER survey, almost 70% of all adults had direct contact with 
the public administration in the previous 12 months, although the average number 
of contacts was only 1.6 per person during that period. Figure 1 shows the four main 
types of such service users and their main distinguishing characteristics, each of 
which is examined in the following.
Government.Service.User
Based on multivariate statistical analysis techniques, Figure 2 shows that a citizen’s 
educational level is the most important factor determining whether or not they use 
government services. For example, citizens with a tertiary education are 2.5 times 
more likely to be government users than those with the lowest educational level, 
while Figure 3 shows that citizens in the over 65 age group are 1.9 times more likely 
to be government users than the 18-24 age group.
Other important factors include income, where citizens with over median income 
are 1.3 times more likely to be government users than citizens below the poverty 
level, and employment status which shows that unemployed citizens, followed 
closely by those who are early retired and invalids, are marginally more likely to 
be government users than other groups. 

256   Millard
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Government.users
are.similar.to.
general.adult.
population,.except.
are.more.likely.to:
E-government.users
are.similar.to.government.
users,.except.more.likely.to:
Social.intermediaries.
for.e-government
are.similar.to..
e-government.users,.
except.more.likely.to:
Receivers.of.partial.
or.full.assistance.from.
social.intermediaries.for.
e-government
are.similar.to..
e-government.users,.
except.more.likely.to:
• 
have higher 
educational 
level
• 
have higher 
income
• 
be 
unemployed, 
early retired, 
or retired and 
invalided
• 
be over 65 
years old
• 
live in a country with 
high e-government roll-
out
• 
live in a country with 
high Internet roll-out
• 
have well developed e-
skills and e-attitudes
• 
be in employment
• 
be 25-34 years old
• 
be male
• 
use government services 
more often
• 
use a wider range of 
government service types
• 
use a wider range a 
different channels, not 
only digital 
• 
be early retired, 
or permanently 
invalided
• 
be unemployed
• 
be 35-64 years old
• 
live in a country 
with not very 
advanced e-
government roll-
out
• 
have low digital 
engagement or skills
• 
be in manual or 
unskilled occupations
• 
be not working or 
retired
• 
be rare Internet users
• 
live in a country with 
not very advanced 
e-government roll-out
• 
be 50 plus years old
• 
have low functional 
and low leisure online 
orientation
• 
be female
• 
have below secondary 
level education
• 
have Internet access 
outside the home
Figure 1. Characteristics of typical user groups
(relative likelihood -- adjusted odds ratio)
 
0 
1 
2 
3 
Below lower 
secondary 
Lower
secondary 
Higher 
secondary  
Tertiary 
Figure 2. Use of government services by education            
(relative likelihood -- adjusted odds ratio)
18 - 24 
25 - 34 
35 - 49 
50 - 64 
65+ 
0 
1 
2 
3 
Figure 3. Use of government services by age                 
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government for an Inclusive Society   257
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
The data overall paint a picture of the typical government service user as an able, 
well educated, and higher income citizen who is in an older age group, and who is 
not working because of unemployment, invalidity, or retirement. Therefore, such 
citizens are those who couple the abilities and background to know about and ac-
cess government with a strong need for such services. The issue remains that those 
citizens without such abilities and backgrounds, but who similarly need government 
services, are more likely to be socially excluded from using them.
E-Government.Service.User
Figure 4 shows that the media channel used when contacting government is still 
overwhelmingly face-to-face. However, other data show that there are very large 
differences between countries, so that Denmark is the leading country in the sample 
with over 40% of government users using e-channels, while in the Czech Republic, 
the figure is less than 9%. Also, in the UK and Ireland, the use of the postal services 
and the telephone has overtaken face-to-face. Overall, new digital media provide 
access for about 20% of all contacts with government, 17% of this via the Internet 
or e-mail, and about 3% via short message service (SMS).
Other data from this survey show that e-government users are more likely, when 
compared to government users, to use services supporting everyday life (such as 
related to work, housing, education, culture, transport, etc.), closely followed by 
taxes. Much of this is accessing information, but there is also increasing communi-
cation with civil servants. More formal and binding transactions, on the other hand, 
involved in calculating and submitting tax returns, making declarations or applying 
for permits (such as to the police or for building permission), and for receiving fi-
nancial benefits and grants, are less popular as online services, but still increasing. 
Clearly the latter services can be more intimidating as they require the provision 
of personal data, and often the perceived need for more face-to-face and real time 
interaction, which can be more difficult to mediate electronically. 
 
 
Telephone
 
Post 
Internet or
 
email
Fax 
SMS
 
0% 
20%
40% 
60% 
80% 
100% 
Face-to-
face 
Figure 4. Media channel used when contacting government

258   Millard
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
There is a strong tendency for the e-government user to use a wider range of gov-
ernment services, whether or not accessed online, than non e-government users. 
In addition, as shown in Figure 5, e-government users use government services on 
average 3.1 times a year compared with non e-government users who only tend to 
use government services 1.5 times a year. Further, when examining the range of 
media.channels used, e-government users are “flexi-channelers” and “channel 
balancers,” in that 60% to 70% of them also use other channels and freely make 
channel choices suited to their preference, to the specific service, and to the specific 
task in hand. 
This is in some contrast to non e-government users who tend much more to be “single 
channellers,” relying mainly on the face-to-face channel to access government ser-
vices. The strong overall conclusion is, therefore, that the individual e-government 
user tends to use government services more than non e-government users for a wider 
range of such services, and to do so through a more flexible channel mix, which 
includes both electronic and traditional channels. The behavior of e-government 
users is thus typically somewhat different from government users.
The profile of e-government users is also quite different from government users, as 
illustrated in Figure 1. According to the eUSER multivariate data analysis, the fac-
tors determining whether or not an individual is likely to be an e-government user 
are country, Internet, or skill related, while sociodemographic factors are much less 
significant. Thus, an individual living in a country with high Internet availability 
and high roll-out of e-government services, and having well developed e-skills 
and e-attitudes, is highly likely to use e-government. The only important sociode-
mographic factor seems to be labor market status, that is, citizens in employment 
are 2.4 times more likely to be e-government users than retired persons. This is in 
Figure 5. Media channel used for government services by type of user 
 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
(A) eGovernment users (total
use 311%)
(B) Internet user but not
eGovernment user (total use
171%)
(D) Government user but not
Interner users (total use
148%)
Internet & email
face-to-face
Post
Telephone
Fax
SMS/text messaging
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government for an Inclusive Society   259
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
some contrast to users of government services generally (rather than e-government 
services specifically) where, education, income, labor market status, and age are the 
most important factors. Encouraging e-government use is thus more a question of 
providing access and skills, rather than tackling income, education, or age issues, 
although the latter are important for wider inclusion issues, and this clearly has 
important policy implications.
However, it is still the case that those e-government users who use the Internet from 
PC platforms tend to be in higher income groups, of lower age, and with a tertiary 
education. In contrast to this, the eUSER data show that access to e-government 
services through handheld devices, like mobile phones or PDAs (personal digital 
assistants or organizers, that is, “m” or mobile government), is both becoming more 
important generally, and is particularly important for people who are otherwise 
likely to be digitally excluded. These include groups with below secondary level 
education, those not working (but not unemployed), or those invalided, as well as 
those living in countries where access is a greater problem.
E-Government.Social.Intermediary
Figure 6 shows that using e-government services on behalf of others (i.e., as a “social 
intermediary” in a context of what can be termed the “social use” of e-government) 
is undertaken by about 11% of all users of government services. The data also show 
that 53% of users of e-government do so for their own purpose, 51% as part of their 
job, and 42% on behalf of family or friends, the latter thus being termed “social 
intermediaries” for e-government.
In terms of national differences, countries with the highest e-government use are 
also those with the highest use on behalf of family or friends; those countries include 
Ireland, Denmark, the UK, and France. In addition, Ireland and France stand out as 
having greater use on behalf of family and friends than they do for their employer, 
and are also conspicuous as having by far the highest ratios of use for family or 
friends in relation to total e-government use, perhaps because of their strong family 
and community centered culture. 
Further, it can be seen that the new.member.states (NMS) have the lowest e-gov-
ernment use for family or friends in terms of total government use, as well as an 
average or a lower than average percentage in terms of total e-government use. The 
former relates to their lower overall use of e-government, and the latter, perhaps, 
to the higher ratio of total e-government use on behalf of their employer. The latter 
appears to be an important route in the NMS for people to become familiar with 
e-government.
This picture changes, however, when it comes to the number of people assisted by 
social intermediaries, as shown in Figure 7, where the NMS are all above the mean 

260   Millard
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
of 2.6, with the Czech Republic soaring to 5.3. This may be due to the fact that the 
NMS, particularly those in this sample, generally have greater access problems and 
lower digital.skills, so that more of the population may need to use e-government 
via the more skilled social intermediaries. Part of the explanation for this could also 
be that it reflects different levels of development (particularly sophistication and 
user friendliness) of e-government services in these countries.
The mean of 2.6 other persons assisted by social intermediaries for e-government, 
coupled with the generally high numbers of such intermediaries (10% of total govern-
ment users and 42% of e-government users), indicates that the phenomenon is prob-
ably a lot more widespread and important than has previously been appreciated.
Figure 6. E-government users: On whose behalf (own purpose, for family/friends, 
or for employer)
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
 DE 
44%
38%
47%
 FR 
56%
48%
42%
  IT  
29%
46%
67%
 DK 
73%
40%
67%
 UK 
55%
43%
49%
  IE  
49%
56%
38%
 PL 
60%
41%
50%
 HU
42%
26%
63%
 CZ 
39%
31%
70%
  SI  
52%
42%
57%
EU 10
53%
42%
51%
Ratio to total eGov use:
for own use >>  
for family etc use >>
for employer use >>
% eGovernment users of total
government users
eGov total users
eGov own use
eGov on behalf of family or friends (social intermediary)
eGov on behalf of employer (as part of job)
Figure 7. Average number of other persons assisted by social intermediaries for 
e-government
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
DE
FR
IT
DK
UK
IE
PL
HU
CZ
SI
EU 10
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government for an Inclusive Society   261
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Figure 1 also shows that there is a quite striking profile of a social intermediary for 
e-government as one who tends to be a user of a large number of different e-gov-
ernment services, with both a functional and leisure orientation to the Internet, and 
who belongs to the group of early retired, permanently invalided, not employed, or 
otherwise not working before the formal retirement age.
Moreover, social intermediaries tend to have well developed application and techni-
cal digital.skills, to be interested in new technology, to have a mixed educational 
background (either very little or very high), and to live in countries which are only 
“emerging” in terms of e-government readiness, as opposed to those which are 
“intermediate” or “advanced.” They also tend to be male, between the ages of 35 
and 64, and with quite low income, although these latter factors are not statistically 
significant. Thus, overall, social intermediaries are far from being typical e-govern-
ment users or Internet “nerds,” but are instead likely to be individuals with plenty 
of free time and with good digital.skills and orientation in not very advanced e-
government countries. Such people, of which could be a large number, represent 
an important resource to help deliver the benefits of e-government. 
There is also some evidence of civil.servants acting as intermediaries as part of their 
job.2 User inclusion and personalization strategies could include a “one-to-one” rela-
tionship between the citizen and the public sector, where an individual civil servant, 
a small team of civil servants, or an electronic agent, have the responsibility to fully 
support individual (or groups of) users, whether these be citizens or businesses. This 
concept could be crystallized around the term “citizen account manager” (in order 
to draw an analogy with “key account managers” in business) or citizen service 
activist, while the term “street-level bureaucrat” has been used. Intermediated and 
personalized support and services can best be provided in this way to users if deep 
knowledge is available about each individual, obtained through highly intelligent 
digital systems, including electronic agents, but also, critically, through human and 
personal experiences based on tacit knowledge which digital systems cannot always 
capture and which is only built up through trust established by close contact over 
time. Thus, this role moves on from the earlier one-stop-shop concept, in which a 
user approached a single desk (or portal) for further access to different services, but 
where the desk officer did not necessarily have any prior relationship with the user, 
to a concept based on longer-term and more stable relationships.
User.Receiving.Assistance..
from.an.E-Government.Social.Intermediary
Figure 8 shows that on average 18% of all e-government users receive some help from 
an intermediary, while 7% receive complete help. Support from an intermediary is 
highest in the new member states, which may be due to greater access problems and 
lower digital.skills, so that more of the population may need to use e-government via 

262   Millard
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
the more skilled social intermediaries. This probably also reflects different national 
levels of e-government service development, particularly in terms of sophistication 
and user friendliness. Italy and Ireland are the only older member states with greater 
than average numbers of users receiving help from a social intermediary.
As with social intermediaries themselves, Figure 1 shows that the profile of the 
typical citizen receiving assistance in using e-government is also highly specific. 
Such assisted users are very likely to have low digital engagement and skills, to 
be in manual and unskilled occupations, to be a rare Internet user, and to live in 
countries with low Internet penetration. They also tend to be 50 years old and over, 
demonstrate a markedly low functional and low leisure online orientation, be female 
rather than male, have a below secondary level education, be unemployed or not 
working, have an income below the poverty level or no higher than median income, 
have Internet access outside the home, and have started to “use” the Internet only 
very recently. These latter factors are, however, not statistically significant.
Overall, it is clear that users assisted by e-government social intermediaries tend to 
be in otherwise socially- and digitally-excluded groups, who would normally not 
receive any benefits from e-government services.
Flexi-Channeling.for.an.Inclusive.Society
Both the eUSER data and other sources show that a multichannel, rather than single 
channel, strategy can successfully reach out to existing users in new ways, as well 
as to previously excluded users, both by providing new channels and through better 
tailored and more appropriate services. Although the face-to-face and increasing 
Figure 8. Users receiving support from an e-government social intermediary
 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
DE
FR
IT
DK
UK
IE
PL
HU
CZ
SI
EU 10
entirely on your own
some help from intermediary
intermediary did everything
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government for an Inclusive Society   263
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
telephone channels remain most important, particularly to disadvantaged.groups, 
the use of electronic channels is rapidly increasing and channel balance is dynamic 
and evolving. Digital systems in the back-office can also help the civil servant pro-
vide better services to users in traditional ways, and this may be for the time being 
more important. (OECD, 2005). 
There is evidence that appropriate channel strategies, built on good user research, 
increase service uptake and channel migration, as well as generate cost efficien-
cies within individual public sector departments (EDS, 2005). There can also be 
increasing user fulfillment given that, in the absence of well thought out channel 
strategies, many citizens regularly demonstrate that they are prepared to trade off 
inconvenience, poor environments, and service for the reliability of traditional 
channels only. Overall experience of the flexi-channel approach shows that success 
means (Millard & Shahin et al., 2006):
• 
Providing better services for the user, which are flexible, accessible, direct, 
rapid, complete, of high quality, easy to use, more secure, and ensure fulfill-
ment.
• 
That channel strategies should be designed to match channel features with actor 
requirements (e.g., user needs, cost efficiency, etc.), and that a business case 
needs to be developed to provide the basis for rational decision making.
• 
That appropriate organizational changes in terms of organizational integration, 
administrative, or legal rules should be made.
• 
That appropriate human resource characteristics, in terms of staff culture, ways 
of working, jobs and roles, numbers, qualifications, skills, and competencies, 
are necessary.
• 
That technological architectures must be in place which enable channels to 
interoperate instead of merely coexist, that is, they must ensure integration of 
channels and applications, take account of phases in user sessions, and switch 
points between channels, as well as the reuse of data and of generic service 
components, and this will often require the integration of backend business 
processes.
Examples of successful flexi-channel strategies from the private sector include 
Amazon (the most successful e-retailer) which now is also moving into multichannels 
and exploring ways to acquire physical outlets (e.g., by entering into cooperation 
with the book store retailer Waterstones in the UK). This is both good for Amazon 
and for Waterstones by developing physical coffee shops, environments for read-
ing, discussion groups, and so forth. Also, Tescos (the UK’s largest retailer) is both 
increasing its physical and e-outlets. There seems to be a strong move in some 
sectors to multichannels and switching between channels, so that more “e” leads 

264   Millard
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
to more “p” (physical), and vice versa. The public sector should learn from this, 
especially in policies to support an inclusive society. Wider evidence from other 
areas of digital application shows that creating more online participation does not 
mean creating less human or physical participation, but typically quite the opposite, 
as Figure 5 amply illustrates.
Despite the benefits of a flexi-channel strategy for inclusion, there is much evidence 
of strong moves away from multichannels towards single digital channels. The 
efficiency program in the UK targets services where most of the users are already 
online, such as students applying for higher education. Government-to-business 
online services like corporation tax are already mandatory for large businesses in 
many countries (e.g., Spain, Denmark, and UK) and are fast also becoming so for 
SMEs (Denmark). Even where multichannel options are maintained, all are rapidly 
becoming supported by digital and shared databases. The move to the single “e” 
channel means the full automation of services which can sometimes lead to less 
information being accessible, for example, when citizens cannot change or even 
check their medical records. However, it should also be borne in mind that the 
traditional system may not have been any better than this and that provision costs 
also need to be considered.
Problems and tensions could arise if the movement to a single e-channel quickens 
and extends to nonspecialists target groups, perhaps triggering a “reverse-engineer-
ing” of e-inclusion in the medium to longer term. When everything is “e” and “e” is 
virtually without cost, and if efficiency is prioritized higher than inclusion, human 
contact will become expensive, given that labor costs compared to other costs will 
rise dramatically. Thus, the already included and better-off citizens will use their 
resources and skills to access human contact with government in situations where 
this gives them a better service (e.g., in terms of personal advice, care, social sup-
port, etc.). The excluded and worse-off citizens will, however, only have recourse 
to the ubiquitous and inexpensive e-services, and will not be able to supplement 
these with human contact. The e-exclusion of today will thus be replaced by the 
h-exclusion of the future, where “h” refers to human service contact. The European 
Union (EU) may need to run h-inclusion programs. (Millard et al., 2006). Indeed, 
the financial sector, which often leads in terms of using digital systems for service 
provision, is already moving strongly to the standard e-channel solution. In Finland, 
for example, e-banking is now the norm and provides a high quality service with 
no access costs. However, if personal face-to-face financial advice is desired, a 
relatively large charge is made for this. If government goes down the same route, 
there could be serious inclusion.policy issues.
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government for an Inclusive Society   265
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Conclusion.and.Recommendations
Users often report that they do not care how a service is delivered, or who delivers 
it, as long as it is easy, cheap, quick, and provides service fulfillment. The evidence 
and analysis presented in this chapter show that there are two often overlooked 
strategies for including disadvantaged users in the benefits provided by government 
services, that is, flexi-channeling and social intermediaries. From the strictly digital 
policy perspective this could provide a challenge as both involve the blending of 
electronic and nonelectronic channels. As in other policy areas, it is necessary to 
avoid the trap of assuming that the e-channel provides all the answers, particularly 
when seen from the perspective of the (disadvantaged) citizen.
On the one hand, using nonelectronic channels, including social intermediaries, 
could be a barrier to users’ own use of e-services, but on the other hand, interme-
diaries are clearly already able to include many citizens who would otherwise be 
excluded. One way of envisaging flexi-channeling and the use of intermediaries is 
as a powerful transition phase for many, prior to their own use of e-services. This 
is certainly the historical pattern of diffusion of new technology in which leaders 
(temporarily) assist laggards, such as radio in the 1920s, TV in the 1950s, and PCs 
and tele-cottages in the 1980s and 1990s.
This chapter has also shown, however, that flexi-channeling is extremely important 
in its own right and may not be a temporary phase at all. It involves informed and 
skilled users switching between channels according to their personal preferences, 
to the service being accessed, and to the task involved, and is strongly associated 
with both greater and more successful use of government services generally. Such 
flexi-channeling strategies are used much more by e-government users than others, 
and this appears to be a deliberate choice based on each channel’s own strengths 
and weaknesses, which taken together are highly complementary and beneficial to 
users.
Extrapolation into the future leads to the prediction that most if not all activities 
which become “routine,” which manipulate, match, and mine data, and which 
require access to information and systematized intelligence, will become codified 
and automated by digital systems, resulting in the squeezing out of direct human 
presence. In the future, on the other hand, human presence will focus even more 
than at present on activities which humans are innately better equipped to do than 
machines. Fortunately, this still appears to encompass a large potential area of 
growth in the numbers and quality of tasks, revolving around the use and creation 
of implicit and tacit knowledge. These areas include care, teaching, consulting, 
counseling, advising, controlling and coordinating, decision and policymaking, 
creating, brainstorming, empathizing, socializing, and so forth. In each case, of 
course, such human presence will increasingly be strongly supported by powerful 
digital systems. (Millard et al., 2006).

266   Millard
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
In contrast to these flexi-channeling strategies used by e-government users, many non 
e-government users access government services through social.intermediaries. This 
is already providing immense benefits by ensuring that potentially disadvantaged 
users, who may otherwise not receive the services they need, successfully receive 
them. The types of individuals receiving assistance from social intermediaries for 
e-government tend to be those who are otherwise beyond the digital divide and 
excluded from e-government, as well as from other information society benefits, 
and who are living in countries which are not leading in e-government.
The social intermediaries themselves represent a potentially rich resource, given that 
up to half of all e-government users are already acting in this way and assist many 
other individuals. It is clear that assistance networks bringing online benefits to a 
large number of people, who would not otherwise enjoy them, already exist. It is 
also likely, of course, that this is nothing new, and that such networks have existed 
at family and community levels—helping to disseminate the benefits of public and 
private services—long before the Internet provided another channel. Policy design 
should recognize and promote these networks in a flexi-channel future.
It was noted above that there is a serious e-government digital.divide, and that 
online services seem, even more than traditional government services, to be used 
by a social elite rather than by a representative cross section of adults. However, 
traditional channels, including the increasingly important telephone-based services, 
are likely to continue to be offered and used by all types of users, including those 
beyond the digital divide, as described above. Moreover, these human and physi-
cal channels are more and more supported and enhanced by digital systems as part 
of the user interface of a transformed and digitized back-office. In addition, there 
are burgeoning examples of e-channels which are increasingly being used by those 
beyond the digital divide, such as mobile devices. This chapter has not looked at 
digital TV, as it is not yet widely rolled out for government services, but also here 
the potential seems significant.
Despite these conclusions, however, this chapter has shown that people who them-
selves use e-channels for government seem thereby to increase their overall interaction 
with government and to obtain important benefits which non e-government users 
do not readily enjoy. So, although the weaker members of society will continue to 
be served particularly by traditional channels, and increasingly by mobile devices 
or social intermediaries, the overall benefits they receive from government are still 
likely to remain considerably less than mainstream e-government users.
Thus, in addition to recognizing and promoting flexi-channeling and the role of 
social intermediaries for e-government, inclusion.policy should also promote wider 
own-use e-government take up. This chapter has shown that the important factors 
involved are not sociodemographic but rather related directly to e-government supply 
and Internet penetration, as well as to individual skills and online engagement. These 
www.ebook3000.com

E-Government for an Inclusive Society   267
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
are factors which can be tackled within the present policy time frame as concrete 
strategies with relatively easily recognized and measurable results and impacts.
References
Electronic Data Systems Corporation (EDS). (2005). Delivering modern services strategy: 
EDS input to first stages of e-government Unit consultation in the UK. London, Eng-
land: Electronic Data Systems Corporation.
Millard, J. (2006). E-government services. Deliverable D5.2, current demand/supply match. 
eUSER project: Evidence-based support for the design and delivery of user-centered 
online public services (European Commission IST 6th Framework IST Program). 
Retrieved September 6, 2007, from http://www.euser-eu.org
Millard, J., Shahin, J., Warren, R., & Leitner, C. (2006). Towards the e-government vision 
for EU in 2010: Research policy challenges.  2020 visions. Seville, Spain: Institute of 
Prospective Technological Studies/ European Commission DG JRC.
OECD. (2005). Multi-channel service delivery. E-government for better government. Paris: 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Endnotes
1 
eUSER provided a statistically valid telephone interview sample of over 10,000 adults 
across ten EU member states (the Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Hun-
gary, Ireland, Italy, Poland, Slovenia, and the United Kingdom,), as well as studies on 
the supply side, on good practice, and on user-orientation issues related to e-health, 
e-government and e-learning services (http://www.euser-eu.org).
2 
Such as civil servant “intermediaries” operating out of small citizen offices located 
in the more deprived areas of Berlin, and using a digital suitcase to visit old people’s 
homes, hospitals, and the like, as information empowered front-line staff. Also, in 
Seattle in the USA a system of mobile civil servants visiting citizens, rather than 
citizens traveling to the town hall, is being established based on the capabilities of 
the city digital backbone. (Millard et al., 2006) 

268   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.XII
The.Utilization.of.Online.
Policy.Forums.on..
Government.Web.Sites..
and.the.Practice.of.
Digital.Democracy
Chan-Gon Kim, Rutgers University – Newark, USA
Marc Holzer, Rutgers University – Newark, USA
Abstract
The Internet provides a new digital opportunity for realizing democracy in public 
administration, and this study raises a central question: What factors determine 
public officials’ acceptance of the practice of digital democracy on government Web 
sites? We focused on online policy forums among many practices of digital democ-
racy. To gauge public officials’ behavioral intentions to use online policy forums 
on government Web sites, we examined individual and organizational factors, as 
well as system characteristics. We administered a survey questionnaire to Korean 
public officials and analyzed a total of 895 responses. Path analysis indicates that 
three causal variables are important in predicting public officials’ intentions to use 
online policy forums: perceived usefulness, attitudes toward citizen participation, 
and information quality. We discuss implications of this study for practices and 
theories of digital democracy.
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   269
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Introduction
Today the Internet is changing the operation of governments. A large number of 
citizens can access a large volume of information simultaneously and conduct online 
transactions with government agencies 24 hours a day and 7 days a week. In addi-
tion, citizens can register their opinions on government Web sites through online 
discussions and online polls anywhere and anytime. Thus the concept of digital 
democracy is emerging. New electronic means have the potential to increase citizen 
participation in government and to ensure that citizens’ preferences are reflected in 
the policy-making process. 
Despite the fact that digital democracy is possible in public agencies, there are wide 
variations in adopting and implementing practices of digital democracy among gov-
ernment agencies at the federal, state, and local levels. Decisions at the organizational 
level do not necessarily bring changes in the attitudes and behaviors of individual 
public administrators. In other words, policy adoption is different from program 
implementation, and factors affecting these two are also different (de Lancer Julnes 
& Holzer, 2001). Successful innovation implementation is determined by human 
factors, or end-users’ acceptance of the innovation (Nedovic-Budic & Godschalk, 
1996). Organizational members can reject or not fully utilize an innovation (Leon-
ard-Barton & Deschamps, 1988). The literature on implementation has indicated 
that street-level bureaucrats have considerable resources with which to influence 
policy outcomes (Hill, 2003; Lipsky, 1980). While some research has examined the 
adoption of e-government at the organizational level (Ho, 2002; Ho & Ni, 2003; 
Moon, 2002; Weare, Musso, & Hale, 1999), little research has been done at the 
micro level with regard to attitudes and behaviors of public administrators toward 
digital democracy.
.This study examines why and how public administrators accept the practice of 
digital democracy on government Web sites when they make and implement pub-
lic policies. Since public administrators offer and maintain government Web sites, 
supplying the space for digital democracy on a government Web site and utilizing 
it is a prerequisite for such democracy in public administration. The major research 
question of this study is: What factors determine public administrators’ acceptance 
of the practice of digital democracy on government Web sites? More specifically, 
this study focuses on a single practice of digital democracy and aims to examine the 
impact of individual, organizational, and system characteristics on administrators’ 
intentions to use online policy forums on government Web sites. 

270   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Digital.Democracy.in.Public.Administration
Citizens’ involvement in public affairs through the Internet has brought about the 
use of several essentially similar terms such as “digital democracy,” “electronic 
democracy,” “e-democracy,” “virtual democracy,” “teledemocracy,” and “cyber-
democracy.” This study uses the term “digital democracy” to describe the use of 
government Web sites for citizens’ participation in public affairs. The main charac-
teristic of the new information and communication technology (ICT) is digital data 
transfer (Hague & Loader, 1999), and “digital democracy” is defined as “a collec-
tion of attempts to practice democracy without the limits of time, space, and other 
physical conditions, using ICT or computer-mediated communication instead, as 
an addition, not a replacement for, traditional analogue political practices” (Hacker 
& van Dijk, 2000, p. 1). 
Online citizen participation can enrich democratic processes and build public trust 
by enabling public agencies to receive broader and more diverse opinions from 
citizens than those available through traditional means of off-line participation 
(Holzer, Melitski, Rho, & Schwester, 2004). Through online discussions, members 
of the public can learn from each other, and public administrators can become bet-
ter informed, sometimes through the experience and hidden expertise of the public 
(Coleman & Gotze, 2001). Several scholars have suggested typologies of digital 
democracy (Kakabadse, Kakabadse, & Kouzmin, 2003; Norris, 2005; Tsagarou-
sianou, 1999). With regard to the current state of digital democracy, information 
disclosure on government Web sites is full-fledged, and many agencies are receiv-
ing feedback on policy issues from citizens through the Internet. However, online 
discussion is just emerging, and decision making through government Web sites, 
such as electronic referenda, is still relatively infrequent in government (Kim, 2004; 
Norris & Moon, 2005). 
Online.Policy.Forums
An “online policy forum,” or an online discussion forum, is a place on the gov-
ernment Web site where public officials or citizens can post discussion topics on 
policy issues and exchange their views on those topics over a period of time. Online 
policy forums can take several formats. Public officials can participate in forums 
as discussants or citizens can discuss issues among themselves without officials’ 
participation. Discussion topics can be offered by the government or registered 
online by citizens. There are also two types: issue-based forums and policy-based 
forums. At an early stage of policy-making, issue-based forums are organized to 
collect ideas and opinions. At a later stage of policy-making, policy-based forums 
are offered to solicit responses about a draft policy (OECD, 2003). 
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   271
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Although online policy forums are still emerging and not universally utilized yet 
in public agencies, there are several exemplary cases of online discussion forums 
around the world (Coleman & Gotze, 2001; Holzer et al., 2004; OECD, 2003). At 
the central government level, the National Dialogue of Public Involvement was 
implemented by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 2001 to offer online 
discussions between public administrators and citizens (www.network-democracy.
org/epa-pip) with 1,261 message postings in 10 days (Beierle, 2002; Holzer et al., 
2004). The Hansard Society e-democracy program has been piloting a series of 
online discussion forums (www.tellparliament.net) for the UK Parliament since 
1998 (Coleman, 2004). At the state level, Minnesota offered an online policy forum, 
Issue Talk (http://issuetalk.state.mn.us), from January 7th to 18th in 2002, inviting 
more than 600 comments and ideas about the state budget shortfall (Minnesota 
Planning, 2002). Cases at the local government level include online forums for the 
city of Kalix (www.kalix.se), Sweden, for the North Jutland County in Denmark 
(www.nordpol.dk), and for Bologna, Italy (www.comune.bologna.it) (Coleman & 
Gotze, 2001; OECD, 2003). Recently, several governments have introduced online 
policy forums which have been recognized as good practices such as ConsultQld 
in Queensland, Australia (Hogan, Cook, & Henderson, 2004), DanmarksDebat-
ten in Demark, Wolverhampton e-panel in UK (European Commission, n.d.), and 
Cyber Policy Forum at the Seoul Metropolitan Government, South Korea (United 
Nations, 2007). 
Conceptual.Framework
Since a government Web site can be viewed as an information system (IS) for public 
administrators, the theories of information system use can be applied to explain and 
predict public administrators’ use of such sites. Kling and Jewett (1994) classify 
theories of information systems use into two broad types: rational systems models 
and natural systems models. The rational systems model views organizations as 
instruments designed to pursue specific goals and considers the efficiency of achiev-
ing those goals the most important value. By contrast, the natural systems model 
assumes that organizational members share a common interest in the survival of 
the organization, and that organizational behavior is oriented toward the pursuit of 
this end. In this model, organizations resemble natural systems that are like living 
organisms (Kling & Jewett, 1994; Scott, 1992). We conducted a comprehensive 
literature review, and an updated classification is presented in Table 1. The prevail-
ing theory of information systems use is based on the rational systems model, and 
the technology acceptance model (TAM) (Davis, 1989) has been the dominant 
model for an individual’s technology acceptance (Adams, Nelson, & Todd, 1992; 
Mathieson, Peacock, & Chin, 2001).

272   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Based on previous research on an individual’s technology acceptance and utilization 
of information systems, this study proposes a model to explain public administra-
tors’ acceptance of online policy forums on government Web sites when public 
agencies introduce such forums in their organizations. Since the characteristics of 
the Internet are different from other information technologies, these factors have 
been considered in formulating the conceptual framework of this study. Previous 
information technology innovations were mainly used by organizational members 
Theories
Research
Variables.Affecting.IS.Use
1..RATIONAL.SYSTEMS.EXPLANATIONS.
A. IS Implementation 
Research
• Kwon and Zmud 
(1987)
• Lucas, Ginzberg, and 
Schultz (1990)
• individual, structural, technological, task-related, and 
environmental factors
• user acceptance, system characteristics, management 
support, user knowledge of system purpose and use, 
organizational support, and so forth.
B. IS Success Model
• DeLone and McLean 
(1992, 2003)
• information quality, system quality, and service 
quality
C. Application of the
 Theory of Planned
       Behavior
• Ajzen (1985, 1991)
• attitude, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral 
control
D. Technology
        Acceptance Model
• Davis (1989)
• attitude, perceived usefulness, and perceived ease 
of use
E.   Application 
of  Innovation 
Diffusion Theory
• Rogers (1995)
• relative advantage, compatibility, complexity, 
trialability, and observability
2..NATURAL.SYSTEMS.EXPLANATIONS
A. Cultural/political
 perspectives 
• Kling (1980), 
Kling and Jewett 
(1994)
• Walsham (1993)
• power politics, coalition building, and forwarding 
agendas
• interpretive approach, and  organizations as cultures 
and political systems
B. Sociotechnical
  Systems Theory
• Kraemer, Dutton, and 
Northrop (1981),
Danziger, Dutton, 
Kling,
and Kraemer (1982)
• Danziger and Kraemer 
(1986)
• political, socioeconomic technological environment, 
political/administrative system attributes, computer 
package (hardware, software, procedures, 
management policies), and orientation of computing
• organizational environment, computer package, and 
user characteristics 
C. Theory of
Technology
Enactment
• Fountain (2001) 
• objective information technology, organizational 
forms, institutional arrangements, and enacted 
technology
Table 1. Theories of information systems use
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   273
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
without interaction with citizens; but using a government Web site for purposes of 
digital democracy requires interaction between public administrators and citizens. 
Thus, when studying online dialogue, factors affecting users’ attitudes and behav-
iors should be considered in contexts different from those utilized in studying other 
information technologies. 
The basic constructs of this study are “perceived usefulness” and “behavioral in-
tention,” which are derived from the technology acceptance model (Davis, 1989) 
and the Theory of Planned Behavior (Ajzen, 1985, 1991). The dependent variable 
in this study is a public administrator’s behavioral intention to use online policy 
forums on a government Web site. A public administrator’s behavioral intention to 
use such forums is considered a predictor for actual use of online policy forums. The 
public administrator’s perceived usefulness of online policy forums is an interven-
ing variable that mediates the relationship between independent variables and the 
behavioral intention. We assume that independent variables have impacts on the 
dependent variable directly or indirectly through perceived usefulness. A survey 
of the literature on variables that affect individuals’ attitudes toward, and use of, 
information technology generated a substantial number of factors (Anandarajan, 
Simmers, & Igbaria, 2000; Davis, 1989; DeLone & McLean, 1992, 2003; Finlay & 
Finlay, 1996; Igbaria, Guimaraes, & Davis, 1995; Lucas, 1978; Ranerup, 1999; Thong 
& Yap, 1995). Among them, nine factors are considered important in predicting a 
public official’s perceived usefulness and behavioral intention to use online policy 
forums. These independent variables can be divided into three broad categories: 
(1) individual factors, (2) organizational factors, and (3) system characteristics. 
Individual factors include Internet attitudes, attitudes toward citizen participation, 
and knowledge about digital democracy. Organizational factors refer to supervisor 
support, IS department support, and innovation-supportive organizational culture. 
System characteristics include the ease of use of online policy forums, information 
quality, and perceived risk in online discussion. Taking account of all relationships 
between these factors, the conceptual framework of this study is presented in Figure 
1. According to empirical research, there is a close relationship between intention 
and behavior (Davis, 1989; Davis, Bagozzi, & Warsaw, 1989; Sheppard, Hartwick, 
& Warsaw, 1988). This study focuses on intentions and relevant factors but does not 
measure actual use of online policy forums. However, behavioral intention can be 
used as a surrogate for predicting actual use of online policy forums.
Individual.Factors
Previous research found that favorable Internet attitudes are associated with the 
frequent use of the Internet (Anandarajan et al., 2000; Spacey, Goulding, & Mur-
ray, 2004). Thus we expect that administrators’ Internet attitudes will influence 

274   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
the perceived usefulness of online policy forums and behavioral intentions to use 
online policy forums. 
Hypothesis.1-1..A public administrator’s favorable Internet attitudes will positively 
affect his/her perceived usefulness of online policy forums.
Hypothesis.1-2..A public administrator’s favorable Internet attitudes will positively 
affect his/her behavioral intention to use online policy forums.
To implement digital democracy, public administrators must interact with citizens 
and allow citizen participation in policy making and implementation through the 
government Web site. Wang (2001) found that both managers’ and public adminis-
trators’ willingness to be accountable was related to increased citizen participation. 
Thus public administrators’ favorable attitudes toward citizen participation are 
prerequisite to the use of practices of digital democracy.
Hypothesis.2-1. A public administrator’s favorable attitudes toward citizen partici-
pation will positively affect his/her perceived usefulness of online policy forums.
Individual.Factors.
•  Internet Attitudes 
• Attitudes toward 
Citizen Participation 
• Knowledge about 
Digital Democracy 
System.Characteristics.
• Ease of Use 
• Information Quality 
• Perceived Risk in 
Online Discussion 
Organizational.Factors.
• Supervisor Support 
• IS department Support 
• Innovation-supportive 
Organizational Culture  
..
Actual.Use.
..
Perceived.
Usefulness.
 
..
Behavioral.
Intention.to.Use.
Figure 1.  A model of public administrators’ acceptance of online policy forums on 
government Web sites
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   275
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Hypothesis.2-2..A public administrator’s favorable attitudes toward citizen participa-
tion will positively affect his/her behavioral intention to use online policy forums.
Research on the use of management information systems (MIS) has shown that 
education, training, experience, and skills of individuals using the technology are 
associated with perceived usefulness and actual use of information systems (Agarwal 
& Prasad, 1999; Igbaria, 1990, 1993; Igbaria et al., 1995; Igbaria, Parasuraman, & 
Baroudi, 1996; Nelson & Cheney, 1987). Thong and Yap (1995) found that busi-
nesses with CEOs who are more knowledgeable about information technology 
(IT) are more likely to adopt IT. Research found that knowledge about the Internet 
affects the use of the Internet (Finlay & Finlay, 1996). If public administrators are 
knowledgeable about digital democracy, they will understand the importance of 
digital democracy and perceive the usefulness of practices of digital democracy as 
high and use online policy forums frequently. 
Hypothesis.3-1..A public administrator’s high level of knowledge about digital democ-
racy will positively affect his/her perceived usefulness of online policy forums.
Hypothesis.3-2..A public administrator’s high level of knowledge about digital 
democracy will positively affect his/her behavioral intention to use online policy 
forums.
Organizational Factors
In MIS research, organizational support—such as manager support and information 
center (IS department) support—was found to affect system usage (Anandarajan et 
al., 2000; DeLone & McLean, 2003; Igbaria, 1990, 1993; Igbaria et al., 1995, 1996; 
Lucas, 1978; Thompson, Higgins, & Howell, 1991). Supervisors may encourage or 
discourage subordinates to use online policy forums in their work. In addition, an 
IS department that is in charge of managing the government Web site may facilitate 
implementing practices of digital democracy in agencies. 
Hypothesis.4-1. Supervisor support for using online policy forums will positively 
affect a public administrator’s perceived usefulness of online policy forums.
Hypothesis.4-2. Supervisor support for using online policy forums will positively 
affect a public administrator’s behavioral intention to use online policy forums.

276   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Hypothesis.5-1. IS department support for using online policy forums will positively 
affect a public administrator’s perceived usefulness of online policy forums.
Hypothesis.5-2. IS department support for using online policy forums will positively 
affect a public administrator’s behavioral intention to use online policy forums.
As long as a certain culture exists within an organizational unit, the activities of 
organizational members can be influenced by the culture. According to Subramaniam 
and Ashkanasy (2001), innovation takes place when organizational members are op-
portunistic, not constrained by many rules, and willing to take risks and experiment 
with new ideas. According to previous research, businesses with more innovative 
CEOs are more likely to adopt IT (Thong & Yap, 1995), and top managers’ risk-taking 
propensity is positively associated with IT innovativeness (Moon & Brestchneider, 
2002). Since online policy forums are new innovations, public administrators who 
work in an innovative organizational culture may try new inventions. 
Hypothesis.6-1. Innovation-supportive organizational culture will positively affect 
a public administrator’s perceived usefulness of online policy forums.
Hypothesis.6-2. Innovation-supportive organizational culture will positively affect 
a public administrator’s behavioral intention to use online policy forums.
System.Characteristics
The influence of perceived ease of use on perceived usefulness and behavioral 
intention is derived from the technology acceptance model (Davis, 1989). Public 
administrators have several means of gathering information from citizens in the 
decision-making process, such as face-to-face meetings, telephone conversations, 
or government Web sites. Thus perceived ease of use of online policy forums is 
directly related to the use of online policy forums. 
Hypothesis.7-1. A public administrator’s positive perception of the ease of use of 
online policy forums will positively affect his/her perceived usefulness of online 
policy forums.
Hypothesis.7-2. A public administrator’s positive perception of the ease of use of 
online policy forums will positively affect his/her behavioral intention to use online 
policy forums.
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   277
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Previous research found that the quality of information had significant influence on 
the perceived usefulness of an information system (Klobas, 1995; Kraemer, Danziger, 
Dunkle, & King, 1993; Lin & Lu, 2000). We can view the government Web site as 
an information system that produces information for public administrators when 
citizens register their opinions on online policy forums. Public administrators judge 
whether the information provided by online citizens is reliable and valid, or whether 
the online information is of uncertain quality. If the quality of online information 
is high, then public administrators may perceive the usefulness of online policy 
forums positively and continuously use those forums. Therefore, the following 
hypotheses are formulated:
Hypothesis.8-1. A public administrator’s perception of high information quality 
of online policy forums will positively affect his/her perceived usefulness of online 
policy forums.
Hypothesis.8-2. A public administrator’s perception of high information quality of 
online policy forums will positively affect his/her behavioral intention to use online 
policy forums.
Online relationships are established between users of the Internet when they are 
engaged in electronic conversation through a chat room or a discussion forum. The 
lack of face-to-face contact leads to greater anonymity in online interactions, and 
online citizens might behave with less good will (Friedman, Kahn, & Howe, 2000). 
If public administrators perceive a high risk in using online discussion forums, they 
might not write on online forums. 
Hypothesis.9-1. A public administrator’s perception of high risk in online discus-
sions will negatively affect his/her perceived usefulness of online policy forums.
Hypothesis.9-2..A public administrator’s perception of high risk in online discussions 
will negatively affect his/her behavioral intention to use online policy forums.
The.Impact.of.Perceived.Usefulness.on.Behavioral.Intention
The importance of perceived usefulness as one of the determinants of the intention 
to use an information system has been stressed by the technology acceptance model 
(Davis, 1989). Perceived usefulness influences user acceptance of the information 
system because of the value of outcomes from using the system. Public administrators 
can utilize online information submitted by citizens through online discussion on 

278   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
the government Web site. If public administrators perceive the usefulness of online 
policy forums as positive, they will use online policy forums more frequently.
Hypothesis.10. A public administrator’s positive perception of the usefulness of 
online policy forums will positively affect his/her behavioral intention to use online 
policy forums.
Research.Methodology
Sample.and.Data.Collection
The unit of analysis in this study is individual public administrators, and the popula-
tion of this study is defined as public administrators who work in public agencies 
that have adopted online policy forums, and make and implement public policies 
in their agencies in South Korea. Our focus is on individual public administrators’ 
use of online policy forums in South Korea, which is the leader in broadband pen-
etration in the world (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 
2001) and places second in terms of Internet usage rate among its population (In-
ternational Telecommunication Union, 2004). South Korea obtained a fifth-place 
ranking in terms of the e-government readiness index and was sixth in terms of 
the e-participation index constructed by the United Nations1 (2004). South Korea 
has been vigorously promoting e-government and digital democracy, with many 
public agencies adopting online policy forums. All Ministries except one among 
18 Ministries offer online policy forums, and 12 upper-level local governments 
among 16 offered online policy forums as of January, 2005. Thus South Korea is a 
particularly good case for the study of digital democracy.
This study mixed purposive sampling and cluster sampling. To select appropriate 
public agencies, we used several criteria, such as the frequency of online policy 
forums, the number of message postings per forum, and the highest and average 
number of message postings per forum. Then, a total of 13 public agencies were 
selected, including four central government ministries, two upper-level local gov-
ernments, and seven lower-level local governments. Among 18 ministries at the 
central government of South Korea, four ministries were relatively active as shown 
in Table 2 in terms of the frequency of online forums and the number of message 
postings. The ministries selected for the survey were the Ministry of Information 
and Communication, the Ministry of Government Administration and Home Af-
fairs, the Ministry of Unification, and the Ministry of Health and Welfare. Among 
them, the Ministry of Unification’s “Online Public Hearing” (www.unikorea.go.kr) 
was the most active, offering six online forums in 2004, with 731 participants on 
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   279
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
average per forum. Discussion topics were offered by government or registered by 
citizens on government Web sites. Most online forums lasted for 15 to 30 days, and 
any citizens or officials could post messages. We applied the same methodology 
to selecting several local governments. Among 16 upper-level local governments, 
the Seoul Metropolitan Government and Gyeonggi Province were actively pro-
moting online policy forums and were selected for the survey. Seoul Metropolitan 
Government’s “Cyber Policy Forum” (http://forum.seoul.go.kr) provided discussion 
topics every month in 2004, with the average number of 120 participants per forum. 
Gyeonggi Province offered five online policy forums in 2004, with 82 participants 
on average per forum (http://www.gg.go.kr/0502new/news/join/dojung/dojung01/
index.html). Among 232 lower-level local governments, seven district offices were 
deemed appropriate for this study: Gangnam, Gangdong, Guro, Jungnang, Seongbuk, 
Yangchon, and Gangseo.
Ministry
Selection of 
discussion topics
Online 
forums with 
message 
postings 21 
- 50
Online 
forums
with message 
postings 
above 50
The highest number of 
message postings per 
forum
Unification
Offered by 
government
0
6
1,257
 (average 731)
Information and 
Communication
Offered by 
government
0
2
99 
(average 96)
Government Administration 
and Home Affairs
Offered by 
government
0
2
1,281 threads (average 
more than 817)
Health and Welfare
Offered by 
government
0
2
167 
(average 120)
Gender Equality and Family 
Offered by 
government
3
2
110 
(average 60)
Education and Human 
Resources Development
Offered by 
government
2
1
106
Construction and 
Transportation
Offered by 
government
0
1
258
Agriculture and Forestry
Offered by 
government
0
1
252
Finance and Economy
Offered by 
government
0
1
85
Science and Technology
Offered by 
citizens
1
0
11
Labor
Offered by 
government
1
0
29
Table 2. Statistics of online policy forums for 18 ministries in South Korea (2004)
continued on following page

280   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Then we selected several divisions at each public agency. Selected divisions were 
those that posted discussion topics on their agency’s Web site or those related to 
discussion topics registered by citizens. A total of 34 divisions were selected in the 
central government, 29 divisions in upper-level local governments, and 31 divisions 
in lower-level local governments. We mailed questionnaires to a manager at each 
agency in central and local governments between February 11th and 15th of 2005. 
Then these managers distributed the questionnaires to all public administrators who 
make and implement public policies in their divisions, which had posted discussion 
topics or had topics registered by citizens on government Web sites for the past two 
years. Questionnaires were distributed to 300 officials at the central government, 
320 at upper-level local governments, and 390 at lower-level local governments. 
Thus the total sample selected for this study was 1,010 as presented in Table 3. 
Questionnaires were accompanied by a cover letter that stated that participation was 
voluntary and that responses were anonymous, encouraging honest responses for 
this study. We did not ask a respondent’s name, phone number, resident registration 
number, address, or date of birth. After respondents completed the questionnaires, 
they voluntarily returned them by mail. After excluding incomplete questionnaires, 
we collected 895 questionnaires, and the response rate was 88.6% across govern-
ments.
Culture and Tourism
Offered by 
government
1
0
18
Commerce, Industry, and 
Energy
Offered by both 
government and 
citizens
1
0
39
Foreign Affairs and Trade
Offered by 
government
1
0
36
Maritime Affairs and 
Fisheries
Offered by 
government
1
0
27
Environment
Offered by 
government
0
0
10
Justice
0
0
0
National Defense
0
0
0
Table 2. continued
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   281
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Measurement.and.the.Survey.Instrument
This study used a five-point Likert-type questionnaire to measure the attitudes and 
beliefs of public administrators. We combined several questions to measure a vari-
able and created a composite measurement by summing individual items for each 
variable. Questionnaire items are summarized in the Appendix. Factor analysis and 
Cronbach alpha coefficients showed the unidimensionality and reliability of the 
instrument. Variables of this study are as follows:
Table 3. Distribution and collection of the questionnaire
Level of 
government
Agency
Number of 
divisions for 
survey
Distribution
Collection
Response 
rate
Central 
Government 
Ministries 
Ministry of Information & 
Communication
8 divisions
70
62
88.6%
Ministry of Government 
Administration & Home 
Affairs
8 divisions 
90
86
95.6%
Ministry of Unification
9 divisions 
70
64
91.4%
Ministry of Health & 
Welfare
9 divisions
70
65
92.9%
Subtotal
34
300
277
92.3%
Upper-
level Local 
Governments 
Seoul Metropolitan 
Government
22 divisions
240
230
95.8%
Gyeonggi Province 
7 divisions
80
69
86.3%
Subtotal
29
320
299
93.4%
Lower-
level Local 
Governments
Gangnam District Office 
12 divisions
120
80
66.7%
Gangdong District Office
3 divisions
40
23
57.5%
Jungnang District Office
3 divisions
55
50
90.9%
Guro District Office
3 divisions
40
39
97.5%
Seongbuk District Office
5 divisions
60
59
98.3%
Yangchon District Office
4 divisions
60
54
90.0%
Gangseo District Office
1 division
15
14
93.5%
Subtotal
31
390
319
81.8%
Total
94
1,010
895
88.6%

282   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
• 
Negative.Internet.attitudes: A public administrator’ negative attitudes toward 
the Internet.
• 
Attitudes.toward.citizen.participation: A public administrator’ willingness 
to allow citizen participation in the policy-making process.
• 
Knowledge.about.digital.democracy: A public administrator’s knowledge 
about digital democracy.
• 
Supervisor.support: The degree to which a public administrator’s supervisor 
emphasizes citizen input through online policy forums in policy processes and 
encourages employees to use online policy forums in their work.
• 
IS.department.support: The degree to which IS department supports a public 
administrator’s using online policy forums in public agencies.
• 
Innovation-supportive.organizational.culture: The degree to which a public 
administrator works in an innovative organizational culture in public agen-
cies.
• 
Perceived.ease.of.use: The degree to which a public administrator expects 
the use of online policy forums to be free of effort.
• 
Information.quality: The degree to which online information submitted by 
citizens is valuable and of high quality.
• 
Perceived.risk.in.online.discussion: The degree to which a public adminis-
trator perceives risks when communicating with citizens online.
• 
Perceived. usefulness: A public administrator’s subjective perception that 
using online policy forums will increase the job performance.
• 
Behavioral.intention: The degree to which a public administrator has the 
intention to use online policy forums in work.
Results
Descriptive.Statistics
Following factor analysis and reliability tests, appropriate constructs were estab-
lished, and the descriptive statistics for 11 research variables are presented in Table 
4. On average, public officials in South Korea seemed to believe that organizational 
culture is moderately innovative (M = 3.68), and they tended to have moderately 
high behavioral intentions to use online policy forums in the near future (M = 3.55). 
However, they think that they have only a little knowledge about digital democracy 
(M = 2.58), perceived low risk in online discussion (M = 2.83), and low supervisor 
support for using online policy forums (M = 2.89). When we examined a correlation 
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   283
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
matrix, perceived usefulness and behavioral intention have positive relationships 
with several variables. None of the independent variables show correlations above 
0.8 among themselves, which implies that multicollinearity would not be a problem 
in regression analysis. 
Path.Analysis
To test hypotheses, we analyzed data using SPSS and employed path analysis. 
Path analysis was developed by Sewall Wright as a method for examining relation-
ships among all variables and testing causal models when multiple variables are 
involved in a theoretical model (de Vaus, 1986; Loehlin, 1998; Pedhazur, 1997). 
In path analysis, a path diagram graphically displays the pattern of causal relation-
ships among a set of variables. An arrow from one variable to another indicates a 
direct effect, and a two-headed curved arrow indicates the correlation between two 
variables. We assume that the relations among the variables in the path model are 
linear and additive, the residual of each endogenous variable is not correlated with 
one another or with other endogenous variables, there is a one-way causal flow in 
the model, and the variables are measured on an interval scale without error. Then 
path analysis can be reduced to the solution of several multiple linear regression 
analyses (Pedhazur, 1997, p. 771). When we examined the assumptions of multiple 
regression, they were also met, including normality of residuals, linear relationships 
between variables, homoscedasticity, and no perfect collinearity.
Variable
N
Mean
Std.
Deviation
Negative Internet Attitudes
891
3.52
.95
Information quality
515
3.07
.63
Perceived usefulness
512
3.24
.64
Perceived risk in online discussion
883
2.83
.80
Supervisor support
861
2.89
.75
IS department Support
867
2.99
.81
Attitudes toward citizen participation
891
3.36
.73
Organizational culture
892
3.68
.68
Knowledge about digital democracy
892
2.58
.83
Ease of use
508
3.42
.64
Behavioral intention
889
3.55
.67
Table 4. Descriptive statistics for research variables

284   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
In path analysis, each path is given a path coefficient, a beta weight (standardized 
regression coefficient) in regression analysis that shows how much impact the vari-
able has on another variable. Since these path coefficients are standardized numbers, 
they can be compared with each other in terms of the degree of importance of each 
variable. 
To control for the effects of other known influences on regression models, we exam-
ined two variables: age and gender. When we removed these two control variables 
in regression analysis, R2 for the model without control variables was similar to R2 
for the original regression model with control variables, and the magnitude of the 
regression coefficients changed little. Among research variables, Internet attitudes, 
innovation-supportive organizational culture, and perceived risk in online discussion 
had no significant impacts on either perceived usefulness or behavioral intention. 
Thus these independent variables were removed in path analysis. 
The initial path analysis produced all path coefficients regardless of statistical sig-
nificance or meaningfulness of coefficients. To trim the path model and make it more 
parsimonious, insignificant or unimportant path coefficients can be removed from 
the model. Accordingly, two criteria were used in deleting a few path coefficients: 
the significance and importance of the coefficient. Path coefficients not significant 
at the 0.1 level were deleted, and path coefficients less than 0.05 were deleted from 
the model. Thus three paths were removed from the original path model: the path 
from knowledge about digital democracy to perceived usefulness, the path from 
supervisor support to behavioral intention, and the path from information quality 
to behavioral intention. All path coefficients in the final model are statistically sig-
nificant at the 0.05 level, R2 for the model predicting perceived usefulness is 0.572, 
and R2 for the model predicting behavioral intention is 0.417. This means that 57% 
of the variation of perceived usefulness is explained by five independent variables, 
and 42% of the variation of behavioral intention is explained by four independent 
variables and perceived usefulness. The final path model is presented in Figure 2. 
The total causal effect of each predictor on behavioral intention was calculated 
by adding the direct and indirect effects in the final path model. To obtain indirect 
effects, we multiply the path coefficients of all of the indirect routs. The results of 
effect analysis are presented in Table 5. Total causal effects for all predictor variables 
are significant at or below the 0.05 level. With regard to the magnitude of the total 
causal effect of each predictor on behavioral intention, the order of importance is as 
follows: (1) perceived usefulness (0.359); (2) attitudes toward citizen participation 
(0.220); (3) information quality (0.199); (4) ease of use (0.17); (5) IS department 
support (0.16); (6) knowledge about digital democracy (0.168); and (7) supervisor 
support (0. 042).
In path analysis, model-implied or model-predicted correlations between two vari-
ables using path coefficients should reproduce the original correlations or observed 
correlations (Heise, 1969; Klem, 1995; Kline, 1998; Pedhazur, 1982; Schumacker 
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   285
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Figure 2.  Final path model
Attitudes toward 
citizen participation 
Information quality 
Perceived.
Usefulness.
Behavioral.
Intention.
Supervisor support 
Knowledge about 
digital democracy  
IS department 
support 
Ease of use 
.187*** 
.117*** 
.359*** 
.127*** 
.120*** 
.090*** 
.116***
.093** 
.135*** 
.553*** 
Note. * significant at the 0.1 level, ** 0.05 level, *** 0.01 level 
.34 
.35 
.37 
.33 
.67 
.33 
.32 
.39 
.35 
.28 
.21 
.24 
.21 
.26 
.29 

286   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Table 5. Decomposition of effects for the final path model
Causal variable
Endogenous Variable
Perceived Usefulness
Behavioral Intention
Attitudes.toward.citizen.participation
Direct effect
.090*
.187*
Indirect effect
.032*
Total causal effect
.090*
.220*
Knowledge.about.digital.democracy
Direct effect
.117*
Indirect effect
Total causal effect
.117*
Supervisor.support
Direct effect
.116*
Indirect effect
.042*
Total causal effect
.116*
.042*
IS.department.support
Direct effect
.093*
.127*
Indirect effect
.034*
Total causal effect
.093*
.160*
Ease.of.use
Direct effect
.135*
.120*
Indirect effect
.048*
Total causal effect
.135*
.168*
Information.quality
Direct effect
.553*
Indirect effect
.199*
Total causal effect
.553*
.199*
Perceived.usefulness
Direct effect
.359*
Indirect effect
Total causal effect
.359*
R2
.572
.417
           Note. * significant at or below the 0.05 level.
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   287
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
& Lomax, 1996), and it is desirable to have correlation residuals with absolute 
values less than 0.1 (Kline, 1998). We calculated a predicted correlation in the 
path model by adding causal effects—direct and indirect effects—and noncausal 
effects—spurious and unanalyzed effects. Spurious effects occur when a third vari-
able has causal paths to both an independent variable and a dependent variable, 
while unanalyzed effects occur due to effects from correlations between pairs of 
source variables (Davis, 1985; Klem, 1995; Kline, 1998; Pedhazur, 1982). In our 
model, correlations range from 0.21 to 0.39 between pairs of source variables, and 
these effects were considered in analyzing the impact of independent variables on 
dependent variables.
The final path model appears to fit the data fairly well. Applying the criterion that 
the difference between the original and reproduced correlations should not exceed 
0.1, we find that correlation residuals in the absolute values for all correlations are 
well below the 0.1criterion (Table 6). Thus, the final path model reproduced all of 
the observed correlations, and the model is relevant in predicting public adminis-
trators’ behavioral intention to use online policy forums in South Korea. The final 
path model confirms that “perceived usefulness” mediates between some predictors 
and “behavioral intention.” Information quality does not directly affect behavioral 
intention, but affects it indirectly through perceived usefulness. Perceived useful-
ness provides only a partial mediation for attitudes toward citizen participation, 
supervisor support, IS department support, and ease of use.
Variable
1. ACP
2. Know
3. SPV
4. IS
5. EOU
6. Info
7. PU
1. ACP
−
2. Know
0
−
3. SPV
0
0
−
4. IS
0
0
0
−
5. EOU
0
0
0
0
−
6. Info
0
0
0
0
0
−
7. PU
.0001
.0129
.0001
0
0
.0001
−
8. BI
.0065
.0046
.0386
.0084
.0001
.0095
.0183
Note. Abbreviated variable names refer to the following variables:
ACP = attitudes toward citizen participation
Know = knowledge about digital democracy
SPV = supervisor support
IS = IS department support
EOU = ease of use
Info = information quality
PU = Perceived usefulness
BI = behavioral intention
Table 6. Correlation residuals from the final path model

288   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Conclusion
This study examined what factors determine public administrators’ acceptance of 
online policy forums on government Web sites for digital democracy and how indi-
vidual, organizational, and system characteristics affect public officials’ intentions 
to use online policy forums in South Korea. Hypotheses 2-1, 2-2, 3-2, 4-1, 5-1, 5-2, 
7-1, 7-2, 8-1, and 10 were supported, but hypotheses 1-1, 1-2, 3-1, 4-2, 6-1, 6-2, 
8-2, 9-1, and 9-2 were not supported at the 0.05 significance level.
First, perceived usefulness of online policy forums is the strongest factor affecting 
public administrators’ behavioral intentions to use online policy forums. Path analy-
sis reveals causal relationships between behavioral intention, perceived usefulness, 
and other predictors. Perceived usefulness has been found to play a mediating role 
between some predictors and behavioral intentions.
Second, public administrators’ favorable attitudes toward citizen participation are 
positively associated with the perceived usefulness of online policy forums and 
their intentions to use online policy forums. If public administrators have negative 
attitudes toward citizen participation, online policy forums cannot be utilized in 
the policy-making 
Third, the information quality of online policy forums is the major factor affecting 
public administrators’ perceived usefulness of online policy forums. It has the larg-
est impact on perceived usefulness among the nine factors. 
Fourth, perceived ease of use of online policy forums is a predictor for perceived 
usefulness of online policy forums and behavioral intentions to use online policy 
forums. If public administrators feel that online policy forums are easy to access 
and use compared to other methods of gathering citizens’ opinions, they will utilize 
online policy forums more frequently. 
Fifth, IS department support for using online policy forums is related to the per-
ceived usefulness of online policy forums and behavioral intentions to use online 
policy forums. Public officials may perceive online policy forums as useful when 
IS departments encourage officials to consider citizens’ opinions in the policy-mak-
ing process.
Sixth, public administrators’ knowledge about digital democracy is positively associ-
ated with their behavioral intention to use online policy forums. In other words, the 
more knowledgeable public officials are about digital democracy, the more likely they 
are to use online policy forums for digital democracy in public administration. 
Seventh, Internet attitudes, innovation-supportive organizational culture, and 
perceived risk in online discussion are not predictors for either perceived useful-
ness of online policy forums or behavioral intention to use online policy forums. 
Considering the fact that South Korean public administrators are heavy users of the 
Internet, Internet attitudes may have no impact on our model. Unlike other discussion 
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   289
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
forums operating in the private sector, the government’s online policy forums may 
strongly regulate messages posted on their Web sites, so public administrators may 
not perceive much risk when they write in online policy forums. As South Korea 
has been promoting administrative reforms at all public agencies, innovation-sup-
portive organizational culture may not be an important factor.
Since digital democracy is still emerging for many public agencies, the results of 
this research can be helpful for successful implementation of the concept. Path 
analysis reveals that.perceived usefulness, attitudes toward citizen participation, 
and information quality are the major determinants of behavioral intention among 
individual, organizational, and information system factors. Policy makers, elected 
officials, and managers should focus on increasing the level of those three factors in 
order to facilitate digital democracy. Leaders within public administration organiza-
tions should pay attention to online policy forums and utilize information provided 
by citizens in the policy-making process so that public administrators may perceive 
the usefulness of those policy forums. Since public administrators’ use of online 
policy forums involves citizen participation in the policy-making process through 
government Web sites, officials’ favorable attitudes toward citizen participation are 
Hypotheses
Results
Hypotheses
Results
H. 1-1. Internet attitude →
Usefulness 
Not 
supported
H. 6-1. Organizational culture →
Usefulness
Not 
supported
H. 1-2. Internet Attitudes →
Behavioral intention
Not 
supported
H. 6-2. Organizational culture → 
Behavioral intention
Not 
supported
H. 2-1. Attitudes toward citizen
participation → Usefulness
Supported 
H. 7-1. Ease of use → Usefulness
Supported 
H. 2-2. Attitudes toward citizen
participation →  Behavioral intention
Supported
H. 7-2. Ease of use → Behavioral 
intention
Supported
H. 3-1. Knowledge about digital
democracy → Usefulness
Not 
supported
H. 8-1. Information quality → 
Usefulness
Supported
H. 3-2. Knowledge about digital 
democracy → Behavioral intention
Supported
H. 8-2. Information quality → 
Behavioral intention
Not 
supported 
H. 4-1. Supervisor support →
Usefulness 
Supported
H. 9-1. Risk in online discussion 
→ Usefulness
Not 
supported
H. 4-2. Supervisor support → Behavioral 
intention
Not 
supported
H. 9-2. Risk in online discussion 
→ Behavioral intention
Not 
supported
H. 5-1. IS department support → 
Usefulness
Supported
H. 10. Usefulness → Behavioral 
intention 
Supported
H. 5-2. IS department support → 
Behavioral intention
Supported
Table 7. Summary of hypotheses testing process

290   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
indispensable to digital democracy. On the part of citizens, they should understand 
policy issues and provide good discussions on policy issues through government 
Web sites so that public administrators can perceive the usefulness of online policy 
forums and utilize them. This was consistent with the analysis of comments from 
respondents who emphasized that the quality of information, mature citizenship, 
and citizen’s competence in policy issues are prerequisite to the success of digital 
democracy..Many officials commented that opinions on online policy forums were 
often posted by narrow, self-interested parties, and some officials complained that 
abusive or malicious opinions were posted on government Web sites.
Theories of digital democracy have hypothesized that the Internet has a potential to 
broaden and deepen citizens’ participation in decision making in government and 
improve the quality of decisions by ensuring deliberative public debate. Although 
several studies have been conducted at the organizational level to find characteristics 
of agencies that have adopted practices of e-government, research on individual 
public administrators is rare. This research underscores several implications for de-
veloping theories of digital democracy. First, this study suggests that the acceptance 
of practices of digital democracy at the individual level should be distinguished 
from the adoption of such practices at the organizational level. This study also finds 
that the level of individual public administrators’ acceptance of practices of digital 
democracy varies within an agency that has adopted those practices. Second, this 
study indicates that the causal path model is valid in explaining public administra-
tors’ behavioral intentions to use online policy forums. This model can be extended 
to public administrators’ acceptance of other practices of e-government or digital 
democracy, such as online opinion polls/surveys, online public hearings, and elec-
tronic town meetings. As these practices take place online, there are no essential 
differences between online forums and other practices.
The generalizability of this study across countries is limited because the samples 
were selected from public officials in South Korea. We expect that individual, or-
ganizational, and IS system characteristics will differ between public officials in 
South Korea and other countries, and one previous study did show that the pattern 
of relationships between variables in IS research was different between countries 
(Igbaria & Zviran, 1991). Thus comparative, cross-national research is necessary 
to more fully understand the implementation process for digital democracy. In ad-
dition, future research might compare public administrators’ willingness to use the 
practice of digital democracy between public administrators who work at agencies 
that adopted such practices and those who work at agencies that did not introduce 
such practices in their organizations.
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   291
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
References
Adams, D. A., Nelson, R. R., & Todd, P. A. (1992). Perceived usefulness, ease of use, and 
usage of information technology: A replication. MIS Quarterly, 16(2), 227-247.
Agarwal, R., & Prasad, J. (1999). Are individual differences germane to the acceptance of 
new information technology? Decision Sciences, 30(2), 361-391.
Ajzen, I. (1985). From intention to actions: A theory of planned behavior. In J. Kuhl & J. 
Beckmann (Eds.), Action control: From cognition to behavior (pp. 11-39). New York: 
Springer- Verlag.
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, 50, 179-211.
Anandarajan, M., Simmers, C., & Igbaria, M. (2000). An exploratory investigation of the 
antecedents and impact of interne usage: An individual perspective. Behaviour & 
Information Technology, 19(1), 69-85.
Beierle, T. C. (2002). Democracy on-line: An evaluation of the national dialogue on public 
involvement in EPA decisions. Retrieved February 17, 2005, from 
http://www.rff.org/Documents/RFF-RPT-demonline.pdf 
Coleman, S. (2004). Connecting parliament to the public via the Internet. Information, 
Communication & Society, 7(1), 1-22.
Coleman, S., & Gotze, J. (2001). Bowling together: Online public engagement in policy 
deliberation. Hansard Society. Retrieved October 14, 2004, from http://bowlingto-
gether.net/bowlingtogether.pdf 
Danziger, J. N., Dutton, W. H., Kling, R., & Kraemer, K. L. (1982). Computers and politics: 
High technology in American local governments. New York: Columbia University 
Press. 
Danziger, J. N., & Kraemer, K. L. (1986). People and computers: The impacts of computing 
on end users in organizations. New York: Columbia University Press.
Davis, J. A. (1985). The logic of causal order. Beverly Hills: Sage.
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of 
information technology. MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 319-340.
Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P., & Warsaw, P. R. (1989). User acceptance of computer technology: 
A comparison of two theoretical models. Management Science, 35(8), 982-1003.
de Lancer Julnes, P., & Holzer, M. (2001). Promoting the utilization of performance mea-
sures in public organizations: An empirical study of factors affecting adoption and 
implementation. Public Administration Review, 61(6), 693-708.
DeLone, W. H., & McLean, E. R. (1992). Information systems success: The quest for the 
dependent variable. Information Systems Research, 3(1), 60-95.
DeLone, W. H., & McLean, E. R. (2003). The DeLone and McLean model of information 
systems success: A ten-year update. Journal of Management Information Systems, 
19(4), 9-30.
De Vaus, D. A. (1986). Surveys in social research. London: George Allen & Unwin.

292   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
European Commission. (n.d.). EParticipation good practices from the eGovernment good 
practice framework. Retrieved March 30, 2007, from http://ec.europa.eu/informa-
tion_society/activities/egovernment_research/doc/eparticipation/eparticipation_good-
practices.pdf. 
Finlay, K., & Finlay, T. (1996). The relative roles of knowledge and innovativeness in 
determining librarians’ attitudes toward and use of the Internet: A structural equation 
modeling approach. Library Quarterly, 66(1), 59-83.
Fountain, J. E. (2001). Building the virtual state: Information technology and institutional 
change. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Friedman, B., Kahn, P. H., & Howe, D. C. (2000). Trust online. Communications of the 
ACM, 43(12), 34-40.
Hacker, K. L., & van Dijk, J. (2000). What is digital democracy? In K. L. Hacker & J. van 
Dijk (Eds.), Digital democracy: Issues of theory and practice (pp. 1-9). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Hague, B. N., & Loader, B. D. (Eds.). (1999). Digital democracy: Discourse and decision 
making in the information age. London: Routledge.
Heise, D. R. (1969). Problems in path analysis and causal inference. Sociological Method-
ology, 1, 38-73.
Hill, H. C. (2003). Understanding implementation: Street-level bureaucrats’ resources for 
reform. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 13(3), 265-282.
Ho, A. T. (2002). Reinventing local governments and the e-government initiative. Public 
Administration Review, 62(4), 434-444.
Ho, A. T., & Ni, A. Y. (2003). Explaining the adoption of e-government features: A case 
study of Iowa County Treasures’ office. American Review of Public Administration, 
34(2), 164-180.
Hogan, M., & Cook, N., & Henderson, M. (2004, April 14-15). The Queensland government’s 
e-democracy agenda. Paper presented at the Australian Electronic Governance Confer-
ence, University of Melbourne, Australia. Retrieved March 30, 2007, fromhttp://www.
public-policy.unimelb.edu.au/egovernance/papers/16_Hogan.pdf  
Holzer, M., Melitski, J., Rho, S., & Schwester, R. (2004). Restoring trust in government: 
The potential of digital citizen participation. Report of IBM Center for the Business 
of Government. Retrieved October 25, 2004, from
http://www.businessofgovernment.org/pdfs/HolzerReport.pdf
Igbaria, M. (1990). End-user computing effectiveness: A structural equation model.Omega, 
18(6), 637-652.
Igbaria, M. (1993). User acceptance of microcomputer technology: An empirical test. 
Omega, 21(1), 73-90.
Igbaria, M., Guimaraes, T., & Davis, G. B. (1995). Testing the determinants of microcom-
puter usage via a structural equation model. Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 11(4), 87-114. 
Igbaria, M., Parasuraman, S., & Baroudi, J. J. (1996). A motivational model of microcomputer 
usage. Journal of Management Information systems, 13(1), 127-143.
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   293
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Igbaria, M., & Zviran, M. (1991). End-user effectiveness: A cross-cultural examination. 
Omega, 19(5), 369-379.
International Telecommunication Union. (2004). Internet indicators: Hosts, users, and 
number of PCs. Retrieved February 11, 2005, from http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/sta-
tistics/at_glance/Internet03.pdf
Kakabadse, A., Kakabadse, N. K., & Kouzmin, A. (2003). Reinventing the democratic 
governance project through information technology? A growing agenda for debate. 
Public Administration Review, 63(1), 44-60.
Kim, S.-T. (2004). E-government: Theories and strategies. Seoul, Korea: Bummunsa.
Klem, L. (1995). Path analysis. In L. G. Grimm & P. R. Yarnold (Eds.), Reading and 
understanding multivariate statistics (pp. 65-97). Washington, D.C.: American Psy-
chological Association.
Kling, R. (1980). Social analyses of computing: Theoretical perspectives in recent empirical 
research. Computing surveys, 12(1), 61-108.
Kline, R. B. (1998). Principles and practices of structural equation modeling. New York: 
Guilford Press.
Kling, R., & Jewett, T. (1994). The social design of work life with computers and networks: 
A natural systems perspective. In M. C. Yovits (Ed.), Advances in computers (Vol. 39, 
pp. 239-293). San Diego: Academic Press.
Klobas, J. E. (1995). Beyond information quality: Fitness for purpose and electronic infor-
mation resource use. Journal of Information Science, 21(2), 95-14.
Kraemer, K. L., Danziger, J. N., Dunkle, D. E., & King, J. L. (1993). The usefulness of 
computer-based information to public managers. MIS Quarterly, 17(2), 129-148.
Kraemer, K. L., Dutton, W. H., & Northrop, A. (1981). The management of information 
systems. New York: Columbia University Press.
Kwon, T. H., & Zmud, R. W. (1987). Unifying the fragmented models of information sys-
tems implementation. In R. J. Boland & R. A. Hirschheim (Eds.), Critical issues in 
information systems research (pp. 227-251). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Leonard-Barton, D., & Deschamps, I. (1988). Managerial influence in the implementation 
of new technology. Management Science, 34(10), 1252-1265.
Lin, J. C., Lu, H. (2000). Towards an understanding of the behavioural intention to use a 
Web site. International Journal of Information Management, 20, 197-208.
Lipsky, M. (1980). Street-level bureaucracy: Dilemmas of the individual in public services. 
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Loehlin, J. C. (1998). Latent variable models: An introduction to factor, path, and structural 
analysis (3rd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lucas, H. C. (1978). Empirical evidence for a descriptive model of implementation. MIS 
Quarterly, 2(2), 27-41.
Lucas, H. C., Ginzberg, M. J., & Schultz, R. L. (1990). Information systems implementation: 
Testing a structural model. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing. 

294   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Mathieson, K., Peacock, E., & Chin, W. W. (2001). Extending the technology acceptance 
model: The influence of perceived user resources. The Data Base for Advance in 
Information Systems, 32(3), 86-112.
Minnesota Planning. (2002). Issue talk: State budget shortfall. Retrieved January 12, 2005, 
from http://www.mnplan.state.mn.us/pdf/2002/IssueTalkSummary.pdf
Moon, M. J. (2002). The Evolution of e-government among municipalities: Rhetoric or 
reality? Public Administration Review, 62(4), 424-433.
Moon, M. J., & Brestchneider, S. (2002). Does the perception of red tape constrain IT 
innovativeness in organizations? Unexpected results from simultaneous equation 
model and implications. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 
12(2), 273-291.
Nedovic-Budic, Z., & Godschalk, D. R. (1996). Human factors in adoption of geographic 
information systems: A local government case study. Public Administration Review, 
56(6), 554-567.
Nelson, R. R., & Cheney, P. H. (1987). Training end users: An exploratory study. MIS 
Quarterly, 11(4), 547-559.
Norris, D. F. (2005). Electronic democracy at the American grassroots. International Journal 
of Electronic Government Research, 1(3), 1-14.
Norris, D. F., & Moon, M. J. (2005). Advancing e-government at the grassroots: Tortoise 
or hare? Public Administration Review, 65(1), 64-75.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2001). The development of 
broadband access in OECD countries. Retrieved February 14, 2005, from http://www.
oecdwash.org/DATA/DOCS/broadband_access.pdf
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2003). Promise and problem of 
e-democracy: challenges of online citizen engagement. Retrieved October 18, 2004, 
from http://www1.oecd.org/publications/e-book/4204011E.PDF     
Pedhazur, E. J. (1982). Multiple regression in behavioral research (2nd ed.). New York: 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Pedhazur, E. J. (1997). Multiple regression in behavioral research (3rd ed.). Forth Worth: 
Harcourt Brace College Publishers.
Ranerup, A. (1999). Internet-enabled applications for local government democratisation. 
In R. Heeks (Ed.), Reinventing government in the information age (pp. 177-193). 
London: Routledge.
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of innovations (4th ed.). New York: The Free Press.
Schumacker, R. E., & Lomax, R. G. (1996). A beginner’s guide to structural equation 
modeling. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Scott, W. R. (1992). Organizations: Rational, natural, and open systems (3rd ed.). Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Sheppard, B. H., Hartwick, J., & Warsaw, P. R. (1988). The theory of reasoned action: A 
meta-analysis of past research with recommendations for modification and future 
research. Journal of Consumer Research, 15(3), 325-343.
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   295
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Spacey, R., Goulding, A., & Murray, I. (2004). Exploring the attitudes of public library staff 
to the Internet using the TAM. Journal of Documentation, 60(5), 550-564.
Subramaniam, N., & Ashkanasy, N. (2001). The effects of organizational culture percep-
tions on the relationship between budgetary participation and managerial job-related 
outcomes. Australian Journal of Management, 26(1), 35-54.
Thompson, R. L., Higgins, C. A., & Howell, J. M. (1991). Personal computing: Toward a 
conceptual model of utilization. MIS Quarterly, 15(1), 125-143.
Thong, J., & Yap, C. (1995). CEO characteristics, organizational characteristics and informa-
tion technology adoption in small businesses. Omega, 23(4), 429-442.
Tsagarousianou, R. (1999). Electronic democracy: Rhetoric and reality. Communications, 
The European Journal of Communication Research, 24(2), 189-208.
United Nations. (2004). UN global e-government readiness report 2004. Retrieved December 
10, 2004, from http://www.unpan.org/egovernment4.asp
United Nations. (2007). Compendium of innovative e-government practices. Retrieved 
March 30, 2007, from http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/UN/
UNPAN023997.pdf 
Walsham, G. (1993). Interpreting information systems in organizations. Chichester, UK: 
John Wiley & Sons. 
Wang, X. (2001). Assessing public participation in U.S. cities. Public Performance & 
Management Review, 24(4), 322-336.
Weare, C., Musso, J. A., & Hale, M. L. (1999). Electronic democracy and the diffusion of 
municipal Web pages in California. Administration & Society, 31(1), 3-27.
Endnote
1  
E-government readiness index is calculated by averaging the Web measure index, the 
telecommunication infrastructure index and the human capital index. The e-participa-
tion index evaluates the extent of information provision on government Web sites and 
citizens’ online participation in policy-making.

296   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Appendix
Perceived.Usefulness.of.Online.Policy.Forums
Respondents were asked for the extent of their agreement/disagreement with: A. On-
line policy forums have been useful for making better decisions in my organization; 
B. Using online policy forums has improved decision-making in my organization; 
C. Online policy forums have been helpful in doing my organization’s task at hand; 
D. I find online policy forums to be effective in inviting citizens’ opinions in the 
policy-making process; E. Using online policy forums has improved citizen-govern-
ment relationships in my organization; F. Online policy forums have strengthened 
public trust in my organization.
Behavioral.Intention.to.Use.Online.Policy.Forums
Respondents were asked for the extent of their agreement/disagreement with: A. 
I intend to access online policy forums during the time when an online discussion 
is held on topics related to my work in the near future; B. I predict that I would 
access online policy forums frequently when an online discussion is held on top-
ics related to my work in the future; C. I intend to use online policy forums in the 
future to invite citizens’ opinions in the policy-making process; D. I am likely to 
use online policy forums in the near future when citizens’ opinions are needed in 
decision-making in my job; E. I am wiling to discuss policy issues with citizens on 
online policy forums in the near future.
Negative.Internet.Attitudes
Respondents were asked for the extent of their agreement/disagreement with: A. 
Soon, our lives will be controlled by the Internet; B. People are becoming slaves 
to the Internet.
Attitudes.Toward.Citizen.Participation
Respondents were asked for the extent of their agreement/disagreement with: A. 
Citizens’ participation in government affairs should be increased beyond the current 
extent of participation; B. Involving citizens in the policy-making   process would 
improve the quality of decisions and public service; C. Ordinary citizens should 
have the same chance of influencing government policy.  
 
www.ebook3000.com

The Utilization of Online Policy Forums on Government Web Sites   297
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Knowledge.About.Digital.Democracy
The following questions were asked to measure public administrators’ knowledge 
about digital democracy. A. In the past two years, how many times have you at-
tended education, training, workshops, seminars, or lectures which include topics 
related to e-government, digital democracy, or informationalization? (never = 1, 
more than three times = 5); B. How often have you read articles on e-government, 
digital democracy, or informationalization in newspapers, magazines, or books? 
(never = 1, more than once per two weeks =5); C. I am familiar with the term “digital 
democracy” and its meanings (strongly disagree = 1, strongly agree = 5); D. Please 
rate your knowledge about best practices of e-government or digital democracy at 
home and around the world. (no knowledge = 1, a lot of knowledge = 5).
Supervisor.Support.for.Using.Online.Policy.Forums
Respondents were asked for the extent of their agreement/disagreement with: A. 
My supervisor has given me support to use online policy forums; B. My supervisor 
has shown an interest in citizens’ opinions posted on online policy forums; C. My 
supervisor has encouraged me to consider citizens’ opinions posted on online policy 
forums in my work; D. My supervisor has urged me to find discussion topics to be 
posted on online policy forums.
 
 
 
 
 
IS.Department.Support.for.Using.Online.Policy.Forums
Respondents were asked for the extent of their agreement/disagreement with: A. 
The IS department in my agency has provided support for my using online policy 
forums; B. The IS department in my agency has encouraged me to use online policy 
forums; C. The IS department in my agency has provided most of the necessary help, 
consulting, and guidance to get us to use online policy forums; D. The IS department 
in my agency has emphasized the advantages of using online policy forums. 
Innovation-Supportive.Organizational.Culture
The following questions were asked to measure innovation-supportive organizational 
culture. (1)  Please tell us to what extent you agree or disagree with the following 
statements. A. Being innovative is very important in my organization, B. Having 
a willingness to experiment is very important in my organization; (2) In regard to 
organizational culture, please indicate the importance of doing the following: A. 

298   Kim & Holzer
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Coming up with a new idea to provide public service, B. Trying new ways of doing 
things, C. Questioning old ways of doing things.
Perceived.Ease.of.Use.of.Online.Policy.Forums
Respondents were asked for the extent of their agreement/disagreement with: A. 
I find online policy forums to be easy to access; B. Using online policy forums 
does not require a lot of my mental effort; C. It is easy to search and read messages 
posted on online policy forums; D. Online policy forums are easy to use compared 
to face-to-face meetings with citizens when I need opinions from citizens.
Information.Quality
Respondents were asked for the extent of their agreement/disagreement with: A. 
Online policy forums provided the precise information that I needed in decision-
making in my organization; B. Citizens’ diverse perspectives were reflected in 
opinions registered on online policy forums; C. Online policy forums provided 
sufficient information that I needed in decision-making in my organization; D. 
Opinions registered by citizens on online policy forums were new information that 
was not previously available; E. Citizens’ opinions on online policy forums were 
relevant to the work of my organization.
Perceived.Risk.in.Online.Discussion
Respondents were asked for the extent of their agreement/disagreement with these 
statements: A. I am concerned that online citizens will criticize my writing if I write 
on online policy forums; B. It is risky to write on online policy forums because 
online citizens may post offensive messages by taking advantage of anonymity; C. 
I am concerned that unknown online citizens will behave with less good will in an 
online discussion than in a face-to-face meeting.
www.ebook3000.com

The Evolution of Web Governance in the Federal Government   299
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.XIII
The.Evolution.of.Web..
Governance.in.the..
Federal.Government
Julianne Mahler, George Mason University, USA
Priscilla M. Regan, George Mason University, USA
Abstract
Over the last 10 years, federal agencies have undergone a major transformation in 
the way they manage programs and internal administration, in their relations with 
Congress, and in their dealings with clients and citizens. Agencies now work in 
electronic environments of e-mail, electronic documents and filings, intranets, and 
the Internet. This article seeks to describe and to account for the emergence of what 
is now being termed Web governance. Briefly, Web governance is concerned with 
the control of content and design for agency Web sites. We explore the evolution of 
the process by which Web governance decisions are being made government-wide 
and at individual federal agencies. We look to changing patterns of administrative 
process in order to help account for the emergence of controls, and we find evidence 
of the importance of networking and of disbursed, self-designing processes.

300   Mahler & Regan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Introduction
Over the last 10 years, federal agencies have undergone a major transformation in 
the way they manage their programs and internal administration, in their relations 
with Congress, and in their dealings with clients and citizens. Rather than operating 
in a slow, cumbersome paper and briefing-book environment, agencies now work 
in electronic environments of e-mail, electronic documents and filings, intranets, 
and the Internet. This transformation has occurred as a result of e-government 
laws, agency initiatives, citizen demands, and technology-industry support. But 
the transformation recently has generated calls for exerting tighter control over the 
content and management of federal agency Web sites, creating uniform standards 
for presentation and accessibility, and establishing more centralized procedures for 
tracking and approving material on the Web sites. These new policy efforts include 
the creation of more elaborate procedures for approving Web site content in many 
federal agencies. Since 2002, OMB also has been charged with overseeing the 
creation and implementation of government-wide standards to guide the look and 
performance of federal Web sites, and more elaborate procedures for tracking and 
approving the content of sites are being created at the agency level. 
Here, we are concerned with the development of these new governance efforts. 
How are decisions about the control of Web content decisions being made govern-
ment-wide and within agencies? What kinds of processes and influences shaped the 
emerging guidelines and approval procedures at the agency and government-wide 
levels? How has this governance process been governed? We seek to describe the 
emergence of what is now being termed Web governance, the authoritative control 
of content and design for agency Web sites. At stake may be a significant change in 
how decisions about Web site content are being made and who makes them.
What should we expect the development of Web site governance tools to look like? 
Decentralized, self-organizing management long has been thought to be the hallmark 
of high technology enterprises. Since the 1960s, a shift from mechanistic to organic 
organizational processes has been associated with high technology. Burns (1963) 
saw in the emerging high technology industrial sector the development of new orga-
nizational forms based on continuous task redefinition, flexible network structures, 
lateral communication, and cooperative problem solving. Current research on the 
kinds of collaborative work settings and problem solving capacities of intranets and 
the Internet shows how intranets and the Internet fulfill some of these early ideas 
about lateral communication and knowledge management (Allcorn, 1997; Scott, 
1998). Self-organizing, learning organizations are thought to be fostered by the open, 
wide dissemination of information made possible with intranets and the Internet. 
Harvey, Palmer, and Speier (1998) find that intranets are the “supporting informa-
tion technology infrastructure that is most effective in creating and maintaining ... 
a learning environment” (p. 341). Research on the evolution of creative, interactive 
www.ebook3000.com

The Evolution of Web Governance in the Federal Government   301
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
intranets sees them as emerging from the bottom up, in several places simultane-
ously, rather than in an orderly, centralized process (Scheepers & Rose, 2001). Our 
own earlier research shows the promise, still often unfulfilled, of intranets to foster 
collaborative management and problem solving (2002). 
Decisions about intranets and the Internet may reflect new ideas about how work is 
managed in the information-intensive setting of the public sector. Peristeras, Tsekos, 
and Konstantinos (2002) note that with the advent of widespread information and 
communication technologies that made e-government possible, public administra-
tion is approaching a paradigm shift. Increasingly, public work is allocated to ad 
hoc groups with specific goals, but these groups are given considerable autonomy 
and allowed to be self-regulating in achieving those goals. The tight control over 
information and knowledge needed to make decisions in large government bu-
reaucracies may be giving way in many cases to disbursed information housed in 
many parts of many organizations and accessible to a widening range of interested 
individuals inside and outside the organization. Knowledge management, based on 
stimulating and capturing innovative solutions to public problems, replaces more 
restricted problem-solving approaches (Brown & Duguid, 1991). Tacit knowledge 
rather than routine procedures may be recognized increasingly as a legitimate means 
to address issues. 
Thus, rather than relying on rule-governed hierarchical control to coordinate ef-
fort, work and workers become increasingly self-organizing, using the networks of 
relations made possible by Internet and intranet connections (Martin et al., 2002). 
Networks replace hierarchies, as workers find ways to partner with agencies and other 
private and non-profit partners in order to achieve the public purpose (Goldsmith 
& Eggers, 2004). Large-scale routine technologies are replaced by communities of 
practice in which knowledge of how to achieve the desired ends is located in tacit 
practice, shared by those connected by interests and perhaps only secondarily by 
organizational settings (Brown & Duguid, 1991). These communities are based 
not on the relationships mapped out on organization charts but rather on the shared 
understanding of how to do work based on expectations built up over past interac-
tions (Weick, 1979).
If this disbursed and self-designing process characterizes the emerging efforts to 
create a set of principles to guide the agency Web site content decisions, we should 
expect to see a Web site governance process and result that represent wide participa-
tion, collaboration rather than control, and self-organizing procedures rather than 
tightly held, top-down control over participation. 
However, the stakes for content management decisions and policies are high. The 
Web sites are seen as an increasingly critical agency resource for managing relations 
with the public and other branches of government (Mahler & Regan, 2004, 2005). 
There may be struggles over control of this resource rather than collaboration and 
openness. In a small way, this research question begins to test the depth to which 

302   Mahler & Regan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
the new collaborative management paradigm can survive serious competition over 
a valued agency resource.
Methodology
The research conducted to examine the development of Web governance procedures 
consists of a set of three interlocking case studies. First, we examine the history of 
the decisions that OMB and Congress made about how to proceed to create govern-
ment-wide Web content rules. Second, we track the evolution of the interagency 
groups that actually drafted the OMB rules. Finally, we look at what agencies have 
done on their own to create Web content governance procedures.
These three case studies are based on interviews with staff responsible for con-
tent management at various offices in seven agencies as well as agency staff who 
participated in several formal and informal interagency councils concerned with 
content management issues and Web governance. In this endeavor, we spoke with 
agency personnel during the summer and fall of 2004. We also spoke with current 
and former OMB staff members tasked with overseeing the development of govern-
ment-wide requirements. These interviews were conducted in the fall of 2004. In 
addition, we perused publications and online documents, setting out the developing 
procedures within agencies such as rules for posting decisions and memorandums of 
understanding about authorization to post content. It is important to note, however, 
that written rules have not been developed in all cases. We also gained access to 
interagency recommendations and government-wide guidelines. 
In order to investigate the development of content management procedures within 
agencies, we selected seven agencies with varying levels of Web site development 
and sophistication, as judged in West’s (2003) fourth annual rankings of federal 
Web sites. These rankings are based on the quality of online publications, online 
databases, audio and video clips, advertisements, fees, privacy and security policies, 
comment forms, readability levels, and presence and number of online services. 
Although these features are not directly relevant to our interest in content manage-
ment for agency Web sites, they do provide an overall measure of the sophistica-
tion and professionalism of a Web site. Using the West rankings we selected two 
agencies rated most highly (FCC and HUD); three in the middle (FDA, DOT, and 
EPA); and two at the bottom of the rankings (EEOC and NLRB). On a 100-point 
scale, the agencies we studied ranked as shown in Table 1.
The West rankings allow us to compare agencies with well-developed Web pres-
ence to those just beginning to offer more kinds of information online. Variations 
in stages of development may be important to decisions about content management 
and governance. 
www.ebook3000.com

The Evolution of Web Governance in the Federal Government   303
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Interviews were conducted with selected agency staff responsible for information 
technology, information management, program content, and public relations in each 
of our agencies. Our interviews were semi-structured with a template of questions 
about the approval process for Web content and changes in the approval process 
from paper release of information. We interviewed a total of 18 agency officials 
in 10 offices and seven former and current staff members at OMB. In some large, 
multidivisional departments, we interviewed Web content staff members in program 
divisions as well as in upper-level public relations, sometimes located in the top 
administrators’ offices. Interviews lasted at least a half hour and often extended 
an hour and a half. Subsequent phone calls and e-mails allowed us to clarify and 
elaborate on the information gleaned during the interview.
Government-Wide.Efforts.to.Control.Web.Sites..
by.Congress.and.OMB
The current role of OMB’s oversight of the development of federal Web sites has 
evolved over the past 25 years from a series of legislative measures and executive 
orders. The Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA) of 1980 and its 1986 amendments 
encouraged agencies to coordinate information collection in order to relieve citizens 
of excessive duplication of reporting requirements and to give OMB the authority 
to oversee this coordination. OMB’s authority for agency information management 
expanded with the 1995 amendments to the PRA, giving them greater responsibili-
ties for developing federal information technology (IT) performance standards, and 
procurement through use of its budget oversight capacities. The Clinger-Cohen Act, 
also known as the Information Technology Management Reform Act (ITMRA), 
almost immediately amended the 1995 PRA and created a Chief Information Of-
ficer (CIO) for each agency. As implemented under OMB Circular A-130, CIOs 
Agency
West..Rating
FCC
73
HUD
62
FDA
53
DOT-FAA
51
EPA
50
EEOC
41
NLRB
38
Table 1.

304   Mahler & Regan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
were charged with creating and enforcing a program in order to integrate IT into 
agency operations and to set up cost-effective IT acquisitions programs. President 
Clinton’s Executive Order 13011 established the CIO Council, chaired by OMB, 
to provide an interagency forum in order for CIOs to exchange information and to 
make recommendations about the development of effective IT management strate-
gies. The composition and the contributions of this interagency council are the 
subject of the next section. 
There have been some questions raised, however, about the adequacy of OMB’s 
budget oversight role as a tool for encouraging the adoption of these policies and 
the appropriateness of the CIO Council as a forum for accomplishing Web policy 
goals (Relyea, 2002). Indeed, in our interviews with agency personnel, there was 
general agreement that OMB has not done very much that is helpful and that its 
role primarily has been a reactive one concerned with putting out fires rather than 
creating a vision. However, one respondent was less critical, seeing OMB as pro-
viding gentle direction. Even those who were critical noted that OMB has so much 
under its jurisdiction that Web content issues were of relatively minor importance 
compared to preparation of the budget and regulatory review. 
The use of the CIO Council to develop policies and strategies in order to develop 
the information content capacities of federal agencies also has been called into 
question. Interviews with agency staff and stakeholder groups outside the govern-
ment revealed a common view that the CIO Council was focused too narrowly on 
technology and, therefore, was not the appropriate group to develop or to oversee 
Web content policies. One respondent noted that OMB sees the CIO Council and 
CIOs as key because agency Web sites began as IT projects. OMB and the CIOs 
were seen as viewing issues of Web governance too narrowly and overemphasizing 
the role of information technology in making Web site visits possible and de-em-
phasizing the role of Web managers and content providers in making it worth the 
visit. Another respondent noted that the I in CIO Council is often forgotten and that 
CIOs start with the tool and ask what can they do with it rather than asking what 
needs to be done.
Concerns about content issues as distinct from the primarily technological focus 
of the CIO Council soon gained more attention as Congress passed the E-Govern-
ment Act of 2002. This act made use of an evolving, informal interagency forum 
in order to develop guidelines for content management. This interagency forum, 
its success, its antecedents in voluntary action among content managers in federal 
agencies, and its inclusive self-organizing process stands as an interesting model 
of collaborative planning
www.ebook3000.com

The Evolution of Web Governance in the Federal Government   305
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Interagency.Initiatives
As Congress deliberated about the E-Government Act of 2002, the question of the 
role and expertise of CIOs was raised as a policy issue. Interest groups, especially the 
library community, and some federal officials advocated that the CIO Council not be 
given responsibility for developing Web content policy. Instead, they promoted the 
establishment of a new group that could be derived from and draw upon the exper-
tise of an existing, informally-constituted group of Web managers. Consistent with 
this perspective, Section 207 of the E-Government Act established the Interagency 
Committee on Government Information (ICGI) (information and documents on the 
ICGI are available online at http://www.cio.gov/documents/ICGI.html). The purpose 
of Section 207 was “to improve the methods by which Government information, 
including information on the Internet, is organized, preserved, and made accessible 
to the public.” Specifically, the ICGI is charged with the following:
• 
Consulting with interested communities.
• 
Conducting studies and submitting recommendations to the Director of 
OMB and the Archivist of the National Archives and Records Administration 
(NARA).
• 
Sharing effective practices for access to, dissemination of, and retention of 
federal information.
The ICGI conducts its work through an executive committee under the direction 
of the CIO Council and a number of working groups (see Table 2), which have 
the responsibility for drafting policy recommendations for final approval by the 
executive committee.
Most relevant to the issue of governance structures for Web content is the Web 
Content Standards Working Group, which, on June 9, 2004, issued its recommended 
policies and guidelines for federal public Web sites. The group developed its recom-
mendations through a three-step process:
• 
First, it compiled all existing Web content requirements from laws, regulations, 
presidential directives, and other official documents.
• 
Second, it reviewed federal Web sites and identified common practices that 
promote usability and good customer service.
• 
Third, it solicited suggestions through a comment form on the FirstGov.gov 
Web site. (Web Standards, Work Plan, http://www.cio.gov/documents/ICGI.
html)

306   Mahler & Regan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
In addition to input from the interagency group, it also identified 14 advisers from 
government agencies who worked directly on agency Web sites and had expertise 
in specific areas, including information architecture, library science, usability, 
records management, and FOIA. In April 2004, the Working Group completed its 
draft recommendations, posted them for public comment on the ICGI Web site, 
and sent them to stakeholders and Web content experts. It received more than 100 
sets of comments from the public during a three-week vetting period. This Working 
Group recognized that the development of Web content policies was an ongoing 
process, requiring structure and, to that end, recommended that OMB establish a 
Web Content Advisory Council.
The larger Web Content Management Working Group also has developed and posted 
on FirstGov.gov the Federal Web Content Managers Toolkit. This contains a com-
pilation of laws and regulations, a list of common practices, and tools including a 
listserv, discussion forum, and library. This Web site is easy to use and complete. 
For example, common practices simply are listed, and each one is linked to a more 
detailed explanation with further links to examples from current federal Web sites 
and other resources. The Web site also solicits additional examples from other agen-
cies that would then be linked from the Toolkit.
Working Group
Membership
Jurisdiction
“Categorization of Govern-
ment Information” Working 
Group
Nine members who represent all 
three branches of the federal govern-
ment; chair appointed by OMB
Responsible for recommendations on 
standards for the organization and cat-
egorization of government information so 
that it is searchable electronically in ways 
that are interoperable across agencies
E-Gov Access Work Group
20 members from several federal 
agencies including most prominently 
GPO, OMB, HUD and GSA
Electronic Records Policy 
Working Group
Eighteen members for the Cabinet 
level departments and from NARA; 
chair appointed by NARA
Responsible for developing recommen-
dations on public access to government 
information on the Internet and in elec-
tronic form
Web Content Standards 
Group of  the Web Content  
Management Working Group
Twenty-two members, almost all 
from cabinet level departments; chair 
designated by OMB
Developing guidance on standards for 
agency websites to assist public users in 
their use of websites
Public Domain Directory 
Group of Web Content Man-
agement Working Group
Fifteen members, with the majority 
from NARA and GSA; chair desig-
nated by OMB
Developing a public domain directory of 
public Federal Government websites and 
a repository of federally funded research 
and development
Table 2. Working groups of the ICGI
www.ebook3000.com

The Evolution of Web Governance in the Federal Government   307
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Both the results and the process leading to the recently released draft guidelines for 
content are noteworthy. In general, the process that the ICGI and its various work-
ing groups have followed is one that is bottom-up, collaborative, and rewarding for 
participating agency staff and for the agency as a whole. Congressional statutes and 
OMB guidelines set out fairly specific goals, but they neither dictated implementa-
tion details nor dictated a process. Although Congress required the establishment 
of the ICGI, OMB might have elected to actively oversee this process through its 
own Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs or through the CIO Council, 
but instead, OMB allowed the ICGI the autonomy that Congress seemed to have 
intended for it. The ICGI subsequently allowed the working groups considerable 
autonomy and allowed agencies to select representatives to the working groups. 
The result has been a process that largely is owned by the agency staff who had 
developed expertise and interest in e-government through direct experience in their 
own agencies. The working groups have given agency heads a means by which 
to recognize staff personnel. In this process, no one agency was designated as the 
best or the model. Instead, the concept of best practices was used in an ecumenical 
fashion, and almost all agencies have been able to contribute some practice to the 
mix. The working groups adopted a clearly collaborative, open process rather than 
a competitive, closed process.
The key to understanding how this open distributive process emerged lies in a devel-
opment from the HUD Web site, one of the earliest sites and one whose development 
was directed by program managers rather than agency Web technology staff. The 
trajectory of the Web site of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, 
which was an early department-wide and award-winning Web site, is summarized on 
HUD’s state of the Web yearly reports (http://www.hud.gov/library/bookshelf15/). 
The aspect of the HUD case that is particularly relevant in order to understand the 
emergence of the interagency policy guidelines for content was the evolution of 
the Federal Content Managers Forum from HUD’s own internal Departmental Web 
Team. This team, created in 1999, was composed of a network of program office 
and field office Web managers. By 2000, a Deputy Secretary’s Task Force on Web 
Management investigated Web management at other federal agencies as a basis for 
developing its own recommendations on the duties of content managers, which put 
HUD actors in touch with those with similar responsibilities in other agencies. In 
2001, the HUD Web team organized a new working group of federal agency Web 
content managers, Federal Web Content Managers Forum, to share experiences, 
discuss problems, and identify best practices in content management. In its second 
year, the Forum sponsored a Web Content Managers Seminar with attendance from 
more than 100 Web content managers from 40 agencies. This Forum now has a 
listserv of 400, and its membership provided the basis for identifying the content 
managers to serve on the ICGI. 
The vision of the Web site as a tool for program administration and agency manage-
ment grew from early experiences of a small number of actors in a few agencies. This 

308   Mahler & Regan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
vision of the potential uses of the Internet in program administration was alluded 
to in legislation since the mid-1990s, but the means to do this, the techniques for 
incorporating the communication and information exchange potential of the Web 
for public management, had yet to be developed. It was this task as much as the 
creation of content guidelines that the Interagency Web Content Managers Forum 
initiated. Using the Internet to accomplish the mission and to serve constituencies 
of the agency was not an obvious extension of what the agency had been doing with 
letters, paper publications, notices, and so forth. It involved the imagining of new 
program tasks and novel kinds of program products that depended on innovative 
practices. These practices did not grow up in a vacuum. The cross-agency collabora-
tion provided the sounding board that made these discoveries possible. 
This unusual source for the ICGI, composed of agency personnel who were informally 
and voluntarily drawn to the problems of content management, reflects not just a 
new source of ideas for OMB committees and guidelines but also the emergence of 
new self-organizing processes in public management. Do we see the decentralized, 
self-organizing process at the agency level, as well? Is a similar process occurring 
as agencies move to develop Web content governance processes? Our agency case 
studies give us an opportunity to look for evidence of this process at the agency 
level as well.
Agency.Governance.Initiatives
We began by asking who controls the content and design of agency Web sites. Now, 
after considering the external actors who may be influencing the course of informa-
tion management decisions, we consider forces inside the agency. At the agency 
level, we investigated where the decisions about Web content are being made and 
what procedures are emerging about who can create and post content. We questioned 
actors about the approval processes emerging for Web content and what kinds of 
standards for content were developing. Together, these issues constitute what we 
mean by governance, the authoritative control of content and design for agency Web 
sites. We found that the approval processes and the principles that actors thought 
were served by the approval process varied widely among the agencies in the study. 
Two issues that capture much of what we found are the degree of centralization and 
the location of Web content authorization. 
In an earlier project (2004), we found that practices surrounding the control of 
content on federal Web sites were highly variable. While most respondents said 
that the degree of centralization in the Web content approval process essentially 
was unchanged from the approval process for print releases, some said that it was 
becoming more centralized over time, and some said less. There also were distinct 
www.ebook3000.com

The Evolution of Web Governance in the Federal Government   309
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
differences in perceptions about where Web content approval decisions were made. 
In almost all cases, top-level agency Web content managers reported that the program 
offices had almost complete autonomy over the initiation and control of the content 
of the sites. However, virtually without exception, the Web posters or Webmasters 
in subordinate program offices identified an elaborate and careful hierarchical pro-
cedure for review and approval of content. What this suggests is that agencies are 
struggling to find ways to control the creation of new content on Web sites. Some 
upper-level managers are trying to prevent Web site postings from becoming (or 
remaining) a “free for all”, as one respondent put it, and some program officers are 
trying to exercise their accustomed autonomy in these decisions. 
Behind these struggles are differences in perspective about how to make the sites 
useful and accessible for different audiences. These are the stakes that respondents 
see as important to the mission and integrity of their organizations. Thus, a major 
trend was that the challenges that agencies face in arriving at content decisions are 
tied closely to the character of their mission and to emerging ideas about who their 
stakeholders are, how they can be served, and how the agency’s mission is advanced 
through the use of the public Web site. 
A number of respondents described tension or conflict in their agency over the control 
of the Web site content. Most often, the conflicts were between program officials 
in the subdivisions of the agency and public affairs offices at the agency director’s 
level. In one regulatory agency, there was a struggle over where responsibility for 
authorizing new content would reside: in the information technology division or 
in public affairs in the director’s office. A memo of understanding was created to 
divide responsibility between them, assigning one the authority for content and 
the other the authority for the look and feel of the site. In another agency, tension 
between the public affairs in the top-level administrator’s office and the subunits 
was resolved with the creation of a central advisory committee to oversee content 
decisions. In two cases, the main conflict appears to be between program offices 
and legal counsel. In two other cases, we heard how the IT division gave up or did 
not seek to control Web content decisions, only to realize later what a significant 
organizational resource such control was. In each case, efforts by IT staff to wrest 
control from content managers were unsuccessful. But in another agency, IT domi-
nates. The CIO is the agency’s representative to the federal Web Content Managers 
Forum and does not communicate new developments from that group to the content 
managers in agency’s subdivision. Finally, we found one case in which the shift 
away from IT control has been gradual, so that now, half of the content managers 
are in public affairs. In most agencies, IT handles the server technology and, in 
some cases, the intranet, but not the Internet content. 
A point of contention we did not anticipate concerns the location of the Web content 
manager within the agency. In some ways, this issue is related to the friction over 
the public relations uses of the sites. Earlier in the evolution of the agency Web site, 
the control of the sites typically resided with the information technology staff. In a 

310   Mahler & Regan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
few cases, the program managers (e.g., HUD) were able to gain control of content 
decisions. In other cases, content decisions migrated to the IRM function of the li-
brary staff. Increasingly, the content functions previously described are now located 
in Public Affairs or the Director’s office. This reflects a shift away from viewing 
the Web site as a technical feature of the agency but does not resolve other issues 
about the uses of the sites for public relations and programs.
We also saw friction in agencies over who was to be the principal audience for the 
Web site and how they were to be served. In some cases, we saw disagreement over 
the relative weight to give to serving the needs of the technical users vs. the average 
users and who those average users were. In most cases, the proliferation of pages 
has meant that many user groups are served.
Interviews also revealed a debate between those who thought that the Web site 
should be used for public relations and those who saw it as a tool for communicating 
program information to the public. The latter often took the form of emphasizing 
the public education mission of the site. Almost all our respondents who defined 
themselves as Web managers emphasized the public education perspective. The 
friction was played out over such issues as whether the secretary’s picture should 
appear on the department’s home page. These debates indicate how ideas for using 
the Web site to serve the mission are unfolding. Similar debates are occurring at the 
state level, where Eschenfelder found that agencies with weaker public education 
missions have smaller Web sites (2004).
These conflicts and the typical uncertainties about who should authorize important 
postings led some of the agencies in our study to create formal procedures or institu-
tions for making posting decisions. In others, as noted, the program actors seem to 
have greater independence, leading to a “wild west” approach, in the words of one 
respondent. This freedom is said to create inconsistent policy and legal positions. 
Some agencies have confronted these problems directly by creating governance 
structures. Three have developed procedures or institutions to govern content deci-
sions, while three more are at varying stages of trying to create such structures.
Agency.Reactions.so.Far.to.the.OMB.Guidelines
Actors we spoke with in agencies with larger and more fully developed Web sites 
(2004) were not concerned about the guidelines on Web content developed by 
ICGI and released by OMB. There appear to be several reasons for this. The larger 
sites already are meeting and exceeding the guidelines, which, in any case, their 
Web content representatives likely had a hand in producing. Of the agencies we 
examined, HUD, FDA, and EPA, in particular, were well represented on the ICGI. 
Several noted that they only needed to tweak current practices in order to meet the 
guidelines.
www.ebook3000.com

The Evolution of Web Governance in the Federal Government   311
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Many respondents also noted that the legislative and administrative backing for 
the guidelines gave legitimacy to practices that already are reasonably widespread. 
They expected that the guidelines would serve as useful justifications within their 
agencies for changes that they wanted to pursue. One respondent noted that the 
guidelines would be a useful spur for the upgrades that they wanted to make. 
Further, the guidelines are limited in scope, focusing on format and accessibility 
features of sites and not broaching the more controversial issues of how the sites 
will serve the agency mission. The provisions that were identified most often as 
real constraints were those related to privacy, but these requirements already exist 
under other legislative and OMB auspices. Not being able to contact users in order 
to follow up on usability surveys to users was seen as a drawback, but not one tied 
to the guidelines particularly. 
Discussion
In characterizing the process and actors of the emerging Web content governance 
procedures, we expected that the process generally would reflect the common char-
acterization of the Internet environment as decentralized and collaborative. We were 
only partly correct. We did see elements of this kind of process at the interagency 
level, with guidelines that may be only marginally intrusive on agency Web content 
decisions. There seem to be few real objections raised to the proposed guidelines, 
since they make only modest demands about format and virtually none about content. 
We typically did not see this kind of process at the agency level, however. Within the 
agencies, the process appears to reflect business as usual within large bureaucratic 
organizations with subdivisions and levels jockeying for control. In the interagency 
setting, we saw a different process, however. The interagency process we observed 
in the development of the content guidelines and the agency participation in that 
development illustrates a trend identified by many observers as a shift in the way 
work is organized as a result of the information and communication technologies 
of the Internet. 
The reality of networks and communities of practice is clearly evident in this case. 
Several respondents from the Forum and the ICGI note that much of what they 
are establishing in the guidelines is the already-agreed-upon community practices. 
In this effort, those who early on recognized the different roles for Web content 
management, Internet technology support, and management were important in set-
ting the stage for the later collaborative processes. These early adopters were the 
discoverers of these practices. The desire of small groups within agencies to find 
others with whom to discuss the difficulties of creating useful content and wishing 
for a group with which to share emerging ideas on how to do this led to the creation 
of a community of Web content managers. 

312   Mahler & Regan
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Later, as OMB implemented the provisions of the PRA and the E-Government Act, 
it did not impose top-down control in part, several of our respondents noted, because 
they were sympathetic to the concerns of the Web content managers. The resulting 
ICGI rested on the network forged by the Forum, in effect allowing those who would 
be using the guidelines to have a role in creating them. This informally created 
network exchanged information about new practices and later best practices. They 
were a community of practitioners sharing knowledge based not on policy mandates 
or on professional standards but on their trial-and-error experiences, extending the 
opportunities for vicarious learning. The early members of the Forum bring experi-
ences to the group in order to find support and inspiration. Without accepted norms 
or procedures to follow, they created their own community and their own guides 
to practice. This non-formal, non-canonical process is a clear manifestation of the 
kind of paradigm shift in public organizations noted previously. 
References
Allcorn, S. (1997). Parallel virtual organizations: Managing and working in the virtual 
workplace. Administration and Society, 29(4), 412-439. 
Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (1991). Organizational learning and communities-of-practice. 
Organization Science, 2(1), 40-57.
Burns, T. (1963, January). Industry in a new age. New Society, 31.
Electronic Records Policy Working Group. (2004). Recommendations for the effective 
management of government information on the Internet and other electronic records 
(A Report to the Interagency Committee on Government Information). Retrieved 
October 20, 2004, from http://www.cio.gov/documents/ICGI
Eschenfelder, K. R. (2004). Behind the Web site: An inside look at the production of Web-
based textual government information. Government Information Quarterly, 21(3), 
337-358.
Goldsmith, S., & Eggers, W. (2004). Governing by network. Washington, DC: Brooking 
Institution Press.
Harvey, M., Palmer, J., & Speier, C. (1998). Implementing intraorganizational learning: A 
phased-model approach supported by intranet technology. European Management 
Journal, 16(3), 341-354.
Mahler, J., & Regan, P. M. (2004, September 3). Crafting the message: Agency Websites 
and political control. Paper presented at the American Political Science Association 
Meetings, Chicago, Illinois.
Mahler, J., & Regan, P. M. (2005). Agency Internets and changing dynamics of congressional 
oversight. International Journal of Public Administration, 28(7/8), 553-565.
Martin, D., Rouncefield, M., & Sommerville, I. (2002). Applying patterns of cooperative 
interaction to work (re)design: E-government and planning. In Proceedings of the 
www.ebook3000.com

The Evolution of Web Governance in the Federal Government   313
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
SIGHI Conference on Human Factors. Retrieved October 10, 2005, from http://www.
dirc.org.uk/publications/inproceedings/papers/65.pdf
Office of Management and Budget. (2002, February 27). E-government strategy: Imple-
menting the president’s management agenda for e-government. Retrieved October 10, 
2005, from http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/infopoltech.html
Office of Management and Budget. (2004, March 8). FY-2003 report to Congress on imple-
mentation of the e-government act. Retrieved October 10, 2005, from http://www.
whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/infopoltech.html
Office of Management and Budget. (n.d.). Circular No. A-130, revised, memorandum for 
heads of executive departments and agencies. Retrieved October 10, 2005, from 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/a130/print/a130trans4.html
Peristeras, V., Tsekos, T., & Tarabanis, K. (2002). Analyzing e-government as a paradigm 
shift (UNTC Occasional Paper Series No. 1). Paper presented at the Annual Confer-
ence of the International Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration, The 
United Nations Thessaloniki Centre for Public Service Professionalism. Retrieved 
October 10, 2005, from unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/UNTC/
UNPAN007008.pdf
Relyea, H. C. (2002). E-gov: Introduction and overview. Government Information Quar-
terly, 19(1), 9-35. 
Scheepers, R., & Rose, J. (2001). Organizational intranets: Cultivating information technol-
ogy for the people by the people. In S. Dasgupta (Ed.), Managing Internet and intranet 
technologies in organizations: Challenges and opportunities (pp. 1-20). Hershey, PA: 
Idea Group Publishing.
Scott, J. (1998). Organizational knowledge and the intranet. Decision Support Systems, 
23(1), 3-17.
Strejcek, G., & Theil, M. (2002). Technology push, legislation pull? E-government in the 
European Union. Decision Support Systems, 34(3), 305-313.
Weick, K. (1979). The social psychology of organizing (2nd ed.). Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley.
West, D. M. (2003, September). State and federal e-government in the United States, 2000. 
Retrieved October 10, 2005, from http://www.InsidePolitics.org
This work was previously published in International Journal of Electronic Government Research, Vol. 
2, Issue 1, edited by D. F. Norris & P. Fletcher, pp. 21-35, copyright 2006 by IGI Publishing, formerly 
known as Idea Group Publishing (an imprint of IGI Global).

314   Roy
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.XIV
Service,.Security,.
Transparency,.and.Trust:
Government.Online.or.
Governance.Renewal.in.Canada?
Jeffrey Roy, University of Ottawa, Canada
Abstract
The objectives of this article are twofold: first, to examine the main conceptual di-
mensions of electronic government (e-government); and secondly, to critically assess 
both the current responses and future prospects of Canada’s public sector. The first 
sections of the paper are primarily conceptual as they delve into e-government’s 
meaning and scope by presenting a set of major thematic challenges driving public 
sector reform. The paper then provides a critical assessment of recent reforms and 
new initiatives undertaken by the Government of Canada. Building on this analysis, 
the article aims to sketch out the major issues and challenges likely to confront 
Canadian governance. Of particular interest is whether or not a sufficient balance 
exists in focusing on dimensions of e-government and e-governance in order to adapt 
effectively to a more informational, digital, and interdependent world.
www.ebook3000.com

Service, Security, Transparency, and Trust   315
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Introduction
The objectives of this article are twofold: first, to examine the main conceptual 
dimensions of electronic government (e-government); and secondly, to critically 
assess both the current responses and future prospects of Canada’s public sector. 
In order to be more precise on the scope of this paper, the following definition of 
e-government is useful as a starting point:
The continuous innovation in the delivery of services, citizen participation, and 
governance through the transformation of external and internal relationships by 
the use of information technology, especially the Internet1. 
This definition helps to underscore the links between government and governance in 
such a context, and the fluid nature of roles and relationships both within the public 
sector and across various stakeholders externally. The latter term—governance—may 
be defined in a general way as the manner and mechanisms by which resources are 
coordinated in a world where power and knowledge are increasingly distributed 
(Paquet, 1997). The rise of electronic governance (e-governance) denotes processes 
of coordination made possible or even necessary by the advent of technology and, 
in particular, the spreading of online activities (Allen et al., 2001).
This starting point has been extended as of late by many groups suggesting that e-
government is more simply and holistically about achieving good government. This 
perspective underscores the widening canvass of e-government as digital technolo-
gies and online activities permeate most all aspects of the public sector. For some, 
e-governance is distinguishable from e-government in that the former comprises a 
more fundamental sharing and reorganizing of power across all stakeholders and the 
citizenry, whereas the latter is more focused on modernizing existing state processes 
to improve performance with respect to existing services and policies (Peristeras 
et al., 2002; Riley, 2003). For others, and more in line with the definitions adopted 
above, e-government must be viewed as encompassing both administration and 
democracy (Bertelsmann, 2002).
Despite rather fluid terminology, such viewpoints offer a useful guide for the con-
ceptual review provided by the first half of this article. Section two explores e-gov-
ernment from a primarily internal perspective, examining the governance of online 
service delivery and homeland security as two distinct but quite related facets of 
e-government. Section three examines more outwardly rooted governance themes 
related to transparency and trust and their connection to broader debates concerning 
democratic reform. The interdependence of such inward and outward considerations 
also matters due to the holistic context of a public sector encompassing both internal 
and external dimensions.

316   Roy
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Section four then undertakes a critical assessment of e-government in Canada. Build-
ing on this analysis, section five looks forward to sketch out the major issues and 
challenges likely to confront Canadian government. The purpose of this discussion 
is less a definitive blueprint of what the future will yield and more some informed 
guidance as to how the public sector in Canada is likely to evolve. Of particular 
interest is whether or not a sufficient balance exists in focusing on administrative and 
democratic adaptation, internally and externally, in line with the emerging contours 
of a more informational, digital, and interdependent world.
Service.and.Security
Remarkably new by any historical measure, the rapid emergence of e-government 
around the world and the specific nature of its current evolution can be viewed as 
stemming from two separate yet interrelated episodes over the past decade—on the 
one hand, the rise of the Internet and electronic commerce (e-commerce) during the 
1990s; and on the other hand, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. While their 
origins are quite distinct, they share many contemporary governance challenges.
With respect to e-commerce, growth and expansion are linked to an online population 
that has now surpassed half a billion people worldwide. Yet, despite progress in most 
regions of the world, this group remains relatively concentrated in the developed 
world within the most advanced economies of Asia, Europe, and North America 
(Geiselhart, 2004). This concentration stems in part from the catalytic role played by 
the private sector. Indeed, within industry the Internet has served three main purposes 
in shaping market behavior and organizational dynamics: a source of product and 
process innovation, an efficiency tool, and an alternative channel of client service. 
The widening scope of digital technologies means that few, if any, industries are 
exempt from some degree of transformation (Andal-Ancion et al., 2003).
For governments, all of these Internet-induced changes are relevant. Much of e-
government reflects private sector activity that has both encouraged and pressured 
public sector organizations to act in a similar manner. Fiscal constraints imposed 
by a quasi-competitive system of global investors and domestic politics, as well 
as a strategic desire to generate cost savings and reallocate spending to new and 
politically attractive priorities, make the nexus between technology management 
and efficiency a central concern in government today (McIver & Elmagarmid, 2002; 
Pavlichev & Garson, 2004). Thus, multinational corporations and national govern-
ments (and large subnational ones) may be viewed similarly in terms of seeking to 
deploy new governance capacities (Cairncross, 2002).
A more careful examination of government, however, reveals important differences 
across the private and public sectors. Efficiency, for example, is a much more politi-
www.ebook3000.com

Service, Security, Transparency, and Trust   317
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
cally contested principle in government. Stakeholders such as unions and political 
parties may oppose worker mobility and job cuts, moves generally applauded in 
the market sector. Although private corporations may aggressively cater to select 
clients, governments remain wedded to broader public interest responsibilities 
involving all citizens.
These public interest considerations are tied to political accountabilities that, in turn, 
shape both the feasibility and the perceived appropriateness of e-government as a 
service-delivery strategy. The modest and uneven results of online service delivery 
by governments, even in those countries leading in Internet use, is indicative of both 
the complexities and diverse preferences characterizing a citizenry and its relations 
with its government (Hart-Teeter, 2003). Indeed, it is not clear whether citizens are 
demanding online services or governments are pushing them, and the requisite mix 
of incentives and results to move citizens online remains elusive (Roy, 2003). This 
elusiveness, in turn, is reflected in dispersed and uneven political leadership, both 
in terms of the relative importance of online service delivery as a strategic objective 
and the level of resources and authority allocated to undertake necessary change.
These necessary changes are primarily about fostering more horizontal governance 
to cut across traditionally separate vertical entities, perhaps the single most crucial 
organizational challenge to realizing citizen-centric portals and service delivery 
mechanisms (Allen et al., 2005; Fountain, 2001). Achieving this horizontal col-
laboration, therefore, requires political will and a set of organizational mechanisms 
to facilitate information sharing and joint action (Batini et al., 2002). There are 
both structural and cultural impediments to such mechanisms, reflecting traditional 
resource allocation processes and separate accountability systems based on verti-
cal hierarchy and, in the case of Parliamentary models, ministerial accountability 
(Allen et al., 2005).
The danger is that in the absence of strong action to overcome these limitations—the 
rhetoric of portals as a basis for integrative services—one stop encounters and 
more seamless governance remains just rhetoric. Moreover, strengthened govern-
ment-wide coordination, implying some degree of central authority, runs counter 
to the thrust of new public management reform in the 1980s and early 1990s that 
emphasized organizational autonomy and flexibility. Striking a new balance is 
proving to be a formidable challenge (as the Canadian experience, examined below, 
demonstrates).
The terrorist acts of September 11, 2001 have brought out similar governance di-
lemmas, albeit with an added sense of urgency. Governments have been quick to 
establish new anti-terrorism and homeland security measures that often create new 
pressures for horizontal coordination and government-wide action. Information 
management and interoperability over a safe and secure digital architecture become 
precursors to improved security for citizens.

318   Roy
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
In many ways, security efforts are in keeping with the definition of e-government 
offered at this article’s outset. Online service delivery has relied upon a secure 
infrastructure in order to underpin the technological feasibility of interacting and 
transacting via the Internet (Holden, 2004). Nonetheless, today cyber-security may 
also be viewed as one element in a broader public safety or homeland security 
agenda that denotes an important reshaping of e-government in terms of purpose 
and focus. A commonality of service delivery and homeland security is an empha-
sis on coordination across government and capacities to transcend organizational 
boundaries in order to focus on the needs of the citizen. A similar necessity for both 
agendas is a sophisticated and reliable digital architecture to underpin government-
wide capacities for action.
There are differences, as well, that are important in shaping how e-government 
is viewed both within and outside the public sector. On the service delivery side, 
most governments have pursued a more collaborative model, facilitating horizontal 
coordination across separate units in an effort to achieve better results for the citizen 
as a consumer of public services (Allen et al., 2005). In comparison, the dramatic 
imposition of homeland or domestic security as a response to recent terrorist activi-
ties has accentuated a more centralized form of organizational response. The United 
States Department of Homeland Security is a case in point, internalizing coordina-
tion within a broader, more central command and control structure accountable 
directly to a senior Cabinet appointee of the President. Yet, challenges of balancing 
hierarchies and networks, structure and flexibility, control and collaboration remain 
stark (Kamark, 2004).
It may well be that a heightened political profile of security and terrorism cor-
responds to a public demand for action and clarity and, as a result, stronger and 
more centralized forms of leadership. This point underscores how an evolution or 
dramatic shift in the mood of the public can shape the organization of government. 
The heightened security-minded focus on centralization and clarity is accelerating 
attention and investments made in cyberspace, technology, and internal governance 
reform, changes that may well bolster the level of seriousness and internal compe-
tencies within government devoted to deploying and managing digital technologies 
(Clifford, 2004; Dutta & McCrohan, 2002).
How and to what ends such deployments occur are dependent on many variables, 
particularly the views of the citizenry and their elected representatives. Internet use 
is expected to rise and grow more prevalent, suggesting that more individuals will 
look to conduct their affairs with their governments online when feasible (Hart-
Teeter, 2003). Uncertainty remains, however, as public attitudes are intertwined with 
service comparisons across online and offline channels and broader socio-economic 
and political shifts. Privacy of information is a case in point. In North America, 
prior to 2001, there was often trepidation in the minds of citizens with respect to 
the government’s collecting, sharing, and using personal information, even if better 
service resulted (Joshi et al., 2002). More recently, governments have been com-
www.ebook3000.com

Service, Security, Transparency, and Trust   319
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
forted, and perhaps even driven, by a public now rebalancing security and privacy 
concerns. Yet, despite this rebalancing, and even with broad support for stronger 
homeland security measures, the American public remains suspicious of government 
handling of personal information (Hart-Teeter, 2004).
This contrast (openness versus secrecy), a major point of departure between deploy-
ing digital technologies as a means of serving citizens and one centered on public 
safety, brings to light the central and related aspects of transparency and trust as two 
inter-related and important dimensions of e-government and e-governance.
Transparency.and.Trust
According to some commentators, we live in the age of transparency (Tapscott 
& Ticoll, 2003). Although this particular invocation targets private corporations 
facing heightening investor and public scrutiny, ultimately rendering secrecy and 
information containment counterproductive, the message and underlying forces 
driving it also hold much relevance for government. Transparency drives this need 
for greater openness and responsiveness, as secrecy invites suspicion, resulting in 
questions, exposure, and increased costs and complexities down the line (Mitchinson 
& Ratner, 2004).
Governments are not immune to such pressures. From one perspective, e-government 
has accelerated this emphasis on openness, as governments themselves have moved 
to provide much more information online, but the Internet has underpinned expanded 
capacities for neutral observers and vested interests to find and share information, 
expose secrets and shortcomings, and mobilize public opinion accordingly.
The relationship between trust and transparency is complex and consequential, and it 
is bound to become more so as online access widens and usage expands. The notion 
of trust in government and political processes is multifaceted and complex. Parent 
et al. distinguish between specific and diffuse forms of political trust.
Specific support refers to satisfaction with government outputs and the overall 
performance of political authorities. Diffuse support refers to the public’s attitude 
toward regime-level political objectives. (Parent et al., 2004, p. 1)
This differentiation underscores the potentially different ways in which citizens may 
judge precise forms of government action and democratic institutions more gener-
ally. Therefore, there may be related differences in how e-government is viewed as a 
set of customer relationship mechanisms (defined primarily by service delivery and 

320   Roy
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
responsiveness) versus how e-governance might come to be viewed (encompassing 
broader elements of legitimacy and accountability).
In their own discussion of how e-government might contribute to rising trust in the 
public sector, Tolbert and Mossberger (2003) offer a more encompassing approach 
bridging, to some degree, these two dimensions. The authors point to potential im-
provements in both administrative and democratic systems by making government 
more responsive, transparent, accountable, accessible, responsible, efficient, effec-
tive, and participatory. Their findings provide cautious testament to the notion that 
e-government’s degree of online transparency is positively correlated to the level 
of trust accorded by citizens along some of these dimensions (Parent et al., 2004; 
Tolbert & Mossberger, 2003). Similarly, some experts see online information report-
ing as a key (although underutilized) component of performance management and 
heightening political and managerial accountability to the citizenry (Lee, 2004).
The relationship between homeland security, transparency, and e-government is 
illustrative. In the United States, despite an expanded realm of powers and secrecy, 
public opinion would seem to accord dramatically higher levels of confidence in 
those public organizations pursuing security-related matters (particularly frontline 
emergency services but also intelligence agencies) than in the federal government 
generally (Hart-Teeter, 2004). At the same time, widening demands for transpar-
ency and openness remain central to such matters, arguably an important factor in 
shaping the sorts of responses put forth by government2.
Other areas of public sector operations—procurement and contracting—underscore 
such trends. With the Internet and increasingly ubiquitous digital technologies, e-
government relies on closer forms of collaboration and partnering between private 
sector specialists and government organizations (Langford & Harrison, 2001). This 
relational complexity is heightened by a wider focus on openness and a loss of the 
traditional common ground joining industry and government. This loss may not 
necessarily be negative as both sectors seek new arrangements to foster more col-
laborative governance in a much more open manner, with transparency extended 
to the widest possible range of stakeholders (Allen et al., 2002; Paquet, 1997). In 
navigating such volatility, an essential element (and often an elusive one) is trust 
(Lane & Roy, 2000; Lawther, 2002).
Yet this point applies more generally to the broad spectrum of relational governance 
challenges driving e-government. Trust is centrally positioned at the nexus between 
the primarily internally driven administrative reforms of e-government’s architecture 
and the related and more externally rooted pressures for e-governance reflected in 
widening debates on openness and engagement. Thus, the nature of trust is likely to 
be increasingly tied not only to online performance measures such as information 
and transactions provided by governments, but also to online process considerations 
more in line with a broader participatory and multi-stakeholder environment that 
challenges conventional notions of authority (Northrup & Thorson, 2003).
www.ebook3000.com

Service, Security, Transparency, and Trust   321
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
In such an environment, democratic legitimacy—the importance of maintaining 
and/or strengthening trust between public sector institutions and citizens—is a 
central and fluid concern. The notion of citizen engagement, for instance, implies a 
more meaningful and ongoing democratic role for the public beyond merely electing 
representatives, and the Internet is a powerful venue for a more widely informed 
and highly educated citizenry disgruntled with largely representational systems of 
democratic governance (Palfrey, 2004; Geiselhart, 2004).
Accordingly, a reconsideration of the relative balance between representational and 
more participative forms of democracy is growing as the Internet’s potential to fa-
cilitate a broader conversation across all stakeholders and the public at large is also 
an argument for inclusiveness, as proponents of e-democracy espouse. Conversely, 
the difficulties in structuring such a conversation and, indeed, questions surrounding 
whether online exchanges can facilitate meaningful venues for democratic decision-
making are real, and they represent critical design issues in terms of making use, or 
partial use, of cyberspace (Fountain, 2002; Lenihan, 2002a; Norris, 2000; Oliver 
& Sanders, 2004). A general observation is that the systemic introduction of more 
digital forms of democracy would constitute a major revolution in the structure and 
functioning of the public sector apparatus (Fountain, 2002). There is, nonetheless, 
widening experimentation with democratic reform, much of which involves online 
capacities (MacIntosh et al., 2002), and while a wholesale redesign of democratic 
governance seems unlikely in the short term, ongoing mixes of acceptance, resis-
tance, and incremental change have resulted (Allen et al., 2001).
In all aspects of online activity, questions surrounding the level of trust and con-
fidence of citizens in the digital technologies themselves are important (Bryant & 
Colledge, 2002). Much like online service delivery channels have been slow to 
evolve in many jurisdictions, it will not be tomorrow when online mechanisms re-
place current democratic practises. Moreover, as with homeland security, approaches 
and demands may vary with circumstance, as a strong public appetite for action 
and clear accountability may, at times, co-exist uneasily with demands for greater 
participation and power sharing. This latter tension reflects a source of contention at 
the heart of how democratic government and governance will co-evolve and adapt 
to the new circumstances of an online and interconnected world.
E-Government.and.E-Governance.in.Canada
Canada provides a useful basis for examining e-government. As one of the world’s 
most advanced countries by measures of economic wealth, quality of life, and In-
ternet access and affordability, Canada has been aggressively bolstering its usage 
of digital technologies in order to realize the promise of e-government.

322   Roy
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
The impetus for a key component of e-government federally evolved from a broader 
effort—Connecting Canadians—that was crafted in the mid-1990s and led by the 
federal Department of Industry. In the Speech from the Throne on October 12, 1999, 
outlining its objectives and priorities, the Government of Canada stated:
By 2004, our goal is to be known around the world as the government most con-
nected to its citizens:
The Government On-Line Initiative (GOL) was launched to meet this commitment. 
The goal of GOL is to provide Canadians with electronic access to key federal 
programs and services. The initiative focuses on grouping or “clustering” online 
services around citizen’s needs and priorities, rather than by government structures. 
(Coe, 2004, p. 6)
The Government showcases citizen satisfaction surveys, and Canada’s reputation 
internationally has also been bolstered by international observers such as Accenture 
Consulting that ranked Canada as a global leader—a recognition largely predicated 
on the Government’s main portal (www.gc.ca) that, in the spirit of integrated service 
delivery, is grouped according to clusters of services and specific client groups3.
Despite such acclaim, evidence suggests that the changes and investments made to 
date have been insufficient to overcome the inertia of more traditional and vertical 
processes of ministerial accountability and silo operations that comprise primarily 
separate and autonomous political fiefdoms. “Silos continue to reign” (Coe, 2004, 
p. 18).
Coe’s (2004) examination of GOL pilot projects—interdepartmental experiments to 
integrative services—reveal a widespread lack of shared accountability to facilitate 
collaboration. Managers are frustrated by tensions between horizontal intent stra-
tegically and vertical constraints operationally. In her review of GOL, the Auditor 
General underscores a similar absence of a coordinated architecture required to 
balance vision and planning: “With only high-level expected outcomes, there is no 
clearly defined end state for GOL. The government will have difficulty measuring 
progress and performance toward 2005 objectives” (Auditor General of Canada, 
2003, p. 10). Such findings are indicative of the growing need for more rigorous 
collaborative mechanisms and performance frameworks to both facilitate shared 
action and gauge progress, particularly in service delivery agendas that transcend 
traditional reporting relationships (Public Policy Forum, 2003; Stowers, 2004).
Similar challenges also characterize security efforts. Over the past three years, 
security has become a high priority with financial investments and organizational 
reorganizations to improve domestic capacity4. In findings remarkably similar to the 
GOL experience, the Auditor General again concludes that horizontal coordination 
has been inadequate.
www.ebook3000.com

Service, Security, Transparency, and Trust   323
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Overall, these gaps and deficiencies point to a requirement to strengthen the man-
agement framework of issues that cross agency boundaries, such as information 
systems, watch lists, and personnel screening. (Auditor General of Canada, 2004, 
p. 39)
In another example, the Auditor General reports on an effort to create an Integrated 
National Security Assessment Centre (INSAC) in 2003 to “use intelligence from 
many sources to produce timely analyses and assessment of threats to Canada” and 
distribute this information accordingly (Auditor General of Canada, 2004, p. 24). 
The findings illustrate the difficulties of joint action:
The latter four organizations (Foreign Affairs, Citizenship and Immigration, So-
licitor General and Privy Council Office) have not yet provided a representative. 
Foreign Affairs said that its resources should more properly address the threat 
to its personnel and assets abroad and that increasingly scarce resources from a 
“foreign ministry” should not be devoted to matters that are better left to domestic 
agencies. Immigration told us it supports the concept and attributes its absence to 
the lack of permanent funding available for that purpose. Solicitor General Canada 
said that although it has not assigned a specific representative, its officials are fully 
engaged in all functions and work initiated by the Centre. The Privy Council Office 
told us that it has no intelligence collection mandate but is actively involved on a 
daily basis in the processing of information produced by INSAC. (Auditor General 
of Canada, 2004, ibid.)
The centrality of information sharing and interoperability lies at the heart of GOL and 
security. Notably, despite the added and significant possibility of invoking national 
security in the latter case, unlike the former, privacy concerns remain a significant 
barrier to cross-agency action, although the Auditor General herself remains suspi-
cious that its relevance is not properly understood or defined.
We noted that privacy concerns were often cited as the reasons why agencies could 
not exchange information. However, officials were not able to show us any legal 
opinions, specific references to legislation, or judgements as a basis for that posi-
tion. (Auditor General of Canada, 2004, p. 17)
In a separate, closely related study, the Senate Standing Committee of National 
Security and Defence conducted a three-year review of security readiness and emer-
gency preparedness, once again noting similar concerns. The Senate report quotes 
a senior official’s assessment of what is required for the newly formed Office of 
Critical Infrastructure Protection and Emergency Preparedness (OCIPEP) to fulfill 

324   Roy
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
its coordination role in responding to a major emergency. “The challenge,” he said, 
“is that this would require an unprecedented level of cooperation inside and outside 
of government” (Standing Senate Committee, 2004, p. 14).
An important lesson of governance would seem applicable to both GOL and security. 
In both cases, despite a similar need for horizontal action, capacities for doing are 
lacking. Moreover, there are important connections between GOL and security. A 
major component of the former is the secure channel, initially conceived as a core 
mechanism to conduct transactions with citizens, but now also a central focus of 
cyber-security. For example, OCIPEP is the government’s primary agent in improv-
ing cyber-security. Thus, their separate fortunes may also shape their collective and 
integrative prospects for success.
The responses of the recently reconstituted federal government (under a new Prime 
Minister) in December 2003, address such dilemmas in a familiar manner—cen-
tralized authority within an enlarged political entity and, it is hoped, a clear and 
decisive mandate to ordain the coordination necessary to improve homeland security. 
Thus, the earlier attempts to pursue a more collaborative and horizontal approach 
to security management have been significantly abandoned in favor of a more 
centralizing approach. Given the disappointing results of GOL to take hold and 
strengthen government-wide capacities, it is not unreasonable to expect that similar 
centralizing tendencies may result here as well, particularly as security becomes a 
common plank of service delivery and homeland safety.
The danger with such an evolution is the disconnect between centralizing the internal 
architecture for e-government in terms of government-wide capacities for service 
delivery and homeland security, and the more participative nature of e-governance 
externally, fueling calls for openness, engagement, and more decentralized and 
collaborative decision-making models. This cleavage is underscored by widening 
dissatisfaction with the Canadian Parliamentary model as a whole, driven in large 
part by the political and managerial dominance of central agencies, and the Prime 
Minister’s Office in particular (Savoie, 1999). Such characterizations are indica-
tive of an operating culture much more axed on top-down communication than 
consultation.
In response to such a critique, democratic reform proposals offered by the new gov-
ernment have focused predominantly on the role of the legislature—Parliament—in 
an effort to re-engage elected officials through a variety of measures to lessen the 
dominance of the Prime Minister’s Office. In short, the emphasis is on refurbishing 
the current representational model in very precise manners in the hopes of reversing 
its steady decline in the eyes of the citizenry5.
Yet the widening canvas of e-governance and more participative democratic forms 
create contradictions in terms of the messages conveyed to citizens. This contradic-
tion stems from the emphasis on citizen engagement as a principle embraced by 
the government, particularly within the public service. Supported and reinforced 
www.ebook3000.com

Service, Security, Transparency, and Trust   325
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
by Ministers who routinely convey similar sentiments in public, citizen engage-
ment promises a more direct voice to the public and to key stakeholders in shaping 
policy decisions and service delivery processes through new and innovative forms 
of consultation and participation. The Government has staked out cyberspace as one 
means of pursuing expanded public engagement, stating online that it is committed 
to finding new and innovative ways to consult with and engage Canadians.6 
The digital gap between reforming Parliament and engaging Canadians is consider-
able, as digital technologies (and the Internet specifically) are utterly absent in terms 
of both usage and debate from Parliamentary chambers, the traditional focal point of 
open and public deliberation (Lenihan, 2002b). Politicians appear increasingly out 
of step in this regard, particularly when, unlike their elected masters, public servants 
have fewer qualms envisioning a very different future (hypothetically, 2013).
Representative democracy in Canada has not been replaced, but it has become 
more participative. Democracy is no longer just voting every four or five years, but 
a continuous, engaged, informed and collaborative dialogue involving all players. 
(E-Government Policy Network, 2004, p. 9)
Presently within the Parliamentary model, the scope of such participation remains 
a source of tension, one likely to intensify as a key determinant in public trust7. 
Moreover, as Canadians seek more voice, in the absence of clarity on how to do 
so, the impacts of transparency are nonetheless widely displayed via a relentless 
series of scandals involving mismanagement or alleged corruption8. This more reac-
tive form of transparency provides testament to the view that, while it is arguably 
unlikely that governments are erring more often at present than in historical terms, 
their failures are now more likely to be exposed, and to a greater affect. As a result, 
trust and cynicism are impacted, inversely related in a negative spiral.
Such difficulties suggest that e-government, if unaccompanied by significant efforts 
at political and institutional reform, may do little more than reinforce the existing 
tendencies of a particular state system (Karakaya, 2003; Wilson & Welch, 2004). 
In the case of the Canadian Parliamentary model, the problem is compounded by 
the tension between these inward, reactionary tendencies of government, on the one 
hand, and the intensifying outward pressures for greater openness and participation 
on the other.

326   Roy
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Contested.Path.Ahead
In attempting to summarize the key lessons and expectations that may be derived 
from the preceding discussion, there are a number of lessons that stand out—lessons 
that will be influential in shaping the future of e-government and e-governance in 
Canada and elsewhere. They are as follows:
The rise of online connectedness as a driver of e-government heightens the need for 
horizontal coordination to transcend internal organizational boundaries, and this 
point applies to both service delivery and security-related processes.
Such horizontal governance requires both technological and political reforms in 
order to align performance objectives, decision-making processes, and account-
ability mechanisms in a suitable manner.
Governance is increasingly becoming more transparent and participative with 
resulting pressures for democratic reform certain to intensify.
Such pressures may nonetheless encounter resistance within existing political 
structures and culture.
Public confidence and trust in government are central to shaping e-government and 
e-governance reforms, representing critical determinants in the ongoing capacity 
of the public sector to adapt.
As one goes down the list, these points become increasingly more strategic and 
complex managerially, and with greater consequences democratically. If an in-
cremental path is insufficient, where does one begin to orchestrate more systemic 
changes required to achieve some of the transformational potential that most all 
governments have acknowledged as worthy of pursuit?
First, a more holistic reform process requires a broader and more encompassing 
view of e-government and e-governance in keeping with the definition offered at 
the outset of this article. The Government of Canada’s current difficulties stem 
largely from subsuming governance as a primarily internal facet of public sector 
modernization without adequately embracing the interface between internal and 
external reforms, both administratively and democratically.
Even with respect to present internal governance reforms associated with service 
delivery improvements, a key inhibitor of performance is misinformation and a lack 
www.ebook3000.com

Service, Security, Transparency, and Trust   327
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
of public understanding surrounding what the government is attempting to do and 
how objectives are being pursued. For example, in response to the Auditor General’s 
criticism of GOL’s horizontal capacities, the federal government’s response is to 
defensively point to a considerable array of horizontal mechanisms now in place.
The GOL governance structure, which was strengthened in 2002, includes a 15-
member deputy minister-level committee and a 16-member assistant deputy min-
ister-level committee that meet at least every six weeks and oversee the work of 
three subject-matter expert committees on service transformation, information and 
other policies, and architecture. In addition, three inter-departmental committees 
focus on the information technology, information management, and service delivery 
“communities of practise.” (Auditor General of Canada, 2003, p. 13)
Such responses may not only be insufficient internally, but also counterproductive 
externally with respect to the views of the citizenry. This is so since the formal 
templates of how government functions, as presented to the public, correspond 
less and less to the more complex and interdependent realities of governing, and of 
organizing to govern. The public senses this drift, becoming frustrated and cynical 
at not being genuinely invited and trusted as a stakeholder. The missed opportunity 
(and the potential source of a further decline in trust) is that a public more knowing 
and understanding of the challenges faced by governments would likely be more 
supportive in embracing experimentation, innovation, and systemic change.
This point may well be particularly consequential for citizens—government relations 
within the context of homeland security, with its added layers of secretive opera-
tions often contentiously co-existing with mechanisms of oversight and pressures 
for greater transparency more generally. In Canada, there has been little effort to 
engage citizens in discussions about security priorities and means, with the only 
mechanism for public openness being an inquiry established reactively to address 
alleged potential mismanagement and shed some light on an otherwise secretive 
governmental apparatus9.
Therefore, while e-government may carry some positive potential for greater trust 
and better accountability, the evidence in Canada suggests that any such benefits 
are mitigated by a public’s rightful sense that it really does not understand how 
government works until after the fact when judgements are formed within a con-
frontational culture of political blame and media sound bites. Perhaps more than 
elsewhere, the centralized and inward Parliamentary system is prone to this danger, 
reinforcing a “culture of secrecy” that is “indicative of a government leadership 
which is unsympathetic to the right of access” (Reid, 2004, p. 82).
The other major challenge faced by the Government of Canada extends to all levels 
of government, as the vision of more seamless forms of governance need not apply 
exclusively to any one government, but rather to the public sector as a whole. Hori-

328   Roy
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
zontality, interoperability and online integrative portal capacities are issues that will 
increasingly drive a wider need for new intergovernmental capacities collectively, 
encompassing all levels government (Fletcher, 2004; Paquet & Roy, 2004).
In Canada, GOL is envisioned to become intergovernmental, providing citizen-
centric service delivery across all levels of government. Yet the structures for doing 
so are completely absent. Similarly, in terms of domestic security and emergency 
preparedness, where the stakes are arguably higher, the situation is similar, as a 
recent Senate report provides an important examination of the extended implica-
tions and dangers of stymied federal coordination for the country as a whole. The 
Committee found major intergovernmental blockages that are particularly harmful 
to local governments and frontline delivery agents most in need of informational 
and tangible resources in order to respond to crises of various sorts (Fletcher, 2004; 
Paquet & Roy, 2004, p. 10).
Whether the public endorses a primarily competitive view of federalism and inter-
governmental relations or a more collaborative view, is a critical variable in shaping 
e-government’s future. Some observers suggest that the federal government may 
well be the beneficiary of a more digital future as citizens maintain their national 
attachment, facilitated in part by online connectivity, while lessening their tradition-
ally strongest ties to provincial governments since these latter identities may erode 
in visibility and relevance over time (Gibbons, 2004). Some early research in the 
United States supports this notion, pointing to a relatively higher level of confidence 
and trust online accorded by citizens to federal and local governments than at the 
state level (Tolbert & Mossberger, 2003).
Sensing this danger, the provinces may be less willing to seek more integrative 
governance solutions that erode their presence. Moreover, in comparison to other 
countries, both federal and unitary, the absence of an intergovernmental dimension 
to e-government’s architecture should be underscored as a key concern and notable 
handicap for the future of Canada’s public sector. Although the current CIO Council 
(comprised of voluntary participants by senior public managers from federal and 
provincial governments) could evolve into a collective entity, it is currently not 
empowered in such a fashion.
At some point, the parameters of Canadian federalism and the processes interlinking 
all levels of government will need to be significantly rethought from their 19th-century 
traditions toward the more digital and interdependent era of the present century. Yet 
that point remains some time in the future, as e-government’s current evolution is 
first and foremost shaped by structures rooted in history.
www.ebook3000.com

Service, Security, Transparency, and Trust   329
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Conclusion
Federally, and in response to the title of this article, e-government would appear to 
be mainly about getting “government online,” despite an accelerating dissatisfac-
tion with the broader system of democratic governance surrounding it, an untenable 
situation unlikely to generate any greater trust in government (Paquet, 2004).
Much of what is required to reframe governance has been recognized. Lenihan, for 
example, points to two over-arching meta-principles that must take hold: collab-
orative and inclusive governance (Lenihan, 2002a). Hunold (2001) invokes a more 
deliberative democracy via wider openness and participation across the citizenry, 
public service, and elected officials. While such fundamentals are a sound begin-
ning, there often remains a gulf separating techno-enthusiasts on the one hand and 
governance architects on the other. Perhaps in the best performing organizations 
from any sector today, this disconnect may be less pervasive (Van Grembergen, 
2004); however, such a divide certainly characterizes many governments at present, 
including the Government of Canada.
For e-government and e-governance to co-evolve in a positive manner, the techni-
cal design work of deploying technology must become more fully integrated with 
those overseeing governance design (or in some instances, redesign). An important 
starting point is fostering stronger and wider deliberative mechanisms from within 
government in order to acknowledge, be more inclusive of, and benefit from the 
expanding set of discursive networks outside of government. In this manner, more 
deliberative and more virtual forms of democracy must become mutually reinforcing. 
Demographics will make this tie more essential, as the first generations of those not 
knowing a time without online commercial, familial, and civic engagements will see 
no valid reason to exempt the political sphere from this reality (Cherny, 2000).
More concretely, within Canada’s Parliamentary model, the absence of a publicly 
recognizable mechanism with organizational and political authority (e.g., a Minister 
or Central agency) to address the nexus between the internal and technical architec-
ture of online government and the broader political, civic, and participatory contexts 
of democratic governance, is a major deficiency. An appropriate response may not 
necessarily be yet another layer of centralization such as the one now in fashion for 
security, but rather a collaborative mechanism with the means, legitimacy, and flex-
ibility to act innovatively. Major priority areas, such as modernizing service delivery 
and improving public safety, have exposed the flaws of an inherently vertical and 
hierarchical system that often implies individual responsibility and accountability 
with a single Minister in a fashion no longer feasible. Thus, collaborative behaviour, 
in order to be effective, will rely upon elected officials embracing new mechanisms 
with shared accountabilities and integrative results (Coe, 2004). Such mechanisms 
will need to be both conceived and gauged more proactively and transparently than 

330   Roy
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
in the past, making use of wider circles of engagement encompassing all relevant 
stakeholders.
In sum, within the confines of service, security, transparency, and trust, the current 
struggles of the federal government are likely to be accentuated by the significant 
investments now being made into the structural and policy directions of the first 
two components without a corresponding effort to widen the governance canvas in 
a corresponding and meaningful fashion. The provincial level, as a network of 10 
potential laboratories of governance reform that share common Parliamentary tradi-
tions may offer more promise in the short term. Many of these governments appear 
more intent on pursuing wider experimentation democratically and more participative 
forms of governance that could, in turn, shape e-government’s path more positively 
within their jurisdictions, federally, and for the country as a whole.
References
Allen, B., Juillet, L., Paquet, G., & Roy, J. (2001). E-government in Canada: People, part-
nerships and prospects. Gov. Info. Quarterly, 30(1), 36-47.
Allen et al. (2002). E-governance and the partnership imperative. Optimum Online, 32(4), 
36-47.
Allen, B., Juillet, L., Paquet, G., & Roy, J. (2005). E-government and Collaboration: Struc-
tural, Accountability and Cultural Reform (forthcoming, Ideas Group Publishing).
Andal-Ancion, A., Cartwright, P., & Yip, G.S. (2003, Summer). The digital transformation 
of traditional business. MIT Sloan Management Review, 62-74.
Auditor General of Canada (2003). Information Technology: Government Line. Ottawa: 
Office of the Auditor General of Canada.
Auditor General of Canada (2004). National Security in Canada—The 2001 Anti-terrorism 
Initiative. Ottawa: Office of the Auditor General of Canada. 
Bertelsmann Foundation (2002). E-government—Connecting efficient administration and 
responsive democracy. Postfach. Retrieved from: www.begix.de
Batini, C., Cappadozzi, E., Mecella, M., & Talamo, M. (2002). Cooperative architectures. In 
W.J. McIver & A.K. Elmagarmid (Eds.), Advances in Digital Government—Technol-
ogy, Human Factors and Policy. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bryant, A., & Colledge, B. (2002). Trust in electronic commerce business relationships. 
Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 3(2), 32-39.
Cairncross, F. (2002). The Company of the Future. Cambridge: Harvard Business School 
Press.
Cherny, A. (2000). The Next Deal—The Future of Public Life in the Information Age. New 
York: Basic Books.
www.ebook3000.com

Service, Security, Transparency, and Trust   331
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Clifford, M. (2004). Identifying and Exploring Security Essentials. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Coe, A. (2004). Innovation and accountability in 21st century government: Government 
on-line and network accountability. [Working paper]. Kennedy School of Govern-
ment, Harvard University.
Dutta, A., & McCrohan, K. (2002). Management’s role in information security in a cyber 
economy. California Management Review, 45(1), 67-87.
E-Government Policy Network, Government of Canada (2004). Transforming government 
and governance for the 21st century: A conceptual framework. In L. Oliver & L. Sand-
ers (Eds.), E-Government Reconsidered: Renewal of Governance for the Knowledge 
Age. Regina: Canadian Plains Research Center.
Fife, R. (2004). Ottawa plans $500M security fix. National Post, 22(04), 1.
Fletcher, P. (2004). Portals and policy: Implications of electronic access to U.S. federal 
government information and services. In A. Pavlichev & G.D. Garson (Eds.), Digital 
Government: Principles and Best Practises. Hershey, PA: IGP.
Fountain, J.E. (2001). Building the Virtual State: Information Technology and Institutional 
Change. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Fountain, J.E. (2002). Electronic government and electronic civics. [forthcoming]. In B. 
Wellman (Ed.), The Encyclopaedia of Community. Sage Publications.
Geiselhart, K. (2004). Digital government and citizen participation internationally. In A. 
Pavlichev & G.D. Garson (Eds.), Digital Government: Principles and Best Practises. 
Hershey, PA: IGP.
Gibbons, R. (2004). Federalism and the challenge of electronic portals. In L. Oliver & L. 
Sanders (Eds.), E-Government Reconsidered: Renewal of Governance for the Knowl-
edge Age. Regina: Canadian Plains Research Center.
Gronlund, A. (ed.). (2002). E-Government—Design, Applications and Management. Her-
shey, PA: IGP.
Hart-Teeter (2003). The New e-Government Equation: Ease, Engagement, Privacy and 
Protection. Washington, DC: Council for Excellence in Government.
Hart-Teeter (2004). From the Home Front to the Front Lines: America Speaks Out About 
Homeland Security. Washington, DC: Council for Excellence in Government.
Holden, S.H. (2004). Understanding Electronic Signatures: The Key to e-Government. 
Washington, DC: IBM Center for The Business of Government.
Hunold, C. (2001). Corporatism, pluralism, and democracy: Toward a deliberative theory 
of bureaucratic accountability. Governance: An International Journal of Policy and 
Administration, 14(2), 151-167.
Joshi, J.B.D., Ghafoor, A., & Aref, W.G. (2002). Security and privacy challenges of a 
digital government. In W.J. McIver & A.K. Elmagarmid (Eds.), Advances in Digital 
Government—Technology, Human Factors and Policy. Boston: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.
Kamarck, E.C. (2004). Applying 21st-century government to the challenge of homeland 
security. In J.M. Kamensky & T. Burlin (Eds.), Collaboration—Using Networks and 

332   Roy
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Partnerships. IBM Center for The Business of Government: Rowman and Littlefield 
Publishers Inc.
Karakaya, R. (2003). The use of the Internet for citizen participation: Enhancing demo-
cratic local governance? [Paper] Political Studies Association Annual Conference, 
University of Leicester.
Lane, G., & Roy, J. (2000). Building partnerships for the digital world. Lac Carling Gov-
ernment Review, 2(1), 23-29.
Langford, J., & Harrison, Y. (2001). Partnering for e-government: Challenges for public 
administrators. [Paper]. Institute of Public Administration of Canada Conference, 
Edmonton. Retrieved from: http://www.ipaciapc.ca/english/menu.htm
Lawther, W. (2002). Contracting for the 21st Century: A Partnership Model. Washington: 
PricewaterhouseCoopers Endowment for The Business of Government.
Lee, M. (2004). E-reporting: Strengthening Democratic Accountability. Washington, DC: 
IBM Center for The Business of Government.
Lenihan, D. (2002a). E-government, Federalism and Democracy: The New Governance. 
Ottawa: Centre for Collaborative Government.
Lenihan, D. (2002b). E-government: The Message to Politicians. Ottawa: Centre for Col-
laborative Government.
MacIntosh, A., Malina, A., & Farrell, S. (2002). Digital democracy through electronic 
petitioning. In W.J. McIver & A.K. Elmagarmid (Eds.), Advances in Digital Govern-
ment—Technology, Human Factors and Policy. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publish-
ers.
Marche, S., & McNiven, J.D. (2003). E-government and e-governance: The future isn’t what 
it used to be. Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences, 20(1), 74-86.
McIver, W.J. & Elmagarmid, A.K. (eds.). (2002). Advances in Digital Government—Tech-
nology, Human Factors and Policy. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Mitchinson, T., & Ratner, M. (2004). Promoting transparency through the electronic dis-
semination of information. In L. Oliver & L. Sanders (Eds.), E-government Recon-
sidered: Renewal of Governance for the Knowledge Age. Regina: Canadian Plains 
Research Center. 
Norris, P. (2000). Global governance and cosmopolitan citizens. In J.S. Nye & J.D. Dona-
hue (Eds.), Governance in a Globalizing World. Cambridge: Brookings Institution 
Press.
Northrup, T.A., & Thorson, S.J. (2003). The web of governance and democratic accountability. 
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.
Nugent, J.H., & Raisinghani, M.S. (2002). The information technology and telecommu-
nications security imperative: Important issues and drivers. Journal of Electronic 
Commerce Research, 3(1), 1-14. 
Oliver, L., & Sanders, L. (eds.). (2004). E-government Reconsidered: Renewal of Governance 
for the Knowledge Age. Regina: Canadian Plains Research Center. 
www.ebook3000.com

Service, Security, Transparency, and Trust   333
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Palfrey, J.G. (2004). Submission to the workshop on Internet governance. International 
Telecommunications Union. Harvard Law School: Berkman Center for Internet and 
Society. 
Paquet, G. (1997). States, communities and markets: The distributed governance scenario. 
In T.J. Courchene (Ed.), The Nation-state in a Global Information Era: Policy Chal-
lenges the Bell Canada Papers in Economics and Public Policy, 5, 25-46. Kingston: 
John Deutsch Institute for the Study of Economic Policy.
Paquet, G., & Roy, J. (2004). Smarter cities in Canada. Optimum Online, 33(1).
Paquet, G. (2004). There is more to governance than public candelabras: E-governance 
and Canada’s public service. In L. Oliver & L. Sanders (Eds.), E-government Recon-
sidered: Renewal of Governance for the Knowledge Age. Regina: Canadian Plains 
Research Center.
Parent, M., Vandebeek, C.A., & Gemino, A.C. (2004). Building citizen trust through e-gov-
ernment. Proceedings of 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.
Pavlichev, A., & Garson, G.D. (eds.). (2004). Digital Government: Principles and Best 
Practises. Hershey, PA: IGP.
Peristeras, V., Tsekos, T., & Tarabanis, K. (2002). E-government or e-Governance: Build-
ing a Domain Model for the Governance system. University of Macedonia: United 
Nations Thessalokiki.
Public Policy Forum (2003). Clusters and Gateways Survey: Preliminary Results. Ot-
tawa.
Reid, J. (2004). Holding governments accountable by strengthening access to information 
laws and information management practises. In L. Oliver & L. Sanders (Eds.), E-
government Reconsidered: Renewal of Governance for the Knowledge Age. Regina: 
Canadian Plains Research Center.
Riley, T.B. (2003). E-government vs. E-governance: Examining the Differences in a Chang-
ing Public Sector Climate. Ottawa: Commonwealth Centre for E-Governance.
Roy, J. (2003, Summer). The relational dynamics of e-governance: A case study of the city 
of Ottawa. Public Performance and Management Review, 26, 1-13.
 Savoie, D. (1999). Governing from the Centre: The Concentration of Power in Canadian 
Politics. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Standing Senate Committee on National Security and Defence. (2004). National Emergen-
cies: Canada’s Fragile Front Lines. Ottawa: Parliament of Canada.
Stowers, G.N.L. (2004). Measuring the performance of e-government. Washington, D.C.: 
IBM Center for The Business of Government. 
Tapscott, D., & Ticoll, D. (2003). The Naked Corporation—How the Age of Transparency 
will Revolutionize Business. Toronto: Viking Canada.
Tolbert, C., & Mossberger, K. (2003). The effects of e-government on trust and confidence 
in government. [Working Paper]. OH: Kent State University.
Van Grembergen, W. (ed.) (2004). Strategies for Information Technology Governance. 
Hershey, PA: IGP.

334   Roy
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Wilson, W. & Welch, E. (2004). Does e-government promote accountability? A compara-
tive analysis of Website openness and government accountability. Governance: An 
International Journal of Policy, Administration and Institutions, 17(2), 275-297.
Endnotes
1 
Among other jurisdictions, the Government of Mexico has recently adopted this 
definition, although its precise origins are unknown. 
2  
Decisions made by governments today that likely would not have been monitored 
and questioned publicly in the past are now regularly deliberated more openly and 
politically. For instance, a recent study on the attitudes of Americans on this topic 
shows majority support for the Patriot Act, but a strong desire to see its performance 
and suitability publicly debated (Hart-Teeter, 2004).
3  
There are three main sub-selections from the main portal: Canadians, non-Canadians, 
and businesses, the logic being that the sorts of information and services required by 
online visitors generally falls into one of these three camps. Accordingly, with just a 
few clicks, users are more likely able to find the information they seek.
4  
Specifically, in the 2001 Federal Budget, the government allocated $7.7 billion in new 
funds over five years on a range of initiatives and reforms centred on public security, 
safety, and anti-terrorism. Following the Auditor General’s report, one public opin-
ion poll conducted in April 2004 showed rising support among Canadians for higher 
spending on anti-terrorism (55% of those surveyed) and military defence (54%) (Fife, 
2004).
5  
The thrust to date of the announced reforms mainly envision reduced partisan control 
within Parliament by empowering members to vote more freely and by extending more 
power to committees to review legislation proposed by government (introduced in 
February 2004, there is insufficient experience to gauge any impact on such measures, 
but the hope is a more discursive and bolstered legislative branch to lessen executive 
branch dominance, notably that of the office of the Prime Minister).
6  
As one example, a new consultation portal has been established (www. consulting-
canadians.gc.ca), suggestive of online citizen engagement, but more a communica-
tions tool and clearinghouse to provide information and links to consultations across 
departments (which vary in online usage).
7  
This point reflects a tension in the current Canadian system as public servants are 
consulting citizens more regularly (more than 30 such initiatives are listed on the 
consultation portal in April 2004), mechanisms that are examples of public servants 
reaching out to the public and inviting input. Many Parliamentarians (i.e., those 
outside of Cabinet, within the legislative branch) are uneasy about this trend since 
a strict reading of the machinery of government would indicate only that they have 
such authority, and public servants are limited to serving Ministers in the executive 
branch.
www.ebook3000.com

Service, Security, Transparency, and Trust   335
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
8  
Over the past several years, numerous examples have emerged federally, featuring 
alleged political and operational mismanagement, including gun control registration, 
human resource assistance programs, and, most recently, the so-called sponsorship 
scandal based on government communication spending, primarily in Quebec during 
the 1990s following the provincial referendum on sovereignty in 1995. The scathing 
Auditor General’s report (completed in November 2003 but released in February 2004) 
embroiled the new government in controversy ever since, resulting in a formal public 
inquiry.
9  
The inquiry is to examine the case of a Canadian citizen deported on suspicions of 
terrorism from the United States to Syria, where he was interrogated and tortured. The 
issues of information management (gathering and sharing, both within and between 
governments) and internal governance may also facilitate a broader consideration of 
government’s expanded roles and responses in homeland security. However, as with 
most such highly legalistic inquiries, the forum is primarily viewed as a vehicle for 
exposing error and assigning fault.
10  
Reporting a wide range of federal (provincial) local barriers to coordinated action, 
the Senate report states, “It is imperative that federal, provincial and territorial gov-
ernments act in common cause, and with common urgency in devising strategies and 
tactics, and allocating resources and training, to ensure optimal responses to major 
emergences” (Standing Senate Committee, 2004, p. 41).
This work was previously published in International Journal of Electronic Government Research, Vol. 
1, Issue 1, edited by P.D. Fletcher & D. Norris, pp. 40-58, copyright 2005 by IGI Publishing, formerly 
known as Idea Group Publishing (an imprint of IGI Global).

336   Shelley, Thrane, & Shulman
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter.XV
Generational.Differences..
in.IT.Use.and..
Political.Involvement:
New.Directions
Mack C. Shelley, II, Iowa State University, USA
Lisa E. Thrane, Wichita State University, USA
Stuart W. Shulman, University of Pittsburgh, USA
Abstract
A structural equation model analysis of data from a 2003 national random sample 
survey (n = 478) on information technology (IT) reveals important direct and indi-
rect effects of generational demographic and attitudinal differences on electronic 
forms of political participation. Younger respondents reported more support for IT 
and fewer technological disadvantages, compared to older respondents. Younger 
respondents showed more desire for public IT availability and e-political participa-
tion, whereas older respondents preferred traditional electoral involvement. The 
more educated held more favorable views of IT generally and of public IT access 
more specifically. Better-educated respondents were more active civically, in both 
traditional and electronic forms of participation. Supportive technological views led 
www.ebook3000.com

Generational Differences in IT Use and Political Involvement   337
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
to greater e-political participation and stronger interest in e-elections. Respondents 
with less concern and fear about IT were more likely to act as digital citizens and 
were more involved in e-politics and e-elections. Proponents of public IT access were 
more supportive of e-elections. Our model suggests that e-citizenry will compound 
existing social divisions as nonelectronic voices are marginalized and electronic 
voices are amplified.
Generational.Differences.in.Information.
Technology.Use.and.Political.Involvement
Past research has demonstrated that generational differences play an important role 
in linking information technology (IT) literacy and usage with political outcomes 
such as partisanship, elections, or public policy decisions (Fox, 2004). Other sociode-
mographic differences, together with generational effects, define what has become 
known as the “digital divide” (Castells, 1999; Warschauer, 2003). Attitudes toward 
the availability and use of IT play an important role in contemporary political theory 
and outcomes regarding political participation.
Complex contemporary issues regarding full participation by older members of the 
political community revolve around the rapidly expanding reliance on electronic 
sources of access that all too frequently are unfamiliar to older adults, for the purpose 
of commenting on pending government rules and the corresponding increased use 
of exclusively online “e-rulemaking” by public agencies (e.g., Garson, 2005; Shul-
man, Thrane, & Shelley, 2005). A related IT research front has emerged regarding 
the global need to adapt technologies that often have been developed of, by, and for 
the young to the needs of the elderly (e.g., Jaeger, 2005; Thrane, Shelley, Shulman, 
Beisser, & Larson, 2005). Making “young technologies” available and functional 
to older users requires careful attention to cognitive, social, and education differ-
ences, as well as to the vastly divergent life histories that separate younger “with 
it” technology users from their elders. An area of particularly critical current ap-
plication of research on the generational dimension of the digital divide lies in the 
need to provide and evaluate functional online information and referral systems for 
services supporting the elderly—and especially the disabled elderly—that can cut 
successfully across generationally different modes of seeking and following up on 
sources of assistance for service delivery (e.g., Auh & Shelley, 2006; Shelley & Auh, 
2006). The importance of combined online, telephone, and in-person contacts cutting 
across generations is driven home by the ongoing multiyear Aging and Disability 
Resource Center initiative of the U.S. Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
and the Administration on Aging to establish information and referral capability for 
the elderly and disabled in nearly every state.

338   Shelley, Thrane, & Shulman
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
In this chapter, we define IT literacy operationally as a self-reported ability to use 
computer hardware and software for self-expression, to communicate with other 
individuals and organizations, to locate and process information electronically, 
and to engage in problem-solving activities. Past research demonstrates that IT 
literacy is greater among younger members of society, those with higher incomes 
and more education, those of more advantaged ethnic groups (white non-Hispanic 
and Asian), and those with IT resources more readily available at home, work, or 
in readily-accessible public locations such as libraries or other public buildings 
(Mossberger, Tolbert, & Stansbury, 2003; Norris, 2001; Servon, 2002). A number 
of studies have identified unequal levels of IT literacy as a significant barrier to 
equity in citizenship (NRC, 1999; Wilhelm, 2000). Survey data have been useful 
for fleshing out the characteristics of the population of nonusers of the Internet, as 
well as particular obstacles and concerns that explain IT nonuse.
This study assesses the impact of generational and socioeconomic status differences 
on IT literacy and political participation. It argues that cohort differences have a 
direct influence on traditional and electronic forms of political engagement, but also 
suggests that interest in and support for technology are key factors in shaping notions 
of digital citizenry. In addition, this research evaluates whether e-political participa-
tion occurs at the expense of more traditional forms of electoral involvement.
Literature.Review
Studies consistently show that age, race, language, and disabilities are significant 
predictors shaping IT literacy, even when controlling for socioeconomic status 
(Cooper, 2000; Goslee, 1998; Novak & Hoffman, 1998). Income and education 
increase the likelihood of access to and use of computers and the Internet (NTIA, 
2000, 2002; UCLA, 2000; Wilhelm, 2000) as well as access to broadband (NTIA, 
2004). The purchase of a home computer, or general access to and availability of 
computers, is widely considered to be dependent on income. Some scholars (e.g., 
Compaine, 2001), however, in situating the rollout of computers and the Internet 
historically, have concluded that access to computers and connectivity to the Internet 
in fact is diffusing at an unprecedented rate compared to other technologies such as 
television, radio, and electricity.
In a study of residents of Los Angeles, California, age had no effect on the centrality 
of the Internet to everyday life; however, older respondents had fewer IT skills than 
their younger counterparts (Loges & Jung, 2001). Age seems to become a barrier 
to Internet use among those over 65 years in age (Lenhart, Rainie, Fox, Horrigan, 
& Spooner, 2000). Concerns about privacy may be an important consideration for 
elders’ use of IT (Dennis, 2001; Lenhart et al., 2000). To this end, Loges and Jung 
(2001) recommend that Internet training should put seniors at ease by addressing 
these privacy concerns.
www.ebook3000.com

Generational Differences in IT Use and Political Involvement   339
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Compared to their older counterparts, citizens 30 years of age and younger are more 
likely to use the Internet as a news source on a weekly basis. Age, sex, education, 
size of locality, and e-information collection have been shown to be significant 
predictors of political involvement (Pew Research Center for the People and the 
Press, 2000). Shah and colleagues (Shah, McLeod, & Yoon, 2001) found that reli-
ance on the Internet for information had a positive effect on “Generation X”ers’ 
civic participation. The Internet may encourage civic and political participation 
while bolstering both off-line and online communication (Katz et al., 2001) and 
strengthening community-level participation (Alexander, 1999; Brants, Huizenga, 
& Van Meerten, 1996). Research findings suggest that traditional political partici-
pation is reinforced by e-activities (Weber, Loumakis, & Bergman, 2003). In turn, 
the Internet may lead users to expand their political knowledge (Horrigan, Garrett, 
& Resnick, 2004).
Compared to nonusers, Internet users are more likely to use other kinds of technol-
ogy, including cell phones, as well as print and broadcast media (Lenhart, Horrigan, 
Rainie, Allen, Boyce, Madden, et al., 2003); others suggest that use of the Internet 
and other technologies is mutually reinforcing (Katz, Rice, & Aspden, 2001). 
Among Midwesterners, the desire for computing skill promoted positive attitudes 
toward e-government (Shelley, Thrane, Shulman, Lang, Beisser, Larson, et al., 
2004). Attitudes toward IT and desire to enhance computer skills may compound 
the impact of sociodemographic constructs, intervening between personal or group 
characteristics and e-political participation.
Theory
Technological literacy, almost by its very definition, evokes images of generational 
differences in orientations to politics and of age-related variation in levels of politi-
cal interest and political involvement, ranging from simply gathering information 
passively to voting actively in elections at all levels. The theoretical structure un-
dergirding our study is based on well-established past research linking generation 
gaps to political outcomes. Our theoretical approach is predicated on the notion of a 
younger, “with it” cyber-literate generation living a vastly different political reality 
than an older generation for which the use of Internet technology is somewhat epi-
sodic and for whom the very thought of making serious use of IT is filtered through 
and sometimes blocked by feelings of technophobia or IT inadequacy. College, high 
school, and even grade school students who can program and Websurf circles around 
their parents provide a stereotype that all too often reflects reality.
Our theoretical base informing this analysis is the extensive literature of political 
science, political psychology, and political sociology addressing the relationships 
between generations and politics (e.g., Abramson, 1989; Greenstein, 1969; Jennings 
& Niemi, 1974, 1981). More specifically, our models are informed by, and reflect, 

340   Shelley, Thrane, & Shulman
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
generational differences in voting behavior elucidated by Miller and Shanks’ (1996) 
multistage generational persistence model of societal change (Kiesler, Morgan, & 
Oppenheimer, 1981; Sears, 1981). Miller and Shanks (1996) postulate that:
The voter sentiments involved in a series of taxpayer revolts, the drive for term 
limits, or the 1994 Republican conception of a revolutionary reduction in the role 
of the federal government may be only the most recent manifestation of a general 
rejection of partisan politics by young, newly eligible voters that began in the 
1970s. (p. 23)
Generational explanations, broadly speaking, capitalize on the inevitability of actu-
arial tables, which guarantee replacement of older political generations by younger 
ones and the ultimate dominance of the ideas that gain greatest credence among the 
survivors within the electorate. More specifically, Miller and Shanks argue, reduced 
participation in U.S. electoral politics was a consequence of post-1964 generations 
“that were dramatically less engaged by, and less likely to participate in, national 
politics than were their predecessors at the same stages of their adult lives” (p. 41). 
Although life-cycle effects lead the electoral participation rates of a given genera-
tional cohort to increase, as the cohort ages over time, from the Miller and Shanks 
perspective, trends from the 1970s through the early 1990s toward lower voting 
turnout combined with plunging interest and trust in government and politics are 
traceable to the replacement of habitual older voters by more heavily nonvoting 
and politically disinterested younger cohorts, particularly since 1972. Period effects 
also played a leading role in these generational vicissitudes, particularly the rising 
cynicism regarding government and politics highlighted by war, political assas-
sinations, civil rights, the making of a counterculture, and Watergate-era political 
crime, cover-up, and presidential resignation.
The three fundamental tenets of the Miller and Shanks (1996) approach are equally 
relevant to the present investigation:
(1) Younger cohorts are particularly vulnerable to influence by historical events in 
their political environment; (2) older cohorts may entertain a ‘lifelong openness to 
change,’ but, in fact, reveal great stability in the persistence of earlier orientations; 
and (3) even in the face of large historical events, long-term societal change may 
occur largely as a consequence of generational replacement. (pp. 43-44)
In addition, social connectedness, otherwise expressed as social cooperation, com-
munity integration, or social involvement (e.g., Knack, 1992; Teixeira, 1987), 
plays an important role both in Miller and Shanks’ study and in our investigation of 
generational differences associated with the virtual societal linkages that character-
www.ebook3000.com

Generational Differences in IT Use and Political Involvement   341
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
ize contemporary IT literacy. However, unlike Miller and Shanks’ reliance on bloc 
recursive models, in which a single equation is enhanced by successive addition 
of new sets of predictor variables (Agresti & Finlay, 1997), we employ structural 
equation modeling (SEM), which is appropriate when causal interpretations are 
desired measuring both the direct and indirect effects of exogenous (independent) 
variables (typically, demographic variables) on endogenous (dependent, often be-
havioral outcomes) variables and the effects of some endogenous variables on other 
endogenous variables (Bollen, 1989; Bollen & Long, 1993; Jöreskog & Sörbom, 
1996a, 1996b). We also conceptualize the role of education differently from Miller 
and Shanks (p. 56), who focus on the profound increases in voting participation 
that are associated with greater educational attainment offsetting overall declines 
in voter turnout in more recent electoral cohorts.
Methods
Sample
The national sampling frame consisted of phone numbers appearing in telephone 
directory listings, which represented three regions of the country. Adults (age 18 and 
above) living in Colorado, Iowa, and Pennsylvania were eligible for participation. 
These states were chosen to provide data from a state (Colorado) with a substantial 
minority population and Rocky Mountain political culture that generally is resistant 
to liberal positive governmental “intrusion,” a state (Pennsylvania) with an older and 
more established political culture generally supportive of a “big government” role 
and of political action by labor unions and other organized popular interests, and 
a state (Iowa) with a characteristically Midwestern streak of independence and an 
economy in transition from agriculture to postindustrial service sector dominance. 
All three states are politically competitive and, among survey researchers, have 
reputations for relative openness to telephone interviews. Respondents (n = 478 
completed interviews, of which 150 were from Pennsylvania, 157 from Colorado, 
and 171 from Iowa) were interviewed in 2003 using computer-assisted telephone 
interviewing methodology. Reported sample percentages are statistically valid 
within ±4.5% at the 95% confidence level over all three states. For individual 
states, the 95% confidence intervals are ±7.8% for Colorado, ±7.5% for Iowa, and 
±8.0% for Pennsylvania. Standard random digit dialing protocols were employed 
and screening calls were used to locate a random sample of adults in each of the 
three states. Businesses, group quarters, teen-lines, vacation homes, numbers with 
an undetermined eligibility status, and nonworking numbers were eliminated from 
the sample. In addition, the sample was weighted prior to data analysis by age, sex, 

342   Shelley, Thrane, & Shulman
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
and geography, to ensure representativeness both within and across states (Larson, 
Anderson, & Anderson, 2003).
Respondent demographics generally reflect the characteristics of the sampling frame. 
Women and men were nearly equally represented (52% and 48%, respectively). 
Nearly nine in every ten were White (89%), with other racial/ethnic origins includ-
ing Black (5%), Hispanic (4%), American Indian/Alaskan Native (1%), and Asian 
or Pacific Islander (1%). The age breakdown was 18-30 years (23%), 31-50 years 
(42%), 51-70 years (22%), and 70+ years (13%). On average, respondents were 46 
years old. Five percent of respondents reported not completing high school, 24% had 
achieved a high school degree, 8% had a technical or vocational certificate, 24% had 
some college but without degree completion, 24% had a 4-year degree, and 15% had 
a graduate degree. Nearly two-thirds were married or living as married (59%), and 
23% had never been married. Eight percent were divorced, 9% widowed, and 1% 
separated. Nearly a quarter of respondents lived in a rural area (23%); another 18% 
residing in a town of less than 10,000; 22% in a town of 10,000-50,000; 11% in a 
city of 50,000-100,000; and 26% in a city of 100,000 or more. The overall response 
rate was 31.4%, ranging from 37.4% in Iowa to 26.7% in Pennsylvania.
Measures
The following variables were employed in statistical analysis. Response catego-
ries for age were 1 = “18-37 years,” 2 = “38-50 years,” 3 = “51-64 years,” and 
4 = “65+years.” Education.was treated as a continuous variable, with response 
categories of 1 = “non-completion of high school,” 2 = “high school diploma,” 3 = 
“trade school,” 4 = “some college,” 5 = “undergraduate degree,” and 6 = “graduate 
or professional degree.” Higher values reflect increased levels of education; the 
mean is 3.81.
Using Statistical Package fo the Social Sciences software, we performed principal 
components factor extraction, with varimax rotation using Kaiser normalization, 
on the values of responses to the seven items measuring attitudes toward tech-
nology. This resulted in two factor-derived scales: the advantages of IT, and the 
disadvantages of IT (Table 1). IT.Advantages is a scale comprised of three items 
(with factor loadings given in parentheses, denoting the correlation between each 
item and the factor with which it is associated): “The Internet is a good source of 
information about state, national and world news.” (.76); “Using email would be a 
good way for people to contact their public officials.” (.72); and “I enjoy learning 
how to use new technological devices.” (.65). Individual item response categories 
range from 1 = “strongly disagree” to 4 = “strongly agree.” Higher values of the 
scale indicate more support for IT. IT.Disadvantages is a four-item scale: “I am 
concerned that personal information stored in computer systems might not be kept 
confidential.” (.73); “Our society is becoming too dependent on computers.” (.71); 
www.ebook3000.com

Generational Differences in IT Use and Political Involvement   343
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
“It is difficult for me to keep up with the changes in technology.” (.59); and “A lot 
of the information that appears on the Internet is not true.” (.48). Individual item 
response categories ranged from 1 = “strongly agree” to 4 = “strongly disagree.” 
Lower values of this scale reflect a distrust of IT.
Two factor scales were extracted from the eight political participation items (Table 
2). The traditional.electoral.participation scale was constructed from three items. 
The largest factor loadings (correlations with the relevant factor) were for “How 
often do you vote in elections that involve only local issues, and candidates for lo-
cal offices, such as mayor, city council, or school board?” (.91) and “How often do 
you vote in elections that involve candidates for state and national offices, such as 
president, governor, senators or representatives?” (.90). Individual item response 
categories ranged from 1 = “never” to 5 = “always.” The third item, “People can 
be involved in the political process in many ways, such as keeping informed about 
issues, writing letters, and attending meetings, as well as campaigning or voting,” 
had a less robust factor loading (.64). Individual item response categories ranged 
from 1 = “not at all” to 5 = “a great deal.” Higher scale values reflect more involve-
ment in traditional political participation. The e-political.participation scale was 
constructed of five items, with “Have you ever used the Internet to get information 
about political issues, current affairs, or elected officials?” (.85), “Have you ever 
used the Internet to get news?” (.75), and “Have you ever used the Internet to get 
information about the views or background of a candidate for political office?” (.67) 
having the largest factor loadings. Measures of more intense participatory commit-
ment had lower factor loadings: “Have you ever responded to an email or Internet 
petition or given your opinion in an on-line political discussion?” (.58) and “Have 
you ever used the Internet or email to contact elected or appointed public officials?” 
Factor.Solution
Item
IT.Advantages
IT.Disadvantages
Enjoy using new technology
.65
Internet is a good source of information
.76
E-mail is a good way to contact public officials
.72
Difficult to keep up with technology
.59
Society is too dependent on computers
.71
Personal information stored in computers might
 not be kept confidential
.73
Information on the Internet is not true
.48
   Note. Absolute values less than .40 are omitted to ease interpretability
Table 1. Factor solution for attitudes toward technology (Varimax rotation) (n=478)

344   Shelley, Thrane, & Shulman
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
(.56). Individual response categories were 0 = “no” and 1 = “yes.” Higher scale 
values indicate more involvement in e-politics. Missing values were not replaced 
for these items. For the e-political participation measure, we used the square root 
transformation to induce normality. Unless otherwise indicated, all factor scores 
were obtained by principal components extraction and varimax rotation, with the 
Anderson-Rubin (1956) procedure used to save the resulting factors as uncorrelated 
standard normal composite variables with mean 0 and standard deviation 1. Unless 
otherwise indicated, missing values were replaced through mean substitution.
Public.IT.access was formed as the mean of two items: (1) “Computers should be 
available to the general public in places like public libraries, so that people who 
cannot afford to buy a computer can use one if they want to,” and (2) “Instruction 
and workshops on how to use the Internet should be available to the general public 
in places like public libraries at no charge.” Individual response categories ranged 
from 1 = “strongly disagree” to 4 = “strongly agree.” Higher values of this construct 
indicate respondents’ greater support for public IT access and instruction. The e-
elections construct measures interest in having elections held on the Internet: “I 
think someday elections should be held on the Internet.” Individual item response 
categories ranged from 1 = “strongly disagree” to 4 = “strongly agree.” Higher 
values indicate more desire for e-electoral participation. To induce normality, a 
square root transformation was applied to both measures.
Factor Solution
Item
Traditional Electoral 
Participation 
E-political Participation
How often vote in local elections
.91
How often vote in state/national elections
.90
Involvement in political process
.64
E-contact with appointed public officials
.56
Used Internet for political information
.85
E-information about political candidate 
.67
Used Internet to get news
.75
Responded to Internet petition
.58
         Note. Absolute values less than .40 are omitted to ease interpretability.
Table 2. Factor solution for political participation (Varimax rotation) (n = 478)
www.ebook3000.com

Generational Differences in IT Use and Political Involvement   345
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Research Questions
We used these variables to answer the following research questions:
1. 
How are demographic traits (e.g., age and education) and attitudes regarding 
traditional political participation, e-political participation, IT advantages, IT 
disadvantages, public IT access, and e-elections interrelated?
2. 
To what extent can the outcomes of support for traditional political participa-
tion, e-political participation, and e-elections be causally related to age, educa-
tion, and attitudes regarding IT advantages, IT disadvantages, and public IT 
access?
3. 
What is the relative magnitude of direct and indirect components of the causal 
links among these variables?
4. 
How well do these results conform to the generational interpretation of dif-
ferences in levels of use and support for IT?
Results
Correlations
Pearson product-moment correlations among the variables examined in this study, 
together with descriptive statistics, are presented in Table 3. In regard to the exogenous 
(independent) variables, as age increased, education declined (r = -.27). The pattern 
of correlations suggests that the exogenous variables were meaningful predictors 
of the measured outcomes. Younger respondents reported more IT advantages (r = 
-.34) and fewer technological disadvantages (r = -.34). Younger people also were 
more likely to suggest that IT should be made available to the public (r = -.31). 
On the other hand, older people engaged in traditional electoral participation more 
often than did their younger counterparts (r = .36), but were less inclined to engage 
in e-politics (r = -.42) or to support e-elections (r = -.15). Education had a positive 
relationship with IT advantages (r = .28) and IT disadvantages (r = .17). Education 
also increased support for public IT access (r = .24) and for both traditional political 
engagement (r = .15) and e-political participation (r = .41).
Those who saw more advantages to technology had more positive attitudes toward 
public access to IT (r = .26). Support for IT had a positive association with e-politi-
cal participation (r = .40) and e-elections (r = .23). The desire for public IT access 
declined as the disadvantages became more pronounced (r = .12). Those who saw 

346   Shelley, Thrane, & Shulman
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
 1 Age
--
 2 Education
-.27**
--
 3 IT advantages (factor score) 
-.34**
.28**
--
 4 IT disadvantages (factor score)
-.34**
.17**
  -.00
--
 5 Public IT access 
-.31**
.24**
.26**
.12**
--
 6 Traditional electoral participation
  (factor score)
.36**
.15**
 -.01
-.14**
-.01
--
 7 E-political participation (factor score) 
-.42**
.41**
 .40**
.28**
.20**
-.04
--
 8 E-elections
-.15**
.06
.23**
.21**
.19**
-.12*
.18**
--
  Mean
2.13
3.81
.00
.00
3.29
.00
1.37
1.75
  Standard Deviation
1.11
1.53
1.00
1.00
.53
1.00
.36
.22
* p <.05; ** p <.01.
Table 3. Correlation matrix (n = 468)
www.ebook3000.com

Generational Differences in IT Use and Political Involvement   347
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
more IT disadvantages were more likely to favor traditional forms of politics (r 
= -.14). Perceiving fewer IT disadvantages was associated with higher levels of 
support for e-political participation (r = .28) and e-elections (r = .21). Favoring 
pubic IT access increased support for e-politics (r = .20) and e-elections (r = .19). 
As traditional electoral involvement increased, support for e-elections declined (r 
= -.12). E-politics and e-elections were positively correlated (r = .18).
Structural.Equation.Model
Our path analysis structural equation model, estimated with LISREL 8.50 statisti-
cal software using the maximum likelihood procedure, fit the data well (Figure 1). 
The chi-square lack-of-fit test was nonsignificant (χ2 = 11.86; df = 10; p = .31). The 
goodness of fit index (GFI) was .99, and the adjusted goodness of fit index (AGFI) 
was .98, while the normed fit index (NFI) was .98 (Bentler & Bonett, 1980); values 
of each of these measures closer to 1.00 indicate a better fit of the model to the 
data. The values of the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA = .02) 
and Akaike information criterion (AIC = 63.7) (Akaike, 1987) also confirm that the 
reduced model accurately reproduces the relationships among the variables contained 
in the model. With 18 cases per parameter, the estimates meet the usual criteria for 
being stable and reliable (Bollen, 1989). Direct effects are displayed in Figure 1 by 
arrows that go directly from a predictor variable on the left to a dependent variable 
to its right, without passing through any other variable in between. In contrast, 
indirect effects are relationships between a left-hand-side predictor variable and a 
right-hand-side dependent variable that are mediated by passing through one or more 
other variables in between. Cross-multiplying the regression coefficients for any 
combination of paths that connects a predictor variable on the left with a dependent 
variable on the right, and then summing these results, determines the magnitude of 
indirect effects. The total effect of a predictor variable on a dependent variable is 
the sum of its direct and indirect effects.
There are statistically significant direct effects from age and education to dimensions 
of attitudes toward technology and political interest. As age declined, respondents 
reported more support for IT (ß = -.33) and fewer technological disadvantages (ß 
= -.34). Younger persons showed more desire for public IT availability (ß = -.26) 
and e-political participation (ß = -.20). However, older-aged respondents had a 
pronounced preference for traditional electoral involvement (ß = .43). Those with 
higher levels of education held more favorable views toward IT (ß = .22) and 
positive attitudes toward public IT access (ß = .17). In addition, better-educated 
respondents were more active civically in both traditional (ß = .26) and electronic 
forms of participation (ß = .25).
Those who had a positive attitude toward IT were aware of its less valuable di-
mensions (ß = -.15). Direct effects also were found between the attitudes toward 

348   Shelley, Thrane, & Shulman
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Figure 1. Reduced model
-.33**
(-7.24)
.43**
(10.07)
-.15**
-.34**
-.20**
(-3.47)
.26**
.26**
(-7.93)
(-4.60)
(6.08)
(6.36)
-0.27
0.12
-0.08
.17**
.22**
(4.21)
(4.96)
-.26**
.20**
(-5.82)
.25**
0.19**
(4.44)
6.29
(4.41)
.17**
.12**
(3.69)
(2.74)
2  
(10) = 11.86 (p  = .31)
*  p  < .05.
GFI = .99
** p  < .01.
AGFI = .98
NFI = .98
Age
Education
Advantages 
of IT
e-Political 
Participation
E-elections
Traditional 
Electoral 
Participation
Disadvantages 
of IT
Public IT 
Access 
www.ebook3000.com

Generational Differences in IT Use and Political Involvement   349
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
technology factors and citizenship activities. A positive attitude toward technology 
led to greater involvement in e-political participation (ß = .26) and an interest in 
e-elections (ß = .20). Individuals with less concern and fear about IT were more 
supportive of digital citizenship. They were more involved in e-politics (ß = .17) 
and more likely to be proponents of e-elections (ß = .19). Advocates of public IT 
access were more interested in e-electoral participation (ß = .12).
The path model displayed in Figure 1 demonstrates how some predictors may have 
an intervening effect on the outcome measure; in general, however, these indirect 
effects had minimal influence. Total effects are decomposed into direct and indirect 
effects in Table 4. Age has an indirect positive effect on IT advantages. Younger 
persons saw fewer IT disadvantages, while those who held positive views of IT 
were also capable of seeing its detrimental influences. This indirect effect (.05) 
accounted for 13% of the total effect. A statistically significant indirect effect was 
found between age and e-political participation; the direct effect accounted for 
61% of the total effect (-.20). For the most part, the effect of age on e-politics was 
mediated through IT advantages. As age increased, IT advantages declined, while 
IT advantages had a positive impact on e-political participation. The indirect ef-
fect that passed through both the negative and positive aspects of IT played a less 
prominent role. In addition, education also indirectly increased support for e-poli-
tics; this indirect effect (.06) accounted for 19% of the total effect. Higher levels of 
education led to stronger support for IT, which in turn led to a more positive attitude 
toward e-politics. Age decreased support for e-elections through several channels 
(-.16) (i.e., IT advantages, IT disadvantages, and public IT access); the effects were 
strongest through IT advantages and disadvantages. Education also had an indirect 
impact (.06) on e-elections through public IT access and IT advantages, but more 
so through the latter construct.
Conclusion
Generational differences are mirrored in orientations to technology and voting pat-
terns, with younger cohorts favoring cyber involvement while older citizens prefer 
more traditional forms of citizenship. Successively older cohorts are increasingly 
likely to hold pessimistic attitudes about IT, which short-circuits their participation 
and interest in e-politics. In addition, older respondents held less favorable attitudes 
toward IT access than did their younger counterparts. It may be that older respon-
dents see fewer IT benefits in their own lives, and they may speculate therefore that 
other citizens are better off without technology as well. Opting for digital citizenship 
decreases respondents’ engagement in voting and the political process. There may 
be a trade-off, as younger people exchange community involvement for e-citizenry 
and invest less in their communities as a result.

350   Shelley, Thrane, & Shulman
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Predictor.
Variable
Dependent.
Variable
Total.
Effect
Direct.
Effect
Indirect
Effect
Standard.
Error
t-statistic
Direct.Effect
as.%.of
Total.Effect
Age
⇒
IT advan-
tages
-.38
-.33
.05
.04
-7.24**
87%
Education
⇒
IT advan-
tages
.22
.22
.03
4.96**
100%
Age
⇒
IT disadvan-
tages
-.34
-.34
.04
-7.93**
100%
Age
⇒
Public IT 
access
-.26
-.26
.02
-5.82**
100%
Education
⇒
Public IT 
access
.17
.17
.02
3.69**
100%
IT disad-
vantages
⇒
IT advan-
tages
-.15
-.15
.04
-3.47**
100%
Age
⇒
Electoral 
participation
.43
.43
.04
10.07**
100%
Education
⇒
Electoral 
participation
.26
.26
.03
6.08**
100%
Age
⇒
E-politics
-.33
-.20
-.13
.01
-4.60**
61%
Education
⇒
E-politics
.31
.25
.06
.01
6.29**
81%
IT advan-
tages
⇒
E-politics
.26
.26
.01
6.36**
100%
IT advan-
tages
⇒
E-elections
.20
.20
.01
4.44**
100%
IT disad-
vantages
⇒
E-politics
.21
.17
-.04
.01
4.21**
81%
IT disad-
vantages
⇒
E-elections
.22
.19
-.03
.01
4.41**
86%
Public IT
 access
⇒
E-elections
.12
.12
.02
2.74**
100%
Age
⇒
E-elections
-.16
-.16
.00
-6.34**
0%
Education
⇒
E-elections
.06
.06
.00
4.17**
0%
Total Effect = Direct Effect + Indirect Effect.
* p < .05 (i.e., |t-value| > 1.96); ** p < .01 (i.e., |t-value| > 2.56).
Table 4. Decomposition of total effects for reduced model
www.ebook3000.com

Generational Differences in IT Use and Political Involvement   351
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Not surprisingly, education promotes IT literacy and extrinsic efficacy. Greater 
educational attainment has the net effect of stimulating support for technology and 
viewing public computer availability and Internet instruction favorably. Citizens’ 
acquisition of technological skills is consequential for the educated, which in turn 
leads respondents to endorse Internet-based elections. Education has a direct im-
pact on citizens’ empowerment and voice in technological and traditional electoral 
participation and an indirect influence through IT benefits.
Older citizens and the less educated may face unique challenges that influence 
their desire to become fluent with IT. The process of becoming a digital citizen is 
influenced by technological attitudes that may widen the digital gap. By permitting 
some citizens to conduct their routine business with the government more easily, 
IT appears to be widening the gap between the IT literate and those without basic 
navigational skills. As society becomes increasingly dependent on e-government, 
social barriers will be compounded if nonelectronic voices are marginalized from 
political participation.
These findings provide evidence supporting the tenets of the Miller and Shanks (1996) 
thesis regarding age and political activity. The positive direct effect of age on electoral 
participation denotes that older respondents were more likely to say they engage in 
traditional forms of politics and government. This relationship is enhanced by the 
negative direct effect between age and electronic forms of political participation; 
younger respondents clearly prefer this more contemporary and innovative mode of 
engagement vs. the preference among their elders for more traditional patterns of 
political involvement. Although the effect is entirely indirect, the negative relation-
ship between age and e-elections similarly demonstrates the positive valence for 
newer electoral cohorts of “with it” modes of casting votes that older cohorts may 
find to be inappropriate, insecure, or simply too new and untested.
It is unknown at this time if Miller and Shanks’ previous findings are replicable. 
We believe that our extension of the Miller and Shanks model works better as an 
explanatory mechanism than as a tool for prediction. The explanatory nature of 
our findings is inherent both in limitations of the data and in the bounded rational-
ity that is imposed by the lack of specific research-based knowledge about which 
variables determine outcomes in the rapidly-evolving “digital divide” arena. It is 
simply too early to have a clear idea about what determines individual or group 
cyberpolitical outcomes.
This study is limited in that it is cross-sectional, although it does provide evidence 
of longer-term trends. Care must be taken in drawing conclusions about the pro-
cesses at work because the data do not allow clear evaluation of these mechanisms 
over time. The study’s results are based on data collected in three states, and may 
not be generalizable to all regions in the U.S. Although the model may fit well 
and be defensible theoretically, it does not imply causality. Nonetheless, this study 
suggests that e-government magnifies social divisions, as age dictates IT involve-

352   Shelley, Thrane, & Shulman
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
ment and empowers younger IT-savvy citizens to shape contemporary and future 
policy. Future research may do well to investigate whether the evident effect of age 
on preferences for e-government will continue as cohorts age in place within the 
electorate. Life cycle patterns and the impacts of dramatic events, such as political 
bombshells or key technological innovations, certainly are expected to be important, 
and efforts to tease out the differential effects of age, period, and cohort should con-
tinue to provide a fertile source of future research as well as exciting opportunities 
to enhance knowledge in this rapidly-evolving aspect of modern governance. Of 
particular relevance for the future research agenda is whether the digital divide will 
persist at about its current level, become more severe, or be reduced. In any event, 
it is evident that among the major driving forces influencing the consequences of 
the digital divide are generational and other societal differences that separate the 
electorate into technological haves and have-nots.
To the extent that IT literacy affects political participation, it is important to ascertain 
how meaningful that difference might be. Neither our findings nor other comparable 
research provides a direct answer yet to whether a higher level of IT literacy in-
creases overall political participation or shifts the forms or quality of participation. 
In particular, it is crucial to understand to what extent, if at all, IT literacy affects the 
important dimensions of voting. It is unclear whether IT literacy benefits Republicans, 
Democrats, third parties, or independent candidates. It also is unclear whether IT 
literacy raises voting participation overall or in more specific ways; for example, 
in national rather than state or local elections, or in elections with high-salience, 
hot-button issues rather than when only more mundane concerns are at issue.
Ultimately, a number of policy considerations are connected to what we know now, 
and what we will learn, about the societal and political impacts of IT literacy. Whether 
IT literacy will—or should—be encouraged will depend in very large part on which 
political interests are perceived to benefit from expanded technological literacy and 
who is in power, as well as the limited budgets and bounded rationality available to 
policymakers. Even if a clear consensus emerges among political elites to pursue 
policies that encourage substantially expanded IT literacy, there is no certainty that 
society will respond quickly, positively, or strongly to such initiatives. Engineering 
societal change is risky business, all the more so when generational differences in 
preexisting levels of IT literacy mean that the targeted audience will be operating 
from multiple perspectives and with vastly different receptiveness. It will require 
a richly textured implementation to make such a policy innovation effective and 
lasting. The challenges of achieving a democracy of the Internet are all the more 
evident in emerging areas including service delivery for the aging and disabled and 
the processes of electronic commenting and e-rulemaking.
www.ebook3000.com

Generational Differences in IT Use and Political Involvement   353
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Acknowledgment
This research was made possible with a grant (EIA-0113718) from the National 
Science Foundation. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations ex-
pressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those 
of the National Science Foundation. This manuscript is based on papers prepared 
for presentation at the dg.o 2004 conference (May 24-26, 2004) and the 2004 An-
nual Meeting of the American Political Science Association (September 2-5, 2004). 
Additional support was provided by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
Grant #11-C-91931/7-01 and Administration on Aging Grant #90AM2821 for the 
Aging and Disability Resource Center, the evaluation of which was made possible 
thanks to the expert efforts of Dr. Seongyeon Auh, Postdoctoral Research Associate 
in the Research Institute for Studies in Education (RISE) at Iowa State University, 
Minsun Lee, RISE Graduate Research Assistant, and Mary Anderson and Mary Ann 
Young, Iowa Department of Elder Affairs.
References
Abramson, P.R. (1989). Generations and political change in the United States. Research in 
Political Sociology, 4, 235-280.
Agresti, A., & Finlay, B. (1997). Statistical methods for the social sciences (3rd ed.). Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Akaike, H. (1987). Factor analysis and AIC. Psychometrika, 52, 317-332.
Alexander, J. (1999). Networked communities: Citizen governance in the information age. 
In G. Moore, J. Whitt, N. Kleniewski, & G. Rabrenovic (Eds.), Research in politics 
and society (pp. 271-289). Stamford, CT: JAI.
Auh, S., & Shelley, M.C., II. (2006, April). Iowans’ needs assessment for the Iowa Aging 
and Disability Resource Center: The Iowa family survey report (Report to the Iowa 
Department of Elder Affairs and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services). 
Ames, IA: Research Institute for Studies in Education.
Bentler, P.M., & Bonett, D.G. (1980). Significance tests and goodness of fit in the analysis 
of covariance structures. Psychological Bulletin, 88, 588-606.
Bollen, K.A. 1989. Structural equations with latent variables. New York: Wiley.
Bollen, K.A., & Long, J.S. (Eds.). (1993). Testing structural equation models. Newbury 
Park, CA: Sage.
Brants, K., Huizenga, M., & Van Meerten, R. (1996). The new canals of Amsterdam: An 
exercise in local electronic democracy. Media, Culture, & Society, 18, 233-247.

354   Shelley, Thrane, & Shulman
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Castells, M. (1999). The informational city is a dual city: Can it be reversed? In D.A. Schön, 
B. Sanyal, & W.J. Mitchell (Eds.), High technology and low-income communities (pp. 
24-42). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Compaine, B. (2001). Declare the war won. In B.M. Compaine (Ed.), The digital divide: 
Facing a crisis or creating a myth (pp. 315-335). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cooper, M.N. (2000). Disconnected, disadvantaged, and disenfranchised: Explorations in 
the digital divide. Retrieved on December 15, 2000, from http://www.consumersunion.
org/pdf/disconnect.pdf
Dennis, E.E. (2001). Older Americans and the digital revolution. In L.K. Grossman & N.N. 
Minow (Eds.), A digital gift to the nation: Fulfilling the promise of the digital and 
Internet age (pp. 175-182). New York: Century Foundation Press.
Fox, S. (2004). Older Americans and the Internet. Retrieved on June 8, 2005, from http://
www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_Seniors_Online_2004.pdf
Garson, G.D. (Ed.). (2005). Handbook of public information systems (2nd ed). New York: 
Marcel Dekker.
Goslee, S. (1998). Losing ground bit by bit: Low-income communities in the information 
age. Retrieved on December 15, 2000, from http://www.benton.org/Library/Low-
Income/home.html
Greenstein, F.I. (1969). Children and politics (rev. ed.). New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press.
Horrigan, J., Garrett, K., & Resnick, P. (2004, October 27). The Internet and democratic 
debate. Retrieved September 6, 2007, from http://www.pewinternet.org
Jaeger, B. (Ed.). (2005). Young technologies in old hands: An international view on senior 
citizens’ utilization of ict. Copenhagen, Denmark: DJØF.
Jennings, M.K., & Niemi, R.G. (1974). The political character of adolescence: The influence 
of families and schools. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Jennings, M.K., & Niemi, R.G. (1981). Generations and politics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Jöreskog, K.G., & Sörbom, D. (1996a). LISREL 8: User’s reference guide. Chicago: Sci-
entific Software International.
Jöreskog, K.G., & Sörbom, D. (1996b). LISREL 8: Structural equation modeling with the 
SIMPLIS command language. Chicago: Scientific Software International. 
Katz, J., Rice, R., & Aspden, P. (2001). The Internet, 1995-2000: Access, civic involvement, 
and social interaction. American Behavioral Scientist, 45(3), 405-419.
Kiesler, S.B., Morgan, J.N., & Oppenheimer, V.K. (Eds.). (1981). Aging: Social change. 
New York: Academic Press.
Knack, S. (1992). Civic norms, social sanctions, and voter turnout. Rationality and Society, 
4, 133-156.
Larson, J.M., Anderson, L.L., & Anderson D.G. (2003, September 9). Methodology report 
for technology and citizenship survey. Ames, IA: Center for Survey Statistics and 
Methodology, Iowa State University.
www.ebook3000.com

Generational Differences in IT Use and Political Involvement   355
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Lenhart, A., Horrigan, J., Rainie. L., Allen, K., Boyce, A., Madden, M., et al. (2003). The 
ever-shifting Internet population: A new look at Internet access and the digital divide. 
Pew Internet & American Life Project. Retrieved on April 20, 2003, from http://www.
pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=88.Pdf 
Lenhart, A., Rainie, L., Fox, S., Horrigan, J., & Spooner, T. (2000, September 21). Who’s not 
online: 57% of those without Internet access say they do not plan to log on. Retrieved 
September 6, 2007, from http://www.pewinternet.org
Loges, W., & Jung, J. (2001). Exploring the digital divide: Internet connectedness and age. 
Communication Research, 28(4), 536-562.
Miller, W.E., & Shanks, J.M. (1996). The new American voter. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Mossberger, K., Tolbert, C.J., & Stansbury, M. (2003). Virtual inequality: Beyond the digital 
divide. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
National Research Council. (1999). Being fluent with information technology. Washington, 
D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). (2000). Falling 
through the net: Toward digital inclusion. Retrieved on July 7, 2002, from http://www.
ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/digitaldivide/
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). (2002). A nation 
online: How Americans are expanding their use of the Internet. Retrieved on July 8, 
2002, from http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/ dn/index.html
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). (2004). A nation 
online: Entering the broadband age. Retrieved on June 8, 2005, from http://www.
ntia.doc.gov/reports/anol/
Norris, P. (2001). Digital divide: Civic engagement, information poverty, and the Internet 
worldwide. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Novak, T.P., & Hoffman, D.L. (1998). Bridging the digital divide: The impact of race on 
computer access and Internet use. Retrieved on October 24, 2000, from http://ecom-
merce.vanderbilt.edu/papers/race/ science.html
Pew Research Center for the People and the Press. (2000). Internet sapping broadcast news 
audience. Retrieved September 6, 2007, from http://www.people-press.org/reports/
display.php3? ReportID=36
Sears, D.V. (1981). Life-stage effects in attitude change, especially among the elderly. In 
S.B. Kiesler, J.N. Morgan, & V.K. Oppenheimer (Eds.), Aging: Social change (pp. 
183-204). New York: Academic Press.
Servon, L.J. (2002). Bridging the digital divide: Technology, community, and public policy. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell Press.
Shah, D., McLeod, J., & Yoon, S. (2001). Communication, context, and community: An 
exploration of print, broadcast, and Internet influences. Communication Research, 
4(28), 464-506.
Shelley, M.C., II, & Auh, S. (2006, October). The needs and satisfactions of aging and 
disabilities resources in a rural state in the U.S.: Lessons from the Iowa case. Paper 

356   Shelley, Thrane, & Shulman
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
presented at the 3rd International Conference on Healthy Ageing & Longevity, Mel-
bourne, Australia.
Shelley, M., Thrane, L., Shulman, S., Lang, E., Beisser, S., Larson, T., et al. (2004). Digital 
citizenship: Parameters of the digital divide. Social Science Computer Review, 22(2), 
256-269.
Shulman, S., Thrane, L., & Shelley, M. (2005). Erulemaking. In G.D. Garson (Ed.), Handbook 
of public information systems (2nd ed.) (pp. 237-254). New York: Marcel Dekker.
Teixeira, R.A. (1987). Why Americans don’t vote: Turnout decline in the United States, 
1960-1984. New York: Greenwood Press.
Thrane, L.E., Shulman, S.W., Shelley, M.C., Beisser, S.R., & Larson, T.B. (2005). Does 
computer training translate to e-political empowerment among midwestern senior 
citizens? In B. Jaeger (Ed.), Young technologies in old hands: An international view 
on senior citizens’ utilization of ict (pp. 159-173). Copenhagen, Denmark: DJØF.
UCLA Internet Report. (2000). Surveying the digital future. UCLA Center for Communica-
tion Policy. Retrieved on November 15, 2000 from http://www.ccc.ucla.edu
Warschauer, M. (2003). Technology and social inclusion: Rethinking the digital divide. 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Weber, L., Loumakis, A., & Bergman, J. (2003). Who participates and why? An analysis 
of citizens on the Internet and the mass public. Social Science Computer Review, 
21(1), 26-42.
Wilhelm, A.G. (2000). Democracy in the digital age: Challenges to political life in cyber-
space. New York: Routledge.
www.ebook3000.com

About the Contributors   357
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
About the Contributors
Donald.F..Norris is a professor and chair of the Department of Public Policy, and 
Director of the Maryland Institute for Policy Analysis and Research at the Univer-
sity of Maryland, Baltimore County. He is a specialist in public management, urban 
affairs, and the application, uses, and impacts of information technology in public 
organizations. He holds a BS in history from the University of Memphis and both 
an MA and a PhD in government from the University of Virginia.
* * *
Henri.Barki is Canada research chair in information technology implementation 
and management at HEC Montréal and a fellow of the Royal Society of Canada. His 
research has been published, or is forthcoming, in Annals of Cases on Information 
Technology Applications and Management in Organizations, Canadian Journal 
of Administrative Sciences, IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication, 
Information Systems Research, Information & Management, INFOR, International 
Journal of Conflict Management, International Journal of e-Collaboration, Interna-
tional Journal of e-Government Research, Journal of AIS, Journal of Management 
Information Systems, Management Science, MIS Quarterly, Organization Science, 
and Small Group Research.
Tony.Carrizales is an assistant professor of public administration at Marist College, 
School of Management. Carrizales is an associate director for the E-Governance 
Institute at Rutgers University – Newark and managing editor for the Journal of 
Public Management and Social Policy. Carrizales received his master’s degree in 
public administration from the Cornell Institute of Public Affairs and his PhD in 
public administration from Rutgers University – Newark.

358   About the Contributors
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission       
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Yu-Che.Chen is an assistant professor of e-government and public management at 
the Northern Illinois University, USA. Chen’s research interests include management 
of e-government projects and IT-enabled collaboration in management networks. 
He has published in Public Performance and Management Review, Social Science 
Computer Review, Government Information Quarterly, Public Administration 
Quarterly, and other journals. He also published IBM reports on IT outsourcing and 
the use of IT in combating global health-related crises. Chen teaches e-government 
and program evaluation courses. He serves on the IT committee of the National 
Association of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration and the editorial board 
for the International Journal of Electronic Government Research.
Daniela.V..Dimitrova is an assistant professor in the Greenlee School of Journal-
ism and Communication at Iowa State University. She received a PhD in mass 
communication from the University of Florida and an MA from the University of 
Oregon. Dimitrova teaches classes in multimedia production, international com-
munications, and communication technology and social change. Her research 
interests focus on news framing of conflict events and international political com-
munication. Dimitrova’s record includes research articles in the following journals: 
The Harvard International Journal of Press Politics, Gazette, Journalism Studies, 
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, Social Science Computer Review 
and Telecommunications Policy.
Marc.Holzer is the dean and board of governors professor in the School of Public 
Affairs and Administration at Rutgers University – Newark. Dr. Holzer is the execu-
tive director of the National Center for Public Productivity and the E-Governance 
Institute. He is the founder and editor-in-chief of the Public Performance and Man-
agement Review. Dr. Holzer is a past president of the American Society for Public 
Administration and a fellow of the National Academy of Public Administration. Dr. 
Holzer holds a PhD in political science and master’s degree in public administration, 
both from the University of Michigan.
Chan-Gon.Kim is the vice mayor of the Guro District in Seoul, South Korea. Kim 
has served as a career public official for 26 years, initiating and implementing a va-
riety of programs. In particular, he is applying new information and communication 
technologies to provide public services to citizens in innovative ways. He previously 
served as an associate director of the E-Governance Institute at Rutgers University 
– Newark. Kim received his PhD in public administration from the School of Public 
Affairs and Administration at Rutgers University – Newark and a master’s in pubic 
administration from the University of Georgia.
Benjamin.A..Lloyd holds a BA from Towson University and a Master of Public 
Policy from the University of Maryland, Baltimore County. From 2003 to 2005, 
www.ebook3000.com

About the Contributors   359
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Ben was a research assistant at UMBC’s Maryland Institute for Policy Analysis and 
Research. He resides in Harford County, Maryland.
Jeremy.Millard (senior consultant, Danish Technological Institute) has 30 years 
experience working with new technology, education, and training and in consultancy 
in the UK, Denmark, Europe, as well as globally. He has worked extensively with 
local and national governments and regional development agencies in all parts of the 
world. He is the coordinator of the European Best eEurope Practices Project, which 
presents and analyses the impact of good practice in e-government and other areas, 
and led a study for the European Commission on the reorganization of government 
back-offices for better electronic public services in 2004. He is currently working 
on user issues in e-government, and is surveying European e-government research 
and relating this to the major European economic and social policies.
Laurence.Monnoyer-Smith, associate professor, is head of media studies at the 
University of Technology of Compiègne where she gives the introductory lecture 
on deliberative democracy and new technology. Her work is focused on the uses 
of ICT in politics in order to enhance political participation (electronic voting and 
deliberation plateforms). She has participated in several European/French contracts 
on e-voting and e-deliberation since 1999 and has published many articles on the 
subject.
Aroon.Manoharan is currently pursuing his doctorate in public administration at 
the School of Public Affairs and Administration, Rutgers University – Newark. His 
research interests include public performance measurement and reporting, survey 
research, e-government, and public transit issues. He currently serves as the assis-
tant editor of the Journal of Public Management and Social Policy. He received his 
Master of Public Administration from Kansas State University in 2005.
Mack.C..Shelley,.II.(mshelley@iastate.edu) is university professor of statistics, 
educational leadership and policy studies, and political science, and director of the 
Research Institute for Studies in Education, Iowa State University. His research 
has addressed American government, public policy, and research methods and 
statistics. 
Stuart.W..Shulman (shulman@pitt.edu) is an assistant professor in the School of 
Information Sciences, with a joint appointment in the Graduate School of Public 
and International Affairs, and a senior research associate in the University Center 
for Social and Urban Research, at the University of Pittsburgh. His other research 
focuses on the impact of electronic rulemaking in citizen-government interaction. 

360   About the Contributors
Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission       
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Genie.Stowers is professor of public administration at San Francisco State University. 
Her primary field of research is e-government and distance education.  She teaches 
in the fields of public budgeting and finance, public policy and policy analysis, 
statistical applications, and information management. 
Lisa.Thrane (Lisa.Thrane@wichita.edu) is an assistant professor at Wichita State 
University. Her research interests include deviance, mental health, social inequality, 
digital citizenship, and research methods. 
Ryad.Titah is a PhD candidate at HEC Montréal. His research interests are in 
information technology adoption and impact in both public and private organi-
zations. His doctoral dissertation focuses on conceptualizing and measuring the 
nonlinear relationships among individual and organizational factors explaining 
e-government capability development, adoption, and impact. He holds an MSc in 
information technology, a DESS in marketing, and a LSc in economics. His work 
has been published in journals such as Information Systems Research, Information 
Technology and People, International Journal of e-Government Research, and in 
academic conferences such as ACFAS and ICEG. 
www.ebook3000.com

Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Index   361
Index
A
acceptance of online policy forum  272, 
274, 288
administrative reform  1–20, 3–5
U.S. experience, the  5
agency governance initiatives  308–311
arena  230, 240–243, 246, 247, 251
argumentation  230, 234, 243–246, 247, 
248, 249
attitudes toward citizen participation  268, 
273, 274, 275, 284, 287, 288, 289
B
behavioral intentions  268, 274, 282, 288, 
290
British Social Attitudes Survey from 2003  
183–204
C
campaign-oriented activism  187, 193
capability theory  52
categories of e-government research  23
adequacy of literature review  25
adequacy of literature reviews  33
authors’ location of origin  24, 30
discipline of lead author  24, 30
formulate hypotheses or research ques-
tions  24, 31
formulate theory  24, 31
support for conclusions  25, 34
test of hypotheses or research questions  
24, 32
test of theory  24, 31
type of analysis  25, 32
type of article  24, 29
type of data  24, 29–30
type of issue  23, 28–29
type of journal  23, 26–28
year published  23, 26
cause-oriented activism  187, 193, 198
citizen participation  100, 101, 104, 106, 
109, 110, 112, 114, 115, 116
civil servants  257, 261, 267
collaborative  318, 320, 322, 324, 325, 
328, 329
consultation  132–134
consultations  124
content  98, 100, 104, 105, 106, 109, 111, 
116
D
deliberative democracy  231, 232, 249, 252
diffusion of innovations  208

Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
362   Index
digital citizen  351
digital democracy  268–298
digital divide  114, 116, 140, 141, 154, 
266, 337, 351, 352, 354, 355
digital governance  98, 99, 100, 101, 105, 
106, 108, 110, 116
Disability Resource Center  337, 353
disadvantaged users  265, 266
DUCSAI  235, 236, 237, 239, 242, 243, 
244, 245, 246, 247
dynamic capability theory (DCT)  52
E
e-democracy  120–123, 125, 127–130, 132, 
134, 135, 137–139
e-elections  337, 344, 345, 347, 349, 351
e-governance  98–119, 321–325
e-government  1–4, 11–16, 321–325, 339, 
351, 352
e-government acceptance  42
e-government adoption  42–97
e-government impact assessment  45
e-government integration  42, 46, 51, 52, 
58, 59, 61, 64, 68, 70, 71, 80, 87, 92
e-government portals  205–229
e-government satisfaction  171
e-government services  254, 255, 258, 259, 
260, 261, 262
E-Government Survey 2003  167
e-inclusion  264
e-political participation  336, 337, 338, 
339, 343, 344, 345, 347, 349
ease of use  272, 273, 276, 282, 284, 287, 
288, 291
elected members  123, 128–130
elections  124, 130
expression  230, 234, 237, 238, 242, 244, 
245, 247, 248
F
federal government  299–313
flexi-channeling  258, 262–264, 265, 266
France  230–253
G
generational differences  336–356
governance  314–335
government  314–335
Government On-Line Initiative (GOL)  
322, 323, 324, 327, 328
government services  254–267
H
handheld devices  259
hybrid  230, 234, 238, 246–248
I
inclusion policy  254, 264, 266
inclusive  232, 237, 245, 247, 248
individual characteristics  45, 47, 48, 51, 
62
information and communication technolo-
gies (ICTs)  184, 185, 189
information architecture  141, 142, 144, 
147, 148, 153, 156
information channels  205, 207, 212, 216, 
217, 221, 223, 226
information organization  146, 152, 153
information quality  268, 272, 273, 277, 
284, 287, 288, 289, 293
information scent  143, 146, 155, 156
information system (IS) department sup-
port  273, 276, 282, 284, 286, 287, 
288, 289
information systems use  271, 272
information technology  1–20
information technology (IT)  159, 160, 
163, 336–356
Interagency Committee on Government 
Information (ICGI)  305
working groups  306
interagency initiatives  305–308
International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU)  106
Internet survey  216, 218
IT advantages  342
www.ebook3000.com

Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission         
of IGI Global is prohibited.
Index   363
IT characteristics  45, 49, 77
IT disadvantages  342
IT literacy  337, 338, 341, 351, 352
K
knowledge about digital democracy  273, 
275, 282, 284, 287, 288, 297
knowledge elite  185
knowledge societies  185–189
L
links to other bodies  124, 132
M
maintenance and navigability  123, 
125–126
managerial practices  45, 54
media channels  258
N
National Archives and Records Adminis-
tration (NARA)  305, 306
National Commission of Public Debate 
(CNDP)  233, 234–237, 238, 246
National Security Assessment Centre (IN-
SAC)  323
navigation features  140–157
new member states (NMS)  259–261
O
Office of Critical Infrastructure Protec-
tion and Emergency Preparedness 
(OCIPEP)  323
Office of Management and Budget (OMB)  
300, 302, 303–304, 304, 305, 306, 
307, 308, 310, 311, 312
online civic engagement  205, 206, 207, 
208, 213, 219, 221, 224, 225
online deliberation  233, 243, 244
online discussion  124, 134
online policy forums  268–298
online transactions  206, 213, 217, 221, 
222, 224
organizational characteristics  45, 48, 70
organizational structure  142, 153
Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (OECD)  98–119
P
perceived confidentiality  158, 159, 160, 
163–167, 169, 175, 177
perceived usefulness  273, 274, 275, 276, 
277–278, 282, 287, 288
performance  158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 168, 
169, 170, 171, 175, 177, 179, 180, 
181
political activism  183–204
political activity  351
political involvement  210–212, 216, 
337–341
political management  124, 131
political participation  336–339, 343–347, 
349, 351, 352
privacy  101, 104, 108, 109, 111, 114, 115, 
116
public administration  270
public debate  230, 233, 235, 241, 244, 245
public IT access  344, 346, 350
public sector Web sites  141–153
R
reform propositions  6–9
repeated use  158, 159, 160, 170, 175
repeat use  170
S
satisfaction  158–182
scholarly literature  21–41
security  98, 101, 103, 104, 106, 108, 109, 
111, 114, 116, 315, 316–319, 320, 
322
service  316–319
service performance  160–167
services  98, 99, 100, 102–106, 109, 
114–118
skill  141
social inequalities  185

Copyright © 2008, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission      
of IGI Global is prohibited.
364   Index
social intermediaries  255, 256, 259–262, 
265, 266
social involvement  210–212
structural equation modeling (SEM)  341, 
347–349
subcultures  45, 48, 49, 51, 75
T
technology acceptance  271, 272
technology acceptance model (TAM)  208, 
212, 223, 271, 295
theory of complementarities (TC)  52
traditional electoral participation  343, 345, 
351
transparency  319–321
trust  319–321
U
United States  1, 2, 4, 14
usability  98, 101, 104, 106, 109, 111, 114, 
116, 141, 142, 144, 148, 149, 154, 
155, 156
user help  140–157
user help features  141, 144, 145, 148, 149, 
154
users  254–267
V
virtual agora  185
W
Web governance  299–313
www.ebook3000.com

Information
Technology Research
at the Click of
a Mouse!
InfoSci-Online
Instant access to thousands of information technology book
chapters, journal articles, teaching cases, and conference
proceedings
Multiple search functions
Full-text entries and complete citation information
Upgrade to InfoSci-Online Premium and add thousands of
authoritative entries from Information Science Reference's
handbooks of research and encyclopedias!
IGI Full-Text Online Journal Collection
Instant access to thousands of scholarly journal articles
Full-text entries and complete citation information
IGI Teaching Case Collection
Instant access to hundreds of comprehensive teaching cases
Password-protected access to case instructor files
IGI E-Access
Online, full-text access to IGI individual journals,
encyclopedias, or handbooks of research
Additional E-Resources
E-Books
Individual Electronic Journal Articles
Individual Electronic Teaching Cases
Sign Up for a
Free Trial of
IGI Databases!
Resources
have flexible
pricing to
help meet the
needs of any
institution.












www.igi-online.com
Looking for a way to make information science and technology research easy?
Electronic Resources are designed to keep your institution up-to-date
on the latest information science technology trends and research.

www.igi-global.com/journals
Download Sample Issues at 
View more titles from IGI Global at www.igi-global.com/journals.
®
IGI Global • 701 E. Chocolate Ave., Suite 200, Hershey PA 17033, USA • 1-866-342-6657 (toll free) or 717-533-8845 ext. 10 • cust@igi-global.com
Formerly Idea Group Inc.
Journal of
Electronic Commerce in Organizations    
Mehdi Khosrow-Pour, Information Resources
Management Association, USA 
ISSN: 1539-2937 
EISSN: 1539-2929 
Institution: US $425.00
Online Only (Institution): US $375.00 
Individual: US $120.00 
International Journal of
Electronic Government Research     
Mehdi Khosrow-Pour, Information Resources
Management Association, USA  
ISSN: 1548-3886 
EISSN: 1548-3894 
Institution: US $425.00
Online Only (Institution): US $375.00
Individual: US $115.00 
International Journal of
E-Business Research  
In Lee, Western Illinois University, USA   
ISSN: 1548-1131
EISSN: 1548-114X
Institution: US $425.00
Online Only (Institution): US $375.00
Individual: US $115.00
International Journal of
Information Security and Privacy   
Hamid R. Nemati, 
The University of North Carolina at Greensboro, USA  
ISSN: 1930-1650
EISSN: 1930-1669
Institution: US $395.00
Online Only (Institution): US $345.00
Individual: US $110.00
Institutional Print
Subscription Includes
FREE Online Access!
Stay on the Cutting Edge of Research...
with Quality, Peer-Reviewed Journals from
Information Science Publishing
Publisher of IT books, journals and cases since 1988
www.idea-group.com
Vol. 3, No. 1 
January - March 2005
IDEA GROUP PUBLISHING
JOURNAL OF
An official publication of 
the Information Resources
Management Association
Electronic Commerce
in Organizations
Publisher of IT books, journals and cases since 1988
www.idea-group.com
Vol. 1, No. 1 
January - March 2005
IDEA GROUP PUBLISHING
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF
An official publication of 
the Information Resources
Management Association
Electronic
Government Research
Publisher of IT books, journals and cases since 1988
www.idea-group.com
Vol. 1, No. 1 
January - March 2005
IDEA GROUP PUBLISHING
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF
An official publication of 
the Information Resources
Management Association
E-Business Research
Vol. 1, No. 1
January-March 2007
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF
An official publication of 
the Information Resources
Management Association
Information
Security
and Privacy
Publisher of IT books, journals and cases since 1988
www.idea-group.com
IDEA GROUP PUBLISHING
www.ebook3000.com

