E-mail Security
A Pocket Guide
Steven Furnell
Paul Dowland

 
 
 
E-mail Security 
 

E-mail Security 
A Pocket Guide 
STEVEN FURNELL 
PAUL DOWLAND 

 
Every possible effort has been made to ensure that the 
information contained in this book is accurate at the time 
of going to press, and the publisher and the authors 
cannot accept responsibility for any errors or omissions, 
however caused. No responsibility for loss or damage 
occasioned to any person acting, or refraining from 
action, as a result of the material in this publication can 
be accepted by the publisher or the authors. 
 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research 
or private study, or criticism or review, as permitted 
under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, this 
publication may only be reproduced, stored or 
transmitted, in any form, or by any means, with the prior 
permission in writing of the publisher or, in the case of 
reprographic reproduction, in accordance with the terms 
of licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency. 
Enquiries concerning reproduction outside those terms 
should be sent to the publisher at the following address: 
 
IT Governance Publishing 
IT Governance Limited 
Unit 3, Clive Court 
Bartholomew’s Walk 
Cambridgeshire Business Park 
Ely 
Cambridgeshire 
CB7 4EH 
United Kingdom 
 
www.itgovernance.co.uk 
 
© Steven Furnell & Paul Dowland 2010 
The authors have asserted the rights of the authors under 
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, to be 
identified as the authors of this work. 
 
First published in the United Kingdom in 2010 
by IT Governance Publishing. 
 
ISBN 978-1-84928-097-6 

 
5 
PREFACE 
E-mail is now an established and increasingly 
essential channel of business and personal 
communication. 
As 
such, 
safeguarding 
its 
operation and integrity is an issue of widespread 
significance. At the same time, e-mail has proven 
itself to represent a considerable threat vector, 
providing a route for a variety of attacks including 
malware, phishing and spam. In addition, e-mail 
usage 
can 
introduce 
further 
risks 
if 
not 
appropriately guided and managed, with the 
potential for confidentiality to be compromised 
and reputations to be damaged. With these points 
in mind it is relevant for all stakeholders to 
consider their role in protecting e-mail and using 
the service appropriately. 
This guide provides a concise reference to the 
main security issues affecting those that deploy 
and use e-mail to support their organisations, 
considering e-mail in terms of its significance in a 
business context, and focusing upon why effective 
security policy and safeguards are crucial in 
ensuring the viability of business operations. The 
resulting 
coverage 
encompasses 
issues 
of 
relevance to end-users, business managers and 
technical staff, and this holistic approach is 
intended 
to 
give 
each 
key 
audience 
an 
understanding of the actions relevant to them, as 
well as an appreciation of the issues facing the 
other groups. 
 

 
6 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Professor Steven Furnell has a significant track 
record in information security, through both 
personal research and consultancy activity and via 
supervised PhD and Masters projects within the 
Centre for Security, Communications and Network 
Research at the University of Plymouth. He has 
authored more than 210 refereed papers in 
international journals and conferences, as well as a 
variety of commissioned journal articles, book 
chapters and books. Specific examples of the latter 
include Cybercrime: Vandalising the Information 
Society, Addison Wesley, Harlow, Essex (2001), 
Computer 
Insecurity: 
Risking 
the 
System, 
Springer, London (2005) and Mobile Security: A 
Pocket Guide, IT Governance Publishing, Ely, 
Cambs (2009). 
Dr 
Paul 
Dowland 
has 
firsthand 
practical 
experience of administering and securing e-mail 
services in his role supporting the Centre for 
Security, Communications and Network Research 
at the University of Plymouth, as well as teaching 
both network- and application-level security 
principles and practice at undergraduate and 
postgraduate levels. He has also authored/edited 
more than 70 publications including 34 peer-
reviewed papers in journals and international 
conferences. 
Further details of the Centre for Security, 
Communications and Network Research can be 
found at: www.plymouth.ac.uk/cscan. 

 
7 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Dedicated to the memory of Lena Furnell ... quite 
a fan of e-mail in her later years! 
 
 

 
8 
CONTENTS 
Chapter 1: E-mail: Can we live without it? .... 12 
Dependency without a guarantee .................... 14 
The implications of dependence ..................... 17 
Takeaways ...................................................... 17 
Chapter 2: E-mail threats and attacks ............ 19 
Mass-mailed malware ..................................... 20 
Spams and scams ............................................ 23 
There’s something phishy going on ................ 28 
Takeaways ...................................................... 32 
Chapter 3: Securing the client ......................... 34 
General guidelines .......................................... 34 
Web-based clients ........................................... 41 
Mobile clients ................................................. 42 
Takeaways ...................................................... 44 
Chapter 4: Safety in transit .............................. 46 
Protocols ......................................................... 47 
Countermeasures ............................................ 53 
Takeaways ...................................................... 54 
Chapter 5: Server side security ....................... 55 
Firewall ........................................................... 55 
Authenticated access ....................................... 56 
Connection filtering ........................................ 56 
Address filtering ............................................. 60 
Content filtering .............................................. 61 
Challenge/response ......................................... 62 
E-mail gateway ............................................... 63 
Relaying .......................................................... 64 
UBE by attachment ......................................... 65 
Takeaways ...................................................... 66 
Chapter 6: E-mail archiving ............................ 68 
Archiving because we want to ........................ 69 
Archiving because we have to ........................ 71 
Takeaways ...................................................... 73 

Contents 
9 
Chapter 7: Ethereal e-mail ............................... 74 
Takeaways ...................................................... 76 
Chapter 8: Risking our reputation? ................ 78 
Going down in history .................................... 79 
Just having a laugh? ........................................ 81 
Putting it in a policy ........................................ 83 
Takeaways ...................................................... 89 
Appendix: additional notes .............................. 91 
Domain Name System (DNS) ......................... 91 
DomainKeys ................................................... 92 
Architectures ................................................... 93 
Additional Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) 
certificate warning examples .......................... 94 
Putting it all together ...................................... 96 
ITG Resources................................................... 98 

 
10 
GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS 
3G 
3rd Generation 
AV 
Anti-virus 
CAPTCHA 
Completely Automated Public 
Turing test to tell Computers and 
Humans Apart 
CC 
Carbon Copy 
DNS 
Domain Name System 
GPG 
GNU Privacy Guard 
HTML 
HyperText Markup Language 
HTTP 
HyperText Transfer Protocol 
HTTPS 
HyperText Transfer Protocol Secure 
IMAP 
Internet Message Access Protocol 
IP 
Internet Protocol 
ISP 
Internet Service Provider 
MD5 
Message-Digest algorithm 5 
MP3 
MPEG-1 or MPEG-2 Audio Layer 3 
MTA 
Message Transfer Agent 
MX 
Message eXchange 
NDR 
Non Delivery Report 
PDA 
Personal Digital Assistant 
PDF 
Portable Document Format 
PGP 
Pretty Good Privacy 
POP 
Post Office Protocol 
S/MIME 
Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail 
Extensions 
SMTP 
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol 
SPF 
Sender Policy Framework 
SSL 
Secure Sockets Layer 
TCP 
Transmission Control Protocol 
TLS 
Transport Layer Security 
UA 
User Agent 
UBE 
Unsolicited Bulk E-mail 
URL 
Uniform Resource Locator 

Glossary of Abbreviations 
11 
USB 
Universal Serial Bus 
WLAN 
Wireless Local Area Network 
 

 
 12 
CHAPTER 1: E-MAIL: CAN WE LIVE 
WITHOUT IT? 
E-mail 
fulfils 
an 
important 
role 
in 
modern 
organisations in terms of facilitating both internal 
communications 
and 
external 
relationships. 
However, while it offers indisputable benefits, such 
significant use introduces inevitable elements of 
dependence 
and 
exposure. 
Indeed, 
from 
a 
business perspective, the mere fact that we now 
place such reliance upon e-mail can introduce the 
first element of risk, especially when the underlying 
technology does not provide a guaranteed service. 
It would be no exaggeration to suggest that e-mail 
is now the lifeblood of modern business 
communications. Indeed, it is conceivable that 
some readers may not even have experienced the 
pre-e-mail era, when the only options for 
circulating a document involved photocopying it 
and/or faxing it, and when memos were sent on 
paper (and when a cc’d recipient may in fact have 
received a genuine carbon copy). At the time of 
writing, these other modes of communication have 
not entirely disappeared, but they are far less 
commonplace and there are likely to be few 
modern business environments in which they are 
now dominant. 
It is now not uncommon to find individuals who 
routinely receive hundreds of e-mails per day. 
(Whether they reply to them all is another matter!). 
Indeed, findings from Radicati Group suggest that 
business users in 2009 received an average of 74 
messages per day, plus sent an average of 34 of 

1: E-mail: Can We Live Without It? 
13 
their own, and consequently spent 19% of their 
working day engaged in e-mail-related activities.1 
To give this some context, the overall figure of 
108 messages per day was actually down on the 
figure for 2008, when respondents had dealt with 
an average of 140 messages per day. Radicati’s 
analysis 
attributed 
the 
reduction 
to 
an 
accompanying increase in the business use of 
instant messaging and social networks. However, 
this should by no means be taken to indicate that 
e-mail itself is in decline. Indeed, to quote further 
statistics from Radicati, the 1.4 billion e-mail users 
of 2009 are set to rise to 1.9 billion by 2013, with 
worldwide traffic increasing from 247 billion 
messages per day to 507 billion in the same 
period.2 
Given the importance of the medium, it is no 
surprise that e-mail security is now an extremely 
significant issue. Indeed, a 2007 report from the 
European Network and Information Security 
Agency (ENISA) revealed that ‘email and 
electronic communications’ was considered to be 
the most important area in which organisations 
should ensure staff awareness of security topics or 
risks.3 The fact that this placed it ahead of a whole 
range of other key issues (including physical 
security, passwords, Internet security and viruses) 
                                                                 
1 Radicati. 2009. Business User Survey, 2009 – Executive 
Summary. Radicati Group Inc., November 2009. 
2 Radicati. 2009. ‘The Radicati Group Releases “Email 
Statistics Report, 2009–2013”’, Press Release, Radicati 
Group Inc., 6 May 2009. 
3 ENISA. 2007. Information security awareness 
initiatives: Current practice and the measurement of 
success. European Network and Information Security 
Agency, July 2007. 

1: E-mail: Can We Live Without It? 
14 
helps to illustrate just how significant the use of e-
mail has now become. Later chapters consequently 
focus upon the ways in which both messages and 
services ought to be protected. To begin with, 
however, attention is turned to the risks that such 
reliance upon e-mail can pose in its own right. 
Dependency without a guarantee 
The reliance upon e-mail has become so engrained 
within many businesses that things can no longer 
function nearly as well without it. Indeed, in 
extreme situations, there are some people that are 
so dependent upon e-mail that they literally don’t 
know what to do if the system is down, and find 
that many of their daily tasks are oriented around 
their e-mail. Whether this is a good thing is clearly 
open to question, especially given that e-mail itself 
is not a completely reliable medium in the first 
place. Indeed, while most senders will work on the 
assumption that once they have successfully sent 
an e-mail it will also be successfully received at 
the other end, the reality is that there are several 
circumstances in which messages may not actually 
reach the recipient as intended. One of the most 
common is that they get misclassified as spam 
(junk) mail, and either get blocked at the 
recipient’s mail server or placed into a junk folder 
on their local machine rather than going into the 
inbox as normal. As a result, the message may 
only be spotted some time later (e.g. if the 
recipient does a periodic trawl of their junk folder 
to check the messages) or may go unnoticed 
altogether (e.g. if the recipient is the sort of person 
who just purges their junk mail without looking at 
it). 

1: E-mail: Can We Live Without It?
15
The underlying cause of the difficulty here is, of 
course, the problem posed by genuine spam mail. 
This has now become so significant that simply 
letting it all through would represent a significant 
overhead, in terms of both the technical demands 
(e.g. wasted bandwidth and storage) and human 
effort (e.g. wasting time having to sift through all 
the junk in order to find the messages that actually 
matter). As a result, many e-mail systems have 
evolved to incorporate spam-filtering techniques, 
which try to reduce the burden by looking for 
signs of spam messages and then flagging and/or 
separating 
out 
those 
that 
look 
suspicious. 
However, the classification process is far from 
perfect, and from the authors’ personal experience 
it is not unusual to find one or two legitimate e-
mails per day that have been misclassified as 
spam, and which, therefore, end up in the junk 
folder rather than the inbox (plus, of course, 
occasional spam messages that still manage to 
make it through). To illustrate the point, the header 
of a related example is shown in Figure 1. The 
reasons are not always predictable, but common 
causes include e-mails that do not have a 
substantial message body (e.g. those that only 
include a hyperlink or an attachment) or messages 
that have been sent to multiple recipients. 
Somewhat ironically then, spam filtering can 
effectively become a threat to the overall integrity 
of operations if the errors are not identified and 
messages get missed as a result. 

1: E-mail: Can We Live Without It? 
16 
 
Figure 1: A legitimate message, but 
misclassified as spam and filed as junk 
mail 
Unfortunately, being mistakenly treated as spam is 
just one of the reasons that things may not go to 
plan. Other options that may lead to messaging 
failure include: 
x 
routing problems within the network, with the 
consequence that the process times out and the 
message never actually finds a path to the 
intended destination; 
x 
messages arriving only to find that the 
recipient’s mailbox is full and, therefore, 
cannot accommodate them; 
x 
blocking of particular message types at the 
remote end or stripping of attachments, 
meaning that recipients do not get to see the 
content that was intended. 
In some cases the sender may get a message back 
to advise them of a problem, but even then the 
timeliness of such notifications may vary. For 
example, whereas a full mailbox is likely to yield a 
fairly immediate auto-reply, delay notifications 
may not appear until hours (or even days) after the 
original despatch of the message. In the event of 
their message being misclassified as spam, it is 
unlikely that the sender would receive any 

1: E-mail: Can We Live Without It? 
17 
indication, and so recovering the situation largely 
rests with whether or not the recipient checks their 
junk mail and/or whether the sender tries to follow 
it up later. 
The implications of dependence 
To answer the question posed by the chapter title, 
the likely response from many would now be ‘not 
very easily’. It’s easy to become blasé about our 
adoption and reliance upon e-mail, because its use 
is already so engrained that it seems obvious. 
However, what is less certain is whether we have 
fully recognised the implications. In fact, whether 
we are new or established users, the prevalence of 
e-mail ought to raise some important questions 
from a security perspective: 
x 
What risks does it introduce? 
x 
Do people know how to use it effectively? 
x 
Do they know how to use it safely? 
x 
What safeguards can technology provide? 
The answers to these and other issues are 
addressed as part of the chapters that follow. 
Takeaways 
¾ 
Recognise the level of dependency that your 
organisation has upon e-mail relative to other 
forms of communication, and ensure that 
security issues are afforded appropriate 
priority accordingly. 
 
 

1: E-mail: Can We Live Without It? 
18 
¾ 
Do not allow the speed and convenience of e-
mail to compromise the credibility of business 
decisions. If an issue requires proper debate, a 
rapid but ill-considered e-mail reply may pose 
as much of a threat as a deliberate attack. 
¾ 
Do not assume that e-mail recipients are 
guaranteed to receive the messages you 
intend for them. Although it works most of the 
time, you cannot be sure that a message has 
got through until you get a reply or do 
something to check. 
¾ 
Recognise that different users may prioritise 
and handle e-mails in different ways. If 
something requires urgent action or explicit 
confirmation then consider that alternative 
channels may need to be used. 
¾ 
Ensure 
that 
users 
are 
aware 
of 
the 
organisation’s expectations regarding e-mail 
usage and frequency of checking (e.g. if they 
are expected to keep a watchful eye on 
messages, then they need to be advised that 
checking once or twice per day is not 
sufficient). 
¾ 
Perform periodic checks of junk mail folders to 
ensure that relevant and important messages 
have not found their way there by mistake. 
Once checked, folders can be purged to keep 
their size down. 

 
 
19 
CHAPTER 2: E-MAIL THREATS AND 
ATTACKS 
Alongside the undoubted benefits, a variety of risks 
can be introduced via e-mail channels, affecting 
individuals, 
systems 
and 
organisations. 
This 
chapter considers problems originating from the 
messages themselves, such as spam and phishing, 
as well as the potential for messages to become 
carriers for malware such as viruses, worms and 
Trojan horses. The discussion highlights the threat 
vectors, illustrating them with appropriate examples, 
alongside advice for reducing the associated risk 
and disruption. 
E-mail can undoubtedly offer us an easy and 
effective means of communication. Unfortunately, 
it also represents a significant channel for threats 
to both organisations and individuals. Indeed, 
many 
of 
these 
are 
well 
established 
and 
organisations have already been forced into 
providing safeguards against the problems. For 
example, 97% of businesses surveyed in the UK’s 
2008 Information Security Breaches Survey 
(ISBS) filtered incoming e-mail for spam and 95% 
scanned it for malware.4 In addition, there are 
further issues that can arise from within the 
organisation. For instance, of the 16% of ISBS 
respondents reporting staff misuse of information 
systems, almost half (7%) were related to e-mail 
                                                                 
4 BERR. 2008. 2008 Information Security Breaches 
Survey – Technical Report. Department for Business 
Enterprise & Regulatory Reform, April 2008. URN 
08/788. 

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
20
access. Moreover, when considering only the large 
organisations (rather than the respondent base as a 
whole) the proportion experiencing e-mail misuse 
rose to a quarter. In terms of the volume of 
associated incidents, approximately half of the 
affected respondents were reporting only ‘a few’ 
during the prior year. However, at the extreme end 
of the scale, almost one in ten were reporting 
several misuse incidents per day. 
The focus of this chapter is primarily placed upon 
the threats that may enter the organisation via e-
mail, with the problems arising from staff misuse 
being more fully pursued in Chapter 8. With this 
in mind, a good starting point is the significant 
threat posed by e-mail-based malicious code … 
Mass-mailed malware 
Although 
Internet-wide 
incidents 
had 
been 
experienced before (e.g. the Internet Worm, or 
Morris Worm, of 1988 was able to infect the entire 
network via a combination of vulnerability 
exploits), the mass adoption of e-mail was a 
catalyst for ushering in truly large-scale and more 
frequent malware incidents. Landmark cases such 
as the Melissa virus and the Love Letter worm 
were fundamentally possible because they used e-
mail as their distribution channel. While later 
years have seen fewer celebrity cases of this 
nature, the problem has far from disappeared. To 
illustrate the point, Figure 2 draws upon data from 
MessageLabs and depicts the changing picture 
over the past decade, with the worst period having 
been in 2004, with an average of one in every 
sixteen messages being infected. 

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
21 
 
Figure 2: Proportion of malware-infected e-
mail from 2000 to 2009 
As a consequence of the threat, e-mail protection 
is now a standard feature of antivirus and Internet 
security packages, and e-mail clients themselves 
now incorporate features to block potentially 
suspicious attachments and executable scripts. 
However, this is one of the many areas of security 
in which technology alone cannot provide the 
complete solution. Many malware-related e-mails 
(and indeed wider e-mail scams that are discussed 
later in the chapter) seek to exploit people via 
social 
engineering. 
For 
example, 
the 
aforementioned Melissa virus claimed to be an 
important 
message 
containing 
a 
document 
requested by the recipient,5 whereas (as its name 
suggests) the Love Letter worm found success by 
                                                                 
5 CERT. 1999. ‘CERT® Advisory CA-1999-04 Melissa 
Macro Virus’, 27 March 1999. 
www.cert.org/advisories/CA-1999-04.html 

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
22
claiming that its attachment was a love letter.6 In 
fact, the methods and guises that malware may 
employ are so variable that it is difficult to provide 
specific advice to staff beyond exercising caution 
with attachments and any messages that do not 
contain expected work-related content. 
Organisations appear to be fairly well attuned to 
the need to protect themselves against incoming 
problems, with the aforementioned 2008 ISBS 
reporting that 95% scanned incoming e-mail and 
web downloads for malware. However, there 
appears to be somewhat less recognition of the 
importance of scanning outgoing mail, with only 
77% claiming to do so. As such, malware that may 
have entered the organisation via another route 
(e.g. on removable media or an infected laptop) 
may then find an unprotected channel for 
spreading onwards and outwards to other systems. 
In fact, scans of outgoing e-mails can also be 
utilised to safeguard against a variety of other 
threats relating to content that employees should 
not be sending. However, as Figure 3 illustrates, 
only a minority of organisations tend to scan for 
things other than malware (with the identification 
of inappropriate content being the next most likely 
target, but still trailing by a considerable margin). 
The finding that a fifth of organisations scan for 
nothing at all clearly goes some way to explaining
why other organisations still face a considerable 
volume of incoming threats. 
                                                                
6 CERT. 2000. ‘CERT® Advisory CA-2000-04 Love 
Letter Worm’, 4 May 2000. 
www.cert.org/advisories/CA-2000-04.html

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
23
Figure 3: Things scanned for in outgoing 
e-mails (Source: BERR 2008 ISBS) 
Technical countermeasures for handling malware 
(plus the other threats mentioned here) are 
discussed in later chapters. 
Spams and scams 
While e-mail has undoubtedly been a boon to both 
business and personal communications, it has also 
provided an easy route for the considerable 
volume of unwanted messages that now reach us. 
While junk mail existed in pre-e-mail days, the 
provision of the electronic channel means that it 
can now address a vast audience, and it can do so 
quickly, in high volumes and at minimal cost. 
Indeed, the sheer ease of sending messages has 
amplified the junk mail problem out of all 
recognition, with the knock-on consequence that 
virtually all e-mail users are familiar with the 
nuisance posed by spam. Consequently, as 
mentioned 
in 
Chapter 
1, 
spam-filtering 
technologies are now a standard element of e-mail 

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
24
provision, and it has been estimated that managing 
the problem costs upwards of US$1.8 million per 
annum for a typical 1,000-user organisation.7 As 
an aside, spam is also an issue to be aware of in 
relation to messages being sent, in order to ensure 
that we are not contributing to the problem. This is 
especially relevant in view of increasing anti-spam 
legislation (e.g. the US CAN-SPAM Act8), which 
can hold organisations accountable for sending 
spam and levy fines if they misbehave. 
The nature of the unwanted messages that we can 
receive in this manner is variable. While many still 
fit into the mould of advertising-related junk mail 
that can still be regularly received by post, they are 
accompanied by more insidious messages that 
seek to dupe and defraud the recipients. A 
common example here is the so-called advance fee 
fraud (also referred to as 419 scams after the 
related article of the Nigerian criminal code) in 
which recipients are promised a large sum of 
money in return for assisting with a financial 
transaction. The example in Figure 4 is typical of 
the genre, with a combined appeal to the trust and 
greed of the recipient (combined in this case with 
the potential added incentive of becoming the 
guardian of a 20-year-old woman). Within the 
rather lengthy body of the message, a notable 
                                                                
7 Radicati. 2009. ‘The Radicati Group Releases “Email 
Statistics Report, 2009–2013”’, Press Release, Radicati 
Group Inc., 6 May 2009. 
8 FTC. 2009. ‘The CAN-SPAM Act: A Compliance 
Guide for Business’, Federal Trade Commission, 
September 2009. 
www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/pubs/business/ecommerce/bus61.sh
tm (accessed 1 September 2010). 

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
25 
aspect is the mention of ‘Tax you will pay during 
the transfer’. This is basically an indication of the 
ensuing sting, when anyone responding to the 
message and expressing interest will find that there 
are various up-front fees to be paid before any 
money can actually be transferred to their account. 
And, of course, the reality is that, if things were 
allowed to proceed, this would be the only money 
that would ever actually change hands. 
From: Miss.Lucy Naumi 
Country: Cote d’Ivoire 
DEAR FRIEND 
My Dear,I saw your contact through the 
Internet directory and after going through your 
profile my instinct advised me to contact you, 
while I was searching for someone who can 
assist me in this great time of need, someone 
who can help me out of this my present 
predicament.Please, carefully read below to 
understand my plight. I need someone, whom 
I can trust and someone who would be also 
sincere to me. I am writing to you hoping that 
you would accord and give me the needed 
help and assistance that I am looking for. 
My name is Lucy Naumi, I’m the only 
Child/daughter of late mr. and mrs. Macoli 
Naumi. My father was a very Wealthy Timber 
& African art Merchant, the Chairman board of 
trustee, of all farm products exporters. (C.F.E) 
here in Abidjan the Economic Capital of Cote 
d’Ivoire , before the death of my father on 
28th August 2009. He was poison by his 
business associate due to he was a 

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
26 
successful man and had a lot of money and 
property. 
He made it clear to me that he deposited the 
sum of ($9.5, 000, 000, 00 US DOLLARS)  
NINE MILLION FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND 
UNITED STATE AMERICAN DOLLARS. Was 
deposited in fixed deposit account in my 
name as the next of kin in a SECURITY 
FINANCE COMPANY, here in Abidjan , Cote 
d’Ivoire . Because he new that his people will 
not let me lay my hand on any of his 
properties that is why he deposited that 
money in a fixed account for me to have 
access to it only.͒With a Clause that, In his 
demise. As only member of the family, I can 
have access to the funds only if im 28 or i 
should look for a foreign partner who will 
assist me to invest the Funds abroad 
Dear, I have all the relevant documents my 
late father used in depositing the money in the 
Bank right now with me and I can forward 
them to you on your demand for your view as 
soon as i hear from you and confirm your truly 
to assist me.͒ 
I am humbly seeking for your assistance in 
these following ways: 
1. To provide a Bank account where the 
money will be transferred into for investment 
purpose. 
2. To serve as my guardian because I am a 
girl of 20 years old. 
3. To find a good university in your country 

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
27 
where I can further my education. 
I am willing to offer you 15% of the total sum 
as compensation for your effort input and 
mapped out 5% for any Tax you will pay 
during the transfer. ͒Furthermore, if you 
indicate your opinion towards this matter as I 
will like us to conclude this transaction within 
(14) working days, if you are with me 
endeavour to make it known soonest. 
Because I am presently in a Hotel here in 
Abidjan for the safety of my life. 
Thanks and may God bless you.͒ 
You can contact me through my private e-mail 
lucynaumi@yahoo.cn 
With Love, 
Miss. Lucy Naumi 
Figure 4: An indicative example of a ‘419’ 
advance fee fraud 
Despite the fact that they are badly written and 
implausible, scams, such as that in Figure 4, are 
still in circulation today and clearly still have the 
potential to snare sufficient victims for the efforts 
to be worthwhile. Indeed, the fact that e-mail 
enables the scammers to cast such a wide net 
means that most of the potential victims do not 
need to fall for it. The economics are such that it 
still pays off if only a tiny percentage of naïve and 
greedy recipients actually take the bait. On the 
positive side, many such messages now get 
automatically classified as spam, thus helping to 

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
28
warn potentially susceptible recipients about their 
questionable provenance. 
There’s something phishy going on
Staying with the theme of fraudulent messages, we 
come to the specific category of phishing, so 
named because perpetrators use the messages to 
fish for sensitive information from any recipients 
that they manage to hook. The aim is to trick the 
user with an e-mail that purports to come from a 
legitimate source and which presents some pretext 
for requiring information from them (typically 
collected via an accompanying website). A good 
definition of the general problem is provided by 
the Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG): 
a criminal mechanism employing both social 
engineering and technical subterfuge to steal 
consumers’ 
personal 
identity 
data 
and 
financial account credentials9
Phishing represents a significant threat, with the 
APWG receiving an average of 30,880 unique 
phishing message reports per month in the last 
quarter of 2009, alongside an average of 45,873 
unique phishing websites being detected per 
month in the same period. As an example of the 
problem, a typical message is presented in 
Figure 5. In this case the message is not 
particularly 
convincing, 
with 
rather 
untidy 
formatting and a solicitation to follow a link that 
                                                                
9 APWG. 2010. Phishing Activity Trends Report – 4th
Quarter 2009. October – December 2009. Anti-Phishing 
Working Group. 
www.apwg.org/reports/apwg_report_Q4_2009.pdf
(accessed 1 September 2010). 

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
29 
does not look remotely like it belongs to the bank 
HSBC (the claimed sender). However, there is still 
a risk that a naïve HSBC customer might receive it 
and be so concerned by the potential for their 
account to be disrupted that they comply with the 
request without thinking. 
 
Figure 5: An example of a phishing 
message 
The 
targeting 
of 
HSBC 
in 
this 
example 
demonstrates the wider problem facing online 
brands, which may find their name being used as 
the basis for a scam and their customers being 
targeted as the intended victims. According to the 

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
30 
2008 ISBS,10 companies across every sector 
reported phishing incidents in which their brand 
had been impersonated by e-mail. In most cases, 
this was fairly infrequent, with 50% reporting one 
incident and 31% reporting ‘a few’. However, 
among the remainder there was somewhat more of 
a problem, with 9% of respondents experiencing 
one incident per month, a further 9% one per week 
and 1% claiming daily occurrence. The findings 
also reported that companies accepting online 
orders were slightly more likely to find themselves 
being targeted. 
One of the challenges of handling phishing is that 
there is no definitive checklist of visible indicators 
that you can use to ensure that a message is 
genuine. There are certainly some things that you 
might look out for in order to raise suspicion (e.g. 
messages claiming to be from credible sources that 
appear unprofessionally formatted or poorly 
written, that seek to guide you to an address that 
does not appear to match the claimed source, or 
which ask you to verify account details), but the 
key point is that the absence of such indicators still 
does not mean that a message is actually safe. 
The fundamental point is that it is very difficult to 
judge the legitimacy of a message from 
appearances alone. Indeed, to illustrate the point 
we can consider the findings from a study in which 
179 end-users were asked to consider 20 potential 
phishing messages, and determine whether they 
                                                                 
10 BERR. 2008. 2008 Information Security Breaches 
Survey – Technical Report. Department for Business 
Enterprise & Regulatory Reform, April 2008. URN 
08/788. 

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
31 
thought each was legitimate or not.11 The 
messages covered a variety of online scenarios 
including banking, retailers and auction services; 
in reality, 11 of the messages were phishing 
attempts, while the remainder were legitimate. 
However, as can be seen in Table 1, the level of 
successful classification by the participants was 
hardly impressive and would seem to be no better 
than one might expect from potluck. 
 
Correctly 
classified 
Incorrectly 
classified 
Don’t 
know 
Legitimate 
messages 
36% 
37% 
27% 
Illegitimate 
messages 
45.5% 
28.5% 
26% 
Overall 
42% 
32% 
26% 
Table 1: End-user attempts to classify 
phishing messages by appearance alone 
A key factor here was that the messages were 
removed from any surrounding context (e.g. a user 
receiving a message from an online bank that they 
did not bank with would have an immediate basis 
for suspicion), and the participants were unable to 
perform checks such as looking at the destination 
of hyperlinks, viewing message headers or 
examining the HyperText Markup Language 
                                                                 
11 Furnell, S. 2007. ‘Phishing: can we spot the signs?’, 
Computer Fraud & Security, March 2007, pp10-15. 

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
32 
(HTML). The results did, however, serve to prove 
that phishing messages do not necessarily stand 
out quite as prominently as some users may 
otherwise expect. 
Another notable point from an organisation’s 
perspective is that some phishing scams are more 
specifically targeted, and may aim to acquire 
information that primarily compromises the 
business rather than the individual. The specific 
term for this is spear phishing, and at this point, 
the 
concept 
departs 
somewhat 
from 
the 
aforementioned APWG definition because the 
victims are not necessarily consumers, and the 
target data tends to relate more towards login and 
access credentials, or company confidential 
information, rather than personal and financial 
details. 
One of the reasons that spear phishing works is 
because the phisher is able to demonstrate a more 
specific knowledge of the recipient and/or their 
organisation, and, therefore, present a more 
plausible and convincing pretext. It is, therefore, 
important for users to be made aware that the 
phishing threat is not limited to the generic 
‘validate your bank account details’ messages that 
they may be used to seeing. 
Takeaways 
¾ 
Ensure the scanning of both incoming and 
outgoing e-mails for malware. 
¾ 
Be aware of the risks posed by particular 
forms of e-mail attachments (e.g. scripts and 
executables, and archive/compressed files 
within which they may be hidden). 

2: E-mail Threats and Attacks 
33 
¾ 
Raise staff awareness of phishing threats, with 
particular attention given to spear-phishing 
approaches that might be used to target them 
as employees of the organisation. Particular 
emphasis should be given to the fact that 
phishing messages may not stand out as 
obviously as some people may expect. 
¾ 
When receiving an e-mail that asks you to do 
something or provide some information, give 
careful consideration to how reasonable it is 
and whether you can check its provenance. 
Consider 
the 
scope 
for 
misusing 
any 
information you may divulge and whether the 
request can/should be referred to someone 
else. 
¾ 
If your brand is likely to be hijacked by scams 
such as phishing, be sure to offer related 
guidance to your clients via other channels 
(e.g. on your website). 

 
 
34 
CHAPTER 3: SECURING THE CLIENT 
There is a wide range of potential e-mail clients 
available to organisational users, with each offering 
a potentially bewildering range of security options. 
This chapter considers 
the related 
features 
commonly integrated within mail clients (including 
WebMail systems), together with other issues that 
may need to be considered as part of an 
organisation’s policies and procedures. 
One issue facing many organisations is the 
perception that security is taken care of centrally 
by the system administrators rather than it being a 
shared responsibility facing all employees. There 
are obviously many ways to implement security 
for e-mail systems and inevitably much of this will 
be done at the server end. However, modern e-
mail clients also offer comprehensive facilities for 
improving security, and it is relevant to consider 
and use these capabilities. 
General guidelines 
Most mail clients offer user-configurable settings 
(or some mechanism to deploy an organisation-
wide policy) that affect how the client behaves in 
certain contexts. While by no means providing a 
definitive list, this section provides some general 
pointers to what should be considered best practice 
(or even minimum standards) in relation to these 
features. 
Anti-virus/phishing/spam: Most clients will 
support some level of integration with commercial 

3: Securing the Client 
35 
anti-virus tools. This is often coupled with 
automatic scanning of incoming e-mails for 
indicators of phishing/spam content. Messages 
flagged as suspicious or containing spam/phishing 
indicators are often moved to quarantine folders 
where users have the option to review the filtering 
decisions or restore blocked e-mails. Users need to 
be aware that these mechanisms are not 100% 
reliable and there will always be a proportion of 
false positives (messages incorrectly classified as 
malicious/suspicious) 
and 
false 
negatives 
(messages overlooked and still presented in the 
user’s inbox). 
Attachments: Even when messages are checked 
by anti-virus scanning, users should still exercise 
caution when opening any attachments, even when 
the message appears to be from a trusted 
individual. 
Attachments 
can 
easily 
contain 
malware that is unknown to the user’s anti-virus 
product, which could then run potentially 
unchallenged. It is also possible that e-mail 
attachments could be encrypted with a password 
provided in the body of the message (with 
encrypted attachments not accessible to anti-virus 
products). Even compressed archives (e.g. ZIP) 
may be used to hide malware (although most anti-
virus products are able to open common 
compression file formats). Users should also be 
aware of double file extensions (where the real 
extension is hidden by the mail client – e.g. 
holiday.jpg.exe, which may appear as the sender’s 
latest holiday photos but actually contains an 
executable file). 
Attachment blocking: Most mail clients support 
attachment blocking (with some enabled by 

3: Securing the Client 
36 
default), generally preventing executable file 
attachments (including .exe, .com, .bat, .pif, etc. 
and often script files, e.g. .js, .vbs, .asp, etc.) from 
being opened. While this is useful for the majority 
of users, organisations should be aware that this 
may be limiting in some cases (e.g. a website 
developer sending a script file to a colleague). 
Organisations may wish to develop policies 
relating to acceptable e-mail file types (both for 
sending and receiving). 
Attachment size: Although not an immediately 
obvious security issue, many organisations limit 
the maximum attachment size. This is usually 
done to prevent exceptionally large files from 
filling mailboxes (and reducing processing, 
bandwidth and ultimately cost). However, it may 
be desirable to limit attachment sizes to restrict 
information leakage (preventing employees from 
exporting large volumes of data via e-mail). 
Encryption: There are two main options for 
providing encryption facilities in most e-mail 
clients (including some WebMail clients): 
1 Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), which was 
developed by Phil Zimmermann in 1991 and 
provides asymmetric encryption (and signing) 
of messages. PGP (and more recently 
OpenPGP/GPG – Gnu Privacy Guard) is 
commonly used for personal users rather than 
organisations (which often prefer S/MIME 
(Secure/Multipurpose 
Internet 
Mail 
Extensions) due to the integration with 
existing User Agents (UAs)/servers). PGP uses 
a public/private key pair that allows the public 
key of a recipient to be widely distributed 

3: Securing the Client 
37
(even by unencrypted e-mail) – effectively 
removing the classic key distribution problem. 
However, it is heavily dependent on trust and 
a requirement to distribute the necessary keys 
to 
all 
recipients 
prior 
to 
secure 
communication. In receiving a public key via 
an insecure medium, the recipient has to 
determine if the key is from a trusted source –
this can be addressed through the use of signed 
keys where a chain of trust is developed 
through friends of friends. Essentially, the 
security that PGP offers is intrinsically linked 
to the secrecy of the private key and the 
trusted network of friends who validate the 
legitimacy of new public keys. 
2
S/MIME operates in a similar manner to PGP, 
except that instead of using keys (with a 
requirement to self-distribute), it utilises a 
hierarchy of digitally signed certificates. For 
example, an organisation may purchase a 
suitable certificate with which it may digitally 
sign personal certificates for each employee. 
These certificates can then be integrated into 
many mail server platforms (e.g. Exchange 
Global Address List) to allow transparent 
encryption and message signing for internal 
users (with most 
mail clients offering 
integrated support for S/MIME – a distinct 
advantage over PGP). Sending encrypted 
content to an external user requires possession 
of their public key; this can be easily provided 
through an exchange of digitally signed e-
mails. Providing an e-mail recipient is able to 
verify the legitimacy of the original certifying 
authority (usually automatic), there is an 
implicit trust of the individual users. Figure 6

3: Securing the Client 
38 
shows how a user can verify an encrypted e-
mail in Microsoft® Office Outlook® and Mail 
under OSX. 
 
 
Figure 6: Verification of an encrypted e-
mail in Microsoft® Office Outlook® (top) 
and Mail under OSX (bottom) 
Digitally signed e-mail: Using S/MIME or PGP it 
is possible to sign an e-mail, which provides the 
recipient with a visual confirmation of the sender 
and that the message content has not been 

3: Securing the Client 
39
modified (Figure 7 illustrates this point by 
showing both signed and encrypted e-mails in 
Microsoft® Office Outlook®). S/MIME also allows 
for easy revocation of digital certificates through 
the 
certificating 
authority. 
Many 
certificate 
providers offer free trials that allow users to 
investigate the use of signed (and/or encrypted) e-
mail. 
Figure 7: Signed and encrypted e-mails in 
Microsoft® Office Outlook® 2007 
HTML e-mail: Again, this is not an obvious 
security threat, but, HTML-based e-mails may 
contain 
embedded 
code 
(e.g. 
VBScript, 
JavaScript), iframes (downloading content from 
external websites) or other objects (e.g. Java 
applets, ActiveX objects, media components) that 
may be acting as a Trojan horse for malware. Most 
clients are also able to suppress images that may 
contain inappropriate content or that can provide a 
web-bug (a graphical image hosted on a web 
server that is used to confirm the legitimacy of an 
e-mail address by logging a uniquely coded 
Uniform Resource Locator (URL) request). The 
options for restricting images (and some other 
HTML content) embedded in e-mails within 
Microsoft® Office Outlook® are illustrated in 
Figure 8. 

3: Securing the Client 
40 
 
Figure 8: Trust centre options in 
Microsoft® Office Outlook® 2007 for HTML 
e-mails 
Hyperlinks: E-mails often contain hyperlinks and, 
in most cases, are linked directly to the appropriate 
website. Unfortunately, when using HTML e-mail, 
it is easy to provide a textual link (possibly 
showing a URL) that then links to a completely 
different site. Users should be familiar with the 
risks of following hyperlinks and should also be in 
the habit of reporting suspicious URLs, as these 
could be blocked by the organisation’s firewall if 
considered a risk to other users. 
Recalling e-mail: This feature is not provided by 
any of the underlying protocols. Instead, this is a 
facility in Microsoft e-mail clients/servers to allow 
users to recall messages that have been sent 
inadvertently or incorrectly. This is not a reliable 
mechanism, since a recalled message may have 
already been read, transferred to another system or 
forwarded, or the recipient may be using a non-
Microsoft client that does not provide message-
recalling services. There may also be concerns 
over the use of message recalling, as a user acting 
on instructions contained in an e-mail may have no 
‘evidence’ if the original sender subsequently 

3: Securing the Client 
41
recalls the message (or a third party spoofs a 
message recall). 
Sensitivity classification (normal/confidential):
This is another Microsoft feature that allows users 
to attribute a confidentiality flag to individual e-
mails. Classifications available include ‘personal’, 
‘private’ and ‘confidential’. It is important to note 
that these classifications do not imply any form of 
protection (e.g. encryption) – they are simple flags 
that are interpreted by Microsoft mail clients to 
visually 
indicate 
an 
implied 
level 
of 
confidentiality. 
Web-based clients 
Web-based clients typically offer a limited subset 
of the functionality of their desktop counterparts. 
However, this difference is becoming less 
significant as the trend to a mobile workforce has 
influenced the development of more advanced 
WebMail features. Figure 9 shows the junk e-mail 
filtering facilities integrated into Microsoft® Office 
Outlook® Web Access (OWA), which provides a 
WebMail interface to the Microsoft® Exchange 
mail server. These options effectively replicate the 
same functionality that would be available in a 
typical desktop client (providing white lists for 
senders – Safe Senders) together with a blacklist 
for blocked senders (by e-mail address or domain). 
In this example it is also possible to include a safe 
recipient list to accept e-mails for a number of 
addresses (e.g. to handle redirected e-mail). 

3: Securing the Client 
42
Figure 9: Junk mail filtering in Microsoft® 
Office Outlook® Web Access (OWA) 
Mobile clients 
With the increasingly mobile workforce, many 
employees 
now 
synchronise 
mobile 
phones/Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) to the 
organisational e-mail servers (sometimes without 
permission) with the consequent risks from device 
theft and loss. Fortunately, some mail servers offer 
the ability to remotely wipe a lost or stolen device 
(see Figure 10), but it should be considered that 
the ability to remotely wipe a device may be 
limited, especially if the new owner doesn’t 
connect the device to the Internet before trying to 
access the locally stored data. 

3: Securing the Client 
43 
 
Figure 10: Mobile device management in 
Microsoft®  Exchange 

3: Securing the Client 
44 
In addition to the local synchronisation of 
phones/PDAs (typically by Universal Serial Bus 
(USB)), users are likely to increasingly use 
WLAN/3G (3rd Generation) connections to 
connect to mail services. Although most of these 
devices will support secure protocols (OWA over 
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), POP3/IMAP over 
SSL, etc.), it is possible for them to be configured 
to use protocols that do not encrypt credentials (or 
the e-mail content). Consideration should be given 
to policies relating to the use of mobile devices – 
especially to the use of personal devices. In 
addition, administrators should be aware of the 
changing legal landscape (taking, for example, the 
recent demands in India, Saudi Arabia and the 
United Arab Emirates for government access to 
data transported via the BlackBerry service12). 
Takeaways 
¾ 
Have a clear policy on the use of attachments 
covering (both in terms of sending and 
receiving): 
¾ 
appropriateness of content 
¾ 
attachment size 
¾ 
attachment type 
¾ 
export of corporate data. 
 
 
 
                                                                 
12 BBC. 2010. ‘India sets Blackberry monitoring 
deadline’, BBC News Online, 17 August 2010. 
www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-10998549 (accessed 
1 September 2010) 

3: Securing the Client 
45 
¾ 
Ensure users have a clear understanding of e-
mail client features and an appreciation of the 
security implications (e.g. an e-mail flagged as 
confidential receives no more protection than 
any other). 
¾ 
Consider the use of encryption for sensitive e-
mail correspondence. Users will need to be 
made aware of the facility and what they are 
required to do in order to use it. 
¾ 
Have a clear policy on synchronisation of 
corporate 
e-mail 
with 
personal 
devices, 
together with a mechanism to remotely wipe 
lost and stolen devices. 
 

 
 46 
CHAPTER 4: SAFETY IN TRANSIT 
This chapter considers the threats to e-mail while 
travelling across networks and between devices, 
e.g. through corporate networks, home networks, 
mail relays and Internet Service Providers (ISPs). 
Consideration 
is 
given 
to the 
potential 
for 
interception/modification of e-mail along the journey 
and the various mechanisms for protecting e-mail 
outside of the control of an organisation. 
The previous chapter identified a range of 
protective mechanisms for e-mail on the client-
side. However, once e-mail has left the user’s 
desktop, there are a myriad of risks that an e-mail 
can face while in transit. These risks relate back to 
the fundamental principles of security, notably: 
x 
confidentiality: ensuring that the e-mail 
content is not disclosed to a third party; 
x 
integrity: ensuring that the e-mail’s content 
cannot be modified before reaching its 
destination; 
x 
availability: ensuring that the mail servers 
(including any additional mail relays en route) 
are not adversely affected (e.g. by denial of 
service attacks); 
x 
authenticity: ensuring that the sender (and 
recipient) are the genuine parties concerned; 
x 
non-repudiation: proving that the claimed 
sender did indeed send the message. 
Before considering the risks and the possible 
countermeasures, it is perhaps useful to consider 

4: Safety in Transit 
47 
briefly the different network protocols used for e-
mail communication. 
Protocols 
Once e-mail has left an organisation (and often 
even internally), the most common protocol for 
forwarding e-mails is the Simple Mail Transfer 
Protocol (SMTP). SMTP is a plain text protocol 
that operates over Transmission Control Protocol 
(TCP) port 25.13 14 The plain text nature allows for 
easy observation of the header and content of e-
mails in transit – hence without further protection 
e-mail confidentiality cannot be guaranteed. To 
illustrate this point, Figure 11 shows an example 
session between a client and a server via SMTP. 
 
Figure 11: An example SMTP 
communication session 
                                                                 
13 RFC 821 ‘Simple Mail Transfer Protocol’, 1982, 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc821 (accessed 1 September 
2010) 
14 RFC 5321 ‘Simple Mail Transfer Protocol’, 2008, 
IETF. http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5321 (accessed 
1 September 2010) 

4: Safety in Transit 
48 
The traffic in the figure was acquired using 
Wireshark, an open source, freely available 
packet-capturing tool. Using Wireshark (or even 
command 
prompt 
tools 
such 
as 
tcpdump/windump), it is possible to capture live 
network traffic and filter for specific protocols 
(e.g. SMTP). This captured traffic can easily be 
saved for later analysis. 
Although there are SMTP variations that allow for 
encrypted credentials (for authenticated relaying) 
and encrypted mail transfer (e.g. using SSL/TLS 
(Transport Layer Security)), as most e-mail 
ultimately leaves organisational boundaries, it is 
impractical to require authentication or encryption 
for 
Internet-bound 
e-mail 
forwarding. 
This 
ultimately 
provides 
multiple 
‘monitoring’ 
locations in which a third party can potentially log 
on and view the contents of the messages (within 
the organisation, throughout the ISPs through 
which the traffic is transmitted and at the 
destination). 
Although it is unlikely that there will be universal 
acceptance 
of 
secure 
versions 
of 
SMTP 
(SSL/TLS), these should still be considered the 
preferred approach – especially internally, where 
the use of SMTP should be considered as a last 
resort. 
SMTP is used exclusively for forwarding of e-mail 
messages to their final destination server, at which 
point the e-mail will normally wait in the 
appropriate user’s mailbox. Although there are a 
number of standardised mechanisms for retrieving 
e-mail from the local server, traditionally this has 

4: Safety in Transit 
49 
used the Post Office Protocol (POP).15 This is 
again a plain text protocol, but, unlike SMTP, POP 
always requires user credentials to identify and 
authenticate the legitimate user for the requested 
mailbox. 
Unfortunately, 
this 
places 
such 
credentials in the hands of a protocol, which (in its 
native form) offers no direct protection. Figure 12 
shows another example where a simple network-
monitoring tool can access the message content of 
an e-mail during delivery (while also capturing the 
user credentials of the recipient). 
 
Figure 12: An example POP3 session 
showing plain text authentication and 
message content 
Although the original implementation of POP 
utilised plain text authentication, later versions 
have introduced enhanced security. For example, 
authenticated POP (APOP) (defined in POP3) uses 
the Message-Digest algorithm 5 (MD5) to conceal 
                                                                 
15 RFC 1939 ‘Post Office Protocol – Version 3’, 1996, 
IETF. http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1939 (accessed 
1 September 2010) 

4: Safety in Transit 
50 
the user’s password (unfortunately, due to 
increasingly cheap computer power, this is now 
vulnerable to brute force or rainbow table-based 
attacks16). 
The Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP)17 
offers an alternative to POP for remote mailbox 
access. IMAP offers extensive mailbox functions 
(beyond those offered by POP), as well as 
supporting 
SSL/TLS 
encryption 
to 
protect 
authentication credentials. Although IMAP should 
be considered the preferred option for accessing 
mailboxes, not all clients or servers support this 
protocol. Some consideration also needs to be 
given to the sending of e-mail (which is still likely 
to need SMTP). 
It should be noted that the weaknesses identified in 
these protocols are not negated by only using them 
within organisational boundaries, as internal users 
could just as easily utilise packet-capturing 
techniques to steal data and credentials. 
WebMail users (and many mobile users) will use 
entirely 
different 
protocols, 
but 
only 
for 
communication between their device (running a 
web 
browser/mail 
client) 
and 
the 
server. 
Exchanges between client and server typically run 
over 
HyperText 
Transfer 
Protocol 
Secure 
(HTTPS), which offers a high level of security. 
However, users need to be aware of the 
                                                                 
16 md5(); website, 2008. http://md5.rednoize.com/ 
(accessed 1 September 2010) 
17 RFC 3501 ‘Internet Message Access Protocol – 
Version 4rev1’, 2003, IETF. 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3501 (accessed 1 September 
2010) 

4: Safety in Transit 
51
importance of certificates and understand browser 
(or client) warnings that may indicate a man-in-
the-middle18 (or man-in-the-browser19) attack 
(Figure 13). 
Figure 13: Man-in-the-middle attack 
The screenshots in Figure 14 show examples of 
browser certificate warnings (taken from Mozilla® 
Firefox® and Microsoft®
Internet Explorer®
respectively – additional examples based upon 
other popular browsers can be found in the 
Appendix). Although the inclusion of these 
warnings alerts users to the possible problems with 
a server certificate, many users will not understand 
what the error message actually means. Users 
                                                                
18 Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) 
‘Man-in-the-middle attack’, 2009. 
www.owasp.org/index.php/Man-in-the-middle_attack
(accessed 1 September 2010) 
19 Gühring, P., ‘Concepts against Man-in-the-Browser 
Attacks’, 2006. 
www2.futureware.at/svn/sourcerer/CAcert/SecureClient.
pdf (accessed 1 September 2010) 

4: Safety in Transit 
52 
should, therefore, be made familiar with typical 
warning 
messages 
and 
be 
provided 
with 
appropriate training to understand the warning, 
evaluate the risk and make an informed 
judgement. 
 
 
Figure 14: Example security certificate 
warnings in Mozilla® Firefox® v3 (top) and 
Microsoft® Internet Explorer® 8 (bottom) 
It should be noted that running WebMail (or 
another client) via HTTP will render all traffic 

4: Safety in Transit 
53 
vulnerable to the same compromises as SMTP or 
POP, as this is also an unencrypted protocol. 
Although the viewing and generation of e-mails is 
likely to be secure between client and server, e-
mails leaving the protection of the organisation’s 
network (destined to external servers) are likely to 
be sent via standard SMTP, with users potentially 
unaware of the security implications once 
messages leave the presumed secure website. 
Countermeasures 
Although many of the issues described in this 
chapter can be addressed by the use of 
authentication 
and/or 
encryption, 
this 
will 
generally only provide protection within an 
organisation’s own network. The main reason for 
this is that it is not feasible to expect or require a 
remote mail system to comply with a set of 
security criteria specific to your organisation. Each 
individual mail server is likely to handle thousands 
of connections from a variety of sources, each 
potentially capable of supporting a range of 
countermeasures – with many unable to offer more 
than simple SMTP. Unless the communication is 
pre-arranged (for example, between remote sites of 
a 
single 
organisation 
where 
an 
SSL/TLS 
connection may be established), it is likely that all 
external e-mail communication will rely on 
unauthenticated and unencrypted SMTP. 
To 
offer 
protection 
above 
these 
simple 
communication protocols, there are a number of 
services that can be utilised within the UAs such 
that the content of the e-mail (the message body) 
can be protected against both disclosure and 

4: Safety in Transit 
54 
modification (for example, PGP and S/MIME as 
discussed in the previous chapter). 
These techniques, although perfectly functional, 
do have a number of limitations and require end-
users to modify their e-mail interactions, as well as 
administrative effort to both set up and maintain a 
secure e-mail implementation. It is also important 
to understand that although the majority of e-mail 
that is sent across the globe is open to abuse, it is 
unlikely that any individual e-mail will be 
intercepted and its contents examined due to the 
sheer number of e-mails travelling through the 
Internet. It is perhaps better to be aware of the 
limitations and risks and choose appropriate 
countermeasures when a specific level of security 
particularly is required. 
Takeaways 
¾ 
Be aware of the inherent weaknesses of e-
mail 
protocols 
and 
provide 
additional 
protection accordingly. For example, ensure 
firewall restrictions protect vulnerable e-mail 
communication protocols. 
¾ 
Educate users over the vulnerabilities facing e-
mail messages. 
¾ 
Educate users to choose the most appropriate 
means of communication for a message. 
¾ 
Unless you have the ability to encrypt end-to-
end communication, assume that messages 
leaving the organisation can be seen and even 
altered by third parties. 
¾ 
Ensure employees are aware of web browser 
security functionality, and in particular are 
familiar with the certificate warnings (and their 
implications) in their chosen browser. 

55
CHAPTER 5: SERVER SIDE SECURITY 
This chapter considers the risks faced by e-mail 
servers at all levels, from organisational servers 
through mail relays to the recipient’s server. Threats 
to confidentiality, integrity and availability are 
considered as well as a range of technical 
countermeasures to detect, prevent or minimise the 
impact of an attack. Specific attention is given to 
solutions to mitigate malware, spam and phishing.
Although Chapter 3 introduced a number of 
countermeasures that can be deployed within the 
client, the majority of protection is provided at the 
server end of any e-mail communication. The 
sections that follow describe a wide range of 
techniques that can be used on the mail server to 
protect recipients from malware and Unsolicited 
Bulk E-mail (UBE), as well as preventing 
organisational systems being used as the source of 
UBE. 
Firewall 
The first level of protection for an organisation is 
perhaps the simplest – a typical firewall can offer a 
good level of protection for the mail server from 
attacks against the underlying operating system 
(e.g. Windows Server®, Linux/UNIX®), as well as 
preventing internal desktop users from misusing 
the organisation’s network to relay UBE messages 
(intentionally or unintentionally). For example, a 
compromised host inside the organisation can send 
millions of UBE messages per day if there is no 
barrier to prevent outgoing SMTP connections. A 

5: Server Side Security 
56 
simple rule to allow only TCP port 25 connections 
to/from the mail server(s) will force all SMTP 
traffic through managed systems (with the option 
to audit and log all outgoing mail). Any systems 
(i.e. end-user devices) attempting to forward e-
mail directly to external mail servers will be 
detected and logged by the firewall for further 
investigation (providing the appropriate level of 
logging is turned on). 
Authenticated access 
If an organisation uses SMTP internally for clients 
to send e-mail, adding mandatory authentication 
will ensure that malware cannot misuse the 
internal servers (if coupled with a firewall 
restriction). This could be further combined with 
encrypted versions of SMTP/POP3/IMAP – 
ensuring that authentication credentials cannot be 
captured from the network. 
Connection filtering 
Incoming e-mail can be filtered based on a number 
of criteria. Most mail servers support at least a 
subset of these (with further options often 
available via plug-in tools). 
Blacklist: A blacklist is used to specifically deny 
individual Internet Protocol (IP) addresses (or 
whole subnets) from making a connection directly 
to the mail server. This can be useful where a 
known subnet (or individual) has been the source 
of large volumes of UBE (as is often the case with 
some ISP subnets). Some caution must be used 
with blacklisting as it can be easy to deny large 

5: Server Side Security 
57 
sections of the IP address ranges by mistake (e.g. 
141.0.0.0/8 rather than 141.163.0.0/16). 
Whitelist: A whitelist is the complete opposite, 
instead listing trusted devices from which 
connections will be accepted. This is often useful 
to identify branch offices, parent companies, 
externally hosted web servers, etc. as trusted 
sources for e-mail. Note that some mail systems 
may exclude whitelisted source addresses from 
further filtering. 
Greylist: A greylist is a relatively new concept, 
utilising the 451 SMTP error code (server 
temporarily not available). When a new e-mail is 
received by the server, it is initially rejected (451) 
and a triplet of data is stored (source IP, sender, 
recipient) with a time stamp. If the sender attempts 
to resend in less than the preconfigured time limit 
(often two minutes), the connection is rejected 
again. Only when the sender delays for more than 
two minutes will the e-mail be accepted. The 
concept behind this is quite simple – the vast 
majority of UBE is sent via botnets (collections of 
compromised and remotely controlled hosts) and 
compromised end-user PCs that do not conform to 
standard SMTP protocol rules. In particular, most 
UBE-sending 
systems 
do 
not 
retry 
failed 
connections. As such, greylisting allows legitimate 
servers (with correctly configured retry cycles) to 
still send e-mail (albeit with a two-minute delay) 
while rejecting most UBE. However, it should be 
noted that very old e-mail clients (and servers) 
may consider a 451 error code as a permanent 
failure and not attempt further retries – effectively 
rendering the destination unreachable. Another 
problem with greylisting is that if the server retry 

5: Server Side Security 
58 
delay is set too long, users may perceive a delay in 
the normally instantaneous e-mail delivery. 
Host 
resolving: 
Another 
simple 
filtering 
mechanism uses the Domain Name System (DNS) 
Message eXchange (MX)20 records to determine if 
the sending host has an appropriate MX entry. Any 
host acting as a mail server should have a DNS 
MX entry to be able to provide its own incoming 
mail service, hence any host attempting to send e-
mail without a suitable MX entry cannot receive a 
Non Delivery Report (NDR) and is likely to be a 
source of UBE. 
Sender 
Policy 
Framework 
(SPF): 
SPF21 
addresses the problem of source address spoofing 
by verifying that the incoming e-mail connection 
is from an approved sender (as determined by the 
administrator of the sending domain). This is a 
subtle difference to the host resolving described 
above in that MX entries are used to define the 
host that handles incoming e-mail while SPF uses 
a custom DNS entry (SPF record type) to advertise 
the hosts within an organisation that are allowed to 
send e-mail. 
DNS blocklists: In addition to black/white/grey 
listing, there are free public services that provide a 
simple DNS look-up facility against which 
incoming connections can be validated. One such 
example is the Spamhaus project, which provides 
                                                                 
20 Further details regarding the role of DNS and mail 
routing are provided in the Appendix. 
21 RFC 4408 ‘Sender Policy Framework (SPF) for 
Authorizing Use of Domains in E-Mail, Version 1’, 
2006, IETF. http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4408 (accessed 
1 September 2010) 

5: Server Side Security 
59 
a number of distinct look-up lists including (but 
not limited to) the: 
x 
Spamhaus Block List (SBL), which contains 
records of IP addresses reported as being 
‘involved in the sending, hosting or origination 
of Unsolicited Bulk Email’;22 
x 
Exploits Block List (XBL), which contains 
records of IP addresses reported as being 
infected by various forms of malware; 
x 
Policy Block List (PBL), which contains 
records of IP addresses that the respective 
administrators have defined as not permitted to 
send outbound SMTP traffic (for example, ISP 
customers on dynamic IP addresses or 
organisational desktop PCs); 
x 
Domain Block List (DBL), which contains 
records of domains referenced in UBE 
messages (for example, phishing sites, 419 
scams, malware hosting sites). 
These services respond to simple DNS look-up 
requests. As an incoming connection is received, 
the source IP address of the connection is 
submitted to the block list provider via DNS 
(typically) with a simple error code (specific IP 
addresses usually beginning 127.0.0.x) returned 
indicating if the submitted IP address exists on the 
respective block list – this simple process can 
effectively filter 80%+ of incoming e-mails.23 
                                                                 
22 Spamhaus website, 2010. www.spamhaus.org/sbl/ 
(accessed 1 September 2010) 
23 ‘Effective Spam Filtering’, Spamhaus website, January 
2010. 
www.spamhaus.org/whitepapers/effective_filtering.html 
(accessed 1 September 2010) 

5: Server Side Security 
60 
Spamhaus does provide a combined look-up list 
named ZEN that allows a single query against the 
SBL, XBL and PBL lists. It should be noted that 
Spamhaus services are only available for free to 
low-volume e-mail sites, although a chargeable 
service is available and similar services can also 
be obtained from managed security providers. 
Address filtering 
Although connection filtering will capture the 
majority of undesired e-mail messages, there is 
still an opportunity to undertake further filtering 
based on the sender and recipient e-mail addresses. 
These filtering mechanisms allow specific e-mail 
addresses (or domains) to be allowed or blocked. 
Sender filtering: This can be used to block 
specific senders (or domains) from communicating 
with the mail server. This can be useful where a 
specific sender has been repeatedly targeting the 
organisation’s mail accounts (a targeted spear-
phishing attack). This can also be used to block 
blank sender addresses (often used for UBE). 
Recipient filtering: This can be used to only 
accept e-mails addressed to specific recipients 
(typically for addresses linked to active user 
accounts). Using this option will ensure that e-
mails addressed to recipients who are not in the 
organisational e-mail directory will be bounced. 
As most UBE is addressed to seemingly randomly 
generated e-mail addresses (e.g. asmith@domain, 
bsmith@domain, csmith@domain), any UBE that 
reaches the server is likely to result in high levels 
of NDRs. Spammers often use these to determine 

5: Server Side Security 
61 
legitimate e-mail addresses for more focused 
spamming efforts. 
Content filtering 
Once an e-mail has been processed through the 
various filtering techniques described in this 
chapter, there are still further security mechanisms 
that can be deployed to reduce the risks to an 
organisation: 
Phishing filters: Although the majority of spam 
mail will be detected through DNS blocklists or 
greylisting, some UBE will always manage to 
bypass these mechanisms (especially as new UBE 
hosts may not appear immediately on blocklists). 
Additional content-based scanning (often using 
heuristics) can identify spam-style e-mails (e.g. 
messages 
using 
excessive 
capitalisation 
or 
disguised words, such as p0rn, c1al1is and 
v1agra). 
Anti-virus (AV): as AV scanning is likely to be 
the most intensive operation compared with the 
relatively simplistic IP and e-mail address 
checking, it is best achieved once the other 
mechanisms have reduced the e-mail volume to 
more manageable levels. As e-mails are received, 
the body content (and attachments) can be scanned 
using a mail server AV solution. Many mail server 
AV solutions also allow extension filtering (e.g. 
blocking .exe, .com, .pif, etc.), which can be used 
to prevent potential malware from reaching the 
organisation (as well as enforcing organisational 
policies regarding attachments). It should be noted 
that decisions need to be made over how to handle 
encrypted messages and attachments that are non-

5: Server Side Security 
62 
readable (and hence non-scannable by the AV 
system). 
Keyword filtering: Although less commonly used 
for direct detection of UBE (having been replaced 
by heuristically based solutions), keyword filtering 
can still be useful for policy enforcement. 
Examples here could include spotting words of an 
obscene or offensive nature, or flagging e-mails 
mentioning names of competitors, etc. Keyword 
filtering has to be used carefully, as some well-
intended keywords may generate excessive false 
positives if not correctly utilised. For example, 
filtering for the word ‘sex’ could flag occurrences 
of ‘Essex’, ‘Sussex’, etc., while messages 
containing the word ‘socialism’ could be blocked 
due 
to 
the 
substring 
‘cialis’ 
(an 
erectile 
dysfunction medication frequently advertised in 
spam messages). Incidents of this nature are often 
referred to as the ‘Scunthorpe problem’.24 
Challenge/response 
It is perhaps unsurprising that, as detection 
mechanisms have improved, so has the ability of 
the UBE generators to evade them. In response to 
this, some administrators have implemented an 
automated challenge/response system that requires 
the sender of any e-mail to verify that they are a 
‘human’ in a similar fashion to the use of 
CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Public Turing 
test to tell Computers and Humans Apart) 
                                                                 
24 McCullagh, D., ‘Google’s chastity belt too tight’, 
CNET website, 23 April 2004. 
http://news.cnet.com/2100-1032_3-5198125.html 
(accessed 1 September 2010) 

5: Server Side Security 
63 
mechanisms in websites. On sending an e-mail to a 
challenge/response-protected server, the recipient 
receives back an e-mail asking them to confirm 
that they are indeed human (Figure 15). This is 
usually achieved through the use of a simple reply 
to the e-mail (embedding a unique code in the 
subject field) or via a unique hyperlink. Such 
systems usually record the authorised sender for 
future messages, so that the effort to each sender is 
minimal. Failing to respond to the challenge and 
subsequently sending further unauthorised mail 
usually results in an addition to a blocklist for that 
particular sender. It should be noted that in Figure 
15, clicking reply uses the SMTP REPLY-TO 
address 
‘reply_username_B143D1C7-B7F8-
1DDB-00E1-FFB200861010@domain’. 
 
Figure 15: Example challenge/response e-
mail 
E-mail gateway 
Although the technologies described so far in this 
chapter can be integrated into the front-end mail 
server, there is value in filtering messages before 

5: Server Side Security 
64
they reach this point. An e-mail gateway (or e-mail 
proxy service on a firewall) can pre-filter 
connections and reduce the mail server load by 
making decisions before forwarding. These 
systems can often apply multiple levels of 
filtering, usually implementing blocklists (white, 
black, grey, DNS) before applying AV and 
keyword filtering. One potential advantage of this 
approach is that, if employees are allowed to 
download personal e-mail from external servers, 
an e-mail gateway can forcibly scan the messages 
before reaching the client (hence applying at least 
some of the organisational e-mail policy) and,
therefore, reducing the risks from malware or 
information disclosure. 
Relaying 
An open relay is a mail server that is configured to 
allow external hosts to send e-mail destined for 
external hosts through it (Figure 16). A correctly 
configured mail server will only accept e-mail 
destined for external domains from its own 
(usually internal) authorised users. To help with 
this problem, there are a number of open relay 
testing services (e.g. www.abuse.net/relay.html), 
as well as comprehensive guidance for fixing an 
open relay server (www.mail-abuse.com/an_sec 
3rdparty.html). If an organisation’s mail server is 
detected as an open relay, not only is it likely to be 
used by third parties to relay UBE (with the 
potential to send millions of e-mails per day), but 
it is quite likely that the organisation will be 
unable to send legitimate e-mails to many external 
recipients who use blocklists. It is worth noting 
that an open relay can occur accidentally, as some 

5: Server Side Security 
65 
older mail servers are configured to allow relaying 
by default, and it is possible that a server can 
appear without being deliberately installed due to 
the defaults used by some installations. In order to 
minimise such risks, it is important that 
administrators are aware of server installations and 
routinely check for e-mail traffic originating from 
non-approved servers. 
 
Figure 16: Illustrative example of an open 
relay 
UBE by attachment 
As already mentioned, there are problems with 
filtering encrypted e-mail messages (as they 
cannot be read by automated filtering systems). 
However, in recent years, security companies have 
reported increasing cases of UBE attachments, 
including MP3 and Portable Document Format 
(PDF) attachments. These formats (among others) 
can be more difficult to interpret automatically 
with organisations often facing the difficult choice 

5: Server Side Security 
66 
of either accepting these file types with no 
verification of the content, or imposing a blanket 
file extension block to eliminate the risk. It is 
inevitable that the use of alternative attachment 
formats will continue and without appropriate 
tools to check the content it is advisable to provide 
training to ensure that staff are able to distinguish 
legitimate attachments and are able to recognise 
undesirable content (or at least have a clear 
mechanism for reporting questionable messages). 
Takeaways 
¾ 
Consider the appropriate combination of 
protection techniques for e-mails. A multi-
layered approach (from firewall and filtering 
through to AV) is likely to be the most 
effective. 
¾ 
Be aware of the trade-off between strong 
restrictions on incoming e-mail and the 
problem 
of 
false 
positives 
resulting 
in 
legitimate e-mails being blocked. 
¾ 
Ensure that mail servers are regularly tested 
for vulnerabilities. 
¾ 
Have a clear policy on employees accessing 
and 
downloading 
personal 
e-mails 
from 
external servers. 
¾ 
Ensure that users are suitably educated over 
the nature of e-mail exploits and are able to 
identify 
malware, 
phishing 
and 
other 
exploitative e-mails. 
 
 

5: Server Side Security 
67 
¾ 
Review guidance available from independent 
bodies (e.g. Center for Internet Security25 or 
National 
Institute 
of 
Standards 
and 
Technology26). 
                                                                 
25 Center for Internet Security. http://cisecurity.org/ 
(accessed 1 September 2010) 
26 National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html (accessed 
1 September 2010) 

 
 68 
CHAPTER 6: E-MAIL ARCHIVING 
In addition to conveying individual messages, e-
mail also accumulates to become a significant data 
source in its own right and therefore represents an 
asset that may be both useful and important to 
maintain for later reference. This chapter considers 
the issues surrounding the storage and archiving of 
organisational e-mail. The discussion encompasses 
the need to store messages for business purposes, 
as well as for regulatory requirements, including 
consideration of evidential value. 
Given its importance to business operations, it is 
relevant to consider how e-mail can be retained for 
later use. This gives rise to the consideration of 
how to archive messages in the most effective 
manner. 
A key point to note at the outset is that e-mail 
archiving is not the same thing as backing up, not 
least because the motivations are different. While 
backing up aims to provide a safeguard against 
some kind of data loss or system failure scenario, 
archiving provides a route for e-mail retention 
with the upfront expectation that it will need to be 
accessed again. So, rather than just being a bulk 
repository from which data can be recovered, the 
archive needs to offer a more flexible basis for 
search and retrieval. 
In terms of existing practice, survey findings from 
MessageLabs have suggested that only 27% of 
organisations are using a dedicated archiving 

6: E-mail Archiving 
69 
solution.27 Meanwhile, 42% take back-ups, 8% 
simply leave it on the server, and 15% do nothing 
at all. In spite of these results, the survey (which 
was based upon responses from 111 e-mail 
managers) also determined that 65% thought that 
archiving was important. 
Organisations need to consider archiving for two 
fundamental reasons: because there is business 
value to retaining the communications, and 
because they may face a legal obligation to do so. 
These perspectives are considered in the sections 
that follow. 
Archiving because we want to 
E-mail can provide a vast amount of information 
about decisions and the context in which they were 
taken. From this perspective, it can be considered 
to be a component of the wider corporate memory, 
and thus a very desirable resource to preserve and 
reference. For instance, maintaining an archive can 
help to evidence and explain business decisions, to 
recover useful contacts that have not been stored 
in the address book, or to simply find out where 
things were left when picking up the thread of an 
old discussion that has not been active for some 
time. Indeed, referring again to the MessageLabs 
findings, a variety of reasons were cited for 
needing to search through old e-mails, with the top 
three being location of business records (59%), 
                                                                 
27 MessageLabs. 2010. Email Archiving; Top 10 myths & 
challenges (& solutions). MessageLabs Ltd, Symantec 
Hosted Services. 
www.messagelabs.co.uk/white_papers/archiving_challen
ges (accessed 1 September 2010) 

6: E-mail Archiving 
70 
recovery 
of 
deleted 
e-mails 
(49%), 
and 
contributing to an internal human resources 
investigation (40%). 
Although the need to archive may in some cases 
be driven by internally imposed constraints such as 
mailbox quotas, it is important to realise that it is 
not simply a question of being able to hive off 
older messages to somewhere else and then 
generally forget about them. A number of potential 
constraints need to be recognised in terms of 
storing, searching, protecting and backing up the 
archive, such that we can get to the contents in a 
useful way when needed, without exposing it to 
unauthorised access or the risk of inadvertent loss. 
It is also important to consider what needs to be 
archived and how to most effectively handle it. For 
example, it is clearly undesirable to retain e-mails 
harbouring spam, phishing and malware, and it 
would not be optimal to end up storing multiple 
copies of large attachments just because they have 
been received by multiple users within the 
organisation. As such, archiving ideally requires 
an intelligent approach that minimises this sort of 
overhead. 
If the administration of such a solution cannot be 
handled in-house, it is worth noting that 
organisations, such as MessageLabs, offer hosted 
archiving solutions, which also free client 
organisations from capacity-related concerns that 
might arise from the volume of e-mail being 
handled. 

6: E-mail Archiving 
71 
Archiving because we have to 
The other perspective on archiving is when we 
face 
an 
obligation 
to 
maintain 
records. 
Organisations may face such a requirement for a 
number of legal and regulatory reasons, relating to 
both core business and accompanying issues such 
as HR or health and safety. Indeed, referring back 
to the aforementioned MessageLabs survey, 
almost a third of the respondents indicated that 
their archiving activities were motivated by 
compliance requirements. 
The specifics of legal and regulatory demands will 
vary by geography and jurisdiction, but as an 
example we can consider relevant legislation from 
the UK perspective. Here we find two particular 
Acts of Parliament that carry implications for e-
mail archiving, namely the Data Protection Act 
199828 and the Freedom of Information Act 
2000.29 The key facts about the related laws are as 
follows. 
Data Protection Act 1998 
x 
It applies to organisations in both the private 
and the public sectors. 
x 
It provides rights for individuals to gain access 
to personal data (both factual and opinion-
based) that is held about them. 
x 
It places obligations on the organisation 
holding the data to surrender all requested data 
within 20 days. 
                                                                 
28 See 
www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts1998/ukpga_19980029_en_1 
29 See 
www.opsi.gov.uk/Acts/acts2000/ukpga_20000036_en_1 

6: E-mail Archiving 
72 
Freedom of Information Act 2000 
x 
It applies to public authorities only. 
x 
It provides rights for persons to be informed in 
writing whether a public authority holds 
particular information, and, if so, for a copy of 
it to be supplied (albeit with some exemptions 
covering areas such as national security, 
defence 
and 
information 
provided 
in 
confidence). 
x 
Organisations failing to comply can be held in 
contempt of court and face consequent 
penalties, including jail. 
Considering the practical requirements that these 
laws place upon organisations, they should raise 
fundamental 
questions 
about 
whether 
the 
organisation would be in a position to respond (i.e. 
whether it is maintaining the data and is confident 
in its ability to search it). It is certain that locating 
data from unstructured back-ups of e-mail 
potentially spanning several years would present a 
major challenge, especially given the requirement 
to locate both facts and opinions about the data 
subject concerned. As such, a specific and planned 
archiving strategy would be a valuable step 
towards reducing the burden (e.g. time and staff 
effort) when facing the need to comply with a 
disclosure request. 
As a related aside, it should be noted that deleting 
e-mails in order to avoid the potential to disclose 
them is not an acceptable approach, and may 
indeed bring the organisation into conflict with 
other legal obligations to maintain full and 
accurate records (for 
example, relating to 
personnel and financial issues). Thus, in order to 

6: E-mail Archiving 
73 
facilitate compliance with the law, organisations 
require a means of storing e-mails in a manner that 
is both secure and offers effective retrieval. 
A final point to note, given the potential legislative 
motivations for archiving, is the importance of 
engaging legal counsel to support the process. The 
decisions on what to archive should not simply be 
left to the IT department to decide, as in most 
cases they are just the custodians (rather than the 
owners) of the data concerned. 
Takeaways 
¾ 
E-mail can provide a valuable source of 
information for ongoing reference, and so 
retention measures are required to ensure that 
it is not lost. 
¾ 
Consider what should be archived and 
whether a locally managed or a remotely 
hosted solution would be more effective (e.g. 
in view of the associated maintenance and 
capacity demands). 
¾ 
Consider your ability to respond to disclosure 
requirements. 
Is 
e-mail 
correspondence 
maintained and held in a form that lends itself 
to search and retrieval? 
¾ 
Ensure that procedures for searching and 
recovering information from the archive are 
established and tested before a genuine need 
to use them arises. 
 

 
 74 
CHAPTER 7: ETHEREAL E-MAIL 
This chapter briefly considers the increasing 
popularity of Cloud-based computing and in 
particular the Software as a Service (SaaS) e-mail 
model. The discussion presents a brief overview of 
some of the issues that must be considered when 
moving to an e-mail solution outside of the 
traditional corporate network perimeter. 
Although running an e-mail system for an 
organisation may seem a relatively trivial task to 
some, 
there 
are 
significant 
challenges 
to 
maintaining an efficient and effective service that 
meets the high expectations of users. With a need 
to support hardware, software, archiving and back-
up, and with an increasingly mobile workforce, it 
is no surprise that more organisations are 
considering adoption of the ‘Cloud’ for their 
business-critical e-mail services. 
A move to Cloud-based e-mail services (where e-
mail services are provided over the Internet to an 
organisation by an external provider as a hosted 
service) is not to be taken lightly, as all the 
previously mentioned issues will continue to be of 
concern. By moving to a service model, the 
physical/practical issues may well be removed 
(physical storage, back-up, cooling, power, etc.), 
but the organisation will now have to manage an e-
mail platform that is potentially less configurable 
then an in-house solution. 
Some of the key considerations are summarised in 
the paragraphs that follow. 

7: Ethereal E-mail 
75 
Security: By moving to a Cloud-based service, 
organisations can provide an effective solution to 
the issue of physical location (ensuring that 
important data is physically isolated from the main 
organisational sites). This can be further extended 
by co-locating, using multiple physical locations 
of Cloud data-centres. When selecting a service 
provider, it is important to consider issues of 
isolation from other users (if using a shared 
service) 
and 
the 
mechanism 
for 
secure 
communication between organisational users and 
the Cloud service. 
Responsibility: One of the common concerns 
when outsourcing e-mail services is the physical 
location of the e-mail (and any regulatory/legal 
issues introduced by the specific location). 
Irrespective of the physical location of the e-mail, 
the organisation is ultimately responsible for the e-
mail messages and must ensure compliance with 
any legislation in whichever country the messages 
reside in. It should be noted that some service 
providers allow customers to choose in which 
country their data is stored to ensure regulatory 
compliance (or to avoid specific issues relating to 
individual countries). The legality of storing and 
accessing e-mails in a variety of jurisdictions must 
be considered, as content that is perfectly legal to 
view and store in one country may be in 
contravention 
of 
local 
laws 
in 
another. 
Consideration should also be given to security 
issues in relation to cryptography, as some 
countries may ban the use of encryption 
technology, or require organisations to provide 
access to encrypted content on request. 

7: Ethereal E-mail 
76
Support: When selecting an e-mail service 
provider, it is important to consider the level of 
support that will accompany it. Moving to an 
external provider should not be based solely on 
price, and consideration should be given to a range 
of factors, including the availability of competent 
support. It is worth noting that few organisations 
will have an in-house team of dedicated e-mail 
support technicians whereas a credible e-mail 
service provider is likely to offer a substantial 
support service of specialised professionals. 
Mailbox size: Although not an obvious security 
issue, the availability of virtually unlimited storage 
may discourage users from properly managing 
their mailboxes. In particular, users may lose the 
skill of correctly storing, archiving or deleting e-
mails, instead saving everything. Although this 
may not be seen as a problem by the individual 
user, Cloud-based cost models may change over 
time – an organisation with 1,000 users, each with 
a 100MB mailbox, could easily find itself with 
1GB (or even greater) per mailbox very quickly, 
with potential for incurring excessive costs for 
storage and back-up. Large mailboxes will also 
introduce 
problems 
for 
finding 
important 
information (for users or organisations), which 
may have legal implications in contexts such as 
the freedom of information requests highlighted in 
Chapter 6. 
Takeaways
¾
Think carefully before moving to an externally 
hosted e-mail service. Cost savings are only 
one aspect to be considered.

7: Ethereal E-mail 
77 
¾ 
Consider legislative/regulatory requirements 
very carefully, and ensure that you are still 
able to meet any expected obligations to 
users, clients, etc. 
¾ 
Give 
particular 
consideration 
to 
the 
implications 
of 
storing 
data 
in 
another 
jurisdiction (both legal and ethical). 
 

78
CHAPTER 8: RISKING OUR REPUTATION? 
In addition to watching what we receive, we also 
need to be concerned about what gets sent out, 
with staff misuse of e-mail introducing risks from 
reputational and legal perspectives. If a message 
has been sent from a business address, then many 
recipients will assume that it reflects the views and 
beliefs of the organisation concerned, which 
becomes problematic if employees start sending 
out messages with potentially offensive or legally 
dubious content. In addition, the ease of onward 
transmission means that messages can rapidly 
spread 
far 
beyond 
the 
originally 
intended 
recipient(s). With such risks in mind, this chapter 
examines some real-life examples and then 
considers the policy measures that organisations 
should consider in order to guide and govern 
acceptable use.
Chapter 2 has already flagged that approximately a 
quarter of organisations scan their outgoing mail 
for inappropriate content. One of the fundamental 
reasons for doing so is to prevent such messages 
from reflecting badly upon the organisation, 
potentially tarnishing its image or bringing its 
name into disrepute. This chapter begins by 
examining some examples of how this might 
happen, before proceeding to consider the fact that 
classifications of what is inappropriate may be a 
bit of a grey area and that a clear policy is needed 
to govern this as well as to underpin other aspects 
of e-mail usage. 

8: Risking Our Reputation? 
79 
Going down in history 
For a landmark example, let’s consider the case of 
Claire Swire, which (at the time of writing, almost 
a decade later) is still a high-ranking result in a 
Google search for ‘infamous emails’! The incident 
began on 7 December 2000, when Swire e-mailed 
10 friends a joke about a sperm bank. In some 
cases, this alone would have led to trouble for 
breaching e-mail usage policy, but for Swire 
things started to go rather more significantly 
wrong when she replied to one of the recipients 
(her boyfriend, Bradley Chait).30 The real 
problems then began when Chait kindly decided to 
share this e-mail with six of his friends, changing 
the message title to something more suggestive. 
Within three minutes of receiving it, one of these 
friends had forwarded it to 12 of his contacts, and 
within a couple of hours the message had spread 
around the world. Not only had hundreds of people 
received it directly, but it was also picked up as a 
story in the international media (with sources as 
diverse as the New York Post, Le Monde, 
Melbourne’s The Age and the BBC). The 
unexpected explosion of the story was doubtless 
embarrassing at an individual level for Swire, who 
consequently went into hiding to avoid the media 
attention. Additionally, the incident was of 
significant concern to Chait’s employer, the 
                                                                 
30 Readers interested in the specifics of the e-mail 
dialogue can find it online by entering the following 
address via www.archive.org and selecting one of the 
archived copies: 
http://claireswireonline.tripod.com/theemail.htm. Please 
note that the original page no longer works, and so the 
archive service needs to be used to recover it. 

8: Risking Our Reputation? 
80 
international law firm Norton Rose, which found 
itself named in many of the resulting stories. 
Indeed, while no long-term reputational damage 
ensued, the company may still be finding it 
difficult to escape the association. For example, at 
the time of writing, a Google search for ‘Norton 
Rose email’ still pulls up several references to the 
incident ahead of any results relating to contact 
addresses at the company. Perhaps unsurprisingly, 
Norton Rose was none too pleased that some of its 
employees had been at the heart of the incident 
and the forwarding of the messages, and five staff 
consequently faced disciplinary action for breach 
of the terms and conditions of their employment.31 
Another notable case occurred just a few months 
later, in May 2001, when investment banker Peter 
Chung began a new job in Seoul with The Carlyle 
Group. Chung was very happy with his new 
location and the opportunities it offered him, and 
used his company e-mail account to send a 
message to friends back home. Unfortunately, 
however, in addition to describing the details of 
his new apartment, Chung explained how he was 
going to ‘**** every hot chick in Korea over the 
next two years’ and exploit the hospitality of other 
bankers (‘they pretty much cater to my every 
whim’). Chung then brought his correspondence to 
a close by saying ‘someone’s gotta start FedExing 
me boxes of condoms, I brought out about forty 
boxes but I think I’ll run out of them by Saturday’. 
Just as with the Swire case, it was thanks to 
                                                                 
31 BBC. 2000. ‘Smutty e-mailers keep their jobs’, BBC 
News Online, 21 December 2000. 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/1081543.stm (accessed 
1 September 2010). 

8: Risking Our Reputation? 
81 
subsequent forwarding that the message became 
an Internet incident, with copies still persisting 
online today.32 Unfortunately for Chung, his new 
employers were among those who got to see it, 
and from a reputational perspective it is easy to see 
why The Carlyle Group might have had even more 
of an issue with Peter Chung than Norton Rose 
had with Bradley Chait. Whereas Chait had simply 
used the company’s e-mail for inappropriate 
correspondence, Chung had amplified this by also 
giving an undesirable impression of how he 
conducted himself in the line of business. With 
this in mind, it perhaps unsurprising to find that, 
just two days after sending the message, Chung 
found himself resigning from the very job he had 
been bragging about. 
Just having a laugh? 
If your experience is anything like ours, then you 
will surely know at least one person who feels 
obliged to e-mail everyone they know with the 
latest jokes and amusing images. However, while 
such mailings may seem fine from an individual 
perspective, there are some issues that ought to be 
recognised from the business viewpoint. For 
example, although jokes may not pose a direct 
security risk (unless they are used as the trigger to 
get users to open a message carrying malware), 
they can still have a tangible impact upon 
productivity. Indeed, if all the recipients of such a 
message spend a minute or two to read it, and then 
                                                                 
32 At the time of writing a copy can be found at 
http://applicant.com/an-email-to-friends-that-ended-a-
golden-career/, but a search for any of the 
aforementioned quotes should also find it in full. 

8: Risking Our Reputation? 
82 
possibly some more time to send copies to their 
friends, then it is easy to see how associated time-
wasting would amass across the organisation. 
Moreover, as with general spam, joke messages 
represent an unnecessary overhead on the mail 
server and the network. While this may effectively 
go unnoticed from an internal perspective, there 
are perhaps greater implications when dealing with 
mobile users if they are using services that incur 
data charges by the byte. 
Perhaps the biggest issue, however, is the potential 
for the content of such mailings to cause offence 
(particularly 
given 
the 
language, 
imagery, 
concepts and innuendo that many of them are 
prone to carrying). Whatever the joke, there is 
always a chance that it will potentially offend 
somebody’s sensibilities. In some cases recipients 
will be quietly upset and in others they may be 
loudly offended. Neither scenario is particularly 
desirable, and so care should ideally be taken to 
avoid them. If a potentially offensive message was 
received 
from 
someone 
else 
within 
the 
organisation, then it could lead to a HR issue 
(involving 
the 
grievance 
and 
disciplinary 
procedures respectively). The situation is likely to 
become more acute with the appearance of 
legislation, such as the UK Equality Act 2010, 
which extends new protection to people who feel 
they have been victimised or harassed. In this 
context, employers would be advised to directly 
ban all sharing of smutty and other jokes, in order 
to avoid accusations of failing to protect their 
employees. Meanwhile, if one of your people has 
e-mailed it externally, then it could lead to 
complaints from recipient organisations. 

8: Risking Our Reputation? 
83 
Of course, you cannot control what people choose 
to send you, so the judgement call (and advisable 
policy area) comes in terms of what you ought to 
be sending to other people. Another point to note 
here is that very rarely are people just passing on 
the joke. These messages tend to get forwarded 
onwards and onwards, with the names, e-mail 
addresses 
and 
signature 
lines 
of 
previous 
recipients progressively accumulating within the 
body of the message. As a result, there is potential 
for employers to get drawn into it, with company 
names being visible alongside their employees, 
which is clearly not very welcome if what they are 
doing is forwarding offensive material and ripe 
jokes. 
Putting it in a policy 
Fundamentally, if suitable rules have not been 
formally recorded somewhere, then trustworthy 
staff may be legitimately concerned about what 
they can do, while those seeking to misbehave are 
handed an easy excuse to claim that they did not 
know any better. As such, it is important to 
establish a clear policy to govern e-mail activity 
and acceptable use. 
There are a variety of points that such a policy 
needs to address, and some key considerations are 
summarised in the pages that follow. 
Attachments 
Given the clear potential to carry malware, users 
should be given specific guidance in relation to the 
handling of attachments. 

8: Risking Our Reputation? 
84 
Incoming attachments should be regarded with 
caution in order to reduce the risk of malware 
infection. Users should be made aware that scripts 
and executable content are particularly notable in 
this context, but that other file types cannot be 
guaranteed to be risk-free. Additionally, the advice 
should highlight that, although they are by no 
means the only source of problems, attachments 
received from unknown sources, or unexpectedly 
from legitimate contacts, should be regarded with 
particular suspicion. 
The policy should also address outgoing messages, 
and users should be made aware that they must be 
careful not to pass on malware or other 
inappropriate attachments to others. 
More generally, users should be made aware that 
even if they are able to attach certain materials, it 
does not guarantee that their intended recipients 
will be able to receive them (e.g. on the basis that 
large attachments and/or particular file types may 
be blocked at the remote end). 
Appropriateness of outgoing content 
In contrast to being wary of malware and other 
malicious threats, this point relates to content that 
users may intentionally place within their 
messages. There are a number of perspectives that 
users ought to be made aware of, and they ought to 
be clearly advised to avoid including content (in 
message bodies or attachments) that may: 
x 
be in breach of legislation (e.g. data protection 
or copyright); 

8: Risking Our Reputation? 
85 
x 
compromise the confidentiality of the 
organisation; 
x 
be reputationally damaging to the 
organisation; 
x 
potentially cause distress, harm, nuisance or 
offence to recipients. 
The policy ought to include specific caution 
against the inclusion of any of the following 
within e-mail communications: 
x 
pornographic, paedophilic or other obscene 
material; 
x 
sexist, racist and other discriminatory content; 
x 
material that could be construed as 
defamatory, libellous or threatening. 
Users should also be advised against sending any 
messages 
that 
purport 
to 
represent 
their 
organisation 
or 
another 
individual 
without 
appropriate authorisation. 
Uncontrolled incoming content 
Users should be made aware that some aspects of 
incoming 
content 
will 
be 
beyond 
the 
organisation’s 
control 
and 
that 
they 
may 
consequently find themselves in receipt of 
unwanted 
messages 
containing 
explicit 
or 
offensive content. Although technical measures 
can certainly be employed to reduce the problem 
(e.g. via spam filtering and malware scanning), 
there is still the potential for things to get through, 
and so, in order to avoid unwarranted complaints 
from users, the policy should make it clear that the 

8: Risking Our Reputation? 
86 
organisation cannot accept responsibility for what 
is received. 
Users can, however, be encouraged to report such 
unwanted messages to an appropriate point of 
contact (see below), which may ease their concern 
and potentially provide the organisation with 
intelligence to improve any e-mail filtering 
controls. Actively encouraging such reports will be 
particularly important for illegal content or 
messages that appear to be specifically targeting 
the organisation in some way (e.g. spear phishing 
of employees). 
Personal use of e-mail 
This is an area in which there is likely to be 
significant 
scope 
for 
variation 
between 
organisations, with some of the possible broad 
scenarios including: 
x 
permitted on the proviso that it does not 
conflict with performance of work duties; 
x 
permitted but with a requirement that personal 
messages are explicitly marked as such in the 
subject line; 
x 
permitted only for emergency situations; 
x 
not permitted under any circumstance. 
Whatever the case, the key point is that the 
statement must be clear and unambiguous to staff, 
and any bounds should be properly defined. 

8: Risking Our Reputation? 
87 
Bulk mailing 
Another factor relating to appropriateness of use, 
this seeks to prevent inconvenience to other users 
through receipt of unwanted messages, as well as 
complaints back to the organisation regarding the 
misuse of its facilities. 
In providing a policy for mass mailings, it is 
relevant to define a threshold of what it means 
(e.g. sending to more than 100 recipients), and to 
clarify that this applies to internal messaging as 
well as to the outside world. Repeated messaging 
of the same or similar content could also qualify. 
One question that might help people to consider 
whether someone else really needs to be in a 
recipient list is to ask themselves whether they 
would also make the effort to send that person a 
copy if it was being done on paper. Genuine 
application of this question can help to cut down 
recipient lists considerably. Highlighting that the 
impacts of bulk mailing may include wasted time 
and inconvenience to other users (particularly if 
receipt of unwanted mail was to cause their 
mailbox to become full, and thus potentially 
prevent them from performing other tasks) can 
also help users to identify with the problem. 
Point(s) of contact for queries and reporting of 
abuse 
Given 
the 
importance 
of 
e-mail 
to 
the 
organisation, users will require a clear route for 
addressing any queries and problems that may 
arise. For example, having a point of contact will 
become relevant to users if: 

8: Risking Our Reputation? 
88 
x 
their e-mail is not working; 
x 
they believe that they have received a virus or 
other malware; 
x 
they encounter targeted phishing attacks or 
other dubious messages. 
The typical approach here is to have a ‘postmaster’ 
address (i.e. postmaster@xyz-organisation.com) as 
a single point of contact for all queries and reports. 
In many cases the handling of messages sent to 
this address is likely to be wrapped into the wider 
IT support function, but the potential criticality of 
e-mail may mean that handling related incidents 
needs to be prioritised over some IT support 
issues. 
Compliance requirements 
Staff in many organisations, particularly those in 
the public sector, can also find themselves needing 
to abide by acceptable use policies from governing 
bodies. For example, in the UK, bodies such as the 
National Health Service (NHS) (for the healthcare 
domain) and JANET (for further and higher 
education) have umbrella policies that apply to all 
of the underlying organisations within their 
sectors. Additionally, there will be a need for 
usage to comply within any relevant national 
legislation from the country involved. Ideally, 
however, rather than expecting individuals to 
consult multiple sources, it is advisable for the key 
principles to be embodied within a single policy 
from their direct employer. 

8: Risking Our Reputation? 
89 
Usage monitoring and e-mail access by the 
organisation 
Users should be made aware that the organisation 
has the right to monitor e-mail usage for a number 
of reasons, including prevention of misuse, 
investigation of potential incidents, evidencing 
business transactions, and general performance 
monitoring and maintenance activities. The 
guidance 
should 
highlight 
that 
in 
some 
circumstances this may involve the actual content 
of messages being seen by those conducting the 
activities. It is relevant to highlight that users 
themselves will stand to benefit from the 
monitoring, as it will help the organisation to 
protect them against malicious threats and the 
implications of misuse by other users. 
The policy should also identify that there may be 
circumstances in which a user’s account needs to 
be accessed in their absence (e.g. if they are ill or 
out of contact) in order to fulfil business 
obligations. 
If encrypted mail is used, users should be made 
aware that there may still be a requirement (and 
indeed a potential legal obligation) to provide 
decryption keys in some circumstances. 
Takeaways 
¾ 
Ensure that users are made aware that any e-
mails they send out from their work account 
has 
the 
potential 
to 
reflect 
upon 
the 
organisation as well. 
 
 

8: Risking Our Reputation? 
90 
¾ 
Include a standard disclaimer within messages 
to explicitly signify that the views expressed 
are those of the author and are not necessarily 
endorsed by the organisation. 
¾ 
Ensure the establishment, promotion and 
enforcement of a comprehensive e-mail usage 
policy, addressing at least the key areas 
flagged in this chapter. 

91
APPENDIX: ADDITIONAL NOTES 
This section contains brief additional notes to 
support earlier chapters. While the information is 
not essential reading, it may be of interest to 
readers requiring more detail of the technologies 
that help to support e-mail. 
Domain Name System (DNS) 
It is worth noting that the DNS plays a role in the 
security of an e-mail system. E-mail forwarding 
relies on DNS MX entries, which determine which 
IP address (or addresses) handle incoming e-mail 
for a specific domain.
For example, the 
microsoft.com domain has the MX entries shown 
in Figure A1. If an attacker is able to control the 
DNS MX entries either directly or through a DNS 
cache poisoning attack,33 it is possible to either 
divert e-mail or block incoming mail to a specific 
server. 
                                                                
33 United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team 
(US-CERT). 2008. ‘Vulnerability Note VU#800113, 
Multiple DNS implementations vulnerable to cache 
poisoning’. www.kb.cert.org/vuls/id/800113 (accessed 
1 September 2010) 

Appendix: Additional Notes 
92 
 
Figure A1: Example MX entries for a 
domain 
DomainKeys 
DomainKeys is a relatively recent technique 
(2007) that can be used to verify the source and 
content of an e-mail using digital signatures and 
DNS 
domain 
records. 
DomainKeys 
was 
superseded by DomainKeys Identified Mail 
(DKIM) as a Request For Comments (RFC) 
standard.34 The use of DKIM allows a recipient to 
verify that the claimed sender domain is the 
genuine source of the e-mail, as well as validating 
that the e-mail content has not been modified. It is 
worth noting that relatively few e-mail sources are 
likely to use DKIM; as such, e-mail without a 
DKIM signature should not be rejected outright, 
but, instead, fed through other anti-spam systems 
to prevent false-rejections. 
                                                                 
34 RFC 4871 ‘DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) 
Signatures’, 2007, IETF. 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4871, (accessed 1 September 
2010) 

Appendix: Additional Notes 
93 
Architectures 
Most e-mail is transferred by Message Transfer 
Agents (MTAs) initially from a local UA. The UA 
is typically a mail client (e.g. Microsoft® Office 
Outlook®, Mozilla® Thunderbird®, Microsoft® 
Entourage®) and transfers messages to an 
organisational mail server that acts as a Relay 
MTA. Relay MTAs apply rules to determine how 
a message should be forwarded, with most 
messages simply forwarded on to the appropriate 
mail server for the mail recipient. Figure A2 shows 
an example route for a simple connection from a 
local UA to a recipient (indicating typical 
protocols). 
 
Figure A2: An example e-mail session 
(simple UA to MTA to MTA to UA) 
In Figure A2, the e-mail is sent by the UA in 
Organisation 1 from the local client to the 
organisational mail server. This is the first stage of 
the simple SMTP journey and is likely to remain 
inside the organisation’s boundary and hence still 
be governed by the appropriate security controls. 
Once the e-mail leaves the organisation (for 
delivery to the MTA in Organisation 2), it is likely 
to be routed through the Internet using simple 
SMTP, and hence be fully readable to any device 
through 
which 
it 
travels. 
On 
arrival 
at 
Organisation 2, the message is stored in the local 

Appendix: Additional Notes 
94
MTA ready for the recipient’s UA to download the 
e-mail (traditionally via POP3). 
A more complex variation introduces Relay MTAs 
– this is commonly found in small- and medium-
sized enterprises where a local mail server will 
store e-mails and then forward them to an ISP’s 
mail server for onward forwarding, as illustrated in 
Figure A3. Note that this model also applies where 
an organisation outsources e-mail security to a 
managed security provider. 
Figure A3: An example e-mail session with 
a Relay MTA 
Additional Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) 
certificate warning examples 
Figures A4 to A6 present some additional 
examples of browser certificate warnings in order 
to complement the Mozilla®
Firefox® and 
Microsoft® Internet Explorer® versions presented 
in Chapter 4. 

Appendix: Additional Notes 
95 
 
Figure A4: Security certificate warning in 
Google Chrome v5 
 
Figure A5: Security certificate warning in 
Miocrosoft® Internet Explorer® 6 

Appendix: Additional Notes 
96
Figure A6: Security certificate warning in 
Apple® Safari v5 
Putting it all together 
Although 
there 
is 
no 
one-size-fits-all 
recommended approach, Figure A7 shows how the 
techniques described in this guide can be 
combined to create a secure e-mail architecture. 

Appendix: Additional Notes 
97 
 
Figure A7: Example secure e-mail 
architecture 
Source: Jayson Agagnier, CISSP. 
Reproduced with grateful permission. 

 
 98 
ITG RESOURCES 
IT Governance Ltd. sources, creates and delivers 
products and services to meet the real-world, evolving IT 
governance needs of today’s organisations, directors, 
managers 
and 
practitioners. 
The 
ITG 
website 
(www.itgovernance.co.uk/) is the international one-stop-
shop for corporate and IT governance information, 
advice, guidance, books, tools, training and consultancy. 
www.itgovernance.co.uk/keep-safe-online.aspx 
is 
the 
information page on our website for our online security 
products resources. 
Other Websites 
Books and tools published by IT Governance Publishing 
(ITGP) are available from all business booksellers and 
are also immediately available from the following 
websites: 
www.itgovernance.co.uk/catalog/355 
provides 
information and online purchasing facilities for every 
currently available book published by ITGP. 
www.itgovernanceusa.com is a US$-based website that 
delivers the full range of IT Governance products to 
North America, and ships from within the continental 
US. 
www.itgovernanceasia.com provides a selected range of 
ITGP products specifically for customers in South Asia. 
www.27001.com is the IT Governance Ltd. website that 
deals specifically with information security management, 
and ships from within the continental US. 

ITG Resources 
99 
Pocket Guides 
For full details of the entire range of pocket guides, 
simply 
follow 
the 
links 
at 
www.itgovernance.co.uk/publishing.aspx. 
Toolkits 
ITG’s unique range of toolkits includes the IT 
Governance Framework Toolkit, which contains all the 
tools and guidance that you will need in order to develop 
and implement an appropriate IT governance framework 
for your organisation. Full details can be found at 
www.itgovernance.co.uk/ products/519. 
For a free paper on how to use the proprietary Calder-
Moir IT Governance Framework, and for a free trial 
version 
of 
the 
toolkit, 
see 
www.itgovernance.co.uk/calder_moir.aspx. 
There is also a wide range of toolkits to simplify 
implementation of management systems, such as an 
ISO/IEC 27001 ISMS or a BS25999 BCMS, and these 
can 
all 
be 
viewed 
and 
purchased 
online 
at: 
www.itgovernance.co.uk/catalog/1. 
Best Practice Reports 
ITG’s range of Best Practice Reports is now at 
www.itgovernance.co.uk/best-practice-reports.aspx. 
These offer you essential, pertinent, expertly researched 
information on an increasing number of key issues 
including Web 2.0 and Green IT. 
Training and Consultancy 
IT Governance also offers training and consultancy 
services across the entire spectrum of disciplines in the 
information governance arena. Details of training courses 
can be accessed at www.itgovernance.co.uk/training.aspx 
and descriptions of our consultancy services can be 

ITG Resources 
100 
found at http://www.itgovernance.co.uk/consulting.aspx. 
Why not contact us to see how we could help you and 
your organisation? 
Newsletter 
IT governance is one of the hottest topics in business 
today, not least because it is also the fastest moving, so 
what better way to keep up than by subscribing to ITG’s 
free monthly newsletter Sentinel? It provides monthly 
updates and resources across the whole spectrum of IT 
governance subject matter, including risk management, 
information security, ITIL and IT service management, 
project governance, compliance and so much more. 
Subscribe 
for 
your 
free 
copy 
at: 
www.itgovernance.co.uk/newsletter.aspx. 

