Earn loads with NeoBux!
•
Introduction
•
What is NeoBux?
•
Preparations
•
The mehtod
•
Outtro
Introduction
First of all, I want to thank you for purchasing my eBook.
My name is Simon, also known as lolzor60, and in this eBook, I'll be teaching you how to 
earn great amounts of money, with NeoBux.
What is NeoBux?
NeoBux is basically a website, that let you earn money from clicking adds.
You won't really be making much by clicking these adds. Maybe a dollar a week, or 
something.
Check out NeoBux here: http://www.neobux.com/
Preparations
First of all, go register at NeoBux.com.
Press the register button, and just fill in your information.
It shouldn't take more than 5 minutes.
Now, you should start learning your way around.
I constructed a couple of pictures, that should make your way around NeoBux easier.
Construction 1.
The top menu.
View Advertisements > The advertisements you can click, for money.
Logout > Explains itself.
Forum > NeoBux's forum.
FAQ > NeoBux's Frequently Asked Questions.
Construction 2.
View Advertisements.
Fixed Advertisements > The available advertisements.

View Advertisements.
Expired Advertisements > Advertisements that isn't available.
Construction 3.
Your userpanel. (Click your username, in the top right corner)
The little + beside ”Rental Balance” > Deposit money to your Neobux Account here.
The ”upgrade” button > Here you can upgrade your Standard account, to a Golden 
account.
The ”referrals” button > Here you can buy referrals.

The method
Now when you should know your way around at NeoBux, let's get started.
As already stated, you won't be making alot of money, by just clicking adds.
This is where our method comes into place.
We want to buy as many referrals as possible, as they will be making money for us.
Referrals will only cost us 30 cents a month, and in our method, they'll pay for themself!
You won't have to spend your own money, on them.
Referrals can both be active, and inactive.
If one of your referrals is inactive, be sure to pay a small amount, to make it active.
We don't like inactive referrals.
Note: Always click your daily adds when you're able to.
You'll be making more from your referrals.
Step 1.
Our first step, is to buy three referrals.
That would cost us around $1.30.
Wait paying, untill you got $3 though.
You can either deposit this small amount, or earn it, by clicking adds.
The reason that we're waiting, untill we have $3, is that it will help us keep our referrals 
active.
Step 2.
When you're purchasing referrals, be sure to check ”Autobuy”.
This will make our referrals pay for themself, so you don't have to pay a monthly fee.
Step 3.
You simply just want to keep fresh referrals coming.
Each time you got $1 extra, buy a new referral.
Always be sure to have $1, when you're buying new referrals.
Don't just rush them, when you get 30 cents, as smoe referrals might be inactive.
When you get around 500 referrals, you'll be earning a shit load of money.
I was at a point, where I was making around $50 a day, without doing anything myself, 
except buying referrals, and clicking the daily adds.
Step 4.
When you reach 50o referrals, stop buying them.
Just maintain the ones you got.
You'll be earning quick money, and when you reach $100, you should upgrade your 
account from ”Standard”, to ”Golden”.
This will double all of your earnings.

Outtro
Thanks for reading my eBook.
I hope you enjoyed it, and that you'll be making shitloads of money, like I did.
If you got any questions, feel free to PM me.
My username, is lolzor60.
I'll do my best to answer every PM I get.
-lolzor60

