Earn 300 a Day Sharecash 
 
Earn a steady income promoting your uploads 
 
Thank you for buying this short report. First of all, if you don't know what is 
Sharecash,take a look at sharecash.org It's a file hosting website who pay you 
to upload files.That mean,every time when someone will download your files 
you will get paid. How much?Depends from where are coming your visitors.If 
they are from USA,Canada,UK you get $0,60 per download.For others 
countries you get between $0,12 and $0,30 per download. Ok,let's start 
working. 
 
 
You will need : 
 
A ShareCash Account , Click here to sign-up its free. 
A Googlemail Account, Click here to sign-up its free. 
Mozilla FireFox Webbrowser, Download here. 
AutoPager Add-on for FireFox, Download here. 
 
Investment needed : $0 
Difficulty level : Easy 
Proof of earnings and some inspiration : 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
My tested method of makingupto 300 Dollars 
daily : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Method 1: Youtube 
 
This is an easy way to get started. People will download anything from youtube. 
So to get started make sure you have an account with youtube. Next go over to 
daily motion and find a good strip tease video where the girl gets naked at some 
point 
in 
the 
video.Download 
the 
video 
from 
daily 
motion 
using 
www.keepvid.com and fire up windows movie maker. The idea is that we want 
to post the video up to the point where it becomes obvious that the girl is about 
to show off some skin (boobs or bottom half) and then we cut the video right 
there. Now what your going to do is upload the cut portion to youtube. Since 
there is no actual nudity in this video (since you cut it out) youtube will not take 
the video down. Upload the entire video to sharecash and put the link in the 
description box next to your video. Give the video a long sexy name and watch 
as people download the entire video from your link in order to see the girl 
naked! Tons of people search for girls on Youtube so your videos will get plenty 
of views very fast. 
 
 
Method 2: Orkut and Myspace method 
 
Signup to yahoo and myspace account. Make around 300-400 friends on them. 
It will take little bit of time but you can do it easily if you spend around 1 hour 
daily on that and add around 50 persons a day. Its not so easy but its not even 
so hard. I got around 500 friends within twoweeks. Most important thing: 
Concentrate only of UK, US and Canada people because sharecash only pays 
for these countries signups. It would be much easier for you if you join US and 
UK communities. If you are comfortable then try to make your profile by a girl’s 
name. Mostly people add a girl more commonly than a guy. After creating a ID 
with 400-500 friends. Add your uploaded pic in your profile or update status. For 
example: Create a notepad file. Clock it with your sharecash link and add in 
your profile. Encourage peoples to download your file by saying that this is your 
phone number, coolest or sexiest pic of yours, or be wilder like this is my nude 
cam show download it. There will be many hornies there to download your stuff. 
Update your profile daily and keep on adding more US and UK friends. 
 
 
Method 3: Forums are your friend! 
 
Ahh yes forums my favorite place to get downloads from. So what we're gonna 
do for this method is find any porn forum and copy a few porn passwords that 
people 
post 
up. 
If 
you 
just 
look 
around 
at 
a 
few 
places 
like 
http://forum.dumpstersluts.com/ you'll find a few passwords. Now go ahead and 
copy those passwords into a text document and archive it with winrar. Here's 
where we're going to do things a little differently. Most people will go and 
outright post these files on the forums with your download link. Now this will 
bring in a few bucks, but when the passwords run out or someone sees a few 
postings about how they already use these passwords, your thread is pretty 
much dead. Instead your going to sign up to as many porn forums as you can 
and place your download link in your signatur with anchor text such as "Free 

BangBros Passwords." Then just post all over the place saying things like "Wow 
nice video" or "Thanks for the videos" stuff like that so people will see your 
name and signature. If the forum will not allow your download link in the 
signature just make a free blogger blog with the download link on there and 
have your signature redirect them there with the same achor text. You will see 
huge traffic with this method, trust me everyone wants free porn passwords! 
 
 
Method 4: Roms and Emulators 
 
This is my biggest money maker by far, and its actually pretty easy to set up. 
The only reason that this is the most advanced method is because it requires a 
few things such as a website, hosting and some experience in creating a 
website and making it look decent. If you can make this method happen you will 
see a huge amount of downloads come through. What you do is search for 
nintendo ds roms and emulators in google. Now when you find a good site just 
download as many as you can. I use a few sites to download ds roms, but 
starting up I just went to mininova and downloaded a huge file with like 100+ ds 
roms. This got my site off the ground much faster and took the hassle out of 
downloading a 100 or so files seperately. Just upload all the files to sharecash 
seperately and post them on your new website. If you keep your site updated 
with new releases you can get a couple thousand downloads in a day easy. If 
you submit your site to any of the top 100 Rom lists you can get some awesome 
traffic that way. Altermatively you can submit to digg and reddit claiming that 
you've found the best DS Rom site on the web. Just remember to put a 
disclaimer on your site stating that all roms downloaded need to be deleted 
within 24 hours unless the legal copy is owned. That statement will keep your 
rom site legal so dont forget it! 
 
 
 
Method 5: Digital Comics 
 
Digital Comics are very popular on the web currently, and no one is using 
sharecash to promote online comics. There are a few things you can do here. 
For one you can visit http://www.lorencollins.net/freecomic/ and download a few 
comics and then post them on a blogger blog. Of course digg traffic works well 
here since comics usually cost money to download online. Another way to 
explode this is to use a site called 4chan.org. Now what you do is visit the comic 
section pick a comic book you downloaded and post the front cover and then 
next to that post the download link. A small description will help with this and get 
a couple people commenting on it. Again everyone loves free comics and 4chan 
is a great place to get your comics downloaded. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Method 6: Exploit Lazyness 
 
This is probably my favorite method just because its actually very creative. 
What you need to do is go to any manual traffic exchange (look on google you'll 
find a ton) and sign up to a few. Upload a large picture or any small program 
that is about 1 to 2 megs in size and name it "Traffic Exchange Bot." Make a 
quick blogger blog and delete everything from the page except for the post and 
title. Make The title large and the body easy to read. State that you have a free 
traffic exchange bot that they can have to use for the traffic Exchange they are 
on. You can customize the page and make one for each traffic exchange you 
use. People will download the file hoping for a bot, even if you dont have a bot 
for them to download once they download the file and see that its not a bot they 
will more than likely just move on with their traffic exchanging while you just got 
a download out of it! Make sure you .rar the file that you upload so it appears 
believable. You can participate in the exchange to get credits or just buy some, 
either way you will get conversions easily since everyone hates having to do 
manual traffic exchanges. 
 
 
Method 7: Make your website or blog especially for 
sharecash 
 
People just love free stuffs. When you are start getting some decent money 
from sharecash, just invest in buying a domain and hosting and make website 
dedicated to downloading free stuffs. SEO it regularly or to improve traffic 
always do yahoo answers posting along with link back to your website. Just 
don’t spam them otherwise you will be punished. 
 
 
Method 8: Gmail 
 
Step one : You are going to be searching for e-mail adresses so go to 
http://www.google.com, clic on "Search settings" in the top right cornerand 
change the number of results to display "100" per page, now clicksave 
preferences. In the search bar you will type a keyword(s) and the e-mail 
extension in speech marks. For example : My keyword "@gmail.com" What this 
will do is search for webpages that contain Gmail e-mailadresses and that are 
also to do with your keyword. The speech marksaround "@gmail.com" make 
sure that "@gmail.com" is on every webpagethat is a result of the search. E.G, 
you could type "peanuts" and every page that is found must contain the word 
"peanuts" somewhere in the text. You can also search single websites for e-
mail adresses as shown on theexample below; site:twitter.com "@gmail.com" 
The example shown above will search the whole of twitter.com for"@gmail.com" 
email adresses. I recommend that your search has atleast 1000 results. Step 
two : With your results in focus, click the arrow at the side of the AutoPager 
icon as shown in the picture below. Then goto "Immediately load > All pages" . 

 
 
 
Step two continued : 
With your search results still in focus, scroll all the way down 
andAutoPager should load the next page of results onto the same 
page youare currently on. Keep scrolling till all pages have loaded 
onto the samepage. 
 
Step three : 
Press "ctrl + a" to select all of the pages then press "ctrl + c" to copy 
theresults. 
With 
the 
results 
still 
in 
the 
clipboard 
(Still 
copied) 
gotohttp://extractor.prusac.com/ . Paste your results into the first 
box which says "1. Put text with email addresses here:" The settings 
should already be correct with "unique emails" and "sortticked" and 
also "new line" should be selected. 
 
Step three continued : 
Click "Start Extracting Emails" and the e-mail adresses should show 
in theresults box below almost instantly. Now copy the results from 
the results box paste them into notepad. Sometimes the e-mail 
adresses seem to end in ".com." instead of just".com" so in notepad 
go to "Edit > Replace" and in the "Find what" textboxtype ".com." 
without the speechmarks in the "Replace with" textbox type".com" , 
without the speechmarks. 
 
Step four - The Final Step : 
In notepad press "ctrl + a" and then "ctrl + c" to copy all your e-mail 
adresses then go to http://www.gmail.com Log-in to your Googlemail 
account and click on "compose mail" in the leftcorner. In the "To" box 
paste in your e-mail adresses. 

In the "Subject" box type in "RE : Breakup" without the speechmarks. 
Now before entering the main text of the e-mail it would be best to 
go over to http://sharecash.org and uploading a video file, i suggest 
around 5mb and make a note of the download url of the file once it is 
uploaded. 
 
Go back to your open Googlemail page and in the message body 
enter the following : You really got the guts to break up with me over 
email,bitch??!?! Tell you what! I just made a nice compilation of 
your/our best scenes and put it up for download on Your ShareCash 
Link. 
 
 
Oh and btw: This email just went out to your parents. I bet they 
didn't know you're into dirty stuff like this. 
 
Cheers! 
Your ex bf 
Now click send of course. And well done thats how easy it was, just 
waitfor the money to start pouring in! 
I hope you learnt something new from this e-book. 
 
 

