Earth bonding & electricity in the bathroom 
Make sure you have isolated any circuit you are working on and see our 
electrical safety project
  
What is earthing?  
The earth, or ground in America, in electrical terms, carries no current, and it is this that 
electricity will make a dash for when it is allowed to escape from its secure home in an electric 
cable or flex. This is because one side of the electrical supply, the neutral, is intentionally 
connected to earth. If someone touches a live conductor then a current will flow through the 
person, their shoes, the floor, the wall, via earth and back to the supply transformer via one or 
more earth connections of the transformer neutral. The person has completed the electrical 
circuit. Should any fault develop in an electrical system the electricity will always head for 
earth, taking the easiest route there. The electrical appliances and supplies in the home are of 
a much higher potential and if any of these become available to touch and are electrically 
charged at a different voltage to earth the possibility of an electric shock exists, with the 
current passing through the connection between the charged parts and earth. 
If, for instance, a person comes into contact with a conductive part that is at a potential 
difference to earthed metalwork and 
that metalwork; then a very serious shock can result. In order to eliminate this possibility, all 
electrical earths of circuits supplying equipment in the bathroom and all extraneous 
conductive parts are bonded together. In this way, even if a potential does develop, such as 
during an earth fault on one of the electrical circuits, all the conductive parts that someone 
could touch will be at substantially the same voltage. No dangerous shock current can then 
flow. 
  
On its way to earth, leaking current may pass through walls, floors or anything capable of 
carrying it. This is made much easier when the connecting substance is wet. Water is an 
excellent conductor of electricity which is why special care must be taken in the bathroom.    
  
Bathrooms carry special rules as far as electricity is concerned. Water and electricity do not 
mix, so the utmost care has to be taken when electrical supplies run in or near the bathroom. 
To this end, in the 16th Edition of the IEE (Institution of Electrical Engineers) Bathrooms carry 
their own, very specific, rules. We will deal with the use of earth bonding first and the rest 
later. 
Should any electrical " leakages occur" in the bathroom the leaking current will try and find a 
passage to earth. It will travel down any damp in the walls or any metal or other conductors 
available. It is therefore important that precautions are taken to ensure these parts are not 
allowed to retain this current and diffuse it. 
This is done by connecting all of the metal parts together with an earth cable. This will collect 
the current/voltage from the leak and equalise it around the pipes and metal parts. Each metal 
part in the bath or shower room must be connected by one of the following means. We 
suggest the use of a specific 4mm earth cable for these connections. This is a minimum 
requirement without conduit and larger earth cable can be used. 

 
The earth tags (above right) should be connected to all pipes and can be bought from most 
diy stores and electrical merchants. They are proprietary connections reading  ELECTRICAL 
CONNECTION DO NOT REMOVE. 
The earth wire, after all bonding is complete should be connected to a local earth which could 
be a close socket, immersion heater or the connection unit for a heater or shower. This is in 
accordance with BS7671 which reads: 
All electrical earths of circuits that 
supply equipment in the bathroom should be connected to the equipotential 
bonding, not just one local earth. 
The cable should not be taken back to the main fuseboard or consumer unit as this can be 
dangerous. 
 
The above layout shows a typical bathroom and its cross bonding layout. Red = hot water 
supply. Blue = cold water supply. Green = earth bonding cable. Plastic pipes and casings do 
not need to be bonded. The earth bond required to metal parts of a bathroom heater and 
shower can be very unsightly if taken to their next connection in the line, and it is permissible 
to connect the earth wires from these directly to the earthed electrical connection from which 
they are wired. Please note that if a bath is used for medical treatment or disabled people 
special considerations may apply and expert help should be sought. 
Under IEE regulations the bathroom is now divided into zones for electrical purposes. The 
zone qualifications are quite complicated and professional guidance should be sought for any 
proposed electrical work in the bathroom. The basic rule is that no source of electrical supply 
should be accessible from a position where one can be in contact with water at the same 
time. Insulated operating cords of pull switches are permissible but they must be in 
accordance with BS 3676, which is most cases will be stamped or labelled on them. 
 

