EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 1 
 
EBay Stealth 3.0 
A Complete Guide to a New EBay Identity 
 
Thank You for Purchasing EBay Stealth! Remember to visit the eBay Suspension Forums for any 
questions, comments or anything else related to eBay. Also be sure to subscribe to our forums to have access 
to the subscriber‘s only area. Please note eBay Stealth is copyrighted and not for resale or re-distribution.  
Let‘s get started! 
 
What Happens When You Become Suspended by EBay? You lose all your auctions; your eBay fees are 
immediately due; your IP address, credit card number, website URL, email address, physical address, phone 
number and any other information you have given eBay will now and always be used to recognize you as a 
suspended user. If you try to create an eBay account with any of this information you will immediately be 
flagged as a suspended user and your account will be suspended. So how do you get around this and create a 
new eBay account safely? It‘s easy, you become someone else.  
 
What you will learn in EBay Stealth 3.0 
Quick Overview! 
Steps in creating your eBay Stealth Account! 
Step 1: Cookies, Flash Objects and EBay Tracking 
Step 2: Change Your IP Address 
Step 3: New Name & Email Address 
Step 4: New Address 
Step 5: New Phone Number 
Step 6: New Bank Account & Credit Card 
Step 7: Creating Your Account 
Live Account! 
You Have a Live Account... Now What?  
Four Steps to selling with a Merchant Account! 
Tips on Staying Under the Radar & Getting Fewer Violations  
Extras! 
Setting up an eBay Account in another Country 
Feedback FAQ 
Suspensions / Violations / Limitations + Getting Reinstated 
Limited PayPal Account: Oh Noes! 
 ―Why I Got Linked / Suspended‖ 
Suppliers and Wholesalers & How to Find Them 
Pros and Cons of Becoming an eBay PowerSeller 
Final Step-by-Step Review 
Final Step-by-Step Review 
 
Remember your goal is to change every aspect of your account to fool eBay into thinking you‘re someone else. 
Any information that can be linked back to you will trigger a suspension. There are many ways to mess this 
up. I'll try to explain everything in detail and show you what eBay does to try and link your account and 
ultimately suspend you. Now let‘s get started with a quick overview on how a stealth account is born! 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 2 
 
Quick Overview! 
 
 
First off before we begin I want you to be aware of the top three ways eBay and PayPal can link new 
accounts you create to any old (suspended + limited) accounts you may have. Now I‘m not going to get into 
too many details right now, I‘ll save that for later. Just be aware that if any of the accounts become linked to 
an old (suspended + limited) account, they will in turn become suspended and limited. You probably already 
know this if you have unsuccessfully tried to create new eBay and PayPal accounts only to be shut down 
almost immediately with the ‗abusing eBay‘ message. So how does it happen?  
 
The top three ways accounts can become linked is by:  
 
1. Your IP Address (logging into multiple accounts with the same IP) 
2. Browser and Flash cookies (eBay and PayPal drops cookies on your machine every time you login 
and if you login to multiple eBay or PayPal accounts without clearing cookies or using a different ‗user 
accounts‘ you can be linked. We‘ll talk about protecting yourself next.)  
3. and Personal Account Details (your address, phone number, bank account number, credit cards, 
email address, etc. can all link you).  
 
We‘ll get into more details a little later but I just wanted you to be aware of how eBay and PayPal can link 
your accounts and suspend you. Now that you understand that let‘s move on to the basic steps of creating a 
new eBay and PayPal account. Again I‘ll explain everything in more detail a little later.  
 
Creating Your First EBay and PayPal Account – A Barebones Guide  
 
Creating a new eBay and PayPal account is pretty easy. It‘s how you use your account(s) that can make or 
break you. When I‘m ready to create a new eBay and PayPal account I usually have a new phone number, 
bank account and a prepaid card ready to go. I‘ll show you how you can get all these a little later. I then 
create a new „user account‟ on my computer, to protect my accounts from accidently being linked, and then 
all I have to do is change my IP address and I‘m ready to create a new eBay and PayPal account! Sounds 
pretty easy right? If not read the above one more time SLOWLY… 
 
Guess what? That‘s 90% of what it takes to create a basic eBay and PayPal account that is unlinked and ready 
to start selling! The most important thing about creating a new eBay and PayPal account is to make sure all 
your account details are brand new and that nothing can be linked back to a suspended account. 
That means your name, address, credit card, bank account, phone number, etc must all be different. I‘ll show 
you how to get all these in the next steps. Also make sure to NEVER log back into old suspended account(s) 
ever again. Once an account is suspended, forget about it and start work on a new account. It‘s too easy to 
mess up somewhere and accidently link your brand new eBay and PayPal account(s) this way. 
 
That‘s the basic overview of how it‘s done! Next I‘ll walk you through the step-by-step process of creating your 
first stealth eBay and Paypal account. I‘ll go into more details on obtaining new prepaid cards, bank accounts, 
addresses, phone numbers among other things needed for your new account. I‘ll show you everything I know 
on how to protect your accounts and of course I‘ll sprinkle in specialty things like selling with a Merchant 
account, using third-party checkouts, avoiding VeRO, and finding suppliers. With that said let‘s get started with 
Cookies, Flash Objects and EBay Tracking! 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 3 
 
Step 1: Cookies, Flash Objects and EBay Tracking… 
 
 
So you understand the basics of creating a stealth eBay and PayPal account, correct? Then you should know 
that eBay and PayPal primarily links an account by browser cookies, flash objects and your IP address. Before 
we get started creating your account, let‘s first create a new ‗user account‘ on your computer to give you a 
clean slate to work with, then move on to changing your IP address in the next step.  
 
Setup a „User Account‟ on Your Computer  
 
Now in the last eBay Stealth update I recommended that you clear your browser cookies and flash objects 
between logging into different eBay and PayPal accounts. This time around I don‟t want you to do that. 
Instead I want you to have different ‗user accounts‘ on your computer for every eBay account you create. In 
doing so you don‘t have to worry about your cookies or flash objects ever again. The reason for this is because 
‗user accounts‘ on your computer keep you browser cookies and flash objects between users completely 
separate from each other, thus protecting your eBay and PayPal accounts from linking.  
 
Another reason for having ‗user accounts‘ is because if you tend to clear cookies and flash objects from your 
computer often, eBay sometimes has issues with this and will want to verify your account with them to make 
sure your account hasn‘t been compromised. Now that‘s fine and good, but who wants to go through all that?  
Keep your cookies intact and utilize separate ‗user accounts‘ for every eBay account you have.  
 
Creating a New User Account (Windows) 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 4 
 
Tip: Name your ‗user account‘ after the name on your eBay account.  
 
Remember to create a new ‗user account‘ for every eBay account you create. 
 
If you plan on having just one eBay and PayPal account and you don‘t want to have ‗user accounts‘ then all 
you need to do is clean your browser cookies and flash objects from your computer before moving on to the 
next step. I recommend downloading and using CCleaner to clean up your cookies. Then head over to Adobe 
Flash Player Settings Manager to delete your Flash-cookies (Local Shared Objects, LSO).  
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
Can eBay Track me any other way? No, eBay cannot track you through anything other than your cookies, 
flash objects and your IP address. No they cannot see your computer name, MAC address, CPU serial number, 
your computer type or if you brushed your teeth last night. They can ONLY track you by your cookies, flash 
objects and IP address.  
 
What are Flash Cookies? – Flash Cookies is a new way of tracking your movement and storing a lot more 
information about you than with normal cookies. One major disadvantage of flash cookies is that you can‘t 
locate them in your browser. They are not shown in the list of cookies that you can see when you take a look 
at the cookies that are currently saved in your web browser. Normal HTTP cookies can‘t save more than 4 
Kilobyte of data while Flash cookies can save up to 100 Kilobyte. If you want to try out how they work you 
could do the following. 
 
 
Go to YouTube, increase or decrease the volume of the videos and delete your browser cookies afterwards. 
You will notice that the volume level is still at the same level when you close your browser and open it again. 
This is done with so called Local Shared Objects, better known as Flash-cookies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 5 
 
Additional Information: Flash Cookies are stored in directories depending on the OS. 
 
Windows:  
[Root drive]:\Documents and Settings\[username]\Application Data\Macromedia\Flash Player\#SharedObjects\ 
Flash Cookies are files with a .SOL extension. 
 
For non-Windows users: 
Macintosh OSX /Users/[username]/Library/Preferences/Macromedia/Flash Player 
GNU-Linux ~/.macromedia 
 
To view/delete and change the settings of your Flash Cookies go to the Adobe Flash Player Settings Manager. 
The Settings Manager can be accessed from the Adobe website but is running locally on your computer. The 
Website Storage Settings display all Flash cookies that are currently saved on your computer. 
 
‖ What happens if I want to delete Flash cookies or prevent their use? 
Although we don‘t recommend it, you can delete or prevent the use of Flash cookies. If you delete or disable 
Flash cookies, we won‘t be able to recognize the computers you frequently use, and we may need to request 
additional verification from you at certain times."    
 
Overview: Know that eBay and Paypal track you by your IP address, browser cookies and flash objects (flash 
cookies). The best thing you can do to limit your risk of linking accounts is to setup separate user accounts on 
your computer as described above. Setup a new user account for every eBay account you create. The added 
bonus for user accounts is that you won't have to worry about your cookies or have to delete them ever again 
since they are kept separate between users. That makes eBay happy, they think you are a normal user and it 
makes it easy on you. The only thing you need to worry about is changing your IP address between logging 
into different accounts. And that's what we're going to talk about next. 
 
Once you have a new ‗user account‘ ready to go and you understand the basics of keeping your account safe, 
then it‘s time to change your IP Address! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 6 
 
Step 2: Change Your IP Address 
 
 
One of the most important things you must do before creating a new eBay and PayPal account is to 
change your IP Address. Below I‘ll explain what an IP address is, how eBay uses it to track you and how you 
can change your IP address.  
 
What is an IP Address? An IP address (Internet Protocol address) is a unique address that certain electronic 
devices currently use in order to identify and communicate with each other on a computer network utilizing 
the Internet Protocol standard (IP)—in simpler terms, a computer address. 
 
IP Tracking: EBay uses your IP address to track your location and to link you to an account. Every time you 
log into an eBay account, your IP address is recorded and kept in eBay's system forever. Let me say that 
again, every time you log into your eBay account, your IP address is logged and kept on file forever! 
 
Here are a few things that every site on the internet is able to see about you (including eBay): 
 
 
 
To find your own IP Address, head over to IPBurger.com 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 7 
 
Sharing an IP Address with a suspended user will sometimes link accounts; this is especially true when there 
are similarities between accounts. If the accounts have no similarities then it's harder for eBay to link you. A 
large network where there could be multiple users with the same IP address is the reason why eBay cannot 
just link and suspend your account for sharing an IP address with another user. But eBay does seem to keep a 
closer eye on you, waiting for you to slip up like forgetting to delete your cookies from another eBay account 
before logging in. Minimize this risk by using separate ‗user accounts‘ as mentioned in step one. 
 
Every time you log into eBay, your IP address is recorded. Not just when you create an account but every time 
you log in. If you forget to change your IP address one day, and you accidentally login to multiple eBay 
accounts with the same IP, consider those accounts linked. Please note you only need to change your IP 
address once and not every time you login to the same eBay and PayPal account. You only need to change 
your IP address between different eBay and PayPal accounts to prevent linking. 
 
Next I‘ll show you different ways to change your IP Address. If you‘re still having problems I recommend 
reading through the IP Address section in the support Forums.  
 
First off make sure you IP address is dynamic and not static - Most Internet Service Providers offer a 
dynamic IP address by default but if you have problems changing your IP address it would be a good idea to 
call your internet provider to make sure you have a dynamic IP which can change instead of a static IP which 
won‘t. If your IP address is static you will need to order a dynamic IP address from your internet provider or 
start using a different Internet Service Provider. 
 
Changing Your IP Address: Broadband Connection 
 
First Option – Changing Your Router Mac Address: In this setup you have a cable modem, router and 
your computer. You‘re connected to the internet through your router, which is connected to your cable 
modem. In order for you to successfully change your IP address you will need to change your router‘s MAC 
address, and reset your broadband modem. Now this might sound scary for a novice, but really it‘s a fast and 
efficient way of changing your IP address. Let me show you how it‘s done! 
 
1. First go to IPBurger.com to get your current IP Address; be sure to write it down. 
2. Now go to your router‘s setup page; type 192.168.0.1 into your internet browser. If that doesn‘t work 
go to your router‘s manual and look for your router‘s IP address to access your router‘s setup page.  
3. Default password to your router setup page might be: admin/password; admin/admin; 
admin/*bank*; if you‘re having trouble with the username and password, again check with your 
router‘s manual for username and password or go here for default router username and passwords.  
4. Once you‘re logged in, look around for your Wan MAC address (xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx). Once you find it 
all you need to do now is change the very last one or two digits of your MAC address and save your 
settings. For example if your router‘s MAC Address is: 0B:0C:0B:0D:0C:06 you can change it to: 
0B:0C:0B:0D:0C:07, then save your settings. Your router will then restart.  
5. Once your router is reset, unplug your broadband modem for 15 seconds then power it back on. Your 
modem will see that your router‘s MAC address has changed and will attempt to grab a new IP for you. 
6. Once everything is powered back on (give it a minute), then reset your router one last time. I just 
unplug it for 10 seconds then plug it back in. 
7. Last step! Now with your computer, make sure you‘re connected to your wireless router. If you did 
everything right you should now have a new IP address. Go to IPBurger.com to see if your IP address 
changed. If not try the steps again.  
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 8 
 
How to retain an IP Address with your Mac Address: Simply changing your router's Mac Address in the 
router settings will change your IP address as mentioned above. To retain your IP Address the idea is to write 
down your Mac Address for future use when working on your eBay accounts. And to change your IP address, 
simply update your Router Mac Address to a Mac address you saved, and then reset your cable or DSL modem 
to accept the changes. You can switch back and forth between Mac Addresses and reset your Modem to 
accept the new IP address. Keep in mind your IP address does expire over time and will change into a new IP 
address when expired. Keep organized and you'll be on top of things. 
 
Second Option – Router Swap: Basically with router swapping it‘s exactly what it sounds like. I went to the 
store, bought a few routers and what I do is simply swap out my router with one I have stockpiled. I have 3-4 
routers lying around; I use cheap NETGEAR routers which work great. Basically how it works is each router 
has a different MAC address attached to it which is used to obtain a unique IP address for certain amount of 
time. Once your router is assigned an IP address, it owns that unique IP address until the lease of that 
address is expired. Once you swap out one router with another which has a different MAC address, and reset 
your cable modem you are then assigned a NEW IP address. 
 
Basically this is the lazy way of doing things. You don‘t have to mess around with the router setup page, 
changing MAC addresses or anything like that. Simply swap out one router for another; reset your cable 
modem and then connect to your new wireless connection. Easy! 
 
Third Option – Direct Connection: In this setup your have a cable/DSL modem and computer. You are 
connected directly to your cable/DSL modem for an internet connection. There is no router in the mix. In order 
to obtain a new IP address, you must do the following… 
 
Release & Renew Your IP address:  
1. First go to ipburger.com to view your current IP Address; write it down 
2. Then power off your cable/DSL modem, leave it powered off for 1-2 minutes. 
3. Then go to command prompt; Go to start > run > type CMD and press enter 
4. Once in command prompt type ipconfig /release 
5. Power up your cable/DSL modem; wait 1-2 minutes while it powers on 
6. Then type ipconfig /renew in command prompt to obtain a new IP address 
7. Hopefully you should have a new IP Address now. 
 
If that didn‘t work you will need to spoof your computer Mac address. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 9 
 
Other Internet Providers: Dialup/VPN/Tethering 
 
Smart Phone Tethering: Another method I use to obtain a quick IP address is tethering my iPhone to my 
laptop. Now I understand not everyone has a smart phone, but if you do and you‘re able to tether it to your 
computer then you‘re in luck! Basically what I did for my iPhone was follow this guide. I had to jailbreak it and 
install PdaNet for it to work. It took me about 20 minutes to do, but I found it invaluable not only for eBay and 
PayPal, but now if I‘m without an internet connection I can just tether to my iPhone and I‘m good to go! 
 
VPN Connection: A VPN connection is basically a bridge between your computer and the VPN Company. It 
uses your high-speed connection, gives you a new IP address AND totally encrypts all of the data that travels 
between you and any websites you visit. This data is so encrypted that not even your own ISP will know what 
you are doing which is good for lots of other things aside from eBay. For example if your ISP is blocking 
certain sites or certain Peer-to-Peer programs, when using VPN, all your data will look like regular internet 
traffic. This option isn‘t for everyone though. I recommend using dialup or changing your broadband IP 
address by methods listed above before going the VPN route. This is mostly for international users who have 
no other option. I recommend a static IP address over a dynamic IP when it comes to VPN. 
 
 
 
Recommended VPN Providers: 
StrongVPN – U.S IP – 15$ per IP per month 
BlackLogic – Canadian IP – Random IP addresses all the time 15$ per month – or static IP for 20$ per month 
 
Dialup: If ALL else fails… dialup is a proven strategy for a new IP address. You‘ll get a new IP address each 
time you connect, and it‘s cheap! The only downside is that it‘s slow, but isn‘t that worth it to get back on 
eBay? Depending on the dialup service you have you should have access to quite a few dial-in numbers which 
with each number you are given a different IP range. What you should do is use a different dial-in number for 
every eBay account you have. Doing so makes sure your IP address is never the same for any two eBay 
accounts. Then once you create your account, you can use an auction lister like ‗Auctiva‘ to manage your 
listings. The advantage of using Auctiva is that your IP address will not be shared with eBay so you can use 
your broadband connection with Auctiva. Make sure when you create your token, linking eBay to Auctiva, that 
you use your dialup connection. After that you can use whatever internet connection you like with Auctiva. 
 
Recommended Dialup Providers: 
United States: 
Juno Internet 
Netzero Internet 
PeoplePC Internet 
Canada: 
Juno Internet 
Netzero Internet 
Bamnet Internet 
United Kingdom: 
GoNuts4Free Internet (free) 
Free Dialup (not actually free) 
Aardvaak Internet 
Worldwide: Go to Google and type: ―[your city] dialup‖ 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 10 
 
Proxies: I DO NOT recommend the usage of ANY proxy service.  
 
Keeping a log of your IP Addresses; It‘s a good idea to keep a log of your IP addresses as you go from 
eBay account to eBay account. The reason for this is because sometimes when changing your IP address, you 
may get an old IP that you just had which can link your accounts. Most of the time, you will get a new IP 
address but about 3% of the time you‘ll get an old address. I recommend having IPBurger.com as your default 
homepage for your different user accounts. Also a change of just one or two digits to your IP Address is good 
enough for what we're doing. That means if your IP Address is 45.177.245.169 and it changes to 
45.177.245.171 you‘re perfectly fine! 
 
How to find your IP Address: 
 
IP Burger - What is my IP Address? Find Your IP Address! 
 
On a Windows computer; go to 'Start' and then 'Run' and type in 'cmd' and press enter. Command 
prompt will run, type 'ipconfig' to view your IP configuration. Please note if you are connected to a 
router, your router IP address will show and not your true IP address. Go to IPBurger.com to view your 
true IP address. 
 
Command Prompts that'll help!  
Ipconfig (shows your IP configuration) 
Ipconfig /all (shows ALL information about your IP configuration) 
Ipconfig /renew (renews your IP address) 
Ipconfig /release (releases your IP address) 
Ipconfig /help (displays other ipconfig commands) 
 
Overview: It‘s easy, change your IP address and you‘re good to go. If you‘re having problems, be sure to 
check out the IP Address section in the support forums and ask any questions you may have.  
 
Once you have a new IP address and user account on your computer, then you‘re ready to create a new eBay 
and PayPal account. In the next section we‘ll give you an identity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 11 
 
Step 3: New Name & Email Address 
 
 
Okay so you should now have a new ‗user account‘ on your computer ready to go (step one) and you 
should have changed your IP address (step two). Now you‘re ready to get started on your new eBay account. 
 
First and foremost with any new eBay account you will need... well a name of course! In the last update I 
gave you a few options on selecting a new name for your eBay and PayPal accounts, with the primary example 
of just using any old name. In this update I don‘t want you to do that.  
 
This time around I want you to take a little more time and think about a name that you can use that is 
legitimate, and can later be ID and SSN verified if requested. If you‘re outside the US, you don‘t need to worry 
about a SSN (Social Security Number) obviously, but you should still use a name that you can later provide an 
ID for if requested by PayPal. If you‘re crafty and outside the United States then you can use the ‗name 
variation‘ option I have listed below. We‘ll talk more about the different options in a little bit.  
 
As you probably already know, depending on how fast your sales increase with eBay, the amount of money 
you have coming in and what items you sale, whether they‘re high or low risk, determines how fast your 
PayPal account will become limited.  
 
Now creating an eBay and PayPal account that can withstand a limitation, which will almost always happen 
with new accounts, should be your number one priority. It can be the difference between selling for a couple 
weeks, to selling for years. But how can you do that when you were suspended and you obviously can‘t use 
your own personal details for an account? There are ways don‘t worry, below I have listed a few proven 
options for you to choose from. Select a method that works best for you and then move to the next step which 
is a new address.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 12 
 
Option One: Using a Family or Friend‘s Name 
 
An account with personal information that can later be verified by eBay and PayPal can withstand a lot 
more than just an account with any random name, address and DOB. For example if you have a relative who 
has never signed up for an eBay or Paypal account and they allow you to use their information, do it! Not 
before you read and understand the rest of this guide though. If you screw up somewhere and become linked 
to an old suspended account you‘re screwed, but if you start slowly, and become limited with PayPal asking 
you to verify your account details then you‘re okay. Creating an account in a friend or family member‘s name, 
address (optional), and DOB will enable you to easily provide whatever documents PayPal requests from you 
including a SSN if you‘re in the US. It‘s a lot easier then getting caught with a phony name and address, of 
course though if you‘re crafty you can get past this as well. 
 
If you‟re outside the US, all you need is a friend or relative‘s permission to use their name, DOB, and 
address (optional) to open a new account. The reason to go this route is because if you become limited by 
PayPal, you‘ll then be able to ‗easily‘ provide the requested documents for example a photo ID because of your 
friend or relative. It‘s a good idea that your friend or relative does not already have an eBay or PayPal account 
because if something happens to one of your accounts for example a limitation, it‘ll happen to any linked 
account as well. Remember a linked account can happen by your address as well, so if you plan on using your 
friend of family member‘s address, which is optional, be careful.  
 
What you‟ll need: 
1. Friend of Family Member‘s Name 
2. Their date of birth 
3. Address (optional – you can safely obtain a new address yourself in the next step) 
 
Added Bonuses:  
 
SSN and other document requirements won‘t be a problem to provide 
 
Saves you money on an address if you choose to use it 
 
Easy to acquire 
 
SSN Requirements: When PayPal request your SSN it‘s only to make sure that you are legit and a trusted 
person to sell using their payment service. They want to make sure your credit is okay, things in your account 
match up like your name, and date of birth. If everything checks out then they‘ll lift your limitation and let you 
continue selling. Now once you become SSN verified, from what I‘ve seen you‘re pretty much in the clear with 
your account as long as you‘re not screwing customers or selling VeRO items. A SSN verified PayPal account 
that is not linked to a suspended eBay account is VERY powerful.  
 
Pay off your SSN Verified Accounts: The main reason PayPal is interested in having your SSN is for credit 
reporting purposes, for example if you somehow go into a negative account balance, PayPal wants to be able 
to put delinquent account marks on your credit report, as well as turn that information over to their third party 
debt collection agencies (Usually, I.C. Systems and/or NCO Financial). So make sure that once you give a SSN 
to PayPal, you do not leave a negative balance on your account or else you could take a credit hit and be 
hassled by collection agencies.   
 
Once you have a name and DOB ready to go, move on to the next step. Or if this option won‘t work for you, 
keep reading. :) 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 13 
 
Option Two: Using a Nickname or Name Variation 
 
If you don‘t have access to a friend for family member‘s name for an account then your next best bet is to use 
a nickname or name variation of your OWN name.  
 
Now I say your OWN name for a couple reasons. The first is because more banks these days are 
rejecting electronic transfers that come to your account in different names. They simply don‘t like it and will 
sometimes shut your account down (including PayPal) if for example your name is Bob Thornton and you have 
deposits coming in under the name of Tom Brady. A way around this is to either use a nickname, or to 
misspell your name slightly. Using the same example, if your bank account is in the name of Bob Thornton, 
then open a PayPal account under Robert Thornton or Bobby Thornton. If you don‘t have a nickname, then 
spell your name slightly different on PayPal and you should be fine. Most banks don‘t care about this though, 
but some do. I‘ll list known banks that have issues with names in the bank account section below.  
 
Let me add that you WILL NOT be linked to another eBay or PayPal account by name alone. As 
mentioned at the beginning of this guide it takes something specific to link you, and a name just won‘t cut it.  
 
If you‘re outside the US, especially using a nickname or name variation of your name is a good idea. If you‘re 
in the US, it‘s better to use a friend or family member‘s name due to the SSN issue.  
 
NOTE: Using a nickname or name variation means if you become limited by PayPal you won‘t have supporting 
documentation to lift your account. Now I‘m not going to say PayPal doesn‘t verify any documents you send 
them so who cares what you send them as long as it matches your account details, but that‘s up to you. Going 
with method one and using a friend or family member‘s personal details to open an account would be an 
easier option if this is an issue for you. If you‘re in the US and PayPal requests a SSN, you have few options 
available to you. I‘ll explain these options later in the guide… for now keep reading.  
 
What you‟ll need: 
1. Think of a nickname or name variation of your OWN name for your new account 
2. Any date of birth will do…  
3. We‘ll set you up with an address in the address section below 
 
Added Bonuses:  
 
Some banks only accept funds in your own name or nickname. Going this route you‘ll be fine making 
deposits to your bank account 
 
You can quickly make a bunch accounts this way to let age 
 
If you‘re outside the US going with a nickname or name variation is your best bet as SSN is not an 
issue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 14 
 
Option Three: Using a DBA / LLC / Assumed Name 
 
Having a DBA ―Doing Business As‖ name (each country has a different name for DBA) is really just a legal 
fictitious name you can use to do business with. Most states require that if you want to do business in a name 
other than your own name, you need to register said name as a DBA, basically to keep you liable. Does this 
help with eBay and PayPal? Well, yes if you want to take your eBay and PayPal accounts more seriously, you 
can register your accounts under your DBA name. With a DBA name you can apply for an EIN (Employer ID 
Numbers) as well, which is basically a business SSN, but of lately PayPal is not accepting an EIN as a SSN 
alternative (US members).  
 
Basically the only benefits you get with a DBA name, is that you‘re legal. You can use your DBA name legally 
anywhere online. Since using this guide you will get a new phone number, a new address, and now a whole 
brand new name, you nearly have a brand new person. Using this DBA Info, you can even make a new bank 
account (YOU WILL need to provide all your real info and SSN# to the bank – never provide false documents 
to banks / financial institutions as you will have the FBI on your tail in a jiffy – Thing with PayPal is that they 
are just a corporation, not a bank, not a financial institution – this is why they can do all the things they do to 
people, and the reason we can do all these things back to them ) Your new bank account and any credit 
cards you apply for will have your DBA Name and your DBA address! Crazy thing is that this is all LEGAL! 
 
The only thing is the price. To create a DBA for example in Canada it costs around $60, in some states in the 
U.S. an ―Assumed Name‖ only costs $15, so all you Americans are lucky in that regard. Then to get a virtual 
address it‘s another $20-$30 per month; then your virtual phone number – $10 per month.  
 
An LLC “Limited Liability Company” is like a DBA but instead owners of the LLC have limited personal 
liability for the debts and actions of the LLC; whereas a DBA does not grant you any protection at all. An LLC is 
its own entity which has members. It seems PayPal takes an LLC more seriously then just a simple DBA, 
especially when it comes to SSN requirement time.  
 
Strategy: Create a LLC that sounds like a person‘s name, for example Bob Thornton LLC. When you‘re 
creating your eBay and PayPal account, use the name Bob Thornton as the name on the account. It‘s been 
noted that PayPal request an EIN instead of a SSN in this situation.  
 
What You Will Need: 
1. Register either a DBA or LLC name  
2. Any date of birth will do… 
3. We‘ll set you up with an address in the address section below 
 
Added Bonuses:  
 
You‘re legal Baby! 
 
You can open bank accounts, credit cards in the DBA name and use for other things other than eBay 
 
You can get an EIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 15 
 
Once you have a name you want to use for your account, you‘ll need a new email address. I 
recommend using Gmail as it auto disables Web Beacons from loading. In each email eBay sends you, they 
put a tiny tracking image (―Web Beacon‖) that can obtain your IP address and can even read your cookies, 
more information at SearchSoa.com.  
 
When using Gmail, make sure to disable images from displaying. By default this should be set for you, but if 
not you can go to settings, and then select ‗Ask before displaying external content‘. 
 
 
 
 
Create a Gmail account (tip; sign up with the same name you used for your eBay account.) 
 
That‟s that… as mentioned above using fake information can only take you so far. If you just want a quick 
and dirty eBay and Paypal account any name will do but it will be difficult to scale such accounts.  
 
By now you should have a new name and email address you want to use for your eBay account, don‘t worry if 
you don‘t have this yet, just think of the strategy you want to use and move on to the next step! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 16 
 
Step 4: New Address 
 
 
Now you need a new address! First off know that the address you choose should be listed in your general 
area (usually within 100 miles from your physical location), remember eBay and Paypal can match up your IP 
address to a general location, if you don‘t believe me click here and scroll down. If you tell eBay your address 
is in New York somewhere, but your IP address tracks back to China… eBay will get suspicious and will 
sometimes limit your account and ask for more information, same with Paypal. So when you‘re thinking of a 
new address to use, make sure it‘s within 100 miles of your IP address location. That means if you‘re using a 
VPN, you get to create an account wherever that VPN tracks back to.  
 
Now let‘s talk about the address itself. Obviously there are a lot of options to go with. The BEST option 
though is a REAL address that you have ACCESS to. Now there are many ways to acquire a real address 
that you have access to, some are free and others cost money. You can also go the route of using an address 
you don‘t have access to, but as you probably already know there are major disadvantages to this. We‘ll get 
into all the options below. Select which works best for you and move on to the next step. 
 
Option One: Using a Family or Friend‘s Address 
 
As mentioned above, the best method is to use a real address that you have access to. Your best bet for this 
is to find some long lost relative or friend, or cousins brothers husbands sister twice removed who‘s address 
you can use, and who has never ever signed up to eBay or Paypal! If you have a friend or relative whose 
name you can use, ask to use their address as well. It‘s the cheapest and best way to go. If you don‘t have 
any of those people, then read on.  
 
Option Two: Renting a P.O. Box 
 
Another option is to actually rent a P.O. Box from your local post office or any other business that offers post 
boxes (i.e. The UPS Store). You might also need a DBA because most packages won‘t fit into the box, so they 
will hold them for you and then give it to you when you show them ID. And since your drivers license has a 
different name then the one you‘re going to use with eBay, the post office won‘t give you the package unless 
you have proof that it‘s your ―business name‖ on the P.O. Box (ask them, talk to them, maybe explain to them 
that you will use that P.O. Box to sell on eBay and don‘t want to give out your real name on the internet which 
is why packages might come in for a name other than yours).  
 
Also, make sure that you can send mail without putting 'P.O. Box' in the address, since Paypal and eBay really 
frown upon P.O. boxes because a lot of scammers use them. Using a P.O. Box will instantly lower your trust 
rating, thus making it easier for you to get suspended. Ask the post office or P.O. Box company if you can 
write "123 Some St. #789" and exclude the word "P.O Box". If they let you, (try it with a test piece of mail 
first) then you can put that as your new eBay and PayPal address.  
 
Self storage stores usually have mailbox rentals cheaper than most post office boxes or UPS stores. Or just go 
to YELLOWPAGES and do a search for ‗mailbox rentals‘ in your area.  
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 17 
 
Option Three: Using Any Address 
 
Otherwise, if you don‘t want to/can‘t use these two methods, just input any address in your general area 
(MUST BE A VALID ADDRESS - A McDonalds or a big box store works). When sending items out make sure 
to always put your real home address as the ―from:‖ address. If the customer asks why your eBay address 
mismatches to the ―from:‖ address on the package, just say that is the drop shipper‘s address.  
 
More on using an address not your own: Using an address in which you have no access to is risky 
because if a buyer needs to return an item, sometimes they will want to ship it back to your registered address 
to be covered under either Paypal or their Credit Card protection. You can try telling them that you used a 
drop shipper to send them the item, so they can‘t use your ―home address‖ (address you have no access to) 
and they must send it directly back to your ―drop shipper‖ (your real address). If the customer does not want 
to do this, tell them that you will send them an extra $20 or something to cover their ―time and extra hassles‖. 
Or if you have an account with UPS (if you sell a lot like I do), they let you print out return labels – basically a 
label already with your address that the customer would just stick onto their package and drop off at a UPS 
location. I put these into every item I ship so that in case the customer wants to return an item, all they do is 
wrap up the package, glue the label on and drop it off. Either way, it‘s better than losing an item and money.  
 
Something else to think about is a safe return address. Lately eBay customer service reps have been 
trying to trick suspected sellers into giving them a return / secondary address in which they can match up to a 
suspended account. If you feel this is happening to you, it‘s a good idea to have a safe address to give 
customers that is NOT in eBay‘s system already. For example a friend or family member who does not have an 
eBay or PayPal account. 
 
Virtual Address Providers (Another Option) 
United States: 
New York, New York 
Houston, Texas 
 
St John, Virgin Islands 
Chattanooga, Tennessee 
New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Canada: 
Vancouver, British Columbia 
Toronto, Ontario 
 
United Kingdom:  
Aylesbury, Redbourn, Harpenden 
 
To find a virtual office company in your area, just Google:  
[your city] virtual office or  
[your city] mail forwarding or 
[your city] virtual address 
Prices should be around 20-30$ per month. 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 18 
 
Step 5: New Phone Number 
 
 
Now you need a new phone number! Like everything else, never attempt to use a previously used phone 
number and stay away from landlines if you can. There are a lot of places that offer a phone call redirection, 
VoIPs and even cheap phone service. And this is what you NEED since eBay WILL call you. How these sites 
work is that you get a phone number anywhere in the world, then input your personal home/cell phone 
number and have the worldwide number forward to you number.  
 
For this case, you will pick a number in your city and forward it to your own cell/home phone. Remember you 
can also use this for tons of other things aside from eBay when you don‘t want to reveal your personal 
number. One thing though, you don‘t want to use Skype because it‘s owned by eBay and information is shared 
between the two services like PayPal. This way is also a lot better than buying prepaid cell phones because it 
costs less and you don‘t have to lug around 5 cell phones for every eBay/Paypal account you have since you 
can get unlimited numbers and have them all redirect to your own cell phone. 
 
Phone Number Providers (VoIP/Redirects): 
United States 
TollFreeFowarding 
Vonage 
GotVMail 
My1Voice 
TRACFONE 
Yahoo Phone 
Google Talk 
Canada 
TollFreeFowarding 
Vonage 
VoiceMailTel 
Ring Central 
United Kingdom 
VoipFone.co.uk 
Ring Central 
Soho66 
CityNumbers.co.uk 
 
Worldwide:  
Go to Google and type: ―[your country] VoIP‖ 
 
When using a VoIP, try to have the same area code as your address listed with eBay and Paypal. Also be sure 
to keep your number active with accounts you‘re currently using for at least 30-60 days. For more phone 
options, go to the Phone Number Verification Forum. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 19 
 
Step 6: New Bank Account & Credit Card 
 
 
Now you‘re going to need a new bank account and prepaid card to verify your PayPal account. The good thing 
is you can open an online bank account in no time and prepaid cards can be found anywhere. Of course with a 
bank account you‘ll need to open it with all your real information, you don‘t want to mess around with fudging 
anything there. If you have a second checking or savings account you haven‘t used with PayPal before, you 
can go ahead and use that for verification. What PayPal is looking for is a new routing and account number. 
They cannot verify the name with the bank account unless the bank itself was to pass that information on, 
which they almost never do. And yes PayPal will ask for the ‗name on bank account‘, but again they don‘t 
check and can‘t verify this so just put the name you got from step three there.   
 
Listed below are confirmed banking and prepaid cards that can be used with PayPal.  
 
Recommend Bank Accounts: Working 
United States 
HSBC Direct 
ING Direct * 
People‟s United Bank 
SunTrust Online Banking 
Wachovia * 
Capital One * 
Bank of America 
Wells Fargo 
Chase 
Emigrant Direct 
Guaranty Bank 
Canada 
RBC Royal Bank of Canada 
HSBC Bank Canada 
TD Toronto Dominion 
ScotiaBank 
Laurentian Bank 
TD Canada Trust 
President Choice Financial 
National Bank 
BMO Bank of Montreal 
CIBC Canadian Imperian Bank
ING Direct * 
United Kingdom 
Barclays Saver 
Abbey Basic Account 
Alliance & Leicester Basic 
Co-operative Bank 
RBS Key Account 
Smile.co.uk 
NatWest Step 
* requires matching name on Bank Account and PayPal to use 
 
Worldwide:  
Go to Google and type: ―[your country] online banking‖ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 20 
 
With your prepaid card you can input whatever name, address, phone number on them and use them just like 
a regular credit card. This is what you will be using to verify your PayPal account with.  
 
Recommend Prepaid Card Providers:  
United States 
Simon Giftaccount 
ePayArea 
Rushcard * 
DeluxeCard 
Giftcards.com 
Gift2Go.net 
Vanilla MasterCard Gift Card 
Facecard (reloadable) 
Canada 
Vanilla Visa 
CitizensBank Visa 
United Kingdom 
EntroPay 
3VCash.com 
MyCashPlus.co.uk 
* Risk of losing funds if names differ 9/16/2009: be wary of using card 
 
Worldwide:  
Go to Google and type: ―[your city] prepaid card‖ 
 
Please Note: Once you enter credit card details into eBay or PayPal‘s system it‘s there for good. You cannot 
reuse the same card for multiple accounts, even if you enter your card details and eBay or PayPal was unable 
to verify your card it's in their system already and they will link you if you try to use it for a second account. 
 
Also note eBay is not working with a lot of gift cards so at this time you will have to add your card to PayPal 
and use PayPal to create an eBay seller account.  
 
Other things to note:  
 
Using a gift card will not suspend you account, so if you become suspended for some reason, it's not 
because of your gift card 
 
Amex gift cards have been reported to not work with eBay and Paypal 
 
Some gift cards without AVS attached may have problems passing verification 
 
To find more prepaid cards, search Google; something like ―visa gift card Australia‖ (without quotes) Make 
sure to get ones where you can specify a card holders address and name since you need to be able to put 
your corresponding name and address on it. It‘s not required but recommend. 
 
Please note that these cards may or might not work. EBay and Paypal constantly update their counter-
measures and block certain gift cards from time to time. Make sure to look at the forums to see which gift 
cards work on Paypal. If there are no cards that you can get where you can put in any name and address, 
then you will need to get a DBA/LLC Name, bank account and apply for a credit card through the bank who 
will check your credit score and do everything they regularly do when issuing a real credit card – Read the 
DBA section. You can also use debit cards from different banks as these will almost always work. 
 
For more information on credit card alternatives, go to the Credit Card Alternatives forum. 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 21 
 
Step 7: Creating Your Account 
 
 
There you have it; you should now have everything you need to create a stealth eBay and PayPal 
account. Next I‘ll show you how to put everything together. 
 
*** First and foremost, before even creating your new account, remove ―Turbo Lister‘ and any other eBay 
programs you might have like an eBay toolbar. As soon as you open any of those programs, they will instantly 
connect to eBay and let them know your IP address and username that you put into those programs. 
Remember, you have to remove ALL traces of your previous accounts before logging in/making new ones. *** 
 
Creating Your Account: First make sure you follow the steps 1-6 above… 
 
1. Create a new ‗user account‘ on your computer 
2. Change your IP address (Dialup / reset modem / VPN) 
3. Create a Name (LLC/DBA optional) & Email Address 
4. Obtain a Mailing Address (Virtual Address, P.O Box, neighbor, etc.) 
5. Obtain a Working Phone Number 
6. Obtain a New Bank Account & Prepaid Card 
 
Now We‟ll First Create Your PayPal Account: If you plan on having a merchant account with eBay it‘s still 
a good idea to sign-up for a PayPal account while your merchant account is getting approved. We‘ll talk more 
about merchant accounts further down.  
 
1. Use your new name, email address, mailing address and phone number from above and create your 
PayPal account. 
2. Add your bank account and prepaid card to PayPal and lift your withdraw limits.  
 
Creating your eBay Account:  
 
1. Using the same name, email address, mailing address and phone number you used with PayPal, sign 
up for an eBay account. 
2. Verify your eBay account. 
3. Then go to notification preferences and check off all notifications, no eBay marketing or phone calls. 
Also check off promotions and surveys so eBay won‘t contact you.  
4. Link your eBay account to PayPal – when you go to list an item, you must add your PayPal email 
address to complete the listing, once you do this your eBay and PayPal account become linked. 
 
You‟re done – Account Created 
 
Next we‘ll discuss listing strategies, how you should organize your accounts, the value of selling with multiple 
eBay accounts and having backups.  
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 22 
 
You Have a Live Account... Now What?  
 
 
First off let‟s get you organized: Use a spreadsheet or some sort of system to organize your identities. 
Making sure to put down all the names, passwords, log-in names, email addresses, date of births, mothers‘ 
maiden names, bank account numbers, and everything else you‘ll be using. Then, on a new sheet write down 
the date and every IP Address you use every time you log on, check email, etc, so that if Paypal/eBay does 
suspend your account or removes a listing you can backtrack your steps and see what you did that could have 
caused the suspension.  
 
You should include the time you started a listing, at what price, what revisions you make, ending time, price 
ended, how much $$ you lost on eBay/Papal and shipping fees. Then you should put in bold red all the items 
that got removed by eBay and put a note to not list on that account for a week (more on all this later). 
Basically everything you do, write it down!  
 
This really helps if one of your accounts is limited or suspended, you know if you did something wrong or to 
not use the details of that account again. You do not have to do this, but it‘s HIGHLY recommended! 
 
 
 
An example of organizing your eBay Accounts from an aspkin.com forum member 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 23 
 
 
 
Keeping track of your IP address 
 
Now that you‟re organized, let‟s talk about your listing strategy: So you have a new eBay and PayPal 
account and you‘re feeling pretty good right? The worst thing you can do right now is to list a bunch of high 
end items from the get go and expect to do okay. It doesn‘t work that way… you must start slowly as to not 
raise suspicion; you are in essence a new eBayer who doesn‘t know what he or she is doing. Do some 
searching on the site, browse the help section, type in some random searches, look at other peoples auctions, 
ask some questions. Do what a new eBay member would do.  
 
As you are doing that, the best thing to do is to wait until your account is at least 30 days old before starting 
to sell. This depends on the items you sell, if they‘re high priced risky items like electronics, brand name items 
(VeRO), jewelry, etc, then you should wait the 30 days. It‘s possible to sell these items from the first or 
second day but with a much higher risk. If you really can‘t wait, then list your auctions in 2-3 days, but if you 
have time on your side and want to play it safe, then wait the 30 days. If your items are generic and low risk 
then you can start selling almost immediately.  
 
Try to think like a newbie, what did you do when you first started using eBay; you probably didn‘t list five new 
cell phones or a $2,000 Louis Vuitton purse on your first day.  
 
After every item sells, let the account cool off. You should rotate the items you sell on your different accounts. 
To start out, your safest bet is to list one item per week, then after the item ends, wait a few days and list 
your next item, then after that one ends wait a few days and list the next, and so on.  
 
Example: 
Account1: purse, wait week, wallet, wait 3 days, shoes, etc… 
Account2: wallet, wait 1 day, cell phone, wait 4 days, GPS system, etc 
 
This is mostly a system for selling risky items, if you sell generic things or you don‘t sell a lot, then you don‘t 
need to list like this, you can sell more items per account per week with less worries of a limitation.  
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 24 
 
Remember PayPal limits an account based on risk. If the items you sell are considered risky to PayPal, 
and are associated with a high level of fraud this alone can be a limiting factor. Also PayPal places risk 
indicators on sellers themselves. If your sales dramatically increase one day, for example if you usually do 
$100 a day and then the next day you bring in $500, this is a huge red flag. I don‘t recommend you sell too 
much the first 30 to 60 days… you need to take things slow and then build up your sales.  
 
Creating Backup Accounts: Since each of your accounts is a separate person, the more accounts you have, 
the more items you can be selling per week in total without being scared of getting suspended. And even if 
one of your accounts does get suspended, it won‘t disrupt your business too much since you can just whip out 
a reserve account and start using that.  
 
You should make at least 3-5 backup accounts and have them sitting there aging. That way you won‘t have to 
wait the 30 days to start listing risky items and you‘ll have reserve accounts ready in case something happens.  
 
Also remember, the longer you wait between listing new items, the less chance you have of them being taken 
down (while also using the tips in the ―how to stay under the radar‖ section below). If you get an item taken 
down either for a VERO violation or ―unauthorized item‖, leave that account for at least 2 weeks, maybe more 
if you can. And use a reserve account you have instead.  
 
Can I have multiple eBay accounts per PayPal account? Yes you can, I don‘t recommend more than 
two eBay accounts per PayPal account though; all details on the accounts must match including your name, 
address, phone number, etc. Be aware that if one of your eBay accounts were to become suspended, your 
other account(s) would also be suspended. If one goes down, they all go down. 
 
The benefits of having multiple eBay accounts is to spread out your risk – for example if one day your primary 
eBay account were to have a strike or two against it, you can then move over to your second eBay account 
and continue selling from there while your primary account cools down. This is great for VeRO alerts! 
 
You create your second eBay account exactly the same as you did your first eBay account except you would 
need to have a separate email address; then link it to your PayPal account to age. One ‗user account‘ on your 
computer can host your two eBay accounts and one PayPal account. Again before you start listing it‘s best to 
wait at least 30 days to lessen the chance of a limitation.  
 
That‟s pretty much it! With the above you should now understand how to safely create unlimited amounts 
of stealth eBay and PayPal accounts! If you have any questions feel free to join the eBay Suspension forums 
and ask away. We‘re not done yet though! You‘re only half way through this eBook, next we‘ll talk about 
selling with a Merchant Account! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 25 
 
Four Steps to selling with a Merchant Account! 
 
 
First off selling with PayPal is easier and gives you more trust to buyers as with each auction you will have the 
familiar slogan ―Pay with PayPal and your full purchase price is covered‖. Buyers will feel safe and even though 
you are a new eBay member with zero feedback; they will be more inclined to bid on your items. The bad side 
to PayPal is the constant threat of limitations which might halt your selling at any time, and the need for a 
verifiable SSN if you‘re in the US. Other than that it‘s easy to work with and have ready to sell from day one.   
 
With a Merchant account (real merchant accounts); it‘s usually a process to get approved for one. They 
will usually verify your SSN if you‘re in the US, ask for DBA information, etc. And then once you‘re approved, 
you will then need to get approved by eBay to use it. EBay will want you to fax in your merchant account 
statement which you may or may not have initially. It‘s harder to sell items with a merchant account because 
the lower trust buyers may have with them. And you‘ll sometimes need third-party checkouts to fully utilize 
your account. The good thing is you‘re not working with PayPal! And that means you won‘t have to deal with 
being limited anymore, your eBay accounts will stay up longer, and really you shouldn‘t have to worry about 
being shut down again.  
 
Most sellers choose to sell using PayPal because it‘s easier in most respects. Others choose to go with a 
merchant account which requires more work, but in the long run it‘s well worth it. Next I‘ll show you how to 
use a Merchant account with your eBay account. Please note in some countries you are required to offer 
PayPal no matter what, for example eBay UK. Also Please check out this Wikipedia paragraph about which 
categories eBay only accepts Paypal for: Wikipedia Paypal – if you sell in any of those categories, you will 
HAVE to accept ONLY Paypal when listing an item on eBay. Check it often to see if it gets updated with new 
categories.  
 
If you‘re in the US and do a lot of sales with eBay, it‘s a good idea to get approved to use a merchant account. 
If you‘re outside the US it‘s easier to stick with PayPal as your limitations are easier to deal with, whereas US 
members have to deal with SSN issues. 
 
All of the merchant accounts outlined below have everything you need to sell on eBay - a payment gateway, 
merchant account and virtual terminal (in order to manually invoice buyers). I recommend you also make an 
Auctiva account for every eBay account. When signed up with Auctiva, there will be instructions on integrating 
your merchant account with it (example; Merchant Plus). Auctiva is extremely useful for selling on eBay. You 
get access to free themes, picture hosting, tracking, an Auctiva store, and automatic invoicing of buyers 
through it. I highly recommend signing up with Auctiva since it‘s cost effective and it will save you money and 
time on eBay; More on Auctiva and why you should sign-up later. 
 
Next we‘ll talk about the top merchant accounts and alternative payment service provides I recommend. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 26 
 
Select a Merchant Account:  
 
The following is a walkthrough on setting up your first Merchant Account to use with eBay. Again the use of a 
merchant account is best for US eBay members as getting away from PayPal and the SSN requirement is a 
priority. Users from other countries are recommended to use PayPal as it‘s easier to get past limitations thrown 
at you. If you want to go the merchant account route, then follow the next four steps on setting up your 
account. First things first, select a merchant account you want to work with and then sign up. 
 
1. Select & Sign up for a Merchant Account: 
 
Google Checkout: 
 
 
Overall I find Google Checkout to be pretty solid. Their fraud detection is much more advanced than any other 
payment service I‘ve used before. They actually do in-depth verification of buyers before a payment is 
approved and sent to you. Most transactions that are considered safe are immediately processed, whereas 
payments that look suspicious are held for further verification. I love this feature because it protects you from 
a lot of scammers out there. Also payments received are automatically withdrawn to your attached checking 
account; Google does not hold your money like PayPal will.  
 
The only negative I see with Google is the initial account screening they do. As your sales start coming in, they 
will do a review of your account, making sure you are on the level and not selling anything against their 
content policy, which hopefully you‘re not. If you fail their review they will immediately shut your account 
down, and refund any pending payments you may have. I had an issue with them and some items I was 
selling, but I was able to reply to their ‗account closure notice‘ and have my account reinstated. It seems once 
you get past this initial account screening you will be left alone and free to sell.  
 
Google Checkout Pros 
 
Easy to sign up for (US & UK members only) 
 
Easily integrates with most third-party shopping carts 
 
Can automate invoices with shopping carts 
 
Can be used for multiple eBay accounts 
 
Google Checkout Cons 
 
They‘re very strict initially 
 
eBay does not accept Google Checkout as a payment alternative  
 
When signing up for Google Checkout, like any other merchant account it‘s best to use real verifiable 
information. Remember your information is NOT shared with eBay so it‘s okay to use your own personal 
information.  
 
Sending Payment Invoices: Obviously eBay will not accept Google Checkout as a payment option so you 
will have to use either a third-party shopping cart to process your payments like Cart Manager as mentioned 
below. Or you can send invoices manually to customers via Google Checkout Tools > Send an Invoice.  
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 27 
 
Also please be aware that in order to use any merchant account without PayPal you will still need to fax in 
your merchant account statement which must be approved by eBay. As mentioned already eBay will not 
accept Google Checkout as an approved merchant account so you will have to sign up for a second merchant 
account like Authorize.net and get approved. Once you‘re approved by eBay you can go ahead and use Google 
Checkout and Cart Manager (or another third-party checkout). We‘ll talk more faxing your merchant account 
statement and shopping carts next.   
 
Signup for Google Checkout : Policies and Guidelines : Content Policies : Discuss Google Checkout 
 
As of now Google Checkout only works in the US and UK; this will most likely change to include other countries 
soon. Next we talk about Authorize.net. 
 
Authorize.Net 
 
 
Authorize.Net is the largest payment gateway with over 212,000 merchants and growing. They sell services to 
both merchants directly and indirectly through re-sellers. A recommended reseller I use is Merchant Plus.  
 
An Authorize.Net account (which is approved by eBay) can be used with Cart Manager, Auctiva and many 
other third-party shopping carts to automate invoices to buyers after an auction. You will need to fax in your 
merchant account statement to eBay to be able to sell with your account. We‘ll talk about that further down.  
 
When signing up for an Authorize.Net merchant account be aware that it‘s a lot like applying for a 
bank account times one hundred! You will be asked for a SSN #, bank account # (for deposits), voided check, 
photo ID, and DBA information among other things. They will check your credit score to make sure your credit 
isn‘t horrible. They didn‘t verify my DBA information when I applied, so any DBA name will most likely do. 
Basically they will verify who you say you are. I have my merchant account through Merchant Plus, which 
includes a virtual terminal that can be used to take credit cards in person, over the phone, wherever. It took 
me two days to get approved for it but it was worth it. Most shopping carts easily integrate with Authorize.net 
so whenever you get tired of eBay and you want to sell from your own website, you‘ll be ready from day one! 
As a side note learn how to start your own online business with another eBook of mine, Webmaster Blueprint. 
 
Authorize.Net Pros 
 
Hugely popular – Works with most shopping carts 
 
eBay will accept account statements from an Authorize.Net merchant account 
 
Can be used for multiple eBay accounts 
 
You have a REAL merchant account which can be used for tons of other things besides eBay 
 
Authorize.Net Cons 
 
Takes time to get approved  
 
Most resellers only accept US and CA residents 
 
Authorize.Net resellers I recommend are: Merchant Plus, E-OnlineData or Charge 
 
Discuss Authorize.Net in the forums 
 
Next we‘ll talk about CCNow… 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 28 
 
CCNow: 
 
 
EBay doesn‘t consider CCNow a real merchant account, and so they won‘t accept a merchant account 
statement from them, and really CCNow isn‘t a merchant account, they are a merchant account alternative 
(whatever that is). 
  
How CCNow Works: CCNow handles the credit card transactions, and pays merchants money they collect 
minus their 4.99% plus 50 cents transaction fee. And they walk a thin line doing so. Credit card association 
rules specifically prohibit credit card factoring, that is, taking a credit card payment on behalf of another 
company. The way CCNow stays legal is to function as the online retailer of their "clients" products. If you sign 
up with CCNow, you agree to the legal terms that when a customer places an order, CCNow buys the ordered 
product(s) from you for immediate resale to the customer. CCNow is the actual retailer, and the credit card 
purchase is in their name. You act as a wholesaler who is paid to ship the product on CCNow's behalf. 
Confusing? Well, maybe a little. 
 
Now of course eBay doesn‘t want you to use CCNow and they definitely will NOT accept a CCNow merchant 
account statement. So in order for you to use CCNow with eBay you will first have to get approved with a real 
merchant account, like Authorize.net; read faxing in your merchant statement in the next step. 
 
CCNow Pros: 
 
Accepts all major credit cards plus PayPal for you 
 
Can be used with MULTIPLE eBay accounts 
 
Accepts Merchants from most countries 
 
Specifically processes invoices for eBay and Overstock (needs auction number, buyers email from the 
you sold it eBay email, you fill in the price and then send) 
 
No PayPal issues to deal with 
 
CCNow Cons: 
 
Invoices must manually be sent to buyers, there are no shopping carts or integration with eBay to 
automate things 
 
CCNow Prohibited Product List 
 
Takes 45 days initially to receive CCNow funds then every 15 days after that 
 
Payments from buyers sometimes aren‘t instant 
 
Invoicing your Buyers:  
 
How to invoice your buyers with CCNow (can use direct payment to email buyers as well) 
 
Using Auctiva you can send out automatic emails after an auction with your payment instructions. You 
can let buyers know in your email that you will send them an invoice shortly where they can pay you 
with either a credit card or PayPal. Learn more about Auctiva below. Auctiva Auto-Email Messages 
 
Sign up for CCNow Now : Discuss CCNow in the forums 
 
To find a merchant account in your part of the world, Google: ―merchant account [your country]‖ without the 
square brackets. Go here for other merchant account discussions. 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 29 
 
2. Faxing in Your Merchant Account Statement to eBay 
 
Once you have a merchant account / alternative payment processor ready to go, you must then fax in your 
most recent account statement to eBay before they‘ll approve you to offer credit cards as a payment option. 
As discussed before, Google Checkout and CCNow will not pass as a real merchant account and therefore will 
not be accepted by eBay. You will have to sign up for or have access to a secondary merchant account like 
Merchant Plus which is accepted by eBay in order to be approved.  
 
When creating a new listing do the following:  
 
 
  
Once you do that and attempt to list your item you‘ll be hit with this message:  
 
 
 
You‘ll need to fax your merchant account statement to eBay which will then be verified before you account can 
accept credit cards as a payment option. 
 
Follow the guidelines below to getting approved to use a merchant account with eBay. 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 30 
 
Guidelines and Basic Steps to Get Approved to Use a Merchant Account with EBay: 
 
1. For more than one eBay account it's a good idea to use different merchant accounts, for example 
First Data, American Express, Merchant Plus, etc. 
2. Only try to approve one or two eBay accounts a week because you could be called by the same 
eBay employee for approval. There are only a few employees for approving accounts. 
3. Make sure your name and address on your account statement matches what you have on your 
eBay account. 
4. Make sure to scratch out part of the account / tax id number on your merchant statement.  
5. If there are multiple pages of your statement, you must fax all of them in to be approved. 
6. Some say it's good to use both PayPal and a Merchant account while waiting to be approved. It's a 
good indicator that you are a solid seller. 
7. Before you fax your documents, be sure to write your eBay ID, phone number and email address 
on the first page of your statement. Make sure this matches up with eBay. 
8. Go to a UPS Store, or HEB or just a random place to fax your documents. Do not fax from your 
house number, and do not reuse the same fax number for multiple accounts – this could give you 
away with your next account. 
9. Get ready for the verification call! EBay will usually call within one or two business days to confirm 
your account. Sometimes within hours.  
10. That's about it, be nice on the call, say you love eBay and look forward to many years of business 
together, some other BS and that's it. It‘s usually an easy call so don‘t fret about it.  
 
It's not that hard, it just takes a little work. Once you get your merchant account approved by eBay you can 
sometimes use the same merchant account for other eBay accounts. Once approved your eBay account will be 
updated to be able to accept credit cards. There‘s not much more to it, just fax in your merchant account 
statement, you‘ll get the call to verify a couple things and then you‘re set.  
 
Free Online Faxing: The easiest way to fax documents to eBay 
and Paypal is right from your computer. Go to Faxzero.com and 
send your document from the internet for free! (It must be in PDF 
form, use primoPDF to convert any file into a PDF file.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 31 
 
3. Set up Your Third-Party Checkout  
 
Hopefully by this step you have a Merchant Account which has been approved to use on eBay and now 
you‘re ready for a third-party checkout system! Now it‘s not required to use a third-party checkout system, but 
it does make things a lot easier when you have a lot of auctions running and you don‘t want to manually 
invoice each of your buyers.  
 
If you‘re using CCNow, there isn‘t a shopping cart that exists for it yet, nor can you link CCNow to eBay. You‘ll 
have to manually send invoices instead. If you‘re using Google Checkout, you can use Cart Manager to send 
invoices automatically and if you are using an Authorize.Net merchant account, you can use Auctiva.  
 
Next we‘ll discuss the top Shopping Carts and third-party checkouts: 
 
Auctiva (Best used with Authorize.Net Merchant Account):  
 
 
 
Auctiva is something that every eBay seller should have – It will speed up the process of listing items, sending 
invoices, giving you lots of listing templates and save you money by hosting your images all for a minimal fee. 
After creating a new eBay account, you should create a new Auctiva account for it. Then create an Auctiva 
token that links your eBay and Auctiva accounts together (don‘t worry this is safe because Auctiva does not 
share your personal info with eBay - just make sure you are doing this from the same IP you created your 
eBay account from). NOW once accounts are linked, the amazing thing about Auctiva is that you can log into it 
from ANY IP address and post new auctions to eBay without eBay knowing your true IP address! 
 
After linking your Auctiva account to eBay, you can then go to "My Account", then Checkout Settings to 
update your Merchant Account settings. You‘ll need your login ID, and Transaction Key given by your 
merchant account provider. I use Merchant Plus and it works perfectly. Once one of your listing ends, Auctiva 
will automatically send an invoice to your buyer, and there you go! 
 
Auctiva Pros 
 
Integrates with eBay / Auto invoices buyers 
 
Can be used with Authorize.Net 
 
Does NOT share you IP Address with eBay  
 
Does not require you to log into eBay to list auctions, can list from Auctiva. 
 
Will host your images for free! 
 
Allows fast re-list with preset profiles for your auctions. (It saves all your auctions so you can re-list 
items with a few clicks). 
 
Users trust Auctiva. 
 
Auctiva Cons 
 
Not Free Anymore 
 
Sign up for Auctiva Now 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 32 
 
Cart Manager (Best used with Google Checkout, Authorize.Net, PayPal, etc) 
  
 
 
Cart Manager Pros 
 
Works with most Payment Gateways 
 
Integrates with eBay / auto invoices buyers 
 
Onetime activation fee of $60 then 12.50/mo after that 
 
If used with an outside PayPal account it prevents eBay from linking to that account 
 
Google Checkout & PayPal show transactions as ‗Goods‘ with Cart Manager / they have no idea 
transactions are coming from EBay 
 
Can auto invoice buyers 
 
Cart Manager Cons 
 
Moderate learning curve 
 
Expensive 
 
Requires reseller to activate account 
 
You‟ll first want to link your Cart Manager account to your eBay account. You can do this by 
generating a token from Cart Manager‘s side of things. Once you do that just add whatever merchant account 
you choose to use with Cart Manager, for example Google Checkout. And you‘re ready to start selling! 
 
Sign up for Cart Manager 
 
Other third-party Shopping Carts worth mentioning: (Not extensively tested) 
 
 
Zoovy (Links to eBay – integrated with most payment processors) 
 
Vendio (Links with eBay and other online marketplaces, buyer appreciate is a nice feature, good for 
letting customers know your preferred payment method, Not as friendly) 
 
Mercantec (Integrates with eBay) 
 
Channel Advisor (No free trial to work with. Cost - $500 + 1% of selling price) 
 
Make-a-Store (Integrates with eBay/ checkout buttons / auction management / looks good) 
 
Kyozou (Integrates with eBay/ auction management / checkout, Not friendly) 
 
Infopia (Another integrator with eBay / manage auctions / etc) 
 
Design Cart (Integrates with eBay) 
 
CoreCommerce (Integrates with eBay / auction management)  
 
inkFrog (Another lister, Very user friendly, works with multiple eBay accounts) 
 
AuctionSound  (Looks like just an auction lister) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 33 
 
4. Disable eBay Checkout & Start Selling! 
 
By now your Merchant Account should be ready to go and approved for usage on eBay! You should have 
selected a third-party shopping cart to use with eBay, so now all you have to do is disable eBay Checkout and 
start selling!  
 
 
 
Make sure to disable the following: ‗Use checkout‘, ‗Offer PayPal in all listings‘, ‗Display PayPal Preferred on my 
listings‘, ‗Include my items when buyers pay all their sellers at once using PayPal‘. You can keep ‗Allow buyers 
to edit payment totals‘ to yes. After you do that, save your preferences.  
 
Things not to do: 
 
Do not put anywhere in your auctions that you do not accept PayPal, or that you accept Google 
Checkout, CCNow, etc.  
 
For more information on merchant accounts, go to the Merchant Accounts Forum. 
 
Workaround: If you have trouble with eBay accepting your merchant account statement or you‘re just in a 
hurry to get sales rolling you can try listing with an email address NOT connected with a PayPal account. When 
you go to create a new listing, in the box that request your PayPal email address simply enter a random email 
address not associated with a PayPal account. Then when a buyer tries to pay you they will get a notice of 
payment is unclaimed and that‘s when you send them an invoice from your merchant account. You have to be 
Johnny on the spot for this to work out. Really it‘s best to get your account approved for a merchant account 
first instead of playing games with buyers. 
 
That‘s it! Hopefully by now you understand what it takes to successfully sell using a merchant account. If you 
have any questions please post them in the support forums here: Merchant Accounts 
 
Next I‘ll give you tips on staying under the radar and getting fewer violations! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 34 
 
Tips on Staying Under the Radar & Getting Fewer Violations 
 
 
 Switch eBay accounts after every risky item is sold and let them cool off for as long as you can wait– 3 days, 5 days, 
7 days, (the longer the better). If you have a second eBay account for every PayPal account you have, switch to that 
account to sell. 
 
 On each account, EVERYTHING has to be different. Have totally different EVERYTHING; titles, descriptions, shipping 
types/amounts, pictures, categories etc. (yes this is said quite a lot, but it‘s very important.) 
 
 Try listing in a different category – for example for a wallet if before you listed as a ―clutch‖ wallet, now list it as a 
―other‖ wallet. 
 
 Change the wording in the title 
 
 Change the fonts, sizes, layouts and anything else you can think of for the item description on every account. For 
example, on one account you have pink text and you have a return policy, on another you use eBay‘s auction 
templates, write an extremely detailed description and use your own hosting for images. On a third you have a black 
background with white text, have a short description and use all capitals in the title. Be creative! You are totally 
different people! 
 
 Change the shipping services/shipping costs. One account you ship with UPS where local shipping costs 12$ and 
international is 30$. On another you ship with your local post office, local shipping is 10.94$ and you don‘t ship 
internationally. On another you just put generic shipping with a cost of 13.25$ and international shipping is 34.25$ 
Again, be creative! 
 
 Add bold, border, featured and other promotional features to some of your items sometimes. Sometimes this and a 
Buy-it-Now price really help since if your item gets taken off, you get all that money back - you have nothing to lose. 
But if you put a border, featured and bold on your item with a Buy-it-Now price you like and it sells, you just made a 
good profit! 
 
 List at different times of the day/night and for different listing durations, some do 5 day, some 7, some 10. Also do 
some Buy it Now items (A good tip is to list as Buy it Now where the buyer can send you an offer. List the Buy It Now 
for nearly retail price, put it to auto-accept offers at a certain price, and just wait. This way your item gets sold faster 
than having to wait exactly 5-7-10 days; less time on eBay, less time VERO and eBay‘s detectives have to cancel your 
listing. Also vary this up too! Don‘t add the offer feature to every one of your Buy-it-Now items on each of your 
accounts. Just remember that you need 5 feedback with a Paypal account and 10 feedback without a Paypal account 
to list Buy-it-Now items.) 
 
 When revising your items, sometimes make sure to add some sort of more-money-for-eBay feature to your listing like 
a bold, or a gallery, or a listing designer. Yes this does matter in how eBay looks at your account because if you are 
constantly revising your items without adding any ―promotional‖ features, eBay will think you are trying to do some 
scam. But also, vary this up; you don‘t want to always add a bold to every item every time you revise it since 
repetition will get noticed. Sometimes add something; other times don‘t add any promotional features.  
 
 ALWAYS leave some money in your Paypal account. Never withdraw everything at once. A good amount is to leave 
80-150$ in there all the time. If you are selling high risk items, withdraw the money to your bank after you have 
specified a tracking number for your order, not right after a person pays you. You want Paypal to see that you are 
trust-worthy. Again ALWAYS leave some money in your PayPal account. 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 35 
 
Setting up an eBay Account in another Country 
 
 
This is good if you want to avoid the SSN requirement for US PayPal accounts. In this example I‘ll show you 
how to setup a Canadian eBay and PayPal account. 
 
The benefits: 
 
No SSN Requirement 
 
Can use US/UK Bank account 
 
Can sale in the US eBay marketplace and Worldwide 
 
Once your account is setup... you can use services like Auctiva to list new auctions for you 
 
Interested? Please be aware that if you become limited by PayPal you will still be required to provide 
postage tracking, proof of ID, utility bills and invoices from suppliers. If you can get past all this then you‘re 
good to go. A good rule to thumb here is to not get limited. :) 
 
Steps to creating your Canadian Account: 
1. Follow step one above and create a new ‗user account‘ on your computer.  
2. Obtain a Canadian IP address either by VPN or Dialup as mentioned on step two above 
3. For a new name use a variation of your own name as mentioned in step three above. This is to satisfy any 
banking inquires that may come up later. Create a new Gmail email account as well. 
4. For an address go to SuperPages.ca and use a Canadian business address. When you‘re sending packages 
use your real address, or safe address as the return address.  
5. For a phone number, go to step five above and acquire a Canadian number. Forward that number to your 
cell or home phone number.  
6. For a bank account, you can use a US / UK bank account on PayPal. For a prepaid card, use step six above 
and acquire a Canadian prepaid card.  
 
Now we‟ll first create Your PayPal Account:  
1. Switch to your new ‗user account‘ you setup, then login to your VPN account. Use your new name, 
email address, mailing address and phone number from above and create your PayPal account. 
2. Add your bank account and prepaid card to PayPal and lift your withdraw limits.  
 
Creating your eBay Account…  
1. Using the same name, email address, mailing address and phone number you used with PayPal, 
sign up for an eBay account. 
2. Verify your eBay account. 
3. Then go to notification preferences and check off all notifications, no eBay marketing or phone 
calls. Also check off promotions and surveys so eBay won‘t contact you.  
4. Link your eBay account to PayPal – when you go to list an item, you must add your PayPal email 
address to complete the listing, once you do this your eBay and PayPal account become linked. 
 
You‟re done – Account Created, now use an account lister like Auctiva to list new auctions! Be sure to take 
things slow the first 30 days, and not to have more than $500 a day go through your PayPal account. 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 36 
 
Feedback FAQ 
 
 
 
Here‟s a tip on how to gain feedback quickly for new accounts. For one, do not buy one cent eBooks. 
In the past buying one cent eBooks was a quick and easy way to get tons of feedback. Now that‘s not the 
case. EBay has figured out what people are doing and put measures in place that will suspend your account if 
you buy too many cheap items in a short period of time. The safest method to gain feedback is to buy tangible 
items (items that are real and can be shipped). For example stamps, coins, beads, baseball cards, trading 
cards and used books have been reported to be ok. But again, buying too many 'cheap' items within a short 
period of time is not recommended. One or two cheap items a day is okay to gain feedback. 
 
Go to eBay.com and in the top search box select category ―everything else‖ (should be at the bottom of the 
list). Then select any one of the next categories. Now it should show you search results. After the search 
results come up, there should be a drop down box on the right side of the screen above the first search 
results, click it and select ―Price + Shipping: lowest first‖. Now just find the stuff that sells for a dollar or more 
and bid on it, or if it‘s a buy it now then just buy it. Then wait a few days and leave feedback. Again do not 
buy too many cheap items at once; this could limit your account for feedback manipulation. One or two cheap 
items a day is okay. Items cheaper than one dollar, is a dead giveaway that you're trying to cheat the system. 
 
Do you really need easy feedback? If you're just trying to increase feedback to make your items sell 
faster, stop! You don‘t need feedback to make your items sale faster or for more money. Your sales page will 
do that for you. The more professional your auctions look and the more questions you answer on page for 
buyers, the better chance you'll have at making more sales. Feedback isn't everything. 
 
But if you must increase your feedback, tangible items with a value of a dollar or more is okay to buy every 
couple days. Do not buy more than one or two items a day for feedback. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 37 
 
Suspensions / Violations / Limitations + Getting Reinstated 
 
 
Since you are reading this, you have no doubt been suspended for at least one of the following reasons. Listed 
below are the top reasons why your account may have been suspended and how you can fix it.  
 
Types of suspensions and how to be reinstated: Though suspensions of this nature can easily be fixed 
by following the appeals process; specific suspensions call for different approaches. 
 
 
Seller Non-Performance: If you have buyer complaints or a low feedback score, you might be 
hit with Seller Non-Performance. Settling disputes and working to increase your positive feedback 
will help restore your account. Read the Feedback FAQ section above for more information on 
building your feedback. 
 
 
Non-Payment: If you forget to pay your balance and your account is limited because of it, you 
can simply pay your balance and they'll reinstate you. Easy no?  
 
 
Shill Bidding: If you were caught shill bidding and eBay gives you a temporary suspension; it will 
usually be lifted after a certain period of time or after you submit required forms. Don‘t shill bid ok? 
 
Listing Violations 
 
1. Competitor flagged your listing: If you are selling in a competitive niche then it‘s quite possible that a 
greedy competitor is flagging your listings. Other than trying to get that member banned there is not much 
more you can do. If you don‘t know who it is, well… then your items might be getting taken down for other 
reasons -> 
 
2. VeRO: This is when the actual company whose trade-marked products you are selling sent eBay a notice to 
take down your auction(s). This is the harshest violation since repeated (1-3 times) VeRO violations will get 
you suspended forever. 
 
If you are actually selling real authentic items, try to contact the VeRO company themselves because some 
items are not even allowed to be sold; for example limited release items, boxes from the item, dust bags, 
certificates, receipts, and other things. Also if your item is authentic try to include as much proof that it is 
indeed real in your auction listing; supplier documents, receipts, serial numbers, lots of close-up 
pictures, statements from stores/businesses that verified your item. 
 
If your items are fake (along with the other 99% of eBay items), well then you will just have to stop 
listing this specific item on this account for at least a couple weeks (this is where having multiple eBay 
accounts comes in handy). So what you would do is move on to another eBay account and lists the item 
there, making sure to follow the ―staying under the radar‖ section above. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 38 
 
3. Trademark Violation: These types of violations are pretty tame. The more feedback your account has, 
the more violations it can take. I know of someone who was a level one Powerseller account and got 12 
trademark violations in one month and is still working fine. New accounts can take one or two of these 
before getting a 7 day suspension. Usually you will instantly get a 7 day suspension for a trademark 
violation, so if you got 1-2 and you aren‘t suspended yet, take that as a sign and lay off selling that item on 
that account for a month. A trademark violation happens because eBay‘s crack squad is surfing the web and 
finds something they don‘t like, or you got reported by another eBayer with nothing better to do. 
 
Suspensions: Getting suspended sucks! If you receive a 7 or 14 day suspension, your best bet is to leave 
your account alone for the duration of the suspension and to use an UNLINKED backup account. After 7/14 
days you will have to fax in a reinstatement form. If you don‘t have a fax machine at home, you can use 
FaxZero.com as mentioned above. 
 
EBay sometimes limits accounts because of Non-Payment, Seller Non-Performance, VeRO or just because they 
feel you're a high risk seller. They'll ask for your driver's license, receipts of items you're selling, copy of a 
credit card bills, they'll want you to take VeRO test and even sign and fax documents! The good news is, if you 
do what eBay asks you stand a good chance of getting reinstated. 
 
Tips to a better reinstatement: Giving eBay the information they request will usually lift any limitations you 
may have. But you must remember eBay is like an old man. If you try to rush things, threaten them without 
teeth, or by pass them all together (the wrong way) you'll lose the chance you have to get your account back. 
The better you follow the tips below, the greater chance you'll have at getting your account back. The fact 
that eBay is giving you a chance to reinstatement is a good sign.  
  
1. Do not spam eBay by spending your fax to them over and over again. This can have adverse affects. 
Remember it can take up to two weeks for reinstatement. If after two weeks eBay hasn't responded it's 
okay to resend your documents. 
2. Make sure your documents are clearly legible. Sending documents that are not legible will delay the 
reinstatement process. 
3. Do not send angry letters demanding reinstatement. It's up to the eBay if they want to release your 
account or not. The best thing you can do is be as nice and go above and beyond what eBay asks of 
you. You're not guaranteed your account back though. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 39 
 
Limited PayPal Account: Oh Noes! 
 
 
From PayPal‟s User Agreement, you can be limited for any of the following reasons:  
 
 
Reports of unauthorized or unusual credit card use associated with the account including, but not 
limited to, notice by the card issuing bank; 
 
Reports of unauthorized or unusual bank account use associated with the account; 
 
Complaints received regarding non-shipment of merchandise, non-delivery of services, merchandise not 
as described, or problems with merchandise shipped; 
 
Initiation by a buyer of a reversal process through the buyer's issuing bank without first pursuing the 
Buyer Complaint process described below; 
 
Receipt of potentially fraudulent funds; 
 
Excessive disputes or reversals, or attempts to "double dip" by receiving funds in a dispute both from 
PayPal and through a reversal or a refund from the seller; 
 
Refusal to cooperate in an investigation or provide confirmation of identity when requested; 
 
Initiation of transactions considered to be cash advances or assisting in cash advances; 
 
Sending unsolicited email or posting referral links on websites where they are not permitted; 
 
Opening multiple Personal accounts; 
 
The account has been used in or to facilitate fraudulent activity; 
 
Violations of this User Agreement; 
 
Name on the bank account associated with the PayPal account does not match the name on the PayPal 
account; 
 
Return of an incoming Electronic Funds Transfer for insufficient funds in the bank account, incorrect 
bank routing number, or incorrect bank account number; 
 
Use of an anonymizing proxy; 
 
Participating in prohibited transactions and activities, including but not limited to multi-level marketing 
programs, gifting clubs and other pyramid schemes, and listing items for sale that have a delayed 
delivery date of 20 days or more after the transaction list, and other activities that are prohibited in 
Part II of this Agreement; 
 
Reports from credit agencies of a high level of risk; 
 
Receipt by PayPal of excessive complaints regarding your account, business or service; and/or 
 
Logging in from a country not included on PayPal's permitted countries list. 
 
PayPal tends to limit accounts based on risk. If your sales suddenly increase one day, it‘s a red flag, if 
you withdraw more than usually in a day, it‘s a red flag. The categories you list on eBay, it‘s all programmed 
into PayPal‘s system to weigh your risk. And it makes sense, statistically high risk items cost PayPal more 
money in fraud than lower risk items. Really just having a linked eBay and PayPal account makes it two to 
three times more likely that your PayPal account will be limited within the first 30 days of selling.  
 
So what now? When your PayPal account is limited, you are usually required to provide invoices, proof of 
delivery, proof of address, a photo ID and or supplier contact information among other things. Most people 
instantly freak out and either sends their entire life‘s info or just say screw it and forever lose that Paypal 
account. What most people don‘t know is that Paypal has no way in hell of differentiating between a real utility 
bill, merchant account statement or driver license and one that‘s made up.  
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 40 
 
If you think about it; Paypal has hundreds of millions of users. Out of those hundred million, let's take a very 
small number and say that 0.1% of those accounts are under review for a suspension – that makes at least 
10,000 accounts being reviewed every week or so. Now you consider that the people working at PayPal are 
generally not that smart (you can tell when trying to solve a problem with them on the phone), which would 
mean that some high school dropout is sifting through ten thousand utility bills, driver licenses, supplier 
documents and merchant account statements. Do you really think they have the time to actually verify the 
information on the documents you send them?  
 
EBay and Paypal actually tell you to BLACK out all the sensitive information on your utility bills/driver 
licenses/credit card bills. This instantly makes the whole process absolutely useless because anyone can just 
pull a utility bill or merchant account statement out of their you know where, put any name and address they 
want and send it in. The person reviewing this will have maybe a 2 second glance to match up the info you 
have in your eBay/Paypal account and the info on this ―utility bill‖ and just either let it go through or if it 
doesn‘t match or isn‘t very good quality tell you to send a new one. I ―heard‖ of people who did this with tens 
of accounts, yes you read that right, not one, but more than 10 accounts. Totally absolutely fake… scary thing 
is that EVERY SINGLE ONE of those accounts got reinstated. Tells you how much they really check.  
 
Getting Past PayPal‟s SSN Request: 
 
Really there is no surefire way of getting past the SSN requirement (US members). As your sales go up, and 
your risk with PayPal increases… you will be required to provide your SSN. Eventually every US PayPal user will 
be required to provide a SSN just to sell with PayPal. It‘s one of the reasons I suggested at the beginning of 
this guide to open your new account in a family member or friends name and address just so when this 
happens to you… you‘ll have a valid SSN to provide.  
 
Of course there are a few strategies I have for you if you didn‘t do that or can‘t do that. Listed below are a 
few recommended ways of getting past a SSN request by PayPal, though not guaranteed.   
 
 
Call PayPal up and ask for alternatives… voter registration card for example. Whenever there are 
problems with PayPal... I like calling them up and fixing the situation over the phone. I‘m usually able 
to sweet talk PayPal reps into doing most anything for me. I don‘t know what it is… I guess working at 
a calling center for 6 months a few years back has paid off. The main thing is to be very nice and 
understanding in the situation, but at the same time wanting an alternative to a SSN. It doesn‘t always 
work, but sometimes you‘ll get lucky.  
 
 
The EIN route >> only works when your PayPal account was signed up under an LLC business name. 
Look at ‗Step 3: New Name & Email Address‘ section above for more information.  
 
 
Another way is that sometimes they give you 3 ways to verify your identity – phone call, credit card 
and a SSN. So you just do the first two.  
 
 
Last the proven strategy that I recommend is simply opening a new account in a relative or family 
member‘s name and address as mentioned in step three. You may use their SSN and it will pass with 
PayPal. Some forum members have even used their children's SSN and yes it works. Just don't ruin 
your child's credit by leaving an unpaid balance on your Paypal account.  
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 41 
 
After Reinstatement: After you get your account back make sure not to go back to your old habits which 
got you suspended in the first place. Going back to selling VeRO items will get you indefinitely suspended the 
next time around. Remember backup accounts are there for a reason.  
 
Also what I recommend before doing any major sales with eBay is to make sure your Paypal account is 
Verified and Confirmed. Use the bank account you created and prepaid card to do this. Also if you can, make 
your Paypal account a Business account (it helps). 
 
When to Create a New Account: So it's been over 1-2 months and eBay still hasn't released your account. 
If after multiple faxes, and no response from eBay it's best to move on and start work with a new stealth eBay 
account. Cancel any virtual numbers, virtual addresses, DBA names and bank accounts and stop using any 
PayPal accounts you ever used with that eBay account as in time they will suspend those too (usually when 
you have some money in it). Also make sure to keep the logs you made containing all the personal information 
and IP addresses you used just in case so you don‘t use any of that information in your future accounts. Shed 
a small tear and move on. The more accounts you have the less significant these suspensions will seem. I still 
cringe when one of my accounts gets suspended, but that‘s just part of doing business on eBay nowadays. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 42 
 
“Why I Got Linked / Suspended” – And how to avoid it in the future 
So why does it happen? You think you have a bulletproof eBay account and out of nowhere, you're suspended! Why? It's 
complicated, but what I can tell you is how other people have been suspended and some advice on how to avoid 
following them. 
 
1. Changing details of your account under a new IP address. EBay will sometimes limit your account, thinking 
it's been hijacked. Usually a short chat to eBay will lift your account.  
 
2. Sharing a small network with a suspended eBay account (IP issues). This won't always link accounts, but if 
there are similar details between accounts (same address), eBay may link and suspend your account as well. 
 
3. Adding a previously suspended shipping/mailing address to your account, or giving out this information to 
buyers. If an eBay member recognizes you by your address, they can report you to eBay which then they'll 
investigate you for inconsistencies. It's okay to add your address as return address within your packages. But 
remember to use a DBA name instead of your own. 
 
4. Having inconsistent information throughout eBay, Paypal, or any credit cards you use. For example using 
different names and addresses on everything. EBay doesn't like this. (Use the same name, address, phone 
number, cc, email address for both eBay and Paypal) 
 
5. Reusing the same PayPal account for multiple eBay accounts. This includes paying your balance. PayPal 
and eBay are linking the moment you pay your balance, send money, receiving money and other ways 
undiscovered yet. You can have up to two eBay accounts per PayPal account, don‘t risk any more. 
 
6. Using the same credit card with multiple eBay accounts (just common since, this will get you linked and 
banned). 
 
7. Using the same IP Address/cookies for multiple accounts. Make sure to have separate ‗user accounts‘ for 
every eBay account you create. Keep a log of your IP address to make sure you don't reuse the same one.  
 
8. Too many customers complain about your auctions. If your feedback score is too low, eBay will place 
selling limits on your account until you can raise your feedback. You can remove negatives from your account, 
and work to increase your positive feedback to lift any limitations. 
 
9. Using an old phone number with a new account. For one make sure your phone number is legit, and 
second never reuse the same phone number from a previous account. 
 
10. Listing a lot of items right away. Read the staying under the radar section above for listing strategies. 
 
11. Shill Bidding. It's never a good idea to shill bid, but if you've been limited because of it, you're usually able 
to get your account back after sending eBay some required information, but don‘t do it again, or you'll find 
your account suspended indefinitely. 
 
12. Buying many cheap e-books/digital items to inflate feedback. No way around this, eBay knows what you're 
trying to do, don't try to buy feedback. You'll be suspended and won't have a chance for reinstatement 90% of 
the time. 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 43 
 
13. Using Proxies Servers or IP Hiding Software. These simply do not work, and eBay will suspend your 
account for 'abusing eBay' when you use them. I do not recommend any proxy service at all.  
 
14. Reusing the same auctions descriptions, image URLs and titles in auctions. Not all suspensions are 
automated. Some come from VeRO members, buyers who recognize your auctions, and even competition. If 
someone knows you've recently been suspended, but finds you're selling under a new name. All they have to 
do is report you to eBay and you'll get shut down in a heart beat. Also reusing the same image URLs in your 
descriptions (exp. domain.com/images/test.jpg) with multiple eBay accounts is a given instant link and 
suspension. Change up your domain name or subdirectory if you're using a third-party image host. 
 
15. Logging into a suspended account and then to your new account. Self explanatory. 
 
16. Listing too much from the get go. It depends heavily on what you're listing. If you try to list 20 iPods from 
day one, you can just about guarantee a limited account within an hour of listing. If you're selling something 
of less risk, then you're able to list more. The more risk an item has, the slower you should list your auctions. 
 
17. Using Turbolister or any other eBay software. It's a bad idea to use anything related to eBay if you don't 
have to. The more programs and companies you deal with that are tied to eBay, the more risk you place on 
your eBay accounts. Auctiva is a better option to Turbolister. 
 
18. Being rude to and sending insulting emails to eBay. The people working at eBay have the power to shut 
your account down with a mouse click. Don't give them a reason to suspend you. Instead kill them with 
kindness and you might be surprised at how they can help you. 
 
19. Using the same password as another suspended / limited / banned user.  
 
20. Same e-mail as another suspended / limited / banned user 
 
21. Same images as another suspended / limited / banned user 
 
22. Similar first or last name as another suspended / limited / banned user 
 
23. Similar address as another suspended / limited / banned user 
 
24. Listed items during a 7 day suspension 
 
25. Withdrew too much money from PayPal at one time or too many times per day/week 
 
26. Competitor flagged you 
 
If you have an account going for a month or two and you're not having any problems, you're usually clear of 
eBay unless you do something stupid like the above. It's also a good idea to have backup accounts just in case 
you slip up. For the most part make use of ‗user accounts‘ to protect your accounts from linking, change your 
IP address between logging into different accounts, list items relative to their risk, and be nice to customers.  
 
And maybe some wishful thinking! 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 44 
 
Suppliers and Wholesalers & How to Find Them 
 
 
Here are some Wholesalers and Dropshippers lists you can buy. If you are not happy with any of 
these Wholesalers/Dropshippers lists, you can get a full refund. 
 
 WorldWideBrands Drop Shipper Directory (certified by eBay) 
 SaleHoo Drop Shipper list  
 General Drop Shipping / Wholesaler List  
 
Here are some free wholesale/supplier directories: 
 Liquidation.com  
 Wholesalecentral 
 Wholesale411 
 GlobalSources 
 DHGate 
 EC21 
 Alibris (used books) 
 DollarDays.com 
 GovLiquidation.com  
 Salvagecloseouts.com/Palletoftheweek.html 
 JDcloseouts.com 
 
Since some of these companies are in countries that don‘t have many consumer protection laws in place, be 
very careful when sending them money. Always check a companies profile and see if it‘s a gold profile 
company or whatever methods a site has to differentiate companies that pay a yearly fee and had background 
checks done on them. Also, visit their website and check the whois record to see if it matches what they have 
on the supplier directory. Some supplier directories even offer a service to double check the company‘s full info 
for a fee, and even run a credit report on their business. If you don‘t want to spend the extra money, then just 
find a company that has been on the supplier directory for more than 2 years; ask them lots of questions and 
then place a test order of 1-2 items first. After they arrive and you are happy, buy a few more, then a few 
more; never buy gigantic loads until you know that the company is legit. Some can even send you a few 
sample orders out of their own pocket, but then when you go place a large order, they just run off with the 
money. Just be careful and don‘t risk too much. 
 
If you don‘t find what you‘re looking for on those sites, try Google: 
 
Type in [product] [country] wholesaler (or) dropshipper, or supplier, or factory or anything else. 
 
You can try something like ―metal gutters wholesaler china‖ or ―nike shoes supplier japan‖. 
 
After you found something you want to sell, first do a search for it on eBay. A lot of times just this step can 
save you hundreds of dollars. You will instantly see if selling that item will be profitable or not. To get even 
deeper statistics on eBay searches, you can use a very powerful website called TeraPeak. Terapeak gives you 
very deep history on eBay searches and items. You can find when the best time to list a specific item is, what 
the best listing durations are, how much the items are selling for, and tons of other things. 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 45 
 
Pros and Cons of Becoming an eBay Powerseller  
 
 
This question has been asked a few times in the eBay 
Suspension Forums. I created my new account, I haven't 
been suspended, and now I have high enough feedback 
that eBay is offering me Powerseller status. Is it worth it? 
 
Pros and Cons of Becoming a PowerSeller 
 
Pros: 
 
Slightly more communication opportunities with eBay. 
 
Having Powerseller Logo gives you more trust to buyers. This could mean more sales. 
 
Depending on your Powerseller level it takes more to suspend you. You're giving SLIGHTLY more 
trust by T&S. 
 
Can take a LOT more listing violations and listing removals before getting suspended – I once had 
15 Vero listing removals in one month and the account is still up. Consider though that the account 
was over 5 years old. 
 
Cons: 
 
EBay will suspend and limit a Powerseller account just the same as a Non-Powerseller. 
 
Using a fake address could hurt you when eBay tries to send you information about your 
Powerseller status. 
 
There is risk of suspension but it is slight. 
 
No extra protection from T&S. 
 
Your account will get noticed more. 
 
Final Answer:  
If all of your items are legitimate and real, get the Powerseller icon. If you are dealing in shady things then 
you might want to keep a lower profile and decline the Powerseller status. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 46 
 
Final Step-by-Step Review 
 
 
There you have it; you should now have everything you need to create a stealth eBay and PayPal 
account! When you‘re ready, create your account. 
 
*** First and foremost, before even creating your new account, remove ―Turbo Lister‘ and any other eBay 
programs you might have like an eBay toolbar. As soon as you open any of those programs, they will instantly 
connect to eBay and let them know your IP address and username that you put into those programs. 
Remember, you have to remove ALL traces of your previous accounts before logging in/making new ones. *** 
 
Creating Your Account: First make sure you follow the steps 1-6 above… 
 
1. Create a new ‗user account‘ on your computer 
2. Change your IP address (Dialup / reset modem / VPN) 
3. Create a Name (LLC/DBA optional) & Email Address 
4. Obtain a Mailing Address (Virtual Address, P.O Box, neighbor, etc.) 
5. Obtain a Working Phone Number 
6. Obtain a New Bank Account & Prepaid Card 
 
Now We‟ll First Create Your PayPal Account: If you plan on having a merchant account with eBay it‘s still 
a good idea to sign-up for a PayPal account while you merchant account is getting approved.  
 
1. Use your new name, email address, mailing address and phone number from above and create your 
PayPal account. 
2. Add your bank account and prepaid card to PayPal and lift your withdraw limits.  
 
Creating your eBay Account:  
 
1. Using the same name, email address, mailing address and phone number you used with PayPal, sign 
up for an eBay account. 
2. Verify your eBay account. 
3. Then go to notification preferences and check off all notifications, no eBay marketing or phone calls. 
Also check off promotions and surveys so eBay won‘t contact you.  
4. Link your eBay account to PayPal – when you go to list an item, you must add your PayPal email 
address to complete the listing, once you do this your eBay and PayPal account become linked. 
 
That should be it! I hope you learned a lot with eBay Stealth, remember if you have any questions be sure 
to visit the eBay Suspension Forum and ask away! You will always get lots of help. 
 
Good Luck! 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 47 
 
You‘ve read the eBook and hopefully you liked it! If you have feedback whether good or bad 
please send it to support@auctionstealth.com. Now you can earn extra money and help 
promote eBay Stealth! We offer 50% commission and pay promptly, click here to learn more!  
 
Other eBooks I‟ve written: 
 
Webmaster Blueprint – The best damn Internet Marketing eBook 
out there, a beginner‘s guide to starting an online business and 
marketing it for exploding sales! Seriously if you want to get 
away eBay and start your OWN online business, Webmaster 
Blueprint is for you. Learn more at WebmasterBlueprint.com 
AutoBlogBook – A more recent guide of mine, more for the 
Internet Marketing group out there. Basically a guide on setting 
up blogs that run on autopilot that you can use to generate 
income from. I‘ve been doing this for years with my own 
websites; I use them to promote my own products, affiliate 
products, or just contextual ads. You can get AutoBlogBook free 
with TrialPay, go here to learn more.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 48 
 
Copyright, Legal Notice, and Disclaimer: 
 
This publication is protected under the US Copyright Act of 1976 and all other applicable 
international, federal, state and local laws, and all rights are reserved, including resale rights: 
you are not allowed to give or sell this Guide to anyone else. If you received this publication 
from anyone other than auctionstealth.com, you've received a pirated copy. Please contact us 
via e-mail at support@auctionstealth.com and notify us of the situation. 
 
Please note that much of this publication is based on personal experience and anecdotal 
evidence. Although the author and publisher have made every reasonable attempt to achieve 
complete accuracy of the content in this Guide, they assume no responsibility for errors or 
omissions. Also, you should use this information as you see fit, and at your own risk. Your 
particular situation may not be exactly suited to the examples illustrated here; in fact, it's likely 
that they won't be the same, and you should adjust your use of the information and 
recommendations accordingly. 
 
Any trademarks, service marks, product names or named features are assumed to be the 
property of their respective owners, and are used only for reference. There is no implied 
endorsement if we use one of these terms. 
 
Finally, use your head. Nothing in this Guide is intended to replace common sense, legal, 
medical or other professional advice, and is meant to inform and entertain the reader. So have 
fun and good luck with your online endeavors!  
 
Copyright © 2010 eBay Stealth, Kingbrend Ltd., All rights reserved worldwide. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EBay Stealth 3.0 © 2010 Kingbrend Ltd. AuctionStealth.com 49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

